S5518 E1637_1 99863489 115692
Catholique Divinity: OR, The most Solid and Sententi∣ous Expressions of the Primitive Doctors of the Church. With other Ecclesiastical, and Civil Authors: Dilated upon, and fitted to the Ex∣plication of the most Doctrinal Texts of Scripture, in a choice way both for the matter, and the language, and very useful for the Pulpit, and these Times. By Dr. Stuart, Dean of St. Pauls, afterwards Dean of Westminster, and Clerk of the Closet to the late K. Charles. LONDON, Printed for H. M. and are to bee sold by Timo. Smart at his shop in the Great Old-Bayly near the Sessions-house 1657.
To the Reader. YOu may by these few sheets un∣derstand in some part that great benefit of humane Learning, how serviceable it may bee made for Divine. For as the Badger-skins, and Goats-hair were made use of for the service of the Tabernacle in the Jewish Church: So may the Endowments of prophane Infidel-Philosophers, Orators, and Poets, bee imployed for the service of the Chri∣stian. And indeed the Arts are but as hand-maids to Divinity. Look but back upon those two famous pat∣terns of Jewish and Christian Di∣vines, Moses learned in all the wisdome of the Egyptians, and St. Paul wise in all the learning of the Grecians, a great Artist, and a good Linguist: Now to what purpose both those gifts, unless improved
to a further end, then they were first intended, namely to make Greece and Egypt Proselites, and to teach those Nations Christianity from the grounds and principles of their own learning. And thus, Reader, mayest thou make use of this Book, if a Mini∣ster for thy Pulpit; if a Lay-man for thy practice. As for the Author, hee is too well known, to bee praysed by a private Pen; onely thus much take notice in his behalf, that these were onely some loose scattered sheets of his Juvenilia; by which you may guess what his full grown elaborate peeces will bee, when ever it shall please God to instruct these igno∣rant Times with those his most learn∣ed Productions. Till when, I am Thine in all Christian service, H. M.
Catholique Divinity: OR, The most solid and sententi∣ous Expressions of the Pri∣mitive Doctors of the Church, &c. Quàm malè est extra legem viventibus, quicquid meruerunt semper ex∣pectant. Petronius. FAt Swine cry hideously, if but touched or med∣led with, as knowing they owe their life to every one that will take it. Tyberius felt the remorse of con∣science so violent, that hee protested to the Senate, that hee suffered death daily: Whereupon Tacitus makes
this good Note, Tandem-facinora & flagitia in supplicium vertuntur, as every body hath its shadow apper∣taining to it, so hath every sin its pu∣nishment: And although they escape the lash of the Law, yet vengeance will not suffer them to live (as the Barbarians rashly censured St. Paul Act. 28.) quietly at least. Richard the Third after the Murther of his two Nephews, had fearful dreams and visions, insomuch that hee did often leap out of his bed in the dark, and catching his sword (which alway naked stuck by his side) he would goe distractedly about the chamber, every where seeking to finde our the cause of his own occasioned disquiet. It is as proper for sin to raise fears in the soul, as for rotten flesh and wood to breed worms. That worm that never dyes, is bred here in the froth of fil∣thy lusts and flagitious courses, and lies gnawing and grabling upon mens inwards; many times in the ruffe of all their jollity. This makes Saul call for a Minstrel, Belshazzar for his carowsing cups, others for other plea∣sures, to put by the pangs of their
wounded spirits, and throbbing con∣sciences. Charles the fourth after the Massacre of France, could never en∣dure to bee awakened in the night without Musick, or some like diversi∣on, hee became as terrible to himself as formerly hee had been to others; but above all, I pity the loss of their souls, who serve themselves as the Jesuite in Laucashire, followed by one that found his glove, with a desire to restore it him; but pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience, hee leapes over a hedge, plunges into a Marle∣pit behinde it unseen and unthought of, wherein hee was drowned. Vestium curiosit as, deformitatis mentium & morum indicium est. St. Bernard. OUr first Parents, who even after the Fall, were the goodliest creatures that ever lived, went no better cloathed, than with leather; no more did those Worthies, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11. 37 And surely, however our condition and calling, afford us better array,
and the Vulgar like a Pohemian Cur, fawn upon every good suit (pur∣puram magis quam dominu colunt) yet wee must take heed that pride creep not into our cloaths, those En∣signes of our sin and shame, seeing our fineness, is but our filthiness; our weakness, our nastiness. It is a sure signe of a base minde to think hee can make himself great with any thing that is less than himself, and win more credit by his garments than his graces. St. Peter teacheth women, 1 Pet. 3. 3. to garnish themselves, not with gay cloaths, but with a meek and quiet spirit, and not as those min∣cing Dames, whose pride the Prophet Isaiah inveighes against, as punctually as if he had viewed the Ladies Ward∣robes in Jerusalem. Rich Apparel are but fine covers for the foulest shame; the worst is Natures garment, the best but follies garnish. How blessed a Nation were wee, if every silken suit did cause a sanctified soul; or if wee could look upon our cloaths, as our first Parents did, as love-tokens from God.
Quicquid propter Deum fit, equaliter fit. St. August. IT is said in the seventh of Gen. vers. 5. That Noah did according to all that the Lord had commanded him; Where the word All, is a little word, but of a large extent; hee doth not his Masters, but his own will, that doth no more than himself will. A dis∣spensatory conscience, is an evill con∣science, God cryes to us, , hee will have universal obedi∣ence both for subject and object. Wee must bee intirely willing in all things to please God, or wee utterly dis∣please him. Herod did many things, and was not any thing the better. Jehues golden Calves made an end of him, though hee had made an end of Baals worship: Hee that doth some, and not all Gods will, with no desire and affection at least, doth but as Benhadad, recover of one disease, and dye of another; yea if hee take not a better course with himselfe, hee doth but take pains to go to Hell. Then shall wee not bee ashamed, when wee
have respect to all Gods Commande∣ments, Psal. 119. 6. Sordet in conspectu judicis, quod fulg in conspect  operantis. Gregor. GOd can finde flaws in that for which wee may look for thanks. This makes Nehemiah crave pardon of his zealous Reformations; and David cryes out, Enter not into judge∣ment with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. Yee are they that justifie your selves before men (saith Christ to the Pharisees) but God knows your hearts, for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abamination in the sight of God. A thing which I see in the night may shine, and that shining proceed from nothing but rottenness, but bee not deceived (or if you bee, yet) God is not mocked, when hee comes to turn the bottome of the bag upwards (as the Steward did Benjamins) all our secret thefts will out, all our collusi∣ons come to light; His Law is a Law of fire, Deut. 33. 2. His Tribunal
of fire, Ezek. 1. 27. His pleading with sinners, in flames of fire, Isa. 60. 15. The trial of our works shall bee by fire, and before God who is a con∣suming fire. Happy are they that are here purged by that spirit of judgement and burning. Bona res neminem scandalizant, nisi malam mentem. Tertullian. GOod meats displease none but the distempered pallats; and must the wholesome dishes bee barr'd the table, because they offend the aguish? No, Scandal in this case is medicin∣able. You know the Physitian of∣fends the sick, that hee may the more surely cure him. If to do well cause discontent, wee then offend not a∣gainst men, but their errors; and in this regard, wee are tender to the per∣sons themselves when wee strike down their ignorance. In Matth. 8. where our Saviour taught the abro∣gation of Jewish Ceremonies, and that the worst meats could not defile us, the text intimates the Pharisees
were offended; nay, and his Disciples from hence seem to intreat his silence, Master, Seest thou not that they are of∣fended? But did our Saviour regard it? Let them alone, saith hee, They are blinde leaders of the blinde. Christ meant to teach us when men grow discontented at the truth it self, the offence is taken onely, not given, and they be said then rather to make, than to receive a scandal: Which may serve to reprove too many in our Church, who still cry out of weakness, who sit not easie though on their mo∣thers 'knees, they complain her cloaths do offend their tender eyes, her Rites say they are scandalous, and they must bee relieved by that text in Saint Paul, If meat offend my bro∣ther, I will eat no meat while I live. It follows then that for their weak sakes, wee must forbear those weak cere∣monies. But is the reason the same? to eat is a private action in common converse, wherein each man is true Lord of himself, hee may command his actions, and therefore in this case to use connivency is still to be thought most commendable. But wee speak
of actions publick, solemnly designed for our Religious meetings, actions enjoyned by Laws, and approved by the far more, which is the rule of Laws; should the Church give con∣tent to some few that dislike, shee would displease multitudes, that ap∣prove her Ceremonies, and so instead of a pretended sleight offence, shee should run her self upon a true gross scandal. Non omne quod licet, etiam honestum est. Paulus Canonista. IT is a Rule of the Canonists, and they borrowed it from their own Innocentius. In all our actions three things must bee observed, Quid liceat; Quid deceat; Quid expediat: What is lawfull, What decent, and what expedient. Our actions must not bee lawfull only; for hee that doth no more than hee is bound to, is rather wary than good, and hath learned only safe dishonesty, how by keeping the Kingdomes Laws, hee may abuse her people. There is a difference be∣tween
strict Law and honesty. In ri∣gour things may bee done, which yet are neither decent in the actor him∣self, nor expedient for the Common∣wealth. Its thus in the Church too: Many things hath God here left in their own selves indifferent; hee hath therefore not forbidden them, because they may oftentimes bee done in safe∣ty, and yet cannot wee bee free, except wee become injurious. Is there no way to shew our own liberty but in our neighbours destruction? Grant these things to bee lawfull, yet they may bee unseemly, and shall wee shame our selves? They may bee ex∣pedient too, and shall wee endanger others? It is not enough to keep the first Precept to forbear things unlaw∣full: A Christian man must bee wary too in matters of indifferency. Quae per rationem innotescunt, non sunt articuli fidei, sed praeambula, ad arti∣culos. Aquinas. TO behold this goodly Fabrick of the world, may soon force a Pa∣gan
to confess that there is a Deity, but to know that this God is both three and one; or that of these three, one was Incarnate: Here nature is blinde, and requires help from a clearer light. To instance in the Resurrecti∣on, to see the Grave open, the Earth trembling, the Angels attending, did no doubt perswade the Watchmen themselves that Christ was risen, but to beleeve that hee rose both God and man, This proceeds from the Spirit alone, who only can enlighten them that sit in darkness. Our do∣mestick abilities may some way pre∣pare us to entertain faith; when it is received, they may perchance con∣firm or awaken it; but wee must con∣fess the authour of it to bee the Holy Ghost alone, and the word his instru∣ment. Notwithstanding where thou mayest use these helps, neglect not the benefits of such outward testi∣monies; for though faith come by hearing, yet let Christians bee specta∣tors too, and learn, as well to see God in his Works, as to beleeve him in his Scriptures, though that hee that made thine eye, as well as thy soul, exacts a
tribute no less from thy fenfe than from thy reason. These lower pow∣ers are made for his glory; and when they are imployed to viler ends, re∣member that thou dost not more abuse thy self, than wrong thy Maker. Mors optima est perire, dum lacrymant Sancti. Seneca in Hypol. SOmething is to bee given to Cu∣stome, something to Fame, to Na∣ture, and to Civilities, and to the ho∣nour of deceased Friends. For that man is esteemed to dye miserable, for whom no friend, no relative sheds a tear, or payes a solemn sigh. I desire to dye a dry death, but am not very desirous to have a dry Funeral. Some flowers sprinkled on my grave would do well, and comely; and a soft showre to turn those flowers into a springing memory, or a fair rehearsal, that I may not go forth of my doors as my servants carry out the entrails of Beasts. But that which is to bee saulted in this particular is, when the
grief is immoderate and unreason∣able; and Paula Romana deserved to have felt the weight of St. Jeroms se∣vere reproof, when at the death of every one of her children shee almost wept her self into her grave. But it is worse, yet when people by an ambiti∣ous and a pompous sorrow, and by ce∣remonies invented for the ostentati∣on of their grief, fill Heaven and Earth with exclamations, and grow troublesome, because their friend is happy, or themselves want his com∣pany. It is certainly a sad thing in Na∣ture to see a friend trembling with a Palsie, or scorched with Feavers, or dried up like a Potsherd with immo∣derate heats, and rowling upon his uneasie bed without sleep, which can∣not bee invited with Musick; nothing but the servants of cold death, poppy, and weariness, can tempt' the eyes to let their curtains down, and then they fleep only to taste of death, and yet wee weep not here: The solemn op∣portunity for tears, wee choose when our friend is faln asleep, when hee hath laid his neck upon the lap of his
mother, and let his head down to bee raised up to Heaven: This grief is ill placed, and undecent. Ne me lacbrym is , nec  Faxit: Cur? Vlit vi per ora vi∣. Ennius. SOlemn and appointed mournings are good expressions of our dear∣ness to the departed soul of our friend, and of his worth, and our va∣lue of him; and it hath its praise in Nature, and in Manners, and publick Custome; but the praise of it is not in the Gospel; that is, It hath no proper and direct uses in Religion. For if the dead did dye in the Lord, then there is joy in him; and it is an ill expression of our affection, and our charity, to weep uncomfortably at the change that hath carried my friend to the state of an huge felicity. But if the man did perish in his folly, and his sinnes, there is indeed cause to mourn, but no hopes of being com∣forted; for hee shall never return to
light, or to hopes of restitution; Therefore beware lest thou also come into the same place of torment; and let thy grief sit down, and rest upon thine own turf, and weep till a showre spring from thine eyes to heal the wounds of thy spirit. Turn thy sorrow into caution, thy grief for him that is dead, to thy care for thy self who art alive, lest thou dye, and fall like one of the fools, whose life is worse than death, and their death is the consummation of all infelicities. The Church in her fu∣nerals of the dead used to sing Psalms, and to give thanks for the redempti∣on, and delivery of the soul from the evill, and dangers of mortality. And therefore wee have no reason to bee angry when God hears our prayers, who call upon him to hasten his coming, and to fill up his numbers, and to do that which wee pretend to give him thanks for. Ne excedat medicina modum. Galenus. CUt not too deep, nor lance too far; Nam non medicina ista, sed
clades est, said Germanicus in Tacitus, when hee saw a great number of Souldiers put to death for Mutiny, ▪ Beriere nocentes Sed cum jam soli poterunt supersse nocentes. Spoken by Lucan of Scylla; hee let out the corrupt blood, but when there was in a manner no other blood left in the whole body of the Com∣monwealth; and this was not to cure, but to cut off a Common∣wealth. And therefore in all punish∣ments let this bee your rule, and let the severity of your justice bee regu∣lated by this prudential and merci∣ful Aphorisme; Poena ad paucos, met us ad omnes perveniat, let the clap fright all, the Thunderbolt strike but a few. For principi non minùs turpia multa sup∣plicia quàm medico funera, it is as great a shame for a Magistrate, as for a Physitian to have many dye under his hand. To save whole multitudes, is a work of Gods mercy; and that Prince deserves the name of Gods Vicegerent that imitates him in this particular. For which reason it was that Scipio when hee put thirty of
his Souldiers to death, ante suas lachry∣mas quam ipsorum sanguinem effudit, shed his own tears before their blood. Si molliora frustra cesserint medicus ferit venam, Senec. Et efflatur omne priusquam concutitur, idem. NOthing is struck with the Thun∣derbolt, which is not blasted be∣fore with lightning; first to use gentle means before wee take a more severe course. For great spirits are for the most part like the Colossus at Taren∣tum, which you may move with your finger, but cannot wag if you put your whole strength to it, it a ratio est libramenti, Plin. Much resembling in this the Pyrrhite stone, which may bee gently ground, or cut with a sharp tool, but if you press it hard, or handle it rudely, it burneth your fin∣gers; So great men may be wrought upon in a civil courteous way, but if you think to bring them to goodness by authority and power, you will then put them in minde of their own
strength, raise enemies, and oppositi∣on, where you did expect a compli∣ance, and friends; and so instead of saving others, you will destroy your self. Suâ sponte cadentem maturius extin∣guere vulnere, inhumanum est. Cice. TO break the bruised reed, to trouble the grieved spirit, to strike the breath out of a mans body, who is giving up the ghost, is cruelty upon cruelty. And therefore it was the complaint of Cyprian against the per∣secutors of Christians in his time, in servis Dei non torquebantur membra sed vulnera, they laid stripes upon stripes, and inflicted wounds upon sores, and tortured not so much the members of Gods servants, as their bleeding wounds.
Tota funeris pompa contemnenda est in nobis, non tamen negligenda in nostris. Cice. THough the pomp of Funerals con∣cerns not the dead in real and effe∣ctive purposes, nor is it with care to bee provided for within themselves; yet it is the duty of the living to see their friends fairly interred: For to the dead it is all one whether they bee carried forth upon a Chariot, or a wodden Beer, whether they rot in the air, or in the earth, whether they bee devoured by fishes, or by worms. When Cryton asked Socrates how hee would bee buried, hee told him, I think I shall escape from you, and that you cannot catch mee; but so much of mee as you can apprehend, use it as you see cause for, and bury it, but however do it according to the Laws. There is nothing in this but opinion, and the decency of some to bee ser∣ved. Let thy friend therefore bee in∣terred after the manner of the Coun∣try, and the Laws of the place, and the dignity of the person. For so
Jacob was buried with great solemni∣ty, and Josophs bones were carried into Canaan, after they had been embalm∣ed, and kept four hundred years, and devout men carried St. Stephen to his burial, making great lamentation over him. And Aelian tells, that those who were the most excellent persons were buried in purple, and men of an ordinary courage and fortune, had their graves only trimmed with branches of Olive, and mourning flowers. It was noted for piety in the men of Jabesh Gilead, that they shew∣ed kindness to their Lord Sanl, and buried him, and they did it honour∣ably. And our blessed Saviour, who was temperate in his expence, and grave in all the parts of his life and death, as age and sobriety it self, yet was pleased to admit the cost of Maries oyntment upon his head and feet, be∣cause shee did it against his burial; and though shee little thought it had been so nigh, yet because hee accepted it for that end, hee knew hee had made her Apology sufficient; by which hee remarked it to bee a great act of piety, and honourable to inter
our friends and relatives, according to the proportion of their condition, and so to give a testimony of our hopes of their resurrection. In spiritualibus nihil perfectum. Au∣gustinus Serm. TO prove this, that in spiritual things nothing is perfect, wee may afford a kinde of spiritual nature to knowledge. And how imperfect is all our knowledge; what one thing do wee know perfectly? whether wee consider Arts or Sciences, the servant knows but according to the proportion of his Masters knowledge in that Art; and the Scholar knows but according to the proportion of his Masters knowledge in that Sci∣ence: Young men mend not their sight by using old mens spectacles. Almost all knowledge is rather like a childe that is imbalmed to make mummy, than that is nursed to make a man; rather conserved in the sta∣ture of the first age, than grown to be greater; rather a singularity in a
desire of proposing something that was not known at all before, then an improving an advancing, a multiply∣ing of former inceptions; and by that means no knowledge comes to be perfect. St. Paul found that to be all knowledge to know Christ; and Ma∣homet thinks himself wise therefore, be∣cause he knows not, nor acknowledges Christ as Paul did. Though a man knew not that every sin casts another shovel of brimstone upon him in hell; yet if hee knew that every riotous feast cuts off a year, and every wanton night seven years of his seventy in this world; it were some degree to∣wards perfection in knowledge. Hee that purchases a Mannor, will think to have an exact survey of the land; but who thinks of taking so exact survey of his conscience, how that money was got that purchased that Mannor? We call that a mans means which hee hath; but that is truly his means what way hee came by it; and yet how few are there (when a state comes to any great proportion) that know that, that know what they have, what they are worth. Wee
have seen Wills where the Testator thinks hee hath bequeathed all, and hee hath not known half his own worth. When thou knowest a wife, a son, a friend, a servant, no better, but that that wife betrayes thy bed, and that son thy estate, and that ser∣vant thy credit, and that friend thy secret, what canst thou say thou knowest? But let us consider this Thesis in spiritual things, of a more rarified nature than knowledge in faith, hope, and charity; and wee shall finde all these to fall within this posi∣tion, and that there is nothing in any of these three, perfect. And first for faith, if you remember who they were that made that prayer, Do∣mine adauge, and the Apostles them∣selves prayed, that their faith might receive an increase, Lord increase our faith; you must necessarily second that consideration with a confession, that no mans faith is perfect. There are men that abound in faith, that is in comparison of the emptiness of other men, or of their own emptiness before they imbraced the Gospel, they abound now, but still it is as
God hath given the measure of faith to every one, Rom. 12. 3. not as of Manna, a certain measure, and an equal measure, and a full measure to every man; no man hath such a measure of faith as that hee needs no more, or that hee may not lose at least some of that. And as our faith is not perfect so neither our hope, for so ar∣gues the Apostle, Jam. 4. 3. Yee ask and receive not, because yee ask amiss; you cannot hope constantly, because you do not pray aright; and to make a prayer, a right prayer, there goes so many essential circumstances, as that the best man may justly suspect his best prayer; for since prayer must bee of faith, prayer can bee but so per∣fect as the faith is perfect; and the im∣perfections of the best faith wee have seen, Christ hath given us but a short prayer, and yet wee are weary of that. Some of the old Hereticks of the Pri∣mitive Church abridged that Prayer, and some new fangled men of these times have annihilated, evacuated that prayer, because, say they, the same Spirit that spake in Christ, speaks in their extemporal prayers, and they
can pray as well as Christ could teach them. And again (to leave these) which of us sayes over that short prayer with a deliberate understanding of every petition as wee pass, or without deviations, and extravagancies of our thoughts in that half minute of our devotion? I throw my self down in my chamber, and I call in, and in∣vite God and his Angels thither, and when they are there, I neglect God and his Angels for the noise of a flye, for the ratling of a coach, for the whining of a door. I talk on in the same posture of prayer, eyes lifted up, knees bowed down, as though I prayed to God; and if God or his Angels should askmee, When I thought last of God in that prayer, I cannot tell: sometimes I finde that I had forgot what I was about, but when I began to forget it, I cannot tell. A memory of yesterdayes plea∣sures, a fear of to morrows dangers, a straw under my knee, a noise in mine ears, a light in mine eye, an any thing, a nothing, a fancie, a chymera in my brain, troubles me in my praier;
so certainly is there nothing, nothing in spiritual things perfect in this world; not in credendis, in things that belong to faith, not in petendis, in things that belong to hope, nor in a∣gendis in things that belong to action, to works, to charity, there is nothing perfect there neither. I would bee loath to say that every good word is a sin, that were to say that every de∣formed, or disordered man were a beast, or that every corrupt meat were poyson, it is not utterly so, nor so al∣together, but it is so much towards it, as that there is no work of ours so good, as that we can look for thanks at Gods hand for that work; no work that hath not so much ill mingled with it, as that we need not cry God mercy for that work. There was so much corruption in the getting, or so much vain-glory in the bestowing, as that no man builds an Hospital, but his soul dyes, though not dead, yet lame in the Hospital; no man mends a High-way, but hee is, though not drowned, yet mired in that way; no man relieves the poor, but hee needs relief for that relief, In all those works
of charity, the world that hath be∣nefit by them is bound to confess and acknowledge a goodness, and to call them good works, but the man that doth them, and knows the weakness of them, knows they are not good works. It is possible to Art to put a peccant humour out of a sick body, but not possible to raise a dead body to life. God out of my confession, of the impurity of my best actions, shall vouchlafe to take off his eyes from that impurity, as though there were none, but no spiritual thing in us, nor faith, nor hope, nor charity, have any purity, any perfection in themselves. Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux, nox est perpetuo una dormienda. Catullus: THe Gentiles and their Poets des∣cribe the sad state of death so, nox una dormienda, that it is one everlast∣ing night to them, a night; but to a Christian, it is dies Mortis, and dies Resurrectionis, the day of Death, and the day of Resurrection; wee dye in
the light, in the sight of Gods pre∣sence, and wee rise in the light in the sight of his very essence. Nay Gods corrections and judgements upon us in this life, are still expressed so, dies Visitationis, still it is a day, though a day of Visitation, and still wee may discern God to bee in the action. The Lord of life was the first that named Death; Morte morieris, sayes God, Thou shalt dye the death. I do the less fear, or abhor death, because I finde it in his mouth; even a Male∣diction hath a sweetness in his mouth, for there is a blessing wrapped up in it, a mercy in every correction, a re∣surrection upon every death. When Jezabels beauty exalted to that height, which it had by art, or higher than that, to that height which it had in her own opinion, shall bee infinitely multiplied upon every body, and as God shall know no man from his own son, so as not to see the very righteousness of his own Son upon that man; so the Angels shall know no man from Christ, so as not to de∣sire to look upon that mans face, be∣cause the most deformed wretch that
is there, shall have the very beauty of Christ himself; So shall Goliahs Armour, and Dives fulness bee doubled, and redoubled upon us, and every thing that wee can call good, shall first bee infinitely exalted in the goodness, and then infinitely multi∣plied in the proportion, and again in∣finitely extended in the duration. Solus Deus verè festumagat. Philo Judae. IT hath been disputed by many both of the Gentiles, with whom the Fathers disputed, and of the Schoolmen, who dispute with one another, ansit gaudium in Deo de se∣met; whether God rejoyce in himself in contemplation of himself, whether God bee glad that hee is God: But it is disputed by them only to establish it, and to illustrate it; for I do not re∣member that any one of them denies it. It is true, that Plato dislikes, and justly, that saluration of Dionysius the Tyrant, to God, Gaude & servato vi∣tam Tyranni jucundam, that hee
should say to God, Live merrily, as merrily as a King, as merrily as I do; and then you are good enough to imagine such a joy in God as is only a transitory delight in deceivable things, is an impious conceit. But when as another Platonique sayes, Deus est quod ipse semper voluit, God is that which hee would bee, if there bee something that God would bee, and hee bee that, if Plato should deny, that God joyed in himself; wee must say of Plato as Lactantius doth, Deus potius seminaverat quam cognoverat. Plato had rather dreamed that there was a God, than understood what that God was, Bonum simplex, saith St. Augustine, to bee sincere goodness, goodness it self, Ipsa est delectatio Dei, this is the joy that God hath in him∣self, of himself; and there sayes Philo Judaeus, hoc necessarium Philosophiae sadalibus, this is the tenent of all Philosophers (and by that title of Phi∣losophers, Philo alwayes means them that know and study God) solum De∣um verè festum agere, that only God can bee truly said to keep holy day, and to rejoyce.
This joy we shall see, when we see him who is so in it, as that hee is this joy it self. But here in this world, so far as I can enter into my Masters sight, I can enter into my Masters joy. I can see God in his creatures, in his Church, in his Word, and Sacraments, and Ordinances, since I am not with∣out this sight, I am not without this joy. Here a man may transilire mor∣talitatom, sayes the divine moral man. I cannot put off mortality, but I can look upon immortality; I cannot depart from this earth, but I can look into Heaven. So I cannot possess that final, and accomplished joy here, but as my body can lay down a burden, or a heavy garment, and joy in that case; so my soul can put off my body so far, as that the concupiscences thereof, and the manifold, and miserable incumbrances of this World, cannot extinguish this holy Joy.
De fiderium generat satietatem, & satie∣t as parit desiderium. Bern. THere is a spiritual fulness in this life, of which St. Jerom speaks, Ebrietas foelix, satietas salutaris, a happy excess, and a wholesome surfeit, Quae quanto copiosius sumitur, majo∣rem donat sobrietatem, in which the more wee eat, the more temperate wee are, and the more wee drink, the more sober. In which (as St. Bernard also expresses it in his Mellifluence) Mutuâ, interminab ili, inexplicab ili, ge∣neratione, by a mutual, and reciprocal, by an undeterminable, & unexpressible generation of one another, the desire of spiritual graces begets a satiety, If I would bee, I am full of them, and then this satiety begets a further de∣sire; still we have a new appetite to those spiritual graces; this is a holy ambition, a sacred covetousness, and a wholesome dropsie. Napth alies blessing, O Napthali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the Lord. St. Stephens blessing, Full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost;
the blessed Virgins blessing, Full of grace; Dorcas blessing, Full of good works, and of Alms-deeds; the bles∣sing of him, who is blessed above all, and who blesseth all, Christ Jesus, Full of Wisdome, full of the Holy Ghost, full of Grace and Truth. But so far are all temporal things from giving this fulness or satisfaction, as that even in spiritual things, there may bee, there is often an error, or mistaking; even in spiritual things, there may bee a fulness, and no satisfaction, and there may bee a satisfaction, and no fulness; I may have as much knowledge as is presently necessary for my salvation, and yet have a restless and unsatisfied desire, to search into unprofitable curi∣osities, unrevealed mysteries, and in∣extricable perplexities: And on the other side, a man may bee satisfied, and think hee knows all, when God knows, hee knows nothing at all; For, I know nothing, if I know not Christ crucified, and I know not that, if I know not how to apply him to my self; nor do I know that, if I im∣brace him not in those means, which hee hath afforded mee in his Church;
in his Word, and Sacraments; if I neglect this means, this place, these exercises, howsoever I may satisfie my self with an over-valuing mine own knowledge at home, I am so far from fulness, as that vanity it self, is not more empty. Resurrectio à peccato, & cessatio à pec∣cato, non est idem. Durand. EVery cessation from sin, is not a resurrection from sin. A man may discontinue a sin, intermit the practise of a sin, by infirmity of the body, or by satiety in the sin, or by the absence of that person, with whom hee hath used to communicate in that sin. But resurrectio est secunda ejus, quod interiit, statio. A resurrection is such an abstinence from the practise of the sin, as is grounded upon a re∣pentance, and a detestation of the sin, and then it is a setling, and an establish∣ing of the soul in that state, and dis∣position; it is not a sudden and tran∣sitive remorse, nor only a reparation of that which was ruined, and demo∣lished,
but it is a building up of habits contrary to former habits, and cu∣stomes, in actions contrary to that sin, that wee have been accustomed to, else it is but an intermission, not a resurrection, but a starting, not a waking, but an apparition, not a li∣ving body, but a cessation, not a peace of conscience. Now this resurrection is begun, and well advanced in baptismate lachryma∣rum in the baptisme of true, & repen∣tant tears. But to put off this repen∣tance to the death-bed is a dangerous delay. For is any man sure to have it, or sure to have a desire to it then? It is never impertinent to repeat St. Au∣gustines words in this case, Etiam hac animadversione percutitur peccator ut moriens obliviscatur sui, quidam vive∣ret, oblitus est Dei, God begins a dy∣ing mans condemnation at this, that as hee forgot God in his life, so hee shall forget himself at his death. Compare thy temporal, and thy spiritual state together, and consider how they may both stand well at that day. If thou have set thy state in or∣der, and made a Will before, and
have nothing to do at last, but to adde a Codicil, this is soon dispatched at last; but if thou leave all till then, it may prove a heavy business. So if thou have repented before, and setled thy self in a religious course before, and have nothing to do then, but to wrestle with the power of the dis∣ease, and the agonies of death, God shall fight for thee in that weak estate, God shall imprint in thee a Cupio dissolvi, St. Pauls not only con∣tentedness but desire to bee dis∣solved, and God shall give thee a glo∣rious resurrection, yea an ascention into heaven before thy death, and thou shalt see thy selfe in possession of his eternal Kingdome, before thy bodily eyes bee shut. When even thy death-bed shall bee as Elias Chariot to carry thee to heaven, and as the bed of the Spouse in the Can∣ticles, which was lectus floridus, a green and flourishing bed, where thou maiest finde by a faithful appre∣hension, that thy sickness hath crowned thee with a Crown of thorns, by participation of the suffer∣ings of thy Saviour, and that thy
patience hath crowned thee with that Crown of glory, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall impart to thee that day. In divinis nihil minimum. Tertul. IT is a wanton thing for any Church in spiritual matters to play with small errors, to tolerate, or wink at small abuses, as though it should bee alwayes in her power to extin∣guish them when shee would. It is Christs counsel to his Spouse, that is, the Church, Capite vulpes parvulas, take us the little Foxes, for they de∣stroy the vine, though they seem but little, and able to do little harm, yet they grow bigger, and bigger every day; and therefore stop errors before they become heresies, and erroneous men, before they become hereticks. Capite, sayes Christ, take them, suffer them not to go on; but then it is Ca∣pite nobis, take us those Foxes, take them for us, the bargain is between Christ and his Church. For it is not Capite vobis, take them to your selves,
and make your selves judges of such doctrinal matters, as appertain not to your cognizance; nor it is not Cape tibi, take him to thy self, spy out a recusant, or a man otherwise, not con∣formable and take him for thy labour, beg him, and spoyl him, and for his Re∣ligion leave him as you found him; neither is it Cape sibi, take him for his ease, that is, compound with him easi∣ly, and continue him in his estate, and errors; but Cape nobis, take him for us, so detect him, as hee may thereby be re∣duced to Christ and his Church. Neither only this counsel of Christ to his Church, but that Commande∣ment of God in Levitious, is also ap∣pliable to this, Non misereberis paupe∣ris in judicio, Thou shalt not counte∣nance a poor man in his cause, thou shalt not pity a poor man in judge∣ment. Though a new opinion may seem a poor opinion, able to do little harm, though it may seem a pious, and pro∣fitable opinion, and of good use, yet in judicio, if it stand in judgement, and pretend to bee an Article of faith, and of that holy obligation, matter
necessary to salvation; Non misereberis, thou shalt not spare, thou shalt not countenance this opinion upon any collateral respect, but bring it to the only trial of Doctrines, the Scrip∣tures. Neither doth this Counsel of Christs, Take us these little Foxes, nor this Commandement of God, Thou shalt not pitty the poor in judgement, de∣termine it self in the Church, or in the publick only, but extends it self (rather contracts it self) to every par∣ticular soul and conscience, Capite Vulpeculas, take your little Foxes, watch your first inclination to sins, for if you give them luck at first, if you feed them with the milk and hony of the mercy of God, it shall not bee in your power to wean them when you would, but they will draw you from one to another extream, from a former presumption to a future desparation in Gods mercy. So also, Non misereberis, Thou shalt not pity the poor in judgement: Now that thou callest thy self to judgement, and thy conscience to an examination, thou shalt not pity any sin, because it pre∣tends
to bee a poor sin, either prove so, that it cannot much endanger thee, nor much incumber thee, or poor so, as that it threatens thee with poverty, with penury, with disability to support thy state, or maintain thy Family, if thou entertain it not. Many times I have seen a Suitor that comes in Forma pauperis, more trouble a Court, and more importune a Judge, than greater causes or greater persons; and so may such fins as come in Forma pauperis, either way, that they plead poverty, that they can do little harm, or threaten poverty if they bee not entertained. Those sins are the most dangerous sins, which pretend reason why they should bee enter∣tained; for sins which are done meerly out of infirmity, or out of the sur∣prisal of tentation, are (in comparison of others) done as sins in our sleep, but in sins upon deliberation, upon counsel, upon pretence of reason, wee do see the wisdome of God, but wee set our wisdome above his, wee do see the Law of God, but we insert, and in∣terline, non obstantes of our own, into Gods Law.
If therefore thou wilt corruptly, and vitiously, and sinfully love another, out of pitty, because they love thee so; if thou wilt assist a poor man in a cause, out of pretence of pitty, with thy countenance, and the power of thy place, that that poor man may have something, and thou the rest that is recovered in his right, if thou wilt imbrace any particular sin, out of pitty, lest thy wife and children should bee left unprovided; if thou have not taken these little Foxes, that is, re∣sisted these tentations at the begin∣ning, yet nunc in judicio, now that they appear in judgement, in exa∣mination of thy conscience, non mise∣reberis, thou shalt not pitty them (as Moses speaks of false Prophets, and by a fair accommodation of all be∣witching sins, with pleasure or profit) If a Dreamer of dreams have given thee a sign, and that sign bee come to pass; If a sin have told thee, it would make thee rich, and it have made thee rich; yet if this Dreamer draw thee to another god, if this profit draw thee to an Idolatrous, that is, to an habitual love of that sin (Tot habe∣mus
recentes Deos, quot vitia, sayes St. Hierom, Every man hath so many Idols in him, as hee hath habitual sins) yet though this Dreamer (as God proceeds there) bee thy brother, or thy son, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, how near, how dear, how necessary soever this sin bee un∣to thee; non misereberis, sayes Moses, Thine eye shall not pity that Dreamer, thou shalt not keep him secret, but thine own hand shall bee upon him to kill him: And so of this pleasurable and pro∣fitable sin; non misereberis, thou shalt not hide it, but powre it out in con∣fession; non misereberis, thou shalt not pardon, no nor reprieve it, but de∣stroy it, for the practise presently; non misereberis, thou shalt not turn out the mother, and retain the daughter, not leave the sin, and retain that which was sinfully got, but devest all, root, and body, and fruits, by con∣fession to God, by contrition in thy self, by restitution to men damni∣fied; else that will fall upon thee, and thy soule which fell upon the Church, that because they did not take their little Foxes, they en∣dangered
the whole Vine. Sicut invisibilibus est Sol, in intelligi∣bilibus est Deus. Nazian. VVHen wee consider the libe∣rality of our King, the bounty of our God to man in Christ, it is species ingratitudinis, it is a degree of ingratitude; nay, it is a degree of forgetfulness, to pretend to remember his benefits so, as to reckon them, for they are innumerable. Bonitas Dei ad extra, liberalit as est, it is the expressing of the School, and of much use, that God is essential goodness, within doors, in himself, but ad extra, when hee comes abroad, when this interior goodness is pro∣duced into action, then all Gods goodness is liberality. Deus est vo∣luntas omnipotens, is excellently said by St. Bernard, God is all Almighti∣ness, all Power, but hee might bee so, and wee never the better. Therefore hee is voluntas omnipotens, a power digested into a will, as willing as able to do us all, all good. What good?
Receive some drops of it in St. Ber∣nards own Manna, his own Honey, Creans mentes ad se participandum, so good, as that hee hath first given us souls capable of him, and made us so, partakers of the Divine Nature; Vivificans ad sentiendum, so good, as that hee hath quickned those souls, and made them sensible of having received him; for grace is not grace to mee, till it make mee know that I have it, aliciens ad appetendum, so good, as that hee hath given tht soul an appetite, and an holy hunger, and thirst to take in more of him; for I have no grace, till I would have more; and then, Dilatans ad capiendum, so good, as that hee hath dilated, and inlarged that soule to take in as much of God as hee will. And lest the soul should lose any of this by unthankfulness, God is kinde even to the unthankful, sayes God himself which is a degree of goodness, in which God seldome is; nay, in which God scarce looks to bee imitated, to bee kinde to the un∣thankfull. But if the whole space to the Firmament were filled with
sand, and wee had before us Clavius his number, how many thousands would bee; if all that space were filled with water, and so joyned the waters above, with the waters be∣low the Firmament, and wee had the number of all those drops of wa∣ter; and then had every single sand, and every single drop multiplied by the whole number of both, wee were still short of numbring the benefits of God, as God; but then, of God in Christ, infinitely, super-infinitely short. To have been once nothing, and to bee now co-heire with the Son of God, is such a circle, such a com∣pass, as that no revolutions in this world, to rise from the lowest to the highest, or to fall from the highest to the lowest, can bee called or thought any segment, any arch, any point, in respect of this circle; To have once been nothing, and now to bee co-heires with the Son of God, that Son of God, who if there had been but one soule to have been sa∣ved, would have dyed for that; nay,
if all souls had been to bee saved, but one, and that that only had sinned, he would not have been contented with all the rest, but would have dyed for that. And there is the goodness, the liberality of our King, our God, our Christ, our Jesus. Ad patriam itur per ipsum mare, sed in ligno. August. VVHich way think you to go home to the Heavenly Je∣rusalem, you must pass through seas of difficulties, and therefore by ship, and in a ship, you are not safe, ex∣cept other Passengers in the same ship bee safe too. Therefore said Christ to James and John, Non est meum dare vobis, it is not mine to give, to ser you on my right, and on my left hand; Non vobis, quia singuli separati ab liis rogatis, not to you, because you consider but your selves, and petition for your selves, to the prejudice and exclusion of others. Therefore Christ bad the Samaritan woman call her husband too, when shee desired
the water of life, Ne sola gratiam acci∣peret, saith St. Chrysostome, that hee might so do good to her, as that o∣thers might have good by it too. The Spouse saith, Trahe me post te, draw mee after thee. When it is but a mee, in the singular, but one part considered there is a violence, a difficulty, a drawing, but presently after, when there is an uniting in a plural, there is an alacrity, a concurrence, a willing∣ness, Curremus post te, wee will run after thee; if wee would joyn in publick considerations, wee should run together. Quantumlibet sis avarus, sufficit tibi Deus. St. Augustine. ACcustome thy self to finde the presence of God inall thy get∣tings, in all thy preferments, in all thy studies, and hee will bee abun∣dantly sufficient to thee for all. Bee as covetous as thou wilt, bee as ambi∣tious as thou canst, the more, the bet∣ter; God is treasure, God is honour enough for thee. Avaritia terram
quaerit, saith the same Father, adde, & Coelum, wouldest thou have all this world? wouldest thou have all the next world too? Plus est, qui fecit coelum & terram, hee that made heaven and earth, is more than all that, and thou mayest have all him. Upon this, St. Cyprians wonder is just, Deum nobis solis contentum esse, nobis non sufficere Deum, that God should think man enough for him, and man should not bee satisfied with God, that God should bee content with Fili da mihicor, my Son give mee thy heart, and man should not bee content with, Pater da mihi spi∣ritum, my God, my Father, Grant, mee thy Spirit, but must have tem∣poral additions too. Non est castum cor, saith St. Augustine, Si Deum ad mercedem colit; as hee saith in another place, Non est casta uxor quae amat quiae dives, shee is never the honester woman, nor the lovinger wife, that loves her husband in contemplation of her future joynture, or in fruition of her present abundancies; so hee sayes here, Non est castum cor, that
man hath not a chaste, a sincere heart towards God, that loves him by the measure, end, proportion of his tem∣poral blessings. And indeed what profits it a man, if hee get all the world, and lose his own soul; and therefore that opinion that there was no profit at all, no de∣gree towards blessedness in those tem∣poral things, prevailed so far, as that it is easie to observe in their Expo∣sitions upon the Lords Prayer, that the greatest part of the Fathers, do ever interpret that Petition, Da no∣bis hodie, Give us this day our daily bread, to bee intended only of spiri∣tual blessings, and not of temporal; so St. Hierom saith, When wee ask that bread, Illum petimus, qui panis vivus est, & descendit de olo, wee make our Petition for him who is the bread of life, and descended from the bosome of the Father, and so hee re∣fers it to Christ, and in him to the whole mystery of our Redemption. And Athanasius, and St. Augustine too (and not they two alone) refer it to the Sacramental bread; that in that Petition, wee desire such an ap∣plication
of the bread of life, as wee have in the participation of the body and blood of Christ Josus in that Communion. St. Cyprian insists upon the word Nostrum, our bread; for saith hee. Temporal blessings cannot properly bee called ours, because they are common to the Saints, and to the Reprobates; but in a prayer ordained by Christ for the faithful, the Petition is for such things as are proper and peculiar to the faithful, and that is for spiritual blessings only. If any man shall say, Ideo quaerenda quia necessaria, wee must pray, and wee must labour for temporal things, because they are necessary for us, wee cannot bee without them, Ideo non quaerenda quia necessaria, sayes St. Chrysostome, so much of them as is necessary for our best state, God will give us, without this laborious anxi∣ety, and without eating the bread of sorrow in this life, Non sperandum de superfluis, non desperandum de necessa∣riis, sayes the same Father, It is a suspicious thing to doubt, or distrust God in necessary things, & it is an un∣mannerly thing to press him in super∣fluous
things. They are not necessa∣ry before, and they are not ours after; for those things onely are ours, which no body can take from us; and for temporal things, Anferre potest ini∣micus homo invito, let the inimicus ho∣mo bee the Devil, and remember Jobs case, let the inimicus homo bee any envious and powerfull man, who hath a mind to that that thou hast; and remember Naboths case, and this en∣vious man can take any temporal thing from thee against thy will. But spiritual blessings cannot bee taken so, idem nemo perdidit, nisi qui spre∣verit, sayes St. Augustine, No man ever lost his faith, but hee that thought it not worth the keeping. Perfect a obedientia est sua imperfecta relinquere. August. THis Peter and Andrew declared abundantly when they left their Nets and followed Christ; yet how∣ever in this leaving of their Nets, there is no example of devesting ones self of all means of defending us from
those manifold necessities, which this life layes upon, upon pretence of following Christ, it is not an abso∣lute leaving of all worldly cares, but a leaving them out of the first con∣sideration, primum quaerite regnum Dei, so as our first business bee to seek the Kingdome of God; For, after this leaving of his Nets, for this time, Peter continued owner of his house, and Christ came to that house of his, and found his mother in Law sick in that house, and re∣covered her there. Upon a like Commandement, upon such a se∣quere, follow mee, Matthow follow∣ed Christ too; but after that follow∣ing, Christ went with Matthew to his house, and sate at meat with him at home. And for this very exer∣cise of Fishing, though at that time when Christ said, Follow wee, they left their nets, yet they returned to that trade, sometimes upon occasions, in all likelihood in Christs life, and after Christs death, clearly they did return to it, for Christ, after his Re∣surrection, found them fishing. They did not therefore abandon,
and leave all care, and all govern∣ment, of their own estate, and dis∣pose themselves to live after upon the sweat of others, but transported with a holy alacrity, in this present, and chearful following of Christ, in respect of that then, they neglected their nets, and all things else. Not to be too diligent towards the world, is the diligence that God re∣quires. St. Augustine doth not say, Suae relinquere, but Sua imperfecta relin∣quere, that God requires wee should leave the world, but that wee should leave it to second considerations, that thou do not forbear, nor defer thy conversion to God, and thy restitu∣tion to man, till thou have purcha∣sed such an estate, bought such an of∣fice, married, and provided such, and such children, but imperfecta re∣linquere, to leave these worldly things unperfected till thy repentance have restored thee to God, and established thy reconciliation in him, and then the world lyes open to thy honest endeavours. Others take up all with their net,
and they sacrifice to their Nets, be∣cause by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. They are confident in their own learning, their own wisdome, their own pra∣ctise, and (which is a strange Ido∣latry) they sacrifice to themselves, they attribute all to their own in∣dustry. Christus non quaesivit per oratorem pis∣catorem, sed de piscatore lucratus est imperatorem. August. CHrist having a greater, a fairer Jerusalem to build than Davids was, a greater Kingdome to establish than Judahs was, a greater Temple to build than Solomons was, having a greater work to raise, yet hee begun upon a lesse ground; Hee is come from his twelve Tribes, that afforded Armies in swarmes, to twelve per∣sons, twelve Apostles, from his Juda and Levi, the foundations of State, and Church; to an Andrew, and a Peter, Fisher-men, Sea-men. Hee sent not out Orators, Rhetoricians, strong, or fair-spoken men to work
upon these Fisher-men; but by these Fisher-men hee hath redu∣ced all those Kings and Empe∣rours, and States which have im∣braced the Christian Religion, these thousand and six hundred years. When Samuel was sent with that general Commission to anoint a Son of Ishai King without any more particular instructions, when hee came, and Eliab was presented unto him, Surely, sayes Samuel (noting the goodliness of his personage) this is the Lords anointed. But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, nor the height of his sta∣ture, for I have refused him; for (as it followeth there from Gods mouth) God seeth not as a man seeth, man look∣eth on the outward appearance, but the Lord beholdeth the heart. And so David in appearance, lesse likely, was chosen. But if the Lords Arm bee not shortned, let no man impute weakness to the instrument. For so, when David himself was appointed by God to pursue the Amalekites, the Amalekites that had burnt Ziglag, and done such spoyl upon Gods
people, as that the people began to speak of stoning David, from whom they looked for defence, when David had no kind of intelligence, no ground to settle a conjecture upon, which way hee must pursue the Amalekites, and yet pursue them hee must, in the way hee findes a poor young fellow, a famished, sick young man, de∣relicted of his Master, and left for dead in the march, and by the meanes, and conduct of this wretch, David recovers the enemy, recovers the spoyl, recovers his honour, and the love of his people. If the Lords Arm bee not short∣ned, let no man impute weakness to his instrument. But yet God will al∣wayes have so much weakness ap∣pear in the instrument, as that their strength shall not bee thought to bee their own. When Peter and John preached in the streets, the people marvelled (sayes the Text) why? For they had understood that they were unlearned. But beholding also the man that was healed standing by, they had nothing to say, sayes that story. The insuffi∣ciency
of the instrument makes a man wonder naturally, but the ac∣complishing of some great work, brings them to a necessary acknow∣ledgement of a greater power work∣ing in that weak instrument. For if those Apostles that preached, had been as learned men, as Simon Magu, as they did in him (This man is the great power of God, not that hee had, but that hee was the power of God) the people would have rested in the admiration of those persons, and proceeded no further. It was their working of supernatural things, that convinced the world; Peter and Johns preaching did not half the good then, as the presenting of one man, which had been recovered by them did. Twenty of our Sermons edifie not so much, as if the Congregation might see one man converted by us. Any one of you might out-preach us. That one man that would leave his beloved sin, that one man that would restore ill-gotten goods, had made a better Sermon than ever I shall, and should gain more souls
by his act, than all our words (as they are ours) can do. Oportet hominem fieri unum. Clem. Alex. MAn must grow in his conside∣ration, till hee be but one man, one individual man. If hee consi∣der himself in humanitate, in the whole mankinde a glorious creature, an immortal soul, be shall see this im∣mortal soul, as well in Goats at the left hand, as in Sheep at the right hand of Christ, at the Resurrection; men on both sides. If hee consider himself in qualitate, in his quality, in his calling, hee shall hear many then plead their Prophetavimus; wee have prophefied, and their ejecimus, wee have exercised, and their virtutes fe∣cimus, wee have done wonders, and all in thy Name, and yet receive that answer, Nunquam cognovi, I do not know you now, I never did know you. Oportet unum fieri, hee must consider himself in individuo, that one man, not that man in nature,
not that man in calling, but that man in actions. Origen makes this use of those words, as hee found them, 1 Sam. chap. 1. Erat vir unus, there was one man (which was Elkanah) hee adds, Nomen ejus possessio Dei, This one man, sayes hee, was in his name Gods possession, Nam quem damones possident, non unus sed multi, for hee whom the Devill possesses, is not one. The same sinner is not the same thing, still hee clambers in his am∣bitious purposes, there hee is an Eagle; and yet lyes still groveling, and trodden upon at any greater mans threshold, there hee is a worm. Hee swells to all that are under him, there he is a full sea; and his dog that is above him, may wade over him; there hee is a shallow, an empty Ri∣ter. In the compass of a few dayes, hee neighs like a horse in the rage of his lust over all the City, and groans in a corner of the City, in an Hospi∣tal. A sinner is as many men, as hee hath vices; hee that is Elkanah, posses∣sio Dei, possessed by God, and in
possession of God, hee is unus homo, one, and the same man. And when God calls upon man so particularly, hee intends him some particular good. It is St. Jeroms note, That when God in the Scripture speaks of divers things in the singular number, it is ever in things of grace. And it is St. Augustines note, that when hee speaks of any one thing in the plural number, it is of heavy and sorrow∣full things; as Jeptha was buried in Civitatibus Gilead, in the Cities, but hee had but one grave, and so that is, they made Aureos vitulos, Golden Calves, when it was but one Calf. Multa relinquitis si desideria renuncia∣tis. Gregor. VVE read Mat. 4. That the Apo∣stles left their nets when they followed Christ. Their Nets were such things as might hinder them in the service of God: such nets, even these men the Apostles, so well disposed to follow Christ, had about them. And therefore let no man say, Imitari
vellem, sed quod relinquam, non habeo; I would gladly do as the Apostles did, leave all to follow Christ, but I have nothing to leave; alas all things have left mee, and I have nothing to leave. Even that murmuring at po∣verty, is a net, leave that. Leave thy superfluous desire of having the riches of this world, though thou mayest flatter thy self, that thou de∣sirest to have, only that thou mightest leave it, that thou mightest imploy it charitably, yet it might prove a net, and stick too close about thee to part with it. You leave your nets, if you leave your over-earnest greediness of catching; for when you do so, you do not onely fish with a net, you fish for a net, even that which you get proves a net to you, and hinders you in the following of Christ, and you are less disposed to follow him, when you have got your ends, than before. Hee that hath least, hath enough to weigh him down from heaven, by an inordinate love of that little which hee hath, or in an inordinate and murmuring desire of more. And hee that hath most,
hath not too much to give for hea∣ven, Tantum valet Regnum Dei, quantum tu vales, Heaven is alwayes so much worth, as thou art worth. A poor man may have Heaven for a penny, that hath no greater store, and God looks that hee to whom hee hath given thousands, should lay out thousands upon the purchase of Heaven. The Market changes as the plenty of money changes; Heaven costs a rich man more than a poor, because hee hath more to give. But in this, rich and poor are both equall, that both must leave themselves without nets, that is, without those things, which in their own consci∣ences they know, retard the follow∣ing of Christ. Whatsoever hinders my present following, that I cannot follow to day', whatsoever may hin∣der my constant following, that I cannot follow to morrow, and all my life is a net, and I am bound to leave that.
Dilige, & dic quod voles. August. LEt the Congregation see that thou studiest the good of their souls, and they will digest any whole∣some increpation, any medicinal re∣prehonsion at thy hands. Wee say so first to God, Lord let thy Spirit bear witnes with my spirit, that thou lovest me, and I can indure all thy Prophets, and all thy vae's, and the woes that they thunder against mee, and my sin: So also the Congregation sayes to the Minister, Dilige, & dic quod voles, shew thy love to mee, in stu∣dying my case, and applying thy knowledge to my conscience; speak so, as God and I may know thou meanest mee, but not the Congrega∣tion, lest that bring mee to a confu∣sion of face, and that to a hardness of heart; deal thus with mee, love mee thus, and say what thou wilt; nothing shall offend mee. Thus dealt Paul, Heb. 13. 22. I beseech you brethren, &c. And the strangeness of the case is exalted in this, that the word there is solatii, I beseech you suffer a word of
comfort; What will you hear wil∣lingly, if you do not willingly hear words of comfort? With what shall wee exercise your holy joy, and cheerfulness, if even words of com∣fort, must exercise your patience? And yet wee must beseech you to suffer even our words of comfort, for wee can propose no true com∣fort to you, but such as carries some bitterness with it; wee can create no true joy in you without some exer∣cise of your patience too. Wee can∣not: promise you peace with God, without a war in your selves, nor re∣conciliation to him without falling out with your selves, not eternal joy in the next world, without a solemn remorse for the sinful abuses of this. Wee cannot promise you a good to morrow without sending you back to the consideration of an ill yester∣day; for your hearing to day is not enough, except you repent yester∣day. But yet though with St. Paul wee bee put to beseech you, that you would suffer instruction, though wee must sometimes exercise your pati∣ence, yet it is but a word of in∣struction,
and counsel; and though in∣struction bee increpation sometimes, yet it may easily bee suffered, be∣cause it is but a word; a word, and away: Wee would not dwell upon increpations, and chidings, and bit∣ternesses. Lacrimae sanguis animae; Aug. Ser. de tempore. THe repentance and contrition of a sincere Christian for his sins upon his death-bed is such, that at more pores then his weak body sweats drops of water, his sad foul weeps blood, and this more for the displeasure of God, than the stripes of Gods dis∣pleasure. Ii verè irascitur Deus cui non irasci∣tur; & nihil eo infoelicius, cui nihil infoelix contigit: VVHom God loves hee chasteneth, Heb. 12. 6. Which rule of divine Occonomy, is so general, and without
exception, that even those duties that are promised a reward here as Alms∣deeds, are yet to expect the payment of this reward, with some mixture of affliction, the hundred fold which some men are promsed to receive, though they bee secular blessings, as houses, lands, &c. yet must they bee with persecutions, Mar. 10. 30. Licet in modum stagni fusum equor ar∣rideat▪ magnos hic campus mantes habet; tranquillitas ista tempestas est. Hieron. IT was more safe for Peter to bee called Satan by Christ, than for Judas to bee called Friend; such an appellation was a Sarcasme in a com∣plement; as when God tells his people by his Prophet, Hos. 4. 14. I will not visit, &c. Gods not visiting here was the greatest plague imagin∣able, and their highest affliction was, not at all to bee punished.
Triticum non rapit ven inanes, palae tempest jactantur, Cyprian. de simpliiat Frela. THe Church is the Barn-floor, the sincere and hypocritical Christian are the corn, and the chaffe in that floor, persecution and heretical do∣ctrine are the two winnowing windes to discern betwixt both; the corn is solid, and immoveable, and will sooner bee ground to powder, than yeeld either to the rough blasts of persecution, or those smooth flat∣tering gales of heresie, whereas the chaffe is carried about, and distra∣cted, with every winde either of per∣secuting, or pleasing doctrine, Eph. 4. 14. Ntu & elinguis ne hoc qui dem ha∣bens ut rogare possit, hoc magis ro∣gat quod rogare non potest, Hieron. Tom. 1. Epist. THe Cripple that cannot stir, works more upon our charity, than the
importunate sturdy beggar that fol∣lows the length of a street  and the very dumbness of those impotent per∣sons in the Gospel, was rhetorick e∣qually as powerful with our Savi∣our, as all those acclamations and Hosanna's of the Jews, the fear and modesty of that poor woman in the Gospel, that blushed to ask the cure of her bloody issue, had it by a touch; that very touch was an effe∣ctual prayer, and every finger a se∣veral votary to beg the blessing. Ant ubi mors non est si jugulatis aquoe? DEath meets us every where, and is procured by every instrument, and enters in at every door, by vio∣lence, and secret influence, by aspect of a star, and the stink of a mist, by the emissions of a cloud, and the meeting of a vapour, by a full meal, or an empty stomach, by watching at the wine, or by watching at prayers, by the Sun or the Moon, by a heat or a cold, by sleeping nights, or sleeping
dayes, by water frozen into the hard∣ness and sharpness of a dagger, or water thawed into the floods of a River: by a hair, or a raizor, by vio∣lent motion, or sitting still, by Gods mercy, or Gods anger; by every thing in providence, and every thing in manners; by every thing in nature, and every thing in chance. It was a sad arrest of the loosness and wilder feasts of the French Court, when their King Henry 2. was killed re∣ally by the sportive image of a fight; and many Brides have dyed under the hands of Maidens dressing them, for uneasie joy, the new and undis∣cerned chains of marriage. Anceps forma bonum, mortalibus ex∣igui donum breve temporis. Senec. I Have rend of a fair young German Gentleman, who living, often refu∣sed to bee pictured, but put off the importunity of his friends desire by giving way, that after a few dayes burial, they might send a Painter to his Vault, and if they saw cause for
it, draw the image of his death unto the life, they did so, and found his face half eaten, and his midrife, and back bone full of serpents, and so hee stands pictured among his armed Ancestors; so doth the fairest beauty change, and it will bee as bad with you, and mee, and then what ser∣vants shall wee have to wait upon us in the grave? what friends to visit us? what officious people to cleane away, the moist and unwholesome cloud reflected upon our faces from the sides of the weeping Vaults, which are the longest weepers for our Fu∣nerals. Quid fit futurum cras, fuge quaerere. Horace. LEt no man extend his thoughts or his hopes toward future and far distant Events. This day is mine, and yours, but yee know not what shall bee on the morrow, every morning creeps out of a dark cloud, leaving behinde it an ignorance and silence, deep as midnight, and undiscerned
as the phantasmes that make a chry∣some childe to smile; so that wee cannot discern what comes here∣after, unless wee had a light from heaven brighter than the vision of an Angel, even the Spirit of Prophesie. Without revelation wee cannot tell whether wee shall eat to morrow, or whether a squinzy shall choke us. St. James notes the folly of some, who were so impatient of the event of to morrow, or the accidents of the next year, that they would consult Astrologers, and Witches, and De∣vils, what should befall them the next calends, against this the Apostle oppo∣seth his counsel, that we should not search after forbidden Records; for whatever is disposed to happen by the order of natural causes, or civil counsels, may bee rescinded by a pe∣culiar decree of providence. When Rithilda the widow of Albert, Earle of Ebersberg had feasted the Emperor Henry the third, and petitioned in be∣half of her Nephew for some lands for∣merly possessed by the Earl her Hus∣band, just as the Emperour held out his hand to signifie his consent, the
chamber floor suddenly fell under them, and Richilda falling upon the edge of a bathing vessel, was bruised to death, and staid not to see he Nephew sleep in those lands, which the Emperor was reaching forth un∣to her, and placed at the door of re∣stitution. Quid brevi fortes, iaculemur quo mul∣tal jate prmt nox, Horat. AS our hopes must bee confined, so must our designes, let us not project long designes; the work of our soul is cut short, facile, sweet and plain, and fitted to the small por∣tions of our shorter life; and as wee must not trouble our inquiry, so nei∣ther must wee intricato our labour, with what wee shall never enjoy; this rule doth reprove such projects as discompose our present duty by long and future designs; such which by casting our labours to events at di∣stance, make us less to remember our death standing at the door. Se∣neca tells of Gncio Corneliu, a man
crafty in getting, and tenacious in holding a great estate, and one who was as diligent in the care of his body, as of his mony, that hee all day long attended upon his sick and dy∣ing friend; but when hee went away, was quickly comforted, supped merrily, went to bed cheerfully, and on a sudden being surprized by a squinzy, scarce drew his breath un∣till the morning, but by that time dyed, being snatched from the tor∣rent of his fortune; and a likely hope, bigger than the necessities of ten men; this accident was much noted then in Rome, because it happened in so great a fortune, and in the midst of wealthy designes, and presently it made wise men to consider how im∣prudent a person hee is, who dispo∣seth of ten years to come, when hee is not Lord of tomorrow.
Aetate fruere, mobili cursu fugit. Sen. MAke use of this instant; for this instant will never return again, and yet it may bee this in∣stant will secure the fortune of a whole eternity. The old Greeks and Romans caught us the prudence of this rule, but Christianity teaches us the Religion of it. They so seized on the present that they would lose nothing of the dayes pleasure. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow wee dye, that was their Philosophy at their solemn feasts, they would talke of death to heighten the present drinkings; I had reason to say that Christianity taught us to turn this into Religion. For hee that by a present and a constant holiness secures the present, and makes it useful to his noblest purposes, hee turns his condition into his best advantage by making his unavoidable fate become his necessary Religion.
Non acipiu brevem vitam sed f∣cimus. Senec. VVEe complain the day is long, and the night is long, and wee want company, and seek out arts to drive the time away, and then weep, because it is gone too soon, And as the revenue of Egypt, and the Eastern Provinces was but a little summe when they were to support the luxury of Mark Autony, and feed the riot of Cloopatra, but a thou∣sand Crowns is a vast proportion to feed an Hermite. Just so is our life, it is 100 short to serve the ambition of an haughty Prince, or an usurping Rebel, to trample upon the enemies of our just or unjust interest; but for the obtaining vertue, for the pur∣chase of sobriety, and modesty, for the actions of Religion, God gave us time sufficient, if wee make the out-goings of the morning and evening, i. e. our infancy and old age to bee taken into the computation of a man.
Omnia crede mihi etiam falicibus u∣bia sunt. Sen. EVen the beauteous spring hath blasts and sharp frosts, the fruit∣full teeming Summer is melted with heat, and burnt with the kisses of the Sun her friend, and the rich Autumne is full of sickness, and wee are weary of that which wee en∣joy, because sorrow is its biggest portion; And when wee remem∣ber that upon the fairest face, is pla∣ced one of the worst sinks of the body, the nose; wee may use it not onely as a mortification to the pride of beauty, but as an allay to the fairest outside of condition, which the sonnes and daughters of Adam doe possesse. For look upon Kings and Conquerors. I will not tell, that many of them fall into the condition of servants, and their subjects rule over them, and stand upon the ruines of their Families: But let us suppose them still Con∣querours, and the greatest that ever were, yet whatsoever tempts
the pride and vanity of ambitious persons, is not so big as the smallest star which wee see scattered in dis∣order, and unregarded upon the pavement and floor of Heaven: And if wee would suppose the Pilmires had but our understand∣ings, they also would have the method of a mans greatness, and di∣vide their little Molehills into Provinces and Exarchats: And if they also grew as vitious, and as miserable, one of their Princes would lead an Army out, and kill his neighbour Ants, that hee might reign over the next handfull of a Turf; but then if wee consider at what price, and with what felicity all this is purchased, the sting of the painted Snake will quickly appear, and the fairest of their fortunes will properly enter into this ac∣count of humane infelicities.
Proper a vivere, & singulos dis sn∣gulas vitas pa; nihil interest i∣diem & sculum. Sence. HEe that would dye well, must alwayes look for death, every day knocking at the gates of the grave, and then the gates of the grave shall never prevaile upon him to do him mischief. This was the advice of all the wise and good men of the world, who especially in the dayes and periods of their joy, and festival egressions, chose to throw some ashes into their chalices, some sober remembrances of their fatal period. Such was the black shirt of Saladine, the Tombstone presented to the Emperour of Constantinople on his Coronation day; the Bishop of Romes two reeds, with flax, and a wax taper; the Egyptian Skeleton served up at feasts. These in their semblances declare a severe counsel, and useful meditation; and it is not easie for a man to be drunk with joy, or wine, pride, or revenge, who con∣siders sadly that hee must ere long
dwell in a house of darkness, and his body must bee the inheritance of worms, and his soul must be what he pleases, even as a man makes it here by his living, good or bad. I have read of a young Hermit, who being passionately in love with a young Lady, could not by all the Arts of Religion and mortification suppress the trouble of that fancy, till at last being told that she was dead, and had been buried about fourteen dayes, hee went secretly to her vault, and with the skirt of his mantle wiped the moisture from the carkass, and still at the return of the temptation, laid it before him, saying, Behold this is the beauty of the Woman thou didst so much desire, and so the man there∣by overcame his inordinate passion; and if we make death as present to us, our own death, dwelling and dres∣sed in all its pomp of fancy, and pro∣per circumstances, if any thing will quench the heats of lust, or the de∣sires of money; or the greedy passio∣nate affections of this world, this must do it.
Non expectavit Christ Saul  in media insai superavit, Chry∣fost. VVHen Saul, see Act. 9. 4. was yet breathing forth slaughter, then came a voyce saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou meo? Then when hee was in the height of his fury, Christ laid hold upon him. And this for the most part was Christs method of curing. Then when the Sea was in a tempestuous rage, when the waters covered the ship, and the storm shaked even that which could remove Mountains, the faith of the Disciples, then Christ rebukes the wind, and commands a calm; then when the Sun was gone out to run his race as a Gyant, then God by the mouth of Joshuah bids the Sun stand still. Then when that unclean spirit foamed and fumed, and tore, and rent the possessed per∣son, then Christ commanded them to go out. Let the Feaver alone, say our Physitians, till some fits bee pas∣sed,
and then wee shall see farther, and discern better; but Christ in the Text above, itayes not till Saul be∣ing made drunk with blood, was cast into a slumber; but in the midst of his raging fit hee gives him phy∣sick, in the midst of his madness, hee reclaims him. Then when his glory was to bring them bound to Jerusalem, that he might magnifie his triumph and greatnes in the eye of the world; then, then sayes Christ to this tempest, bee calm; to this unclean spirit, come out; to this Sun in his own estimation, go no further. Non in fine sed in principio conversus latro. Cyril. IF thou deferrest thy repentance till the last, because of the Theefs ex∣ample, thou deludest thine own soul; the Theef was not converted at last, but at first, as soon as God afforded him any call, hee came; but at how many calls hast thou stopped thine ears, that deferrest thy repentance? Christ said to him, This day thou
shalt bee with mee in Paradise. When thou canst finde such another day, look for such another mercy; a day that cleft the Grave-stones of dead men; a day that cleft the Temple its self; a day that the Sun durst not see; a day that saw the Son of God (may wee not say so, since that man was God too) depart from man. There shall bee no more such dayes, and therefore presume not of that voice, bodie, this day thou shalt bee with mee, if thou make thy last minute that day; though Christ to magnifie his mercy, and his glory, and to take away all occasion of ab∣solute desperation, did here call the Theef unto him when hee was at the last gasp. Novit Deus vulnerare ad amarm. August. THe Lord, and only the Lord knows how to wound us, out of love; more than that, how to wound us into love; more than all that, to wound us into love, not one∣ly
with him that wounds us, but into love with the wound its selfe, with the very affliction that hee in∣flicts upon us. The Lord knows how to strike us so, as that wee shall lay hold upon that hand, that strikes us, and kiss that hand that wounds us; Ad vitam interficit, ad exaltationem prosternit, saith the same Father, No man kills his enemy because his enemy might have a bet∣ter life in Heaven, that is not his end in killing him. It is Gods end, who therefore brings us to death, that by that gate hee might lead us into life everlasting. Ask of mee, saith God to Christ, Psal. 2. 8. and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance. Now how was Christ to use these Heathen when hee had them? Why thus, Thou shalt bruise them with a rod of iron, and break them in peeces like a Potters vessel. Now God meant well to the Nations in thus breaking and bruising them: God intended not an annihilation of the Nations, but a reformation; for Christ asks the Nations for an Inheritance, not for a Triumph; therefore it is intended
of his way of governing them, and his way is to bruise and beat them: that is, first to cast them down, before hee can raise them up; first to break them, before hee can make them into his fashion. Facies Dei est quâ Deus nobis inno∣tescit. August. THat is the face of God to us, by which God manifests himself to us, God manifests himselfe to us in the word and Sacraments: If wee see not them in their true lines and colours (the word, sincerely and religiously preached and ad∣ministred) wee do not see them, but masks upon them; and if wee do not see them, wee do not see the face of Christ. And I could as well stand under his nescio vos, which hee said to the negligent Virgins, I know you not, or his nescivi vos, which hee said to those that boast of their works, I never knew you, Matth. 7. 22. as un∣der this fearful thunder of his mouth, You shall see my face no more: I will absolutely withdraw, or I will
suffer prophaneness to enter into those means of your Salvation, Word, and Sacraments, which I have so long continued in their sin∣cerity towards you, and you have so long abused. Blessed God, say not to us yet, Yet let the tree grow ano∣ther year before thou cut it down; and as thou hast digged about it by bringing judgements upon our neighbours, so water it with thy for∣mer rain, the dew of thy grace, and with thy latter rain, the tears of our contrition, that wee may still see thy face here, and hereafter; here in thy Kingdome of Grace, hereafter in thy Kingdome of Glory. Reperit Deus nocentes, saith Theocritus, who was an Heathen. IN which saying the natural man hath a first, and a second lesson: First, That since God findes out the Malefactor, he never scapes; and then since God doth finde him at last, God sought him all the while: though God strike late, yet hee pur∣sued
him long before, and many a man feels the sting in his conscience, before hee feels the blow in his body; that God findes, and therefore seeks, that God overtakes, and therefore pursues, that God overthrows, and therefore resist, the wicked is a na∣tural conclusion, as well as a divine. So that for this Doctrine a man needs not bee preached unto, a man needs not bee Catechized; a man needs not read the Father's, nor the Councels, nor the School-men, nor the Ecclesiastical story, nor Sum∣mists, nor Casuists, nor Canonists, no nor the Bible its self for this Do∣ctrine. For this Doctrine that God findes out the guilty person, the na∣tural man hath as full a Library in his bosome as the Christian. Non judicandum de crue secundum preoedicamentum quantitatis sed rela∣tionis. Luther. VVE must not judge of a ca∣lamity by the predicament of quantity, but by the predicament of relation; to what God refers that
calamity, and what hee intends in it. It was a wise and a pious counsel that Gamaliel gave that state, Absti∣nete, Act. 5. 33. forbear a while, give God Sea-room, give him his lati∣tude, and you may finde that you mistook at first; for God hath di∣vers ends by inflicting calamities, and he that judges hastily, may soon mi∣stake Gods purpose. It is a notable expression which the Holy Ghost hath put into the mouth of Naomi, Ruth 1. 19. Call not mee Naomi, said shee there, Naomi is lovely, and lo∣ving, and beloved; but call mee Mara, said shee, Mara is bitterness; but why so? For, said shee, the Lord hath dealt very bitterly with mee; bit∣terly, and very bitterly; but yet so he hath with many that he loves full well. It is true said Naomi, but there is more in my case than so; The Al∣mighty hath afflicted mee, and the Lord hath testified against mee; testified, there is my misery; that is, done enough, given evidence enough, for others to beleeve, and to ground a judgement upon it, that hee hath abandoned mee, utterly forsaken mee
for ever. Yet God meant well to Naomi for all this testification, and howsoever others might mis-inter∣pret Gods proceeding with her. A Deo doctus non solùm, divina discit, sed divina patitur. Dionys. Arco∣pag. HE that is throughly taught by Christ, doth not onely beleeve all that Christ sayes, but confirms him to all that Christ did, and is ready to suffer as Christ suffered. Truly, if it were possible to fear any defect of joy in heaven, all that could fall into my fear, would bee but this, that in heaven I can no longer express my love by suffering for my God, my Saviour, a greater joy cannot enter into my heart than this, to suffer for him that suffered for mee. It is said. Matth. 24. 30. That at the day of judgement shall appear in heaven the sign of the Son of man; this is frequently, ordinarily received of the Fathers, to bee intended of the Cross; that before Christ himself
appear, his sign, the Cross, shall ap∣pear in the Clouds. Now though the sign of the Son of man may bee some other thing than the Cross, yet of this sign the Cross, there may bee this good application, that when God affords thee this manifestation of his Cross in the participation of those crosses and calamities that he suffer∣ed here, then thou hast this sign of the Son of man upon thee, con∣clude to thy self, that the Son of man, Christ Jesus, is coming towards thee, and as thou hast the sign, thou shalt have the substance, as thou hast the cross, thou shalt have the glory; For this is that which the Apostle intends, Phil. 1. 29. Unto you it is given (not laid upon you as a punishment, but given as a benefit) not onely to beleeve in Christ, but to suffer for Christ. Where the Apostle seems to make our crosses a kinde of assurance, as well as our faith: For so hee argues not onely to beleeve, but to suffer; for howsoever faith is a full evidence yet our suffering is a new seal even upon that faith.
Et cum blandinis pater es, & pater es cum coedis. August. I Feel the hand of a Father upon mee when thou stroakest mee; and when thou strikest mee, I see the hand of a Father too. I know thy meaning when thou stroakest, it is lest I should faint under thy hand; and I know thy meaning when thou stri∣kest mee, it is lest I should not know thine hand: As God saw that way prosper in the hand of Absalom, 2 Sam. 14. 30. hee sent for Joab, and Joab came not, hee came not when hee sent a second time, but when the messengers came to burn up his corn, then hee came, and then hee com∣plied with Absalom, and seconded, and accomplished his desires: So God calls us in his own outward Ordinances, and a second time in his temporal blessings, and we come not, but we come the sooner, if he burn our corn, if hee draw us by afflicting us.
Contemptu famae contemnuntur & vir∣tutes, was so well said by Tacitus, that it is pity St. August. said it not. THey that neglect the good opi∣nion of others, neglect those vertues which should produce that good opinion; therefore St. Jerome protests to abhor that paratum de tri∣vio, as hee calls it, that vulgar, that street, that dunghil language, as long as my own conscience reproaches me of nothing, I care not what all the world sayes; wee must care what the world sayes, and study that it may speak well of us. For though it is true, that a fair reputation, a good opinion of men, is not a foun∣dation to build upon, yet it is a fair stone in the building, and such a stone as every man is bound to pro∣vide himself of: For, for the most part most men are such, as most men take them to bee, neminem omnes, nemo omnes fefellit, all the world never joyned to deceive one man, nor was ever any one man
ever able to deceive the whole world. Scinditur incertum studia in contra∣ria vulgus. Virgil. THe Poet here layes the greatest lenity, and change that can bee laid to this kinde of people, that is, in contraria, that they change from one extream to another; where the Poet doth not onely mean that the people will bee of divers opinions from one another; for, for the most part they are not so; for, for the most part, they think, and wish, and love, and hate together; and they do all by example, as others do, and upon no other reason, but therefore because others do. Neither was that Poet ever bound up by his words, that hee should say in contraria, because a more milde word would not stand in his verse; but hee said it, because it is really true, the people will change into sundry opinions. And whereas an Angel its self cannot pass from East
to West, from extream to extream without touching upon the way be∣tween; the people will pass from ex∣tream to extream, without any middle opinion. Last minutes mur∣therer, is this minutes God, and in an instant Paul whom they sent to bee judged in hell, is made a judge in heaven, Act. 28. 6. the people will change; therefore as David could say, I will not bee afraid of ten thousand of men, Psal. 3. 6. So hee should say, I will not confide in ten thousand men, though multiplied by millions, for they will change. Wee finde in the Roman story many examples (particularly in Commod us his time, upon Cleander, chief Gentle∣man of his chamber) of severe exe∣cutions upon men that have courted the people, though in way of charity, and giving them corn in the time of dearth, or upon like occasions; there is danger in getting them, occa∣sioned by jealousie of others; there is difficulty in holding them, occa∣sioned by lenity in themselves; there∣fore wee must say with the Prophet Jer. 17. 5. Cursed bee the man that trusteth in man.
Sequamur patres tanquam duces no tanquam dominos. Cajetan. LEt us follow the Fathers as guides, not as Lords over our under∣standings; as Counsellors, not as Commanders. It is too much to say of any Father, that which Ni∣cephorus sayes of Chrysostome; In il∣lius perinde atque in Dei verbis ac∣quiesco, I am as safe in Chrysostomes words as in the word of God. It is too much to say of St. Peter him∣felf, that which Chrysologus sayes, that hee is Immobile fundamentum sa∣lutis, the immovable foundation of our salvation; & Mediator noster ad Deum, the Mediator of man to God. The holy Patriarchs in the Old Testament were holy men, though they strayed into some sinful actions: The holy Fathers in the primitive Church, were holy men, though they strayed into some erroneous opinions; but neither are the holiest mens actions, alwayes holy, nor the soundest Fathers opinions, alwayes sound.
Molius est mihi non esse quàm fine Jesu esse. Aug. I Were better have no being, than bee without Jesus: I were better have no life, than any life without him. For as David could finde no being without Jehovah, a Christian findes no life without Jesus. For what Jehovah was to David, Jesus is to us. Man in general hath relation to God as hee is Jehovah, being wee have relation unto Christ, as hee is Jesus our salvation; salvation is our being, Jesus is our Jehovah; and therefore as David delights himself with that name Jehovah, for hee re∣peats it eight or nine times Psal. 6. a short Psalm. And though hee ask things of a diverse nature at Gods hands, though hee suffer afflictions a diverse nature from Gods hands, yet still hee retains that one name, hee speaks to God in no other name in all that Psalm, but in the name of Jehovah. So in the New Testa∣ment, hee which may bee compared with David, because hee was under
great sins, and yet in great favour with God; St. Paul, hee delights himself with that Name of Jesus so much, as that St. Jerome saith, as he loved him excessively, so hee na∣med him superabundantly. It is the Name that cost God most, and there∣fore hee loves it best. It cost him his life to bee a Jesus, a Saviour. The Name of Christ which is anointed, hee had by office, hee was anointed as King, as Priest, as Prophet; but his name of Jesus a Saviour, hee had by purchase, and that purchase cost him his blood. Of a devout use of this very name do some of the Fathers interpret that Oleum effusum nomen tuum, that the Name of Jesus should bee spread as an oyntment, breathed as a perfume, diffused as a soul over all the petitions of our prayers, as the Church concludes for the most part all her Collects so, Grant this, O Lord, for our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christs sake.
Nihil de causâ suâ deprecatur, qui ni∣hil de conditione suâ miratur. Ter∣tul. IN which the Father describes a patience of steel, and an invincible temper. Hee means that the Chri∣stians in those times of persecution, did never intreat the Judge for fa∣vour, because it was not strange to them to see themselves, whose conversation was in Heaven, despised, and condemned upon earth. They wondred not at their misery, they thought it a part of their profession, a part of the Chri∣stian Religion to suffer, and there∣fore they never solicited the Judge for favour; they had learnt by expe∣rience of daily tribulation the Apo∣stles lesson, Think it not strange when tribulations and tentations fall; that is, make that your daily bread, and you shall never starve, use your selves to suffering, at least to the expectation of suffering, acquaint your selves with that, accustome your selves to that before it come, and it will not
bee a stranger to you when it cornes. Sanctus in irâ Dei emendari non vult, erudiri non vult. August. A Saint is loath to fall into Gods hands, loath to come into Gods fingers at all when hee is angry; hee would not bee disputed with all, nor impleaded, nor corrected; no, not instructed, not amended by God in his anger. The anger of God is such a Pedagogy, such a Catchim, such a way of teaching as the Law was. The Law is a School-master, saith the Apostle, but the Law is such a School-master, as brings not a rod, but a sword. Gods anger should in∣struct us, but if wee use it not aright, it hardens us. Though Gods anger bee one of his wayes, yet it is such a way as you may easily stumble in, and as you would certainly perish without that way, so you may easily perish in that way. For when a sin∣ner considers himself to bee under the anger of God, naturally, hee con∣ceives
such a horror as puts him far∣ther off. As soon as Adam heard the voyce of God, and in an accent of anger, or as hee tuned it in his guilty conscience to an accent of anger, when Adam heard God but walking in the Garden, but the noise of his going, and approaching to∣wards him, Adam fled from his pre∣sence, and hid himself among the trees. Much more then if the Lord come in anger, if hee speak in anger, if hee do but look in anger, a sinner perishes: Hee did but look, and hee dissolved, hee melted the Nations, Hab. 3. 6. David was an obsequious pa∣tient to take any physick at Gods hand, if there were no anger in the cup. He provokes God with all his emphatical words, Judge mee, prove mee, try mee, examine mee, Psal. 26. 1. bring not onely a candle to search, but even fire to melt mee. But up∣on what confidence is all this? For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes. If Gods anger, and not his loving kindness had been before his eyes, it had been a fearfull appari∣tion, and a dangerous issue to have
gone upon. So also Psal. 139. 23. Try mee, O God, and know my heart. But how concludes hee? And lead mee in the right way for ever. As long as I have God by the hand, and feel his loving care of mee, I can ad∣mit any weight of his hand, any furnace of his heating. Let God mould mee, and then melt mee a∣gain; let God make mee, and then break mee again; as long as hee establishes, and maintains a rectifed assurance in my soul, that at last hee means to make mee a vessel of honour to his glory, howsoever hee rebuke, or chastise mee, yet hee will not rebuke mee in anger. In scalâ prima ascensio est ab humo. Basil. HE that makes but one step up a stair, though he be not got much nearer to the top of the house, yet he is got from the ground, and deli∣vered from the foulness and damp∣ness of that. So in Davids first step of prayer, Psal. 6. 2, 3. O Lord bee
merciful unto mee; Though a man bee not established in heaven, yet hee is stepped from the world, and the mi∣serable comforters thereof. There are certain steps and ascensions of the soul in prayer; and though a sinner may grow up to this strength of de∣votion, to supplications, to prayers, to intercessions, to thanksgivings, yet at first, when hee comes first to deprehend himself in a particular sin, or in a course of fin, hee comes bash∣fully, shamefully, tremblingly, hee knows not what to ask, hee dares ask no particular thing at Gods hand, but though hee bee not come yet to particular requests for pardon of past sins, nor for strength against future, not to a particular consideration of the weight of his sins, nor to a com∣parison betwixt his sin, and the mercy of God, yet hee comes to a Miserere mei Domine, to a sudden ejaculation, O Lord bee merciful unto mee, how dare I do this in the sight of my God? And thus likewise in the regene∣ration of a sinner, though hee come not presently to look God fully in
the face, nor conceive nor prefently an assurance of an established re∣conciliation, a fulness of pardon, a cancelling of all former debts in an instant; though hee dare not come to touch God, and lay hold of him∣self by his body and blood in the Sacrament, yet the Evangelist calls thee to a contemplation of much comfort to thy soul, in certain pre∣paratory accesses and approaches. Behold, saith hee, that is, look up, and consider thy pattern, behold a woman difeased, &c. Matth. 9. 20. shee knew there was vertue to come out of his body, and shee came as neer that as shee durst; shee had a desire to speak, but shee went no fur∣ther, but to speak to her self, shee said to her self, saith that Gospel, If I may but touch; but Christ Jesus supplied all, performed all on his part abundant∣ly. Presently he turned about, sayes the Text; and this was not a transi∣tory glance, but a full sight, and ex∣hibiting of himself to the fruition of her eye, that shee might see him: Hee saw her said St. Matthew here, hee did direct himself upon
others, and leave out her; and then hee spake to her to overcome her bashfulness; hee called her daughter, to overcome her diffidence; hee bids her bee of good comfort for shee had met a more powerful Physitian than those upon whom shee had spent her time, and her estate; one that could cure her, one that would, one that had already, for so hee said pre∣sently, Thy faith hath made thee whole; From how little a spark, how great a fire; from how little a beginning, how great a proceeding? Shee de∣sired but the hem of his garment, and had all him. De infirmitate blandimur, & ut libe∣rius peccemus libenter infirmamur. Bernard. VVE flatter our selves with an opinion of weakness, and wee are glad of this natural and cor∣rupt weakness, that wee may im∣pute all our licentiousness, to our weakness and natural infirmity. But did that excuse Adam, said that Fa∣ther,
that hee took his occasion of sinning from his weaker part, from his wife; that thou art weak of thy self, is a just motive to induce God to bring thee to himself, who hath surely born all thine infirmities. But to leave him again, when hee hath brought thee, to refuse so light and easie a yoak as his is, not to make use of that strength which he by his grace offers thee; This is not the affection of the Spouse when the person languishes for the love of Christ, but it is when the love of Christ lan∣guishes in that person. The former weakness is a good motive for mer∣cy, if in a desire of further strength wee come to that of Lazarus his sisters to Christ, Behold Lord that soul whom thou lovest, and hast dyed for, is weak and languishes; Christ an∣swered then, This weakness is not un∣to death, but that the Son of God might bee glorified, Joh. 11. 3. hee will say so to thee too, if thou present thy weakness with a desire of strength from him, hee will say, Why will yee dye of this disease? Gratia mea sufficit, you may recover for all
this, you may repent, you may ab∣stain from this sin, you may take this spiritual physick, the word, the Sa∣craments, if you will, onely as God said to Joshua, bee valiant, and fight against it, and thou shalt finde strength grow in the use there∣of. Acceptus in gratiam, hilariter veni ad postulationes. Bernard. VVHen thou art established in favour, thou mayest make any suit; When thou art possest of God by one prayer, thou mayest offer more; This is a Reli∣gious insinuation, and a circumven∣tion that God loves, when a sinner husbands his graces so well, as to grow rich under them, and to make his thanks for one blessing, a reason and an occasion of another; so to gather upon God by a rolling trench, and by a winding stair, as Abraham gained upon God in the behalf of Sodome; for this is an act of the wisdome of the Serpent, which our
Saviour recommends unto us in such a Serpentine line, as the Artists call it; to get up to God, and get in∣to God by such degrees, as David doth, Psal. 6. 2. from a miserere, to a saa, from a gracious look, to a perfect recovery; from the act of the Levite that looked upon the wound∣ed man, to the act of the Samaritan that undertook his cure; from de∣siring God to visit him as a friend, to study him as a Physitian. Medicinae ars a Deo data, ut inde ra∣tionem animae curandae disceremus. Basil. GOds purpose in giving us the science of bodily health, was not determined in the body, but his large and gracious purpose, was by that restitution of the body, to raise us to the consideration of spiritual health. When Christ had said to him who was sick of the Palsie, Mark. 2. Thy sins are forgiven thee: And that the Scribes and Pharisees were scandalized with that as though
hee being but man, had usurped upon the power of God; Christ proves to them by an actual resto∣ring of his bodily health, that hee could restore his soul too in the for∣giveness of sins. Hee asks them there Whether it is easir to say thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, take up thy bed and walk. Christ did not de∣termine his doctrine in the declara∣tion of a miraculous power exer∣cised upon his body, but by that established their beleef of his spiri∣tual power, in doing that which in their opinion was the greater work; pursue therefore his method of cu∣ring; and if God have restored thee in any sickness by such means, as hee of his goodness by natural means hath imprinted in natural Herbs and Simples, think not, that that was done onely, or simply, for thy bodies sake, but that it is as easie for God to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, as to say, Take up thy bed and walk: So it is as easie for thee to have spi∣ritual Physick, as bodily; because that as God hath planted all those medicinal Simples in the open fields
for although some do tread them un∣der their feet, so hath God deposited and prepared spiritual helps, for all, though all do not make benefit of those helps which are offered. Now this is Gods method, as in restoring bodily health, hee said, Surge, tolle, ambula, Arise, take up thy bed, and walk: So to every sick soul, whose cure hee undertakes he saith so too; our beds are our natural affections, these he doth not bid us cast away, nor burn, nor destroy: Since Christ invested the nature of man, and be∣came man, wee must not pretend to devest it, and become Angels, or flatter our selves in the merit of mortifications not enjoyed, or of a retiredness, and departing out of the world, in the world, by a withdraw∣ing of our selves from the offices of mutual society, or an extinguishing of natural affections; but Surge, saith our Saviour, Arise from this bed, sleep not lazily in an over-in∣dulgency to these affections, but Ambula, walk sincerely in thy Cal∣ling, and thou shalt hear thy Saviour say, Non est infirmitas haec ad mor∣tem,
these affections, nay these concupiscencies shall not destroy thee. Membra etiam animae sunt. Basil. THe soul hath her limbs, as well as the body. Surdi audite, coeci aspicite, saith God in Isa. 42. If their souls had not ears and eyes, the blinde could not see, the deaf could not hear, and yet God calls upon the deaf, and blinde, to hear and see; as St. Paul saith to the Ephesians, The eyes of our understanding being in∣lightned; So David saith, Thou hast broken the teeth, Psal. 3. i. e. the pride, and the power, the venome, and malignity of the wicked. And thus the soul hath her bones too in that expression of Davids, Psal. 6. 2. for Davids bones here, were the strongest powers and faculties of his soul, and the best actions and operations of those faculties, and yet they were shaken; for this hereditary sickness, original sin, prevails so far upon us, that upon our good dayes, wee have
some grudgings of that fever, eve in our best actions wee have some of the leven of that sin; so that if wee go about to comfort our selves with some dispositions to Gods glory, which wee finde in our selves, with some sparks of love to his Precepts, and his Commandements; with some good strength of faith, with some measure of good works, yea with having something for the name and glory of Christ Jesus; yet if wee consider what humane and cor∣rupt affections have been mingled in all these, our bones will bee troub∣led, even those that appeared to bee strong works, and likely to hold out, will need a reparation, an excla∣mation, O Lord healthese too, or else these are as weak as the worst. Qui fine ullà intermissione orat honest à quadam impudentia, agit impnden∣tem. Nazian. INceffant prayer hath the nature of impudency, wee threaten God in prayer, as Nazianzen adventures to
express it; hee said his Sister in the vehemency of her prayer would threaten God, shee came to a Reli∣gious impudency with God, and to threaten him that shee would never depart from his Altar, till shee had her petition granted; and God suffers this impudency and more. Prayer hath the nature of violence. In the publick prayers of the Con∣gregation, wee besiege God, and wee take God prisoner, and bring God to our conditions, and God is glad to bee straitned by us in that siege. And therefore the Prophet David executed before, what the Apostle counsels after, pray inces∣santly. Even in his singing he prayed, And as St. Basil saith, Etiam somnia justorum preces sunt, a good mans dreams are prayers; hee prayes, and not sleepily in his sleep, but with a holy fervent extasie and rapture.
Nescit diabolus quanta bona de illo fiut, etiqm cum soevit. August. LIttle knows the Devil how much good hee doth us when hee tempts us. For by that wee are excited to have our present recourse to that God whom in our former security wee neglected, who gives us the issue with the temptation. I know what infirmities I have submitted thee to, and what I have laid and applied to thee, I know thy sick∣ness, and I know thy physick; what∣soever the disease bee, my grace shall bee sufficient to cure it. For whether wee understand that de gra∣tra miraculorum, that it is sufficient for any mans assurance in any temp∣tation or tribulation, to consider Gods miraculous deliverances of other men in other cases, or whether wee understand it according to the general voyce of Interpreters, i. e. bee content that there remain in thy flesh matter and subject for mee to produce glory from thy weakness, and matter and subject for thee to
exercise thy faith, and allegiance to mee, still these words will carry an argument against the expedience of absolute praying against all tempta∣tions; For still this gratia mea suf∣ficit, will import this, amount to this, I have as many Antidotes, as the Devil hath poysons; I have as much mercy, as the Devil hath ma∣lice▪ There must bee Scorpions in the world, but the Scorpion shall cure the Scorpion; there must bee temptations, but temptations shall adde to mine, and to thy glory. And therefore is it conduceable to Gods purposes in us (which is the rule of all our prayers) to pray ut∣terly against all tentations as vehe∣meutly as against sins. God should lose by it, and wee should lose by it, if wee had no tentations. For God is glorified in those victories which wee by his grace gain over the Devil.
Salvus factus s  nihilo non de ni∣hilo tamen▪ Bernard. THou bringest nothing for thy salvation, yet something to thy salvation, nothing worth it, but yet something with it. Thy self hath a part in those means which God u∣seth to that purpose, thy self art the instrument, though not the cause of thine own salvation. Thy new crea∣tion by which thou art a new crea∣ture, i. e. thy regeneration is wrought as the first creation was wrought. God made heaven and earth of no∣thing, but hee produced the other creatures out of that matter which hee had made. Thou hadst nothing to do in the first work of thy Rege∣neration thou couldst not so much as wish it, but in all the rest thou art a fellow-worker with God, because before that there are seeds of for∣mer grace shed in thee.
Nullâ o Deus perinde atque corporis aerumna conciliatur. Nazian. A Moning spirit, and an af∣flicted body, are great instru∣ments of reconciling God to a sinner, and they alwayes dwell at the gates of Atonement, & restitution and Bo∣naventure in the life of Christ reports, that the holy Virgin mother said to E∣lizabeth, that grace doth not descend into the soul of a man but by prayer and affliction. Besides a delicate and prosperous life is hugely contrary to the hopes of a blessed eternity. And certainly hee that sadly considers the portion of Dives, and remembers that the account which Abraham gave him for the unavoidableness of his torment was, because hee had his good things in this life, must in all reason with trembling, run from a course of banquets, and faring deli∣ciously every day, as being a dange∣rous estate, and a consignation to an evil greater than all danger, the pains and torment of unhappy souls. So then hee that desires to dye well, and
happily, above all things must bee carefull that hee do not live a soft delicate, and voluptuous life; but a life severe, holy, and under the Dis∣cipline of the Gross. No man wants cause of tears, and daily sorrow. Let every man consider what hee feels, and acknowledge his misery; let him confess his sin, and chastise it; let him long and sigh for the joyes of hea∣ven; let him tremble and fear be∣cause hee hath deserved the pains of hell; let him commute his eternal fear, with a temporal suffering, pre∣venting Gods judgement by passing one of his own; let him groan for the labours of his pilgrimage, and the dangers of his warfare, and by that time, hee hath summed up all these labours, and duties, and contingen∣cies, all the proper causes, instru∣ments, and acts of sorrow, hee will finde, that for a secular joy and wan∣tonness of spirit, there are not left many void spaces of his life.
Nemo mala morte unquam moriebatur, qui libenter opera charitatis exer∣cuit. St. Hieron. THis the Father with all his read∣ing, and experience verifies. I do not remember to have read that any charitable person ever dyed an evill death; and although a long ex∣perience hath observed Gods mer∣cies to descend upon charitable peo∣ple, like the dew upon Gideons fleece, when all the world was dry; yet for this also wee have a promise which is not onely an argument of a certain number of years, but a security for eternal ages, Luke 16. 9. Make yee friends of, &c. When faith fails, and chastity is useless, and temperance shall bee no more, then charity shall bear you upon wings of Cherubims to the eternal Mountain of the Lord. I have been a lover of mankinde, and a friend, and merciful, and now I expect to communicate in that great kindness, which hee shews that is the great God, and Father of men and mercies, said Cyrus the Persian on
his death-bed. Now I do not mean this should onely bee a death-bed charity, any more than a death-bed repentance, but it ought to bee the charity of our life and healthfull years, a parting of a portion of our goods, then when wee can keep them, when wee cannot then kindle our lights, when wee are to descend into our houses of darkness, or bring a gla∣ring torch suddenly to a dark room that will amaze the eye, and not de∣light it, or instruct the body; but if our rapers have in their constant course descended into their grave, crowned all the way with light, then lt the death-bed charity be doubled, and the light burn brightest when it is to deck our Herse. Prima quae vitam dedit hra carpsit. Seneca. VVHen Adam fell, then hee be∣gan to dye; the same day (so said God) and that must needs hee true; and so it must mean that upon that very day hee fell into an
evill and dangerous condition, a state of change and affliction; then death began, i. e. the man began to dye by a natural diminution and apness to disease and misery; his first state was, and should have been so long as it lasted a happy duration; his se∣cond was a daily and miserable change, and this was the dying pro∣perly: This appears in the great in∣stance of damnation, which in the stile of Scripture is called eternal death, not because it kills of ends the duration, it hath not so much good in it, but because it is a perpetual in∣felicity, change or separation of soul and body, is but accidental to death. Death may bee with, or without either; but the formality, the curse and sting of death, i. e. misery, sorrow, anguish, disho∣nour, and whatsoever is miser∣able, and afflictive in nature, that is death: Death is not an acti∣on, but a whole state and condition, and this was first brought in upon us by the offence of one man. But now though this death entred first upon us by Adams fault, yet it came
nearer unto us, and increased upon us by the sins of more of our fore∣fathers. For Adams sin left us in strength enough to contend with humane calamities, for almost a thousand years together: but the sins of his children, our forefathers, took off from us half the strength about the time of the flood; and then fell off from five hundred to two hun∣dred and fifty, and from thence to an hundred and twenty, and from thence to threescore and ten so often halfing it, till it is almost come to no∣thing; so that wee have not now time enough to get the perfection of a single manufacture, but ten or twelve Generations of the world must go to the making up of one wise man, or one excellent art; and in that succession of those ages, there happens so many changes and interruptions, so many wars and violencies▪ that seven years fighting, sets a whole Kingdome back in learning and vertue, to which they were creeping, it may bee a whole .
Debilem facito manu, debiem pede, lu∣bricos quatedent, vita dum super∣est bene est. Sen. THe Gout, the Stone, and the Tooth-ach, the Sciatica, sore eyes, and aking head, are evils in∣deed; but such, which rather than dye, most men are willing to suffer; and Mecaenas added also a wish ra∣ther to bee crucified than to dye, and though his wish was low, timorous, and base, yet wee finde the same de∣sires in most men dressed up with better circumstances. It was a cruel mercy in Tamberlane, who com∣manded all the leprous persons to bee put to death, as wee knock some beasts on their head to put them out of pain, and lest they should live miserably. The poor men would rather have endured another lepro∣sie, and have more willingly taken two diseases than one death. Never therefore account that sickness in∣tolerable, in which thou hadst rather remain than dye; and yet if thou hadst rather dye than suffer it,
the worst of it that can bee said, is this, that this sickness is worse than death, i. e. it is worfe than that which is the best of all evils, and the end of all troubles, and then you have said no harm against it. Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas. Horat. ALl impatience howsoever ex∣pressed, is perfectly useless to all purposes of ease, but hugely ef∣fective to the multiplying of sorrow, and the impatience and vexation is another, but the sharper disease of the two; it doth mischief by its self, and mischief by the disease. For men grieve themselves as much as they please; and when by impatience they put themselves into the retiue of sorrows, they become solemn mour∣ners. Massurius Sabinus tells, that the image of the goddess Aug was with a muffler upon her mouth, placed upon the Altar of Volupi, to represent that those persons who bear their sicknesses and sorrows,
without murmure, shall certainly pass from sorrow to pleasure, and the ease and honours of felicity, but they that with spite, and indigna∣tion bite the burning cole, or shake the yoak upon their necks, gall their spirits, and fret the skin, and hurt no∣thing but themselves. Nolo, quod cupio, statim tenere, nec victoria mî plaoet parata. Petron. SIckness is in some sense eligible, because it is the opportunity, and the proper scene of exercising some vertues. It is that agony in which men are tried for a Crown; and if wee remember what glorious things are spoken of the grace of faith, that it is the life of just men, the re∣stitution of the dead in tres passes and sins, the justification of a sinner, the support of the weak, the confidence of the strong, the Magazine of pro∣mises, and the title to very glorious rewards. Wee may easily imagine that it must have in it a work, and a difficulty in some proportion an∣swerable
to so great effects: And therefore if you will try the excel∣lency, and feele the work of faith, place the man in a persecution, let him ride in a storm, let his bones bee broken with sorrow, and his eye∣lids loosened with sickness, let his bread be dipped in tears, and all the daughters of Musick brought low; let God commence a quarrel against him, and bee bitter in the accent of his anger, or his Discipline, then God tries your faith. Can you then trust his goodness, and beleeve him to bee a Father when you groan un∣der his rod. For in our health, and clearer dayes, it is easie to talk of putting trust in God. Wee readily trust him for life when wee are in health; for provisions when wee have fair revenues; and for deliverance when wee are newly escaped; But let us come to sit upon the margent of our grave, and let a Tyrant lean hard upon our fortunes; let the storm arise, and the keels toss till the cordage crack, or that all our hopes bulge under us, and descend into the hollowness of sad misfortunes, then
can you beleeve when you neither hear, nor see, nor feel anything but objections? Faith is then brought into the Theatre, and so exercised, that if it abides but to the end of the contention, wee may see the work of faith which God will highly crown. The same I say of hope, and of charity, or the love of God, and of patience, which is a grace pro∣duced from the mixtures of all these, they are vertues which are greedy of danger. And no man was ever honoured by any wise, or discerning person for dining upon Perfian Carpets, nor rewarded with a Crown for being at ease. It was the Sire that did honour to Mutiu Scoevola, poverty made Fabritius famous, Rutilius was made excellent by banishment, Regulus by torments, Socrates by a prison, Cato by his death, and God hath crowned the memory of Job with a wreath of glory, because hee sate upon his dung-hil wisely and temperately; and his potsherd, and his groans mingled with praises, and justifica∣tions of God, pleased him like
an anthem, sung by Angels in the morning of the Resurrection. Marcet virtus fine adversario. Ci∣cero. GOd loves to see us strugling with a disease, and resisting the Devil, and contesting against the weaknesses of nature, and against hope to beleeve in hope, resigning our selves to Gods will, praying him to choose for us, and dying in all things but faith, and its blessed con∣sequents. For so have I known the boysterous North-winde passe through the yeelding aire which opened its bosome, and appeased its violence, by entertaining it with easie compliance in all the Regions of its reception. But when the same breath of heaven hath been checked with the stifness of a Tower, or the united strength of a wood, it grew mighty, and dwelt there, and made the highest branches stoop, and make a smooth path for it on the top of all its glories. So is sickness, and so is
the grace of God. When sickness hath made the difficulty, then Gods grace hath made a triumph, and by doubling its power, hath created new proportions of a reward, and then shews its biggest glory, when it hath the greatest difficulty to ma∣ster, the greatest weaknesses to sup∣port, the most busie temptations to contest with. For so God loves that his strength should bee seen in our weakness, and our danger. Detestabilis est coecitas, si nemo oculos perdiderit nisi cui eruendi sunt. Senec. BLindness were a most accursed thing, if no man were ever blinde but hee whose eyes are pulled out with tortures, or burning bafons: And if sickness were alwayes a te∣stimony of Gods anger, and a vio∣lence to a mans whole condition, then it were a huge calamity; but because God sends it to his servants, to his children, to little infants, to Apostles, and Saints, with designes
of  to preserve their inno∣cence, to overome tentation, to try their vertue, to fit them for rewards, it is certain that sickness never is an evill, but by our own faults; and if wee will do our duty, wee shall bee sure to turn it into a blessing. If the sickness bee great, it may end in death, and the greater it is, the sooner; and if it bee very little, it hath great intervals of rest; if it bee between both, wee may bee Masters of it, and by serving the ends of pro∣vidence, serve also the perfective end of humane nature, and enter into the possession of everlasting mercies. However, if all the cala∣mities were true concerning sickness, with which it is aspersed, yet is it far to bee preferred before the most pleasant fin, and before a great se∣cular business, and a temporal care; and some men wake as much in the foldings of the softest beds, as others on the cross, and sometimes the very weight of sorrow, and the weariness of sickness presses the spirit into slumbers, and images of rest, when the intemperate, or the
lustfull person rolls upon his uneasie thorns, and sleep is departed from his eyes. Solatium est pro honesto dura tolerare, & ad causam patientia respicit. Senec. IN all sufferings, the cause of it makes it noble, or ignoble, tole∣rable, or intolerable. For when pa∣tience is assaulted by a ruder vio∣lence, by a blow from heaven or earth, from a gracious God, or an unjust man, patience looks forth to the doors which way shee may escape: And if innocence, or a cause of Religion keep the first en∣trance, then whether shee escapes at the gates of life, or death, there is a good to bee received, greater than the evils of a sickness; but if sin thrust in that sickness, and that hell stands at the door, then patience turns into fury; and seeing it is im∣possible to go forth with safety, rowls up and down with a circular and infinite revolution, making its motion not from, but upon its own
center, it doubles the pain, and in∣creases the sorrow, till by its weight it breaks the spirit, and bursts into the agonies of infinite and eternal ages. If wee had seen St. Polycarp burning to death, or St. Lawrence rosting upon his gridiron, or St. Igna∣tiu exposed to Lions, or St. Seba∣stian pierced with arrows for the cause of Jesus, for Religion, for God, for a holy conscience, we should have been in love with flames, and have thought the gridiron fairer than the marriage bed; and wee should have chosen rather to converse with those beasts, than those men that brought those beasts forth, and have esteemed Sebastians arrows to bee the raies of light, brighter than the Moon. For so did those holy men account them; they kissed their stakes, and hugged their deaths, and ran violently to torments, and counted whippings, and secular disgraces to bee the enamel of their persons, and the oyntment of their heads, and the embalming their names, and secu∣ring them for immortality. But to see Sejaus orn in peeces by the
people, or Nero crying, and creep∣ing timorously to his death when he was condemned to dye, more majo∣rum, to see Judas pale and tremb∣ling, full of anguish, sorrow, and despair, to observe the groanings and intolerable agonies of Herod, and Antiochus, will tell and demon∣strate the causes of patience and im∣patience, to proceed from the causes of the suffering, and that it is sin onely that makes the cup bitter and deadly. Non est magnum audiri ad voluntatem non est magnum. August. BE not over-joyed when God grants thee thy prayer, the Devil had his prayer granted when hee had leave to enter into the herd of Swine, and so hee had when hee obtained power of God against Job. But all this aggravated the De∣vils punishment; so may it do thine, to have some prayers granted. And as that must not over-joy thee if it bee, so if thy prayer bee not granted, it must not deject thee. God suffered
St. Paul to pray, and pray, and pray, yet after his thrice praying granted him not that hee prayed for. God suffered that if it be possible, and that let this cup pass, to pass from Christ himself, yet hee granted it not. Tentemus animas quae deficiunt a fide, naturalibus rationibus adjuvare. St. Hieron. LEt us endeavour to assist them who are weak in faith with the strength of reason, though God hath not given the Minister a power to in∣fuse faith into men, yet hath God put it into his power to satisfie the rea∣son of men, and to chafe that wax to which hee himself vouchsafes to set to the great seal of faith. And truly it is very well worthy of a serious consideration, that whereas all the Articles of our Creed are the objects of faith, so that wee are bound to receive them de fide, as matters of faith; yet God hath left that, out of which all these Articles are to bee de∣duced,
and proved, i. e. the Scripture, to humane arguments. It is not an Article of the Creed to beleeve these and these books to bee, or not to bee Canonical Scripture, but our argu∣ments for the Scripture are humane arguments proportioned to the rea∣son of a natural man. God doth not seal in water, in the fluid and tranfitory imaginations and opinions of men; wee never set the seal of faith to them, but in wax, in the re∣ctified reason of men, that reason that is ductile, and flexible, and pli∣ant to the impressions that are na∣turally proportioned unto it, God sets to his seal of faith; and there∣fore faith it self by the Prophet Isaiah is called knowledge, Isa. 53. 11. By his knowledge, &c. saith God of Christ, i,e. by that knowledge that men shall have of him, Insomuch that it is not enough for you to rest in an imaginary faith, and easiness in beleeving, except yee know also what, and why, and how you come to that beleef. Implicite beleevers, ignorant beleevers, the adversary may swallow, but the understand∣ing
beleever, hee must chaw, and pick bones before hee come to assi∣milate him, and make him like him∣self. The implicite beleever stands in an open field, and the enemy will ride over him easily: The under∣standing beleever is in a fenced Town, and hee hath out-works to lose before the Town bee pressed, i. e. reasons to bee answered, before his faith bee shaked; and hee will sell himself dear, and lose himself by inches, if hee bee sold, or lost at last. Anima spiritualiter cadit & spiritua∣liter resurge. August. SInce wee are sure that there is a spiritual death of the soul, let us make sure a spiritual resurrection too. Audcter dicam, saith St. Je∣rome, I say confidently however, God can do all things, hee cannot restore a Virgin that is an from it to Virginity again, hee cannot do this in the body, but God is a Spirit, and hath reserved more power upon
the spirit and soul, than upon the body: And therefore I may say with the same assurance that St. Je∣rome doth; no soul hath so prostitu∣ted her self, so multiplied her forni∣cations, but that God can make her a Virgin again, and give her even the chastity of Christ himself. Fulfill therefore what Christ saith, Joh. 5. 25. The hour is coming, and now is, &c. bee this that hour, bee-thy first re∣surrection; bless Gods present good∣ness for this now, and attend Gods leisure for the other resurrection hereafter; and then doubt not but what glory soever thou hast had in this world, glory inherited from noble Ancestors, glory acquired by merit and service, glory purchased by money, and observation, what glory of beauty, and proportion; what glory of health, and strength soever thou bast had in this house of clay; the glory of the latte house, as it is Hag. . 9. shall bee greater than of the former.
Qui peacat quatenus peccat, sit seip so detetion. Clem. Alex. IN every sin a man falls from that degree which himself had before. In every s hee is dishonoured, hee is not so good a man as hee was; impoverished, hee hath not so great a portion of grace as hee had; infa∣tuated, hee hath not so much of the true wisdome of the fear of God as hee had; disarmed, hee hath not that interest, and confidence in the love of God that hee had; and deformed, hee hath not so lively a representa∣tion of the image of God as before. In every sin wee become prodigals; but in the habit of sin wee become bankrupts, afraid to come to an ac∣count. A fall is a fearful thing, that needs a raising, a help; but sin is a death, and that needs a resurrection; and a rerection is as great a work as the very Creation its self. It is death in semine in the root, it pro∣duces, it brings forth death; it is death in arbore, in the body, in its self; death is a divorce, and so is sin; and it is
death in fructu, in the fruit thereof; sin plants spiritual death, and this death produces more sin obduration, impenitence, and the like. Transeant injuriae plerasque non acci∣pit qui nescit. Seneca. HEe that knows not of an in∣jury, or takes no knowledge of it, for the most part hath no injury. But alas, how many break their sleep in the night about things that disquiet them in the day too, and trouble themselves in the day about things that disquiet them all night too. Wee disquiet our selves too much in being over tender, over sen∣sible of imaginary injuries. They that are too inquisitive what other men say of them, they disquiet themselves; for that which others would but whisper, they publish; and therefore that which hee adds there for moral and civil matters, holds in a good proportion in things of a more divine nature, in such parts of the Religious worship and service
of God, as are not fundamental, non expdit om videe, non omnia au∣dire, wee must not too jealoussy sus∣pect, nor too bitterly condemn, nor too peremptorily conclude that whatsoever is not done as wee would have it done, or as wee have seen it done in former times, is not well done. Antequam unlneramur monemur. Origen. BEfore our enemies hit us, God gives us warning that they mean to do so. When God himself is so ar incensed against us, that hee is turned to bee our enemy, and to fight against us (it was come to that Isa. 63. 10.) when hee hath bent his bow against us as an enemy (it was come to that in the Prophet Jeremy, Law. 2. 4.) yet still hee gives us warn∣ing before-hand, and still there comes a lightning before his thun∣der. God comes seldome to that dis∣patch, a word, and a blow, but to a blow without a word, to an execu∣tion
without a warning, never. Cain took offence at his brother Abel, the quarrel was Gods, because hee had accepted Abels sacrifice, there∣fore God joyns himself to Abels party; and so the party being too strong for Cain to subsist, God would not surprize Cain, but hee tells him his danger, Why is thy countenance cast down? Gen. 4. 10. You may pro∣ceed if you will, but if you will needs, you will lose by it at last. Saul per∣secutes Christ in the Christians, Christ meets him upon the way, speaks to him, strikes him to the ground, tells him vocally, and tells him actually, that hee hath under∣taken too hard a work, in opposing him: This which God did to Saul reduces him; that which God did to Cain wrought not upon him, but still God went his own way in both, to speak before he strikes, to lighten, before hee thunders; to warn, before hee wounds. In Dathan and Abi∣ams case, God may seem to proceed apace towards execution, but yet it had all these pauses in arrest of judgement, and their reprieves be∣fore
execution, yet when Moses had information and evidence of their factious proceeding, hee falls not upon them, but hee falls upon his face before God, and laments, and deprecates in their behalf, hee calls them to a fair trial and examination the next day, Tomorrow the Lord will shew, Numb. 16. 5, and they said, Wee will not come, vers. 14. Then God up∣on their contumacy, when they would stand mute, and not plead, takes a resolution to consume them in a moment, and then Moses and Aaron return to petition for them, vers. 25. And Moses went up to them again, and the Elders of Israel fol∣lowed, and all prevailed not, and then Moses comes to pronounce judge∣ment, These men shall not dye a common death; and after, and yet not pre∣sently after that hee gave judgement, execution followed, vers. 31. God opened his mouth, and Moses his, and Aaron his, and the Elders theirs, before the earth opened hers. In all which wee see that God alwayes leaves a latitude between his sentence and execution, which interim is
sphaera activitatis, the sphere in which our repentance, and his mercy move, and direct themselves in a benign aspect towards one ano∣ther. Vili vendimus coelum, glauci more Christiani sumus. Tertul. HOw poor a clod of earth is a Mannor? How poor an inch a Shire? How poor a span a King∣dome? How poor a pace the whole world, and yet how prodigally wee sell Paradise, Heaven, Souls, Con∣sciences, Immortality, Eternity, for a few grains of this dust. What had Eve for heaven? so little, as that the Holy Ghost will not let us know what shee had, nor what kinde of fruit, yet something Eve had. What had Adam for heaven? but a satis∣faction that hee had pleased an ill wife, as St. Jerome states his fault, that fruit, ne contristaretur delicias suas, lest hee should cast her off whom hee loved so much, into an inordinate dejection; but if hee satisfied her
and his own uxoriousness, any sa∣tisfaction is nothing. But what had I for heaven Adam sinned, and I suf∣fer, I forfeited before I had any posses∣sion, or could claim any interest; I had a punishment before I had a be∣ing, and God was displeased with mee before I was, I was built up scarce fifty years ago in my mothers womb, and I was cast down almost six thousand years ago in Adams loyns. I was born in the last age of the world, and dyed in the first. How justly do wee cry out against a man that hath sold a Town, or sold an Army, and Adam sold the World, he sold Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Patriatchs, and all the Prophets; and if Christ had not provided for himself by miraculous Generation, hee had sold him too.
Agnoscere nolumus quod ignorare  possumus. Cypri. de mortal. THere is no meditation more seri∣ous, than upon the vanity of the world, no consideration more sea∣sonable, than of the brevity and un∣certainty of time it self, no know∣ledge more wholesome, than of the diseases of the minde; no contem∣plation more divine, than of hu∣mane misery and frailty. Which though wee read in the inscription of every stone, see in the fall of eve∣ryleaf, hear in the knol of every bell, taste in the garnishing and fancy of every dish, smell in the stench of every dead corpse, feel in the beat∣ing of every pulse; yet wee are not sensible of it, wee will not take knowledge of it, though wee can∣not bee ignorant of it. In which consideration the Wise man, whose words are as goads and nails, vers. 11. pricks us deep with the remembrance hereof, so deep that he draws blood, sanguinem animae, the blood of the soul, as St. Austin termeth our tears,
Lachryma sanguis animae. For who can read with dry eyes, that those that look out of the windows shall bee darkned; who can hear with∣out horrour, that the keepers of the house shall tremble, or consider without sorrow, that the daughters of Musick shall bee brought low, or comment without deep fetched sighs upon mans going to his long home, and the mourners going a∣bout the streets, to wash them with tears, and sweep them with Rose∣mary. Infans nondum loquitur, & tamen pro∣phetat. August. Serm. de bono pat. IT is lamentable to hear the poor infant which cannot speak, yet, to boad his own misery, and to Prophecy of his future condition, and what are the contents of his Pro∣phecie, but lamentations, mournings, and woes? Saint Cyprian accords with Saint Austin in his doleful note, Vitae mortalis anxietates, & dolores
& procellas mundi quas ingreditur in∣exordio statim suo ploratu, vel gemit rudis anima testatur, little children newly born, take in their first breath with a sigh, and come crying into the world, as soon as they open their eyes they shed tears to help fill up the vale of tears, into which they were then brought, and shall bee after a short time carried out with a stream of them, running from the eyes of all their friends. And if the Prologue and Epilogue bee no bet∣ter, what shall wee judge of the Scenes and Acts of the life of man, they yeeld so deep springs of tears, and such store of arguments against our aboad in this world, that many reading them in the books of Hege∣sias the Platonick, presently brake the prison of their body, and leaped out of the world into the grave. Others concluded with Silenus, Optimum non nasci, proximum quam primum mori, That it was simply best never to bee born, the next to it to dye out of hand, and give the world our salve, and take our vale at once.
Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus avi primi fluit. Horat. THe prime scope of the book of Ecclesiastes, is to stir up all Religi∣ous mindes to set forth towards hea∣ven betimes, in the morning of our dayes, Chap. 12. vers. 1. Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth; to enter speedily into a strict course of holiness, which will bring us to eternal happiness, to dedicate to God and his service, the prime in both senses, that is the first, and best part of our time. For as in a glass of di∣stilled water, the purest and thinnest first runneth out, and nothing but lees and mother at the last; so it is in our time and age, our best dayes first run, and our worst at the last. And shall wee offer that indignity to the Divine Majesty, as to offer him the Devils leavings? Florem aetatis dia∣bolo consocrare, faecem Deo reservare, to consecrate the top to the Devil, and the bottome to God, feed the flesh with the flower, and the spirit with the bran; serve the world
with our strength, and our Creator with our weakness, give up our lusty and able members as weapons to sin, and our feeble and weak to righteousness. Will God accept the blinde, and the lame, the lean, and the withered for a sacrifice? How can wee remember our Creator in the dayes of our age, when our memory, and all other faculties of the soul are decayed? How shall wee bear Christs yoak, when the Grashopper is a burthen unto us? when wee are not able to bear our selves, but now under the sole weight of age? What delight can wee take in Gods service, when care, and fear, and sorrow, and paine, and manifold infirmities, and diseases wholly possess the heart, and dead, all the vital motions, and lively af∣fections thereof.
Senes in limine mortis, vitae sunt avidis∣suni. Aristot. de long. & brevi. avit. IT was Aristotles observation, that old men that have their foot on deaths threshold, would then draw back their leg if they could, and at the very instant of their dissolution, are most defarous of the continuance of their life; and seeing the plea∣sures of fin like the apples of Tan∣talus running away from them, they catch at them the more greedily, for want is the whetstone of desire, and experience offereth us many instan∣ces of old men, in whom St. Pauls old man grows young again, who according to the corruption of na∣ture, which St. Austin bewayleth with tears, Malunt libidinem expleri quam extingui, they are so far from having no lust or desire of pleasures, as being cloyed therewith, that they are more insatiable in them than in youth; the flesh in them are like the Peacocks, Quae cocta recrudescit, which after it is sod, in time will
grow raw again, so in them after mortification by diseases and age it reviveth. Sophocles the heathen Poet, might pass for a Saint in com∣parison of them, for hee thanked God, that in his old age hee was free from his most imperious Mistriss, lust: These men on the contrary, desire to enthral themselves again in youthly pleasures, and concu∣piscence in them is kindled even by the defect of fewel; it vexeth them that their sins forsake them, that through the impotency of their limbs and faculties, they cannot run into the like excess as in former times: Their few dayes before death, are like Shrove-tide before Lent, they take their fill of flesh, and fleshly desires, because they sup∣pose that for ever after they must fast from them. Thus they spur on their jadish flesh, now unable to run her former stages, saying, Let us crown our selves with Rose-buds, for they will presently wither, let us eat and drink, for to morrow wee shall dye.
Respice sepulchra & vide quis servus, quis dominus, quis dives, & quis pau∣per, discerue si potes vinctum a rege, fortem a debili, pulchrum a deformi. Aug. l. de nat. & grat. THe hand of a dead man stroak∣ing the part, cures the Tympany; and certainly the consideration of death, is a present means to cure the swelling of pride in any form in this life; many things make odds between men and women, as birth, educa∣tion, wealth, alliance, and honour; but death makes all even, Respice se∣pulchra, saith St. Austin, Survey mens graves, and tell mee then who is beautiful, and who is deformed. All there have hollow eyes, flat noses, and gastly looks, Nereus and Thirsites cannot bee there distin∣guished. Tell mee, who is rich, and who is poor; all there, wear the same weed, their winding sheet: Tell mee who is noble, and who base and ignoble, the worms claim kindred of all: Tell mee who is well hou∣sed, and who is ill; all there are be∣stowed
in dark and dankish rooms under ground. If this will not sa∣tisfie you, take a sieve and fift the dust and ashes of all men, and shew mee which is which. I grant there is some difference in dust; there is powder of Diamonds, there is gold dust, and brass-pin dust, and saw∣dust, and common dust, the powder of Diamonds resembles the remains of Princes; gold dust, the remains of Noble-men; pin-dust, the remains of the Tradesmen; saw-dust the remains of the day-labourer, and common dust, the remains of the vulgar, which have no quality or profession to distinguish them, yet all is but dust. At a game of Chesse, wee see Kings, and Queens, and Bishops, and Knights upon the board, and they have their severall walks, and contest one with the other in points of state and honour; but when the game is done, all toge∣ther with the Pawns are shuffled in one bag: In like manner, in this life men appear in indifferent garbs, and take divers courses, some are Kings, some are Officers, some
Bishops, some Knights, some of o∣ther ranks, and orders. But when this life like a game is done, which is sometimes sooner, sometimes later, all are shufled together with the many or vulgar sort of people, and lye in darkness and obscurity, till the last man is born upon the earth, but after that, Erunt ipsis quoque fata se∣pulchris. The grave which hath swallowed up all the sons of Adam, shall bee swallowed up it self into victory. Theodoro parum interest huminc an in sublime putrescat. Erasmus. ALthough the heathen Philoso∣phers made little account of Burial, as appeared by the speech of Theodorus to the Tyrant, who threatned to hang him: I little pass by it whether my carcass pu∣trifie above the earth, or on it. And the Poet seems to be of his mind, whose strong line it was, Coelo teg∣tur qui non habet urnam, which was Pompeys case, and had like to have
been Alexanders, and William the Conquerors; yet all Christians who conceive more divinely on the soul, deal more humanely with the body, which they acknowledge to bee membrum Christi, and templum Dei, a member of Christ, and temple of God. If charity commands thee to cover the naked, saith St. Ambrose, how much more to bury the dead? When a friend is taking a long jour∣ney, it is civility for his friends to bring him on part of his way; when our friends are departed, and now going to their grave, they are ta∣king their last journey, from which they shall never return till time shall bee no more; and can wee do less then by accompanying the corpse to the grave, bring them as it were part on their way, and shed some few tears for them, whom wee shall see no more with mortal eyes. The Prophet calleth the grave Miscabin, a sleeping chamber, or resting place; and when wee read Scriptures to them that are departing, and give them godly instructions to dye, wee light them as it were to their bed;
and when wee send a deserved testi∣mony after them, wee perfume the room. Indeed if our bodies (which like garments wee cast off at our death) were never to be worn again, wee need little care where they were thrown, or what became of them; but seeing they must serve us again, their fashion being only altered, it is fit we carefully lay them up in Deaths Wardrobe, the grave; though a man after hee hath lost a Jewel, doth less set by the casket, yet hee who loves much, and highly esteemeth of the soul of his friend, as Alexander did of Homer, cannot but make some reckoning of the Desk and Cabinet in which it alwayes lay: Wee have a care of placing the picture of our friend, and should wee not much more of bestowing his body. If burial were nothing to the dead, God would never have threatned Coniah that hee should have the burial of an Ass, nor the Psalmist so quavered upon this doleful note, Dederunt ca∣daver servorum tuorum coeli volucri∣bus, O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy
Temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones, the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to the fowls of hea∣ven. Mors non est exitus sed transitus & temporali itinere decurs ad aeterna transgressus. Cyp. de mortal. VVHich is verified from Rev. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven &c. From whence wee may learn first, That if all that dye in the Lord are blessed, from the very moment of their death, and this blessedness is confirmed by a voyce from heaven: Let us give more heed to such a voyce than to any whisper of the flesh or devil. What∣soever Philosophy argueth, or rea∣son objecteth, or sense excepteth a∣gainst it: Let us give more heed to God than man, to the Spirit than to the flesh, to faith than to reason, to heaven than to earth; although they who suffer for the testimony of the Gospel seem to bee most miserable,
their skins being flayed off, their joynts racked, their whole body torn in peeces, or burned to ashes, their good confiscate, their arms defaced, and all manner of disgraces put up∣on them: Yet they are most happy in heaven, by the testimony of heav∣ven it self, the malice of their ene∣mies cannot reach so high as hea∣ven, it cannot touch them much there, much less awake them out of their sweet sleep in Jesus. Secondly, If the dead are blessed in comparison of the living, let us not so glew our thoughts, and af∣fections to the world, and the com∣forts thereof, but that they may easily bee severed, for there is no comparison between the state of the godly in this life, and in the life o come, for here they labour for rest, there they rest from their labour; here they expected; here they hun∣ger, and thirst for righteousness, there they are satisfied; here they are continually afflicted, either for their sins, or with their sins, and they have continual cause to shed tears, either for the calamities of
Gods people, or the stroaks they themselves receive from God, or the wounds they give themselves; there all tears are wiped from their eyes: Here they are alwayes troub∣led either with the evils they fear, or the fear of evil; but when they go hence, death sets a period to all fear, cares, sorrows, and dangers. And therefore Solon speaketh divinely, when hee taught Croesus that hee ought to suspend his verdict of any mans happiness till hee saw his end. Lastly, If all that dye in Christ are blessed, as a voyce from heaven assureth us, wee do wrong to hea∣ven if wee account them miserable, wee do wrong to Christ; if wee count them as lost, whom hee hath found, if wee shed immoderate tears for them from whose eyes, hee hath wiped away all tears, to wear perpetual blacks for them, upon whom hee hath put long white Robes. Whatsoever our losse may bee by them, it cometh far short of their gain; our cross is light in com∣parison of their super-excellent
weight of glory, therefore let us not sorrow for them as those that have no hope. Let us not shew our selves infidels by too much lamenting the death of beleevers. Weep wee may for them, or rather for our loss by them, but moderately, as knowing that our loss, is their gain; and if wee truly love them, wee cannot but ex∣ceedingly congratulate their feasts of joy, their rivers of pleasures, their Psalms of Victory, their Robes of Majesty, their Crowns of glory. Water therefore your plants at the departure of your dearest friends, but drown them not; For whatso∣ever wee complain of here, they are freed from there; and whatsoever wee desire here, they enjoy there; they hunger not, but feast with the Lamb; they sigh not, but sing with Moses, having safely passed over the glassie Sea; they lye not in darkness, but possess the inheritance of Saints in light. They have immunity from sin, freedome from all temptations, and security from danger, they have rest for their labours here, comfort for their troubles, glory for their
disgrace, joyes for their sorrows, life for their death in Christ, and Christ for all. Ut Romae mori non potest qui Romae non vixit, ita qui in domino non vixit, in e non moritur. Cor. Alapide. AS a man cannot dye at Rome, who never lived at Rome; so none can dye in Christ, who never lived in him, and none can live in him, who is not in him; First, then wee must labour to bee in him, and how may wee compass this? Christ himself teacheth us, I am the Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, e∣very branch that beareth not fruit in me, he taketh away, and every branch that beareth fruit be purgeth, that it may bring forth more fruit; as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can yee, except yee abide in mee. Hence wee learn that wee cannot bear fruit in Christ, un∣less as branches wee bee ingrafted into him. Now that a graft may bee inoculated, 1 There must bee made
an incision in the tree. 2 The graft or Syence must be imped in. 3 After it is put in, it must be joyned fast to the tree. The incision is already made by the wounds given Christ at his death, many incisions were made in the true Vine; that which putteth us in, or inoculateth us, is a special faith, and that which bindes us fast to the tree, is love, and the grace of perse∣verance. If then wee bee ingrafted by faith into Christ, and bound fast unto him by love, wee shall partake of the juice of the stock, and grow in grace, and bear fruit also more and more, and so living in the true Vine, wee shall dye in him, and so dying in him, wee shall re-flourish with him in everlasting glory.
Nihil melius aterna lex fecit quam quod unum introitum ad vitam no∣bis dedit, exitus multos. Sen. Ep. 10. VVE come but one way into the world, but wee go a thousand out of it: As wee see in a Garden pot, the water is poured in but at one place, to wit, the nar∣row mouth, but it runneth out at a hundred holes. Some dye by fire, as the Sodomites; by water, as the old world: By the infection of the aire, as threescore and ten thousand in Davids time: By the opening of the earth, as Corah, Dathan, and Abi∣ram, Amphiraus, and two Cities, Buris, and Helice. Some meet with death in their Coach, as Antiochus, their chamber as Domitian, their bed, as John the twelfth, the Theater, as Caligula, the Senate, as Caesar. The Temple, as Zenacherib. Their table, as Claudius. At the Lords Table, as Pope Victor, and Henry of Luxen∣burg. Death woundeth and striketh some with a Pen-knife, as Soneca a
Stilletto, as Henry the fourth. A sword, as Paul. A Fullers e am, as James the Lords brother. A Saw, as Isaiah. A stone, as Pyrrhus. A Thunder-bolt, as Amistatius. What should I speak of Felones de se, such as have thrown away their souls. Sardanapalus made a great fire, and leaped into it. Luoretia stab∣bed her self. Cleopatra put an Aspe to her breast stung therewith, dyed presently; Saul fell upon his own sword. Judas hanged himself: De∣ronius cut his own veins. Heremius bear out his own brains. Licinius choaked himself with a napkin. Dortia dyed by swallowing hot burning coals. Hannibal sucked poyson out of his ring. Demosthenes out of his Pen, &c. What seem∣eth so loose as the soul in the body, which is plucked out with an hair, driven out with a smell, frayed out with a phansie? Verily that seemeth to bee but a breath in the nostrils, which is taken away with a scent; a shadow, which is driven a∣way with a Scare-crow; a dream, which is frayed away with a phan∣sie;
a vapour which is driven away with a pusse; a conceit which goes a∣way with a passion, a toy that leaves us with a laughter; yet grief kil∣led Homer; laughter Philemon; a hait in his milk, Fabius; a flye in his throat, Adrian; a smell of lime in his nostrils, Jovi; the snufte of a candle a childe in Pliny; a kernel of a raison Anacreon; and an Icesickle one in Martial, which caused the Poet to melt into tears, saying, Onbimors non est, si jugula∣tis aque? What cannot make an end of us, if a small drop of water congealed can do it? In these re∣gards wee may turn the affirmative in the 1 Cor. 15. 55. into a negative, and say truly, though not in the Apostles sense, O death where is not thy sting? For wee see it thrust out in out meats, in our drinks, in our ap∣parrel, in our breath, in the Court, in the Country, in the City, in the Field, in the Land, in the Sea, in the Chamber, in the Church, and in the Church-yard.
Domiviam potest a est um utendi  abutend. Justinian. GOd may lend thee out even to Satah, suffer thee to bee his Bay∣lie, and his instrument to the vexa∣tion of others: So hee lent out St. Paul to the Scribes and Pharisees, to serve them in their persecutions; so God may lend thee out. God may let thee out for a time to them that shall plough and harrow thee, fell, and cleave thee, and reserve to him∣self but a little rent, a little glory, in thy patience; So hee let out Job even to Satan himself; so God may let thee out, God may mortgage thee to a six months Fever, or to a longer debilit; so he mortgaged He∣zekias. God may lay thee waste, and pull-up thy fences, and ex∣tinguish their power, or with-draw their love, upon whom thou hast established thy dependance; So hee laid David waste, when hee with-drew his childrens obedience from him; so God may lay thee waste. God may let out all his time in thee
in this world, and reserve to him∣self onely a last year, a last day, a last minute, suffer thee in unrepen∣ted sins to the last gasp; so God let out the good, Theef. God is Lord of all that thou hast and art; and then hee that is Lord owner, Proprietary, may do with that which is his, what, he will. But God will not, cannot de∣vest his Domirsion, nor sell thee so, as not to reserve a power, and a will to redeem thee, if thou wouldest bee redeemed. For howsoever hee seem to thee, to have sold thee to sin, to sadness, to sickness, to superstition, (for these bee the Ishmalites, these bee the Midianite Merchants, that buy up our Josephs, our souls) though hee seem to sell his present estate, hee will not sell reversions, his future title to thee by a future repentance, hee will not sell, but whensoever thou shalt grow due to him, by a new, land a true repentance, hee shall re-assume thee into his bed, and his bosome, no bill of divorce, and re∣enter thee into his revenue, and his audit, no bill of sale, shall stand up to thy prejudice, but thy dejected spirit shall
spirit shall bee raised from thy con∣sternation to a holy cheerfulness, and a peaceful alacrity, and no ten∣tation shall offer a reply to this que∣stion, which God makes to establish thy conscience, ubi libellus, Where is the bill of thy mothers divorce∣ment, &c. Isa. 50. 1. Unde illi cura cordis cui ne ipsa qui∣dem adhuc ris circumspectia. Bernard. POu Domine custodiam ori meo, was the prayer of David, Set a watch before my lips. And in the Law of Mases, the vessel that had not the coveting fastened to it, was unclean; and therefore the inner parts of a fool are resembled to a broken vessel, which hath neither part entire, nor covering. Hee can keep no knowledge while hee liveth, Eccles. 21. 14. Hereupon those more nobly bred amongst the Romans, learned first to hold their peace, and afterwards to speak. For hee is an ill treasurer of his own thoughts,
that keeps not the doors of his lips shut; and that heart is never locked fast upon any secret, where a pro∣fuse tongue layes interest to the key. And therefore nature hath provided well by fortisying this member, more than any part of the body, setting a garrison of the strong and stout men about it, Eccles. 12. doubly intrenching it with lips and teeth, not so much to oppose a forreign invasion, as to allay mu∣tinies within, for the tongue is an unruly member, and sides much with the perverseness of our will; and therefore reason should keep strict Sentinel upon it, and as well direct, as guard it. Nature hath proportioned us a double ear and eye to a single tongue, and rea∣son interprets instantly. Wee should hear, and see twice, ere wee speak once
Natum esse Dee sempiternum est. TO bee born with God, is to bee eternal with God, spoken by St. Austin against the Arrians, and the Father opens himself by his old si∣militude, Sicut splendor qui gignitur ab igne, as light which is begotten of fire, and defused, is co-equal with the fire, and would bee co-eter∣nal too, if fire were eternal; So the Son with the Father, this being be∣fore all time, the other must kiss in the same everlastingness. The Father thinking his reason built too slenderly doth buttress (as it were) and back it with the authority of an Apostle, such an Apostle as was sometimes a Persccutor, and there∣fore his Authority most potent a∣gainst a Persecutor where hee stiles Christ, the Power and Wis∣dome of God. If the Son of God bee the Power and Wisdome of God; and that God was never without Power and Wisdome; how can wee scant the Son of a Co-eternity with the Father? For either wee must grant that there was alwayes a Son, or that God had sometimes no wis∣dome,
and impudence, or madness, were never at such a growth of blas∣phemy, as to belch the latter. If the reverend allegation of a learned Prelate, or those more sacred of an Apostle, cannot bring up the mouth of a malicious Heretick, hear the voyce of a Prophet, and a Father warbling upon that too. Before mee there was no other God, and after mee there shall bee none, Isa. 43. 10. Quis hoc dicit, pater an filius? (saith Am∣brose) Who is here, the speaker; the Father, or the Son (hee cometh over him with a subtil Dilemma) if the Son, thus hee saith, Before mee there was no other Cod; if the Father, After mee (saith hee) these shall bee none: For both the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father must bee known; when thou namest a Fa∣ther, thou hast also designed a Son, because no man is a Father to him∣self; when thou namest a Son, thou confessest also a Father, for no man is son to himself, the Son therefore can neither subsist without the Fa∣ther, nor the Father without the Son, the one being from everlasting, wee
may not depose the other from the like Omnipotency. Vereor ne dum propter te fugis, propter alios sis in pericul apud dominum. Athan. in Epist. ad Drac. TO avoid all occasions of pub∣lick service for the Church un∣der a pretence of humility, or re∣cluseness, speaks (too broadly) the de∣linquent, refractory; your Anchorite that digs his grave in speculation meerly, and your Moale that is earthed wholly in an affected solitari∣ness, are not liable so properly to obscurity, as death, such elaborate∣ness tends not to perfection, but dis∣ease; and wee finde an Apoplexy, and sleep, no less on their endea∣vours than in their name; all know∣ledge is dusted with them, and it is no more a nursery of vertues, but a Tomb. And (indeed) such slk-worms spin themselves into flyes, disanimate heartlesse flyes, fit nei∣ther for Church, nor Common∣wealth. The Laurel, and honour
of all Secular designes, is the exe∣cution, and the happiness of those sacred ones is not intayled barely to the knowledge of them, but to that fac & vives, and that not at home onely in thy particular intendments, but abroad also in thy services for the Church; so that hee that re∣treats at any alarm, or summons of his God, for the common affairs of the Church, to hug, and enjoy him∣self in his solitary ends, runs him∣self on the shelves of a rough cen∣sure, that of the father to his Dra∣contius. To stand by, and give aim only whilst others shoot, and thou thy self no mark-man, proclaimes thy laziness, if not thy impotency. What a nothing is thy arme, thy bow, thy shaft? if not practised, nor bent, nor drawn up; or if so glorious a mark, the Church, why not levelled at? either shee must bee unworthy of thy travel, or thine of her. If therefore this thy mother implore thy aid (so Augustine counsels his Indoxis) on the one side, have not ambition on the other, lean not to a lie refusal, weigh not thine own
idleness with the necessities and greatness of her burthens, to which (whiles shee is in travel) if no good men will administer their help, Certe quomodo nasceremini non inve∣niretis, God must then invent new wayes for our new birth. Occidar modo imperet. Tacit. Annals. AMmbition whither wilt thou? Nay, whither wilt thou not? To the pinacle of the Temple for the glory of the world, though thou tumble for it to thy eternal ruine. The Greek Philosopher Eudorus will beg of the gods, that hee may behold the Sun so near, as to com∣prehend the form, beauty, greatness of it, and afterwards hee cares not if hee burn, as if there were no such Martyrdome as what Ambition fites. Let mee bee killed, so that hee may reign, was the resolution of Agrip∣pina for her Nero. But lo, how the event crowns the unsatiateness of her desires; hee gains the Kingdome, and first digged out those bowels
which had fostered him, and then that heart which was the throne of such an aspiring thought, Cruelty, shall I call it, or Justice, when the vain-glory of the mother was pe∣nanced with the unnatralness of the son. Thus lofty mindes (furnished with a strong hope of the success of their designes) have imbarked themselves into great actions, and proposing humane ends, as scales to their high thoughts, have been wa∣sted into strange promotions, but after they have (a while) spangled in that their firmament of honour, they become falling stars, and so the success proves as in-glorious as the enterprise was bold and desperate. Wee have seldome met with any eminency that was sudden and per∣manent: Those which in their dawn of fortune break so gloriously, meet with a storm at noon, or else a cloud at night. The Sun that rises in a grey and sullen morning, sets clearest: And indeed, Ambion is too hasty, and is hurried violently to the end it aims at, without cauti∣ousness, and circumspection to
the mean; but humility hath a calm, and temperate pace, and stoops it along in a gentle posture, yet at length attains her mark, but slowly, as if it went unwilling to honour, and sleighted those proffers which o∣thers sue for. Primatus fugientem desiderat deside∣ratum horret. Chrisol. IT is a trick of primacy to fawn where it is not crouched to, but look coy where it is over-courted; like some Weather-cock which in a constant and churlish wind break fairly towards us, but in a wanton blast-turn tail. Hence it is that in matters of Authority, and prehe∣minence, pride hath for the most part the foil, humility the conquest, that stoops basely to the title, or the profit, and loses either, this in a mo∣dest distance, keeps a loof, till worth invite it, and at length gains both; fo that it is in wayes of promotion, as in some Water-works, where one engine raises it to make it fall more
violently, another beats it down that it might mount higher. The advice then of St. Peter comes sea∣sonably here, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5. 6. The words are not without the strength of emphasis, here is an humiliaini Crowned with an ut exaltet, humble your selves that hee may exalt, as if humility were so necessary a dis∣position to preferment, that without it God might not exalt. Habet hoc vitium omnis ambitio, non respicit. Seneca. THe thirst of Eminency is head∣strong, and runs with a loose bridle. It is to see much below sa∣tiety, that it still desires, nay it is hungry even in surfeit, and is sharp∣ned with the fruition of that it co∣veted, so that the birth of this childe, is but the conception of another, one honour rooms not the greatness of his thought, and an ambitious desire seldome anchors any where,
but goes on still with a full sall, till it hath compassed the Cape it is bound for. This man makes Go∣vernment the stall both of his pride and tyranny, his projects are loftily cruel, so are his actions too, yet still in a hot scent of promotion, which (if they want a Trumpet for others commendation) shall borrow one from his own, and so at one applaud his designes, and justifie them. And indeed this titilation, and itch of honour, if it once finde in the bo∣some of the receiver a fair admit∣tance, doth smoothly insinuate, and cheat upon the powers of reason; but when it is throughly seated, and enthroned there, it is no more a guest, but a tyrant, and leaves the possessor, not a Master, but a cap∣tive; and in this case, I know not whether St. Augustine will pity his Anrelius, or excuse him, Quod si cui∣quam facile sit gloriam non cupere dum ngatur difficile est ea non de∣lectari cum offertur, in his 64. Epistle. However the Father seems there to plead onely for the delight in glories offered, not in the unjust pro∣secution
of those denied. Si nil attuleris, ibis Homere for as. Ovid. IN wayes of sufficiency, and worth, it is the si nil attuleris, damps the preferment; the age can instance, in some languishing and weak in their intellectuals, men without sap, or kernel, who (having their store-house well fraught with that white and red earth) have stumbled on the glories of the time, as if fortune would make them happy in despite of vertue; when others of Christs followers (were truly his Disciples) are sent abroad with their ite & pre∣dicate, bare footed, without bag or scrip, but their Commission large, omni creaturae, the wide world is their place of residence; no particular roof to shelter them, or place of ro∣tiredness to lay their head in. Nay some that have served a triple Ap∣prentiship to Arts and Sciences, and spent in these our Athens the strength of their time, and patrimony, men
throughly ballasted for those high designes, well kerned both in years and judgement, hee mouldring for non-imployment, and dashed for slowness of promotion, when others of cheap, and thin abilities, men without growth or bud of know∣ledge, have met with the honours of advancement, and trample on those dejected book-worms which dissolve themselves into industry for the service of their Church, yet meet neither with her pomp, no her re∣venue; nay, some that have wasted their lamp, and burnt their Taper to an inch of years, have spent those fortunes in the travels of Di∣vinity, which would largely have ac∣commodated them for more secular courses, and enforced to retire them∣selves to the solitariness of some ten pounds cure, and so spin out the re∣mainder of their age in a discon∣tented contemplation of their mis∣fortunes: and (I pray God) not in a murmuring against his Church. Where the fault lyes, hee that hath but slenderly transiqued with the oc∣currences of the time, may judge.
Spiritual promotions are slow of foo, and come for the most part halting, or in a by-way. Times more than calamitous, when the in∣heritance and patrimony of the Church shall bee thus leased to ava∣rice and folly, when these her ho∣nours which shee intails upon desert, shall bee heaped upon a golden igno∣rant, who rudely treads on those sacred Prerogatives. Strange monu∣ment of weakness, he that reels under his own burthen, stoops to be opprest with the weight of others, and loe how hee tumbles to a mortal sin (the School-men do stile it so) directly opposite to a pair of vertues, Justice, Chastity; unjust, that the revenues due to worth, should be packed upon bulkless and unable persons, and un∣charitable for him to undertake the guidance and pasturing of a flock who was never trained up in the conditions of a shepherd. Neither is hee an enemy only of a double ver∣tue, but a companion of two such sins, which seem to brave, and dare the Almighty to revenge on the prophanr, Incusion, Perjury; first,
in rushing on the profession not legi∣timately called; then in purchasing her honours. Pompa mortis magis terret, quam mors ipsa. Seneca. VVHy should this sad toil of mortality dishearten us? Groans and Sighs, and Convulsions, are the bodies passing-bells, no less customary, than natural, and more horrid in the circumstance, than the thing, the retinue and comple∣ment of death, speaks more terrour, than the act. The Adversary, the Judge, the Sentence, the Jaylor, the Executioner, more daunt the Male∣factor, than the very stroke, and cleft of dissolution. Are wee so foolish as to fear that (sayes the heathen) which will dash or split us in the whole, no, it is the port which we ought one day to desire, never to refuse; into which (if any have been cast in their younger years) they need repine no more than one, which with a short cut hath ended his Navigation. For
there are some whom slacker winds mock, and detain, and weary with the gentle tediousness of a peaceable calm; others swifter wafted by sud∣den gusts, whom life hath rather ra∣vished thither, than sent, which had they a time delayed, by some flatte∣ring intermissions, yet at length, must of necessity strike sail to it. Some faint-hearted Adrian will (to his power) linger it, and fearfully expostulate with a parting soul. Quae nunc abib is in loca, pallidula, ri∣gida, nudula? As if the divorce from the body were everlasting, and there should not bee (one day) a more glorious contract. When a confident Hilarian, shall dare all those grisly assaults, Soul get thee out, thou hast seventy years served Christ, and art thou now loath to dye? Again some spruce Agag, or hem'd Amalakite, would bee palsie-struck with an amara mors, death is bitter, death, mors, death is bitter, death is bitter, 1 Sam. 15. When a Lubentius, and a Maximi∣nus have their breast-plate on, with a Domine parati sumus▪ Wee are
ready to lay off our garments the flesh: And indeed, saith St. Austin, Boughs fall from trees, and stones out of buildings; and why should it seem strange that mortals dye; Some have welcomed death, some met it in the way, some baffeld it in sickness, persecution, torments. I instance not in that of Basil, to the Arrianated Valns (it is too light) that of Vincentius was more remarkable, who with an unabated constancy thus shuns the rage of his merciless Executioner, thou shalt see the Spi∣rit of God strengthn the tormented, more than the Devil can the hands of the tormenter. And that you may know a true Martyrdome, is not dashed either at the expectation, or the sense of torture; as Barlaam will hold his hand over the very flame of the Altar, and sport out the hor∣ridness of such a death, with that of the Psalmist, Thou hast aught my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. Seeing then wee are compalsed with such a cloud of witnesses, what should scare a true Apostle from his Cupio dissolvi? Let us take his reso∣lution,
and his counsel too, lay aside every weight, and run with patience the race set before us, Heb. 1. Iniquitatem damnare novit Deus, non facere. August. GOd knows how to judge, not commit a crime, and to dispose, not mould it, and is often the Father of the punishment, not the fact. Hence it is that the dimness of hu∣mane apprehension conceives that oftentimes a delinquency in God, which is a monster of our own frail∣ty, making God not onely to fore∣know, but predestinate an evil, when the evil is both by growth and con∣ception ours, and if ought savour of goodness in us, it is Gods, not ours, yet ours too, as derivative from God, who is no less the Patron of all goodness, than the Creator; and it is as truly impossible for him to commit evill, as it was truly mira∣culous to make all that hee had made good. And therefore Ter∣ulli in his first book, de Tri,
makes it a non potest fieri, a matter beyond the list and reach of possi∣bility that hee should bee artifex mali operis, the promoter and ingi∣neer of a depraved act, who chalen∣geth to himself, the title no less of an unblemished Father than of a Judge. If any then fall off from goodness, hee is hurried no less with the vio∣lence of his own perswasion than concupiscence, and in those despe∣rate affairs, Gods will is neither an intermedler nor co-partner; Cujus ope scimus multos ne laberentur retentos, nullos ut laberentur impulsos, saith Aug. by whose hand of providence, wee know many to bee supported that they might not fall, none impelled that they should: And in his answer to that fourteenth Article, falsely supposed to bee his fieri non potest, ut per quem a peecatis surgitur per eum ad peecata decidatur, for one and the self-same goodness to bee the life and death of the self-same sin, is so much beyond improbability that it is impossible; let this then sa∣tisfie our desire of knowledge, Et ab illo esse quod flatur, & non ab illo esse
quod ruitur; That his providence is the staffe and crutch on which wee so lean, that wee yet stand our cor∣rupt affections, the bruised and bro∣ken reed, on which if wee so lean, wee fall. If any then go onward in the true rode of Divine graces, no doubt, but the finger of the Al∣mighty points out his way to true happiness; but if hee wander in the by-paths of a vitious and depraved dissoluteness, his own corrupt affe∣ctions becken him to ruine. How then can wee without sacriledge and robbing of divine honour, make God the Father of so foul and un∣washed a crime as obduration, per∣ditio tua ex te Israel, If destruction dog thee, thank thy corrupt affecti∣ons, not blame thy Maker, for hee doth but leave thee, and they har∣den. To lay then with some depra∣ved Libertines, the weight and bur∣then of our sins on the shoulder of pre∣destination, and make that the womb of those foul-enormities, may well pass for an infirmity, not for an ex∣cuse. For though God from eternity knew how to reward every man
either by crown or punishment▪ yet hee never enjoyned any man either  necessity, or a will to sin. Compeseat se humana temerit as & id quod non est non qurat, ne id quod est, non inveniat. August. MOrtal thoughts should not carry too lofty a sail, but take heed how they cut the narrow streights and passages of divine Predestination. A busie prying into this Ark of Gods secrets, as it is accompanied with a full blown insolence, so with danger; Humility here is the first stair to safety, and a modest knowledge stands constantly wondring, whilst the proud apprehension staggers, and tumble too, Here is a sea unnavi∣gable, and a gulph so scorning fa∣thom, that our Apostle himself was driven to his . O depth, and in a rapture, more of astonishment, than contemplation, hee stiles it the Sacrament and mystery of his will, be∣ing so ull of unknown turnings and Mnders, that if a naked reason hold
the clue, wee are rather involved, than guided in so strange a laby∣rinth. To inquire then the cause of Gods will, were an act of lunacy, not of judgement. For every effi∣cient cause is greater than the effect. Now there is nothing greater than the will of God, and therefore no cause thereof. For if there were, there should something pre-occupate that will, which to conceive were sinful, to beleeve blasphemous. If any then suggested by a vain-glori∣ous inquiry, should ask why God did elect this man, and not that, wee have not onely to resolve, but to fore-stall so beaten an objection, be∣cause hee would; but why would God do it? Here is a question as guilty of reproof as the author, which:seeks a cause of that, beyond, or without which, there is no cause found; where the apprehension wheels, and reasonruns giddy in a doubtful gyre. Here a sorupulous and humane rashness should bee hushd, and not search for that which is not, lest it finde not that which is: Let him that can discry
the wonders of the Lord in this great deep, but let him take heed hee sinks not down then with this aspiring thought, this ambitious desire of hidden knowledge, and make not curiosity the picklock of Divine se∣crets, know that such mysteries are doubly barred up in the coffers of the Almighty, which thou mayest strive to violate, not open, and therefore if thou wilt needs trespass upon the Diety, dig not in its bosome; a more humble adventure, suits better with the condition of a worm, scarce a man, or if so exposed to frailty. It is a fit task and imploy∣ment for mortality to contemplate his works, not sift his mysteries, and admire his goodness, not blur his Justice. If any therefore stagger at those unfathomed mysteries of Gods Election and Predestination, and his reason and apprehension bee struck dead at the contemplation of Gods eternal, but hidden projects; let him season a little his amazement with adoration, and at last solace his distempered thoughts with that of Gregory, Qui in fact is Dei, &c. In
the abstruse and dark mysteries of God, hee that sees not a reason, if hee sees his own infirmity, hee sees a suf∣ficient reason why hee should not see. Mee thinks this should cloy the appetite of a greedy inquisition, and satisfie the distrust of any, but of too querulous a disposition, which with the eye of curiosity prying too nicely into the closest of Gods secrets, are no less dazeled than blinded, if not with profanation, heresie. Divine secrets should rather transport us with won∣der, than prompt us to inquiry, and bring us on our knees to acknow∣ledge the infiniteness both of Gods power and will, than ransack the bosome of the Almighty, for the revealing of his intents. Is it not blessedness enough that God hath made thee his Steward, though not his Secretary. Will no Mansion in heaven content thee, but that which is the Throne and Chair for Omni∣potency to sit on? No treasury but that which is the Cabinet and Store-house of his own secrets? Worm and no man, take heed how thou struglest with thy Maker. Expo∣stulation
with God, imports no less pe∣remptoriness, than danger; and if An∣gels fell for pride of emulation, where wilt thou tumble for this pride of inquiry? as in matters therefore of unusual doubt, where truth hath no verdict, probability finds audience. So in those obstruct and narrow passages of Gods will, where reason cannot inform thee, beleef is thy best intelligencer, and if that want a tongue, make this thy interpreter; so thou mayest evade with less di∣strust, I am sure with more safe∣ty. Etsi domine ego commisi unde me dam∣nare potes, u tamen non amlsisti un∣de me salvare potes. Anselm. O Blessed Jesus, though I have committed those transgressions for which thou mayest condemn me, yet thou hast not lost those com∣passions by which thou mayest save mee. And therefore if our souls were insuch a streight that wee saw hell opening her mouth upon us, like
the Red Sea, before the Israelites; the damned and ugly feinds pur∣suing us behinde like the Egyptians; on the right hand, and on the left, death and sea, ready to ingulf us; yet upon a broken heart, and undis∣guised sorrow, would I speak to you in the confidence of Moses, Stand still, and behold the salvaton of the Lord. Thou then which art opprest with the violence and clamor of thy sin, and wantest an Advocate either to intercede, or pity, hear the voyce of the Lamb cry unto the, I will hear thee out of my holy hill. Is any heavily loaden with the weight of his offences, or groans under the yoak and tyranny of manifold temptations, Come unto mee, I will refresh thee. Doth any hunger after righteousness, Behold, I am the bread of life, take eat, here is my body. Doth any thirst after the wayes of grace? Loe I am a living spring, come drink, here is my bloud, my bloud, that was shed for many for the remission of sins; for many, not for all. Hath sin domi∣nion over thee, or doth it reign in thy mortal heart? Are the wounds
of thy transgressions so deep, that they cannot bee searched, or so old, that they corrupt, and putrifie, here is that good Samaritan that will ei∣ther binde them up, or pour in oyl; but art thou not yet dead in trespasses, are not thy ulcers past cure? Are there any seeds of true life remain∣ing? is there any motion of repen∣tance in thy soul, will thy pulse of remorse beat a little, hast thou but a touch of sorrow, a spark of contri∣tion, a grain of faith? know there is oyl of comfort for him that mourns in Sion, Isa. 61. 3. not a tear drops from thee in sincerity, which is either unpitied, or unpreserved, God puts it into his bottle. On the other side, is there a Pharoah in thee, a heart unmollified, a stone that will not be bruised, a flint unmalleable? I, both mourn for it, and leave it. But is this heart of stone taken away? and is there given thee a heart of flesh, is it soft and tender with re∣morse, truly sacrificed to sorrow, then know there is balm of Gilead, for the broken heart, balm that will both refresh and cure it. T then
which groanest in thy spirit, and art drawn out as it were into contrition for thy sins, thou which hast washed thy hands in innocency, go cheerfully to the Altar of thy God, and cry with old Anselm, Etsi domine ego commisi unde me damnare potes, tu tamen non a∣mifisti unde me salvare potes. Qui pectus suum tundit & se non cor∣rigit, aggravat peccata, non tollit. August. VVHere there is an outward percussion of the breast, without remorse of the inward man, there is rather an aggravation of sin, than a release. That subtle fallacy of the eye, pointing towards hea∣ven; that base hypocrisie of the knee, kissing the earth; that seeming austerity of thy hand, martyring thy breast; gains from God neither ap∣plause nor blessing, but the curse of the Pharisee, whose example would have chid thee to such an outside of devotion: Is then thy re∣pentance disguised? Hath it a touch
of dissimulation in it? Is not thy old corruption clean disgorged, but must thou again to thy former vomit? Hypocrite, thy Altar is without fire, thine Incense without smoak, it shall never touch the nostrils of the Al∣mighty, thy prayers in his ears sound like brass, and tinckle like an ill∣tuned cymbal; all this formality of zeal is but a disease of the lip, Give mee thy heart, my son, saith God, Prov. 23. I will have that or no∣thing, and that clean too, washed both from deceit and guilt. Those blanchings and guildings, and gar∣nishings of external zeal, are as odi∣ous in the eye of God, as those of body in a true Christian: This gloss, this paint of demureness, speaks but our whoredomes in Religion, and the integrity of that man is open, both to censure and suspicion, that is exposed either to the practice of it, or the approbation. A villain is a villain, howsoever his garb or habit speak him otherwise, and an hypo∣crite is no less, though sleeked over with an external sanctity, and dres∣sed in the affectations of a preciser
cut. Let us bee truly that what wee seem to bee, and not seem what wee are not; let there bee doors, and case∣ments in our breasts, that men may see the loyalty betwixt our heart and tongue, and how our thoughts whis∣per to our tongue, and how our tongue speaks them to the world. Away with those meteors, and false∣fires of Religion, which not onely by-paths us in a blinded zeal, but mis-leads others in our steps of er∣ror. Let us then put off the old man in our pride, vain-glory, envy, malice, hatred, and (that foul disease of the times) hypocrisie, and let us put on the new man in sincerity, faith, re∣pentance, sobriety, brotherly-kindness, and (what without it disparages the tongue both of men and Angels) charity: That so at length wee may receive that everlasting benediction, Come yee children, in herit the King∣dome prepared for you from the begin∣ning of the world.
Bonum causatur ex integra causa, ma∣lum autem ex singularib us defecti∣bus. Tho. Aquin. GOd expects perfection, perfe∣ction of parts, where man ex∣pects acceptance. Now as unto that which is good, so unto that which is perfect, there must bee an intire concurrence of all requi∣sites. The defect, or want of any one thing required, may cause an imperfection, but to the constitution of perfection, there must bee a meet∣ing of all things required; It will appear in the cause specified, Lev. 22, 21. The sacrifices of Beeves, or of Sheep, there mentioned, must bee perfect. Now if the beast had wan∣ted but any one part, an eye, an ear, an horn, an hoof, any one of these defects had caused an imperfection, and the sacrifice had been imperfect, and so no acceptance of it. But now to have made it perfect, to bee ac∣cepted, it must have all, and every one of the parts, every member of the body in its number, and pro∣portion.
Now the equity holds in all duties of worship. To what end is our worship, if not accepted; if wee will have it accepted, wee must have it perfect, there must bee all these things in it that God re∣quires. Now God requires in wor∣ship, not onely that wee use his Or∣dinance, but his Order, as outward, so inward. Now when there is this perfection that God requires, then may a blessing and acceptance bee expected. But if that Order, that spiritual Order which God calls for, bee wanting, if wanting in any one part of it, there the duty is imper∣fect, there no acceptance can bee looked for, but rather a breach. Wee may see it exemplified in the Law of the Peace-offerings, Levit. 7. First, see the Ordinance of God, vers. 11, 12, 13. There is the sub∣stance of the sacrifice prescribed, then the Order is, that they bee eaten in due time, vers. 16. It shall bee eaten the same day that hee offers his sacri∣fice, that the flesh bee clean, vers. 19. And the flesh that touches any un∣clean thing, shall not bee eaten. That
the persons that do eat it must bee clean, vers. 19. And as for the flesh, all that bee clean shall eat thereof; that is, all that eat thereof must bee clean, as appears by that which follows, vers. 20. So then as here is the Or∣dinance prescribed, so the Order of eating, that they may bee eaten purely, that pure things bee eaten, that they bee eaten of pure persons; there Peace-offerings thus eaten, were accepted, because here was perfection from the concurrence, and integrity of the causes consti∣turing perfection. But now if any one of these things were missing in point of order, it made them im∣perfect, and so unacceptable. If not purely in regard of time, though pre flesh, and eaten by pure persons; yet no blessing, no acceptance, but a breach, vers. 18. It shall not bee ac∣cepted, it shall bee an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it, shall bear his iniquity. If not pure flesh eaten, though by pure persons, yet not onely no acceptance and blessing, but an uncomfortable breach, Even that soul shall bee cut off
from his people, vers. 20, 21. Sacramenta sunt fodinae gratiae, dis∣positio est vasculum gratiae, pro∣majore dispositione, & affectu tuo majorem gratiam reportabis. Eu∣seb. FIll the mens sacks with food as much as they can carry, sayes Jo∣seph to his Steward, Gen. 44. 1. Look how they came prepared with Sacks and Beasts, so they were sent back with Corn: The greater, and the more Sacks they had prepared, the more Corn they carry away: If they had prepared but small Sacks, and a few, they had carried away the less. A prepared heart is a vessel that shall bee filled at the Sacra∣ment. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psal. 81. 10. Now the more or less the heart is prepared, the greater or lesser is the vessel. Ac∣cording to the size and capacity of the vessel, shall it bee filled. Fill such mens hearts with spiritual blessings, with vertue from Christ,
with the comforts of the Holy Ghost, sayes the Lord at the Sacra∣ment, fill them with spiritual food as full as they can hold, as much as they can carry. What a sweet com∣fort is that? Who desires not to carry away from the Sacrament as much as may bee? Then bee careful to prepare our hearts, and prepare them to the purpose, the larger is our pre∣paration, the larger is our vessel, the larger our vessel, the larger is our largess and dole at the Sacrament. If wee carry not away as much as wee would, it is our own fault, that by preparation wee did not furnish our selves with a more capacious vessel. The poor pittances that many go from the Sacrament withall, make them droop when they are gone. They may thank themselves; for if Josaphs brethren had brought small Sacks, they could not have carried away much corn out of Egypt. Let men come with hearts so prepared as they should, and they shall bee laden and filled with as much as they can carry.
Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad mo∣dum recipientis. Aristotle. SAcraments work according to that disposition wherein they finde such as receive them. Such as are the receivers, so prove the Sacra∣ments unto them. It is in this case as it was with the woman under jealousie, and suspicion of unclean∣ness, drinking the cursed waters, Numb. 5. 27, 28. And when hee hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, that if shee bee de∣filed, &c. Look then as the woman was, such was the work of the wa∣ter. If shee were clean, the water did her no hurt; nay, it did her good, shee conceived seed, shee became fruit∣full, but if shee were defiled and un∣clean, it wrought with a mischief, Her belly did swell, her tigh did rot, and shee became a curse. It is so in receiving the Sacrament. As men are that receive it, so is the work and efficacy of it, either for good or hurt, either for bain or bles∣sing; if a man bee prepared with
repentance, and so bee clean, then the Sacrament brings a blessing, it makes a man fruitful. But if a man bee defiled, and unclean, as every im∣penitent sinner is, then it banes and mischiefes him, hee proves a more rotten, and wretched sinner than be∣fore. An unwholesome and dis∣eased stomach that every food it re∣ceives, it alters, and rather nourishes the disease, than the body, and turns wholesome nourishment to matter of grief and vexation. So an im∣penitent soul coming to Gods Ordi∣nance in its fins and defilement, doth but turn the wholesome nutriment of the Sacrament to the feeding of its disease, and the increasing of its own sorrow and mischief; as the wa∣ter that made the clean woman fruitful, made the unclean woman swell and rot. God curses the Sa∣crament to an impenitent, defiled person, and so makes a sad breach upon him instead of a blessing.
Pertunte sole, pereunt omnia. Se∣neca. FOr a man to bee stupid and sense∣less under corporal afflictions, ar∣gues a very ill temper of spirit; but for a man to be stupid and senseless under spiritual afflictions, under such a spiritual affliction, as this, the loss of the Son, the loss of Christ as a Comforter, argues a very ill temper of spirit indeed. Strive therefore, O deserted stupid soul, to affect thine heart throughly with thy loss; thou hast lost more than Job when hee had lost children, substance, health, honours, and friends; nay, thou hast lost more, than if thou hadst lost this world; nay, thou hast lost more, than if thou hadst lost thy life; which is of more worth than the world; thou hast lost Christ, which is richer than the world, and sweeter than thy life. What an infinite loss were it to this world to lose the Sun? It were at once to lose all. Pereunte sole, pe∣reunt omnia; for all things service∣able
for the use of man, depend up∣on the motion and influence of that glorious body. What a loss then is it to the lesser world, to lose Christ the Son of Righteousness? It is to lose all good at once, for soul and body. All graces close and wither, when Christ departs, as all fragrant flow∣ers, when the Sun withdraws his in∣fluence. And when these flowers wither in the soul, a man is a mov∣ing dunghil, that stinks in the no∣strils of God and man where ever hee comes. A man that hath lost Christ, may truly say, as shee when the Ark was lost, That his glory is departed. As the Sun in the glory of the greater World; So Christ the Son of Righ∣teousness, is the glory of the lesser world, to wit, man. Thou hast lost that in the world, that is more worth than the world, and which all the world can never help thee to. Thou hast lost that which would make the worst con∣dition in this life, a Heaven, whereas the best without it, is but a Hell; thou hast lost that which would have been to thy soul a continual
feast; whereas now thy soul is in a continuall famine and leanenesse. Thou hast lost thy spirits, and thy soul as in a dead-palsie, so that thou art a living dead-man, fit for no spi∣ritual service. Thou hast lost thy head, thou hast lost thy eyes, thou hast lost thy hands, thou hast lost thy cloathing; nay, thou hast lost thy best Father, thy best Husband, thy best Friend; all, all this, and much more comfort is Christ to man. Thou hast great reason then, O deserted soul, to lay to heart thy loss. Ignis focalis immateriale non urit. Aristoteles. THe sorrows of Hell are such as principally torture the spirit. The fire which wee make, can one∣ly burn, and torture the bodies of men, because this onely of man is material; immaterials, as the souls of men are, our fire cannot fasten upon, but that strange fire, which God hath kindled in Hell for all
that disobey him, burns the souls of men, though immaterial substan∣ces. Nay, so strange is that fire, that it burns these immaterial sub∣stances most fiercely, as being the most sinfull part of man; for it is onely sin that pitches and defiles the soul, and makes it combustible; which otherwise would never burn if all the fiery Artists of Hell did blow the bellows. Now just such is that fire which conscience kindles upon the breach of integrity, to wit, a fire that burns inwardly, and consumes the mar∣row of the bones, and drinks up the spirits. The Arrows which con∣science shuts in upon a man, upon the breach of sincerity, are such as pierce principally the spirit. As long as Job was patient under Gods hand, hee felt the Arrows of the Almighty, onely without him, as I may say, to wit, in his body, in his children, and substance; but when hee brake out, and cursed his day, hee presently complains that hee felt the Arrows of God within him, and that the poyson of them drank
up his spirits, Job 6. 4. All that which before hee felt without, was nothing to that which hee now felt within upon his spirit. As the tor∣ments which damned wretches shall suffer in their bodies, are nothing to those which shall continually flye up and down in their souls. So Da∣vid, after hee had made breaches in his integrity, God filled his loynes with loathsome diseases; but this was nothing to speak of; God made things strike into his heart, and then hee roared, I am feeble, and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the [disquietness of my heart.] David felt pains gather a∣bout his heart, and then hee cryes out. The heart is the mark that God principally aims at, when a Chri∣stian hath turned aside from his up∣right course; other outward parts hee may hit, and deeply wound, but this is but to make holes into the heart, where the seat of unsound∣ness that principally offends him, is. The Fire which Conscience
kindles, it may flash forth into the eyes, and tongue, and hands, and make a man look fearfully, speak desperately, and do bloodily a∣gainst the body; but the heat of the fire is principally within, in the furnace, in the spirit; it is but some sparkles, and flashes onely, that you see come forth at the lower holes of the furnace, which you behold in the eyes, words, and deeds of such men. Invidia est vitium permanens. Ari∣stoteles. ENvy is a long lived thing, it will live as long as there is any marrow in the bones; It will hunt a David long, through Ziph, En-gedi, many Wildernesses, though never so long; it will finde a Dart to throw at a David, till it hath killed him, or stabbed it selfe. Envy fights desperately, and unweariedly, it will never give over as long as there is breath; it will eat no bread till it hath done its work, killed a Paul,
or sterved it self. Envy is all spirit, all evill spirits move; it is a spirit of the right breed for the Devil, it will fight, and fight till death; it will work to the utmost vires, as long as nerves and sinewes binde bones together; it is everlast∣ing burning, which nothing will quench but its own blood. Ab extremis miseriae, quies. Se∣neca. I Would speak to such from this sentence which are quite undone, which have lost all mony and joy too; which have many sufferings upon them for Christ, but can make no joy out of them. Surely I can guess your pain, you are blinde; you know not who hath stript you, not when hee will return it again. It is impossible for a man to joy under long suffering, unless a man can look to the end of it. This makes heavy afflictions light, long afflicti∣ons short, to look where they end.—Our light afflictions which indure but
for a moment, work about a far more exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory. Long-suffering is but a mo∣ment, when compared with eternity of glory. The great Heaven at a distance, makes a little heaven at present, a heaven in hell, to that soul which hath it in its eye. As those lower heavens, give a great lustre and vigor at a distance to be∣holders, and raise much; so doth the Heaven of heavens. It is a heaven to behold heaven afar off, where ever the body bee. It was Canaan to Moses, to see Canaan afar off. The fight of the end shortens the way; suffering is deadly long when a man can see no end, when a man is in darkness, and can see no light, it is hard to bring the soul to joy in such darkness. A man must look upon affliction from one end to the other, that would fetch in joy to his soul from suffering. At one end of long suffering for truth, is a father; at the other end, a reward, which if seen well, will make the longest suf∣fering very short, and very sweet.
Media gratiae, ordinem creationis sube∣unt. Aquinas. THe means of Grace have the or∣der of Creation stamped upon them; Christ, the great Wheel, that turns all other wheels of our salvation, is made unto us, what hee is, and made of God—Who of God is made unto us, Wisdome, Righteous∣ness, &c. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ is a full sea indeed, but not a drop to us, but as made of God. So wee are made able Ministers of the New Testa∣ment, not of the letter, but of the spirit. Could such a poor man as I, by speaking a while to the ear, turn the heart from sin to Christ, did not a creating blessing sit on my lips? Divine institutions have the forma∣lity of a creation in them, because they have what they have, and doe what they doe, from supreme power onely, above all cause and reason: Therefore are Institutions and means of Grace, not so much as mentioned, Col. 1. 11. Giving thanks to the Father [who hath me
us meet] to bee partakers of that in∣heritance of the Saints in light. One∣ly the Father is here mentioned; Means are so beside likelihood and reason, to so noble an end, as to make and fit souls for heaven, Giving thanks to the [Father] who hath [made] &c. None else worthy to bee so much as mentioned in this noble work. Alterius perditio sit tua cautio. Isidor. FOr the wickedness of them that dwell therein, it is that a fruitful land is turned into a wilderness, saith David, Psal. 107. And the Heathen Historian saith little less, when hee tells us that the ruine and rubbish of Troy, are set by God before the eyes of men, for an example of that rule, that great sins, have great punish∣ments. But now say the Learned, not to bee warned by others, is a sure presage of ruine. Scipio beheld, and bewayled the down-fall of Rome,  the destruction of Carthage:
And when Hannibal was beleagure∣ing Saguntum in Spain, the Romans were as sensible of it as if he had then been beating upon the walls of their Capitol. A storm oftentimes begins in one place, and ends in another. When the Sword rides Circuit (as a Judge) it is in Commission, Ezek. 14. 17. And when I begin, saith God, I will make an end, 1 Sam. 3. Wee cannot but fore-see a storm, unless wee bee like those in St. Bernard, Qui festueam quaerunt unde oculos sibi er∣ant, that seek straws to put out their eyes withall. If wee break not off our sins by repentance (that there may bee a lengthning of our tran∣quility) a removal of our Candle∣stick, may bee as certainly fore-seen, and fore-told, as if visions and letters were sent to us from heaven, as once to the Church of Ephesus. God may well say to us; as to them of old, Have I been a wilderness unto Israel, a land of darkness? or as The∣mistocles to his Athenians, are yee weary of receiving so many benefits by one man? Bona a tergo formosissima, our sins have long since solicited an
utter dissolution and desolation of all, and that wee should bee made an heap, and an hissing, a waste, and a wilderness, Quod Deus aver∣tat. Hoc scio, me nihil scire. So∣crates. CHrist thought St. John worthy to lay his hand on his holy head in Baptisme, who thinks not himself worthy to lay his hand under-Christs feet. The more fit any man is for whatsoever vocation, the less hee thinks himself, Who am I, said Mo∣ses, when hee was to bee sent into Egypt, whereas none in all the world was comparably fit for that Em∣bassage. Not onely in innumerable other things am I utterly unskilful faith St. August, but even in the holy Scriptures themselves, (my proper profession) the greatest part of my knowledge, is the least part of mine ignorance. I in my little Cll, saith Jerome, with the rest of the Monks, my fellow-sinners, dare no deter∣mine
of great matters. This is all I know, that I know nothing, said Socrates, and Anaxarchus went fur∣ther, and said, Ne id quidem scire quod nihil sciret, that hee knew not that neither, that it was nothing that hee knew. This is the utmost of my wisdome, said one, that I see my self to bee without wisdome. And Si quando fatuo delectari volo non longè mihi quaerendus est, me video, saith Seneca, if I would at any time de∣light my self in a fool, I need not seek far, I have my self to turn too. Thus the heaviest ears of corn stoop most towards the ground: Boughs, the more laden they are, the more low they hang, and the more direct the Sun is over us, the less is our sha∣dow; so the more true worth there is in any man, the less self-conceited∣ness; and the lower a man is in his own eyes, the higher hee is in Gods. Surely the Baptist lost nothing by his humility and modesty in the third of St. Matth, for our Saviour extols him to the multitude, Mattb. 11. And there are that doubt not to af∣firm (where they have it I know
not) that for his humility on earth, hee is dignified with that, that place in heaven, from whence Lu∣cifer fell. Sure it is, that hee that humbleth himselfe shall bee exalted. If men reckon us as wee set our selves, God values us accord∣ing to our abasements. The Church was black in her own eyes, fair in Christs. Ignis congregat homogenea, segregat heterogenea. Aristoteles. IT is one and not the least proper∣ty, of the Holy Ghost to assimi∣late, and make men like it self. As fire turns fuell into the same pro∣perty with its self; so doth the bles∣sed Spirit inform the minde, conform the will, reform the life, transform the whole man more and more into the likeness of the heavenly pattern, it spiritualizeth and transubstantia∣teth us, as it were, into the same image from glory to glory, as the Sun, the fire of the world, by often beating with its beams upon the
pearl, makes it radiant and orient, bright and beautiful like it self. And this is the property of the Holy Ghost as well as of fire, congregat homo∣genea segregat heterogenea; it unites men to Saints, and separates them from sinners; For what communion hath light with darkness? It maketh division from those of a mans house, if not of his heart, and yet causeth union with Gentile, Barbarian, Sy∣thian, if truly Christian, Coloss, 3. 11. Oh therefore get this fire from hea∣ven, so shall you glorifie God, Matth. 5. 16. and bee able to dwell with devouring fire (which hypo∣crites cannot do, Isa. 33.) get warmth of life and comfort to your selves, give light and heat to others, walk surely as Israel did by the conduct of the pillar of fire, and safely, as walled with a defence of fire; and if any man shall hurt, such fire shall proceed out of their mouths to de∣vour them. So that a man had better anger all the Witches in the world, than one of those that are baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; especially if they bee much morti∣fied
Christians, such as in whom this fiery spirit hath done with the body of sn, as the King of Moa did with the King of Edom, Amos 2. burnt its bones into lime. Mali in area nobiscum esse possunt, in horreo non possunt. Augustinus. THe wicked may bee with us in the Floor, they cannot in the Garner; For there shall in no wise en∣ter into the City of the Lamb, any thing that defileth, or that worketh abomi∣nation▪ Heaven spewed out the Angels in the first act of their Apo∣stacy and albeit the Devil could sue himself into Paradise▪ yet no unclean person shall ever enter into the Kingdome of heaven; without shall bee dogs and evill-doers; no diry dog doth trample on that gol∣den Pavement, no dross is with that gold, no chaffe with that wheat, but the spirits of just men made perfect amidst a Panegris of Angels, and that glorious Amphitheatre, Heb. 1. 22. In the mean while, Dei fru∣mentum
ego sum (may every good soul say with that Father) I am Gods wheat: And although the wheat be as yet but in the ear, or but in the blade, yet when the fruit is ripe, hee will put in the sickle (be∣cause the Harvest is come) and ga∣ther his wheat into his Barn, into his Garner. Fider famem non formidat. Ber∣nardus. IF bread fall, feed on faith, Ps. 37. 3. So Junius reads that Text. Jeho∣saphat found it sovereign, when all other helps failed him, 2 Chron. 20. 6. and the captive Jews lived by faith, when they had little else to live up∣on, and made a good living of it, Hab. . . To this text the Jews seem to allude in that fiction of theirs, that Habbakkuk was carried by the hair of the head by an An∣gel into Babylon, to carry a dinner to Daniel in the Den. It was by faith that hee stopped the mouths of Li∣ons; and obtained promises, Heb. 11.
and by faith, that one in Queen Maries dayes, answered her Perse∣cutors, If you take away my meat, I trust that God will take away my stomach. God made the Ravens feed Elias that were more likely in that Famine to have fed upon his dead carkass, and another time caused him to go forty dayes in the strength of one meal. Faith fears no famine, and although it bee but small in substance, and in shew (as the Manna was) yet it is great in vertue and operation. The Rab∣bins say, that Manna had all manner of good tastes in it, so hath faith, it drinks to a man in a cup of Ne∣penthes, and bide him bee of good cheer, God will provide for him, who likes not to bee tyed to the se∣cond ordiniry causes, nor that in de∣fect of the means, wee should doubt of the providence. It is true, God commonly work∣eth by means, when hee could do without, that wee may not neglect the means, as being ordained of him. David shall have victory, but by an ambush, a Sa 5. Men shall bee
nourished, but by their labour, Psal. 128. 2. But yet not so as that hee doth all in all, by those means; hee made Grass, Corn, and Trees, be∣fore hee made the Sun, Moon, and Stars, by the influence whereof, they are, and grow; yea to shew himself chief, hee can, and doth work other-whiles without means, 2 Chron. 14. and against means, suspending the power and operation of the natural causes; as when the fire burnt not, the water drowned not, the Sun went back ten degrees, the rock gave water, the iron swam. And then when hee works by means, hee can make them produce an effect diverse from their nature, and disposition; or can hinder, change, or mitigate their proper effect. As when at the prayer of Elias it rained not for three years and an half, and hee prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruits. A man would have thought, that after so long drought, the roots of trees and herbs, should have been utterly dryed up, and the land past
recovery; But God heard the hea∣vens (petitioning to him that they might exercise their influence for the fructifying of the earth) and the hea∣vens heard the earth, and the earth heard the corn, the wine, and the oyl, and they heard Jezreel, Hof. 2. 21. Let all this keep us as it did our Sa∣viour, when hee was tempted in the fourtth of St. Matth. from diffi∣dence in Gods Providence, and make us possess our souls in pa∣tience. Hang upon the promise, and ac∣count it as good as present pay, though wee see not how it can bee effected. God loves to go a way by himself, Hee knows how to deliver us, saith St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. and hee might speak it by experience, if ever any man might. The King shall rejoyce in God, saith David of himself, when hee was a poor exile in the wilder∣ness of Judah, Psal. 63. 11. but hee had Gods word for the Kingdome, and therefore hee was confident, seemed the thing never so impro∣bable, or impossible. Wee trust a skilful work-man to go his own way
to work, shall wee not God? Loose wee then any particular means, saith one, It is but the scattering of a Sunne beam, the breaking of a bucket, when the Sunne and the fountain is the same. But wee for the most part do as Hagar did, when the bottle was spent, shee falls a crying shee was undone, shee and her childe should dye, till the Lord opened her eyes to see the fountain. It was near her, but shee saw it not, when shee saw it, shee was well enough. If thou hadst been here, said Martha, my brother Lazarus had not dyed; as if Christ could not have kept him alive, unless hee had been present: So if Christ will come and lay his hands on Jairus his daughter, and Elisha stroke his hand over Naamans leprosie, they shall bee cured. So the Disciples beleeved that Christ could feed so many thousands in the wilderness, but then hee must have two hundred pennyworth of bread. But our Saviour soon after gave them an ocular demonstration of this truth, That man lives not by bread alone, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Preventus diabolus in accusatione, Ultra nos accusare non poterit. Origen. BE sure before thou come to the Sacrament to renew thy repen∣tance in confession; one sweet ad∣vantage shalt thou have by it a∣mongst others, and that is this, our self-accusations in  our confessions, will bee a prevention, and a disap∣pointment of Sathans accusations a∣gainst us: The Devil even at the Sacrament will bee laying in against us; It is good therefore to take a course to defeat him. Hee will bee pleading against a man, Lord shall this man bee welcome to thy Table? Shall hee receive the benefit of thine Ordinance? Hee hath done thus and thus, I can lay to his charge these and these sins. Thus by his accusations, will hee seek to put in a bar against a blessing upon us. Now when a man before the Sacra∣ment
renews his repentance, and hath in his confessions brought in the accusations against himself, Sa∣tan is prevented; for then wee do, as I may say, furnish the Lord with an answer to stop Satans mouth; for then will God bee ready to an∣swer for us, why Satan thou accu∣sest this man of nothing whereof hee hath not already to the full accused himself; hee himself hath accused himself of all this already. Thou comest too late, all thine accusations shall bee no bar to my blessing. The elder brothers nose swells at his fa∣thers kindness, and goodness to his prodigal brother, and therefore Luke 15. 30. hee rips up all his courses, and throws the filth of them in his face, that hee was one that had devoured his Fathers living, and had spent it among Harlots. And this hee doth now whilst they are at the feast, at the fatted Calf, and good cheer. Yet all this doth the Prodigal no hurt, the musick ceaseth not, the feast is not broken off, nor hee thrust out of doors again. And how comes it about that all this did
him no hurt? because the Prodigal had prevented his brother, hee him∣selfe had accused himself to the full in his confessions when hee came to his Father, and so by his own con∣fession, had took out the sting and poyson of his brothers malicious ac∣cusation: So that his brother comes too late, now the feast and the mer∣riment goes on nevertheless. So will the Devil bee snarling against, and picking quarrels against men, even in the Feast time; but he comes too late to do them hurt, if they themselves have first put in the bills of their own indictments against themselves in their confessions before their coming to the Sacrament. Hamine non est solammodo necessarium ut Christum i ipsius passione de∣pioret, sedmagis seipsum in Christo. Bernard. BEhold, saith the Baptist, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Upon the Cross wee be∣hold Christ taking away the sins of
the world. On it wee see Christ cru∣cified, wee see his hands, feet, and side pierced; now this sight should so affect us, as it should pierce the very hearts of us. What, the blessed Son of God to strip himself of his glory to humble and abase himself to the ignominious and accursed death of the Cross? the glorious Son of God thus abused, and abased; the onely begotten Son of the Father, to make such bitter lamentation, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? What may the cause of all this bee? Alas, all this was for our sins. It was not Judas, nor the Jews, nor Pilate, nor the Souldiers, but they were our sins, thy sins, my sins, that put the Son of God to all this sorrow. Wee, wee, and none but wee, were the evill beasts that devoured this Jo∣seph. Our sins were so hainous, and had so provoked the Justice of God, that there was no way to satisfie Gods Justice, to appease his wrath, and to make our atonement, but by the precious blood of the Son of God crucified on the Cross. And shall I now see my sins lye so heavy
upon him as to make him sweat blood; shall I see him even squeezed under the huge weight of my sins; shal I see my sins crown him with thorns, nail his hands and feet to the Cross, gore his side with a spear, with an un∣pierced heart? Oh the deep sorrow that our hearts should bee filled withall, when wee see Christs body bruising and bleeding upon the Cross. It should bee with us then, as it was with them, Zech. 12. 10. They shall look on him whom they have pierced, And how shall that sight affect them? And they shall mourn, and bee in bit∣terness for him, as one that mourns for his onely Son, as one that is in bitter∣ness for his first born. How bitterly will such a man mourn? so bitterly shall they mourn when they look upon Christ whom they have pier∣ced. And great reason, for is it not a matter of greater sorrow, to pierce the onely Son of God, the first born, the first begotten from the dead, than to lose one onely or first begotten son? So here, when wee look upon Christ whom wee have pierced, this sight should fill our hearts with bit∣terness,
should make our hearts full of sorrow. Not onely with an Hi∣storical sorrow, or a sorrow of na∣tural compassion when wee hear, or see some sad, or sorrowful event, this is nothing; but with a practical sorrow, with an unfained sorrow of heart, that wee by our personal sins, have had our hands imbrued in the blood of the Son of God, that our sins envenomed those thorns, those nails that pierced him, and by their venome made them put him to such bitter torment; have wee hearts con∣formable to Christ on the cross? Thou beholdest a broken Christ, thou beholdest a bleeding Christ, behold him therefore with a broken heart, with a bleeding heart, with a pierced spirit. So behold Christ on the cross, as the Virgin Mary beheld him there. And how was that? Woman sayes Christ, behold thy Son. How did shee behold him? Simeon tells her, Luke 2. 35. That a sword should passe through her soul, then did a sword pierce through her soul, when shee be∣held him pierced on the cross, that sight was a sword through the heart
of her. So when we see him pierced, it should bee as a dagger in our hearts. Oh wretch that I am, that my sins have been thorns on his head, nayls in his hands and feet, a spear in his side. Lord, saith David, when hee saw the people slaughtered by the Angels sword, Lo I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these she what have they done? So let every one say, Loe I have sinned, I have done wickedly, but this inno∣cent and immaculate Lamb, what hath hee done? It is I that have sin∣ned, and it is thou, O Lord, that hast smarted. It is I that have sin∣ned, and it is thou, O Lord, that hast suffered. It is I that have put thee to all these sorrows, my oaths, my uncleannesses, my lusts, my cove∣tousness my drunkenness, these were the Judasss that betrayed thee, these were the Jews that crucified thee. Lord I have eaten the sowre grapes, and thy teeth were set on edge: Lord I played the theef, and thou restoredst the things the tookest not.
Quid tam ad mortem quodnon Christi morte salvetur? Bernardus. HE was wounded for our trans∣gresions, with his stripes wee are heated, Isa. 53. What sweet comfort may faith retch hence? Look upon the wounds of Christ on the Cross, as on the Cities of Refuge, where the pursued soul by the avenger of blood, may flye for safety and san∣ctuary. Indeed I am a grievous sin∣ner, I have wounded my conscience with my transgressions, but behold my Saviour here wounded for my transgressions: I have cause to bee troubled in my conscience for the wounds my transgressions have made therein; but yet my confci∣ence needs not sinke in a desponden∣cy of spirit, whiles I look at these wounds of Christ; here bee wounds for wounds, healing wounds for stabbing wounds; curing wounds, for killing wounds. Hee was wounded for our transgressions; what wound so deadly, that may not, or cannot bee healed by his death and wounds.
What comfort is here for faith in the wounds of Christ crucified, They pierced my hands, and my feet, Psal. 22. They pierced his side with a spear, and there came out water and blood; nay, there comes out of these wounds honey and oyl unto faith. By these passages may our faith suck honey and oyl out of the rock, and may taste, and see how good and sweet the Lord is. The nayls, the spear, the wounds, all preach un∣to faith a reconciled God, That God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. The Lords bowels are laid open by these wounds, so as through them wee may see the tender bowels of his mercy, and so as through them, mercy flows from those bowels unto us. Oh my Dove that art in the clefts or holes of the rock, Cant. 2. 14. Some of the Ancients understood those clefts of the rock, the wounds of Christ, in which the Dove, the Church hides and shelters her self. However it may bee alluded to, that should bee our work of faith when it sees those clefts of the rock o∣pened, like a Dove, to betake her
self thereunto, for shelter and securi∣ty against all fears and distresses that wrath and guilt may put the con∣science to. Do any fears of wrath trouble thine heart? Doth any con∣science of guilt disquiet thee with the fears of hell? Why now for thy comfort, behold the holes in the rock where thou mayest bee shel∣tered: Dwell now in the Rock, and bee like the Dove that makes her Nest in the side of the holes mouth, Jerem. 48. Nessel thy soul in the clefts of this Rock. See, and fully beleeve thy peace to bee made with God in Christs blood, and look upon him wounded for thy transgressions, with such a faith, as may fill thy heart with an holy se∣curity against all such fears. Hannibal vel victor, vel victus, nun∣quam quiescebat. Augustinus. THe Devil left not our Saviour at the first and second tempta∣tion, this Master-flye Beelzebub, though beaten away once and again,
yet returns to the same place. Hee so∣licits and sets upon our Saviour again, and again (as Potiphars wife did upon Joseph for all his many de∣nials) and is not onely importunate, but impudent. Stand wee therefore still upon our guard, and look for no ease here. The Roman Captains when they had once triumphed, took their ease ever after. So did not Cato, and is therefore highly commended. So may not wee, if ever we will bee ap∣proved as good Souldiers of Jesus Christ. Our whole life is a conti∣nual warfare, and wee must look for the continual hail-shot of Satanical assaults and suggestions. When Xerxes fought against the Greeks, the Sea was full of ships, saith the Orator, the Earth of soul∣diers, and the Air of arrows. So fares it with the Saints under Satans batteries, no truce, but continual conflict. St. Paul sounds the alarm, Eph. 6. Arm, arm, Take the whole Ar∣mour of God, and bee ever in your har∣ness: And St. Peter gives the rea∣son, Because your Adversary the
Devil as a roaring Lion, walketh and watcheth, night and day soeking whom he may devour. For our incouragement, as the Devil is a roaring Lion, so is Christ the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, that delivereth us, and maketh us more than Conquerors, holding the Crown of glory over our heads, as wee are fighting, with this inscripti∣on, Vincenti dabo, To him that over-cometh, will I give. Fight there∣fore, and faint not, your reward is se, your Armour is of proof. Get on both these peeces of defence (as the girdle of truth, brestplate of righteousness, shooes of peace and patience, shield of faith, helmet of hope, and those also of offence, as the sword of the Spirit, and darts of prayer. It is said of Scva at the siege of Dyrrachium, that hee so longresisted Pompeys Army, that hee had two hundred and twenty Darts sticking in his shield, and lost one of his eyes, and yet gave not over till Caesar came to his rescue. The like, and somewhat more is reported of Cynegrius the Athenian in the Per∣sian wars. These did thus for a cor∣ruptible
Crown, or temporary ho∣nour, what should not wee do for an eternal? Hold out, and hold fast that thou hast, that no man take thy Crown from thee. Gods Spirit sets up a standard in the Saints, Isa. 59. 19. And stronger is hee that is in you, than hee that is in the world. That old Serpent hath his head so bruised, and crushed by Christ, that he cannot now so easily thrust in his mortal sting, though hee assay it never so often, unless wee dally with him, and lay our selves open, unless wee tempt Satan to tempt us by inconsidera∣tion, security, or venturing on the occasion. Vitanda est glacies si no∣lis cadere; hee that tastes of the broth, will have a minde to the meat. The Nazarites might not, not onely drink wine, but forbear to eat of the grape, whether moist, or dry, Num. 6. 3.
Saturitas ventris seminarium libidinis, Hieronymus. A Full belly, and a foul heart scarce go uncoupled; for indeed how should they? Per membrorum ordinem, saith St. Augustine, Ordo vitiorum intelligitur, as in the Ana∣tomy of our bodies, the parts of gluttony and lust are linked together, so are the sins themselves. And therefore the Apostle joyns them, Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambring, and Wantonness; first Rioting, and then Wantonness, that leads on this, and not onely this, but a whole troop of rebellious actions, security, disobedience, idolatry. Thus when the Fools barns in the Gospel were filled with Corn, there was no thought of God the Benefactor; all the care was about, Soul take thine ease, eat, drinke, and bee merry. And indeed, this eating quite takes away our stomach from all holy duties. I need not tell you of Adams surfeit, the Israelites in their Paradise of Ca∣naan, fell to eating too, and by eating
fell, as hee did, from their God: And this the Lord fore-told them in the 31. of Deuteronomy, when sayes God, I shall have brought Israel into the land that floweth with milk and honey inud they shall have eaten, and filled themselves, then will they turn to other gods, then and not till then; and just so they did. For in the very next Chapter, at the 15. vers. you have Jeshurun, which is Israel, waxed fat, and kicking, and then saith the Text, Hee forsook God which made him. Well therefore did the Church of Christ prescribe fasting to a Re∣ligious end, to bridle and keep in the lust of the flesh, so to prevent sins to come, and punish our selves for those already past. And this last St. Paul calls an holy chastising and afflicting himself for that thorn in his flesh, which forced him to his watchings often, and his fastings often, to his Castiga corpus . To correct the in ward man, and bring his body under the lash. And this was Christs reason of fasting before tentation. Now Christ abstained thus not for himself, for the Devil could not
have prevailed had hee not fasted: There were no faulty desires of the flesh to be tamed; no possibility of a freer, and more easie assent and compliance of the soul with God, who was already perfectly united to the Deity; but as for us he would suf∣fer death, so for us too, hee would suffer hunger, that first as a Saviour, this last as an example, pointing us that had need, for hee had none, the best way to encounter the evill spirit of concupiscence, which is not cast out, no nor kept out neither, but by fasting. In Praedicando Evang elium non merita personarum, sed officia sacerdotum considerantur. Ambrosius. HOliness becomes every man well, but best of all publick persous, and that not onely for ex∣ample of good, but liberty of con∣troling ill. The Snuffers of the San∣ctuary made to purge others, must bee of pure gold themselves. Thus Herod feared John, not cause hee was a powerful Teacher, but a just man.
This holiness casts a more dazeling lustre than any other accomplish∣ment whatever. But now suppose the Priest sinful, shall the people notwithstanding follow his doctrine, his doctrine, whose life is not the use, his voyce, whose hand points a con∣trary way? Nothing more, for what if the Sacrificer bee unclean, is the offering so? Was the glory of Is∣rael, the Ark, any whit lessened when it came from the Philistims? Did the breath of the Lord his answers pass by the less regarded, cause a Saul prophesied. Scripture is Scrip∣ture, though the Devil speak it, no mans sins should bring the service of God into contempt, nor may good bee refused, because the means are ac∣cidentally evill. It is a gross dull ca∣pacity that cannot distinguish be∣twixt the work, and the instrument, the weakness of the person, and the power of the Function. You know no unclean Viands were for the table of an Israelite, no birds of prey, fit company for a Prophet; yea, Samp∣son made much of his honey, though in a putrified Lion; and if Ravens
are sent to preserve an Eiah, hee wil∣lingly accepts their courtesie, and dis∣likes not the meat, cause the waiters were black. These then of the Law are less scrupulous, than some of the Gospel, who disdain the graces of God when not served in the purest vessel, and loath their Mannah, if not out of the Tabernacles golden Pot. Utilis est scientia Gentilium, dummodo in usum Christianum convertatur. Hadrianus Sextus. LOe a Vision appeared to mee, saith Ezekiel, a whirlewind, and a fire; to shew, the Prophets of the Lord must have light with them, as well as noyse, understanding, as Tongue. Gods Ministers are Angels, and these called, , from their ma∣nifold knowledge. I speak this meerly, for that there is a generati∣on that square out the Divines study by the Scripture-canon onely, all o∣ther rules being crooked, and of no use. Would you know the reason,
the less learning, the less stipend▪ And indeed good Letters have not a little pined away, since Divinity began to officiate at the Tables end for the Trencher. Now it is true, Scripture was ever the Levites predominant element; but if you will make him a perfect mixt body, the Arts are neceslary in∣gredients. And therefore though Hadrian the Sixth, in his Tract, de verâ Philosophiâ, cryes down hu∣mane learning with a noise of Fa∣thers, yet hee concludes utilem esse scientiam Gentilium dummodo in usum Christianum convertatur, that to shave and pare the captive woman, and then espouse her, was ever held lawful Matrimony. Look back up∣on the two famous patterns of Je∣wish and Christian Divines, Moses learned in all the Wisdome of the Egyptians, and St. Paul wise in all the Learning of the Grecians, a great Artist▪ and a good Linguist; and no less may wee expect from the rest of the Apostles, to whom it was not said, Follow mee, and streight way bee Fishers, but follow, and I will make
you Fishers. They were to learn▪ ere they were to teach, to bee Disci∣ples, before Apostles. No man is born an Artificer, his soul coming as naked into the world, as his body, not having so much freedome as to set up in the meanest Trade without serving an Apprentiship. And for that, Dabitur in illâ horâ, to speak without coming, was a promise made to the twelve Apostles when they should bee called to the Bar, not the Pulpit. The which place, how∣ever some of late years in my poor distracted Country, have made it scandalous, requires both learning and industry. And thus much St. Paul intimated, when hee sent for his books, finding as great want of them, as his cloak in Winter. Ut hilarem ita celerem datorem diligit Deus. Bernardus. IT is said of the unjust steward, Luke 16. that what hee did was with dispatch, hee called his Masters debtors and bid them sit down quick∣ly.
God delights in expedition, as well as cheerfulness; Give Alms with a cheerful heart, and counte∣nance, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. and therefore give quickly; when the power is in thine hand, and the need is in thy neighbour, and thy neighbour at the door. Hee gives twice, that relieves speedily. The more speed, the more comfort. Nei∣ther the times are in our own dispo∣sing, nor our selves. If God had set us a day, and made our wealth in∣separable, there were no danger in delay, but now our uncertainty, if it quickens not, deceives us. How many have meant well, and done nothing, losing their Crown with lingring; to whom that they would have done good, is not so great praise, as it is dishonour that they might have done it; their death oftentimes preventing their desires, and ma∣king their good intentions the wards of their Executors; who ma∣ny times prove the Executioners of their wills and estates. This there∣fore should bee as a word of ad∣vice
and caution to all rich men. Let their wracks bee our warnings, who are equally mortal, equally fickle. It is a woful, and remediless com∣plaint, that the end of our dayes should out-run the beginning of our good works, which are commonly so done, as the poor may thank our death-beds for them and not us, our disease, rather than our charity. For hee that gives not till hee dyes, shews that hee would not give then, if hee could keep it: And they that give thus, give by their Testaments, it is true, but I can scarce say they give by their wills; the good mans praise, Psal. 112. was, that himself dispersed his goods, and not left them behinde him, and his distribution is seconded by this retribution of Gods, That his righteousness indured for ever. The Saints of God are like Dorcas in the Acts, rich in the good works, which shee did her self, and not intrusted o∣thers to do them, being her own Ex∣ecutrix. Let us therefore do good in our life time. Our Saviour tells us, Matth. 5. That our good works are our lights: Let your lights so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in heaven. Now what man will have his candle brought behinde him, and not rather carried before, that hee may see which way it goes, and which way himself goes by it? Let us therefore do good in our life time; Early beneficence hath no danger, many joyes, Isa. 58. 8. For first, the conscience of good done. Secondly, The prayers, and blessings of the relieved. Thirdly, The gratulations of the Saints, are as so many per∣petual Comforters, which will make our lives pleasant, and our deaths happy: when every one of us may say to his soul with that rich man in the Gospel, but upon better grounds, Sul take thine ease, for thou hast trea∣sure laid up not for many years, but for ever.
Dives verè Christianus non amat di∣vitias sed mavult. Augustinus. CHristians may entertain the un∣righteous Mammon in the Go∣spel, not onely as a servant, but a friend, but by no means as a Lord. There is great vertue in the true use of riches, if there bee a qualification in our desires. And therefore St. Au∣gust. (10. Serm. de tempore, 5. Serm. de verbis Apostoli & cap. 10. de Civit. Dei) disputing of that impossible Analogy between heaven and a rich man, a Camel, and the eye of a needle; would have a rich man un∣derstood there to be Cupidum rerum temporalium & de talibus superbien∣tem, such an one as joyns avarice to riches, and pride to avarice; not pro∣hibiting a moderate and timely care of necessary temporals, but their in∣ordinate appetite, not their propriety and possession, but the difficulty and eagerness of that pursuit. A wise man, as hee will not make riches the object of his pursuit, so neither of his refusal, Non amat divitias sed
mavult, was St. Augustines; hee weighes them so evenly betwixt de∣sire and scorn, that hee doth neither undervalue, nor over-prize them: Hee makes not his minde his chest, but his house, in the which hee doth not lock, but lodge them; hee loves them not properly but by way of comparison, not as they are riches, but as they are not poverty: yes too, as they are riches, they may not onely bee temperately loved, but desired, but prayed for, prayed for as our daily bread, not absolutely for our spiritual improvement but by way of restriction; first, humbly with submission to the will of God, then conditionally, so they prove ad∣vantagious either to our civil, or moral good. For otherwise if ri∣ches are pursued, either with an un∣lawful, or an unbridled desire, they lead our reason captive, blind-fold our intellectuals, and so damp and dead all the faculties of the inward man, that in way of conscience and Religion, wee are benummed meer∣ly; Nabal himself not so stony and churlish, not half so supine and stu∣pid
as wee. And therefore your earthly sensualists have this woful brand set upon them by the spirit of, They are men of the world, they have their portion in this life onely, Psal. 17. Quid quaeris brevi immittere vasculo totum mare? Hieronymus. TO endeavour to express fully the joyes of heaven, were as vain a work as to endeavour to put the ele∣ment of waters, or whole sea, into a ba∣son. And this may appear, from that story of St. August. concerning St. Jer. of whom St. Augustine saith, Quae Hieronymus nescivit, nullus hominum unquam scivit; what St. Hierom knew not, no man in the world ever knew: yet of the joyes of glory, of heaven, in the fruition of God, St Hierom would adventure to say nothing, no not then when hee was divested of his mortal body dead. For as soon as hee died at Bethleem, hee came in∣stantly to Hippo, St. Augustines Bishoprick, and though hee told
him, Hieronymi anima sum, I am the soul of that Jerome to whom thou art now writing, about the joyes and glory of heaven, yet hee said no more of that, but this, Quid quaeris brevi immittere vasculo totum mare? Canst thou hope to pour the whole sea into a thimble, or take the whole world into thy hand? and yet that is easier than to comprehend the joy and glory of heaven in this life. Nor is there any thing that makes this more incomprehensible, than that semper in 1 Thess. 4. 17. That wee shall bee with God for ever. For this Eter∣nity, this Everlastingness, is not onely incomprehensible to us in this life, but even in heaven, wee can ne∣ver know it experimentally, no not in heaven, and all knowledge in hea∣ven is experimental; as all know∣ledge in the world is causal (wee know a thing, if wee know the cause of it) so the knowledge in heaven is effectual, experimental; wee know it because wee have found it to bee so. The endowments of the blessed, those which the School calls, Dotes aorm, are ordinarily delivered to
bee these three, Visio, Dilectio, Frui∣tio, the sight of God, the love of God, and the fruition, the injoying, the possessing of God. Now as no man can know what it is to see God in heaven, but by ex∣perimental, and actual seeing of him there; nor what it is to love God there, but by such an actual and ex∣perimental love of him; nor what it is to injoy and possess God, but by an actual injoying, and experimen∣tal possessing of him; so can no man tell what the Eternity and Ever∣lastingness of all these is, till hee hath passed through that Eternity, and that Everlastingness; and that hee can never do, for if it could bee passed through, then were it not Eternity. How barren a thing is Arithetick? and yet Arithmetick will tell you how many grains of sand will fill this hollow vault to the Firmament. How empty a thing is Rhetorick, and yet Rhetorick will make absent and remote things, pre∣sent to their understanding. How weak a thing is Poetry, and yet Poe∣try is a counterfeit Creation, and
makes things which are not, as though they were; how infirm, how impotent are all assistances, if they be put to express this Eternity. The best help in my poor judgement that can bee assigned, is to use well, Aeternum vestrum, our own Eternity, as St. Gregory calls our whole course of this life, Aequum est ut qui in aterno su peccaverit, in aeterno Dei puniatur; it is but justice, that hee that hath sinned out his own eternity, should suffer out Gods Eternity; so if you suffer out your own eternity in sub∣mitting your selves to God in the whole course of your life, and glo∣rifying him in a constant patience under all tribulations; It is a righ∣teous thing with God to recompence tribulation unto them which trouble y, and to you which are troubled, everlasting rest, 2 Thess. 1. 6.
Magna parvis minime exprimuntur. Seneca. SAcred Communication, is to make suitable demonstration of infinite love. Great love is not suit∣ablely expressed by small things. Springs make Channels, Streams, Rivers, suitable to their strength, they make their rent without, suit∣able to their bubling within, under ground. Heaven is but a suitable expression of the love of a God: It is but strange, suitable to such a foun∣tain; but legible writing out of in∣finite love. Were not heaven made communicable, infinite love would bee but half expressed, it would bee far more in it self, than known to us: It is with Christ here in this world, as it is with a Christian, a Christians fortune here doth not suit his titles, called a King, and hath no∣thing. Now are wee the Sons of God▪ but it doth not appear what wee shall bee. Why wee shall bee but the Sons of God; his meaning is, that now Title and Revenew do not
agree, nothing in possession that speaks out the Sons of God, the Son of a King; State and Title do not fitly and fully express one ano∣ther; So it is with Christ, now his love, and his expression of it, are short one of another: Many ex∣pressions of love are made here, but they all express it but brokenly. Heaven will speak out an infinite love, it will demonstrate it to the life, to all senses at once, which is such a demonstration of a thing, as here man cannot make of any thing. There a man shall have the advan∣tage of all senses together, to fathom infinite love; Hee shall hear it, see it, taste it, &c. hee shall see the foun∣tain where, and how it riseth; the Ocean how vast it spreads, and how broad it bears, Christ demonstrates infinite love fully, fitly, therefore is heaven made communicable to poor earthen creatures, Partakers of the in∣heritance of the Saints in light, Col. . 12.
Qui Gehennas met it, non peccare me∣uit, sed ardere. Ille autem peccare metuit, qui peccatum ipsum sic ut Ge∣hennas odit. Augustinus. THe Object of repenting sorrow, is sin. It is sin that specially af∣flicts and disquiets a repenting soul, that is the thing that wrings and pinches it. Where was it that the Prodigals shooe did specially wring him? Luke 15. 21. Father I have sinned against heaven; that is, against God in heaven: Hee doth not say, Father, I am in a depth of misery, ready to perish with hunger, in that pinching distress that I would bee glad to eat husks with Hogs. But Father I have sinned. This is the grief of a repenting soul, that Gods Majesty hath been offended in, and by his sins, this was that which lay heaviest upon, and sat closest to Da∣vids heart. Hee neither cryes out of his discredit, and shame in the world, nor yet speaks a syllable of wrath or hell, but Psal. 51. 3:4. My sinis ever before mee, against thee onely have I
sinned, and have done this evil in thy sight. My sin is ever before me, not Hel and damnation is ever before mee; Not the fame and reproach of the world, but my sin is ever before mee. It is this, Lord, that pinches and disquiets mee, that I have sinned, and done this evill in thy sight. A good heart fears more the committing of sin, than the suf∣fering of punishment following it, Prov. 30. 9. Give mee not poverty, lest I bee poor, and steal and take the name of my God in vain. Hee doth not say, lest I bee poor and steal, and bring my selfe under the Magistrates sword, or thy wrath; but hee looks onely at the sin, lest▪ I steal, and take thy Name in vain. Hee fears the pro∣phaning of Gods Name, more than the bringing of his name and person in question. And to this purpose is that which Elihu charges Job withall, Job 36. 21. Regard not iniquity, for this thou hast chosen rather than af∣fliction; that is, thou hast rather chosen sin and iniquity, than poverty and affliction; as if hee had said, In∣asmuch as thou hast vainly, and rashly expostulated with God, vers.
20. desiring death, rather than to bear this affliction; thou art guilty of iniquity, and sinnest in this thy choice. This therefore implies that a good heart would rather chuse affliction than iniquity, to suffer affliction, than to do iniquity. Now as a good heart is more afraid of sin, than affliction and punishment, so likewise a repent∣ing heart, is more grieved or sin com∣mitted, than for sorrow to be suffered. We shall find David in great anguish and distress of spirit, Psal. 25. 17, 18. The troubles of mine heart, are in∣larged, Oh bring thou mee out of my distress, wringing, pressing anguishes; look upon my affliction, and my pain. Here bee troubles of heart, distresses of spirit, affliction and pain, but what is it now that thus wrings, distresses, and pains David? See the last words, And forgive all my sins, not forgive all my punishments; Davids sin, not his punishment, was his pain. Wee shall see the like in him, 2 Sam. 24. 10. I have sinned greatly, I beseech thee to take away the iniquity of thy servant: Hee men∣tions not the taking away of any
smart; nay vers. 17. Hee is willing to bear it, I have sinned, let thine hand bee against mee. Hee begs that the punishment may bee laid upon him, but begs that his iniquity may bee taken away. Let God bee plea∣sed to take away his iniquity and hee is nothing solicitous for the punish∣ment. The offence of God troubled him more, than his personal smart: So that Gods heart were but towards him in the pardon of his sin, hee did not care though Gods hand were a∣gainst him smiting him with tem∣poral chastisement. And this will better appear, if wee do but compare Pharaoh with David, Exod. . 8. Intreat the Lord, that hee may take away the Frogs from mee. The Frogs troubled him more than his sin a∣gainst God. Take away the Frogs, but no mention at all of taking away his sin. And when afterwards a con∣fession of sin is extorted from him; yet was it not his sin that disquieted him. Exod. 9. 27, 28. not take away my sin, but take away the Thunder∣ings, and Hail; Lord, sayes David, Take away the iniquity of thy servant:
Oh! sayes Pharoah, Take away these filthy Frogs, and this dreadful Thun∣der. A repenting heart is more troub∣led, than a Thunder and Frogs. It seems more filthiness in sin than in Frogs, or Toads, or ever else can bee presented more ugly to it. A repenting sinner hath his eye upon God, and upon his Law, Hee sees the hollness of God, that hee is a God of pure eyes, that cannot behold iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. Hee sees him a good, gracious, patient Father, and so it cuts him to the heart, to have offended such a Father, and God. Hee looks upon the Law, and sees it to bee holy, just, and good; and this galls him to the heart, to have violated so holy, and so pure a Law. Now wicked men, they look wholly at the justice and wrath of God, at the curse of the Law, and so nothing troubles them, but the fear of hell and death. If these might bee avoided, the offending of an holy and good God, the violating of an holy and good Law, would not a
whit afflict, or disquiet them: Nay it is remarkable in David, that though hee had upon Nathans mes∣sage to him, confessed his sin, and Nathan upon his confession had pronounced the pardon of it; yet after this hee cryes out, My sin is ever before me, against thee onely have I sinned. Mark then, that even par∣doned sin, forgiven sin, vexes and disquiets a repenting heart. It pin∣ches him, and disquiets him, though it be forgiven; it grieves him that hee hath so plaid the fool, and that ever hee was such a beast to offend so gra∣cious a God. When the Prodigals Father sees him coming afar off, hee runs to meet him, shews compassion to him, falls upon him, and kisses him. That kiss was the seal of his pardon, as if hee had said. Behold, I forgive all thy sin; as when David kissed Absolom, and Esau kissed Ja∣cob, they both did it in token of full reconciliation. And yet for all this, see how the Prodigal speaks; hee sayes not, O Father, from the ground of my heart, I unfainedly thank thee, Oh how great is my Fa∣thers
goodness thus to pardon mee, &c. but Father, I have sinned against thee. I, but his Father had kissed him, and thereby testified that hee had freely forgiven him, what need hee confess his pardoned sin? Why is hee not rather in the con∣fession of praise, than in the confes∣sion of sin. Oh no, a repenting sin∣ner is so affected and grieved with the offence of God in his sin, that though God have pardoned and for∣given it, yet hee cannot but mourn for it, and be afflicted with it, that so holy a Law hath been broken by him, that so good a God hath been offended by him, Psal. 25. 6 7. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, remember not the sins of my youth. If God remember mercy, hee forgets, and forgives sin. If God for∣get it, why doth David remember the sins of his youth? Yes, so will a true repenting heart do: It will re∣member the sin that God forgets, it will mourn for the sin which God hath forgiven.
Nou est poenitens sed irrisor, qui ad∣huc agit, unde poeniteat. Bernardus. REpentance not onely confesses, but forsakes the confessed sin, Job 34. 22. If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. That is the lan∣guage, and the resolution of true re∣pentance, Eph. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more. True repentance makes men do as God did, when hee repented him, Gen▪ 6. 6. 7. And it repented the Lord that hee had made man on earth, and it grived him at his heart: But that was not all: And the Lord said▪ I will destroy man, whom I have created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast, &c. for it repents moe that I made them. Nay, repentance in man goes further, one Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord, and hee was spared from the common destruction; but hear, not one lust or sin findes grace in the eyes of a man that truly re∣pents, but all must bee drowned in the flood of the tears of Repen∣tance. It is with a man that hath the griefe of true Repentance,
as it was with Nehemiah, Neh. 13. 7, 8. I came to Jerusalem, and under∣stood of the evill that Eliashib, had done for Tobiah, in repairing him a Chamber in the Courts of the house of the Lord, and it grieved mee sore: But hee rests not there, but goes further, therefore I cast forth all the houshold stuffe of Tobiah out of the Chamber. What should Tobiah do with a Chamber there? Therefore he not onely outs Tobiah, but out goes all his stuffes too. So doth repentance, when it considers all the evill, that Satan and corruption hath done, and how they have taken up Chambers in the heart, that should bee the house of God, it is grieved sore, and thereupon it outs Satan, and all his stuffe; neither Satan, nor his stuffe shall bee chambered there any lon∣ger. So doth repentance dispossess Satan of the soul, as Christ dispos∣sessed his body of him, Mark. 9. 2. Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee to come out of him, and enter no more into him; So repentance cast Satan and filthy abominations out of a man, that they enter no more, they are
cast out for ever. Tears of repen∣tance are not onely wetting, but wash∣ing tears, Isa. 1. 16. Wash you, make you clean; David tears wash his couch, Psal. 6. and so much more wash him∣self. Baptisme is called the Baptisme of repentance, Luke 3. 3. In Baptisme there is a washing away of sin. And how is Baptisme the Baptisme of re∣pentance? If in repentance there were not the doing away of sin. If a man could shed a sea of tears, yet if hee do not drownd his sin in that sea, what were hee the better? If a man should weep his eyes out, yet if hee weep not his sins out, to what pur∣pose were it? Wheresoever repen∣tance is, there must necessarily fol∣low this forsaking and casting off our sins. Try therefore thy repentance by this, consider what have thy sins, thy beloved sins been; is thy drun∣kenness, with loathing and indigna∣tion forsaken? are thine oaths, un∣cleannes, covetousns, curses, &c. with loathing and indignation abandoned? It is a good sign, but how idlely talk they of repentance, who because
they have blubbered out a few tears, think all is well, when yet they still live, and lye in their sins, and hold them as fast as ever the Mariners when they found out Jonas, yet fain they would have saved him, won∣drous loath to cast him over-board. Many see their sins, and know them to bee dangerous sins, but yet ex∣ceeding loath to shake hands with them, loath to throw them into the sea, but will rather adventure their own casting away, than cast them over-board. Never deceive thy self therefore, though thou hast sighed, cryed, prayed, begged mercy, yet if still thou live, and go on in thy sin∣ful courses, there is no truth of re∣pentance in thee. Dives in Evangelio damnabatur, non quia abstulerat aliena, sed quod non donaret sua. Anselmus. EVery Christian ought to imitate the high pattern of his Creator, whose best riches is his bounty. Hee that hath all, gives all, reserves no∣thing.
In our creation he gave us our selves, in our redemption hee gave us himself, and in giving himself for us, gave us our selves again that were lost. Onely good use then commends earthly possessions, and hee alone knows the true use of the unrighteous Mammon, that receives it meerly to disburse it. For what commendation is it to bee the keeper of the best earth? that which is the common coffer of all the rich Mines, the earth, wee do but tread upon, and account vile, because it hides those treasures: whereas the skilful Metallist, that re∣fines these precious veyns for publick use, is rewarded and honoured. If therefore your wealth, and your will bee not both good, if your hands bee full, and your hearts empty; you de∣serve rather pity, than commenda∣tion, and may bee said to have riches indeed, but neither goods, nor bles∣sings; your burthens being greater than your estates, and your selves richer in sorrows than in mettals. And this was the rich Gluttons case in the Gospel, who was damned, not for taking away any thing from
poor Lazarus, but because hee re∣lieved not his wants. It is reported of Warram Archbishop of Canter∣bury, being on his death-bed, sent his steward to see what store of corn was in his Treasury, and when answer was brought, that there was either very little, or none at all, the good man cried, Nimirum sic oportuit, that it was very fitting it should bee so: For when said hee could I dye bet∣ter, than when I am thus even with the world. Vera virtus radices agit. Seneca. THings have their specification from their form. Christ in the soul, or truth in the heart, is the form of a Christian. Hence is that expression, Hee is a Jew that is one in∣wardly, so hee is a Christian which hath Christ in him, and hee up∣right whose heart is so; therefore is uprightness annexed in the 94, Psal. and the 15. verse, to that which is its proper subject, and without which, it subsists not, nor can, to wit, the
heart; Ʋpright in heart, all the upright in heart shall follow righteousness. A good man is called a good man as hee can derive goodness from within; Luke 6. 45.A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good. Truth treasured up in the heart is the onely true treasure, and then out of this treasure, motion made to this, and to that expence from hence up∣on God, upon man; this is a good man, and bringeth forth that which is good, an upright heart. A man is noted for an evill man, as evill sei∣seth the heart. Son of man, these men have set up Idols in their hearts, should I ee inqured of at all by them? Ezek. 14. So to set up truth in the heart, as that, and onely that which I love to bow down to, and bee governed by; this is an upright heart. It is said of the Devill, that hee abode not in the truth, because no truth is in him, Joh. 8. 44. whilst hee was in heaven, heaven was not in him, but pride, and that is hell where ever it is. Truth in the heart, and wee abide in truth, that is, wee walk in it, and ate ruled by it. Lust in the heart,
and let the creature bee where hee will, in heaven, or on earth, hee a∣bides in this, is led up and down by this, and not by truth, and so is cal∣led according to that which is in him, and informs him a sinful, deceitful hearted man. There is truth in the heart, or in the midst of the heart, the expression is, I think with allu∣sion to the natural form of the heart. The heart hath a tunicle, and a ven∣tricle, one to cover it, the other to hold life, bloud and spirits, and these small ventricles are in the midst of the heart and these the life of the heart; Truth within the tunicle of the heart is not enough, it must bee in the ventricle, in the midst. The expression imports ths much, that if truth bee not in the soul as the soul of the soul, as the life bloud in the heart, giving life and motion to all, the soul is not healed by it of its unsoundness, and so con∣sequently no upright heart. The Psalmist speaking of a righteous man, saith, That his mouth speaketh wisdome, and his tongue talketh of judgement: But is this enough to give the formality of a righteous man.
Many can talk very soundly, and ju∣diciously, and yet very unsound at heart: Observe therefore what fol∣lows, where hee centers the formali∣ty of integrity, the Law of God is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide, Psal. 37. 31. the small lines of truth, the string of the heart; the Law of God, a Law in and unto the heart; binding and loosing that which lives as it were a life by it self, continually moving when all other parts are still; that this organ which makes so many steps to others, and yet not making one step, but in, and under the Law of Truth and Christ, this is an upright heart. Meditatio pascit scientiam, scientia compunctionem, compunctio devotio∣nom. Augustinus. MEditation gives a man a sight and knowledge of himself, of his sins, of the riches of Gods mer∣cy in Christ; and such knowledge is it, which works compunction of spi∣rit, wee are to bee taken up in the
duties of Thanksgiving and to bee more than ordinarily inlarged there∣in. There is no such way to inlarge the heart in that duty, as by medita∣tion to heat, and warm our hearts. So Psal. 104. 33. 34. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, my meditation of him shall bee sweet, I will bee glad in the Lord. There is nothing so feeds spiritual joy, and so maintains and holds up that holy flame that should bee in a mans heart, as doth meditation; that is the oyl and fuel that keeps such fire burning; the sweeter our meditation is, the more is the heart prepared and inlarged to prayses, and thanksgivings, and joy in the Lord. Therefore as in other Religious exercises, so more parti∣cularly in the Sacrament, one special duty to bee done, is to take up our hearts with serious meditation. And for the better raising and feeding this meditation, it is good when wee are come to the Lords Table, to do as Solomon wishes to do in that case. Prov. 23. 1. When thou fittest to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently what is before thee. Hee adviseth it for a
mans better caution, if hee bee a man given to his appetite, that hee may not bee desirous of such dainties as are set before him. But in this case it is good to consider what is set before us, to provoke our appetite, and to stir up in us a longing after those dainties. Consider therefore what is set before thee, what is done before thee. Consider the Sacramental pro∣mises, the Sacramental elements, the Sacramental actions. Behold then, and meditate what a feast God hath prepared for us, and set before us, such a feast as that, Isa. 25. 6. A feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the lees, &c. Alas how lean are our souls, what hunger-starved spirits have wee, but here bee fat things full of marrow to feed and fat our lean souls. How dead and dull are our hearts, but here is wine upon the lees, wine that goes down sweetly, That will cause the lips of those that are asleep to speake, that will refresh and quicken our spirits. Here wee see the bread broken, the wine powred out. Here wee see Christ crucified before our eyes; now wee see him
hanging, and bleeding upon the Crosse, we now see him pressed and crushed under the heavy burthen of his Fathers wrath. Now wee see him in the Garden in his bloody sweat. Now wee may behold him under the bitter conflict with his Fathers wrath upon the Crosse. Be∣hold the man, saith Pilate. This is our duty by meditation, to present unto our selves the bitterness of Christs passion, Exod. 24. 8. And Moses took the bloud, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the bloud of the Covenant. So here, Be∣hold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the world: And be∣hold the bloud of that innocent, and spotless Lamb; yea behold him now shedding his precious blood to take away the sins of the world, and look upon him as the Scape-goat, bearing and carrying our sins upon him. Represent we unto our selves in our meditations, as lively as wee are able, all the sorrows of Christs passion. This Christ commands, and makes it one main end of the institution of the Sacrament, Do this in remem∣brance
of mee: Therefore appointed hee the Sacrament, that therein wee might in special manner meditate upon his passion, and his love to us therein. David had a Psalm of re∣membrance, Psal. 38. in the title. But for the death of Christ his love in it, and the benefits by it, wee have not onely some Psalms of remem∣brance, as Psal. 16. 22. and 69. and others; But besides, the Lord Christ hath to the worlds end appointed a Sacrament of remembrance, that this great work of Christs death, and his infinite love and mercy therein, might above all other works bee meditated upon, and had in remem∣brance. FINIS.
A Catalogue of such Sentences of the Fathers, and other Ecclesiastical, and Civil Authors, as are explained, and applied to the use of the Pul∣pit, and the practice of Christians, in this Book. QƲàm malè est extra legem vi∣ventibus, quicquid meruerunt semper expectant. Page 1. Vestium curio sit as deformitatis menti∣um & morum judicium est. 3 Quicquid propter Deum fit, equaliter fit. 5 Sordet in conspectu Judicis, quod ful∣get in conspectu operantis. 6 Bone res neminem scandalizant, nisi malam mentem 7 Non omne quod licet etiam honestum est 9 Quae per rationem innotescunt, non sunt articuli fidei, sed praeambula ad arti∣culos 10
Mors optima est perire dum lachrimant sui p. 12 Nemo me lac hri is decoret, nee funera fletu faxit; cur? volito vivus per ora virum 14 Ne excedat medicin modum 15 Si molliora frustrà cesserint, medicus ferit venam 17 Suâ sponte cadentem maturiùs extin∣guere vulnere inhumanum est 18 Tota funeris pompa contemnenda est in nobis, non tamen negligenda in no∣stris 19 In spiritualibus nihil perfectum 21 Nobis, cum semel occidit brevis lux, nox est perpetua una dormienda 27 Solus Deus verè fest um agat 29 Desiderium generat satietatem, & satiet as parit desiderium 32 Resurrectio a peccato, & cessatio a poc∣cato, non sunt idem 34 In divinis nihil minimum 37 Sicut in visibilibus est sol, in intelligibi∣libus est Deus. 43 Ad patriam itur per ipsum mare, sed in ligno 46 Quantumlibet sis avarus, sufficit tibi Deus 47 Perfecta obedientia est sua imperfecta
reliquere 51 Christus non quaesivit per oratorem pis∣catorem, sed de piscatore lucraus est imperatorem 54 Oportet hominem fieri unm 58 Multa relinquitis, si desideria renun∣ciatis 62 Dilige, & dic quod voles 63 Lachrimae sangnis animae 65 Illi verè irascitur Deus, cui non irasci∣tur; & nihil eo infaelicius, cui nihil infaelix contigit. ibid. Licet in modum stagi fsum aequor ar∣rideat magnos hic campus montes ha∣bet; tranquilit as ist a tempestas est 66 Triticum non rapit ventus, inaes pa∣leae tempestate jactantur 67 Elinguis ne hoc quidem habens ut ro∣gare possit, hoc magis rogat quod ro∣gare non potest 67 Ʋbi mors non est si jugulatis aquae? 68 Anceps forma bonum, mortlibus exi∣gui donum breve temporis 69 Quid sit futurum cras, fuge quaerere 70 Quid brevi fortes jaculamr aevo mul∣ta? jam te premet nox 72 Aetate fruere, mobili cursu fugit 74 Non accipimus brevem vitam, sed fa∣cimus 75
Omnia crede mihi etiam faelicibus du∣bia sunt 76 Propera vivere, & singulos dies singulas vitas puta, nihil interest inter diem & saeculum 78 Non expectavit Christus ut Saul fati∣gatus debacchando mansuesceret, sed in mediâ insanin superavit 80 Non in fine, sed in principio conversus Latro 81 Novit Deus vulnerare ad amorem 82 Facies Dei est, quâ Deus nobis inno∣tescit 84 Reperit Deus nocentes 85 Non judicandum de cruce secundum praedicamentum quantitatis, sed re∣lationis 86 Adeo doctus, non solùm divina discit, sed divina patitur 88 Et cum blandiris pater es, & pater es cum coedis 90 Contemptu famae contemnuntur & vir∣tutes 91 Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus 92 Sequamur patres tanquam duces, non tanquam dominos 94 Melius est mihi non esse quam sine Jese esse 95
Nihil de causâ suâ deprecatur, qui nihil de conditione sua miratur 97 Sanctus in ira Dei emendari non vult, erudiri non vult 98 In scala prima ascensio est ab humo 100 De infirmitate blandimur, & ut libe∣rius peccemus, libenter infirmamur 103 Acceptus in gratiam, hilariter veni ad postulationes 105 Medicinae ars a Deo data, ut inde ratio∣nem animae curandae disceremus 106 Membra etiam animae sunt 109 Qui sine ulla intermissione orat, honest a quadam impudentia agit impuden∣tem 110 Nescit diabolus quanta bona de illo fi∣unt etiam cum saevit 112 Salvus factus es pro nihilo, non de ni∣hilo tamen 114 Nullare Deus perinde atque corporis aerumna conciliatur 115 Nemo mala morte unquam moriebatur, qui libenter opera chariatatis exer∣cuit 117 Prima quae vita dedit hora carpsit 118 Debilem facito manu, debilem pede, vita dum superest bene est 121 Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere
est nefas 122 Nolo quod cupio statim tenere, nec vi∣ctoria mihi placet parata 123 Marcet virtus sine adversario 126 Detestabilis esset cacit as, si nemo ocu∣los perderet nisi cui eruendi sunt 127 Slatium est pro honesto dura tolerare, & ad causam patientia respicit 129 Non est magnum audire ad voluntatem non est magnum 131 Tentemus anim as quae deficiunt a fide, naturalibus rationibus adjuvare 132 Anima spiritualiter cadit, & spiritua∣liter resurget 134 Qui peccat quatenus peccat, fit seipso deterior 136 Transeant injuriae, plerasque non ac∣cipit qui nescit 137 Antequam vulneramur, monemur 138 Vili vendimus coelum, Glauci more Christiani sumus 141 Agnoscere nolumus, quod ignorare non possumus 143 Infans nodum loquitur, & tamen pro∣phetat 144 Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus avi prima fluit 146
Senes in limine mortis v ita sunt avi∣dissimi 148 Respice sepulchra, & vide, quis servus, quis dominus, quis dives, & quis pauper, discerne si potes, vinctum a rege, fortem a debili, pulerum a deformi 150 Theodoro parum interest huminè, an in sublimi putrescat 152 Mors non est exitus sed transitus, & temporali itinere decurso ad aterna transgressus 155 Ut mori Roma non potest qui Romae non vixit, ita qui in domino non vixit in o non moritur 159 Nihil melius aeterna lex fecit, quàm quod unum introitum ad vitam nobis dedit exitus multos 161 Dominium potestas est tum utendi tum abutendi 164 Ʋnde illi cura cordis, cui ne ipsa qui∣dem adhuc or is circumspectio 166 Natum esse Deo sempiternum est 168 Vereor ne dum propter te fugis, propter alios sis in periculo apud dominum 170 Occidar modô imperet 172 Primatus fugientem desiderat, deside∣rantem horret 174
Habet hoc vitium omnis ambitio non respicit 175 Si nil attuleris ib is Homere foras 177 Pompa mortis magis terret, quàm mors ipsa 180 Iniquitatem damnare novit Deus, non facere 183 Compescat se humana temeritas, & id quod non est non quaerat, ne id quod est non inveniat 186 Et si domine ego commisi unde me dam∣nare potes, tu tamen non amisisti unde me salvare potes 190 Qui pectus suum tundit, & se non cor∣igit, aggravat peccata, non tollit 193 Bnum causatur ex integra causa, ma∣um autem ex singularibus defecti∣bus 196 Sacramenta sunt fodinae gratiae, dispo∣fitio est vasculm gratiae, pro majore dispositione & affectu tuo majo∣rem gratiam reportabis 199 Quicquid recipitur recipitur ad modum recipientis 201 Perene sole pereunt omnia 203 Ignis focalis immateciale non urit 205 Invidia est vitium permanens. 208
Ab extremis miseriae quies 209 Media gratiae, ordinem creationis sube∣unt. 211 Alterius perditio sit tua cautio 212 Hoc scio, me nihil scire 214 Ignis congregat homogenea, segregat heterogenea. 216 Mali in area nobiscum esse possunt, in horreo non possunt. 218 Fides famem non formidat 219 Praeventus diabolus in accusatione, Ultra nos accusare no poterit 224 Homini non est solummodo necessarium ut Christum in ipsius passione de∣ploret, sed magis seipsum in Christo 226 Quid tam ad mortem quod non Christi morte salvetur? 231 Hannibal vel victor, vel victus, nun∣quam quiescebat 233 Saturitas ventris, seminarium libidinis 237 In Praedicando Evang elium non merita personarum, sed officia sacerdotum considerantur 239 Utilis est scientia Gentilium, dummodo in usum Christianum convertatur 241
Ut hilarem it a celerem datorem diligit Deus 243 Dives verè Christianus non amat di∣vitias sed mavult 247 Quid quaeris brevi immittere vasculo totum mare? 249 Magna parvis minime exprimuntur 253 Qui Gehennas metuit, non peccare me∣tuit, sed ardere. Ille autem peccare metuit, qui peccatum ipsum sic ut Ge∣hennas odit 255 Non est poenitens sed irrisor, qui ad∣huc agit, unde poeniteat 262 Dives in Evangelio damnabatur, non quia abstulerat altena, sed quod non donaret sua 265 Vera virtus radices agit 267 Meditatio pascit scientiam, scientia compunctionem, compunctio devotio∣nem 270 FINIS.
