t2855 42475255 151414
A TRUE PICTURE Of the much Honoured & Reverend Mr. JOHN KING, (Sometimes Minister of Abbots-Langley, Hert∣fordshine) for the Closets of his Friends. WIll he that diggs up rugged Stone direct, Or the rough Mason venture to erect A Royal Tomb? Yet I, unskilful I, Am call'd to strain my Nature in an Elegy On a good King. Nothing will please but Verse. Sad Verse disgrace a Kingly Prophet's Herse. But yet I'll try, altho another mend. An ill-drawn Picture of a loved Friend, As much esteem'd, is hung in chiefest place. Love overlooks course Paint; 'tis the dear Face It hangs upon; if that be taken right, It draws, more than the Frame or Paint, the Sight. I will not paint, I'll take my Pen, and write; I'll use no Colours, only black and white. The one his Death and Innocence present; The other that, which mourning I lament.
Take a full stroke: At one stroke write him Saint, That did abhor all Hypocritic Paint. Next, in him there was nothing low, but Stature, Which was suppli'd with noble Soul and Feature. In him you'd think you saw some Judg, or rather Some grave and ancient, learned, holy Father. Yea, our King's Face had Majesty and Love. He look'd as the he sought a Crown above. He never mir'd his Soul in worldly Pelf, Nor wanted what was decent for himself. Had he mov'd higher, he had, like the Sun, Done good to all, and been by none outdone. He spake his very thoughts, when Hospitals, Or Learning, Schools, or Colleges, or Halls, Were spoken of; had Wealth been at's Command, The Scholar, Poor, and Saint had had good Land. Great Souls will talk of what they cannot do, And of the Good they do, think meanly too: Just so did he.—He early was a Man, A manly Christian Course betimes began. Dr. Tho. Talor, of Al∣dermanbury, then of Wat∣ford.Good Doctor Taylor did by Exercise In Greek take his just measure, not by size, As learn'd enought to wear a Gown, with those, That in Immanuel to Greatness rose: What Men they were, I've often heard him tell, How dear to Christ, the true Immanuel. He liv'd not there to eat, and drink, and sleep, But suck'd his Alma Mater, and drunk deep Out of her sacred Cups: The learned Arts, The Tongues, and sacred Knowledg fill'd his Parts. Well stor'd, at his good Father's time and will, He Cambridg left, but loth to try his Skill, Till Grace and Prayers did in time prevail, And the good Spirit drew aside the Vail
Of Modesty, which to his dying day Hung o're his Face, and was not laid away. Great Doctor Sibbs did with alluring Smile, Train him into his Toil, and by a Wile, An honest Wile, got him fast fixed there, Where he well spent near three and fifty year. From his Fa∣ther's House in Watford to Langley.The first Flight from his Nest ('twas short) he took, Was to the House of old Sir Robert Brook: Whose Lady, Holy and Elect, behind Yet stays and waiteth for a happy Wind. I did admire to hear, while since, how still She writes Epistles, as with Angel's Quill. 'Twas She and Sibbs that chiefly laid the Plot, To mount him in that Pulpit; and when got Into the Mount, nothing e're mov'd or drew Him thence, but black and windy Barthol'mew. Of Meat, and Drink, and Cloth, he took no thought, He cleanly trod the World, nor sold, nor bought: But kept his Study, left (as well he might) Those Cares unto the prudent over-sight Of a good Wife, who did discharge them well, Whose Care and Industry did most excel. On a small Vic'rage he contented sate, His Charge came on, and so did his Estate. I ne're knew Man that did so live and thrive, And left so much to her that doth survive. He sought God's Kingdom, and its Righteousness, And by so doing got the more, not less. He was content in such a state to be, As God had call'd him to in each degree. He was a constant Student night and day; It was his Meat to read, to preach, and pray. His Home a Court, his Pulpit was his Throne; He sought the things of Christ, and not his own.
Could he have rul'd, none had been unbaptiz'd, Nor one baptiz'd, had liv'd uncatechiz'd; Nor one past unconfirmed, and unable To plead his Title to the Lord's own Table. He griev'd to think of Peoples Ignorance, And fruitless use of every Ordinance. His tender Heart did sigh and groan, to think That any Soul should walk so near the brink Of Hell, in Error, or foul ways of Sin, And end far worse than did their Lives begin. He priz'd dear Souls, and was afraid their Blood Should be requir'd, therefore desir'd their Good. But careless cruel Souls know not their Friends, Until they come to miserable Ends. Mad sinful Souls, despise, obstruct, or hate Those Men that seek their Cure, and better state. His humble Mind did fear himself in fault, When others fell, as if he did but halt In his good Course. Of late when any di'd, His Negligence he thought against him cry'd. He was much bent on Personal Converse, Lest any Soul should die, except perverse; And was for stooping low to them, whose low And meaner parts requir'd, that they might know Their God, Themselves, their Way, and latter End, (To Souls of every size he was a friend) And wish'd that every one would either come To learn, or entertain the Word at home. He fed the Lambs, and did o'resee the Sheep, From Errors, Pining, Rots them safe to keep. He did not pull down what another built; He did endeavour to avoid the guilt Of sitting silent, or of just Offence; And both from a well studi'd pious sense.
He preach'd in Private, and in Publick heard; The Private with the Publick never jarr'd. Langly, lament thy Loss! Tho he with Age Was spent, yet such Men's Deaths no good presage: No more then if experienc'd Horsemen fell Dead in the Char'ot of God's Israel. Had he ne're spoken, his holy Life did tell, The way to Heaven was by living well. Pretences and allegations of careless PeopleHis Voice was low; could he not speak aloud? Attentive ears will close up in a Crowd. So Souldiers will close up, to understand What their Commanders give them in command. But when we speak (except our Lungs we tear) Of Life and Death, they'l say, they cannot hear. But if the Preacher's voice reach not thine Ear, Then change thy Posture, Place, and press to hear. His Doctrine pure, his Method was exact, His Reasons strong, his Building was compact, His Language proper, and his Heart was warm, And yet how few, how few would hear him charm!Some will not hear in private, calling it sedi∣ous, as truly as that there are armed men hid under the good Womens white Aprons. But Calumniator saith, They'r Schismaticks, Fanaticks, Rioters, Traitors, Hereticks, What not? He swears, he fears, he hears Of Horse and Arms, of Pikes and Musquetiers Among Dissenters hidden lie. But where? Ʋnder Lawn Approns. 'Tis like, 'tis likely there. Did ever Satan yet disgrace a Play? Or Works of Darkness acted in the Day? 'Tis lawful by his Acts to meet at Dice, At Wine, at Swords, at Cards for Avarice: But he could ne're abide the Word of God, No more than Sorcerers could Aaron's Rod. He never saith there's Treason in a Play, No Schism in shuffling Cards all night all day.
Go see and hear the Plays, and hum the Stage, Applaud the Play'rs: at Preachers hiss and rage. Informer, Satan, hold thy lying Tongue, Dare not to say there's any Plots among House-preaching Protestants; for they detest Plots, Papists, Pope, and Thee, and all the rest. Thou grand Ejecter, load'st them with disgrace, Thou gav'st some of thy All things for their Place, But could'st not buy their Tongues: where e'r thou art, Thou plottest Plots and Mischief, that's thy part. Though Preachers dy, yet God will raise enow, That shall thy Plots detect and overthrow. Our holy Preacher had no other aim, Than Sinners teach and save, and Grace proclaim. To his once Auditors, tho dead, he saith, Follow my Doctrine, Charity, and Faith. An Arbor in his Garden, where he used to retire for study and de∣votion.His Arbour may be call'd a holy Bow'r, In which he prayed many a silent hour. In reeling Times he stood, and walk'd with God, In the pure steps of Hildersham and Dod, Of holy Martyrs kept alive by Fox, Of Loyal Puritans, and Orthodox: He did admire the venerable Ʋsher, Who fought with Rome as tho he meant to crush her: He took the Challenge,Ʋsher's Answ. to the Chal∣lenge of Ma∣lone the Irish Jesuit. and disarm'd Malone, And gave the Friers cause to cry, Ahone! Majestick Brownrig, and the Reynolds both, Fulk, Whitaker, Assertors of the Truth: Ames,New-England Hooker, Fellow in Eman. Coll. when he was student there. He would of∣ten speak of him with ad∣miration. Brightman, Perkins, Bradshaw, and Paul Bains, Who in their several ways took worthy Pains. He'd speak of Hooker in Immanuel, Of both the Dyke's, the worthy Daniel; And Boanerges Jeremy, (so he To call him us'd) Richardson and Estee,
(Great Men in his esteem) he would scarce yeild That any better knew, of Wethersfield, Daniel the Son of Rogers. Sibbs the sweet, Preston the clear, and more of them did meet,Mrs. King's Wife was Mr. G. Throckmor∣ton's Sister. With this their holy melancholy Brother Throckmorton (George) yea and many other Good Men, esteem'd by Saints of Great Renown, That strove to make the Abbots-Ley, God's Town. I'le not leave out that pair of AnthoniesMr. Anthony Burgess of Sut∣ton Cofield, & Dr. Tuckney. Burgess and Tuckney, his Learned Chronies: Nor yet his much beloved Doctor Stanton, That daily Preacher. And admired Manton, Some months before him, got a speedy Wind, And left him working for a while behind. Baxter takes often leave, and cannot go, He stays a Cause to plead, and Reason show, Why he and more should have their Liberty, To rescue Souls from Hell's Captivity. Bishop Morley of Winchester, and Gunning of Ely, to whom he dedi∣cates his last Book.He puts two Bishops in the Court Christian, For breaking Peace, to answer, if they can, For foulest Sacrilege, and other Crimes, For Outing Labourers in working times. If they should stop his mouth, and hinder Love, He'll move the Judg to hear the Cause above. I fear he'll get his promis'd Writ of Ease,The Title of his Book, the Non-conform∣ists Plea. Before he end his Suit in Common-Pleas. But our dear Friend from hence is thither gone, Where all are Puritans, and all are one. No Schism's there, nor Non-conformity; No Cross, but crowned Heads in Unity. His Heart was with them here, but now his Soul Is with them there, where Love and Peace controul. Were there no more in Heav'n than those that I Have nam'd, in Light, in Love, in Purity,
How happy He! But there are Millions more, Whose Names and Faces he ne're knew before, And many more to come; for 'tis God's will, That more be call'd, come in, his House to fill. Zaccheus having long'd our Lord to see, Above the Multitude did climb a Tree: So this blest Soul is got 'bove Sycamore, To praise and see, and seeing to adore His Jesus, Lord, and King, 'bove Multitude, 'Bove Dust and Wrath, in clear Beatitude, Above imperfect Grace, and Faith's dim Light, To see the All in All, A blessed Sight! FINIS. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.
