W3665 E870_7 99872241 168369
THE WOƲNDS of an ENEMIE IN THE House of a FRIEND. BEING A RELATION Of the hard Measure sustained by Miles Halhead, and Thomas Salthouse, for the Testimony of JESUS: parti∣cularly in a long, and sore, and close Imprison∣ment, first at Plymouth, and then at Exeter in the County of Devon, though they have neither offended the Law of God, or of the NATION. Published for the clearing of their Innocency from the cloud of Transgression, of which they are supposed high∣ly guilty, and by reason of their silent abiding such sharp, and long, and cruell sufferings. Even the Sea Monsters draw out the brest, they give suck is their young ones; the daughter of my People is become Cruel, like the Ostriches in the wildernesse. Lam. 4.3. Have the workers of Iniquity no knowledge? who eate up my People, as they eate Bread, they have not called upon God. There were they in great fear where no fear was, for God hath scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee, thou hast put them to shame, because God hath despised them, Psal. 53.4. The dark places of the Earth, are full of the Habitation of Cruelty, Psal. 74.20. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him, Psal. 12.5. If he turn not he will whet his sword, he hath beat his Bow and made it ready, He also hath prepared for him the Instruments of Death, he ordaineth his Arrowes a∣gainst the Persecutors. Psal. 7.12, 13. LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread-Eagle, near the West end of Pauls 1656.
THE WOUNDS OF AN ENEMY, In the House of a FRIEND. MILES Halhead and Thomas Salthouse being pressed in spirit, to visite the Seed of God in captivity in Plymouth in the County of Devon, left their outward Beings, and relations in the North, and passed thitherward as far as Hunniton near the City of Exeter, where a guard being placed for the apprehending of such persons as were suspected to have had a hand in an insurrection broke forth a little before (whilst they were on their jour∣ney) at Salisbury, and dispersed at Southmoulton, in the County aforesaid, they were taken up by them and brought before Colonel Cappleston, High-Sheriff of the County, upon suspition of being Cavileeres, and ha∣ving
had a hand therein; who having examined them, though he confessed he did not believe them to be Cavalieres, not any thing appearing upon, or against them, as matter of suspition, yet caused he them to kept close prisoners, at Exeter for the space of about fourteen dayes, and then sent them from Officer to Officer towards their homes. But being come two miles from Taunton on the way to Bridgwater, the Officer that conducted them from thence, fell to the ground, and lying grovelling thereon in the sight of divers people, was able to goe no further, whereupon they returned back to the Ju∣stice at Taunton, and acquainted him with what had befallen the Officer he sent with them, and to know what further he would injoyn them, who after some consideration, told them he would have no more to doe with them, and having set them at liber∣ty desired the Lord to be with them. Hereupon they passed to Bristoll, where, and in the Country thereabouts, having stayed some time they departed, being moved of the Lord towards Plymouth againe; having with them a friend of Bristoll, born at Exeter, and Certificates from the Captaine of the Fort at Bristoll, and of a Justice, concerning them, and their good affections to the Common wealth; which before they had not, being ignorant, when they came out of the North, of any such occasion as had fallen out, whilst they were on their way, that might re∣quire any such thing. And so, through the hand of the Lord, they came to Plymouth the sixteenth day of the month called May, 1655. and there had severall peaceable meet∣ings, in the houses of friends, to whom they ministred what they had heard, and seen, and handled of the word
of life, and were made manifest with mighty power to that of God in the Consciences of many to whom they were sent, who being thereby turned from darknesse to light, and the eye being opened in them, which the God of this world hath blinded, the captives came to witnesse delive∣rance, even the acceptable time, the day of salvation. The Standard of the Lord being thus set up, many people flock thereunto, insomuch that the house of John Harris, a friend near the Town, where a meet∣ing was appointed to be on the first day of the week following, being not able to receive them, they went into his garden, and to them both in the fore and af∣ternoon did they declare the truth of the experience of what they had found of the free grace of God which brings salvation manifested in them, provoking them unto love, and to good works, according to the Scriptures of the Prophets, and Apostles, as the Spirit gave them utte∣rance, exhorting them in the words of sobernesse and truth full of plainnesse and simplicity, and tending onely to the advancement of the Kingdome of Christ amongst men, without using any inveighings against men, or opinions, and were approved of by those that heard them, though severall came onely to hear some new thing. Having both of them spoken, and finished what they had to say, George Brookes then Priest of the Nightingale Friggot, a man whom they knew not, spake to the people a pretty space of time, wholly in the praise and commendation of what they had said, affir∣ming it to be the eternall truth, and exhorting them to perseverance, from that Scripture, Take heed that yee receive not the grace of God in vaine, telling them that they must expect to suffer persecution; but the prin∣ciple from whence he spake being seen in the light of
Jesus Christ, which changeth not, with which he was comprehended, Thomas Salthouse said that he had spoken many good words, and faire speeches, but asked him whether he lived the life of what he spake, for that it was he that had the witnesse in himselfe that setteth to his seale that God is true; and their friend who came with them from Bristoll as aforesaid, told him, he had spo∣ken of a Trinity in Unity, and a Unity in Trinity, when as no such language was to be found in the Scriptures; which being ended, Thomas Salthouse spake a few words more to the people, exhorting them in the words of the Apostle, Let him that stole, steal no more; and made use of the words of Christ, He that entreth not in by the doore into the sheep-fold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thiefe, and a Robber; which he directed not to George Brookes, or any one in particular: Miles Halhead having not spo∣ken one word, nor Thomas Salthouse otherwise then as afore rehearsed, and so the meeting ended. But the persecution raised against them, then began; in which the Priest aforesaid, to fulfill the words him∣selfe had said, (to wit) that they must expect to suffer persecution, was instrumentall; and on what was then said to him, being in truth no otherwise then what have been said, as ten honest men of Plymouth, then present, have attested under their hands, which is hereunto annexed, is laid the pretended ground of the long and cruell sufferings, which they have, and doe still undergoe, hereafter mentioned. For on the third day of the week following, being the 21 of the month called May, the day before they intended to depart the Town, Miles and Thomas be∣ing at a meeting of friends in Robert Caryes house in the Town; the Counstables came thither with a
Warrant from John Page Mayor, out of which they took them, and their friend of Bristoll, and them ha∣ving apprehended, they brought before the Mayor at his house, who after a few words spoken to them, sent them to Prison at the Gild-hall, without signify∣ing any crime they had committed, that might de∣serve a restraint. The next day they were brought from Prison be∣fore the Mayor, Magistrates, and Counsell, and the Priest of the Town, and severally examined,G: Hughes. the doores being shut and all who were their friends tur∣ned out by the Constables, not one being suffered to be present at their Examination, who any wayes fa∣voured them, to testifie in their behalfe; and having examined them after this manner for the space of a∣bout three hours, they released their friend of Bristoll, and returned the other two to Prison. In which having continued them some dayes, a friend applyed himselfe to the Mayor, and desired of him to know for what they was committed, who positively answered, that they were detained for de∣nying the Trinity, and that there had been Oath ta∣ken before them, for that purpose; to which accusa∣tion though they had fully answered at their exami∣nation, yet that their innocency might more clear∣ly appear, they wrote a Letter to the Mayor, decla∣ring what they held therein, according to the Scrip∣tures, against which they excepted not. After the perusall of which, the friend aforesaid went to the Mayor againe, to know whether that had given him any satisfaction, and if so, to know what further he had to say against them; to which the Mayor (finding nothing of exception in their Letter, concerning the Trinity, which would beare any
weight) answered, that they were detained for refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration, and upon suspition that they were Jesuites (though many who are any ways ingenious, freely declared they had no such thoughts of them, as indeed they afforded no matter for any such suspition, being plain husband-men, and such as had never been out of this Island) whereupon they sent the Mayor a second Letter, wherein they set down more plainely the grounds wherefore they could not sweare, then they were admitted to mani∣fest at their examination, though for refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration the Proclamation that inforceth it gives no power of imprisonment, nor injoyns any such thing. Notwithstanding all which, having kept them then Prisoners for the space of a week; the Mayor sent them in custody the 28 of the same month to the common Goal in the Castle at Exeter, with a Warrent under his hand; wherein he chargeth them, not with the denyall of the Trinity or refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration of Popery, the causes as he before said of their Imprisonment: but as Being ap∣prehended as disturbers of the publick peace, and for di∣vers other high misdemeanours against a late Proclamati∣on prohibiting the disturbing of Ministers, and other Chri∣stians in their assemblies and meetings, and against an Or∣dinance of his Highnesse the Lord Protector, and his Coun∣sell, lately made against Duels, and Challenges, and all pro∣vocations thereunto: And for refusing to give sufficient Suretyes for their personall appearance at the next generall Sessions of the peace, to be held for the County of De∣von, and in the mean time to be of the good behaviour a∣gainst his Highnesse the Lord Protector, and all his leige peo∣ple, as by the copy of the Warrant at large appeareth:
when as they disturbed not the Peace in the least, nor them whom they call Ministers, nor other Chri∣stians in their Assemblies and Meetings, for they were with none of them, nor were any other whilst they had been in the Town; but disturbed they were in their Meetings by the Mayor, who by his Constables and Warrant took them out from their Meetings, and imprisoned them without a cause, and contrary to the said Ordinance, and to the Govern∣ment, which Article 37 saith in these words. That all that professe faith in God by Jesus Christ,Government. Art. 37. though differing in judgement from the doctrine, worship, and di∣scipline publickly held forth, shall not be restrained from, but be protected in the profession of the faith, and exercise of their Religion, so as they abuse not this liberty to the Ci∣vill injury of others, and to the actuall disturbance of the Peace, on their parts. Provided that this liberty be not ex∣tended to Popery, Prelacy, and to such as under the profes∣sion of Christ hold forth and practice licentiousnesse. Nor Challenged they any to Duells, or gave any provo∣cation thereunto: The Principle by which they are guided, leading out of strifes, debates, and quarrellings; and the root from whence they proceed (to wit) the Spirit that is in men, that lusteth unto envy; and with all men have they peace as far as is possible. And for that clause, For refusing to give Sureties for their good behavi∣our, &c. It would be a matter of admiration that the Mayor did not blush to give such a notorious untruth under his hand, when as he knowes two sufficient able men, as to the outward (to wit) Robert Cary, and Arthur Cotton of that Town, were bound before him in such a Recognizance for their appearance, as he required, though the next day he made it voyd, were it not that his illegall and oppressive proceedings, and
the manifest other lyes with which the Warrant is filled, renders him as one that will know no shame. All which more at large appeareth in their Answer to this Warrant, and the Testimony of eleven honest men of that Town, who were eye and ear Witnesses of these passages, delivered under their hands to Ma∣jor Generall Disbrow, before the Sessions hereafter mentioned, to the truth of their said Answer. And for the divers other high misdemeanours, they are yet to mention, and therefore there needs nothing in Reply; for all men who understands the Law, know, That a generall Charge requires no particular Reply, and is as much as nothing. Only this may be observed, That he who had so contrary unto Law imprisoned them, and kept them for the space of a week, and during that time had shifted from one thing to another as the cause there∣of, as hath been said, and then sent them to Exeter Prison, with this Warrant full of other abominable falshoods, there being not one true Assertion there∣in, would no doubt have formed something or other in relation thereunto, had it come within the reach of his invention, which had created and expressed so many therein, known to himself to be so contrary to truth; and also in his, and his brethrens filthy flat∣tering Letter to Generall Disbrow, in excuse of their unjust proceedings against these innocent servants of the Lord, made up with other abominable untruths, by which they endeavoured to beget in him a good Opinion of them, for so doing, and to continue his favour to their Town, as by a copy of their Letter, and Miles and Thomas Answer thereunto, added to this Relation, at large appeareth. But being brought to Exeter upon the Warrant
aforesaid, there they continued in the common Goal, lying on the ground, untill the Generall Sessions of the Peace of the County held there the Tenth of the Month called July following, on the 12 day of which Month, they were brought before the Sessions, to whom the Clerk read a Bill of Indictment exhibited against them upon the Ordinance for preventing of Du∣ells, wherein was expressed: That they the said Thomas and Miles not fearing or regarding the same Ordinance, and the penalties therein contained, did the 20 of May, 1655. at Plymouth in the presence and hearing of divers honest persons then and there being, use diverse disgracefull provoking words and gestures to George Brooks Clerk in the Nightingale Friggot, he being then opening and declaring to the same persons a certain place of Scripture, wherein he spake some∣thing of the Holy Trinity (viz.) Thou (the said George Brooks meaning) lyest in saying there were three persons in the Trinity, we deny it, there is no such thing; but thou art a deluding spirit come to draw away the hearts of the people from God. And further, they did farther speak to the people then present, that they should not hearken to the said George Brooks, for that he was a Thief, and was come with a lye in his mouth, and had stoln what he had from others, and had it in his hand, pointing to the Bible which was then in the said George Brooks his hand open. And further did say it was a lye which the said George Brooks had brought, and other harms to the said George Brooks then and there did contrary to the form of the said Ordinance, and against the publick peace. How utterly untrue in every particular this Indict∣ment is, both as to the matter and manner of the accu∣sation charged therein, is clearly manifested in the
Relation aforesaid, of the passages at the meeting, the truth of which is testified under the hands of diverse honest men at Plymouth which were present as afore∣said, and the Testimony of many more could be had, were not those enough, and in the Answer of Miles and Thomas thereunto, added to this Relation; but having wronged the innocent in that high manner as is expressed, it concerned them, at least, to have some∣thing, how false soever, to pretend as a colour in Law, as the cause of their so doing. Miles Halhead spake not a word at the Discourse, up∣on which occasion is taken, and the ground of this Indictment laid, and he that saith nothing cannot be made an offendor for a word, though there be that make a man an offendor for a word that is none indeed: Nor doth that Ordinance require, or any Law, that if one man transgresse it (were it so that Thomas Salthouse had so done (which is denyed) two should suffer, that were to destroy the righteous with the wicked, unto which the Law is a terror; and yet hath Miles Halhead been Imprisoned and Indicted, & suffered hath he though he was altogether silent, and without so much as any thing that might be a pretence of offending in the least that Ordinance, or any other Law of God, or the Nation. Nor did Thomas Salthouse speak one word to George Brooks in particular, as to what the Indictment char∣geth; true it is, after George Brookes had spoken so largely in the praise of what they had declared from the Lord, saying, it was the eternall truth, and Exhort∣ed the people to take heed that they received not the grace of God in vain; Thomas Salthouse compre∣hending the Principle from whence he spake, in the light of Jesus Christ which changeth not, said unto
him to this effect, Thou hast spoken many good words, and faire speeches, but doest thou live the life of what thou speakest? for it is he that hath the witnesse in himself, that setteth to his seale that God is true: which were savory words, and feasonable for the directing of his mind, and the hearers also, to see that they witnessed indeed what they spake and professed, and to speak and professe no more then they witnessed, that so he and they might not be deceived with the subtilty of the Serpent, in thinking they had that which was eter∣nall life, when in the day of Tryall it would appear to be no such matter. This was love to his soule, though in requitall he hath made it matter of perse∣cution. Had they come in wayes of craftinesse to deceive, they would have cherished his Testimony to the truth of what they had spoken, and not have questi∣oned it with such expressions. Allow the Dragon but a place in Heaven, and he shall cry out, These are the Servants of the most High, which shew us the way to salvation; but cast him out into the Earth,Acts 16.17. his proper seat, and then he makes war with the Lamb, and those who have the Testimony of Jesus. He also Exhorted the people, in the close of all, af∣ter the end of the discourse aforesaid, in the words of Paul, Let him that stole steale, no more,Ephes. 4.8. John 10.1. and made use of the words of Christ, He that entreth not in by the door, into the sheep-fold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief, and a Robber; but directed them not to George Brookes, as the Indictment hath falsly charged it, nor to any one in particular; but had they been directed unto him, or to any other in particular, are those words of Paul, and of Christ, and the language of Scripture, disgracefull words, provocations to Duells,
let that of God in every mans conscience speak, and judge?Jer. 23.10. Therefore behold, I am against the Prophets, saith the Lord, that steale my words every one from his neigh∣bour, that use their tongues, and say, he saith. Had Jere∣miah lived in these dayes, and spoken these words now, the false Prophets now who smite with the fist of wickednesse, would certainly have Indicted him upon the Ordinance for preventing of Duells, and were Christ Jesus and Paul who spake as aforesaid, and all the Pro∣phets and holy men of God, now alive in this Nation, testifying as they did to the Generations in which they lived, of which the Scripture bears Record, the same would they receive from the Priests, and men of this Generation; and yet we find not that the false Prophets of old, did Indict them for so speaking, as Provocation to fightings, nor did they pretend to any Law as a cover for so doing; so far doe the Priests and men of this Generation, who in works pretend to the Prophets, and Christ Jesus, and the Apostles, and the holy men of God, and the Scriptures, outstript their fore-fathers in a sottish and malicious persecuting of the truth; for till this example, the like hath not been heard of since the foundation of the world, and is voyd of understanding, and ridiculous amongst all rationall men. On this foot, he that tells an envious person that he is a murderer, and he that looks on a wo∣man to lust after her is an adulterer, and the covetous per∣son, that he is an Idolater, and he that speaketh a Divi∣nation of his own heart for the word of the Lord, useth witchcraft, and he that knowes not, nor speakes from the mouth of the Lord, is a dumb Dog that cannot bark; and he that saith when the Lord saith not, is a devourer, the murderer of soules; and he that biteth with his teeth, and prepareth war when men put not into his mouth, is a greedy
Dog, and those who are in the nature and Generation of the Pharisees, who professe what they are not, and persecute and murder the life of what they professe where it is manifest∣ed, are Serpents, Generation of Vipers, with such like: would be Indicted as Offendors against the Ordinance for preventing of Duells. He that taketh what is none of his as to the things without, the things of this world, is a Thief, and tru∣ly is so judged and accounted of. He that taketh the words of the Prophets, and Christ Jesus, and the Apo∣stles, which they spake from the life, and useth his tongue, and saith, the Lord saith, when the Lord spake not to him, having not the life that spake them forth, taketh that which is none of his, and is a Thief, as to the things which are within, the things that are spiritu∣all, and truly is so judged and accounted of. He that steals without hath an outward Law to passe upon him as a Transgressour; he that steals within hath the Law of Christ Jesus by which he shall also be judged; for further then the outward, the Law of man hath no power, and this is agreeable to that of God in every mans conscience; also to the Ordi∣nance against Duells, which they, and all the Children of light own in its place, as a bearing of the sword against fightings, quarrellings, evill speakings, and such like, as evill doing, which the Principle of light which is Jesus Christ discovers, and witnesseth against, and the root from whence they proceed (to wit) from mens lusts that are within them. And he that said, Let him that stole steale no more, was the Minister of God, who addeth the Law upon the trans∣gressour; and he that said. He that entreth not in by the doore into the sheep-fold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief and a Robber, is the Law-giver, the Pro∣phet
whom whosoever doth not hear in all things, shall be cut off from his people; and he that said, I am against the Prophets that steales my word every one from his neigh∣bour, is the Lord of glory who shall judge the quick and the dead by the man Christ Jesus, the Law-giver, and Mini∣ster of God, at his appearing and coming. But the Priests have gotten a new weapon against the Lamb (to wit) the Ordinance against Duells, and with it they will fight against his battle Axes and Weapons of War, (to wit) his Witnesses, and none shall testifie against their deceit with a spirituall weapon; but they will have it to be a carnall one, and will take an Ordinance of man to fight against it, and judge it by, which never intended it. But their Weapon formed shall not prosper, the overflowing scourge shall sweep away their refuge of lyes, and their coverings are ripping off, nor can the Rocks and Mountaines hide them from the wrath of him who sitteth on the Throne, and judgeth righteously. And whereas something is mentioned in the In∣dictment, of the Trinity, one of them said, I know no such Scripture that speaks of three persons in the Trinity, but the three the Scriptures speak of, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, these three are one, and that Baptism, by one Spirit, into one body, and the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, the Scriptures declare to be one, and he that hath the Son, hath the Father also, and this we own; he that can receive it, let him. And this was spoken as to what G. Brookes said of a Trinity in Unity, and a Unity in Trinity, which as he was told the Scriptures no where spake. Court. To this Indictment they were demanded to answer guilty, or not guilty? Answer. We are not guilty in what is there charged upon us. Court. By whom will you be tryed?
Answer. By you whom the Lord God of power hath set in Autho∣rity, to judge righteously between man and man, and to put a difference between the precious and the vile, and set the oppressed free, from whom we doe expect justice and equity. Court. Will ye be tryed by God and the Country? Answer. We are willing to be tryed by this Bench, and desire that our accusers may be brought in, and that we may have liber∣ty to speak for our selves, and make our defence against the false accusations laid to our charge. Court. Will ye be judges of your own case? Jaylor, take them away, which was done imme∣diately. When they were first apprehended, and brought before the Mayor and Magistrates of Plymouth, many honest people, who were present at the meeting a∣foresaid, and were ready in the Hall to testifie the truth of things, were all turned out, and not a man or woman that favoured them permitted to stay, not∣withstanding which, and the keeping fast of the doores of the common Hall, that so none of them might returne in, did they in the presence of near one hundred of other people, desire openly, that if either man or woman, had any thing to lay to their charge, they would speak: but no man or woman appeared to speak, nor ever were their accusers brought face to face, that they might see them, or hear them speak. And now after seven weeks imprisonment, being brought before the Sessions, and such an abominable pack of falshood, and lyes, in an Indictment exhibited against them, unto which they pleaded not guilty; and declared againe and againe in answer to what they required of them, (to wit) by whom will ye be try∣ed? That they were willing to be tryed by the Bench, whom the Lord God of power had set in Authority, to judge
righteously between man and man, &c. as aforesaid, and desired their accusers might be brought in, and that they might have liberty to speak for themselves, and make their defence against the false accusations layed to their charge; because they spake it not in the form of words which they would have, though they both pleaded, and submitted to a tryall, as aforesaid, and a Jury might they have called, and tryed them by, or otherwise as they pleased; they asked them whether they would be Judges in their own case? when as they desired no such thing, but to be tryed by them who were in Authority, and turned them aside for a thing of naught, and called to the Jaylor to take them away, which command of theirs was presently executed. And here let all that are sober, and who calmnly weigh things in the balance of equity, judge, whether innocent men in a case of this nature, wherein without a cause, and contrary to the Law of the Land they were Imprisoned, and so hardly dealt withall, and wick∣edly Indicted, and stood before enemies, having largely experienced that neither Law nor justice had took place in their behalfe; but oppression and cruelty as hath been mentioned, should, for their parts, being demanded by whom they would be tryed, make in reason, equity, and justice, any other answer, then by those whom the Lord God of power hath set in Authority to judge righteously between man and man, and to put a diffe∣rence between the precious and the vile, and to set the op∣pressed free, from whom they expected equity and justice; or to put themselves on any other issues without be∣ing guilty of a manifest wilfull throwing away of their innocency, and of a continuation of sufferings by their own consent: If those in Authority will have a tryall by other manner of men, that they cannot help,
and of their sufferings that might follow thereupon, they are not accessary, nor will it by such men be judged a contempt of Authority in that they submit to a tryall. A man will in reason chuse to have right ta∣ken away from him by force, rather then to put him∣selfe upon an issue, from which he can expect no o∣ther, and so as it were by his own consent to give it a∣way. And to that of God in the consciences of those then present, and of all others, who seriously observe, with what rage, and malice, these innocent people are prosecuted, and how contrary to Law, and justice, proceedings are every where had against them; as if they were fit onely to be destroyed, yea, even to that of God in the consciences of their enemies themselves, doe I appeal, whether righteous judgement can be by them expected from those, whom the Lord God of pow∣er hath not set in Authority to judge righteously between man and man, and to put a difference between the precious and the vile, in things relating to the kingdome of Jesus Christ, which can onely be seen and judged in his light, to whom all judgement is given both in Heaven and in Earth; And the children of light can give consent to no other judgement, and tryall; nor, from any other can they expect right, and judgement, but where that is. But to put this matter out of doubt, and to ma∣nifest how instead of seeking judgement, and relieving the oppressed, which the Lord requires who is a God of judgement, the needy are turned aside from judgement, and the righteousnesse of the righteous taken from him. Those who understand the Law, know, that as to all Indict∣ments of trespasse (of which nature this is pretended to be) of misdemeanor, and breach of the peace, to an∣swer not guilty, or to put in a Traverse is a sufficient le∣gall plea; and the Clerk of the peace is to record it,
and joyne issue, and is punishable, if he doth it not: and that onely in cases of life, the Law or custome of England requires the person Indicted to joyne this issue of saying, by the country, when after he hath plea∣ded not guilty, it is demanded of him, by whom he will be tryed? And here all People may take notice what measure of injustice these innocent Servants of the Lord receive, who are sent to Prison instead of be∣ing heard in their just defence, and their accusers brought forth, when after they had legally pleaded these things were by them lawfully demanded: and how contrary to Law, and justice, and to the libertyes of Englishmen lately vindicated with so much blood, is this proceeding? how plainly doth it speak as if no other thing were intended in bringing them to the Bar, then to asperse, and destroy their innocency, as their libertyes had been before injured by above seven weeks Imprisonment; and by arraigning them as a∣bominable offenders in the face of the country, to en∣deavour to render them odious to the people who had heard so much of their oppressions, and thereby amongst them to seek to beget a beliefe that their suf∣ferings were just, from which least they should clear themselves, and in so doing their long sufferings come to an end, (which to lengthen and make grievous to the purpose resolutions were had) to Prison they are sent, and the benefit of the Law denyed them in a try∣all. What greater injustice can there be then this, and oppression? what higher violation of Law, and liberty? of these things the Roman heathen were not guilty, and to be so dealt withall the worst of their adversa∣ryes would cry out against; were it his own case, as justly he might. Yet this is the measure which the wit∣nesses of the great and living God receive from this adul∣terous
generation, and who is there that regardeth, or layeth it to heart? though it is every mans concern∣ment, and may become the condition of others, how soon they know not. To close this particular, let the wise in heart judge, whether amongst those a man is found whom the Lord God of power hath set in Authority to judg righteously between man & man, & to put a difference between the precious and the vile; who, thus, turne aside the needy from judgement, and take the righteousnesse of the righteous from him? And whether they had not cause to say, being asked by whom they would be tryed, that they desired to be tryed by such whom the Lord God in power had set in Authority to judge righteously, as aforesaid. About the space of an houre after they were called in again. Court. It is thought fit that you take the Oath of Abjura∣tion because of your contempt of Authority, which accordingly was to them tendred, and a Bible holden to them, that they might swear. Answer. In the presence of the eternall God, and before all this people, we doe deny with as much detestation, as any of you doth, the Pope, and his Supremacy, and the Purgatory, and all therein mentioned, and declare freely against it; and we doe not deny to swear because of any guilt that is upon us, but in obedience to the command of Christ, who saith, Swear not at all; and we will not come under the condem∣nation of an Oath for the liberty of the outward man: after which they were returned to Prison. The Mayor of Plymouth when he first apprehen∣ded them, tendred them this Oath, which when they had refused, and given the reasons of their so doing, he sent them back to Prison, and afterwards signify∣ing that as the cause of their detainment to a friend,
they sent him in writing more fully their answer there unto, then they had liberty to expresse, when they were examined; but there still continued them Pri∣soners: And now after seven weeks further durance, it was tendred them againe, and they refusing are re∣turned againe to Prison. Christ Jesus the onely John 3.16. beggoten Son of God, by whom the Joh. 1.3, 10. world was made, the John 8 12. light of the world, who John 1.9. lighteth every one that cometh into the world, who is greater then Luke 11.31. Solomon, who is Psal. 110.1. Mat. 22.43, 45 Davids Rev. 27.16. Root, and Lord, whose day John 8.56. Abraham saw, and rejoyced; whom Heb. 1.6. the Angels of God are commanded to worship; who is the Rom. 10.4. end of the Law for righteousnesse to every one that believeth: Heb. 7.23. the surety of a better Testament; the Heb. 8.6. Mediator of a better, of the Heb. 13.20.12.24. everlasting, new Co∣venant: the Deut. 18.15. Acts 3.22, 23.7.37. Prophet whom Moses said the Lord their God should raise up like unto him, whom they should hear in all things whatsoever he should say unto them, and it shall come to passe, that every soule that will not hear that Pro∣phet shall be destroyed from amongst the people: he who Mat. 24.35. said Heaven, and earth, shall passe away, but my word shall not passe away: who Mat. 5.17. came not to destroy the law, of the Prophets, but to fulfill: who is Luke 1.73. the Oath of God, the Rom. 2.8, 9, 10. end of contention and strife where he is witnessed, the Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse, Rev. 3.14. the Judge of all, whose Acts 10.42.17.32. 2 Tim 4.1. Rom. 2.16. sheep hear his voyce, saith, You John 10.17. Mat. 5 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. have heard it hath been said by them of old time, thou shalt not forswear thy selfe, but shalt performe unto the Lord thine Oathes; but I say unto you, swear not at all, but let your communications be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these cometh of evill. Then which there is no command in Scripture more plaine, and positive, either for obedience to Magistrates, or forbidding to doe that which is evill. And the Apostle James saith,
But James 5.12, above all things my brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, least ye fall into con∣demnation. And yet how are his sheep the children whom the Father hath given him, and who in obedience to this his command, dare not to swear at all, but are come to the yea and nay in their communications, im∣prisoned and cruelly dealt withall throughout this Nation, for refusing in conscience to swear at the will of man; who calls himselfe a Magistrate of God, and requires obedience as to the Minister of God to this his command, which is contrary to the command of the higher powers, Jesus Christ by whom Prov. 8.15. Kings reigne, and Princes execute justice, to whom Psal. 62.11. all power belong∣eth, unto whom the Father hath committed all judgement, and at whose Phil 2.10, 11. name every knee shall bow, of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and every tongue shall confesse, and who will render Rom. 2.9. tri∣bulation, and anguish upon every soule that doth evill, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, for there is no respect of persons with God. And yet those who swears, where they forbid, them they punish, and thus doe they ex∣alt themselves above all that is called God. The bloody Persecutors in the times of Popery, thought not their other persecutions of the poor Protestants to secure the Papacy against them; but the Sacrament of the Altar they had by a Law, whereupon to examine them, by which they sought to destroy their consci∣ences, or their bodies in the fire; and many of their lives they had in witnesse of the truth against it: upon whose examinations the next question usually was, what say you to the Sacrament of the Altar? and where they suspected a man to be a heretick (as they called then the witnesse of the Lord) and had malice against
him, presently was tendred the Sacrament of the Al∣tar. The Bishops of late who in words denyed the Sa∣crament of the Altar, and cryed out against the Papists, for shedding of the blood of the Martyrs, who testified against it, were not satisfied with what dispersions they had made of the tender conscientous Puritans the witnesses then, against them, in, and out of these Do∣minions; but that their Kingdome might be esta∣blished, and remaine unmoveable, an Oath, et caetera, they had, for every one to take, who should be admit∣ted Priest, to uphold the Government by Arch-Bishops, Bishops, &c. Whereby to catch, and work out of the Priest∣hood, and their beings, and lively hoods, the residue of those non conformable factious men, (as they called them) whom by no other device they could reach, or attach; and at length the sword they drew, and joyned with the Papists in a war against them. These carrying the war against the Bishops, and Pa∣pists, a part of them climbing up into the Chaire of Presbytery to affect, and establish the Authority they intended over the State, and the consciences of their brethren in the three Nations, had a Covenant, and neither in Church (as they called it) nor State (and how universall as to others time had manifested, as it was by some timely foreseen, and understood, and prevented) was any to be intrusted: but such as should subscribe to that, and as many of those as they could (though never so deserving in the wars for the Nations interest, of liberty, and justice, and faith∣full) turned they out of imployment, who in consci∣ence scrupled it, as Hereticks, and Schismaticks, though above any of them they affectually answered the just
and righteous ends thereof: but what use these men of the Presbitery made of it against the libertyes of Eng∣land, and what a snare it proved as to that, is not yet forgotten; and when they saw they could not sub∣mit the Army thereto, who were made the Sword of the Lord; for the ending of the Wars against the Pa∣pists, and the Bishops, they drew the sword against them, and their poor wasted Countrey, and not prevail∣ing in a first War, many of them joyned with the Pa∣pists, and the Bishops, and the then neighbour Nation of Scotland, and the Rebells in Ireland, and the common enemy yet to accomplish. And now an Oath of Abjuration of Popery is found out, and tendred to them to swear, as suspected Pa∣pists, upon the penalty of the sequestration of their estates, if they refuse, who have been known throughout their time, to be constant Witnesses for the Truth, and most faithfull to the Common wealth, and its Army, and have born the brunt and heat of the day in the late Wars, with the perill of their lives in the field, and the losse of their Estates, against the Popish, Prelaticall, and Pres∣byterian party, and have been known all their time to be most contrary to Popery, and now in life above any, witnesse against all Popish and formall Religion, who dare not in conscience to the Command of Christ, swear at all. And these are the men in severall parts, who are summoned by Prelaticall, Malignant, and Presbyterian Justices so called to abjure Popery, or their Names and Habitations to be taken, and returned into the Ex∣chequer, for the Sequestration of their Estates; and these are the men who are taken up in the Country as they are upon their lawfull occasions, against whom there being no accusation in Law, this Oath is
put to them, which because they refuse to take out of conscience to an Oath, not daring to swear at all, be∣cause of the Command of Christ Jesus the great Law-gi∣ver, are imprisoned, where many of them have a long time layn, and doe yet lye, though contrary to Law, not unknown to the Chief in Authority, some of whom have personally pressed it. And not only is this ex∣ercised upon men, but on women also, who till this day since the times of Popery, were never known to be so used, but have been forborn, as that which hath been accounted below the dignity and spirit of a man to exact. And the next word now to any one who is re∣proached with the name of Quaker, who are known out of Conscience, not to dare to Swear at all, is usu∣ally, give him or her the Oath of Abjuration of Popery, though he be their Neighbour, whom they know to be, and their Consciences tells them, is far from any such thing; and there they are sure to catch him, and to have their revenge on him for Witnessing the Truth as it is in Jesus: when otherwise they cannot get him into the compasse or pretence of any Law, and having fast here, there he may lye for the Eter∣nall Truth for which he suffers, seeks not to man for deliverance, and those who should regard care little for the matter, and the cry of their oppressions sel∣dome enters into their ears. Thus in all Ages hath Error sought to support it self against the Truth, and to ensnare the Conscien∣ces of those of her Children with Oaths, when other manner of Persecutions have not reached, that so she might be secure, and never know sorrow: Which Oaths, as they are out of the Doctrine of Christ, so a Curse have they proved, instead of a Defence, and
the beginner and certaine Fore-runner of the Destru∣ction and Finall Overthrow of that Kingdome, as these and former Generations have witnessed, though before in never so promising and flourishing condi∣tion, and seeming in its own eye to want nothing, but Oaths to establish it. And now the Witnesse of God is drawn forth a∣gainst this, and all manner of Swearing, and it is Wit∣nessing in sufferings, at the hands of those on whom was pressed the Oath, &c. And the Covenant, and who in their time Suffered by, and Testified and Fought against those who imposed and sought to e∣stablish both; and also against the Bishops Oath Ex Officio, which required a man to Swear against him∣self; and Whether the imposing of an Oath upon a man to abjure what is supposed to be his conscience wherewithall to worship God, upon the penalty of loosing his Estate, if he refuse, be lesse, let the Wise in heart, judge? And Whether upon the same ground, and by the same Rule, the like Oath may not be imposed as to any other thing, and ex∣acted upon the same penalty? The Witnesse of God hath its time of Raigning as well as Suffering, and will as certainly Raigne, as it doth Suffer; it was ever so in all Ages, these later, above any, have known it so, and so it will be in this, and in the Ages to come: Let those whom it concerns, who have had a time of Suf∣fering and Reigning, and now cause others to Suffer, consider before it be too late, The Judge standeth at the door, and according to the Greatnesse and Majesty of the Truth that is witnessed, and the Sufferings that attend its Testimony, and the condition of those who cause it to Suffer, as having been Witnesses and Suf∣ferers themselves, and the Sword of the Lord upon that which hath caused to Suffer, and have known
his Presence and Mighty Power therein wonderful∣ly, and his strange Overturnings, whereby to cause to Raigne what hath been so testified unto by Suf∣ferings, will be the Judgement, Except they repent. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for your iniquities, saith the Lord. Whilst they are the sufferings of Sion, who is there that considereth or layeth them to heart; but the Rod of the wicked shall not alwayes lye on the back of the Righteous; there's a time when the Testimony of the Truth in sufferings will be finished, and other men will have their Day, who have cryed Aha, and nagged the head, and stamped with the feet, and helped on their suf∣ferings, and caused them to suffer, and looked on their bre∣thren in the day of their distresse, wherein the Lord will mock at their calamity and their sorrowes which shall come upon them, as on a woman in travell, and they shall not escape, whilst the righteous who have mourned in Sion, joy in the Lord, and rejoyce in the God of their salvation, having beauty for ashes, the Oyle of joy for mourning, and the Garments of praise for the spirit of heavinesse; for God is Judge. The next day they were brought before the Bench again. Court. Will ye confesse that you wronged G. Brookes, in calling of him Thief, and be sorry for it, and make him satisfaction? Answ. One of us did not speak one word to him, and therefore I deny to make him satisfaction, or to be sorry for it, and what was spoken was no such thing; therefore we will not lye for our liberty, nor confesse that we are sorry for that which we never spoke. Court. You are fined five pound a piece, and must goe to the House of Correction till payment, and to find
Sureties for your good behaviour; and for refusing to take the Oath, we shall take course to send to the North to seize on your Estates, according to the Pro∣clamation. And so to Prison were they returned, and what fol∣lowes entred as the Record of their proceedings. A Calender of the Prisoners Tryed and Deli∣vered at the Generall Sessions of the Peace publick holden at the Castle of Exon. July 10. 1655. THomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead, for provo∣king words against George Brooks, Clerk, who re∣fused to be Tryed by the Countrey, fined 5 l. a piece, committed to Bridewell, till payment, and finding Sureties for their good behaviour. And thus as the day before they were returned to Prison, instead of being admitted to a Tryall accor∣ding to Law, after the Indictment against them was read, and they had made a sufficient Legall Plea thereunto, and Desired their Accusers might be brought in, and they liberty to speak in their own Defence; as aforesaid, so now Judgement is given against them without a Tryall, or Hearing, or bring∣ing in so much as one Accuser, and yet the Record saith, A Calender of the Prisoners Tryed. Have such things as these before these dayes been heard of in this Nation? Is it not hereby manifest, that nothing but to cause the Innocent to suffer is sought after by them, who to help those to right, that suffer wrong, and to relieve the oppressed, are entrusted
by the Law? And is not the Justice and Relief of the Law hereby made voyd, and of none effect, and tram∣pled under foot by those who are in Commission to execute Justice? What is become of Liberty, of li∣berty for tender consciences? If things must be so, talke no more of Law, let not liberty come forth of your lips. When they were first imprisoned at Plymouth, the Mayor said they were detained for denying the Trini∣ty, then for refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration, then he sent them to the common Goal at Exeter, and charged them with disturbing of the Peace, and Other high misdemeanours against the Act prohibiting the di∣sturbing of Ministers and other Christians in their peace∣able Assemblies, and against the Ordinance for preventing of Duells, and for not finding Sureties for their good beha∣viour. At this Sessions they are Indicted for disgrace∣full provoking words spoken to G. Brookes, calling him Thief, &c. That being read, They are had a way, and being brought again the Oath of Abjuration of Popery was tendred Them, after which they are returned to Prison, and the next day are demanded To confesse that they had wronged G. Brooks, in calling him Thief, and to be sorry for it, and to make him satisfaction. (What turnings are here, and falshoods traversed to destroy the Innocent?) When as One of them spake not a word to him, and the Other no such word, nor to any such pur∣pose, as is contained in the Indictment, as is already manifested, and as in their Answer to the Warrant by which they were committed, and the Attestation of ten honest men at Plymouth, delivered to Generall Disbrow, and in another Declaration of theirs all here∣unto annexed, at large appeareth; and notwithstan∣ding no accuser was ever brought to their faces, and
thy heard in their own Defence, or to speak for themselves, though both at Plymouth, and this Sessions they de∣manded it; and because they denyed to make him satisfaction for what they never did, and to be sorry for words which they never spoke, and so to lye for their liberty. A Legall Tryall is denyed them, and without a Tryall, or Hearing, Judgement given a∣gainst Them, wherein they are Fined 5 l. a piece, and committed to Bridewell till payment, and finding Sureties for their good behaviour, after their having been kept Prisoners for above seven weeks before, and in that manner as aforesaid, by those who had broke the Law upon them in taking them from their peaceable Meeting waiting on the Lord, when as they had transgressed no Law. And to make sure work have they cast them into a place which is no Prison in Law, and therefore a re∣move cannot be had out of it by a Habeas Corpus to the Upper Bench, nor falls it under the considerati∣on of the Judges in their Circuits. Doth our Law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he doth? And indeed well might they avoyd it, and be asha∣med of their Cause and Proof, for besides a Cloud of Witnesses which could have been brought, and di∣vers that were then present ready to give Testimo∣ny to the contrary, as hath been mentioned, and of the Innocency and Harmlesnesse of that Meeting, and what was said therein, upon which is grounded as is pretended the cause of all their sufferings. Peter Pepham one of the Witnesses which were ready to Swear against them, was heard to say the day before his going to Exeter to this effect, I am go∣ing to Swear against the Quaker, and if Swearing will doe it, I will make them to suffer soundly: He being a known
Cavaliere, and sometime a Servant to Duke Hamilton. And besides G. Brookes and his two Witnesses, there is not one to be found of these many who made up the Meeting, of whom divers came out of novelty to Testifie what they affirm; but the contrary for what they spake was generally well approved of. And to mention only one particular, One who had been a Captain in the Kings Army, very well known in Plymouth, did freely declare to a friend, That ha∣ving a scorn and contempt of the men and their way, his end in coming to hear them, was to see what he could catch from them, to render them odious; but having heard them, he confessed that he thought them to be harmlesse, innocent, honest men, and he would not lift up a finger against them, if he might gain thereby ten thousand pounds. And he freely declared to both the Witnsses with whom he was very well acquainted, That if they Swore any evill against them, they would be perjured men. Also that he ne∣ver was so much convinced of the evill of his wayes, and the power of God, by any Minister that he had heard for many years before. And for G. Brookes himself, he is one whole conver∣sation stinks in the Nostrills of those who savour of Civility and honesty, who know him and his Con∣versation. There needs to this no further instance then of his beastly & wicked behaviour in the Nightingale Frig∣got, of which he was then Priest, which was such, that even some of the Seamen of that Ship, justified one who reproved him to his face, of the Vanity & Mad∣nesse, of his Conversation, about three weeks before the Meeting aforesaid, and told the said George Brooks, that They should not be so wicked in their wayes, were it not for his example.
And the Steward of the Ship aforesaid, in the pre∣sence of two or three Witnesses affirmed, That he was had and wicked enough before the said George Brooks came into the ship, but since, he was ten times worse; and that he, and some other in the ship, could not endure to hear him Preaching or bauling (as he called it) yea a friend of the said Priests, who manifesting some dislike in the Garden at the Meeting aforesaid, that his friend G. Brooks should be questioned by what Spirit he spake, at length confessed, That his life was not confor∣mable to his Doctrine. And so abominable was his filthinesse, that in the same Frigot was he made a publick Example for his Drunkennesse, having a Quarter Canne hanged about his Neck, and is since for that and his other wicked∣nesse set on shore, or turned out or the said Ship, as appeareth by the Certificates of the Captain of that Friggot, and two other Captaines of Friggots here∣unto annexed. And yet in the Cause and behalf of this Son of Be∣lial, so full of lyes and falshoods in every particular, are the Innocent servants of Christ Oppressed and Afflicted, as if they were not fit to live, and after almost two months imprisonment lying on the ground, be∣cause they refused to confesse and be sorry for calling him Thief, which they never did, nor was there any one that made proof thereof to their faces, after their long and hard bonds, as aforesaid; for provoking words to him the said G. Brookes (as it is falsly alledged) without a Tryall, are they fined 5 l. a piece, and commit∣ted to the House of Correction, till payment, and finding Sureties for their good behaviour. And not only so, but for refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration out of consci∣ence to the Command of Christ Jesus (none appearing
to testifie to their faces that they suspected them to be Papists, or Popishly affected) as an addition to the former, as if what hath been already expressed had not been enough suffering, they are told by the Bench that therefore to the North would they send to have their estates sequestred, according to the Proclamation; and so in Prison they are judged to lye, till they pay five pound a piece, where they owe nothing, and their Estates to be sequestred, out of which they can only have money where withall to discharge it; and whe∣ther this intended any other then a perpetuall impri∣sonment, let the reasonable judge. And that the abominablenesse of these illegall and oppressive proceedings may seem to have som cover in the Record of the Judgement given against them, with∣out a hearing as aforesaid; 'tis inserted, who refused to be tryed by the Country, when as they pleaded to the In∣dictment not guilty; and although his Answer was e∣nough in Law, yet being demanded further, by whom they would be tryed? they answered again and again, By you, the Bench, whom the Lord God of power hath set in Authority to judge righteously between man and man, and to put a difference between the precious and the vile, and to set the oppressed free, from whom we doe expect Justice, and Equity, and desire that our Accusers may be brought in, that we may have liberty to speak for our selves, and make our defence against the fals accusations laid to our charge. And upon what issue they pleased might the Court have put them; for though they being asked by whom they would be tryed, gave no other Answer then hath been expressed: And for the Reasons aforesaid, could they be in Law, or equity, expected any otherwise to doe; yet plead they did, and to Tryall they submit∣ted, by the bench, whom they owned to be set in Autho∣rity
by the Lord God of power to Judge righteously between man and man, &c. And desired that their accusers might be brought in, and their liberty to speak in their own de∣fence, and had Witnesses in their own behalf ready, and from them expected an issue, according to equity, and Justice, and refused not to be tryed by the Country, but submitted to be tryed by those whom God had set in Authority to Judge righteously, and such Judgement is the Lords, for God is Judge, and no other Judgement can the Children of light put themselves upon, but his upon which as it rules man they put themselves, but not on the wills and lusts of men, as added or equall unto God, or joyned with him; for man not guided by the ligh of Jesus Christ, is blind, and dark, and erres in Judgement, and is as the Beast that perisheth, though even the wills and lusts of men in imposing sufferings upon them in their bodies, they doe not resist, as all parts of the Nation sadly testifie, and particulary the Town of Plymouth, and City of Exeter, and County of Devon, the black Habitations of cruelty, and persecuting of the Just. Nor is this the end, but rather the beginning of their sufferings, for the 16 of the said fifth Month cal∣led July, being removed from the common Goal in the Castle of Exeter, to Bridewell in Thomas Parish near Exeter, over and above the Order of Sessions, a Guard of Souldiers under the Command of Col. Coppleston High Sheriff of the County, who was formerly a Commander for the late King in the Wars against the Parliament, was placed upon them, with strict War∣rant in writing, signed by one Joyce a Captain, to de∣tain all such Prisoners who came to visit them, whom in the Warrant he in scorn calls Quakers (giving the Prisoners aforesaid no other Name therein) especially
such as they should suspect to be such; who having shut them up in a close dark room, where they lay on the ground many dayes, kept them close Prisoners, and with much violence intreated, and detained Prisoners, those who came to visit them, whether of the Town, or Country, and to relieve them with necessaries, though they were strangers in that place, and above two hun∣dred miles from their outward Habitations; yea such as looked in but at a hole where they lay, did they so use. And whereas there was a friend in the Town who came to see them, him they imprisoned, though he knew not of any Order for their close restraint; and notwithstanding that he was then a Constable of the Parish, and a man known alwayes to be faithfull and active for the Common-wealth, and its Army, and of a godly and sober conversation; whom also they sometime afterwards imprisoned again, for coming in to them, though he was there upon the perswasi∣on of the Officer, who when he asked for them, being unwilling to goe in, told him he might see them freely without danger, and went in with him, and stood between the Souldiers and him; but being there, private notice presently was sent to an Atten∣dant of the Sheriffs, who Ordered his detainment, and being kept in Prison that night, the next morn∣ing he prevailed with the Souldiers to bring him be∣fore the Sheriff, who at first Ordered him to Prison again, but having heard him, released him with Threatnings, what he would doe unto him, if he came there once more. And a woman of Totnes in the same County, they kept two dayes and two nights on the Guard, for co∣ming to see them.
And though upon the cry of these their sore oppressi∣ons, several friends, to the truth from divers parts of the Nation came to see them, and to search whether, af∣ter all the blood that hath been shed, such sufferings could possibly dare to be exercised, amongst whom was some, who had been Members of the Army, and in places not of the least trust, and eminency in the Nation, men of activity, and service, and of unspotted in∣tegrity, and of considerable estates, as to the outward in the world, yet have they received the same uncivill, and barbarous usage, some of them have been threat∣ned to be taken into Prison; for being in the out∣ward court, and speaking to them, others detained on the Guard, and to their Inns hath the Mayor of the Town sent his Officers to know their Names, as if they were some dangerous persons, and when they have asked, to see his Warrant, when his Officers have required them to come before him, a company of Butchers was got to bring them thither by force, in case they had refused, though when they came before him, he had nothing to say unto them, wherefore they were thus dealt with; and some have been had up to the Castle, and kept in custody there, and sear∣ched, and others detained in their Inns, as they have lodged there passing into the country, and searched, and their papers taken from them, though onely of private concernment; and when any friends have ob∣tained liberty to see them, the Souldiers stand by to hear what they say. And lately seized them on all the papers of those two Prisoners, and took them a∣way. And to this day are they continued Prisoners, and the Guard of Souldiers upon them, who Imprison friends as aforesaid, according to their pleasure,
though divers of them confesse that what they doe is a∣gainst their conscience, and that they know no law for what they doe, and that it is contrary to the liberty they have fought for, but they must obey the orders of their superiour Officers, or they shall be turned out of their places, and livelyhood: and even, when those cruelties have been exercised upon them, the Cavaliers in the same Pri∣son, in custody upon the late Insurrections, have had no Guard upon them, nor their friends hindered from visiting them, and bringing them necessaries, and out of the Prison have they leave to walk to friends hou∣ses without any one to attend them, onely those two innocent servants of the Lord, who have been constant faithfull friends to the Common wealth, are thus guar∣ded, kept close Prisoners, and dealt withall as is afore∣said, beyond the example of the highest offenders, whether of Thieves, Robbers, or Murderers, in that County, of which particulars could be instanced were it not too large for this short Relation. Nor during the time of their long Imprisonment (to wit) for near seven Months under this close re∣straint, and above seven weeks before at Plymouth, and the Castle of Exon, have their persecutors administred unto them, or caused any to take care that they had those accomodations that were necessary for men: but as if nothing else were intended, but the starving of them, and causing them to wear, and wast, and to dye in a miserable languishment, far from friends, and re∣liefe in the heat of summer, and sharp cold of winter, such hath been the cruell dealing with them, as hath been rehearsed without naturall affection, or common humanity, and contrary to all Law, and justice, and li∣berty, and the righteous ends for which the late blood hath been shed, and the many and solemn Ingagements made be∣fore,
and to God, and this Nation. And had not some broke through their violence, and other difficulties, and resolvedly watched all opportunities to relieve them, nothing had been expected as to men, but that they had long since perished with famine, and ne∣cessity. If a man hath broken the Law it is something to him that the Law is to be known and the punishment that it inflicteth for the breach thereof, by which he understanding the extent of the Law, and having sa∣tisfied what it requires, may come to the end of his trouble. Or if a man suffer being innocent upon a pretence of a Law which he hath not offended, it is something to know what that Law is, and what it re∣quires of those who offend it: But neither to have offended the Law of God, or the Nation; but to have both broken on him even by those who are in Commission, as Ministers of the Law, for the protecting of the innocent, and punishing of the guilty, who thereby become themselves transgressours of the law, and lya∣ble to the penalties thereof; and yet neverthelesse be∣ing innocent to be by such punished as guilty beyond the direction of any law and contrary thereunto in long and cruell Imprisonments; and when brought before the Bench to be denyed hearing and tryall accor∣ding to law, and yet judgement to be given, wherein are exactions of such fines of other performances, for such causes expressed, as are utterly untrue, and the Imprisonment to continue till there be a satisfying thereof; and such an Imprisonment as from it Ap∣peals cannot be had to the Higher Courts for Justice, as House of Correction are, which are no Prisons in law, and therefore without the Cognizance of the Judges in the Circuits, or the Ʋpper Bench by Habeas Corpus, and
which to satisfie a man cannot without an acknow∣ledgement of guilt, and giving away the righteousness of his cause, which is to be prized above all things, will be accounted very hard, and grievous, even by e∣very man, who seriously makes it his own condition, as indeed it is every mans; for what is done to the in∣jury of one mans liberty, is done unto all: But to have hereunto added guards of Souldiers, who have fought for liberty with whom, and in the same cause of liberty and justice a man hath ingaged his life, and what is dear to him, in the time of peace, after that cause hath prevailed, by such as have drawn the sword, and been in command against it,A close Impri∣sonment is di∣rectly contrary to the 23: H: 8. Cap: 2. which provideth that Prisons shall be in the most emi∣nent and popu∣lous Townes where is most resort of people, that the Priso∣ner may be the oftner visited, and relieved. And though the Statute of Westminster 2. provides for a safe Imprison∣ment, yet for a close Impri∣sonment there is neither that nor any other Law: and a∣bove all things doth the Law value the liberty of a man. and by Souldiers who former∣ly were the reliefe of the oppressed, to be oppressed, and kept close Prisoners from friends and accomodations (contrary to the Law; for in no case whatsoever doth it require a close Imprisonment, but provides a∣gainst it) in a strange place some hundreds of miles from his outward being for many Months together, in heat, and cold, of which he can understand no end, as he can know no reason for their so doing, and du∣ring all this time, having not so much as an accuser brought to his face, nor he heard in his own defence, against the manifold false accusations, and shiftings from one lye to another, as the pretence of his suffe∣rings, and such friends as come to visit him, whether from far, or near at hand, citizen, or stranger, violent∣ly to be intreated, and detained in Prison, yea for but looking in at a hole where he lyes: and if any obtain leave to see him, not to be permitted to speak with him without a Souldier by to hear what is said, and to have his Friends searched, and his, and their Papers, and Letters of private concernment only taken away, as if there were some dangerous treason by him de∣signing,
though he stands onely a Prisoner of inno∣cency, and never had any such thing layed to his charge, when as at the same time, and at the same Prison those in custody, who have been Cavaliers, and clapt up, as having had to doe in the generall Insur∣rection, have had no Guard upon them, but liberty of Friends, and accomodations, and of going forth to their Friends houses, without so much as a Keeper; and during this long and close Imprisonment to have none appointed by those who cause him so to be kept to take care of him, and to administer the reliefe that is fitting to a man, nor to have any reliefe to be administred to him, by such, or in such a way, would be esteemed highly oppressive, and unsupportable, e∣ven by the chiefest of their Persecutors, were it, or did he make it his own condition, and the soule of every English man, would it greatly afflict who retaines the sence of another mans condition, as of his own, and is not blinded with prejudice, and hurried with rage, and madnesse by the Prince of the Aire, who rules mightily in the children of Disobedience, beyond bowells and naturall affection. And this is the case, and this is the condition of these two innocent servants of the Lord, who having all their dayes been seeking after the Lord, and walking in that which is called good conscience, and Godlinesse, and having at length through the riches of that free love of God in Jesus Christ, come to find what they had so dili∣gently sought for, even Eternall life, which is in the Son, and to witnesse it in their measures, and in the light of Jesus Christ, by whom the world was made to comprehend and see where all professions and people are, who know not nor believe in the light, (to wit) Jesus Christ the light of the world, who lighteth every one that cometh
into the world, nor doe winesse the life of Jesus made manifest in them, as by the light they have been brought to see it in their owne particulars; and knowing the terrours of the Lord, out of bowels of love to the precious soules of people, which are eternall, and at the command of the Lord have left their Country, and Relations as to the outward in the North, and travel∣led for their sakes to shew unto them what they had found, and tasted, and seen, and handled of the word of life, that so their soules might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; and being come thither, did no other thing, then to meet in the fear of the Lord, with friends to wait upon him, and to declare the truth of the expe∣rience of what they had found of the free grace of God, which brings salvation, manifested in them, provoking them un∣to love, and to good works according to the Scriptures of the Prophets, and Apostles, and exhorting to holinesse, and the things that are eternall, as the day approacheth from the measure of the life of God, which they had received, as the Spirit gave them utterance; out of which meetings they were taken contrary to the practice of the Church of Christ, and the example of the Saints in the Scriptures, and the instrument of Government; and dealt withall as hath been mentioned: And which indeed is hard∣ly to be believed; but hath been said, is true, for no other thing, but as aforesaid, have they done, or that is not according to the righteous Law of the holy God, which shall be answered with that in every mans conscience. And to make appear truly to the contrary, are all men here openly charged, who can, even their greatest adversaries, because of whose cruelty, and oppression, and to manifest what it is, this Relation is underta∣ken. Neverthelesse through the power of the Lord, in whom is everlasting strength, whom they witnesse,
and for whom they suffer, they glory in tribulation, and stands over the heads of their greatest enemies, who puffe at them, knowing, that he who shall come, will come, and will not tarry, when their Testimony in sufferings is fi∣nished, for the Seeds sake, and the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus, for whom they suffer in bonds, and are ready even unto the death, from the hands of those, who pro∣fesse him as dying at Jerusalem, and yet crucifie him in his truth, & members, and have the generation of their forefathers from the beginning: And then neither Guards nor Gates shall be able to keep them; For our God is King over the whole Earth, and his Kingdome is begun to be set up, and to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the Nation abhorreth, to a servant of Rulers Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship, because of the Lord who is faithfull, and the holy one of Israel which hath chosen him, saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his holy one, who commandeth deliverance for Jacob▪ and Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing mothers, they shall bow down to thee with their faces towards the earth and lick up the dust of feet, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord, for they shall not be a∣shamed that wait for me. The sons also of those that afflict thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all those that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee, the City of the Lord, the Syon of the ho∣ly one of Israel. Whereas thou hast been forsaken, and ha∣ted, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternall excelency, a joy of many generations. Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breasts of Kings, and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Sa∣viour, and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob; For thus saith the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be ta∣ken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I
will contend with them that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children, and I will feed them that oppresse thee with their own flesh, and they shall be drun∣ken, with their own blood, as with sweet wine, and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour, and Redeemer the mighty one of Jacob. And the Nation, and the Kingdome, that will not serve thee shall perish, yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted. Therefore hear now this thou afflicted and drunken but not with wine, Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of his people, behold I have taken out of thy hand, the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my sury, thou shalt no more drink it againe; But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee, which have said to thy soule, bow down that we may goe over, and thou hast layed thy body as the ground, and as the street to them that went over. A Testimoniall of severall honest men of Ply∣mouth, concerning the meeting aforesaid, and the passages thereat, upon which is laid the pretended ground, and cause of the sufferings of Miles Halhead, and Thomas Salthouse, at which they were present. FOrasmuch as we are concerned in the sufferings of our dear Friends Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Hal∣head, who have been kept close Prisoners in and near the City of Exeter almost six Months contrary to e∣quity, and justice, they having not broken the least clause of any Law, we think it necessary to give a briefe Relation of the state of their Sufferings. After some trouble, and difficulty, which the said
Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Halhead indured in coming to Plymouth, May 16. 1655. they came safe to Ply∣mouth, where then had severall Meetings with most of us, and the first day of the week following, we had a Meeting which was appointed by us at John Harris his house, a little out of the Town, where both our Friends spake in the forenoon, and afternoon, and were approved of by those that heard them, there being no lesse then thirty persons of the company in the afternoon, that came out of novelty to hear them, amongst whom was one George Brooks a Priest belong∣ing to the Nightingale Friggot, who is since turned out of the said Friggot, for his deboyst conversation, who (af∣ter Miles Halhead and Thomas Salthouse had left speak∣ing) took upon him to speak to the people, highly ap∣proving of what our Friends had spoken and exhorted the people to perseverance, telling them they must expect to suffer persecution; he began with this text (as they call it) Take heed that ye receive not the grace of God in vaine, but he being comprehended and seen in the Light, af∣ter he had spoken, & ended without any interruption Thomas Salthouse entred into some discourse with him, telling him, that he had spoken many good words, and faire speeches; but asked him, whether he lived the life of what he spoke; and one standing by told him that he had spo∣ken of a Trinity, and there was no such Scripture; but he obstinately persisted, affirming that it was the Scripture phrase: And after their dispute was en∣ded, Thomas spake againe to the people some few words, in which he used this Scripture, Let him that stole, steal no more; and this also, He that entreth not by the door, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief and a Robber: but the other of our Friends namely Miles Halhead spake not one word to the Priest, either
about the Trinity, or any thing else, who yet lyes in Prison under colour of disgracefull provoking words he should speak to the same Priest George Brookes at the same meeting. Now we testifie to all to whom these may come, that we have here truly declared, and manifested the very utmost that was spoken, or acted by our said Friends, while they were in Plymouth that might oc∣casion to say, that either they denyed the Trinity, that they gave provoking language to G. Brooks, or any other, or that they disturbed any Ministers or Christians in their Assemblies: but we rather judged our selves distur∣bed in our Meeting by such a deboyst person, as the Priest was known to some of us to be. The third day of the week following, May 21. we had another Meeting appointed by us at Robert Ca∣ryes house in the Town, where the Constables came, and by a Warrant from the Mayor of the Town took our said friends Miles Halhead, and Thomas Salthouse, and a friend of Bristoll, and carryed them to the May∣ors house, who after a little talk with them, sent them to the Prison at the Guildhall, where they were kept till the next day, and then were brought forth before the Mayor, Magistrates, and Counsell, and severally examined, and all that were their friends were drawn out from the rest of the multitude, and by the Consta∣bles turned out of the Hall, & not one suffered to be present, at their examination; after they had exami∣ned them about three houres, the Friend who spake not to the people was set free, with charge to be gone home, and the other two were again committed to Prison, where they kept them near a week, and sent them to Exeter Goal, where they remained untill the Sessions and were afterwards removed to Bridewell in
Thomas parish, without the City, where they now re∣maine close Prisoners. Now whether their Actions above truly related, have deserved such hard measure, let all who have understanding judge, to whom we shall leave it:Loe hear what a filthy worker of iniquity this Priest is, for de∣nying of whose spirit before the people these long and cruell suffe∣rings are inflict∣ed on the inno∣cent? What a defiler of the flesh is this in whose behalfe these men make war against the Lamb? Is not this Priest who not onely pro∣phecies of, but fills himselfe with wine and strong drink, a fit Prophet for these people? What think you? had they a Spirit of discer¦ning who com∣prehended this Priest, and his root and principle and denying his spirit before the people, though he spake so high in the praise of what they had said? Would not these men, plead Barabas his part against Jesus, were he on the earth? But as for our parts, we are fully satisfied that these their sufferings have turned, and yet more abundantly shall turne to the furtherance of the Gospel, it being known to most of the Inhabitants of Plymouth that this here related is the utmost for which they are imprisoned, & how many are ashamed of the injustice of it, we shall not now further mention; but subscribe our names. Nicholas Cole. Richard Smith. Ralph Fogg. John Harris. Anthony Todde. Edward Dyer. Arthur Cotton. Robert Cary. John Martindale. Richard Lepincote. Plymouth, 12. of the 9 Month, or Nov. 1655. The Testimonies of the Captaines of the Nightingale Friggot, and of the Nantwich, and of the Constant Warwick, concerning the deboyst, filthy, and drun∣ken conversation of George Brooks Priest, or Clerk, with the reasons wherefore he was put on shore, or tur∣ned out of the said Friggot. I Having been formerly desired to relate upon what account that Mr. George Brooks Chaplin of the Friggot, and under my com∣mand was put on shore; because he was a busiy body, and distur∣bed the whole Ships company. Secondly, being on shore, it was his common practice to abuse the creature in such sort, that he was drun∣ken, voyd of good reason, that he would abuse any one that came in his company by ill language, besides the abuse of himselfe and the good creature, daily complaints coming unto me both aboard, and on shore. Therefore knowing him to be a deboyst fellow, and not fit for that im∣ployment, therefore I put him on shore, and I dare own it, who shall ever call me to question, witnesse my hand. Robert Vessay. MR. Brookes being formerly with me in the Nightingale I found him to be very idle, and continually drunk, which once made me to put a quarter Can about his necke, whereunto I su∣scribe. John Jeffery, Captain of the Nantwich.
THe person above mentioned I have seen drunk at shore, in testi∣mony whereof I have set my hand. Richard Potter, Captaine of the Constant Warwick Frigot. A true Copy of the Warrant by which they were sent to the common Goal in Exeter, from the Prison at Plymouth. Devon. JOhn Page, Merchant, Maior of the Burrough of Ply∣mouth in the County aforesaid, and one of his Highnes∣ses Justices of the Peace within the said Burrough. To the Keeper of his Highnesses Goal at Exon Castle, or to his law∣full Deputy in that behalfe, greeting. I send you herewithall by the bearer hereof, the bodies of Thomas Salthouse late of Drugglibeck in the County of Lancaster husbandman, & Miles Halhead late of Kendal in the County of West∣morland, lately apprehended here, as disturbers of the pub∣lick peace, and for divers other high misdemeanours against a late Proclamation prohibiting the disturbing of Ministers, and other Christians in their assemblies, and meetings, and against an Ordinance of his said Highnes the Lord Protector and his Counsel lately made against Duells, Challenges, and all provocations thereunto, who have refused to give suffici∣ent security for their personall appearance at the next gene∣ral Sessions of the Peace to be held for the County of Devon, and in the mean time to be of good behaviour against his Highnesse the Lord Protector, and all his liege people. These are therefore in his said Highness his name to will, and com∣mand you that when the bodies of the said Thomas Salt∣house and Miles Halhead, shall be unto you brought, you them safely detain, and keep them untill by due course of law they shall be thence delivered, hereof fail not at your pe∣rill. Given under my hand and seal of Plymouth afore∣said, the 28 day of May, in the year of our Lord God 1655. John Page, Mayor.
The Answer of Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Halhead, to the above written Warrant. A True Copy of a Miltimus, by which we Thomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead are committed to the Goal at Exon. by John Page Mayor of Plymouth, with Answers in defence of the truth, to the false ac∣cusations cast upon us, to make truth odious; but for Sions sake we cannot hold our peace, and suffer lyes to goe for truth. First Accusation. Disturbers of the publick Peace. ANswer. The Accusation is false, for we have not disturbed the publick peace, nor have we fellow∣ship with any such as break the peace, but have free∣ly declared the way that leads to peace, and doe de∣sire that Grace and Peace may be multiplyed publickly to the ends of the earth, and that all the occasion of strife and envy may be taken away, and that the feet of them that are running on in the broad way that leads to destruction, may be turned into the way of peace. The second Accusation. For divers other high mis∣demeanors against the late Proclamation, by his Highnesse the Lord Protector, prohibiting the distur∣bing of Ministers, and other Christians in their Assemblies and Meetings. ANswer. The breach of this Proclamation we charge upon thee, who when we were assembled, and
met together in a friends house to wait upon the Lord, as hath been the practice of all Christians in former Ages, and which the Law of this Nation doth allow. Thou sents the Constables with a Warrant from thee, and fetchest us out of the house from a∣mong our friends, and broughts us two before thee, and thou saidst thou hadst not time then to examine us, but sents us to Prison. Here let all people that love the light, whose eyes are open, judge, whether we or our accusers have broken and transgressed this Proclamation, which we, and our friends claim our priviledge in, we being free born men, and friends to the Common-wealth, and have disturbed none in their Assemblies, nor were we at any publick meeting that thou canst charge upon us, but amongst our own friends, as many can witnesse for us if they may be heard. And here we charge upon thee that which thou cal∣lest misdemeanours, for we are clear in the thing, and what is charged upon us here, is false, as many can witnesse that our demeanour hath not been disorderly, nor contrary to the Lawes of God, nor the Lawes of this Nation. And although the word diverse be men∣tioned, yet none in truth can be laid to our charge, nor proved against us. The third Accusation. Against an Ordinance of his Highnesse the Lord Protector, and his Counsell, lately made against Duells, Challenges, and all provocations thereunto. ANswer. This Accusation against us, is falsly charged upon us; the Act we own, and the Ma∣gistrates sword of Justice we own, which is for the punish∣ment of evill doers, and the incouragement of them that doe well. Our weapons are not carnall, but sprituall, nor
have we challenged any man, nor done violence to any, nor provoked any, nor used any other language then Scripture holdeth forth, as Thee and Thou to a particu∣lar person, whether he be King, Priest, or Prophet, Judge, or Justice; and if any be offended by this, or provo∣ked by it, let him speak, or write the unlawfullnesse of it; for against fightings, quarrellings, challenging, and provoking one another to wrath by corrupt communi∣cations, doe we declare freely, knowing the ground of it; for where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evill worke. The fourth Accusation. Whereas Thou sayest, We have refused to give Sureties for our personall appea∣rance at the time and place mentioned. ANswer. Let the light of Christ in thy own con∣science judge Thee, and witnesse against Thee, for us, and for our friends that can bear us witnesse that sufficient Security was proffered to Thee for our Appearance; but to make thy selfe manifest, and thy Counsellors, how hast thou written these lyes in the name of the Lord Protector, and strengthned thy self to accuse the Innocent, by using his name; but to the Children of light is thy deceit discovered and laid open. The fifth Accusation. And whereas thou sayest, In the mean time to be of the good behaviour. ANswer. We doe affirm before Thee, and all the word, that we are of the good behaviour, and seek to be at Peace with all men; and we know that in the truth you cannot charge us with any evill behavi∣our, or that we walked disorderly amongst you, where∣fore
be witnesse against thy self, for out of thine own mouth Thou shalt be judged, for that thou hast char∣ged upon us, we are not guilty of, as many can wit∣nesse for us. And under these lyes, and false Accusations doe we lye in Prison at Exon in Devon. whose names are Thomas Salthouse. Miles Halhead. Whom the world scornfully calls Quakers. The Copy of a Warrant aforesaid, with the Answer above written to it was given in to the hands of General Disbrow, at Plymouth, with this following Testimony to the truth thereof. WE whose names are hereunto subscribed doe testifie, That the severall particulars in this Answer made by our friends, are true (to wit) That they did not at all disturb the publick peace. Nor were they at any other Meeting (but that which was appointed by us) to disturb any Ministers, or other Christians, in their Assemblies and Meetings; Nor are they guilty of any Challenges, Duells, and Provocations there∣unto in the least measure, whilst they were amongst us. And as for their refusall to give security, two of us, whose names are Robert Cary, and Arthur Cotton, had given security to the Mayor, by entring into Recognisance for their appearance at the next Sessions, the day before their sending to prison, but that the Town Clerk made it void the next day, pretending it could not be according to Law. Ralph Fogg. Arthur Cotton. Robert Cary. Richard Smith. Anthony Todde. John Harris, the younger. Thomas Faulkner. Nicholas Cole. John Martindale. Richard Lepincote. John Harris, the Elder.
The Copy of a Letter from the Mayor of Plymouth, to Generall Disbrow, concerning Miles and Thomas. Plymouth, 1 June, 1655. Right Honourable; CAptain Hatsell hath communicated to me what you rote him in reference to those two men Thomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead, of whom and of their im∣prisonment your Honour had heard something from some persons of this place, and received a copy of a Letter which they sent me. By the inclosed copies of their Examinations your Honour will see some part of the cause of their con∣finement, which was on their refusall to give Bayle for their appearance the next Generall Sessions to be held for the County of Devon, they being as I conceive, offendors within the late Ordinance of his Highnesse the Lord Prote∣ctor and Counsell, made against Duells, Challenges, and all provocations thereunto, and also his Highnesse his late Pro∣clamation against Quakers, and they still refusing to give Bayle for their appearance as aforesaid, went from hence to the Goal at Exon. on Tuesday last. Indeed Sir, their carriage here was not becoming men, much lesse Christi∣ans, and besides their contempt of Authority, and all the while they were in Prison, they never sought God by pray∣er at any time, nor desired a blessing on any Creature they received, or gave thanks for them; and these very men were about two months past, taken up by Collonel Copple∣ston High Sheriff of our County, and after 14 dayes re∣straint were sent away by him for Taunton, from Tithing to Tithing, as by their own Examination, and they shew no
occasion they have to come to these parts. They are by profession Quakers, but Husbandmen by their calling; one of them is a Lancashire man, the other of Westmorland, and they left their Families, Relations, and Callings about three Months since, as they say, and doe net work, nor em∣ploy themselves in their Callings, to procure themselves a livelihood: but wander up and down in all parts, to vent their wicked Opinions, & discover their irregular practises in the breach of Peace, & disturbance of good People. Indeed Sir they hold many sad Opinions, destructive to the true Re∣ligion, and Power of godlinesse. I have hereby according to my Duty given your Honour an account of what passed here in reference to these men; I could say much more in refe∣rence to their Examination, and discourse with them, but I fear I have already trespassed upon your Honours patience, in the perusal of these lines, and humbly desiring your excuse for giving you this trouble, and doe most thankefully ac∣knowledge your Honours continued favours to this place, and for which we stand very much obliged, desiring your Honour still te retain such an Opinion of us, as those that desire to doe nothing unbecoming Christians, and persons that desire the welfare and peace of this Common-wealth, and Government, and shall ever labour to appear Your Honours very humble Servant. JOHN PAGE, Mayor, for my Self, and Brethren. THis is the second time this Mayor hath affirmed this abomi∣nable lye under his Hand and Seal, notwithstanding that two sufficient men of the Town of Plymouth had entred into a Recog∣nizance before him for their Appearance, which the next morning he denyed to give under his hand as he had promised, and voided the Recognizance, the Town Clerk saying it would not stand in Law, and sent them to Prison. And here as he twice chargeth
them for refusing to doe that which they had done before him, and which he had refused to deliver them under his hand accord∣ing to his promise, and made voyd as the cause of their imprison∣ment, so he committed them to Prison for refusing to doe that which the Town Clerk said would not stand in Law, and so accor∣ding to what he affirmed, was contrary thereunto. Canst thou who doest such things as these blush? Is it not hereby apparent that cause is sought for, and made where there is none to destroy the innocent? What the measure wants of filling, with false Accusations, that the Indictments meaning, and this Mayors conceiving shall make up to cause the righteous to suffer. Where is that late Proclamation intituled against Quakers? There is one against disturbing of Christians in their peaceable Assemblies, and there is the 37 Article of the Government, which saith, That all that professe faith in God by Jesus Christ, shall not be restrained from, but be protected in the profession of the faith, and exercise of their Religion, &c. Both which thou hast broken, in sending thy Officers, and taking them from their peaceable meet∣ings of Christians waiting on the Lord, by thy Warrants. The Law forbids the reproaching of any, and all evill speak∣ing, as evill doing, yet this Mayor who calls himself a Minister of the Law, reproacheth the Servants of the most high God, who fear before his presence, and tremble at his word, as the holy men of God have done from the beginning on Record in the Scrip∣tures, with the name of Quakers, and intitles the Generation of those who seek the face of the Lord, with the name of Quakers (which he so reproacheth) by profession. What difference is there between a calling and profession? Is coming to Plymouth in obedience to the movings of the Lord, to visite friends, and to speak to them the words of eternall life, to Preach the everlasting Gospel, and to exhort them to love, and good works, according to the Scriptures of truth, no occasion? shewed they not this as the occasion of their coming thither? and is it not a lawfull one? And have they not there many seals of their Ministry, who by it are turned from darknesse to light, and from the Kingdome of Satan unto God? How can they employ themselves in their callings of husban∣dry,
when kept in Prison? how can they return to their Fami∣lies, Relations, and Callings, when thus detained, as they were at first hindred in their Journey on their lawfull occasions, and are still by Thee? Doest thou complain of them for not doing that which by imprisoning of them thou hast made impossible? Did they want a livelihood before they were laid hands on, or do they now, though it's neer nine months since the time of their com∣mitment by thee? Did they ask any thing of thee, or of any one else? wast thou or Plymouth burdened, or made chargeable by? or had not the Town the advantage of their expence for themselves and Horses, and the friend that was with them? how knowest Thou that they want a livelihood? or hast Thou or thy Genera∣tion administred to them, or to their Families, and Relations du∣ring near nine months of restraint, and six of them in a close im∣prisonment without a cause, in a strange place 200 miles from their outward Habitations, whereby they are kept from imploy∣ing themselves to procure a livelihood for themselves, Families, and Relations? Is riding the strait Road from Bristoll to Plymouth, lying at the best Inns, and paying for what they have for themselves and Hor∣ses, a wandring? Thinkest thou what the Law calls wandring, is not known, and how much thou hast broken the Law upon them, and what penalties thou art under for so doing, and art thou sure thou shalt never be called to an account, deceive not thy self? May not a man travell where he will in times of peace, paying for what he hath, and behaving himself peaceable? what if they had come onely to see the Town of Plymouth? Make it thy own case, wouldst thou not judge it hard measure for them to doe to thee, as thou hast done to them? Art thou not ashamed of lying, to say they wandred in all parts, when they travelled the direct Road? Or callest thou the going about to Preach the Gospel, a wandring? Did not the A∣postles and holy men of God doe so, and yet were they not as hardly thought of, and reviled by those of thy Generation then, as these are now by thee, and those of the same Generation, and as wickedly persecuted, by reason of whose cruelty they wandred in Desert, in Mountaines, in Dens and Caves of the earth, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, of whom the world was not
worthy, as these doe by thine, suffer imprisonment and as is afore mentioned. What are their wicked and sad opinions, destructive to the true Religion and power of godlinesse, that (as thou sayest indeed Sir) they hold and have vented in all parts? What are their irregular practises in the breach of peace and disturbance of good people, that they have discovered? they are yet to name that are indeed so. But thou hast in this Letter, and thy Warrant, and thy whole carriage towards these innocent servants of the Lord vented, and manifested thy sad opinions, conceivings, and actings, and disco∣vered thy irregular practises (though thou art in Commission to doe Justice, and wouldst be esteemed as a Magistrate) in the breach of the peace, and disturbance of good people, to give an account hereof to Generall Disbrow, thou doest not blush to say to him, it is thy duty, on whose patience and Justice, as bearing the sword of God against evill doing, thou mayest well fear thou hast trespassed, and beg excuse for thy trouble, and for thy self and Brethren desire by thankfully acknowledging his former fa∣vours, to retain such an opinion of you, as those that desire to doe nothing unbecoming Christians, and persons that desire the wel∣fare and peace of this Common-wealth, and Government, when under thy hand, and as aforesaid, against the innocent thou hast so plainly manifested the contrary, and yet for thy self and Bre∣thren art not ashamed of him to desire it, who is in Justice, you have obliged to visit the more your transgressions upon your heads by reason of the ill use you have made of his former fa∣vours, in acting contrary to the welfares and peace of this Com∣mon-wealth, and Government, and so unbecoming Christians, in disturbing good people, and oppressing the innocent, and in bely∣ing and slandering them when you have so done; and in consi∣derations of his favours; and neverthelesse to his face, when you have so offended, to wipe your mouth, as if you had none iniqui∣ty, & in confidence to entreat him to understand you as aforesaid. Now to that of God in thy conscience, and in the consciences of thy Brethren, and of all who shall read this Relation, whose car∣riage was not becoming men, much lesse Christians, theirs, or thine, and thy Brethren, and who contemn Authority, and despise Dominion, and discover their irregular practises in the breach of
the peace, &c. Thou, and thy Brethren, who being intrusted as Ministers of the Law, thus break the Law, or those who being in∣nocent have the Law thus broken upon them by thy self and bre∣thren. The Magistrate of God is a praise to him that doth well, & a terror to the evil doer, Rom. 12. And he that breaketh the righ∣teous Law, on him the Law is added, as a contemner of Authority, and a Transgressor, and Transgression, especially such as this is, tendeth to the destruction of the Nation, and is a reproach to a∣ny people. And who hold many sad and wicked opinions destru∣ctive to the true Religion and power of godlinesse; they are thee, who doest thus act and write, and art not come so much as to the bridling of thy tongue, and so all thy Religion is vain. And if thou wilt not yet take shame, behold these lyes and false Accusations in this one Letter of thine, to murder the inno∣cent, set in Order before thee. On their refusall to give Bayle for their appearance the next Generall Sessions to be held for the County of Devon. One— And they still refusing to give Bayle for their appearance as aforesaid, Two— Indeed Sir, their carri∣age here was not becoming men, much lesse Christians, Three— And besides their contempt of Authority, Foure— All the while they were in Prison, they never sought God by prayer at any time, Five— Nor desired a blessing on any Creature they recei∣ved, Six— Nor gave thanks for them, Seaven— And they shew no occasion to come to these parts, Eight— But wander up and down in all parts, Nine— To vent their wicked Opinions, Ten— And discover their irregular practices in the breach of the Peace, and disturbance of good people, Eleven— Indeed Sir they hold and vent many sad Opinions destructive to the true Religion, and power of Godlinesse, Twelve— And let these convince thee, and give judgement against thee, that thy tongue is bent like a Bow for lyes, and art not valiant for the truth upon earth, but proceedest from evill to evill, and know∣est not the Lord: And all lyars shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Rev. 21. And the Devil is the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. And false Accusers are they who make the dayes perillous, 2 Tim. 3.3. And the Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, Psal. 12.3. And he that respecteth persons committeth sin, and is convinced
of the Law as a Transgressour, James 2.9. And the wages of sin is death, Rom. 6.53. And woe unto them that call good evill, and evill good, and put darknesse for light, and light for darknes, Isa. 5 20. And blaspheme that worthy name by which the chil∣dren of light are called, James 2.7. And of these things are thy Letter made up, and these things are found on thee, and the judge∣ment cannot be avoyded, for the Lord is righteous, and not one jot or tittle of his word shall passe away, and thy soule is preci∣ous. Therefore turn within, and consider thy condition, and re∣pent whilst thou hast time, before thou goest into the Pit, and it be sealed on Thee, out of which there can be no redemption. The Answer of Miles Halhead, & Thomas Salt∣house, to the Accusations in the aforesaid letter. John Page Mayor of Plymouth. WE have seen a copy of a Letter, which we hear you sent to Major General Disbrow, in refe∣rence to us, Thomas Salthouse, & Miles Halhead, where∣in thou hast manifested thy self to the children of light to be of the same generation, by thy flattering of him in feigned humility, and thy rayling accusations against us, we say, to be of the spirit of Tertullus, Acts 24. who accused and informed the Governour against the Apo∣postle Paul, to be a pestilent fellow, &c. And so thou hast laid open thy Ignorance, in imprisoning; us, because thou conceivest we are offendors, which indeed is no∣thing but thy conceiving; and thou sayest, The cause of our confinement is because we refused to give Bayle to an∣swer at the Sessions. Here be witnesse against thy self, and for us, that we refused not to give Bayle, but had suf∣ficient men, Robert Cary, and Arthur Cotton, which thou wast content to take, and we were willing to appear upon thine own conditions, that if we were any way disabled to come, either by sicknesse, or any other
restraint, we being to goe out of the County, thou promised us, that a Certificate from the next Justice of the Peace, where we were so disabled, should set our Recognizance void, and clear us, and our friends were willing to ingage for us. And the next morning when we came to receive it under thy hand, according to thy promise, thou there refusedst to give it, and the Town Clerk said it would not stand in Law, which is like to thy Letter thou sentest us to Exon Prison, and so because thou con∣ceivest we are offendors, doe we suffer; but thou ma∣kest thy conceiving a Law, to imprison us by. And fur∣ther thou hast manifested thy enmity, and persecuting spirit in what thou witnessest falsly against us, that all the while we were in Prison, we neither sought God by prayer, as thou sayest, nor desired a blessing of God on any Creature that we received, nor gave thanks for them. Here let thy mouth be stopped, and for shame pro∣ceed no further in thy false Accusations, to render us, and the truth odious; for besides the witnesse of God which is true, and greater then the witnesse of man, many in Plymouth can witnesse against thee in this thing, that joyned with us in spirit, being moved se∣verall times in prison, and out of prison, to goe to prayers, and to give thanks for the blessing of God that we received. And further thou sayest, We wander up and down in all parts, to vent our wicked Opinions, to the di∣sturbance of good people. Here thou hast vented forth thy malice, out of the spirit of bitternesse against us, to make us appear odious to good people, if they will lend an ear to thee, for wicked Opinions we doe deny. And we have not disturbed any good people, neither have we wandred in all parts, as thou sayest, but came the straight Road from Bristoll to Plymouth, and were chargeable to none in our Journey, but lay at the best
Inns where we came, and paid for what we had need of, for both our Horse, and our selves. And again thou sayest, Indeed Sir they hold many sad Opinions, destru∣ctive to true Religion, and power of godlinesse. We say in∣deed, if thou hadst the true Religion, thou would have power over thy tongue, but thou hast manifested thy Religion to be in vain, and thy ignorance both of the true power, and also of the form of godlinesse, for godli∣nesse is a mystery, and he that hath the form, and not the power, from such we turn away; and with such as have the power and life of what they professe, have we fellowship in the light, which hath no fellowship with darknesse, neither with such as walk disorderly, and con∣trary to the light of Christ, who bringeth peace on Earth, and good-will towards man. And we never contemned thy Authority as a Magistrate, neither doe we slight the Generall Disbrow, whom thou desirest to have a good opinion of thee, who hast made thy conceivings, and thy will a Law, to imprison us by, though we have transgressed no Law, but to the Children of light thou art discovered, and thy deceit laid open. He that hath understanding let him read. And this we have writ∣ten to thee, in reference to that thou writest to Gene∣ral Disbrow, for thy self, and thy Brethren, not rendring to thee, nor thy Brethren, rayling for rayling, but in the spirit of love, and meeknes, we exhort you all to repent, and fear to offend the Lord, and the least of them who be∣lieve in his name, lest he come in a day when you are not aware, and cut you off in a day when you are not aware, and cut you off, and you be numbred amongst the transgressors, and have your portion amongst them which make war with the Lamb, and the Saints and Servants of the most high God. This is the day of your visitation, while you have time prize it. From us who are friends to your soules. Thomas Salthouse, Miles Halhead, prisoners in Exon Goal.
A Copy of an Indictment Exhibited against, and read to them at the Sessions. Devon.THe Jurors for his Highnesse the Lord Protector of the Common∣wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, upon their Oaths doe present, That whereas by an Ordinance of his Highnesse the Lord Protector, and his Counsell, bea∣ring date the 29 day of June, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty foure, for preventing of Duells, and all occasions of Challenges and Quarrells, and using any disgracefull provoking words, or gestures tending to that effect, it was Ordered, That no per∣sons whatsoever should from and after the publishing of the said Or∣dinance, use any provoking words, or gestures, whereby Quarrells or Challenges may arise, as by the said Ordinance may more at large appear. Neverthelesse Thomas Salthouse late of Druggly beck in the County of Lancaster, Husbandman, and Miles Halhead of Ken∣dall in the County of Westmorland, Husbandman, not fearing nor regarding the said Ordinance, and the penalty therein contained, after the publishing of the said Ordinance, to wit, the twentieth day of May, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and five, at Plymouth in the County aforesaid, in the presence and hearing of di∣vers honest persons of the Common-wealth of England there then be∣ing, did use divers disgracefull provoking words, and gestures, to George Brooks, Clerk in the Nightingale Friggot, he being then opening and declaring unto the said persons, a certain place of Scrip∣ture wherein the said George spake something of the Holy Trinity, to wit, Thou, the said George Brooks meaning, lyest in saying there were three persons in the Trinity, we doe deny, there is no such thing, but thou art a deluding spirit come to draw away the hearts of the people from God. And farther they the said Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Halhead did further speak to the people then present, that they should not hearken to the said George Brooks, for that he was a Thief, and was come with a lye in his mouth, and had stollen what he had from others, and had it in his hand, poynting to the Bible which was then in the said George Brooks his hand open. And further did say it was a lye which the said George Brooks had brought, and other harmes to the said George Brooks then, and there did, contrary to the form of the said Ordinance, against the peace publick.
Thomas Salthouse, and Miles Halheads Answer to this Indictment. BEing that we were not permitted to speak for our selves, when this Indictment or Bill was read to us in the open Court at the Generall Sessions, holden at the Castle of Exon. upon the 12 day of the fifth Month 1655, but by the Justices there in Commis∣sion, the Goaler was commanded to to take us away. So to make our defence for the truths sake, we are constrained to write some∣thing in Answer to the substance of it: The sum of it is, To make us Offendors in an Act made against Duells and Challenges, and the like, by the Lord Protector and his Councell; and you say, We not fearing or regarding the said Act, and the penalty therein contain∣ed, did use divers disgracefull and provoking words to George Brooks Clerk of the Nightingale Frigot. To which we Answer. THe fear of the Lord which is the beginning of wisedome, hath taught us to regard and honour all men in the Lord, and that Act we own, which is made against quarrelling, and fighting, and cursed speaking, which is the fruit of the flesh, and that the Magi∣strates bear not the sword in vain, but adds the penalty to the transgression of it, and not to add the Law where there is no trans∣gression proved. And we doe declare, and many can witnesse, that unlesse you call the Scripture disgracefull words, there was none spoken to him by us. And we doe affirm, that one of us did not speak one word to him, and yet we are both accused and impriso∣ned, and if this be the penalty of the Act, that if one man offend, two must suffer, let all that know the Law of England, with mo∣deration, judge? And whether discoursing of the Scripture be a transgression of that, yea or nay? For what was spoken, many of our friends of Plymouth, which you confesse to be honest people▪ that are friends to the Common-wealth of England, did hear us, you say. Yet might they not be permitted to hear us examined before the Mayor and Magistrates of Plymouth, upon the 23 day of the third month, in the Common Hall in the presence of neer one hundred people; and all our friends that heard the discourse, and know the truth of it, were put forth of the Hall, and the door kept fast. And we desired, that if either man or woman had any thing to lay to our charge, they might then speak. But we never
had our Accusars brought before us, that we might see them, or hear them speak. And for that George Brooks spake concerning the three persons of the Trinity, these words was spoken by one of us, I know no such Scripture that speaks of the three persons in the Trinity; but the three that the Scripture speaks of, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. And the Bap∣tism by one Spirit, into one body, and the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, the Scripture declares to be one; and he that hath the Son, hath the father also. And this we doe own, he that can receive it, let him. And no such word was spoken by us, as calling him a delu∣ding spirit, and therefore the Accusation is false: Neither did we say that he came to draw away the hearts of the people from God, as you say; for he stood up, and vindicated what we had declared, to be truth, and that of God in his conscience will witnesse against you in this thing. And in that you say, We spake to the people not to hearken to him, and that he was a THIEF, and pointed to the Bible which was then in his hand, and other harms to the said George Brooks, against the peace publick. Here under a cloak of maliciousnesse have you made Lyes your refuge, but with the light you are comprehended, and your works of darknesse brought to it, and reproved, for we did neither call him Thief, nor say he had stollen the Bible that was in his hand, which you say, we pointed at. And you speak of other harms against George Brooks, and say, We meaned that he lyed. And here you make use of meanings, as if here were not false Accusations sufficient to drive on your design of Persecution; you might have mentioned those other harms you speak of, if you knew of any; but it's like you have mentioned the worst you heard of, which we declare to be false, as many can witnesse that heard the discourse, that are inhabi∣tors of Plymouth, and friends to the peace of Englands Com∣mon-wealth. So all yee that take your Oaths, and give informa∣tions, consider what you doe, for because of Oaths the land mourns, and the Lord God will come near to judgement, and will be a swift witnesse against the lyar, and the false Swearer, that are out of the doctrine of Christ who saith, Swear not at all, but in all your com∣munications, let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more, is evill. And every one of you in particular, take heed to the light of Christ in your consciences, and there is your Teacher,
loving it, that will keep you from accusing any man falsly, and lead you out of all controversie and strife, up to Jesus Christ who is the end of the Law for righteousnesse, to every one that believeth on him, who brings peace on earth, and good will towards men, who is the Prince of Peace, of whose Government there shall be no end, who is God over all blessed for evermore. This we have written in Answer to the Bill of Indict∣ment against us Thomas Salthouse and Miles Hal∣head, Prisoners for the truths sake in Bridewell in Thomas Parish neer Exeter, in Devonshire. Record of the Sentence given against them at Sessions. Devon. A Calender of the Prisoners Tryed and Deli∣vered at the Generall Sessions of the Peace publick holden at the Castle of Exon. July 10. 1655. THomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead, for provo∣king words against George Brooks, Clerk, who re∣fused to be Tryed by the Countrey, fined 5 l. a piece, and committed to Bridewell, till payment, and find∣ing Sureties for the good behaviour. The Answer of Miles and Thomas thereunto. TO you Justices by whom we are committed, we Answer as we did when we were before you, and doe affirm that one of us spake not a word unto him George Brooks, and to satisfie all such as
may hear this thing, under which we suffer as if we were Thieves, or Murtherers; we shall lay open to the view of all people, the ground of the Discourse. We being met together at a friends house neer Plymouth, to wait upon the Lord, there being more people then the house would contein, we went into a Garden, and after we had spoken some words of Exhortation to the people and had declared the truth of the experience we had found manifested in us, of the free grace of God that brings salvation, provoking them to love, and to good works, according to the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, as the Spirit gave us utterance at that time. Then George Brooks unknown unto us, stood up and spake to the people, with the words of Paul to the Corinthians, and said, Take heed that yee receive not the grace of God in vain, with many words in Vindication of what we had spoken, witnessing that it was the eternall truth which we had spoken. So after all was ended, some began to enter into some discourse with him, and one of us asked him whether he could witnesse what he had spoken to be from the life and power of it saying, Thou hast uttered many Scriptures and good words, but it's he that hath the witnesse in himself, that sets to his seal; that God is true. Then directing my speech to all that were there, by way of Ex∣hortation. I spake the words of Paul to the Ephesians, Let him that stole steal no more, with many other words of truth and so∣bernesse, which was not to any one in particular. If these be provoking words, and worthy of such bonds as we suffer, let all men that have moderation bear witnesse. And in that you say, We refuse to be tryed by the Country. Oh! how dare you give such things under your hands, when you your selves, and all people that were in the Court, can bear us witness, that we did not refuse to be tryed, but did appeale to the highest power that was there, unto whom many in the Country came for Justice, and from whom we expected righteous judgement; for you know we said, We were willing to be tryed by the Bench, to whom all the Court was in subjection, to whose power we were and are subject to, for conscience sake, and did not resist your power; but for the▪ ve pounds that is demanded of us, we answer, we owe nothing to any man but to love one another, therefore we deny to
pay so much money for naught; but if any man will come to us and say that we have wronged him, we will make him satisfacti∣on, and pay him the utmost farthing. And as for Sureties for the good behaviour, they that walk in the light of Christ, who is the Surety of a better Covenant then mans Covenant, whom we witnesse, teaching us to deny the customes, and fashions of the world, and all ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to doe to all men as we would they should doe unt us. And we are ty∣ed to the good behaviour by the Righteous Law of God, and dare not lye, nor swear, nor be drunk, nor use any deceit, pollicy, shifts, or double dealing, nor respect mens persons for the liberty of the outward man, or any other advantage, to that in all your consci∣ences doe we appeale, whether we be wo thy of such bonds as these, where none of our friends nor acquaintance must come at us, or speak with us, but they must be imprisoned: Is the Law of England so exact against us, such as have been alwayes faithfull in that which hath been manifested, and in the States service, and desires nothing else but to worship God in Spirit and truth, accor∣ding to what is manifested and witnessed in the light of Jesus Christ, who is the way to the father, that when we were locked up in close Prison, the Souldiers kept John Gannyclife who is a Constable, in their custody, for coming to speak with us, and ano∣ther person who did spy in at a hole of the door where we were; this they did by an Order from Captain Joyce, who hath given it under his hand to take into their custody all such as they suspected to be of us whom they called Quakers. But this they doe that the Scripture may be fulfilled, which Jesus Christ spake to his Disciples, They shall hale you before Magistrates, and Rulers, who shall cast some of you into prison, and the time shall come if they kill you, they shall think they doe God good service. But here is our con∣fidence in his Promise, that he that endures to the end shall be saved; and if we suffer with him, we shall also reigne with him; for whose sake we are made willing by his eternall power to suffer the losse of all things, that we may receive an inheritance with them that are Sanctified, and witnesse against all deceit, and abomination, to the laying down of our lives, if it be required, who are Prisoners for the Testimony of Jesus in Thomas Parish neer Exon, in Bridewell. Thomas Salthouse. Miles Halhead.
A copy of their Letter sent the Mayor of Plymouth, after their first Apprehension. FRIEND, SEing the Lord God of power, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, hath entrusted thee with the power of a Magistrate, to bear the Sword of Justice, which is for the punishment of evil doers and the encouragement of those that doe well, and to rule for him who brings peace on earth, and hath good will towards men, even Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant; who is the end of the Law for righteousnesse to every one that belie∣veth; who was supposed to be the Son of Joseph, but was the Son of God; and he that hath the Son, hath life; and he that hath not the Son, hath not life; and we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, to know him who is true; and he that hath the Son, hath the Father also; and he that hath the witnesse in himself, hath set to his seale that God is true; he that hath understanding, let him read; he that loveth not, knoweth not God, for God is love; and if any man say, I love God, and hate his Brother, he is a lyar, for his Commande∣ment is love; and he that rules in love, rules with Authority, and not as the Scribes and Pharisees. The Law of God is perfect, and endureth for ever; he is our Judge, and Law-giver, before whom all must appear, to give an accompt for all the deeds done in the body, when every man shall receive according to his works. Now Friend, to thee for Justice doe we call, that the truth may be freed from scandalls, and false reports, and the oppressed set free, which is pure Religion; that we may have that favour at thy hands, which the Law doth afford, to bring our Accusers to us, that have any thing to lay to our charge worthy of Bonds, that things may be tryed by the light, and actions weighed in the ballance of equity; that truth may spring up out of the Earth, and righteousnesse may run down as a mighty stream, and peace and Justice may kisse each other; for know assuredly, although
we are counted deceivers, yet are we true; and nothing doe we desire from thee, as thou art a Magistrate, but to have the truth cleared by the light, and truth set at liberty; and if there be any that knoweth the onely true God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, and hath eternall life abiding in him; we desire to be tryed by him, even him that is guided by the Spirit of God, and as ma∣ny as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. And whereas some ignorant men say, that we deny the Trinity, and the God-head, which is false; for God is a Spirit, and as many as are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God, and the Father Son and Spirit are one; and this we witnesse according to the Scrip∣tures, and this God is but one, in whom all things live, move, and have their being, who is above all, and in all, and through all, God blessed for ever. And for the word Trinity, there is no such Scripture as speaks of a Trinity; so in tendernesse of conscience, and love to the Spi∣rit of Truth, which gave forth the Scriptures, we dare not wrest them nor speak any other language, nor add nor diminish from them. So Friend, to the light of Jesus Christ in thine own con∣science, and the measure of the Spirit of Truth, doe we exhort thee to take heed that the spirituall man judge all things in righte∣teousnesse and truth. So we remain Prisoners of the Lord, not as evill doers, our conscience bearing us witnesse in the presence of the Lord in whom is everlasting strength, who are friends of the Truth, and of the Common-wealth of England. Known to the World by the Names of Thomas Salthouse. Miles Halhead. For the hands of John Page Mayor of Plymouth.
The copy of another Letter to the Mayor of Plymouth, concerning Swearing. John Page Mayor of Plymouth; FOrasmuch as it hath pleased thee to cast us into Prison, and hast Examined us, and hast found no breach of any Law, by which thou can'st lawfully punish us; but under a pretence hath tendred us an Oath to swear against the Supremacy and Purgato∣ry. We doe in the presence of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, deny the Pope, and all things therein mentioned, with as much detestation as thou thy self, or any in the world can, or doth; our consciences also bearing us witnesse, in the presence of our God, who is able to deliver us, although we are cast into a Pri∣son; nay, if we be cast into a Den of Lyons, and a fiery Furnace, with the three Children, as you may read in Daniel, that would not fall down to worship the Image, neither will we disobey the Command of Jesus Christ, who saith, Swear not at all; and the Apostle James saith, Above all things, my brethren, swear not, nei∣ther by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, lest you fall into condemnation. And all that doth the will of God, shall know of the doctrine of Christ; and whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the do∣ctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, hath both the Father, and the Son. If any come unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, nor bid him God speed; and this we doe affirm, that swearing is out of the doctrine of Christ, although you may alledge many Scriptures for Swearing, as in the first Covenant; and that an Oath among men for confirmation, is to them an end of all strife; but he that is made the Surety of a better Covenant, who hath put an end to all strife, where it is witnessed, saith, Swear not at
all; although that you may alledge that the Angels swore, yet know this, that when he bringeth his first begotten into the world, he saith, Let the Angels of God worship him: So we lay it upon thee to witnesse for us, or against us, whether Yea or nay is not to be preferred before swearing, by all those who professe Religion, seeing that Jesus Christ hath commanded not to swear at all; and he saith, If yee love me, keep my Commandements; and if we suffer imprisonment for keeping the Commandements of Christ, it is not grievous to us; for we refuse not to swear, for any guiltinesse that is in us, or that can be charged upon us, for we are against all false wayes, false worships, false Lawes, but we deny swearing, because Jesus Christ hath commanded us, not to swear at all. So if we be kept in Prison, let it never be said by you, That it is for any thing, but because we dare not swear, know∣ing, that to disobey the Commandements of Christ, is the way of Cain, who was driven out from the presence of God, and became a Fugitive, and a Vagabond; and this some of you would charge upon us, to be Vagabonds, who in tendernesse of conscience, and in the obedience to the light of Jesus Christ, and in love to him, our lives are not dear to us, to lay down, if it be required, for the confession of him before men, and the keeping of his Comman∣dements; for to this end are we called; and our rejoycing is in this, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, our conversations hath been, and is honest, as many can witnesse for us against those, who in their wisedome goe about to entrap and ensnare the innocent: And this we write, not to justifie our selves but for the sake of the simple ones, who have heard many lyes and false reports of us; of this doe we put thee in mind, not that thou art ignorant that all the glory and honour belongeth to the Lord God, who hath said, He will not give his glory unto another; and Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, saith the Lord, who will ease himself of all his Adversaries, and recompence tribulation to them that trou∣ble, afflict, or offend one of the least that believe in his Name. So in love to thee, and all people, for the eternall good of all, doe we heartily wish, that grace and peace may be multiplied; so we rest in the will of our father, to doe or to suffer, that he may be glorified by us, to whom all glory belongeth for evermore; and
pray, that the sin of Persecution may not be committed by thee, nor any that professe to be the friends of Englands, Whose Names are known to be Thomas Salthouse. Miles Halhead. For the hands of John Page, Mayor of Plymouth.
HEar ye this O Priests, and hearken ye house of Israel; and give ye eare O house of the King, for judgement is towards you, because you have been as a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor: And ye revolters are profound to make slaughter; though I have been a rebuker of them all. Hear I pray you O Heads of Jacob; and yee Princes of the house of Israel; Is it not for you to know Judgement? Shalt thou reigne, because thou closest thy selfe in Cedar? Did not their Father, eate, and drinke, and doe Judgement, and Justice, and then it was well with him? he Judged the Cause of the poor and needy; then it a as well with him, was not this; know me saith the Lord. And hear yee Rulers, who hate the good, and love the e∣vill, who pluck the skin from off the people of the Lord, and their flesh from off their bones; yea who abhor Judgement, and pervert all equity; who turne Judgement into worme wood, and leave off righteousnesse in the Earth; who decree unrighteous decrees, and write grievousnesse which ye have prescribed: Woe unto you; for Judgement is turned away backward, and Justice standeth afar off, for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter; yea truth faileth, and he that departeth from evill, maketh himselfe a prey: a man is made an Offender for a word; a snare is laid for him that reproveth in the gate; the just is afflicted, and turned aside, for a thing of nought, and the poor in the gate from their right: The righteousnesse of the righteous, is ta∣ken from him; he that rebuketh in the gate, is hated; he that speaketh uprightly is abhorred; iniquities are concei∣ved, are travelled withall; are searched out; A diligent search is accomplished, the inward thought, and the heart is deep, they dig as low as hell, the pit is made into which to cast and destroy the innocent, the workers of iniquity make insurrections, they whet their tongue like a sword, they bend
their bowes, and make their Arrowes keene, and ready on string, and shoot at the perfect, at the upright and fear not; there are who incourage themselves in an evill matter, that commune of laying snares privily, that lye in waite in the lurking places of the Villages, in the secret places, as he that setteth snares to murther the innocent, that set a trap that catch men; as a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit: therefore, are they become great, and wax in rich, they are waxen fat, and shine; yea, the deeds of the wicked are over passed: The rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded, violence is risen up into a rod of wickednesse, Sion is built up with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity; the stran∣ger is vexed, and oppressed (which the Lord hath comman∣ded shall not be, but be beloved as a mans selfe, for the Lord loveth the stranger) and turned aside from his right, and dealt wrongfully withall, his Judgement is perverted, and upon him is violence, and cruelty, exercised: The people of the Lord are sould for nought, and there are none that in∣quire after their blood, they are eaten up as one would eate breath; they whom the Lord hath smitten are persecuted, & the spoyled is not delivered out of the hand of the Oppres∣sour: the Lord is not feared; this people are broken in pieces, and his heritage afflicted: yet they that doe these things, say in their hearts, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it; God hath for gotten, he hi∣deth his face; he will never see it; God is contemned; they say, he will not require it; yea every one in the darke, in the chambers of his Imagery, saith the Lord seeth us not; the Lord hath forsaken the earth; how doth God know, is there knowledge in the most High? Thou hast seen it O Lord, for thou beholdest mischiefe, and spight, to requite it with thy own hand; the poor committeth himselfe unto thee; thou art the helper of the fatherlesse.) Ʋnderstand ye bruitish among the people; And ye fools,
when will ye be wise? He that planteth the eare, shall not he hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see? he that cha∣stiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know? Surely, the Lord seeth it, and it displeaseth him that there is no Judgement, and he sees that there is no man, and wonders that there is no In∣tercessor; therefore his arme is bringing salvation unto him, and his righteousnesse it sustaineth him; for he is put∣ting on righteousnesse as a breast plate, and a helmet of sal∣vation upon his head, and he is putting on the garment of vengeance for a cloathing, and is clading with zeal as with a cloak; he will awake as one out of sleep, and go forth as a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine; he will stir up jealousie like a man of war; he will cry, yea roare; he shall prevaile against his enemies; he hath a long time holden his peace, and he hath been still, and refrained himselfe; he will cry like a travelling woman; he will devoure and de∣stroy all at once; he he will make wast mountains, and hills, and dry up all their herbs; he will make the rivers Islands; and he will dry up the pools, and according to their deeds, accordingly, will he repay, fury, to his adversaries, recom∣pence to his enemies. For these things, shall I not visite saith the Lord, shall not my soule be avenged on such a generation as this? Shall not God avenge the sufferings, the blood of his Elect, who cry Night and Day unto him, how long O Lord holy and true dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Though he bear long with them: I tell you, he will avenge them speedily. And hath he said it, and shall he not doe it? hath he spoken it, and shall it not come to passe? he hath avenged their blood, from the dayes of righteous Abel, to the Times of this gene∣ration, and shall he not avenge it on this generation? hath this generation witnessed this word of the Lord
to be true above many generations before whose Eyes; and by whose hands the righteous God hath executed his dreadfull Judgements on the Enemies of his Elect; and shall this Generation who have exceeded what hath been done by their Fathers go unpunished? Hath he despised the Image of the King, and Princes, and Nobles, and the great ones, and many of the people of these Nations, and their pomp and glory, and powred forth their blood as water on the Earth, and made them a fearfull desolation, in the cause of his people, and of Ju∣stice, and Equity, and shall those whom he hath made the rod of his Anger, and the staffe of his Indignation, up∣on these; doing the same things, for which he judg∣ed, and cast them out, escape? Hath all this blood been shed, that unrighteousnesse may reigne, and oppres∣ssion? hath not God spared the glory, and beauty, and excellency of these Nations, and the goodlinesse of them, but in the Iniquities that they have committed, and in the sins wherewithall they have sinned, hath cut them off, and made them the dreadfull examples of his vengeance, to make way for others to rise up, and to commit greater abominations? Was persecution of tender consciences unjust in the Bishops, and is it righteous now in them, who suffered by the Bishops, for the tendernesse of their consciences, and shed so much blood for a secure provisi∣on therein, and put it to this Issue, by the sword either they and theirs not to be or not to be without it; to outstrip the Bishops; yea the latter Ages, in a cruell and barbarous persecution of their Brethren, because of the tenderness of their consciences? Was the Infringement of Liberty, the endeavouring to subvert the fundamentall Lawes of the Nation; and the violation of right; unrighteous in the King, and Strafford, and Canterbury, and that ge∣neration; and Judged Tyrannicall, and Trayterous,
and Justice executed upon them, for so doing, and the Kings Family rooted up, and thousands of Families de∣stroyed, and the three Nations made fields of blood, and hazarded in many years fierce and cruell Wars to bring it to passe, and is it just now in inferiour Ministers, who are in Commission, and sworn to execute the Law, to preserve liberty, and to defend right, as saith also the Instrument of Government; to exceed them all in the violation of Law, and the destruction of right, and liber∣ty, as if so be the Cause and the Justice of the Wars were to destroy one Generation, for another to exercise the same, and far greater violences and oppressions, upon those who were instrumentall in the destruction of the other, when lost their liberties, or by what Law, Contract, or Conquest? have they lost them in suffering and fighting for them, and having had to doe in obtain∣ing the Victory, or in fearing the Lord, and being peaceable in the land, and living in the principle that leads out of transgression, and not resisting evill with evill, but bearing all things, and suffering all things, both from those who have been friends and enemies, though contrary to Law and liberty, and common humanity, and the righteous ends of the Wars are their sufferings; leaving vengeance to the Lord, whose it is, and who will repay it; and laying their bodies as the ground, and as the street to them that say bow down thy body, that we may goe over? And wherein consists the vertue, merit, or prerogative of the other by which they may in equity or right claim such a privi∣ledge? Is Law, and Justice, and Liberty, and Right chan∣ged in the ending of the Wars, for them into peace, that those must be denyed either, and the contrary inflicted on them, in such a manner of cruelty, that the presidents of former times, have not parallel'd, whose lives in the field, and whose All hath been so often engaged,
for the effecting thereof? Is this Generation delivered to commit greater abominations and Cruelties, then those who for these things sake, and by their hand have been so lately Destroyed? Is the Weight of the Blood of these Nations a small Matter? and all the Gar∣ments rolled in blood, the mangled and dead Carkas∣ses of so many Thousands, the Plundering, burnings, Devastations, Ruines of Multitudes, the Barbarous and the unheard of Cruelties and Murthers executed especially in Ireland, the Cryes of the Great Compa∣nies of Fatherlesse and Widowes, for Liberties and Justice, a pleasant sight? that Men so Lightly Gird it to their loynes, and goe over their Graves, in act∣ing higher Wickednesses then what were the Causes of those Miserable Destructions? God is not unrigh∣teous, so severely to punish Offences in some, and to let others goe free, who transgresse in the same, and act more wickedly. Shall not the Judge of the whole earth doe right? God is true, and every man a lyar; and at his hands every man shall receive according to their deeds. If he spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chaines of darknesse, to be reserved unto Judgement: Nor the old world, bringing in the flood upon the World of the ungodly; nor Sodome and Gomorah, but turned their Cities into ashes, and condem∣ned them with an overthrow, making them Ensamples to them that afterwards should live ungodly; nor the King∣domes of Israel and Judah, in whom the iniquities and mighty sins afore-mentioned were found, but suffered for those things sake; Sion to be plowed as a field, and Jerusa∣lem to become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the higher places of the forrest, and removed them both out of his sight; and upon whom the wrath is come to the utter∣most. And if he spared not those in these three Nati∣ons, upon whom some of these things were found, but
hath spread them before this Generation, as the re∣markable and sad Examples of his Vengeance & Ju∣stice, who renders to every one according to his works; then what can they expect, who having all these examples before their eyes, and having bin the Instruments of his indignation, upon those of their Age, doe not only the same things, but over-passe their deeds in afflicting the just, and persecuting the witnesses of the li∣ving God, the God of their mercies, who hath wrought all their wonderfull deliverances, whom of their brethren he hath raised up and sent amongst them to turn their feet out of the wayes of destruction, into the path of peace, and to di∣rect them to that, which if hearkned unto, will guide them out of all deceipts and subtilties, and power of darknes, up to the Kingdom of his Son, whose Throne is for ever and ever, and the Scepter of whose Kingdome is a righteous Scepter, which is the substance of what the late wars were a figure, & the principle from whence alone Justice shall spring up from the earth, & righteousnes shall slow down from heaven; who shall rule the Nations with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces as a potters vessel, whose kingdome is begun to be set up, which shall never have an end. I say, what remaineth for such, but a fearfull expectation of the revelation of the righ∣teous judgements of God, which shall destroy the adversary, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, beyond the measure of those that have gone before them, except they re∣pent. For, God is not mocked, as men sow, so shall they reap, and those that follow their pernicious wayes, their judgment lingreth not nor doth their damnation slumber; the testimony of his Elect in sufferings is finishing, & the measure of the iniquity of their persecutors is filling up apace, and the Judge standeth at the door, & Judgement hastneth, and vengeance is preparing her self, and destru∣ction is making ready, and woe unto you, ye potsheards of the earth, who strive with your Maker. What will ye doe in the day of visitation, and in the desolation that cometh from far? To whom will ye flee for help, and where will you leave your glory? Can your hearts endure, & your hands be strong, in the days when the Lord shall deal with you.
Be wise therefore, O yee Kings, be instructed O yee Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce with trembling. Touch not his Anointed, and doe his Prophets no harm. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and yee parish from the mid way; when his wrath is kindled but a little (and it is kindling) blessed are all they that trust in him. But sing O Heavens, and be joyfull O Earth, and break forth into singing O Mountaines, for God hath comforted his people, and will have mercy on his af∣flicted. FINIS.
