18225.6 S94248 54532424 180848
This is the glasse of helth. A great Treasure for pore men, necessary and nedefull for euery per¦son to loke in, yt wyll kepe theyr body from syckenesses, and dyseases: and it sheweth how the planettes reygne euery houre of the daye & the nyght, with the na∣tures & exposicions of the .xii. syg∣nes, deuyded by the .xii. Mone∣thes of the yere. And after foloweth of all the euyll and daungerous dayes of the yere. And sheweth the reme∣dyes, for dyuers infyrmyties and dyseases, that hurteth the body of man. ¶ These ben the .iii. Peryllous mondayes in the yere to let blode or to take a¦ny medicin or purgaci∣on, yt is for to say. The fyrst Mon∣daye of Au∣gust, ye secō∣de is the last Monday of Apryll, and the thyrd is the last Mondaye of Decembre.
¶ The Prologue of the Auctour. I Do you well to wytte, that this Boke profyteth greatly to euery Surgyon, for to knowe in what sygne, or what degree of the syg∣ne the sonne and the Moone syt∣teth euerye daye / In any of the .xii. sygnes / And not onely it is profytable to Surgyons, but also to Phesycyons, and Barboures, and to all that vse to gyue medycynes, or Laxaty¦ues, or to vse any Passyons, or cuttynge, or Lettynge of Blode / For as the sonne passeth thoroughe all the .xii. sygnes, by the space of a yere, abydynge in a sygne .xxx. dayes / ryghte so doth the Moone passe thoroughe all the .xii sygnes, that in .xxx. dayes abydynge in a syg¦ne .lx. houres, and as the Moone amonge all planettes is nexte the Earth in course. So he hath most effecte of workynge, in these earthly thynges, after the dysposycion of the Nature of the sygnes that he hath his course in? And therfore it is full good and necessary truely to knowe the state, the course, & the nature of the Moone. For therby a man may knowe, whan it is good to begyn many dyuers thynges, & whan it is not good / And also what wether moste lykely is to falle, after the nature of the sygnes, whether drye, or moyste, hote, or colde
there shall folowe after the Nature of the syg∣ne that he is in / In dyuers coniunctions of Planettes, that is ioyned therwith / And ther∣fore naturally in order, I purpose me to decla¦re, shortly in the thyrde Chapiter, the nature & the state of euery sygne that he passeth by. Thus endeth the Porlogue. ¶ And here foloweth the Table. THe fyrst chapiter of this Boke, sheweth of the .xii. dayes of the weke, with theyr Planettes. Capitulum. primum. ¶ And howe the Planettes reygne, in euerye houre of the day & of the nyght. And the fyrst is the houres of the Sonday Capi. 2. ¶ The natures and exposycyons of the .xii. Sygnes, deuyded by the .xii. monethes of the yeare Capitulum. 3. ¶ And after foloweth the euyll and peryllous dayes of the yeare Cap, 4, ¶ And fyrst y• remedy for the pestilence. ca. 5. ¶ For to spourge the heade Cap, 6, Also for to spotge the heade Cap, 7, ¶ For the heade ache Cap, 8, ¶ For the akynge of the heade Cap, 9. ¶ For the toth ache Cap, 10, ¶ For the ache of a holowe toth Ca, 11,
¶ Also for the toth ache, Cap, xii, ¶ Also for the toth ache, Cap, xiii, ¶ Also yet for the toth ache, Cap. xiiii, ¶ For stenche in the mouth, Ca, xv, ¶ For a stynkynge breth, Cap, xvi, ¶ For ache & wormes in the eares, ca, xvii. A precyous water for poyson, and specyallye agaynst the pestylence, Cap, xviii, ¶ For runnynge eyen, Cap, xix, ¶ For red Blered eyen, Cap, xx, For eyen that be dasuited or dryke, Ca, xxi, ¶ A precyous water for the syght of the eyen, Cap. xxii. ¶ For the pynne, and the webbe in the eyen, Cap. xxiii. ¶ For all euylles in the eyen, Ca, xxiiii, ¶ For boylynge in the eyen, Cap, xxv, ¶ For a stynkynge breth, Cap, xxvi, ¶ For a hote swollen stomacke, Cap, xxvii, ¶ For the stomacke that aketh, that commeth of colde, Cap, xxviii, ¶ For to forse the stomacke, cap, xxix, ¶ For the Stomacke, and the Belly that a¦keth, cap, xxx, For a man that is sycke, in the stomacke or in the belly, or at the harte, or hed, or were bytten with any venomus beest, or poysoned. ca. xxxi. ¶ For rysyng vnder the stomacke. ca. xxxii.
¶ A good playster for the rysynge vnder the stomacke, Cap, xxxiii, ¶ For hee in the stomacke, cap, xxxiiii, ¶ For brenynge in the stomacke, ca, xxxv, ¶ For to auoyde flewe out of the stomacke & also out of the heade cap, xxxvi. Fo all euylles in the stomacke ca, xxxvii. For a dysease at the harte cap, xxxviii, For weaknes of the harte cap, xxxix. For fayntnes of the harte Cap, xl. For the breest that is incombred ca. xli ¶ For a man woman or chylde that is broken in the belly cap, xlii. ¶ A playster to knyt hym Cap. xliii. ¶ For the playster in May Cap. xliiii. ¶ For to breke wynde in the belly Ca. xlv. ¶ For a swollen wombe Cap. xlvi. ¶ For akynge of the wombe Cap xlvii For the harte brennynge Cap xlviii, For sore sydes within forth cap. xlix, Eontra telan & maculam in oculo ca, 50, For a womans pap that is sore cap, 51. ¶ For the lyuer that is corrupted and wasted Capitulum, 52, ¶ For heate in the lyuer Cap, 53, ¶ Also for heate in the lyuer of a man that his Coloure is yelowe Cap, 54, For a mans breest that is encombred Ca, 55.
¶ For a man that hath wormes in his belly and his body be lene, cap, lvi, ¶ For the brest and the lunges, cap, lvii, ¶ For to auoyde & destroye flewme, ca, lviii, ¶ For the stone, cap, lix, Another for the stone, capi, lx, ¶ For the colyke, strangury & the stone ca, lxi, ¶ For a man that is lepre, and it take in his leg¦ges, and go vpwarde, cap, lxii, ¶ For a dertre in a mans flesshe, cap, lxiii, ¶ For a sauce flewe vysage, cap, lxiiii, ¶ For hym y• can not holde his water, ca, lxv, Another for the same, cap, lxvi, ¶ For to destroy flewme, cap, lxvii, ¶ For a wombe that is harde, ca, lxviii, ¶ For the blody mencion, cap, lxix, ¶ For a mans stones that be swollen, ca, lxx, ¶ For to make one sklender, cap, lxxi, ¶ For hym that lacketh wynde, ca, lxxii, ¶ For hym that is costyfe. cap. lxxiii. ¶ For a wycked blast in the vyfage, ca, lxxiiii, ¶ For the shyngles, capi, lxxv. ¶ For the kowghe, cap, lxxvi. ¶ For the peyllus kowghe, cap, lxxvii Also for the chynke kowghe, cap, lxxviii, ¶ For the Itche, capi, lxxix, ¶ For to drawe a Byle, from one place to ano∣ther. capitul. lxxx.
¶ For hym that pysseth blode, ca. lxxxi. ¶ For hym that hath lost his mynde, ca. lxxxii. Another for the same, cap. lxxxiii. ¶ For hym that hath the fensy, ca. lxxxiiii. yf one vomysshe to moche, cap. lxxxv. ¶ For a dysease in the eares, cap. lxxxvi. ¶ For a man that hath his eares sowne within, capitul. lxxxvii. ¶ For synewes that shrynke after that they ha∣ue en hurt, and heled agayne, cap. lxxxviii. ¶ For to staunche blode, cap. lxxxix. Also to staunche blode, cap. lxxxx. ¶ For an impostume, cap. lxxxxi. ¶ For spyttyng of blod, cap. lxxxxii. ¶ For wylde fyre, that is called the fyre of hell, capitul. lxxxxiii. ¶ For bytynge of a mad dogge, ca. lxxxxiiii. ¶ For to do away a wen, cap. lxxxxv. To breke a felon in a nyght, cap. lxxxxvi. ¶ For the Megym, cap. lxxxxvii. ¶ For the morfewe, cap. lxxxxviii. ¶ For to stop the flyxe, cap. lxxxxix. ¶ For the Canker, wylde fyre, & Ignis sancti Antonii, capi. c. ¶ For to make heare growe, cap. c. i. ¶ For to do away heare, cap. c. ii. ¶ For a scalde heade, cap. c. iii. ¶ For the yelowe Iaundes, cap. c. iiii.
¶ For the blacke Iaundes capitul. c. v. ¶ for wormes and hete in the handes ca. c. vi. ¶ for the Gowte, cap. c. vii. ¶ for sore knees that doth swel & ake ca. c. viii. ¶ for the fallyne euyll, cap. c. ix. Also for brennynge or scaldynge, ca. c. x. Also for brennynge with fyre, ca. c. xi. To hele hurtes and woundes, cap. c. xii. To make a salue to drawe & to hele ca. c. xiii. ¶ for styngyng of Edders & snakes. ca. c. xiiii. ¶ for hym that can not slepe, cap. c. xv. ¶ for the Palsey, cap. c. xvi. A good drynke for the poxe, ca. c. xviii. ¶ For the gowte or the swellyng of Ioyntes, knobbes, and knorres, that commeth of Ache of the poxe, capitul. c. xix. ¶ for the crampe, cap. c. xx. ¶ for spottes of the morfewe, cap. c. xxi. To put away the morfewe, ca. c. xxii. ¶ For a Chylde that is Iowe fall, or Molde fall, or Rose fall, cap. c. xxiii. ¶ for the Mother, cap. c. xxiiii. ¶ for all feuer Agues, and for yonge chyldren suckynge the breest, cap. c. xxv. ¶ for to destroy poyson, cap. c. xxvi. ¶ For the Ague infected with the Pestilence, Capitulum. c. xxvii. ¶ Finis Tabula.
¶ And hereafter foloweth the .vii. dayes of the weke, with the Planettes. Capitulo. Pri. IN these .vii. Planettes you ought to know y• the Sōday hath his doynges vnder y• Sōne. ¶ The Monday vnder y• Moone. ¶ Tuesday vnder Mars. ¶ The wednysdaye vnder Mercury. ¶ The Thursdaye vnder Iupiter. ¶ The Frydaye vnder Venus. ¶ The Saterdaye vnder Saturne. ¶ Note well, that all the trewe acte and opera∣cyon ought to be made vnder his Planette, and is best and it be made on his propre daye of the Planette, and the houre propre exempte. ¶ Vnder Saturne is the lyfe edyfyce, doctry∣ne and mutacyon comprynse. ¶ Vnder Iupiter obtayne honoure, rychesse, and gay costly garmentes. ¶ Vnder Mars, batayle, pryson, maryage, & enmyte. ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ Vnder the Sonne, esperaunce, gayne, fortu¦ne, and herytage. ¶ Vnder Venus, loue, socyete, lyfe louynge, and walkynge abrode. ¶ Vnder Mercury, syckenesse, myserye, dette, and fearefulnes. ☞ ❧ ❧
¶ Vnder the Moone, slouthe, euyll thoughtes and thefte. ✚ ☞ ☞ ☞ ☞ ❧ ❧ ¶ Here foloweth howe the Planettes reygne in euery houre of the daye, and of the nyght. And the fyrste is the houres of the Son∣daye. Cap̄ .ii. ¶ The houres of the Sonday. THe fyrste houre of the sondaye reygneth Sol, the seconde Venus, the thyrde Mer¦cury, the fourth Luna, the fyfth Saturne, the syxt Iupiter, the seuenth Mars, the eyght Sol the nynthe Venus, the tenthe Mercury, the le∣uenth Luna, the twelfeth Saturne. ¶ The houres of the Sonday nyght. ¶ The fyrste houre is iupiter, the .ii. mars, the .iii. sol, the .iiii. venus, the .v. mercury, the .vi. lu∣na, the .vii. faturne, the .viii. iupiter, the .ix. mars the .x. sol, the .xi. venus, the .xii. mercury. ¶ The houres of the Monday. ¶ The fyrste houre luna, the .ii. saturne, the .iii. iupiter, the .iiii. mars, the .v. sol, the .vi. venus, the .vii. mercury, the .viii. luna, the .ix. saturne, the .x. iupiter, the .xi. mars, the .xii. sol. ¶ The houres of the monday nyght. ¶ The fyrste venus, the .ii. mercury, the .iii. lu∣na,
the .iiii. saturne, the .v. iupiter, the .vi. mars, the .vii. sol, the .viii. venus, the .ix. mercury, the .x. luna, the .xi. saturne, the .xii. iupiter. ¶ The houres of the tuesday. ¶ The fyrst mars, the .ii. sol, the .iii. venus, the .iiii. mercury, the .v. luna, the .vi. saturne, the .vii. iupiter, the .viii. mars. the .ix. sol, the .x. venus, the .xi. mercury, the .xii. luna. ¶ The houres of the tuesday nyght. ¶ The fyrst saturne, the .ii. iupiter, y• .iii. mars. the .iiii. sol. the .v. venus, the .vi. mercury, the .vii. luna. the .viii. saturne, the .ix. iupiter, y• .x. mars, the .xi. sol, the .xii. venus. ¶ The houres of the wednysday. ¶ The fyrste mercury, the .ii. luna, the .iii. satur¦ne, the .iiii. iupiter, the .v. mars, the .vi. sol, the .vii. venus, the .viii. mercury, the .ix. luna, the .x. saturne, the .xi. iupiter, the .xii. mars. ¶ The houres of the wednysday nyght. ¶ The fyrste sol, the .ii. venus, the .iii. mercury, the .iiii. luna, the .v. saturne, the .vi. iupiter, the .vii. mars, the .viii. sol, the .ix. venus, the .x. mercu¦ry, the .xi. luna, the .xii. saturne. ¶ The houres of the thursday. ¶ The fyrste iupiter, the .ii. mars, the .iii. sol. the iiii. venus, the .v. mercury, the .vi. luna, the .vii. saturne, the .viii. iupiter, the .ix. mars, the .x. sol, the .xi. venus, the .xii. mercury.
¶ The houres of the thursday nyght. ¶ The fyrste luna, the .ii. saturne, the .iii. iupi∣ter, the .iiii. mars, the .v. sol, the .vi. venus, the .vii. mercury, the .viii. luna, the .ix. saturne, the x. iupiter, the .xi. mars, the .xii. sol. ¶ The houres of the fryday. ¶ The fyrste venus, the .ii. mercury, the .iii. lu∣na, the .iiii. saturne, the .v. iupiter, the .vi. mars, the .vii. sol, the .viii. venus, the .ix. mercury, the .x luna, the .xi. saturne, the .xii. iupiter. ¶ The houres of the fryday nyght. ¶ The fyrste mars, the .ii. sol, the .iii. venus, the .iiii. mercury, the .v. luna, the .vi saturne, the .vii. iupiret, the .viii. mars, the .ix. sol, the .x. ve∣nus, the .xi. mercury, the .xii. luna. ¶ The houres of the saturday. ¶ The fyrste saturne, ye .ii. iupiter, the .iii. mars the .iiii. sol, the .v. venus, the .vi. mercury, the .vii. luna, the .viii▪ saturne, the .ix. iupiter, y• .x. mars, the .xi. sol, the .xii. venus. ¶ The houres of the saturday nyght. ¶ The fyrste mercury, the .ii. luna, the .iii. satur¦ne, the .iiii. iupiter, ye .v. mars, the .vi. sol, the .vii. venus, the .viii. mercury, the .ix. luna, the .x. sa∣turne, the .xi. iupiter, the .xii. mars. ¶ Note well. ¶ Note that Iupiter and Venus ben good, Saturne and Mars euyll, Sol and Luna in∣dyfferent,
Mercury is good with them that be good, and euyll with them that be euyll. ¶ Also note well that the houres of the Pla∣nettes ben dyfferent to theym of the Clockes, for the houres of the Clockes be egall alwayes of .lx. mynutes, but they of the planettes whan the day and the nyght ben egall, that the Sōne is in one of the Equinocces they be egall, but as soone the dayes longeth or shorteth, so doth the naturall houres, by this it is conuenyent al¦waye, for the day to haue .xii. temporall houres and the nyght .xii. temporal houres? And whan the dayes ben longe, and the houres longe, and the dayes shorte, and the houres shorte, in lyke wyse is the nyght. And neuerthelesse an houre of the daye, and an houre of the nyght, bothe togyther haue .xl. mynutes, as for two houres Artyfycyales, that the one leuyth, the other ta∣keth. And than take we our Planettes from the Sonne rysyng, and not before vnto the sonne goynge downe, and than all the remenaunt is nyghte. And so aboute the moneth of Decem∣bre the dayes haue but .viii. houres Artyfycya∣les of the Clockes, and they haue .xii. tempora∣les, than lette the .viii. houres Artyfycyalles be deuyded in egall partyes, and it shall be .xii. ty∣mes .lx. mynutes, and euery partye shall be a temporall houre, that shall be of .xl. mynutes
and no mo. Thus in Decembre the temporall houres of the daye, haue but .xl. mynutes, but the houres of the nyghte haue .lxxx. mynutes. For in that tyme the nyghtes haue .xvi. houres Artyycyalles, yf they ben deuyded in .xii. par∣tyes ben .lxxx. mynutes, For euery temporall houre of the nyght in Decembre haue .lxxx. my¦nutes & .xl. For an houre of the day ben .vi. score mynutes in two temporall houres, as many in two houres Artyfycyalles, that ben eche of .xl. mynutes. In the moneth of Iune is the con∣trarye. In Marche and in Septembre all hou∣res ben egall: as is the dayes in other monethes by egall porcyon. ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ Thus endeth the .vii. Planettes, vpon the .vii. dayes in the weke. ¶ And hereafter foloweth the natures, and exposycions of the .xii. syg∣nes deuyded by the .xii. Monthes of the yere. Capitulo .iii. ¶ Marche hath the sygne of the Ra. And is indyfferent for takynge of purgacyon. And is very good to let blode.
ARies is a sygne mouable hote and drye, coleryke, nature of the fyre, and hathe lordshyp in mannes heade & the face, and the partyes longynge to the heade, whan the Moone is in that sygne, beware of cuttynge in the heade or in the face, or in any vayne that longeth to the heade. Also it is peryllous in the begynnyng of Aries to take any heade ache, or any hurtynge in the heade, for it were token of longe durynge or els of death, but it is not so peryllous in the ende of it, and this sygne is mouable oryentall and of masculyne kynde, than is good to wor∣ke all thynges that is wroughte with fyre, and it is good to take vyages towarde the Eest, and it is good to let blode on the arme, and to bathe the, and to sowe sedes, and to make matrymo∣nyes, and to begyn all good werkes that thou wolde soone ende, and is euyll to do thynges, whiche thou woldest haue longe laste, for asmo¦che as the Ram is a beest that roungeth, and ca∣steth vp agayne the meate that he eateth tofore. Therfore than there shulde no medycyne, nor no passyon be taken inwarde, whyle the moone is in that sygne, for all naturall medycynes, and passyons receyued in that tyme, men shul∣de caste them vp agayne, and so it falleth in all
the sygnes that ben roungynge, as Aryes, and Taurus, and Caprycorne, and the laste parte of Sagittarye. In all these there shulde no pas¦syone be gyuen for drede of castynge vp agay¦ne, for this sygne aryseth oute of the Oryent, and causeth the tyme to be hote and drye. ¶ The man that is borne vnder the sygue of Aries, by kynde of complexyon is Coleryke, and shall be wytty and wylye, slye and dyscey∣uable, small of bones, yelowe of coloure, and kynde of herte. The sonne entreth in the sygne of Aries: the .xv. Kalen̄. of Marche, and dwel∣leth therin vnto the .xvi. kalendas of Apryll. ¶ And in this moneth of Marche i .iii. peryl∣lous dayes to take any syckenesse vpon, that is to saye, the .xv. xvi. and .xix. ¶ Apryll hath the sygne of the Bulle, And is euyll for to take purgacyon, And also is euyll to let blode. THe Moone beynge in Taurus, that is the sygne of the Bulle, the whiche Syg∣ne reygneth in the necke and the throte, it is than peryllous to be ventused in the necke, or to catche or take syckenes in the throte, and mo¦che more peryllous in the begynnynge than is in the ende, this sygne is stedfast Meridyonall
is of the Southe partie, he is colde & drye erth∣ly, and of femynyne kynde / and melancoly of complexion, it is than good to sowe sedes, to plante trees & vynes: for they shal redey growe and it is good to buylde howsonge, and to wd a wyfe, and euery thynge to do that thou wol∣dest haue longe to endure, and stably to abyde It is euyll to begyn batayle or to fyght. For it causeth the tyme to be colde & dry, and the wyn¦de to haue his course nygh the erthe, and the skyes to flye abrode by the erthe. ✚ ☞ ¶ The man that is borne vnder this sygne, is by kynde of complexion Melancoly vnstable & vnttewe, whyte lyuered, & scarce of his purse. The sonne entreth in ye sygne of Taurus, the .xv. Kalen̄. of Apryll, and dwelleth therin tyll the .xvi. Kalen̄. of May. ¶ And in this monthe of Apryll, is .ii. peryl∣lous dayes to take any maner of syckenes on, that is to saye the .xvi. and the .xxi. ¶ May hath the sygne of two Twynnes. And is indyfferent to take purgacyon. And is euyll to let blode. WHan the moone is in Gemyny, that is the sygne of .ii. Twynnes / or .ii. Chyl∣dren of one byrthe, the whiche sygne reygneth
in the armes and handes of man. This sygne is dowble bodyed and Occidentall, that is of ye west partie, and is Sanguyne of complexion, hote and moyste after the eyre. In that tyme beware of cuttynge in the shulders, armes, and handes, nor in that tyme open no vayne in tho places. It is good that tyme to treate of frend¦shyp, & whan the moone is in the sygne of Ge¦myny, beware of lettyng of blode, for it is euyl and specyally in the blumes, for Gemyny go∣uerneth them, And yf one take the syckenes in a howse and dye, all the other be in great daun∣ger to dye of the same. ☞ ❧ ❧ ¶ The man tha is borne whyle the moone is vnder the lordshyp of this sygne, he shal by way of kynde be very wyse, preuy, and true, he shall haue thre wyues: & he shal trauayle myghty fast to purchase worshype. The son̄e entreth in the sygne of Gemyny, the .xv. kalen̄. of May, and dwelleth therin tyll the .xvi. kalen̄. of Iune. ¶ And in the monthe of May is .iii. daunge∣rous dayes, that is to say ye .vii. the .xv. & the .xx. ¶ Iune hath the sygne of the Creuy, And is good for to take purgacyon. And is indyfferent to let blode. CAncer is a sygne mouable, colde moyste
flumatyke, and watery, and hathe of mannes body the brest, and the stomacke, the splen, and the tybbes, whan the moone is in this sygne, it is good to begyn away by water, and is metely good to take medycynes? but beware to wedde any mayde, whan the sygne is in Cancer. And yf any man take syckenes in any tyme whyle the moone is in the sygne of Cancer, it is great fortune yf he dye not. For it is peryllous bothe in the begynnynge and in the ende, this sygne is Septemtryonall, that is of the Northe par∣tye. Also it is euyll to buylde howsynge, or to sette trees, or to begyn any werke that shall last and endure longe. ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ The man that is borne whyle that ye moone entreth in this sygne, he shall be Femynyne of face, melancolyous, feynt herted and whyte of skynne, and he shall loue a woman whiche shall greue hym, & his destenye shall be harde in his youthe, but whan he is paste .xxx. yere, he shall haue a maladye in the raynes, and he escape, he shall lyue by kynde .C. yere. The sonne en∣treth in the sygne of Cancer, the .xv. Kalenda of Iune, and dwelleth therin tyll the .xvi. Ka∣lendar of Iuly. ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ And in this monthe of Iune is .ii. daunge∣rous dayes to take syckenesse vpon, that is to say, th iii. and the .vii.
¶ Iuly hathe the sygne of the Lyon. And is euyll to take purgacyon. And very euyll to let blode. Or Leo is a sygne stedfaste Oryentall hote and drye Co∣loryke, nature of fyre, and of masculyne kynde, and hath of mannes body the sydes, & the backe, senwes, bones, & grystels, beware whyle the moone reygneth there, of venusyng, or cut¦tynge, or harme catchange in tho places, for it is very daungerous in the ende of Leo to take syckenes, more than in ye behynnynge, for than he maye releue by good gouernaunce, and it is euyll to gyue medycyne to the herte, or stomac¦ke, and the vaynes to touche with yron. ¶ A man that is borne whyle ye moone entreth in this sygne of Leo, by kynde he shal be holden easye, he shall take a wyfe a heady stronge wo∣man, he shall be loued as the Lyon amonge be∣astes, and he shall haue great power amonge stronge men. The sonne entreth in this sygne the .xv. Kalen̄. of Iuly, and dwelleth therin tyll the .xvi. Kalen̄. of August. ¶ And in this monthe of Iuly is. ii. daunge∣rous dayes to take any syckenes vpon, that is to say, the. . and the .xx.
¶ August hath the sygne of a Virgyn. And is euyll for to take purgacion. And is indyfferent to let blode. VIrgo is a Sygne dowble bodyed Merydyonall, that is of ye South partye colde and drye, Melancoly of complexion, nature of the erthe and of Femynyne kynde, & hathe of mannes body the wombe, medryfe, & guttes the lyuer galle, and mylte. But chefelye in the lym̄es byneth the medryfe, than beware of brea¦kynge, or cuttynge on the belye, or preuye pla∣ces withinforth. Also it is peryllous for a man to take any syckenes in the begynnyng therof, but not so peryllous in the ende, but rather to∣ken of helthe, it is not good to wedde a mayde for she shal be barayne, but it is good to wedde a wydowe. ¶ The man that is borne vnder this sygne, he shal be well loued, and a man of great pytie and wyse, and lyue moche in ease, he shall be of good name amonge all maner of men, he shall haue worshyp in his age, he shall haue a sy∣gne in the heade. The son̄e entreth in the sygne of Virgo the .xv. Kalen̄. of August, and dwel∣leth therin vnto the .xvi. Kalen̄. of Septembre. ¶ And in this monthe of August is .ii. peryl∣lous dayes to take any maner of syckenes on, that is to saye the .xix. and the .xx.
¶ Septembre hath the sygne of the Balaunce And is good for to take purgacyon. And is very good to let blode. LIbra is a Sygne mouable hote & moyste Sanguinariu, and hathe the ouerparte of a man: and the ne¦der ende of a woman, that is to say the nauyll, the raynes, and the lowe partyes of the wombe, & the share, whan the moone is in Libra, it is good to let blode, & is beste to make medycynes for the nauyll, and to do all thynge that thou wolde haue broughte to the ende, and this sygne is Occidentall san∣guyne of complexion, and of masculyne kynde and is good to begyn that y• shall longe laste, & knowe well from the degre of Libra, to the de∣gre of Scorpio, it is euyll to begyn dyuers thynges, for ye moone is y• tyme in the worste. ¶ The man that is borne vnder this sygne, he shall be well beloued, and good shal neuer fayle hym, he shall haue a sygne in the necke or in the shoulder bone, he shall be in great peryll tyll y• he be .xxx yere olde, & than shal he come to great worshyp. The sonne entreth in the sygne of Libra the .xv. Kalen̄. of Septembre, and dwel∣leth therin tyll the .xvi. Kalen̄. of Octobre. ¶ And in this monthe of Septembre is. ii. pe∣ryllous
dayes to take any maner of syckenesse on, that is to saye the .vi. and the .vii. ¶ Octobre hath the sygne of a Scorpyon. And is good for to take purgacyon. And is indyfferent to let blode. SCorpio is a sygne of a Ser∣pent colde and moyste, Flu∣matyke nature of water Sep¦temtryonall, that is of the Northe partye, and hathe of mannes body the preuye mē¦bres and the bladder, and whan the moone is in this sygne, it is good to gyue medycynes to ye membres of man and woman, and to take laxa¦tyues, and to make all thynge that shall last lon¦ge, and it is good make a way by water. ¶ The man that is borne vnder this sygne, he shall loue well the company of women, and ha∣ue other mennes herytages, he shall be melanco¦lyous, his wordes shall turne wel in age, he shal be in trauayle, and in the heade he shall haue a token or in the face, he may lyue by kynde .xl. ye¦res. The sonne entreth in the sygne of Scor∣pio the .xv. Kalen̄. of Octobre, & dwelleth therin tyll the .xvi. Kalen̄. of Nouembre. ¶ And in the monthe of Octobre is one peryl∣lous daye, that is to say the .vi. daye.
¶ Nouembre hath the sygne of the Archer. And is good for to take purgacyon. And also is good to let blode. I Do you to wyt that Sagitta∣rius is a sygne of an Archer, & is dowble bodyed hote and dry nature of the fyre, and is colo∣ryke of complexion, & of mas∣ulyne kynde Oryentall, that is of the Eest par¦tie, and this sygne reygneth in the thyes & lad∣doges of a man, and beware of cuttyng of tho places, and than is good to let blode & to trea∣te of peace, and to wedde a wyfe, and to make all medycynes that is made with fyre. ¶ The man that is borne vnder this Sygne, shall be hasty and bolde to do folye, and he shall haue a sygne in the cheke, or in the shoulders, he shall be bytten of a dogge, he shall haue troble, and sore iyen, he shall haue two wyues, & ye laste shal begyle hym, & he shall wexe sycke at .xl. wyn¦ter, and he escape he shal lyue by way of kynde C. yeare. The sonne entreth in this sygne of Sagittarius the .xv. kalen̄. of Nouembre, and dwelleth therin, tyll the .xvi. kalen̄. of Decēbre. ¶ And in the monthe of Nouembre, is .ii. peryl¦lous dayes to take any maner of syckenes on, that is to saye the .xv. and the .xix.
¶ Decembre hath the sygne of the Gote. And is euyll to take purgacyon. And is euyll to let blode. CApricornus is a sygne moua∣ble and vnstedfast of the South partie endely colde and drye, me¦lancoly nature of the erath, and of femynyne kynde, and hathe of mannes body y• knees, whan the Moone is in this sygne, it is good to make medycynes to the knees, but beware of cuttyn¦ge or hurtynge therof, for dreade of towchinge the senowes & vaynes: for it is peryllous whyle the moone reygneth there, and moche more greatter peryll in the ende, than is in the begyn¦nynge. ☞ ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ The man that is borne vnder this sygne shal be wyse, fayre, and hasty, and he shall haue a to¦ken in the heade or in the kne, he shall be melan∣coly, & he shall lyue by kynde. C. yeare, as Astro¦nomyers sayth. The son̄e entreth in the sygne of Capricornus, the .xv. Kalen̄. of Decembre, and dwelleth therin tyll the .xvi. Kalen̄. of the moneth of Ianuary. ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ And in the moneth of Decembre is .vi. peryl¦lous dayes to take syckenes, or any dysease on, that is the .iii. vi. vii. ix. xv. and .xvi.
¶ Ianuarye hath the sygne of a man shedynge water. And is good to take purgacyon. And is indyfferent to let blode. AQuarius is a Sygne stedfast Occydentall, that is of the west partye, hote and moyste after the kynde of y• eyre, and Sanguyne of complexion, & hath of mannes body the shan¦kes vnto the ende of the ancles, and whan the moone is in that sygne, it is good to set trees, & to buylde, & to wed, & is euyl to take sickenes in al the tymes whyle ye moone reygneth there. ¶ The man that is borne in ye sygne of Aqua¦rius shal be worshypped, he shal be good & true, and shal be welbeloued, and haue often hedache he shall haue a fall from ryches, but he shall be happye in the west conutree, and he shall be in peryl of water. The sonne entreth in the sygne of Aquarius the .xv. Kalen̄. of Ianuary, & dwel¦leth therin tyll the .xvi. Kalen̄. of February. ¶ And in the moneth of Ianuarye, is .viii. pe∣ryllous dayes to take syckenes, that is to saye the .i. ii. iiii. v. x. xv. xvii. and the .xix. ¶ Februarye hath the sygne of thre Fysshes And is good for to take purgacyon. And is indyfferent to let blode.
PIsces is a sygne cōmon dow∣ble bodyed Septemtryonall, colde, moyste, and watery, flu¦matyke of complexion: and of femynyne kynde, and hath of mānes body the feete, than is peryllous to let blode, or open any vayne in that place, and yf a man take syc∣kenes in any tyme of that sygne, it is not of ryghte great peryll, but it is good to go to counseyll to accorde, and to make all thynge that maye go by water, and to make a thynge that shall laste longe. ✚ ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ The man that is borne vnder this sygne of Pisces, shall be a great lechour, and go ferre in traueylynge, he shall haue an euyll hurte in his heade, in his youthe he shall haue many malady¦es, he shall fall in water and escape, well he may lyue by kynde. C. yeare, & ye he wyll haue good he must dwell in the North. The sonne entreth in this sygne of Pisces the .xv. Kalen̄. of Febru¦arye, and dwelleth therin tyll the .xvi. Kalen̄. of the moneth of Marche. ¶ And in the moneth of Februarye is .iii. pe∣ryllous dayes to take any maner of syckenes on, that is to say the .viii. the .x. and the .xvii. ¶ Here foloweth the euyll and peryllous dayes in the yere. Cap̄. iiii.
MAysters of Physycke that this Crafte fyrste founde, telleth the fyrste peryllous dayes, and the moste daungerous dayes in the yeare. In whiche yf any man or woman be let blode of wounde or vayne, they shall dye within .xxi. dayes folowynge. Or who so falleth in any syckenes in any of these day∣es, they shal neuer escape tyl they be deed. And who so take any great iourney in any of these dayes to go ferre from home, he shall be in daū∣ger or dye, or he come home agayne. And who so weddeth a wyfe in any of these dayes hastely they shall be departed, or els they shall lyue to∣gyther with moche sorowe. And who so begyn∣neth in any of these dayes any great warke, it shall neuer come to good ende. And these ben the dayes folowynge, that is to saye. ¶ In Ianuarye are .vii. dayes, that is to saye the fyrste, the .ii. the .iiii. the .v. the .x. the .xv. the .xvii. and the .xix. ¶ In Februarye are .iii. dayes, the .viii. the .x. and the .xvii. ¶ In Marche are .iii. dayes, the .xv. the .xvi. and the .xix. ¶ In Apryll are .ii. dayes, the .xvi. and the .xxi. ¶ In May are .iii. dayes, the .vii. xv. and .xx. ¶ In Iune are .ii. dayes, the .iiii. and the .vii.
¶ In Iuly are .ii. dayes, the .xv. and the .xx. ¶ In August are .ii. dayes, the .xix. and the .xx. ¶ In Septembre are .ii. dayes, the .vi. &. the .vii. ¶ In Octobre is one, the .vi. daye. ¶ In Nouembre are .ii. daye, the .xv. and y• .xix. ¶ In Decembre are .iii. dayes, the .vi. & the .vii. and the .ix. Et alii dicunt .xv. and .xvi. ¶ Also there are .iii. dayes in the yere, as saynt Bede telleth, in the whiche yf any man let hym blode, or take any drynke to medycyne, within the .vi. day or the .xiii. day of the moneth he shal dye, that is for to say, the fyrste daye of the mo∣neth of August, the laste daye of Decembre, & the .viii. day of ye Kalen̄. of Apryll.. Or who so eate of a goose in any of these .ii. dayes within xl. dayes after he shal be sycke & in peryl to dy. ¶ Also there is thre peryllous Mondayes, that yf any man or woman eate of any gose flesshe on any of these .iii. dayes, they shal haue the fal¦lynge euyll, and no bodely werke shall come to good ende that is begon in any of these .iii. day¦es, that is to say, the fyrste monday February, The seconde the last mondan of May, And ye thyrde, the last monday of Septembre. ¶ Who so wyll learne of the .iii. peryllous mon¦dayes as clarkes sayen, in the whiche no man shulde be letten blode of wounde nor vayne. For who so be lette blode in any of these dayes,
soone after he shall dye, & that within .iii. dayes And who so that than taketh any medycyne, he shal be in great daunger to dye. And who so be borne in any of these dayes, he shall be acom∣bred thorughe stronge deth, that is for to saye, The fyrste mondaye of August. The seconde is the laste mondaye of the same moneth. And the thyrde is the laste mondaye of Decembre. And for this encheason many men drede and fere eche mondaye. ✚ ☞ ❧ ❧ ¶ who so wyll learne the Canyculer dayes, the whiche be dayes of great daūger and peryll, as Clarkes saye, and they begyn the .xv. Kalen̄. of August, and endureth to the fourth Nonas of Septembre, in whiche season is very peryllous to take syckenes, and it is also peryllous to ta∣ke drynkes, or medycynes, or to lette blode, but yf it be for great nede, and that muste be after the myddes of the daye. ¶ Thus endeth the natures, and exposycions, of the .xii. Sygnes, deuyded by the .xii. Monthes of the yeare vpon blode lettynge, with the moste daungerous dayes for to do any maner thynge towchynge Physycke and any other.
¶ And here foloweth the Remedyes for many dyuers Infyrmyties and dyseases that greueth and hurteth the body of man. And fyrste for the Pestylence, and the remedy therfore. Or the mooste nedefull thyng of all, yf so be that this appere in any wyse foresayd, is for to drawe the botche by crafte away from the clensynge place a great space from y• her∣te. And that shall I tell the howe, and in all my practysynge in Physycke this .xviii. yeare, I wyste it neuer fayle but twyse, & that was not longe of the Medycyne, And none other tyme but of other defautes: the whiche I wyll not wryte at this tyme, though it wyll expell it and voyde it. Also loke in the tyme of Pestylence, that thy Codwares be alway fresshely wasshen, and after the wasshynge, loke that they be dyp∣ped in fyne water of roses: and on the same wy¦se the kerchyefe that thou lappest thy heade in on nyghtes, and let it drye by the fyre, and not by the Pestylence eyre. And whan thou lyest ye downe to slepe, lay vnder thy heade, and vnder the ende of thy pyllowe that is towarde thy vy∣sage
Rosemary, Isope, soueraygne, Myntes, Penyalryall, Lorey leues, put in thy mouthe macys, and clowes, or els Nutmyges, loke eue¦ry daye that thou take of fyne tryacle proued ye quantyte of a beane & a halfe. Also bere in thy purse these maner of spyces, Macys, Clowes, Quibibes, Canell, or els Cynamon: and chewe therof, and eate therof, all the tymes of the day. ¶ And yf thou be a poore man & maye not at∣tende to the costes of these thynges. Take than euery daye fastyng. ix. soppes in fyne vynegre of whyte wyne, or els of red wyne, and drynke to them a saucerfull of vynegee, or thou passe out of thy chambre, howse, or place. ¶ Also one of the beste gouernaunce of all is in blode lettynge, for thou shalte vnderstande that a man is in spyrytuall membres pryncy∣pall, that is to saye, the herte, the lyuer, and the brayne, and euery one of these hathe his place gyuen hym by kynde, by the whiche he maye a∣uoyde all superfluytes, and clense hym selfe. ¶ The herte hath his clensynge place in the ar∣me hole. ¶ The clensynge place of the lyuet is betwyxte the thyghe and the body. ¶ The clen∣synge place of the brayne, is vnder the eare, at the rotes, and in the throte. ¶ Than this syckenesse of Pestylence cōmeth thus, whan the pores of a man are open, than
fyrste entreth the venomus & the corrupte eyre, that as soone as it hath maystrye, and is myn∣ged with mannes blode, than tonneth it to the herte that is rote and grounde of mānes lyfe, for to enfecte and dystroye all lyuely spyrytes in a man, and so fynally for to kylle and slee hym, but ye herte & the clene blode flyeth all that is oyous and contraryous vnto kynde. And in asmoche as in hym is expelled all such ma∣ner of corrupcyon and venomus, from hym to his clensyng place to the arme hoole. But than for that place is somtyme stopped, that it may not out, & it passeth than to the pryncypall mē¦bre nexte, that is the lyuer for to enfecte & for to dystroye it. And than it dothe as the herte doth in his kynde, and explleth it from hym to his clensyng place bytwyxte the thyghe and the body for it is also sparred in case and stopped, that it may not out, but passeth the meates & the vaynes vnto the thyrde pryncypall mem∣bre that is the Brayne, but than he wolde ex∣pelle it to his clensynge place, that is vnder the erys and it maye not in case out, therfore the stoppynge and the sparryng of the meates and porys, and for thyckenes of the fowle and corrupte blode, and the venomous matter is mouynge that is myngled therwith, and thus longe tyme the matter is mouynge or it resteth
in any place, somtyme. xii. houres, & somtyme. xxiiii. houres, and somtyme more, and somty∣me lesse after the degre and the gentylnes and the greatnes of the sycknes corrupcyons and venoms that be gendred. But than at the laste, somtyme within. xiiii. houres it passe not out at the clensynge place, nor at none other place throughe bledynge, thā it fystures in some pla∣ce, and cast a man in to an ague, and maketh a botche in some of the thre clensynge places, or els nere to theym on some vayne, for ye shall well were that a botche groundeth hym euermo¦re, and setteth hym on a vayne and letteth the blode than, that it maye not haue his kyndelye course by the vayne as he shulde haue, but it is infecte therby. And so all the pryncypall & spy∣rytuall membres are infecte & thus sleeth man. ¶ Finis. ¶ Thus endeth the thyrde partye of this pestylence treatyse. ¶ For to spourge the hed. Cap̄. vi. TAke the seede of Stauysacre, & beate it small to powdre, & whan it is beaten small, take a fyne ly∣nen clothe, and put the powder therin, and make therof a lytell ball the quantyte of a great ha∣sell nutte, and put in thy mouthe and roll it to
and fro betwyxte thy tethe chawynge holdyng downe thy hed, the space of an houre & it wyll spourge thy hed and thy gūmes, and kepe thy tethe from akynge. ¶ Also for to spourge the hed. Cap̄. vii. ¶ Take the rote of Pelater of Spayne, and chawe it betwyxte thy tethe to and fro a good whyle, and it wyll spourge well thy heade, and also fasten thy tethe, and spourge thy gūmes. ¶ For the hed ache. Cap̄. viii. ¶ Take hemleckes and seeth them tyll they be softe as pappe, than lay them to the heed there the payne is, and let them lye al nyght▪ & on the mornynge laye another hote playster of the sa∣me & do so .ii. or .iii. tymes, and he shall be hole. ¶ For akynge of the heade .Ca. ix. ¶ Take and make lye of Veruayne, or els of Betayne, or of wormewode, & therwith wasshe thy heade thryse in the weke, and it shall do the moche good, and take awaye the ache. ¶ For the to the ache .Cap̄. x. ¶ Take Betayne and wylde gourdes, & sethe them in wyne or els in vynegre, and than put it in thy mouthe as hote as thou mayest suffre and holde it a good whyle in thy mouthe, and it wyll take awaye the payne. ¶ For the ache of a holowe to the .Ca. xi. ¶ Take Assafettda and put it in thy to the that
is holowe, and it wyll appease and take awaye the ache. ¶ Also for the tothe ache. Ca. xii. ¶ Take Henbane and bruse it, and holde it be∣twene thy teth a good whyle, & lay it vpon the tothe ye aketh, & it wyll swage ye payne anone. ¶ Also for the tothe ache. Ca. xiii. ¶ Take the sede of Henbane and cast it vpon a chaffynge dysshe of charcole fyre, & holde thy mouthe ouer the fyre, that the smoke maye en∣tre in to thy mouth, & also than hold thy mouth ouer a basen of fayre clene water, & thou shalte se vpon the water as it were smal wormes, that shall come droppynge out of thy mouthe. Also take the seed of henbane & bete it to small pow∣der, and medle it with waxe, and make a lyttell pellet that it maye be full of powdre without forthe, and put it in the hole of the holowe toth that aketh, and it wyll lyghtely slee the ache of the tothe. ¶ Also for the toth ache. Ca. xiiii. ¶ Take the roote of Henbane, and sethe it in vynegre to the thyrde partye be sodden awaye, and with the same wassh thy mouthe, and hol∣de thy mouthe full a good whyle / and it wyl sle¦the to the ache, Also take the roote of Henba∣ne, and holde it betwene thy akynge tethe, and it wyll do awaye the payne.
¶ For the stenche in the mouthe. Ca. xv. ¶ Take the Ioyce of Veruayne and bruse it & put it in thy mouthe, and holde it a good why∣le close in thy mouthe, and it wyll take awaye the stenche. ¶ For a stynkynge brethe. Ca. xvi. ¶ Take oyle Dorret, Turpentyne, hony, oyle olyue, vyrgyn waxe, as moche of one as of an other, and boyle theym all togyther and make an oyntemente therof, and vse it euery daye in the pacyentes nosethrylles, and lette it be put in to the nose euery daye in the mornyng with two tentes made of lynte scraped of fyne lyn∣nen clothe, and he shalbe hole. ¶ For ache & wormes in the eares. Ca. xvii. ¶ Take the ioyce of Henbane and put it in to thyne eares, & it wyll take awaye the ache and sle the wormes in them. ¶ A precyouse water for poyson, and specy∣ally agaynst the pestylence, Cap̄. xviii. ¶ Take Turmentyl, scabyous, goldes, detay∣ne, and pympernell, of eueryche a lyke moche and dystyll therof a water, & drynke it fastyng euery daye in the mornynge, fyrste next your herte, for it shall do you moche good. ¶ For ronnynge iyen. Cap̄. xix. ¶ Take blacke snayles and seeth them in fayre water, than take the grece that is on the water,
and therwith anoynte the iyen that be watery and ronneth, ¶ For red blered iyen. Cap̄. xx. ¶ Take the ioyce of Rue, and powdre of Cō∣myn, medle theym togyther, than take cotten and depe it well therin, and laye it therto, and anoynte the temples, the browes, and the lyd∣des of the iyen therwith, and they shal be hole. ¶ For iyen ye be dasuned or dyrke. Ca. xxi. ¶ Take the rote of red fenell in wynter, and in sōmer the leues, or elles bothe rotes & leues and stampe theym and wrynge out the iuce, and tempre thy iuce with fyne claryfyed hon∣ny, and make therof an oyntment, & anoynt the iyen therwith, and it shall put awaye the derkenes, and shall clere the syghte. ¶ A precyous water for the syght of the iyen. Cap̄. xxii. ¶ Take smaleche, red fenell, rue, veruayne, Betayne, Egrymonye, pympernell, efrage▪ sauge, salendyne, of eueryche a lyke moche of quantyte, and wasshe them well and clene and stampe them, and put theym in to a fayre bra∣sen panne, and take the powdre of. xv. peper cornes, fayre sarcyd in to a pynt of good why∣te wyne, and put it vnto the herbes, with. iii. sponefull of lyfe hōny, and. v. sponefull of the water of a man chylyde that is an Innocent,
and medle theym all togyther and boyle them ouer the fyre, and whan it is sodde strayne it throughe a clene lynnen clothe, and put it in a glasse and stoppe it well and close / tyll you wyll occupye it, and whan nede is do therof in to the sore iyen with a fether, and yf it be waxen drye tempre it with good whyte wyne, for it is very good for the syght of the iyen. ¶ For a pynne and the webbe in the iyen. Cap̄. xxiii. ¶ Take a curtesye of clene claryfyed hōnye, and as moche of womans mylke, that norys∣sheth a mayde chylde, and for the woman the man chylde, and sethe them togyther, & whan it is colde putte it in a glasse, and close it from the eyre, and thus do. ii. or. iii. dayes. ii. or. iii. tymes euery day, and he shall be hole. ¶ For all euyls in the iyen. Cap̄. xxiiii. ¶ Take clene claryfyed hōnye one parte, and more than of halfe the hōny of the gall of an Hare, medle them togyther in a vessell ouer the fyre, but make it but luke warme, and kepe it in a Glasse, but beware that thou take not to moch therof in thyne iyen, for the quantyte of a small pynnes heade is ynoughe at ones whan thou goste to bedde, & that is sufficyent for. vii. yeares yf a man haue a perle, or a web in his iye & it be not drye, put therto some dele
more of the gall than of hōnye. ¶ For boylynge in the iye. Cap̄. xxv. ¶ Take may butter and powdre of commyn / and stampe them togyther / and laye it on a lynnen clothe to the iyen, and often tymes re∣newe it, and whan the boylynge is swaged, ta∣ke saffron, and womans myke, & grynde them togyther, and droppe therof in the sore iyen, & than thou shalt be hole. ¶ For a stynkynge brethe. Capi. xxvi. ¶ Take .ii. handfull of powdre of cōmyn and sythe it in good whyte wyne, from a quarte tyll a pynte, and drynke this fyrste and laste alwayes hote, and he shall be hole within .ix. daa¦es drynkynge. ¶ For the stomacke that is hote and swollen. Cap̄. xxvii. ¶ For the stomacke that is hote and swollen, take the rote of Smaleche and stampe it / and put it in swete wyne, or in other good wyne all a daye and anyghte, and than let it be passed throughe a fayre lynnen clothe, and put it in a clene vessell, and vse to drynke a quantyte ther∣of euery daye fastynge .viii. or .ix. dayes duryn∣ge and he shall be hole. ¶ For the stomacke that aketh, that cōmeth of colde. Cap̄. xxviii. ¶ For the stomacke that aketh, that cōmeth of
colde, take an herbe that is called Poleo, and drye benes, and an handefull of syngryge and as moche of this Poleo, and putte it in a ves∣sell with fayre water, & let it sethe there on the fyre, tyll y• thyrde parte of the water, be soden away, and put therto sugre of stone and a cur∣tesye of honny, & drynke it .vi. dayes fastynge, and he shall be hole. ¶ For to force the stomacke. Cap̄. xxix. ¶ To force the stomacke take, canell .iii. poy and .i. poys of mastyke, and .i. poys of the pa∣rynges of Pomegarnades, and halfe a poys of galyngale, and stampe all these togyther / and tempre it with honnye that hath ben boyled on the fyre, and well scummed, and vse of this as moche as a nut euery day, durynge .ix. dayes fastynge, and he shall be hole. ¶ For the stomacke and the bely that aketh. Cap̄. xxx. ¶ For the stomacke and the bely that aketh, ta∣ke the floure of an herbe that is named Nema∣ham, that is lyke to mynte, and it hath a good sauour, take .iiii. poys of Cosmer, & .vii. poys of water, and sethe all togyther to the .iii. poys of water, and sethe all togyther to the .iii. parte and with sugre drynke this .v. dayes fastynge in the mornyng, and he shall be hole. ¶ And a man be Sycke at the stomacke, or in the belye, or at the herte, or heed,
or were bytten with any euyll venomus beest, or poysoned. Cap̄. xxxi. ¶ And a man were by the waye trauaylynge, or in his house, and he had all these syckenes, and he had with hym a Lectuarye, that is made of .v. thynges, and he eate therof, or dronke therof in water .iii. poys, or .iiii. he shulde be hole and he vse it .xv. dayes fastynge, whan he goth to bed last, he shulde be hole of all the syckenes in his body, & he dronke euery tyme two poys, and these thynges they be, Scor∣logio, Morre, Genciana, Grandorer, and zaraont, as moche of one as another, & stampe them and strayne them, and medle them with honny that hath ben well boyled on the fyre, & well scummed fayre and clene. For this is cal∣led the Lecutuarye of lyfe. ¶ A good medycyne for rysynge vnder the stomacke. Cap̄. xxxii. ¶ Take peper, longe peper, graynes, saffron gynger, anneys, lycores, and sugre, sethe all these in good ale tyll it be thycke, and gyue it the sycke to drynke, and he shall be hole. ¶ Also a good playste for the rysynge vnder the stomacke. Cap̄. xxxiii. ¶ Take yarowe, otherwyse called mylfoyle, ed fenell, red myntes, borage, rue, fetherfoy, clote leues, perytory, egrymonye, of eueryche
a lyke mothe, and the grece of a barowe hogge, for a man, and for a woman of a yelke hogge, that is of a sowe kynde, and sethe theym all togyther in good ale, & make a playster ther∣of, & laye it to the stomacke as hote as it maye be suffered .ii. or .iii. tymes, and he shall be hole. ¶ For to dystroye the hete in the stomacke. Capit. xxxiiii. ¶ Take fayre clere water and boyle it well, and scūme it, and put therin sheuers of browne breade, and let theym lye therin an houre, tyll the water be almoste colde, and than drynke therof .ii. or .iii. dayes by dyuers tymes, and he shall amende in shorte tyme. ¶ For brennynge in the stomacke. Capitu. xxxv. ¶ Take and eate grene percely & galyngale without any other maner of thynge. ¶ For to auoyde flewme out of the sto∣macke, & also the heade. Cap̄. xxxvi. ¶ Take powder of Pelater of Spayne, and powdre of Cōmyn, powder of longe peper, powder of gynger, mustarde, vynegre, and medle them togyther, and chaffe theym on the fyre vntyll they waxe thycke, and than as hote as ye maye suffre, putte parte therof in your mouthe galkyng in your throte vp and downe but lette none entre in to your stomacke, and
do this dyuers tymes, spyttynge out be the space of an houre, and this is a gargarysme. ¶ For all euylles in the stomacke. Capitulum. xxxvii. ¶ Take asshe sede, lynne sede, and Cōmyn, of eueryche a lyke moche, and gyue it to the sycke body to drynke with hote worte, or els with fayre hote water. ¶ For a dysease at y• herte. Cap̄. xxxviii. ¶ Take Sentuarye and sethe it in stale ale, whan it is wel soden stampe it in a morter and sethe it agayne with the same lycoure, & than clense it through a clothe, & {pro}porcyon the iuce, to .ii. sponefull of the iuce, put therto .iii. spone∣full of claryfyed hōny, & than boyle it well to∣gyther agayne, & put it in a boxe & gyue it to the pacyent euerydaye .iii. sponefull fastynge, tyll he be hole, & this shall do away y• glut from his herte, & make hym to haue talent to meate. ¶ For wekenes of the herte. Cap̄. xxxix. ¶ Take Rose water, and Perles betyn small to powdre, and medle it with sugre, & drynke it .ii. or .iii. dayes, and it shall do the good. ¶ For fayntnes of the herte. Cap̄▪ xl. ¶ Take the fylynge of golde, and the powdre of the bone of a hartes herte, medle with the iuce of borage and sugre made in syrope, for that is very good for swonynge.
¶ For the brest that is encōbred. Cap̄. xl. ¶ Take Isope & sethe it in a pottell of wyne yll that it come to a quarte, & let the sycke vse therof fyrst in the mornynge, and last at euen hote, and at morowe colde tyll he be hole. ¶ For a man, woman, or chylde, that is broken in the bely. Cap̄. xlii. ¶ Take in Maye the tendre croppes of herbe Osmunde, and drye theym with the wynde, and not in the sonne, and make powdre ther∣of, and sarce it and kepe it drye in a bladder, & let the pacyent drynke of that powdre with whyte wyne euen and morowe, wynter and sōmer, saue in Maye. In Maye drynke of the tendrynges of the sayde Osmunde, for this drynke wyll make the broken belye grene as it were newe broken, and the pacyent muste be well and easey trussed, that he or she maye go with it all daye, and lye with it all nyght tyll he be hose, and that wyll be within .xiiii. dayes, yf he be well ruled, for he muste lye vp ryght as moche he maye both daye and nyght, and not strayne his belye, but as lytell as he can. And he muste kepe hym lae as longe as he is sycke and lye in his bedde .ii. houres in the mornyng after he hath dronke this medycyne, and must eate no whyte meate tyll he be hole, nor walke but easely for straynynge.
¶ The playster to knyt hym. Cap̄. xliii. ¶ Take Polypody that groweth on an oke, the rootes therof and pare them clene, and the rootes of Elena cāpona, and pare them clene, and than beate them in a morter, as small as thou caste, and tempre it with oyle of baye and make a thycke playster, and laye it on a thycke clothe a good quantyte, and lay it there the sycke is greued vnder the trusse from the euyn vntyll the morowe, and on the morowe chaunge it agayne, this is for all the yeare saue in May, than the leues be better. ¶ For the playster in Maye. Cap̄. xliiii. ¶ Take Polypodye leues, and the leues of Elena campana, and Daysye leues, and bete them small, & tempre them with oyle of Baye as thou semest best to make a palyster, and lay it there the sore is euyn and morowe, and he shall by the grace of God be hole. ¶ For to breke wynde in  bely. Cap̄. xlv. ¶ Take cōmyn, fenell sede, and anneys sede beatyn to powdre, than sethe it in wyne and drynke it fyrste and laste. ¶ For a swollen wombe. Cap̄. xlvi. ¶ Take the iuce of Kue, and let the pacyent drynke it with wyne or ale, and he shal be hole on warantyse. ¶ For akynge of the wombe. Cap̄. xlvii.
¶ Take tansay, rue, sothernewode, and eate them with salte, and he shall be hole. ¶ For the herte brennynge. Cap̄. xlviii. ¶ Take the croppe of Fenell, and chewe it in thy mouthe, and sucke the iuce therof, & spette out the other parte, and he shall be hole. ¶ For sore sydes within forthe. Cap̄. xlix. ¶ Take Alysaundres, persely, louage, red fe∣ell, smalege, burnet, and gromell, and sethe theym in whyte wyne, tyll halfe be consumed than strayne it and let the sycke drynke it fyrste and last, at euen hote, and at morowe colde, ¶ Cōtra telam et maculā in oculo. Cap̄. l. ¶ Take fenell, vnset goldes, veruayne, and betayne An̄. and stampe theym & tempre them with ale or whyte wyne, and strayne it, and than stampt .ix. lowpes, otherwyse called Chesiockes, and put theym in to the sayde ly∣coure, and gyue it to the pacyeunt to drynke. ix. dayes folowynge, and he shall be hole. ¶ For a womans pappe y• is sore. Cap̄. li. ¶ Take the rote of ryan, y• is to saye, wylde Neppe, and make bare all the ouer parte of the sayde roote, that is to saye, the toppe of the roote, and make an hole therin, and couer it with a tyle stone and put it in the earth, and lay earth vpon it, and let it stande so .iiii. or .v. dayes, than open it and take the iuce, that ye
fynde in the hole and kepe it in a glasse, and therwith anoynte the brest and it shal be hole. ¶ For the lyuer that is corrupte and wasted. Cap̄ .lii. ¶ Take a good quantyte of lyuer worte, and bruse it a lytell, & than sethe it in good stronge worte with a quantyte of Rubarbe, and vse this medycyne and thou shalt be hole. ¶ For the hete in the lyuer. Cap̄ .liii. ¶ Take the iuce of sowre apples, and swete apples of eche a pounde or more, as moche as you thynke veste, and .ii. pounde of sugre and medle these thynges togyther, and lette them boyle on a symple fyre tyll it be thycke as a sy∣rope, and vse this a curtesye therof euery daye fastynge with luke warme water. ¶ For the hete in the lyuer of a man that his colour is yelowe. Cap̄ .liiii. ¶ Take the water of Sycore, and water of Letuse, and the water of the leues and small braunches of a wylde moryer tree, or els take the herbes and stampe all these togyther, and as moche of one as of another, and take the iuce of these thynges, and as moche as all this of sugre, and boyle all togyther vntyll it be as thycke as syrope, and than put therto a poyse and a halfe of Rubarbe, and vse a quantyte of this syrope in colde water euery day fastynge
and last at nyght, and he shall be hole. ¶ For the brest that is encōbred. Cap̄. lvi ¶ Take and drynke .viii. dayes, or .ix. of the Fumer, the cōmeth of sylke wormes, euery daye a poys in syrope of Isope, and yf a man maye not haue this drynke, take the pure hert Dōlignam also in syrope of Isope .x. dayes, and he shall be hole. ¶ For a man that hath wormes in his bely and his body be lene. Cap̄ .lvi. ¶ Take the galle of a Rowe, and floure of Lupius a curtesye and medle theym togyther, and make a playste of wolle, and laye it on his help where the grefe is, and do this .iiii. or .v. dayes, and he shall be hole. ¶ For the breste & the lunges. Cap̄ .lvii. ¶ Take a quātyte of claryfyed hōny & boyle it, and whan it is boled putte therto halfe a pounde of pere wardyns mynsed, and boyle theym well togyther, and than put therto an ounce of powdre, made of the rotes of Elena campana, and an ounce of powdre of lycores / and let theym boyle tyll it be somwhat styffe, than take it from the fyre, & whan it is nyghe colde put therto an ounce powdre of gynger, & styrre it well togyther, vse this fyrste & last. ¶ For to auoyde & distroy flume. Ca .lviii. ¶ Take percely rotes, fenell rotes, perytory,
and Isope, and sethe theym in good ale  lycores, and a quantyte of claryfyed honnye, and vse to drynke it, and thou shalt be hole. ¶ For the stone. Cap̄ .lix. ¶ Take the roundes of thornebacke and drye theym fayre, and make powdre therof, & than take therof .ii. d. weyght, and put therto two sponefull of water of Ramsyne, and drynke it euery daye, and euery nyghte, and than thou shalte be hole. And yf it be a great stone take a sponefull of water of stone croppe .ii. spone∣full of water of Ramsyns, & .ii. peny weyght of the foresayd powdre medled togyther, and vse this medycyne .iii. tymes, and thou shalte be holpe, be the stone neuer so great. ¶ Also for the stone. Cap̄ .lx. ¶ Take the blode of a male Kyd, and drye it in an ouen and make powdre of it, than take gromell sede, grounde Iue beryes, stanmar∣che sede, the rote or the sede of Saxyfrage, ro∣tes of Turmentyll, and of phylypendula, by euyn poicyon, and bete all to smale powdre, than take as moche as the powdre of kyddes blode, and of the sedes and rotes abouesayde, and vse this powdre whan nede is in sauce or in potage, a peny weyght at ones & no more. ¶ For the Collycke, strangury, and the stone. Cap̄.
¶ Take Careawey, fenell sede, spyckenared annes, cōmyn, cynamum, and galyngale, of eueryche halfe an ounce, gromell sede, and ly∣cores, of eueryche of them an ounce, and se the weyght of all them, and bete thē all to powdre, and put halfe a sponefull of the same powdre in ale luke warme and drynke it, and walke therafter an houre, or thou eate or drynke any maner of thynge. ¶ For a man that is lepre, and it take in his legges and go vpwarde. Cap̄ .lxii. ¶ For a man that is lepre, and it take fyrste in his legges and go vpwarde in to his body he maye be soone hole, and yf he wyll take a Charabot, that is to saye, a Bettyll and bren it to asshes, and beate it all to powdre small, and than take olde barowes grece, and melt it well on the fyre, and tempre it togyther, and as moche as halfe that of Blanchet, and make an oyntement therof, and vse it on the sore, and vpon the oyntement, loke that ye putte a plate of lede, full of small holes in many pla∣ces, and chaūge it bothe in the mornynge and at nyght the oyntement, but not the lede, and he shall be soone hole of that syckenes. ¶ For a dertre in a mans flesshe. Ca .lxiii. ¶ Take a worme that is called a Piachar, that is as great as a bene, & is clene blewe or
sendre, and it hath many small feete and whyte vnder the bely. And whan a man toucheth it he waxeth rounde as a boton, take that worme and rubbe it well agaynst the derte, so that it be all broken, and do this euery daye .iii. or .iiii. tymes, and at euery tyme rubbe .iii. wormes, or .iiii. and anone it shall be hole. ¶ For a sauce flume vysage. Cap̄. lxiiii. ¶ Take Elena campana and sethe it in a pot with vynegre tyll it be soden in, than stāpe it small, and than put therto quyckesyluer, and brymstone, and gyltes grece, and bray it togy∣ther and make therof a playster, and laye it to the vysage all nyght, and vpon the morowe wasse it of. ¶ For hym that maye not holde his water Capitulum. lxv. ¶ Take gotes talowe and bren it, and make therof powdre, and put it in to the pacentes potage, and let hym vse this and he shall pysse mesurably ynoughe. ¶ Another for the same. Cap̄. lxvi. ¶ Take Synshone and shepes talowe, and sethe them well togyther, & as hote as it maye be suffered laye it to the membre, and he shall make water anone. ¶ For to dystroye flume. Cap̄. lxvii. ¶ Take betayne and drye it, and make therof
powdre, and kepe it tyll thou haue nede, and whan thou wylt occupye therof take a quan∣tyte of honnye and of the powdre, and make therof .ii. or .iii. pellettes, and swolowe theym downe all hole laste whan thou goest to bed, and that shall do the moche good. ¶ For a wombe that is harde. Cap̄. lxviii. ¶ Drynke the iuce of waybrede with olde wy∣ne and he shall be eased. ¶ Also another for the same, take Cynkfoyle, that is to saye, fyue leued grasse, and stampe it and drynke it with hote mylke, and he shall be eased. ¶ For the blody Menyson. Cap̄. lxix. ¶ Take mylfoyle and plantayne of eueryche alyke moche, stampe them all togyther, and ke∣pe it, and whan thou wylte take therof tempre it with wyne, and lette the pacyent drynke it, and he shall be hole. ¶ For a mans stones that be swollen. Capitulum. lxx. ¶ Take an Herbe that is called Marcellee in Frenche, and frye it well in oyle Olyue, and laye it to the stones that is swollen, as hote as it may be suffered .viii. dayes or more and nede be, for this wyll hele the swellynge. ¶ For to make one sklendre. Cap̄. lxxi. ¶ Take and sethe Fenell in water and drynke
the water laste at euen, and fyrste at morowe, & it shall swage hym or her shortly. ¶ For hym that lacketh wynde. Cap̄. lxxii. ¶ Take malowes, mercuree, and borage & seth them togyther with a peace of porke, and ma∣ke therof potage & eate it, and drynke the broth with whyte wyne, or with whey made of mylke ¶ For hym that is costyfe. Cap̄. lxxiii. ¶ Take the iuce of walworte, & medle it with hōny, and gyue it the pacyent to drynke. ¶ For a wycked blaste, and wynde in the vysage. Cap̄. lxxiiii. ¶ Take an henne egge and roste it harde, than take the whyte therof, and an ounce of Cope∣ras, and bete it togyther small in a brasen mor∣ter tyll it be lyke an oyntment, and therwith a∣noynte the face that is blasted, and whan it is hole, thm anoynt it with Populyon, and that wyll souple the skynne, and make it hole. ¶ For the Shyngles. Cap̄. lxxv. ¶ Take Doues donge and Barly meele, and stampe them togyther, and tempre theym with aysell, and lay it therto. ¶ For the Kowgh. Cap̄. lxxvi. ¶ Take netles that be gathered betwene saynt Mary dayes in Haruest, of theym that beareth sede, and drye them in the sonne, and rubbe out the sede, and grynde it to powder, and drinke it
with me, and thou shalt be hole. ¶ For hym that hath the peryllous Kowghe. Cap̄. lxxvii. ¶ Take Sauge, Rue. Comyn, and powdre of peper, and sethe them in hōny, and make therof a Lectuary, and vse therof a sponefull at euyn and another in the mornynge. ¶ For the Kowghe, that is called the Chynke knowghe. Cap̄. lxxviii. ¶ Take the rotes of Horsehele, and Comfery as moche of one as of another, and stampe them small in a morter, sethe them in fayre wa∣ter, tyll the halfe dele be wasted, and than take the thyrde parte of hōny boyled and scummed, and put them to gyther, and make therof a Lec¦tuarye, and do it in a boxe, and let the sycke vse therof .v. dayes or .vi. a good quantyte at ones, fyrste and laste, and he shall be hole. ¶ For the Iche. Cap̄. lxxix. ¶ Take frankensence, and braye it small, and medle it with oyle of Baye, and than anoynte there as it Icheth. &c. ¶ For to drawe a byle from one place to aother. Cap̄. lxxx. ¶ Take an herke that is called Oeulus christi, and eruayne and make a playster of it, and lay it from the byle .ii. fyngers brode, and whan it hath lyen a good whyle remeue it, and do so
styll, tyll it be there that thou wolde haue it, and there let it breke. ❧ ❧ ❧ ❧ ¶ For hym that pysseth blode. Cap̄. lxxxi. ¶ Take percely, ambrose, and bursa pastoris, of eueryhe a lyke moche, and stampe them and tempre them with a quantyte of gotes mylke, and strayne it, and let hym drynke it .iii. dayes euyn and at morowe, and this wyll staunche hym shortly. ❧ ❧ ❧ ¶ For a man that hath loste his mynde. Cap̄. lxxxii. ¶ Take the iuce of Goldes, of Sauge, and of wormewood, of eueryche of them a sponefull, & take as moche of whyte wyne, and put therto and let hym drynke it at euyn, and as moche a morowe colde, and serue hym thus fye dayes durynge, and he shall be hole. ¶ Another for the same. Cap̄. lxxxiii. ¶ Take and shae of the heer of the molde of his heed, than take Archaungell and stampe it, and bynde it to his heed, where it is shauen, & lette hym take a slepe therwithall, and whan he waketh he shal be ryght weyke, & sobre ynough. ¶ For hym that hath the frenesye. Capitulum. lxxxiiii. ¶ Take oyle of roses, oyle of yolettes, and of eueryche of them .xx. poys, and as moche of water of Locorde, and put it in a newe vessell
of earthe, & boyle it tyll all the water be fayled, than put out that, and put in other in the same vessell asmoche of that water, and boyle it thus seuen tymes, & than put therto halfe of the .iiii. parte of a poys of Cāfere & medle it well togy¦ther, & vse it on his heed whan it is new shauen. ¶ For a persone that vomyssheth to moche. Cap̄. lxxxv. ¶ Take Roses and boyle theym well in good stronge vynegre, and makt a playster therof, & lay it to the persones stomacke. ¶ For a man that hath disease in his eares. Cap̄. lxxxvi. ¶ Take fayre oyle Olyfe, and let it be blowen out of a mans mouthe, that is clene and fastyn¦ge in to the eares of the sycke man, and let this be done .iii. or .iiii. tymes, and lette that syde of the heed be turned downewarde, that the ordure of the heed maye ronne out, and vse this .viii. or ix. dayes, and he shall be amended. ¶ For a man that his eares sowne within. Cap̄. lxxxvii. ¶ Take Amondes, and the Carnelles of Pe∣ches, and let them be clene pylled in hote water, and make oyle of them, and let that oyle be put in to the eares of y• sycke body with tentes ma∣de of fyne lynnen clothe, and vse this .viii. or .ix. dayes, and he shall be hole.
¶ For synewes that shrynke after they haue ben hurte & healed. Ca. lxxxxviii. ¶ Take ensenee, calasome, mastyke, hantit, tur¦pentyne, galbenon, visque, the mary of an asse shepes suet, olde swynes grece, and butter, & of eueryche of them halfe an ounce, than take an ounce and an halfe of waxe, and an ounce of oyle olyue, and stampe them and boyle all these thynges togyther, and make it in maner of an oyntment harde to make playsters, & than ma¦ke therof a playster and laye it on the hurte se∣newes, and lette this lye .xv. dayes or more, and they shall stretche out well. ¶ For to staunche blode. Cap̄. lxxxix. ¶ Take an herbe that is called Lune maae and stampe it, and laye it on the wounde, or ta¦ke the grene leues therof, & laye vpon the woun¦de, and it shall staunche, and yf a man may not haue this hethe, lette hym bren the Fethers of a cockes necke, and take the asshes of theym, and laye the asshes on the wounde, and the blode shall soone be staunched. ¶ Also to staunche blode. Cap̄. lxxxx. ¶ Take a pease of salte beefe that is well salted or els a pease of salte beefe that hangeth in the rofe, & couer it in hote embres tyll it be through hote, and take asmoche as wyll stoppe the hole, and bynde it fast to, as hote as the pacyē may
suffre it, and it all staunche anone, but let the beefe be fatte and lene togyther. ¶ For an empostume. Cap̄. lxxxxi. ¶ Take barlye & drye beanes, and lycores, and let boyle them with fayre water al togyther, of eueryche a lyke moche, and drynke therof with sugre euery daye fastynge, and at nyght whan he goeth to bed, and vse this .vi. dayes or more, and he shall cast out the postume. ¶ For spettynge of blode. Cap̄. lxxxxii. ¶ Take ache, myntes, rue, and betayne & sethe them togyther well in good mylke, and gyue it hym to drynke fyrste in the morenynge, & laste at nyght, and he shall be hole. ¶ For wylde fyre, that is called the fyre of hell. Cap̄. lxxxxiii, ¶ Take red wormes of the earthe, and the rote of valeryon, and stampe them togyther, & laye it therto, and take valeryon the rote and the le∣ues and stampe it, and tempre it with water & gyue hym to drynke, and he shall be hole. ¶ For the bytynge of a mad dogge. Capitulum. lxxxxiiii. ¶ Take the sede of boxe & stampe it, & tempre it with holy water, & gyue it hym to drynke. &c. ¶ For to do away a wenne. Cap̄. lxxxxv. ¶ Take & bynde fast the wenne, than take ver∣dygrece, sulphur, sope, oyle of egges alom and
honny, and tempre theym togyther, and laye it therto, and it shall do away the wenne, and hea¦le it without any doubte. ¶ For to breke a felon ī a nyght. Ca. lxxxxvi. ¶ Take powdre made of Cantarydes, & tem∣pre it with clene shepes alowe, & make a play∣ster therof & laye it therto, and it shall breke. ¶ For the mygrym. Cap̄. lxxxxvii. ¶ Take .iiii. handefull of redde Rose flowres fresshe in sōmer, & in wynter welked, & .iii. han∣defull of camamell, and as moche of veruayne and breke them small with thy handes & boyle them in a pottell of whyte wyne of gascoyne yf it maye be had, or elles in tochell wyne vntyll it come to a quarte, and put them in .iii. bagges broched flat lyke a playster, and lay there the ache is, as hote as the sycke may suffre. and chaunge them hote and hote, durynge a day and a nyght, and lenger yf nede be. ¶ For the morfewe. Cap̄. lxxxxviii. ¶ Take water of elder & drynke it .iii. spone∣full in ye mornynge .ii. or .iii. tymes, & whan ye reccyue it, walke after and catche a good hete. And than take a pynte of whyte vynegre and .ix. oke aples, and cut theym and layne theym. iii. dayes, and .iii. nyghtes in the same vynegre and after take a fayre lynnen clothe and put the aples in the same cloth, & strayne them, and
with the lycoure therof & anoynt thy body .iiii. dayes, & it wyll do away the morfewe. ¶ For to stop the flyxe. Cap̄. lxxxxix. ¶ Sake an onyon and roste it tyll it be tender than bruse it and lappe it in a lynen clothe, and put it betwyxt the clyfte of the buttockes euyn ioynynge to the foundement, and set hym dow¦ne therupon, as hote as he maye suffre a longe tyme, and take an other onyon and plucke out the core, and fyll the hole full of frankensence, and englysshe saffron, and take the couerynge of the onyon and couer the hole, and put it in the embres, and lette it boyle tyll it be somwhat tender, and than put away the couerynge, and lay y• onyon as hote as it may be suffred vpon his nauell hole, and bynde it fast that it fall not awaye, and he shall be hole. ¶ For the Canker, wylde fyre, & ignis sancti Aathonii. Cap̄. C. ¶ Take & roste Sorell in a wete lynnen clothe the space of halfe an houre, vnder the hote em∣bres, and than stampe it with fyne claryfyed honnye and laye that to the sore, and without doubte, it wyll do awaye the brennynge blacke¦nes, and styncke, and heale it perfytely. ¶ For to make heere to growe. Cap̄. C .i. ¶ Take and sethe malowes rotes and all, and wasshe the place there as the heere lacketh, and
it shall growe. &c. ❧ ❧ ❧ ❧ ¶ For to do awaye heere. Cap̄. C .ii. ¶ Take horse leches and bren them to powdre, and mynge it with eysell, and towche the place there the heere groweth, and it shall growe no more there. &c. ☞ ❧ ❧ ¶ For a scalde heede. Cap̄. C .iii. ¶ Take a peny worth of lampe oyle, and halfe a pynte of fayre water, and boyle it well togy∣ther, and whan it is colde put therto an halfe pe¦ny worthe of quycke syluer, and tempre it well togyther, and anoynte the heede. ¶ For the yelowe Iaundes. Cap̄. C .iiii. ¶ Take a quantite of turmeryke, and asmoche of yuorye beten to powdre, and asmoche of the inner barke of barbery tree, and a quantyte of Englysshe saffron in powdre, and modle them all togyther, & drynke it with mylke .iii. or .iiii. dayes fastynge in the mornynge. ¶ For the blacke Iaundes. Cap̄. C .v. ¶ Take genciana, longe peper, calamus aro∣maticus, auencis, lycores, reysyns of coraunce whyte sope of spayne, of eueryche. i. 3. and two sponefull of mustarde, and boyle all these in a quarte of wyne tyll the thyrde parte be wasted, and let the pacyent drynke it. ¶ For wormes and heate in the handes. Cap̄. C .vi.
¶ Take Chykenwyde and bruse it a lytell, and than sethe it in ronnynge water, tyll the water be half wasted awaye, than take and wasshe the sore handes therin, as hote as the pacyent, may suffre it, and do thus .iii. or .iiii. dayes durynge and he shall be hole. ☞ ❧ ❧ ¶ For the gowte. Cap̄. C .vii. ¶ Take red myntes, and cressons, and vnset le¦kes, and let these herbes sethe well togyther and wasshe there as the syckenes is euery daye two tymes a daye, and yf ye can not haue these her∣bes, let the sycke body be wasshed with hote wa∣ter, and anoynte hym before the fyre or in the sonne with this onyntmēt, and robbe hym well therwith. Take virgyn waxe, turpentyne, saf∣fton, the yolke of an egge, oyle olyue, oyle of Almondes, Maye butter, oyle of nuttes, oyle doret, the grece of a barowe hogge, oyle of Ca∣mamell, and shepe suet, with good clarifyed hō¦ny, and set all these be medled togyther, & boy∣led fayre and easely by the fyre. ¶ For sore knees that doth swell and ake. Cap̄. C .viii. ¶ Take rue, louage, & stampe them togyther and put therto honny, and make therof a play∣ster, and laye it to the sore knees, and that shall fet away the swellynge and the ache. ¶ For the fallynge euyll. Cap̄. C .ix.
¶ Take the blode of his lytel fynger that is syc¦ke, and wryte these. iii. erses folowynge, and hange it aboute his necke. Iasper fert Myrram / thus Melchior / Balthazer aurum. Hec quicū secum portat / tria noa egum. Soluitur a morbo / domini pietate caduco. ¶ For brennynge and scaldynge. Capitulum. C. x ¶ Take fresshe gees Donge, and frye it with fresshe butter, and shepes talowe, and strayne it throughe a clothe, and laye it on the sore, and it wyll hele anone. ☞ ☞ ❧ ❧ ¶ For brennynge with fyre. Cap̄. C. xi. ¶ Take the rynde of an elme tree, and sethe it halfe a daye in fayre water, and let it kele, and gather of the thycke that thou fyndest vpon the water with a fether, and euery daye anoynte it with the fether euyn and morowe. ¶ For to hele hurtes & woundes. Ca. C. xii. ¶ Take malowes and sethe them well, & whan they be wel soden, take and stampe them, and than take olde barowes grece, and clene barly mele, and mynge the iuce, the mele and the gre∣ce all togyther, and make a salue therof, for it is a redy heler. ☞ ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ Also to make a salue to drawe and to hele. Cap̄. C. xiii.
¶ Take a quartron of a poūde of virgyn waxe and two ounces of shepes suet, and melte them togyther a lytell, and than take them from the fyre, and put therto an ounce of frankensence and stere it well togyther, and do it in a boxe, & this wyll bothe drawe and hele. ¶ For styngynge of Edders and snakes. Cap̄. C. xiiii. ¶ Take dragons and drynke it, & also stampe dragons and laye it to the place there the styn∣gynge is, and that shall sucke out the venym & sease the smertynge. ☞ ☞ ❧ ¶ For hym that can not lepe. Cap̄. C. xv. ¶ Take pety morell and stampe it, and wryn∣ge out the iuce, than take. iiii. sponefull of the iu¦ce, and .iiii. sponefull of womans mylke, and a sponefull of vynegre and hete it, and therwith anoynte his temples and his forheed, and as it dryeth anoynte it agayne, and than wete a clothe therin, and laye it vpon his forheed, and vse this oftentymes, & this shal make hym slepe ¶ For the palsey. Cap̄. C. xvi. ¶ Take the galle of an oxe, or of a bulle of one coloure, yf it may be gotten, and .iii. or .iiii. red onyons, and roste them tyll they be tendre, and than stampe them well in a bole dysshe, & myn∣ge the gall and them togyther, and loke there be .iiii. tymes asmoche of the galle as of ye onyons
& therwith anoynte wel the place that is greued tyll it be dronke in, and than take a softe shete newe whaste, and warme it agaynst the fyre, & wrappe the sycke body therin, and this muste be vsed at nyghte to bedwarde, and within .ix. nyghtes it wyll amende and make the flesshe growe thoughe it be moche awaye, and yf the skynne be waxen thycke by vanysshynge away of the flesshe, take red nettell croppes and rubbe well the synne, and the oyntmente wyll better drynke in, and this oyntmente is good for all maner aches, for euery body. ¶ A very good drynke for the Poxes. Capitulum. C. xvii. ¶ Take Salendyne, and Englysshe saffron, the weyghte of an halfe peny, and a farthynge worth of graynes, a quarter of longe peper, a peny weyght of mase, & stale ale, stampe your herbe, and powdre your saffron, & medle theym all togyther, and than dyrnke it. ¶ A salue for the poxes. Cap̄. C. xviii, ¶ Take whyte lede .i. quartron. ob. verdegrece. i. . ob. mastyke. i. 8. comfere. i. 8. rosen .ii. ounces seryouse. i. . mercurye. ob. turpentyne, brekeall these in a morter, and medle your turpentyne with yle olyue, and than mynge them all togy¦ther, and make therof a salue & anoynt the syc∣ke body therwith and let hym lye & swete. &c.
¶ For the gowte, or swellynge of ioyntes and knobbes, that cōmeth of the ache of the Poxes. Cap̄. C. xix. ¶ Take May butter, and halfe a pounde of cō¦myn, and a quarter of a pounde of blacke sope, and a handfull of rue, & a lytell of shepe stwet and stampe all these in a morter, than take the gall of an oxe, and a sponefull of baye salte & seye all togyther in a fryenge panne tyll it be thycke, than lay it on a wollen clothe and lay it to the ache as hote as it may be suffred, duryn∣ge .iii. wekes, and euery weke a newe playster, and it shall take awaye the ache and the swellyn¦ge without doubte. ☞ ❧ ❧ ¶ For the Crampe. Cap̄. C. xx. ¶ Say Bero, Barto, Bertora, these muste be sayde thre tymes, make a crosse vpon it with your hande, whan the Crampe cōmeth vpon a man or a woman. ☞ ❧ ❧ ¶ For the spottes of ye morfewe. Ca. C, xxi. ¶ Take and roste .iiii. egges harde, & put them broken all hote in to a pynte potte with a pynte of vyegre, and let it stande so .iii. dayes, and .iii. nyghtes, durynge well stopped, & than clen∣se it throughe a lynnen clothe, and wasshe the spottes therwith tyll they be awaye. ¶ To put away the rote of the mor∣fewe. Cap̄. C. xxii.
¶ Take Fumytarye .viii. handfull, borage, sca∣byous, of eche .iiii. handfull, and braye them to∣gyther in a morter, and put therto a pottell of clene whaye, than strayne them togyther, and set it ouer the fyre tyll it haue a hatte of scūme, than set it downe and strayne it clene, and set it ouer the fyre agayne, and put therto claryfy¦ed hōny, and boyle them togyther clene, that is to say, boyle them easely as lōge as any scūme wyll aryse, or els ye maye claryfye it with eg∣ges, who so claryfyeth whay, & take therof .viii. sponeful or a good draughte or two, as ye thyn¦ke best, for it shall do you moche good. ¶ For a chylde that is Iowefall, or molde fall, or rofe fall. Cap̄. C .xxiii. ¶ Take a handefull of Chycke wede, & lappe it in a red Cole lef, or els in a lynnen clothe and roste it in hote embres in the fyre, & it wyll be a grene salue, and than laye the sayd salue to the bone in the necke as hote as it may be suffred. Also take sowre leuyn of whyte brede, & crōme it on the molde of the childes heed as a playster & it shall reyse vp the bone or molde by the gra∣ce of god, within .ix. dayes. ¶ For the moder. Cap̄. C .xxiiii. ¶ Take moderworte, called ye mother of all her¦bes, that is to saye shortly mugwort, herbe Sy¦mynde, sauarye, and redde mynte, and drynke
this iuce with good redde wyne. ❧ ❧ ❧ ¶ For all feuer agues, & for yonge chyl∣dren suckyng the brest. Cap̄. C .xxv. ¶ Take powdre of Chrystall / and laye it to sooke in wyne / and gyue it to drynke to the noryse of the chylde / and the suckynge chylde shal be hole. Also take the rote of morsus dia∣boli with the herbe / and hange it aboute the necke of the chylde. ¶ For to dystroye poyson. Ca. C .xxvi. ¶ Take a quantyte of dragons / and a quan∣tyte of betayne / and a quantyte of plantayne and make herof wortes / & vse them .iii. dayes and this shall dystroye poyson and venym / but the moste parte muste be dragons. ¶ For the ague. Cap̄. C .xxvii. ¶ Take Endyue, sowthystyll / daundelyon / letuse / sorell / of eueryche a lyke moche / and stylle these all togyther / and the water wyll be passynge good for the agewe. ¶ For the hote ague infected with pysty∣lence taken betymes. Cap̄. C .xxviii. ¶ Take the Iuce of syngrene / and the whyte of foure egges / and fayre flowre of whete / and medle it well togyther / and make ther∣of a fayre playster / and lay it to the pacyent{is} sydes / and than take the water of betayne / & the water of pympernell / and the water of sca∣byous,
and the water of turmentyll, and water of radeys, of eueryche a lyke moche medled to∣gyther / and gyue the pacynt the drynke. ¶ For the gowte. Cap̄. C .xxix. ¶ Take tansey and wormewode of eche a lyke moche / temperatlye ynoughe of shepes sewet, accordynge to your herbes / and frye them in a panne ouer the fyre tyll it be grene / but beware it be not brente / and whan ye well occupye it / cast a sponefull of lynesede therin and yf it be the colde gowte / lay it to hote / and yf it be the hote gowte laye it to colde wynter and somer. ☞ ❧ ¶ To drawe out ache. Cap̄. C .xxx. ¶ Take cantarydes / and take of theyr heddes and stepe them .iiii. or .v. houres in good vyne¦gre / and than laye them vpon a playster of diaculum / & aboue vpon them a fyne lynnen clothe / or elles fyne double of lawne next the skynne / and sowe in your cntarydes in ma∣ner of a quylte / and laye it to the ache / and it wyll make it to blyster / than prycke it out with a nedle / and than take this medycyne fololowynge / and it wyll drye it. ¶ To drye the same. Cap̄. C .xxxi. ¶ Take grounde yuye a quantyte and stam∣pe it in a morter / than take shepes sewet / and put them both in a panne and frye them well
togyther / tyll it be grene / and than ye shall strayne it, and make of it a cake, and whan it is colde, make therof a playster broder than youre Cantarydes was, and within thre dayes after all shall be paste and drye. ¶ For the swellynge in a mans knee or legge that aketh. Cap̄. C .xxxii. ¶ Take a blewe or a blunket wollen clothe, as moche as wyll lappe aboute the knee or legge, & than take the whyte of two or thre henne egges and bete them well in a treen dysshe and sprede it vpon the clothe, so done / than take the yolkes and bete them in the same dysshe, and put ther∣to blacke sope as moche or more, and bete them both well togyther, and whan they be wel beten togyther it wyl be a fayre salue, & than spreke it thycke vpon the same cloth, on the whyte of the egges, meately thycke, and lappe it aboute the sore knee or legge and rolle it, and let it lye thre daye and thre nyghtes, and it wyll fetche away the swellynge and the ache. ¶ For the yche or scabbes. Cap̄. C .xxxiii. ¶ Take the seede or the herbe called stauysacre and stampe these with portulake and with oyle of baye, and anoynte the pacyentes body ther∣with, this is hote and drye. ☞ ☞ ❧ FINIS.
¶ Imprynted by me Robert Wyer, dwellynge in seynt Martyns parysshe, at charynge Crosse. Ad imprimendum solum. ROBERT WYER. printer's device of Robert Wyer
