19251.5 99884309 183022
The Lovers Ioy and Griefe: OR A young mans relation In a pitifull fashion, Being from his Loue hindred By Locks, Bolts, and Kindred. To the tune of Yongmen and Maids. AMong the uine, all Nymphes diuine, that haunt the forked mountaine, If any will bring me a Quil, dipt in Castalia's fountain Ile shew (in briefe) my ioy and griefe, and her due praises render, To whom I would come if I could, but locks and bolts doe hinder. My ioy, in that I had the fate, to chuse so rare a iewell, My griefe in this, that she (my blisse) is kept by kindred cruell, Out of my sight, which day and night doth pierce my heart so tender, Tis she to whom I faine would come, but locks and bolts doe hinder. She is a Lasse that doth surpasse, her neighbours round about her, Her worth is such, it grieues me much, to liue so long without her: With strong desire in Cupids ire, my heart burnes to a cinder, I would possesse my happinesse but locks and bolts doe hinder. As Thisbe faire by Parents care from Pyramus was hidden, So she to come abroad from home is earnestly forbidden: She dares not stir, nor I to her, so closely they haue penn'd her, She would come out I make noe doubt, but locks and bolts doe hinder. As Danae was i'th Tower of brasse, inclosed by her Father, So she (my sweet) lest we should meet, is kept more closely rather: Yet as great loue got to his Loue, though walls did comprehend her, So I doe hope to haue frée scope, though locks and bolts doe hinder. I'th interim I must patiently expect that happy season, I dare not thinke that she will shrinke, for intruth I haue no reason, I find that she is true to me, in that I must commend her, She would not be so long from me. but locks and bolts doe hinder. It grieues my heart to think what smart (poore creature) she endureth, What meanes her kindred vse to winne her heart, which she assureth Is fixed fast, while life doth last, no policie can bend her, To any course loue hath such forcs, but locks and bolts doe hinder.
The second part To the same tune. SHée hath (tis true to speake what's due) too great a marriage portion, This may I vow, for Cupid now, is bent vnto extortion? I would therefore her friends were poore, or else in heart more tender, For poor or rich wée'd go through stitch, but locks and bolts doe hinder. Although my selfe want worldly pelfe, vnto their expectation, Yet if I may the truth display, without any ostentation, My birth and parts and due deserts are not so weake and slender, But that I might earne my delight, though locks and bolts doe hinder. Were I a Prince of eminence, and shee a peasants daughter, Had she no more of learnings store, then what wise nature taught her, Her péerelesse face and inward grace, shewes in my heart such splendor, Shée mine should be, the like sayes she, but locks and bolts doe hinder. Tis not her pelfe but her swéet selfe, that I (in heart) doe couit Necessity let wealth supply, for nothing else I loue it, Her onely loue is that doth moue my heart and makes it tender, I mourne in griefe without reliefe, for locks and bolts doe hinder. No ease of mind at all I find, but onely this assurance, That my deare wench will neuer flinch, though she be kept in durance, Shee hath her share of woe and care for which I must commend her, On me she hath bestow'd her faith, though locks and bolts doe hinder. Continue still in thy good will. thou Paragon of beauty, And I to thée as true will bee (so am I bound in duty) Though fortune frowne, yet the renowne of our affections tender, Abroad is flowne, we two are one, though locks and bolts doe hinder. With patience wee'll expect to feele, the fruit of all this sorrow, Though sorrow may indure this day, I shall haue ioy to morrow, In the meane while, I in exile will be thy true defender, And spread thy name which is my claime. though locks and bolts doe hinder. Oh cruell fate, expire the date, of two deare Louers trouble, If once our griefe doe finde reliefe, our ioyes wil then be double And all our teares, our cares and feares, will to our names add splender Thy heart is mine, and mine is thine, though locks and bolts doe hinder. M.P. FINIS. Printed at London for Tho: Lambers and are to be sold at the signe of the Hors-shoo in Smithfield.
