a182A 52529133 178691
ACCOUNT OF A GREAT ENGAGEMENT Which hapned between the English Squadron, under the Command of Vice-Admiral HERBERT, and the whole French Fleet, near the Coast of Ireland, on the First of May, 1689. With Allowance. HIS Majesty's Naval Forces having taken the Seas, under the Command of Vice-Admiral Herbert; In order to Curb the Insults of the French, and to hinder their Attempts upon the Kingdom of Ireland, &c. After several Suc∣cessful Enterprizes, and suppressing the French-Capers and Privateers, rescu∣ing several Prizes they had taken and were carrying into their Harbours, Braving the Naval Forces of the French-King, with a small number of Ships in his chief Harbour, &c. And resolute to prosecute the Glorious War against the Disturbers of Christendom: The English understanding the French were gotten to Sea, under the favour of the Night, and contrary Winds that hindred ours for standing in, or bearing up with them, and mistrusting they made for Ireland, they stood to that Coast to prevent their Landing any Forces to Distress the Protestants. On the First of May Instant, the English got sight of them lying in the Bay of Bantree in the West of Ireland, near the County of Kerry, and resolving forthwith to enter the Bay and Attacque them, the Wind unluckily Chopt about, and blew hard at West North-west, so that we could not but with abundance of Difficulty turn into the Bay. But resolving by any means to get in to them, with Nine of our Ships, the Admiral himself leading them, they Advance; which the French perceiving, with full Sail before the Wind, they make up and meet us. The French Fleet consisted of Twenty Nine Sail of Men of War, besides Tenders; Ours but Nineteen in the whole, whereof Five on∣ly could fully come up to Engage. Our Admiral had immediately seven of their best Ships upon his Quarter, and the French Admiral lying on the other Broad-side of him, but notwithstanding the Inequality, our brave Admiral never stirr'd off the Quarter-deck encouraging his Men, both by his Orders and Example; the rest of our Ships that could come up, charging them Board to Board, discharging their Broad-sides, Grappling, and couragiously Fighting on the Decks, thundring in their Vollies of Small Shot, Killing their Men in great number, and renting their Sails, Masts, and Rigging, thereby very much Disabling them, continuing resolutely Engaged till Night parted them: And al∣though the English, much inferiour in Number, and wanting the Weather-gage, which greatly hindred them, did not gain the Advantage they otherwise might undoubtedly have had, yet nothing was wanting that might testify their continued Gallantry and Bravery, and to shew the French that they are not to dispute with them the Soveraignty of the Ocean. As to the Particulars of the Loss on either side we are wanting; however it Reported on all hands, the English have not lost one Vessel: Yet under the favour of Engagement, the French having Landed a few Men, retreated, dispairing notwithsta¦ing the advantage of their number, of any answerable success, though our Admiral solves to stick close to them. And in a little time we doubt not (under God) to ma good the Justice of our Cause, and pull down the Pride of that Antichristian Mona who has so long disturb'd the Peace of the whole Christian World. LONDON Printed by W. Davis. 168.
