a645-variant 99887592 183216
Advice to Batchelors, OR, The Married Mans Lamentation. Take heed you that unmarried are, how you do make your choice; But if a good Wife you do find, 'twill make your heart rejoyce, Tune of, Hey Boys up go we; Busie Fame; Martellus; or, Jenny Gin. YOu Batchelors that single are, may lead a happy life; For married men are full of care, and Women oft breed strife: As by my late unhappy match, you here may plainly see; A loving Man and froward Wife will never well agree. Beautys a thing that wins mens hearts and reason so bewitches; That Men oft let the weaker sort, like fools, to wear the Breeches: And I my self too late lament my Apish foolery; For it I speak an hasty word, then, hey Boys, slap goes she. I in the morning up must get, or else there is no quiet; And get her some delicious bit, for she doth love good Dyet: I ask her why she'I be profuse? she crys, what's that to me? And if another word I use, then hey Boys, slap goes she. She'l make me rise out of my Bid to let another in; And if I ask the reason why, a Quarrel doth begin; She'l haul me up and down the house, the like you ne'r bid see, I must be silent as a Mouse, or, hey Boys slap goes she, If I but for my breakfast ask, then doth she laugh and jeer; Perhaps give me a hard dry crust, and strong four-shilling Beer; She tells me that is good enough for such a Rogue as me; And if I do but seem to pout, then, hey Boys, slap goes she. She oftentimes doth tell me plain, that I do wear the Horns; Sure e'ry Man doth this disdain, and wisemen meerly scorns: But since 'tis my unhappy fate, how can it helped be? But it I chance thereof to prate, then, hey Boys, slap goes she. The Pots and Dishes I must wash, and scowre the Irons too; Nay, and must wash the childrens clouts believe me this is true: But those that did the Children get, should slave as well And if I chance to ver or fret, then, hey Boys, slap goes she. This is a strange and dismal life, that I poor Man do lead; And when I do consider well, it makes my heart to bleed: But if it goes against the grain, I must contented be; If in the least I do complain, then, hey Boys, slap goes she. Oh that I were a single Man, as I was heretofore; Or if I were a Widdower, I ne'r would Marry more: For I do to my sorrow know, and to my grief I see, When she says I, and I say no, then hey Boys slap goes she. A thousand times I wish in vain, I ne'r had been begot; Then had I been a happy Man, now Cuckold, Fool, and Sot: But once again you Batchelors, take warning now by me: For 'tis a curse to be a Slave, and yet a Curkold be. FINIS. Printed for J. Deacon. at the Angel
