B2967AB 99885281 182230
A Nevv BALLAD Of a Famous German PRINCE and a renowned English DUKE, who on St. James's day One thousand 666 fought with a Beast with Seven Heads, call'd Provinces; not by Land, but by Water; not to be said but sung; not in high English nor Low Dutch; but to a new French Tune, called Monsieur Ragou, or, The Dancing Hobby-horses. THere happen'd of late a Terrible Fray Begun upon our On Saint James's day (1581) the Seven Pro∣vinces first Resolved themselves into Free-States. S. James's day. With a Thump, Thump, Thump, Thump, Thump, Thump, Thump, a Thump, Thump. Where Rupert and George for CHARLEMAIGN Swing'd the Dutch again and again, (As if they had been but the French or Dane) With a Thump, &c. 'Twas brave Tom Allen led the Van, Stout Ʋtber, and bold Tiddiman, With a Thump, &c. And then our Immortal GENERALLS With twenty thousand Thunder-balls Pierc'd their boggie flesh-mud-walls With a Thump, Thump, &c. The Game was hot, and then you'll swear That Jordan (Heart of Oak) was there With a Thump, Thump, &c. And gallant Holmes that never fails, Torn and hurt, yet still prevails, Valiant with or without his Sails, With a Thump, Thump, &c. The Royal Charles was all their Aim (For there they knew was Princely Game) With a Thump, &c. Seven Provinces here spend their Quire, (De Ruyter's mighty Triple Tyre) But had his Answer all in Fire With a Thump, &c. For here our glorious Prince and Duke Gave him such a sore Rebuke With a Thump, &c. That now De Ruyter finds it clear The Warlike English have no peer, Who dare do any thing but Fear A Thump, Thump, &c. The Soveraign came to revenge her Wrongs, (Becalm'd a while for want of Lungs, Without any Thump, &c.) But soon as her dreadful Sail displaid Good Lord what Lanes and Wrecks she made! The Devill a Dutch came nigh or staid, For fear of a Thump, Thump, &c. Her Balls of Fire the Flemming sees Are thrice as big as a Holland-Cheese, With a Thump, &c. And now they ran, they ran, they ran, And left poor Zealand shift as it can; They made him the Rere, who would be the Van -Van Trump, Trump, Trump, &c. The Kings own Colours (Red and White) Pursu'd the Boors all day and night With a Thump, &c. O how 'twould Lords and Commons please To see our Soveraign of the Seas, Chasing their Seven Provinces With a Thump, &c. Over Flatts and Banks we fir'd their tails (Till we heard their croaking Nightingales) With a Thump, &c. This difference 'twixt two Navies stands, Ours built for the Sea, and theirs for the Sands, We had sent them else to their last Netherlands With a Thump, Thump, &c. Their Shott still at our Tackling flew, Lest when they ran we should pursue With a Thump, &c. For though the Dutch are Sea-men grown, Bold English are the Marks-men known, And therefore kill them six for one With a Thump, Thump, &c. Our Rere was Smith, with other two (Spragge and Kempthorn) both true Blew, With a Thump, &c. And here the Zealanders came on, Who stoutly gave us Gun for Gun, Till Holland-like they also run With a Thump, Thump, &c. In In, In In, said Valiant Spragge, Wee'll beat this vapouring Trump to th' Hague With a Thump, &c. His Chaplain fell to his wonted work. Cry'd Now for the King and the Duke of York! He pray'd like a Christian, and fought like a Turk With a Thump, Thump, &c. Six thousand Dutch (a Low-Country Dish) We sent to their own Cozen the Fish With a Thump, &c. The rest into Holes so tamely crawl That little Fanfan dar'd them all, Great Rupert's Sloop is an Admirall, With a Thump, Thump, &c. What Amsterdamnable Cowards are these To boast that they were Lords of the Seas With a Thump, &c! Their Impudent Gazette proclaims How bravely they lock'd up the Thames! But had no leave from CHARLES or JAMES, And therefore had a Thump, Thump, &c. And now De Witt's new Holland Rump (Who rides the States) will burn to th' Stump With a Thump, &c. For George in England once before Hath fir'd one Rump, and will do more Till Men and Bells all Dutch-land o're Sing Rump, Rump, &c. Then let them invent some other Cheat, Go hang their Captains 'cause th'are bear With a Thump, &c. Let Monsieur or Myn Heer that snarls At our Soveraign and Royal Charles, Beware of Ruperts and Albemarles With a Thump, Thump, &c. Printed in the Year, 1666.
