C4732 99884069 183259
The Cloath-worker caught in a Trap: Or, A Fool and his Mony soon parted. Being a true Relation of a Cloath worker, dweelling in Thames-street who was wished by an old wo∣man to a Maid near Pauls Church-yard, perswading him she had mony at use, being a meer Plot of the Maiden and she to cheat him of his Money, knowing him to be none of the wisest, cheated him of forty pound. if you will know then give good Ear, The merriest Jest that e'r you did hear. The Tune is, How now Jocky whither away. Or the Tyrant. C God people I'll tell you now of a fine jest, Which now unto you shall here be exprest, You shall know how I have been cosen'd of late, By her whom I called my Love and my Mate: She made me a promise she would be my Bride, But I have lost her and my Mony beside. There was an old Woman did wish me unto her, And I, like a woodcok, must needs go and woe her, I bought me new cloaths, boots and silver spurs, The cause why I mist her the fault it was hers. She made, &c. My sweet-heart was wondrous gallant & spruce, She made me believe she had mony at use, My fingers did itch to be at her coin, As hoping the mony and she should be mine. She made, &c. I followed her closely by day and by night, The hope of her Mony was all my delight: But when she perceived m gréedy intent, A trick for to cheat me she then did invent, She made, &c. She knew I had mony, and she had the wit, To couzen me of it she thought it most fit. O she was to hard for me in the end, God keep me hereafter from such a false friend, She made, &c. She sent the old Woman upon an ill day, She came unto me, and thus she did say, Your Sweet-heart is taking the Lease of a house. The which doth belong to old Nicolas Rouse. She made, &c. Her Money's at use, and out of her hands, That she cannot purchase Houses nor Lands. But if forty pound you will lend her in lieu, Lo she will make over the house unto you. I lookt for the house and likewise the Bride, &c. I was over-joy'd when I heard her say so, I gave her the Mony without more ado, Forty good pounds she cozened me of, And now at my misery make but a scoff, She made me a Promise she would be my Bride, But I have lost her and my Money beside. I Told all my Neighbours I merry would be, my sweetheart had purchast a house now for me Though I lent her mony her ca to prefer, Yet I should have all whe I married with her. Thus a promise she made me for to be my Bride, But I have lost her and my Mony beside. At length I did find that I was over-matcht, I reckon'd my Chickens before they were hatcht, I found to my grief I was wronged God wot, By a young Harlot and an old old Trot. This cunning old woman, my Sweet-heart & she Did make but a younger Brother of me, For when as I went to visit my Dove, She would not come neer me, not grant me her Love She said her affection was altered quite, And she bid me be packing now out of her sight, She made, &c. Fair Mistress, quoth I, what moveth this change? And what is the reason you should be so strange; If you be resolved to leave me, sweet Jane, I play then restore me my Mony again. Now all men that here me pity my case, For I have lost all by her being base. She would not be known that my Mony she had, But asked the question, if that I were made Th old VVoman had it, quoth I, for your use: Then you may go look it, go, she, good-man Goose. She made, &c. If you were so foolish to give her your Coin, Who ca my nam, the fault is not mine: O learn yo more wtt hereafter, I Seek out your old woman, if you'd have you And since thou wantest wit thou shalt want a For I'll never have thee while that I have lif When as she had given me these purging Plu I stood like sheep-biter biting my Thumbs, I made me to fret, to fume, and to stare, Just like the Bull that bewraied the Fair. That all that beheld me thought I was mad Beholding my staring and countenance sad She shoved me out then, and locked the dore, Now was ever man so abused before, Unless 'twere the Grasier, I ne'r knew the li Next morning she sent me a Feather bed tike She made, &c. She sent me a Feather bed then in disdain, When as she heard how I did complain, To rest my restless body, upon, After the Baggage had me undone, She made, &c. She sent me a Bed in height of my pride, But she was too good to lie by my side, I paid dearly for it I plaly have found, My Feather=ed sirs cst m forty good poun Now well a day must be all my Song, She hath the Mony and I have the wrong. My covetous humour di meet with a cross; And I was rewarded with rty pound loss, A Proverb to all me, lo here I will be, A Fool and his Money's soon pated we see. She made me a promise she would be my Br But I have lost her and my Mony beside.
