D1305 99890361 182731
A DIALOGUE Between DEATH AND Doctor ROBERT WYLD, Who Dyed lately of an APOPLEXY. D. NO Roring Christmas shalt Thou keep, now Rore Bold Wit! W. Oh! oh! Hhohh! Well! I'le cry no more, Alas, it is for Thee, not Me, to Rore. A Deadly Blow! But where's thy Sting? There lies The King of Terrors cow'd out! In Sacrifice (An Eucharist) Lord, take this Soul to Thee, By Death Thou hast slain Death, Redeemed Me. Grave, take the Carcass, at the reck'ning Day With Interest the Principal repay. Take Worms meat (they'l scarce lick the punched Face,) Bring't up in Glory, though sown in Disgrace, In never-fading Beauty it shall rise, And be transplanted int' yon Paradise.) They'l Digg the Kernels out (the Eyes) Digg on! One Breakfast makes the Head a Skeleton. They'l tease the Hands, and Toes, and Paunch (their Fence) Intolerable Pains, have numb'd all Sense. 'Twas not Seer Sheldon, when he turn'd Me out, Did Me perplex; no, it was Bishop Gout. Death did me vex and terrifie much less, I'le now be gone out of his Diocess. I con you Thanks. Bish. Gout proceeded on, You granted me a Prohibition. Adieu, my Lord. D. I'm but a Pursivant, To th' Court you to conduct, by Heaven sent. W. I liv'd a Martyr all my Dayes, now I, In flaming Spices, like a Phoenix, Dy. My Heart bleeds for the Church and State, I faint, Take of my Cordial, Surviving Saint. Proud Babel Reels, it Totters, it will Fall, As sure as Lambeth stands against White-Hall. Come Seraphims, and bear this Soul above, Impatient to see her Vines, her Love. One Stroke, with all the Clusters, Lop'd the Vine, One chop'd off Love. Ha, ha! their Lot is Mine. They were so quick at Work, their Master's Voice Soon call'd them off; Into your Master's Joyes. More Blessed Sight I'le see, ('Twill satisfie) The Glorious, Ever-blessed Trinity. Whom I Ador'd and Lov'd sometimes, Him I For ev'r will Love, Admire, and Glorifie; So, so, I'll spend a Blest Eternity, In everlasting Love, Delights and Joy. Hal—Le—Lu—Jah. Alas! Poor Scholar, hast thou felt the Stroke Of matchless Death? Are all thine Heart-strings broke? Who'l sing thine Iter Empyraeum? I After thy Blood-suck send this Hue and Cry. Great Wyld is slain! Slain! Let this Shreek fly round Till Hills, and Dales, and Rocks, and Shores rebound, Unto Pale Pyrene, and from thence go on Over Parnassus unto Helicon. Raise up the sluggish Sisters, Three times Three, In Lamentations Drop one Elegie. Streams Ever-flowing from each Muses Eye May Spring a Fountain, now their Well is Dry. Tagus and Ganges will astonish'd be, And all th' Antipodes as well as We. Who slew the Muses Darling, of Mankind The Choice Delights? Search out until you find. Who was't kill'd the Divine? Who slew the Poet? Eccho. Eat! What Nimble Chaps, what Cormorant was he Could eat up Wyld? Might not he poyson'd be? Who poyson'd Wild? Wakeman with all his Main Could not get Sacred Charles out of his Wain. He pawn'd his Skill, though Justice might not spy, A Plaister to the Fist affects the Eye. 'Twas Death (that Jesuit) so greedy grown It chapt up Robert, and let George alone. Rome's Emissary Leeches, so fine bred, Won't touch Posteriors, they chap at th' Head. AN EPITAPH. HEre lies Poor Robin, most enriched one With Nature's Dowre,Graces large Portion. Nature brought Reason, Prudence, Eloquence, And Magnanimity, Munificence, Courage and Constancy, and Matchless Wit. Grace Him adorn'd with Faith, andHope, and Love, That Saints below he might excell, above With Patience, in none admired more; Nature and Grace on him laid out their Store. Rome's Plot to strangle Justicein Godfrey, Hell's was; in Wild, to choak Divinity. Here lies the Poet, here lies Poetry, Here's the Divine, here lies Divinity. Ah Fools! an inexhausted Springdoth Lye, Justice in Charles, in God, Theology. London, Printed in the Year 1679.
