E3064 99890590 182742
ENGLANDS TRIUMPH. OR THE RUMP ROUTED By the true Assertor of Englands Interest, Generall George Monck. A SONET To the Tune of, Fill up the Parliament full. WHat maketh the Souldiers To stand to their Arms? 'Tis for what they protest To keep us from harms, The Members Secluded Come now in by Swarms To fill up the Parliament Full, full, full. To fill up the Parliament Full. You know that the City Gates Late were thrown down, The Walls too were order'd By Parliament Frown: But General Monck, has pleas'd Souldier and Gown, And fil'd up the Parliament And fil'd up the Parliament Full. A dispute there was had By the Members Secluded, Brave Monck was the Umpire And found them Deluded, But Englands great joy Is now wholy Concluded: For he's fild up the Parliament Full, full, fu He's fil'd up the Parliament full. Sir Arthur the Valiant Must make his speech Large, Lest the Members Excluded Lay Treason to's Charge, Hee'd better t'have dealt With his Newcastle Barge, Than to see the Old Parliament Full, full, full Than to see the Old Parliament full. The Aldermen Grave, And the Commons o'th City, Imprisoned were The more is the Pity, But Gen'ral Monck said, That I will acquit yee, For the Parliament now shall be full, full, full For the Parliament now shall be full: Have you not seen Fresh flowers in the Spring; And have you not heard A Cage-Bird to sing? But if the Cage-Members Would bring in the King— It would fill up the Parliament Full, full, full; It would fill up the Parliament full. The Parliament now will Come into their Geers, For Secluded PRYN (That once lost his Ears) Marcht in with his Rapier For Commons and Peers, To fill up the Parliament Full, full, full, To fill up the Parliament full. Whose often Declaring Ha's furnish't the Nation With Parliament Arguments Of the old Fashion, And would have both King, Lords and Peers in this Nation To fill up the Parliament Full, full, full To fill up the Parliament full. Our brave General Monck We bound are to thank, The Honest Lord Fairfax Ha's plaid (too) his Prank No thanks to be given To the Rump nor the Shank To fill up the Parliament Full, full, full To fill up the Parliament full. Had the City ne'r mov'd, Nor the Prentices strove, They'd lost their Old Charter: But MONCK had a love To challenge the Grand Ones Which Mischiefs did move; And so fill'd up the Parliament Full, full, full, And so fill'd up the Parliament full. LONDON, Printed for James Johnson.
