E390 99890131 182592
AN ELEGY On the Death of that Learned, Pious, and Famous DIVINE, Doctor JOHN OWEN, Who Dyed the 24th. of August, 1683 22. Sept. 1683. How came't to pass that none did Silence break, In all this time, when they'd such cause to speak? Sad Hearts and Eyes cou'd only yet Lament A Loss so great; Grief wou'd give Words no Vent. Blame not Ʋnusual Sorrow when there fell This Rev'rend Father in our Israel; Tho' Verse was silent, there's no doubt but those Who knew him well, made Elegies in Prose: And wrote 'em on their Hearts; and we may think, If writ elsewhere, they us'd their Tears for Ink. When such a Pillar of the Church is taken Away, we've cause to fear the Fabrick's shaken; And to deplore th' Eclipse of such a Light, Whose Rayes Enliven'd, Warm'd, and Shin'd so Bright; And well may apprehend some Ill to come, When an Ambassador's Commanded Home. Not that this Venerable Person's Herse, Needed (at all) the Ornament of Verse; But this Resentment's paid, as due by th' I aws Of Gratitude; his Name's above Applause. H' has rais'd himself a Monument of his Own, Which will out-last those of the hardest Stone. His Fame will Live to lat'st Posterity, In 's Theo—Christo—Pneumatology: And various Volumes more; where we may find How in's Great Soul, Rich Gifts and Grace were joyn'd. His Learned Tongue (which (living) did impart, Its Message from his Own, to th' Hearers Heart; And taught those Truths whose Worth & Excellence, Were Felt before, by's own Experience) Alas, is Silenc'd now! But 's Pious Pen, Do's and will Preach to Multitudes of Men; Such Sound and Weighty Doctrines do's unfold, As are by th' Scripture-Touchstone prov'd true Gold. Which like strong Rocks, Shipwrack the false Opinions Of Atheists, Papists, Libertines, Socinians. This Skilful Architect built sure upon That Chief and Fundamental Corner-Stone; And took great Care the Diff'rence to Descry, Between true Grace, and meer Morality: Was none of those that only th' Outside Scour, But to the Form of Piety joyn'd the Pow'r: Not only Taught, but Trod the Gospel-Path, And both Defended and Adorn'd the Faith. His Zealous Love to God, his Son, and Spirit, From all true Christian Hearts, Esteem did merit: For those who joyn in That, may well Dispense, In smaller matters with some Difference. Who can please All? Sure too too few can tell Where we may find (on Earth) his Parallel: Who Spoke and Wrote, and Liv'd and Dy'd so well. Many a Spiritual Orphan here Remains, That owe their Birth to his Religious Pains; And many more that have by him been Fed, Instructed, Helpt, Rais'd, Cur'd and Comforted. Who'd cause to make his Herse with Tears to swim, Had not their Loss prov'd so great Gain to Him; That long had Travel'd in the Narrow Way, And born the Heat and Burthen of the day. We ought (though to our Loss,) to yield that such Shou'd go to Rest, who've Born and Done so much: And may we Learn of Him to Conquer Death, Who when his Work was finish'd here beneath, Lay down in Peace: and as the Sun (they say) When't sets serene, foretels 'twill shine next day: So this Great Luminary's Lightsome Even, Show'd with what Splendor he now Shines in Heaven. HIS EPITAPH. IN this Place Sleeps an Eminent DIVINE: ONE who Religion made his Chief Design. London, Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley, in Pater-Noster-Row. 1683.
