E394A C.20.f.2[298] C.121.g.9[97] 99886981 181620
AN ELEGY On the Death of the Author of the Characters, &c. Of the Ladies In∣vention, who dyed on the 13th of this instant May at the Rose Spunging-house in Woodstreet, under an Arrest. Written by a Young Gentleman whom he had abus'd in his Characters. HE's Dead! Lament ye Mercuries and Hawkers▪ And Mourn his timeless Fall ye Tavern-Chalkers. Death, cruel Death, who's merciful to no Man, Has done more harm than Iohnson and his Yeoman; The Seizure of his Body Their Offence is, But She (Curse on her) captivates his Senses▪ And stops that Tongue, so harden'd is her Conscience, Which dar'd, what e'er came of't, to pratle Nonsense. Who now shall set White-Fryers Crew a Roaring? And countenance the noble Art of Soring? O P—s to thy great Example's owing, That many a Printing-Press is nw a going; That Bars are whit'ned by Poetick Debtors, And many a Name is Book'd in ample Letters; And should thy Vertues want to be recorded, Or thy transcendent Worth be unrewded, How would this thankless Age be call'd ungrateful! And Sots hereafter go without their Pateful! Since therefore B—t, nor his Father R—r Will hire a Muse to praise their Hackny-Toper▪ Ev'n I unknown to Verse, a Young Beginner Will dare to sing our late departed Sinner. First for his Courage, hear of what I'm treating, He dar'd deserve, and sometimes stood a Beating; Nor was our Rhiming Heroe e'er afraid, Of Wife, or Widow, Spinster, or of Maid; All were abus'd, as was his just intention, And underwent the Lash of his Invention: And though a Learned Legislator swore it, That Killing Horses had no Sin before it, And told a vile Offender as his Sentence, Such Righteous Blood deserv'd a true Repentance; He would not own the Doctrine which was taught here, But Swore Horse Murder, could not be Man-slaughter. Bold Youth! t' oppose a Man whose Learning reaches As far as Post or Carrier bears his Speeches; And who durst call his Majesty most Christian, A Son of Mahomet, a mere Philistian, And in a trice, a new Disguise to try on, Give him Huge Wkers, and pronounce him Lyon. Next, for his Iustice, it must be confess'd, I want due weight of Words to have 't express'd. As He without exception ran in Debt With all who'd trust Twelve Penny-worth of Wet.
So all alike impartially were paid, No diffrence us'd, and no distinction made. Witness both Ale, and Wine, how he could tick it, And be his Advocates both Tap, and Spicket; For ye best know the methods of his dealing, If Knowledge chiefly does consist in Feeling. But, Grief prevails, and gains upon my Spirits, And I must e'en pass by his other Merits, For who can sing, and not be broken-hearted So Learn'd a Soul, from such a Corps departed: Methinks I see him sitting at the Goat, His Wig untwisted, and unlin'd his Coat, His Eyes just dropping out, his Cheeks a glowing, His Head a swimming and his Tongue a going; One Hand the Pot, is grasping by the Handle, And t' other deals about his Stock of Scandal; Whilst Porters laugh, and many a Trading Fool Wishes his Friends had sent him too to School; Whilst Lewis shakes his sides, and Men of Wales Leave Toasted Cheese to feed upon Tales. But, why alas! am I thus long deceiv'd? And fancy Life in one of Life bereav'd? Yonder He lies, and breathless is his Carkass, Damn't, I could almost swear, 'tis such a hard case. O *Loury, what the Devil didst thou meanA sort of an ill-favr'd Turn-key to the Spging∣house. To let thy Face within his Room be seen? Medusa like thou hast the Bard enchanted, And struck Him quite Stone-dead, it must be granted. Henceforth, thou Squint-ey'd Man of Sin, may ne'er A Debtor come beneath thy Key, and care, But what is Penny-less, and being trusted Shall make's Escape, and leave it unadjusted, Whilst naught in's stead, but Lice and Itch is left, And that, for thy great care, shall be thy gift. May Compter Locusts after these thy Losses Side with the Lice, and multiply thy Crosses, And both these Vermin lovingly agreed, On Thee, as thou on Men are wont to feed, Till thou into a Goal thy self art hurried. And dyest, art damn'd, and afterwards unburied. But I too long my Tears, and Sighs have spent, And fruitless Vows for P.— upward sent, To Verse in vain my Sorrows l've digested, He'll ne'er return again to be Arrested! Yet, Heav'n (though he by it's Decrees is dead) Has left a young Ascanous in his stead. Nonsense shall never fail, or Scandal falter, Since, Uno avulso non deficit aureus Alter. Oh! how the Bard in his Successor shines! And stinking Thoughts adorn his shitten Lines! Strong is his Sense, and loathsome e'vry word, As he describes a Temple, or a Turd: Nor shall our Author's just resemblance dye, While How shall dare to print the London Spy. The EPITAPH. REader, beneath this Turf I lie, And I am e'en content; Piss if you please, pray what care I? Since now my life is spent. A Marble Stone indeed might keep My Body from the Weather, And gather People as I sleep, And call more Fools together: But had'st thou been from whence I came, Thou'dst never mince the matter, But show thy Sentiments the same, And hate Stone-doublets after. I'm dead, and that's enough t'acquaint A Man of any Sense, That if he's looking for a Saint, He must go farther hence. Between two Roses down I fell. As 'twixt two Stools a Platter. O ld me up exceeding well, T'other did no such matter. The Rose by Temple-bar gave Wine Exchang'd for Chalk, and fill'd me, But being for the ready Coyn, The Rose in Woodet kill'd me. FINIS.
