H1386A 47012472 174438
Hells Master-piece discovered: Or Joy and Sorrow mixt together. Being a breife and true Relation of the Damnable Plot, of those invetrate Enemies of God, and the King; who intended to a mixt our Joy for the Nativitie of Christ, with the blood of the King, and his faithfull Subjects. Being a fit Carrall for Royallist to sing, That alwaies fear God, and honour the King. To the Tune of, Sommer time. YOu Loyall Subjects all give eare, unto my sad and joyfull Song; A true Relation you shall heare, For unto you it doth belong. The Devill and his Instruments, hath long been Plotting night and day, For to destroy both King and Church, & now they thought they had found ye way, They would cut down both Root & Branch and all the Shrubs that doth belong, About our Royall Garden plot, as Fences to our Ceader strong. The chiefe Ring-leader of this Plot, is Mazarine as I do understand, The chiefest Enemie to our King, when bloody Cromwell rul'd this Land. These Saint like Devils would bring in the French or who they else could find, To ruine King and Kingdome too, for to revenge their bloody mind. For in this Plot they did intend, by fire and Sword to make their way, Throughout the City to the Court, and all they met for to destroy. They would a saved the King they say, but make him yeild unto their will, To Sign or Grant what they desired, or else be sure they would him kill. The Quéen, the Duke, and Proginie, and General Monck should all a dyed, With most of the Nobility and all the Royall part be side. Those that they Caveliers did call, but little mercy should have found, And I beleive that for their King, their ets with swords both fals to groūd. I hope theres none that now wears swords for to defend his Majestie, If ever he should in danger be, For quarter now they scorn to cry. The number in this Devilish Plot, it is not known, nor cannot be, But seventéen thousand as tis thought, should first begin this Masacree, No doubt but desperate they'd been, if God had let them in't alone, And thus those Saints, they call themselfs by blood would make the Land their own The second Part, to the same Tune. THis Devillish Plot was carried on, tis thought in all the Kingdoms round, So secret are they, now 'tis known not many of them yet are found. A Porter at first discovered all, which once was Serjant vnto White, Which White was Major once of Foot, at Portsmouth nere the Jsle of Wight. He did belong to Morley too, that kept the Tower a little while, What side they'r for ther's none doth know for every side they did beguile. All the Grand Rebels of the Land, which many thought was e're in France. Was here in London as tis thought, this Hellish Plot for to advanse. There's Ludlow, Whaley, and Baxster too, with Okey & Hewson that single ey'd theif With the Devil of the west cal'd Disbrow, and Overton these were the chiefe. But Overton and Disborow's tooke, and both are fast enough in hold; Squier Dun never fears to charge them all for all they think themselves so bold. There's thousands in this Land I feard to whom the King doth mercy shew▪ They are resolved for to be hang'd, whether his Grace he will or no. Examples you sée every day, on most the Gates here in the City, Now you have hang'd your Masters up, Dun vowes on you hée'l take no pitty. And if you'r troubled still (he saith) with the gréedy worm still in your brains, Hée'l ease you on't in half an houre, or else have nothing for his pains. But as your Friend I do desire You'd pray to God to guid your hearts, To fear the Lord and love your King, and then you'l act true Subjects parts. If God had not reveal'd this Plot, a bloody Christmass had befell. Then civily pray drink on pot, to one we oft for to love well. The Porter tis, who under God, preserv'd the King, and all his Péers, Be sure hée'l never be forgot. by honest Royall Caveliers. C. H. A List of the Trators Names. Robert Overton formerly called Major Generall Overton, Francis Elstone, Iohn Disborow formerly Collonel, Iohn Hargrass, El. Hunt, Gabriel Hopkins, Wil. Kirk, Fran. Booth, C. Bag∣ster, C. Babinton, W. Wright, Anthony Barushaw, Thomas Millard, Tobias Hill, Rich. Dilling, Peter Thompson, Tho. Simcock, Frederick Barnwel, Ric. Danie, Ric. Shoope, Iohn Luca▪ W. Howard, Tho. Nicols, Henry Limrick, Francis Gavill. Henry Simboll, Iames Eglefield, Jeffery Hookins, Sam. Jepp, Isaac Benton, Rich. Young, John Steward, John Ward, Tho. Butler, Rich Glover, George Thomas, Iames Sanford, Ro. Parker, Rich. Burt, Iohn Decks, Owen Davis. London, Printed for Francis Grove dwelling on Snowill.
