H647A R177890 49520907 174148
Analysis or Resolution of MERCHANTS ACCOMPTS, by RALPH HANDSON, Accomptant. The Fourth Edition, Corrected and Enlarged. NOTA: That, Dr. signifieth the Debitor, and Cr. the Creditor. Also, All Accompts of Ex∣change and of parties resi∣ding in Forrain Countries, are to be kept with a dou∣ble Margin, viz. The in∣ward Margin for the Mo∣ney of the place beyond the Seas, and the outward for the place where you reside. Accompts for Mer∣chants are resolved into Do∣mestick, Forrain, or Partable, viz. Domestick consisteth of viz. Inventory of the Ready Mony, Wares, Voyages, and Debts belonging or owing to You; Dr. those several Parcels, or Parties; Cr. your Stock or Principal. Debts owing by You; Dr. your Stock or Principal; Cr. the several Parties to whom you owe the same. Receipts of Mony By Bond, Bill, Accompt, or otherwise; Dr. Mony; Cr. the Party or Parties from whom the same was due. For Wares sold and delivered; Dr Mony; Cr. those Wares so sold and delivered, the Mony being received upon the delivery (which is seldom in use.) Taken up at Interest by Bond Dr. Mony for the sum received or taken up Dr. Interest, or Profit and Loss for the Interest thereof Cr. the party that lent the same for the Principal and the Interest. For Interest of Mony (formerly lent, the Principal being continued:) Dr. Mony: Cr. the Accompt of Interest, or Profit and Loss. For Assurance of Goods Shipped by another: Dr. Mony: Cr. the Accompt of Assurance, or Profit and Loss. By Exchange remitted from your Factor: Dr. Mony: Cr. the party to whom the Bills were directed, if he have formerly been charged in Accompt for the same. Otherwise Cr. your Factor or Correspondent by a double Margin. Taken up by Exchange: Dr. Mony: Cr your Factor, or he to whom the bills are directed. Bills Of Assignation from another: Dr. the Assigns or Party assigned to pay: Cr the Assignor; or he who assigned over the same. By Exchange: Dr. the party to whom the Bills are directed after his acceptance: Cr. the Factor who remitted the same by a double Margin. Wares. Bought for Mony: Dr. the Wares bought and received: Cr. Mony, when the Mony is paid upon the delivery of the Wares, which is seldom used. Bought for Time. Part Mony, part time. Part Mony, part anothers Bill, part time. Dr. the several Wares bought and received: Cr. the party that selleth the same. And after the Seller is Dr. for the Mony paid, or Bills delivered him as afore. Bought for Part Mony, part for anothers Bill: Dr. the Wares bought. Cr. Mony for the sum paid. Cr. the party whose Bill is delivered for the value thereof. In barter Wares for Wares simply: Dr. the Wares received: Cr. the Wares delivered for the same sum, which seldom happens. For part Mony, part Wares: Dr. the Wares received: Cr. or Mony for so much as is paid. Cr. the several Wares delivered for the value of them. In barter For part Mony, part Wares, part time. For part Mony, part by anothers Bill, part Wares, part time Dr. the several Wares bought & received: Cr. the party that selleth the same And after he is Dr. for the Mony paid, Wares or Bills delivered as before. From beyond the Seas, from your Factor: Dr. the several Commodities received: Cr. your Factor by a double Margin. Payments of Mony. Owing by you by Bill, Bond, Accompt, or otherwise: Dr. the Party or Parties to whom the same was due. Cr. Mony. For Wares bought for Mony: Dr. the Wares so bought and received. Cr. Mony. Lent at Interest by Bond: Dr. the Party or Parties borrowers for the Principal and Interest. Cr. Mony for the sum paid. Cr. Profit or Loss, or the Acc. of Interest, for the Interest thereof. For Interest of Mony formerly taken up (the principal being continued) Dr. Interest, and Profit or Loss: Cr. Mony. For Assurance of Goods Shipped: Dr. the Accompt of Assurance of, or Profit and Loss. Cr. Mony. Remitted by Exchange: Dr. the Factor or Party to whom the Bills are payable. Cr. Mony. By Bills of Exchange charged upon you: Dr. the Factor or Party under-writing those Bills. Cr. Mony. For Charges Of Wares bought: Dr. those Wares. Of Goods Shipped: Dr. the Voyage. Extraordinary. Dr. Profit and Loss, or petty expences. Of Houshold. Dr. Profit and Loss, or petty expences. Cr. Mony. Delivery of a Bill or Bills of Debt, by assignation for Mony owing by you: Dr. the party assigned to receive the same: Cr. the party whose bill you delivered. Sales of Wares. For Mony: Dr. Mony: Cr. the Wares sold and delivered (the Mony being received upon the delivery of the Wares sold, which is not usual.) Sales of Wares. For Time, or For part Mony, part time, or For part Mony, part Wares part by anothers bill, part time. Dr. the party that buyeth those Wares: Cr. the Wares sold and delivered for the whole sum. And for the Mony received make: Dr. Mony: Cr. the party buyer in the second branch. And in the third branch: Dr. the party whose bill you take: Cr the buyer. Sales of Wares. In barter Wares for Wares simply: Dr. the Wares received: Cr. the Wares delivered both be of equal value, which seldom hapneth. In barter For part Mony, part Wares: Dr. Mony for so much as is received. Dr. the Wares received for the value of them. Cr. the several Wares delivered for the whole sum. In barter For part Mony, part Wares, part Time: For part Mony, part Wares, part anothers bill, part time: Dr. the Party or Parties that buy the same. Cr. the Wares sold and delivered for the same sum, as before. In barter For part Mony, part by anothers bill: Dr. Mony for the sum recieved: Dr. the party whose bill is taken for the value thereof: Cr the Wares sold and delivered for the whole sum. For part Wares, part by anothers bill: Dr. the Wares received for the value of them: Dr. the Party whose bill is taken for the rest: Cr the Wares sold and delivered for the whole sum. By advice from your Factor: Dr. that Factor: Cr. the Voyage or Voyages for the Goods sold by him. The contrary whereof is to be observed in the buying of Wares. Abatements Upon Wares. Bought: Dr. the party that sold those Wares: Cr. the Wares bought and received. Sold: the Wares sold and delivered: Cr. the Party that buyeth those Wares. Upon Debts Due to you: Dr. Profit and Loss: Cr. the Party or Parties to whom the abatement was made. Owing by you: Dr. the Party or Parties that make the abatement: Cr. Profit and loss The abatements being neither received, nor paid in Mony. Voyages of Goods Shipped with Charges: Dr. that Voyage for the whole sum: Cr. the Wares severally Shipped for their several values with their Charges. Cr. Mony for the Charges of those Wares so shipped (not put to their particular Accompts) Ballance. Of Goods. In Quantity: Dr. Accompt of Goods remaining: Cr. the Voyage or Goods unsold. If Gain: Dr. the accompt of Goods or Voyages: Cr. Profit and Loss. If Loss: Dr. the accompt of Profit and Loss: Cr. the Goods or Voyage. Of Mony: Dr. balance: Cr. Mony for rest of that Accompt Of Debts. Owing to you: Dr. ballance: Cr. the arties owing. Owing by you: Dr. the Parties due to have: Cr. ballance. Of Goods remaining: Dr ballance: Cr. the accompt of Goods remaining. Of Profit and Loss: Dr. that Accompt: Cr. Stock or Principal, if Profit; or contrarily if there be Loss. Of Stock: Dr that accompt: Cr. ballance which will be equal; And will shew the estate of the whole Accompt kept for conclusion. Forraign consisteth of viz. Receipts of Mony. Upon bills of Exchange remitted to him, Dr. Mony. For Goods sold formerly consigned him. Dr. Mony. Cr. the Party that remitted that Mony. Cr the Party that assigned the same. Cr. the Goods received for the accompt of the party or parties that consigned them. Goods. bought for Mony, at Time, in barter, &c. Dr. and Cr. as in private Accompts. by Consignation: Dr. the Goods received for Accompt of A B, specifying for whose Accompt: And under that Title naming the particulars of those Goods received wthout value, and so they are to have no Creditor to answer that parcel; but if you value them, there must be Dr. and Cr. Payments of Mony. by bills of Exchange remitted to your Principal, Dr and Cr. as in private Accompts aforesaid. by bills of Exchange charged on you by your Principal: Dr. your said Principal: by Commission: Dr. the Party that gave the Commission: For Charges. Of Goods received by Consignation: Dr. those Goods under one Title of A B, &c. Of Goods Shipped: Dr. the several Goods Shipped: Extraordinary: the Accompt currant of your Principal for whom the same was expended. Cr. Mony. Payments of Mony. For Goods bought: Dr. and Cr. as in private Accompts, whether for Mony, Time, &c. Lent at Interest: Dr. the Party to whom you Lend the same for the Principal and Interest. Cr. Mony for the sum paid. Cr. the Party whose Mony you Lent for the Interest thereof. Sales of Goods received for Accompts of your Principal, be it for Mony, Time, barter, &c. Dr. as in private Accompts. Cr. the accompt of those Goods received of A B, &c. Shipping of Coods with Charges: Dr. the Accompt currant of your Principal, for whom the same are Shipped: Cr. the several Goods Shipped, as in private Accompts. The rest as in private Accompts. Partable. Which may be resolved, as Domestick or Private Accompts: Imagining the intire Accompt to be a Tree, whereof the Accompt partable may represent the Trunk or Body and the several Partners the Branches thereof, of which sufficiently before is written. LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Robert Horne. 1669.
