L3358 R180259 52528852 178833
THE Loyal Presbyterian, AND THE New Conformist; With a LIST of the Names of the several Ministers, that have taken the OATH; And a true Copy thereof. Also, the Farewell-Advice of Mr. Chester, and divers others; And four Medi∣tations, for all true Belie∣vers. London, Printed for G. Egerton, 1666.
The Loyal Presbyterian; AND The New Conformist. OUt of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, comes better and sweeter honey, than out of Sampsons Lion; that is the sweetest honey which we suck out of Christs Hive: And the mutual intercourse of Love and Affection be∣tween Christ and his Church, should so highly endear the Members thereof to Unity and Con∣cord, that above all others the Ministers should cement and knit fast that lovely Knot, and una∣nimously assent and conform to the Discipline of the Church, according to the late Act of Par∣liament; upon publishing whereof, divers not before satisfied in their Judgments touching the
lawfulness thereof, upon secondary Thoughts, and mture Deliberation, weighing the particu∣lar an distinct Clauses therein contained, resol∣ved to aquiese therein, and to take and subscribe the following Oath, according to the Tenor of the Act, viz. I A. B. do Swear, That it is not lawful upon any preence whatso∣ever, to take Arms against the King; And that I do abhor that Traiter∣ous Position of taking Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are Commissionated by Him, in pursuance of such Commis∣sions; And that I will not at any time endeavour any Alteration of Govern∣ment, either in Church or State. The Names of those Ministers which ubscribed, are as fol∣loweth:
Mr. Bates, Mr. Salmon, Mr. Archer, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Mayo, Mr. Clark, Mr. Sheffield, Mr. Pool, Mr. Rood, Mr. Brooks, Mr. Reles, Mr. Overton, Mr. Vincent, Mr. Church, Mr. Fawly, Mr. Stanliff, Mr. Smith, Mr. Cooper, As touching those that refused to come in and subscribe, they are ex∣empted from the benefit of the Act; And some upon their depar∣ture, exhorted their Congregati∣ons to Peace and Unity; amongst the rest, Mr. Chester declared, That the onely way to praise and glorifie GOD, was, to pray for the Kings most excel∣lent Majesty, and that the LORD
would soon turn from his wrath, if men were turned from their wicked∣nesses: And Mr. Dyer his desire was, That all People would often meditate and think on the four last Things, Death which is most cer∣tain, Judgment wch is most strickt, Hell which is most doubtful, Hea∣ven which is most delightful: As first, To meditate upon Death which is most certain, he hath appointed unto men once to die, Heb. 9.27. Out of the Dust was man formed, and into the Dust shall man be turned. When you come into the World, you do but live to die again; When you go out of the World, you do but die to live a∣gain; He that lives well, cannot die ill; he that is assured of a life that hath no end, cares not how soon this life is at an end; but he that lives without fear,
shall die without hope; he that hath no grace in his life, shall haue no true peace in his death. 2. Meditate upon Judgment which is most strickt, we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10. They who will not come before his Mercy-Seat, shall be forced to come before his Judgment-seat; they who will not hear his word, shall feel his sword; they who are graceless in this day, will be speechless in that day. 3. Meditate upon Hell which is most doleful; Heaven is a place where all is joyful, and Hell is a place where all is dole∣ful; in the former, there's nothing but happiness, and in the latter theres no∣thing but heaviness. 4. Meditate on Heaven which is most joyful, It is a place where all Joy is enjoyed: One days joy in Heaven is worth ten thou∣sand
Worlds. The Vessels of grace shall swim in the Ocean of glory; here all the Earth is not enough for one man, but there one Heaven is enough for all men. A Believer should see with an Eye that is purified, what he shall shortly see with an Eye that is glorified; We may talk of the great∣ness of our Crowns, but we shall never know the weight of our Crowns, till they be set on our Heads. I shall wind up all with that saying of Ignatius, They who adhere to them who ad∣heres not to Truth, shall never inhe∣rit the Kingdom of GOD. FINIS.
