M1877 99887824 183479
THE Merry Wooing of Robin & Ioan The West-Country Lovers. To the Tune of, The beginning of the World, Or, Sellingers Round, Or, Great Boobe. O Mother thave been a Batchellor This twelve and twenty years, And Ize have often been a wooing: And yet cham never the near: Joan Gromball cheel ha none of me Ize look so like a Lowr: But I vaith cham as proper a Man as she Zhe needs not be Zo stout. She Zaies if ize coud dance and sing, As Thomas Miller con, Or cut a Cauper, as little Jack Taylor O how cheed love me then; But zoft and fair, chil none of that, I vaith cham not Zo nimble The Taylors have nought to trouble his thoughts But his needle and his thimble. O Zon th' art of lawful Age And a jolly tide Boy Ide have thee try her one again She can but say nay: Then O Gramarcy Mother Chill Zet a good Vaces of the matter Chill dress up my Zelf as fine as a Dog, And chill have a fresh bout at her. And first chill put on my Zunday Parrel, That lac'd about the Quarters; VVith a pair of Buckram Slops And a Vlanting pair of Garters VVith my Sword tide vast to my Zide And my Grandfathers Dugen Dagger And a Peacocks Veather in my Capp, Then ah how Ise shall swagger. Nay take the Loekrum Napkin Son, To wipe thy snotty nose, Tis no matter vor that chilli Snort is out And Vlurt it athwart my Cloaths: Dv's bod kins nay sie away I prethee Son do not so, Be mannerly Son till thou canst tell VVeather sheel ha thee or no. But Sirrah Mother hark a while, VVhos that that comes so near: 'Tis Joan Grombal, hold thy peace For fear that she do hear: Nay out be she chill dress my words, In Zuch a Scholards Grace, But virst of all shall take my Hands, And lay them athwart her Vace. Good morrow my Honey my Sugar-Candy My little pretty Mouse, Cha hopes thy Vather and Mother be well At home at thine own House Ich am came Vart to show my mind Cham Zure, thou knowest my Arrant: Zum say Iug that I mun ha thee, O no good Sir, I warrant. You must (Sir Clown) is for the King, And not for such a mome, You might have said by your leave fair Maid And let your (must) alone. Ich am no more a Clown that vlat Cham in my Zunday Apparel Ich came vor Love and I pray so tak't The hopes the will not quarrall. Joan. Robin dost thou love me so well, Robin. I vaith abomination, VVhy then you should have fram'd your wodrs Into a finer fashion. Vine Vashions and Vine eeches , As Schollards Volks can Vtter, Chad wrather speak but twa words plain Than half a score and stutter. Robin. Chave Land, chave House, chave twa v Be That's better then fine Speeches, Joan. 'Tis a sign that Fortune favours Fools, She let them have such Riches, Robin. Hark how she comes upon me now, I do wish it be a good Zine, Joan. He that will steal any wit from thee Had need to rise betime. Ise, Vaith Ise am no vool Ise Zay Ise think you Zud know better: Dost thou think Ise not know I pray, Good speech and manners better: 'Tis sure you know not if you did You'd nee'r have been a Lover. Nay nay, my Dear, nay nay udzlid Why mun not I discover. What long in secret i'se ha kept And woud ha longer done it Had not my Passion been Zo heap'd Ise had no more Room for it. And are you in Love as you Zay. Yes Vaith and Troth Ise Zware it Then prithee Robin set the day And wees ee'n both be Married.
