N617 99885289 182244
A New DIALOGUE between ALICE & BETRICE, As they met at the Market one Morning Early. To the Tune of Mopsaphil. This may be Printed, R. P. Alice. I. GOod Neighbour whyd'ye look awry? you're grown a wondrous Stranger You walk about, you Huff and Pout, as tho' you'd burst with Anger; If its for that your Fortune's great; or you so Wealthy are, Or else so High, there's none so nigh, that with you can compare: But t'other day I heard one say, your Husband durst not shew his Ears, But like a Lout he walks about, so full of Sighs and Fears. Betrice, Good Mistress Tart, I care not a Fa—t for you nor all your Jeers. II. My Husband's known for to be one that is most Chaste and Pure, And would be, continually, but for such Jades as you are: You smack, you smick, you wash you lick, you smirk, you swear, you grin, You nod, you wink, and in your Drink, you strive for to draw him in. Alice, You Lye you Punk, you're almost Drunk, and now you Scold and mke a Strife, With running in the Score, and playing the VVh— you lead him a weary Life, Bet. Tell me so once again, you Dirty Quean, and I'll pull you by the Coif. III. Go dress your Rats, those nasty Brats, that are always Sleep and Drowsie VVith Vermin spread, they're almost dead, they're kept so wondrous Lousie. Al. Pray hold you there, and do not Swear, yours are not half fo sweet, You feed them up with bit and sup, then give 'em a dirty Teat. Bet. My Girls and Boys, my only Joys, they're better taught and fed than yours. Al. Tell me so once more, you dirty VVh—, and I'll kick you out of doors Bet. 'Tis a very good Jest, pray do your best, and Isaith I'll quit the Scores. IV. Go, go you are a silly Bear, your Husband can't away with't, A stinking Quean as e'er was seen, your Neighbours all will say it: A  Trot, and good for naught, unless it be for that You  a Spoon out of the Room, the last Christering you were at. Al. You lye you VVi—, you have got the Itch, the Prish knows, you are not : ws with ugly Paws, and I'll fell you to the Ground: my Hood, and shall make it good, if it cost me the orty Pound, your Course. I. Blace, at the Looking glass on London-bridge.
