S1082 R183889 53299233 179971
ACT FOR A NEW LEVIE OF HORSE To be put out by the SHIRES: And List of the Colonels and their infe∣riour Officers, with their severall numbers of Horse. EDINBURGH last July 1648. Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie. 1648.
ACT For a new Leavie of Horse to be put out by the Shires. And List of the Colonels and their inferiour Officers, with their severall numbers of Horse. EDINBURGH, last July 1648. THE Committee of Estates ac∣cording to the trust and power committed to them, Taking to consideration how necessar it is; That when the Prince his High∣nesse shall come into this King∣dom, His Person be attended with all honour and respect. And considering the danger our Borders are in of ane invasion from the Sectaries and their adherents in England, who have presently considerable numbers of forces in the North. And may upon a sudden invade this Kingdom, to the disturbance of the Peace thereof, and the prejudice of the present under∣takings of this Kingdome, in pursuance of the ends of the Solemn League and Covenant, Have thought fit for the reasons foresaids, to appoint the just equall half of the last proportion of Horse, to be presently levied forth of the se∣verall Shires of this Kingdom. And for that effect Ordains the Committee of War of the severall Shires, to cause the Heritors, proper Woodsetters, Life-renters, and others sub∣ject
in our-putting of Horses, conform to the List hereto sub∣joyned, put out their Horse and Men, well armed with suffi∣cient Pistols and Swords. And that the Heretors, Life ren∣ters, and others foresaids of the severall Shires who are ly∣able to put out Horse, be ordained to bring their severall proportions armed and provided as aforesaid, to the place of Randevouse in each Shire, under the pain of 400. merks for each deficient Horseman, which are hereby ordained to be kept at the diets following, viz. All the Shires on this side of Spey upon the 15 day of August next. And these benorth Spey upon the 22. day of the same moneth. And Ordains the saids Colonels and Committees in every Shire to have their proportions of Horse armed and provided as aforesaid, at the place of Randevouse, and at the diets respective above∣mentioned, to march according to such orders as shall be then sent to them, under the penaltie aforesaid. And for the more speedy and effectuall raising of the said Horse, The Committee gives power and command to the Colo∣nells, with the assistance of such of the Committee of the Shire as will joyne with them: and are hereby commanded to be assisting to them to poynd and distreinʒie the goods of any Heretors and others foresaids, who are de∣ficient in putting out of their said Horse for the foresaid pe∣naltie of 400. merks for each Horseman wanting at the day of Randevouse, from every Heretor and others foresaids. And farther the saids Committee declares, that the Heretors and others foresaids, failing in their proportions, shall be e∣steemed as enemies to, and hinderers of the publick service of the Kingdom, in pursuance of the ends of the Covenant, and disaffected persons to the preservation of Religion, of the Prince his Highnes Person, the safety of the Kingdome. And the Committee of Estates Ordains the foresaids Com∣mittees to use all diligence for performing the foresaids du∣ties
intrusted to them, as they will testifie their affection to Religion, the peace of the Kingdom, and the preservation of the Prince his Highnesse Person. And that they fail not to make report to the Committee of Estates of this Kingdome within six dayes after the dayes of Randevouse respectivè above written assigned to the Committees of the Shires re∣spective as is aforesaid. And if the Committees of the Shires be remisse in their meetings, or in putting their orders to ex∣ecution, that the Colonels with such of the Committee as are willing to joyn with them, conveen upon al occasions for putting their orders to execution, and for doing every thing that may further this present Levie, being alwayes compt∣able for their proceedings to the Committee of Estates. And if any person or persons, of what degree, qualitie or condition soever, shall offer to oppose or obstruct by violence the reso∣lution of the Committee of Estates, with power to the saids Committees and Colonels, to use all meanes to compose them, and if need be, to pursue the raisers of the tumults, and the publick opposers of the resolutions of the Committee in a hostile way by the strength of the Shire: And if the insur∣rection or opposition come to that height, that the Shire where it falls out is not able to suppresse the same, That the Committees, Colonels and Commanders of the next adja∣cent Shires on all quarters, joyn for suppressing thereof, as they shall receive advertisement. And that the saids Forces may be kept in the better order and discipline, The said Committee ordains all Officers constantly to attend their charge, and that none of them upon any pretext whatsoever, be absent the space of three dayes, without waarrand. With certification to the contraveeners hereof, that their places shall be declared vacand, and another established in their charge. And the Committee of Estates declares, that what∣soever Officer or Souldier shall be found guiltie of taking at
their own hand, horse, or any other goods from the subjects of this Kingdome, that he shall die for the same. And for the better regulating and putting forth of the said Horse of such as will not fail to put out a whole horse, It is declared, that the greatest rent of these to be joyned for making up of horse, shall provide the horse and man; and the rest to joyne and contribute according to 160 l. for ilk horseman. And where the rent is equall, to cast lots. Follows the List of the Horse to be put out of the severall Shires, with the names of the Colonels and Rut∣masters, and their divisions. Out of the Sheriffdom of Roxburgh and Selkirk 100 horse; out of the Sheriffdom of Berwick 50 horse; out of the Sherif∣dom of Hadintoun 50 horses; out of the Sheriffdom of Edin∣burgh 50 horses; Out of the Sheriffdom of Lithgow 30. Out of the Sheriffdom of Peebles 20. Out of the Sheriffdome of Dumfreis 60. Out of the sheriffd. of Wigtoun and Kirkcudbright 60. Out of the sheriffd. of Air and Renfrew 120. Out of the sheriffd. of Lanerick 100. Out of the sheriffd. of Stirline and Clackmannan 60. Out of the sheriffd. of Fyfe and Kinrocher 120. Out of the sheriffd. of Perth 120. Out of the sheriffd. of Forfar 70. Out of the sheriffd. of Kincardyne 27. Out of the sheriffd. of Aberdeen 116. Out of the sheriffd. of Bamf 26. Out of the sheriffd. of Elgine and Nairn, & that part of Innernes on this side of Ness 60. Out of the Earl of Seafort and Lord Lo∣vats division of Innernes 60. Out of the E. of Seaforts part of Innernes, Caithnes and Sutherland 60. to be divided according to the act of Parl. thereanent. Out of the sheriffd. of Dumbar∣tane 10. Which number of horse above-written are to be di∣vided in three Regiments. And the Committee do nominat and appoint the Earl of Lanerick, the Laird of Garthland, and Colonel David Barclay to be the three Colonels. And  to be Lieut. Col. to the E. of Lanerick, John
Murray of Pomais Major, Sir Archbald Stirlin of Carden, Sir William Nisbet of Dean, Sir John Leslie younger of Newtoun, William Murray son to the Lord Elibank, and Captain Andrew Hamiltoun to be his Rutmasters. As also they nominat and appoint Major John Macdowel Lieut. Col. to the said Laird of Garthland,  Major,  Afflec of Balmanno, Wood of Grange, Sir Robert Creichtoun, and Och∣ter Cochrane brother to the Lord Cochrane his Rutmasters. As likewayes they nominat and appoint Harie Bruce younger of Clakmannan to be Lieut. Col. to the said Colonell David Barclay, Bernard Lindsay his Major,  Ramsay of Bal∣main younger,  Middletoun brother to Lieut. Generall Middletoun,  Forbes of Tolquhon  Ponter and the Laird of Dun his Rutmasters. And the saids Regiments to be levied out of the several Shires underwritten and divi∣ded amongst the Colonels in manner following, viz. the 100 horse out of the sheriffd. of Roxburgh and Selkirk: the 50 horse out of the sheriffd. of Berwick the 50 horse out of the sheriffd. of Hadintoun: the 50 horse out of the sheriffd. of E∣dinburgh: the 30 horse out of the sheriffd. of Linlithgow the 20 horse out of the sherffid. of Peebles: the 90 horse out of the sheriffd. of Lanerick: the 60 horse out of the sheriffd. of Stir∣line and Clackmannan: the 120 horse out of the sheriffd. of Fyfe and Kinroshire, all to be in one Regiment, to be com∣manded by the Earl of Lanerick, who is hereby authorized to appoint localities to the several Officers and Captains un∣der his charge, The 60 horse out of the sheriffd. of Wigton and Kirkcudbright: the 60 horse out of the sheriffd. of Dun∣freis: the 120 horse out of the sheriffd. of Air and Renfrew: the 10 horse out of the sheriffd. of Dumbartan: the 120 horse out of the sheriffd of Perth; all to be in one Regiment nder the command of the Laird of Garthland, together with 80 horse formerly allotted to him, except 60 horse which are to
be given to Captain Andrew Hay Lieutennent Quarter ma∣ser to the Army in England. And the said Laird of Gart∣nd is hereby authorized to appoint localities to the severall Officers and Captaine under his command. The 70 horse ut of the sheriffd. of Forfar, the 27 out of the sheriffdom of incardyn, the 116 out of the sheriffdom of Aberdeen, the 26 ut of the sheriffdom of Bamff, the 60 horse out of the she∣iffdom of Elgine and Nairne, and that part of Innernes on his side of Ness, the 60 out of the Lord Seafort and Lord Lovats divisionsof Innernes, the 60 horse out of the rest of he Earl of Seaforts bounds in Innernes, all to be put into a Regiment under the command of Colonell David Barclay, ogether with the old Troup belonging to himself, who is hereby authorized to appoint localities to the severall Offi∣cers and Captains under his charge, For forth-putting, and out-reiking of the saids horses. The Committee do statute and ordain, That the severall Heretors, Wodsetters, Liferen∣ters, and others lyable in out-putting thereof, shall have al∣lowance of ane hundreth pounds for each Horseman suffici∣ently mounted and armed, (providing they keep the day of the Randevouse above written) and that out of the first end of the three moneths maintenance, presently imposed upon this Kingdom, viz. out of the moneths of October, Novem∣ber and December next 1648. And the Committee appoints his present Act to be Printed. FINIS.
