s1711 53299275 180008
W R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms PROCLAMATION Appointing Twenty Shilling to be Payed for every Boll of Foraign Victual that shall be Imported. WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith. To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part Conjunctly and Severally, Specially, Constitute Greetings▪ For as much as, by sundry Acts of the Lords of Our Privy Council, and Proclamations formerly emitted by Us; Foraign of the continuing Dearth of Victual in several places of this Kingdom, and of the Want and Distres many of Our good Subjects Ly under there-through; And that the Unseasonableness of the Weather Threatning a Late Harvest may make the Straits and Wants of many, especially of the Poorer fort. Insupportable before they can be Relieved by the present Cropt We have resolved to give all Incouragement to any who shall Import Victual to this Kingdom from any Foraign Country during the Space after∣mentioned. THEREFORE, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Grant License, and full Liberty to all Persons what∣somever, Foraigners or Natives, to Import Victual or Corns of all Sorts, either by Sea or by Land from any other Kingdom or Country whatsoe∣ver, until the first Day of October next to come, and that Free of Custom, Excise, or other Impossition for all that shall be Imported after the Day and Date hereof During the Time foresaid; And Recommends it to the Commissioners of Our Theasaury to Discharge the Exacting of any such Custom, Excise, or Imposition for the said Victual so to be Imported, notwithstanding of any Act of Parliament, or Book of Rates Impo∣sing the same; And for a farther Encouragement, and Invitation to all such who shall Import and Bring into this Kingdom, either by Sea or Land betwixt and the Day foresaid, Victual or Corn of any Sort, except Malt, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Ap∣point, and Ordain the Sum of Twenty Shilling Scots for Each Boll of the said Foraign Victual (Excepting as said is) to be Imported after the Day and Date hereof, and betwixt and the said first of October, to be Given and Payed out of Our Customs to the Importer thereof, upon his Oath of Verity, of the Number of Bolls Imported by him, taken in presence of any of the Sheriffs of the several Shires of this Kingdom, Baillies of Bailliaries or Regalities, Stuarts of the Stewartries or their Respective Deputs Magistrats of Burghs or any of the Commissioners of Supply, or Justices of Peace within the same, and Subscribed with his hand, and Attested by the foresaids Judges, and also by the Collector of the next Adjacent Custom-House; And of which Twenty Shilling Scots, We with Advice foresaid Require and Command the Tacksmen and Farmers of Our Customs, and their Col∣lectors and other Receivers at the respective Custom-Houses to make present and immediate Payment for Each Boll of Foraign Victual Imported by Sea or Land to the Importer thereof upon his Receipt to be given upon the Back of the foresaid Subscribed Oath of the Number of Bolls Imported; And which Receipt We with Advice foresaid Declare, shall be a Sufficient exoneration to the saids Tacksmen and Farmers of Our Cu∣stoms and their Collectors of their said Tack-Duty, and be Allowed to them in the Fore-end thereof protanto, Certifying such of the saids Collectors, or other Persons Imployed to Receive Money at the respective Custom-Houses, by the Tacksmen and Farmers of Our saids Customs; That if they shall fail to make Due and punctual Payment of the said Twenty Shilling Scots for Each Boll of Imported Victual, (Excepting as said is) postpon or delay the Importers thereof in the ready Payment of the said Sum when the said Subscribed Oath and Receipt is offered to them. They shall not only be Declared, and ipso facto thereby become Incapable to Serve, or be Imployed by Our saids Farmers in any Office or Trust under them in Uplifting Our saids Customs, but be farther Lyable in what Penaltie and Dammages to the Party, the Lords of Our Privy Council shall think fit to inflict upon them. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you Strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinhurgh, and to the remnant Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewarties within this Kingdom; And their in Our Name and Authority make Intimation hereof, that none pretend Ignorance: And Ordains these Presents to be Print∣ed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Seventh Day of August,  and of Our Reign the Eight Year. 1696 Ex deliberatione Dominorum Secreti Concilli. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save the King. William R▪ Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1696.
