20308 [ocm]60449214 181297
ANTI-MORTONVS OR AN APOLOGY In defence of the Church of Rome. AGAINST The Grand Imposture of Doctor Thomas Morton, Bishop of Durham. Whereto is added in the Chapter XXXIII. An Answere to his late Sermon printed, and preached before his Maiesty in the Cathedrall Church of the same Citty. Narrauerunt mihi iniqui fabulationes: sed non vt lex tua? Psal. 118. vers. 85. Dubit abimus nos cius Ecclesiae condere gremio, quae ab Apostolica Sede per successiones Episcoporum, frustra Haereticis circumlatrantibus, culmen Authoritatis obtinnit? Cui nolle Primas dare, vel summae profecto impietatis est, vel praecipitis arrogantiae. S. August. de vtil. cred. cap. 17. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XL.
S. Bernardus serm. 64. in Cantica, in id Cant. 2.15. Capite nobis vulpes paruulas quae demoliuntur vineas. SI iuxta allegoriam, Ecclesias Vineas, Vulpes Haereses, vel po∣tius Haereticos ipsos intelligamus, planus est sensus, vt Haere∣tici capiantur &c. Capiantur dico, non Armis, sed Argumen∣tis, quibus refellantur Errores eorum: ipsi verò, fi fieri potest, re∣concilientur Catholicae, reuocentur ad veram Fidem. Haec est enim voluntas eius, qui vult omnes saluos fieri, & ad agnitionem Veritatis venire &c. Quod si reuerti noluerint, non propterea se nihil egisse putet, qui Haereticum vicit & conuicit; Haereses con∣futauit; Verisimilia à Vero clarè aperte{que} distinxit; praua dog∣mata planâ & irrefragabili ratione praua esse monstrauit &c. Ce∣pit, qui talia operatus est, Vulpem, etsi non ad salutem illi: & cepit eam Sponso, & Sponsae, quamuis aliter. Nam etsi Haereticus non surrexit de faece, Ecclesia tamen confirmatur in Fide: & quidem de profectibus Sponsae, Sponsus sine dubio gratulatur.
TO DOCTOR MORTON BISHOP OF DVRHAM. My Lord, WITHOVT endangering the least suspition of Complement, I belieue I may craue your pardon for this Dedication: And as others vse in modesty, of necessity I must suspect my Boldnes. But Truth which I here vindicate from Imposture, disdaines to shadow it selfe in Ceremony, most resplendent in its naked lustre. And forced by that, I addresse this Worke to you, who haue hitherto with so much art endeauo∣red to clowd it. I know the pride of human iudgment slights all the threatnings of hereafter punishment, when confession of mistake is required: And often by the opiniated, Obstinacy in error is esteemed Resolution: which makes me in some degree despaire that fruite,
these labors otherwise might haue hereafter gathered. Moreouer your Lo. is so glorious in your Challenge, and your Grand Imposture proclaimes it selfe so inuin∣cible, that iealous of my owne inhability, I feared I might repent my courage, if I entertained the Combat. But from my Weaknes I drew Confidence, and called to memory, how small an arme confounded the proud boast of the huge Philistian; and by how childish a wea∣pon he was hurled downe to what he built on, earth; and forc't to acknowledge himselfe dust, and vanity. Take not therfore your owne height by the Eminen∣cy of that Title you beare, or Reputation of your much learning, which is your Guilt, not Ornament. Nor mea∣sure me by my humble Vocation, for I haue vowed to be ambitious of no higher; or by the obscurity of my Name, since I can easily forgiue the present Age, if it know me not; and Posterity, if it forget, I was. Neither had I now entred into this publike Quarrell, had not your bold defiance to all of my profession prouoked me to disco∣ner how little integrity there is, where it is most vaun∣ted. At first, a pious Curiosity laboured only my owne Satisfaction: That it now appeares abroad, is the Charity I owe my Countrey: And that it swells to this Volume, is the fault of your many, and I feare, too wil∣full mistakes. Consider, my Lord, how many soules are imbarked with yours; for whose wrack at the last day you must stand accomptant. And though a pleasing gale hath blowne gently on you, yet no wind but driues you on towards Iudgment. There the sincerity of action, not the fallacy of language shal preuaile: there no enforced Argument, false Citation, or cunning Distinction shal be able to iustify Vntruth. There heresy shall stand con∣founded,
and they who maintained it (rackt by their owne Consciences) cry out; Behold where the Saints are enthroned in glory, raised thither by Humility, & Obedience to the authority of that Church, which if Truth it selfe speake truth, is Infallible; by resignation of theirs to the diuine will, and cooperating to the merits of the great Mediator: But we mad men made a moc∣kery of their wisdome; & to take the blemish from our loose behauiour, discredited the value of good works: We presumptuous in the vanity of Wit, opposed the di∣uine Truth; and to destroy the Monarchy of S. Peter & his Successors, proclaimed liberty to euery Rebellious Doctrine: We listened to the suggestions of a priuat Spirit; and seduced by that, contemned a long recea∣ued, and vniuersall Verity: and therfore iustly now is our portion darknesse, and our inheritance eternal fire. I doubt not but the holy Spirit often whispers these thoughts into your soule: but Pride keeps the gate of the hart fast shut. Moreouer if we looke not streight on heauen, without squinting on temporall respects; con∣sidering your fat reuenue, and your Lordship, I may well be thought to inuite you to your losse. But who, that hath regard to Safety, despiseth not the flatteries of Wealth, and Honour, when he meditates on the Treasures of the Eternall? And why shold I vtterly de∣spaire, though you haue erred willfully, that the Al∣mighty Mercy may reclaime you; if ignorantly, that when you heere find how much your iudgment hath betraied you, you will penitently submit, and make much satisfaction by your great example? S. Augustine thought it no dishonour to his Iudg∣ment, to be ouercome by Truth, and rather then loose a Soule, forsooke an Heresy; which, as all others, had an
age to florish in. Nor is his Humility, a scandall to his Learning, or was his Change, Inconstancy: whose Vo∣lumes carry that reputation, that euen Sectaries, who want his vertue for Obedience, endeauour to wrest his doctrine, for Defence. Here may your Lo? learne in∣struction: whom to accompany in an humble Conuer∣sion, will be more safety and glory, then to perseuer ob∣stinate in a proud mistake. If the cunning, and art of your many Writings enamour you, throw away the vnhappy dotage, though in them Hope flatters you, that your memory may hereafter liue. Safer far, to haue no Name with the succeeding Age, then to pre∣serue it in the infamy of a spurious Issue. And belieue it, when the Soule wilfully imbraceth Errour, it com∣mits the worst Adultery; what-euer is ingendred by such conceptions, being both illegitimate, and mon∣struous. Looke vpon the opinions of them, who liue seuered (if they can be said to liue who are dead to grace) from the Vnity of the Church; and confesse, how little con∣stant Errour is to it selfe. That Innocency from Lust, which so many of your Writers affirme impossible to preserue, your owne single, and (I hope) incorrupt life hath approued possible: for vnlesse you will endanger your selfe to a Censure in the high Commission, you must acknowledge, flesh and bloud may be kept in or∣der, by the spirit. But what discouers the bodies of all Churches, which oppose the Catholike, most missha∣pen is the diuision among your selues; now and euer so apparent, that I dare confidently auerre, were there a Councell called of all those you reckon yours, his Ho∣linesse might suspend his Censure, each one of you prepar'd to pronounce the other, Heretike. And for
your Lo.p, though reputed most Orthodoxall, vnlesse you quit that most reuerend Title, which is your honor to make good, I suspect, you would by the Maior voyce be condemned, without the guilt of any other crime: though Truth and all Antiquity teach vs, that Episco∣pall dignity hath euer bene most eminent, and necessa∣ry in the Church, and ought to be held in veneration, where lawfully conferred, not vsurped. But I feare, I keep no good time, when I strike on this harsh string: I will not therfore further afflict your eare. Let me only intreat, and if possible, preuaile with your Lo.p, to cast vp the accompt of those many yeares you haue numbred heere on earth. And if you haue prouided a Marble hereafter to inclose your dust, looke not on the flattering Epitaph, which betrayes the Reader: but listen to the silent sad Oratory, in which it pleads to you your condition. It tells you, that eue∣ry path of life, how crooked soeuer in mans purposes, leads streight to death: That all the pompe of wealth, and honour (for acquisition of which he doubts not often to stake a Soule) is but an euening shadow, soone to be lost in an euerlasting darknesse: That youth doth oftentimes breake promise, when it proposeth length of life; but that age is frantick, if it hope long to hold out against the assault of death. It therfore imports your Lo.p, who opprest with yea∣res bow downward to the graue, seriously to looke in∣ward, & turne your sight frō those vanities which haue hitherto bewicht you. For pardon me, if to pride & va∣nity I ascribe a long continuance in error: and that I want credulity to thinke, an able Scholler can belieue Vntruth, though for the designes of his owne Ambi∣tion, he obtrude it to the world. May your Lo p take,
courage, and gaine an entire Conquest ouer Sense, by subscribing to that Church, in which only is safty, and which your many vnlucky Labors haue slaundered, not iniured. So signall a Conuersion will add ioy, and triumph to the Angells; and make me, who haue bene hitherto your Aduersary, not Enemy, hereafter, Your true Admirer, and humble Seruant. I. S.
TO THE READER. GOOD READER, The Author of the Grand Impo∣sture, in his first Epistle dedicated to his Maiesty, sets only forth in generall the heads of that doctrine he afterwards en∣deauors (though vnluckily) to make good. But Error without apparence of proofe, confutes it selfe: And it would anticipate the designe of my study, if here I should labor thy satisfaction; since the whole ensuing Treatise disco∣uers euery of his mistakes in particuler, which at the first en∣trance to his Booke, he affirmes in grosse. Yet could I wish, that only truth should dare to approach the throne of Maie∣sty; and that a conscience guilty of deceipt, should not be able to pretend the confidence of the innocent: for the falsest do∣ctrine may easily winne beliefe vpon the Laity, whom either much busines diuerts from the search of truth, or an vnwil∣lingnesse to be disturbed, encourageth to follow that easy path, they from their infancy haue beaten; especially when it appeares in publike asseuered by them who haue their large stipend, and high honor, only on condition to be sincere in
what they teach. But howeuer he may flatter himselfe that hs Reader will neuer arriue to patience inough, to trauaile beyond his Epistles, or that his authority will be sufficient, though his proofes are defectiue; I hope he will find his com∣fort to haue betrayd him: for the businesse which here we con∣trouert, being of value far beyond the whole world beside, I meane the soule of man, and the Church, in which only that can expect safety; I doubt not (good Reader) but thou wilt be so charitable to thy selfe, as to reade, distinguish, and then reiect error, how plausible soeuer it may appeare to sense: Nor, though his reputation may haue gained heretofore much vpon thee, wilt thou belieue, that Truth is by couenant bound to christen all the abortiues of his Opinion. And wheras in his second Epistle, directed to all Romish Priests, whether Iesuits or others, he seemes by a Rhethoricall figure, to heare them censuring his charging the Church of Rome with Imposture, the bold assumption, or rather impudent, and impious presumption of an Heretike; I cannot but commend the iudgment he instructs them to pronounce: for how could the wit of Iustice inuent a more proper, or seuerer? Or to speake more truly, how could Mercy vse a gentler? And though in that single word, Heretike, all Impiety is comprehended; yet how can he deserue any o∣ther sentence, who hath dared to defame thy innocency, O thou Immaculate Spouse of our great Redeemer? Who hath termed thy doctrine, which threw downe the Statues of the Heathens, and rooted vp all false worship, Idolatrous, Sacri∣legious? Thy doctrine, which planted the fayth of Christ with the bloud of Martyrs, and tyed vp the common enemy of man, Satanicall, and Antichristian? Thy doctrine, which is the only safety of the soule, Execrable, and Pernicious? which teacheth the true adoration of God, Blasphemous & Impious? which neuer varied in the least article from the
truth, Schismaticall, and Hereticall? But how farre vna∣ble are these weake calumnies to wound thy strength, which hath triumpht ouer all the opposition of heresy, and hell? Thou art built vpon a Rock of Diamond, which yields the brightest lustre, when impure slander raifeth the blackest night: A Rock, which neuer moued since Christ designed it, as a foun∣dation for his greatest worke on earth: A rock, against which her many Aduersaries haue battered with continuall tem∣pests, but still ended in froth, and noise. But all these fowle aspersions might be interpreted the wild expressions of an extrauagant zeale, and perhaps challenge that pitty we throw away vpon the franticke. Neither can any man be enraged with such infamous language, who con∣siders, it is that spirit, which possest the first professors of this pretended reformation; who created a Religion in contempt of iurisdiction. And as euery where they derogated from the spirituall, so spared they not the temporall, where feare of pu∣nishment restraind not their tongues to modesty. But what euen amazeth my Vnderstanding, is, that so well practis'd a man in controuersy, so iealous of honor, and such a pretender to integrity, should fall into that deceitfull, and, I may say, fatall crime of the writers of his Coate, false citation, and misinterpretation of Authors. What iniury hath he done the dead, whose soules are blessed in heauen, and whose ashes are reuerenced on earth, to make them defend a doctrine, in opposition to which they emptied euery veine in their most (acred bodies? What cruelty to the liuing, by a pre∣tended obedience to the authority of the primitiue times, to inforce them to belieue the errors of the present? Doth he hope, his Volumes shall fall only into the hands of the igno∣rant, or els of the negligent, so far, that any doctrine shall posse for currant, which his fancy hath bene pleased to coyne? Did he intrust others to make scrutiny into Authors for his
purpose, & so aduenture his reputation to the world, on an vncertaine, and perhaps vnfaythfull euidence? Or did he belieue, according to the rule of the worst Statesmen, any al∣legation how iniurious soeuer, most iust, if it serued the ad∣uancement of his designe? For certainly he hath giuen the world an example of such a courage, that no good Writer will euer follow, in daring thus to be disproued by any Rea∣der, who hath the benefit of a Library, and the patience to compare truth with falshood. For without giuing credit to the testimonies I here alleage, if any man will search into the Authors themselues, he shall find them mangled, as thatPro∣crustes apud Plutarch, in The∣seo. Tyrant did his ghests (who with most barbarous torment shortned or lengthned their bodies, according to the proportion of his bed:) No man writes short of his sense, but is extended on the rack: no man beyond, but is mutilated without mercy. This discouery of his vnhappy practise I wish may beget his conuersion, not confusion. But should he be so enamoured on his error, as not to be remoued by the most forcible Ar∣guments of Truth; I hope (Reader) in thee to reape some fruit of my labor. The Almighty in distribution of his be∣nefits, will not be directed by humane iudgment. Let his di∣uine wisdome therfore bestow the fruit of my study, where, & on whom he pleaseth: for to his glory I must consecrate that, with whatsoeuer I am. Only (Curious Reader) I must beg thy pardon, that in endeauouring to write busines, I haue neglected language, which like that musick Poets ascribe to the Syrens, hath bene often treacherous to the hearer. Elegancy of speach is a gift, in which the wicked share equally with the good: and the most sacred tongue that euer spake, disdained to adulterate truth with any fallacy of an artificiall Phrase. The policy of some Republikes hath expeld their Orators, as subiects whom the power of eloquence rendred formidable; the multitude being
easy to receaue any impression through the eare; and Oratory being a weapon as sharpe to destroy, as defend the State. Nor doe I value the cunning of language worthy the industry of the serious: It may be of consequence, where well directed; but truth needs not borrow any ornament of language, to make it selfe more amiable. That which I aime at, is thy satisfaction; and that the Church of God, which is on earth no other, but the Roman, may shine vnclouded in the sight of men, as it hath euer bene most pure in the eye of God. And that all man∣kind whom error hath misled, may re-vnite themselues into her fayth; guided by which, the innocent can only hope for perseurance to glory, and the repentant a way to mercy. An Addition. COurteous Reader, I had almost forgotten to ad∣uertise thee, that wheras Doctor Morton hath made two Editions of his Grand Imposture; the Edi∣tion which I shall cite in this Apology, is the second, reuised, and supplied, and printed at London by George Miller, for Robert Milbourne. 1628.
A table of the Chapters and Sections of this Booke. CHAP. I. GEnerall principles premised for the bet∣ter vnderstanding of this Apology. Pag. 1. The importance of the subiect. Sect. 1. ib. Whether the Roman Church be truly called the Catholike Church, and in what sense. Sect. 2. pag. 4. That in the language of antiquity the Catholike Church, and the Roman Church, were two names signifying one and the same thing. Sect. 3. pag. 7. That whosoeuer is out of the Roman Church, is out of the state of saluation. Sect. 4. pag. 13. CHAP. II. Of Doctor Mortons manner of alleaging Au∣thors in generall. pag. 27. CHAP. III. Whether the (now) Roman Church, hath composed a new Creed. pag. 36. CHAP. IV. Whether the (now) Roman Church haue ad∣ded any new Articles to the Creed of the Apostles. pag. 38. CHAP. V. That the word Roman, is no deprauation, but a true declaration of the article of the Catholike Church. pag. 40. Doctor Mortons first Argument against the precedent do∣ctrine answeared. Sect. 1. ibid. His second Argument answeared. Sect. 2. pag. 43. His third Argument answeared. Sect. 3. pag. 52. His fourth Argument answeared. Sect. 4. pag. 54. His fifth Argument answeared. Sect. 5. pag. 56. His sixth Argument answeared. Sect. 6. pag. 58. His seauenth Argument answeared. Sect. 7. pag. 59. His eight Argument answeared. Sect 8. pag. 60. CHAP. VI. That the Roman Church is the Head and mo∣ther of all Churches. pag. 61. CHAP. VII. S. Peters primacy defended. pag. 72. CHAP. VIII. Abuses and wronges offered by Doctor Morton to the ancient Fathers and other Catholike wri∣ters. pag. 81.
CHAP. IX. S. Peter exercised his authority, and iurisdi∣ction of supreme Pastor and Gouernor, ouer the other A∣postles, and ouer the whole Church. pag. 88. CHAP. X. Doctor Mortons Arguments against the for∣mer doctrine, answeared. pag. 93. CHAP. XI. Sleights and falsifications of Doctor Morton to shift of the testimonies of ancient Fathers teaching S. Peters supremacy. pag. 107. CHAP. XII. The authority of the Roman Church in her definitions of fayth proued to be infallible. pag. 117. Our first Argument. Sect. 1. pag. ibid. Our second Argument. Sect. 2.125. S. Pauls subiection to S. Peter, and his acknowledgment therof. Sect. 3. pag. 132. Other Arguments of Doctor Morton answeared. Sect. 4. pag. 140. Priuiledges granted to other of the Apostles, and not to S. Peter, obiected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 5. pag. 143. What estimation S. Paul had of the Roman Church. Sect. 6. pag. 152. Why S. Paul did not entitle his Epistles, Catholike Epistles. Sect. 7. pag. 159. Other Arguments out of S. Paul, and other Catholike Au∣thors answeared. Sect.8. pag. 162. CHAP. XIII. Whether S. Iohn the Euangelist conceaued himselfe subiect to the Roman Church. pag. 166. Whether Rome shall be the seat of Antichrist. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether S. Iohn suruiuing S. Peter, were subiect to the B. of Rome, S. Peters Successor. Sect. 2. pag. 173. CHAP. XIV. Why the Epistles of S. Iames, Iohn, and Iude are intituled Catholike Epistles. pag. 177. Of the name Catholike. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the title of Vicar of Christ belong to the Pope, and in what sense. Sect. 2. pag. 180. Whether S. Paul reckoning the Ecclesiasticall orders, gaue the Pope any place among them. Sect. 3. pag. 182. Doctor Mortons rayling against the Inquisition. Sect. 4. pag. 187. CHAP. XV. Of the signification of the word Catholike: & the iudgment of diuers Fathers, obiected by Doctor Morton against the Roman Church. pag. 195. That the word Catholike proues the Roman Church to be the true Church. Sect. 1. ibid.
The iudgment of S. Hierome concerning the Church Catho∣like. Sect. 2. pag. 198. The iudgment of S. Gregory concerning the Supremacy of the B. of Rome, and his title of vniuersall Bishop. Sect. 3. pag. 201. S. Dionyse his iudgment concerning the supremacy of the Roman Church. Sect. 4. pag. 302. S. Ignatius his iudgment of the Roman Church. Sect. 5. p. 303. S. Irenaeus his iudgment of the Roman Church. Sect. 6. p. 304. Tertullian his iudgment of the Roman Church. Sect. 7. pag. 308. Vincentius Lyrinensis his iudgment of the Roman Church. Sect. 8. pag. 311. Other obseruations of Doctor Morton out of Antiquity, answeared. Sect. 9. pag. 312. CHAP. XVI. The iudgment of the Councell of Nice, concerning the authority of the B. and Church of Rome. pag. 313. Doctor Mortons obiections against the precedent doctrine, answeared. Sect. 1. pag. 318. CHAP. XVII. The second generall Councell held at Con∣stantinople, belieued the supreme authority of the Bishop and Church of Rome. pag. 324. By what authority this Councell was called. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the Primacy of the Pope be Primacy of Authority and Iurisdiction, or of Order only. Sect. 2. pag. 328. Whether the names of Brother, Collegue, and Fellow-Minister, which the Pope giueth to other Bishops, and they to him, argue them to be of equall Authority, and Iurisdiction with him. Sect. 3. pag. 330. A friuolous cauill of Doctor Morton against Bellarmine, ans∣weared. Sect. 4. pag. 335. Of the Decree of this second Councell generall made in fa∣uor of the Archbishop of Constantinople. Sect. 5. pag. 336. That no Canon of any Councell can be of force, vntill it be confirmed by the See Apostolike. Sect. 6. pag. 338. That the Bishops of Constantinople knew this Canon to be of no force. Sect. 7. pag. 340. CHAP. XƲIII. The third Councell generall, being the first of Ephesus, belieued the supreme authority and iuris∣diction of the B. of Rome ouer all Bishops. pag. 343.
Of the deposition and condemnation of Nestorius, by the command of Pope Celestine: and whether the style of an∣cient Popes were to command. Sect. 1. ibid. The Councell of Ephesus acknowledged the supreme au∣thority of the Pope in the cause of Iohn Patriarke of An∣tioch. Sect. 2. pag. 351. Of the Ordination of the Bishops of Cyprus, treated in the Councell of Ephesus. Sect. 3. pag. 352. Whether it may be gathered out of the Councell of Ephe∣sus, that the authority of the Pope is aboue a generall Councell. Sect. 4. pag. 353. CHAP. XIX. The Councell of Chalcedon belieued the supreme authority of the B. of Rome. pag. 355. That Leo Pope called the Councell of Chalcedon by his au∣thority, and presided in it by his Legates. Sect. 1. ibid. That the Councell of Chalcedon by the authority of Leo Pope deposed Eutyches and Dioscorus, & restored Theo∣doret. Sect. 2. pag. 356. Whether the title of Ʋniuersall Bishop, which the Councell of Chalcedon gaue to the Pope, argue in him no more but a generall care of the good of the Church, such as belongs to euery Bishop, and to euery Christian. Sect. 3. pag. 360. Whether the Couneell of Chalcedon did giue to the B. of Constantinople priuiledges equall with the B. of Rome. Sect. 4. pag. 362. Falsifications and vntruths of Doctor Morton discouered, & his Arguments answeared. Sect. 5. pag. 367. CHAP. XX. The fifth Councell generall belieued the su∣preme authority of the Bishop & Church of Rome. p. 375. Doctor Mortons ignorance, and contradictions concerning this Councell. Sect. 1. ibid. Doctor Mortons ignorance further discouered, and his falsi∣fying of Binius. Sect. 2. pag. 377. Of the matter treated in the fifth generall Councell. Sect. 3. pag. 381. Doctor Mortons glosse vpon the word Obedience. Sect. 4. pag. 383. CHAP. XXI. Of the sixth generall Councell. pag. 385. That it acknowledged the supreme authority of the Bishop and Church of Rome. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the fixth Councell condemned Honoriu Pope as an Heretike. Sect. 2. pag. 387.
CHAP. XXII. Of the seauenth and eight generall Coun∣cells: pag. 391. That these two Councells acknowledged the supreme au∣thority of the Bishop and Church of Rome. Sect. 1. ibid. Doctor Mortons ignorance concerning the eight generall Councell. Sect. 2. pag. 392. Whether the eight generall Councell condemned the Satur∣day-fast allowed by the Roman Church. Sect. 3. pag. 394. CHAP. XXIII. Doctor Morton defendeth the hereticall custome of the Asian Bishops. pag. 397. CHAP. XXIƲ. Doctor Morton in opposition to the Ro∣man Church defendeth the hereticall Doctrine of Rebap∣tization. pag. 402. CHAP. XXƲ. Other Arguments of Doctor Morton out of S. Cyprian, answeared. pag. 408. CHAP. XXƲI. The Councells of Carthage and Mileuis acknowledged the supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome. pag. 411. CHAP. XXƲII. Appeales to Rome proued out of the African Councell which was the sixth of Carthage. p. 419. The state of the question. Sect. 1. ibid. That the Nicen Canons were more then twenty in number. And that the Canons concerning appeales to Rome, were true Canons of the Nicen Councell. Sect. 2. pag. 421. Whether, if there had bene no Canon for appeales to Rome in the Councell of Nice, it had bene forgery in Pope Zosi∣mus, to alleage a Canon of the Sardican Councell, for a Canon of Nice. Sect. 3. pag. 426. Vntruthes and falsifications of D. Morton discouered, and his obiections answeared. Sect. 4. pag. 429. Whether this Controuersy of appeales wrought in the Afri∣cans, any separation of Communion from the Roman Church. Sect. 5. pag. 437. CHAP. XXƲIII. Whether the Britans and Scots, not celebrating Easter after the manner of the Roman Church, were for that cause separated from her communion. p. 450. CHAP. XXIX. Of the great reuerence of ancient Chri∣stian Emperors, and Kings, to the Pope. pag. 454. CHAP. XXX. Whether Christian Emperors haue inuested themselues in Ecclesiasticall affaires. pag. 461. Constantine the Great inuested not himselfe in Ecclesiastical causes. Sect. 1. ibid.
Doctor Mortons second Example of Theodosius, exami∣ned. Sect. 2. pag. 469. Doctor Mortons third instance of Theodosius the yonger and Honorius, examined. Sect. 3. pag. 471. Doctor Mortons fourth instance of Theodosius and Valen∣tinian, examined. Sect. 4. pag. 473. Doctor Mortons fifth instance of Iustinian, examined. Sect. 5. pag. 475. CHAP. XXXI. Of the authority, and place of Emperors in Councells. pag. 480. CHAP. XXXII. Whether Popes haue challenged ciuill subiection from Emperors and Kings, Christian and Hea∣then. pag. 483. Doctor Mortons first Argument out of Innocent the third examined. Sect. 1. ibid. Doctor Mortons second Argument out of Hieremy the Prophet, examined. Sect. 2. pag. 486. Doctor Mortons third Argument out of the examples of diuers Popes, examined. Sect. 3. pag. 490. Doctor Morton contradicteth himselfe. Sect. 4. pag. 494. CHAP. XXXIII. Doctor Mortons late Sermon preached in the Cathedrall Church of Durham, answeared. pag. 495. The sense of S. Pauls words which Doctor Morton tooke for his text, declared. Sect. 1. pag. 496. Ancient Popes obiected, and falfified by Doctor Morton. Sect. 2 pag. 501. Other Fathers and Catholike authors obiected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 3. pag. 507. Doctor Morton slaundereth Vrban Pope, and with him all Catholikes. Sect. 4. pag. 510. Doctor Morton obiecteth the Bull of Maundy-thursday. Sect. 5. pag. 512. Other slanderous accusations of Doctor Morton answeared. Sect. 6. pag. 514. The same matter prosecuted. Sect. 7. pag. 517. CHAP. XXXIƲ. Doctor Mortons doctrine condem∣neth the Saints and Martyrs of God. pag. 522. S. Policarpe obiected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 1. ibid. S. Cyprian obiected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 2. pag. 523. S. Athanasius obiected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 3. pag. 525. S. Basils beliefe of the supreme authority of the B. of Rome proued, and Doctor Mortons obiections answeared. Sect. 4. pag. 528.
Whether S. Hilary excommunicated the Pope. Sect. 5. p. 533. S. Hieroms iudgment concerning the necessity of vnion with the Church of Rome, and subiection to the Bishop ther∣of. Sect. 6. pag. 536. S. Ambrose his iudgment concerning the necessity of Vnion and subiection to the Bishop and Church of Rome. Sect. 7. pag. 545. S. Augustines iudgment concerning the necessity of Vnion, with the Church of Rome, and subiection to the Bishop therof. Sect. 8 pag. 552. S. Hilary B. of Aries acknowledged himselfe subiect to the B. of Rome. Sect. 9. pag. 558. CHAP. XXXƲ. Of titles attributed to the Pope. p. 561. CHAP. XXXƲI. The nullity of Doctor Mortons answeares to the testimonies of ancient Fathers discouered. pa. 571. Some of his answeares examined. Sect. 1. ibid. Others of Doctor Mortons answeares to the Ancient Fa∣thers, examined. Sect. 2. pag. 574, Doctor Mortons answeare to the testimony of Acacius ex∣amined. Sect. 3. pag. 577. Doctor Mortons answeare to Vincentius Lyrinensis confu∣ted. Sect. 4. pag. 581. Doctor Morton in his answeare to Optatus contradicteth himselfe. Sect. 5. pag. 582. Other vntruthes of Doctor Morton discouered, & his cauil∣ling against the title of Holinesse giuen to the Pope. Sect. 6. pag. 583. CHAP. XXXVII. Of the authority of the Epistles of ancient Popes. pag. 587. Of the Epistles of Popes liuing within the first 300. yeares after Christ. Sect. 1. pag. 588. The nullity of Doctor Mortons answeares to the testimo∣nies of Popes, that liued in the second 300. yeares after Christ. Sect. 2. pag. 592. CHAP. XXXVIII. The vniuersall iurisdiction of the B. of Rome proued by the exercise of his authority ouer o∣ther Bishops. pag. 600. The Popes vniuersall authority proued by the institution & confirmation of Bishops: And of the vse and signification of the Pall, or mantle granted to Archbishops. Sect. 1. p. 601. A shift of Doctor Morton reiected. Sect. 2. pag. 604. The Popes power of instituting and confirming Bishops, proued by examples. Sect. 3 pag. 605.
The Popes power of deposing Bishops without a Councell proued by examples. Sect. 4. pag. 608. The Popes power of restoring Bishops without a Councell Sect. 5.. pag. 611. Doctor Morton to Crosse the Popes authority in restoring Bishops deposed, takes part with the Arians, and iustifies their impious proceedings against S. Athanasius, & other Catholike Bishops. Sect. 6. pag. 612. Other passages of Doctor Morton examined. Sect. 7. pa. 618. Doctor Mortons ignorance concerning excommunication. And of Heretikes excommunicating the Pope. Sect. 8. p. 621. Adrian and Nicolas Popes obiected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 9. pag. 623. Of the deposition of Flauianns Patriarke of Antioch. Sect. 10. pag. 624. Doctor Morton in defence of his doctrine chargeth ancient Bishops which exercising Acts of authority out of the li∣mits of their owne iurisdiction. Sect. 11. pag. 631. CHAP. XXXIX. Of Appeales to Rome decreed in the Councell of Sardica. pag. 635. Whether the Councell of Sardica were a generall Councell. Sect. 1. ibid. Other obiections of Doctor Morton against Appeales to Rome, answeared. Sect. 2. pag. 637. Examples of innocent Appellants. Sect. 3. pag. 638. Doctor Mortons ignorance concerning the antiquity of ap∣pealing to Rome from remote nations. Sect. 4. pag. 639. That S. Athanasius appealed to Iulius Pope, and Theodoret to Leo, as to absolute Iudges: and that by their authority both of them were restored to their Churches. Sect. 5. p. 641. That S. Chrysoftome appealed to Innocentius Pope, as to an absolute Iudge, and by his authority was restored to his Church of Constantinople. Sect. 6. pag. 643. That Flauianus appealed to Leo Pope, as to an absolute Iudge. Sect. 7. pag. 648. Of Nilus equalling the B. of Constantinople with the Pope, in his right of Appeales. Sect. 8. pag. 650. The rest of Doctor Mortons Arguments against Appeales to Rome. Sect. 9. pag. 653. CHAP. XL. Whether the Easterne Churches be at this day accordant in Communion with Protestants. pag. 654. The state of the question. Sect. 1. ibid.
Whether the Grecians of the primitiue and successiue times agreed in Fayth and Communion, with the Bishop and Church of Rome, and particularly at the Councell of Flo∣rence. Sect. 2. pag. 655. That many of the Grecians at this day are of the Roman Communion, and professe subiection to the B. of Rome. Sect. 3. pag. 662. Of the Aegyptians. Sect. 4. pag. 663. Of the Aethiopians. Sect. 5. pag. 664. Of the Armenians. Sect. 6. pag. 665. Of the Russians. Sect. 7. pag. 666. Of the Aslyrians. Sect. 8. ibid. Of the Antiochians. Sect. 9 pag. 668. Of the Africans. Sect. 10 pag. 669. Of the Asians. Sect. 11. ibid. CHAP. XXXXI. That in the forenamed countries there are no Christians that agree in fayth & Communion with Protestants. pag. 669. The Grecians, which are not of the Roman communion are absolute Heretikes. And Doctor Morton falsifieth Ca∣tholike Authors to excuse them. Sect. 1. pag. 670. Of the Lutherans of Germany, writing to Hieremy Pa∣triarke of Constantinople to be admitted into the com∣munion of the Greeke Church: and his answeare to them. Sect. 2. pag. 674. A particular instance of Ignatius Patriarke of Constantino∣ple produced by Doctor Morton, to proue that he dissen∣ted from the Roman Church, examined. Sect. 3. pag. 678. The Aegyptians, Aethiopians, Armenians, Russians, Mel∣chites, Africans, and Asians, which call themselues Chri∣stians, and be not of the Roman communion, are absolute Heretikes. Sect. 4. pag. 679. CHAP. XXXXII. Doctor Mortons plea for his Prote∣stant Church. pag. 683. The small extent of the Protestant Church proueth her not to be the Catholike Church. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the Protestant Church be free from error in do∣ctrine. Sect. 2. pag. 686. Doctor Mortons pretended purity of manners, in his Pro∣testant Church. ect. 3. pag. 687. That Protestants by Schisme haue diuided themselues from the Catholike Church. Sect. 4. pag. 688.
CHAP. XXXXIII. Of the Head of the Roman Church compared to the body therof. pag. 691. Whether it be matter of fayth, that the Pope is aboue a Councell. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether it be matter of fayth, that this indiuiduall person, v. g. Vrban the eight, is true Pope, and true Head of the Church. Sect. 2. pag. 692. Whether the Church of Rome be at any time a body head∣lesse. Sect. 3. pag. 693. Whether the Roman Church haue at any time a false Head. Sect. 4. pag. 696. Whether the Roman Church at any time be diuided into many Heades. Sect. 5. pag. 700. Whether the Roman Church be doubtfully headed. Sect. 6. pag. 702. Of the Councell of Constance, defining a Councell to be aboue the Pope. Sect. 7. pag. 704. The same matter prosecuted, out of the Councell of Basil. Sect. 8. pag. 706. Doctor Mortons instances of France and England to proue the no-necessity of Vnion with the Church of Rome. Sect. 9. pag. 709. CHAP. XXXXIV. Whether Luther & his followers had any iust cause to separate themselues from the Ro∣man Church. pag. 711. Whether any Protestants haue held that the Catholike Church, before Luthers fall, was wholly extinguished. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the Catholike Church assembled in a generall Councell may erre in her definitions of fayth. Sect. 2. p. 714. Whether Protestants hold the Church of Christ to be inui∣sible. Sect. 3. pag. 720. What causes may suffice to depart from the communion of a particular Church. Sect. 4. pag. 725. Of Luthers excommunication, and his conference with the Diuell. Sect. 5. pag. 731. Whether the Roman Church be as subiect to Errors, as any other Church. Sect. 6. pag. 735. Whether there be in the Scripture any Prophesy, that the Church of Rome shall fall from the fayth. Sect. 7. pag. 740. Whether Luther were iustly excommunicated. Sect. 8. p. 741.
Of the first occasion of Luthers reuolt from the Church. And that Doctor Morton to defend his doctrine against In∣dulgences, falsifieth sundry Authors. Sect. 9. pag. 744. The causes giuen by Doctor Morton in excuse of Luthers departure from the Roman Church. Sect. 10. pag. 749. Whether Protestants had any professors of their fayth be∣fore Luther. Sect. 11. pag. 751. That all changes of fayth haue bene noted in the persons, times, and places of their beginnings. Sect. 12. pag. 757. The lineall succession of Bishops in the See of Rome, is a true and certaine marke of the Catholike Church. Sect. 13. pag. 760. Of the conformity of Protestants and Donatists, in their separation from the Catholike Church. Sect. 14. pag. 763. That the fayth of the (now) Roman Church is acknowled∣ged by Protestants to be sufficient for saluation. Sect. 15. pag. 765.
CHAP. I. GENERALL PRINCIPLES PREMISED for the better vnderstanding of the ensuing Apology. SECT. I. The importance of the Subiect. THOVGH there be many questions in Religion controuerted betweene Pro∣testants and vs, yet none more impor∣tant, or more necessary to be knowne, then that of the Church. Protestants a∣gree with vs so far, as to belieue that there is. & shall be to the end of the world ex∣tant on earth One, Holy, Catholike, and Apostolike Church, which is the1. Tim. 3.15. Pillar and touchstone of truth; which all men that will not be as Heathens, and Publicanes, must heare andMath. 18.17. obey; which is the second Eue framed out of the side of our second Adam Christ, whome whosoeuer will not acknowledge to be his Mother, cannot haue him to be hisS. Aug. de Symb. l. 4. c. 10. Father. She is the mysticall body of ourEphes. 5.23. Lord, out of which (sayth S. Augustine)Ep. 50. ad . the holy
Ghost imparteth life to no man. She is the VineyardMath. 20.1. & seqq. in which he that laboureth not, shall not receiue the wages of euerla∣sting life. She the Arke of NoeS. Hiero. ep. 57 S. Gau∣dent tract. 2. de lect. E∣uang. in which whosoeuer is not, or out of which whosoeuer departeth, shall perish. She is the wellspring of truth,Lactant. 4 diuin iu∣stit. . vlt. Orig. hom 15. in Math. Theod in c. 2.2. ad Thessal. the House of fayth, the Temple of God, in which mens prayers are heard, and their sacrifices accepted; all other congregations being Synagogues of Sathan & denns of Diuels. She is the garden of GodCant. 4.12.13.15. in which whosoeuer groweth not, is not a flower planted by the hand of Christ but a weed to be plucked vp, and cast into hell fire. Finally she is the kingdome of Christ2. Reg 7.12 1 Para∣lip. 17.11. Psal 44.7. Luc. 1.33 Co∣los. 1.13. in which whosoeuer is not, is none of Christs people Whosoeuer (saythEb. 152. ad popul. fact. Donas. & cont. ep Par∣men l. 2. c. 3. S Augustine) is diuided from the Catholike Church, although he thinke himselfe to liu neuer so laudably, for this only crime that he is diuided from the vnity of Christ, the wrath of God abideth on him And speaking of Emeri∣tus an hereticallSerm. su∣per gestis cum Emerito post med. Bishop; He cannot haue saluation, but in the Catholike Church. Out of the Church he may haue all things but saluation: he may haue honour he may haue Sacraments, he may sing Alleluia he may answere Amen he may haue the Ghospell, he may haue and preach beliefe in the name of the Father, and the Sonne & the holy Ghost: but saluation he can find no where, but in the Catho∣like Church. Wherefore since the saluation of our soules cannot be had out of the Catholike Church, it is most necessary for euery man to inquire and learne, which, and where is that Temple of God, that kingdome of Christ, that store-house of truth, and that second Eue our spirituall Mother, that knowing her, & resorting to her, he may be cherished in her lap, and nou∣rished at her brests with the milke of her holsome Do∣ctrine. The beliefe of all Catholikes is, that these foresaid atri∣buts agree to the Roman Church, and to no other congre∣gation in the world; and that therfore she alone is the Holy, Catholike and Apostolike Church, in which whosoeuer is, may, & in which whosoeuer is not, cannot be saued. Vpon this our Doctrine you passe a censure suitable to your modesty, Videlicet, that it is False. Imposterous Scandalous, Schismati∣call, Hereticall, Blasphemous; euery way Damnable,Pag. 5.182.419. Presum∣gtuous,
Pag. 336. Impious,Pag 95. Execrable,Pag 127. Damnably hereticall,Pag 91. Pernicious, Antichristian,Pag 99. Sacrilegious,Pag. 336. Sathanicall, Idola∣rousPag. 387. This is your censure; and to make it good, you write a large volume, which you intitle, The Grand Impo∣sture of the (now) Roman Church; but mistake your selfe in the name, for the booke is, & ought to haue been intituled, The Grand imposture of Doctor Thomas Morton, against the Roman Church of this and all former ages, for vpon due examination such he will find it to be, that shall please to passe his Eye ouer the ensuing Apology: and I doubt not, but after the perusall thereof, he will rest conuinced, that those mon∣strous Titles wherewith you slaunder our Doctrine, most fitly agree to your owne, deliuered in your Grand Imposture. But before I come to ioyne issue with you concerning the particulers, it will not be amisse, to examine briefly in ge∣nerall, whether the ancient Fathers and Doctors of Gods Church (whom you acknowledge to haue liued vpon earth in the true fayth, and now to be most glorious Saints in heauen) were of your beliefe concerning the Roman Church, or of ours: for they being lights of the worldMath. 5.15. whom God hath raised in all ages, and placed on the candlesticke of his Church, to enlighten our wayes, and deliuer vnto vs the true sense and meaning of his holy word, that we may not be like children wauering and caried away with euery blast of here∣ticalEphef. 4.14. Doctrine, I suppose, that as there is no wiseman, who will not desire to be rancked among them in the next world, and to stand with them at the later day: so there is none, that will not desire to be in this world a member of the same Church, and a professor of the same fayth, which brought them to that happines, especially knowing (as we doe) that there is bur one Church in which, and one fayth by which mē may be saued: for to thinke that so many men so eminently learned, and that vsed so great meanes both of study and prayer, to attaine to the knowledge of truth, and of the right way to heauen, haue all erred, not liuing in the true Church which leades to saluation, but in an erring Sy∣nagogue, that leades to euerlasting ruine and damnation, is a conceipt that I thinke no Christian (and I am sure no
prudent man) can harbour in his brest; which yet he must doe, that will credit your Doctrine, as the ensuing proofes will declare. SECT. II. Whether the Roman Church be truly called the Catholike Church, and in what sense? ALthough the Name of Catholike Church, whether we regard the etimology, or the most proper and vsuall acception of the word Catholike, signify not any particuler Church, but the Vniuersall spread ouer the whole world, yet with-all it is true, that euery particuler Church may in some sense be called Catholike: for as euery particuler Or∣thodoxe man hath the denomination of a Catholike man, be∣cause he professeth the Catholike fayth, and is a member of the Vniuersall Church: so for the same reason, and in the same sense, both the particuler Church of Rome, and all o∣thers orthodoxall, may be called Catholike Churches. In this sense, the Christians of Smyrna writing to the Churches of Pontus,Euseb. l. 4. histor. c. 14. addresse their Epistle, To the Church of God at Phi∣lomelium, and to all other the holy & Catholike Churches throughout the world. In the same sense ConstantineIn Apo∣log. 2. Atha∣asij. the Emperour calleth the Church of Athanasius, The Catholike Church of A∣lexandria, by reason of the Catholike fayth, which it preser∣ued entire, whiles many other Churches of Aegypt were infected with Arianisme. And so likewiseCont. ep. Fund. c 4. S. Augustine (with whom agreeEpist. 1. Pacianus, and Cyrill of Hierusa∣lem)Cateches. 18. sayth, that if a stranger come into a Citty infected with Heresy, and enquire for the Catholike Church, euen the Heretiks themselues will not direct him to any Church of theirs, but to a Church in which Catholikes meete to serue God. In this sense, as other particuler Churches, so also the Roman (euen as she is a particuler Church limited to the Dioces of Rome) may haue the name of A Catholike Church. But when we say, No man can be saued, that is not a member of
the Roman Church, we speake not of the Roman Church in this sense (for Catholikes of other Dioceses may be sa∣ued, aswell as of the Roman) but by the Roman Church we vnderstand the Vniuersall Church, comprehending both that of the Roman Dioces, and all other particuler Churches that professe subiection to her, follow her Doctrine, and imbrace her communion: for all these by adherence to her, and vnion with her, make one mysticall body of Christ, and one holy Catholike, or vniuersall Church, of which she is the Head, and the rest members. For the better vnderstanding of this, we are to consider seuerall dignities vnited in the person of the Bishop of Rome. He is Bishop, Arch-bishop, Patriarke, and Pope. As he is Bishop, his iurisdiction is confined to the Citty of Rome, and other townes within her territories, of which the Roman Dioces consisteth. As he is Archbishop, he hath subiect vnto him some few others, the chiefest of which, is the Bishop of Ostia. As he is Patriarke, the extent of his au∣thority is ouer all the Westerne, or Latin Church. And fi∣nally as he is Pope, that is to say the Successor of S. Peter, and the chiefe Vicar or Lieutenant of Christ vpon earth, he is the supreme Pastor & Gouernor of the whole Church of God, which is vniuersally spread ouer the face of the earth, wheresoeuer the name of Christ is known; which therfore is absolutely and without limitation called the Catholike Church. In re∣gard of this transcendent authority of the Bishop of Rome, he is rightly stiled Bishop of the Vniuersall, or Catholike Church; to whom therefore all the members of the Church aswell Pastors as people, by the institution of Christ, owe subie∣ction and obedience. And as he is the head and Father of all Bishops, so the particular Church of the Roman Dioces, is the head and Mother of all Churches. Now, that not only the particuler Church of the Roman Dioces, but also the whole body of the Catholike or vniuersall Church consi∣sting of the Roman as head, and the rest as members, is like∣wise rightly and in a true and proper sense stiled the Roman Church. I proue out of S. Augustine, sayingDe percato orig. l. 2. c. 17. that against the Pelagians, not only the Councels of Bishops, and the See Aposto∣like,
but also, vniuersam Romanam Ecclesiam, the whole Roman Church, and the Roman Empire were most iustly incensed: where by the Roman Church he vnderstands the vniuersall, or Catho∣like Church spread ouer the world, as by the Roman Em∣pire he vnderstands the Empire of the Romans spread ouer the world. And the same I proue by examples. For when we speake of the Iewish people, or the Iewish Church, we vnderstand not the tribe of Iuda only, but all the rest of the tribes, that were ioyned therwith. S. Iohn Baptist was of the tribe of Leui; S. Paul of the tribe of Beniamin; and that holy widow Anna, mentioned by S. LukeCap. 2.36. of the tribe of Aser: and yet they all are rightly called Iewes, parts of the Iewish people, and members of the Iewish Church, by reason of their adherence to, and communion with the principall tribe, which was that of Iuda. Likewise vnder the name of the Greeke Church, are not comprehended the naturall Greeks only; for the Muscouits and Russians, though they be of a different nation, and haue their seruice in a different tongue, are yet esteemed, and said to be of the Greeke Church, because they imbrace her Doctrine, and commu∣nion. And what more vsual to Protestants themselues, then to call Catholikes in what parte of the world soeuer they liue, Romanists? And lastly to cōfirme this manner of speach with secular, aswell as with Ecclesiasticall examples, who knoweth not, that according to the phrase of all writers, by the name of the Roman Empire, is not vnderstood the Citty and territories of Rome only, but also whatsoeuer other Prouinces subiect to the Roman Emperors, though neuer so distant from Rome? And so in like manner, when we say, that out of the Roman Church there is no hope of saluation, by the Roman Church we vnderstand not the particuler Dioces of Rome, but all the Churches of the world, which make one Catholike or vniuersall Church, of which the Roman is head, and the rest members subiect to her. And because the Bishop of Rome is head of all Bishops, the particuler Church of the Roman Dioces is the mother and mistresse of all Churches: In regard whereof she may in a sense not improper, be called the Catholike Church: as in a fleete of
Galleys the chief Galley which hath commaund ouer the rest, though it be a particuler Galley, is called the Generall: and in an army of men, though the chiefe commaunder be a particuler man, and as a Captaine haue a particuler com∣pany of his owne, yet he is rightly called the Generall. And as none can be a Souldier of that fleete of Galleys, vnlesse he be in the chief Galley, or in some of the rest subordinate to her; nor a souldier of that Army, vnlesse he be of the Ge∣neralls particuler company, or of some of the rest subiect to him: so none can be a membr of the Catholike Church, vnlesse he be of the particuler Church of Rome, or of some other, subiect to her. And from hence it is, that albeit euery Orthodoxe Church may be called a Catholike Church, and euery Orthodoxe man a Catholike man, yet this deno∣mination agreeth to the Bishop and Church of Rome cau∣sally and originally, and to other men and Curches par∣ticipatiuely. In regard whereof S. CyprimL. 4. ep. 8. alleth the Roman Church The roote and Mother of the Catholke Church, and the originall of Sacerdotall vnity: from whence also it fol∣loweth, that as euery particuler person that is in commu∣nion with the Church of Rome, is rightly styled Catholike: so all others, that are not of her communion, are Schisma∣tiks, or Heretikes. SECT. III. That in the language of Antiquity, The Catholike Church, and the Roman Church, were two names signifying one, and the same thing. IT hath euer beene the constant beliefe of all Orthodoxe Fathers and people, aswell of the primitiue, as of the suc∣cessiue ages since Christ, that the Roman Church is the Ca∣tholike Church as hath beene declared; and that out of her there is no hope of saluation. The whole scope of your Grand Imposture, is, to impugne this truth: and the whole drift and subiect of this Apology shall be to maintayne &
defend the same truth. And that the reader may haue some little taste or prelibatiō of what shal be more largely proued in the ensuing Chapters, I haue thought good to set downe in the frontispice of this worke, the beliefe of some of the most famous and renowned Fathers of Gods Church, not in myne, but in their owne cleare expresse and vnan∣swerable words. First therefore Tertullian speaking of Marcion, who had presented a great summe of money to the Church of Rome, saythCont. Marcio. l. 4. c. 4. Marcion gaue his money to the Catholike Church, which reiected both it and him, when he fell into heresy. The same appeareth by that ancient learned Bishop of Carthage and Primate of Africa S. CyprianL. 4. ep. 2. who ex∣presseth to Antonianus, how great ioy he conceaued to vn∣derstand, that forsaking the Nouatians, he wholly agreed with the Catholike Church, adhering to Cornelius Pope. And againe:Ibid. You writ (sayth he to Antonianus) that I would send a copie of your letters to Cornelius, to the end he might vnderstand, that you communicate with him, that is to say, with the Catholike Church. And speaking to Cornelius himself,L. 4. ep. 8. and calling the Ro∣man Church, The roote and originall of the Catholike Church, he sayth: It seemed good to vs, that letters should be sent to all our Col∣leagues at Rome, that they should firmely imbrace your communion, that is to say, the vnity and charity of the Catholike Church. Hereby it appeares, that in S. Cyprians language and beliefe, to com∣municate with the Roman Church, and to communicate with the Catholike Church, was one and the selfe same thing. And the same appeareth by those Africans whome Nouatus had se∣duced to forsake Cornelius the true Ppe, and adhere to Nouatian the Anti-pope: for perceauing that by falling from Cornelius, they were fallen from the Catholike Church, and become Schismatiks, they acknowledged their error, and made their recantation in these words, reported and commended by S. Cyprian:Ep. 46. We acknowledge Corne∣lius to be Bishop of the most holy Catholike Church, chosen by Almigh∣ty God, and our Lord Iesus Christ. We confesse our error we haue beene seduced: we haue beene circumuented by perfidiousnes & cap∣tious loquacity: for although we did seeme to haue communication with a man (Nouatian the Anti-pope) that was a Schismatike,
and an heretike, yet our mind was alwayes sincere in the Church: for we are not ignorant that there is one God, and one Lord Christ, whom we haue confessed, and one holy Ghost, and that there ought to be one Bishop in the Catholike Church. In these words S. Cy∣prian (as you see) together with those his Africans, calleth the Bishop of the Roman Church the Bishop of the Catholike Church, and pofesseth, that to be diuided from him, is to be diuided from the Catholique Church. The same appeares by Cornelius himselfe, who speaking of Nouatus, that had set vp Nouatian an Anti-pope in opposition to him, sayth:Apud Eu∣seb. l. 6. hist. c. 35. Nouatus forsooth would haue vs to think, that he had forgotten there ought to be but one Bishop in the Catholike Church; where by the Catholike Church he vnderstands the Roman Church, as the head and Mother of all others. The same appeares by S. AmbroseDe obitu fratris Saty∣ri., who reporting, how his holy Brother Saty∣rus in his returne out of Africa, being cast by shipwrack on the Island of Sardinia, which he knew to be infected with the Schisme of the Luciferians, and desiring to communi∣cate with none but Catholikes, called for the Bishop of that place, and enquired of him, whether he agreed with the Catholike Bi∣shops, that is (sayth S. Ambrose) with the Roman Church. And S. Augustine hauing alleaged a sentence of S. Am∣brose to confute Iulian the Pelagian heretike, sayth:L. 1. cont. Iulia. Pelag. c. 2. Here is Ambrose of Milan, whom thy Mayster Pelagius so highly com∣mended, as to say, that in his bookes chiefly the Roman fayth doth shyne, so, that his very enemy durst not reprehend his fayth, and most pure interpretation of Scripture. Who seeth not that S. Augu∣stine here by the Roman fayth, vnderstands the Catholike fayth? And therefore speaking againe of the great constan∣cy of the same Saint, of his labours, and dangers for the Ca∣tholike fayth he sayth:Cont. Iu∣lian. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2. The Roman world doubteth not to magnify them with him; wher againe by the Roman world he vn∣derstandeth all the Catholikes of the world. The same was the beliefe of S. Hierome:Apol. aduers. Ruf∣fin. l. 1. What fayth (sayth he) doth Ruf∣finus call his fayth? That which the Roman Church holds, or that which is cōtayned in Origens books? if he answere that which the Ro¦man Church holds, then are we Catholikes. The same appeares by the Epistle of Theodosius the Emperor to Acatius Bi∣shop
of Berōe, and other his Collegues, to whom he sayth:In Synod. Ephes. to. 5. c. 10. It becometh your Holinesse to aske these things of God earnestly, and by manifest tokens to shew your selues approued Priests of the Roman Religion. The same appeares by Palladius,In vita Chrysostomi. who writeth of Theo∣dorus Tyanaeus, that he fortified his Bishoprick with a wall of pie∣ty, by perseuering till the end of his life in the communion of the faithfull Romans, of whom Paul giueth testimony, saying, your fayth is renowned throughout the whole world. The same appeares by what Victor of Tunes reporteth of Vitalianus a ScythianIn Ana∣stas. namely, that he tooke armes a∣gainst Anastasius the Emperor, and would neuer promise peace vnto him, but vpon condition that he should vnite all the Churches of the East to the Roman: which plainely sheweth that the Roman Church was then held to be the Catholike Church, as the Head and center of Catholike Communion, and Mother of all Churches. The same appeares by Iohn Patriarke of Constantino∣ple, who abiuring the memory of Acatius, said to Hormis∣das Pope:Epist. ad Hormisd. We hope to be in one communion with you declared by the See Apostolike, in which there is the integrity of Christian Reli∣gion, and perfect solidity; and we promise not to recite hereafter in the sacred mysteries, the names of those that haue separated themsel∣ues from the communion of the Catholike Church, that is to say, that agree not in all things with the See Apostolike. And not vnlike to this is the profession of fayth which Iustinian the Emperor sent to Agapetus Pope. The same appeares byEp. ad A∣gapet. apud Bin. to. 2. pag. 417.420. S. Augu∣stine, testifying,Ep. 157. that the Heresy of Pelagius and Celestius by meanes of the vigilancy of two Episcopall Councels, hath beene con∣demned in the extent of the whole world, by the Reuerend Prelates of the Apostolike See, yea euen by two of them, Pope Innocentius and Pope Zozimus. And that S. Augustine by the See Apostolike vnderstands the Catholike Church, Possidius speaking of the same subiect declareth,In vita Aug. c. 18. calling the sentence pro∣nounced by these Popes, Ecclesiae Catholicae iudicium. The iudg∣ment of the Catholike Church Innocentius (sayth he) and Zozimus in their seuerall tymes, censuring the Pelagians, and cutting them of from the members of the Church, by their letters addressed to the
African Churches of the East and West, commaunded them to be a∣nathematized, and auoyded by all Catholikes: and the most religious Emperour Honorius hearing of this sentence of the Catholike Church pronounced against them, condemned them also by his lawes, orday∣ning that they should be ranked among Heretikes. The same appeares by GelasiusIn decret. de Scriptor. apocryph. an African borne, and (it is thought) a Disciple of S. Augustine, testifying, that the holy Roman Catholike and Apostolike Church hath not bene preferred before other Churches by any Synodicall constitutions, but hath obteyned the primacy by the voyce of our Lord and Sauiour in the Ghospell, saying, Thou art Peter &c. The same appeares by S. Prosper S. Augustines second soule, saying:L. de pro∣miss. & prae∣dict. Dei part. 4. c. 5 The Apostles Peter and Paul founded the Church of the Gentils in the Citty of Rome, where they taught the doctrine of Christ our Lord: they deliuered it to their Successors peaceable and free from diuision: the Christian that communicates with this gene∣rall Church, is a Catholike: but if he be separated from it, he is an Heretike and Antichrist. The same appeares by the testimony of those two fa∣mous Doctors of the African Church S. Fulgentius and Primasius, with other their fellow-Bishops 220. in num∣ber, who being banished by the Arian King Trasamun∣dus out of Africa into Sardinia, writ from thence a Syno∣dicall Epistle to the Catholikes of Africa, in which they exhort them for the auoyding of Pelagianisme to read the books of S. Augustine, of which (say they)Extat in Bibliotheca Patr. edit. Colon. to. 6. part. 1. pag. 152. Hormisdas of blessed memory, a glorious Bishop of the Apostolike See, made men∣tion with great commendation of Catholike prayse, in the Epistle which he writ in answer to the Consultation of Possessor our holy bro∣ther, and fellow-Bishop. His words are these: What the Roman Church, that is the Catholike Church holds, and obserues concerning freewill and the grace of God, may be fully knowne out of diuers books of blessed Augustine, & chiefly those which he writ to Prosper & Hi∣lary. These their words conuince that not only in the be∣liefe of that ancient and holy Pope Hormisdas, but also of all the Catholike Bishops of Africa, the Roman Church and the Catholike Church, the Roman fayth and the Ca∣tholike fayth, were Synonima's betokening one and the same thing.
The same appeares by S. Gregory the Great, who set∣teth downe the forme of abiuration which all Bishops re∣turning from Schisme to the Vnity of the Catholike Church were to make, expressing it in these words:L. 1. epist. 30. I Bishop of N. hauing discerned the trappe of diuision wherein I was caught, am returned by Gods grace with my pure and free will to the Vnity of the See Apostolike: and I vow and promise, that I will neuer returne to Schisme, but alwayes remayne in the Vnity of the Catholike Church, and in the communion of the Bishop of Rome. This profession sheweth, that as now it is, so then it was held to be no lesse then open Schisme to be diuided from the Roman Church. And the like profession made by Ni∣colas the first of that name, was afterwards sent by Adrian the second to the eight Councell generall, and being read in the first Action, was approued and praysed by all the Fathers therof.Act. 1. apud Bin. to. 3.881.913. & Can. pag. 199. The same appeares by the testimony which Venerable Bede giues of Oswin King of Northumberland, who by meanes of a famous disputation held between Colman a Scottish Abbot, and Wilfrid a learned Priest of the Britans for the decision of certaine points of Religion, wherein the Britans and Scots at that tyme disagreed, was conuer∣ted to the Roman Church: and thereupon with the aduice of Egbert king of Kent sent Wigandus a Priest to Rome to be ordained Archbishop there, to the end that returning he might ordayne Bishops throughout all Britany: for (sayth Bede) Oswin though brought vp by the Scots,L. 3. hist. Angl. c. 29. had rightly vnderstood, that the Roman Church is the Catholike and Apostolike Church. These testimonies sufficiently proue, that the most ho∣ly and learned Fathers, as also the Orthodox Christians of former ages did belieue that the Roman Church was the Catholike Church, and that to be deuided from the Ro∣man Church was to be no Catholike but a Schismatike. And that it may appeare how like you that deny this truth are to the Arian Heretikes, it will not be amisse to shew that they knew Catholike and Roman to be all one: and that because they would not grace Catholikes with the
name of Catholikes, they called them Romans, or Roma∣nists, as at this day you call vs, shewing your selues to be of the same spirit with the Arians. Victor that famous Afri∣can Bishop of Vrica writeth to thisL. 2. de per∣secut. Vandal. purpose, that Io∣cundus an Arian speaking to king Theodoricus, sayd: Thou maiest make an end of Armogastus with diuers afflictions: for if thou put him to death by the sword, the Romanists will proclayme him a Martyr. And of another Martyr he reportethIbid. that being questioned by the Arians concerning his fayth, he profes∣sed himself to be a Catholike, saying. Romanus sum, I am a Roman.Apud Baron, amo 471. In like manner Ermodius reporteth of the Nobili∣ty of the Ligures that proposing to Ricimer an Arian Goth a man fit to sollicite a peace, they said: Si Catholicus est, & Romanus, if he be a Catholike, then is he a Romanist. And S. Gre∣gory of Tours reporteth of an Arian Prince,De glor. Mars. c. 25. that thinking within himself be sayd: It is the fashion of the Romans (so they call men of our religion) to attribute it to chance and not to the power of God. And againe he reporteth this speach of one Arian to nIbid. c. 361 other: If thou wilt but harken to my Counsell, we will this day make our selues merry, laughing hartily at this Romish Priest. And speaking of the Arians that were in France:Ibid. c. 79. what thinke you (sayd one of them) will these Romanists now say? And what thinke you now Doctor Morton, what will you say? Do not these testimonies conuince, that in the language and be∣liefe of antiquity Catholike and Roman did signify the same Church, the same fayth, and the same Orthodoxall people? Or what may we thinke of you that either are so ignorant, as not to know this? Or if you know it, so malicious as to deny it, to call it an insultation of ours, and to censure it as Schismaticall, hereticall, temerarious, impious, sacrilegious, Anti∣christian &c. SECT. IV. That whosoeuer is out of the Roman Church, is out of the state of Saluation. THis truth is euidently deduced (out of the premises already proued) by this syllogisticall argument.
Whosoeuer is out of the Catholike Church, is out of the state of Saluation. This maior Proposition you grant, and it hath beene already proued.Hoc cap. sect. 1. But whosoeuer is out of the Roman Church, is out of the Catho∣like Church. This also hath beneHoc cap. sect. 3. and shall be throughout this whole Apology effectually proued. The consequent then is euident in Barbara. Ergo, whosoeuer is out of the Roman Church, is out of the state of Saluation. But yet in further confirmation of this consequent, it will not be amisse to heare the ancient Fathers themselues speake and testify the truth therof in their owne language. For so teacheth that ancient and learned Bishop S. Ire∣naeus who liued soone after the Apostles and was Disciple to their Disciples. He prescribing a certaine rule to know and distinguish the Catholike Church from the conuenti∣cles of Heretikes, saythL. 3. c. 3. that, All Churches and all the faith∣full from all places must necessarily agree with the Roman Church by reason of her more powerfull principality, that is by reason of the soueraignety of the See Apostolike, and the neuer-inter∣rupted succession of Bishops in that See: which succession (sayth he) isIbid. a conuincing demonstration, that the same fayth which was preached by the Apostles, is still conserued in that Church; and therefore,L. 4. c. 43. that all such as withdrawe themselues from this principall succession, we ought (sayth he) to hold them as He∣retikes of a peruerse iudgement, or as Schismatikes and selfe-liking presumptuous fellowes. And as S. Irenęus alleaged this neuer interrupted succession of twelue Bishops vntill his tyme in the Roman Church, as in the head Church of the world, which therfore he calleth the principall succession; if (I say) he alleaged this against the heretikes of those primitiue tymes, as a conuincing demonstration to proue that they hauing departed from the Roman Church, in which that principall succession was to be found, had therby departed from the Catholike Church, and forsaken true fayth deliuered by the Apostles: far greater reason had Tertullian,De praes∣crip. Euse∣bius,
L. 5. hist. c. 6. S. Epiphanius,Haeres. 27. S. Ierome,Dial. cont. Lucifer. Optatus, S. AugustineLib. 2. cont. Parm. and other Fathers of after ages to all eage the same succession of longer Continuance against the Here∣tikes of their tymes to conuince them to be such. AndEp. 165. & Psal con∣tra part, Do∣nati. f diuers of these Fathers as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, S. Epiphanius, Optatus, and S. Augustine haue reckoned vp by name all the Bishops of the Roman Church against the Heretikes of their tymes; we may now iustly reckon a ar greater number of them cōtinued vntill these our dayes gainst Protestants, to proue them to be out of the true Church, in which only this neuer interrupted succession is to be found, and wish them, (as S. AugustinePsal. con∣tra part. Do∣nati. did the Donatists) not to lye cut of from this succession, that being he Rock against which the proud gates of hell preuaile ot. So teacheth S. Cyprian saying:L. 1. ep. 8. There is one God, and ne Christ. & one chayre built vpon Peter, out of which whosoeuer ga∣thereth, scattereth, that is, maketh a Schisme in the Church, s the Nouatians did, against whom he writeth. And why did he reioyceL. 4. ep. . to heare that Antonianus communicated with Cornelius Pope, but because (as there he expresseth) to be in his Communion was to be in the communion of the Catholike Church? And writing to Cornelius himselfe he calles the Chayre of S. PeterL. 4. ep. 8. the roote and Mother of the Catholike Church, andL. 1. ep. 3. the principall chayre from whence sacerdotall Vni∣ty is deriued: from whence he inferreth, that whosoeuer depar∣teth from thatL. de v∣nit. Ecclesiae. See, holds not the fayth, nor is in the Church. So teacheth ancient PacianusEp. 2.: for Nouatian (as S. Cyprian affirmeth) hauing made himselfe an adulterous and contrary Head to Cornelius the lawfull Pope, and thereby separated himself from the Roman Church, Pacia∣nus for that very cause pronounceth him to haue dyed out of the state of saluation. Although (sayth be) Nouatian hath bene put to death, yet he hath not bone crowned. And why not? be∣cause he was out of the peace of the Church, out of concord, out of that Mother wherof whosoeuer will be a Martyr, must be a portion. So teacheth Optatus that learned Bishop of Mileuis in Africa, when writing against Parmenianus the Donatist, heL. 2. cont. part. Parmen. sayth; Thou canst not deny out that thou knowest the Epis∣copall
chayre to haue bene first set vp in Rome for Peter, in which seat was placed the Head of all the Apostles, Peter; from whence he hath bene also called Cephas, to the end that in this only chayre Vni∣ty might be preserued to all, least the other Apostles might attribute to themselues each one his particular Chayre, and that he should be a Schismatike and a sinner, that would against the only chayre set vp another. And againe shewing the Donatists to be Schisma∣tikes, and out of the state of saluation, because they oppo∣sed the Roman Church, heIbid. sayth: From whence is it, that you attempt to vsurpe to your selues the Keyes of the kingdome, you that fight against the chayre of Peter by your bold and sacrilegious pre∣sumption? Thus writ Optatus 1200. yeares since: and by his argument we may now proue Protestants to be Schisma∣tikes, no lesse then he did the Donatists. So teacheth S. Ambrose,De obitu Satyri. professing, that to communi∣cate with Catholike Bishops, and to communicate with the Roman Church is all one. And writing to Siricius Pope, and ac∣knowledging all those to be Heretikes whom the Ro∣man Church condemneth as such, he sayth:L. 10. ep. 81. Whom your Holines hath condemned, knowe that we also hold them condemned, according to your iudgment. So teacheth S. Hierome, who writing against Lucifer the Schismaticall Bishop of Calaris in Sardinia, and the Luciferians his followers, that boasted themselues to be the true Church sayth to Lucifer:Epist. 8. I could dry vp all the riuers of thy arguments with the only sun-shine of the Church: but because we haue now reasoned longe, I will in few words declare plainly vnto thee my iudgment, which is, that we are to remayne in that Church, which being founded by the Apostles, dureth vntill this day. And else where declaring what Church he meaneth, he adui∣seth Demetrias that if she will auoyd the snares of Hereti∣kes, she hold fast the fayth of Innocentius Pope, sonne and successor in the Apostolicall chayre to Anastasius, who had broken the pestilent head, and stopped the hissing mouthes of that Hydra, which attem∣pted to pollute and corrupt the simplicity of the Roman fayth commen∣ded by the voyce of the Apostle. And againe: writing to Dma∣sus Pope he sayth:Ep. 57. I am ioyned in communion with your Bles∣sednes, that is to say, with Peters Chayre: I know the Church is built
vpon that Rocke, whosoeuer is not in the Arke shall perish at the com∣ming of the floud; he that eates the lambe out of this house, is pro∣phane: whosoeuer gathers not with you, scatters, that is to say, who∣soeuer is not of Christ, is of Antichrist. So teacheth S. Basill. In very deed (sayth he in a letter to theEp. 69. per Sabin. Diac. Pope) that which was giuen by our Lord to thy piety, is wor∣thy of that most excellent voyce, which proclaymed thee blessed, to wit, that thou maiest discerne betwixt that which is counterfeyt, & that which is lawfull and pure, and that without any diminution thou maist preach the fayth of our Ancestors. It is then certaine in S. Basils beliefe, that the assurance which Christ gaue to S. Peter that the gates of hell (which are errors and Heresies) should neuer preuaile against the Roman Church, was not made to S. Peter in his owne person only, nor only for his tyme, but in him to all his Successors; and to them in him is granted that admirable priuiledge of preaching the fayth of Christ pure, and without any diminution. So teacheth S. Maximus, aliàsIn ep. ad Orientales apud S. Tho. in Opuse. 1. prope fin. Maximianus. All the bounds of the earth that haue receaued our Lord sincerely, and all Catholikes throughout the whole earth that confesse the true fayth, looke vpon the Church of the Romans as vpon a Sunne, and shall re∣ceaue from her the light of the Catholike and Apostolike fayth: and not without cause: for Peter is the first that is read to haue made a perfect confession of the fayth, our Lord reuealing it vnto him, Math. 16. When he said: Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God: whereupon our Lord said vnto him, I haue prayed for thee Peter, that thy fayth fayle not. AndIbid. againe: We professe the Vniuersall Church to be framed and founded vpon the rock of Peters confession according to the sentence of our Sauiour, in which Church it is neces∣sary to remayne for the saluation of our Soules, and to yield obedience to her, keeping her fayth and confession. So teacheth S. Augustine: who among the Arguments which held him in the Catholike Church, reckoneth the succession of Bishops in the Roman See euen from S. Pe∣ter vntill his tyme: I am kept (saythL. eont. epist. Funda. c. 4. he) in the Church by the succession of Priests from the very See of Peter the Apostle, to whom our Sauiour after his resurrectien committed his sheepe to be fed, euen to the present Bishop. And exhorting the Donatists, which
bragged that they also had Bishops, heEpist. 165. sayth: If the order & Succession of Bishops be to be obserued, how much more assuredly & safely indeed do we begin our accompt from S. Peter himselfe, vnto whom as he represents the whole Church, our Lord said. Math. 16. vpon this Rock I will build my Church? for Linus succeeded to Peter, Cletus to Linus: and hauing reckoned vp all the Popes vnto Anastasius, who then sate in S. Peters chayre, he cōcludeth against the Donatists: In this order of succession there is not any one Donatist to be found: to which we may adde, no, nor yet any Protestant. Since therefore the Church, in which there is a continued Succession of Bishops from S. Peter, cannot be the Protestant Church (which hath no such suc∣cession) but the Roman; it followeth that S Augustine held the Roman Church to be the Catholike Church: and therefore he grieued to see the Donatists lye cut off from her, as branches from the vine. Be yee ingraffed on the Vine (sayth he to thePsal. con∣tra part. Do∣nati. Donatists: It is a griefe to vs to see you so lye cut of: number the Priests euen from the See of Peter, and consi∣der in that ranke of Fathers, who succeeded whom: That is the Rocke which the proud gates of hell ouercome not. And as in these words S. Augustine sheweth the miserable estate of those then that are diuided from the Roman Church, so on the con∣trary he declareth the happinesse, and security of all, that are in cōmunion which her, when speaking of Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage, who had bene condemned by a numerous Councell of Donatist Bishops in Africa, he sayth:Ep. 162. Cecilianus might haue contemned the conspiring multi∣tude of his enemies, because he knew himself to be vnited by commu∣nicatory letters both to the Church of Rome in which the Soueraygn∣ty of the See Apostolike hath alwayes florished, and to other Coun∣treys, from whence the Ghospell came first into Africa. So teacheth Possidius Bishop of Calama, a familiar friend to S. Augustine, whose life he writ; and therein re∣portethCap. 18. that when Innocentius and Zozimus had condemned the Pelagians, the most religious Emperor Honorius hearing of this sentence of the Catholike Church pronounced against them obeyed it, & condemning also by his lawes, ordayned that they should be ranked among heretikes. By which it appeares, that the Roman
Church was then held to be the Catholike Church; & her iudgment in matters of fayth to be infallible, and that the Emperors by their lawes seconded her iudgment, com∣demning as Heretikes those whom she had condemned. So teacheth S. Cyril Patriarke of Alexandria, explica∣ting those words of ourMath. 16. Sauiour; Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not pre∣uaile against it. According to this promise of our Lord (saythApud S. Thom. in Ca∣ten. ad cap. 16. Math. he) he Apostolical Church of Peter perseuereth in her Bishops pure & free from all seduction & circumuention, aboue all Prelats & bishops, & aboue all Primats of Churches and people, most perfect in the fayth and authority of Peter. And whereas other Churches haue bene stay∣ned with the errors of some, she alone remayns established firmely & vnconquerably, silencing and stopping the mouthes of all Heretikes: & we vpon necessity of saluation neither deceiued nor drunke with the wyne of pryde, togeather which her confesse, and preach the forme of truth, and of holy Apostolicall tradition. AndApud S. Thom. Opusc. 1. againe: Let vs re∣mayne as members in our head the Apostolicall throne of the Bishops of Rome, from which it is our part to inquire, what we ought to be∣lieue, and what to hold. And lastly; It is (sayth the AngelicallIbid. Doctor) proued necessary for saluation, to yeild obedience to the Bishop of Rome: for Cyril sayth in his booke of Treasures: Therefore Brethren if we will imitate Christ, let vs as his sheep heare his voyce, remayning in the Church of Peter, and let vs not be puffed vp with the wynd of pride least peraduenture the crooked serpent for our con∣tention cast vs out, as long since he cast Eue out of Paradyse. So teacheth S. Peter, for his golden eloquence surna∣med Chrysologus, exhorting Eutyches the Arch-heretike, to leaue his heresy, and learne the true fayth from the Church ofEpist. ad Eutych. Rome. We exhort thee Reuerend Brother to lend an obe∣dient eare to the letters of the most holy Pope of the City of Rome, for as much as the Blessed Peter who liues and rules in his owne seate, ex∣hibits the true fayth to those that seeke it. So teachethL. de pro∣miss. & pro∣dict. Dei part. 4. c. 5. S. Prosper: The Apostles Peter and Paul founded the Church of the Gentiles in the Citty of Rome, where they taught the Doctrine of Christ our Lord, and deliuered it to their Suc∣cessors A Christian communicating with this generall Church is a Catholike: but if he be separated from it, he is an heretike, and Anti∣christ.
So teacheth ArnobiusIn psal. 106. explicating the necessity of remayning in the Roman Church in these few, but effe∣ctuall words: He that goeth out from the Church of Peter, peri∣sheth for thirst. Whereupon Erasmus sayth,Praefat. instruct. Comment. in Psalterium. Arnobius seemes to yeild this honor to the Roman Church, that whosoeuer is out of her, is out of the Catholike Church. So teacheth Iohn an ancient Patriarke of Constantinople,In ep. ad Orientales. who making profession of his fayth to HormisdasIn ep ad Hormisd. Pope, acknowledged, that in the See Apostolike the Catholike Religion is alwayes conserued inuiolable: and that they who consent not fully with the See Apostolike, are out of the communion of the Catholike Church. So likewise teacheth S. Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspa and a famous Doctor of the African Church, who togeather which other Bishops his Collegues made this answer to Pe∣ter a Deacon that had bene sent out of theL. de in∣carnat. & grat c. 11. East: The Ro∣man Church enlightned with the words of the two great lights Peter & Paul, as with radiant beames, and honoured with their bodies, and which is also the top of the world, without hesitation belieues so to iustice, and doubtes not to Confesse so to saluation. So he, teaching that no Christian ought to make doubt of the fayth of the Roman Church. Againe a Disciple of his that writ and dedicated his life to Felicianus his Successor, reporteth that when Fulgentius going to theVita S. Fulgent. c 11. Extat in Bi∣blioth. Pat. Edit. Colon. tom. 6. wildernes of Thebais, to fast, arriued at Syracusa, Eulalius Bishop of that City, dis∣suaded him with these words: Thou doest well in aspiring to greater perfection: but thou knowest that without fayth it is impos∣sible to please God, and that a perfidious dissention hath separated those Countreyes into which thou art trauelling, from the commu∣nion of blessed Peter: wherfore, Sonne, returne home, least by seeking a more perfect life, thou runne hazard of loosing the true fayth. By which it is euident that the Roman Church was then held to be the Catholike Church; and that all such as dissented from her Doctrine, were out of the true fayth, and incapa∣ble of Saluation. So teacheth S. Leo, the first Pope of that name, for his admirable learning, wisdome, and sanctity surnamed The Great, who writing to the Bishops of Vien∣ne, sayth;Epist. 89. Christ from the See of Peter, as from a certaine
Head, powreth his gifts vpon the whole body of his Church, to the end that whosoeuer should be so bold, as to depart from the solidity of that See, might know himself to be no way partaker of the diuine mysteries. AndIbid. that, whosoeuer goeth about to diminish the power of the Bishop of Rome, endeauoreth with most impious pre∣sumption to vilate the most sacred strength of the Rock (Peter) fra∣med by the hand of God. And speaking against Hilary Bishop of Arles, and all such as are refractary and disobedient to the Successors of Peter, and in them to Peter himselfe, heIbid. addeth: To whom whosoeuer thinketh the primacy to be denied, can no way diminish their authority, but puffed vp with the spirit of pride, plungeth himselfe headlong into hell. AndEpist. 75. that he who dare oppose the Roman Church built by the voyce of our Sauiour vpon the most blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, as vpon a rock is either Antichrist, or a Diuel. All these sayings of so learned a Doctor, and so great a Saint, I wish the Protestant reader duly to con∣sider. So teacheth the holy Councell of ChalcedonAct. 3. affir∣ming Peter the Apostle to be the rock and head of the Catholike Church, and foundation of the true Fayth. From whence it fol∣loweth, that whosoeuer buildeth not vpon the foundation of Peters See, is not in the Catholike Church, nor in the true fayth, without which no man can be saued. So teacheth S. Gregory the Great, who writing to Boni∣facius,L. 3. ep. 41. sayth: I admonish you that whiles you haue tyme of lyfe remayning, your soule be not found diuided from the Church of bles∣sed Peter, to whome the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen were com∣mitted▪ and the power of binding and losing giuen, lest his fauour be contemned here, he there exclude you from the entrance into lyfe. So teacheth S. I sidore, a learned Doctor and Archbishop of Seuill,Ep. vltima ad Eugenium Episcop. To∣letanum. saying; that albeit the Episcopall dignity and power descend from S. Peter to all Catholike Bishops, yet especially and by a fingular priuiledge it remayneth for euer to the Bishop of Rome, as to a Head higher then the rest of the members: whosoeuer therfore (sayth he) yelds not obedience reuerently to him is separated from the head, and makes himself guilty of the schisme of the Acephalists, that is of certain heretikes, who acknowledged no one particular Head. And he addes, that the Church belieues this as the
Creed of S. Athanasius, and as an article of fayth: and that whosoeuer belieues it not cannot be saued. So teacheth S. Maximus Martyr the greatest Diuine of his age, & that writ learnedly against the Monothelites, pestilent Heretikes, that held but one will and operation in Christ, and were anathematized in the sixth generall Councell. He among other Elogies of the Roman Church hathEpist. ad Marinum Diac. this: All the bounds of the earth, and whosoeuer in any place of the world, do con∣fesse Christ our Lord with a pure hart, and Orthodox fayth, looke v∣pon the most holy Roman Church and her confession and fayth atten∣tiuely, as vpon a Sunne of euerlasting light, receauing from her the shining light of spirituall, and holy Doctrines &c. For from the first comming of the Word Incarnate all the Churches of Christians throughout the world haue had from her their beginning, their only and surest foundation, against which the gates of hell shall no way preuaile, according to the promise of our Sauiour himself, that she shold haue the Keyes of Orthodoxall fayth and Confession, and open to them that religiously come to the same Roman Church, seeking true reall and only piety; and contrariwise shut and stop euery here∣ticall mouth that speaks iniquity against heauen. So teacheth S. Aldelmus an ancient Bishop of the Scots, whom Venerable Bede highly commendeth for his elo∣quence, for his great knowledge of humane literature, of Scripture, and Ecclesiasticall rites. Among other his works which Bede reckoneth, he writ an excellent booke against the error of the Britans, who at that tyme differed from the Roman Church in the celebration of Easter. And of the same subiect he writ an epistle to Geruntius, in which he sheweth, the Britans by reason of that their separation from the Roman Church, to be in error.Epist. ad Gerunt. If (sayth he) the keyes of the heauenly kingdome were by Christ giuen to Peter, of whom the Poet sayth: He is the Porter of heauen, that opens the gate to the stars, who is he that despising the principall statutes of that Church, and condemning the Doctrine which she commands to be ob∣serued, can enter into the gate of heauenly paradise? And if Peter by a happy lot, and a peculiar priuiledge, deserued to receyue the power & monarchy of binding both in heauen and earth, who refusing to ob∣serue the Roman rite of Easter, can thinke that he is not rather to be
straitly tied with in soluble bonds, then any way to be absolued? And the same he further proueth out of the priuiledge of not er∣ring, granted to the Roman Church, when Christ promi∣sed to build his Church vpon Peter as vpon an impregna∣ble rock. So teacheth Venerable Bede,Homil. in die Apost. Petri & Pau∣li. saying: Therfore the blessed Peter confessing Christ with true fayth, and following him with true loue, receaued specially the keyes of the kingdome of hea∣uen, and the soueraignty of iudiciall power, that all the faythfull throughout the world might vnderstand, that whosoeuer do any way separate themselues from the Vnity of his fayth and society, can nei∣ther be losed from the bonds of their sins, nor come within the gate of the heauenly kingdome. And speaking of a conference held betwene Colmannus an Abbot, and Wilfridus a learned Priest concerning the celebration of Easter, Colmannus defending the Iewish rite, and Wilfridus the custome of the Roman Church, Wilfridus said:Beda in histor. gent. Ang. l. 3. c. 25. If you disdaine to follow the decrees of the See Apostolike, yea and of the vniuersall Church, they being confirmed by the holy Scriptures, without all doubt you sinne: for be it, that your Columba was a holy man, and of Christ, & likewise your Fathers; yet is their smal number in a corner of a re∣mote Iland to be preferred before the vniuersall Church of Christ? And hauing in proofe of the Authority of the Roman Church alleaged the words of Christ, promising to build his Church vpon Peter, and to giue him the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen, Of win king that was present at the conference demanded of the disputants, whether both of them agreed in this, that those words of our Sauiour were principally spoken to Peter, and whether the keyes of the kingdome of heauen were giuen to him? And they answe∣ring Yes; the kingIbid. concluded: And I say to you that because Peter is that porter, I will not gainsay him; but so far forth as I know, and am able, I desire to obey his ordinances in all things, least peraduenture if I coming to the gates of the kingdome of heauen, there be none to open vnto me, he being offended with me, that is knowne to keep the keyes. So teacheth Aponius in his learned Commentary vpon the CanticlesIn Cant. lib. 2. saying: It is manifest to all the earth, where the
pasture of holsome doctrine was reuealed to Peter: to wit, when Christ asking he answered; Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God &c. These pastures the Iew sees not, nor the Gentill nor yet any heretike whatsoeuer: for they follow not that Pastor, whom Christ the Prince of Pastors hath left as his Vicar in the world. So teacheth Theodorus Studites a holy Abbot and very famous for his learning, and constancy in maintayning the Catholike fayth against heretikes, who with diuers Regulars his Collegues writing to Paschalis Pope, among other titles calls him, TheEp, ad Paschalem Papam. chief Priest of Priests, Pastor of the sheep of Christ, Porter of the kingdome of heauen, and Rock of the fayth, vpon whom the Catholike Church is built. And the Roman Church, heIbid. calles? The supreme throne in which Christ hath placed the keyes of fayth, against whom the gates of hell, which are the nouthes of heretikes, haue neuer preuailed, nor shall euer preuaile; the fountaine of Orthodoxall truth, the quiet hauen of the Vniuersall Church against all hereticall stormes; the chosen Citty of refuge for saluation. And els where speaking of the Heretikes of his tyme, heEp. ad Naucrat. sayth: I protest here before God and man, they are diuided from the body of Christ, and the supreme See, in which Christ hath deposited the keyes of fayth, against which the gates of hell, that is to say the vnbrideled mouths of heretikes haue neuer preuailed nor shall preuaile euen to the end of the world, according to the promise of our Lord, which cannot fayle. AndIn opere de cultu imag. againe: So great is the fayth of the Romans, that there is seene to be the impregnable rock of fayth founded according to the promise of our Lord. These two la∣ter testimonies are set downe and highly commended by that learned Patriarke of Constantinople Gennadius Scholarius, who addeth to them this verdict of hisIn defens. Concil. Flo∣rent. c. 5. sect. 17. owne: If that diuine See belieue not aright, Christ lyes, when he sayth; Heauen and earth shall passe, but my words shall not passe; for in these words he promised his Church to be with her, and that the gates of hell shall not preuaile against her. So teacheth Rabanus, that learned Bishop of Mentz:Apud S. Thom. in Ca∣tena ad c. 16. Matth. Therfore Peter specially receaued the keyes of the kingdom of heauen and the Soueraignty of iudiciall power, that all the faythfull through∣out the world might vnderstand, that whosoeuer in any sorte sepa∣rate themselues from the vnity of his fayth and society, can neither be
absolued from the bonds of their sins, nor enter into the gate of the kingdome of heauen. And the same power of the Roman Church to shut the gates of heauen against all those, that diuide themselues from her communion, he expresseth a∣gaine in a Poeme which he writ in prayse of the holy Crosse, to Gregory the fourth of that name. The same teacheth PetrusBaron. anno 105. Damiani a Bishop of excel∣lent learning and of a most holy and austere lyfe, that liued six hundred yeares since, and was sent by Nicolas the se∣cond (together with S. Anselme Bishop of Luca) to Milan to extinguish the heresies of the Simonians, and Nicolaits, wherwith diuers clergy men of that Citty being infected, to the end they might auoyd the correction and censure of the Roman Church, pretended, that the Church of Ambrose was free, and not subiect to the lawes of the Pope of Rome: for the cōfutation of which error Petrus Damiani made a learned oration, in which he prooued effectually the supreme au∣thority granted by Christ to the Roman Church aboue all Churches, and that whosoeuer denies her authority, is an heretike. And this his Oration tooke so good effect, that those licentious Clergymen abandoning their heresy, sub∣mitted themselues to the Roman Church, with promise neuer to depart againe from her Communion. So teacheth S. Bernard, whoIn ep. ad Innocent. 2. writing against Schis∣matikes giueth this rule to distinguish between them and Catholiks: Those that are of God, are vnited willingly to Innocen∣tius (the true Pope): And he that stands out against him, either belongs to Antichrist, or is Antichrist himself. To omit the like testimonies of many other holy and learned Doctors, so writeth our famous Arch-bishop of CanterburyDe Eu∣charist. conc. Boreng. Lanfrancus, that liued almost six hundred yeares since, deliuering his owne and their Verdicts in these words, worthy to be noted: The Blessed Doctors, if not in the same words, yet in the same sense haue vnanimously taught in ma∣ny places, that euery man which dissenteth from the Roman and vni∣uersall Church in Doctrine of fayth, is an heretike. If therfore the Blessed Doctors, those (I say) whom Protestants with vs acknowledge to haue liued and died
in the true sayth, and to haue bene members of the Catho∣like Church, and lights of the world, haue all agreed in this; and these be their expresse Tenents, faithfully deliuered in their owne words, that whosoeuer is out of the Roman Church, is to beheld as an Heretike of peruerse iudgment, or as a Schisma∣tike, and self-liking presumptuous man: That he which standeth out against the See of Rome, neither is in the Church, nor holds the true fayth: That vpon necessity of saluation we ought to remayne as mem∣bers in our Head the Apostolicall throne of the Bishop of Rome: That if we imitate Christ, we are (as his sheepe) to heare his voyce, remay∣ning in the Church of Peter: That he who opposeth the Chayre of Pe∣ter, is a Schismatike, and a sinner: That he agrees not with the Ca∣tholike Church: That he is a prophane person: That he gathereth not, but scattereth: That he is not of Christ, but of Antichrist: That he shall perish at the comming of the floud: That he perisheth for thirst: That a perfidious dissension hath separated him from the Communion of S. Peter: That he is an Heretike, and Antichrist: That he can no way be partaker of the diuine mysteries: That he is either Antichrist, or a Diuell: That in the next world he shall haue the entrance of lyfe shut vnto him: That he is guilty of the heresy of the Acephalists: That he gainsayth S. Peter, the Porter of Heauen: That he cannot be ad∣mitted into the gate of heauenly paradise: That he is an Heretike, speaking iniquity against Heauen: That he cannot be loosed from the bonds of his sinnes: That he either belongs to Antichrist or is Anti∣christ himself. These be the very Tenents of the most famous Doctors, and Saints of God: These (M. Doctor) the cen∣sures which not I, but they inflict on your Doctrine. And now I desire to know with what conscience you taxe this their and our doctrine as false, pernicious, impious, Schismati∣call, Hereticall, scandalous, damnable, blasphemous, sacrilegious, An∣tichristian &c. Or with what title you goe about to defend your owne departure from the Roman Church, and to persuade others, that being out of her, they are in state of saluation? If you answer, that you haue departed from the (now) Roman Church, because she hath departed from the true fayth, which the Roman Church anciently pro∣fessed, that's an excuse common to all heretikes, and can no more iustify you, then it could the Pelagians, the Donatists,
or other ancient Heretikes, who would neuer haue depar∣ted from the Roman Church, but vpon pretence that she had fallen from the true fayth. And moreouer it is absolu∣tely false: for as the Fathers censure, & condemne all that are out of the Roman Church, as incapable of saluation, so shall you heare themChap. 12. sect. 1. & 2. constantly affirme, and prooue, that it is as impossible for the Roman Church to fall from that fayth, which she once receiued from the blessed Apo∣stles Peter and Paul, as it is for the word of Christ to fayle, or for Christ himself to be a lyer. In profe of this truth, I might yet further insist by other most forcible arguments: but partly not to detayne the reader, and partly because diuers of them shall be touched in the current of this Apology, I will immediatly passe to the examination of your Grand imposture, first in generall, & then in particular. CHAP. II. Of Doctour Mortons manner of alleaging Authors in generall. AMONG many vnworthy sleights vsed in other your workes, and particularly in this your Grand Imposture, one is, to maske Protestants with the names of Our Authors, and Our owne men; and ther∣upon to vrge against vs their testimo∣nies, as of Authors whose Doctrine we are bound to allow, and maintaine: Wheras you know right well, that they are not our, but your men, and your owne Protestant brethren, and that their workes are in particular, and by name condemned and forbidden by the Roman
Church. Of this you haue bene formerlyBy M. Brierley in the Aduertis∣ment before his Protest. Apology. admonished; and yet notwithstanding, in this your Grand imposture, you hold on your wonted course, as confidently, as if you ne∣uer had bene admonished of your vnconscionable dealing therin. Of this, and other your like slightes I thought fit to giue the reader notice, that before hād, he might haue some tast of your manner of writing in generall, the particulars wherof will more clearly appeare hereafter, in their due places. One of the Authors, whom in your former workes you haue vrged against vs, as a Catholike writer, is George Cas∣sander, borne at Bruges in Flanders, and a pestilent here∣tike, as being infected not only with the errors of this age, and with an other peculiar to himself against the holy Ghost, but also with the old condemned heresy of Apelles, and others that liued afterwards vnder Zeno the Emperor, called Pacifiers; which heresy of his hath bene learnedly confuted not only by Ioannes à Louanio a Catholike Di∣uine, but also by your Grand-Maister Iohn Caluin, in a spe∣ciall booke written against him. And for these his Heresies he is by name censured and condemned as an heretike pri∣maeIn indice lib. prohib. classis. Of all this you haue bene particularly admo∣nished by a learned Antagonist of yoursF. Persons in his treatise tending to mi∣tigation pag. 238. & seqq., and since a∣gaine by M. BrierleyLoco cit., wishing you in your future wri∣tings not to vrge against vs the testimonies of Cassander, as being of an hereticall and condemned Author. Who would not thinke this warning sufficient to stay the hand of any man, that hath regard (I will not say of honesty, but at least) of his owne credit? And yet you without taking any notice at all of these Caueats, confidently vrge in this your Grand imposture the testimonies of Cassander, not oncePag. 135. h. 389. o 400. b. 410. q. but often, & not as of an Heretike, but as of a Ca∣tholike; nor as of a Grammarian (for he was no more) but as of a graue and learned Diuine. Can this dealing be ex∣cused? With no lesse want of sincerity and conscience you al∣leage against vs Paulus VenetusPa. 382. m. a seditiour fryar of Ve∣nice, burnt a few yeares since at Rome for heresy; and di∣uers
others, whose workes you know to be expresly and by name condemned by the Catholike Church: as 1. Nilus a Bishop of ThessalonicaPag. 333. l., who besides his hereticall Doctrine against the Holy Ghost (whom he holdeth not to proceed from the Sonne, but from the Father alone) was a professed enemy to the Roman Church, and writ two speciall Treatises against the Popes supremacy, and Purga∣tory; and is therfore challenged for a Protestant by Illyri∣cus, and reiected by Bellarmine, and all Catholike wri∣ters. 2. FaberPag. 77. b., whose workes are censured and condem∣ned by the Vniuersity of Paris, as Illyricus testifieth, and in regard therof he is claymed by him for a Protestant. 3. Con∣trouersiaePag. 163. l. 382. m. memorabiles. 4. Acta ConcilijPag. 34. q. 338. y. 382. m. Tridentini. 5.Pag. 361. b. 382. k. 336. c. 388. l. Fasciculus rerum expetendarum, & fugiendarum. All which are workes of Protestāts deceiptfully set forth without names of authors; and aswell they, as Nilus prohibited by the Church. A second sleight of yours is, to cite as Catholike authors diuers others, who if they were not absolute heretikes, yet were tainted with erroneous and hereticall doctrines; whose bookes are therfore iustly condemned and forbid∣den. As first BenoPa. 388. l. a feigned Cardinall, and a Schisma∣tike, who to become gracious with that sacrilegious and dissolute Emperour Henry 4. vnaduisedly and vntruly vt∣tered certaine speaches in disgrace of Religion, and the A∣postolike See. 2. Cornelius AgrippaPag. 85 u. 385. *., who was no Di∣uine, but a Lawier, and a Magician from his youth, as he himself professeth. And though he was afterwards asha∣med of what he writ in that kind, yet his other booke De vanitate scientiarum (which is the worke you cite) by the very title well sheweth his arrogant presumption, and is iustly condemned by the Church. 3. Iosephus ScaligerPag. 37. marg. fine. a man not vnlike to Agrippa, and a condemned Author. 4. Franciscus DuarenusPag. 45. c. a lawier, and (as the most eminent Cardinall PeronRepliq. Chap. 34. pag. 270. aduertised our late Soueraigne K. Iames) a professed enemy to the Pope, and Church of Rome. 5. Nicolaus Augustus ThuanusPag. 85. x. 385. b. 389. u. 404. f., an other French
Lawier, whom you call. Our noble Historian, whereas the whole course of his history sheweth him to haue bene a Huguenot, or litle better. Nor are you contented with ci∣ting him as a Catholike author, but to helpe out the mat∣ter, you falsify him most notoriously, as hereafterChap. 44. sect. 9. shall be proued. A third sleight is, to vrge as Catholike authors, some, that are of suspected fayth: as 1. ErasmusPag 208., who albeit in the end he abandoned Luther,303. u. 306. a 381. g 380. f. g. and dyed Catholike, (as out of his owne confession, and Osianders testimony BrierleyAduer∣tism. before his Protest. Apol. hath proued) yet for some tyme he fauoured Luther, & in regard therof, is challenged by Doctor Humfroy, and Doctor Reynolds, for a man of your religion, and by Iohn Foxe Ca∣nonized for a Protestant SaintActs and Mon. pa. 402. Kalend. 22. Decemb. His rash and vnadui∣sed writings gaue occasion to Lutherans and Zuinglians, to Father on him diuers of their hereticall Tenents, and ther∣fore are generally reproued by Catholikes, &Ind. lib. prohib. condem∣ned by the Church; which you cold not be ignorant of, & therfore your persisting still to alleage him against vs as an approued Catholike author, is inexcusable. 2. To this classe may be reduced others, who though Catholikes, yet fell into some errors: as Beatus Rhenanus, Claudius Espencaus, Papyrius Massonius, Ioannes Ferus, and Gu∣lielmus Barklaius: of which, the foure first are prohibited by the Church; nor were you ignorant therof: for speaking of Rhenanus, you say:Pag. 101. Rhenanus writ so, whiles he had the vse of his tongue, but since you haue gagged him by your Index expurgato∣rius. By what authority then do you vngagge him, whom the Roman Church (which he acknowledged to be his Mother) hath so iustly gagged? And though William Barkley be not registred in the Index as a condemned au∣thor (his booke being set forth since the Index was made) yet BellarmineTract. de potest. Papae aduers. Bar∣claium, in praesat. hath produced against his doctrine, the a∣greeing consent of the most learned Diuines of Italy, France, Spayne, England, and Scotland, as also the de∣crees of ancient Popes, and generall Councels; and therfore with great reason hath censured him, for that being no Di∣uine, but a Lawier, he presumed to write a booke De pote∣state
Papa in temporalibus, which contayning diuers errors, & being left imperfect at his death, was afterwards published without name of author, printer, or place of impression: for although some copies say it was printed at Mussipont, yet Bellarmine conuinceth that to be anIbid. vntruth, & Iohn Barkeley sonne to William hath confessed the same,In praef. Parenesis. gi∣uing notice to all men, that it was published in England by Protestants, and hath withall acknowledged his Father to haue erred in that booke, and retracted his owne de∣fence therof. All this might haue moued you to forbeare the alleaging of Barkeleys booke against vs. And so much the vrge in this your Grand imposture, the very same passage of his, which your ancient AntagonistF. Per∣sons Treatise to mitigations, Chap. 6. pag. 202. here tofore shewed you to haue obiected in an other treatise of yours corruptly against our common beliefe and practise, falsi∣fying and sophisticating both his and our meaning. And the like abuse he sheweth you to haue offred toIbid. Tolosanus, whose testimony you yet againe impertinently produce here againstPag. 172. vs. 3. And to this classe may be reduced Polydore VirgillGrand. Impost. pag. 46.97. e. 164. p. 382..386. c. who being a Catholike author, his Booke De inuentoribus rerum hath bene enlarged and corrupted by heretikes, and is for that cause prohibited. 4. Your fourth sleight is, to alleadge, and insist much on some writings of Aenae as Siluius, Cardinall Cusanus, and Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, which they set forth in their youth, but afterwards repented, and publike∣ly retracted. Aenaeas Siluius that was afterwards Pope Pius the second, being in his yonger yeares present at the Councell of Basil, and Secretary therof, writ a booke exal∣ting the authority of a Councell, and depressing the au∣thority of the Pope: which booke is not only forbiden by the Church, but he himselfe also being more mature in yeares, more ripe in iudgment, and more solidly learned, repenred the writing therof; & when he came to be Pope, set forth a speciall bull to retract it:Extat hac Bulla apud Binium to. 4. pag. 512. & seqq. in which among o∣ther words, he sayth, In minoribus agentes &c. Whiles I was in
minority, not yet entred into any holy orders, being present at Basil, among those, who made themselues a generall Councell, & said they represented the vniuersall Church, I writ a small booke of Dialogues &c. in which ignorantly (as Paul did) I persecuted the Roman and chief See. Wherfore I admonish in our Lord, that you giue no credit to such former writings of mine, as do in any sorte extenuate the Soue∣raigne authority of the See Apostolike. And then hauing decla∣red that he made not this change by his comming to the Popedome, but before he was either Pope, or Bishop, and set downe the causes that moued him therto, he addeth: Hauing considered all these things, I submitted my selfe to Pope Eu∣genius, saying with Hierome, I am ioyned in communion with the chayreof Peter, vpon which I know the Church to be built: and I had at that tyme no other orders, but of Priesthood only, when I returned to the obedience of Eugenius. By this it appeares, that when Bellarmine sayth,Lib. de Scriptor. in Aenea Siluio. he retracted his error in his old age, and being Pope, he speaketh only of the setting forth of the said Bull, to make his retractation publikely knowne to the whole world: but the error it selfe he recalled before he was either Pope or Bishop, as you haue heard. And this discouereth your want of sincerity, who in diuers places of your Grand Imposture alleaging testimonies of Aeneas, to shew his iudgment concerning the Roman Church, con∣ceale all those, in which his doctrine and beliefe is truly deliuered, and set downePag. 91. d. 210.*.249. d. only such, as you could pick out of his former workes written in his youth, forbidden by the Church, and retracted by himself: which dealing is no lesse impostetous, then if you should deliuer as S. Augu∣stins doctrine, that, which in his Retractations he hath recal∣led. But you seeke to lessen this Imposture, by adding an other to it: for lest peraduenture your Reader might haue notice of this retractation of Aeneas, and therby discouer your bad dealing, you couer it by insinuating that he made no such recantation, till he was Pope: for hauing cited a passage of his, you say:Pag. 210. So Aeneas (out of Hierome), whilest he was Aeneas, and not as yet Pope of Rome himself: whereas it is a certaine truth, and well knowne to your selfe, that Aeneas retracted those his writings, euen whilst he was Aeneas, and
long before he was Pope of Rome himselfe. Hauing done this wrong to Aenaeas, you offer the like to Nocolaus CusanusPag. 22 y. 29 f. 40. nu. 44. a. 93. l.c. 7. d. 107. d 12 i. 163. m. 200. f. 179 i. 283. d. 287. l. 289. q. 301 f. 302. l. 366. d. who in his youth & before he was Cardinall, being also present at the Councell of Basil, writ a boke which he intituled Concordantia Catholica, see∣king therein to exalte the authority of a Councell aboue the Pope: but soone after perceiuing the Councell to grow into open schisme against Eugenius then lawfull Pope, he withdrew himselfe, and detesting their proceedings, writ most graue and learned Epistles against them, and employ∣ed his best indeautors to extinguish that Schisme, as it is to be seene in his epistle to Rodericus, where he fully ex∣pesseth his iudgment concerning the supreme authority of the Pope & Church of Rome; as also in many other places of his workes; and especially in his Epistle to the Bohe∣mians, where he prescribeth to them and to all others an infallible rule to know whether they be in the true church, which is, to examine, whether they be vnited to the Chayre of the Bishop of Rome by continuall succession deriued from S. Peter. If your meaning had bene good, you would haue alleaged this, as the Doctrine of Cusanus, and not the contrary which he himselfe acknowledged to be false, and recanted: but your intention was to deceaue: and no meruaile, for such sleights are the firtest proofes for such Doctrine. No lesse want of syncerity is that, which you shew in setting downe, and descanting vpon a passage of Stephen Gardiner Bishop of WinchesterPag. 362. c. 390. q., who in the beginning of King Henries defection from the Church of Rome, be∣ing carried away with the streame of the tyme, and desi∣ring to purchase the kings fauour, writ a litle boke, De vera obedientia, and in it en deauored to proue the Kings supre∣macy in spirituall things, and to iustify his diuorce from Q. Catherine, and his mariage with Anne Bolen: which boke is forbidden by the Church, & he himselfe afterwards in the dayes of Queene Mary (who for his great wisdome and learning made him Lord Chancelor of England) con∣demned his owne doing in a famous Sermon preached at Paules Chrosse, which is mentioned by Iohn Stow in his
Anno 2. Mariae. Cronicle. At this Sermon were present the King, and Queene, Cardinall Pole, the Popes legat, the Embassa∣dors of the Emperor, of the french King, & other Princes, besydes a marueylous great, learned, and noble auditory, as perhaps was euer at any sermon in England, either be∣fore, or since that tyme. He tooke for his text those words of the Apostle.Rom 13.11. Hora estiam nos de somno surgere: It is high tyme now for vs to awake from sleepe. His discourse was to shew, that since King Henry left the old trodden path of his Ancestots, breaking from the vnion of the Roman Church, they had runne astray not without great strife and diuision among themselues, and that therefore it was now time to awake. In this sermon he likewise made a most hū∣ble & harty accusation of himselfe for his fall, & consenting to king Henries wil in that booke De vera obedientia, which he vttered with so great vehemency of spirit, and such abundance of teares, that he could not goe forward, but was inforced diuers tymes to make pauses. And how harty those teares were, the euent declared: for afterwards fal∣ling sick, and drawing neare his end, he caused the passion of Christ to be read vnto him, & commyng to the denyall of S. Peter, and how Christ hauing looked backe vpon him he went out and wept bitterly, the Bishop cryed out, bidding them stay there, and see, whether his sweet Saui∣our wold vouchsafe also to looke vpon him, and giue him some part of Peters teares: For (said he) Negaui cum Petro, exiui cum Petro, sed nondum fleui amarè cum Petro. I haue deuyed with Peter, I haue gone out with Peter, but I haue not yet wept bitterly with Peter. And by often repetition of those words, and as king God forgiuenesse with sighes and cryes, he entertayned himselfe, vntill flouds of teares streaming from his eyes, he gaue vp the ghost. This answere was giuen to Syr Francis Hastings,In the Wardword Encounter 4. pag. 41. & seqq. who obiected against vs Bi∣shop Gardiners booke De vera obedientia, as you now doe: nor do I thinke, that you were ignorāt thereof. But how∣soeuer you knew that before his death he repented himselfe of his fall, & recalled that booke: for the passage which in this your Imposture you obiect out of it, you professe to
take out of the English translationPag. 390. q. the author whereof being a Protestant, and of your strayne in writing, both in his preface and in his marginall notes, throughout the booke, rayleth most imtēperatly against Bishop Gardiner, for recalling that Booke, tearming him. Doctor double-face, a weathercock that turneth ersy-uersy as the wind bloweth, an Anti∣christian Angell of Satan, a seducer, a hell-hound of a false trayte∣rous hart, a filthy traytour, a pernicious Papist, a knaue, a double-faced, periured, impudent, trayterous, chattering Chancelour, that seekes to pull away the authority of the crowne from the Queene, and her heyres for euer. And finally he giues his reader this marke, wherby he may know him to be, a double periured trayterous Villayne, because (sayth he) in that booke he affirmed that the Bi∣shop of Romes authority in England was against Gods word, and now be iugleth to bring it in againe. All these and other worse are the words of your modest Brother, whose style you seeme to approue, by citing his translation of Bishop Gar∣diners booke against the Pope, and Church of Rome: but with what conscience, you can best iudge, sithence the translator testifies that he retracted it, and the Church hath forbidden it, and the Bishop himselfe before, and at his death lamented the writing of it with so many and so harty teares. Wherfore as it were a grand imposture to perswade men, that it is lawfull for them to deny Christ, because S. Peter out of humane infirmity denyed him; so it is for you to persuade your readers that it is lawfull for them to deny the authority of the Pope and Church of Rome, because Bishop Gardiner out of fraylty and other humane motiues once denyed it: for as S. Peter bewayled his fall, with many teares, so did Bishop Gardiner, his. Finally, and that which most of all sheweth your lack of Conscience in producing diuers of these authors as com∣petent witnesses against vs, is, that wheras in your former wrytings you haue obiected the testimonies of Cassander, Nilus, Faber, Cornelius Agrippa. Erasmus, Aenaas Siluius, Cusa∣nus, and Polydore Virgill; M. Brierley in the Aduertisement pre∣fixed before his Protestant Apology, hath giuen you in particular and by name speciall warning, not to obiect them in your
future wrytings against vs, as being prohibited authors, whose testimonies are of no more authority with vs, then your owne Grand imposture, or then the testimonies of di∣uers other Protestants, whom in the same worke you al∣leage against vs. This may serue to giue the reader a taste of your man∣ner of wryting in generall, which how vnfitting a man of your place, yeares, and learning it is, the ensuing Chap∣ters will better declare. CHAP. III. Whether the (now) Roman Church hath composed a new Creed. YOVR first charge, is, (a) that the Roman Church in her Councell of Trent,Pag. 3. & by the Bull of Pope Pius the fourth, set forth for the confirmation of the same Councell hath composed a new Creed, cōsisting of more then twenty articles of the (now) Roman fayth. These your words contayne two vntruthes: for neither hath the Councell of Trent composed any new Creed, nor is there mention of any such Creed, or articles in the bull of Pius, set forth for the confirmation of that Councell. A∣mong other Bulls of his commonly annexed to the Coū∣cell, there is extant a profession of the Catholike fayth to be made by all Ecclesiasticall persons, that haue charge of soules, and by all Doctors and professors of whatsoeuer Artand faculty of learning: in which they oblige them∣selues by oath to obserue all the decrees of the Councell of Trent, and of all other Oecumenicall, that haue bene held
in the Church of God, and to anathematize all heresies condemned by them. This profession you are pleased to call a new Roman Creed, of more then twenty articles. But if that be a Creed, which consisteth of Articles, you that haue composed and sweare to a new beliefe, which your selues call, The 39. articles, are chargeable with a new Creed of your diuising. But that we call the bull of Pius the fourth, a Creed, or the profession of our fayth contained in it, Arti∣cles, you cannot shew: and therfore your tearmyng it a new Creed is a silly conceypt voyd of truth, and a fit foundation for a Grand Imposture. And no lesse vntruly you charge vs, with adding in our Creed to the article of the Catholike Church, the word, Roman. For that article of our Creed, I belieue the ho∣ly Catholike Church is set downe without any such addition in all our Missals, Breuiaries, Primers, and Catechismes. And that which most of all declareth your cauilling, is, that in this very profession of our fayth set downe in two different bulls of Pius the 4. the Creed vsed by the Roman Church is read without any addition of the word, Roman: It is true, that out of the Symbol of Creed, when we ex∣plicate which is the Catholike Church mentioned in the Creed, we say, it is the Roman Church, which to be true, ap∣peareth euidently by the testimonies of antiquity, out of which I haue already proued, The Catholike Church, and the Roman Church to be tearmes conuertible.
CHAP. IV. Whether the (now) Roman Church haue added any new articles to the Creed of the Apostles. YOV say,Pag. 7. It is a doctrine acknowledged in our owne schooles, that the Church hath no power to create new articles of fayth: & yet afterwards you set downe as our doctrinePag. 383. out of Philiarchus, that the Church hath power to create new articles of fayth, and that the contrary is one of Lu∣thers Heresies. These two propositions of yours I know not well how to saue from contradi∣ction: that, I leaue to you. In the thing it selfe, there is nei∣ther difficulty, nor difference of opinions among Catho∣likes: for if by new articles of fayth, you vnderstand doctrines newly reuealed, as none but God can be the author of diuine reuelation, so none but God can make articles of fayth: and in this sense all Catholike Diuines agree. But if by articles of fayth, you vnderstand not new reuelations, but such Veri∣ties as are contayned implicitly and virtually in the word of God, but not as yet explicitly declared vnto vs, so like∣wise all Catholike Diuines agree, that the Church hath power to make articles of fayth; that is, to explicate and declare vnto vs some verities of fayth, which before were not so clearly deliuered, nor vniuersally receaued as such. So she hath declared the epistle to the Hebrewes, and that of S. Iames to be canoicall: and (as our learned Roffensis hath wellAd arti∣cul. 18. Luthe∣ri. obserued) there are many things of which no que∣stion
was made in the primitiue Church, which yet, doubts arising against them, are now accleared by the diligence of posterity. So in the first Councell of Constantinople the holy Ghost was explicitly declared to proceed from the Father and the Sonne. So the three Creeds of Nice, of Constantinople, & S. Athanasius adde by way of declaration, many Verities, which are not expresly but implicitly or virtually contai∣ned in the Creed of the Apostles. And so likewise neither the celebration of Easter after the manner of the Roman Church, nor the validity of Baptisme ministred by here∣tikes, were of necessary beliefe, vntill the Councell of Nice had declared them to be such. In this sense the Canonicall lawGloss. in Extrau. d Verb. signif. tit. 14. c. 4. expresseth, that the Church hath power to make articles of fayth, to wit, by confirming and declaring them to the faithfull. This power Luther denied to the Church; and Pope Leo the X. in his bull against him condemned him for it. But you to iustify Luther, falsify Leo. Luthers as∣sertion is this:Apud Bin. to. 4. pag. 654. Certum est in manu Ecclesiae aut Papae prorsus non esse statuere articùlos fidei, imò nec leges morum, seu bonorum operum. It is certaine, that it is no way in the power of the Church or the Pope, to appoint articles of fayth, nor lawes of manners, or good workes. You, to iustify Luther, and traduce the Pope for con∣demning this his assertion, leaue out the later part of Lu∣thers article, adde nouos in the middest, and omit prorsus, set∣ting it downe thus.Pag. 383. Certum est (ait) non esse in manu Eccle∣siae statuere nouos asticulos fidei. Luther maintaynes as certaine▪ that it is not in the power of the Church to ordayne new articles of fayth. You cut of the later part of his article▪ to conceale the im∣piety of his Doctrine, denying the Church all power of making lawes, either to reforme abuses, or refrayne men from sinne by the practise of good workes. And so likewise your leauing out of prorsus, and putting in of nouos, is to per∣suade your reader, that the Pope condemned Luther for denying the Church power to coyne new articles of fayth, that is, to broach new reuelations; which is an vntruth: for if Luther had said nothing els, Leo would not haue con∣demned him. And to the same end you corrupt Philiarchus, who (say you) will hue vs to take head of the heresies of Luther,
teaching that the Church hath no power to create new articles of fayth. That word (new) is an addition of your owne to Philiarchus his text, as his Latin words in your margēt con∣uince: but what wonder, since your worke is a Grand Im∣posture. CHAP. V. That the word (Roman) is no deprauation, but a true declaration of the article of the Catholike Church. TO declare which is the catholike Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed, we say, it is the holy, Apostolike, Roman Church. Against this youPag. 8. 9. 10. obiect, that the word (Roman) is no true exposition and declara∣tion, but a notorious alteration and deprauation of the article of the Catholike Church. This you proue with eight seuerall arguments set downe in so many sections. SECT. I. Your first Argument. YOVR first is,Pag. 9. that because the Catholike Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed by the accordance of S. Augustine and other our Diuines comprehendeth both the triumphant and the militant Church, the word (Roman) which cānot be a declaration of the Catholike Church, as she is trium∣phant but only as she is militant, can no way be a declaration of the
Catholike Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed. So you, for∣getting your selfe: for heere you hold that the Catholike Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed comprehendeth both the triumphant Church, and the militant: but els where contradicting yourPag. 365. selfe, you define the Church properly Catholike set downe in the Symbolor Creed of the Apostles to be the Church militant▪ videlicet, the multitude of Christian be∣lieuers, whensoeuer, and wheresoeuer dispersed throughout the world; and, the congregation of Christians assembled in a generall Synod, to be the representatiue body of the Church in the Symbol properly called Catholike. From whence it followeth against your selfe, that the word (Roman) may be a true declaration of the Catholike Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed, which by your owne definition, is the multitude of all Chri∣stian belieuers dispersed throughout the world; for this definition can no way agree to the Church triumphant (where the cleare vision of the diuine essence excludeth fayth) but to the militant only, consisting of all Christian belieuers. And because true Christian beliefe is to be found, only in the Roman Church, it followeth, that the woro (Roman) is a true declaration of the Catholike Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed. 2. Be it, that the Catholike Church mentioned in the Creed taken in her whole latitude, comprehendeth both the militant and the triumphant; yet in your argument you mistake the state of the question: for when we declare the Catholike Church to be the Roman Church, we speake not of her taken in her whole latitude, but only as she is militant. And this you know right well: for whiles in this Imposture you so often rayle at vs, for holding the Roman Church to be the Catholike Church, out of which there is no hope of saluation, you sufficiently declare, that you know vs to speake of the Catholike Church, as she is militant only: for she only is in hope of saluation; the triumphant already enioyeth it. I conclude therfore, that your argument is grounded on a wilfull mistake of the question; which as you cannot defend without contradicting your selfe, so neither without wronging S. Augustine: for when he
sayth, that the Catholike Church comprehendeth both the militant and the triumphant, he speaketh of her, taken in her whole latitude: but that the may, and euen in the Apostles Creed be taken for the militant only, he expresly declareth in his explication of the same Creed, where tea∣ching the Catechumenists which is the Catholike Church mentioned in the Creed, heDe Symb. ad Catechum. l. 1. c. 6. sayth: We belieue the Catho∣like Church: She is the holy Church, one Church, the true Church, the Catholike Church, fighting against all heresies: she may be opposed, but she cānot be ouerthrowne. All heresies are gone eut from her, as vnprofi∣table branches cut of from the Vine: but she remaynes in her roote, in her Vine, in her charity; & the gates of hell shall neuer ouercome her. In these words S. Augustine teacheth the catechumenists to belieue, that the Catholike Church mentioned in the A∣postles Creed, is the Church militant built vpon S. Peters Chayre as vpon a rock, against which the gates of hell can not preuaile. And the same he declareth, when speaking to the Donatists, he denounceth vnto them, that because they were out of the Roman Church, they were out of the Ca∣tholike Church and out of the state of Saluation. Be yee in∣grafted (saythPsal cont. part. Donati.) he) on the Vine: It grieueth vs to see you lye so cut of. Number the Priests, euen from the See of Peter, and consider in that ranke of Fathers who succeeded ech other. That is the rock, which the proud gates of hell ouercome not. That Church ther∣fore in which there is a neuer interrupted succession of Bi∣shops from S. Peter, is (in S. Augustines beliefe) the Catho∣like Church. Do not you then abuse S. Augustine produ∣cing his authority to proue that the catholike church men∣tioned in the Creed, cannot be the Church militant, since he so expresly teacheth the contrary? yea, and not only that she is the militant Church, but in particular that she is the Roman Church, built vpon S. Peter and his successors; and that whosoeuer is diuided from her, is an vnprofitable branch cut of from the Vine, which is Christ our Lord, and therfore no lesse deuoyd of spirituall life, then the dead branch is of naturall.
SECT. II. Your second argument. YOur second argumentPag. 10.1.12. is grounded on a false prin∣ciple, with is, that the Catholike Church in her essentiall state is inuisible. We know, that the essentiall forme of the Church which is, Fayth, is inuisible to corporall eyes. But the Church (as youPag. 36 confesse) is the multitude of all Christian belieuers whensoeuer and whersoeuer dispersed throughout the world, and that the congregation of Christians assembled in a generall Synod is the re∣presentatiue body therof. Wherfore as it were ridiculous to af∣firme that a multitude of men ioyned in one Common∣wealth, or the representatiue body therof assembled in Parliament, is essentially inuisible, because their soules are inuisible, or that Christ liuing on earth was inuisible, be∣cause his Diuinity was inuisible: so it is no lesse ridiculous to affirme that the Church in her essence is inuisible, because fayth is inuisible: for fayth is not the Church, but the essentiall forme of the Church, as the soule of man is not man, but the essentiall forme of man. Man consisteth essentially of body aswell as of soule: and by reason of his body he is vi∣sible; for according to the axiome of Philosophers, Actiones & passiones sunt suppositorum. And so likewise the Church consisteth essentially of the persons that belieue, as of mat∣ter, and of fayth, as of forme; and by reason of her matter is visible, as man is by his body, and Christ by his humanity. Now wheras to proue, that the Church in her essentiall state is inuisible, you alleage the whole tenor of the Apostles Creed,Pag 11. affirming, that the obiect of euery article of that Symbol (from beliefe in God vnto beliefe of life euerlasting) is vnto vs inuisible, and so far as it is belieued, is without compasse of sense, you speake vn∣truly and ignorantly: for was not the natiuity of Christ vi∣sible to corporall eyes? did he not visibly suffer in his body, when he was whipped, crowned with thornes, and buf∣feted? Was he not visibly crucified? Did he not visibly dye? Was he not visibly buried? Did he not visibly ascend into
heauen, the Astpoles beholdingAct. 1.9.10.11. him? And is he not to come agayne visibly to iudge the quick & the dead? The exam∣ple which you alleage of S. Thomas, is against your selfe: for not only the Diuinity of Christ is the obiect of fayth which S. Thomas belieued, but also his humanity: and he that belieueth not his humanity, aswell as his Diuinity, is an heretike. To what end, I pray you, when the Apostles thought, that Christ after his resurrection appearing to them, was not a man, but a Spirit, did he shew them his hands andLuc. 24.39.40. syde, and bid them feele, and see, that so they might belieue him not to be a Spirit; because (said he) a Spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me to haue? And to what end did heIoan. 20.27. bid Thomas put his finger and hand into his wounds, but that by feeling them he might belieue the bodie he touched to be the same that he had seene suffer on the Crosse? Nor do you bring any thing of mo∣ment to disproue this: for the definition of fayth, which the Apostle giues, saying,Heb. 11.1. Fayth is an argument of things not ap∣pearing, is sufficiently verified in these obiectes. It sufficeth that fayth be either of things wholly inuisible, or els of things visible, apprehended vnder inuifible conditions, & proprieties, as those are, vnder which we apprehend Christ when we belieue him to be both man and God; and those, vnder which we apprehend the Scripture, when we say, it is the word of God; or the Church, when we belieue her to be the spouse of Christ, the house of fayth, the temple of God, the mansion of the holy Ghost, the gate of heauen, the treasuresse of spirituall graces. And who knoweth not, that the Sacrament of baptisme, whether we confider the matter, which is water, or the forme, which are words, is the obiect of sense? and the very essentiall definition of a Sacrament, is to be, A visible signe of iuuisibleMagist in 4. d 1. S. Tho. 3. part q. 60. a 2. & 3. corp. grace: and yet to belieue one Baptisme in remission of sinnes, is an article of the Creed expressed in the Councell of Gonstantinople. And this discouereth the weaknesse of your argument taken from the predestinat, to approue the inuisibility of the Church: for though predestination be inuisible, as fayth is, yet neither the predestinat, nor the faithfull are inuisible; and therfore if I should grant for argument sake, that the
Church consisteth of the predestinate only, it would not follow that she is inuisible. But to proue her inuisibility, youPag. 11. say: Diuine Scripture in positine doctrine doth manifest thus much, in that speach of Christ to S. Peter, Mat 16.19. Vpon this Rock will I build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it; where the word, Church (by the iudgment of S. Augustine, and the accordance of your owne Doctors) doth signify, Only the number of predestinat. But let vs see how you make good this your charge. Our Doctors which you name, are Caietan, Ferus, Stella, and Salmeron. But Stella in that place neither explicates those words of Christ, nor makes any mention of them, nor of S. Peter, nor of the Church; but speakes of particular men, prouing out of other words of Christ recorded by S. LukeLuc. 6.47.48.49. that they which haue fayth without good works, build their house vpon loose earth, which therfore wanting founda∣tion, by winds and stormes of tentations is easily ouer∣thowne; wheras they that haue both fayth & good works, build vpon a firme Rock, which is Christ: and from thence he inferreth, that your Lutheran Brethren teaching that fayth cannot be without good workes, build not on Christ the Rock, but vpon sand. This is Stellas discourse, which to be imposterously alleaged by you, to proue, that the Church consisteth only of predestinat, or that she is inui∣sible, no man can deny. And no lesse imposterous is your obiection out of Sal∣meron, who speaketh in the same sense that Stella doth; & is so far from teaching that the Church is inuisible, that in the very same disputation which youIn 1. Ti∣moth. 3. disp. 22. q. Porro. to. 15. obiect, he proueth that the house of God, which is his Church, is visible and conspicuous in her Head or gouernor, the Bishop of Rome; in her members, the faithfull; in the word of God, which she is commanded to heare; in the profession of her fayth, which she is commanded to make openly; and in her Sacraments, wherwith she is sanctified; all these being ob∣iects of sense. AndTom. 7. tract. 6.12.38. e furthermore she weth that the church in holy writ is compared to a field that hath wheat and cockle; to a floare that hath corne and chaffe; to a net that contaynes good and bad fishes; to a vine that hath some branches bearing fruit, and some
that beare none; to a body of which some members are liuing, and some dead; to a fold in which there are both sheep, & kids; to a great house in which there are not only vessels of gold and siluer, but also of wood and earth; and to the Arke of Noe, in which there were liuing creatures, both cleane and vncleane. And from these parables, as also out of other testimonies of holy Scripture, he inferreth against your Confession of Augusta, as also against the Pe∣lagians, the Donatists, and all other sectaries, that the Ca∣tholike Church in this life consisteth both of good & bad, of predestinate & reprobate. I know not therfore, with what conscience you produce him as a patron of your Do∣ctrine, so contrary to his owne. Caietan and Ferus I haue not seene: but I feare, you deale with them as you do with Stella and Salmeron. Besides, Ferus is a prohibited author. Your second obiection is proposed in thesePag. 11. sin. 12. words: The same may be said of the Church, as it is called the flock of Christ, Ioh. 10. My sheep heare my voyce: where by Sheep, are only meant, the sanctified Elect of God, as the testimonies of your owne Iesuites, the iudgment of S. Augustine, and S. Chrysostome do confirme. This then is your argument. Suarez, Tolet, and Bellarmine (for those are the Iesuites you name) S. Chrysostome & S. Au∣gustine, by sheep in the words of Christ obiected, vnder∣stand only the sanctified Elect of God. Ergo, the Church consi∣steth only of predestinat. An absurd consequence, and falsly fathered on these authors, who teach that the name of sheep in holy writ, is taken sometimes for the elect, and some∣tymes for the reprobate. In this text of S. Iohn which you obiect, it is taken for the elect; for Christ speakes of those sheep, to whom he will giue euerlasting life, and which therfore no man shall pluck out of hisIoan. 10.28. hand, as Suarez rightlyL. 3. de au∣xil. grat. c. 16..18. obser∣ueth: but other sheep there are, which the infernall wolfe shall deuour: such was Iudas; and such are all reprobate Christians. And if it were true, that by sheep in Scripture were vnderstood the elect only, yet your consequence is false, and the Doctrine contained in it, hereticall: and such it is held to be, by those very authors, which you alleage to patronize it. Suarez shewethDe tripl. virt. Theol. part. 1. disp. 9. . 6. & seqq. that the Church is a fold, contayning both sheep, and kids, that is, both predestinate,
and reprobate, as Christ himselfe hathMath. 25.33. declared. And treating there of the sense of this very place of S. Iohn, he prooueth, that some wolues are in the Church, and some sheep out of the Church: this (I say) he proueth out of the words of S. Augustine (whom you alleage for the contra∣ry) saying:Tract. 45. in Ioan. According to prescience and predestination, how many sheep are without, and how many wolues within? how many liue wantonly now, that will become Christians? how many blaspheme Christ, who shall belieue in Christ &c. And how many prayse God within, who will blaspheme him? are chast, and will become wantons? stand now, and will fall? And he concludeth, that these later notwithstanding they be actually in the Church, are re∣probat, and the former though they be actually out of the Church, are predestinate. All this and much more to the same effect is alleaged by BellarmineL. 3. de Eocles. c. 7. & 9. out of Scriptures, and Fathers. And the same is deliuered by Tolet in that very place which you cite for theAd c. 10. Ioan. Auno∣tat. 16. contrary: for he sayth, that as some who did not as yet belieue were sheep, and elect, so contrarily, some, that did actually belieue and were sheep, were notwithstanding re∣probats, as Iudas. And lastly S. Chrysostome is so far from holding with you, that the Church containes only the sanctified Elect of God, that he writethIn Psal. 39. thus: The whole Church consi∣steth not of perfect men, but hath also those that giue themselues to idlenesse and slouth, that lead easy and dissolute liues, and willingly serue their pleasures. And that in the net of the Apostles (which is the Church) are contayned good and badHom. 45. in cap. 12. Math. fishes. Which Doctrine he like wise deliuereth in other places of his workes. I conclude therfore that you haue wronged Suarez, To∣let, Bellarmine, S. Augustine, and Chrysostome, fathering your false Doctrine on them. But you proceed,Pag. 12. saying: A third Scripture we find, Rom. 1.9. where the Apostle sayth. He that hath not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his, which sheweth that none is truly a Chri∣stian, but as he is regenerated by the spirit of Christ. But we find this Scripture to make nothing at all for you, for you, for who euer is regenerated in the Sacrament of Baptisme, receiueth
some gifts of the holy Ghost, which is the Spirit of Christ. And as he is truly a man, that is borne of Adam by naturall pro∣pagation, so is he truly a Christian, that is borne of Christ in Baptisme by spirituall regeneration; for as therby he re∣ceaueth fayth, so he is inrolled in the number of Chri∣stians, and made a member of the mysticall body of Christ, which is his Church. True it is, that all members of the Church are not alike: those that with fayth haue sancti∣fiing grace (which is the life of our soules) are liuing mem∣bers: they that haue fayth without grace, are according to diuers opinions tearmed diuersly: some say, they are dead members: some, that (because they are dead) they are not members properly, but improperly or equiuocally, and ther∣fore rather to be called partes of the Church, then members. Others say, that they are neither members, nor partes, but as superfluous or corrupt humors in the body of man. These opinions though they differ in words, yet they agree in this, that fayth being the essentiall forme of the Church, all the faythfull (be they Saints, or sinners, pre∣destinat or reprobat) are contained in the precincts ther∣of, euen as all, whether members, parts, or humors of man are contained in the body of man. And as for this diffe∣rent manner of speach, Turrecremata, Canus, and others cited by them, and here alleaged by you out of Bellarmine (for out of him you tooke them) call sinners, partes of the Church, and not members, but only equiuocally, because (as Sua∣rez rightlyDe trip. virtute Theol. p. 1. d. 9. n. 12. obserueth) by members, they vnderstand on∣ly such partes as liue; wheras the name of partes may also agree to those that liue not. Wherfore they differ only in the names, vnderstanding by partes the very same, that the holy Councell of Trent and other Diuines do by members. And doubtlesse this manner of speach vsed by the Coun∣cell, is more proper, because sinners hauing fayth, & hope, are not voyd of all motion of spirituall life: for as fayth is the beginning of iustification, so it vniteth the belieuer in some sort vnto Christ. Nor doth Costerus (whom here you obiect) differ from this opinion: for that he denyes not sinners to be dead partes, or members of the Church,
he declareth,Enchir i contro. 6.2. prope fin. when speaking of the Bishops of Sar∣dis, and Laodicea, that were reprehended, the one, that he was dead in Spirit, the other that he was nether cold nor boat, but luke-warme, wretched, miserable, poore, blind, and naked, he affirmeth that notwithstanding this, they were both still ac∣knowledged to be Bishops, and heads of their Churches. And a litle after, where he saythSolut. ad▪ obiect. Haert. that sinners are in the Church, as humors in the body, he sayth withall, that they are as wythered bowes on the tree. Wherfore vnlesse you will haue the Head to be no member of the body, and the wythered bowes no partes of the tree, you must consesse, that your obiecting of Costerus to proue, that sinners and reprobates are no partes of the Church, is a grand Imposture. And here by the way I must aduertise you of a sleight which you often vse, and it is; that when in the explication of any point of Doctrine, you finde diuersity of opinions among Catholike Diuines, some speaking more probably, or properly, and others lesse; you conceale the former, and set downe the latter (as here you do) calling it, the accor∣dance of our owne Doctors, and from thence frame arguments against vs, as from a ground, which we are not to deny. But who seeth not this manner of arguing, to be fraudu∣dulent? For by denying that opinion, or manner of speech, as any Catholike may do, such arguments need no solutions, but of themselues fall to the ground. For ex∣ample, I may refuse to allow the opiniō of those Diuines, which say, sinners are not members, but partes of the Church. I may also reiect Costerus his manner of speach tearming them superfluous humors; and therby it will appeare that your obiecting these authors to proue that sinners are not members of the Church, is an argument of no force, especially since they differ not from other Diuines (which hould wicked men and reprobats, to be members of the Church) really, but only in manner of speach, as hath bene shewed, To the testimonies of Scripture you addePag. 1. some Fa∣thers, who so expresly condēne your doctrine, that no man but your selfe could be so inconsiderate, as to make them
patrons of it. S. Ambrose teacheth, and proueth out of S. Paul1. Tim. 2.20. that, as in a great house there are some vessels of siluer and gold, and some of wood and earth: so in the Church there are some good and perfect, signified by the siluer and gold; and some bad and reprobate, signified by the vessels of wood and earth. And of this truth (saith he) I thinke no man to doubt. The same Doctrine he like wise expresseth in other his workes. S. Augustine (whom in the second place you obiect) condemneth your Doctrine in these words.Tract. 6. in Ioan. We confesse▪ that in the Catholike Church there are both good and bad: the good are corne; the bad, chaffe. The Church hath in her strong men, and weake; she hath iust and iniust.Serm. 107. de temp. In the Church there are many reprobates mingled with the good; and both of them are gathered as into a net, and swimme together in this world without difference, vntill they come to the shore, where the euill shall be seuered fromDe Ciuit. Deil. 18 c. 49. the good. With S. Augustine accordeth S. Bernard, prouing out of the same parable of the Net contayning good and bad fishes; that in the Church militant there are iust men and sinners, elect andSerm de conuers. ad clerios c. 17. & eoist 11. reprobate. S. Gregory sayth,Hom. 11. in Euangel. That the holy Church on earth is rightly compared to ten Virgins, of which some are wise, and some foolish; because in her, the good are mingled with the wicked, the elect with the reprobate. These testimonies conuince, that wheras you here con∣fessePag. 13. your Doctrine in this poynt to be one of the Te∣nents, for which Iohn Husse was burned in the Councell of Constance; you by making the Fathers guilty of the same Tenet, do what you can, to cast them into the same fier with him, that so they may be burnt for heresy, as he was. The accusations you being against them, to proue, them guilty of Iohn Husse his heresy, are: First because, S. Ambroses words (say you) are,Pag. 12. All that are in the Church fight for Christ, intimating that the wicked fight against Christ. Why do you wrest S. Ambroses words to a false sense? his words are, Omnes qui sunt in Ecclesia, Deo militant: which signi∣fy nothing els, but that all which are in the Church are Gods soldiars, and fight vnder his colours. But all that fight
vnder Gods colours, fight not as good soldiars: many suffer themselues to be ouercome, and lose that crowne which no man shall gaine, but he that ouercometh. These are the reprobats, of whom it is true, that albeit for the present many of them be in gods campe, which is his Church, yet before their death they shall runne away, as Iudas did, and be damned with him. Out of S. Augustins worke de Genesi ad literam c. 2. you obiect these words:Pag. 12. The Catholike Church is so called, be∣cause it is in euery part perfect. But S. Augustine in that place hath no such words. And you are very forgetfull: for a litle before you toldPag. 9. vs, out of S. Augustine, that, to hold the Catholike Church here vpon earth to consist of them that are per∣fect, was the heresy of the Pelagians. And yet now speaking of the same Church, you set downe, as S. Augustins words, that the Catholike Church is so called, because it is in euery part perfect: which is to make S. Augustine say, and vnsay, as you doe; but the truth is, that these later words are not his, but yours: and so the contradiction must rest vpon you, not vpon him. In like manner you sayPag. 12. that the Church of Christ consisteth only of the predestinate and sanctified elect of God. But els where, you tell vs,Pag 340. that the Aegyptians, Aethiopians, Armenians, Russians, and others among whom there are some guilty of some fundament all heresies, are partes of the Catholike Church, and in state of saluation. And againe both in this Grand Im∣posturePag. 330., and in your Treatise of the kingdome of Israel in the Tract of the ChurchSect. 4. pag. 8., your Tenet is, that those who professe Iesus Christ to be the Sauiour of the world, although they do indirectly by wickednesse of life or heresy in doctrine, deny their owne profession, yet are they to be accounted Christians, true members of the Church consist only of the predestinate, and sanctified elect of God, how can it be verified that heretikes are true members of the Catholike Church; since it is the constant Doctrine of S. Augustine, and all the fathers, that heretikes are wholy out of the Church, and neither sanctified nor predestinate, but
miscreant reprobates, and out of the state of saluation. Your doctrine therfore is, that the Church consisteth of the san∣ctified and predestinate only; and yet withall, that it consisteth al∣so of Arians and other heretikes, who are damnable reproba∣tes. Reconcile these two. Againe you Protestants esteeme your selues to be all true members of the Church: & yet among you there are some drunkards, adulterers, vsurers, and theeues. If therfore you be all in the number of the san∣ctified, and elect of God, some of you be strange Saints. But to returne to your obiections out of S. Augustine, the other two testimonies which youPag. 12. lit. 0. bring, are no∣thing to your purpose: for he only sayth, that the predesti∣nate cannot be seduded, nor diuided from the Church, which is true: for before the end of their life, they shall become members of Gods Church, and perseuere in her vntill death. But how proues this, that none but predestinate are in the Church? Nor doth it import, that he giues to the predestinate the name of Church: for that name sometimes doth not signify the vniuersall Church, but a particular company of the faythfull; as when we say: The Church of the Corinthians, or of the Ephesians: and when S. PaulRom. 16.3. sayth, Salute Prisca and Aquila, and their domesticall Church. And1. Cor. 16.19. againe: Aquila and Prisca with their domesticall Church salute you. In the same sense the name of Church is taken by Cle∣mens Alexandrinus, S. Gregory, and S. Bernard, whom heere youPag. 12. obiect: for they all giue that name to the iust and predestinate, by reason they are the principall partes of the Church. SECT. III. Your third Argument. YOvPag. 16. say: Though all agree in this (as your selues confesse) that without the Catholike Church there is no sal∣uation, yet haue you confessed two sorts of Christian professors, namely Excommunicates, and Catechumenists to be actually sa∣ued, albeit no members of your Roman Church. So you, in∣ferring, that the Roman Church is not the Catholike
Church. Syr, you know, that Bellarmine (whom here you cite) expreslyL. 3 de Ec∣cles. milit. c. 6. declareth, that when we say, none can be saued out of the Church, we speake only of such as neither are in the Church really, nor intentionally by desire, but that if they be in the Catholike Church, either really, or at least by desire (as Catechumenists, and some Excommunicats are) they may be saued. Which Doctrine both he, & other Catholike Diuines approue. And it is so certaine, that you know not how to disproue it, but byPag. 16. that as for being saued only by desire or vow of being in the Church, is but a wild and extrauagant peece of learning, in the iudgment of your owne Ie∣suit Suarez. Pardon me, Syr. This is not Suarez his censure, but an vntruth of yours: for Suarez speaking of excommu∣nicats,De trio. virt. d. 9. sect. 1. n. 14. sayth; that those Diuines which hold them not to be in the Church really, but only by desire, differ not from him in the sub∣stance of their Doctrine, but only in manner of speech. Now, he de∣fends, that both excommunicats & Catechumenists are in the Church actually and really: which also Valentia hol∣deth ofTom. 3. d. 1. q. 1. punct. 7. §. 14. & 15. excommunicats: on whom therfore youPag. 15. marg lit. d. saying, that the Church Catholike is compared by S. Peter to the Arke of Noah: from whence you inferre, that as in the tyme of the deluge, all which were with∣in the arke, were saued, and all without it, were drowned (although they desired neuer so much to be admitted into the arke) so whosoe∣uer are essentiall members of the Catholike Church, cannot possibly perish; and contrarily, whosoeuer is not a reall and vitall member therin, cannot but perish. So you reason the matter, misvnder∣standing S. Peter: for he compares not the Arke of Noe to the Church, but to the Sacrament of Baptisme, wherin your argument holdeth not: for though in the deluge, none were saued, but only they, which actually were in the arke, yet it is certaine, that in the law of grace, some are sa∣ued, which neuer receaued the Sacrament of Baptisme, as diuers Martyrs, that were baptized in their owne bloud: & you acknowledge the same of Valentinian the Emperor, who dyed vnbaptized.
But admitting the arke of Noe to be a type of the Ca∣tholike Church (for so it is often taken by the ancient Fa∣thers) yet your argument proues nothing: for similitudes hold not in all things. Wherfore I answere, with S. Augu∣stineL. 5. de Bapt. c. 28. that albeit none that were in the arke perished in the deluge, and all perished that were out of the arke; yet it falleth out otherwise in the Catholike Church represented by the arke: for ill Catholikes notwithstanding they be in the Church, not only by desire, but corporally and really, perish, because they make bad vse of their baptisme: and contrarily, others that belieue aright, and liue accordingly, though they be not in the Church really, but only in hart and desire (as being yet vnbaptized) are saued. From whence S. Augustine concludeth, that what is said of being in, or without the arke in order to saluation, is to be vnder∣stood, of being in, or without the Church, corde, non corpore, that is to say, not corporally and really, but in hart and desire. Which Doctrine, as it is all Catholike Diuines, so it is contrary to yours, and sheweth your simplicity, in calling it, a wild and extrauagant peece of learning. The things in which the Church is like to the arke (witnes S.Aduers. Lucifer. Hierome) are: that as the arke was visible, so is the Church: as in the arke there were Creatures cleane, and vncleane, so in the Church there are good and bad: and as in the arke, there were predestinate, and also Cham, a reprobate; so in the Church, there are both predestinate and reprobate. Wher∣fore this comparison which you haue brought, of the arke, destroyes your owne doctrine. SECT. IV. Your fourth Argument. YOur fourth Argument to proue the Roman Church not to be the Catholike Church, isPag. 17. because (say you) our Diuines that speake more ingeniously, freely graunt, that the Pontificall dignity, Roman (as it is Roman) is not from Diuine au∣thority, because only from the fact of Peter. And they that are more
affectionate to the Roman See, although they attribute it to the insti∣tution of Christ, yet dare they not say, that this is to be belieued vpon certainty of fayth, but only as a matter probable and coniecturall. If you should argue thus: An Aethyopian (as he is black) is not a man, Ergo, an Aethyopian is not a man, your argument were a sophisme; and so is that which heere you make a∣gainst the Roman Church: for as an Aethyopian though he be not a man reduplicatiue and formaliter, as he is black, yet he is a man, as he is a rationall creature: so like wise, though it be no matter of fayth, that the Roman Church reduplica∣tiuè, as Roman, is the Catholike Church, yet it is matter of fayth, that S. Peter by diuine institution was created su∣preme Pastor and Gouernor the whole Church, & that the same power descendeth from him to his Successors. And it is also matter of fayth, that S. Peter fixed his See at Rome, and died there, and that the Bishop of Rome suc∣cedeth him in his See, and supreme authority of Prince, and Gouernor of the whole Church of Christ: nor was this euer questioned by any but heretikes. That which some Catholike writers dispute, is, whether S. Peter had any command from Christ, to place his See at Rome, and not to remoue it from thence; or whether without any com∣mandment from Christ he chose Rome for his See, out of his owne free election, as he might haue chosen Milan, or any other city? That he had such a command from Christ, is affirmed & learnedly proued byDe tripli∣ci virt. Theol. d. 10. sect. 3. n. 10. Suarez,L. 2. de Pont. c. 12. Bellarmine,Institut. mor. part.2. l. 4. c. 21. §. Se∣cunda sent. Azor, and by the greatest part of Catholike Diuines, with many forcible testimonies of antiquity. According to this opinion (which is the more probable & pious, & lear∣nedly proued by Suarez) it followeth, that the Roman Church, euen as Roman, is by Diuine institution the See of S. Peter, and his Successors; and that therfore it is not left free for them to remoue their See from Rome, to any other place. But (to giue you your greatest aduantage) be it, that S. Peter receaued no such commandment from Christ, but that it was free for him to chose for his See, either Rome, or any other Citty; and that his successors may also freely
transferre their See from Rome: Yet this affoards no help to your cause: for though according to this opinion it be no matter of fayth, that the Roman Church reduplicatiuè, as Roman, be the Catholike Church, yet specificatiuè, and ab∣solutely it is: for albeit S. Peter might haue placed his See els where, yet it is matter of fayth that de facto he placed his See at Rome; and that whiles his Successor continueth his See there, the Roman Church is de facto the Head & Mi∣stresse of all Churches, and that whosoeuer is not a mem∣ber vnited to this Head, is out of the Catholike Church. This you should haue disproued; but wilfully mistake the state of the question; and because it is not matter of fayth, but of opinion, that the Roman Church reduplicatiuè, as Ro∣man, is the Catholike Church; you inferre that specificatiuè and absolutely it is not matter of fayth, but only of opi∣nion, that she is the Catholike Church: which is as good a consequence, as that an Aethiopian absolutely is not a man, because formally, as black, he is not a man. With such argu∣ments you delude ignorant Readers, that want learning to discerne your sleights. SECT. V. Your fifth Argument. YOur fifth argument to proue that the Roman Church is not the Catholike Church,Pag. 18.19.20. is, because there was a Catholike Church, which had Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors bles∣sed Saints of God, before the Roman Church was founded, yea and before the article of the Catholike Church was put into the tenor of the Creed, or the Apostolicall Creed it selfe composed. All this though it be granted as true, is yet of no force against our Doctrine; which is, that S. Peter was ordained by Christ Pastor of his whole flocke; and therefore Gouernor of the vniuersall Church: from whence it followeth, that what∣soeuer Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, or other faythfull li∣ued in the Church of Christ, after S. Peter was made Head thereof, were members of the vniuersall, or Catholike
Church subiect to Peter, though for a tyme there were no one particular Church which was head of al Churches, be∣cause S. Peter as yet had not made choyce of any particu∣lar seate, as afterwards he did at Antioch: and therfore the Church of Antioch whiles he sate there, was the Head and Mother Church, to whom all other Churches were bound to professe vnion and obedience. In regard wherof, that Holy Pope Innocentius the first, greatly commended by S. Augustine,Epist. 18. Alexand. Episc. An∣tioch. sayth, that the See of Antioch had not giuen place to the See of Rome, but because what Antioch obtayned only by the way, Rome obtayned absolutely and finally. To which I adde, that if the Successor of S. Peter should now remoue his See from Rome to Milan, as S. Peter did from Antioch to Rome, not the Church of Rome, but that of Milan should be the Catholike Church, as the Head and Mother Church of the world. But because by the prouidence of God S. Pe∣ter fixed his seat, & left it to his Successors at Rome, whiles they continue it there, the Roman Church by reason of his See, is the Head, & Mother Church of the world, to which (saythL. 3. c. 3. Irenaeus) all Churches, and all the faythfull from euery place are of necessity to agree, by reason of this her more powerfull principality. I conclude therfore, that you ignorantly or wit∣tingly mistake the state of the question: for the Roman Churches being, or not being the Catholike Church, as the Head and Mother Church of the world, no way depen∣deth on her being founded before or after the article of the Catholike Church was put into the tenor of the Creed, but vpon being the See in which S. Peter Prince of the Apo∣stles liued and dyed, and which he left to his Successors: for the Bishop of that See, being S. Peters Successor, succeedeth him in his supreme authority; and that authority maketh the Roman Church the Head of the world, which dignity it hath euer enioyed since S. Peter sate there, and shall en∣ioy whiles his Successor continueth there, which shal be to the end of the world. To haue spoken to the purpose, you shold haue proued, that the Saints which departed this life, before the Roman Church was founded, were separated from the communion of S. Peter, and from the Church of
which he was Head: which if they had bene, they had no more bene Saints, then you now are. SECT. VI. Your sixth Argument. YOur sixth Argument is a mere sophisme. Al Catholike Diuines accord, as in a matter of fayth, that the Catho∣like or vniuersall ChurchPag. 20.21.22. mentioned in the Apostles Creed, hath a prerogatiue of continuing in the true fayth vntill the end of the world, according to Christs promise made to S. Peter. Secondly, and that the Roman Church, whiles the Successors of S. Peter continue their seate at Rome, cannot fayle in fayth. But that S. Peter fixed his seat at Rome by the commandement of Christ, there to remaine to the end of his life, and in his Successors to the end of the world, although it be a most pious and probable opinion, held by the greatest and best part of Diuines, yet it is not expresse matter of Fayth, because no such precept of Christ appeareth in Scripture or tradition: and therfore some Di∣uines stick not to grant that the fixing of S. Peters See at Rome, was a thing proceeding merely from his owne free will, and election; & consequently, that it is in the power of his Successors to transport it from Rome to Antioch, or any other City. In which case, as Rome shold not then be the See of S. Peter, but Antioch: so neither should the Bi∣shop of Rome be the supreme Gouernor of the whole Church, nor the Church of Rome the Catholike Church, as the Head and mistresse of all others (as now she is) but Antioch: Nor should she then haue any priuiledge of not erring in fayth, as now Antioch hath not, since the remo∣uall of S. Peters See from thence. But therfore to inferre that the now Roman Church (against which you write this Grand Imposture) being at this present the See of S. Peter, or whiles hereafter she shall remaine the See of S. Peter, may erre in fayth, is to argue à sensu diuiso ad sensum compo∣situm, and to infer that such things as perhaps are possible, but neuer shall be, are already in being. If I should argue
thus. It may possibly come to passe (though it be impro∣bable) that the Metropolitan See of England may be re∣moued from Canterbury to Carlile: Ergo the Church of Canterbury is not now the Metropolitan Church of En∣gland: were not this a sophisme? And so is yours. Some of our Diuines grant that the See of S. Peter which maketh the Church of Rome the Mother & Mistresse of all Chur∣ches, and secureth her from all error in fayth, may be remo∣ued from Rome, though there appeare no likelihood ther∣of: Ergo (inferre you) in the opinion of some of your Di∣uines, the now Roman Church is not the Mistresse and mother Church of the world, but may now fall from the fayth, euen whiles she is the See of S. Peter, no lesse, then she might, if his See were already remoued from thence. Who seeth not this Argument to be sophisticall? And to so∣phistry you ioyne fraud: for, to proue that the Successor of S. Peter hath not his See at Rome by diuine ordinance, but only by humane election, youPag. 21. alleage SuarezDe trip. virt. Theol. disp. 10. sect. 3. n. 10. say∣ing, that before the ascension of Christ, nothing appeareth of any such ordinance, either in Scripture, or from tradition. Here you breake of, leauing out the rest of Suarez words, and con∣cealing his Doctrine: for in the very same place both be∣fore and after these his words, which you cull out, he ex∣presly affirmeth, that it is more pious, and probable, that Christ after his ascension appearing to S. Peter, commanded him to place his See at Rome; which he ptoueth by the testimonies of many ancient Fathers, and by other Arguments; all which you conceale, and cite him for the contrary opinion. The same abuse you offer to Valentia, Bellarmine, and Azor. For all these prooue, with many testimonies of antiquity, and o∣ther forcible Arguments, that it is of Diuine institution, holding it for certaine, and the contrary opinion not to be safe, though not expresly de fide. SECT. VII. Your seauenth Argument. THAT the Successor of S. Peter in the Roman See ca∣nonically chosen, is Head of the vniuersall Church,
all Catholikes beleeue, as vndoubted matter of fayth. But that this indiuiduall person, v. g. Vrban the Eight, is true Pope, and true Head of the Church, though the more probable opinion of Diuines hold it also to be of fayth, yet diuers others defend, that it is only of morall certaynty. You not knowing how to solue the arguments of the first opinion, otherwise then by rayling against it,Pag. 23. fine. & cal∣ling it, a Iesuiticall fayth both grosly false & wickedly blasphemous, assume the second, as granted, which I, with the authors of the first opinion, do not grant, but deny. For the Church proposing vnto vs this indiuiduall man. Vrban the eight, as true Pope, it is not only morally, but absolutely, and in∣fallibly certayne, that in the person of Vrban the eight, are found all the conditions of true Baptisme, Ordination, Election, and whatsoeuer els requisite for a true Pope, and true head of the Church: for as the Church being assisted by the holy Ghost, cannot erre in proposing other Veri∣ties of fayth; so nether in proposing this man to be the true head, and lawfull gouernor of the vniuersall Church wherfore our beleefe that this man is true Pope, is not hu∣mane, morall, and fallible; but diuine, and infallible, vnlesse you will question the authority of the holy Ghost, making it humane, and fallible. Yea euen in the other o∣pinion, though it be no matter of fayth that this indiuiduall man is true Pope, yet the Authors thereof hold it to be a Theologicall conclusion so certayne, that whosoeuer shall deny it, is worthy of flames. SECT. VIII. Your eight Argument. YOVR eight argumentPag. 25. 26. 27. is nothing but a repetition of what you haue sayd in the former sections, without any addition of new proofes, vnlesse to proue your Do∣ctrine be to rayle against ours, calling it, new, false, scanda∣lous, pernicious, hereticall, blasphemous, and vs periured persons: all which being nothing but an empty froath of iniurious words, deserue no other answere, but contempt.
CHAP. VI. The Roman Church is the Head and Mother of all Churches. IN this matter you wholly mistake the state of the question: for when we de∣mand, which Church is the Head, the Mother, and Mistresse of all Churches, the question is not, which Church was first founded? If you speake of priority of tyme, or antiquity, and call those Churches, Mothers of all such, as were founded after them, we grant that in this sense the Church of Hierusalem is the Mother Church of all Churches, and the Roman in the same sense a daughter both to the Church of Hierusalem, of An∣tioch, and all others that were founded before her. And in this sense the Bishops which had bene present at the first Councell of Constantinople call the Church of Hierusa∣lem, the Mother of all other ChurchesTheodor. l. 5. histor. c. 9.. But this is not the que∣stion: for you know, and set it downe as our Doctrine,Pag. 29. & 38. that the Roman Church is called the Mother Church of all Churches, because S. Peter was constituted by Christ the ordinary Pastor of the whole Church. By which it appeares, you know right well, that the mother-hood which we attribute to the Roman Church, is not priority of tyme, but of authority, and iuris∣diction grounded on the supremacy of S. Peter: for as by reason of his transcendent authority ouer the whole flock of Christ, which is his Church, he was (and in his succes∣sors is) the Father and Head of all Bishops; so the Roman Church (in which sayth S. ChrysologusEpist. ad Eutych. Peter still liueth and gouerneth) is the Head and mother of all Churches, and
vnto which (sayth S.L. 3. c. 3. Irenaeus) all Churches are necessa∣rily to agree, by reason of her more mighty Principality, that is to say, by reason of the soueraignty, and supreme authority of the See Apostolike. And in this sense, she is called by S. IrenaeusIbid. and OrigenApud Euseb. l. 6. hist c. 12.. The most ancient Church: and by S. CyprianDe simpli∣cit. Praelat., The Root, the fountayne, and head of Episcopall power; and, The principall Church from whence Priestly vnity began.L. 1. ep. 3.. And from the same ground it is, that S. Maximus Mar∣tyr saidSpond. anno 657. n. 8., All the Churches of Christians had their beginning from the holy Roman Church: and the Primates of AfricaEp. ad Theod. Pa∣pam. that, all other Churches were to learne from her, as from their natiue foun∣tayne, what they ought to belieue: and Innocentius the first in his EpistleEpist. 9. highly commended by S. AugustineEpist. 106., that from the Roman Church other Churches as springs proceeding from their mother source, and running with the purity of their originall, through the diuers regions of the whole world, are to take what they ought to ordaine. And the holy Councell of Chalcedon,Epist. ad Leonem. that the fountaine and source of our religion is from the See Apostolike. And finally, for diuers other respects the Roman Church is iu∣stly called, The most ancient Church, as Bozius learnedly pro∣uethDesig. Eccles. to. 1. l. 3. cap. 10.. To him I remit you. Wherfore the mother-hood of the Roman Church which we defend consisteth in her supreme authority, and iurisdi∣ction ouer all other Churches. This you should disproue, which here you do not, but inferre, that Hierusalem, Cae∣sarea, Antioch, the Brittish Church, & the Greeke Church in generall, are all Mothers to the Roman, because they were founded before her; which is a false cōsequent drawne out of a wilfull mistake of the state of the question: for though the Church of Hierusalem was founded before that of Caesarea, yet who knoweth not, that (as the famous Councell of NiceCan. 7. hath declared, S. HieromeEp. 61. testi∣fieth, and you here confesse) the Church of Caesarea was the Metropolitan, or mother Church of all Palestine, and that both the Church of Hierusalem and all others of that prouince, were for aboue foure hundred yeares subiect to her. Againe, who knoweth not, that the Bishops of Caesa∣rea, of Hierusalem, and of all the East were subiect to the
Bishop of Antioch, as to their Patriarke, notwithstanding that the Church of Antioch was founded after some of the Easterne Churches? And who knoweth not that albeit the Church of Antioch was founded before that of Rome, it was neuerthelesse subiect to the Church of Rome? for why els did Iuuenal Bishop of Hierusalem sayIn Concil. Ephes. Act. 4. in the pre∣sence of the whole Councell of Ephesus, that the ancient cu∣stome, and Apostolicall tradition was, that the Church of Antioch, is to be ruled, and iudged by the Roman. Syr, a man of your reading ought to haue knowne, that in the mysteries of Christ, the yonger are preferred before the elder: Abel before Cain; Iacob before Esau; Iudas before Ruben; Dauid before Eliab; Salomon before Adonias? and so likewise of Christians, the Gentils were preferred before the Iewes; the Latines before the Greekes, and the west before East: for as the Apostle sayth,1. Cor. 15.46. that is naturall which is first; and spirituall that which is afterward: and he that by his birth-right shall exalt himselfe, as being the elder, shall by the right hand of God be humbled, that so the fa∣uors he bestoweth on his Church may be knowne to pro∣ceed from no other root, but his gracious vocation. So we see, among the Apostles, that although in the opinion of S. EpiphaniusHaeresi 51. (which is followed by BaroniusAnno 32. n. 23., Lo∣rinusIn ca. 1. Act. 5.13., SerariusTract. de Apost., and many others) Andrew were el∣der then Peter, and (as S. AmbroseIn c. 12.2. ad Corinth. sayth) followed Christ before Peter, yet Andrew receaued not the primacy, but Peter. And therfore though the Churches of Hierusalem, of Antioch, and others of the East, were founded before that of Rome, yet not they, but she obtayned the primacy. Wherfore you produce in vaine the testimonies of S. Hie∣rome, S. Augustine, and S. Basil, affirming, that the Ghos∣pell was first preached at Hierusalem, and other partes of the East, and that from thence it came into the West: for this proueth, that the Church of Hierusalem and some others were founded before that of Rome, and therfore were mo∣thers to her in antiquity, not in iurisdiction and autho∣rity. But S. Chrysostome (sayPag. 30. you) affirmeth, that S. Iames
was the first that obtayned a Bishopricke, namely at Hierusalem. You ought to haue added, that the same S. Chrysostome like∣wise saythIn Ioan. Hom. vltima. that he was made Bishop of Hierusalem by S. Peter mayster of the whole world. If therfore Iames was chosen Bi∣shop of Hierusalem by Peter, that sufficiently sheweth his authority ouer Iames, and the other Apostles. And what els did S. Chrysostome signify, saying, that Iames was made Bishop of Hierusalem by Peter, Mayster of the world, but that as much as the Bishop of the whole world surpasseth in au∣thority the Bishop of one See: so much did Peter surpasse Iames in authority? which Euthymius hath also expressed in the same words with Chrysostome. And no lesse effe∣ctually S. Bernard: The rest of the Apostles (sayth he)L. 2. de consid. c. 9. ob∣tayned ech of them their peculiar flocks; Iames contented with Hie∣rusalem, yelds the vniuersality to Peter. And S. Gregory:L. 4. epist. 38. Peter surely is the chiefe member of the holy and Vniuersall Church Paul, Andrew, Iohn, what were they but heads of particular Dioceses? Impertinent therfore is your alleaging of S. Chrysostome, to proue that Iames was the first that obtained a Bisho∣pricke at Hierusalem: for both he and these other Fathers testify, that Peter was Bishop of the whole Church, and conse∣quently also of Hierusalem, which was a part of the Church. And who knoweth not, that of all the Apostles, S. Peter first preached the Ghospell to the Iewes, and also to the Gentils; first in the East, and then in the West? and that by his authority he instituted the three Patriarkcall seats, of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, by which all o∣ther Churches of the world were gouerned? and that (as BoziusDe sign. Eccles. l. 4. c. 2. & 3. obserueth) the whole world was conuerted by those, which either were sent by S. Peter, and his Successors in the Roman See, hauing their mission and authority from them; or els by such as were made Bishops by them whom S. Peter had ordayned. And so likewise wheras herePag. 33. you make the Church of Caesarea mother to that of Rome, who knoweth not, that S. Peter founded that Church, and made Cornelius the Centurion Bishop therof, which therfore remained subiect to S. Pe∣ters See? Impertinent likewise, and fraudulent is your obie∣ction
Pag. 34. out of Sozomene,L. 3. c. 7. that the Eastern Greeke Churches challenged this prerogatiue in their letters to Pope Iulius, that they came from the East, who first brought Christian Religion to Rome: for if they came from the East, their ordination and autho∣rity was from S. Peter. And againe those letters were not of Orthodoxe Bishops, but of the Arians, assembled in their false Councell at Antioch; who with an hereticall pride stomaked at the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, because (as Sozomene there reporteth) by the dignity and pre∣rogatiue of his See, he had restored to their Church, Athanasius Pa∣triarke of Alexandria, Paul of Constantinople, and other Catholike Bishops, whom they had deposed; and rebuked them sharply for their vniust proceedings against them. But yet, their writing was more tolerable then yours: for though (to magnify themselues) they alleaged, that the Doctors of Christian Religion came first from the East to Rome, yet withall they acknowledged,Sozom. ibid. that the Ro∣man Church obtayned the prize of honour from them all, as hauing bene from the beginning the Metropolitan of Religion: A truth, which you here conceale, and euery where deny. But you tell vsPag. 29. 30., that Bellarmine groundeth the mother∣hood of the Roman Church on a false principle taken out of the coun∣terfeit epistles of Anacletus, which is, that all the Apostles had their Episcopall ordination of Pastorship from Peter; which principle is denyed by Azor and Suarez. Heere you speake vntruly, and contradict your selfe: for (as you confesse)Pag. 38. Bellarmine groundeth the monarchie of S. Peter vpon those words of our Sauiour Math. 16. Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock will I build my Church &c. And on the same passage, as also vpon those other words Iohn. 21. feed my lambes, feed my sheepe, (by which Christ made him Pastor of his whole flock) not only Bellarmine, but all Catholikes, with the ancient Fa∣thers, ground their beleefe of the Monarchy of S. Peter, and of the vniuersall authority and motherhood of the Ro∣man Church. Wherfore Bellarmine here alleaged by you out of those passages of Scripture, supposeth the supremacy of the Roman Church, as vndoubted matter of fayth; and from thence inferreth probablie, as a singular priuiledge of
S. Peter, that all the Apostles had theyr. Episcopall ordina∣tion from him, and proueth the same not only out of the epistle of Anacletus (which you are pleasedPag. 29. & 34. to call coun∣terfeit, and bastardly, grounding your selfe on the testimony of Cusanus in a prohibited worke, and which you know he himselfe hath retracted) but out of the expresse testimo∣nies of S. Cyprian, of Innocentius the first in his epistles to the two Councels of Carthage and Mileuis, of Iulius the first, and Leo the Great; all which you imposterously conceale. This deduction of Bellarmine, though it follow pro∣bably, yet not so necessarily, that the authority of the Ro∣man Church any way dependeth theron. And therefore other learned Diuines, and in particular Azor, and Suarez (who no lesse firmely beleeued the Roman Church to be the mother of all Churches, then Bellarmine did) are herein of a different opinion from him, holding that the Apostles were not ordayned Bishops by Peter, but immediatly by Christ himselfe, which (say you)Pag. 29. & 31. they mantayne vpon the oracles of God, out of direct Scriptures, accompanied with the con∣sent of S. Augustine, and many other Diuines. And because you would haue vs beleeue, that in their opinion, none of the Apostles were ordayned by Peter, you set downe in a different letter these words, as theirs:Pag. 30. mitio. Mathias had his or∣dination to the Bishoprick which Iudas lost, not by the hands of Peter, but by lot immediatly from God; and S. Paul, his, not by S. Peter, but by a voyce from Heauen, euen immediatly from Christ. But your dealing is insufferable: for these words are not theirs, but feigned by your selfe, and falsly fathered on them. And as the words are not theirs, so nether is the Doctrine: for when they say, The Apostles were ordayned Bishops immedi∣atly by Christ, they speake not of Mathias, and Paul, but only of those twelue, which Christ called and conuersed with in his life tyme, as Suarez expressly declareth;De trip. virt. Theol. disp. 10 sect. 1. n. 7. prouing withall, that both Mathias and Paul were not ordayned Bishops immediatly by Christ, but by the Apostles (s) their imposition of hands: which also (for as much as concer∣neth S. Paul) he confirmeth with the testimonies of S. Chrysostome, and S. Leo.
Againe, whereas you say, they mantayne that the A∣postles were ordayned Bishops immediatly by Christ, out of direct Scriptures accompanied with the consent of S. Augustine, you can∣not be excused from an vntruth: for albeit Suarez in proofe of his opinion alleage the glosse vpon those words of the Apostle, God placed in his Church, first, Apostles &c. yet he neither vrgeth these words of S. Paul, nor any other text of Scripture to that purpose; nor any testimony of S. Au∣gustine, sauing one, out of the booke of Questions of the old and new Testament, which you ought not to regard, because, when it is alleaged against you, you reiect it with contempt,Pag. 50. marg. as hereticall & contrary to S. Augustine: but because you conceaue, that here it makes for your purpose, you will haue it to be S. Augustines. So inconstant and contradictorious are you to your selfe. And I must here also aduertise you of your absurd man∣ner of arguing, whiles you frame a syllogismePag. 30. fin. 31. assuming for your Maior proposition out of Bellarmine, that, all the other Apostles were ordayned Bishops by S. Peter; and out of Suarez & Azor for your Minor, that all the other Apostles were not ordayned by S. Peter; which being two contradictories, as there is no man so senselesse, that wil defend two opinions playn∣ly contradictory: so there is no man so foolish, that will grant both the premises of this your syllogisme; which yet he must do, that will allow your argument to be good. He that will defend Bellarmines opinion, will deny your Minor: and he that will hold with Azor, and Suarez, will deny your Maior: and so your consequent in both the opi∣nions is false: for what els can a consequent be, that is in∣ferred out of two premises contradictory to themselues. Moreouer you sayPag. 34. fine 35. The nation of Brittayne by our owne ac∣counts, receaued the Ghospell (Cardinall Baronius and Suarez ac∣knowledging thus much out of most ancient records) by the preaching of Ioseph of Arimathia in the 35. yeare of Christ, two yeares before Peter did found the Church of Antioch where he was seated, 7. yeares before he founded the Church of Rome: that is to say; in Brittany was planted a Church nine yeares before there was any Church in Rome, and hereby so much her elder sister. So you, not
without ignorance and falsehood: for you set downe this acknowledgment in a different character, as the words of Baronius and Suarez, which yet are not theirs, nor of any of the other authors, whom you name, but your owne fiction. They indeed acknowledge, that Ioseph of Ari∣mathia came into Brittany: but that his coming was the 35. yeare of Christ, before S. Peter founded either the Church of Rome, or of Antioch, is your addition falsly imposed on them. For though according to the computation of Baronius, Lazarus with his sisters Mary and Martha were driuen out of Hierusalem in the 35. yeare of Christ, and together with Ioseph of Arimathia (by the prouidence of God) came to Marsils in France; yet nether Baronius nor Suarez, nor any one of the authors ancient or moderne, which you obiect, sayth, that Ioseph planted that yeare a Church in Brittaine. You name Gildas; but he neither mentioneth Ioseph of Arimathia, nor saith, that Christian religion was planted in Brittaine in the tyme of Tiberius Caesar, as you by misplacing his words, make him say, but speaketh of the great calamities and desolation of that I∣land, caused by the warres which the Romans made vpon the Brittans, not in the tyme of Tiberius, nor of Caius (for in their tymes the Romans had no warres with the Brit∣tans) but of Claudius; in the third yeare of whose Empire, those warres began, and continued 40. yeares togeather, vntill the tyme of Domitian. Interea &c. In the meane tyme (saythIn epist. de excidia Bri∣tan. c. 6. Gildas) that is, during those warres, there appea∣red, and imparted it selfe to this cold Iland (more remote from the visible sunne, then other Nations) that true and inuisible sunne, which in the tyme of Tiberius Caesar, had manifested himselfe (by the fame of his preaching and miracles) to the whole world; I meane, Christ vouchsafed to impart his precepts. Gildas then is wholly against you: for although he say, that in the tyme of Tiberius Caesar Christ manifested himselfe, and impar∣ted his precepts to the world, yet he discribeth the first planting of Christian Religion in Brittaine not in the tyme of Tiberius, but of the Roman warres in tyme of Claudius, by occasion wherof, there was continuall going
and comming from Rome to Brittaine: and as Christian Religion was then planted, & did daily increase in Rome, so from thence it was also kindled in Brittaine, especially there being many Brittains at that tyme inhabiting in Rome, some for their pleasure, some to flye the warres, and vnquiet state of their owne Countrey, and some taken by force and caried thither for hostages, as Caractacus King of the Silures, and much Nobility with him, as Cornelius Ta∣citus reportethAnnal. l. 12.. And from hence it is, that Holin sheadIn des∣crip. Britan. to. 1. c. 9. and CambdenIn sua Britan. p. 162. Protestant historians affirme, that one Claudia Ruffina a noble Brittish Lady (wyfe to Pu∣dens the Senator, and the first hostesse of S. Peter in Rome,) sent from thence diuers bookes and messages to her frendes in Brittaine, and was therby a great helpe to their conuer∣sion. To which I add, that S. Peter being come to Rome in the second yeare of Claudius, to teach and conuert the We∣stern parts of the world, when all the Iewes were by pu∣blike proclamation banished from Rome, he tooke that oc∣casion to goe into France, and preached the Ghospell to the French; and from thence passing into Brittaine (as Meta∣phrastesApud Sur. die 23. Iun. pag. 862. out of Greeke antiquities recordeth) preached, founded Churches, and ordained Priests & Deacons there: which is also testified by that famous holy Pope Innocen∣tius the first, saying;In epist. ad Decen. The first Churches of Italy, France, Spayne, Affrica, Sicily, and the bordering Ilands were founded by S. Peter, or by his Schollers, or successors. Which caused Guilielmus EysengreniusCent. 1 p. 7. d. 8. to affime, that the first Christian Churches of England were founded by S. Peter. And finally S. Peter himselfe appearing to a holy man in the tyme of King Edward the Confessor, shewed him how he had preached in England and the care he had of that Church, and Nation, as Alredus RhieuallisApud Sur. 5. Ianuar. pag. 131. left written 500. yeares since. And from that care it proceeded, that as DorotheusIn Synopsi., MirmanusIn thero de conuers. gent. pag. 4. and BaroniusMartyrol. 15. Martij. out of the Greeke Martyrologe affirme, Ari∣stobulus his disciple, and a knowne Christian in Rome, was sent by him into Brittaine, and there made Bishop. By all which it appeares, that the Brittish Church was not first founded by Ioseph of Arimathia, the 35. yeare of
Christ in the raigne of Tiberius, but by S. Peter in the time of Claudius, after he had founded the Church of Rome, & placed his seat there; and consequently that the Church of Rome is most truly and properly Mother of the Church of Brittaine, not only by reason of the second conuersion of our nation by Fugatius and Damianus sent by Eleutherius the 13. Pope after S. Peter; and also of the third conuersion by S. Augustine, and his companions, sent by S. Gregory the Great (whom therfore Bede calleth the Apostle of En∣gland) but also in respect of the first preaching, and foun∣ding of a Christian Church in this Iland, it hauing bene wrought by S. Peter his disciples, & other Roman Chri∣stians cooperating therto. And so much the more if it be true, that S. Paul assisted S. Peter therin, going from Rome into Brittaine to preach, as TheodoretIn psal. 106. & l. 5. de curandis Graec. affect., SophroniusSerm. de Natali A∣post., Venantius FortunatusIn carm. and others affirme. As for Ioseph of Arimathia his comming into England, I grant it to be true, though it be not affirmed by any an∣cient writer, but only by Capgrauius, Polydore Virgil, & other late historians. Tradition is sufficient to confirme me in the beliefe therof. Yet withall it is certain, that he came not the yeare of Christ 35. (as you without any proofe at all suppose) but hauing come out of Iury into France, with S. Mary Magdalen, and her company, after he had liued there sometime, and seene her great austerity of contem∣platiue and solitary life, and rigor of pennance which she vsed, went ouer into Brittaine, either sent by S. Peter, or by his owne free election. And though it be likely that by preaching the Ghospell, he increased the number of Chri∣stians in the Brittish Church, yet the chiefe intention of his comming was, to begin that kind of solitary and heremiti∣call life, which he had seene practised by S. Magdalene in France, as CambdenIn des∣crip. Brit. pa. 162. obserueth. Ioseph (sayth he) and his companie did take vpon them a solitary life: that with more tranquil∣lity they might attend to holy learning, and with a seuere kind of conuersation exercise themselues to the bearing of Christs Crosse. From hence it followeth, that the Roman Church is Mother to that of Brittaine, not only by reason of the su∣pereminent
authority and power which she hath ouer her, aswell as ouer all other Churches of the world, but also in antiquity, she being planted before there was any Church at all in Britaine; and most especially, because she begot, and founded the Brittish Church. Wherfore with great reason K. Henry the eight confesseth,Lib. de 7. Sacram. con∣tra Luther. art. 2. that all the Churches of the faythfull acknowledge and reuerence the most holy See of Rome for their Mother. And our late Soueraigne K. Iames of fa∣mous memory, in the Summe of the conference before his Maiesty, affirmethPag. 75. that the Roman Church was once the Mo∣ther Church, and consequently that as well the Church of Brittaine, as all others were her daughters; which right she being once possessed of, cold neuer lose; vnlesse you will make false the words of Christ, who promised that, the gates of hell (which are false and hereticall Doctrines) shall neuer preuaile against her. Lastly I will not omit to put you in minde of two o∣ther slights. The one is, that wheras you know, all anti∣quity to haue belieued, and left expressed in their workes, that the Roman Church is, The head and Mother of all Chur∣ches, and that it were not difficult (if needfull) to set downe their testimonies in their owne words, you mention no o∣ther authority for our beliefe of that truth, but the late Councell of Trent. The other is, that you runne on in your owne mistake, calling it in vs, a mad point of genealogizing, to conclude, that Rome must be mother to those Daughters of S. Peter, which were be∣gotten 7. yeares before she was borne, and which therfore you callPag. 31. & 36. Mothers, grand-mothers, and Aunts to her. If by motherhood you vnderstand, antiquity of tyme, though it were indeed a mad point of Genealogizing to call the Roman Church, Mother, in respect of any Church that was founded before her, yet in this very sense of Motherhood, it is false, that the Roman Church is a daughter to the Brittish: for the Brittish was founded after the Roman. But you know, that by Mo∣therhood we vnderstand superiority, and iurisdiction: and therfore as it were a mad manner of arguing to inferre that Caesarea in Palestine is not Superior in iurisdiction
and mother to the Church of Hierusalem, after which she was founded; so it is in you to inferre, that the Roman Church is not superior in iurisdiction and Mother to all Churches, because she was founded after some of them. CHAP. VII. S. Peters Primacy defended. TO proue that S. Peter was not of the now Roman fayth cōcerning his owne primacy, youPag. 38. & seqq. obiect those words of our Sauiour Mat. 16. vpon this Rocke: for in them (say you)Pag. 38. the fayth of S. Peter did not conceiue any Monarchicall, or supreme iurisdi∣ction promised vnto himselfe by Christ. The natiue, obuious, and true sense of these words of Christ deliuered by the agreeing cōsent of ancient Fathers, Councels and all Orthodoxe writers, is, that Christ spake them to Peter, & in reward of that admirable confession of his fayth, wherby he proclamed Christ to be The Sonne of the liuing God, made him an impregnable Rock, and promised to build his Church vpon him, as vpon a foundation so firme and immoueable, that the gates of hell (which are er∣rors and heresies) should neuer preuaile against it. This sense you cannot disgest; & therfore seek to elude it by abusing and falsifying the Fathers, and other exposi∣tors. For the better vnderstanding hereof, it is to be no∣ted, that wheras you alleage some Fathers affirming, that the rock on which Christ promised to build his Church, is the fayth and confession of Peter, and others saying, that it is Christ himselfe; these their expositions are no way con∣trary either in themselues, or to our Doctrine: for (as Bel∣larmine
L. 1. de Pont. c. 10. §. Nemo dubi∣tat. obserueth) no man doubts, but that Christ is the chiefe foundation of the Church, and that so much may be gathered out of these his words: for if Peter be a secondary foundation supplying the place of Christ on earth, it fol∣loweth that Christ himselfe is the first and chiefe founda∣tion, or as S. AugustineIn Psal. 86., and S. GregoryL. 28 Mo∣ral. c. 9. call him, Fundamentum fundamentorum, The foundation of foundations. Agayne, they are not to be vnderstood of the person of Christ abstracting from the Confession of Peter, but inclu∣ding it, as the obiect confessed; nor of Peters confession ab∣stracting from Peter himselfe, but including him, as the person that confesseth. Wherfore the sense is, that Christ promised to build his Church vpon himselfe confessed by Peter, or (which is all one) vpon Peter confessing Christ, and for the confession he made of Christ. Which (to speake in the Schoole language) is to say, that Christ built his Church causally vpon Peters confession and formally v∣pon his person; because that excellent confession of Peter was the cause which moued Christ to chose Peters person for the foundation of his Church. The confession of Peter (sayth S. HilaryCau. 16. in Mathaeum. hath receaued a worthy reward: & declaring what reward it was, he addeth: O, in the title of a new name, happy foundation of the Church, and worthy stone of her edifice! O blessed Porter of Heauen &c. And againe:Lib. e. de Trim. This is he that in the silence of all the other Apostles, beyond the capacity of humane infirmity, ac∣knowledging the sonne of God by the reuelation of the Father, meri∣ted by the Confession of his fayth a supereminent place. 2. S. Basil:L. 2. Cont. Eunom. Because Peter excelled in fayth he receaued the building of the Church on himselfe 3. S. Ambrose:Serm. 47. Peter for his deuotion is called a rock; and our Lord is called a Rock for his strength: he rightly deserueth to be a partaker in the name▪ that is partaker in the worke: for Peter layd the foundation in the house. 4. S. Hie∣rome:In cap. 16. Math. Because thou Simon hast said to me, Thou art Christ the Sonne of God, I also say to thee, not with a vayne or idle speach that hath no effect, for my saying is doing; therfore I say to thee, Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church. And againe:Ibid. He rewardeth the Apostle for the testimony he had giuen of him: Pe∣ter had said; Thou art Christ the Sonne of the liuing God. His true
confession receaued a reward &c. 5. S. ChrysostomeIn psal. 50.: Here, what he sayth to Peter, that Pillar, that foundation; and therfore cal∣led Peter, as being made a Rock by fayth. 6. TheophilactAd cap. 1. Math.: Our Lord rewardeth Peter, bestowing on him a singular fauour, which is, that he built his Church vpon him. By these testimonies of Fathers it appeares, that to say, Christ built his Church vpon the confession of Peter, is not to deny, that he built it on the person of Peter, but to ex∣presse the cause, for which he built it on his person: Euen as when we say, The valor of a Captaine got the victory, we say it not, to signify that his valor in abstracto got the vi∣ctory without his person, but to expresse the meanes wher∣by he got it. And in like manner, when S. Hierome and S. AmbroseEp. 61. Ad Pamma. ad∣uers error. Ion. Hiero∣sol. S. Am∣bros. l. de fide resurrect. said, Not Peter, but his fayth walked vpon the wa∣ters, it was not to deny, that his person truly and formally walked on them, but to declare, that the cause which made him walke on them, was not the naturall vertue or actiuity of his body, but the fayth he had giuen to the words of Christ. And so likewise it is in our case: for as these two propositions, The fayth of Peter walked on the waters, and, Peter walked on the waters, are both true, but in a diffe∣rent sense; for the fayth of Peter walked on them causally, as being the cause why Peter walked: and the person of Peter walked on them truly, properly, and formally. So likewise are these two both iointly true, though in a diffe∣rent sense: The Church is built vpon the person of Peter; and, The Church is built on the fayth or confession of Peter; because the pri∣macy of Peters fayth & confession was the cause which mo∣ued Christ to choose Peter for the foūdation of his Church, rather then any of the other Apostles: & to that end he gaue him the name and solidity of a Rock, that the gates of hell might neuer preuaile against the Church built on him. In like manner when S. Augustine and other exposi∣tors teach, that Christ is the Rock or foundation on which the Church is built, their exposition differeth not from the former in substance, but only in manner of speach: for (as SalmeronTom. 4. part. 3. Tract. 2. and SuarezDefens. fid. l. 3. c. 11. n. 11. haue well obserued) their meaning cannot be, that the Rock on which Christ pro∣miseth
to build his Church for the future, is his owne per∣son, formally considered as in himselfe, both because on him, it was already built from the tyme of his incarnation; as also because he speaketh not to himselfe, but to Peter, saying, Thou art Peter &c. And therefore as when in the words immediatly preceding, he called Peter by his owne name Simon the Sonne of Iohn, he spake to Peter in particular; so likewise he did when immediatly he added: and I say to thee, that thou art Peter (that is a Rock) and vpon this Rock I will build my Church. And the same is yet made more euident by other profes which BellarmineL. 1 de Pont. c. 10. §. Primo pro∣nomen. alleageth. Wherfore the sense is, that Christ promiseth to build his Church on himselfe, obiectiuely, that is to say, as confessed by Peter: which exposition differeth not from the former, and is ex∣pressly deliuered by S. AmbroseIn c. 3.1. ad Cor. in these words: The true and approued sense is, that the Church is built by God vpon Christ, but yet as confessed by Peter, and not by any other: which is as if it were said, vpon thee confessing Christ, and vpon the confession which Peter made of Christ, or vpon Christ confessed by Peter. So S. Am∣brose: and so also S. Augustine sayingL. 1. Re∣tract. c. 21.: Afterwards I ex∣pounded thus, these words of our Lord, Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, that it should be vnderstood to be built vpon him whom Peter confessed, saying, thou art Christ &c. And that by this exposition S. Augustine intendeth not to deny the Rock meant by Christ in those words, to be S. Peter, is a truth that may not be denyed: both because in that very place he sayth, that, This sense is celebrated by many in the verses of S. Ambrose saying, The Cock crowing, the Rock of the Church washed out his offence; as also, because he there affirmeth, that in other places of his workes he had expounded those words not of Christ, but of Peter (as the rest of the Fathers do) which exposition he recalleth not, but leaueth to the readers discretion, to choose which of the two, he liketh best. Let the reader chose (sayth he)Ibid. which of these two senses is the more probable. From whence it must needes follow, that albeit he doubted, whether of those two senses agreeth best to the words of Christ in that place, yet of the truth to the thing it selfe, to wit, that, Peter is the Rock on which Christ
built his Church, he neuer doubted. If he had thought that to be a false sense, he had done very absurdly, in not recalling it, but leauing to the readers choyce, to follow eyther that, or the other: for it had bene to leaue it in his choyce, to follow a true sense, or a false, an orthodoxe verity, or an hereticall error: which though you do, yet none but such as you, will presume S. Augustine to haue done. By this it appeares, that all those testimonies of Fa∣thers, Popes, and other authors, which you (to make a florish) heap vp in the foure first Sections of your fourth Chapter, to proue that the Rock on which Christ promised to build his Church, is not Peter, but the Confession of Peter, or Christ (for either of both will serue your turne, so that Peter be excluded) are impertinently alleaged: for the meaning of them is, that the Church is not built vpon Peter, meerely, as he was a weake man, and abstracting from his confession of Christ; but vpon him, as confessing Christ, and for his confession, and in reward therof. And so likewise it is built vpon Christ, not excluding Peters confession, but vpon him as confessed by Peter. All which is euident out of those very Fathers and expositors which you produce for the contrary: For they so fully, and so vnanswerably auouch Peter to be the Rock on which Christ built his Church, and you so certainly know it to be true, that much against your will you are inforced vpon the rack of truth to confesse so much, though you do it mincingly, saying:Pag 42. We may not dissemble thus much, that some Fathers doe expound by Rock, Peter. You should haue said, All Fathers, and all Councels which treat of that subiect, and all Ca∣tholike expositors. And I must intreat the reader here in pru∣dence to consider, how vnaduisedly you alleage Catho∣like approued authors against this truth, which no vnder∣standing Protestant will in his iudgment beleeue, that any of them euer denyed, it being a mayne, and euen the grea∣test point of difference betweene vs and you, and which being decided the rest would easily follow. Wherfore it cānot be but that you wrong the Catholike authors which you cite in fauor of your doctrine: and the like you do to
the ancient Fathers. To examine euery particular, were an endlesse labour, for your falsifications for the most part consist in a very few words, cut off, and dismembred from their contexture: whereas to shew your finistrous dea∣ling, the whole context must be set downe, as it lyeth. Yet some of them I will present to the readers view, by which he may make coniecture of the rest. 1. You begin with Baronius, saying:Pag 38. When Luther, Caluin, and others aduentured to expound this of Christ, and of fayth in him, as the Sonne of God, your two grand Cardinals oppose: What do they oppose? The one (say you, speaking of Baronius) opposeth his owne passion, calling it impudent madnesse in Protestants to expound the Rock to signify Christ. So you, vntruly, and sun∣dry wayes abusing Baronius: for in that very placeAnno 33. n. 19. & seqq. he expressly affirmeth Christ to be the Rock, on which the Church is built: and a little beforeAnno 31. n. 24.25.26. he had professedly proued the same out of the Syriack, in which our Sauiour spake, and shewed by the testimonies of Fathers, that as Christ is the primary Rock, or foundation, on which the Church is built, so he communicated to Peter his owne name of a Rock, and the honor of being next to himselfe. the secondary and ministeriall foundation in the structure of his Church. And as witnesses of this truth he alleageth Tertullian, S. Basil, S. Hierome, S. Leo, Hypolitus, Opiatus, ex∣pressly affirming, that the name of Cephas signifieth a Rock, and is the same that Petrus, or Petra: which he further pro∣uethAnno 33. out of the testimonies of S. Cyprian, Tertullian, Ori∣gen, S. Epiphanius, S. Hilary, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, S. Au∣gustine, S. Cyril, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Chrysostome, S. Leo, and of the Councell of Ephesus; all of them affirming, that Christ by Rock (on which he was to build his Church) vnderstood S. Peter. And this they teach in as plaine and effectuall words, as either Baronius or any Catholike li∣uing at this day is able to expresse. And as Baronius citeth the words of these Fathers, so he might of the rest (for they were of the same beliefe) as likewise all the generall Coū∣cels; which to auoid prolixity he omitteth, but yet expres∣seth their doctrine in generall, in these words: All the Eccle∣siasticall
Orthodox writers that haue liued since the aforesaid Fa∣thers, al the Synods that euer haue bene lawfully assembled in the he∣ly Ghost, haue no lesse constantly and ingeniously professed the same truth, to wit that Peter is by Christ our Lord made the foundation of the Church. By this it appeares how vntruly you say, that Bare∣nius opposeth his owne passion against the exposition of Protectants, denying Peter to be the Rock, on which the Church is built, since he confuteth it with the testimonies of all the Fathers, of all generall Councels, and of all Orthodox wri∣ters. You by saying. he opposeth his owne passion, would per∣suade your readers, that he had nothing els to say against their exposition, but only to call it, Impudent madnesse. Whe∣ther he might not with reason haue called it so, iudge your for what els can it be, to deny that to be the true sense of our Sauiours words, which all Fathers & Councels haue professed to be the true and lawfull sense of them? But you (to haue a better colour of inueighing against Baronius) say, that he calls the exposition of Protestants Impudent madnes, which is not true: for he hath not the word impudent: thats your addition to his text. 2. Hauing thus wronged Baronius, you passe to Bel∣larmine, saying,Pag. 38. that he to proue Peter to be the Rock on which Christ promised to build his Church, obtrudeth the consent of our owne schoole, saying, that by Rock, it meant Pe∣ter, it is the common opinion of all Catholikes: He sayth so in∣deed: but sayth he nothing els? doth he not proue it, out of twenty seuerall passages of the new Testament, so ex∣pounded by the ancient Fathers? Doth he not proue it, out of the agreeing consent of the most famous Doctors aswell of the Greeke, as of the Latin Church? If this be to ob∣trude the consent of our owne schoole, then (your selfe being the iudge) our schole consisteth not only of all the Catholikes of later ages, but of Christ, of his Apostles, of his Euange∣lists, and of the ancient Fathers of the Greeke and Latin Chuurch: for all these Bellarmine alleageth. These we ac∣knowledge to be our schoole, and from these maysters we haue learned our Doctrine. And yours being contrary to
this, it is soon vnderstood out of what schole, & from what Maister you, and your grand Tutors Luther and Caluin haue learned it. 3. Hauing thus handled Baronius, and Bellarmine, you passe to Roffensis, our learned Bishop of Rochester, who in tyme of K. Henry the eight writ in defence of this Do∣ctrine against Luther, and sealed what he writ with his bloud. Of him you say:Pag. 38. fin. p. 39. he approueth the same exposition (that Peter is the Rock on which the Church is built) saying: In this, truth triumpheth, as though it were as cleare as the Sunne; which sunne-shyne we Protestants (alas aur blindnesse) cannot dis∣cerne, but rather iudge, that it hath bene, and is mistaken by you for moone-shine through some defect in your faculties of sight. So you taunting that learned Bishop, and with him all Catho∣likes, telling vs of his insultation: but not without imposture: for the insultation is not his, but Luthers; who though he bring nothing against this exposition (as Roffensis shew∣eth) foolishly insulteth vpon the Pope, the ancient Fathers, and all Catholikes, for expounding Peter to be the Rock. Adeste huc &c. Come hither Pope (saythArt. 25. Luther) and all you Papists, melt and cast all your studies into one, if perhaps yee be able to vnty this knot. At least, this authority stands victorious, & trium∣phant against you. This insultation of Luther it is, which Roffensis iustly retorteth on him. Thou (saythAdart 25. Luthert. he to Lu∣ther) vpbraydest these things to the Orthodox members of the Catho∣like Church: and I will returne thee thine owne words: Come hither Luther, with all thy Lutherans: cast all your studies into one; and yet you shall neuer euince but that Christ foretold truth when he said, he was to build his Churh vpon a Rock, namely Peter. This authority stands victorious against you, and triumpheth, and shall triumph ouer you. And how true this speach of Roffensis is, who know∣eth not? for in other Bishopricks euen in the greatest Pa∣triarchall seates, there haue bene many heretikes, and not a few of them Arch-heretikes, as in the See of Hierusalem Iohn the Origenist, Salustius, Arsenius, Heraclius, Hilarius. In the See of Antioch, Paulus Samosatenus, Eulalius, Euzoius, Ioannes, Domnus, Petrus Gnapheus, Macarius. In the See of Ale∣xandria, Gregorius, Sergius Cappadox, Lucius, Dioscorus, Timo∣theus,
AElurus, Moggus, and others. In the See of Constanino∣ple Macedonius, Acacius, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus, Petrus, Aasta∣sius. Anthymus, Theodorus, and others. And who knoweth not, that the Churches founded by the other Apostles haue bene, and still are ouerwhelmed with Paganisme, Tur∣cisme, and heresie? and that the Succession of Bishops hath fayled in them; as of Iames, in Hierusalem; of Andrew, in Achaia; of Iohn, in Asia; of Thomas, in India; of Iude, in Persia; of Mathew, in AEthiopia; of Philip, in Phrygia; of Paul, in Greece? The Roman Church only is she, to whom (sayth S. CyprianL. 1. ep. 3.) misbelieue can haue no accesse: she only hath euer remayned free from all spot, and contagion of heresy, or other infidelity: and notwithstanding the out∣ragious persecutions of Pagan Emperors, the barbarous attempts of Saracens and Turkes, and the furious assalts of all Heretikes, she hath euer florished, and still florisheth: which euidently sheweth, that she, and none els but she, with such other Churches, as by vnion with her make one vniuersall Church, are the true Church of Christ, founded by him on S. Peter, as vpon an impregnable Rock. against which the gates of hell shall neuer preuaile. Vpon this Rock (sayth S. Hierome speakingEp. 57. of the Roman See) I know the Church to be built. She may be assalted, she may be battered, but o∣uercome she cannot be: sor she (saythPsalm. contra part. Donati. S. Augustine) is that Rock. against which the gates of hell preuaile not. And S. Leo the Great speaking of S. Peter and his See. pronouncethEpist. 89.; that, whosoeuer goeth about to violate the most sacred strength of the Rock (Peter) framed by the hand of God, or to infringe the power of the Roman Church is most impiously presumptuous: and that who∣soeuer thinkes the Principality to be denyed to S. Peters Successor, can no way diminish his dignity, but puffed with the spirit of pride, casts himselfe headlong into hell: andEp. 74. that, since the Vniuersall Church by that principall Rock Christ, is made a Rock, and the most blessed Peter chiefe of the Apostles hath heard from the mouth of our Lord. Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, whe is he that dare oppose this inuincibletruth, but either Antichrist or the De∣uill? I conclude therfore with Roffensis, that the authority of S. Peters See grounded vpon the promise of Christ, stan∣deth
deth victorious, and triumphant against you, and shall so remaine vntill the end of the world. CHAP. VIII. Abuses, and Wronges offered by Doctour Morton to the ancient Fathers, and other Catholike writers. TO proue that Christ, by the Rock, on which he promised to build his Church vnderstood not S. Peter, you obiect the ancient Fathers. And firstPag. 42. lit. . S. Ambrose saying,Ad c. . Luc. lib. 6. Petra erat Christus: Christ was the Rock. There cannot be a more wilfull falsification: for that Peter is the Rock on which Christ hath built his Church S. Ambrose teacheth, when in his hymne mentioned by S. AugustineHym. ad laud. Dom. spea∣king of S. Peters teares, he sayth: The Cock crowing, the Rock of the Church washed out his offence. The same he declareth and fully explicateth els whereSerm. 11. & serm. 47. and (to shew your false dea∣ling) in that very placeL.e. com∣ment. in ca. 9. Lucae in which you alleage him for the contrary: for he sayth, that as Christ was the Rock, so he communicated almost all his owne names to his Disciples. He was the light of the world, and he called his Disciples the light of the world &c. And hauing proued the same of other names, as of Bread, of a Vine &c. he particularly sheweth the same of the name of Rock. saying, Petra est Christus &c. which are the words you obiect. And then, to shew that he gaue also this his name of Rock to S. Peter, he addeth: Etiam discipulo suo huius vocabuli gratiam non neganit &c. And he refused not to honor his Disciple with this name, that he also may be a Rock, hauing from
the Rock Christ the solidity of constancy, and firmenesse of fayth. 2. You obiectPag. 42. marg. that S. AmbroseSerm. 84. distinguisheth betweene the Rock. and Peter, as plainly as between Christ and a Christian. But though S. Ambrose say, that as Christia∣nus is called à Christo, so also Peter the Apostle is called Petrus à Pe∣tra, yet he sayth not, that Petrus is a deriuatiue of Petra, as Christianus, is of Christus, but that, Petrus, and Petra, is one & the same name. His words are: because Christ is a Rock, Simon is also rightly called Petrus, that as he agreed in fayth with our Lord, so also he might haue one and the same name with our Lord. Wher∣by it is euident that S. Ambrose taketh Petrus and Petra to be one and the same name. And the same is euident out of the words of Christ: for if he had said, Tu es Petra, & super hanc Petram, thou art a Rock, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, there had bene no colour to deny, that Christ pro∣mised to build his Church on Peter: Ergo, now there is none; for Christ spake in Syriack, Tues Cephas, & super hanc Cepham &c. Wherupon S. HieromeIn c. 2, ep. ad Gal noteth, that Petrus signifies not one thing, and Cephas another, but the selfe same, because what the Latins call Petra, the Hebrewes & Syrians call Cephas. And the same is proued out of the Greeke: for as Phauorinus aduertiseth , and  haue one, and the same signification,  being vsed , and ; which he confirmeth out of Euripides: and not only he, but Caluin and BezaAd cap. 16. Math. vers. 18. con∣fesse, that Petrus and Petra are the same that Cephas, and dif∣fer not in signification, but only in termination. And therfore as if the latin interpreter had said, Tues Cephas & super hanc Cepham &c. the sense had bene playne against you, so it is now: for the Latin interpreter intended not to alter the sense of our Sauiours words; but vsed Petrus rather then Petra, be∣cause Petrus being the masculine gender, was more fit to expresse the name of a man, then Petra, though both of them haue one and the same signification. This you know right well, and therfore cannot deny, but that S. Ambrose ack∣nowledged Peter to be the Rock on which the Church is built: for you say:Pag. 42. Among the Fathers S. Ambrose giues this reason,Serm. 47. why S. Peter was called Rock, because he did first lay a∣mong
nations the foundation of fayth: but giues he no other rea∣son? Yes, because he sustayneth the frame and weight of Christian building, which words declare Peter to be the Rock or foun∣dation, on which the Church is built: and therfore you mangle S. Ambrose sentence, leauing them out. 3. You obiectPag. 42. r. out S. Hierome these words; Petrus nominatur à Petra, to signify, that Petrus doth not signify a Rock, but is a deriuatiue of Petra, as Christianus of Christus. But S. Hierome hath no such Doctrine, but directly the contrary. His words are; vpon this Rock our Lord founded his Church; from this Rock the Apostle Peter tooke his name, to wit, of a Rock. And that this is the true sense of S. Hierome, it is plaine out of his Comment vpon Mat. 16 where professed∣ly declaring the words of Christ, he sayth that they were not vaine and without effect, but that by calling the Apostle, Petrus, he made him a Rock: and that as Christ himselfe being the light, gran∣ted to his Disciples that they shold be called the light of the world: so to Simon, which had belieued in Christ the Rock, he gaue the name of Petrus, and according to the metaphore of a Rock, it is truly said to him: I will build my Church vpon thee. 4. You obiectPag. 42. c. S. Hilary to proue that not Peter but Christ himselfe is the Rock on which he promised to build his Church. The words you bring, are: Vna hac fidei petra Petri ore confessa, Tues Christus filius Dei viui. I finde no such words in S. Hilary: nor is it likely that he would vse confessa passiuely, as in these words you doe. But how im∣posterously you alleage him to proue, that S. Peter is not the Rock on which Christ promised to build his Church, S. Hilary himselfe shall be the iudge. O (saythCan. 16. in Math. he) in the title of a new name, happy foundation of the Church, and worthy stone of her Edifice! O blessed Porter of Heauen, to whose arbitre∣ment are committed the keyes of the eternall kingdome, whose iudg∣ments haue authority to preiudge in heauen! And els whereIn Psal. 131. he calleth Peter the first Confessor of the sonne of God, the foundation of the Church. And in that very place which you obiectL. 6. de Trin. that, after his confession, subiacet, he is layd vnder the building of the Church, and receaues the Keyes of the heauenly kingdome.
5. You obiectPag. 42.1. S. Epiphanius alleaging out of him these words,Haeres. 59. , that is, the Rock of faith, which shew, that Peter is the firme Rock on which the Church is so strongly built that she shall neuer fayle in fayth. But he that wil see your vnsincere dealing, if he read S. Epipha∣nius his contexture, shall find that in that very place which you cite for the contraryHaeres. 59. he affirmeth in most expresse words, not once, but thrice, that Peter is the Rock on which Christ hath built his Church: that he is the foundation of the Church: and that Christ hath committed to him the charge of feeding his flock. The same he teacheth in his AncoratusPropè int., adding, that all questions of fayth are in Peter. Wherby is not only signified his supremacy (which twice he there expresseth) but also his authority to resolue all doubts of sayth, and condemne all heresies, which he expoundeth to be the gates of hell, that shall neuer preuaile against the Church built vpon Peter. 6. You say:Pag 40. Gregory (surnamed the Great) speaking of the foundation of the Church, hath defined that whensoeuer the word, Foundation, is in the Scripture vsed in the singular number, no other then, Christ, is signisied therby; from whence you inferre, that out of the Scripture Peter cannot be proued to be the foun∣dation of the Church. But you shall be iudged out of your owne mouth: for you confesseIbid. that, Petra, a Rock, is taken as all one with foundation: you also grant,Pag. 42. that some of the Fa∣thers vnderstand by Peter, Rock; you should haue said all: for (as Maldonate whom you citePag. 39. f. marg. noteth,In c. 16. Math. n. 16. prope fin. none but here∣tikes euer denied it: from whence it must follow, that since the name of Rock (which is all one with foundation) is giuen him in Scripture, it is all one, as if the name of foundation had bene giuen him in Scripture. And therfore Clemens Romanus, Origen, S. Hilary, the Councell of Chalcedon, Isidorus, Pelusiota, and others giue him the name of Foun∣dation, aswell as of RockApud Iod. Cocc. to. 1. l. 7. art. 4.. 7. To S. Gregory the Great, you ioyne Gregory the seauenth, a most holy and learned Pope, whom you tra∣duce, saying:Pag. 40. Hildebrand who in his owne opinion was greater then Gregory the Great, and the greatest Dictator that euer possessed the Papall See, Anno 1077. inuited Rodulph Duke of Sueuia, to re∣bell
against his Liege Lord and Emperor, Henry the 4. and sent vnto the same Rodulph a Crowne with this inscription, Petra dedit Petro Romam, tibi Papa coronam. Syr, you haue bene formerly ad∣monished by P. R. in his Treatise tending to mitigation against the seditious writings of Thomas Morton Minister, of your tradu∣eing and falsly slandering this holy Pope, of whose admi∣rable vertnes I may haue occasion to speake hereafter. But you are still the same man. and tel vs this fable, which Ba∣roniusAnno 1077. n. 7. apud Spond. setteth downe as related by Albertus Stadenfis, and Helmoldus, two late writers, whom he conuinceth of falshood, shewing, that the Princes of Germany, who cold no longer endure the execrable wickednes, insolency, and oppressions of Henry, and being greatly incensed a∣gainst him for his sacrilegious practises against the See A∣postolike, wholly renounced him, and chose in his place Rodulph Duke of Sueuia, without either the aduice or knowledge of Gregory, and brought him to Mentz, where he was consecrated by Sigefridus Bishop of that Citty. So vntrue it is, that Gregory either Crowned him, or sent any Crowne vnto him, or any way incited him against Hen∣ry. And it is to be noted, that wheras you call Henry, Ro∣dulphs Liege Lord, and Emperor, he was neuer Crowned, but only by Guibertus an Antipope, set vp by himselfe to that end, and consecrated by Bishops, that were actually ex∣communicated, and deposed. But any thing wil serue your turne, to make an argument against the Pope, be it true, or false. 8. You obiectPag. 41. marg. these words of Theophylact: Confessio ipsa, fundamētam. But why do you mangle his words, which are: Our Lord rewardeth Peter, bestowing a great fauour on him, which is, that vpon him he built the Church: for because Peter confes∣sed him to be the sonne of God, he said, that this Confession which he made, shall be a foundation to them that belieue &c. Can there be a more grosse falsification, then to obiect three words of Theophilact, to proue Peter not to be the foundation of the Church, and leaue out the former part of the sentence, in which he so expresly affirmeth, that, Christ to reward his fayth, built his Church vpon him?
9. And no lesse deceiptfully you alleagePag. 39. g. the Romā glosse,Gloss. De∣cret. part. 1. d. 10. in Cap. Dominus no fler. to proue, that not Peter, but his confession with∣out any relation to his person, is the Rock, on which Christ promised to build his Church: for the glosse sayth: Christ would haue his owne name of Petra, a Rocke, giuen to Peter, &c. therfore called him Petrus. And the Chapter on which this glosse is made, is taken out of an Epistle of S. Leo, in which he not only affirmeEp. 83. Peter to be the Rock on which the Church is built, but addeth; that whosoeuer denyeth this truth is impiously presumptuous, and plungeth himselfe into Hell. To these, and otherlike obiections out of the Fathers, and other Catholike authors, you ad some confirmations of your owne. The first is: None (say you)Pag. 41. will deny, but that there was meant in Peters Confession, that matter, which he confessed: but Peter confessed not himselfe, but Christ, saying. Then art the Sonne of the lyuing God. Ergo, his confession had relation to Christ, and not to himselfe. A false and senslesse consequence: for euery confession hath relation not only to the matter, as to the obiect, or thing confessed, but also to him that cō∣fesseth, as to the agent, from which it proceedeth: and ther∣fore to inferre, that when Christ answering Peter, and re∣warding his confession, sayd vnto him, Thou art Peter &c. he meant not Peter, but himselfe to be the Rock, is as sens∣lesse an inference, as to say, that when Thomas cryed out vnto Christ,Ioan. 20.28. My Lord, my God, and Christ in reward of his confession sayd,Ibid. vers. 29. Blessed art thou Thomas, he pronoun∣ced not Thomas blessed, but himselfe, which was the matter Thomas beleeued. 2. You obiect:Pag. 42. fin. 43. All the Apostles and Prophets are called foundations, wherby is not meant their persons, or dominions, but their doctrines. I grant, that Christ, S. Peter, the rest of the Apostles, and Prophets, are foundations, on which the Church is built: Christ is the chiefe and primary founda∣tion by his owne power, and strength: Of him the Apo∣stle sayth,1. Cor. 3.11. Other foundation no man can lay, besyde that which is layd, which is Christ Iesus: whome therfore S. AugustineIn Psal. 86. and S. GregoryL. 28. Mo∣ral. c. 9. call, Fundamentum fundamentorum, The foundation of foundations. Besydes Christ, the Apostles, and
Prophets are also secondary foundations of the Church: for the Prophets by fore-telling Christ, and the Apostles by preaching his sayth and doctrine, vphold the body of the Church, to wit, the faythfull; who therfore are calledEphes. 2.20. Domostikes of God built vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner-stone: and for this cause, the wall of the Citty (of the Church) is saydApoc. 1.24. to haue 12. foundations, and in them the 12. names of the 12. Apostles. Among these secondary foundations, Peter hath the first, and chiefest place. The rest of the faythfull in res∣pect of him are ordinary stones; he, an impregnable Rock, as being built immediatly vpon Christ, and the rest by meanes of him: in regard wherof it was sayd to him alone, and to no other of the faythfull, or Apostles, Thou art Pe∣ter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church. And therfore S. Augustine sayth:Serm. 15. de Sanct. Our Lord called Peter the foundation of the Church; for which cause the Church with reason worshippeth this foundation, vpon which the height of the ecclesiafticall edifice is raysed. 3. You say,Pag. 42. that when the Fathers expound by Rock Peter, they meane ether a primacy of order, or honor, or els a priority of Confession in Peter, not of Authority and Dominion: and the same you repeate afterwards saying;Pag. 110. The similitude of head and members hath no colour of superiority, but of priority, of place, or of voyce. And this reason you alleage,Pag. 41. why, though the other Apostles beleeued before Peter spake, yet he alone answered, as being the mouth of the rest. I grant that Peter spake in the name of the rest: but to inferre, that therfore Christ when he answered Peter, saying, Thou art Peter, made him not a Rock, or promised not to make him the foundation of his Church, is a Non sequitur. I grant also, that the other A∣postles beleeued before Peter spake, & that he answered, as the mouth of the rest; not because he had any Commission from them, but because out of his great feruor, he preuen∣ted the rest, and spake for them, as their head, and Supe∣riour, as Christ somtimes did for all his Apostles;Math. 9.11. Luc. 6.2. and as the Rector is wont to answere in the name of the whole Colledge. So sayth S. Cyrill of AlexandriaL. 4. in Ioan. c. 18. They all ans∣were by one, that was their Superiour. And againeIbid. l. 12. cap. 64. when our Sa∣uiour
asked his Disciples, whom doe you say that I am? Peter as being Prince, and head of therest, first cryed out: Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God. So S. Cyrill of Hierusalem:Catech. . All the Apostles being silent (for this doctrine was aboue their strength) Peter Prince of the Apostles, and the chiefe preacher of the Church, sayth vnto him, Thou art Christ &c. And in the same sense, S. Cyprian,L. 1. ep. 3. sayth; Peter on whom our Lord built his Church. speaketh for all, & in the voyce of the Church: And S. Augustine:Serm. 31. de verb. A∣post. c. 1. Peter bearing the figure of the Church most feruent in the loue of Christ, chiefe in the order of Apostles, and holding the Princedome of the Apostleship, often answers one for all. And againeTract. 124. in Ioan. That in his answere he bare the person of the Church, for the primacy of his Apostleship; and for the primacy which he had among the Disciples. And whereas you, to elude this exposition of the Fa∣thers, say,Pag. 42. & 110. that, when they expound by Rock, Peter, or pronounce him to be the head and Captaine of the rest, they meane not primacy of authority and iurisdiction, but of order or honor, is a distinction that caries with it its owne confutation, and shall be effe∣ctually disprouedChap. 17. sect. 1. hereafter. CHAP. IX. S. Peter exercised his Authority, and Iuris∣diction of supreme Pastor, and Gouer∣nor ouer the other Apostles, and ouer the whole Church. TO disproue S. Peters authority ouer the other Apostles, you obiect first,Pag. 45.46. that S. Gregory vpon those words of the Apostle,Rom. 9.12. I will magnify my office, in as much as I am Doctor of the Gentils, sayth:L. 4. ep. 36. The Apostle teacheth vs so to carry humility in our hart, that we do keep and preserue the diguity of that
order wherunto we are called: but S. Peter (as Salmeron testifieth) though he were Head, and Iudge ouer the other Apostles, so behaued himselfe among them that he might seeme in a manner to haue ne∣glected his Pastorship, by carrying himselfe as a Brother, and equall with them, and not as either Head, or Rector ouer them. So you out of Salmeron, whose words make wholly against you: for in them he acknowledgeth the Pastorship of S. Peter ouer the other Apostles; & that he was their Iudge, their Head, & their Re∣ctor. If therfore he say, that S. Peter carried himselfe with so great humility, that in some sort he may seeme to haue ne∣glected his Pastorship, he sayth it not, to deny his Pastorall power, but to shew, that in the exercise therof, he caried himselfe rather like a Brother, and equall, then as a Supe∣rior or Iudge: which Salmeron might haue said of Christ, who sayth of himselfe,Ioan. 13.13. You call me Mayster and Lord, and you say well, for I am so: and yet he carried himselfe not as a Maister, but as a seruant, washing his Disciples feete. It is the property of the Spyder, to draw poyson from the same flower, out of which the Bee sucketh hony: & so out of the singular modesty and humility of S. Peter in the exercise of his Pastorall power (which Salmeron alleageth to his great commendation) you draw an argument to dis∣proue his authority; to which S. Gregory hath answered longe since. Peter (sayth he)L. 9. cp. 38. the chiefe of the Apostles ans∣wered the complaint of the faythfull, not by his power, but by rea∣son: for if when he was blamed by the faythfull, he had regarded the charge which he had receaued ouer the holy Church, he might haue answered, that the sheep should not dare to reprehend their Pastor, to whose care they were committed. But if in the complaint of the faythfull, he should haue said any thing of his owne power, surely he had not bene the Doctor of meekenesse. Wherfore Peter exercised his power, but yet with meekenesse and humility, after the example of Christ, who being Lord and Maister, was in the middest of his Disciples, as one that ministred.Luc. 22.27. His example Peter followed, shewing himselfe to be meeke and humble of hart,Math. 11.29. & practising that lesson which he had learned from him, The Princes of nations dominiere ouer them, but you not so;Luc. 22.25. but he that is the greater, let him become as the yonger, and he that is the elder, as
the wayter. Yet neuerthelesse as humility hindred not Christ from shewing his power, and authority, when and where it was sitting, so neither did it hinder Peter from exercising his iurisdiction, as often as occasion required: for as Philip a reuerend Priest and Legate of the See Apostolike in the famous Councell of Ephesus, truly said,Concil. Ephes to. 2. c. 10. It is out of doubt, and notorious to all ages, that the holy and most blessed Peter Prince and Head of the Apostles, pillar of the fayth and foundation of the Ca∣tholike Church, receaued from Iesus Christ our Lord, our Sauiour, & redeemer of mankind, the keyes of the heauenly kingdome, and exer∣cised the power of binding and losing which he had receaued, and that in his Successors he still liueth vntill this day. Some of the particulars in which he exercised his power, are expressed in holy Scripture. We read in the Acts of the Apostles,Cap. 1.15. & seqq. that immediatly after the Ascension of Christ, Peter rising vp, proposed to the brethren the substituting of an other Apostle insteed of Iudas, exercising his authority therin. Peter (sayth S. Chrysostome)Hom. 3. in Acta. rising vp in the middest of the Disciples, said &c. Behold how feruent Peter is: how he owneth the flock committed to him by Christ; how he sheweth himselfe Prince of this assembly. See likewise the modesty of Iames: he had bene made Bishop of Hierusalem, and yet sayth not a word. Consider also the sin∣gular modesty of the other Disciples, how they yeld the throne to Peter, not debating for it among themselues, as formerly they had done. And further shewing, how Peter in this affayre exercised his au∣thority before, and aboue the rest, he sayth:Ibid. Why doth he communicate this businesse with them? might he not haue made the election alone? He might without doubt but did not, lest he might seeme partiall to any. And againe:Ibid. This was the wisdome and fore∣sight of this Doctor: He said not, We alone are sufficient to teach: and although he had right to appoint an Apostle, as much as all they had, yet this doing it with aduice, was agreeable to the Vertue of the man. And because eminency in spiritual power is not an honor, but a care of subiects, yet worthily doth he first before them all, exercise authority in the busines, qui omnes habebat in manu, who had all the rest at his disposition, and will: for this is he, to whom our Lord sayd; And thou being conuerted confirme thy brethren. So Chrysostome. And no lesse plainly Oecumenius: Not Iames (sayth heAde 1 Act. but Peter
ryseth, to whom the gouerment of the Disciples was committed. Nor did any of them make reply to Peters words; but presently at his com∣mand, they appointed two whom they thought worthiest of that dig∣nity, that God himselfe might designe one of them. Can any Ca∣tholike at this day more fully, or in more significant words expresse the exercise of S. Peters iurisdiction ouer the o∣ther Apostles and his power to command them, then these two ancient Fathers haue done? To whom also I adioyne another like testimony of Leo the ninth, a learned & holy PopeEpist. ad Michael. c. 1.. Silly therfore is your shift, whiles you reduce the force of this argument to Peters deposing of Iudas from his Bi∣shoprick: for it insisteth not on his deposition, but on the election of Mathias in his place, which you conceale, not so much as mentioning it, because you know it to be vn∣answerable. 2. No lesse cunningly you shift of S. Peters giuing sentence of death vpon Ananias and SaphyraAct. 5.5.10. for their fraud and hypocrisy. It was (say youPag. 48. no act of ordinary Magistracy, but an extraordinary act of Miracle, as Pauls striking of Elimas starke blind, was. But S. Augustine (or whosoeuer is author of the worke De mirabilibus sacrae scripturae) tea∣cheth you another lesson, saying;L. 3. cap. vlt. Peter punished thē to shew how great his Apostolicall authority was, and how great their sinne, and that their chastisment might be an example to others. And S. Gregory treating of the Pastorall function, and shewing how great benignity it requireth towards those that do well, and how great seuerity, and zeale of iustice towards those that offend, giues this fact of Peter, as an example.L. 1. ep. 24. From whence it is (sayth he) that Peter by authority from God, hauing the Principality of the holy Church, refused to be ouer∣much reuerenced by Cornelius, that did well: but when he found the fault of Ananias and Saphyra, he presently shewed, how farre he was growne in power aboue the rest: for he tooke away their liues with a word, and shewed himselfe to be the chiefest in the Church against sinne. And he addeth, that Peters zeale in punishing, declared the force of his power. The same is deliuered by S. BernardEpist. 8., who speaking to Eugenius Pope of his power ouer the
whole Church, and in particular to depose Bishops when they deserue it, sayth: He that holds the place of Peter, can with one blow kill Ananias; and Simon Magus, with another: and (to speake more plainly) it belongs only to the Bishop of Rome, to pro∣nounce a peremptory sentence for the deposing of Bishops; because though others be called to a part of solicitude, yet he only hath the ful∣nesse of power &c. How thinke you Doctor Morton? whe∣ther is it fit, that we belieue these renowned Doctors of Gods Church, teaching vs, that the sentence of death pro∣nounced by S. Peter against Ananias and Saphyra was an act of his ordinary power, and iurisdiction, or you, deny∣ing it? 3. He exercised his authority vpon Simon Magus, who (witnesL. 1. c. 2. & l. 3. initio. S. Irenaeus) was the Prince and father of all heretikes. The holy Apostle detected his wickednesse first at Sama∣ria, and excommunicated himAct. 8.18. & seqq. ; and afterwards (as S. HieromeIn catal. script. in Si∣mone Petro. and TheodoretHaeret. Fabul. l 1. report) went to Rome to oppose him, and there condemned his Doctrine. The Doctrine of Simons sorcery, seruing the Angels (sayth Tertullian)L. de Praescrip. was reckoned among Idolatries, and condemned by Peter the A∣postle in Simon himselfe. And S. AugustineL. de hae∣res. haer. 1.: At Rome the blessed Apostle Peter killed Simon the Magician by the true power of almighty God. And Marianus with all the Regulars of Syria in their petition presented to the Councell of Constanti∣nople vnder MenasAct. 1. God sent Agapete Pope of old Rome to Constantinople for the deposition of Anthymus, and the fore-named heretikes, as hereofore he sent great Peter to the Romans, for the de∣struction of the sorcery of Simon. And S. Bernard:Serm. 1. in die Potri & Pauli. What more powerfull then Peter, who with the breath of his mouth ouertoke Simon Magus in the ayre, and receaued the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen in so singular a manner, that his sentence goes before the sen∣tence of heauen? And to declare that the power of Peter still liueth in his Successors, he sayth:Epist. 138. He that holds the place of Peter, can at one blow kill Simon Magus. Nor was it voyd of mystery, that the first Arch-heretike, with his heresy, shold be condemned at Rome, by Peter, where all the heretikes, and heresies of ensuing ages, were to be condemned by S. Peters Successors.
4. He shewed himselfe to be Head, and Prince of the Apostles, in asking, and answearing often-times, in the name of them all. When Christ exhorted the Apostles to perfection, Peter answered for all:Math. 19.27. Behold we haue left all things, and followed thee: what therefore shall we haue? And when some of the Disciples forsaking Christ, he asked the rest, will you also be gone? Peter as representing the person of them all, answered:Ioan. 6.58. O Lord, to whom shall wee goe? thou hast the words of eternall life. Vpon which passage S. Cyrill wri∣teth:L. 4. in Ioan. c. 28. It was not fitting, they should answeare confusedly; and therfore giuing example of wisdome, and modesty to future ages, they answere by one, that was gouernor, and greater then the rest. And to another question of our Sauiour; Peter answered (sayth S. Cyrill)L. 12. in Ioan. c. 64. as Prince and Head of the rest. The same is testi∣fied by S. Cyprian, by S. Cyrill of Hierusalem, and S. Au∣gustineSee aboue nu. 23. Now that Peters answering for all, was an act declaratiue of his iurisdiction, is proued by the example of Christ our Lord: for as oftentimes the Deane, because he is Head, and Superior of the Chapter, answereth for all the Canons, and in name of them all; so Christ, because he was Head & Mayster of all the Apostles in diuers occasiōs answe∣red for them. The Pharisees demanded of them:Math. 9.11.12. Why doth your Mayster eat with Publicans and sinners? Christ answe∣red for them: They that are in health, need not a Physitian, but they that are ill at ease. And when the same Pharisees saw the Apostles plucking eares of corne on the sabboth day, and asked them,Luc. 6.2. why they did so? Christ answered for them, defending their fact by the example of Dauid. Wherfore as Christs answering for all the Apostles shewed him to be their Head, and Mayster, so Peters answering for the other Apostles, declared him to be Mayster, and Rector of the Apostolicall Colledge. 5. Among the Christians newly conuerted at Antioch there arose a dispute, whether the law of Moyses were to be obserued, or no? for decision of this doubt, Paul, Bar∣naby and some others went vp to Hierusalem, to the Apo∣stles and Priests, and chiefly to S. Peter, to whom as to the Head of the Church, and supreme Iudge of Contro∣uersies
the resolution of that doubt chiefly belonged. Wher∣upon S. Paul himselfe speaking of this his iorney sayth:Gal. 2.2. I went vp to Hierusalem &c. And TheodoretEpist. ad Leon.: Paul the preacher of truth, and the trumpet of the holy Ghost, ranne to great Peter, to bring from him a resolution of such doubts, as arising about the obseruation of the Law, did minister occasion of strife to them that were at Antioch: How much more need then haue we that are weake and contemptible to runne to your Apostolicall seat, to fetch sal∣ues for the sores of the Church. And S. ChrysostomeHom. 87. in Ioan. sayth: Paul went to Peter, prae alijs, aboue others, and that, by reason of his authority, as S. Hierome expressethEp. 11. ad Augustinum. And S. Ambrose:In cap. 1. ad Gal. because our Sauiour had committed to him the charge of the Churches. Nor did S. Pauls going to Peter, and the other Apostles, and Priests togeather with him, any way derogate from this supreme authority; as the bringing of a suite to the Parliament, derogateth not from the supreme Authority of the King, who is Head of the Parliament. Wherfore Peter, as Head of the Church, for the determina∣tion of that doubt assembled a Synod at HierusalemAct. 15.7. & seqq., which as it was the first Christian Councell, so was it the pattern of all others, that since that tyme haue bene held in the Church of Christ. For from this Councell it procee∣ded, (and euer since hath bene the custome of generall Councells) that the Pope presiding by himselfe, or by his legates, first declareth the fayth of the Roman Church, all Bishops subscribing, and condemning the contrary. And this is done to the imitation of this Apostolicall Synod, in which Peter spake first, and the rest following him, con∣firmed his sentence; Paul and Barnaby by relating the great signes and wonders God had done among the Gen∣tils by them; and Iames, both by shewing the sentence gi∣uen by Peter to accord with the words of the Prophets, and by giuing this verdit of his owneAct. 15.19.: I iudge, that they which of the Gentils are conuerted to God, are not to be disquieted &c. These are the wordes which you obiectPag. 64. to proue that, not Peter, but Iames gaue sentence in the Apostolicall Synod; but without ground: for the word, I iudge, contaynes no de∣finitiue sentence, not expresseth any authority, but only
signifieth, It seemes to me, or, my verdict is: the contrary were to make Iames Superiour to Peter, which no man euer said. Besides, that the definitiue sentence was giuen by Pe∣ter, the ancient Fathers expresly affirme, none of them so much as insinuating, that is was giuen by Iames. All the mul∣titude (sayth S. HieromeEp. 89. ad Aug. c. 2. held their peace, and into his (Pe∣ters) sentence Iames the Apostle and all the Priests togeather did passe. And long before him, Tertullian:L. de pudi∣citia. In that controuersy of keeping the law, Peter by instinct of the holy Ghost, spake of the vo∣cation of the Gentils. And hauing set downe S. Peters words, he addeth: This sentence both losed those things that were omitted of the law, and bound those that were reserued. It was therfore the authority of Peter that did bind and lose in that Coun∣cell: for which cause S. HieromeIbid. calls S. Peter, The Prince, or author of the decree. And finally the sentence of Peter was confirmed, and ratified by the whole Councell, and sent to Antioch by Paul and others, chosen to that purpose, to the end they might publish it, as an Ordinance of the holy Ghost. 6. Peter exercised his pastorall function by promulga∣ting the Ghospell both to the Iewes and Gentils. To the Iewes; for he first of all the Apostles vpon the very day of Pentecost, immediatly after the receauing of the holy Ghost, preached vnto them Iesus ChristAct. 2.14. & seqq., and exhor∣ting them to pennance, at that one Sermon conuerted a∣bout 3000. soules. He spake (sayth S.Ad cap. 2. Act. Chrysostome) as the month of all; and the other eleuen stood by, approuing with their testimony, what he sayd. Peter also was the man, that first preached to the Gentils, and that by speciall Commission from God, as he declared in the Councell of Hierusalem, saying:Act. 15.7. Men brethren, you know, that of old dayes God a∣mong vs chose, that by my mouth the Gentils shold heare the word of the Ghospell, and beleeue. And to this end, when God sent Cornelius the Centurion vnto him to be instructed, he shewed vnto him that maruelous vision,Act. 10.1. which is des∣cribed in the Acts of the Apostles, to declare, that the tyme of founding the Church among the Gentils was now come: And by bidding him, kill and eat, he declared him to
be the Head of the Church; for eating is an action, that belongs to the head. Hereupon Peter out of hand preached the Ghospell to Cornelius, and other his friends and kin∣dred, and baptized them.Act. 10.35. & seqq. Againe, who but Perer foū∣ded the Churches of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, in which Constantinople is? who founded the Patriarchall seates of Antioch, (where the faythfull were first called Christians) but Peter? Who the other seates of Alexandria, and Rome, the one by S. Marke his Disciple, and the other by himselfe, but Peter? For Christ according to his promise, chose him to found his Church, and as S. Ambrofe saythSerm. 47. first of all to begin it (both a∣mongst the Iewes and Gentils) giuing him therby, the same place in his Church, which the foundation hath in a materiall building; and by that meanes notifying his su∣pereminent dignity vnto vs: for as S. Chrysostome wi∣sely obserueth▪In cap. 2. Act. One thing it is, to open a gate that is shut, & giue begining to a worke (as S. Peter did,) and another thing, to pro∣secute the same worke, after it is begun, as the rest of the Apostles did. 7. Peter, of all the Apostles, wrought the first miracle after the ascension of Christ, in confirmation of the Ghos∣pell which he had promulgated, curing a man that was lame from the wombe of his motherAct. 3.7.: which S. Ambrose interpreteth to be an act of his supreme Pastorall power; the healing and consolidating the lame mans feete, betoke∣ning him to be the firme, and solide foundation of the Church. Because Peter (sayth S. Ambrose)Serm. 68. is the Rock on which the Church is built, with great reason he first healeth the feete, that as he holdeth the foundation of fayth in the Church, so likewise in man he may confirme the foundations of his limbes. It was Peter also that raised Tabitha from deathAct. 9.40., working that kind of miracle, first before any other of the Apostles. And that aswell in working these first miracles, as by performing o∣ther admirable things in the first place before the other A∣postles, he exercised his iurisdiction and authority, S. Chry∣sostome expresseth in these words:Hom. 21. in Acta. Peter walking as a Cap∣taine in his army, did consider which part was vnited, and well or∣dered,
and which wanted his presence: See how diligently he runnes vp and downe, and is found to be the first in euery place. When an A∣postle is to be chosen, he's the first: When the Iewes are to be certified that the Apostles are not druncke, when the lame man is to be cured, when the Ghospell is to be preached, he is before others: When the Princes, and Ananias are to be proceeded against, and when cures are to be made by a shadow, Peter is the man: and when miracles are to be wrought, he steps out first: where there is danger, and where gouer∣ment is necessary, there Peter is: but when things are in peace and tranquility, they are left to all the Apostles indifferently. Lastly Peter by the iudgment of our Lord was appoin∣ted to feed his flock, whē he said vnto him,Ioan. 2.26.27. feed my lam∣bes, feed my sheep. By lambes, he vnderstandeth the faythfull people: by sheep (which are the dammes of the lambes) the Bishops and other Pastors of the Church. Wherfore S. Pe∣ter in the exequution of his Pastorall charge, among other admonitions, which he giueth to his subiects, putteth the Bishops and Pastors in mind of their dueties, alluding to the words feed my sheep, by which Christ made him su∣preme Pastor of Pastors vnder himselfe. Feed (sayth he1. Pet. 5.2 the flock of God, which is among you, prouiding not by constraint, but willingly according to God; neither for filthy lucres sake but volunta∣rily; nor as ouer-ruling in the Clergy, but made examples of the flock from the hart. And when the Prince of Pastors shall appeare, you shall receaue the incorruptible crowne of glory. Now that S. Peter made this exhortation to them, as their Superior, & chiefe Pastor, is declared by the second Councell of Nice:Can. 4. Peter the chiefe Apostle cōmanded, Feed the flock of our Lord, administring your Bishopricks, not by force, but voluntarily &c. And Haymo:Domin. 2. post Pascha. The chiefe Pastor of the Church admonisheth the other Pastors, sayng: Seniors that are among you, I beseech you &c. And the Bishops of the East, when they banded themselues against the preuarication of their Patriarch Acacius, writ to Pope Symmachus:Extat haec Epist. inter Otho∣dox. impress. Basil. to. 2 Thou art euery day taught by thy sacred Doctor Peter, to feed the sheep of Christ, which are cōmitted to thee through∣out the habitable earth, not constrained by force, but willingly &c.
CHAP. X. Doctor Mortons obiections against the former Doctrine, answeared. THESE examples taken out of the holy Scripture, expounded by the ancient Fathers, conuince that S. Peter in di∣uers occasions exercised acts of iurisdi∣ction properly belonging to his autho∣rity, ouer the Apostles, and ouer the whole Church. And the same will yet more appeare by the futility of the Arguments which you frame to disproue his Supremacy. The first is,Pag. 46. that be had no Crowne on his head to shew his Empire▪ nor Miter to shew his pastorall dominion ouer the other Apo∣stles: for though Peter had no Empire, as being no tempo∣rall Prince, yet (as Baronius shewethAnno 34. . 85. all the Priests in the old testament (which represented our Bishops) did vse Miters: and the high Priest (representing the Pope in the law of grace) had an especiall Miter odorned with a plate of gold, which the Scripture calleth a CrowneEcclest. 45.14., & (as Iose∣phus testifiethL. 3. An∣tiq c. 8. made in a triple forme. How then do you proue that S. Peter (who call's the Priesthood of the new testament a kingly Priesthood1. Pet. 2 9. had not a triple Mi∣ter or Crowne as his Successor now hath? (though not so rich, by reason of the pouerty in which the Church at those her first beginnings was) especially since S. Hierome trea∣ting of the Sacerdotall Ornaments of the law of Moyses, affirmeth,Ep. 128. ad Faiolam. that in Christ they are more perfectly consummated. 2. You say,Pag. 46. that Peter had no Legates à laetere to carry his mandats. This is your ignorance: for as the Pope sendeth
to other Churches his decrees, made with the aduice of his Confistory; so S. Peter with aduice of the rest assembled with him in the Councell of Hierusalem, chose out two prime men, Iudas, surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, togeather with Paul and Barnaby to cary the mandats or decrees of that Councell to the Churches of Antioch, Syria, and CiliciaAct. 15.12.13.. Your third Obiection isPag. 46. No person was admitted (a pride which S. Peter abhorred) to kisse his feete. From whence to in∣ferre, that S. Peter was not Head of the Church, or that he exercised not any iurisdiction ouer the other Apo∣stles, is an argument, that deserues no answer; the Conse∣quent hauing as little connexion with the Antecedent as an Egg with an Oyster. But you are so pleased with it, that you repeat it afterwards againePag. 160., and both here and there vrge it against the Pope, to disproue his supremacy, not considering, that if it be a sinne in him to admit of that honor, yet it is no error in Doctrine, nor want of authori∣ty, and iurisdiction (which is the thing you should haue proued) but of humility; and therfore no more disproues his supreme authority, then Pride, or other vices disproue the supreme authority of a temporall Monarch, or the iurisdi∣ction of any other Bishop. But wheras you attribute the admittance of this honor to Pride in the Vicar of Christ, you know thatDe sign. Eccles. l. 11. c. 9. Bozius (whom you citePag. 160. effectually proueth, that the Pope considering his place and superemi∣nent dignity of being the Vicar and Lieutenant of Christ on earth, admitteth lesse honors then any temporall Prince or Bishop whatsoeuer; which you conceale, that so you may taxe him with pride, for suffering his feet to be kissed. You might in like manner blame Christ for admitting the same honor from Mary MagdaleneLuc. 7.3., and for suffering the IewesMath. 21.8. to straw the bowes of the trees, and spread their owne garments in the way, vnder the very feet of the Asse on which he rid, and for not prohibiting the Chil∣dren to proclame his prayses: for at that the Iewes stor∣medIbid. Vers. 16., as you do at the Popes permitting his feet to be kissed.
Now that this honor of kissing his feet (and that pro∣strate on the ground) is no new thing (as Polydore Virgil by you cited, in a worke corrupted by Protestants, and which you also know to be prohibited, affirmeth) the hi∣story of the holy Virgin SusannaApud Baro. anno 94. maketh good. And the same is proued by what TertullianLib. de poe∣nit. c. 9. 100. yeares be∣fore that tyme reported of the manner vsed by the Roman Church in receauing of penitents, who (sayth he) did kneele downe to the Priests, and to the seruants of God. And the same is conuinced by the practise of ancient Christian Emperors, and Kings: of Iustinus; of both the Iustinians, the elder, and the yonger; of Fridericus the first, and the second, surnamed Aenobarbus; of Ludouicus, the first surnamed The godly, and Ludouicus the second; of Luitprandus King of the Lom∣bards; of Pipinus, Ludouicus Crassus, and Ludouicus the seauenth Kings of France; of Henry the first, and the se∣cond, kings of England: some of them falling downe pro∣strate on the ground to reuerence the Popes person, and kissing his feet; and others performing the office of yeomen of his stitrop, and leading his horse, going themselues on foote by him. All which particulars if you please you may read in BaroniusSpond. in Indic V. Ob∣sequia.. And this reuerence done to the Pope, was not obscurely foretold by the Prophet Isay, in two places, which are ex∣cellently pondered by Iacobus Gordon HuntleyContro. 2. c. 26. to this purpose, where withall he sheweth, that Caluin to auoyd the force of the former, corrupteth the facred text. The like is also gathered out of the other words of the same Pro∣phet,Cap. 60.14. speaking of the great power and maiesty of the kingdome of Christ on earth (which is his Church), where he mentioneth this promise made vnto it. The Children of them that humbled thee, shall come crouching to thee; and all that detracted from thee, shall adore the steps of thy feet: in which words is plainly foretold the adoration of the Church, and of her visible head on earth; an honor which Caluin vpon this very place confesseth not to exceed that which is due to the Church, because it is giuen to Christ, who is adored in the Church: and Leo de Castro vpon the same text out of a very ancient record of the order of S. Benedict, con∣cerning
the customes of the Catholike Church, reporteth, that, Kings in ancient tymes going to the Synods of Bishops, did pro∣strate themselues before them and kisse the ground, not rising, vntill the Bishops descending from their seats did take them vp in their ar∣mes, and place them in thrones answerable to their Princely dignity. To this purpose also make the testimonies of S. Hierome,Ep. ad Pammach. aduers. error▪ Ioan. Hieroso▪ who speaking of S. Epiphanius, sayth: A great number of all ages and sexes did flock vnto him offering their little ones, and kissing his feet; and of S. ChrysostomeHom. 14. in priorem ad Timoth▪ exhorting the people to prostrate themselues at the feet of the monkes, & kisse them: Draw neare, touch their holy feet: for it is a far greater honor to touch their feet, then to touch the heads of other men. It was therfore in the puter tymes of the Church, no disparagement to the greatest Princes to prostrate themselues, either to the Pope, or to Bishops, or to other holy seruants of Christ, and to kisse the hemms of their garments, and their feet: because as Alexander the greatApud Ioseph. do antiq. l. 1. ▪ vlt. adoring Iaddus the high Priest of the Iewes, knew and testified, that he did in him exhibite that honor to God, whose Priest he was; so Christian Em∣perors and Kings, when they adore the Pope, kissing his feete, do it to honor Christ in him, to whome that honor redoundeth, euen as the honor done to an Embassador re∣dounds to the king his Mayster. And as Princes by exhibiting this honor to the Vicar of Christ, no way disparage their royall greatnesse, so nei∣ther is the acceptance therof any note of pride in the Pope: for he accepts it not, for his owne sanctity, or for any other personall quality▪ as he is a priuat man, but only for the pu∣blike authority, and spirituall power which he receaueth from Christ, and which properly, and principally is of Christ, who is honored and adored in his Vicar, as Tertul∣lian noteth, saying:Vbi sup. cap. 10. When thou castest thy selfe downe at the feet of thy brethren, thou touchest Christ, thou adorest Christ. And therfore the Pope hath on his shooe, a Crosse, which the faythfull kisse, to signify that they exhibite not that honor to him, but in him to Christ, whose person he representeth. And finally wheras you obiectPag. 46, that, S. Peter abhorred this pride when Cornelius prostrated himselfe vnto him, I answere
with S. HieromeL. Aduers. Vigilant., that Cornelius conceaued Peter to be some God, (as the Lycaonians thought of Paul & Bar∣naby) and therfore prostrated himselfe to honor him with the supreme adoration of Latria due to God alone, as it ap∣peareth out of S. Peters answer to him:Act. 10.26. Arise, for I also am a man. This kind of adoration, if any man should offer to the Pope, he would admonish and forbid him, as S. Peter did Cornelius. But yet if it be granted that (as some Fathers expound) Cornelius adored not S. Peter, as a God, but as a man, yet S. Peter with great reason forbid him: for he ado∣red him not, in respect of Christ, whose Vicar he was, but in respect of himselfe: and in like case the Pope would also forbid any man to adore him: but he knoweth (and so do you) that the cause why Catholikes exhibit that honor to him, is the excellent power giuen him by Christ, or rather Christ himselfe gouerning his Church in his Vicar. which adoration is good, and pleasing to God, both as it is exhi∣bited by the faythfull, and as it is admitted by the Pope. Your fourth Obiection isPag. 46. that, S. Peter had no Canon to direct the Apostles. Syr, the Apostles being guided by the holy Ghost, nee∣ded no humane Canons, nor constitutions for their owne direction. But for the direction of all ecclefiasticall Pastors they made Ecclesiasticall Canons, which S. Peter as their Head, confirmed, and deliuered by word of mouth to S. Clement his Disciple, and Successor in the Roman See: & he committing them to writing left them to posterity as Canons of the Apostles. I know, that your Magdeburgian Centurists cauil against them, as false, & suppositious: but withall I know, that diuers of those Canons are alleaged by many ancient Fathers, by many Councells, and confir∣med by later Canons of the Church, and inserted word by word into them, as Franciscus Turrianus hath learnedly demonstrated (x),L. 1. pro Canon. Apo∣stol., & vindicated them from the Magdebur∣gian calumnies. Your fifth and sixth Arguments are,Pag. 46. that, S. Peter made no clayme, nor yet admittance of any appeale from the other A∣postles; no reseruation of any great case as by speciall prerogatiue due
to himselfe, to wit, of admitting any out of the Dioces of another, ab∣soluing those that are excommunicated by another, of Canonizing Saints, of confirming Synods, of granting plenary Indulgences &c. Who seeth not the futility of these obiections? For first the Apostles being confirmed in grace, neither did, nor could wrong their subiects: in which case only Appeales are lawfull. 2. I haue already shewedChap. . that the resolution of that great case concerning the obseruation of the law of Moy∣ses, was reserued to S. Peter; and that he resolued the same in the Synod of Hierusalem, presiding in it: and when the Pope personally presideth in a Councell, there needeth no other confirmation. 3. When Christ made Peter Head of his whole Church, he gaue him power to bind & lose throughout the whole world, and therby power to excommunicate delinquents in whatsoeuer Dioces of other Bishops; and likewise to absolue them from the guilt of sinne, in the Sacrament of pennance, as also to binde by excommunication, and ab∣solue from the same: and finally to release the penalty due to sinnes by Indulgences, out of the Sacrament: for the power of binding and losing which he gaue to Peter, he li∣mited not to the Sacrament of Penance only. But whether Peter exercised this power of excommunicating and par∣doning by indulgences, we know not; for all his actions are not written. We know, that S. Paul did excommunicat the incestuous Corinthian1. Cor. 5.5., and afterwards when he re∣pented, at the intercession of Timothy, & Titus, (as Theo∣doretIn 1. Cor. 2.10. expoundeth) granted him a pardon, or Indul∣gence in the person of Christ, that is to say, by the power he had receaued from Christ to that end. Nor is it to be doubted, but that S. Peter (who as ordinary Pastor had power ouer the whole Church) did exercise the same power, if the like occasion were offered. 4. In those primitiue times the Canonization of Saints was not performed with so great solemnity, nor with such exact inquiry into all particulars, nor with the deposition of so many witnesses, as in these later ages it is. If then the
Church did with vnanimous consent, reuerence any one that had died for Christ (as the Martyrs did) or that liued & died holily (as did the Confessors,) he was by publike voyce and consent of the Church reuerenced as a Saint, (the See Apostolike either expresly, or tacily approuing the same) and therby canonized. In this manner were Ca∣nonized S. Stephen, and others, that died before S. Peter, without whose approbation neither S. Stephen, nor any one els was then reuerenced by the whole Church, as a Saint; not any since that time, without the approbation of his Successors. 5. To make good S. Peters iurisdiction ouer the other Apostles, you require vsPag. 46. fin. to shew, that he pardoned Simo∣ny, and almost an 100. the like sinnes; which is to say, that vn∣lesse we shew, that the other Apostles committed Simony, and almost an 100. the like sinnes, and that S. Peter pardo∣ned them, we must not belieue S. Peter to haue had power and iurisdiction ouer them. That S. Peter euer pardoned Simony, we read not; but that he punished it, we proue by the power he shewed ouer Simon MagusSee aboue Nu. 24.. And how far the Successors of S. Peter are from pardoning, or any way conniuing at Simony, yea how seuere they are, and euer haue bene in the punishment therof, the decrees and consti∣tutions of diuers Popes extant in the Canon Law giue a∣bundant witnesse against such men as you are, who out of their hatred to the Roman See, are wont to slander S. Peter in his Successors falsly with pardoning Simony and almost an 100. the like sinnes, as here you do, without any proofe at all. 6. With no lesse folly you require vsPag. 46. & 47. to shew, that S. Peter was distinguished from the other Apostles by some one note and character of Imperial eminency, and authority, as by his guard, or coyne, or habit, or command, or constitutions, as euery temporall Mo∣narch is distinguished from his Nobles. Can there be greater sim∣plicity, then to require vs to shew, that S. Peter like an Em∣peror, had Princely robes, a guard, and a peculiar coyne, as kings & Emperors haue, when he was no temporall Mo∣narch? and when not only he, but (as you forgetting your
selfePag. 283. confesse the holy Popes his Successors in those primitiue time, were (alas) daily in danger of banishments, imprisonments, torments, & death? Is it not then ridiculous, to bid vs shew S. Peters guard, and his coyne? his commands we shew: for Oe∣cumenius saythIn cap 1. ct.: The Apostles were committed to the gouer∣ment of Peter, and presently at his command appointed two, whom they thought worthiest to be chosen in place of Iudas: which Do∣ctrine is also deliuered by S. ChrysostomeHom 3. in Act.. Of the Constitutions of the Apostles, which were pecu∣liarly of S. Peter as their Head, and set forth by Clement his Disciple and Successor, we know, that albeit they are of no great reckoning among many of the Latines (as hauing some things inserted into them by heretikes) yet they are greatly esteemed by the Greekes, and both cited, and com∣mended by S. EpiphaniusHr 45. & ser 70. and other Greeke Fathers: To which I add, that they are learnedly defended by Tur∣rianusProem in lib. Clem. Ro.: and GenebrardL. de Li∣turg. Apo∣stol c. 5 fol. 21.22. affirmes them to haue bene receaued by all antiquity. Your last argument to proue (as you call it)Pag. 47. the no do∣mination of S. Peter ouer the other Apostles, is, that, meeting toge∣ther at Hierusalem, they sent Peter, and Iohn into Samaria; which proueth Peter to haue no superiority ouer the rest, by whom he was sent; or if it doe, it must needs imply in Iohn an equality with Peter: for as Iohn was not sent as Superior to the other A∣postles, so neither was Peter. This inference we wholly de∣ny. 1. because in a Corporation or Colledge (as that of the Apostles was) the Superior may out of his owne desire be sent in the name of the whole Community, the Maior in name of the Citty, and the Deane in name of the Chapter. 2. The authority of the whole Colledge together (which includeth both the head & the members) differeth from the Head alone (to vse the phrase of Metaphysicks) tanquam includens ab incluso, and is at least extensiue of greater authori∣ty then the Head alone; and therfore the Head alone may be sent by authority of the whole Colledge. 3. And if we take a community for the inferiors, not including their Su∣perior, though he cannot be sent by their command, he may by their in treaty. So S. ChrysostomeIn cap 11 ep. ad Gal. sayth, Paul
was sent to Hierusalem by the Christians of Antioch, who yet were not his Superiors. So the Deane is sometymes sent by the Canons, and the Rector by the Collegialls. So was Pope Pi the second sent by the Colledge of Cardinals, about an expedition intended against the Turkes: and (as Bozius obsernethDe fig. Eccles. to. 2. l. 18. c. 2. §. Quocirca. the Roman Emperors were often sent by the Senate. Nor doth such a mission any way extenuate, but rather manifest the authority of such Missionants: for per∣sons of greatest quality are fittest to be employed vpon weighty affaires, especially when they import the publike good, as this Mission of Peter and Iohn did: for Philip the Deacon hauing conuerted the Samaritans to Christ, these two great Apostles were sent to oppose the wicked practi∣ses of Simon Magus, by whom the Samaritans had bene long seduced, and to confirme them in their fayth, giuing them the holy Ghost by imposition of hands; a thing, which Philip (though otherwise a most perfect man, and full of the holy Ghost, yet being no Bishop) was not able to doe, that being a function proper to Bishops. To this you haue no other reply to make, then tell vs, that a iourney vnder∣take by a Gouernor, at the desire and request of his inferiors, can∣not be called a mission, but a profection and going. An answere, that serues for nothing, but to discouer your ignorance: for the same iorney is both a going and a mission: a going, as it is performed by him that vndertakes the iorney; and a mission, as it proceeds from those that sent him: euen as the same lesson is both doctrina, and disciplina; doctrina, as it is de∣liuered by the Maister that teacheth; and disciplina, as it is re∣ceaued by the Scholler that learneth; and as in Philosophy the same production is called Actio, as it proceeds from the Agent, & Passio, as it is receaued in the subiect. And to say, that the sending of Iohn with Peter, argueth Iohn to be e∣quall in authority with Peter, is a great Non sequitur, as if you should argue a Chanon to be of equall authority with the Deane, or a Cardinall with the Pope, if they be sent togeather.
CHAP. XI. Sleights, and falsifications of Doctor Mor∣ton, to shift off the testimonies of Ancient Fathers, teaching S. Peters supremacy. BELLARMINE to proue S. Peters pri∣macy ouer the other Apostles, produceth conuincing testimonies of many Fa∣thers, both Greeke and LatinL. 1 de Pont. c. 25.. These you vndertake to answer, or rather to elude by diuers sleights. Some of them, as being so cleare, that you knew not how to deuise any answer vnto them, you wholly omit, without any mention of them, as of S. Prosper, Arator, and Aetherianus. Others you mention, as of S. Leo the great, of S. Gregory, of Venerable Bede, and S. Bernard, but put them of with deuises. We pretermit (sayPag. 50. marg. n. 20. you) the testimony of Pope Leo, wherof reason is giuen hereafter: but wheras Bellarmine alleageth two vnanswerable testimonies of S. Leo, you are so far from giuing any reason of them, that (for ought I can find) you neuer after mention eyther of them. The testimo∣nies of Bede, and S. Bernard you reiect, as not truly ancient: wheras Bede liued almost 1000. and S. Bernard aboue 500. yeares since. But the true reason indeed why you reiect them, is not want of antiquity, but because they clearely conuince your Doctrine of falshood. For when S. Ber∣nard, the later of these two, hath any thing which by mis∣interpreting his meaning or falsifying, you can wrest to your purpose (as afterwards you do)Pag. 170. & 182. S. Bernard is ancient
inough. S. Gregory you shift of, promising to speake of him largely afterwards. S. Gregory did disclaime from the title of Vniuersall Bishop, in that sense in which Iohn Pa∣triarch of Constantinople did arrogate the same to him∣selfe. Of this indeed you treate at largePag. 92. & seqq.: but his testimo∣nie which Bellarmine vrgeth in proofe of S. Peters pasto∣rall power ouer the whole Church, you neither answere, nor so much as mention afterwards. 3. Bellarmine citeth out of Eusebius his Chronicon, these words: Petrus natione Galilaeus, Christianorum Pontifex pri∣mus. Peter a Galilean borne, the first chiefe Bishop of Christians. He sayth not, Peter the first Bishop of the Romans, as in the same place he sayth. Iames the first of Hierusalem, and Euodius the first Bishop of Antioch, but, Peter the first chief Bishop of Christians: which differēce of expression she weth, that wheras Iames and Euodius were Bishops of two particular Dioceses, Pe∣ter was the Bishop of all Christians. This is one of the te∣stimonies of Eusebius alleaged by Bellarmine, which you conceale, without giuing any answer vnto it, though you name the place, out of which he alleageth it. The second is out of Eusebius his history, which you are contented to mention, that you may pick a quarrell against Bellarmine: for you say,Pag. 49. marg. he miscites the Chapter, the 14. for the 13. But by desiring to carpe, you discouer your ignorance: for in the different versions of Eusebius, the Chapters are differently diuided: and though the passage which Bellarmine citeth, be in the 13. Chapter according to the version of Christo∣phorson, yet in that of Ruffinus, which he followeth, it is in the 14. as he cites it. And wheras Eusebius there calleth Peter Reliquorum omnium Apostolorum Principem. The Prince of all the other Apostles, you answere, That it is with this restriction. omitted by Bellarmine, , for his singular vertues sake. But what doth this omission auaile your cause. or hurt ours? The Fathers agree in this, that when Christ promised to make Peter the foundation of his Church, it was for that excellent confession of his Diuinity, and in reward therof, as hath bene prouedAboue Nu 11.: and so like∣wise when he actually conferred on him the dignity of su∣preme
Pastor, it was a reward of his feruent loue. But doth it follow, that because this supereminent dignity was pro∣mised to Peter, and conferred on him for his singular ver∣tues, it was nor therfore a primacy of Magistracy, and iurisdi∣ction, but of order only? Is not the office of Pastor of Christs flock an office of Magistracy and iurisdiction? but such are the ans∣wers, which you giue to insoluble arguments; & yet shame not to charge Bellarmine with vnconscionable dealing, in vrging this place of Eusebius against you. 4. He vrgeth S. Gregory Nazianzen saying: Vides &c. You see how among the Disciples of Christ, all truly great, and high, and worthy to be chosen; this (to wit Peter) is called a Rock, and hath the foundations of the Church committed to his charge: And he (that is Iohn) is loued more, and reposeth on the brest of our Lord; and the other-disciples did not take it in ill part, that these were pre∣ferred before them. These are the words of Nazianzen: and these very words Bellarmine truly and punctually setteth downe; whom therfore you vniustly traducePag. 49. marg. as depra∣uing Nazianzen; whose words as he corrupteth not, so neither doth he peruert his sense: for out of them it is eui∣dent, that as Christ preferred Iohn, by louing him more then the rest, so in far higher degree he preferred Peter be∣fore them, and before Iohn also. For who seeth not that Nazianzen acknowledgeth a far greater dignity in Peter, then in Iohn, or any other of the Apostles, when he sayth that, Christ called Peter a Rock, and committed to his charge the foundations of the Church? for that is to say, that he made him Head, and Gouernor therof, it being a knowne truth, that the foundation in a building, is the same that the Head in a politicall body: from whence it is, that the famous Coun∣cell of ChalcedonAct. 3. calleth Peter, The foundation of true fayth, and the rock and top of the Catholike Church, which is a far greater dignity, then to leane on Christs brest, or any o∣ther that was conferred on Iohn, or any of the other Apo∣stles. 5. BellarmineL. 1. de Pont. c. 25. vrgeth 3. testimonies out of S. Au∣gustines workes. The second you passe ouer without any answer to it, or mention of it. The third you reiect, as
taken out of a booke, which Bellarmine himselfe and o∣thers acknowledge not to be S. Augustins, but of an here∣ticall Author. Bellarmine (I grant) confesseth the booke not to be S. Augustines, and therfore he citeth it not, as of S. Augustine: he granteth also, that the author erred in some particulars, which he expresseth: but because in this matter of S. Peters Supremacy, he was neuer taxed of error, but a∣greeth with the rest of the Fathers, his testimony was not to be contemned; especially being so forcible, as youPag. 52. confesse it to be. But be it whose you will; with what face can you reiect it? For do you not produce against vs two other testimonies of the same booke, affirmingPag. 30. & 286. S. Augustine himselfe to be the author of them? This Dilemma wil discouer your dealing: either the book is S. Augustins, or it is not. If it be not S. Augustines, why do you in other places vrge it against vs, as of S. Augustine? If it be S. Au∣gustines, why do you here deny it to be his, and reiect it as hereticall, when we vrge it against you? Is not this shuf∣ling? Shall it be S. Augustines, and of force, when you vrge it against vs? & shall it not only not be S. Augustines, but hereticall when we vrge it against you? but such dea∣ling suiteth best with a Grand Imposture. The third testimony which Bellarmine alleageth of S. Augustine is out of his second booke of Baptisme against the Donatists, where hauing said, that the primacy of the Apo∣stles doth singularly excell in Peter, he addeth: I thinke that Cyprian Bishop▪ without any affront, is compared to Peter the Apostle▪ for as much as concernes the glory of Martyrdome: but I rather ought to feare, lest I be contumelious to Peter: for who knoweth not, that that Princedome of Apostleship, is to be preferred before whatsoeuer Bishop∣rick? To this you answere,Pag. 49. marg. fin. That Primatus Apostolorum signifieth nothing els. but, Munus Apostolicum, the Apostolicall function, and that is most illustrious in Peter. But your answere is deficient▪ for to say that the primacy of the Apostleship singu∣larly excelled in Peter, is not only to say, that Peter was an A∣postle, but that he was Primate and Prince of the Apostles, and that his primacy contained a singular preeminence of dig∣nity belonging to him, which was not in any of the other
Apostles: and this dignity it was, that made him more illu∣strious then the rest. Againe wheras S. Augustine said, he had cause to feare, lest he might affront S. Peter in comparing Cyprian the Martyr vnto him, because that Princedome of Apostleship (which was in Peter) exceeded all Bishopricks: you answerePag. 50. marg. that in these words there is only a comparison betweene Peters Apostleship and Cyprians Bishoprick, and that no Protestant will de∣ny that the Apostleship, though of Barnabas, was more ex∣cellent, then the Bishoprick although of Linus. This ans∣were is not to the purpose: for S. Augustine compares not the Apostleship in generall with Cyprians Bishoprick, but in particular, illum Apostolatus principatum, that Princedome, or Soueraignty of the Apostleship, which was peculiar to Peter, as to Head and Prince of all the Apostles. Nor is it true, that S. Augustine only compareth Peters Apostleship with Cyprians Bisho∣prick: he compares Peters Bishoprick with Cyprians Bishop∣prick, Peters Chayre with Cyprians Chayre; & (which you cunningly leaue out both in your english, and Latin) ac∣knowledgeth, that distal cathdrarum gratia, etsi vna sit Marty∣rum gloria, that albeit the glory of Martyrdome be alike in them both, yet there is distance betwene the Dignity of their chayres: and by reason of this distance, S. Augustine sayth, he hath cause to feare, lest he wrong Peter, in making any comparison betwene Cy∣prians chayre, and his chayre: for though Cyprian were Pri∣mate of all Africa, yet Peter was Bishop, and Gouernor of the Vniuersall Church: a dignity no way belonging to Cyprian, or any other Bishop, or Apostle whatsoeuer. With shifts not vnlike to these you elude the testimonies of S. Cyprian, S. Hierome and other Fathers, who (as you confesse)Pag. 50. iit. call Peter sometymes Prince, Head, and Captayne of all the Apostles; somtymes Chiefe Priest of the Christians, Captayne of Gods hoast, Pastor and foundation of the whole Church, and, One to whom the guydance and presidence of the vniuersall Church is com∣mitted. To these their testimonies you answerePag. 50. med. that they argue not any primacy of authority and iurisdiction ouer the other Apostles, or ouer the whole Church, but of Order only. This distin∣ction you often vse, to shift of the authorities of Fathers, when you are pressed with them. By Primacy of Order, you
vnderstand priority of place and of voyce, as afterwardsPag. 110. you declare. But whatsoeuer you vnderstand, sure I am, that an∣cient Fathers by the primacy of Peter vnderstand not only priority of place, and of voyce, but true power, and iurisdi∣ction ouer the other Apostles, and ouer the whole Church, and so it is apparent by the very names which they vse to expresse his primacy, as, of Prince, Head, and Captayne of all the Apostles, Pastor, and President of the vniuersall Church: for hath not the Prince in his territories authority, and iurisdiction? hath he not power to commād his subiects, to make lawes, to punish offendors? In a City, hath not the Head (which is the Magistrate) power and authority ouer the Citizens? Hath not a Captayne the command of his soldiers? and the Pastor power to rule his flock? wherfore since with the Fathers you confesse, that Peter is Prince, Head, and Captayne of all the Apostles, Pastor, and foundation of the whole Church, and that the guydance, and presidence of the vniuersall Church is commit∣ted to him, either you vnderstand not what you say, or els you grant that Peter hath not only primacy of Order, but of authority, power, & cōmand ouer the Apostles & ouer the whole Church, as a Prince hath ouer his subiects, a Cap∣taine ouer his souldiers, a Maior ouer the Citizens, and a shepheard ouer his flock. And what els is it that S. Chryso∣stome teacheth, sayingHom. in B. Ignat.: that Peter was the Superintendent of the whole world; that to him Christ consigned the keyes of the king∣dome of Heauen, and committed the disposition of all things. AndOrat. 5. ad∣uers. Iud. that Peter was made chiefe of the Apostles, and had the whole world in subiection: andHom. 80. ad pop. Au∣tioch. that, Christ deliuered to him the gouerment of the Church throughout the whole world. What els did S. Maxi∣mus meane when he saidHom. 3. in Natali Apost. Pet. & Pauli. Peter was of so great merit in the sight of Christ, that after the rowing of a small boat, the gouerment of the whole Church was put into his hands? What ArnobiusAd Psal. 138., pronouncing that, Peter is Bishop of Bishops, and that Christ gaue to him, and to no other of the Apostles, his owne name of Shepheard, and togeather which the name, that power which he alone had, to to wit, of being Pastor of his whole flock? what els S. Cyril sayingIn l. the∣sau. apud S. Thom. Opuse. 1. that, as Christ receaued of his Father the scepter of the Church ouer all Princedome, and most full power ouer all, that all
be subiect vnto him; so also he committed the same power to Peter and his Successors: and that what was his, he fully committed to P∣ter, and to none els, but to him alone? what S. Leo affirmingSer 3. d Assamp. sua. that, albeit in Gods people there be many Priests, and many Pastors, yet Peter gouerneth them all, as Christ also doth principally rule them? what Euthymius and TheophilactIn c. 21. Ioan. that, Christ commit∣ted to Peter the charge and gouerment of his flock throughout the whole world? what OecumeniusAdc. 1. Act. that, the gouerment of the Disciples was committed to Peter? what S. BernardL. 2. de confiderat., that, eue∣ry one of the other Apostles receaued their seuerall ships; but that Pe∣ter receaued the gouerment of the whole world, and that to him was committed grandissima nauis, that maruelous great ship, to wit, the vniuersall Church spread ouer the whole world: and that to him the pastorall charge of the whole Church was committed? Finally, and what S. Eucherius that ancient Bishop of Lyons sayingIn vigil. S. Pet. Extat in Bibliothee. Pat. edit. Co∣lon. to. 5. par. 1 pag. 712. that, Christ first committed to Peter his lambes, and then his sheep; because he made him not only a Pastor, but Pastor of Pastors. Peter therfore (sayth he) feedeth the lambes, and the sheep: he feedeth the yong ones, and the dammes: he gouerneth the subiects, and the Prelates, and is therfore Pastor of all: for besyde lambes, and sheep, there is no∣thing in the Church. What thinke you Doctor Morton? do these Fathers ac∣knowledge in Peter no other primacy, but of order? Can there be any thing more cleare, then that they belieue him to haue authority, power, and iurisdiction ouer the whole Church, as President, and Gouernor therof? were these men of your beliefe? But you obiectPag. 51.: Iames and Iohn (whom S. Paulcalleth chiefe Apostles) S. Chrysostome interpreteth Princes; & Oecumenius Heads: Ergo, they were also Gouernors ouer the other Apostles, and Monarkes ouer the whole Church, or els Peter was not. How followeth this? In the Empyre there are many Princes, Ferdinand the Em∣peror and many others: Ergo they are all equall to Ferdi∣nand, and all Emperors, or els Ferdinand is no Emperor. In the kingdome of Naples there are many Heads, the Vi∣ceroy, and the Gouernors of diuers Prouinces, and Cities: ergo these Heads are all equall in authority, & haue power ouer the whole kingdome, or els the Viceroy hath not.
These consequences are absurd; and yours is no lesse. It is true, that ech of the Apostles are Princes ouer the whole earth by reason of their Apostolicall power: but as Bishops they are only Heads of their seuerall flocks, and therfore in iurisdiction not equall to Peter. Paul, Andrew and Iohn (sayth S. GregoryL. 4. epist. 38. what are they but Heads of seuerall flocks? but Pe∣ter is the chiefe member of the holy and vniuersall Church. And S. BernardL. 2. de considerat.: Iames contented with the Bishopricke of Hierusalem, yeldes the vniuersality to Peter. And againe speaking to Euge∣nius Pope of his authority receaued from S. PeterIbid., Thou alone art Pastor of all Pastors. Dost thou aske how I proue this? By the words of our Lord: for to which (I will not say) of the Bishops, but euen of the Apostles, were all the sheep so absolutely, and without ex∣ception committed? If thou louest me Peter, feed my sheep: what sheep? the people of this, or that City, or countrey, or kingdome? he sayth, My sheep: who seeth not manifestly that he designed not some, but assig∣ned all? Nothing is excepted, where no distinction is made. And so likewise the other title, Prince of all the Apostles, is an attribute which agreeth not to Iames, nor to Iohn, nor to any other of the Apostles: for though Iames & Iohn be chiefe Apostles, and Princes in respect of that transcen∣dent authority which as Apostles they had from Christ, to preach, and ordaine Bishops throughout the whole world, yet neither the one, nor the other, is, nor euer is called seue∣rally by himselfe, Prince of all the Apostles, as Peter is. And so likewise. when Peter and Paul togeather, are called Princi∣pes Apostolorum, Princes of the Apostles, it is not in respect of any authority and iurisdiction common to them both, ouer all the other Apostles, but in respect of their great labors in preaching and propagating the fayth of Christ: for when there is speach of the extent of their authority, and iurisdi∣ction, Paul seuerally by himselfe is neuer called Prince of the Apostles, as Peter is. All the Apostles being silent (saythCathc. 11. S. Cyril of Hierusalem) Peter Prince of the Apostles sayth &c. And S. EphremSerm. de Transfigu. Dom.: As Moyses by the commandment of God was Prince of the congregation of the Hebrewes, so is Peter of the Church of the Christians. And as Moyses was Prince of the old testament, so is Peter of the new. And CassianusL. 3. de In¦carnat. c. 12.: Let vs aske that chiefe Dis∣ciple
amongst the Disciples, and Mayster amongst Maysters, which gouerning the Roman Church, as he had the Princedome of fayth, so likewise of Priesthood. Speake therfore and tell vs, O Peter, Prince of the Apostles &c. In which words Peter is called Prince of the Apostles, because he was the chiefe among them, and had the soueraignty of Episcopall, and Sacerdotall dignity aboue the rest. But by the way I must aduertise you of your abusing S. Ambrose and S. Cyprian. In your MargenPag. 10: you obiect certaine words of S. Ambrose in Latine; and comming to english them in your text, you set downe in lieu of them others of your owne, in a different character, as of S. Am∣brose, which neither are his, nor of the same sense with his, as the iudicious reader will perceaue, if he compare S. Am∣brose his Latin, with your English. With S. Cyprian you deale in the same manner, for you make him say, that, Christ before his resurrection did build his Church vpon Peter: An igno∣rance, of which S. Cyprian was not guilty. He sayth, that, Christ speaking to Peter said: vpon this Rock I will build my Church: which words he spake before his resurrection, and they containe no more, but a promise of building his Church v∣pon Peter, for the future: which promise he fulfilled not, vntill after his resurrection, when he gaue to Peter the actuall charge of feeding his lambes, and his sheepIoan. 21.16.17.. Nor doth S. Cyprian contradict this, in the words which you obiect; to wit, that, Christ after his resurrection gaue equall power to all the Apostles saying: As my Father sent me, so I send you: receaue yee the holy Ghost &c. For by these words he gaue to them all, e∣quall authority to preach throughout the world, to reueale matters of fayth, assurance of infallibility to make canoni∣call Scriptures, to institute the first mission of Pastors, to re∣mit sinnes, to giue the holy Ghost, and the like. In this sense, he sayth: The Apostles were the same that Peter, endowed with like fellowship of honor and power, to wit, in the exercise of these A∣postolicall functions ouer the faythfull, to whom he sent them. But S. Cyprian sayth not, that Christ made all the Apostles equall among themselues, exempting them from the iurisdiction of S. Peter in the manner of exercising this
power. Nor is it true: for he gaue it thē with subordination to him, as to their Superior. Peter (sayth S. LeoSerm. . in Aniuers. suae Assumpt. is preferred before all the Apostles: & if Christ would haue them to haue any thing common with him; he gaue it them not, but by him, And this is de∣clared, and the reason therof yelded by Optatus, & S. Hie∣rome; and by S. Cyprian himselfe in that very place, which you obiect for the contrary. In the Episcopall chayre (sayth OptatusL.  cont. Parmn. was set the Head of all the Apostles. Peter, from whence he was also called Cephas, to the end, that in this only chayre, Vnity might be preserued in all; and that the other Apostles might not chal∣lenge to themselues ech one a seuerall chayre; but that he might be a Schismatike, and a sinner, that against this only Chayre should erect another. The Church (sayth S. HieromeL. 1. ad∣uers. louin. c. 14., is built vpon Peter: & though els where it be also built vpon the rest, yet among the twelue, one is chosen, to the end that a Head being made, occasion of Schisme might be taken away. And S. CyprianL. de vnit. Eccles.: Christ, to manifest vnity, constituted one chayre, and ordayned the originall of Vnity, be∣ginning from one, giuing the primacy to Peter, that so one Church of Christ, and one chayre might be manifested. And then declaring you, that haue forsaken this originall of Vnity (S. Peters Chayre, on which the Church is built) to haue lost the fayth, and to be out of the Church, he addoth: He that kee∣peth not this vnity of the Church, doth he belieue himselfe to hold the fayth? he that resisteth the Church, he that forsaketh the chaire of Pe∣ter, on which the Church is built, doth he thinke himselfe to be in the Church? So S. Cyprian, equalling you with the Nouatians, for your disclayming from the Church of Peter.
CHAP. XII. The authority of the Roman Church in her definitions of fayth, proued to be infallible. HAVING in vayne shot your darts at S. Peter, to dethrone him from the height of Authority in which Christ hath pla∣ced him, you come now to try their force, against the Bishop of Rome his Successor; whose authority in his defini∣tions of fayth you hold to be fallible. SECT. I. Our first Argument. THat the authority of the Bishop of Rome in his defi∣nitions of fayth is infallible, we proue out of the words of Christ, spoken to S. PeterLuc. 12.32.: I haue prayed for thee, Peter, that thy fayth faile not, and thou being once conuerted, con∣firme thy Brethren. There is no man so voyd of vnderstanding (sayth Leo the 9. speakingEp. ad Mi∣chael. Impr. of this prayer) that can thinke Christs prayer (whose will is his power) to haue bene inefficacious: which the Apostle allso teacheth, sayingHeb. 5.7. ; he was heard for his reuerence. And for this prayer in particular Christ himselfe signifieth so much, saying, I haue prayed for thee: for what would his prayer haue auayled Peter, if he had not obtay∣ned for him what he asked? Or how cold his brethren haue any assurance of their confirmation in fayth from Peter, if Peter could haue error; proposing vnto them falshood for
truth? Againe, that Christ in these words prayed not in me∣diatly for the whole Church, nor for all the Apostles, but for Peter alone, appeareth in this, that he expressed one sin∣gular person, saying: Simon, Smon (for in the Greeke it is twice repeated) and added the pronounce of the second per∣son; I haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth fayle not, and thou being once conuerted, confirme thy brethren. That Christ prayed not for the other Apostles, you grantPag. 53., and take this for a ground to proue, that, he prayed for Peter only, and not for Cle∣ment, Vrban, or any other of his Successors in the Roman See. But your argument proueth nothing: for Christ had formerly obtayned the personall perseuerance of Peter and the rest, when he said:Ioan. 17.9. & seqq. for them I do pray &c. Holy Father keep them in my name &c. I pray not, that thou take them out of the world, but that thou preserue them from euill: And therfore this prayer for Peters not fayling in fayth, was not made for him, in the person of a priuat man, and without relation to his office of Supreme Pastor, but as for a publike person, that is, as for the Head of the Apostles, and Gouernor of the whole Church, and consequently for his See, and all his Succes∣sors in the same See: for as that supreme dignity of Head, & Gouernor of the vniuersall Church was not to dye with Peter, but to descend by him to his Successors; so the effect of this prayer of Christ, being a prerogatiue obtayned for Peter, by reason of his office, was to descend to Clement, to Vrban, and to whosoeuer hath hitherto, or shall hereafter succeed him in the same office: euen as whatsoeuer prero∣gatiue is granted to a Vice-Roy, as Vice-Roy, and as be∣longing to his office, is consequently granted to all his Suc∣cessors in the same office. But you obiectPag. 54., that this priuiledge cannot agree to Peters Successors, because, Salas the Iesuit teacheth, that a per∣sonall and singular priuiledge is that which is granted to an indiui∣duall person with expression of his name: and therfore doth not extend to any other, but dyeth with the person to whom it is granted. You vnderstand not Salas: for he calleth a personall priuiledge, that, which is granted to an indiuiduall person, as he is a piuat person only, for his owne particular good, & not by
reason of any publike office, for the good and benefit of the community: for if it be granted to him, as to a publike per∣son, by reason of his office, as this was to S. Peter, as to the Head of the Church, and for the common good of the Church, though his name be neuer so much expressed in it, it is not a personall, but a commonSee Bona∣cina Com∣pend. v. Priui∣leg., or as SuarezL. 7. de leg. c. 3. n. 23. from whom Salas learned his Doctrine, de legibus) call's it, A reall priuiledge: which he confirmeth with the example of a pri∣uiledge, that being granted to a certaine Bishop in the Ca∣non law with expression of his name, is notwithstanding supposed to passe to his Successors. Now that this prayer of Christ, was not made for Peter as for a priuate, but as for a publike person, that was supreme Head and Gouern or of the Church, and consequently for the common good and benefit of the Church, & that ther∣fore by vertue therof the Popes his Successors haue an in∣fallible prerogatiue of not erring in their publike defini∣tions of fayth to the seducing of others, is the agreeing con∣sent of the ancient Fathers in their expositions of this pas∣sage of S. Luke. And 1. three holy Popes in their epistles: Lucius the first, to the Bishops of Spayne and France, Felix the first, to Be∣nignus; and Marke to S. Athanasius, out of this prayer of Christ made for S. Peter, gather the infallibility of the Ro∣man Church in her definitions of fayth. But because Pro∣testants hold for suspected the authority of these epistles, I omit them, and passe to such as by Protestants are granted to be vndoubtedly of those Popes, to whom they are attri∣buted. 2. Therfore Agatho a most holy Pope, and whom God graced with Miracles, in his Epistle to the Em∣perorExtat Act. 4. A∣pud Bin. to. 3. pag. 12. Constantine Pogonat (which was read in the sixt generall Councell, and approuedAct. 8. & 18. as the sug∣gestion of the holy Ghot, dictated by the mouth of the holy, and most blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, speaking by Agatho) sayth: Our Lord promised, that the fayth of Peter should not faile, and commanded him to strengthen his brethren: which, that the Popes my Apostolicall predecessors haue euer performed, is a thing
notorious to all. This testimony sheweth that not only Aga∣tho, but all the Fathers of that Councell belieued this pri∣uiledge of not erring in sayth, and confirming others to haue bene obtained by Christ not only for S. Peter, but for all his Successors; and that this is a truth suggested by the holy Ghost, and dictated by S. Peter speaking by Agatho. 3. S. Gregory:L. 6. ep. 37. Who is ignorant that the holy Church is strengthned by the solidity of the Prince of the Apostles, who in his name receaued the constancy of his mind, being called Peter of a Rock, to whom by the voyce of truth, it is said, Confirme thy Brethren. And els whereL. 4. ep. 3. he proueth, against Iohn Patriarke of Con∣stantinople, the authority of the Bishop of Rome ouer the vniuersall Church, by the Commission giuen to S. Peter his predecessor: It is manifest to all such as know the Ghospell, that the charge of the whole Church is committed to the Apostle Peter Prince of all the Apostles: for to him it is said; Feed my sheepe. And so him it is said, I haue prayed for thee Peter, that thy fayth fayle not▪ & thou being once conuerted, confirme thy Brethren. Which testimony conuinceth tha Christ prayed not for S. Peter as for a pri∣uate person, bu as for the Head of his Church, and conse∣quently for his Successors in him. 4. S. Leo the greatSerm. 2. de Natali Apost. Petri & Pau∣li.: The danger of tentation was com∣mon to all the Apostles & they all equally needed the protection of Gods help: but our Lord taketh a speciall care of Peter, and prayeth pecu∣liarly for his fayth, that the state of all the rest might be more secure, if the mind of the Chiefe were not corquered. The strength then of all is fortified in Peter, God so dispensing the ayde of his grace; that the assurance and strength which Christ gaue to Peter might by him redound to the Apostles. And he addeth, that, as Peer confirmed the Apostles, so it is not to be doubted, but that still he affordeth his help to his Successors in the Roman chayre, and as a pious Pastor confir∣meth them with his admonitions, and ceaseth not to pray for them &c. 5. Leo the ninthEp. ad Mi∣chael. Imper. c. 7.: The false deuises of all heretikes haue bene reproued, confuted, and condemned by the See of the Prince of the Apostles, which it the Roman Church, and the hartes of the Bre∣thren strengthned in the fayth of Peter, which hath not fayled hither∣to, nor shall euer fayle hereafter. And the same sense of these
words of Christ, is deliuered by Nicolas the firstEp. ad Michael. Imp., and Innocentius the thirdIn Cap. Maior. de Bap.. If you answere, that these testimonies are of Popes spea∣king in their owne cause; I reply, that they speake in the cause of God, and his Church, and are worthy of all credit, both because they were men most eminent in learning, & sanctity; as also because in this exposition they agree with the Fathers both of the sixth generall Councell, and the rest: for S. Ambrose saythAd ca. 22. Luc.: Behold what our Lord said, and vn∣derstand it: Peter is sifted; he fall's into tentations, but after his tenta∣tion, is made Gouernor of the Church: and therfore our Sauiour be∣fore hand signifieth, why afterwards he chose him to be Pastor of his flock; for he said vnto him, And thou being once conuerted, confirme thy brethren. You see then, that in S. Ambrose his iudgment, Christ prayed for Peter, as for the Pastor of his flock, and that, for Peter to confirme his brethren, is to performe the office of Pastor, and Gouernor of the Church: which office, as it was no lesse necessary afterwards then in S. Peters tyme, so it descended from him to his Successors. A truth, which Theodorus Studites with other his bre∣thren being pressed with the outragious persecutions of eretikes, professe in their epistle to Paschalis Pope, in these words:Apud Baron. anno 817. Heare O Apostolicall Head, made by God Pa∣stor of his sheep, porter of the kingdome of Heauen, and Rock of the fayth, vpon whom the Catholike Church is built: for thou art Peter adorning and gouerning the See of Peter. Christ our God said to thee; And thou being once conuerted, confirme thy brethren. Behold now the tyme, behold the place; ayde vs &c. Thou hast power from God, because thou art Prince of all: fright away the hereticall wild beasts &c. And TheophilactAd cap. 22. Luc. expounding the same words: The plaine sense of them is this: because I hold thee as Prince of my Disci∣ples, when thou (after thou hast denied me) shalt weep, and come to repentance, confirme the rest; for this becometh thee, that next to me art the Rock and fortresse of the Church. And we may vnderstand it not to be spoken of the Apostles only, but of all the faythfull that shall be till the end of the world. Which addition of Theophilact sheweth, that this priuiledge giuen to Peter of not failing
in fayth, and confirming his brethren, was not personall, but belonging to his office, and descending with it to his Successors: for Peter in his owne person, was not to liue till the end of the world; and therfore not by himselfe, but by his Successors, to confirme the faythfull vntill the end of the world. The same truth is further proued out of an ancient Trea∣tise intituled, A dispute between the Church and the Synagogue, written by a learned Author, aboue 700. yeares since, in which it is saidCap. 19. art. 4.: Christ seemeth to haue defined, that the fayth of the Roman Church shall neuer faile, saying to Peter; I haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth faile not: for he foresaw, that Peter whose fayth he promised shold neuer faile, was to be Bishop of the Roman Church, and there to end his lyfe by Martyrdome. And what, I beseech you, are we to thinke him to haue signified to vs, but that, that Church especially whose Bishop Peter (the Head of all Churches after Christ) was to be shold alwayes remaine in the confession of one true fayth. To these I adde the testimony of Georgius Trapezuntius a learned Grecian, who explicating the same words of Christ, saythIn illud Ioan. Si eum volo manere &c.: In them, two great Mysteries are plainly expres∣sed: the first, that only the fayth of Peter & his Successors, that is to say, of the Roman Church, shall not fayle. The other, that the fayth of the rest shall sometimes fayle: Wherefore (sayth Christ) thou being once conuerted, confirme thy brethren. He said, Once, to shew that the Apostles being confirmed with the grace of the Holy Ghost none of them should erre; but that their Successors should; for whose confir∣mation Peter, that is to say his Successors, are commanded to be con∣uerted; which hath byn effectually performed: for the rest of the Chur∣ches of the world haue byn often confirmed by the Roman, but She ne∣uer by others. Finally S. Bernard writing to Pope Innocentius, and re∣quiring him to condemne the heresies of Abailardus, sub∣scribeth to the same exposition, sayingEp. 190.: It is fit that all dan∣gers & scandals arising in the kingdome of God, and chiefly those that concerne fayth, should be referred to your Apostleship: for I thinke it iust, that the ruines of fayth shold be repared there, where fayth can∣not fayle; for that is the prerogatiue of your See: for to what other was it euer said, I haue prayed for thee Peter, that thy fayth faile not: and
therfore what followeth, is required from Peters Successor: And thou being once conuerted, confirme thy brethren. It is tyme therfore (most ouing Father) that you show your zeale, repressing the corruptors of ayth. Out of these testimonies I inferre against you, that what∣soeuer Bellarmine in his Controuersies holdeth to the con∣traryL. 4. de Pont. c. 3., these words of Christ, I haue prayed for thee Peter &c. containe no priuiledge of Peter peculiar to his person, but a publike prerogatiue belonging to his office, and des∣cending to his Successors, as Bellarmine in a later workeApol. c. 14. §. Neque solum. expresly declareth. And therfore though out of them it cannot be proued, but that his Successors in their priuate Doctrine, or writing may erre, and fall into heresy; yet it followeth, that they neuer shall, nor can erre ex cathedra, that is, iudicially, in their Councels, Consistories, publike decrees or definitions of fayth made for the whole Church: for S. AugustineEpist. 16. truly sayth; The heauenly Mayster in the chayre of Vnity hath placed the Doctrine of verity, and secured his peo∣ple, that for euill Prelates they forsake not the chayre of holsome Do∣ctrine, in which chayre euen they that are ill men, are inforced to speake good things. There is then in the Church a chayre of holsome Doctrine, which is not the chaire in which Christ now sitteth in Heauen: for in that there sit no ill men, nor any other but himselfe. Nor is this Chayre, the chayre of euery Bishop; for euery Bishop is not inforced to speake truth: many haue bene heretikes and inuentors of heresies. Wherfore S. Augustine himselfe declareth this chayre of Vnity to be that, in which sitteth one Pastor, in whom all Pastors of the earth are one. I find (sayth he)L. de Pa∣stor. c. 13. all good Pa∣stors in one: for surely good Pastors are not wanting, but they are in one. They that are diuided, are many: here one is praysed, because vni∣ty is commended. This one chayre is none els but that of S. Peter: There is one chayre (sayth S. Cyprian)L. 1. ep. 8. founded vpon the Rock by the voyce of our Lord. and againe:Lib. de V∣nit. Eccles. Christ to ma∣nifest vnity constituted one chayre, and ordained the originall of this vnity, beginning from one, giuing the primacy to Peter, that so one Church of Christ, and one chayre might be manifested &c. He that keeps not this vnity doth he thinke himselfe to hold the fayth? In the
Episcopall chayre, sayth OptatusL. 2. contra Par∣men. was set Peter, the Head of all the Apostles, to the end, that in this only chayre vnity might be pre∣serued to all. From this priuiledge obtayned by Christ for S. Peter & his chayre, it proceedeth that the ancient Fathers haue not doubted to belieue and teach the infallibility of the Ro∣man Church in matters of fayth, as also from other grounds of Scripture to be declared hereafter. S. Cyprian speaking against the Nouatians, saythL. 1. Ep. 3.: They presumed to carry letters from Schismatikes, and heretikes, to the chayre of Peter, and the principall Church from whence Sacerdo∣tall vnity is deriued; not considering that the Romans are they whose fayth was praysed by the mouth of the Apostle, and to whom misbe∣liefe can haue no accesse. S. Basil writeth to Damasus PopeEpist. 69. per Sabinum Diac.: Surely that which is giuen by our Lord to your Holynesse, is worthy of that most excellent voyce, which proclamed you Blessed, to wit, that you may discerne bet∣weene what is counterfeit, and what is lawfull and pure, and that you may without any diminution preach the fayth of our ancestors. S. Ambrose writeth to Siricius PopeL. 10. ep. 31.: Whom your Ho∣linesse hath condemned know that we also hold them condemned ac∣cording to your iudgment. S. Hierome sayth to RuffinusL. 1. A∣pol. aduers. Ruffin.: Know thou, that the Roman fayth commended by the voyce of the Apostle, admitteth no such delusions, and that being fensed by S. Pauls authority, it cannot be altered though an Angell should teach otherwise. S. Augustine writing against the Pelagians, and hauing professed that the Bishop of Rome hath from the holy Scriptures authority to declare the true fayth and condem∣ne heresies, addethEpist. 157.: The Catholike fayth expressed in these words of the Apostolike See, is so ancient, so grounded, so certaine, & cleare, that it is great impiety for a Christian to doubt therof. S. Fulgentius saythDe incar∣nat. & grat. c. 11., that what the Roman Church tea∣cheth, the Christian world without hesitation belieues to iustice, and doubts not to confesse to saluation. S. Peter surnamed Chrysologus exhorteth Eutyches the arch-heretike thusEp. ad Eu∣tych. prafixa Act is Concil. Chalced.: We exhort thee reuerend brother, to lend an obedient eare to the letters of the most holy Pope of the Citty of
Rome, for as much as the blessed Peter who liues and rules in his owne seate, exhibits the true fayth to those that seeke it. I omit other te∣stimonies no lesse cleare of S. Cyrill, of Iohn, and Maxi∣mianus Patriarkes of Constantinople, of Venerable Bede, S. Maximus Martyr, Theodorus Studites, Rabanus, and o∣thers formerly alleagedChap. 1. sect. 4.. From this infallibility of the Roman Church it procee∣ded that the ancient Fathers and Councels for the decision of all doubts of fayth had euer recourse to the See of Rome, and that many learned and holy Doctors haue sent their writings to the Popes of their tyme to be examined by them, and approued if their Doctrine were found to be Orthodoxall, or reproued if it were erroneous. So did S. Augustine to Zozimus: the 4. Primates of Africa to Theo∣dorus: the Councells of Carthage and Mileuis to Innocen∣tius: S. Cyril to Celestine: Theodoret and the Councell of Chalcedon to Leo the great: S. Anselme to Vrbanus: S. Bernard to Innocentius. Other particulars I omit, hauing dwelled long in this point already. SECT. II. Our second Argument. AN other place of Scripture wherwith we proue the Roman Churches indefectibility in fayth, are the words of Christ, Math. 16. Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I wil build my Church▪ & the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. By the gates of hell Origen, S. Epiphanius, S. Hierome, S. Cyril, Rabanus, and all other expositors vnderstand, Here∣sies, and Arch-heretikes, by whom as by gates men descend into hell. And contrarily by Rock, they vnderstand S. Peter, and his Successors in the Roman See, against which here∣sies, and whatsoeuer persecutions raised by them, haue no more power to preuaile, then the furious waues of raging tempests against a Rock, firmely seated in the middest of the sea. They may beate, and breake themselues against it, but destroy it they cannot. And so experience teacheth: for howbeit the Heathnish persecutors and other enemies of Christ haue tried their forces against it, and all the other
Patriarchall Sees haue fallen into heresy, yet against the Roman Church (God protecting it) no persecutions, no errors haue preuailed, nor euer shall preuaile: for she, sayth S. AugustinePsal. cont. part. Donati. is the Rock which the proud gates of hell ouercome not. Neither against the Rockon which Christ builded his Church (sayth OrigenTract. 1. in Math. nor against the Church it selfe the gates of hell shall preuaile. Vpon this Rock (sayth S. HieromeEp. 57. speaking of the Roman See to Damasus) I know the Church to be built: he that gathereth els where, scattereth. Our Lord (sayth S. Epipha∣niusIn An∣corato. made Peter, the chiefe of the Apostles, a strong Rock, vpon whom the Church of God is built; and the gates of hell which are heresies and Arch-heretikes shall not preuaile against it: for the fayth is euery way fortified in him. S. Chrysostome saythHom. 55. in Math.: Our Sauiour promised to Peter power to forgiue sinnes, & that the Church hauing for her Pastor, and Head, a poore fisherman, shold amongst the assalts of so many raging flouds, remaine immoueable, and more firme∣ly fixed and setled, then the strongest Rock. S. Cyril explicating the same words of our Sauiour saythApud S. Thom. in Ca∣tena ad c. 16. Math.: According to this promise of our Lord, the Apostolicall Church of Peter perseuereth in her Bishops pure, and free from all se∣duction and circumuention, aboue all Prelates and Bishops, and aboue all Primates of Churches, and people, in the fayth and authority of Peter. And wheras other Churches haue bene stayned with the errors of some, she alone remaines established firmely, and vnconquerably, si∣lencing, and stopping the mouthes of all heretikes. Possessor a famous African Bishop, and banished by the Arians, consulting Hormisdas Pope, about the Doctrine of Faustus Rhegiensis, yeldeth this reasonExtat E∣pistola apud Baron. Anno 520.: It is expedient to haue recourse to the head, as often as the health of the members is trea∣ted of: for who hath a more solicitous care of his subiects, or from whom is the resolution of fayth when it is questioned, to be required, but from the President of that See, whose first Rector heard from Christ, Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. S. Leo the great:Serm. 2. de sua assump. The solidity of that fayth which was pray∣sed in the prince of the Apostles, is perpetuall: and as that remaines, which Peter belieued, so remaineth that also, which Christ instituted in Peter. Wherfore the disposition of truth remaineth, and Peter per∣seuering
in the strength of a Rock, hath not left the gouerment of the Church, which he once vndertooke. S. Maximianus an ancient Patriarke of Constantinople higly commended by Celestine PopeEp. ad Theodosium., and othersApud Spond. anno 431. n. 22., writeth to the Orientalls: All the bounds of the earth haue sin∣cerely acknowledged our Lord; and Catholikes throughout the whole world, professing the true fayth, looke vpon the power of the B. of Rome, as vpon the Sunne: And then speaking of the reward, which our Sauiour gaue to Peter, for that excellent confes∣sion of his fayth, he addeth: For the Creator of the world amongst all men of the world, chose S. Peter, to whome he gaue the chayre of Doctor, to be principally possessed, by a perpetuall right of priuiledge, to the end, that whosoeuer is desirous to know any diuine and profound thing, may haue recourse to the oracle, and doctrine of this instruction. Iustinian the Emperor maketh this profession of his fayth to Bonifacius PopeExtat in∣ter decreta Bonif. Papae.: The beginning of saluation is to conserue the rule of right fayth, & no way to swarue from the tradi∣tion of our fore-Fathers; because the words of our Lord cannot faile, saying. Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock &c. And the proofes of deeds haue made good those words, because in the See Apostolike the Catholike Religion is always conserued inuiolable. And the same profession was made by Iohn Patriarke of Constantinople to Hormisdas PopeIn epist. ad Hormisd., abiuring the memory of all such, as dye out of the Communion of the Roman Church, or a∣gree not in all things fully with her. S. GregoryL. 6. ep. 37.: Who knoweth not, that the holy Church is strengthned by the solidity of the Prince of the Apostles, who with his name receaued the constancy of his minde, being called Peter, of a Rock to whom by the voyce of truth it is said, I will giue thee the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen? S. Maximus a famous Martyr, the greatest Diuine of his age, and a stout Champion of the Church against the Mo∣nothelitesEpist. ad Marin. Diac. Apud Spond. Anno 657. n. 2.: All the Churches of Christians had their beginning, and surest foundation from the Roman Church, against which the gates of hell shall no way preuaile, according to the promise of our Sa∣uiour himselfe, that she should haue the keyes of Orthodoxe fayth and confession, and open to them that come to her religiously seeking true piety, and contrarily shut and stop all hereticall mouthes, that breath out iniquity against heauen.
Theodorus Studites a man very famous for his learning, and constancy in defending the Catholike fayth, writing togeather with other his Colleagues to Paschalis PopeEp. ad Pas∣hal. & ep. ad Naucrat. calleth him, Porter of the kingdome of Heauen, and Rock of the fayth, vpon whom the Catholike Churches built; And the Roman See, The supreme throne in which Christ hath placed the keyes of fayth, against whom the gates of hell, which are the mouthes of Here∣tikes, haue neuer preuailed, nor shall euer preuaile, according to the promise of our Lord which cannot faile. To these testimonies I adde others of Theodoret and Gelasius alleaged by BellarmineL. 4. de Pont. c. 3., which make vp more then a full Iury, to pronounce you guilty of a so∣lemne vntruth, in denyingPag. 55. that, what was here spoken to Peter, doth accordingly belong to the Pope, by the right of Succession: for you haue heard the Fathers teaching the contrary. Their exposition I embrace, and follow, as the true sense of holy Scripture, & detest yours, who haue nothing to say against it, but to outface it, by calling it, An error, & to obiect against it the comment of Abulensis, who (say youPag. 55. teacheth, that by those words, Blessed art thou Simon, there was granted to S. Peter an infallible certainty of his soules eternall blessednes, which is an excellent priuiledge, but no promise of authority made vnto him. If Abulensis comment so, his comment makes nothing to your purpose: for he denies not the Church to be built vpon Peter, nor grants, that the gates of hell (which are heresies) shall preuaile against her. Againe if he say (for I haue not seene him) that Christ by saying, Blessed art thou Simon, granted to S. Peter an infallible assurance of his eternall hap∣pines, it followeth not, that the same assurance passeth to his Successors, as the office of Foundation, Head, and Gouer∣nor of the Church, doth: for the assurance of eternall happi∣nesse, was for his owne peculiat good, and therfore granted to him alone, and not to his Successors. But the office of Head, and Gouernor of the Church, was promised to him for the good of the whole Church, and therfore to passe to his Successors, according to the nature of priuiledges, which is, that when a prerogatiue is granted to a Gouer∣nor for the good of the Community of which he is Gouer∣nor,
(as the office of Head and foundation of the Church was to S. Peter) it dieth not with him, but still liueth in his Successors. Againe, that comment of Abulensis (if it be his) I ap∣proue not: for it is disproued out of the words themselues, which being of the present tense, import nothing els but a present blessednes, in hauing so great a fauor bestowed on him, as by the speciall reuelation of Almighty God, to know the Diuinity of Christ, and to be the first that made so illustrious a confession therof, and (as S. BasillOrat. 3. de peccato, & in proem. de iu∣dicio Dei. ex∣poundeth) to haue his confession rewarded with a promise of buil∣ding the Church on him, and of hauing the keyes of the kingdome of heauen committed to him: which (sayth he) was a far greater bles∣sednes then the other Apostles obtained. And in the same sense ex∣pound S. HieromeAd c. 16. Math. and S. AugustineSerm. 10. de verb. Do. & serm. 31. de verb. Apost.. But wheras out of the comment of Abulensis (be it his, or whose you please) you charge vsPag. 56,, with lack both of con∣science, and modesty in violating the sacred writ, vnlesse to make good the iurisdiction of our Popes deriuatiuely from S. Peter, we can shew that all of them by vertue of their succession from him, are so blessed now in their hopes, as to be infallibly persuaded that no temptation of Satan shall preuaile against their persons, but that they shall be bles∣sed euerlastingly; you cannot be excused from fraud, & folly: fraud, in changing the state of the question: for our assertion is, that out of these words of Christ, S. Peter, and his Suc∣cessors are secured from erring in their publike decrees, and definitions of fayth. But that Popes may not erre in man∣ners, to the damnation of their soules, we neither deduce out of this, nor any other place of holy writ: nor is it true, nor asserted by any Catholike, nor necessary for the defence of their iurisdiction, or priuiledge of not erring ex cathedra: for Christ (sayth S. Augustin)Ep. 166. hath placed in the chaire of Vni∣ty the doctrine of Verity, and secured his people, that for ill Prelates they forsake not the Chayre of holsome Doctrine, in which chayre euen ill men are inforced to speake good things. And els whereEp. 165. hauing reckoned all the Popes from S. Peter to Anasta∣sius, who then possessed his chayre, he addeth: If in all this tyme any traytor had come in by surreption, it cold not breed any pre∣iudice
to the Church, nor to innocent Christians, for whom our Lord making prouision, sayth of euill Prelates; What they say do yee; but what they doe, do it not: for they say, and do not. And as it is fraud, in you to change the state of the que∣stion, so is it folly to inferre, that because Popes may be vi∣cious in their liues, they may erre in their publike defini∣tions of fayth, or manners, to the seduction of others. S. Au∣gustineEp. 137. obserueth it to be an old tricke of Heretikes, because they cannot calumniate the Scripture, in which they find the Church commended, to calumniate those, by whom she is defended & gouerned, to make them odious. And Tertullian long beforeL. de Praes∣crip. obserued the same in the heretikes of his tyme, to whom he answered, that what they obiected, were vitia conuersationis, non pradicationis, faults of manners, not of Doctrine: and for this S. Augustine re∣prehendeth Petilianus the Donatist, sayingCont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.: Why dost thou call the Apostolike See the chayre of pestilence? if for men, whom thou thinkest to professe the law, and not to fulfill it, did our Lord Ie∣sus Christ for the Pharisies, of whom he sayth, that they say and do not, do any wrong to the chayre in which they did sit? Did he not com∣mend that chayre of Moyses, and reprehend them, preseruing the honor of the chayre? Wherfore you in carping at the vices of some Popes, shew your self to be like to the Donatists, who (sayth S. AugustineIbid. had with wicked fury separated themselues from the Roman Church. And as no vices of Popes could iustify their separation, so neither can it yours. I denie not, but that histories mention sinnes and scan∣dals of some Popes; but yet of few in comparison of the great number of most holy and learned Bishops, that haue possessed that Seat, for whose excellent vertues, and great labors in defending, and propagating the Catholike faith, you ought rather to commend the Bishops of Rome, then for the vices of a few to defame both them and their Seat. Though all the Popes haue not bene holy like Sem and Iaphet, yet (as S. Gregory admonisheth)L. 25. Mor. c. 22. & l. 3. Pastoral. c. 1. it is not law∣full for you to imitate wicked Cham, in laying open their faults. It is no maruell, if among so many good there haue bene some few bad: for among the twelue Apostles there
was a Iudas, whose wickednesse, as it was no defamation to the Apostolicall function, so nether are they faults of a few bad Popes, to the dignity of the Roman See. But what if there had bene many? Could their euill life excuse your euill fayth? Shall their falling from God by frailty for a tyme, iustify your departing for euer from Gods Church, by contempt and obstinate rebellion? If the ill liues of Pre∣lates be a sufficient cause to forsake the Church, how can you remaine in your Protestant Congregation? For Lu∣ther (whom your brother Klebitius in his booke against the Saxonicall Popedome tearmeth, The Pope of Wittemberg) was a Iewd Apostata, and had conuersation with the Diuell: Caluin, a stigmaticall Sodomite; Beza, an especiall paterne of wantonnesse and lust. And if you looke nearer home, Cranmer, and other chief Heads in your English Church, haue not bene very great Saints. Wherfore since you can∣not but know, that the ill liues of some Popes, is a Non sequitur, to proue that they may erre in their definitions of fayth, you cannot be so simple, as to alleage it to that end, but only to ease your stomake of some parte of that ve∣nime, wherwith it is charged against the authority of the Roman Church. And yet not this without imposture: for of the authors, which you bringe, Massonius is a fabulous Historian, and forbidden by the Church.In indic. lè. prohib. Costerus, as in that very place he confesseth that Popes may be wicked in their liues,Enchir. c. 3. §. Patemur. so he proueth that they cannot propose to the Church any heresy, or error, which is the thing you ought to disproue, but cannot, & therfore diuert from it to rayle at the ill liues of Popes, that haue bene, or may be. Baro∣nius and Genebraed speake only of such Popes as were in∣truded, partly by the tyranny of Emperors, partly by the Marquis of Thuscia, partly by the Nobility of Rome, and Princes of Etruria. This you ought to haue obserued with Baronius, and with him to haue put your reader in mind, of the singular care, and prouidence, wherwith Christ protecteth the Roman Church: for notwithstanding she suffered greater calamities by the tyranny of these Chri∣stian Princes, thē she had euer done vnder any heathenish
persecutors, yet it cannot be shewed, that any of those Princes euer doubted of the infallibility of the Roman Church, or that any of the aforesaid Popes, albeit they came in by intrusion, euer taught any thing repugnant to fayth. SECT. III. S. Pauls subiection to S. Peter, and his acknow∣ledgment therof. TO proue that S. Paul belieued not the domination of S. Peter (for so you call itPag. 57. and consequently of the Pope, or the vniuersall power of the Roman Church aboue all others, or yet the absolute continuance therof in the fayth of Christ, you spend many arguments throughout six whole Sections, from the eight to the fourteenth, all which make against your selfe. It is frequent with you to call the supreme Ecclesiasti∣call iurisdiction of S. Peter and his successors, their dominion. If by dominion you vnderstand a dominiering power, wher∣with some temporall Princes gouerne their subiectes, S. Peter forbiddeth that to all ecclesiasticall Prelates1. Pet. 5.3., com∣manding them not to dominiere in the Clergy. But if by dominion, you vnderstand a Fatherly gouerment and iuris∣diction ouer the vniuersall Church and their infallible as∣surance in their definitions of fayth; that S. Peter and his successors haue such a power and iurisdiction, hath bene already proued, & will be more confirmed by the answere to your arguments against S. Peters supremacy out of sun∣dry passages of S. Paul to the GalathiansPag. 58. & seqq.. The first is, Paul some tyme after the exercise of his Apostleship, would not goe to Hierusalem to Peter, or any of the Apostles, lest he might haue seemed to haue bene authorized by them: yet three yeares after that, he taketh a iourney thither of see Peter; doubtlesse for honor sake, as one in order of Apostleship most eminent: but this be did voluntarily, in discretion, & brotherly communion; & not in subiection, as the Context sheweth. So you: but the Context sheweth no such matter, and the sacred Expositors teach directly the contrary. S. AmbroseIn eum lo∣cum.: It was fit, that Paul should desire to see Peter, to whom our Sa∣uiour
had committed the charge of the Churches. S. HieromeEp. 89. quae est 11. inter epist. August.: Peter was of so great authority, that Paul writeth in his epistle, Then after three yeares I came to Hierusalem to see Peter. And againeIn c. 1. ad Gal.: He went to see him to the end he might yeild honor vnto him. Theo∣doretIn cap. 1. ad Gal.: he went to yeild vnto Peter, as to the Prince of the Apo∣stles, that honor which was fitting. And shewing that S. Paul held Peter to be the supreme iudge to whom all doubts of fayth ought to be referred, he saythIn ep. ad Leon.: Paul the preacher of truth, and the trumpet of the holy Ghost, ranne to the great Peter, for a resolution of such doubts, as rising about the obseruation of the Law, did minister occasion of strife to them that were at Antioch. Oecu∣meniusIn cap. 1. ad Gal.: He went to see him, as one greater then himselfe, and stayed with him, to honor him with his presence. S. Chryso∣stomeHom. 87. in Ioan.: He went to see him aboue others, because he was the mouth, and Prince of the Apostles, and the Head of the whole compa∣ny. and againeIn c. 1. ad Gal.: he went to him, as to one greater then himselfe, and that, not in a vulgar manner, but (as he obserueth out of the Greeke Verbe, ) to behold and admire him, as a perso∣nage of great excellency, and maiesty, as men goe to behold, and ad∣mire great and famous Cities: for which cause, and to satisfy himselfe with a perfect view of his person, and behauiour, notwithstanding his great employments, he stayed 15. dayes with him. If therfore the generall accord of sacred expositors be of weight, this 1. place of S. Paul which you produce to disproue his subiection to S. Peter, is so farre from disprouing it, that it strongly proueth it, and his owne ac∣knowledgment therof. Againe: 14. yeares after this time (sayth S. Paul) I went vp to Hierusalem, according to reuelation to conferre with them the Ghos∣pell which I preach among the Gentils. From this place you arguePag. 5. that S. Paul held himselfe equall in authority with S. Peter: for S. Hierome (whom you alleage out of Salmeron) sayth, it is one thing to conferre, an other thing, to learne: for among them that conferre, there is equality. What equality? of iurisdi∣ction, and power? No: (for a subiect may conferre with his Superiour, a Collegiall with his Rector) but of Doctrine, and learning only; as S. Hierome there declareth, adding, that betweene him that teacheth, and him that learneth, he that lear∣neth
is the lesser; to wit, in knowledge. And therfore I grant that S. Paul went not to learne of S. Peter: he had learned his Ghospell by reuelation immediatly from Iesus Christ, the same Maister that taught S. Peter. Nor did he receaue from S. Peter, or the other Apostles power, or authority to preach: for that likewise he had immediatly from Christ: & in this sense he saythGal. 2.6.: The Apostles added nothing to me. Neuer∣thelesse because he had not conuersed with Christ in mor∣tall flesh, nor learned his Doctrine from the other Apo∣stles, which had bene instructed by him before his death, lest the Gentils, to whom he preached, being incensed a∣gainst him by false Apostles, might haue any doubt of the truth of his Doctrine, or of his Commission to preach; for their satisfaction, and that his preaching might not be in vaine, and without profit to the hearers, he went to Hie∣rusalem, and conferred his Ghospell with the chiefe Apo∣stles, to the end that the Gentils might be certified of the truth of his Doctrine, knowing it to haue their approba∣tion, and to be the same, that they preached. But you that borow your argument from SalmeronIn Ep. ad Gal. Disput. 2., why do you conceale what followeth in his Comment? If (sayth he) it was needfull for so great an Apostle of Christ, to con∣ferre his Ghospell with the Apostles, and Peter; how much more ne∣cessary was it, that Luther and Caluin should haue brought theirs, to be conferred with the See Apostolike? With what pillars of the Church did they conferre it, as Paul did? or with what Miracle did they proue it? they that could neuer persuade themselues so much, as to come to the See Apostolike, and Roman Church the mother of all Churches to conferre; nor to the Oecumenicall Councell (of Trent) that was gathered for their soules health sake, that was free, and open to them, that did courteously intreat them, and with a safe conduct inuite them to come. So Salmeron; whose words you thought best not to mention, both because they shew your Doctrine to be destitute of lawfull authority, and also because they refute the fabulous report which youPag. 404. make out of Thuanus your historian, that, diuers Protestants came to the Councell, and desired of the Popes Legates liberty to dispute, but could not be ad∣mitted: for Samleron was present at the Councell, as one of
the Popes Diuines, who therfore knew what passed in the Councell better then Thuanus. And to Salmerons testi∣mony, I adde your owne confessions in the late Declaration of the Archbishops and Bishops of Scotland against the pretended Ge∣nerall assembly holden at GlascowPag. 13. ; and in your Apology of the Church of England, which also expresseth the reasons why you refused to come, set downe in your owne words, and refelled by Doctor Harding, in his Confutation of the same ApologyPart. ad Chap. 7. fol. 293. & seqq.. How far therfore you are from the Doctrine & exam∣ple of S. Paul in this point, not only Salmeron, but Vene∣rable Bede and S. AnselmeIn cap. 2. ad Gal. haue declared out of S. Au∣gustine, whose words both they and Salmeron set downe to this purpose. If the Apostle Paul himselfe (sayth S. Augu∣stine)L. 28. con∣tra Paust. c. 4. being called from Heauen, after the Ascension of our Lord, had not found the Apostles liuing, that by communicating and conferring his Ghospell with thew, he might shew himselfe to be of the same society, the Church would giue no credit at all vnto him. But when they knew that he preached the same Doctrine which they did, that he liued in communion and vnity with them, and did worke Mi∣racles as they did (our Lord therby commending him) he deserued so great authority, that his words at this day are heard in the Church, euen as if Christ were heard to speake in him, as he most truly said. With these Fathers accordeth S. HieromeEpist. 89. quae est 10. inter epist. August. defining that, Paul had not had security of preaching the Ghospell, if it had not bene approued by Peters sentence, and the rest that were with him. So S. Hierome, whose testimony with the rest shew how beg∣garly a cause you haue, since those very Scriptures which you produce in defence therof, are so many verdicts a∣gainst you. A third text of S. Paul2. Cor. 12.11. you set downe thus: I am no∣thing inferior vnto the Chiefe of the Apostles. But I cannot com∣mend your translation: for none but Peter is Chiefe of the Apostles, to whom therfore S. Paul compares not himselfe in the singular number, as you here, and els where (falsifiing his words make him to say) but to the Chiefe Apostles in the plurall number, and yet not that, in authority and iurisdi∣ction, (of which he speaketh not) but in the dignity of an
Apostle, in his great labors, in his Miracles, in his reuela∣tions, in his dangers and iourneys vndertaken for the prea∣ching of Christ, as the Context before and after sheweth, & S. Ambrose, Theodoret, S. Anselme, S. Thomas Aquinas and other expositors declareIn eum lo∣cum.. But you vrge the testimonies of Fathers.Pag. 60. fin. vpon this text of S. Paul: And first that S. Ambrose saithIn 1. Cor. c. 12., Paul was no lesse in dignity, then Peter. You falsity. S. Ambrose there compares not Paul with Peter in particular, but speaking of him and the rest in generall sayth, that, albeit he were called to the Apostleship after them all, yet in the dignity and function of an Apostle, in preaching and in working of miracles he was not inferior to them. And to shew how imposterously you bring this his testimony against S. Peters primacy, he addeth, that, Though Andrew followed our Sauiour, before Peter, yet Andrew receaued not the primacy, but Peter. 2. You obiectPag. 60. fin. S. Maximus, saying: Whether Paul or Peter is to be preferred, is vncertaine. Here againe you falsify. For, to insinuat that S. Maximus preferred Paul before Pe∣ter, you peruert the order of his words, placing Peter after Paul, which S. Maximus doth not, but contrarily Paul after Peter. Againe he compares them not in authority, but only in sanctity of life, and merits. Howbeit (sayth he) all the most blessed Apostles obtaine equall grace of sanctity in the sight of God, yet I know not how Peter and Paul by a peculiar prerogatiue of fayth in our Sauiour, surpasse the rest &c. But which of the two is to be pre∣ferred, is vncertaine, for I thinke them to be equall in merits, because they are equall in their death. You make no mention of merits to persuade your reader that S. Maximus compares them in authority, and so much the more you are to be blamed, because in that very place, he sayth, that, Paul hath the key of knowledge to preach and teach, but Peter the key of power; which is to say, that Paul excelled in knowledge, but Peter in au∣thority. And therfore els where he sayth;Hom. 3. in Nat. Apost. Pet. & Paul. Peter was of so great merit in the sight of our Lord, that after the rowing of a small boat, the gouerment of the whole Church was committed to him: and thatHom. 1. de eisdem. As Christ was a Rock, so be made Peter a Rock, and built his Church vpon him, and gaue him charge of feeding his sheep, and
lambes, which out of his mercy he had redeemed. Wherfore, as cer∣taine as it is, that S. Maximus held S. Paul to be a member of Christs Church, and one of the sheepe which he redee∣med: so certaine it is, that he held him subiect to S. Peter, as to his Head and Pastor. 3. You obiectPag. 60. fin. out of S. Chrysostome: Paul (that I say no more) was equall to Peter. You still falsify. S. Chryso∣stome sayth: Paul was equall to Peter in honor, to wit, of an Apo∣stle, for of that he speaketh: you leaue out, in honor, to inferre that he equaleth Paul with Peter in authority and iurisdi∣ction; which cannot be excused from imposture: for one thing it is to be equall with Peter in the honor of Apostle∣ship (in which all the Apostles were equall vnto him) and another, to be equall to him in authority, which none of the Apostles were. Among the most blessed Apostles (sayth S. LeoEp. 48; in the likenesse of honor, there was difference of power: and though the election of them all were a like, yet it was granted to one, that be should surpasse the rest: from whence as from a patterne, hath proceeded the distinction of Bishops. The same is declared by S. MaximusSerm. vlt. de Apost. Pet. & Paul., yea, and by S. Chrysostome himselfe, in this very place which you obiect, sayingIn ep. ad Gal. 1.18.: Paul went to Peter, as to one greater, and elder then himselfe: And,Hom. 87. Ioan. he went to see him, because he was the mouth, and Prince of the Apostles, and head of the whole company. These testimonies as they demonstrate Chrysostome to haue belieued that S. Peter surpassed Paul in authority; so they conuince you of imposture in putting on him the contrary. 4. You attributePag. 60. fin. to S. HieromeIn Psal. 44. these words: The titles of these two Apostles are equall: they are Chiefes of the Church. But S. Hierome vpon that Psalme hath no such words, nor maketh any comparison between Peter and Paul, nor any mention at all of them. 5. You obiectPag. 61. init. out of S. Basils epistles (but at ran∣dome naming none in particular) that, S. Peter and Paul are Pillars of the Church. And what of that? As among many great, one may be greater then another; so of two Pillars, one may be higher then another. By those 7. Pillars men∣tioned in the ProuerbesProu. 9.1., some of the Expositors vnder∣stand
the 7. Sacraments, which yet are not all equall: for Baptisme exceedeth the rest in necessity, and the Eucharist in Excellency. Others vnderstand the Doctors of the Church, whom Daniel compareth to starresDan. 13.3▪ which yet (witnesse S. Paul1. Cor. 15.42. are vnequall in their light. And here∣by is shewed the futility of your argument, that S. Paul held Iames and Iohn to be equall in iurisdiction with Peter, because speaking of them three, he cals them all, Pillars. 6. You obiectPag. 61. init. out of Casaubon, that, Eucherius cal∣leth Peter and Paul, Two Princes of the Christians. But S. Hie∣romeIn Psal. 44. calleth all Bishops, Princes of the Church, and yet all Bishops are not equall in iurisdiction: for Bishops are sub∣iect to Archbishops, Archbishops to Patriarkes; Patriarkes to the Pope; and so was Paul, to Peter. But let Eutherius speake for himselfe: Christ (sayth he)In vigil. S. Pet. first committed to Pe∣ter his lambes, and then his sheep; because he made him not only a Pastor, but Pastor of Pastors. Peter therfore feedeth the Lambes. & the sheep: he feedeth the yong ones and the Dammes: he gouerneth the subiects and the Prelates, and is therfore Pastor of all: for besyde lam∣bes, and sheep, there is nothing in the Church. So Eucherius, shew∣ing how Casaubon and you abuse him: and that if Paul be a sheep of Christs flock, he is subiect to Peters pastotall au∣thority. A fourth text of Scripture you obiect,Pag. 59. which are those words of S. Paul: They saw, that the Ghospell of the vncircumci∣sion was committed to me, as the Ghospell of the circumcision vnto Pe∣ter. Your glosse is, that the ordinary ministration of these two Apostles was distinct, Peter hauing for his Diocesse, the Iewes; and Paul the Gentiles, which was of infinit extent larger. But by the like argument you might inferre that S. Paul by calling Christ, The minister of Circumcision,Rom. 15.8. and himselfe, Doctor of the Gentiles,1. Tim. 2.7 signified that himselfe had a distinct ordinary ministration from Christ, & a Dioces of farre larger extent, then his. Wherfore this clause implyes not any diuision of the au∣thority of their ordinary Ministery; nor yet, that the Dio∣cesse of Peter was confined to the Iewes, or of Paul to the Gentiles; for both of them preached to Iewes & Gentiles. It cōtaines nothing els, but a speciall testimony of the bles∣sing
of God vpon S. Peter, to persuade the Iewes, and v∣pon S. Paul to persuade the Gentiles: and yet not so, but that all the other Apostles had likewise authority to preach vnto them both. But you opposePag. 59., that S. AmbroseIn Gal. 2 from hence cellecteth two different Primacies, the one of Peter, and the other of Paul. S. Ambroses words are: As Paul receaued a primacy of founding Churches among the Gentiles; so Peter had the primacy of founding the Church; a dignity farre greater, then to preach and found Churches among the Gentils, and that implieth the sub∣iection of S. Paul, and all other Prelates of the Church vn∣to him. 2. You say:Pag. 59. Chrysostome argueth from these words of S. Paul, that both he and Peter had the same dignity: and, Oecumenius wisheth his reader to obserue, that Paul herein equalled himselfe to Peter. I answeare: The false Apostles excepted against S. Pauls Doctrine, and authority to preach, because he had not conuersed with Christ, nor bin trayned vp in his schole before his passion, as the other Apostles had; and by that meanes seduced some of the Galathians, as it appeares out of the first Chapter of his epistle to them. Wherfore in the second Chapter he certifies them, that he went to Hierusa∣lem, to conferre his Ghospell with the chiefe knowne A∣postles, and was receaued by them into their society, as being an Apostle no lesse then they were, and one that had learned his Doctrine by reuelation, and receaued his au∣thority to preach from the same mayster, that taught and authorized them. And herein only S. Chrysostome and Oecumenius say, that S. Paul is equall to the rest, & com∣pares himselfe to Peter the chiefest of them: for (sayth Oe∣cumenius)In cap. 2, ad Gal. though he speake this of Peter praedicationis causa, to authorize his owne Doctrine (with the Galathians) yet he respecteth and honoreth Peter farre aboue himselfe, that is to say, as, Head of the Apostles (for so he had called him a little before:) and,Ad c. 1. Act. As one, to whom the gouerment of the Disciples was committed, and that had power to command them all. And how cold S. Chrysostome meane any other thing, he that said;In c. 2. ad Gal. & hom. 87, in Ioan. Paul went to Peter as to one greater then himselfe; as to
the mouth and Prince of the Apostles, and Head of the whole company: that, in matters belonging to authority Paul giues the primacy to Pe∣terHom. 35. in c. 14.1. ad Cor.: that Peter surpassed the rest of the Apostles in authority by many degrees:L. 2. de Sa∣ord. that he was chiefe of the Apostles, & had the whole world subiect to him:Orat. 5. ad∣uers. Iudaeot. that, Christ deliuered to him the gouermēt of the Church throughout the whole world,Hom 80. ad Antioch. & the charge of fee∣ding those sheep, which he had redeemed with his bloudL. 2. de Sa∣cord.. 3. You obiectPag. 61. S. Gregory, saying: Paul was made the Head of Nations, and obtayned the principality of the whole Church. S. Paul (I grant) obtayned the principality of the whole Church, as the rest of the Apostles did, because they were all Princes ouer the whole Church, as S. Hierome and others collect out of those words of the Psalme,Psal. 44.17. Thou shalt make them Princes ouer all the earth. And this is the principality which S. Chrysostome declared S. Paul to haue,Hom. 18. in epist. ad Rom when he said; all preaching, the affayres of the world, all mysteries▪ and all dispensations were committed to him. But this argueth not that the Princedome and authority of S. Paul or the other Apostles was independant, and without sub∣ordination to S. Peter: for (as S. HieromeIn psal. 44. obserueth) The Church hath Bishops insteed of the Apostles, and as their Suc∣cessors in their Episcopall authority; which therfore in that respect are Peers and Princes of the Church, yet not without due subordination: for all Bishops are subiect to the Pope: and so were Paul and the other Apostles to Peter. And this S. Gregory himselfe (to shew your imposture in obiecting him for the contrary) declareth saying:L. 4. ep. 38. Peter the Apostle is the chiefe member of the holy and vniuersall Church: Paul, Andrew, Iohn, what are they, but Heads of seuerall flocks? SECT. IV. Other arguments of Doctor Morton answeared. IN prosecution of the same matter you obiect,Pag. 62.63.64. that Paul named Iames before Peter saying: Iames, Cephas, and Iohn: wherby you will haue, Paul to mate and equall Iames, & Iohn with Peter: for it had bene ill manners in him to name Iames before Peter, if Peter had bene Iames his Superior, as it would be thought ill
manners, in a Catalogue of Bishops to reckon the Bishop of Colen be∣fore the Pope. You argue from an vncertaine ground: for S. Chrysostome in his commentary, S. Ambrose, and S. Hie∣rome both in the text and commentary, read, Peter, Iames and Iohn: and so likewise doth S. Hierom in other his workesContr Heliud & l. de Scriptor. Eccles. in Paulo.. It is therfore credible that S. Paul in naming them, obserued the same order: but if he named them other∣wise, it is no argument to proue that he equalled Iames in authority with Peter: first because (as S. ChrysostomeIn cap. 1. ep. ad Gal. noteth) S. Paul (in that very Epistle) professeth himselfe to yeld greater honor to Peter, and shew more loue to him, then to the rest, in saying, that he went vp to Hierusalem, not for any of them, but for his sake alone. 2. because ascending by gradation he placeth Pe∣ter aboue himselfe, and next vnto Christ: I am Paules, and I Apolloes, but I of Cephas, and I of Christ. 3. If it be true, that he named Iames before Peter, he did it not to equall them in authority, and much lesse to preferre Iames before Peter, but in regard of the priority of the knowledge which Ia∣mes receaued of the great grace giuen to Paul: for when he came the first tyme to Hierusalem to giue the Apostles no∣tice of his calling, and of the great fruit of his labors, he found none of them there but Iames. Put now the like case, and it will neither be ill manners, nor any derogation to the Popes authority to name him after the Bishop of Co∣len, or of Milan. 4. Because it is certaine, that in all other places of the new Testament, in which there is a Catalo∣gue of all the Apostles in generall, or of some in particu∣lar, Peter is still named in the first place: and if here (as you say) he is named before Peter, because he was Bishop of Hierusalem, it is no argument to proue him Superior or e∣quall in authority to Peter. S. BernardSerm. 3. de 7. misericord. fragm. nameth Paul & Mathew before Peter, and yet in that very place expresly sayth, that the Pastorall care of the whole Church was committed to Peter. And the sacred Expositors teach you the same lesson: for when a new Apostle was to be chosen in place of Iudas, S. Chrysostome notethHom. 3. in. Act. that albeit Iames was Bishop of Hierusalem, yet he acknowledged the superiority not to belong to himselfe, but to Peter, & that
therfore not he but Peter shewed his authority in the ca∣riage of that busines. Behold (sayth Chrysostome) the mode∣sty of Iames: He had receaued the office of Bishop of Hierusalem, and yet speakes ot a word, but yelds the throne to Peter. And Oecu∣e ni:Ad cap. 1. Act. Iames riseth n, out Peter, be being the man, to whom the gouerment of the Disciples was committed. And Chrysostome further declaring that the Episcopall authority which christ gaue to Peter, was as farre aboue that of Iames, as the Bi∣shop of the whole world surpasseth in authority the Bi∣shop of one particular See. saythHom. vlt. in Ioan.: If any one demaund how Iames obtained the See of Hierusalem, I answere, he was made by Peter, Maister of the whole world: which difference betweene the authority of Peter and Iames, EuthymiusAd c. 21. Ioan. hath also expressed in the same words. And no lesse S. Bernard, say∣ingL. 2. de considerat. c. 9.: The other Apostles obtayned ech of them their peculiar stocks, Iames contented with Hierusalem, yelds the vniuersality to Pe∣ter. I conclude therfore that if S. Paul once named Iames before Peter (which is yet doubtfull) it is a non sequitur to collect from thence, that he held Iames superior or equall in authority to Peter. You shew your selfe to be one of those men of whom S. Peter1. Pet. 3.16. sayth, that reading S. Paules epistles, they depraue them, and the rest of the Scriptures, to their owne perdition. Not vnlike to this, is the argument you makePag. 62. fin. 63. to proue that S. Paul (forsooth) butteth and excopteth against Pe∣ters authority, because he saythGal. 1.18., I went to Hierusalem to see Peter, and tarried with him 15. dayes; but other of the Apostles I saw none, saue Iames the brother of our Lord. Your inference is, that Paul going vp to stop the mouths of false Apostles, who obiected that he had not sufficient commission to preach, as not hauing bene authorized by the other Apostles, if the spi∣rit of Popery had reigned in those dayes, his Aduersaries might haue replyed, that Peter being the Vicar of Christ, and the Ordinary and vniuersall Pastor of his Church, was alone sufficient, and All in All to authorize him, because the Gouernor of all others without exception. So you, but falsly and ignorantly: for Paul went not then to Hierusalem to haue his Ghospell approued, but only for honors sake, to see and reuerence Peter his Superior, as
the expositors with one accord declare: Their words you haue already heard. His iourney to Hierusalem to vin∣dicate his calling, and haue his Ghospell approued by S. Peter and the other Apostles, was 14. yeares after, when he tooke Barnabas & Titus with him, as in the second Chap∣ter to the Galathians he declareth. But you are contented to confound the former iourney with this: such mistakes are the engines of Arguments wherewith you But at the Popes authority. SECT. V. Priuiledges granted to other of the Apostles, and not to S. Peter, obiected by Doctor Morton. TO the former obiections you adde others, concerning some priuiledges granted to other Apostles, and not to S. Peter; which I will briefly touch. The first isPag. 64.; Peter gaue not sentence in the Apostolicall Synod, but Iames in his presence. This is an vntruth, and such I haue proued it to be. The secondPag. 64.: Peter leaned not on Christs brest, as Iohn did. True; but Christ made Peter the foundation of his Church, and Pastor of his flock; a far greater dignity, then to leane on his brest, and which implies Iohns subiection to him. The third isPag. 64.: Peter solicited Iohn to aske a question of score∣cy. He did so: but how ill aduised you are, to obiect this a∣gainst Peters Primacy, the Fathers will informe you. Cas∣siodorusL. de ami∣cit. c. Quasi diceret, be∣nefac. sint amici.: Surely our Lord preferred Peter before Iohn, and be∣stowing the Princedome on Peter did not therfore withdraw his af∣fection from the disciple whom he loued. He gaue to Peter the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, that he might open and shut heauen: to Iohn he gaue a facility of opening vnto vs the secrets of his brest. To Peter he gaue the charge and gouerment of his Church: to Iohn the care and custody of his Mother. Peter durst not aske of our Lord, who was to betray him: Iohn at Peters instance asked confidently what the Prince of the Apostles durst not in quire. S. ChrysostomeHom. vlt. in Ioan.: Why doth Iohn mention his leaning on Christs brest? Not without cause; but to shew the confidence of Peter after his deniall: for he that
durst not then aske, but did is by another, after the charge of his bre∣thren was giuen to him committeth is not to another, but himselfe asketh the Maister; and Iohn is silens. He speakes and shewes his loue to Iohn &c. For when Christ had communicated great matters to Peter, and giuen him charge of the whole world, he being desirous to haue Iohn for his partner, and colleague, said; And this man, what? And as he not daring to aske at the last supper, did it by Iohn; so now doth he the like for Iohn, thinking that he was desirous to aske, but durst not. And againeHom. 66. in Math.: Marke how this same Iohn that lately made such demands, after wholly yelds the primacy to Peter, and pre∣fers him in all things before himselfe. S. HieromeL. 1. ad∣uers. Iouin.; Among the twelue Apostles one is chosen, that a Head being appointed, occasion of Schisme might be taken away. And declaringIbid. why the dig∣nity of Head was not giuen to Iohn, but to Peter, he yel∣deth this reason, because Peter was the elder, and lest if Christ had bestowed that dignity on a yong man, whom he loued, he might seeme to minister occasion of enuie to the rest. That famous Empe∣ror Leo surnamed The wise, hauing declaredSerm. de S. Petro. that Christ male Peter Prince of pastors, and required of him the care of fee∣ding his flock, as a returne of his loue, addeth: Peter knowing that to be a great Princedome, and how great strength it requireth, seing Iohn following whom Iesus greatly loued, said; And this man, what? wilt thou haue me to be placed as Head ouer the disciples, what then dost thou commaund him to doe? Our Lord answered, as it were chec∣king Peter: So I will haue him to remayne, till I come: what's that to thee? follow thou me, that is, follow me with this pastorall staffe: and as whiles I was with you, I did keepe you watching ouer you, as a Fa∣ther, & as your Head & Mayster: so be thou in my place, & follow me with thy Princedome and power, confirming thy brethren; for I will haue thee to be in my place: from whence it is, that Peter remayneth till this very day following Christ in his Successor. TheophilactAd c. vlt. Ioan.: Our Sauiour speaking to Peter, sayth: I deliuer into thy hands the preaching of my Ghospell and the whole world &c. I lead thee forth, to gouerne the world. And againeIbid.: The gouerment of the sheep is committed to Peter: and not only that; but he asketh, and is made a mediator for him, that was best beloued. So these Fathers. And if it be lawfull to compare sacred things to prophane, we may in this liken Christ, & these two Apostles, to Alexan∣der,
and his two friends, Craterus and Ephestion. Craterus loued Alexander as a King, looking to his publike affayres, and honor: Ephestion loued his person, diligently procu∣ring his health, and priuat well-doing: whereupon Ale∣xander was wont to say, that Craterus loued the King; and E∣phestion loued Alexander. So we may say, that Iohn loued Christ, more then any other of the Apostles did, as the cause of his virginity, and author of his chast loue: but Pe∣ter loued him, as the Prince of Pastors, more then any other euer did. And in reward of this their loue, Christ loued Iohn, as a Virgin, that had dedicated his body and soule to him alone, and commended to him, as to a Virgin, the cu∣stody of his Virgin Mother: but he loued Peter in regard of his flock, which was to be fed, and gouerned vpon earth: & in that respect, made him Vniuersall Pastor and Gouernor therof: which was a greater dignity, then to leane on Christs brest, or to be the guardian of his Mother. The fourth obiection isPag. 64.: Paul reprehended Peter to his face before all. This you had vrged beforePag. 61. as a principall Argument, to disproue S. Peters superiority ouer S. Paul; but as vnfortunatly as the rest: for this reprehension was not of superiority, but of charity, as that of IethroExod. 18.14. to Mo∣yses; that of Ioab to king Dauid2. Reg. 19.15. & seqq.; and of S. Bernard to Pope EugeniusL. 4. de considerat.: all which, as they stand well with the superiority of the persons reproued, to their reprouers; so doth this with the superiority of Peter, to Paul: yea the Fa∣thers are so farre from arguing from hence any equality of Iurisdiction betweene these two Apostles, that diuers of them assume it, as an Argument, to proue that when there is iust occasion, inferiors may with due charity and humili∣ty reprehend their Superiors. Paul (sayth ChrysostomeIn cap. 2. ad Gal. reproues, & Peter heares, to the end that whiles the Mayster reproued holds his peace, the schollers may learne to change their opinion. S. Augustine:Ep. 19. That which was done of S. Paul profitably, by the liberty of charity, Peter tooke in good part, by holy and benigne god∣linesse of humility: and therby gaue a more rare and holy example to posterity, if at any tyme they do amisse, not to disdaine reproofe from their inferiors, then Paul did in teaching the meaner to resist the grea∣ter
with brotherly charity, for the defence of truth. And S. Grego∣ryHom. 18. in Ezechiel. noteth, that Peter as he was chief in the Apostellship, so he shewed himselfe to be chief in humility. All which discouereth your ignorance, in sayingPag. 62., that with all like circumstances of opposition, in true tenor of morality, one can hardly reprehend an∣other, vnlesse he be his equall. If you had bene as skilfull in Diuinity, as you are diligent in laying hold of any shad∣dow of occasion, to carpe at S. Peters authority; you would haue knowne the lesson which S. Thomas and all Diuines with him,2.2. q. 33. art. 4. teach, that there are two kinds of correction; the one of iustice, the other of charity: the first belongeth only to Superiors, in respect of their subiects: the second, to all men: for as charity bindes vs to loue all, so it binds vs in due circumstances to vse fraternall correction to all, euen Su∣periors: and so Paul did to Peter. Finally so certaine it is, that all antiquity belieued S. Peter to be Superior in au∣thority to S. Paul, that (as S. HieromeApud S. Aug. op. 11. noteth) blasphe∣mous Porphyrius taxed S. Paul of petulancy, and pride, in reprehending his Superior: and that some to free him from that note, thought it was not Peter the Apostle whom he reprehended, but another of the Disciples, called Cephas. But you replyPag. 62. out of our interlineary Glosse, that Paul reprehended Peter, tanquam par, as being his equall. You mi∣stake: for that note is not in the interlineary, but in the glosse of Lyra, and (as Gratian hath declared2. q. 7. Cap. Paulus. is to be vnderstood of parity in the Apostleship, and in purity of lyfe, and conuersation, not of Ecclesiasticall power, and iu∣risdiction: in which sense, S. AugustineL. 2. de bapt. c. 1. writeth of S. Cy∣prian, that he was equall to S. Peter in his Martyrdome, but inferior in power. But you make a digressionPag. 61. & 210. to tell vs, of a notorious pre∣rogatiue, which our Popes challenge to themselues in their bookes of priuiledges authorized by themselues for their owne licenciousnesse, saying: None presumeth to reprehend the Pope, except only in case he depart from the fayth: no, not although otherwise he draw innume∣rable multitudes with himselfe into Hell. Of which priuiledge they can giue no other ground, then their falsly pretended plenitude of Pa∣pall power: whereupon it is, that their Glosse affirmeth, that in dispo∣sing
of Prebends, and such acts, there is none that dare say to the Pepe, Syr, why do you so? These are your words, from which you take occasion to rayle lustily against the Pope. And I aske you, Syr why do you so? For you cannot but remember, that in your hatefull libell, set forth many yeares since vnder the title of, A discouery of Romish doctrine in the case of conspiracy & rebellion, you proposed this very obiection, and that a lear∣ned Antagonist of yoursF. Per∣sons. in his Treatise tending to mitiga∣tion, against the seditious writings of Thomas Morton Minister, told youChap. 5. num. 54., that many yeares before that tyme the same obie∣ction had bene set forth in print, by Syr Francis Hastings, in his Watchword, and defence therof, and stoutly auouched by Mathew Sutcliffe Minister, his Aduocate and Proctor of that defence: and that the same obiection was confuted at large by the Warn word, and so many lyes, falshoods, and fraudes discouered therin, that the said Mathew Sutcliffe in his Reply intituled, A full and round answere, thought good to let it passe roundly, without any answere at all: & ther∣fore your said Antagonist told you (as with reason he might) that he greatly marueyled, with what conscience, or if not conscience, with what forehead at least, you could at that tyme write and print things, that you did know, or might haue knowne, to be merely false, and forged. Is not this (sayth he) a signe of obstinate wilfulnesse, & that neither God, nor truth is sought for by you, but only to maintaine a part or faction, with what slight or falshood soeuer? Hauing giuen you this ad∣monition, though he remit you, or rather the reader to the Warnword for a larger satisfaction, yet he also briefly answe∣rethIbid. num. 55.56.57.58. shewing, 1. Your grosse ignorance in ascribing that Canon to Pope Boniface, wheras it is gathered by Gratian, out of the sayings of S. Boniface an Englishman, that was Archbishop of Ments in Germany, and a holy Martyr. 2. Your fraud, in setting downe the words of the Canon cor∣ruptly, both in Latin, and English, as by leauing out the beginning which sheweth the drift of the Canon; and the end which containeth a reason of all that is said; and cutting of other words in the middest, to couer the pious meaning of S. Boniface. 3. Your falshood in leauing out, and altering
some words, and corruptly translating others, with a heape of falsities, as he rightly calleth themIbid. num. 57. marg.. Wherefore if he had iust cause to marueile, with what conscience or forehead you could then repeate an obiection so fully answered before; farre greater cause haue I to maruayle now, that after he hath againe giuen you this second answere, and so fully discouered your fraud, you are not ashamed yet againe to reiterate the same obiection, without taking any notice of those errors, & wilfull falsities, which that answerer laid to your charge. To him, and to the Warnword, I remit the reader. But because the glosse affirmeth the Pope to haue pleni∣tude of power in disposing of Prebends, and that none ought therin to say vnto him, why do you so? You call this, the height of all desperate presumption in the Popes, to make themselues incontroulable in their mischiefes. A bold censure. Kings haue fullnesse of power to dispose of the temporall offices of their kingdomes, and none ought to say vnto them, Why do you so? Will you therfore tell them, that this their authority is the height of all desperate presumption to make themselues incon∣troulable in their mischiefes? No; why then do you giue it that name, and censure in the Popes? You might haue done well, to aske S. Bernards opinion: He would haue told youEp. 131., that the plenitude of power is by a singular prerogatiue gi∣uen to the See Apostolike: That he which resisteth this power, resisteth the ordination of God: that he hath power, if he iudge it profitable, to erect new Bishoprickes, where formerly they were not; and of those that are in being, to put downe some and set vp others, as reason shall dictate vnto him; so that he may lawfully of Bishops, make Arch∣bishops; and contrariwise, if it shall seeme necessary: He can summon from the furthest partes of the earth, whatsoeuer Ecclesiasticall per∣sons of neuer so high degree, and compell them to appeare before him, and this, not once, or twice, but as often as he shall find it expedient. This is the power which the glosse speaketh of: you call it the Height of all desperate presumption, wherby the Popes make themselues incontroulable in their mischiefes. S. Bernard holds it to be a power giuen him by Christ, and that whosoeuer re∣fisteth it (as you doe) resists the ordinance of God. Whether
is it fit, that Christian men should belieue S. Bernard, or you? especially since you acknowledg him to be a Saint, which he cold not be, if he had erred in fayth: nor will any wise man thinke, that in this point he was of any other be∣liefe, then all the holy Fathers of Gods Church were, whose doctrine he knew, and vnderstood better then you do. But not contenting your selfe with censuring, & con∣demning Popes, you carpe at the holy Martyr S. Boniface, (whom all Germany reuerenceth as their Apostle) for teaching, that albeit the Pope shold by his scandalous life draw in∣numerable multitudes with him into hell, yet no man may presume to correct him (to wit iuridically by punishing or deposing him, for that is the sense in which S. Boniface speaketh) vnlesse he also depart from the fayth. But you consider not the wrong which by thus carping at the Pope, you offer to all Chri∣stian Princes: for dare you say, that if an Emperor, a King or any other absolute Prince be of so scandalous a life, that by his example he lead thousands with him into Hell, he may therefore be deposed? Wherfore since you will hold it to be good doctrine, that albeit a temporall Prince, yea or many Princes liuing at the same tyme, shold by their vicious liues, draw thousands with them into hell, none of them may therefore be corrected iuridically; why do you carpe at vs for defending the same of the Pope, who is but one at once? Your fifth obiection isPag. 64. sin. 65.; S. Paul alone writ to the Ro∣mans, not S. Peter. True; for when S. Peter writ his Epistles, he was at Rome, and had conuerted many of the Romans to Christ, and planted the Church among them, before S. Paul came theither, or writ his epistle to them. Againe S. Peter writ his epistles to all the faythfull, and in regard therof you intitle them, Generall Epistles, and we, Catholike Epistles, a title, which is not giuen to those of S. Paul. Your sixth Obiection isPag. 65.: It was not sayd of Peters ship as it was of that wherein S. Paul was, God hath giuen vnto thee all them that sayle with thee: and except those (to wit the Mari∣ners) remaine in the Ship, you cannot be saued. Among 28. fa∣mous priuiledges, which BellarmineLib. 1. de Pont. c. 17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24. sheweth to haue
bene granted to S. Peter, and not to S. Paul, nor to any o∣ther of the Apostles, you are content to conceale them all without making any mention of them, vnlesse it be of two or three, to carpe at them, as here you doe at his ship, post∣posing it to that, in which S. Paul sailed, because in a dan∣gerous tempest, God preserued the liues of all that were in the ship, for his sake. But in this, your dealing is no better, then in the rest: for the holy Doctors take the ship of Pe∣ter to be a type of the Catholike Church, out of which none can be saued eternally: which they say not of the ship, in which Paul sayled. When Christ saw two ships standing by the lake of Genezareth, going into the one, shipLuc. 5.3. that was Simons, and sitting, he taught the multitude out of the ship; it was not without mystery, that of those two ships, Christ made choyce of Peters only to teach the people out of it: for (as S. Hilary sayth)Can. 13. in Math. the Church is the ship, in which the word of life is placed, and preached, and which they that are out of it, cannot vnderstand, but lye like sand barren and vnprofitable: and the pre∣aching of Gods word out of the ship of Simon in particu∣cular, signifies, that Christ dwelleth in that society, which keepes the fayth and communion of Peter, and makes his See the pastorall chayre, from whence by Peter and his successors, he teacheth the doctrine of his Ghospell. Our Lord (sayth S. Ambrose)Serm. 11. goeth only into that ship of the Church, of which Peter is Mayster, our Lord saying, Vpon this rock I will bu∣ild my Church. And then he addeth, that the Church of Pe∣ter is the Arke of Nōe, to shew that out of his Church none can be saued. Which Doctrine S. Hierome likewise deli∣uereth, comparing the Roman Church to the Arke of Nōe, out of which whosoeuer is, shall perish at the coming of the floud. Moreouer howbeit other ships be tossed, yet (sayth S. Am∣brose) Peters ship is not tossed: in her wisdome sayleth, perfidious∣nesse is absent,L. 5. in c. 5. Luc. fayth fauoureth: for how cold that ship be tossed, of which he is Gouernor, that is the strength of the Church? And S. BernardL. 2. de consider.: The sea is the world; the ships, the Churches: From whence it is, that Peter walking on the waters like our Lord, shewed himselfe to be the only Vicar of Christ, which was not to gouerne one nation, but all; for many waters are many people: and therfore wheras
each of the others hath his peculiar ship, to thee (he speakes to Eu∣genius Pope S. Peters successor) is committed that one mighty great ship made of them all, to wit the vniuersall Church of the whole world. I conclude therfore, that the ship of S. Peter is the pa∣storall Chayre, from whence the doctrine of Christ is to be learned by all, and the Arke of Nōe, out of which none can be saued; and that therfore betweene his ship, and that in which S. Paul sayled; as also betweene the priuiledges granted to the one, and to the other, there is as much diffe∣rence, as betweene the eternall saluation of all Gods elect, and the corporall lyfe of a few Mariners, and passengers, that sayled with S. Paul. Your seauenth and principall Obiection isPag. 65.: If S. Pe∣ter had written of himselfe, as S. Paul did of himselfe, saying: I haue the care of all the Churches, this one wold haue seemed to you a firmer foundation, then the word, Rock, or any other of those Scriptures, wherby you labour to erect a Monarchy on S. Peter, and (by your con∣sequence) vpon the Pope ouer all Churches in the world. Answere. There are two kindes of solicitude, and care: one procee∣ding from the obligation of iustice, the other merely out of the zeale of Charity. The supreme care which S. Peter had both of all Churches, and of their Pastours was of obliga∣tion of iustice, because he had iurisdiction ouer them all, as being supreme Pastor ouer the whole flock of Christ: and therfore as the Pastor hath obligation of iustice to gouerne his flock, and attend to the good therof, so had S. Peter to attend to the good & gouerment of the vniuersall Church, and whatsoeuer persons therof; which function was not committed to S. Paul, nor did Christ promise to build his Church on him, as he did on S. Peter: and therfore that care he had of the vniuersall Church, proceeded from his great zeale of Gods glory, and feruorous charity, which made him trauell so much in the conuersion of soules.
SECT. VI. What estimation S. Paul had of the Roman Church. YOu say,Pag. 65. S. Paul had not by farre so great estimation of the Roman Church, as we would make the world belieue. How proue you this? because (say you) Dionysius Bishop of the Corinthians, (witnesse EusebiusL. 2. c. 24. sayth, that Peter and Paul both founded the Church of Corinth, and that of Rome. This then is your argument: Dionysius Bish. of Corinth sayth; Peter and Paul founded the Churches of Corinth, and Rome: Ergo S. Paul had not by farre so great estimation of the Church of Rome, as we would make the world belieue. A witlesse consequence: It is true, that we account it a great honor, and happinesse for the Church of Rome, to haue bene founded by those two most glorious Princes of the Apostles: and so it was also to the Church of Corinth. But the Church of Rome was not only founded, but moreo∣uer ennobled by them: for (as TertullianL. de Praescr. c. 36. obserueth) they powred into her all their doctrine, togeather with their bloud, and enriched her with the inestimable treasure of their sacred bodies. But her chiefest dignity, and that which maketh her absolutely the Head and Mother of all Churches, is, that S. Peter the supreme Pastor and Gouernor of the vni∣uersall Church fixed his seate at Rome, and ending his life there, left the same dignity to his successors: and they (as oc∣casion required) ceased not to send their pastorall admoni∣tions to the Corinthians: for when not long after S. Peter and Paul had founded a Church among them, they fell in∣to errors and dissentions among themselues, S. Clement Pope successor to S. Peter, writ vnto them (sayth S. Irenaeus)L. 3. c. 3. potentissimas literas, most effectuall letters, reducing them to peace, and shewing them the Doctrine, which they had newly recea∣ued from the Apostles. And to the same purpose Soter Pope, not long after, writ also vnto them. And that the Corin∣thians acknowledged these epistles of the Roman Church to be sent vnto them, as from their Mother Church whose doctrine they were to imbrace, and receaued them as such,
appeareth in this, that (is Dionysius their Bishop, and Eu∣sebiusL. 4. hist. c. 22. out of him testify) they held them in so great ve∣neration, that they vsed to read them publikely in the Churches, for the instruction of the saythfull. But this you could not see, or if you did see it, were willing to conceale it, as not being for your purpose. 2. Wheras we in commendation of the Roman fayth and Church are wont to alleage those words of S. Paul, in his Epistle to the RomansRom. 1.8.: I giue thankes to my God; through Iesus Christ for all you, because your fayth is renowned throughout the whole world; you sayPag. 66., that we vpon this commendation of the fayth of those Romans, vse in a manner to triumph, as though that Encomium with the same fayth were hereditary to that Church, or as if at that day, Catholike, and Roman, had bene all one. If in this testimony of S. Paul we triumph, and hold the Catholike fayth, and the Roman fayth, to be all one, and hereditary to the Church of Rome, we do therin nothing more, then what the most holy and learned Doctors of Gods Church from tyme to tyme haue done. And as out of this passage of S. Paul we shew you, that the fayth of the Roman Church was pure in the Apostles tyme, so we require of you (as S. AugustineL. de. vnto. Eccles. c. 12. & 13. did of the Donatists) to shew vs out of Scri∣pture, that after 600. yeares she was to fall from the true fayth, as you pretend her to haue done. Let them (sayth S. Augustine) reade vs this in the Scripture, and we yeild: but if they reade not this in the Scripture, but seeke to persuade it by their con∣tentions wrangling, I belieue those things which are read in the holy Scriptures, but I belieue not those which are affirmed by vaine here∣tikes. And in requiring this at your hands, we require no o∣ther prose for the truth of your Protestant Church & fayth, but what we are able to shew for ours: for that the Roman Church cannot erre in sayth I haue already prouedHoc cap. sect. 1. & 2. out of Scriptures and Fathers, which therfore conuince her to be the true Catholike Church, in which the spirit of truth dwelleth for euerIoan. 14.16. And that the Catholike Church, & the Roman Church, are termes conuertible denoting one and the same thing, hath also bene prouedAboue Chap. 1. sect. 3.. But because you seeme to thinke, that out of this text of S. Paul it cannot be
proued, that the fayth which S. Peter deliuered to the Ro∣mans, is hereditary to the Church of Rome, or that the Ca∣tholike fayth, and the Romen fayth are all one, it will not be amisse to let you heare, what the ancient Fathers (the best interpreters of Scripture) haue belieued in this point. That holy and renowned Martyr S. CyprianL. 1. ep. 3. out of this text proueth, that the Roman Church cannot fall from that fayth which she once receaued. They (to wit the No∣uatian heretikes) hauing set vp a false Bishop presume to carry let∣ters from Schismatikes, and heretikes, to the chayre of Peter, and the principall Church, from whence Sacerdotall vnity is deriued, not con∣sidering, that the Romans are they whose fayth was praysed by the mouth of the Apostle, and to whom vnfaithfulnes, can haue no accesse. If vnfaithfulnes can haue no accesse to the Romā Church, it followeth that she retaineth still the same fayth, which was commended by S. Paul, and that whosoeuer belieueth at this day as she belieues, is free from all error in fayth. The same is confirmed by an other testimony of the same Fa∣ther, who writing to Cornelius Pope, and diuers of the Romans suffering banishment in the persecution of De∣cius, and praysing their constancy and fayth, saythEp. 57.: It was fore-seene in spirit, and prophetically foretold by the Apostle: My dea∣rest brethren whiles you are of one hart, and one voyce, it is the con∣fession of all the Roman Church; that fayth hath shined in you which the Apostle praysed. He did euen then foresee in spirit, this prayse of your vertue, and strength of your constancy, and by prediction of fu∣ture things gaue testimony of your desertes, and commnding the pa∣rents, incouraged their Children. With S. Cyprian accordeth S. Hierome: When (sayth he to Demetrias)Ep. 8. thou wast litle, and the Bishop Anastasius of happy and holy memory gouerned the Roman Church, a cruell tempest of heretikes risen out of the Easterne parts attempted to pollute and corrupt the sincerity of that fayth, which had bene commended by the mouth of the Apostle: but this personage (Pope Anastasius) rich in a most plentifull pouerty, and in an Apostolicall care, brake the pesti∣lent head, and stopped the hissing mouth of that Hydra. And because I feare, yea haue heard say, that the buds of this most renemous plant do still liu, and spring vp in some, I thought it my duety, to ad∣monish
thee in a deuout zeale of Charity, that thou keepe fast the fayth of S. Innocentius his sonne, and successor in the Apostolicall chayre. And writing to Theophilus, Patriarke of Alexan∣driaEp. 68.: Know, that we haue nothing in greater recommendation, then to conserue the statutes of Christ, and not to transgresse the bounds of our Fathers, and alwayes to haue in mynde the Roman fayth praysed by the mouth of the Apostle, wherof the Church of Ale∣xandria glories to partake. And impugning Ruffinus his errors as being contrary to the Catholike faythLib. 1. A∣pol. aduers. Ruffin.: Know thou, that the Roman fayth commended by the Apostle, receaues not such delu∣sions: though an Angell should denounce otherwise then it hath hene once preached, it cannot be altered, being fensed by Pauls authority. If therfore S. Hierome be to be credited, the Roman fayth in his tyme was conserued pure, as it was preached, and cannot be altered, as you pretend it to haue bene since that tyme. And therfore, as it were speaking to youEp. 6. ad Pammach. & Ocean. he fur∣ther sayth: Who-euer thou art, that auouchest new sects, I pray thee haue respect to the Roman eares, spare the fayth which was commen∣ded by the voyce of the Apostle. And to Paula and Eusto∣chiumProem. lib: Comment. in ep. ad Galat.: Will you know, how the Apostle hath noted euery pro∣uince with their proprieties? the fayth of the people of Rome is pray∣sed; where is so great concourse to Churches, and to Martyrs sepul∣chers &c. Not that the Romans haue any other fayth then the rest of the christian Churches, but that in them there is more deuotion, and simplicity of fayth. To which place of S. Hierome the Ange∣licall Doctor S. Thomas alluding, saythIn vers. 8. cap. 1. ad Rom.: The Romans are commended for their fayth, because they receaued it easily, and perse∣uered in it constantly: from whence it is, that to this day are shewed very many signes of their fayth in the visitation of holy places, as S. Hierome sayth vpon the Epistle to the Galathians. And a litle after: The Apostle reioyceth, and giueth thankes to God for their fayth, not only for their sake, but for the profit that followed therof, because they being Lords of nations, other countreys were moued to belieue by their example: for as the Glosse sayth; The inferior doth readily, what he sees done by his Superior: which last words are also of S. Am∣brose. And S. Augustine speaking of Pelagius the Arch-heretikeL. 2. de peccat. orig. cont. Pelag. c. 8., sayth: He deceaued the Palestine Councell, and ther∣fore seemeth to haue bene absolued there. But he was not able to de∣ceaue
the Roman Church, (though be endeauored, to do is) because the most blessed Pope Zozimus called to minde what opinion (Innocen∣tius) his predecessor worthy to be imitated, had of his proceeding: and be considered likewise, what iudgment the fayth of the Romans wor∣thy of prayse in our Lord did make of him: for he perceaued them with vnited endeauors to striue earnestly against his error for the Catholike truth. The reason therfore why Pelagius after he had decea∣ued the Councell of Palestine, endeauored also to deceaue the Roman Church by a feigned profession of his fayth sent to Innocentius Pope, was, because it was the constant be∣liefe of all Christians in those dayes, that the Roman Church as being heyre of the fayth commended by S. Paul, could not approue any doctrine, but what was truly or∣thodoxall and Catholike, as Pelagius in that his profession acknowledgeth, saying:In fin. Symb. ad D. apud Hieron. to 4. & Ba∣ron. anno 417 This (o most blessed Pope) is the fayth which I haue learned in the Catholike Church, and which I haue al∣wayes held, and do bold. Wherin if I haue said any thing ignorantly, or vnwarily. I desire to be corrected by you, that hold the fayth and chayre of Peter. If this my confession be approued by the iudgment of your Apostleship, whosoeuer layes an aspersion on me, shall shew him∣selfe to be ignorant, or malicious, or els not to be a Catholike; but he shall not proue me to be an heretike. With this profession Pelagius sought to deceaue the Roman Church, but could not, be∣cause Zozimus (sayth S. AugustineProximè cit. considered what iudg∣ment the fayth of the Romans commended by the Apostle, had made of him in the tyme of (Innocentius) his predecessor. For which cause Procopius truly saidL. 1. de bello Goth.: If euer any, surely the Romans chiefly are they that haue had the Christian fayth in veneration. I conclude therfore, that (if the holy Fathers haue vnder∣stood the Scriptures aright) the fayth of the Roman Church is proued to be infallible, not only by the Scriptures for∣merly alleagedSupra hoc ap., but by this very passage of the Apostle. Nor do Tolet, or Sà, whome heere you obiectPag. 66., say ought to the contrary: for if they obserue, that when the A∣postle sayth to the Romans, your fayth is published euery where, it is an hyperbole (because the sense is not, that the fayth which they belieued, was then actually preached throughout the whole world, but that is was a thing knowne, and published throughout the whole
world, that they had belieued) they say nothing, but what is true: for the Apostle cold not say, that the Roman fayth which was the fayth of Christ, was then actually preached in all partes of the world, as neither it is yet at this day; but that it was publikely knowne throughout all the world that the Romans had receaued the fayth of Christ, because in common speach and morall reputation, that which is diffused ouer a great part of the world, and famously knowne, is said to be euery where. And this publike fame was of great moment for the conuersion of other nations: for Rome being the Head of the world, whither all sorts of people vnder that vast Empyre had recourse for discharg of their tributes, and accompts of their offices, they cold not but haue knowledge that the Romans belieued in Christ. And (as Tolet noteth out of S. Chrysostome, but you to detract from the Romans what prayse you can, conceale it) this publike same and knowledg of their beliefe, was an example and a great motiue for other nations to receaue the fayth of Christ. Now, wheras you addePag. 60., It is an obiection now a dayes breathed into the mouth of euery vulgar Papist, that at that day, Ca∣tholike, and Roman were all one, the testimonies of antiquity which I haue formerly brought in profe therof, shew that none but he, which is not so much as vulgarly read in Ecclesiasticall history, can be ignorant of so certaine a truth. Wherfore you speake vntruly, when you say, it is an insultation of ours easily checked with a paralell of the like, if not of a larger commendation of the Church of Thessalonica by the same Apostle. 1. Thessal. 1.2. We giue thankes alwayes to God for you all, making mention of you in our prayers, remembring without ceasing your worke of fayth. And a∣gaine. v. 8. From you (sayth he) sounded out the word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in euery place your fayth to Godward is spread abroad &c. This is your paralell, which is easily disparalelled: for as Baronius obseruethAnno 58. out of S. Chrysostome, the Romans being Head of the world, their fayth was a forcible motiue to bring other nations to be∣lieue in Christ. And therfore S. LeoSerm. 1. in Nat. Apost. Pet. & Paul. had reason to say, that S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, not by humane counsell, but by
diuine ordination came from Antioch to Rome, to preach the Ghos∣pell and fixe his chayre in that Citty, that so the chiefe seat of religion might be, where the Head of superstition had bene: and that the fayth from thence as from the top of the Empyre might be diffused through∣out the world. And S. Anselmen c. 1. ad Rom. that, S. Paulgiuing thankes to God for the fayth of the Romans, sayth: I giue thanks to God for all the faithfull, & in the first place for all you, because you are the chiefest, the Roman Church hauing the primacy among all Churches. And wher∣as the Apostle sayth, The fayth of the Romans is published through∣out the whole world, the same S. Anselme notethIn c. 1. ad Thessal., that he sayth not so to the Thessalonians, but, You are made a paterne to all that belieue in Macedonia and Achaia: and from you the word of our Lord was bruted not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in uery place, that is (sayth he) in euery place neare to you. And hereby it appeareth that the Romans for the example of their fayth and the profit that redounded therby to others, were preferred by S. Paul before the Thessalonians, as farre as the whole world (ouer which the conuersion of Rome was quickly spread) exceedeth Macedonia & Achaia, with a few bordering Prouinces, which only had notice of the Thessalonians. And therfore S. Paul giueth a further prayse to the RomansRom. 15.15.: I am assured of you, that you are also full of loue, replenished with all knowledge, so that you are able to admonish one another. And againeRom. 16.19.: Your obedience is published into eue∣ry place: none of which prayses he gaue to the Thessalo∣nians. But lest we should gather any preeminence of the Ro∣man Church, because the Epistle to the Romans among all S. Pauls epistles hath the first place, you preoccupate this obiection, telling vsPag. 67. that the epistle to the Thessalonians and others were written before that to the Romans. Be it so: but we aduertise you with S. AnselmePraefat. in ep. ad Rom.. It is to be belie∣ued, that they which collected S. Pauls epistles into one body, iudged that the epistle to the Romans ought to haue the first place, because it was addressed to that Citty which was then Head of the whole world, and because the Roman Church still vntill this day hath the soueraign∣ty of all Churches. And in his commentary of the eight verse of the first Chapter, Here againe (sayth he) it is manifest, that
the pistle to the Romans ought to be placed first, because the Romans among all the faythfull are the chiefest, & because the Roman Church hath the soueraignty among all Churches. SECT. VII. Why S. Paul did not intitle his Epistles, Catholike Epistles. THat S. Paul in his epistle to the Romans hath giuen sufficient testimony of the preeminency of the Ro∣man Church aboue all others, is a thing manifest, if not you but the ancient Fathers may be the iudges. Them you must giue vs leaue to follow, and forsake you, fighting against S. Paul and them. Against this truth you frame yet two Arguments more: The first isPag. ., that whereas the epistles of S. Iames, Peter, Iude, and Iohn are intituled Catholike epistle, if S. Paul had bene possessed with the spirit of the now Bishop of Rome, he would haue intituled the Church of Rome, the Catholike Church, and at least in∣scribed his epistle▪ Catholike. The second isIbid., that he giueth not to the Roman Church so much as the title of a Church, which yet in his prefaces to the Corinthians, Galathins, and Thessalonians he giues to those Churches. To the first I answere, that the Apostles themselues did not giue to any of their epistles the name of Catholike epistles. That title is prefixed to the epistles of Iames, Peter, Iohn, & Iude by the Church for diuers reasons, which you may reade in SalmeronDisp. 1. in Ep. S. Iacobi. and chiefly because (as S. AugustineDe fide & oper. c. 14. witnesseth) they were written against the heresy of Si∣mon Magus, defending Iustification by only fayth, wherin Protestants are his heires. And for that cause their epistles insist so much on good workes, and the keeping of Gods Commandements, and shew that fayth without charity is dead and fruitlesse. And for the same cause S. IohnEp. 1. vers. 24. & 27. ad∣monisheth the faythfull, to abide in that Doctrine which they haue heard from the beginning, because many seducers are gone out into the world. And S. IudeVers. 4.8. & seqq. exhorteth them to stand to their old fayth, shewing them by examples, that it is dam∣nable not to be constant in it.
To your second Argument I might answere with 8. Chrysostome, that they which were but a small number newly conuerted, and weake, S. Paul salutes them by the name of a Church, to comfort them; but not those, that were more in number, and of longer standing, as the Ro∣mans were, when he writ vnto them. For this reason I say, that as S. Paul did not salute the Ephesians, Philippians, & Colossians, by the name of a Church in expresse words, so neither did he the Romans, but only virtually and impli∣citly, sayingRom. 1.7. To all that are at Rome the beloued of God, called Saints, which title cannot agree to any congregation, but to a true Church of Christ, asTom. 13. disp. 7. in ep. ad Rom. Salmeron learnedly proueth, and you contradicting your selfe acknowledge, saying:Pag. 7. sin. S. Paul to shew that the Church rather doth consist in the professors then in the place, omitteth the name of a Church, and mentioneth only the persons saying: To the Saints at Colosse: To them at Rome be∣loued of God, called Saints. But because you mention Salme∣rons solution, I will giue the reader notice, how fouly you abuse and fallify him. He giues three solutions to this Argu∣ment. The first, he most approueth; and this you wholly pretermit to persuade your reader, that he giues not three, but only the two later: and therfore wheras he begins the second thus: Posset secundò commode dici, you leaue out fecundo that this may seeme not to be his second solution, but his first: and to the same end you say, allata alia solutione, ad hunc redit, that hauing brought another solution he returnes to this, saying, but the first solution in my iudgment is more sode, which words containe a most notorious falsification: for he returnes not to this, which you make the first, by leauing out secundò, but to the first of the three, which you neuer mention. And wheras he sayth, that the first solution is in his iudgment the more solide, you by falsifying, apply this his saying to the second; against which because you can make a shift to cauill, you would haue your reader thinke it is Salmerons first solution, and that he thought it to be the most solide of all the three. But of what import to your cause is this iugling? Marry, that because in the second solution Salmeron mentioneth
the factions that were then in Rome betweene the Iewes and Gentiles, you may inferre, that S. Paul did thinke Rome to be (as other Churches) subiect to the alteration of Schismes and factions: and in proofe therof you say,Pag. 69. that, not only our Professors among themselues, but also Popes and Antipopes were distracted into diuers Schismes, and factions &c. One of our deuout Doctors reckoning the number of these Schismes to haue ben twenty; an other accounting the continuance of one of them to haue endured fifty yeares. Our Deuout Doctor whom you mention to proue that there hath ben twenty schismes in the Roman Church, is Stapleton. The place in which you cite him is his thirteenth booke, De princip. Doctrin. Cap. 15. wheras in that worke he hath but twelue bookes in all. But be it, that there haue ben twenty Schismes in the Ro∣man Church: Schisme is not a sinne against fayth, but a∣gainst Charity. If then Antipopes or other professors of the Roman Church haue broken the bond of charity, was it therfore lawfull for you to renounce the fayth of the Ro∣man Church? If Schismes be a lawfull cause of departure, who can stay in your Protestant congregation, diuided & subdiuided into Lutherans, Caluinists, Zwinglians, Bro∣wnists and a thousand other Sects vnder these? new ones daily arising among you, as Separatists and Socinians, all which are diuided not only in poynt of charity, but in the very substance of fayth. And surely you are ill aduised to obiect the Schismes of the Roman Church in iustification of your departure from her: for since (as our Authors haue aduertised) nether the persecutions of heathen Emperors, nor the Gothes and Vandals, nor the Turke, nor any sacks, or massacres by Alaricus, Gensericus Attila, Borbon, and others, nor the emulation of secular Princes, (were they Kings or Empe∣rors) nor the many Schismes and diuisions betweene the lawfull Popes and Antipopes, nor the manifold difficul∣ties & dangers in their elections, nor the great vices which haue bene noted in some of their persons, nor any scan∣dall, haue had power to ouerthrow the Roman Church, as they haue done the Churches of the East, and many of the
West; it is a manifest signe (& so much the more euident, the greater the persecutions, and the more and longer the schismes haue bene) that she is the impregnable Rock which the proud gates of hell cannot ouerthrow. SECT. VIII. Other Arguments out of S. Paul, and other Catholike Authors answered. S. Paul writing to the Romans saythRom. 1.13.: I haue often pur∣posed to come vnto you that I may haue some fruite in you, as also in the other Gentils. Toletin eum loc. Annot. 22. vpon these words obserueth that the Ghospell is indifferent to all, and that howbeit the Romans were more eminent then other nations, and had the primacy, yet in prea∣ching of the Ghospell and busines belonging to saluation, the Apostle equalleth others with them. These words of Tolet you obiectPag 70. but to what end I know not: for Tolet declareth the reasō why S. Paul equalleth other nations with the Romans in preaching to them the doctrine of Christ, and procuring their saluation, to be, because, as Christ found all sinners and dyed for all; so he calleth all, and receaueth them from whence soeuer they come. If you had set downe these words of Tolet, you had discouered, that to inferre either from his, or S. Pauls words, the equality of other Churches with the Roman in matter of iurisdiction, is a senselesse illation: for by the same consequence you may inferre, that all Diocesans in spiritual iurisdiction are equall with their Bishops, and all subiects in temporall power with their Princes, because Christ hauing shed his bloud equally for all, the soules of all are equally deare to him, and their saluation ought with all indifferency to be procured by preaching the Ghospell to all aswell to the least, as to the greatest, to the poorest, as to the richest. 2. No lesse impertinently you obiect other words of the same ApostleRom. 11.19. in which (as you confesse) he exhorteth not the Romans in particular, but all the conuerted Gen∣tils in generall, not to be ouer-wise, but to feare, lest they also be broken off by infidelity, as the Iewes were. For
these words shew, that no man hath certainty of fayth that he shall be saued, as Protestants vaynly presume themsel∣ues to haue, but that all ought to liue in feare, lest they fall into infidelity, or other sinnes: which feare the Bishop of Rome and the Romans ought to haue, as well as other nations. But to inferre from thence, that the Bishop of Rome may teach hereticall Doctrine ex Cathedra, or that the whole Roman Church may fall from the fayth (which is the poynt in controuersy) nether is it S. Pauls meaning, nor any Interpreter euer expounded so. 3. As little to your purpose it is, that S. Paul saythRom. 1.11. to the Romans, I desire to see you, that I may impart vnto you some spirituall grace to confirme you: for therby, as S. Hierome (or whosoeuer is the author of those Commentaries) Theodo∣ret, S. Chrysostome and S. Thomas expoundIn eum lo∣cum., he shew∣eth that they had receaued the fayth already from S. Peter: Because (sayth Theodoret) the great Peter had already declared to them the Euangelicall Doctrine, therfore S. Paul necessarily ad∣des, To confirme you. And S. Hierome: Paul sayth, he will con∣firme the Romans already belleeuing: not that they had not receaued the fayth by the preaching of Peter, but that their fayth might be strengthned by the witnesse and doctrine of two Apostles. Wherfore S. Paul desired to see them to confirme them, that is (as he himselfe declareth) to the end both he & they might receaue mu∣tuall comfort from each other; they by his fayth, and he by theyrs. What makes this against the primacy of S. Peter, or of the Roman Church? 4. You obiectPag. 72▪ Bellarmine, confessing that S. Peter & Paul were Co-sounders of the Roman Church. He doth so; & it is true: but yet so, that S. Peter first planted that Church, & S. Paul came not to Rome till many yeares after, to assist him: for which cause the conuersion of the Romans and the planting of Christian religion there, is absolutely at∣tributed to S. Peter. Our will is (say the godly Emperors Theodosius and Gratian)Cod. tit. 1. l. 1. that all the people ruled by the Em∣pire of our clemency, shall liue in the same religion which the diuine A∣postle Peter gaue to the Romans, as the religion insinuated by him vn∣till this present witnesseth, and which it is manifest, that the high
Priest Damasus followeth. Wherfore when Bellarmine sayth, that S. Peter and Paul were Co-founders of the Roman Church, he sayth it not to equall them in the foundation, and much lesse in authority: for in that very placeL. 1. de Pout. c. 27. he learnedly proueth that in authority S. Peter farre exceeded S. Paul. 5. You obiectPag. 72. out of Lorinus, that S. Epiphanius calleth both Peter and Paul Bishops of Rome. True: but S. Pauls Episcopall authority was only transient: he had no Episco∣pall Chayre at Rome, as S. Peter had: and therfore Lo∣rinus sayth, that S. Epiphanius called S. Paul Bishop of Rome in no other sense, then because he exercised the Episcopall functions there, as he might doe in any other place of the world. This explication contents you not: and therfore you sayPag. 72. marg., it is confuted in the next testimony, and in the Challenge following: but you breake promise; for there you nether confute it, nor mentiō it. And as for the thing it selfe, it is manifest: for no man euer sayd that S. Paul had an Episcopall Chayre at Rome, as S. Peter had: no do S. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, Optatus, S. Augustine, S. Epiphanius (whome you ob∣iect,) making catalogues of all the Roman Bishops from S. Peter till their tyme, nor any other writers, reckon S. Paul as one of them. 6. You obiectPag. 72., that, the authority of both is cited in the Popes Breues for confirmation of Papall ordinances: that both haue their images ingrauen in the Popes bulls, and that in such sort, that Paul somtime hath the right hand of Peter, as well as other while Peter of Paul. You often borrow arguments out of Catho∣like authors, and conceale their answeres. This you bor∣rowed out of Bellarmine.L. 1. de Pot. c. 27. who largely and learnedly answereth, giuing three different solutions vnto it: To him I remit the Reader. Only I will tell you, that the wordes which you set down in a different character as of Peterius are not his, but your owne: for thogh he proue out of Scrip∣ture, & out of a place of Virgil, that apud homines, among men the right hand is the better and more honorable, yet he sayth not, that it is so among all people sauing the Persians (as you by adding to his words this particle, All, make him to say:) for he acknowledgeth, and Bellarmine out of Eusebius &
Nebrissensis proueth the like by examples of other natiōs. And to what he sayth, I adde the reason, which Blessed Augustinus Triumphus a holy and ancient wryter that li∣ued 400. yeares since, yieldeth,De Potest. Ecclesiact. c. 7. art.  why S. Paul in the Popes buls is somtimes placed on the right hand of S. Pe∣ter. S. Paul (sayth he) was lesse then Peter, greater then Peter, and equall to Peter. He was equall to Peter in the office of preaching: lesse then Peter in Ecclesiasticall power, for Peter alone was Cephas, that is, Head of the whole Church: but he was greater then Peter in the prerogatiue of his election to the Apostleship, for he was chosen by Christ after his resurrection, & glorification: & for this cause Paul in the Popes bulls is placed on the right hand, & Peter on the left. So he. Hauing now answered the arguments which hitherto you haue brought out of S. Pauls epistles, and shewed that by alleaging them, you conuince your owne Doctrine of falshood, and proue ours; I must craue pardon, if I aske you a question concerning his Epistle to the Romans, which Optatus asked the Donatists concerning some other of his epistles, and S. Augustine concerning them all. How dare you (sayth Optatus)L. . cont. Parmen. read S. Pauls epistle to the Romans, in whose communion you are not? You (sayth S. Augustine)L. 2. de Baptism. c. 6. that haue it, and read it, and say that you liue according to it, why doe you not communicate with the Church to which it was sent? An∣swere, why haue you separated your selues &c? Choose which you will: If then (that is when Donatus, when Luther, when Caluin began) the Roman Church was polluted with errors, it was perished: for a Church that holds false, pernicious, schisma∣ticall, hereticall, blasphemous and Antichristian Doctrine (with which you often charge the Roman Church) can∣not be a true Church of Christ, but a Synagogue of Satan: from whence then had Donatus (Luther or Caluin) his begining? where was he Cathechized? where baptized? where ordayned? I conclude therfore as Optatus did against the Donatists, Know, that you are cut of from the holy Church. And I say to you as S. Augustine did to themL. de vnit. Eccles. c. 12.: You haue the epistle to the Ro∣mans but we read it, and beleeue it, and haue the Roman Church in our communion from which we grieue (with himPsal. cont. part. Donati. to see you lye cut of, she being that Rock which the prowd gates of hell ouercome not.
CHAP. XIII. Whether S. Iohn the Euangelist conceaued himselfe subiect to the Roman Church. YOVR Tenet isPag. 73., that S. Iohns fayth did not conceaue the Article of subiection to the Roman Church. In proofe therof you assume, that in his booke of Reuelation, he reuealeth the City of Rome to be Babylon, & that Autichrist shall haue his seate there: which though it were granted, yet I see not, which way it followeth, that. Iohn did not acknowledg himselfe subiect to S. Peter, or o his Successors in the Church of Rome. But let vs exa∣mine the particulers of your Doctrine and proofes. SECT. I. Whether Rome shall be the seat of Antichrist. THat the City of Rome is Babylon mentioned in the Reuelation (say youIbid. is the gener all consent of our owne Iesuits and o∣ther Diuines. But in proose hereof you can find no other Ie∣suits, nor Diuines to alleage, but Ribera, Viegas and the Rhemists, whom you abuse and falsify to make them serue your turne, as I shall now declare. The Rhemists (say you)Pag. 74. do thus farre grant▪ as to say: The great Antichrist shall haue his seat at Rome as it may well be, though others thinke that Hierusalem rather shall be his principall soat. But your Iesuits Ribera and Viegas both of them Spanish Doctors and pu∣blike professors do confidently auerre the contrary: and the one is so
bold as to hold him to be a most notable foole that shall deny it. But good Sir, by your leaue, this is a most notable vntruth. That which Ribera sayth, is, that towards the end of the world, Rome shall be burned, not only for her former sinnes of Idolatry, and persecuting of Christ, vnder the Pagan Em∣perors, but also for other sinnes, that in the end of the world she shall commit vnder Pagan Kings: and that this is so certaine out of the Apocalypse, that no man, though neuer so foolish, can deny it. This Ribera sayth: and it may well be said, that he who out of these words of Ribera in∣ferreth (as you do) that the City of Rome is to be the seat of Antichrist, or that Ribera sayth so, is, I will not say, a no∣table foole, but whether he deserue not that name, I leaue to the readers censure. The Doctrine of Ribera, Viegas, & the Rhemists is, that when S. Iohn calleth Rome, Babylon, he neither speaketh of the Church, or Pope of Rome, nor yet of the Citty of Rome, as she is vnder the gouerment of Christian Empe∣rors, or in obedience of the See Apostolike: for in that estate, the hath (sayth S. Hierome)L 2. cont. louin. wiped out the blasphe∣mies written in her forehead, by the confession of Christ. In that estateEp. 17. ad Marcell., there is in Rome the holy Church, there are the triumphant Monuments of Apostles, and Martyrs, there is the true confession of Christ, there is the fayth praysed by the Apostle, and gentility troden vnder foote, the name of Christ daily aduancing it selfe on high. Wherfore when S. Iohn calleth Rome. Babylon, Ribera, Viegas, and the Rhemists, with the ancient Fathers ex∣pound him to giue her that name, as she was the head of Paganisme, the mother of superstition, and Idolatry, and persecuted the Church and Popes of Rome, (being drunke with the bloud of the Saints, & Martyrs of Christ IesusApoc. 17.6. as she did vnder Nero, and Domitian, in S. Iohns tyme, & afterwards vnder other Pagan Emperors, when she put to death thir∣ty Popes successiuely, one after another; and as she shall do againe in the end of the world: for both Ribera and Viegas hold, that the Citty of Rome shall then fall from the obe∣dience of the See Apostolike, and from the fayth of Christ: and that as well for her enormous sinnes anciently com∣mitted
vnder the heathen Emperors, as also for other like, which in the end of the world she shall commit vnder hea∣thenish Kings, she shall be burn's and consumed with fyre. But that Rome euen then vnder pagans Emperors, was, or hereafter vnder Heathenish Kings, shall be the seate of An∣tichrist, neither Ribera, nor Viegas affirme, nor any way insinuate, as it may appeare out of their words, which you here set downe in LatinPag. 74. marg.: for those words, Roma sedes Antichristi which you attribute to Ribera, are not his, but foysted in by your selfe, to Father on him your owne fi∣ction. And therfore wheras here, & els where oftenPag. 377. 378. & alibi. you affirme peremptorily out of Ribera, and take it as a truth granted by him and vs, that Rome shall be the seate of An∣tichrist, you passe the limites of truth; for Ribera most ex∣presly affirmethAdcap. 11. Apoc. n. 20. sin. & 21. init. that Antichrist shall haue his Court in Hie∣rusalem & reigne there; and that the Iewes shall receyue and honor him as their Messias. And the same is the most common and receaued opinion as well of our moderne Diuines, as of the Ancient Fathers. Hippolitus Martyr, Lactantius, S. Chrysostome, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Se∣dulius, S. Damascen, Arethas, Seuerus Sulpitius, S. Grego∣ry of Tours. Venerable Bede, Haymo, and S. Thomas re∣lated by SuarezDefens. sid. l. 5. c. 16., BellarmineL. 3. de Pont. c. 13. and SandersVisib. Mo∣narch. l. 8. c. 26., that Antichrist shall not haue his seat at Rome, but at Hierusa∣lem. And if the Rhemists say, it may be that he shall haue his seat at Rome, withall they rightly obserue that, whosoeuer op∣poseth the Roman Church, or belieueth otherwise then she teacheth, belongs not to Christ, but is an Heretike, & a member of Antichrist, And the same was the beliefe of the most learned Doctors of Gods Church. S. HieromeEp. 57.: I know the See of Rome to be the Rock on which the Church is built. And speaking to Damasus PopeIbid.: Whosoeuer gathereth not with thee, scattereth, and is not of Christ but of Antichrist. And be∣fore him S. CyprianL. 1. ep. 8. had said: He that gathereth out of the Church and chaire built vpon Peter, scattereth. Optatus:L. 2. cont. Parmen. that whosoeuer opposeth the Episcopall chayre of Rome built vpon Peter, is a Schismatike and a sinner. S. LeoEp. 75.: that whosoeuer presumeth to oppose the Roman Church built by the voyce of our Sauiour vpon the
most blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles as vpon a Rock is either An∣tichrist, or a Diuel. S. Maximus a famous Martyr, & the greatest Diuine of his ageEpist. ad Marin. Diue.; that they which speake against the Church of Rome, are heretikes that with vnbrideled mouths breath out ini∣quity against heauen. S. BernardEp. ad Hil∣debert. Arch. Turon.; that, they which be of God, are vnited with the Pope, and he that stands but against him, either belongs to Antichrist, or is Antichrist himselfe. By these testimo∣nies it appeares first: how great reason the Rhemists, Ribe∣ra, and Viegas had to admonish you, that this Prophecy of S. Iohn, though (in their opinion) it point out the destru∣ction of the City of Rome for her Idolatry vnder the Pa∣gan Emperors, and for the Apostacy from the fayth vnder other wicked kings in the end of the world, when she shal returne to her ancient greatnesse; yet it aymeth not at the Church of Rome, or Bishop therof, because that Apostacy shall be from the fayth of that Church, and from the Bi∣shop therof. 2. And since you confessePag. 75. that these Authors ad∣monish their readers here of againe and againe, thereby you conuince your selfe of folly: for this your argument out of the Apocalyps against the Bishop and Church of Rome is wholy grounded on their exposition & testimony, which being so manifestly against you, what man but your selfe would haue produced them, or (which is all one) S. Iohn as expounded by them, for witnesses against the Roman Church? Or with what cōscience could you say herePag. 74. & afterwards againe so boldly repeatePag. 377. 378., as their Doctrine, that Rome shall be the seate of Antichrist, since Ri∣bera (from whom Viegas dissententh not) most ex∣pressly teacheth that Hierusalem shall be his seate, and that he shall raigne there? Is not this a most wilfull falsi∣fication? 3. And from hence the reader may learne how frau∣dulently you remit vs to the testimonies of Ribera & Vie∣gas in their exposition of this text of S. Iohn, to proue a necessity of your departure from the Church of Rome; since they condemne you as an heretike, and the holy Fa∣thers pronounce you to be a member of Antichrist for it.
The departure which S. Iohn speaketh of, is not from the Church of Rome, but from the idolatry and vices which in his tyme reigned in the City of Rome, and shall reigne in her againe in the end of the world. And this departure is not to be made so much by locall motion, as by steps of fayth, that is, by not communicating with her in her wic∣kednesse. And therfore notwithstanding that admoni∣tion of S. Iohn, Goe out of Babylon my people, the faythfull in his tyme did not leaue the Citty of Rome, but still remayned there, departing from her idolatry, and other Vices. But you askePag. 76. 77.; If the destruction of Babylon mentioned in the reuelation point only at the Citty, and not at the Church, or Bi∣shop of Rome, how can the Pope at that tyme still remayne Bishop of Rome, when he and all Christian people are departed out of the City, and the City it selfe is vtterly extinct? for then to be called Bishop of Rome (say you) is but a man in the moone, and, Titulus sine re. I answeare, though at that time the Citty of Rome shall be consumed with fire; yet the Church of Rome shall not, for youPag. 76. confesse, that the Church rather consisteth in the Pro∣fessors, then in the place: and therefore whiles the faythfulll Professors of the Roman Church, yea of Rome it selfe, with their Bishop shall remaine, which shalbe till the end of the world (though not in the Citty after it is destroyed,) the Church of Rome shall still remayne according to your owne Principle, and chiefly according to the oracle of Christ, That the gates of Hell shall neuer preuaile against her. Suppose (which God forbid) Turkes and Infidels should take from you the Citty of Durham; or that the same should be consumed by fire into ashes, the whole multitude of your good & godly Christians escaping away with your selfe, liuing, and be∣ing by you fed in some corner of your Diocesse; in this case would you say, the Church of Durham should be ex∣tinct? the Bishop of Durham become Titulus sine re? Should the superintendent of Durham, be changed into the man in the Moone? The Citty of Rome, as RiberaRibera in Apocal c. 1. n. 47. Ponti∣ficem cum multitudine Sanctorum eijcient. Nam multi viri bo∣ni, ex has po∣tissimùm Ci∣uitate, iecto Pontifici ad∣haerebunt. holdes, shall towardes the end of the world fall from the Christian fayth and o∣bedience
of her Bishop; not that all the people of Rome shall fall away, for a great multitude of good Christians, and Saints shall re∣maine constant, and adhere to the Pope, and depart with him out of the Citty; yea the Citty it selfe (their Bishop with the multitude of Saints being departed out of it) shall be consumed with fire before the reigne of Antichrist, or in the very beginning therof, asRiber a cap. 17 n. 20. in vers 16. Ex hoc, quod nunc ait A∣postolus, in∣telligitur Ro∣man euer∣tendam ante∣quam Anti∣christus reg∣nare incipiat, vel certè ipso initio regni eius. Ribera andViegas in cap 17. n. 5. Viegas reach. In this supposition why may not the Pope with that multitude of holy Chri∣stian Romans, be truly and verily, the Bishop, and Church of Rome? Why should that multitude of Roman Christian and Saints be titulus sine re, and not a very glorious and ve∣nerable Church? Why should the Pope then cease to be Bi∣shop, more then the Bishop of Canterbury should, in case Canterbury should be destroyed into ashes? Will you say v∣pon this contingent that the Bishop of Canterbury shall be the man in the moone, the sheepheard of Vtopia, to wit, ? You might haue learned from CusanusEpist. 2. ad Bohemos. (whome you cite of∣ten, and highly commend) that if by any accident the Citty of Rome should fayle, the truth of the Church shall remaine there, where the Principality, and seat of Peter shalbe. Nor is your example of the Emperor of RomePag. 77. any helpe to your Argument: For albeit the Roman Empyre be now in part decayed, or weakned, in respect of that power and greatnesse, which anciently it had; yet it still re∣mayneth so, that the name & succession of the Roman Em∣perors at this day is famous in the world: els why did our late Soueraigne King Iames inscribe his Monitory Prefa∣tion, Sacratissimo, atque inuictissimo Principi ac Domino, Rodul∣pho secundo Romanorum Imperatori, semper Augusto &c. And why els doth the Church of Rome in her OfficeIn die Pa∣rasceues & Sabbatho Sancto., pray for the Roman Emperor? Nor the Authors which you alledge for the contrary, do say ought els, though you falsify Salmeron to make his words found otherwise: for wheras he spea∣king of the Roman Empire, as it anciently was, sayth, Impe∣rium illud Romanum iamdiu euersum est, that Empire of Rome (to wit, with that ancient splendor, maiesty, and power, which once it had) is long since destroyed; you leaue out il∣lud, and make him say absolutely, The Roman Empire is long
since destroyed, wheras in the words next following, he ex∣presly affirmeth, that there is still a Roman Emperor, and that he is so called, although what now be possesseth, be but a very small sha∣dow of the ancient Empire. Lastly, I will not omit to put you in minde, of your weake manner of arguing throughout all this Section: for how doth it follow, that because Ribera and Viegas hold, that Babylon, out of which the faythfull are commanded to depart, is the City of Rome, as she shall be idolatrous in the end of the world, you may now lawfully reuolt from the Church of Rome? Againe, who obligeth me to allow of their exposition? I might retort your Argument vpon your selfe, and tell you, that Babylon signifies not Rome, but Geneua; and proue it by the testimony of Castalio, a prime brother of yours, who liued there, and was a speciall friend of Beza. They (sayth he speaking of the Geneuian brethren)Apud Rescium pag. 54. are proud, puft vp with glory, and reuenge: We may with lesse danger offend Princes, then exasperate these fiery Calui∣nists: their life is infamous, and villanous: they are Maisters of art in reproches lyes, cruelty, treachery, and insufferable arrogancy. They name their Geneua, The holy City; and their assembly, Hierusalem: but in very truth we should call it, O Babylon, Babylon; O infamous So∣dome, and children of Gomorrha. If you like not this exposition, yet I know no reason, why if you will belieue Ribera and Viegas expounding Babylon in the Apocalyps to be Rome you may not as well belieue your brethren Vdalricus Ve∣lenusLib. de hac r., and Henricus BuntingusIt iner. de it iner. Petri. denying it: and so much the more because S. Augustine, Tyconius Bede, Are∣thas, Primasius, Ansbertus, Haymo. S. Anselme, and S. ThomasApud Riber. in vers. 8. cap. 14. A∣poc., by Babylon vnderstand not Rome, but the socie∣ty of all the wicked in generall, from whose vices the faith∣full are commanded to departS. August. Breuic. Collat. collat. 3.. Others vnderstand Pa∣ganisme, which because it adoreth a confused multitude of Gods, is rightly named Babylon, that signifies Confusion; o∣thers Mahometisme, the mother of fornication, and all fil∣thinesse. Others, Constantinople, the Metropolitan of Tur∣cisme. And others, the chiefe City of the Chaldaeans, which is properly called Babylon. These expositions with their Au∣thors
and reasons, you may read in Cornelius à LapideAde. 17. Apoc., SuarezDefens. fid. l. 5. c. 7., and PeronReplic. Chapit. 15.. But the truth is, that all these senses, as likewise that of Ribera, being purely allegoricall, afford no solid foundation to build matter of fayth vpon, but are merely coniecturall. And therfore if S. August. sayEp. 48., Who dares with an vnbridled licence produce for himselfe, that which is couched in an allegory, vnlesse he haue places more cleare by whose light to illustrate that which is obscure, we may with iust reason reproue you, for grounding your departure from the Roman Church vpon the allegoricall sense of those words of the Apocalyps, Get forth of Babylon my people: and so much the more, because the Authors whose exposition you take for your ground, admonish you, that by Babylon is not vnderstood the Church of Rome, but the City, & that not as it is Christian, but as it was idolatrous in S. Iohns tyme, and shalbe againe in the end of the world. But any thing will serue your turne, be it true or false, if by sleights you can wrest it against the Pope and Church of Rome. SECT. II. Whether S. Iohn suruiuing S. Peter were subiect to the Bishop of Rome, S. Peters Successor? SVarez treating of the authority of S. Peter, and his Suc∣cessors, moueth this questionDe trip. virtute disp. 10. sect. 1., Whether the Apostles that suruiued S. Peter, were subiect to S. Peters successor in the See of Rome? His answeare is: I remember not, that I haue read any thing of this point in Authors: but it seemes to me, to follow out of what hath bene said, that they were inferior in iurisdiction, and con∣sequently subiect therin to the Bishop of Rome, although in other ex∣cellencies and prerogatiues they were superior to him. For the same power and iurisdiction that was in S. Peter descended to his Succes∣sours; who therfore in three things surpassed the Apostles there liuing. 1. In the obiect of their power; for the charge and gouerment of the
whole Church belongeth primarily to the Successor of S. Peter, which (as I haue said) belonged not to the other Apostles. 2. That power did extend to all Bishops, because the reason of order and Ecclesiasti∣call vnity so required. 3. The power of the Bishop of Rome was al∣waies ordinary, and to continue perpetually in the Church, not so in the other Apostles. This is Suarez his Doctrine, which I haue set downe in his owne words, that the reader perusing yours, and com∣paring them with his, may see how you falsify: for both in your Latin margent, & English text, you leaue outPag. 79. the reason, wherwith he proues his assertion, and set downe for his only ground, that he cannot remember to haue read in any au∣thor any thing of this point, wheras he proues it out of what he had formerly said. And doth he not here againe proue it, out of the power and iurisdiction which was in S. Peter ouer the whole Church, & descended from him to his Suc∣cessors? And doth he not from thence inferr, three preroga∣tiues which his Successors had ouer the other Apostles, two of which you conceale? And though you set downe the third, yet it is in your Latin Margent only, and so dis∣membred from Suarez his context, that the reader will not easily vnderstand the force therof. Againe, who is so blind that sees not your absurd manner of arguing, which is thisPag. 78. 79. Suarez opinion is, that S. Iohn suruiuing S. Peter, was subiect to Linus his Successor, ergo, S. Iohns fayth did not con∣ceaue the Pope to haue iurisdiction ouer all other Bishops and Pastors in the Catholike Church. You might as well haue inferred, that because Yorke hath a Minster, London hath a Bridge: for this is as good a consequence, as yours. But hereby the Reader may see, with what silly Sophistry you de∣lude (or to vse your owne words against your selfe) with what vntempered morter, you daube vp, the consciences of your fol∣lowers. Now as for Suarez his assertion, that the iurisdiction of S. Peters Successor was greater, then the ordinary Episco∣pall iurisdiction of the other Apostles, a iudicious Reader wil easily conceaue to be no such improbable Doctrine, if he reflect, that the Successor to euery Bishop is inuested in
all the Episcopall authority of his predecessors and therfore Linus being Successor to S. Peter, it must follow, that 8. Peter being in Episcopall authority, and iurisdiction, supe∣rior to all the other Apostles, Linus had the same authori∣ty and iurisdiction ouer those that suruiued S. Peter. And this S. Chrysostome seemeth to haue expressedL. 2. de Sa∣cerd. 1, when he said: Christ committed to Peter, and to Peters Successors, the charge of those sheep, for the regayning of which he shed his bloud: from which number I trust you will not excluded S. Iohn, or any other of the Apostles that suruiued S. Peter. And what els did S. Cyril meane, when he saidApud S. Thom. Opusc. cont. error. Graec. c. 32.: As Christ receaued from his Father most ample power, so he gaue the same most fully to Peter. and his Successors? And what Paschasinus, when in the pre∣sence, and with the approbation of the Councell of Chal∣cedonAct. 1., he affirmed, the Pope to be inuested in the dignity of Peter the Apostle. And what meant S. BernardL. 2. de considerat. when he said to Eugenius Pope? Thou art Peter in power, and by vnction Christ: the sheep of Christ were not so without exception committed to any Bishop, nor to any of the Apostles as to thee: thou art Pastor not only of the sheep, but Pastor of all. Pastors. And what meant S. LeoSerm. 2.. Anniuers. suae assump. when he said: The ordinance of truth standeth, and S. Peter continuing in the receaued solidity of a Rock, hath not left the gouerment of the Church: for truly he perseuereth and liueth still in his Successors. And againeIbid.: In the person of my humility he is vnderstood, he honored, in whom the solicitude of all Pastors, with the sheep commended to him perseuereth, and whose dignity in an vn∣worthy heyre fayleth not. And what S. Peter (surnamed Chry∣sologusEp. ad Eutychet. when he exhorted Eutyches, to heare obediently the most blessed Pope of Rome, because S. Peter who liueth in his owne See, and is stil president in the same, exhibits the true fayth to those that seeke it? And what the Legates of Celestine Pope in the Councell of EphesusP. 2. Act. 2.? No man doubtes (for it hath bene no∣torious to all ages) that the holy, and most blessed Peter, Prince and Head of the Apostles, piller of the fayth, & foundation of the Catho∣like Church, liues and decides causes yet vnto this day, and for all e∣ternity by his Successors? And what Eulogius Patriarke of Ale∣xandria writing to S. GregoryApud Greg. l. 6. ep. 37., that Peter Prince of the A∣postles sitteth still in his owne Chayre, in his Successors? And what
S. Gregory himselfe reportingDial. l. 3. c. . that Agapet Pope com∣ming to Constantinople, the friends of a man that was lame and dumbe, beseeching him to cure that man by the authority of Peter the Apostle, Agapet by the same autho∣rity cured him. And what the Fathers of the sixt Councell generall, when commending the Epistle of Agatho Pope they saidAct. 18.: The paper and inke appeared, but it was Peter that did speake by Agatho. And finally, what Constantine Pogo∣nate, when writing to the Roman SynodApud 6. Syn. Act. 18., he admired the relation of Agatho, at the voyce of the diuine Peter himselfe. It followeth then, that if Linus was inuested in the E∣piscopall dignity and power of Peter, if S. Peter still liue and rule in his owne See, and decide causes in his Successors, if he speake by them, and their voyce be to heard as his voyce; to be subiect to Linus, was no other thing then to be subiect to S. Peter; and to diso∣bey Linus, was to disobey S. Peter, who did speake by Li∣nus, and gouerne in his owne See by him. Wherfore as the Apostles owed subiection to S. Peter, whiles he liued, so those that surui him, did to Linus, hauing the place of Peter for  rian alles the Roman See.L. 4. p. 2.
CHAP. XIV. Your fifth Chapter, with diuers Ar∣guments answered. SECT. I. Of the Name, Catholike. AFTER a discourse made from an Argu∣ment ab authoritate negatiuè, which euery Logician knowes to be of no force, you sayPag. 81.: We begin at the word, Catholike, and desire to vnderstand, why the epistles of Iames and Iohn, and Iude were called Catholike, or vniuersall, as well as the two Epistles of Peter, if the word Catholike were so proper to the Roman Chayre? seing that the Epistles of Iames, Iohn, and Iude were not sent to, or from Rome, nor had any relation to Peter there. Before I answere, I de∣sire you to remember, that the name Catholike by the an∣cient Fathers is giuen as a certaine note, or marke, wherby Orthodoxall people are distinguished from Heretikes, as you haue already heardChap. 2. sect. 2. out of Pacianus, S. Cyrill of Hie∣rusalem, and S. Augustine: and contrariwise that they who to expresse their fayth, haue taken new names (as the A∣rians of Arius, the Marcionists of Marcion, the Pelagians of Pelagius, the Donatists of Donatus, & the like) witnesse S. IrenaeusL. 1. c. 20., S. IustineIn Tri∣phone., LactantiusDiuin. in∣stitut. l. 4.30., S. Athana∣siusSerm. 1. cont. Arian., and S. HieromeCont. Lu∣cifer. fine., haue bene knowne therby (as by an vndoubted marke) to be Heretikes, who haue bene inforced to take new names, knowing that the ancient name of Catholike cold not agree to them. And for the same
cause you knowing your selues not to be Catholikes, & that you shall neuer be esteemed such, haue bene inforced to call your selues by a new name of Protestants, to distinguish your selues from those, who in all ages haue bene, and are still knowne by the name of Catholikes; by which neither we, nor you vnderstand any other, then those, which pro∣fesse the Roman fayth, and are in the communion of the Roman Church; Catholike and Roman being termes conuer∣tible, as hath bene prouedChap. 1. sect. 3.. And this is the reason, why Protestāts speaking not only to vs, but euen among them∣selues, euer call themselues Protestants, as knowing, that by Catholikes, no man vnderstands any other, but them that before Luther began, were, and are still knowne by that name, and can neuer loose the possession of it. This was a thing well knowne to ancient Heretikes, who therfore abhorred the name Catholike. So did Gau∣dentius the Donatist, calling itApud S. Aug. l. 1. cont. Gau∣dent. c. 23. a humane fiction. So did other heretikes, who speaking in the Lutheran language, saidPraefat. in nouum Te∣stam. anni 1565.; Come, O yee fooles, and silly wretches, that are commonly called Catholikes, and learne the true fayth, which lay hid many ages heretofore, but is now reuealed, and shewed of late. With these iumpe our Protestants: for Beza (k) call's it, A vayne word: Doctor HumphreyIn vita Iuelli p. 113., An empty tearme: Mayster Sutcliffe,Chal∣lenge pag. 1. A fruitlesse name: and others of you scoffe at the word,Doctor Bristow Mo¦tiues, pag. 7. nicknaming vs, Cacolikes, and Cartholikes. And this is the reason why the Lutherans reiected an allegation out of Luther, because (said theyIn Colloq. Altemburg. anno 1568. pag. 154. Is is not a phrase of Luther, that any thing ought to be vnderstood Catholikely. And for this cause (as LindanusIn Dubi∣tant. obserueth) Luther and other your new reformers in hatred of that name haue corrupted the Creed of the Apostles, saying in their Catechismes, insteed of, I be∣lieue the holy Catholike Church: I belieue the Christian Church. And you english Protestants insisting in their steps, for the good will you beare to that name, haue left it out of your Bibles: for whereas EusebiusL. 2. histo. c. 12. reporteth that the Epistles of Ia∣mes, Peter, Iohn, and Iude were knowne in antiquity by the name of Catholike Epistles, and therfore the Catholike Church so instiles them in her Bibles, you in yours of the
yeares 1562. and 1577. (which are yet currant among you, hauing neuer bene forbidden) haue wholy left out that name. And though since that tyme you haue bene ad∣monished of your bad dealing therin, yet still in all your later Bibles you commit the same fault, vsing the prophane signification of the word Catholike in lieu of the Ecclesia∣sticall, and in styling the Catholike Epistles, The generall E∣pistles, saying, The generall Epistle of Iames, of Peter &c. Who seeth not the absurdity of this translation? For it is as ridi∣culous to translate Catholike, Generall, as if when S. Hierome saidL. 1. A∣pol. aduers. Ruffin.: If Ruffinus call his fayth that, which the Roman Church professeth, then are we Catholikes, you should translate, Then are we Generalls: or whom S. AugustineContra ep. Fundam. c. 4. reporteth, that Ca∣tholikes trauailing among Heretikes, to distinguish their owne Churches from hereticall conuenticless, aske. qua itur ad Catholicam? which is the way to the Catholike Church, you should translate which is the way to the Generall? All this shew∣eth that you know your selues not to be Catholikes, since you seeke as far forth as you can, to suppresse the name. How therfore can you aske why the Epistles of Iames, Iohn, and Iude, were called Catholike, as well as the two Epistles of Peter? (I say) you that call none of them Catho∣like, but in a prophane manner, Generall Epistles? And that very improperly if not also falsly: for some of them, (as the two last of S. Iohn) were not written to all the faythfull in generall, but to particular persons: The reason why the Ca∣tholike Church instileth the Epistles of Iames, Iohn, and Iude Catholike Epistles, as well as the two Epistles of Pe∣ter, is, because they were written in defence of the Catho∣like fayth against heretikes, as well as the Epistles of S. Peter were. So it hath bene already shewed out of S. AugustineChap. 12. sect. 8.. Your second question isPag. 81.; why S. Paul was so sole, as of himselfe to anathematize the false Apostles? I answere, that not only S. Peter, but each of the Apostles had power to excommunicate or anathematize offenders; for their Apo∣stolicall iurisdiction was vniuersall ouer all the faythfull; but yet not ordinary, at S. Peters was: and therfore not to descend to their successors.
SECT II. Whether the title, of Vicar of Christ, belong to the Pope, and in what sense? YOur third question isPag. 82., why S. Paul did absolue the in∣cestuous Corinthian, as the Vicar of Christ, if (as Bellarmine pretendeth) that title wholly belong to the Pope, as an Argument of his succession from S. Peter in the Monarchy of the whole Church. This argumēt you vrge again afterwardsPag. 242. as of principal note, and confirme with the testimonies of S. Ignatius, of Euse∣bius Pope, and Genebrard who obserues that Tertullian calleth Paul, Vicar of Christ. Answere. The name of Vicar may be giuen to any one, that supplieth the place of ano∣ther. Kings are Vicars of God, in things belonging to Ciuill gouerment. Bishops are Vicars of Christ, in spirituall and ec∣clesiasticall affayres, because, the holy Ghost hath placed them to rule the Church of GodAct. 20.28.. All the Apostles were Vicars of Christ, because they were Legates, God as it were exhorting by them2. Cor. 5.20.: and thereby S. Paul had power to absolue the in∣cestuous Corinthian in the person of Christ, or, as his Vicar, as the Rhemists expound. But the supreme Vicar, and chiefe Lieutenant of Christ on earth (as S. Peter was, so now) is the Bishop of Rome his Successor: and so much the holy Councels haue declared. He that hath the See of Rome (sayth the Councell of Nice)Can. 39. ex Graecis & Arab. is Head and Prince of all Patriarkes: for as Peter was, so he is, the chiefe, to whom power is giuen ouer all Christian Princes, and all their people, as one that is the Vicar of Christour Lord ouer all people, and ouer the whole Christian Church. And the generall Councell of LionsIn Sxt. Decret. Cap. Vbi. pericu∣lum. calleth the Pope the Vicar of Iesus Christ, the Successor of Peter, the Gouernor of the Vniuersall Church; the guyde of our Lords slock. And in the same sense S. BernardL. 2. de Confid said: Peter walking vpon the water like our Lord, shewed himselfe to be the only Vicar of Christ, that was to go∣uerne not one nation, but all: for many waters, are many people: By this you see, that when we call the Pope, The Vicar of Christ, we take the name of Vicar, antonomastice, for him, that bea∣reth
the person, and holdeth the place of Christ, as vniuer∣sall Pastor and Gouernor of the whole Church. In which sense, neither Tertullian attributed that name to S. Paul, as Genebrard obserueth in that very place in which you cite him for the contraryChrou. l. 3. pag. 479.80.: nor doth it in that sense agree to any other Bishop but only to S. Peter and his Successors in the See of Rome; which Genebrard also testifieth against you in these words: Christ hath no Successors, because he still li∣ueth: but he hath Vicars and Ministers, on earth, among which Peter and the Bishops of Rome his Successors haue the Soueraignty, as all antiquity without exception hath belieued: and therfore with great reason we reckon their Succession, which is to continue till the worlds end, as one of the markes that hold vs in the lap of the Catholike Church. S. Ignatius, and Eusebius Pope you likewise abuse: for although Deacons be in their degree Ministers and Vicars of Christ, yet S. Ignatius sayth it not, but only commandeth the Trallians to whom he writeth, to reuerence them as our Lord Iesus Christ, and as guardians of that place: and so much his owne words set downe by youPag. 242. n. 15. in Greeke declare. The testimony of Eusebius you falsify: He sayth, Caput Ecclesiae Christus est, Christ is Head of the Church: You corruptly tran∣slate, There is one Head of the Church, Christ; to signify, that there is no one Head thereof vnder Christ, as his chiefe Lieutenant, and Vicar on earth; which is contrary to the Doctrine of Eusebius in the same Epistle, both before and after the words which you obiect. And to this you add an other corruption: for where Eusebius sayth, Priests are Vi∣cars of Christ you in your English leaue out the word Priests for the good will you beare to that name, and function. Whose Vicar may he be thought to be that deales so impo∣sterously? But you obiectPag. 82.: S. Paul to auoyd Schismes among the people, will not haue them adhere to any one man; no more to Cephas (that is Peter) then to Paul or Apollos: wheras your Roman Cephas would haue taught S. Paul a contrary lesson, saying, that they who adhere vnto Cephas, cannot be called Schismatikes, as those who hold of Apollos, because Cephas was the Rock whereupon the Church was
built. Answere. That Cephas was the ministeriall Rock on which Christ built his Church, is a truth asserted by Christ, and by all the Orthodoxall writers, that haue liued in the Church: & therfore with great reason they haue pronoun∣ced him, that separates himselfe from the communion of the Bishop and Church of Rome, to be, a sinner, a Schisma∣tike, an Heretike, and not to be of Christ, but of Antichrist. Their words I need not repeate; you haue heard them alreadyChap. 1. sect. 4.. And tell vs now; did those Fathers teach S. Paul a lesson contrary to our Doctrine? So you say, but misunderstand S. Paul: for S. Augustine, and S. Gregory expound him to speake these words against them, that contemning Christ did not build their fayth vpon him, but vpon men, as v∣pon Heads not subordinate to him;L. 4. ep. 38 or to vse S. Gregories words, extra Christum, out of Christ. Paul the Apostle (sayth S. AugustineSerm. 13. de verb. Dom. knowing himselfe to be chosen, and Christ to be con∣temned, said: What? is Christ diuided? was Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized in the name of Paul? In like manner expound S. Anselme, and S. ThomasIn eum loc., saying, that the Apostle spea∣keth against those that made many Christs, and many Authors of grace. What force then hath this Scripture against vs, who hold S. Peter and his Successors to be Vicars of Christ, and reuerence and obey them, because they are his Vicars? so farre we are from contemning him, or setting vp another Head different from him, as the false Apostles, and some of the Corinthians seduced by them, did; for which the Apo∣stle reprehendeth them. You might with more truth haue proued out of these words, with S. ChrysostomeIn hunc locum., that Paul acknowledged S. Peter to be his Superiour, because he spake ascending by gradation, that so he might place Peter aboue himselfe, and next to Christ. SECT. III. Whether S. Paul, reckoning the Ecclesiasticall Orders, gaue the Pope any place among them. IF S. Paul (say you)Pag. 82. had bene of our sayth to belieue, that the Pope of Rome as Successor of S. Peter, is the visible Head of the
Church, whereas he alleageth the Ecclesiasticall orders twice, first, A∣postles, then Prophets, after Doctors: and againe: Some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Euangelists, he should haue alleaged Pe∣ter among them, and the vnion with the Bishop of Rome, as a true note of the Church. Syr, you may be pleased to take for an answer the fearfull example, which Doctor SandersVifib. Mo∣narch. l. 7. pag. 690. related of one Wright a Doctor of law, and Archdeacon of Oxford, who after the change of Religion in England, being loath to loose his place, falling one day in a Sermon on these words of S. Paul, said: Here you find not one word of the Pope. Which when he had vttered, being presently strucken with a vehement disease, & as it were suddainly become dumbe, he was carried from the pulpit, not to dinner as he had in∣tended but to bed, where the eight day after he ended his life. I feare that this answer (howbeit it is from God) will not please you; S. Damascen will giue you another. For with him I desire to know of you (who to flatter Se∣cular Princes grant them the chiefest place of gouerment in the Church, making them Heads therof) where among the Ecclesiasticall Orders reckoned by S. Paul, you with all your wisdome can sind any place for secular Princes, or Magistrates, or any mention at all of them? It belonges not to Kings (sayth S. Damascen)Orat. 2. de Imagin. to giue lawes to the Church: for consider what the Apostle sayth, and whom he hath placed in the Church, first Apostles, after Prophets, then Pastors, and Doctors: in the constitution of the Church he placed not Kings: And againeIbid.. Obey your Prelates and be subiect to them, for they watch, as being to render accompt of your soules. And; remember your Prelates, which haue spoken the word of God to you. Kings are not they which haue spoken the word, but Apostles, and Prophets, and Pastors, and Do∣ctors. The ciuill gouerment belongs to Kings; but the Ecilesiasticall constitution to Pastors and Doctors. So Damascen, whose Do∣ctrine if it please you not, you may learne the same lesson from your Grand-maister Caluin, teaching, that the chie∣fest place of gouerment in Christs Church belonged to the Apostles, and so to Bishops and Priests their Successors. And lest you might thinke, that there is so much as one word in S. Paul, which may argue him to grant vnto secu∣lar
powers any place of gouerment in the Church. CaluinL. 4. In∣stit. c. 3. sect. 5. & cap. 11. sect. 1. specially noteth that by gubernationes, gouerments (which S. Paul after Apostles, and Doctors reckoneth in the sea∣uenth place) are not vnderstood ciuill officers, but, such men, as were ioyned to the Preachers, for better order in spirituall gouer∣ment. But though you in neither of these places (where the Apostle speaketh of the Ecclesiasticall dignities) can finde any place for secular Princes, and Magistrates, the Fathers of the Church haue found in both of them a place for the Pope: for S. Hierome obseruethIn Psal. 44. that in the Church, Bi∣shops succeed in place of the Apostles: and therefore Ter∣tullianL. de praes∣crip. c. 2. & 32., and S. AugustineEp. 162. haue noted, that their Churches were called Apostolicall, so long as they continued in the fayth receaued from the Apostles; as likewise all o∣thers, that being afterwards founded, agreed with them in Doctrine, or as Tertullian speaketh propter consanguinitatem doctrinae. Now as S. Peter was Head and Prince of the A∣postles, so the Roman Church in which he placed his Epis∣copall Chayre, and into which (sayth Tertullian)L. de praser. c. 36. both he, and S. Paul powred all their Doctrina, togeather with their bloud, was, and is still by a speciall prerogatiue called, The See Apo∣stolike, in so much, that when the See Apostolike is named without any addition, the Roman See is alwayes vnder∣stood. In this language speake S. HieromeL. 2. A∣pol. aduers. Ruffin. when he said Ironicè to Ruffinus: I wonder how the Bishops haue receed that, which the See Apostolike hath condemned. In this spake S. AugustineEp. 106., saying: Relations concerning this busines were sent by the two Councells of Carthage and Mileuis, to the See Apostolike. And els whereEp. 162.: In the Roman Church hath alwayes florished the Principality of the See Apostolike. In the same language spake the Councell of ChalcedonAct. 1., calling Paschasinus the Popes legate, The Vicar of the See Apostolike. And the Bishops of Dardania in their Epistle to GelasiusExt in∣ter epist. Ge∣lasij.: It is our desire to obey all your commands, and to keep inuiolate the ordinations of the See Apostolike, as from our Fathers we haue learned to do. And S. BernardL. 2 de Considerat. vpon those words of S. Paul, He that resisteth power, resisteth the ordinance of God, sayth to Conradus the Em∣peror:
This sentence I wish, and by all meanes admonish you to keep in yelding reuerence to the chiefe, and Apostolicall See. From hence it also proceedeth, that (as S. HieromeEp. 58. said to Damasus): The Bishop of Rome followeth the Apostles in ho∣nor, and therfore he aboue all other Bishops is called Aposto∣licus, Apostolicall. So was S. Leo called in the Councell of ChalcedonAct. 1., The most blessed and Apostolicall man, Pope of old Rome, which is the Head of all Churches. And the Bishops of FranceInter op. Leonis. to 52. salute him with the title of, The most blessed Pope to be reuerenced with Apostolicall honor. And RupertusDe diui offic. l. 1.27.: The Successors of the other Apostles are called Patriarkes: but the Succes∣sor of Peter for the excellency of the Prince of the Apostles, Apostoli∣cus nominatur, hath the name of Apostolicall. And Hugo Victo∣rinusL. 1. Erud. Theol. de sa∣cram. Eccles. c. 43.: The Pope is called Apostolicall, because he hath the place of the Prince of the Apostles. From hence also his Episcopall dignity is by a speciall prerogatiue called, Apostolatus, Apostolate, or Apostleship. So Paschacinus in the Councell of Chalcedon said of Pope LeoAct. 1.: His Apostleship hath vouch safed to command, that Diosco∣rus sit not in the Councell. So the Bishops of France writing to the same Leo, beseech his Apostleship to pardon their slownesseIuter ep. Leon. ante 52.. Honorius the Emperor beseecheth Pope BonifaciusEp. ad. Bonifac. that his Apostolate would offer vp prayers to God for the good of his Empire. S. Bernard sayth to InnocentiusEp. 190.: It is fitting that whatsoeuer dangers or scandals arise in the kingdome of God, be re∣ferred to your Apostleship All this sheweth that vnder the name of Apostles, to whom S. Paul allotteth the first and chiefest place among Ecclesiasticall gouernors, are vnderstood S. Peter and his Succcessors, who haue the first and chiefest place of gouermentin the Church. And this the Fathers & Councels haue sufficiently declared by giuing the Pope the title of Apostolicall, by calling his place Apostleship, and his Church absolutely Apostolicall See. This you could not see: so dimme sighted you are in beholding any light that shewes the Authority of the Bishop or Church of Rome. And this also is thereason, why you could not see, that S. Paul comprehendeth Peter, and the Popes his Succes∣sors, vnder the name of Pastors: for Christ made Peter Pa∣stor
of his flock; & the same dignity remayneth to his Sue∣cessors: for why els did the Mileuitan Councell (in tyme of the Pelagian heresy) beseech Innocentius PopeAug. ep. 2. to apply his Pastorall diligence to the great perills of the weake members of the Church? why did S. HieromeEp. 57. liuing in Palestine fly to Damasus Pope for resolution of his doubts, as a sheep to his Pastor? Why did S. Chrysostome sayL. 2. de Sacordot. that, Christ com∣mitted to Peter, and his Successors, the charge of those sheep for which he shed his bloud? Why did S. AmbroseEp. 81. call Siricius Pope a good and rigilant Pastor, that with pious solicitude keepes the flock of Christ? Why did S. Prosper sayl. de in∣grat. c. 2. that Rome by the See Apostolike is made the Head of Pastorall honor to the world? Why did the Bishops of the East say to Pope Symmachus,In volum. Orthodoxo∣graph. impres. Basileae. You are taught dayly by Peter your sacred Doctor, to feed the flock of Christ, which is committed to you throughout the whole world? Why did Amator, an African Bishop, write to Siluerius Pope in banishment:Ep. ad Sil∣uer. What do you thinke becomes of vs, when such things are done to the chiefe Pastor? Why did that Em∣peror Leo, surnamed the wise, saySerm. de. S Petro. that Christ made Peter Prince of Pastors, and required of him the care of feeding his flock as a returne of his loue? Why did the Emperor Constantine Pogonate, and the sixth Councel generall call Agatho the vniuersall Arch-pastor?Ep. ad synod. Apost. in . synodo. Act. 18. You (say they to the Councell of the West) and the vniuersall Arch-pastor by your procurators haue bene present at our Councell. Why did the second generall Councell of LionsSext. de∣cret. C. Vbi peric. call Gregory the tenth, Gouernor of the vniuersall Church and guyde of our Lords flock? And finally why did S. BernardL. 2. de considerat. say to Eugenius Pope. To you are committed the sheep not of one City, or countrey, but all the sheep of Christ without exception? What thinke you M. Doctor? These Fathers and Councels found the Pope among the Pastors reckoned by S. Paul, and beleeued him to be the Arch-pastor, and Pastor of all Pastors vnder Christ: but you that shut your eyes against the light, cold not discerne him. The same I say of the name and title of Doctor, which all antiquity hath acknowledged to be due to S. Peter, and in him to his Successors. S. Hypolitus Martyr sayth:Orat de consummat. mundi. Peter the Prince, the Rock of fayth: he the Doctor of the Church,
the chiefe of the Disciples. S. Chrysostome calleth himOrat. En∣com. in Pet. ac Paul. Doctor of the Apostles, and Mayster of the world. And the Coun∣cell of FlorenceIn lit. vni∣on. with the accord both of the Latin and Greeke Church, defineth the Bishop of Rome to be, The Successor of blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, the true Vicar of Christ, the Head of the whole Church, the Father and Doctor of all Christians. Nor doth this title agree to him, as it doth to others, but in a far more noble and excellent manner: for S. Augustine speaking of his Chayre, saythEp. 160.: The hea∣uenly Mayster hath placed in the Chayre of Vnity the Doctrine of ve∣rity. To you (sayth S. Basil to Damasus Pope)Ep. 69. per Sabin. Di∣ac. it is giuen by our Sauiour to discerne betweene what is counterfiete, and what is pure; and without any diminution to teach the fayth of our Ancestors. And S. HieromeL. 1. Apol. aduers. Ruf∣fin.: That though an Angell should preach other∣wise then the Roman Church teacheth, he were not to be beleeued: Wherof Maximianus Patriarke of Constantinople yeldeth the reason, sayingEp. ad Oriental.: The Creator of the world among all the men of the world, selected S. Peter, to whom he granted the Chayre of Doctor to be principally possessed by a perpetuall right of priuiledge, that whosoeuer is desirous to know any profound and diuine thing, may haue recourse to the oracle and Doctrine of this instruction. Nor is there any man that can deny this truth, if he credit the auncient Fathers, teaching that the priuiledge giuen to S. Peter of confirming his Brethren, did not dye with him, but was in him grāted to his Successors: In regard wherof the Councels haue sent their decrees to the Pope to be cō∣firmed by him: & S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Theodoret, S. Cyril, Venerable Bede, S. Anselme, S. Bernard, and many other of the most learned Doctors of Gods Church haue submitted their writings to the seuerall Popes of their tymes to be examined & approued, or reproued according to their iudgment. SECT. IV. Doctor Mortons rayling against the Inquisition. YOu obiectPag. 83. 84 that, S. Peter as an Elder exhorteth the Elders or Bishops: feede the flock of God, not dominiering ouer Gods
heritage. What may be inferred from hence (say you) we may vn∣derstand in your second Challenge. But you must giue vs leaue not to learne the sense of this Scripture from your Chal∣lenge, but from the Ancient Doctors of Gods Church, who out of it shew, that S. Peter had, & practised the au∣thority of Supreme Pastor, and Gouernor of the vniuersall Church. But because S. Peter writing to Bishops, commanded them not to dominiere in the Clergy,See aboue Chap. 9. fin. you take occasion to raile against the Romish Inquisition, first by making a relation of your ownePag. 85. no lesse false then spitefull) of imprisonment, famishment, torment, and ropes to strangle prisoners, and all in tene∣bris, workes of darknesse; employed against all beleeuers, receyuers, defenders, and fauorers of heretikes. And to this your relation you add another like of Cornelius Agrippa,Ibid. whom you know to be a Magician, an heretike, and a forbidden author, and yet you are not ashamed to call his lyes. Our Confession. And to the same purpose you bring Thuanus,Ibid. whom we owne not, but bequeath him to you, as one who by praysing the Huguenots and theyr Doctrine, and by speaking against the Pope and Church of Rome, suffi∣ciently declareth what he is. Now as for the thing it selfe, who seeth not the absur∣dity of your argument, which reduced to a few words is: The inquisition is seuere in punishing heretikes, especially such, as hauing abiured their heresy before a Iudge, relapse into the same againe, and are in danger to infect others, Ergo saluation may behad out of the Roman Church; or, Ergo it is lawfull to depart from her fayth & communion: or, Ergo the Roman Church is not the Head of all Chur∣ches: for these are the poynts in proofe wherof your grand Imposture wholly insisteth. That you know all these illa∣tions to be absurd, t'is not to be doubted: but you are con∣tented that men of learning, and iudgment should know you to be absurd, so that therby you may make the Roman Church hatefull to simple soules, that want learning and iudgment to discerne your Impostures. That Iews, Mahumetans, and Heretikes hate the In∣quisition,
t'is no wonder. Malefactors hate their Iudges, & theeues the gallowes. How (sayth S. Augustine)Ep. 166. can he that hath an ill suite, prayse the Iudges, by whom he hath bene con∣uicted? And els whereTract. 11. in Ioan. & ep. 48. & 50. he declareth, that as they which blasphemed the God of Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, were iustly punished by the Edict of Nabuchodonosor; so heretikes, because they draw men from Christ are in like manner iustly punished according to the lawes made a∣gainst them by Christian Kings and Emperors. And shew∣ing that they haue no reason to complaine therof, he saithTract. 11. in Ioan.: They (the Donatists) will do such things, and yet will not suffer such punishments: See what they do, and what they suffer: They kill soules, and are punished in their bodies: They cause euer∣lasting deathes, and complaine that they suffer temporall deathes. And againeCont. ep. Parmē. l. 1. c. 8.: What do not these men iustly suffer, seing they suffer deseruedly for their offences by lawfull power, and by the iud∣gement of God gouerning from aboue, and admonishing them by such punishments to beware of euerlasting fyre. Let them first proue them∣selues not to be Heretikes or Schismatikes, and then let them com∣plaine that they suffer iniustly. And els where he saythConc. 2. in Psal. 34.: The Physician is somtymes inforced to cut and lance, and desisteth not, though the Patient curse, and rayle: They that are in a letargy are wakened, and they that are in a phrensy, are bound; yet both of them are loued. Let no man therfore say, I suffer persecution: let him not proclayme his punishment, but let him proue his cause, lest if he proue not his cause, he be reckoned among the wicked. And answering the arguments of the Donatists, who desiring to be freed from the punishment due to their Heresy, argued out of Terence, that it is better to refraine men frō euill by shame and freedome, then by feare of punishment, he answereth,Ep. 50. that albeit those which are drawne with loue be better, yet more come by feare; which he proueth, 1. out of the same Poet, say∣ing: Thou knowest not how to do well, vnlesse thou be enforced with punishment: 2. with a Prouerbe of Salomon, that, A stif-necked seruant will not be amended with words: for though he vn∣derstand, he will not obey: & 3. by experience: for (saith he) it is superfluous to proue this with words, seing it is manifest by, many examples, that not these, or those men, but that many Cities of Here∣tikes
are now become Catholike for feare of the Imperiall lawes from Constantine to the present lawes. These are the lawes M. Doc∣tor, which you storme at: for the Inquisitors nether pro∣nounce sentence of death against any, nor execute it. If any man be accused, they examine his cause, as with iu∣stice, so with great meekenesse. If he be found guilty of heresy, they vse all meanes both by themselues and by o∣ther learned men to reclayme him. If he acknowledge his error, he is deliuered vp to religious persōs to be instructed, and with charitable vsage gayned to God. But if they find him to stand out obstinatly against all persuasions, they de∣liuer him vp with his whole processe, to the secular Ma∣gistrates, beseeching them to deale mercifully with him. And if the Magistrates iudge him worthy of death, & pu∣nish him according to the Imperiall lawes, I know no reason you haue to blame them: for (as S. Augustine saith with the Apostle)Ep. 164. & l. 1. cont. ep. Parmen. c. 8. &. l 2. cont. Petil. c. 83. they beare not the sword without cause: for they are Gods Ministers, reuengers vnto wrath, to them that do euill. Nor do I see what you haue in all this to quarrell at, vnlesse you thinke, that theeues, and murderers of mens bodies ought to be punished with death, and that murderers of mens soules ought to be spared. And so much the more inconsiderate you are in this your cauill, because your sel∣ues vse the same proceeding against heretikes: for haue you not burnt Dauid George in Holland, Hacket, Coppinger, and others in England? But you complainePag. 85. 86., that not only heretikes are pu∣nished, but also Beleeuers, Receauers, Defenders, and Fauorers of heretikes, namely such as commend their learning, wit, Zeale, con∣stancy or simplicity, which any Christian may do in a Pagan. Sir, I know not how to excuse you either from imposture or im∣piety: for (as SuarezDe trip. virt. Theol. disp. 24. n. 2. and AzorPart. 1. l. 8. c. 15. the very authors whom you obiect haue declared) Beleeuers are they that giue credit to the Doctrine of heretickes, and make profes∣sion therof, or prayse the same as no way dissonant to the Catholike fayth: May a Christian do this to a Pagan? De∣fenders are not they that praise the learning, wit, or elo∣quence of heretikes, but that commend or maintaine their
doctrine, or praise their pertinacy (which you call zeale) in defending their errors. Say now: were it not impiety to do this to a Pagan? And so it is in you, to say that, any Chri∣stian may lawfully do it to an heretike. Fauorers or receauers are not they, that receaue heretikes into their howses, or shew loue or fauor vnto them as to their freinds or kinsfolkes (this any man may do to a Pagan) but that receaue, cōceale or assist them, that they may perseuer in their heresy, and teach it to others: also officers, that ought to concurre to the apprehension of heretikes, and do it not, but ayd them to escape the hands of the lawfull iudges, that so they may not be punished, but remaine free to peruert others. This is the Doctrine of Suarez and Azor, whom you obiect: & no Catholike Diuines speake otherwise against him, that hauing abiured his heresy before a Iudge, relap∣seth into the same: for if he talke with an heretike, or visit him as his neighbour, or reuerence him as his Superior, or reward him for any fauor receaued, or commend him for his wit, or other talents of nature or learning, he is not therfore thought to haue relapsed into heresy. But if he vi∣sit, reuerence, reward, or commend him, because he is an heretike, and for his hereticall Doctrine, he is then by the law of Frederike the Emperor to be deliuered to the secular Magistrate, & as a relaps to be executed, as one that by rea∣son of his inconstancy is held morally incorrigible, & that by his example and Doctrine may infect others. But yet if he repent, the Church like a pious mother, receaues him into her bosome, allowing him the Sacrament of Alsolution and Eucharist, and affords him all instruction, and helpe, for the good of his soule, that so he may dye in state of sal∣uation. Against this your choler riseth, sayingPag. 87.: Bubalus was neuer so stupid, as to iudge them morally incorrigible, which do repent so▪ as to make themselues capable of Absolution: but, Syr, Bubalus was neuer so stupid, as not to vnderstand that a relapsed heretike being condemned to death, may by the helpe of Gods grace open his eyes to see and acknowledge his error, and thereby make himselfe capable of the Sacraments; and
yet that neuerthelesse the Church may iustly feare, that as he became a relaps after he had once solemnly abuired his heresy, so if he be permitted to liue, he may fall the third and fourth tyme againe, which is to be morally incorri∣gible. And wheras you adde,Ibid. that there was neuer any Rha∣damanthus so extreme, as at once to pardon and kill, and that ther∣fore such mercy is to be cursed, because it is cruell: by these words you condemne the practice of all Christian Common we∣alths, which when they put Malefactors to death, grant them accesse to the Sacraments of Pennance and Eucharist, & afford them all help and instruction to dye well, as the Church doth to Heretikes, if they will accept therof: for with them she dealeth no otherwise in this case, then all Christian Princes do with other malefactors. But belike nether heretikes nor other Malefactors must be put to death, or if they be, the Church must deny them the holy Sacra∣ments, that so their soules may perish with their bodies; or els you will compare her to Rhadamanthus: you will say she pardons and kils at once, and curse her mercy, canoni∣zing it for cruelty. What may we say, or thinke of such a man? Small reason therfore you hadPg. 85. 86. to call the Inquisiti∣ons proceeding against heretikes, Tyrannous Romish cruelty, and Barbarous Romish cruelty. And so much the reader will yet better vnderstand, if he consider, that nether the In∣quisitors, nor any other Ecclesiasticall persons pronounce, nor much lesse execute sentence of death against heretikes: and what the secular Magistrate doth in that kinde against Lutherans & Caluinists, is not by force of any new lawes made against them, but according to the lawes which the most godly Christian Emperors haue anciently prouided (before any Protestants were exstant in the world) for the preseruation of Christian Religion against Iewes, Mahu∣metans, and Heretikes. But if I were disposed to deale with you by retorsion (which kind of argument is familiar to you in this Grand Imposture) I cold put you in mind, how without any
warrant of law (for at that tyme you had made no lawes against Catholikes) yea and contrary to all lawes of this kingdome, and of Christianity, in the dayes of K. Henry the eight, and Queene Elizabeth, you partly sent and for∣ced into banishment, and partly consumed with the loath∣somnesse of prisons, and stench of dungeons, many Catho∣likes of all degrees, aswell Ecclesiasticks, as Laicks. I cold write of your racking, and many other wayes cruelly tor∣turing of Priests, and lay Catholikes, and of your putting to death many of them for crimes composed, and malici∣ously forged against them by your selues, you hauing then no lawes wherby to condemne them. And I cold reckon the number and specify the cruelty of your Parlament Sta∣tutes made since that tyme against all sortes of Catholikes, and the seuerity vsed in the execution of them, with con∣tinuall vexation of innocent people, especially by the in∣ferior sort of your officers. But for the honor of our Coun∣trey: I forbeare the rehearsall of them, and wish that the Christian world abroad had not taken so much notice of them, as their Histories shew them to haue done. But if leauing England, I passe to other nations, what pen is able to expresse the neuer before heard of inhumane, bar∣barous, & sacrilegious cruelties of your Geuses in the Iow Countries, and your good brethren the Huguenots in France? which whosoeuer desires to know more in par∣ticular, may see liuely presented to his view, by M. Ri∣chard Verstegan in a booke of pictures intituled Theatrum crudelicatum haereicorum nostri temporis, printed at Antwerp, Apud Adrianum Huberti Anno 1592. with so many particu∣lars of the tyme, place, persons, and torments, that no man euer had the face to question the truth therof: nor the relation which Doctor Harding, In his proofe of certayne ar∣ticles of religion against Maister IuellFol. 129.130. hath made of the Cal∣uinists at Paté, not farre from Orleans, throwing 25. infants quick into the fire; of their burying of Catholikes aliue at S. Macarius; of cutting infants in two; of ripping vp the bellies of Priests aliue; of drawing out their en∣trailes by litle and litle, and winding them about stakes;
of cutting of the priuy parts of a Priest, then frying them, after causing him by violence to swallow them downe, and last of all ripping vp his stomach being yet aliue, to see what was become of them; of their dragging other Priests after their horses, then picking out their eyes, cutting off their eares, noses, and priuy parts, wearing their eares in their hats as iewels to glory in their malice; hanging vp the carcasses of some yet striuing for life, dispatching others at once with their pistols, hacking and mangling the faces of some, & cleauing the heads of others in two at a stroke to make tryall of their strength. To which you may adde the horible sacriledges, the vnspeakeable cruelties fitter for Tygers then men; and the monstruous beastlinesse of your French and Holland Brethren at Tillemont in Brabrant Anno 1635. I pretermit the particulars not to soyle my paper with the rehearsall of them. If you desire to know them, the famous Vniuersity of Louayne, next neighbour to Tillemont, hath depainted them in liuely colours: in their relation you may read them. If you had consired these and many other most horrible cruelties of your Ghospel∣ling Bretheren, the like wherof haue neuer bene heard among any people neuer so inhumane and sauage, and ad∣ded vnto them your owne outrages committed both in England and Ireland (some of which Verstegans Thea∣trum representeth vnto you) you wold surely haue bene a∣shamed to instile the iust proceedings of the Inquisition, or the sentences pronounced against them by Catholike Ma∣gistrates, Tyrannous Romish cruelty, Barbarous Romish cruelty.
CHAP. XV. Of the signification of the word, Catho∣like, and the iudgment of diuers Fa∣thers obiected by Doctor Morton against the Roman Church. SECT. I. That the word Catholike proues the Roman Church to be the true Church. YOv demandPag. 88. 89 how the Roman Church (seing it is Roman, that is, a particular Church) can be called Catholike, that is, vniuersall, or the whole Church? And if it be the whole Church, how can it be a parti∣cular Church, distinct from the Church of Greece, or Church of France? will you make vs beleeue, that the thumbe of the hand can be the whole body? Syr as we are not so witlesse as to thinke that the thumbe of the hand can be the whole body, so nether are we so foolish as to beleeue that the particular Church of the Roman Dioces can be the vniuersall Church. We know, and so do you to, and it hath bene already prouedChap. 1. Sect. 2. &. 3., that not only the particular Church of Rome, may in a true & proper acception be called the Catholike Church, as Head of all Churches; but also that the Roman Church taken (as often it is) for the collection of all Churches in the world, consisting of the Roman as Head, and the rest as members,
may be, and is truly and vsually called The Catholike Church, and the vniuersall Church. Yea it is euident, that if (according to the Etimology of the name Catholike, andCont. Gand. l. 3. c. 1. Serm. 131. de temp. & ep. 170. the interpre∣tatiō of S. Augustine, the Catholike Church be that which is vniuersally spread ouer the world, the Roman Church and none els but she, is the Catholike Church: for Vni∣uersality agreeth to none but to her, all Sects lurking in corners. Wherfore you not only inconsideratly but against your selfe produce S. Augustine herePag. 89., and Optatus af∣terwardsPag 341., to proue, that your Protestant Church is the Catholike Church. S. Augustine saythL de pa∣stor. c. 8.; Not all heretikes are spread ouer the face of the earth. & yet there are heretikes spread ouer the whole face of the earth, some heere, some there; yet they are wanting no where; they know not one another. One fact for ex∣ample in Africa, another heresy in the East, another in Aegypt, an∣other in Mesopotamia. In diuers places they are diuers: One Mother Pride hath begot them all, as our one Mother the Catholike Church hath brought forth all faythfull people dispersed throughout the whole world. So said S. Augustine to the Donatists; and so say we to you: There are diuers sectcs in the world: Wiclefists in Bohemia; but in any other part of the world they are not. There be Lutherans in Germany, in Denmarke &c. but in the rest of the world they be not. There are ridged Calui∣nists in Geneua, France, and Scotland, to whom you may ad your English Puritans, but in other parts of the world they are not. There are Protestants a more temperate sort of Caluinists in England; but out of England they are not. These therfore, and all other sects of heretikes whatsoeuer are confined to a few Countries; and therfore none of them can be the Catholike Church, which is vniuersally spead ouer the whole world, as the Roman Church is; & therfore she, and none els but she, is the Catholike Church. Optatus speaking also to the Donatists, saydL. 2. con∣tra Parmen.: You will haue the Church to be where you are; and you will haue it not to be where you are not: that it may be with you, you will haue it to be in a corner of Africa: and that it may not be with vs, you will not haue it to be in allmost innumerable Ilands, Prouinces, and Coun∣tries, where we are, and you are not. So we say to Protestants:
you will haue the Catholike Church to be in England, where you are: but you will not haue it to be in so many other countries of Europe, Africa, Asia and America almost innumerable, where we are, & you are not. If your Church be the Catholike Church, if it be vniuersally spread ouer the face of the earth, as the Catholike Church must be; we say to you, as S. Augustine did to the DonatistsEp. 163.: Giue vs for∣med letters to men of your fayth and communion in all parts of the earth. This you cannot do; but we can: for we are not only in Countries almost innumerable of Europe, Africa, Asia, and America, where you are not; but we are also in En∣gland, in France, and all other Countries, in which you are. We therfore can giue you letters of communion to men of our Religion, professing the fayth, & liuing in the com∣munion of the Roman Church throughout all the world, as well in places where you are; as where you are not. The Roman Church therfore, e al one, and on but she, is v∣niuersally spread ouer the face of the earth, whersoeuer the name of Christ is knowne: and therfore if Christ haue any Catholike Church on earth, none but she is the Catholike Church. The words which you obiect out of the Confernce of Carthage (which in some copies are ioyned to Opttus) are neither his, nor S. Augustine, but of Balduinus a late Protestant writer of small credit. But be they whose you please, they are not pertinent to your purpose: for no man doubts, but that as the Church of Christ began at Hierusa∣lem where his Ghospell was first preached by S. Peter, and from thence by degrees spread ouer the world, so whosoe∣uer is in communion of this Church vniuersally spread, hath God for his Father, and the Catholike Church for his Mother, as S. Augustine professed himselfe to haue. But withall he tea∣chethPsal. cont. part. Donat. (and so doth all Antiquity) that this Catholike Church so spread ouer the world, is built vpon S. Peter and his Successors as vpon a Rock which the proud gates of Hell cannot ouer∣come: and so doth S. Hierome, sayingEp. 57. to Damasus of the Roman See, I know the Church to be built vpon this Rock. In re∣gard wherof he nceth all them that are not in the
communion of the Bishop of Rome, not to be of Christ but of Antichrist. And for the same cause S. AugustinePsal. cont. part. Donat. grieued i see the Doutistl ye cut of from the Roman Church; and exhorted them, as eunite themselues to her, as branches to their Vine. SECT. II. The iudgment of S. Hierome, concerning the Church Catholike. WHat his iudgment was you haue partly heard.  eli the Roman See to be the Rock on which the Catholike Church is built▪ he was in her com∣munion andEp. 57. eld you that refuse her communion, to be a prophane person belonging to  brist: he held her to be, The  of  whosuer els shall be found at the ing , shall . His iudgment wasDial. cont. Lucifer.▪ that if Christ  Church diffused throughout the world (as the  is hat ws ordi only (as the sect of the Luci∣frin against whom he writeth was, or only in a few Northerne parts of the world, as your Protestant Congre∣ga ) fit i e creding por. His iudgment wasIbid. that  orayne in that Church, which being founded by the postles dth vntill this day, which is none els but the Ro∣man,  in her alone there hath bene, and still is a neuer in∣terrupted Succession of Bishops from S. Peter, vnto Vrban the eight, who  g eh that Church; wheras there is no other. Church founded by the Apostles, in which Suc∣cession is not either wholly decaied, or hath not bene often interrupted and broken of by heretikes, or Arch-heretikes, those Churches being wholly possessed by them▪ His iudg∣ment was that which he declar, when he said of Ruffi∣nusL. 1. Apol. aduers. Ruf∣fin.: Which fayth doth he call his is. If that which the Roman Church holdeth, then we are Catholikes. And speaking to Ruf∣finusIbid.▪ Know, that the Roman fayth commended by the voyce of the Apostle, admitteth not such delusions: though an Angell should teach otherwise th eth bene on iuered, it cannot be altered being sensed . Paul thority. He declared his iudgment▪
when he said to such as you areEp. 6. ad Pammach. & Ocean.▪ Whosoeuer thou are, that auouchest no Sects, I pray thee haue respect to the Roman eares: spare the fayth which was praysed by the voyce of the Apostle: He de∣clared his iudgmentEp. 8., when aduising Demotrias to auoyd the cruell tempest of Heresy, which rising out of the Easterne parts, at that tyme when Anastasius of happy and holy memory goaned the Roman Church, attempted to pollute and corrupt the sincerity of that fayth, which was commended by the mouth of the Apostle, he prescri∣beth her this rule, that the keep fast the fayth of S. Innocentius, sonne and Successor to Anastasius in the Apostolicall Chayre. He de∣clared his iudgment, when he saidProom. lib. 2. Com∣ment. ad Ga∣lat.: The fayth of the people of Rome is praysed: Where is there so great conrse to Churches, and to Martyrs sepulchers? Where soundeth Amen like thunder from He e∣uen &c. Not that the Romans haue any other fayth then the rest of the Christian Churches, but that there is in them more deuo∣tion, and simplicity of fayth. He declared his iudgment, when he said to MarcellaEp. 17.: In Rome is the holy Church, there are the trophies of the Apostles and Martyrs; there is the true confession of Christ there is the fayth celebrated by the Apostle, and gentility trod∣den vnder foot, the Christian name daily aduancing it selfe on high: He declared his iudgment when he saidEp. 16. that Peter (Pa∣triarke of Alexandria) persecuted by the Arians sted to Rome as to the safest hauen of communion. These testimonies of S. Hierome declare his iudgment of the Roman Church: against which you obiectPag. 91. that he reproued an ill custome (not of the Pope, or Church of Rome, but) of the Deacons of that Church, who though few in number, yet growing proud in regard they had the treasure of the Church in their custody, contrary to the an∣cient practise of that Church, and of all other (which was that Priests, fitting with the Bishop, Deacons should stand) they of Rome began to presume by little and little to fit. This custome S. Hierome reprehended, because it pro∣ceeded from pride, and wanted authority: for (sayth he) if authority be required, greater is the authority of the world, then of a Citty: which is true in things of this nature, that nether con∣cerne fayth nor the Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome: for who feeth not, that a custome no way con∣cerning
sayth or iurisdiction, but discipline, and warranted by all other Churches of the would, was of greater authori∣ty, then a contrary, custome brought in by a few Deacons of the Roman Church, without any warrant of the Bishop of Rome? And who seeth not, that these words of S. Hierome are impertinently brought against the Roman sayth, or the supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome? for in them he neither speaketh against the Roman fayth, nor maketh any comparison betwene the Church of Rome, & the rest of the world in point of iurisdiction, but only bet∣weene the authority of all the other Churches of the world, and the authority of a few Deacons of the Roman Church in a custome no way repugnant to fayth, nor tou∣ching the iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome. And finally, who seeth not, that your intention is to de∣lude, and deceaue your readers? For he that hath so many and so pregnant testimonies of S. Hierome, in which he ex∣presly declareth, that the Roman fayth is the. Catholike fayth; that it admitteth no delusions, nor can be changed; that the way to auoyd heresy, is to hold fast the fayth of the Roman Church; that we must re∣maine in her, as being that Church which hath Succession from the Apostles, that he is the safest port of communion; that the Church of Christ is built vpon the Roman See; and that he which is not in the communion of the Bishop of Rome, gathereth not, but scattereth; that he is prophane, and belongs not to Christ, but to Antichrist. He (I say) that hath so many, and so forcible testimonies of S. Hie∣rome, & yet comming to deliuer his iudgment concerning the Roman Church, concealeth them all, and obiecteth one only testimony wholly impertinent, as you do; what intention can he be thought to haue, but to deceaue men in the most important affaire of their saluation? But you replyPag. 91.: This is that testimony of S. Hierome, wherin the Fathers of the Councell of Basil did in a manner triumph in oppo∣sition to the Popes clayme. How proue you this? With a sen∣tence of Aeneas Siluius. O imposture! For you know, that the Councell of Basil was a Schismaticall Conuenticle: & moreouer you know, that the words which you obiect, are, not of the Councell of Basil, but of Aeneas Siluius, and
that he hath retracted them, with the whole booke out of which you tooke them. Are not then you a deceiptfull merchant, to cosen your customers with such false wares? Nor do I well see, how you can be excused from contra∣diction: for you sayIbid., S. Hierome was a professed and deuout child of the Church of Rome, when Rome was yet a true and naturall Mother, and no Step-dame: Ergo, in S. Hieromes dayes the Church of Rome became a Step-dame, which could not be otherwise then by falling into error. How then is it true, that, as afterwards you grantPag. 17. & 19. the Roman Church remained pure and free from error in fayth 600. yeares af∣ter Christ, which was not in S. Hieromes tyme, but 200. yeares after him? SECT. III. The iudgment of S. Gregory, concerning the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and his title of Vniuersall Bishop. YOur scope here is, to disproue the vniuersall authority of the Bishop of Rome by the iudgment of S. Gregory refusing, and reprehending in Iohn Patriarke of Constan∣tinople the title of Vniuersall Bishop, as likewise did Pela∣gius, and Leo Bishops of the same See. And first you tell vsPag. 91., It can be no sufficient argument for concluding a Papall au∣thority, to obiect against you the testimonies of Popes in their owne cause. It was necessary for you to premit this Caueat: for howsoeuer you here pretend that S. Gregory, S. Leo, and Pelagius did not acknowledge in themselues any superio∣rity or iurisdiction ouer the vniuersall Church, your guilty conscience tels you the contrary: and therfore you slight their testimonies as of men partiall, and that speake in their owne cause. And the like you do afterwards againe with reproachfull and contumelious words: for wheras Bellar∣mineL. 2. de Pont. c. 21. in profe of the ancient practise of appealing to the Pope, produceth the testimonies of S. Leo and S. Gregory, youPag. 30, 304, reiect them, as of partiall witnesses, and compare
them to Adonias, who traiterously sought to set the crown on his owne head, which is in effect to say, that as Adonias traiterously assumed to himselfe the dignity of a King, not due vnto him: so did these Popes vnlawfully challenge to themselues, the dignity of Pastors, and Gouernors of the vniuersall Church, hauing no right therunto. A most vn∣godly comparison: for these two Popes were of the most holy, learned, and renowned Prelates, that euer sate in the Chayre of S. Peter, since his tyme, whose sanctity God hath testified with most illustrious miracles, and whom all po∣sterity hath iustly honored with the surname of Great. S. Leo is he, that with great care and vigilancy suppressed the Manichees that came flying out of the Africa to Rome, & other places of Italy; that vsed singular industry to roote out the Donatists in Africa, the Pelagians in France, & the Priscilianists in Spaine, writing to the Bishops of greatest learning, and fame, that were then liuing in those Coun∣tries, to be watchfull, and assemble Councells for the con∣demning, and extirpating those heresies: and like wise he himselfe against the errors of Nestorius, Eutyches, & Dios∣corus assembled in the East that famous Councell of 630. Bishops at Chalcedon, who all acknowledged him to be their Head, and themselues his members, and children; and that to him the gouerment of the Church was committed by our SauiourIn relat. ad Leon.; and who esteemed his words as the words of S. Peter, and his iudgments as oracles of God, cry∣ing out all which one voyceAct. 1., Peter hath spoken by the mouth of Leo; Leo hath iudged the iudgment of God. Nor was S. Gregory of lesse renowne: for to omit the admirable humility wherwith he refused the dignity of su∣preme Pastor, the conuersion of our English nation, and o∣ther great workes, which he performed for the good of the Church, the excellent bookes he writ, for which he hath deserued the title of Doctor of the Church, and the many famous miracles wherwith God declared his sanctity, who is ignorant of the admirable Elogies wherwith ancient writers haue celebrated his prayses? Among others, that fa∣mous Archbishop of Toledo, and Primate of Spayne S.
Hildephonsus writeth of himIn lib. de viris illust., that in sanctity he surpassed Antony, in eloquence Cyprian, in wisdome Augustine, & by the grace of the holy Ghost was endowed with so great light of humane science, that in former ages none had bene equall vnto him. And Petrus Diaconus testifiethVit. S. Greg. that he saw the holy Ghost in forme of a doue at his care, inspiring him whiles he was writing: which alone might haue made you forbeare the traducing of so admirable a man. But returning to our question: this very euasion of yours, to wit, that the testimonies of Popes are no sufficient argument to conclude a Papall au∣thority because they speake in their owne cause, sufficiently conuinceth, that you know them to haue acknowledged such authority in themselues, and that when you deny it, you speake without all ground of truth: for who can think that S. Leo, S. Gregory, and many other Popes renowned Martyrs, and glorious Confessors, most eminent in humili∣ty, and all kind of vertue, and to whose sanctity God ad∣ded the seale of diuine miracles, should with a Luciferian pride arrogate to themselues Pastorall authority, & power ouer the Church of God throughout the whole world, if that dignity had not bene giuen by Christ to S. Peter, and in him to them? I deny therfore that when they maintayne their authority, they speake in their owne cause: They speake in the cause of God, as (witnes your selfe)Pag. 4. S. Paul did when he saidRom. 11.: I will magnify myne office, in as much as I am Doctor of the Gentiles. And the like did S. Gregory, when vpon that text he collected a generall lesson for the defence of his owne iurisdiction against such as you are, sayingL. 4. ep. 36.; The Apostle teacheth vs so to carry humility in our hart, that we do keep and preserue the dignity of that order, wherunto we are called. Wherfore as if a Vice-Roy should defend & maintaine the dignity of his place, for the seruice of the King his Maister, and the repression of seditious persons, he that should op∣pose him, and resist his authority, vnder color that he spea∣keth in his owne cause, would be accounted no better then a rebell; so no other reckoning is to be made of him, that re∣iects the testimonies of Popes, the Vicars and Lieutenants of Christ on earth, because they defend their authority: for
they do it, to defend the honor of Christ their Maister, to magnify their office with S. Paul, and with S. Gregory to pre∣serue the dignity of that order wherunto they are called: which dig∣nity S. AugustineEp. 92. and the whole Councell of Mileuis acknowledge to be taken out of the authority of holy Scriptures, But here by the way I desire to be resolued of a doubt. You confessePag. 301. that power of appeales if it be right, and proper, is a most certaine argument of dominion. Againe you cōfessePag. 303. marg. fin. n. 8. that S. Gregory excommunicated Iohn, a Greeke Bishop of the first Iustinianaea, because he had presumed to iudge Adrian Bishop of Thebes, after he had appealed to the See Aposto∣like: which conuinceth S. Gregory to haue belieued that the Bishops of the Greeke Church might lawfully appeale from their owne Metropolitans, and from their Patriarke of Constantinople to the See Apostolike, & that the same See had true and proper right, to admit their appeales, and re-iudge their causes; which it could not haue, if the Pope had not true & proper authority ouer the Greeke Church. How then can you deny, that S. Gregory belieued him∣selfe to haue that authority, or that he practised the same? Yea, that he had power and iurisdiction not only ouer the Greeke Church, but also ouer the vniuersall Church, & practised the same, is a thing so certaine, that your Prote∣stant brethren Friccius, Peter Martyr, Carion, Philippus Nicolai, the Centurists, and OsianderApud Brier. Protest. Apol. Tract. 1. sect. 7. sub∣diu. 9. à n. 11. ad 29. shew out of his writings, these particulars: That, the Roman Church appointeth her watch ouer the whole world: that the Apostolike See is the Head of all Churches: that the Bishop of Constantinople is subiect to the Apo∣stolike See: that S. Gregory challenged to himselfe power to command Arch-bishops, to ordayne, or depose Bishops: that he assumed to him∣selfe right for citing Arch-bishops to declare their causes before him, when they were accused, and also to excommunicate & depose them, giuing commission to their neighbour Bishops to proceed against them: that in their prouinces he placed his Legates to examine, and end the causes of such as appealed to the Roman See: that he vsurped power of appointing Synods in their prouinces, and required Arch-bishops, that if any cause of great importance happened, they should referre the same to him, appointing in prouinces his Vicars ouer the Churches
to end smaller matters, and to reserue the greater causes to himselfe. All this is testified by your owne brethren: to which Doctor SandersVisib. Mo∣narch. l. 7. à n. 433. ad 541. addeth much more of the same kind, out of S. Gregories owne workes, and in his owne words: as, that the See Apostolike by the authority of God is preferred before all Churches: That all Bishops if any fault be found in them, are sub∣iect to the See Apostolike: That she is the Head of fayth, & of all the faythfull members: That if any of the foure Patriarkes had done a∣gainst the Popesletters, that which was done by the Bishop Salona, so great a disobedience could not haue passed without a most grieuous scandall: That the See Apostolike is the head of all Churches: That the Roman Church, by the words which Christ spake to Peter, was made the Head of all Churches: That no scruple nor doubt ought to be made of the fayth of the See Apostolike: that all those things are false which are taught contrary to the Doctrine of the Roman Church: That to returne from Schisme to the Catholike Church, is to returne to the communion of the Bishop of Rome: That he which will not haue S. Peter (to whom the keyes of heauen were committed) to shut him out from the entrance of lyfe, must not in this world be separated from his See: That they are peruerse men, which refuse to obey the com∣mands of the See Apostolike. I conclude therfore with Doctor Sanders, that he which readeth all these particulars, and more of the same kinde that are to be found in the workes of S. Gregory, and yet with a brasen forehead feareth not to interpret that which he writ against the name of Vni∣uersall Bishop, so, as if he could not abide, that any one Bishop should haue the chiefe seate and supreme gouerment of the whole militant Church; that man (sayth he) seemes to me, either to haue cast of all vnderstanding and sense of a man, or els to haue put on the obstinat peruersnesse of the Diuell. How comes it then to passe, that you are not ashamed to vrge here, and els where so often in this your grand Imposture S. Gregories refusing the name of vniuersall Bishop, as an argument to disproue his au∣thority, and iurisdiction ouer the vniuersall Church, espe∣cially since it hath bene so often, and so fully answered by vs? But because here you insist so much theron, I will for the readers satisfaction briefly declare, in what sense Pela∣gius, and S. Gregory refused that title, and how to better
your argument, you abuse, and falsify our Authors. The title of Vniuersalis Episcopus, Vniuersall Bishop, may be ta∣ken two wayes: first for a Bishop, that challengeth an vni∣uersall power ouer all other Bishops, clayming to himselfe a right of hearing, and determing all Ecclesiasticall causes in his owne, and their Diocesses, leauing them no other right to exercise any Episcopall iurisdiction & power, but only such as they shall receaue frō him as his Vicars. In this sense S. Gregory conceaued Iohn Patriarke of Constanti∣nople to stile himselfe Vniuersall Bishop, as it appeareth out of his plaine and expresse words in diuers of his EpistlesL. 4. ep. 32.34. & 36.38. & l. 7. ep. 70. to which the margent will direct you. And in this sense he calleth the name of vniuersall Bishop, A prophane and Antichri∣stian title. 2. It may be taken in the same signification with Episcopus Vniuersalis Ecclesiae, so, that it signify a Bishop to whom belongeth the gouerment of the vniuersall Church and the determining of all such causes as appertaine to her in generall, without taking away, or hindering the ordi∣nary power and right of other Bishops, and leauing each of them in their seuerall places & degrees with full power and authority to iudge and determine all Causes Ecclesia∣sticall belonging to their Diocesses, and within them. In this sense the tytle of Vniuersall Bishop is not condemned by S. Gregory as new, or prophane, or any way vnlawfull, but agreeth to the Pope, no lesse then the title of Bishop of the vniuersall Church. And therfore as S. GregoryEp. ad omnes Episc. stileth himselfe Bishop of the vniuersall Church, so likewise when Eu∣logius Patriarke of Alexandria writing to himL. 4. ep. 36. gaue him the title of vniuersall Bishop, he acknowledgedL. 4. ep. 36. that in this sense he might lawfully accept therof, and that, the Councell of Chalcedon, and the following Fathers had giuen it to his predecessors. But yet he refused it out of his great humility, as also he denied himselfe to be a PriestL. 4. ep. 31., and as S. Paul called himselfe the greatest of sinners1. Tim. 1.15., and thought him∣selfe vnworthy to be called Apostle1. Cor. 15..: And chiefly lest he might be thought to accept of it in the former sense vnlawfull, & iniurious to other Bishops, in which he conceaued Iohn Patriarke of Constantinople to vsurpe it: And finally, that
therby he might better represse his insolency. This doctrine is deliuered by Baronius and Bellarmine, of whom (because they declare Vniuersalis Episcopus in this second sense to be all one with Episcopus Vniuersalis Ecclesiae) you sayPag. 94.: They would gladly confound these two titles, therby to proue their Popes to be proper Monarkes ouer the whole Church, be∣cause some predecessors of S. Gregory haue bene called Bishops of the vniuersall Church, which is their peruerse error refuted by one of their learned Iesuits. But you must pardon me, if I tell you, that this is a shamefull vntruth: for Baronius and Bellarmine deliuer the same double acception of Vniuersalis Episcopus, which I haue declared; and likewise affirme, that in one of them it may be attributed to the Pope, but not in the other: which is not to confound, but to distinguish, that confusion and mistake may be auoyded. And the thing it selfe is eui∣dent: for if the title of Vniuersalis Episcopus might not be ta∣ken in a sense vnlawfull, S. Gregory would not haue con∣demned it in Iohn of Constantinople, as a new, prophane, & Antichristian title. And againe, if it might not be taken in a sense lawfull, neither the Councell of Chalcedon, nor the following FathersApud S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 36. would haue giuen it to the Bishops of Rome. The former sense is vnlawfull because it taketh away all ordinary power and iurisdiction due to other Bi∣shops in their Diocesses. The second is lawfull, because it leaueth to them their ordinary power and iurisdiction. From whence it followeth, that as S. Gregory in this se∣cond sense did instile himselfe Episcopum Vniuersalis Ecclesiae;Ep. ad om∣nes Episcop. so if Vniuersalis Episcopus be taken in the same sense, it is al∣so lawfull, and due to the Bishops of Rome: and in this sense he taketh it when he sayth, that the Councell of Chal∣cedon and the following Fathers gaue it to his predeces∣sors. But the former sense he condemned as prophane and Antichristian, & reprehended in Iohn of Constantinople. And Salmeron (for it is he whom you call the learned Iesuit) is so far from refuting this double sense of Vniuersalis Episcopus deliuered by Baronius and Bellarmine, that in the very place which you nominateTom. 12. Tract. 78. he expresly deliuereth the same: but you (to make good your word) falsily him:
for (say youPag. 94. he confesseth that a Bishop of the vniuersall Church, is one, that hath care of the whole Church, which terme may agree to euery Bishop. This cannot be excused from an vntruth: for Salmerons words are: Episcopus Vniuersalis Ecclesia is est, qui vacat curae & regimini Vniuersa Ecclesia: at Episcopus Vniuersalis est, qui solus omnibus praeest, omnia curare vult. He is Bishop of the vniuersall Church that hath the care and gouerment of the Vniuer∣sall Church: by which words Salmeron rightly proueth that which is auerred by the two Cardinals, to wit, that as the Popes before S. Gregory were stiled Bishops of the Vniuersall Church, so they had not only a charitable care, which be∣longeth to euery Bishop, and to euery lay man, and wo∣man, but also the gouerment of the whole Church, which by vertue of their office of supreme Pastors belonged vnto them. This explication of Salmeron you cannot disgest: & therfore though you set downe truly part of his Latin words in your margent, yet in your English of them you fraudulently leaue out regimini, gouerment, to persuade your readers (which either vnderstand not or els seldome looke into your Latin margents) that the ancient Popes had not the gouerment of the whole Church, but only a charitable care of her good, such as euery Bishop, & lay man is bound to haue. Hauing thus falsified Salmeron, you do as much for Platina, whose words you set downe thusPag. 97.: Bonifacius tertius à Phoca Imperatore obtinuit, vt sedes Petri, ficut est caput omnium Ecclesiarum, ita diceretur & haberetur: quem quidem locum Ecclesia Constantinopolitana sibi vendicare conabatur. And in your text you english them thus: Boniface did obtaine of the Emperor Phocas, that Rome should haue the same title of Head-ship ouer all other Churches, which the Bishop of Constantinople had challenged to his See. In these few English words you haue no lesse then three falsifications. For, 1. Sedes Petri, you trāslate not the See of Peter, but Rome, which fignifieth not the Church but the City, that so you may the better pretend that the Roman Church is not the See of Peter, nor the Pope S. Peters Succes∣sor. 2. Platina sayth, that The See of Peter is, Caput omminm Ec∣clesiarum, The Head of all Churches: and this in your english you
omit, to insinuate that the Roman Church is not Head of all Churches, by any right it hath to that title from Christ, but only by the concession of Phocas, and that obteyned with much importunity by Bonifacius 3. You say, Boniface ob∣teyned of the Emperor Phocas that Rome should haue the same title of Head-ship ouer all Churches, which the Bishop of Constantinople challenged to his See. And these words you set downe in a different character, as the words of Platina, which is ano∣ther imposture: for Platina's words are: Boniface obteyned of Phocas that the See of Peter, as it is, so it should be called and estemed to be, the Head of all Churches: which is not to say that Phocas gaue that title to the Roman See, but that it belonged vnto it by right, and that Phocas preserued the right of that See, ordayning, that the Patriarke of Constantinople, who did falsly challenge to his Church a Head-ship, and to him∣selfe a title of Vniuersall Bishop, should desist from that vniust clayme, and that the Roman See, as it is, so it should be called and held to be the Head of all Churches. Phocas therfore did not first giue the title of Vniuersall Bishop to the Pope, but preserued it to him, as his right: for it had bene giuen to him long before by the Emperor Martian in the Councell of ChalcedonAct. 3.. and by the Clercks of Alexandria, whose petitions presented in the same Councell beare this titleIbid.: To the most holy and most blessed Vniuersall Archbishop, and Patriarke of great Rome Leo, and to the holy generall Councell. And in the Councell of Constan∣tinople vnder Menas the petitions of the Regulars of Con∣stantinople, and of Syria, & of the Bishops of the Patriark∣ships of Antioch and Hierusalem, to Pope Agapete were inserted with this inscriptionAct. 1.: To our holy and blessed Lord the Archbishop of old Rome, and vniuersall Patriarke Agapetus. And the Angelicall Doctor writethOpuse. cont. error. Graec. c. 3.: It is read in the Councell of Chalcedon, that the whole Synod cried out to Leo Pope; Long liue the most holy, Apostolike, and vniuersall Patriarke Leo. Hereby appeares how falsly you sayPag. 9., that the title of V∣niuersall Bishop was not absolutely ascribed to Pope Leo in the Coun∣cell of Chalcedon, but with a great restriction as thus: Vniuersall Bi∣shop of great Rome, which is as much, as to deny him to be the Bishop
of the Vniuersall Church, euen as when the now Roman Emperor is instiled, The vniuersall Emperor of Rome, he is therby distinguished from the Emperor of Turky of Persia, and others. Who feeth not the futility of this cauil? for as none of these Emperors are Vniuersall ouer the world, so neither do they instile themsel∣ues, nor are by others instiled Vniuersall Emperors. But in the Councell of Chalcedon the Pope is not only stiled Pa∣triarke of Rome, but also Vniuersall Archbishop, and Vniuersall Pa∣triarke absolutely, without any addition, or restriction; which sheweth him to be not only Archbishop and Pa∣triarke of Rome, but also of the vniuersall Church: for els those titles absolutely, and without addition could not a∣gree to him; as the title of Vniuersall Emperor without addi∣tion, agrees not to the Emperor of Rome, of Persia, or to any other, whose Empire is not absolutly Vniuersall throughout the world, as the iurisdiction of the Pope is, & of whom that famous Bishop of Patara in Lycia said to Iustinian the EmperorApud Li∣berat. in Breu. c. 22.: that albeit there were many Kings in the world, yet not one of them, as the Pope, who is ouer the Church of the whole world. 2. You reuile the Roman See with most vnseemly termes, and are extremely out of patience with Phocas, for repressing the insolency of the Bishop of Constantinople, and righting the Pope. Your words arePag. 97.: The Head of the Popes vniuersall iurisdiction vnder that title, as it were vnder a poy∣soned Miter, hath growne far more loathsome by impostumes, and swolne with tyranny, then it could possible be at the first vsurpation therof; being become no lesse intolerable, then was that Emperor Pho∣cas, of whom Pope Boniface with much importunity receaued that title: which Emperor your Cardinall Baronius noteth to haue bene a bloudy Tyrant. So you, who by calling Phocas a bloudy Ty∣rant, would diminish the dignity of the Roman See, as though that See had not had for her protectors and deuo∣ted Children, the most godly and religious Emperours of the Christian worldOf this see Coccius to. 1. l. 7. art. 8.: Yea, by how much more pious they haue bene, so much the more deuoted haue they bene to the Chayre of S. Peter. And although Phocas his cruelty be not excusable, yet he was not so vngodly, but
that as he preserued the right of Roman Church, so he per∣formed other workes of Christian piety. Such were, his clensing Rome from all filth of Idolatry, and his causing that famous Temple of Pantheon, which was built in ho∣nor of all the heathenish Gods, to be dedicated to Christ, in honor of his blessed Mother, and all the Martyrs. 3. You cauill at BellarminePag. 96. without cause, for say∣ing, that the Bishop of Constantinople by clayming the title of Vniuersall Bishop sought to make himselfe sole Bishop, and the rest only his Vicars: for Bellarmine sayth no∣thing, but out of the expresse words of Saint Gregory himselfeL. 4. ep. 34. & 36. &  7. ep. 70.: Nor is it against this, that diuers Bishops of the East, which still held, and exercised their ancient iu∣risdiction, gaue to the Patriarke of Constantinople the Name of Vniuersall: for they did giue him the sole name, without yelding to him any part of their Episcopall iuris∣diction, which therfore they still exercised as freely, and fully, as before he laid clayme to that title. 4. Without, and contrary to all truth, you obiect S. Leo against the title of Vniuersall Bishop: for he was not only so called by the Councell of Chalcedon (as you haue heard) but he himselfe also vsed that title,Ep. 54. as appeareth out of the Latin Volume of his Epistles, and out of the Greeke Copy of the same annexed to the Councell of Chalcedon.So noteth Spondanus anno 451. n. 34. To which I adde, that speaking of such as you are, he saythEp. 89.: Whosoeuer denieth the Supreme Authority of the Roman Chayre, cannot diminish the power therof, but puffed vp with the spi∣rit of pride, plungeth himselfe headlong into hell. 5. I must not omit to aduertise you, that you abuse Bi∣niusPag. 9▪ fathering on him certaine words in his Annota∣tion vpon the third Action of the Councell of Chalcedon as taken out of Baronius: which words Binius hath not: nor doth he in that Annotation so much as once mention Baronius, but sheweth out of S. Gregory that the name of Vniuersall Bishop was giuen to the Popes his predecessors in that Councell, and by other Fathers after wards, as also that Syxtus and Zephyrinus vsed the same title long before that tyme: and finally that S. Leo writing to Martian the Em∣peror
Ep. 54. stiled himselfe Episcopus Romanae & vniuersalis Eccle∣sia. Wherfore when S. Gregory sayth, that his predecessors vsed not that title, he only denieth that they vsed it in a so∣lemne manner alwayes, and in all their inscriptions as Iohn Patriarke of Constantinople did, who (witnes S. Gregory) almost in euery lyne intitled himselfe, Vniuersall Bishop. SECT IV. S. Dionyse his iudgment concerning the Supremacy of the Roman Church. CAsaubon (say youPag. 100. spurs vs a necessary Question, Why S. Dionyse the Areopagite professedly wryting of the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy and gouerment, was so vtterly silent in not mentioning the Vniuersall Visible Head of the Church reigning at Rome, if at that tyme there had bene any such Monarchicall Head there? Before I answer, I must spur you a more necessary question, why S. Dionyse professedly wryting of the Ecclesiasticall Hierar∣chy, did not reckon secular Princes, at least in generall, whom you not only place in the Hierarchy of the Church, but make Heads therof? Now to Casaubons question I answeare, that S. Dionise treateth not of any Church in particular, nor of the Bishop of any particular See, but of the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy, and orders in generall, which he defineth thusDe Re∣cles. hierarch. c. 1. Qui Hie∣rarchiam dixit, omnium simul sacrorum ordinum dispositionem dixit. He that names a Hierarchy, names the disposition or due ranking of all sacred orders. And among the sacred orders, he giues the first and chiefest place to Bishops. The diuine order of Bishops (sayth heIbid. c. 8. is the first and chiefest of those orders that see God. From this number he excludeth not, but includeth the Bishop of Rome, as being the Head, and Chiefe of all Bishops: for (as S. Thomas the Maister of Diuines defining a Hierarchy,1. p. q. 108. art. 1. corp. sayth) A Hierarchy is a holy Principality; by which name of Principality; two things are vnderstood, namely the Prince himselfe, and a multitude ordered vnder the Prince. Who is this Prince in the Hierarchy of the Church, but the Prince of the Apo∣stles,
whom Christ made Pastor, & Gouernor of his flock, and whom S. Dionyse did acknowledg for suchDe diuin. nomin. c. 3. post med., when speaking of the Apostles and Bishops vnder the name of Diuines, he sayth: Peter was present the most ancient and supreme top, or Head of Diuines. These passages of S. Dionyse, Casau∣bon and you either out of ignorance could not find, or if you could and did, why do you conceale them? SECT. V. S. Ignatius his iudgment of the Roman Church. CAsaubon, and you with him obiectPag. 100. out of the Epi∣stles of S. Ignatius, that ancient Bishop of Antioch, that, he being frequent in setting forth the order Ecclesiasticall, and dignity of Bishops, forbeareth all mention of S. Peter, or any Roman Pope. What Ignatius his iudgment was of the great dignity of the Bishop and Church of Rome, he himselfe declared, when writing to the Romans, he addressed his Epistle, To the Church sanctified and illuminated in the will of God, which hath done all things according to fayth, and the loue of Iesus-Christ our God and Sauiour, and which gouerneth in the region of the Romans, worthy of God, worthy of eminency, worthy of memory, worthy of bles∣sednesse, worthy of prayse, founded in the loue and fayth of Christ, hauing the name of Father &c. Although this holy Martyr writ to the Trallians, Magnesians, Philippians, Antiochians, E∣phesians, Philadelphians, and to those of Tharsis & Smyr∣na, and gaue great prayses vnto them, yet he attributeth to the Roman Church, as her peculiar prerogatiues, that, she is illuminated in the will of God, that she is founded in the loue and fayth of Christ, that she is of eminent dignity, that she hath (by rea∣son of her Bishop) the name of a Father, which is to say, that the rest as children are subiect to her, and that she gouerneth in the region of the Romans: the sense of which words cannot be, that she gouerneth the Roman Dioces; for no Church go∣uerneth it selfe, but one Church gouerneth another, as the Metropolitan doth the Suffragans, & the Roman Church as being the Head, and Mother Church, ruleth all others of the world.
Nor is this explication of lesse force, becauss he sayth, that she gouerneth in the region of the Romans: for he sayth it not, to limit her gouerment, but to expresse the place, in which she is seated, and from whence she gouerneth all other Churches. I conclude therfore that by calling her the Church that gouerneth, and not limiting her gouerment to anyone Church, or nūber of Churches, he declareth her to be Head & Gouernesse absolutely of all Churches: for as S. Bernard speaking of this subiect, saythL. 2. de consider at.: Where there is no limita∣tion, nothing is excepted. And in this sense, Theodoret long before had saidEp. ad Leon.: The Roman See hath the sterne of gouerment of all the Churches of the whole world. This to be the genume sense of S. Ignatius his words, Casaubon and you peraduenture did see; and therfore to giue an expedite solution, you reiect the whole Epistle, saying:Pag. 100. marg. No man skilfull in Greeke, would belieue it to be written by S. gnatius. But this solution is exploded by EuscbiusL. 3. hist. c. 30. and S. HieromeL. de Scriptor., who might be Casau∣bons and your Maysters in Greeke, and yet affirme S. Ig∣natius to be the Author of this Epistle, and transcribe a part therof yēt to be found in it; as also doth S. IrenaeusL. 4. ad∣uers. haeres. apud Baron. anno 109. to shew the admirable spirit and feruor of that holy Bishop. Hauing proposed these arguments of Casaubon, you obiect out of your owne obseruationsPag. 100., that S. Ignatius exhorting the Trallians vnto obedience to Bishops, instanceth equally in Timothy S. Pauls scholler, as in Anacletus Successor to S. Peter. Answere. You may by the like argument proue that S. Ignatius equalleth Priests in authority with Bishops: for exhorting the Trallians to obedience, he instanceth as well in Priests as in the Bishop: Obey (sayth he)Ep. ad Trallianos. the Bishop, & the Priests. Who then seeth not your argument to be a chil∣dish Sophisme? SECT VI. S. Irenaeus his iudgment of the Roman Church. I Renaeus (say you)Pag. 100. for direction in the right of Tra∣ditions, referreth as well to Polycarpe Bishop of Smyrna▪ as to
Linus Bishop of Rome. Tertullian also to secure Christians in the Do∣ctrine of the Apostles, prescribeth vnto them, that they consult with the Mother Churches, immediatly founded by the Apostles, naming as well Ephesus in Asia, and Corinth in Achaia, as Rome in Italy: and for the persons, mentioning as well Polycarpe ordayned by S. Iohn, as Clemens by Peter. The like argumēt you make out of Vin∣centius Lyrinensis. But all of them imposterously, and a∣gainst your selfe. And first to begin with S. Irenaeus: these words, Discite ab Apostolicis Ecclesijs. Habetis Romae Linum, which you alleage as of S. IrenaeusL. 2. c. 3., I find not in him. It is true, that both he and Tertullian teaching the Christians of their tyme to auoyd heresy, warned them, that the true fayth was to be learned from the Apostolicall Churches, that is, from the Churches founded by the Apostles themselues, or by Apo∣stolicall men, as Timothy, Polycarpe, and other their dis∣ciples, that preached the same fayth they learned from the Apostles their Maysters. But withall they taught them, that the chiefe Church they were to adhere vnto, and by whose authority they were to confound all Heretikes, was the Roman Church. All men (sayth S. Irenaeus)L. 3. c. 3. may behold the tradition of the Apostles (that is the fayth deliuered by them to their Successors) in euery Church, if they be desirous to heare the truth: and we can number the Bishops, that were made by the Apostles in Churches, and their Successors, euen vnto vs, who neither taught▪ nor knew any such thinge as rauing heretikes do broach &c. But because it were a long businesse to number the Successions of all Churches, we declare the tradition of the most great, most ancient, and most knowne Church, founded by the two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul; which tradition and fayth it hath from the Apostles cōming to vs by Succession of Bishops; and thereby we confound all them that any way ether by euill complacence of themselues, or vaine∣glory, or blindnesse, or ill opinion do gather otherwise then they ought. Lo here how Catholikes in S. Irenaeus tyme did confound all heretikes, by the fayth of the Roman Church, and by the Succession of Bishops in that See. And he yeldeth the reason, sayingIbid.: for to this Church by reason of her more power∣full Principality, all Churches must necessarily agree, that is to say, all
the faythfull of what place soeuer: in which (Church) the tradition and fayth of the Apostles hath bene alwayes conserued. And in con∣firmation of this, he reckoneth by name all the Popes from S. Peter to Eleutherius who at that tyme gouerned the ChurchIbid.: And by that orderly, and neuer-interrupted Succession, he proueth the Roman Church to haue con∣serued vnto his daies the fayth pure, and entyre, as it was preached by the Apostles: By this Succession that Doctrine and truth which the Apostles preached in the Church hath come to vs: And this is a demonstration conuicing, that it is one, and the same quickening fayth, which from the Apostles tyme vntill this day, is conserued, and delinered in truth. And againe relating to this place, and speaking of the same Succession of Bishops in the Roman Church (which he calleth the principall Succession) he declareth all those that withdraw themselues from it, to be Schismatikes, or heretikes: They that are in the Church (sayth he)L. 4. c. 41. ought to obey those Priests, which haue their Succession from the Apostles, which togeather with the Succession of their Bishoprikes haue receaued the assured grace of truth, according to the good will of the heauenly Father. And we ought to hold suspected, all others, that withdraw themselues from the like Principall Succession, and ioyne togeather in some other place. We ought (I say) to hold them as here∣tikes of a peruerse iudgment, or as Schismatikes, and selfe-liking pre∣sumptuous fellowes, or els, as Hypocrites, that worke for lucre and vaine-glory. If then S. Irenaeus in his dayes thought it an ar∣gument sufficient to conuince all Heretikes, that they had fallen from the true fayth preached by the Apostles, be∣cause they had fallen from the Succession of Bishops in Pe∣ters See, to which all the Churches, and faythfull of the world must necessarly agree, how much more conuincing is the same Ar∣gument against Protestants, to whom we shew not the Succession of twelue Popes in S. Peters See, as S. Irenaeus did to the heretikes of his tyme, but almost of 240. You were not ignorant of the force of these testimonies of S. Irenaeus, and therfore lest you might seeme to passe them ouer without answere, you sayPag. 100. marg. fine.: As for the words, Propter Principalitatem, they are answered hereafter. How are they answered? first, you bid vsPag. 253. marg. remember, that Irenaeus was
he, which consented with the Asian Bishops that were excommunica∣ted by Pope Victor. But wee know this to be an vntruth, and wish you to remember, that you acknowledge so much, & contradict your selfe, sayingPag. 131.: Irenaeus differed in opinion from the Asian Bishops. These then are your propositions: Ire∣naus consented with the Asian Bishops: Irenaeus differed in opinion from the Asian Bishops: Reconcile them. 2. Wheras S. Iraeneus saythL. 3. c. 3.: It is necessary that all Churches haue recourse to the Roman Church by reason of her more mighty principality, you answerePag. 253.: This might haue bene spoken of the Imperiall power of that City, to which the subiects of the Roman Empire were bound to resort, for paying of tributes; and the Gouer∣nors of Prouinces, to yield an account of their offices. But the very words of S. Irenaeus shew the falshood of this answeare: for he mentioneth not the City, but the Church of Rome. Ad hanc Ecclesiam &c. To this Church (sayth he) all Churches must of necessity resort. Againe, they which were to resort to the City of Rome for the discharge of their offices and paymēt of tributes were the subiects of the Roman Empire only: But S. Irenaeus tels you, that omnes vndique fideles, that is, All the faythfull, and all the Churches, not only of the Roman Em∣pire, but of all the world are necessarily to repaire to the Church of Rome; shewing therby, that her authority and command is of larger extent then that of the Roman Empire: for (as Prosper truly saydDe ingrat. c 2. & de vo∣cat. gent. l. 2. c. 6., Rome the See of Peter is greater by the for∣tresse of Religion, then by the throne of (temporall) power: and be∣ing made the Head of Pastorall honor to the world, possesseth by reli∣gion, what, she doth not by force of armes. 3. You answearePag. 253.254.: Be it Ecclesiasticall power, yet was not the necessity of recourse vnto it, absolute, and perpetuall, but occasio∣nall for that tyme. This is as vntrue as the rest: for the neces∣sity of resorting to the Roman Church (sayth S. Irenaeus)L. 3. c. 3. is by reason of her more mighty principality, or (which is all one) by reason of the great dignity of the See Apostolike, which (sayth S. Augustine)Ep. 162. hath alwaies florished in her and which maketh her the Mother Church of the world. And therfore so long as she shall be S. Peters See, which shall be till the end of the world: so long the necessity of
all other Churches resorting to her, and agreeing in fayth and communion with her, shall still continue. SECT VII. Tertullian his Iudgment of the Roman Church. TErtullian agreeth with S. Irenaeus in pressing against all heretikes the same argument of the neuer interrup∣ted succession of Bishops in the Roman See,L. 3. Carm. cont. Marcio. c. vltimo. recknoning all the Popes by name vntill his tyme against Marcion and all heretikes, to proue thē to be such. It is manifest (saith he)Praes∣crip. c. 21. that all Doctrine which agreeth with those Mother and originall Churches, founded by the Apostles is true, and to be held as certayne, being that the Churches receaued it from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, and Christ from God, and that whatsoeuer is contrary to this, is to be accounted false, and erroneous. And speaking of heretikesIbid. c. 32.: If there be any of them that darevent their Doctrine for Apostolicall, let them shew the originall of their Churches; let them vnfold the order of their Bishops, in such sorte, that by a Succession deriued from the beginning, they proue their first Bishop to haue bene some one of the Apostoles, or of the Apostolicall men that perseuered with the Apostles vnto the end. This Tertullian sayth the Smyr∣naeans in his dayes could do, shewing that Polycarpe their Bishop was placed there by S. Iohn; and that the Roman Church could do the like, shewing Clement ordeyned by S. Peter. And the same she can do at this day, shewing that all her Bishops vnto Vrbā the eight which now possesseth that Chayre, had S. Peter the Apostle for their predecessor, and first Bishop in that See; and that from him they can li∣neally deriue their pedigree; wheras no heretikes could e∣uer shew any such descent, as Protestants at this day can∣not. And therefore Tertullian bringeth in the Catholike Church vpbrayding them, and all heretikes in this manner.Ibid. c. 37. Who in Gods name are you? When, and from whence came you hither? What do you among myne, being none of myne? By what right O Marcion dost thou cut downe my woods? What leaue hast thou, O Valantine, to turne my streames and fountaynes another way?
By what authority doest thou remooue my bounds, O Apelles? (O Luther, O Caluin, O Zuinglius?) The possession is mine: I haue it of old I enioyed it before you: I can deriue my pedigree from the very first Authors to whom the thing did properly belong: I am the right beyre to the Apostles: According to their will and testament, ac∣cording to their trust and charge giuen, my Tenure standeth. As for you, they alwayes disinherited you, and reiected you as aliens, yea and as enemies. In this very manner may Catholikes with great reason vpbrayd you, who as you cannot shew any Suc∣cession of your Bishops continued from the Apostles; so you are therby conuinced not to be their heires, but stran∣gers and enemies to them, and to the Churches founded by them. Againe, Tertullian prescribing a rule for you to finde out the true fayth, & doctrine deliuered by the Apostles; saithIbid. c. 36.: Goe to: If thou wilt be curiously exact in the affaire of thy sal∣uation, repaire to the Apostolicall Churches &c. If thou be a neigh∣bour to Italy, thou hast Rome, from whence we also haue authority. O happy Church, into which the Apostles powred all their Doctrine to∣geather with their bloud; where Peter is equalled to our Sauiours passion, where Paul is crowned with Iohn Baptists lot, where Iohn the Apostle being plunged into boyling oyle, and yet not hurt therwith, was banished into an iland. Let vs obserue what this Church hath learned, what she hath taught. Tertullian was an African, a Priest of the Church of Carthage, and yet speaking of the Roman Church, sayth: From whence we, that is (as Mace∣rus expoundeth) all the African Churches, or all Catholikes haue authority at hand for our defence. Wherfore out of this place of Tertullian Quintinus rightly inferreth, that the Roman Church euen from her first foundation had great authority aboue all Churches of the world; and that all men are to learne from her the Doctrine of fayth, deliuered vnto her by the blessed Apostles. And this is the reason why Ter∣tullian speaking of Marcion and ValentinusIbid. c. 30., proueth them to be heretikes, because they had fallen from the faith into which they had beleeued in the Roman Church. Nam constat &c. For (sayth he, and his words no lesse agree to Luther and Caluin, then to Marcion and Valentinus) it is ma∣nifest
that they first beleeued the Catholike Doctrine in the Roman Church vntill in the tyme of the blessed Bishop Eleutherius, for their turbulent spirit of nouelty, wherwith they did also peruert their Bre∣thren, they were often excommunicated, and at length cast out for e∣uer to perpetuall ruine. By this it appeareth, that the Roman fayth was then held to be the Catholike fayth, and the Ro∣man Church, (which Tertullian calleth, The Catholike Church)L. 4. cont. Marcio. c. 4. the Head and Mistresse of all Churches in the world: for Marcion was borne at Sinope in Pontus, and for his heresy and lewdnesse of lyfe excommunicated by his owne Father a holy Bishop, who refusing to absolue him he went to Rome to seeke absolution: but (his Father op∣posing) obteyned it not. Valētine was as Aegyptian borne, and hauing fallen into heresy in Cyprus, came to Rome in the tyme of Higinius Pope, and feigning himselfe to be a Catholike, was receaued into the Communion of the Roman Church, but falling often backe into heresy, as a dog returning to his vomit, was finally cast out of the Church by the blessed Pope Elutherius, as you haue heard Tertul∣lian report. And why did these heretikes (as also Cerdon at the same tyme) when they sought absolution from heresy, come from so remote countreyes subiect to other Patriar∣kes, and why from all the Easterne Church, and why all of them to the Church of Rome in particular, but because they knew her to be the Head & Mistres of all Churches, that had power to absolue all those which had bene ex∣communicated by any other Bishops whatsoeuer, and to be the originall and center of Catholike Communion, and that so long as they remayned out of her bosome, they ne∣ther were, nor should be esteemed Catholikes, nor to be in state of saluation? Herby it appeares how little reason you had to say out of Beatus RhenausPag. 131.1.▪ though Tertullian giue an honorable testimony to the Church of Rome, yet be did not esteeme her so highly, as wee see her accounted of at this day. And since you acknow∣ledge that Rhenanus his mouth (for that and other his in∣considerat speeches) is gagged by the Index expurgatorius, you shew litle iudgment in obiecting his authority against vs.
SECT. VIII. Vincentius Lyrinensis his iudgment of the Roman Church. VVHat hath bene sayd, sheweth the futility of your argument out of Vincentius Lyrinensis, which is like to the two former out of S. Iraeneus and Tertullian. And how little support you haue for your cause in the au∣thority of this ancient and learned Father, he will testify for himselfe: for when the Doctrine of rebaptizing Here∣tikes at their returne to the Catholike Church defended by Firmilianus Bishop of Cefarea, Agrippinus, & S. Cyprian Bishops of Carthage, and many others, wrought so great inconueniences, that it gaue a paterne of sacriledge to all heretikes, and occasion of error to some Catholikes, Vin∣centius declareth, how Stephen then Pope of Rome sup∣pressed it by his authority. When (sayth heL. cont. propha. hae∣res. nouat. c. . all men euery where exclamed against the nouelty of that Doctrine, & all Priests in all places, ech one according to his zeale did opppse, then Pope Stephen of blessed memory Bishop of the Apostolike See resisted indeed with the rest of his fellow Bishops, but yet more then the rest, thinking it (as I suppose) reason, so much to excell all others in deuotion towards the fayth, as he did surmount them in the authority of his place. To conclude, in his epistle which then was sent to Africa, he decreed the same in these words: Let nothing be innouated, but that which comes by tradition be obserued. AndIbid. c. 10. notwithstanding that the contrary doctrine had (sayth he) such pregnant wits, such eloquent tongues, such a number of Patrons, such shew of truth, such testimonies of Scripture, but glosed after a new and naughty fashion, and that it was decreed in an African Councell; yet the authority of the Pope declaring it a nouelty, was of so great force, that after he had condemned it, all those things were abolished, were disa∣nulled, were abrogated as dreames, as fables, as superfluous. And afterwardsIbid. c. 43. he alleageth as witnesses of his Doctrine, diuers Greeke Fathers, and addeth to them, the authority of S. Felix Martyr, and S. Iulius, both Bishops of the Ro∣man
Church, whom (to declare their soueraigne authority) he calleth The Head of the world▪ And he concludeth:Ibid. c. 45. Least in such plenty of proofes any thing should be wanting, wee haue added for a conclusion a double authority of the See Apostolike; the one of S. Sixtus, a venerable man, that now honoresh the Church of Rome; the other of Pope Celestine of blessed menory, his predecessor. And their decrees he calleth Apostolicall, and Catholike decrees. SECT. IX. Other Obseruations of Doctor Morton, out of Antiquity, answeared. YOur obseruations arePag: 101. & seqq. that S. Athanasius, S. Augustine, the Councels of Constantinople, of Aegypt, and of Cauthage, rec∣koning diuers Bishops to shew their agreement in fayth with them, name not only the Pope, but other Bishops, and write both to him, & them; and consult with him, and them, as with their fellow Bishops, which you say, is to giue the Bishop of Rome so many mates, and to equalize other Bishops with him. But who seeth not what poore stuffe these your obseruations are? For if one concerning matters of fayth should consult with his parish Priest, and his Bishop, would it follow, that he equalizeth the parish Priest with the Bishop, and maketh him his mate? Or if you writing to the King and his Coun∣sell, I should lay to your charge, that by consulting with his Maiesty, and his Counsell, you giue his Maiesty so many mantes, as he hath Counsellors, and equalize them in power and dominion with him, would you not thinke m a trifling, and indeed a childish opponent? how then shall wee thinke otherwise of you, that by like consequence go about to equalize other Bishops with the Pope, & among themselues?
CHAP. XVI. The iudgment of the Councell of Nice, concerning the authority of the Bi∣shop, and Church of Rome. THAT the Councell of Nice acknowled∣ged the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome ouer all Bishops, is proued. 1. Because Iulius a most holy Pope, in his third E∣pistle (which S. Athanesius hath inser∣ted into his second Apology) writing to the Arians, and declaring vnto them the right of the Roman See, to haue the hearing and finall de∣cision of the causes of Bishops, fayth: Are you ignorant, that the custome is, that wee be first written vnto, that from hence may proceed the iust decision of things? And therfore if any suspicion were conceyued against your Bishops there, it ought to haue bene referred hither to our Church. And then declaring vnto them, that this authority of the Bishop of Rome was acknowledged by the Councell of Nice, he denounceth vnto them, that in condemning Athanasius without expecting his sentence, they had done contra Canones, against the Canons, to wit of the Nicen Councell, which he setteth downe at large in his second epistle to them; & that as well Athanasius in appea∣ling from their Councell to him; as also he, in repealing their actes, & in restoring to their seates Athanasius, & the other Bishops whom they had deposed, and in summo∣ning their aduersaries to appeare at Rome, & yeld account of their proceedings, had done, quod Ecclesiastici Canonis est, according to the Canons of the Church.
2. The same is proued by the testimony of Innocenti∣us the first, whom S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and other Fa∣thers of that age, highly commend: He ordaynethEp. ad Victric. Rho∣tomag. Epise., that if any difference arise betweene Priests, their cause be iudged by the Bishops of the same Prouince; but that greater causes be referred to the See Apostolike, as the Nicen Councell hath ordeyned. 3. The same is proued out of S. Leo the Great, who writing to Theodosius the yongerEp. 4, and representing vnto him the sacrilegious proceeding of the second Coun∣cell of Ephesus, which he by his owne authority had called and impiously maintained, & that Flauianus the holy Pa∣triarke of Constantinople (which in that Councell had bene iniustly deposed and many wayes wronged) fled to him for redresse, presenting a Writ of Appeale to his Legates, in∣treateth his assistance for the calling of a generall Councell in Italy; adding, that the Nicen Canous necessarily require the cal∣ling of a Councell after the putting in of an Appeale. This sheweth that the Councell of Nice decreed the lawfulnesse of appe∣ales from generall Councels to the Pope. Nor are you ig∣norāt thereof: for afterwardsPag. 308. you bring these very words of S. Leo against Appeales to him, but not without great Eclypse of iudgment: for in them two things are clearly ex∣pressed: the one, that according to the Nicen canōs. Bishops whē they are wronged, may lawfully appeale to the Pope: the other▪ that after the putting in of an Appeale to him, a generall Councell ought to be called, that to the greater satisfaction of all parts, the cause may be fully examined & reiudged by the common consent of the Church: which no more preiudicateth the Popes Authority, then it doth the Kings, that after an appeale made to Maiesty, a Parlia∣ment be called for the decision of the cause: for as the King is Head of the Parliament, so is the Pope of a generall Councell. And hereby it appeares how litle iudgment you shew in obiecting the African Councell, to proue, that the Councell of Nice denyed appeales to Rome, both because your selfe alleaging this testimony of the Nicen Councell out of S. Leo proue them to be lawfull, as also because the African Councell is wholly against you, as hereafter shall be prouedBelow Chap. 27..
4. That the Councell of Nice acknowledged the vni∣nersall authority and iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, is proued out of Socrates, a Greeke historian of aboue 1200. yeares standing, who speaking of the Arian Councell at AntiochL. 2. c. 5., proueth it to be vnlawfull, because Iulius Bi∣shop of Rome was not there, nor sent any in his steed, although the acclesiasticall canon forbids to rule the Churches without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome. And SozomenL. 3. c. 9.: Iulius reprehended them (the Arians) that they had secretly altered the fayth of the Ni∣cen Councell, and that against the lawes of the Church, they had not called the Pope to their Synod: for there was a sacerdotall law, which pronounceth all things to be inualide that are done without the allo∣wance of the Bishop of Rome. And TheodoretL 2. hist. c. 4.: Iulius Bishop of Rome following the canon of the Church, commanded them (the Arian Bishops) to come to Rome, and summoned the Diuin Atha∣nasius to answeare for himselfe in iudgment. And the same is re∣ported by Nicephorus. Now this Canon so vniformely auouched by these Greeke historians, which forbiddeth Bishops to be depo∣sed, or any Ecclesiasticall decrees to be made without the allowance of the Bishop of Rome, can be of no other, then of the Nicen Councell, or els of that of Sardica, which con∣firmed the decrees of the Councell of Nice, and is reputed as an appendix vnto it: both because (as you haue heard) Innocentius afflirmeth the Councell of Nice to haue made such a law; as also for that since the Apostles tyme, vntill the tyme of those two Councels there had bene held no o∣ther generall Councell in the Church: And finally be∣cause Iohn that learned Disputant of the Latines in the Councell of FlorenceSess. 20., in their name answeareth Mar∣cus Ephesius▪ the disputant of the Greekes, that the most ancient epistles of Iulius and Liberius Popes, which Iulian Cardinall of S. Sabina had shewed to the Grecians in that Councell did conuince, that blessed Athanasius being per∣secuted by the Arians in their Councell at Antioch, writ to Felix, Marcus, Iulius and Liberius, all of them successiue∣ly Popes of Rome for a true copy of the Actes of Nice, which were kept entire and incorrupt at Rome, all those
that were in the East, being corrupted by the Arians: and that their answere was, They wold not send the originall acts, which being written in Greeke and Latine, and sub∣scribed by the Nicen Fathers, and sealed with their seales were kept by the Bishop of Rome with great veneration but that they wold send him copied out seuerally such Ca∣nons as were for his purpose. And moreouer he sheweth▪ that when Athanasius had appealed from the Councell of Antioch to the See of Rome, and that the Arians obiected it vnto him as a thing vnlawfull, Liberius promised to send him copied out the Nicen decree for the lawfulnesse of ap∣pealing to Rome: and that Iulius in his Epistle sharply re∣buked the Arians for hauing presumed to call a Councell without his allowance; shewing thē out of a decree of the Councell of Nice, that no Councell could euer be held without the authority of the Bishop of Rome. And lastly PisanusApud Bin. to. 1. pag. 345.346. in proofe of these Nicene decrees produceth the testimonies of the Councell of Constantinople, of Mar∣cus, of Stephanus, and Innocentius Popes, of Athanasius, and the Bishops of Aegypt, of other Orientals, of Maria∣nus Scotus, Iuo Carnotensis, and Gratianus. All which with the rest here alleaged shew your vnshamefastnesse, in vrging the Councell of Nice against Appeales to Rome, which were so certainly allowed and decreed by it. 5. The same is confirmed out of the Councell of Sar∣dica, which being held soone after that of Nice, made three decrees concerning Appeales: The firstCap. 3., that if in the cause of a Bishop, who conceaues himselfe to be wronged, a new iudge∣ment be required, the Bishop of Rome is to giue the Iudges. The se∣condCap. 4., that if a Bishop deposed by the next Bishops, say his cause ought to be iudged againe, none is to be installed in his See, vntill the Bishop of Rome haue pronounced vpon it. The thirdCap. 5., that a Bi∣shop accused, may haue recourse to Rome, by way of appeale. These Canons of Sardica sufficiently declare the beleefe of the Nicen councell touching the authority of the Bishop of Rome: for as Harmen opulus writethIn Epit. Can.: By the aduice of the Emperor, and of the Bishop of Rome, the Synod if Sardica was assembled, consisting of 341. Fathers, which confirmed the fayth of
the Councell of Nice, and published the Canons. Wherfore these canons touching appeales extant in the Councell of Sar∣dica, are either the very Nicen canons inserted into that of Sardica, or declarations of them: for the Sardican Councell consisting for the most part of the same Bishops, that the Nicen did, it is a senselesse thing to say, that when those Bi∣shops in their Councell at Sardica, so expresly, and so effe∣ctually declare the Bishop of Rome to be the supreme iudge of all Bishops, they professe a new doctrine contrary to that, which a litle before they had professed in the Councell of Nice. 6. The authority of the Bishop of Rome ouer the whole Church, is yet further declared in the Nicen Coun∣cell, decreeing thusCan. 39. ex 80. Graec. & Arab.: A Patriarke is so ouer all those that are vnder his power, as he that hath the See of Rome is Head, and Prince of all Patriarkes: for he is the chiefest, as Peter was, to whom power was giuen ouer all Christian Princes, and all their subiectes, as being the Vicar of our Lord ouer all people, and ouer the vniuer sall Church. 7. The same is proued by the order of subscribing in the Councell: for Victor and Vincentius being not Bi∣shops, but simple Priests, because they were Legates to the Pope, presided in the Councell togeather with Osius B. of Corduba, and subscribed in the first place, before all the Bi∣shops, and Patriarkes, which they could not haue done, but only in regard they represented his person, who was Superior to all Bishops and Patriarkes. 8. Though Constantine the Emperor was a great cause of the Bishops meeting in the Councell of Nice, both because he persuaded that meanes of Concord, as also be∣cause he defrayed their charges, and by his letters called them together, yet he called them not, by his owne autho∣rity, but (as Ruffinus saythL. 1. c. 1. fin. apud Spond. Anno 325. n. 5.) ex Sacerdotum sententia, by the determination or decree of the Priests: as in like manner he called an other Councell of 275: Bishops at Rome at the same time, in which it is said, Siluester gathered the whole Coun∣cell with the aduice of the Emperor. The same is testified by Da∣masus in Syluesters life, and by the sixt generall Councell, sayingAct. 18.: Constantine and Syluester worthy of prayse called the
famous Councell of Nice. And how can it be thought, that it was called by any other authority then of the Pope, seeing S. Athanasius and the Bishops of Aegypt in their Councell at Alexandria, witnesseEp. Synod. ad Felic., that the Nicen Councell made a decree, that no generall Councells should be held without the al∣lowance of the B. of Rome: and this decree it is, which Iulius Pope (the next but one to Syluester) alleaged against the A∣riansEp. ad O∣rientales., rebuking thē sharply, that they had infringed it, by calling their Councell at Antioch without his allowance: which is also testified by Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodo∣ret, as you haue heard. 9. And as this Councell was called by Syluester Pope, so that it required confirmation from him, we are certified by the Roman Councell vnder Felix the thirdIn ep. Sy∣nod. Felic. c. 3., and by the Councell of Nice it selfe, sayingIn summ. Conc. Nice.: Placuit &c. It hath seemed good, that all these Acts and decrees be sent to Syluester B. of Rome. And in their letter to SyluesterApud Baron. An. 325. ex col∣lect. Crescon.: Whatsoeuer is deter∣mined in the Nicen Councell, we beseech you that it may be seconded with the confirmation of your mouth. And that Syluester accor∣dingly confirmed their decrees, we may learne from a Councell of the Bishops of Italy held at Rome, in which he presiding, saydApud Bar. An. 325. & Bin. to. 1. pag. 382.: Whatsoeuer is determined by the 318. holy Priests at Nice in Bithinia, for the strength of the holy Catholike and Apostolike Church, we with our mouth accordingly confirme: and all those that shall dare to dissolue the definition of the holy and great Councell assembled at Nice, in the presence of the most religious and venerable Prince Constantine the Emperor, we anathematize them. And all answeared: So be it. SECT. I. Doctor Mortons Obiections, against the precedent Doctrine, answeared. THough you either could not, or would not find any thing of all that which hath bene alleaged out of the Councell of Nice in proofe of the Popes authority, yet you cold find two argumēts to obiect against it, The first isPag. 105. & seqq.:
The Councell of Nice decreeth, that the ancient custome goe on, to wit, that the Patriarke of Alexandria, haue power ouer Aegypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, because the B. of Rome hath so accustomed. To this argument Bellarmine hath answearedL. 2. de Pont. c. 13., that the Canon speakes of the Patriarke of Alexandria with restri∣ction, assigning to him the Prouinces of Aegypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis: and of the Pope, without restriction, not prescribing any lymits to his iurisdiction, nor ordeyning any thing concerning the authority of the Roman Church, but making her, a rule, and patterne for the gouerment of other Churches, commanding, that the B. of Alexandria haue power ouer those three prouinces, because the B. of Rome hath accustomed so to allow, or permit. And this canon is so explicated by Nicolas the firstEp. ad Michael. Im∣per. that liued al∣most 800. yeares since, and for his learning and sanctity hath deserued the surname of Great. And the same explica∣tion is confirmed by the practise both of the Roman, and of the Alexandrian Church. For if according to your con∣struction the Roman Church by this canon be proued to haue no superiority of iurisdiction ouer the Church of Ale∣xandria, or other Easterne Churches, but only ouer those which are within the Patriarkeship of the west; how comes it to passe, that S. Athanasius Patriarke of Alexandria, and other Easterne Bishops, which had bene personally pre∣sent at the Councell of Nice, being soone after cast out of their Seates by the Arians, did fly to Rome, and appeale to Pope Iulius for redresse, as to their lawfull Su∣perior, and Iudge? Or if this Canon do limit the iurisdicti∣on of the Pope to the Patriarkeship of the West, as it doth that of the B. of Alexandria to the prouinces named in the canon; how comes it to passe, that (as SocratesL. 2. c. 1. Sozo∣menL. 3. c. 7. and NicephorusL. 9. c. 8. report) Iulius by the ancient dig∣nity, and prerogatiue of his See, and because the care of them all be∣longed to him▪ restored each of them to their Churches, and rebuking the Arians for their iniust proceedings threatned to punish them, vn∣lesse they desisted to innouate; and cited Athanasius, and some of the chiefe of the Arians, to make their appearance at Rome, on a set day, and answere for themselues in iudgment; and that Athanasius obey∣ing,
transported himselfe in all diligence to Rome? And how comes it to passe, that when the Arians in their mock-Councell of Philippopolis required the Fathers assembled at Sardica, to absteyne from the communion of Athanasius, & the other Bishops whom they had deposed, those Fathers represen∣ting all the Catholikes of the world, answered,Sozom. l. 3. c. 10. that they neuer had, nor would now abstaine from their communion▪ and prin∣cipally because Iulius B. of Rome hauing examined their cause, had not condemned them? And how comes it to passe, that Peter Successor to S. Athanasius in the See of Alexandria (whom Theodosius and GratianCod. Tit. 1. l. 1. call, A man of Apostolicall sanctity) being in like manner deposed by the Arians, appealed to Rome as to the safest hauen of communionS. Hieron. Ep. 16., and relying on the authority of Pope Damasus his letters, returned to A∣lexandriaL. 4. c. 30., and by vertue of them recouered his Seat, & expelled Lucius the Arian intruder? Doth not all this shew, that the authority of the Roman Church was not limited by the Nicen Councell to the Patriarkship of the West? vn∣lesse you will haue vs belieue, that you vnderstand the sense and meaning of the Councell better, then S. Athana∣sius, and other holy Bishops, which were present at it, and at the Councell of Sardica; and better then Peter that re∣nowned Patriarke of Alexandria, that liued soone after these Councells. In confirmation of this, I adde, that the Councell of Nice ordeynethCan. 6.: that the ancient custome goe on. Now the ancient custome was, that all Churches should resort to the Ro∣man Church by reason of her more mighty principalityIren. l. 3. c. 3. and be∣cause, she is the Chayre of Peter, and the principall Church from whence Sacerdotall vnity is deriuedCyp. ep. 55. ad Cornel.: and because, in her the principality of the Apostolike Chayre hath alwayes florishedS Aug. ep. 162.. And if we come to the Patriarkes of Alexandria, of whom this Canon particularly speaketh, they did alwayes euen be∣fore the Councell of Nice, acknowledge themselues sub∣iect to the B. of Rome, as appeareth by the example of Dionysius Patriarke of that Citty, who being fallen into suspicion of heresy, long before the Councell of Nice, the Catholikes of Alexandria had not recourse to the Synods
of their owne prouinces, nor to any other Patriarke of the East, but went to Rome, to accuse him before Dionysius Pope. They went vp to Rome (sayth S. Athanasius)De sent: Dionys. to accuse him before the B. of Rome, being of his owne name. And a litle af∣terIbid.: And the B. of Rome sent to Dionysins, to cleare himselfe of those things, whereof they had accused him; and suddenly he answered, sending his bookes of defence, and apology. And againeDe Syn. Arim. & So∣leu.: Some hauing accused the B. of Alexandria before the B. of Rome, to hold the Sonne for a creature, the Synod of Rome (that is the Popes Consistory consisting of the neighbour Bishops, and the principall Church-men of Rome, without whose aduice he iudgeth nothing of importance) was offended with him, & the B of Rome writ to him the opinion of all the Assistants: and he for his iustification addressed to him a Booke of defence, and apology. This playnely sheweth, that the custome before the Coun∣cell of Nice, was, that the Bishop and people of Alexan∣dria did acknowledge the Pope of Rome to be their Supe∣rior: which custome therefore the Councell will haue to goe on. But that the true meaning of this Canon may the better be vnderstood, it is to be noted, that the entire Acts of the Councell of Nice being lost, that which remayneth of them in the vulgar copies, is but fragments. Among the rest this very Canon hath not passed without mutilation: for the beginning of it (as it is related by Dionysius Abbas, an author of 1000. yeares standing) is: Ecclesia Romana semper ha∣buit primatum: The Roman Church hath alwayes had the primacy. This beginning troubleth your patience, and to refute it, you sayPag. 108.: They shame not to preferre one vulgar booke before all other Greeke and Latine Copies: False. For that beginning of the Canon is in like manner extant in an ancient Manus∣cript of the famous Monastery of S. Vedastus in Atras, writ∣ten aboue 800. yeares sinceOf this see Pamelius in Annot. ad lib. Cyp. de V∣nit. Eccles. n. 16.: and (which taketh away all occasion of doubt) it is so read in the famous Councell of ChalcedonAct. 16.. True (say you)Pag. 108. but by the Popes Legates. But what? Were not the Popes Legates reuerend Bishops, and Presidents of that Councell? And when they read this beginning of the Canon, did the Fathers of that Councell
except against it, as you do? Nay, after they had read and considered it, did they not sayAct. 16.? Ex his quae gesta vel ab vno∣quoque deposita sunt perpendimus omnem primatum, & honorem prae∣cipuum secundum canones antiquae Romae Deo amantissmo Archie∣piscopo conseruari. By those things which haue bene done, and the proofes which haue bene produced on both sydes, we find that accor∣ding to the Canons▪ all primacy▪ and chiefe honor is preserued to the most beloued of God the Archbishop of old Rome. Then which words none can be more effectuall, to declare the primacy of the Pope, to be Primacy of authority and iurisdiction, and not of order only as you falsely comment; both because primacy of order is not all primacy, nor is it the chiefe ho∣nor: for the honor due to superiority of gouerment, and iu∣risdiction, is farre aboue it. Besides, that as I haue already shewedAboue Chap. 12. and shall in the next Chapter proueSect. 2., this your shift of Primacy of Order (to which you often betake your selfe, as to your last refuge, when you are pressed with vnanswearable arguments) is a mere shift inuented to de∣lude ignorant readers, with empty words voyd of truth. And by this canon it is in like manner euident, that the pri∣macy was not then first giuen to the Church of Rome, but preserued vnto it according to the canons. Your second ArgumentPag. 107. to proue, that the later Roman Councells are bastardly▪ and illegitimate, and that we haue little re∣gard to the Councell of Nice, is taken out of Theodoret, wri∣ting, that Constantine the Great required in that Synod, that, because the bookes of the Apostles do plainly instruct vs in diuine matters, therfore we ought to make our determinations vpon questions from words which are diuinely inspired. And then you tell vs, that Bellarmine answeareth thus: Costantine was a great Em∣peror indeed but no great Doctor of the Church who was yet vnbapti∣zed, and therfore vnderstood not the mysteries of religion. Thus (say you) doth this your Cardinall twite▪ and taunt the iudgment of that godly Emperor, and (as the Steward in the Ghospell) iniustly con∣cealeth from his reader that, which followeth in Theodoret namely, that the greater part of that Councell of Nice obeyed the voyce of Con∣stantine. So you, as you are won: for first you falsify Bellar∣mine, who sayth not, that Constantine was yet vnbaptized, but
that, that is the opinion of you Protestants, and the old Arians: from whence he argueth ad hominem against you, that this testi∣mony of Constantine is not of so great weight, as Caluin and Kemnitius make it: for if he were vnbaptized, he could then be no great Doctor of the Church, as being a Neo∣phyte, and therfore not so well skilled in the mysteries of Christian Religion. What twiting, or taunting of that godly Em∣peror your find in this answere of Bellarmine, I know not; but I know, that you in holding Constantine to be then vnbaptized, both seeke to disgrace that godly Emperor, and withall to vphold the authority and credit of the Arian heretikes, who to make him a Patron of their heresy, gaue out that he was not baptized vntill a litle before his death, and that then he receaued his baptisme from Eusebius B. of Nicomedia, the chiefe ringleader of the Arian faction. But that your dealing may the better appeare, it is to be noted, that Bellarmine is so farre from twiting, or taunting that godly Emperor, that he admitteth of his testimony: Ad∣mitting (sayth he)L. 4. de verbo Dei c. 11. §. Admiss the authority of Constantine, I say, that in all those doctrines which concerne the nature of God, there are ex∣tant testimomes in Scripture, out of which if they be rightly vnder∣stood, we may be fully and plainly instructed; but the true sense of the Scriptures dependeth on the vnwritten tradition of the Church. Wher∣fore the same Theodoret that reporteth this speach of Constantine, declareth in the next Chapter, that in the Councell of Nice Scriptu∣res were produced on both sydes, but the Arians were not conuinced with them▪ because they expounded them otherwise then the Catho∣likes, and therfore were condemned by the vnwritten tradition of the Church piously vnderstood: to which condemnation no man euer doub∣ted, but that Constantine assented. So Bellarmine. And hereby it appeares, that when you say, Bellarmine citeth Theodoret, & yet (as the Steward in the Ghospell) iniustly concealeth that which followeth in him, namely, that the greater part of the Councell obeyed the voyce of Constantine, you wrong Bellarmine, and a buse Theodoret, who in those words relateth not to the determining of controuersies by Scriptures, but to Constantines exhortation made to the Bishops of peace, and concord among themselues, which
(sayth Theodoret) the greatest part of the Councell obeyed, im∣bracing mutuall concord, and true doctrine, though diuers Arians disagreed, some of whose names he there expresseth. This you iniustly conceale, like the ill Steward in the Ghospell, that you may pick a quarrell with Bellarmine. In confir∣mation of this I might adde, that (as S. AugustineL. 5. de Baptism. c. 23. and Vincentius LyrinensisCont. haer. c. 9. & 10. haue testified) the heresy of Re∣baptization could not be disproued by Scripture, but was condemned by Tradition. And finally I might aske you, why you, like the bad Steward, conceale what Theodoret writeth in that very place, namely, that what Constantine said, he spake not to the Bishops, as their Head, but, as a sonne that loued peace offered vp his words to the Priests as to his Fa∣thers, and that he would not enter into the Councell but after them all, nor sit downe but with their leaue, and in a low chayre. Did he (trow you) belieue himselfe to be Head of the Church? CHAP. XVII. The second Generall Councell held at Constantinople, belieued the supreme authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome. SECT. I. By what authority this Councell was called. BELLARMINE in proofe of the Popes vni∣uersall iurisdiction, alleageth, that the Fathers of the first generall Councell of Constantino∣ple, (which was the second generall of the whole Church) in their Epistle to Pope Damasus, say: They
were gathered by his Mandate, and confesse that the Church of Rome is the Head, and they the members. This (say youPag. 109. is all that is obiected, but vpon a mistake. What then is the mistake? Because Bellarmine in the Recognition of his workes, afterwards obserued, that it was not the Epistle of the second generall Synod, but of the Bi∣shops which had bene present at the Synod, and met againe the next yeare after at Constantinople. But if this Epistle were not of the Synod, why do you, speaking of it not without con∣tradiction, sayPag. 10.: The generall Councell of Constantinople do en∣dite an EpistlePag. 110. margin., and inscribe it thus? And why do you mentio∣ning the inscription of the same Epistle call it, Synodicae Epi∣stolae inscriptio, The inscription of the Synodicall Epistle? And why doth TheodoretL. 5. hist. c. 9. stile it Libellus Synodicus à Concilio Con∣stantinopolitano missus, A Synodicall writ sent by the Councell of Constantinople &c? But howsoeuer, you alleaging that Bel∣larmine acknowledgeth his owne mistake, is a mere cauill, nothing auailing your cause: for be it, that those Bishops writ not their Epistle, whiles they were assembled in Councell, but when they met the next yeare after at Con∣stantinople, yet you must acknowledge the truth of what Bellarmine alleageth out of their Epistle, vnlesse you will make them all lyers. But let vs goe on. Bellarmine saythRecogn. pag. 46. in hoc Concil., it is sufficiently proued out of the sixth generall Councell, that this of Constantinople was called by the commaund of Pope Damasus: you answearePag. 109. that, in proofe therof he referreth himselfe to another Councell, a∣gainst the vniuersall current of histories, which with generall consent set downe the Mandates of Emperors as the supreme, and first com∣pulsary causes for the collecting of Councells. So you, but falsly as hath bene already prouedChap. 1. . 8.. And to go no further for examples, That very sixth generall Councell which you mention, beareth witnesse for Bellarmine against you, say∣ing: As soone as Arius arose, the Emperor Constantine, and Syluester worthy of prayse assembled the great and famous Councell at Nice. And that Constantine did not call that Councell by his authority, hath bene proued,Ibid., and is confirmed out of the sixth Councell it selfe, which was cal∣led by the authority of the Pope, as it appeareth out of the
Epistle of Constantine the Emperor to DonusInter praeambul. 6. Synod. apud Bin. to. 3. pag. 6., in which he earnestly intreateth him to send Legates in his name, with sufficient instructions, and authority, for the celebra∣tion of a Councell, to represse heretikes, and restore peace to the Church; promising withall to see them securely con∣ueighed to Constantinople, to receaue them with due ho∣nor, and the Councell being ended, to returne them home with safety. Donus being dead before this letter came to Rome, it was receaued by Agatho his Successor, who yiel∣ding to so pious a desire of the Emperor, caused diuers Sy∣nods to be held in the West to examine the Monothelites Doctrine. Which being done, he called a Synod at Rome to establish more firmely the Catholike fayth against those Heretikes, and then sent his Legates to Constantinople, vpon whose ariuall the Emperor (as knowing that with∣out the authority of the See Apostolike no Councell could be valid) signified by lettersExtat apud Bin. to. 3. pag. 7. to the Patriarkes of Con∣stantinople and Hierusalem, that the Pope hauing yelded to his desire of calling a Councell, had sent his legates re∣presenting his owne person, and with them order, and in∣structions how to proceed therin: and therfore wished them with their Metropolitans and Bishops, to resort to Constantinople. All which sheweth how vntruely you say, that Emperors are the supreme, and first compulsarie causes for the collecting of Councells: for indeed how can that authority belong to them, who haue no more, then the sixth Coun∣cell sheweth? Which being ended the Popes Legates, though none of them were Bishops, but two of them Priestes, and the third a Deacon, as they had presided in the Councell, so they subscribed in the first place, before all the Bishops, and Patriarkes, and the Emperor in the last place after all, and in these words, Legimus & consensimusApud Bin. to. 3. pag. 7., shew∣ing therby, that he had no authority of a Iudge in the Councell, but that his duety was (as it is also of other Em∣perors) to agree vnto what the Bishops by their authority, as Iudges had determined. 2. To proue that the Emperor was the supreme and first com∣ulsaty cause of collecting the second generall Councell at Constanti∣nople,
you produce Theodoret as a witnessePag. 109. 110., that not Da∣masus, but he was the absolute Commander. If Theodoret say, that the Emperor commanded, he sayth it not to shew, that he commanded by his owne authority, but by the power he had receaued from Damasus; so, that his command and conuocation was only executory of Damasus his authori∣ty: for why els doe not those Bishops say, that the Empe∣ror called them? and why do they say to Damasus, You cal∣led vs, as your owne members by letters sent to the Emperor, but be∣cause Damasus was he that chiefely called them, and the Emperor no otherwise, then by vertue of Damasus his let∣ters sent vnto him to that effect? Euen as Basilius the Em∣peror in like manner called the eight generall Councell by the Mandate of Pope Adrians lettersApud Bin. to. 3. pag. 881.: Volumus &c. Wee will (sayth Adrian to the Emperor) that a full Councell be held at Constantinople, by the industry of your Piety, in which our Legates presiding &c. And this would haue bene no lesse cleare con∣cerning the calling of the second generall Councell at Cō∣stantinople, if what you set downe in your Latin and Greeke marginals, you had syncerely rendred in your En∣glish text, which most imported your readers for the vn∣derstandding of the truth. And the same is yet further proued out of two very an∣tient Manuscripts, the one of the Vatican, and the other of S. Maria Maior, in which it is saidApud Ba∣ron. anno 381.: Damasus confirmed the sentence of condemnation pronounced against Macedonius, and Eu∣nomius, in the second Synod, which by his command and authority was held at Constantinople. And lastly whether Damasus did belieue, that the au∣thority of calling Councells belonged to the Emperor or to himselfe, may be gathered out of another Epistle of his, written in answere to one Stephen, an Archbishoppe of Mauritania, and three African CouncellsDamas. Ep. 4. apub. Bin. to 1. pag. 499., in which ha∣uing declared, that he had the Episcopall charge, or ministery ouer the house of God, which is the vniuersall Catholike Church, and that the See Apostoleke is constituted by God ouer all Priests, and Bishops, he addeth; for as you know, it is not Catholike, that a Synod be held without the authority of the holy See Apostolike, nor a Bishop condem∣ned,
but in a lawfull Synod assembled by the same authority: nor are any Councells read to be valid, but only such as haue their strength from the Apostolicall authority. And hereby you are conuinced of an vntruth, in saying,Pag. 110. that Damasus his letters were not mandatory to the Orientals, but letters of request to the Emperor Theodosius for obteyning liberty, to collect, and assemble a Synod. For albeit Damasus requested Theodosius to assist him therin, as the duty of a Christian Emperor was to do, yet (witnes TheodoretL. 5. c. 8. he with his Roman Synod (without whose aduice he dispatcheth no busines of moment) sent letters to the Easterne Bishops themselues, to call them to a Councell at Rome; which let∣ters they hauing receaued by the Emperor, returne an ans∣were to Damasus, not taxing him for want of authority to call them, but excusing their not obeying his command, by reason of the shortnes of tyme, & the great inconuenien∣ces their long absence would haue bred to their Churches newly freed from the persecutions, and troubles of Here∣tikes. Which excuse sufficiently sheweth, that they ack∣nowledged in him authority to call them. SECT. II. Whether the Primacy of the Pope be Primacy of Authority and Iurisdiction, or of Order only. BEllarmineL. 2. de Pont. c. 13. proueth the Popes authority ouer the Orientals by their acknowledging him to be their Head and themselues to be his members. You answere,Pag. 110. that the simi∣litude of Head, and members, implieth, no superiority of iurisdiction, but only of Order, that is, of priority of place, of voyce, and the like. But this euasion is cōfuted by the very comparison it selfe: for the Head hath not only priority of place aboue the members, but gouerneth and ruleth the whole body. And therfore your answere is no lesse contrary to reason, then if you should tell vs, that in a politicall body, as in a Col∣ledge, the Rector, which is Head of the house, hath no o∣ther superiority ouer his fellow-Collegials, but only priority
of place, or of voyce: nor the Gouernor of a City ouer the Ci∣tizens, nor the Vice-Roy ouer the inferior officers of the kingdome. And so much the more reprehēsible is this your sophistry, because you know, that the holy Councell of Chalcedon speaking to Leo Pope, saythInrelat. ad Leon.: You rule ouer vs, as the Head doth ouer the members. AndIbide: We beseech you to honor our iudgment with your decrees, and that as in what concernes the weale we haue had correspondency to our Head; so your Soue∣raignty would fulfill to your Children, what concernes decency. Do not these Fathers here expresly acknowledge Leo to be the ruler and Gouernor of the Vniuersall Church, and beseech him to confirme and authorize their decrees? If he had not power and authority ouer the whole Church, why did S. Ambrose (one of the Bishops to whom these Orientals ad∣dressed their letter, as the inscriptionApud Theodoret. l. 5. hist. c. 9. declareth) speaking of this very Pope Damasus, sayIn cap. 3. prior. ad Ti∣moth.: Though all the world be Gods, yet the Church is called his house, wherof at this day Damasus is Gouernor? If the Pope haue not iurisdiction ouer all Bi∣shops, euen the greatest Patriarkes of the East, and power to annuall their decrees, and the decrees of their Councells, why did S. ChrysostomeEp. 1. ad Innocent., when he was deposed from the See of Constantinople, in a Councell held by Theo∣philus Patriarke of Alexandria, write to Innocentius Pope, beseeching him to annull the Acts of that Councell, and punish them that had so iniustly condemned him? Why did Theodoret Bishop of Cyre, deposed in the second Councell of Ephesus, ap∣peale to Pope LeoEp. ad Renat. & ep. ad Leo., acknowledging, that the holy Roman See hath the sterne of gouernment ouer all the Churches of the world? If the rule and gouerment of the vniuersall Church belong not to the Pope, why did the Bishop of Patara in Lycia, vpon the expulsion of Pope Siluerius from his SeeLiberat. in Breui. c. 12., re∣present vnto Iustinian the indignity of that fact, saying, that albeit there be many Kings and Princes in the world, yet none of them ouer all the earth, as the Pope is ouer the Church of all the world? If the gouerment of the vniuersall Church belong not to him, why did the Emperor Valentinian the thirdCod. l. 7. & 8. in∣stile him, Rector of the vniuersaloty of Churches? Why doth the same Emperor and Theodosius decreeConstit. Nouel. tit. 24., that all those things
shall be lawes, which haue beue or shall be ordayned by the Pope of the eternall Citty, and that presumption attempt nothing against his au∣thority: for so (say thoy) the peace of the Church shall be maintay∣ned by all, if the vniuersality acknowledge her Rector. If the Pope haue no superiority ouer other Bishops, but only priority of place, or of voyce, why did Athanasius Patriarke of Alexandria, Paul of Constantinople, with many others of the East, in their wrongs, appeale to Iulius Pope, as to their IudgeSocrat. l. 2. c. 11.? & how came he to replace them in their seates, butSozom. l. 3. c. 7. by the soueraignty of his Church; andNicepho. l. 9. c. 8. because the charge of all belonged to him? But to returne to the Councell of Constantinople; Those Fathers in their letter to Damasus, made sufficient acknowledgment of his authority ouer themApud Theodoret. l 5. c. 9., when they demanded from him the confirmation of their decrees of fayth, and in particular that of the deposition of Timo∣thy Patriarke of Alexandria, condemned for heresy: All these things (say they) being lawfully decreed according to the Ca∣nons of the Church, we beseech your Holiness, to approue them. To which petition Damasus answearedApud Theodoret. ibid. c. 10.: Wheras your chari∣ty (most honoured children) yeldeth due reuerence to the Apostolike See, it shall turne you to great honor &c. But what need was there to require from one the deposition of Timothy, seeing he was long since deposed here, with his Maister Apollinarius, by the iudgment of the See Apostolike, and in the presence of Peter Bishop of Alexandria? SECT. III. Whether the name of Brother, Colleague, and fellow-Minister, which the Pope giueth to other Bishops, and they to him, argue them to be of equall authority, and iurisdiction with him? YOu obiectPag 110.111., that the Fathers of this second Councell generall write not to the Pope alone, but to him with other Bishops of the Roman Synod, whome they acknowledge to be their Colleagues and fellow members, and therby cut the Roman Head into so many peeces, as there were Bishops, to whom they inscribed their Epistle.
It is a prime Argument of yours, which you often re∣peate, and strongly insist onPag 63. fin. 64.83.84.110.111.116.141.268., that because Bishops are ioyned in society with the Pope, or because they call him Brother, Colleague, and fellow-Minister, as also because he wri∣ting to them, calleth them, his Brethren & Colleagues, there is no inequality of power betweene the Pope and them, but that they are all equall with him. Whiles you giue to the Pope (say you)Pag. 63. fin. 64. an absolute iurisdiction, cum plenitudine potestatis, ouer all Bishops, how can you suffer him to be mated, or equaled with others Bishops, as Paul did Peter, by ioyning in society with him Iames and Iohn? 2. HerePag. 110.111. you inferre, that because the Orientall Bishops that had bene present at the second Councell ge∣nerall, writing to Damasus Pope, and other Bishops as∣sembled at Rome, call both him, and them, their Brethren, and Colleagues, they acknowledge not any authority or iu∣risdiction in the Pope, more then in themselues, or in the other Bishops, to whom they write. 3. You frame the like ArgumentPag. 116. out of the Councell of Ephesus, because it cal∣les Celestine B. of Rome, Fellow-Minister. 4. And out of S. E∣piphaniusPag. 241., who called Pope Hormisdas, Brother. 5. And out of S. Cyprian you tell vsPag. 268., that he neuer calleth the Pope Bishop of Bishops, Father of Fathers, High Priest of Christ, and Mo∣narke of the vniuersall Church, as he would haue done, if he had be∣lieued his Monarchy: but contrariwise in all his Epistles, saluteth Pope Cornelius, with only Charissime frater, Most deare Brother, & taketh his Vale, with the same, Most deare brother, farewell. And when in his Epistles to others he falleth into mention of him, he exceedeth not these Epithets, Ourfellow brother Cornelius, Our Colleague, or fellow in office Cornelius: which if it be beheld in a secular glasse is, as if a Vassall should salute his King, with, All hayle brother Henry, & take his leaue with, Farewell brother Henry. Fy fye: What will you make of the Fathers? will you iudge them so witlesse, as not to haue vnder∣stood their Morals. This is your discourse: Graue (I warrant you) and very iudicious, but how farre from the purpose, haue but a litle patience, and you shall heare. And first, to begin with your secular glasse; God in the holy Scripture sayth to his peopleDeutero. 17.15.: Thou shalt take a King whom our Lord thy God shall choose out of the number of thy
brethren. And againeIbid. vers. 20.: That the Kings hart be not lifted vp in∣to pride aboue his Brethren. Wherfore the subiects of a King, are his brethren: and yet because the manner of gouerment vsed by Kinges to keep their subiects in awe, and represse the Violence of Malefactors, is with a Lordly dominion, such as our Sauiour discribeth, sayingLuc. 22.25. The Princes of na∣tions dominier ouer them, in the stile of the world he should be esteemed vnmannerly and saucy, that should presume to say to his Soueraigne. All haile Brother Henry, or farewell fel∣low Henry. And therfore S. Gregory speaking of the worldly greatnesse, and state of Kings, saythIn 1. Reg. l. 4. c. 2.: The things which are conteyned in the law, that concerneth Kings, are foretold, to the end they may be auoyded, rather then followed. And the same is taught vs by the example of our Blessed SauiourMarc. 10.45. & Luc. 2.27. who, as he came into the world to serue, and not to be serued, so he would not haue the Ecclesiasticall Monarchy like to that of Secular Prin∣ces, but a gentle and brotherly Monarchy, as that of an El∣der brother, ouer his yonger brethren: for that is the title which the Apostle giues him, calling himRom. 8.29.. The first begot∣ten among many brethren. And therfore albe it (as he told his ApostlesIoan. 13.23. he was their Lord, and Maister, yet proposing him∣selfe vnto them as an example of superiority, accompanied with humility, and teaching them in what manner they ought to gouerne their inferiors, he said vnto themLuc. 22.27. & vers. 25.2.: I am in the middest of you▪ as one that ministreth: the Princes of nations dominier ouer them, but you not so: but he that is the greater among you, let him become as the yonger; and he that is the leader, as the waiter. This rule S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and first B. of Rome obserued, according to our Sauiours command; and exhorted all Bishops, as his inferiors to obserue the same, saying1. Pet. 5.2. & 3.: Feed the flock of God, which is among you, prouiding not with constraint, but willingly according to God; nor dominiering in the Clergy, but made examples of the flock from the hart. And out of this paterne of sweet and brotherly gouer∣ment vsed by Christ, and prescribed by him to his Apo∣stles, and by S. Peter to his Successors in the Roman See, and to other Bishops, the Pope and all other Prelates haue
drawne theirs, and therfore call and salute ech other, by the name of Brethren: in so much that S. Gregory speaking of Bishops saythL. 7. ep. 65.: When crimes exact it not, all Bishops according to the condition of humility are equall. And yet to shew, that all Bishops are subiect to the Pope, he had said immediatly be∣fore, I know no Bishop, but is subiect to the See Apostolike. And a∣gaineL. 7. op. 64.: Who doubts, but that the Bishop of Constantinople is sub∣iect to the See Apostolike? which the most religious Lord the Emperor, and our brother Bishop of the same Citty, do continually Protest. In which words he calleth the B. of Constantinople, Brother, and yet declareth him subiect to the See Apostolike. And in like manner our Sauiour in the Ghospell often calleth the Apostles. His brethrenLuc. 25.40 & cap. 28.10. & Ioan. 20.17.: from whence you may inferre, that he was not Superior to them in authority, and it will be as good a consequence, as to inferre, that the Pope is not Su∣perior in power to other Bishops, because he calls them Brethren. But for the more full declaration of this, it is to be no∣ted, that it was a thing familiar to ancient writers, to vse the word Brother, not to exclude the superiority of iurisdi∣ction, but to expresse the vnity of communion. For, 1. the Catholike Bishops of Africa answeated the Donatists in the Conference of Carthage, that Cecilianus who had bene Archbishop of that City, and consequently the Head and Superintendent of all the Bishops of Africa, was their Bro∣ther: He was (sayth S. Augustine)Collect. Carthag. Act. 3. our Brother because of the Communion of Sacraments. 2. In the same sense he called Au∣relius Archbishop of Carthage, his BrotherDe oper. Monach. c. 1., notwithstan∣ding that he was the spirituall subiect of Aurelius, & made B. of Hippo by meanes of the dispensation, which he had giuen to Valerius B. of that City, to take him for his Coad∣iutor (m); and he acknowledged himselfe bound to exe∣cute his commands: I haue (sayth hePossid in vita Aug. c. 8. obeyed your commands my holy Brother Aurelius. 3. Epigonius one of the Bishops of the third Councell of Carthage, calls the same Aurelius,De opere Monach. c. 1. His BrotherConc. Car∣thag. c. 45., whom yet he there acknowledgeth to haue iu∣risdiction ouer all the Bishops of Africa. 4. The Councell of Carthage writing to Innocentius Pope, to confirme the
sentence of condemnation, which both in that, and in the Councell of Mileuis, had bene pronounced against Pela∣gius, saythAug. ep. 90.: This, ô holy Lord and Brother, we conceaued we ought to represent to your Charity, that to the statuts of mediocrity might be added the authority of the See Apostolike. In which words they acknowledge Innocentius to be their Lord and Superior, and to haue authority to confirme their decrees, & yet notwithstanding, call him their Brother. 5. Iohn Pa∣triarke of Constantinople calls Hormisdas Pope, Brother,Ep. ad Hormisd. and yet protests to obey the See Apostolike in all things. 6. IustinianCod. tit. 1. l 8. writing to Pope Iohn surnamed Mercurius, calleth the Patriarke of Constantinople, his Bro∣ther: and yet both in the same Epistle and in another to the Patriarke himselfeCod. tit. 1. l. 7., he professeth the Pope to be The Head of all the holy Prelates of God. Hereby it appeareth, how ignorantly and falsly you in∣ferre, that S. Cyprian equalleth himselfe in authority with Cornelius Pope, because he styleth himselfe his Brothrer, or that Cornelius acknowledgeth in himselfe no authority ouer Cyprian, because he giueth him the same title. For be∣sides what hath bene said, Erasmus a man highly esteemed by you hath taught youNot. in ep. Cyp. ad Cor∣nel. that the word Brother there sig∣nifieth not equality, but society of religion. And nothing els is signified by the words, Colleague, and Fellow-minister, when other Bishops are so instiled by the Pope, or the Pope by them. For that ancient Father Vin∣centius Lyrinensis speaking of Pope Stephen, and other Bishops opposing the doctrine of rebaptization defended by Firmilianus, and Cyprian, saythCont. haer. cap. 9.: Then the blessed Ste∣phen made resistance together with, but yet before, his Colleagues, iudging it (as I conceaue) a thing worthy of him to excell them in fayth, so much, as he did in the authority of his place. And Inno∣centius the first in answere to the Councells of Carthage and MileuisInter ep. Aug. ep. 93.: I conceaue, that all our Brethren and fellow-Bi∣shops ought not to referre what may be profitable in common to all Churches, to any but to Peter, that is to say, to the author of their name and dignity. And the Bishops of Aegypt in the Synod of Alexandria call S. Athanasius, their ColleagueAthan. Apol. de fuga sua., who yet
was their Head, and had iurisdiction ouer them, as the Coūcell of Nice declarethCan. 6.. And lastly the Bishops of the Councell of Ephesus, call Celestine Pope, their fellow-mini∣sterPar. 2. Act. 1.; and yet in the same place stile him their most holy Father. and make themselues executors of his decrees: Con∣strained necessarily (say they) by the force of the Canons, and by the letters of our most holy Father, and Fellow-minister Celestine, we are come not without teares, to pronounce this heauy sentence against Nestorius. I conclude therfore, that these words, Brother, Colleague, and fellow-minister, when they are vsed by the Pope to other Bishops, or by other Bishops to the Pope, signify nothing els, but society of religion and vnity of communion: from whence to inferre (as you do) that other Bishops are of e∣quall authority with the Pope, is a peece of ignorance, no way suiting with a man of your reading, and altogeather vnbeseeming him that holds the place of so great a Bishop. SECT IV. A friuolous cauill of Doctor Morton against Bellarmine, answeared. YOu obiectPag. 109. fin. that, wheras Theodoret sayth, , which is, letters the yeares past, Bellarmine a∣gainst all Lexicons readeth, The mandate of letters. Is not this fine art, trow yee? &c. If any should translate the yeare past, into Man∣date, might it not be suspected, that the mans witts were now in the wayne, as being ignorant &c. So you; who by seeking to shew your wit in scoffing at Bellarmine, discouer your igno∣rance, and folly. Bellarmines intent is to shew, that the Councell of Constantinople was called by the Popes au∣thority, because the Fathers of the Councell writing to Damasus, acknowledge that they were called, , by his letters, which Bellarmine translateth, mandato literarum, by command of his letters, following the ver∣sion of Christopherson; and with good cause: for who is so stupid, as not to vnderstand, that it is all one, to call the
Bishops to a Councell, by his letters, as the Greeke sayth, or, by the authority and Mandate of his letters, as Christopherson translated? But to translate  for Mandate, neither did Bellarmine so translate, nor would any man, whose wits are not in the wayne, haue imputed so grosse an ignorance to that learned Cardinall, especially, since in two different places, he setteth downe the same passage at large, and ex∣presseth both Mandato litterarum,L. 2. de Pont. c. 13. & In Respon. ad Apol. pro iu∣ram. fidel. pag. 375., and, Anno superiore, saying: Mandato litterarum superiore anno à vestra Reuerentia ad sanctissi∣mum Imperatorem Theodosium missarum: by the Mandate of letters sent the last yeare by your Reuerence to the most religious Emperor Theodosius. Which sheweth, that if he had left out of the La∣tin, Anno superiore, (as you citing his words cunningly do) it had not bene to translate  into Mandate, but to omit Anno superiore, as a particle wholly impertinent, either to proue, or disproue the Popes power of calling generall Councells, which no way dependeth on the yeare, but on the authority and dignity of his place. SECT. V. Of the Decree of this second Councell generall, made in fauor of the Archbishop of Constantinople. AGainst what hath bene said, you oppose aPag. 112. 113. Canon of the second Councell, ordayning, that the B. of Con∣stantinople haue the honor of primacy next after the B. of Rome, be∣cause Constantinople is new Rome. This Obiection reboundeth on your owne head: For if the Bishop of Constantinople sought then to obtayne the second place after the Pope, be∣cause Constantinople is new Rome, it is therby manifest, that before that tyme, the B. of old Rome had the prima∣cy, aboue all Bishops: The primacy (I say) not of order only (for this the Bishops of Constantinople neuer denied to the Pope) but of authority, and iurisdiction ouer the Pa∣triarkes of Alexandria, Antioch, and Hierusalem: for that authority it was, in which they sought to participate with him, though in the second place after & vnder him: which
they cold not haue done, vnlesse the primacy of authority ouer those Patriarkes had primitiuely, and originally be∣longed to him. So farre therfore is this your Argument from euincing any thing against the Popes authority, that it confirmeth the same. And so much the more, because the Canon obiected (whatsoeuer the sense of it be, and whatsoeuer the Bishops of Constantinople pretended by it) is of no force: for the Councell in which it was made, consisted only of the Bi∣shops of the East, and therfore was not Generall of it selfe, but only by the adiunction, and confirmation of another Councell of the Westerne Bishops, held at Rome, vnder Damasus Pope, at the same tyme, which neither knew of this Canon before it was made, nor confirmed it after it was made, as S. Gregory hath testified sayingL. 6. ep. 31.: The Roman Church neither hath, nor receaueth the Canons, or the Actes of the Councell of Constantinople: but she hath admitted that Synod in what it defined against Macedonius. And the same is testified by S. LeoEp. 53., who reprehending Anatolius Patriarke of Con∣stantinople, for seeking to renew this Canon in the Coun∣cell of Chalcedon, sayth: The signature of certaine Bishops made (as thou vauntest) more then threescore yeares since, cannot iustify thy intention, to the vpholding whereof (being of it selfe from the be∣ginning ruinous, and long since quite fallen) thou hast sought weake and feeble props: for neuer hauing bene transmitted by thy predeces∣sors to the knowledge of the See Apostolike, it could be of no force. That this Canon was neuer allowed by the See Apo∣stolike, you know, but shift it off sayingPag 112.: Truly it were more then maruell, if the Church of Rome should admit any Canon, that may any way derogate from her presumption This your ans∣were is, as if the lower house of Parliament should enact a law against the Kings iust and lawfull authority, or at least without his knowledge: and the King not admitting therof, you should iustify their acte, saying (a): It were more then maruell if the King should admit any acte that may any way de∣rogate from his presumption: Were this loyalty? Were this good Doctrine? Yet such is yours: for concerning Ecclesiasticall affaires, the Pope hath the same place in a generall Coun∣cell,
that a King hath in his Parliament. And as no Statute enacted in Parliament can be of force, vnlesse it be confir∣med by his Maiesty, so no Canon, nor decree of a Councell can be of force, vnlesse it be confirmed by the Pope. SECT. VI. That no Canon of any Councell can be of force, vntill it be confirmed by the See Apostolike. FOr who knoweth not, that, as Socrates shewing the decrees of the Arian Councell at Antioch, to be of no force, saythL. 2. c. 5.: Iulius B. of Rome was not there, nor sent any in his steed, wheras the Ecclesiasticall Canon commandes, that no decrees be made for the Churches, without the sentence of the B. of Rome. Which Doctrine is els where repeated by himselfeL. 2. c. 13., and by Epiphanius Scholasticus in the Tripartite, sayingL. 4. c. 9.: Councells must not be held without the allowance of the B of Rome. And by Sozomen,L. 3. c. 9. who writes, that Iulius rebuked the A∣rians, for that against the lawes of the Church they had not called him to the Synod, there being a Sacerdotall law, which declareth all Actes to be inualid, that are made without the allowance of the B of Rome. The reprehension of Iulius, which these Historians men∣tion, is exstant in his first Epistle to the Orientalls, where he sayth: The Nicen Canons command that by no meanes Councells be held without the B. of Rome. And in his secōd Epistle (which S. Athanasius hath inserted into his second Apology) spea∣king to the Arians: Are you ignorant that the custome is, that if any exceptions were taken against the Bishops there, we should first haue bene written to, that what is iust might be determined from hence? And how ancient this custome is, Marcellus the first a holy Pope and Martyr testifieth, sayingEp. ad E∣pise. Antioch. Prouin.: The Apostles or∣deyned, that no Synod should be held without the Authority of the See of Rome. Which ordination of the Apostles the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian confirmed by a speciall law in these wordsConst. Nouel. Theo. tit. 24.: We decree, that according to the ancient cu∣stome, nothing be innouated in the Churches, without the sentence of
the Reuerend Pope of the City of Rome. And in like manner Iu∣stinian in his Law to Epiphanius Patriarke of Constanti∣nopleCod. tit. 1. l. 7.: We preserue the estate of the Vnity of the most holy Chur∣ches in all things, with the most holy Pope of ancient Rome, to whom we haue written the like, because we will not haue any thing to passe concerning the affayres of the Church, which shall not be also referred to his Blessednesse, because he is the Head of all the holy Prelatet of God. And in his letter to the PopeCod. tit. 1. l. 8.: We wil not suffer that any thing be treated of, belonging to the estate of the Church, though cleare and manifest, which shall not also be referred to your Holynesse, who are the Head of all Churches. Vpon this ground it was, that Dioscorus Patriarke of Alexandria was accused, and by the Popes command pu∣nished in the Councell of ChalcedonAct. 1., for, that he had temerariously presumed to hold a Synod without the authority of the See Apostolike, which neither was, nor could euer lawfully be done. And Euagrius in the history of the same Councell, repor∣tesL. 2. c. 18. that the Senators demanding of Leo's Legates, what charge there was against Dioscorus, they answered, that he must yeld an ac∣count of his iudgment, because against right he had vsurped the person of a Iudge, without the B. of Romes permission. Wherupon by the iudgment of the Synod he was commanded as a person guilty to stand vp in the middest of the place, and accused of many crimes, as the same Narration declareth. Againe from this ground it proceeded, that (as the Fa∣thers of Chalcedon testifyAct. 10., in generall Councells the Legates of the See Apostolike were alwayes wont to speake, and confirme the decrees made, in the first place, be∣fore all other Bishops. And as all those Councells generall and particular which haue required and obtained Confir∣mation from the See Apostolike, haue euer bene held valid, and reuerenced throughout the Christian world; so con∣trarily all those that haue wanted this confirmation, haue bene reiected, and condemned as vnlawfull, and spurious assemblies. The Councell of Ariminum for number of Bi∣shops, was exceeding great; and yet for want of this con∣firmation, the profession of fayth made by them in that Councell, as also the Councell it selfe, haue euer bene repu∣ted
inualid. The number of Bishops assembled at Ariminum (sayth Damasus with many other BishopsTheod. l. 2. c. 22. Sozom. l. 6. c. 23. ought to haue no force of preiudice for as much as that profession of fayth was made without the consent of the B. of Rome, whose sentence before others, ought to haue bene attended. Againe, for want of this confirmation the second Councell of Ephesus hath alwayes bene condem∣ned as a piraticall Synod. And that famous Martyr Stepha∣nus Iunior, speaking of a Councell held by the Image-breakers vnder Constantinus Copronymus, answeredApud Damas. edit. Pacis an. 1603. part. 2. pag. 491.: How can this Councell be called Oecumenical, which was not allowed by the B. of Rome, without whose authority no Ecclesiasticall decrees can be made. In like manner Pelagius predecessor to S. Gre∣gory speaking of Iohn B of Constantinople saythEp. 1.: That intituling himselfe Vniuersall, he presumed to call a general Councell, wheras the authority of calling generall Synods, hath bene consigned by a singular priuiledge to the Apostolike See of blessed Peter &c. And therfore (sayth heIbid. to the Bishops of that Councell) all that you haue decreed in that no-Synod of yours (for Synod so at∣tempted it could not be, but a Conuenticle) I ordaine by the authori∣ty of blessed Peter, that it be annulled and abrogated. And S. Gre∣gory speaking of this sentence of Pelagius, saythL. 4. op. 38. & l. 7. ep. 70.: Our Predecessor Pelagius of blessed memory, hath disanulled by a sentence entirely valid, all the actes of that Synod, except what concerned the cause of Gregory B. of Antioch. Finally to adde more proofes for the confirmation of a truth so certaine, were to adde light to the Sunne, starres to the Heauens, and water to the Ocean. These sufficiently shew, that you by confessing, that this Canon of the Coun∣cell of Constantinople was neuer admitted by the Church of Rome, discouer your folly, in insisting so much on a Ca∣non, which for want of due confirmation is inualid. SECT. VII. That the Bishops of Constantinople knew this Canon to be of no force. YOu aske;Pag. 112. Which of the Fathers, for the space of 60. yea∣res after, opposed against this Canon? What one Bishop before
Pope Leo thought is not most equall? I answeare, that this Ca∣non was so farre from being allowed, either by the Popes, or other Fathers of that tyme, that because it was not con∣firmed by the See Apostolike, it presently dyed: and the Patriarkes of Constantinople acknowledged themselues still subiect to the Pope, and the Pope exercised his iuris∣diction ouer them, as formerly he had done. For this Councell of Constantinople being held in the tyme of Nectarius Patriarke of that Citty, S. Chrysostome that was his immediat Successor, being deposed at the pro∣curement of Eudoxia the Empresse, by a Councell of Bi∣shops held at Constantinople vnder Theophilus Patriarke of Alexandria, had recourse by letters of appeale to Inno∣centius Pope, beseeching him to disanull by his letters, and authority, the Actes of that Councell; to abrogate their sentence of condemnation iniustly pronoūced against him, to restore him to his Bishopricke, and punish his aduersaries according to the Canons of the Church; yet not with such rigor, but that if they did repent, he would be pleased to spare them. All these particulars are the requests of S. Chry∣sostome expressed in his letters to InnocētiusEp. 1. & 2. ad Inno∣cent.: in which who seeth not, that he acknowleged in him the power of an absolute Iudge, not only ouer himselfe, but also ouer Theophilus the greatest Patriarke of the East, and ouer the whole Councell, that had condemned him? Chrysostome was no sooner thrust out of his See, and sent into banishment, but his enemies set vp Arsacius in his place, who liuing not much aboue a yeare, Innocentius would neuer admit him to his communion, and after his death commanded his name to be razed out of the records of the Church. After Arsacius succeeded Atticus, Chrysostome yet li∣uing. Him likewise Innocentius excommunicatated: and notwithstanding that he sent many embassages, to procure absolution he could neuer obteyne it, vntill he had inrolled the name of Chrysostome in the records of the Church, as Innocentius ordeinedTheod. l. 5. c. 34.. Sone after him succeded Nestorius, who being fallen
into heresy, was by the authority and command of Pope Celestine excommunicated, & deposed in the first Coun∣cell of EphesusSee the next Chap. sect. 1.. In his place Maximianus a man of excellent vertue was ordained by the Legates of the See Apostolike, and confir∣med by Celestine Pope: and who, in acknowledgment of the See Apostolike, writ a famous Epistle to the Orientals. Part of his words you haue heard aboueChap. 1. sect. 4.. After him succeeded Flauianus, who hauing condem∣ned Eutyches in a Synod at Constantinople, and being therfore deposed in the second Councell of Ephesus by meanes of Dioscorus, an hereticall Patriarke of Alexan∣dria, appealed to Leo Pope. Fliuianus (saith Liberatus)In breuiar. c. 22. appealed to the Apostolike See by petition presented to his Le∣gates. The same is testified by Leo himselfeEp. 24., and by Valentinian the third to Theodosius his Father in lawIn Ep. preamb. Con∣cil. Chalced.. These examples are so many testimonies of your ig∣norance. You aske, which of the Fathers for the space of 60. yeares (after the Councell of Constatinople) opposed against this Canon, or what one Bishop before Leo thought it not equall? But we contrarily demand of you, which of the Bishops of Constantinople (in whose fauor this Canon was made) for the space of 70. yeares, which passed betweene the two Councells of Constantinople, and Chalcedon, did clayme any priuiledge of honor, ouer the other Patriarkes of the East, or any exemption from the Popes iurisdiction, by vertue of this Canon▪ Or what Pope in those 70. yeares did thinke it equall? The examples alleaged conuince, that the most famous Bishops of Constantinople, which liued in that tyme, knew the Canon to be of no force; since in the wronges done them by other Patriarkes, and Councells of the East, they neuer alleaged it in their owne defence, but still appealed to the Popes of those tymes, as to their law∣full Iudges: and the Popes thought their appeales, to be most equall, and iust: & absoluing them, condemned their aduersaries. And finally, that this Canon tooke no effect, is a thing evident, by the answere which the Popes Legates made,
when Anatolius B. of Constantinople attempted to haue it renewed in the Councell of Chalcedon: for hauing said, that it was not to be found in the Code of the Canons of the vniuersall Church, they addedAct. 1.: If the Bishops of Constantinople haue en∣ioyed it, what would they haue more? And if they haue not enioyed it, why do they now require it? CHAP. XVIII. The third Councell Generall, being the first of Ephesus, belieued the supreme Authority, and Iurisdiction of the B. of Rome, ouer all Bishops. SECT. I. Of the deposition, and condemnation of Nestorius, by the Command of Pope Celestine▪ and whether the style of ancient Popes were to Command. CELESTINE Pope being informed of the blasphemous Doctrine of Nesto∣rius Patriarke of Constantinople (who held that in Christ there were two per∣sons, diuine, and humane, and that ther∣fore the B. Virgin Mary was the mo∣ther of man only and not of God) con∣demned it first at Rome, and then made Cyrill Patriarke of Alexandria his Vicar in the East, giuing him Commis∣sion to publish, and execute his sentence at Constantino∣ple. This he signified to Nestorius himselfeConc. Ephes. to. 1. c. 17. sin.: We haue sent (sayth Celestine) the forme of this iudgment, together with the
whole processe to our holy fellow-Bishop of Alexandria, to the end that he being made our Vicar, may notify this our Decree vnto all, And giuing Commission to Cyrill to publish and execute his sentence, he saythEp. ad Cy∣ril. in Conc. Ephes to. 1. c. 16.: Adding to thee the authority of our See, and vsing with power the representation of our place, thou shalt exe∣cute exactly and seuerely this sentence, namely, that if within ten dayes told, after signification of this admonition made to Nestorius, he do not in expresse words anathematize his wicked Doctrines &c. thy Holinesse shall prouide for that Church without delay, and declare him to be wholly cut off from our body. Who seeth not that these words of Celestine import a command to Cyrill? And in conformity to this command, Cyrill writ to the Clergy, & people of ConstantinopleConc. E∣phes. to. 1. c. 5.: We are constrayned to signify to Nestorius by Synodicall letters: that if very speedily, that is, within the tyme prescribed by the most holy Bishop of the Roman Church, he renounce not the Nouelties of his Doctrine, he is to haue no more com∣munion with vs, not place among the Minister of God▪ And the Councell it selfe proceeding to the sentence of condemna∣tion against him, saythConc. E∣phes. to. 2. c. 20.: Constrained necessarily by the force of the Canons, and by the letters of our most holy Father Celestine, we are come not without many teares, to pronounce this heauy sentence against him. And then they couch the sentence it selfe in these wordsIbid.: Therfore our Lord Iesus Christ whom Nestorius hath assailed with his blasphemies, by this holy Synod pronounceth him wholly depriued of all Episcopall dignity, and cast out from all company, and conuersation of Priests. These passages proue the authority of the Pope. 1. Ouer Cyrill Patriarke of Alexandria whom he made his Vicar, and who acknowledged himselfe bound by Celestines let∣ters, to condemne Nestorius, and cast him out from among the Ministers of God. 2. Ouer the Patriarke of Constanti∣nople, whom he first condemned at Rome, and afterwards gaue command to Cyrill, to publish his condemnation at Constantinople, and to substitute another Bishop in his place. And 3. ouer the Councell of Ephesus, in which the Bishops professeEuagr. l. 1. c. 4., that they were compelled necessarily by the force of the Canons, and by the letters of Celestine, to condemne Ne∣storius: Which (sayth Bellarmine) was to professe that they depo∣sed
him by the command of Pope Celestine. False (say youPag. 114.: There is not the word Command vsed by the Councell &c. No, you know well, that to command, was not the stile of Popes in primitiue, and ancient tymes. S. Gregory B. of Rome 150. yeares after Celestine, did vtterly abhorre it. I command (sayth he)? Away with the word Command: I haue not commanded. And the same you repeate afterwards againePag. 233.. And to persuade your readers, that the passages alleaged containe no Command of Celestine to Cyril, or to the Councell, you shift them off sayingPag. 115.; Those Fathers confesse, they were moued, and compelled by Cele∣stines letters meaning by the persuasions of that Orthodox Bishop, and that but only (tùm tùm) in part; for so they say, Both by the Canons, and also by your letters. But this euasion cannot serue: for they say not. They were persuaded by Celestines letters, (there is no mention of persuasion) but that they were necessarily com∣pelled by them, which is to be Commanded: for Persuasions do not necessarily compell, but Commands. And what more cleare, then that Celestine did exercise the authority of a Iudge, and Commander, in ordayning Cyrill to execute exactly, and se∣uerely the sentence of condemnation against Nestorius, if he did not within ten dayes after admonition giuen him, anathematize his here∣ticall Doctrine? Was this only to persuade? Was it not most stri∣ctly, and properly to command? Vnlesse you will say, that when his Maiesty (without vsing the word Command) gi∣ues strict charge to his Iudges, to condemne a Malefactor, he commands them not, but only persuades them to condemne him. But you sayPag. 115., Those Fathers were compelled by Celestines letters, and by the Canons: and therfore not wholly by his letters, but only in part. What then? If the Iudges say, they are compelled by the lawes, and by his Maiesties letters to condemne a malefactor, doth it therfore follow, that his Maiesty hath no authority to command the Iudges, or that his letters were not mandatory to them, but only persuasiue? with such poore euasions you deceaue your disciples. But you sayPag. 114.: We well know, that to command, was not the style of Popes in primitiue and ancient times. Pardon vs Syr, we well know, that you speake vntruly, and ignorantly: for
Victor the first Pope of that name who liued in the first age after Christ, commanded the Asian Bishops to cele∣brate the Feast of Easter, after the manner of the Roman Church, and excommunicated them, that obeyed noEuseb. l. 5. hist. c. 24.. 2. Anthetus that liued in the beginning of the next age, writ to the Bishops of Andaluzia, & Toledo: These things we command to be obserued, according to your desireApud. Bin. to. 1. pag. 145.. Stephen the first of that name writing to S. Cyprian, comman∣ded that such as were baptized by hetetikes, should not be rebaptized: Let nothing be innouated (sayth he)Vincent. Lyr. aduers. haer. c. 9. but the an∣cient to adition abserued. And notwithstanding the opposition of S. Cyptian, of Firmiians, and many other learned Pre∣lates, this command of Stephen preuailed, and the contrary doctrine was condemned by the Councell of Nice, as he∣reticall. 4. Iulius the first of that name, rebuked the AriansSozom. l. 3. c. 7. because they had rashly depersed Athanasius, and other Catholike Bi∣shops, and commanded that some of them in the name of all, should appeare at Rome on a set day, to giue ccempt of the iustice of their sentence, and threatned not to let them passe without punishment, vn∣lesse they did leaue to innouate. And both TheodoreL. 2. hist. c. 4. & S. A∣thanasiusApol. 2. out of an vndoubted Epistle of the same Pope, report, that following the Ecclesiasticall law, h commanded the Arian Bishops to come to Rome, and suned Athanasius cannic al∣ly to present himselfe in iudgment: and that as soone as he receaued the citation, he transported himselfe in diligence to Rome. What thinke you of these examples? Was it not the stile of ancient Popes before S. Gregory, to command, and to command the greatest Patriarkes of the East? But let vs goe on. 5. Anastasius the second of that name speaking to Ana∣stasius the Emperor saythIn ep. ad Anastas. Aug.: Let not Pride make resistance to the Apostolicall precepts, but those things which are commanded by the Roman Church and Apostolicall authority, let them be obserued. 6. when Aurelius Bishop of Carthage writ to Damasus Pope for a copy of all the decrees and Statutes ordeined by the Roman Church since S. Peter to his tyme, he sent them to him, sayingEp. 5.; We wish you to obserue them, and command you to publish them, that with due reuerence they may be kept by all. The African Bishops acknowledgeEp. ad Bo∣nifac. in Con∣cil. Africa. c. 101., that they had recea∣ued
from the Pope, Mandata & literas, Mandates and letters. 8. Gelasius a learned & holy Pope maketh expresse mention of the decrees and commandes of the Popes his predecessor for the good of the ChurchEp. . 9. Leo the great writing to Anatolius Patriarke of Constantinople testifiethEp. 4. that he bath enioyned him the execution of his decree. And in his first Epistle which is to all Bishops, he sayth: All the decrees and constitutions, as well of Innocentius of blessed memory, as of all our predecessers, we command your Dilection to keepe, so, that if any one contemne them, he may know, that pardon shall be denied him. And to the Bishops of MauriraniaEp. 8.: We command, that the cause of Lupicinus Bishop be heard there, whom we haue restored to our com∣munion, he himselfe earnestly, and often desiring it. These few testimonies of holy and renowned Popes that liued before S. Gregory, are sufficient to shew, how ignorantly you affirme, that it was not the style of Popes in the ancient and primitiue tymes to Command. And as the ancient Popes commanded, when it was ne∣cessary for them to shew their authority; so the Bishops, euen the greatest Patriarkes, acknowledged in them au∣thority to command, and in themselues subiection, and o∣bligation to obey. For did not S. Athanasius vpon Pope Iulius his citation, obey, taking his iourney from Aegypt to RomeTheoder. l. 2. hist. c. 4.? and doth he not professe his subiection to Mar∣cus PopeEp. ad Marc., when he sayth: We are yours, and with all that are committed to our charge, are, and will euer be obedient to you? And do not the African Fathers writing to Bonifacius Pope promise, to obey his Mandates, vntill a more diligent inquisition of the Nicen Canons? And do not the Fathers of the Mileuitan Councell beseech Innocentius the first, to shew his autho∣rity against the Pelagians? Many (say they)Ep. ad Innocent. oppose against them, in defence of Grace, and the truth of the Catholike fayth &c. But we belieue, that with the helpe of the mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ, they that hold these opinions so peruerse, and pernicious, will more easily yeld to the authority of your Holinesse, drawne from the authority of the holy Scriptures. And when Paschasinus B. of Lilibaea, & Lucentius of Ascoli, Legates of Leo pope, said to the Councell of ChalcedonConc. Chalced. Act. 1., We haue in our hands the
Commands of the blessed and Apostolike Prelate of the Citty of Rome, wherby he hath vouchsafed to ordaine, that Dioscorus sit not in the Councell; and that if he offer to do it, he be cast out, because hauing no right to do the office of a Iudge, he attempted it, and presumed to hold a Synod, without the authority of the See Apostolike, which neuer was lawfull, nor hath euer benedone. And did not the Councell obey the Popes command, causing Dioscorus not to sit among the Bishops, as a Iudge, but as a person guilty, to stand in the midest of the place to yeld account of hid proceedings? And did not the Bishops of Dardania in their Epistle to Gelasius, acknowledge, that they had receaued his commands with due reuerence, and thanke him that he had vouchsafed to visit them with his Pastorall admonitions? And did not the Bishops of France in the second Councell of Tours, sayCan. 21.: Our Fa∣thers haue alwayes obserued, what the authority of the See Apostolike hath commanded? And when Chrysostome was deposed by a Councell of Bishops at Constantinople, did he not ap∣peale to Innocentius Pope, and petition him in these wor∣desEp. 1. ad Innocent.: Vouchsafe to command, that these things so wickedly done, we being absent, and not refusing iudgment, may not be valide, as in truth they are not; and that they which haue caried themselues so in∣iustly, may be submitted to the punishment of the Ecclesiasticall lawes? And when Theodoret B. of Cyre was deposed in the se∣cond Councell of Ephesus, did he not write to Leo Pope:Ep. ad Leon. I attend the sentence of your Apostolike Throne, and beseech your Holinesse, to succour me appealing to your right, and iust iudgment, & to command that I transport my selfe to you, and verify that my Do∣ctrine followes the Apostolike steps? And finally did not the Em∣perors Theodosius & ValentinianNouel. Theod. tit. 24. publish a law which ordeynes, that to all Bishops those thinges shall be lawes which haue bene, or shall be ordeyned by the Apostolike See; in such sorte, that whatsoeuer Bishop being called by the Pope, shall refuse to appeare, shall be constrayned therunto by the Gouernor of the Prouince. These, and a thousand more examples which may be alleaged, conuince, that it was the stile of ancient Popes before S. Gregories tyme to command, when necessity requi∣red it; and that all Bishops, and generally all Christians ac∣knowledged this power in the Popes, and in themselues obligation to obey.
And as for S. Gregory in particular, who (say you): vt∣terly abhorred the word Command, as he was a man of ad∣mirable humility, so his gouerment was not dominiering in the Clergy, but according to the commandment of ChristLue. 2.27., and of S. Peter his predecessor1. Pet. 5.2., with great meekenesse and humility: and therfore writing to Eulogius Patriarke of Alexandria he wisheth him,L. 7. ep. 5. not to mention any command of his: for, when crimes exact it not (sayth he) all Bishops according to the condition of humility are equall. And in many places of his workes he teachethL. 4. ep. 38. l. 2. Pasto. c. 7. Hom. 18. in Ezechiel., that, the Ecclesiasticall Gouernor ought to make himselfe a companion, and equall to his subiects; and whiles they do well, to preferre himselfe before them in nothing: but yet so, that if they offend, he shew his power, and authority in corre∣cting them. This therfore is the reason, why in his Epistle to Eulogius (which you obiect) he beseecheth him not to say, that he commanded: for being he writ not to him, to taxe him of any crime, or offence committed, though by the autho∣rity of his place he knew himselfe to be his Superior, yet by humility, he made himselfe his equall, and wished him not to say that he commanded: for (sayth he) I commanded not, but endeauored to signify those things, which are profitable. All which notwithstanding, the same S. Gregory to shew, that in authority and iurisdiction, he was Superior to Eulogius, and all other Bishops, and had power to com∣mand, and punish them, when they ossended, saythL. 7. ep. 64.: For wheras the Patriarke of Constantinople confesseth himselfe subiect to the See Apostolike, I know no Bishop that is not subiect to it. And what he professed in words, he practised in dee∣des, commanding, and exercising his iurisdiction ouer the Bishops of all Christian nations, as out of his writings, and the confessions of our owne more learned brethren, I haue formerly prouedChap. 15. sect. 3.. But because you so boldly auerre, that he vtterly abhorred the word CommandPag. 114., I will briefly shew, how ignorantly, and vntruly you speake: for to An∣themius he writethL. 11. ep. 35.: Because notice hath bene giuen vs, that the Bishops of Campania are negligent &c. therfore with this autho∣rity we command you, to call them together, and by vertue of our Command, to giue them a strict charge, that hereafter they be not
slouthfull, but by their cariage shew themselues to haue the zeale, and solicitude which becometh Priestes, and that they be vigilant in these things which it is fitting for them to do iustly according to God, that hereafter no complaints may be made of them. And if you finde any of them to be negligent, send him to vs without excuse, that he may feele by Canonicall punishment, how grieuous an offence it is, not to a∣mend those thinges which are reprehensible. And in the priuiledge which he granted to the Monastery of S. MedardusL. 12. Epi∣stolarum sin. & alias l. 2. post ep. 38.: If any King, Bishop, Iudge or secular person whatsoeuer, shall violate the de∣crees of this Apostolicall and our Command, let him be depriued of his honor, be he of neuer so high a degree. I know that Bellarmine al∣leaging this decree, you tell vs out of Doctor IamesPag. 179. (a man of as much credit as your selfe) that it is forged, wheras that most holy and learned Pope Gregory the seauenth, which liued 600. yeares nearer the tyme of S. Gregory, then Doctor Iames, and had better meanes to know, what writings of his were legitimate and what spurious, allea∣geth it as his vndoubted Epistle. And his testimony you disproue no otherwise, then by rayling against him, whom yet (as hereafter I shall shewChap. 32. sect. 3. the Historians of that age, and among them the two S. Anselmes of Canterbury, and Luca, highly extoll for one of the most admirable Prelates that euer sate in the Chayre of S. Peter; and whose sanctity God himselfe testified with many most famous miracles. But howsoeuer you carpe at this decree of S. Gregory, Bellarmine in the same placeCont. Bar∣. c. 40. alleageth another of the same tenor, granted by him to an Hospitall built in Au∣stum by Brunichildes Queene, & Syagrius Bishop of that City, which because you know not how to shift of, you slily passe ouer without mentioning it, notwithstanding S. Gregories authority and command is no lesse effectually expressed in it, then in the former. I conclude therfore, that (as this holy Doctor confesseth)L. 4. ep. 6. he had learned from the Apostle to cary humility in his hart, and yet to preserue the honor and dignity of his place, commanding, and denouncing punish∣ment to offenders, when it was needfull.
SECT. II. The Councell of Ephesus acknowledged the supreme au∣thority of the Pope in the cause of Iohn Patriarke of Antioch. HAuing shewed that the Councell of Ephesus deposed Nestorius by the commandment of Pope Celestine, and that it was the ancient custome of the best and holiest Popes to Command, when the affaire required it, let vs goe on with youPag. 115. to the cause of Iohn Patriarke of Antioch, whom the Councell of Ephesus durst not iudge, but reserued him to the iudgment of CelestineConc. E∣phes. to. 4. c. 17. in ep. ad Celestin, Pa∣pam.. This againe (say we) sheweth the supreme authority of the Pope. You deny it, because: Those Fathers in the same Epistle report, that they had diuested him of all Sacerdotall power, and deposed him, before they made any relation therof to Celestine Pope. False. For their words areIn eadem ep.: Moued with the indignity of his proceeding, we would haue pronounced a∣gainst him such a sentence, as he had pronounced against those, that were not conuicted of any crime. But to the end, that we might with lenity ouercome his rashnesse, we haue reserued his sentence to the iudgment of you Piety, and in the meane tyme, we haue excommuni∣cated him, & diuested him of all Sacerdotall power. These words euidently conuince against you, that those Fathers to gaine Iohn with lenity, and hoping that he might be reclaimed (as afterwards in the time of Sixtus Pope he was) pronoun∣ced not any absolute and finall sentence against him, ac∣cording to his deserts, but reserued that to Celestine, as to his supreme Iudge: yet they excommunicated him in the meane time, and (as they say to the EmperorEp. ad Theodos. to. 4. c. 8. tantisper, for a while suspended him from the exercise of his Episcopall function, that he might not hurt others. And the same is gathered out of Celestines Epistle to the CouncellApud Bin. to. 1. pag. 628., in which he sayth, that, after their sentence against Iohn, diuers things remained to be considered, and determined by him. And this proceeding of the Ephesine Councell against Iohn, was afterwards imita∣ted by the sixth Councell generall, in the cause of Maca∣rius
another Patriarke of Antioch, as the Emperor Con∣stantine Pogonate reportes in these wordsIn 6. Sy∣nod. Act. 18.: Macarius B. of Antioch, and his adhereurs, haue bene deposed by the consent of the whole Councell, and reserued to the discretion of the most holy Pope. It is therfore euident, that both these Councells acknow∣ledged the giuing of the last and definitiue sentence against those Patriarkes, to belong to the Pope: which is also con∣firmed by the words of Iuuenall B. of Hierusalem vttered in presence of the whole Councell of Ephesus:To. 4. c. 4. apud Bin. to. 1. pag. 794. It is fit (said he) that Iohn the right reuerend B. of Antioch, honoring this great, holy, and Oecumenicall Councell, haue recourse hither, to iusti∣fy himselfe, of what is obiected against him, and that he honor, and obey the Apostolike throne of great Rome; especially since the custome of Apostolike tradition and practise is, that the seat of Amioch be per∣petually ruled, and iudged by that of Rome. I appeale to the reader, whether these Councells did not acknowledge the supreme power of the B. of Rome, in re∣seruing to him the last sentence in the causes of these two great Patriarkes. What then may we thinke of you, that haue the boldnesse to out-face so manifest a truth? SECT. III. Of the ordination of the Bishops of Cyprus, treated in the Councell of Ephesus. BVt there remaines one, which youPag. 116. call, A principall obiection, and it is, that wheras Reginus, Zenon and E∣uagrius Bishops of Cyprus had by a petition presented to the Councell of Ephesus made complaint of the Patriarke of AntiochTo. 2. Append. 1. c. 4., That contrary to the ancient custome practised from the tyme of the Apostles, and contrary to the Canons of Nice, he had presumed to ordeyne Bishops in that Iland; the Councell decreed,Ibid. that, no Bishop should encroath vpon the liberties of any other, nor draw vnder his subiection any Prouince, which belonged not to him from the beginning: and therfore, that if the ancient custome were not, for the Bishop of Antioch, to ordaine Bishops in Cyprus, he should not trouble the Bishops of that Iland, but leaue to them the or∣dination
of their owne Bishops. This Decree you will haue to exclude the authority of the B. of Rome, as well as of any other. But your Argument is of no force: both because nei∣ther this Canon, nor any other of what Councell soeuer, is powerfull to limit his authority, nor hath force further then it is confirmed by him, as hath bene proued; as also be∣cause he is not only Bishop of the Roman Dioces in parti∣cular, but of the vniuersall Church. Other Bishops (sayth S. Bernard)L. 2. de Confider. c. 9., according to the Canons, are called to a part of solici∣tude; he to the fullnesse of power: the power of other Bishops is confi∣ned to certaine limits; his is extended also to them that haue recea∣ued power ouer others. He, if there because can shut Heauen to a Bi∣shop, and depose him from his Bishoprick. He, can erect new Bisho∣pricksS. Bernar. ep. 131. where they were not? He, of Bishopes, can make Archbishops, and contrarywise of Archbishops, Bishops, if reason so dictate vnto him. Wherfore albeit as considered in the quality of a parti∣cular Bishop of the Roman Dioces, he cannot ordaine Bi∣shops out of that Dioces, more then other Bishops can out of theirs, yet as he is Pastor, and Bishop of the vniuersall Church, he can depose and ordaine Bishops in other Dio∣ceses, as Agapet deposed Anthymus Patriarke of Constan∣tinople, and ordeyned Menas in his place. And the Eccle∣siasticall histories are full of examples of the same nature: which therfore conuince, that the Councell of Ephesus by that decree intended not to prescribe any limits of iurisdi∣ction to the Pope, but only to command all particular Bi∣shops not to entrench vpon the liberties of others: which decree Celestine Pope confirmed with all the rest of that CouncellEp. 2. ad Syn. Ephes., as no way contrary to his Vniuersall autho∣rity. SECT IV. Whether it may be gathered out of the Councell of Ephe∣sus, that the authority of the Pope is aboue a Generall Councell. YOu sayPag. 115.: If the Councell could not depose Nestorius, with∣out the Popes mandate, nor durst depose Iohn Patriarke of An∣tioch,
but reserued the cause to the iudgment of the Pope, the issue must be directly this, that the Pope is absolutely aboue a generall Coun∣cell. And was not this (say youPag 116. more then holdnesse in your Car∣dinall (Bellarmine) to inferre this supreme authority out of this Councell? O egregious imposture! Bellarmine only relateth what passed in the Councell, namely that those Fathers durst not pronounce a definitiue, and vltimate sentence a∣gainst the two Patriarkes, but reserued it to Celestine Pope, as to the supreme Iudge of all Bishops. Your guilty con∣science telling you, that the issue therof directly must be, that the Pope is aboue a generall Councell, you make that inference out of the Councell against your selfe, and falsly father it on Bellarmine: for though els where he defend, that the Pope is aboue a generall Councell, yet neither there, nor here he makes any such inference out of this Councell of Ephesus. And no lesse imposterous is your alleaging the Councells of Constance, and Basil, against that Doctrine of Bellar∣mine: for the Councell of Basil is a damned Conuenticle: and that of Constance, when it defined a Councell to be a∣boue the Pope, was not a generall Councell, nor speaketh of him that is certainly known to be true Pope, but of three Popes in tyme of Schisme, when it was doubtfull which of them, or indeed whether any of them, were true Pope. Nor was that decree euer confirmed, but expresly condem∣ned by the Councells of Florence, and Lateran, as (you know) BiniusTo. 1. Not. ad Con∣cil. Constan. pag. 1662. and BellarmineL. 2. de Conc. c. 17. haue obserued. But to proue that the Pope is not aboue a Councell you vrgePag. 116. out of Stapleton, that the contrary was neuer expresly decreed in any Councell. But in this you are as false, as in the rest: for you cite Stapleton in his thirteenth booke, De principijs doctrinalibus, wheras in that worke, he hath but twelue bookes in all. But be the proposition his, or whose you please, and be it that no Councell hath expresly defined that the Pope is aboue a Councell, doth it therfore follow, that the Doctrine is not true? Is nothing true, but what is defined in Councells? Who seeth not how inconsequent this your consequence is?
CHAP. XIX. The Councell of Chalcedon belieued the supreme authority of the B. of Rome. SECT. 1. That Leo Pope called the Councell of Chalcedon by his Authority, and presided in it by his Legates. OVT of the famous Councell of Chalce∣don (one of the foure which S. Grego∣ryL. 1. ep. 24. reuerenced as the 4. Ghospells) the supreme authority of the B. of Rome ouer the whole Church, is proued many wayes, 1. Because this Councell was cal∣led by his authority: If it please your Ho∣linesse (sayth Martian the Emperor to Leo Pope)Extat in Ep. preamb. Conc. Chalced. that a Synod he held, vouchsafe to signify so much by your letters, that I may direct mine into all the East, into Thracia, and Illyria, to the end that all the most holy Bishops may meete at a set place, where your Holinesse shall please to appoint, and by their wisdome declare those things which may be profitable for Christian Religion, and the Ca∣tholike fayth, as your Holinesse, according to the Ecclesiasticall rules, shall define. And Pulcheria the Empresse writing to the same PopeExtat epist. ibid.: Your Reuerence vouchsafe to signify, according as you haue ordeyned, that all the Bishops of the East, of Thracia, and Il∣lyria, may come together into one Citty, and by your authority deter∣mine there in a holy Councell, what the Christian fayth and your Pie∣ty require, concerning the Catholike profession, and the Bishops which
haue bone excommunicated. And the Bishops of the second Maesia in their Epistle to Leo the EmperorApud Bi. to. 2. pag. 154.: May holy Bi∣shops were assembled in the Citty of Chalcedon, by the commandment of Leo B. of Rome, who is truly the Head of all Bishops. And Gela∣sius Pope 40. yeares after the Councell of ChalcedonDe Ana∣them. vincu∣lo.: The See Apostolike delegated the Councell of Chalcedon to be held for the common fayth, and the Catholike and Apostolike truth. And a∣gaineIbid.: The Pope alone ordeyned, that by his authority the Coun∣cell of Chalcedon should be held. 2. And, as by his authority he called this Councell, so by his Legates he presided in it. My Brethren (sayth he) spea∣king of this CouncellEp. 94. presided in my steed in the Orientall Sy∣nod. And writing to the Councell it selfeEp. 47.: Your brotherhood is to conceaue, that in these my brethren Paschasinus and Lucentius Bishops, Bonifacius and Basill Priests, which are sent by the See Apo∣stolike, I preside in your Synod: And be confident, that I am not absent from you, who am present in these my Vicars. And to Pulcheria the Empresse he saythEp. 5.: that by those his brethren he sent to the Councell instructions in writing, what forme they ought to obserue in their iudgment. And finally the Councell it selfe acknow∣ledged, that the Pope presided in it: You (say they to Leo)In relat. ad Leon. presided in this assembly, as the head doth to members, exhibiting your good will by those that held your place: And the faythfull Empe∣ror presided for ornament sake, and to see good order kept, that is, to hinder by his secular power such tumults, and murders as had bene lately committed in the second false Councell of Ephesus. Who seeth not, that the whole Councell in these words acknowledged the Pope to be their Superior, and themselues to be his subiects, since they professe that, he ru∣led ouer them, at the head doth ouer the members. SECT. II. That the Councell of Chalcedon by the authority of Leo Pope deposed Eutyches and Dioscorus, and re∣stored Theodoret. THe supreme authority of the Pope is yet further pro∣ued out of the Councell of Chalcedon: For Flauia∣nus
Patriarke of Constantinople, hauing reckoned vp the enormities of Eutyches, requested Leo Pope to confirme the sentence of condemnation, which in a Coūcell at Con∣stantinople he had pronounced against him: Moued then (saith heIn ep. praeambul. Concil. Chal∣ced. most holy Father with all these attempts of Eutyches, & with those thinges which haue bene done, and are done against vs, and against the holy Church, worke confidently according to your courage, as it belongs to the Priesthood: and making the common cause and the discipline of the holy Churches, your owne, Vouchsafe to confirme by your writings, the condemnation which hath bene regu∣larty made against him. Leo according to this petition of Fla∣uianus condemned Eutyches and depriued him of his dig∣nity. Dioscorus (sayth the Councell of Chalcedon writing to LeoRelat. ad Leon. by the decrees of his tyranny hath declared Eutyches inno∣cent, and restored to him the dignity, wherof he was depriued by your Holinesse. What els is this, but to say, that albeit Eutiches had bene condemned by Flauianus his owne Bishop, and law∣full Iudge, yet afterwards, when Flauianus by Eutyches his negotiation being deposed in the false Councell of Ephe∣sus, appealed to Leo Pope, and Leo declaring him inno∣cent, deposed Eutyches; the Councell of Chalcedon im∣braced this sentence of Leo, and attributed to him the finall deposition of Eutyches, as to the supreme Iudge, that had power to reiudge the iudgments of other Bishops? Which power Valentinian the third writing to Theodosius ac∣knowledged, and declared in this very cause of Flauianus: We ought (sayth heIn ep. praeamb. Conc. Chalced. to preserue inuiolable in our dayes, the dignity of particular reuerence to the blessed Apostle Peter, that the holy Bishop of Rome, to whom antiquity hath attributed the Priest∣hood aboue all, may haue place to iudge in matters of fayth, and of Bi∣shops &c. For therfore according to the custome of Councells, the Bi∣shop of Constantinople (Flauianus) appealed to him in the conten∣tion which is risen about points of fayth. The same power was like wise acknowledged by the Councell of Chalcedon in the cause of Theodoret Bishop of Cyre, who being deposed by the second Councell of Ephesus, appealed to Leo, and was restored by him, and therupon admitted to take his place in the Councell of
Chalcedon: Let the right Reuerend Bishop Theodores come in (say the Emperors officers)Conc. Chalc. act. 1. that he may haue part in the Synod. because the most holy Archbishop Leo hath restored him to his Risho∣prick, and the most sacred and religious Emperor hath ordayned, that he assist in the holy Councell. Now, that the Emperor ordayned not this, as challen∣ging any authority ouer Bishops, but only as one, that by his officers assisted at the Councell, to execute the Popes decrees, and to see peace, and good order kept, you haue heard the Councell testifySect. prae∣ced.; and he himselfe declared the same, saying to Pope LeoIn ep. praeamb. Concil. Chalced.: Our desire is, that peace be resto∣red to the Churches, by this Councell celebrated vnder your authority. The authority then is in the Pope, not in the Emperor. And when the cause of Dioscorus Patriarke of Alexan∣dria came to be examined, the Councell inquiring of the Popes Legates, what charge they had against him, Lu∣centius one of them answearedAct. 1. & Euagr. l. 2. c. 18.: Dioscorus must yeld an ac∣count of his Iudgement, because hauing no right to do the office of a Iudge, he attempted it, and presumed to hold a Synod without the authority of the See Apostolike; a thing, which nether was, nor cold euer lawfully be done. And Paschasinus another of the Legats:Act. 1. Wee haue here the commandes of the blessed and Apostolike Pre∣late of the City of Rome, which is the Head of all Churches, wherby his Apostolate hath vouchsafed to command, that Dioscorus Archbi∣shop of Alexandria sit not in the Councell, but yet that he be admitted to be heard. Wherupon the Councell commanded him not to sit as a Iudge, among the Bishops, but to stand in the middest, as a person accused, to answeare for himselfe.Euag. l. 2. c. 4. And the Councell hauing heard his whole cause, con∣demned him, requesting the Popes Legates, to pronounce the sentence of condemnation against himAct. 3.: We beseech your Holinesse who haue the place, and primacy of the most holy Pope Leo, to pronounce the sentence against him. Wherupon the Le∣gates Paschasinus, Lucentius, and Bonifacius pronoun∣ced it in these wordsIbid. Therefore Leo the most holy and most blessed Archbishop of the great and ancient Rome, hath by vs, and by this present Synod, together with the thrice blessed and worthy of all praise Peter the Apostle (who is the Rock, and Head of the Catholike
Church, and the foundation of the right fayth) deposed Dioscorus from the Episcopall dignity, and depriued him of all Sacerdotall function. To this sentence all the Bishops subscribed. And it is to be noted, that wheras many most enor∣mous crimes of Dioscorus are there rehearsedIbid., yet that which the Councell iudged to exceed all the rest, was, that he had presumed to pronounce a sentence of excommunication against the most holy and most blessed Archbishop of great Rome, Leo: which enormity of his the whole Councell exaggerating to Leo, saydRelat. ad Leon.: And after, and aboue all these things, he hath extended his phrensy euen against him, to whom the guard of the Vine hath bene committed by our Sauiour, that is to say, against your Apostolike Holinesse, and hath dictated an Excommunication against you, that seeke to vnite speedily the body of the Church. In which words the Councell plainly professeth, that the custody and charge of the whole Church (signified vnder the name of a Vine) was giuen to the Pope by our Sauiour; and that he, be∣cause he is Head of the Church, laboreth to vnite the body thereof: which also they professe by acknowledgingIbid., that he ruled ouer them, as the Head doth ouer the members: and therfore beseeching him to confirme their decrees with his authority, they addeIbid.: We pray you to honor our iudgment with your decrees; and that as in what concernes the Weale, we haue held correspondence to our Head; so your Soueraignty wold fulfill vnto your Children what is fit and conuenient. These testimonies so cleare, and pregnant, cannot but conuince the vnderstanding of any impartiall reader, that the Councell of Chalcedon beleeued the vniuersall autho∣rity and iurisdiction of the B. of Rome, whom therefore the same Councell often callethAct. 1.2.3, Bishop of the vniuersall Church.
SECT. III. Whether the title of Vniuersall Bishop, which the Coun∣cell of Chalcedon gaue to the Pope, argue in him no more, but a generall care of the good of the Church, such as belonges to euery Bishop, and to euery Christian. OF all the proofes hereunto alleaged you take no no∣tice, two only excepted, namely, of the title of Vni∣nersall Bishop, and of the metaphor of a Vine, by which the Councell expresseth the vniuersall Church, sayingIn relat. ad Leon., that the custody therof is by Christ our Sauiour committed to the Pope. These two you call, Two postes to support the ruinous Monarchy of the B. of Rome. And your answeare to them, herePag. 117.118. and afterwards againePag. 236., is, that these attributes import no vni∣uersall power of iurisdiction in the Pope, but of prouidence and care, which euery Bishop shold haue in wishing, and to his power endeauo∣ring the vniuersall good of the whole Church. But if the words of the Councell import no more, it will follow that the cu∣stody of the vniuersall Church (that is the gouerment ther∣of) was by Christ committed not only to euery Bishop, but also to euery Christian man, and woman, who should wish, and to their power procure the vniuersall good of the whole Church. But you obiectPag. 116.117. & 236. that Eleutherius Pope writing to the Bishops of France, sayth: The vniuersall Church of Christ is committed to you, that you may labor for all men: and that according to Binius his exposition, the meaning of Eleutherius is, that for as much as heretikes oppugne the Catholike and vniuersall Church, is belongeth to euery Bishop to haue an vniuersall care to defend, and support it. And this (say you) is a true answere indeed. But you speake vntruly, and interprete falsly: for Binius hath no such word as Vniuersall care: nor doth he speake of Bishops only, but sayth, that a care & solicitude of defending the vniuersall Church against heretikes belongeth not only to Bishops, but to euery Christian, for as much as we are commanded by God (Eccl. c. 4.) to
fight fortruth, and iustice vntill death. How do these words of Binius proue that the Pope hath not, or that the Councell of Chalcedon acknowledged him not, to haue authority, and iurisdiction ouer the vniuersall Church, but only a charitable care of her good, as S. Paul had, and as euery Bishop, and euery Christian man, and woman, according to their power are bound to haue? for did not that Councel giue to Pope Leo, the title of Vniuersall Archbishop and Patri∣arke, or (as you set it downe)Pag. 235. of Bishop of the vniuersall Church? but, these words (say youIbid. were not the words of the Councell, but of two Deacons, writing to the Councell, and of Pas∣chasinus the Popes Legate. False: for it was giuen to himAct. 3. in foure different petitions, of Theodorus, and Ischyrion, Deacons of Alexandria; of Athanasius a Priest of the same City; and of Sophronius: And the Councell approuing thereof, commanded theyr petitions to be registred in the Acts. Moreouer the same title was giuen him by Pascha∣sinus, who though he were his legate, was a Reuerend Bi∣shop; as also by Martian the Emperor, the Councell no way excepting therat. And did not S. Gregory, and after him, the Angelicall Doctor S. Thomas, testify, that the whole Councell of Chalcedon, with the following Fathers, gaue the same title to Leo Pope? And did not Leo (a man of admi∣rable sanctity & learning) instyle himselfe Bishop of the vni∣uersall Church? And did not the Regulars of Constantino∣ple, and of Syria, and the Bishops of the Patriarkships of Antioch, and Hierusalem, giue the same tytle to Agape∣tus Pope, in the Councell of Constantinople vnder MenasSee all this proued aboue Chap. 15. sect. 3.? Againe did not the Councell of Chalcedon acknow∣ledge in Leo power to restore Theodoret to his Bishoprick of Cyre bordering vpon Persia, from which he had bene deposed in the second Councell of EphesusAct. .? Did it not acknowledge in him authority to depose Dioscorus the greatest Patriarch of the EastAct. 3.? Did not all those Fathers, being the representatiue body of the Vniuersall Church, professeIn relat. ad Leon., that Leo Pope did preside & rule ouer them, as the Head ouer the members? Is this Authority, common to euery Bi∣shop? Or did Eleutherius, or the Fathers of Chalcedon acknowledge any such thing?
But he that will see, how imposterously you wrest the testimony of Eleutherius against the vniuersall power and iurisdiction of the B. of Rome, and against the meaning of the Councell of Chalcedon, let him read the epistle, and he shall finde, that Eleutherius a litle before the words, which you obiect, declareth, that althought it be lawfull to exa∣mine the accusations and crimes obiected against Bishops, either before their Metropolitans, or before the Bishops of their owne Prouince; yet that it is not lawfull to end them there, for as much as it hath bene decreed by the Apostles, & their Suc∣cessors, that the finall decision of Bishops causes, is to be referred to the See Apostolike, and no others substituted in their places vntill their iudgments be ended at Rome. Can there be a more full expres∣sion of the vniuersall iurisdiction of the Pope ouer the whole Church, then to professe him to be the sole supreme Iudge of all Bishops? Or can there be a greater imposture, then to obiect this epistle of Eleutherius for the contrary? SECT. IV. Whether the Councell of Chalcedon did giue to the B. of Constantinople priuiledges equall with the B. of Rome. YOu obiect heerePag. 118., and often repeate, that the Fa∣thers of Chalcedon, did giue priuiledges to the Patriarke of Con∣stantinople equall with the Church of Rome. Answeare. The Fa∣thers of Chalcedon in absence of the Popes Legates, & of the Patriarke of Alexandria, and of all the Bishopes of Aegypt, at the suggestion of Anatolius Patriarke of Con∣stantinople renewed the decree of the 150. Fathers made in the first generall Councell of that City, which was, that, the B. of Constantinople shold haue the second place of honor, after the B. of Rome. And to this decree was added, that, he should haue equall priuiledges with the B. of Rome after him. But this ad∣dition to the Canon, of equall priuiledges, was surreptitiously made, by the vsurpation of Anatolius, to augment his po∣wer: for the Fathers of Chalcedon neuer owned it, as it appeares in this, that when they beseeched Leo Pope to
confirme their decree, they made to him no mention of E∣quall priuiledges, but only saidIn relat. ad Leon., We haue confirmed the rule of the 150. Fathers assembled at Constantinople, which ordeyned that after your most holy and Apostolike See, that of Constantinople should haue the second place of honor; which is to say, that as the B. of Rome had the Primacy absolutely ouer all the Patriarkes: so the B. of Constantinople should haue it after him, ouer all the other Patriarkes. So this Canon is reported by Eua∣grius: It was decreed (sayth he)L. 2. c. 4. fin. that the See of new Rome by reason she held the second place after the ancient Rome, should haue the primacy before the other Sees. In which sense, and in no o∣ther, SocratesL. 5. c. 8. testifieth this decree to haue bene made in the Councell of Constantinople, which was the source of all this pretence. And Iustinian the Emperor speaking of both these Councells, saythNoue. 131., that in them it was decreed, that, as the holy Pope of old Rome is the first of all Prelates, so the Archbishop of Constantinople new Rome, should haue the second place after the See Apostolike of old Rome, and be preferred before all the other Sees. And long after that time the Emperor Basilius the yonger, and Eustathius Patriarke of ConstantinopleGlaber Rodulph. hist. l. 4. c. 1. de∣sired, that it might be lawfull for them to obteyne with the consent of the Pope, that the Church of Constantinople might be called Vni∣uersall; in the compasse therof, as the Pope of Rome, was in the com∣passe of the whole world. By this appeares, that although the Fathers of those two Councells, contrary to the decrees of Nice, endeauored by this Canon, to make the B. of Constantinople the first, and chiefest Patriarke of the East, and to conferre on him, after, & vnder the Pope, an vniuersal iurisdiction ouer the other Patriarkes; yet they neuer intended therby to put any limi∣tation to the Vniuersall Iurisdiction of the Pope, ouer the whole Church; nor any way to exempt themselues, or the Patriarkes of Constantinople, from his subiection and obe∣dience. Which is also further proued. 1. By the testimonies of Zo∣naras, and Nilus, both of them Greeke Schismatikes, and e∣nemies to the Roman Church. Zonaras saythIn Conc. Constantin. 1. c. 3. that, wher∣as the Councell of Constantinople ordeyned that the Bishop of that
Citty should be the second after the Pope of Rome, some thinke, that the Preposition (after) importeth not inferiority, and submission, but only posteriority of tyme: and in proofe of this their opinion, they make vse of the 28. Canon of the Councell of Chalcedon, which ordaynes, that new Rome shold be honored with the same ecclesiasticall preroga∣tiues, as old Rome; and should be preferred in honor, before all the o∣ther Churches, being the second after her. But this (sayth he) is refu∣ted by the 130. Nouell of Iustinian, inserted into the third title of the fifth booke of the Basilikes▪ which giues the Canon to be otherwise vn∣derstood. And therfore he concludeth sayingIbid.: From hence it appeares manifestly that the Preposition (after) signifies submission, and inferiority. And Nilus B. of ThessalonicaDe prima∣tu Ppae l. 1.: We are not separated from peace, for attributing to our selues the primacy, nor for refusing to hold the second place after the principality of Rome: for we neuer contested for primacy with the Roman Church. 2. The same is proued: for the Fathers of Chalcedon acknowledged the supreme authority of the Pope in the deposition of Eutyches and Dioscorus; in the restitution of Theodoret to his BishoprickSee aboue sect. praeced.; in confessingIn relat. ad Leon., themsel∣ues to be his members, and him to be their Head; in submitting to him their decrees to be confirmed, and in particular this made in fauour of the B. of Constantinople: We haue (say they)Ibid. confirmed the decree of the 150. Fathers, confiding, that the beame Apostolike raigning amidst you, and you by your ordinary gouerment spreading it to the Church of Constantinople, you may cause it to shine into these partes, because you are wont without enuy, to enrich those of your linage, with the participation of your goods. Againe, if we speake of Anatolius in particular, who to augment his owne power, was the proiecter of this decree, how can it be thought, that he did not acknowledge him∣selfe to be a spirituall subiect of the Pope? he I say, who be∣ing made Patriarke of Constantinople by Dioscorus, in the false Councell of Ephesus, had no right to that See, but on∣ly by the confirmation of Leo Pope, which afterwards he obteyned: in regard wherof Leo writing to Martian the Emperor against this attempt of Anatolius, saidEp. 54.: It shold haue sufficed him, that by the help of your Piety, and by the consent of my fauor, he hath obteined the Bishoprick of so great a Citty. And
what els did Anatolius himselfe signify, when speaking of the Acts of the second Councell of Ephesus, in which Ma∣ximus was chosen Bishop of Antioch, he saidCone. Chalced. Act. 10.: My ver∣dict is, that none of the things ordeyned in the pretended Councell of Ephesus remaine firme, but that which was done for Maximus B. of great Antioch; for as much as the most holy Archbishop of Rome Leo, receauing him into his communion, hath iudged that he is to rule the Church of Antioch. 3. Because the Fathers of Chalcedon knowing that without the Popes confirmation, their decree could be of no force, had recourse to Leo, beseeching him to confirme it. We beseech you (say theyIn relat. ad Leon. to honor our decrees, with your iudgment: and that as we haue held correspondence with our Head for matters of weale, so your Soueraingty will yeld to your Children in things of decency: for in so doing, the religious Emperor shall be gratified. To this their petition, Leo assented not, but who∣ly annulled, and abrogated their decree. The Piety of your fayth being ioyned with vs, (sayth he to Pulcheria the Empe∣resseEp. 55. we annull the plots of the Bishops, repugnant to the rules of the holy Canons established at Nice: and by vertue of the authority of the Blessed Apostle Peter, we wholly abrogate them by a generall sentence. Another Epistle of the same tenor, he addressed to the whole Councell of ChalcedonEp. 61.: And to Anatolius himselfe he likewise writEp. 53.: Neuer may my conscience consent, that so depraued a couetousnesse be furthered by my fauor, but rather that it be suppressed by me, & by them that allow not the proud, but consent with the humble. Wherfore this Canon first made in the Councell of Constantinople, and afterwards renewed in the Councell of Chalcedon, was neuer confirmed, but still resisted, by the See Apostolike; and therfore hath alwayes remained inua∣lid. That (sayth Gelasius)De A∣nathem. vin∣culo. which the See Apostolike consen∣ted not to, the Emperor imposed it not, nor Anatolius vsurped it, but all was put into the hands of the See Apostolike: and therfore what the See Apostolike confirmed of the Councell of Chalcedon, hath remai∣ned valid; and what that See hath reiected, could neuer obteyne any force: and she hath annulled that only, which the Synodicall assembly adiudged to be vsurped against order. It resteth therfore, that albeit
this decree haue many other nullities, yet this one of the want of con∣firmation from the See Apostolike, abundantly conuinceth the inuali∣dity therof, as hath bene already proued. And because Anatolius knew, that if it were once vn∣derstood, that this Canon was resisted, and condemned by the See Apostolike, it would be condemned by the iudg∣ment of all Catholikes in the world, he craftily suppressed the letters of condemnation, as Leo in his answere to the Emperor Martian testifiethEp. 59.: I writ to your Glory, and to the B. of Constantinople letters, which euidently shewed, that I approued those things, which had bene defined in the Councell of Chalcedon, concerning the Catholike fayth. But because, by the same letters I re∣proued those things, which by occasion of the Synod had bene vnlaw∣fully attempted, he (Anatolius) rather chose to conceale my ap∣plause, then to publish his owne ambition. And to Pulcheria the EmpresseEp. 60.: Wheras the most religious Emperor hath willed me to write letters to all the Bishops, which assisted at the Councell of Chal∣cedon, to confirme what was there defined concerning the rule of fayth I haue willingly performed it, lest the deceipt full dissimulation of some might breed any doubt of my sentence; although by meanes of the B. of Constantinople, to whom I had largely testified my ioy, what I had written might haue come to the knowledge of all, if he had not rather chosen to conceale my contentment, then to publish the rebuke of his owne ambition. Wherfore it is euident, that as this Decree, when it was first made in the Councell of Constantinople, remayned inualid, for want of Confirmation from the See Aposto∣likeSee aboue Chap. 17. sect. 5. & 6.; so for the same want, it tooke no effect, when it was renewed in the Councell of Chalcedon; in so much, that Anatolius was enforced to desist from his clayme, and excuse the attempt he had made, laying the blame on o∣thers, as it is cleare out of these words of Leo to himEp. 7.: This thy fault, which to augment thy power, thou hast committed, (as thou sayest) by the persuasion of others, thy Charity had blotted out better, and more sincerely, if thou hadst not imputed wholly to the Counsell of thy Clergy, that, which could not be attempted without thy allowance &c. But (deare Brother) I am glad, that thy Charity protesteth thou art now displeased with that, which euen then ought
not to haue pleased thee. The profession of thy loue, and the testimony of the Christian Prince is sufficient to re-admit thee into common grace: nor doth thy amendment seems late, that hath gotten so reue∣rend a surety. This recantation of Anatolius sheweth, that his attempt of hauing the second place after the Pope, and enioying the like priuiledges after him, was vnlawfull, and proceeded merely from his ambition. SECT. V. Falsifications and vntruthes of Doctor Morton, discouered; and his Arguments answeared. VVHat you produce in defence of this Canon, are either falsifications, vntruthes, or friuolous ca∣uills: for first you falsify AzorPag. 118.. His words are: The Ca∣nons and decrees of Councells which are either of fayth or of the law of God, or of nature the Pope can neither annull, nor alter: but if the decrees and Canons be of those things which belong to human right, he may annull them, or alter them in whole, or in part: And this (sayth he) is the common opinion of Diuines, and Canonists. You very honestly mangle his words, not mentioning the first part of them in which he sayth, The Pope can neither annull, nor alter the decrees of Councells which are of matters of fayth, or of things commanded by the law of God, or nature. And wheras he addes, that, the Pope can annull, or alter the Decrees of Councells, which are of human right, you in your english leaue out those words (which are of human right) to persuade your Reader, that Azor sayth, and that our Diuines and Canonistes with common consent allow, the Pope power to change the Decrees of fayth, and annull the precepts of God, and of nature; whereas he speaketh only of lawes, that concerne Ecclesiasticall discipline, which according to diuers occa∣sions, and circumstances, may be altered, for the good of the Church. If this be not an imposture, what is? 2. You obiectPag. 12.19.; The Fathers of Chalcedon thought that the Church of Rome got the primacy, not by diuine, but by humane right, to wit, because Rome was the chiefe Impriall seat. Ans∣were.
There are two causes of the primacy of the Roman Church: the one immediate; the other mediate. The imme∣diate cause is the dignity of S. Peter, wherwith Christ ho∣nored him, when he made him the foundation of his ChurchMath. 16.18., and the Pastor of his flockIoan. 21. vers. 15.16.17.. And so much the Fathers of Chalcedon acknowledged, when they cal∣led the Popes Epistle, The speach of the See of S. PeterIn allo∣quut. ad Im∣perat., and when they said to LeoIn relat, ad Leon.: Dioscorus hath extended his phrensy against him, to whom the custody of the Vine (which is the Catho∣like Church) was committed by our Sauiour, that is to say, against your Apostolike Holinesse. The same truth the Mileuitan Coun∣cell, in which S. Augustine was Secretary, had professed not long before, acknowledging the Popes authority to be of diuine right, when speaking to Innocentius, they saidAug. ep. 92., that, his authority was taken from the authority of the holy Scrip∣tures. And Gelasius with a Councell of 70. BishopsIn decreto de lib. Apo∣cryph.: The Roman Church hath not bene preferred before other Churches by the constitutions of Synods, but hath obtained the primacy, by the voyce of our Lord, and Sauiour in the Ghospell. And as the same Gelasius rightly obseruethEp. ad Episc. Dar∣dan., Milan, Rauenna, Sirmium, Treuers, and Nicomedia, were for a long tyme seates of the Empire, and yet the Fathers neuer thought, that any Primacy was therfore due to the Bishops of those Cities. Neuerthelesse, it may be said in a true sense, that the me∣diate, and remote cause of the Primacy of the Roman Church, that is to say, the cause which moued S. Peter to place his See at Rome, rather then in any other Citty, was the dignity of Rome; To the end (sayth S. Leo)Serm. 1. de Apost. Pet. & Paul. that the light of truth, which was reuealed for the saluation of all nations, might from the Head of the world, be communicated more effectually to the whole body. Of this cause the Father of Chalcedon speake, when they sayAct. 15.. Rome got the Primacy, because it was the chiefe seate of the Empire. And both these causes are compre∣hended by the Emperors Theodosius, and Valentinian, in their Law made a litle before the Councell of Chalcedon, in these wordsNouel. Theodos. tit. 24.: Three things haue established the primacy of the See Apostolike; the merit of S. Peter, who is Prince of the Episco∣pall society; the dignity of the City; and the Synodicall authority.
3. You obiectPag. 118.: The Fathers of Chalcedon gaue priuiledges to the Patriarkes of Constantinople, equall to the Church of Rome. This we deny: for in the Councell of Chalcedon, there was no mention made of equal priuiledges; this clause was afterwards added by Anatolius, or by the Clerkes of Con∣stantinopleSee this proued aboue in this Chap. sect. 4.: and to this S. Gregory seemeth to relate, when he saythL. 5. ep. 14.: The Councell of Chalcedon in one place hath bene falsified by the Grecians. And the Fathes of Chalcedon ne∣uer intended by this Canon, to giue the Patriarkes of Con∣stantinople any priuiledge of exemption from their obedi∣ence, and subiection to the Pope, but only to grant them precedency before the other Patriarkes of the East, as hath bene prouedIn this Chap. sect. 4.. And the same is manifest out of the wri∣tings of Leo Pope, who though in his epistle to the Fathers of Chalcedon, and in diuers others, which he writ to the Emperor Martian, to Pulcheria the Empresse, to Anato∣lius himselfe, and to diuers other Bishops, of this subiect, he speake against Anatolius, for his ambitious attempt; yet in none of them doth he say, or insinuate, that those Fa∣thers gaue to Anatolius, or that Anatolius himselfe euer a∣spired to equality of priuiledges with the B. of Rome, but only reprehended him for wronging the Patriarkes of A∣lexandria, and Antioch, in procuring himselfe to be pre∣serred before them. The same is yet further proued, because when Rome was fallen into the hands of the Gothes, and Wandals, the Patriarkes of Constantinople making vse of the tyme, and setting this Canon on foote againe, procured the Em∣peror Zeno to establish by a law, that the Patriarke of Cō∣stantinople shold haue the precedency before the other Pa∣triarkes. And the like they obtayned from Iustinian after the recouery of Rome, when he ordaynedNouel. 131., that the Ar∣chbishop of Constantinople shold haue the second place after the holy See Apostolike, and be preferred before all the other See. Lastly the same is proued by the subiection, which the Patriarkes of Constantinople acknowledged to the Pope, after the Councell of Chalcedon, and by the authority, which he exercised ouer them: for not long after that tyme,
when Acacius B. of Constantinople, an enemy to the Councell of Chalcedon, had fallen into the faction of here∣tikes, the Churches of the Patriarkeship of Constantinople had recourse to Symmachus Pope, as to their Pastor, & as Superior to their Patriarke. Seeing your Children perish (sayd theyEp. Eccles. Orient. ad Symach. in vo∣lum. Ortho∣dox. impress. Bafil., in the preuarication of our Father Acacius, delay not, or rather, to speake with the Prophet, stumber not, but make hast to de∣liuer vs. And when the same Acacius, for his adhering to Peter Moggus, an hereticall inuasor of the See of Alexan∣dria, was deposed by Felix Pope, though he stood out, as long as he liued, contemning the Popes sentence sent vnto him to Constantinople, yet the Emperor Iustine, that suc∣ceeded Anastasius, caused Felix his sentence to be executed on him after his death, making his name to be razed out of the Records of the Church, and from the recitall in the sa∣cred mysteries: Wee haue giuen order (sayth Iustine to Hor∣misdas Pope,Epist. ad Hormisd. that the Reuerend Church of Constantinople, and many others, accomplish your desire, in razing out the names of those whom you haue commanded to be taken away from the sacred records. And in conformity to this, Iohn Patriarke of Con∣stantinople writing to the same Hormisdas, saidEpist. ad Hormisd.: I ana∣thematize Acacius somtime Bishop of this City, and promise hereafter not to recite in the sacred mysteries, the names of them, that are exclu∣ded from the communion of the Catholike Church, that is to say, that agree not in all things with the See Apostolike. And Theodorus A∣nagnostes reportethAd calc. hist. Eccles. Theodor. ex edit. Robert. Stopha., that when Anastasius the Emperor vrged Macedonius Patriarke of Constantinople, to abro∣gate the Councell of Chalcedon, he answeared, he could not do it, without a generall Councell, in which the B. of Rome must be president. And when Anthymus B. of Trebizond inuaded the See of Constantinople, Agapetus Pope being arriued thither, deposed him euen in the City of Constantinople it selfe, and in the sight of Iustinian the Emperor, and excom∣municated the Empresse Theodora, that protected him, and with his owne hands ordained Menas in his place: the truth of all which, is auerred by Iustinian himselfeNouel. 42, by Marcellinus ComesIn Chron., by LiberatusBreuiar. c. 12., and Victor of TunesIn Chron. edit. per Io∣seph. Sclig.. And did not Menas Patriarke of Constantino∣ple
make open profession, of obeying the See Apostolike in all thingesIn Conc. Constan. sub Me. Act. 4.? And when Iohn the first Pope of that name, was arriued at Constantinople, Iustine the Emperor inui∣ting him to sit in a seat by Epiphanius Patriarke of that Ci∣ty, that they might seeme both to be of equall dignity, Iohn refused to sit, vntill according to the prerogatiue of his See, a throne was prepared for him aboue EpiphaniusNicoph. l. 17. c. 9.: which passing in the City of Constantinople it selfe, and in Epi∣phanius his owne Church, and that many yeares after this decree of the Councell of Chalcedon was made, euidently sheweth, that it neuer tooke effect; since neither Epipha∣nius, nor any of the other Patriarkes here named, liuing af∣ter the Councell of Chalcedon, claymed any right of E∣quall Priuiledges therby, but all of them remained subiect to the Pope, as before the Councell they had bene. And that which purreth this out of al doubt, is, that albeit the Pa∣triarkes of Constantinople at length obtained that prece∣dency before the other Patriarkes of the East, which in the Councells of Constantinople, and Chalcedon they labo∣red for, yet neuerthelesse, euen then, they still acknowled∣ged themselues subiect to the Pope: witnesse S. Gregory, who writing to Iohn B. of Syracusa, saythL. 7. ep. 4.: Who doubts, but that the See of Constantinople is subiect to the See Apostolike, which both our Lord the most religious Emperor, and our brother, Bi∣shop of the same City, do continually protest? But wheras we say, that Leo neuer confirmed this de∣cree of the Councell, but only such Canons and decrees, as concerned matters of sayth, This answeare (say you)Pag. 121. pro∣ueth you faithlesse in all your defence: for if he therfore opposed the de∣cree of that Synod, which oppugned the Papall primacy, and domi∣nion, because it was no matter of fayth, he therby plainly confesseth your Article, which maintayneth the dominion of the Roman Church, not to be at all an article of fayth. But, Syr, you wholly mistake your marke: for this decree was no way against the prima∣cy of the Pope, as hath bene prouedIn this Chap. sect. 2.: Nor did Leo refuse to confirme it because it oppugned his primacy, but because by vertue therof, the Patriarke of Constantinople iniustly, and against the Canons of the Nicen Councell, sought to
make himselfe superior to the other Patriarkes of the East, whose rights the Pope, as supreme Gouernor of the vniuer∣sall Church, was bound to maintayne. Yea this decree was so farre from oppugning his primacy, that from it may be drawne a strong Argument in proofe therof: for why els, was the decree sent to him to be confirmed, but because the Councell knew, it could be of no force, without his confir∣mation? Lastly we say, that this decree could be of no force, be∣cause it was made by the vsurpation of Anatolius, after the departure of the Iudges, of the Senators, and of the Popes Legates. You answearePag. 121., that the Popes Legates were absent, because they would not be present. Why do you not say the same of the Iudges, and the Senators? You might with as much truth. But for the Popes Legats, LiberatusBru. c. 13. beares witnes against you, that they knew not of any such decree, vntill the next day after it was made. And therfore, wheras you wish vsPag. 121., to tell you, if we can, where there cold be found more impudent boldnesse in any, then appeared in the Popes Legates, who offered to face downe 400. Bishops in a Councell, with a manifest vn∣truth, obiecting circumuention in framing the Act? We finde no impudence at all in the Popes Legates, but we find it in a very high degree in your selfe, who haue the face to deny circumuention in an Act, made by the vsurpation of Ana∣tolius, to augment his owne power, espying his tyme, when there was no Patriarke of Alexandria, and all the Bishops of Aegypt, who had most reason to oppose it, were absent, being excluded by his meanes vnder pretence, that it was not lawfull for them to signe the decrees of Coun∣cells, without the will and command of the Patriarkes; & in absence of the Popes Legates, of the Emperors officers, and of the greatest part of the Iudges, which were the Bi∣shops that assisted at the Councell. You sayPag. 122., that 430. Bishops concurred to the making of this decree. But you cannot be excused from ignorance, or fraud: for albeit Marcellinus ComesIn Chron., LiberatusBreu. c. 3., PhotiusDe 7. Sy∣nod. c. 4. and Leo PopeEp. 5. beare witnesse, that 630. Bi∣shops assisted at the Councell, yet of all that number, none
concurred to the Act, nor signed it, but those of the Pa∣triarkship of Antioch, and of the prouinces neere Constan∣tinople, which were few more then 200. as the Acts them∣selues testifyApud Bi. tom. 2. pag. 134. 135.; which alone is a sufficient proofe, that the decree was not Canonically made, but by surreption and fraud. What Aetius spake in defence therof, is not to be regar∣ded: for he being an Archdeacon of Constantinople, & an abbettor of Anatolius his clayme, vttered diuers manifest vntruthes in fauor of this decree: as 1. that the Popes Lega∣tes had notice of it before it was made. 2. That the Fathers yelded the primacy to the Pope, because Rome was the seate of the Empire. 3. The 150. Fathers in the Councell of Constantinople, granted to the Bishop of that City priui∣ledges equall with the Pope; wheras they make no men∣tion at all of equall priuiledges, but absolutely place him after the PopeCan. 3.. 4. and that the same Councell had adiud∣ged to the Patriarkes of Constantinople, the ordination of the Metropolitans of Pontus, Asia and Thracia; wheras it ordaines directly the contraryCan. 2., namely, that the Bishops of Asia, should gouerne the affaires of the Dioces of Asia; & the Bishops of Pontus, the affayres of the Dioces of Pon∣tus; and that the Bishops of Thracia (that is to say of Con∣stantinople) should gouerne the affaires of thracia only: which decree is in like manner reported by SocratesL. 5. c. 8.. And when in the Councell of Chalcedon it selfeAct. 11., there was speach of hauing a new Bishop of Ephesus ordayned in place of Bassianus, and Stephen, both of them inuasors of that See, the Clerkes of Constantinople pretending, that this new Bishop ought to be ordeyned by the Patriarke of Constantinople, according to the Canon of 150. Fathers in the first generall Councell of that City, the Bishops of Asia minor prostrating themselues before the Councell, protested against it, crying out, that, it was contrary to the Ca∣nons, and that of 37. Bishops of Ephesus, which had liued since S. Ti∣mothy, vntill that tyme, all of them had bene ordayned at Ephosus, Bassianus only excepted▪ who comming in vnlawfully, was by Vio∣lence ordeined at Constantinople, which caused great tumultes, and
many murders in the City of Ephesus: & that the like wold now fall out againe, if their Metropolitan were ordeined out of the prouince. Wherupon the Bishops of the Councell cryed outIbid.; Let the Canons stand; let the Bishop be ordeyned in the prouince. This protestation of the Asian Bishops sheweth, that when afterwards they subscribed to the contrary, and be∣ing asked, said, they did it willingly, they were partly wroght to that answeare by Anatolius, and the Clerkes of Con∣stantinople abusing the fauor of the Senate, and partly mo∣ued by a false relation of Eusebius B. of Dorilaeum, a prin∣cipall abbettor of Anatolius his clayme, who testified, that the decree was approued by the Pope: I haue (sayth heAct. 6. voluntarily subscribed this Canon, because I haue read it at Rome to the most holy Pope, and he approued it. And therupon it was, that the Fathers of the Councell said to Leo PopeIn relat. ad Leon.: We haue taken the boldnesse to confirme it, as a thing begun by your Holinesse. And yet neuerthelesse this testimony of Eusebius, was full of falshood and fraud, as Bonifacius one of the Popes Le∣gates conuinced out of the instructions giuen to him and the other Legates in writingAct. 16.; one of them being, that, they should not suffer the Canons of the holy Fathers to be violated by any rashnesse: and that if any trusting in the power of their City, shold offer to vsurpe any thing contrary to the dignity of his person, they should represse them, as iustice requireth. Which in like manner Leo himselfe testified to Maximus Patriarke of Antioch Ep. 62.: If they say that the brethren which I send in my steed to the Synod haue done any thing more then what con∣cernes fayth, that shall be of no force, because they were sent by the See Apostolike, only to root out heresies, and defend the fayth.
CHAP. XX. The fifth Councell Generall beliued the supreme Authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome. SECT. I. Doctor Mortons ignorance, and contradictions concerning this Councell. IN your discourse of the fifth Generall Councell, contradictions, ignorance, & vntruthes march by troopes: for 1.Pag. 122. here you suppose the Councell of Con∣stantinople vnder Menas, Archbishop of that Citty, to be the fifth generall: and afterwards you directly affirme the samePag. 289. marg. lit. 0., when speaking of the Councell vnder Menas, and alleaging the Synodicall relation made out of the Epistle of Pope Agapetus extant in the first action therof, you call it, Concilium secundum Constantinopolitanum, quod erat quintum generale: The second Councell of Constantinople, which was the fifth generall. And againe twice morePag. 347. lin. 14. & pa. 348. lin. 11. you repeate, that this Councell vnder Menas was a generall Councell. And yet in another place contradicting your selfe you say no lesse expresly,Pag. 238. lin. 11. that, it was not a generall Councell. It was then a generall Councell, and it was not a generall Councell. Reconcile these two, & eris mihi magnus Apollo.
2. You acknowledge.Pag. 238. & 347., that this Councell vnder Menas, was held in the inter-regnum, or vacancy between the death of Pope Agapetus and the election of his succes∣sor the yeare 536. and yet not without contradiction you proue out of Baronius and BiniusPag. 2. in tis. sect. 6. & pag. 123. lit. m., that the fifth gene∣rall Councell was held the yeare 553. which was neither in the vacancy after Agapetus his death, nor in the tyme of Siluerius his successor, but in the 14. yeare of Vigilius, full 17. yeares after the other vnder Menas. And as these two Councells differed in tyme, so they did in matter: for in that vnder Menas was handled the execution of the se∣cond sentence, which Agapetus Pope before his death pro∣nounced against Anthymus: but in the fifth generall, was discussed the cause of the Three Chapters. Is it not then great ignorance in you, to confound these two Councells, the one being particular consisting of 50. Bishops only, & the other generall of more then 165. the one held vnder Menas the yeare 536, and the other vnder Vigilius Pope the yeare 553, and to frame Arguments out of them both, as out of one and the same Councell? 3. You sayPag. 189. marg. lit. o., that the Councell vnder Menas, was the second Councell of Constantinople: and yet you had said be∣forePag. 235. marg. lit. s., that it was, the fifth Councell of Constantinople; neither the one, nor the other being true: for betweene this, and the first generall Councell of Constantinople, there were held eleuen or twelue other Councells vnder diuers Pa∣triarkes of that City, as you may read in BaroniusApud Spond. Ind. verb. Constan∣tinop. Concil.. 4. To proue this Councell vnder Menas to be a gene∣rall Councell you alleagePag. 347. Binius who sayth directly the contrary, to wit, that it consisted of such Bishops only, as were neere to Constantinople, and some others then re∣sident in the City, all of them being but 50. in number, whose names are expressed in the beginning of the first action. And the same is testified by BaroniusAnno 536. and Bel∣larmineL. 1. de Conc. c. 5. & l. 2. de Pont. c. 13., by ZonarasIn vita Iustinian., and NicephorusLib. 17. c. 9..
SECT. II. Doctor Mortons ignorance further discouered, and his falsifying of Binius. COming to the relation of what passed in the fifth Ge∣nerall Councell, you sayPag. 122.: Anthimij causa ab Agapeto Papa condemnata. Binius Tom. 2. p. 416. post in Synodo Constantino∣pol. ventilata. Idem Binius in Not. Conc. Constant. sub Menna. This is an egregious falsification: for Binius hath no such words, and therfore your setting them downe englished in a dif∣ferent character, as his, is another false sleight, that by fa∣thering them on him, you might ground on his authority, the Argument, which out of them immediatly you frame against the authority of the Pope, sayingIbid. This argueth the no-dominion of the Pope ouer that Councell, which will take vpon them to examine that cause, which the Pope before had condemned. But these your words besides falshood, containe excessiue ignorance: for Agapetus pronounced two sentences of condemnation against Anthymus. By the one, he deposed him from the See of Constantinople: by the other, from the See of Trebizond. In the former sentence the Councell had no hand: for it was definitiue, and absolutely perfected, and put in execution. Menas being ordeined in Anthymus his place by Agapetus his owne hands, before his death. But because Anthymus was not only an vsurper of the See of Constantinople, but also guilty of heresy, Agapetus being solicited by the Eastern Bishops, ordained, that wheras v∣pon the sentence of his deposition from the See of Con∣stantinople, his owne See of Trebizond had bene reserued vnto him; if he did not cleare himselfe from the crime of he∣resy, he should also be deposed from that See, and withall excommunicated, and depriued of all Sacerdotall title, and of the very name of a Catholike. But because Agapetus dyed, before the tyme which he gaue Anthymus to purpe himselfe from the imputation of heresy. Menas the Pa∣triarke after his death assembled a Councell, not to re-exa∣mine,
mine, and ventilate the sentence of deposition, which Aga∣petus pronounced against Anthymus, as you ignorantly mistake, but to put in execution the second sentence, which he had begun, but preuented by death, could not finish. All this is cleare out of the petition of the Regulars of Syria, reported in the Councell it selfe, when speaking of the first sentence of Agapetus, they sayIn Conc. sub Mena. Act. 1.: God sent into this Citty Agapet, truly, Agapet, that is, truly beloued of God and man, Pope of old Rome, for the deposition of Anthymus, and of the aforesayd heretikes, as heretofore he sent great Peter to the Romans, for the de∣struction of Simn the Magician. This reuerend person then, knowing by the requests of many of ours, the things iniustly attempted vpon the Churches, and knowing them by sight, would not so much as admit into his presence Anthymus, transgressor of the Canons, but iustly de∣posed him from the Episcopall See of this Citty. Loe here the first sentence absolutely finished by Agapet before his death. And then speaking of the second sentence, they addeIbid.: Afterwards the Bishops of Palestine assembled in this Citty, and o∣thers of the East, and deputies of others, and we did againe present petitions touching Anthymus, and the other heretikes, and demanded that Anthymus should certify his beliefe by writ to the See Apostolike, and should purge himselfe from all hereticall errors; & in this case, re∣turne to the Church of Trebizond: or if he would not do it, that he should be finally condemned, and deposed from all Sacerdotall digni∣ty, and action. And a litle afterIbid.: These our iust requests, the same most holy personage (Agapet) preuenting, and seeing that An∣thymus had fayled to appeare, condemned him with the aforesaid he∣retikes, and despoiled him of all office, and dignity Sacerdotall, and of all title Orthodoxall, euen till the pennance of his errors. The same is declared by all the Fathers of that Coun∣cell, who in their sentence pronounced against Anthymus, speaking of his first deposition, sayAct. 4.: The Blessed Pope Aga∣pet of most holy and happy memory, setting with God his hand to the sacred Canons deposed Anthymus from the See, which belonged not to him, pardoning those which had participated, and communicated in the act. And then passing to the second sentence, they adde:Ibid. But because that euen in doctrine, Anthymus was charged with many accusations, and that many petitions were preferred against,
him, by diuers reuerend personages, to the most religious Emperor, and the most blessed Pope; the same most blessed Pope, after much paine taken with a Fatherly care to regaine his soule &c. pronounced a sentence in writing against him, full of Clemency, and seemly holy∣nesse, granting him tyme of repentance; and ordayned, that vntill he had changed his opinion, and satisfyed the doctrines canonically defi∣ned by the Fathers, be should neither haue the title of a Catholike, nor of a Priest. This sheweth that the Councell intermedled not at all, with the first sentence of Agapet, by which Anthymus was deposed from the See of Constantinople: but because this second sentence of his deposition from the See of Tre∣bizond, was not absolute, but left depending, and subiect to reuocation, if he should appeare, and purge himselfe from heresy, the Councell taking the cause where the Pope left it, and according to the order giuen by him, cited Anthy∣mus thrice to appeare; and because he appeared not, execu∣ted the Popes sentence on him, deposing him from the Bi∣shopricke of Trebizond, and depriuing him of the title of a Priest, and the name of a Catholike. We (say they)Act. 4. in sentent. cont. Anthym. fol∣lowing those things, which haue bene rightly examined by the most blessed Pope, ordayne, that he as an vnprofitable and rotten member be cast out of the body of the holy Churches of God, and depriued of the Bishopricke of Trebizond, and depriued of all sacred dignity, and action, and (according to the sentence of the most holy Pope) stript euen of the name of a Catholike. Who now seeth not, how ignorantly, and vntruly you haue saidPag. 122., that, The cause of Anthymus, which the Pope had condemned, was afterwards ventilated in the Councell of Constanti∣nople? For those Fathers neither questioned, nor any way examined either the first or the second sentence of the Pope against Anthymus, but assembled themselues to put in exe∣cution the sentence, which Agapet had pronounced, and being preuented by death, could not see executed. All which is so farre from making against the iurisdiction of the Pope ouer the Bishops of the East, that it is a strong proofe therof. And that it may better appeare, how vnaduised you are
to vrge this history against the authority of the Roman Church, it is to be noted, that Anthymus an Eutychian he∣retike, not contenting himselfe with his owne Bishopricke of Trebizond, by the fauor of Iustinian (who as yet knew not, that he was an heretike) and chiefly by the craft of Theodora the Empresse, an Eutychian, and for that cause a great fauorer of Anthymus, intruded himselfe to the See of Constantinople. But Agapet Pope cōming thither, depo∣sed him, and with his owne hands ordayned Menas in his place; which was an admirable effect of the power of S. Peter in his Successor: for at that tyme Constantinople was the seate of Iustinian, and the Head of the Empire; wheras Rome was oppressed and made a slaue vnder the tiranny of Gothes, a barbarous and Arian people. The Church of Constantinople was most florishing, and glo∣rious; and that of Rome greatly depressed, and afflicted. Iu∣stinian the Emperor wa vctorious, and triumphant; and contrarily the Pope, brought to such straytes, that Theodat an Arian King of the Gothes, threatned to ruinate the Ro∣man Church, vnlesse he would goe to Constantinople, & solicite the Emperor for peace, and procure him to call his armies out o Italy: which vge therfore Agapet could not refuse, though he were so poore, that for the perfor∣mance therof, he was inforced to pawne the sacred Ves∣sells of his Church: wheras on the other side, Anthymus being exalted by the Emperor and Empresse, from the Bishoptick of Trebzond, to the Patriarkeship of Con∣stantinople, was very powrefull in meanes, and highly fo∣uored by them both. And yet neuerthelesse, and that the Empresse threatned Agapet if he deposed Anthymus, and promised him great rewards if he would leaue him in the See of Constantinople, the holy Pope soon after his ariuall, being a stranger, and without support, deposed him, casting him out of that See, euen in the very Imperiall Citty, in the presence of the Emperor that fauoured him; and excom∣municated Theodora the Empresse that obstinatly main∣tained him; and with his owne hands ordained Menas a Priest of Constantinople in his place, and pardoned Peter
Patriarke of Hierusalem, and other Bishops of the East, that had communicated with him. All this is accordingly reported by Marcellinus ComesIn Chron., LiberatusBreu. c. 12., Victor of TunesIn Chron. edit. per Ios. Scal. ad calc. Chron. Euseb., and Iustinian him∣selfeNou. 42.: and is so cleare an euidence for the supreme au∣thority of the B. of Rome, that it admitteth no colour of answeare. SECT. III. Of the matter treated in the fifth generall Councell. THe matter disputed in this Councell was about cer∣taine writings of Theodorus Mopsuestinus. Ibas, and Theodoret, commonly called, Tria capitula, The three Chap∣ters. Before the Councell, Vigilius Pope with the Bishops of the West, defended the Three Chapters. which the Easterne Bishops opposed: and what both of them did, was vpon pious considerations, in defence of the Councell of Chal∣cedon. The Bishops of the East assembled in a Councell at Constantinople, condemned the Three Chapters. But Vigi∣lius knowing, that the Westerne Bishops stood in opposi∣tion to their sentence, refused to confirme it, hoping by that meanes. like a prudent and solicitous Pastor, to worke both partes to an accord, and establish peace in the Church. But finding the Emperor, and the Easterne Bishops violent in the prosecution of their decree, and that the Bishops of Ve∣nice, and the regions adioyning, as also those of Ireland, fol∣lowing his opinion, & relying on his authority, had con∣demned this Councell of Constantinople, and that the Church therby was in danger to be rent in sunder with Schisme: and on the other syde considering, that the subiect of that Contention, was no matter of fayth, and neither the one part, nor the other any way repugnant to the Coun∣cell of Chalcedon (as S. Gregory hath notedL. 3. ep. 37., but a thing of it selfe indifferent, he altered his opinion, and yelded to confirme this decree, purchasing to himselfe that commen∣dation, which S. AugustineEp. 162. giues to the most famous Go∣uernors
of Gods people both in the old & new Testament, which is, that, They tolerate for the good of vnity, that which they hate for the loue of equity, and imitating the example of S. Leo the great, who testifies of himselfeEp. 14. that, for the loue of peace he yelded to confirme the ordination of Maximus B. of Antioch, which Anatolius Patriarke of Constantinople without any example, & against the Canons, had presum∣ptuously vsurped to himselfe. Nor can Vigilius herein be argued of leuity: for if he al∣tered his mind, he did it vpon iust causes, for the auoyding of Schisme; and following the example of S. Paul, who hauing first giuen his voyce for the abolishing of circum∣cisionAct. 15.11., afterwards vpon iust cause circumcised TimothyAct. 16.3.: and yet againe reprehended Peter, that by his dissimu∣lation, he induced the Gentiles to circumcision, and other Iewish ceremoniesGal. 2.11. & 14.. You to proue the no-necessity of subiection to the Pope, obiect the standing out of the Easterne Bishops against Vi∣giliusPag 123. 124.. But you might by the like Argument proue, that subiects are not bound to obey their Prince, because some of them stand out in rebellion against him. And as litle to the purpose is your telling vsPag 123. fin., that those Bishops condemned all them, that defended the Three Chapters: for contrarily we tell you, that the Bishops of the West in their Councell at Aquileia, condemned all those Bishops, and their Councell at Constantinople: and had more right to do it, then the Easterne Bishops to condemne them: for they did it in defence of the Popes authority, whose opinion they followed. Your vrgingPag. 123. the perse∣cution which Iustinian raised against Vigilius, to bring him to confirme the decree of the Easterne Bishops, maketh wholly against you: for why did both he, and the Bishops themselues vrge Vigilius so uch, to confirme their decree, but because they knew, that no decree of any Councell can be of force, vnlesse it be approued by the See Aposto∣likeSee this proued aboue Chap. 17. sect. 6.? Finally the Popes authority  effectually proued out of this Councell, for as much as by vertue of Vigilius his con∣firmation,
it hath obtained the force of a lawfull Councell, and deserued the title of the fifth generall; wheras without his confirmation it would not haue bene receaued by the Church more then that of Ariminum, or the second of E∣phesus, which the See Apostolike hath reiected. And the same is confirmed by Eutichius Patriarke of Constantino∣ple, who though he prefided in this Councell, yet ack∣nowledged the right of presiding not to belong to him∣selfe, but to Vigilius, when inuiting him to the Councell, he saydEp. ad Vigil. in quinta Syn. Collat. 1.: Our desire is, to haue the Three Chapters examined, your Blessednesse presiding ouer vs. SECT IV. Doctor Mortons glosse vpon the Word, Obedience. TO conclude your discourse of the fifth generall Coun∣cell, as vntruly, & ignorantly, as you began, you say:Pag. 124. Idle and vaine is your obiection out of that Synod. from one word Obedience, which they professed to the Catholike See, by not discerning betwene a logicall and a morall obedience: for they promised obedience to that See, in all her orthodoxe, and reasonable perswasions, but not to her peremptory commands, and conclusions: for you may obey S. Augustine by subscribing to his iudgment, without submitting to his iurisdiction. So you: where first you ignorantly make this profession of obedience to the Roman Church, to be of the fih generall Councell, and alleage Bellarmine for your author, who expresly sayth, that they are words of the Sy∣nod held vnder Menas, before the fifth generall Councell. 2. Your glosse vpon the word Obedience, is idle, and false: for you wrest it to an improper signification. I deny not, but that the words of Obedience, and Command, may be taken improperly; as if when your equall or inferior requests you, to do a fauor for him, or perswades you, to your owne good, you answeare, I will obey your commands, vnderstan∣ding by his Commands, his requests and persuasions. But that the B. of Rome as being gouernor of the vniuersall Church hath true power, and authority to Command, according
to the most first and proper signification of the word, and that the greatest Bishops, & Councels haue acknowledged in themselues obligation to obey in the same sense, hath bene already prouedChap. 18. sect. 1.. False therfore is you glosse, that this Councell acknowledged not in themselues obligation to obey the B. of Rome, nor in him authority to com∣mand, but only to persuade. You defend an ill cause, which vpon no other ground, but only to excuse your disobedi∣ence to the See Apostolike, inforceth you to wrest the words of the Councell to an improper signification. And as your glosse vpon the word Obedience, is false; so is it re∣pugnant euen to common sense: for let a generall Coun∣cell be called, of all the Orthodox Bishops in the world; let them condemne an Arius, an Eutyches, or a Pelagius; if your glosse may be allowed, any of these heretikes, or any other neuer so impious, may refuse to submit himselfe, and obey their decrees, saying, He will obey them in all their Ortho∣doxe and reasonable persuasions, but not in their peremptory com∣mands, and conclusions, and so obey them in nothing at all. For what heretike will not say, that the decrees of a gene∣rall Councell against his heresy, are not Orthodoxe, and reaso∣nable persuasions, but peremptory commands, and conclusions? Cold this euasion iustify Arius his disobedience, or excuse him from heresy? No: and so neither can your glosse iustify your cause, or satisfy any man of iudgment. And as your glosse is false, so is your dealing imposte∣rous: for the words of the Councell truly alleaged by Bel∣larmine (out of whom you cite them) are: Apostolicam Se∣dem sequimur, & obedimus, & ipsius communicatores communicato∣res habemus; & condemnatos ab ipsa & nos condemnamus We fol∣low and obey the See Apostolike, and her communicants we haue for our communicants; and those that are condemned by her, we also con∣demne. Why then did you say, that we obiect out of this Councell, but one word Obedience? why did you here and af∣terwards againePag. 237. citing this passage out of Bellarmine, in both places, cut it of in the middst? Can any Catholike at this day professe more perfect, and exacte obedience to the See Apostolike, then to hold all them for Orthodoxe,
and communicate with them all, that communicate with her; and to condemne all them that are condemned by her? This was the obe∣dience of that Councell to the Pope; which to shift of and deceaue your reader, you mangle the words, leauing out the most effectuall part of them; because they shew, that if you had bene liuing in those primitiue tymes, that Coun∣cell would haue detested, and condemned you, as it did An∣thymus, and other heretikes there mentioned, for their dis∣obedience to the See Apostolike, and for not communica∣ting with her. CHAP. XXI. Of the sixth Generall Councell. SECT. I. That it acknowledged the supreme Authority of the B. and Church of Rome. THAT the sixth Generall Councell was called by the Authority of the B. of Rome, I haue already prouedChap. 17. sect. 1.. And that it acknowledged the vniuersall iu∣risdiction of the Pope ouer the whole Church, is declared by Constantine the Emperor, who speaking to the Roman Synod held vnder Agatho, calls him, Vniuersall Father, and Vniuersall Arch-PastorSyn. 6. Act. 18.; and by the Councell it selfeIbid. cal∣ling him. Bishop of the first See, and of the vniuersall Church. And speaking of the Epistle of Agatho sent from the Roman Councell to the Emperor, they receaue it as of the holy Ghost, dictated from the mouth of the holy and most Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, and written by the hand of the thrice blessed Pope A∣gatho. And againe:Ibid. We assent (say they) and agree to the
dogmaticall Epistle of our most holy Father, the soueraigne Pope A∣gatho (sent to your Highnesse,) and to the suggestion of the holy Synod of 225. Fathers vnder him. And a litle after, speaking of the same Epistle, and acknowledging Agatho to be the Suc∣cessor of S. Peter, they adde: The paper and inke appeared, but it was Peter that did speake by Agatho. One of the things which Agatho spake in that EpistleApud Bin. to. . pag. 11. was, that the Roman Church hath neuer bene stayned with error, & that the whole Catholike Church, all the Councells, & all the Venerable Fathers, and all the holy Doctors haue imbraced her authority, and re∣uerenced, and followed her Apostolicall Doctrine; which contrarily, the heretikes haue maliciously derogated from, and persecuted. And speaking of the same Church to the Emperor, and his two sonnesIbid.: This your spirituall Mother the Apostolicall Church of Christ by the grace of Almighty God, shall neuer be proued to haue erred from the track of Apostolicall tradition, nor by any deprauation to haue yelded to hereticall nouelties; but as from the beginning of the Christian fayth, the receaued it pur from her authors the Princes of Christes Apostles; so she remaineth vntill the end, according to the di∣uine promise which our Lord and Sauiour made to the Prince of his Disciples in the Ghospells, saying: Peter, Peter, Satan hath required to sift you, as one that sifteth wheat: but I haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth faile not, and thou being once conuerted, confirme thy Bre∣thren. Your Clemency therfore consider, that our Lord and Sauiour of all, who hath faythfully promised that the fayth of Peter shall not faile, admonished him to confirme his brethren; which that my Apo∣stolicall predecessors haue alwayes assuredly performed, is a thing noto∣rious to all men. And because Theodorus Patriarke of Con∣stantinople, was a Monothelite, & (as Anastasius testifiethIn vita Agathon. condemned with Pyrrhus, and the rest of that Sect, in this sixth Councell, he addeth; that, Since the Bishops of Con∣stantinople haue endeauored to bring hereticall Nouelties into the Church of Christ, his Apostolicall predecessors of holy memory, haue neuer ceased to exhort, and admonish them to desist from hereticall error, lest by holding one will and operation in Christ, they should oc∣casion a beginning of diuision in the vnity of the Church.
SECT. II. Whether the sixth Councell condemned Honorius Pope, as an Heretike. THese passages of the sixth Councell so forcible for the authority of the Roman Church, you mention not, but passing by them, as being not for your purpose, pick out of it a quarrell against Honorius B. of Rome, & that with no small lack of syncerity: for wheras you obiect out of Bellarmine, that in this sixth Councell, as also in the sea∣uenth, and eight, Honorius was condemned as a Mono∣thelite, Bellarmine contrarily proueth out of Honorius his expresse words, that he was no way guilty of that he∣resy, but alwayes a Catholike, holding with the Roman Church two wils and operations in Christ. And he confir∣meth the same with the testimony of S. Maximus Martyr, the greatest Diuine of that age, and that liued in Honorius his tyme. And Maximus himselfe in a famous disputation which he had with Pyrrhus Patriarke of Constantinople, alleageth as witnesse of this truth Honorius his owne Se∣cretary, that writ those epistles dictated from his mouth, and was then still liuing. Wherfore Bellarmine denyeth that the sixth Councel damned Honorius, as an Hereticke; and further proueth it, because Agatho in his first epistle to Constantine the Emperor, which was read in the Coun∣cell, and not only read, but approued, and admired as the words of S. Peter, and as dictated by the holy Ghost, af∣firmeth expressly, that none of his Predecessors (one of which was Honorius) was euer guilty of heresy, but that they haue alwayes made resistance to heretikes, & that the Pope, as Pope, cannot decree any thing contrary to fayth. And from thence he inferreth, that the Councell did not iudge Honorius to be an heretike, nor condemne him as such: els by receauing and reuerencing Agathos Epistle, as the words of S. Peter, and as dictated by the holy Ghost, the Coun∣cell should contradict it selfe, and condemne both S. Pe∣ter,
and the holy Ghost of a lye, in affirming that none of Agatho's predecessors was euer guilty of heresy. And the truth hereof he confirmeth by the testimony of Nicolas the first, who in his epistle to Michael the Emperor, auoucheth, that, none of his predecessors was euer stayned with the least spot, or blemish of heresy, which he wold not euen for very shame haue affirmed so resolutely, if Honorius in the publike assēbly of a generall Councell had bene anathematized as an heretike. Wherfore Bellarmine rightly inferreth, that Honorius was not condemned by the sixth Councell, but his name inserted among those heretikes whom the Councell con∣demned, by the Greekes, enemies to the Church of Rome. And so it is testified by Theophanes Isaurus a Greeke histo∣rian, and out of him by Anastasius Bibliothecarius: which also he confirmeth, because it was the frequent and almost ordinary custome of the Greekes, to corrupt, and falsify Bookes in hatred of the Roman Church, and in fauor of their owne errors. S. Leo complainesEp. 83. that they had cor∣rupted his Epistle to Flauianus Patriarke of Constantino∣ple. S. GregoryL. 5. ep. 14. ad Narsem., that they had falsified the Councell of Chalcedon, and he suspected the like of the Councell of Ephesus. And where in his DialoguesL. 2. c. 38. he hath, Paracli∣tus à Patre semper procedit, & filio, they in their copies leaue out, & filio, and insteed thereof, say, & in filio manet; a thing which Ioannes DiaconusVita S. Greg. c. 75. obserueth, testifiing that Za∣charias Pope hauing translated that worke of S. Gregory faythfully, and published it in the East, the Greekes razed out the name of the Sonne, in fauor of their heresy, that the holy Ghost proceeds not from him, but from the Father a∣lone. Againe Nicolas the first remitteth Michaell the Em∣peror to the Epistle of Adrian, if (sayth he) it be not falsified after the manner of the Graecians, but kept by the Church of Con∣stantinople, as it was sent by the See Apostolike. And he had rea∣son to say so: for what he alleageth to Photius, out of A∣drians Epistle to Tharasius, is not to be found in that Epi∣stle, as it is read in the eight Synod. And finally this very sixth Councell discouered, that the Greekes had falsified the fifth Councell generall, fathering on Pope Vigilius, and
Menas Patriarke of Constantinople, certaine quaternions of their owne. If then they haue falsified the writings of the Fathers of the third, the fourth, the fifth, and eight generall Coun∣cells; what maruell if they haue done the like to the sixth, and seauenth, defaining Honorius? and especially, since a little after the sixth Councell, they assembled themselues againe at Constantinople, by their owne authority, and made the Trullan Canons, in hatred of the Roman Church. To this I adde, that in the Lateran Councell of 105. Bishops, held before the sixth Synod, by Martin the first Pope and Martyr, against the Monothelites, Sergius, Cy∣rus, Pyrrhus, and Paul were condemned by name with∣out any mention of Honorius; whom yet those Bishops being graue men and impartiall, would not haue left vn∣censured, if he had bene guilty of the same heresy; as nei∣ther would Paulus Diaconus, Theophanes Cerameus, Photius, and Zonaras in their Catalogues of the heretikes condemned in the sixth Councell: especially Photius, and Zonaras being professed enemies to the Roman Church. And finally Emmanuel Calleca, a Grecian, with all the Latin historiansSee Cocc. to 1. l. 7. arc, 13. and Bell. l. 4. de Pont. c. 11. commend Honorius for a Catholike and holy Prelate. These proofes, most of them being brought by Bellar∣mine, and so vnanswerably conuincing, that Honorius neither was an heretike, nor condemned by the sixth, or seauenth Councell; is it not strange, that you should so confidently assume the contrary, as a thing granted by him, and that it being a matter of fact those Fathers were decea∣ued therin? Good God (say you)Pag. 125. the rare modesty of this man, who will haue vs belieue, that one Bellarmine liuing now 1000. yeares since that matter was in agitation, should iudge better by his coniecture, of the circumstances of a mater of fact, then could 639. Bishops in their publike Synods (iam flagrante crimine) when as yet the cause was fresh, their witnesses liuing, and all circumstances, which are the perfect intelligencers, visibly before their eyes. So you. And Bellarmine may truly say: Good God, the strange
conscience of Doctor Morton, that will speake so vntruly! for doth bellarmine bring no other proofes, but his owne con∣iecture? Doth he not produce the testimonies of Honorius his Secretary, and of S. Maximus Martyr, who were liuing at that tyme, of Martin the first with a Councell of 105. Bi∣shops, of Iohn the fourth, of Nicolas the first, of Theopha∣nes Isaurus, of Emmanuel Calleca, and of all the Latine Fathers, that Honorius neuer assented to the Monothelites, but (euen in those his very Epistles which are obiected) de∣fended two wills, and operations in Christ, with all the Catholikes of the world? And doth he not proue the same, by the expresse testimony of Agatho Pope, affirming that, none of his predecessors were euer stayned with heresy? and out of the sixth Councell it selfe receauing this testimony of Aga∣tho, as the words of S. Peter, and as an oracle of the Holy Ghost? Againe, doth he in all this say, that 639. Bishops were deceaued? Nay doth he not proue by the testimony of Theophanes Isautus, and Anastasius, and collect the same out of many other authors, that the condemnation of Ho∣norius, is not theirs, but falsly inserted in their Councells by the Greekes, according to their ordinary custome of cor∣rupting Councells, and other bookes in hatred to the See of Rome? Good God then, the seared conscience of Doctor Morton, who can conceale all this, and lay hold on a few words, which Bellarmine addeth, to wit, that, if any man be so obstinat, that all this cannot satisfy him, he may receaue another solution from Turrecremata, which is, that the Fathers of the sixth Synod condemned Honorius, but out of false information, and ther∣fore erred therin, as any Councell may in matter of fact. The reason why you omit all the rest of Bellarmines doctrine, & catch at this solution of Turrecremata, is, to in∣ferre that Popes may be heretikes, & that not only as priuat Doctors (which some Catholikes grant) but in their pu∣blike persons, as Popes, because, those Fathers condemning Ho∣norius in their publike Councell did iudge him according to his pu∣blike person. These your wordsPag 126. containe a ridiculous fal∣lacy: for when we say, The Pope cannot erre, as Pope, or (which is all one) as a publike person, or ex Cathedra, the
sense is, that he cannot either in a Councell, or by himselfe ordayne any hereticall doctrine to be receaued by the Church. Nor could you be ignorant of this: for as Canus (whon ye alleage) granteth, that Popes according to their priuat persons may be heretikes, and that peraduenture one or two examples may be giuen therof, so in that very placeL. 6. c. 8. pag. 214. he addeth, that no example can be giuen of any Pope, that though he fell into heresy, did euer decree the same for the whole Church, which is the thing you ought to haue disproued, to shew, that either the sixth, or any other Coun∣cell iudged the Pope according to his publike person. And lastly, as for Honorius in particular, BellarmineL. 4. de Pont. c. 11. rightly sheweth, that Canus was in a double error, concerning him, whose opinion therfore is to be reiected. CHAP. XXII. Of the seauenth, and eight Generall Councells. SECT. I. That these two Councells acknowledged the supreme Authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome. THAT the seauenth, and eight Generall Councells belieued the B. of Rome to be the Head, and Gouernor of the Vniuersal Church, is a truth not to be denied. In the second Action of the seauenth Synod, was read, and approued the Epistle of A∣drian Pope to Tharasius, in which spea∣king of S. Peters See, he sayth: Whose seate obtayning the pri∣macy, shineth throughout the whole world, and is the Head of all the Churches of God.
In the eight Synod, the profession which all Schismati∣call Bishops, returning to the Catholike Church, were to make, is expressed in these wordsApud Bin. to. 3. pag. 923. & Can. l. 6. c. 6. pag. 200.: The begiuning of salua∣tion is, to conserue, the rule of right fayth, and no way to swarue from the tradition of our Fore-fathers, because the words of our Lord can∣not fayle saying: Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. And the proofes of deeds haue made good these words; for as much, as in the See Apostolike the Catholike religion is alwayes conserued inuiolable. We therfore desiring not to be separated from the fayth and doctrine of this Sea and following in all things, the constitutions of the Fathers, and chiefly of the holy Prelates of the See Apostolike, anathematize all heresies &c. And a litle after. Wherfore following the See Apo∣stolike in all things, and obseruing all her constitutions, we hope to de∣serue to liue in one communion which the See Apostolike teacheth, in which there is the true and entire solidity of Christian religion: & we promise likewise not to recite in the sacred mysteries, the names of those, which are separated from the communion of the Catholike Church, that is to say, which agree not to the See Apostolike. What you thinke Doctor Morton, I know not: but sure I am, that if you who deny the Roman Church to be the Head, and gouernesse of all Churches, you that liue out of her Communion, you that refuse to obey her constitutions, you that professe not to follow her doctrine, had liued in tyme of the seauenth and eight Synods, they would haue anathematized you, and condemned your doctrine, as he∣reticall. And this is the reason, why you conceale these, & many other passages of those Councells, in which the same truth is deliuered, and many other points of your Prote∣stant Doctrine condemned. SECT. II. Doctor Mortons ignorance, concerning the eight Generall Councell. IN your eight Chapter, in the title of the eight Section, you sayPag. 127. The beliefe of the Article, Viz. The Catholike Ro∣man
Church, without subiection wherunto there is no saluation, dam∣neth the eight Councell, which you call generall, consisting of 383. Bi∣shops, in the yeare 870. This is your title; in proofe wherof, you cite BiniusTom. 3. p. 143. in your margent, but ignorantly, and falsly: for the Councell which Binius there setteth downe, is not the eight generall, held the yeare 870. vnder Basilius the Emperor; and Adrian the second Pope of that name, but a particular Synod, consisting of certaine Greeke Bishops as∣sembled the yeare 692. by the industry of Calinicus Pa∣triarke of Constantinople, in the tyme of Sergius Pope, & Iustinian the yonger, in his pallace called Trullum, & hath neuer bene esteemed a lawfull Councell, but alwayes re∣proued as a false, and erraticall assembly, as Binius prouethTo. 3. pag. 154. 155., and I shall presently declareSect. seq.. Againe you say; The eight generall Councell consisted of 383: Bishops, and giue Binius for your Author: But you are mi∣staken, & wrong Binius: for heTom. 3. pag. 910. proueth out of Nicetas, and Anastasius who was present at the eight Councell, that it consisted only of 102. Bishops. Nor will it serue you for an excuse, that Bellarmine sayth, it consisted of 383. Bi∣shops: for you bring not him for your author, but Binius. who affirmeth, and proueth the contrary. And in what sense Bellarmine speaketh, you might haue learned, if you had obserued, what Binius noteth out of Anastasius, na∣mely, that many other Bishops agreed to this Synod, though they were not present at it. But let vs go on: What was done (say you)Pag. 127. in this fourth Synod of Constantinople, you may vnderstand from your owne men. Here I must request you to call to mind, that els where you sayPag. 235. marg. lit. ., the Councell vnder Menas was the fifth Councel of Con∣stantinople. How then can the eight general Councel, which you say was held the yeare 870. be the fourth Councell of Constantinople, since in this other place alleaged, you af∣firme the Councell vnder Menas held the yeare 553. to be the fifth Councell of Constantinople? for therby you ig∣norantly make the fifth Councell of Constantinople, to haue bene held aboue 300. yeare, before the fourth.
SECT. III. Whether the eight generall Councell condemned the Saturday fast, allowed by the Roman Church. YOu tell vsPag. 17. that, we may vnderstand from our Binius, that these Bishops (of the eight generall Councell) condemned a custome of the saboth fast in lent, then vsed in the Church of Rome: and therupon, made they a Canon inhibiting the Church of Rome, from keeping that custome any longer. And you addeIbid.: This Canon (sayth your Surius) is not receaued, because it reprehendeth the Church of Rome, the mother-Church of all other Churches. So you: And your readers, especially of the vulgar sort, by this your expression, what will they conceaue, but that the Ro∣man Church did in those tymes fast the Sundayes in Lent? for as by the Saboth day Protestants, especially the vulgar, vnderstand no other day but Sunday, so by the Saboth fast, what will they vnderstand, but the Sunday fast, which was neuer vsed, nor allowed in the Roman Church, but con∣demned in the Councell of Gangra, as an hereticall obser∣uation of the EustathiansSee Spond. anno 319. n. 9.. The fast which this Canon inhibiteth is the Saturday fast, which, as then it was, so, notwithstanding this Canon, is still vsed by the Roman Church in Lent, and not prohi∣bited out of Lent. Nor was that Canon made by the eight generall Coū∣cell, to whom you ignorantly ascribe it, but by the Trullan Synod, as Binius, and Surius testify; whom therfore you abuse, in fathering on them your owne ignorant mistake of the Trullan Synod, for the eight generall Councell. And so much the more, because both of them, with all Ca∣tholike Diuines, hold the Trullan Canons to be illegiti∣mate, and of no force: for as much, as no Legates of Sergius then Pope, were present at that Synod, nor was it assem∣bled by his authority, or consent, but absolutely reproued, and condemned by him, notwithstanding the barbarous violence of Soldiers, and other meanes vsed by the Empe∣tor,
to extort a confirmation from him, and his successors, as Venerable BedeL D sex aetat, in iusti∣nian. iuniore. who liued at that tyme, Paulus Diaco∣nusL. 6. e. 4. and other historians testify, and you may read in BaroniusAnno 692, BellarmineL. 1. de, BiniusTom. 3. pag. 152., and CanusL. 5. de loc. c. vlt.; who rightly obserue, that as not by the Pope, so neither by any of the Patriarkes of the East, nor by any authority of antiquity it hath bene receaued, as a true Councell, but held to be (and so BedeLoco cis. calls it) Erratica Synodus, An erring Sy∣nod; in so much, that the Greeke Historians, Theophanes, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Glycas, and others, thought best to bu∣ry it in silence, neuer reckoning it among the Councells, nor making any mention at all of it. And with great rea∣son: for how Almighty God punished both the wicked Patriarke Calinicus, and the Emperor, who pleaseth may read in BaroniusAnno 691.. All which being true, as it is, it must follow, that you shew great ignorance, or els lack of Conscience, in attribu∣ting to the eight generall Councell a decree of this im∣pious Conuenticle, and obiecting it against a religious cu∣stome of the Saturday fast in Lent, piously obserued by the Roman Church, from the Apostles tyme. If it be an abuse, why did not the seauen first Oecumenicall Councels take notice of it? Do not the Greeke authors with one voyce cry out, that in thinges of this nature which are not repug∣nant to fayth, or good manners, the variety of ancient cu∣stomes vsed in diuers Churches is to be obserued? And did not S. Hierome, being consulted about this very custome of the Saturday fast, long before the Trullan Synod, ans∣weareEp. 28., Let euery countrey abound in their owne sense, and reue∣rence the precepts of their Fore-fathers, as Apostolicall lawes? And did not S. AmbroseSpond. anno 384. n. 6. in this very particular, aduise Moni∣ca S. Augustines Mother, to obserue the custome of what∣soeuer place she was in? And do not both he, and S. Augu∣stineApud S. Aug. ep. 86. professedly proue against you, and such as you are, that wheras the Easterne Church from the tyme of the A∣postles fasted not, but feasted on Saturdayes, contrary to the custome of the Westerne Church, both of them did it, vpon good and pious considerations, declared by the ancient Fa∣thers
Apud Baro. an. 692.? And doth not S. AugustineLoco cit. shew, that variety to be a singular ornament to the Church? And do not the Councells of AgathaC. 22., and EliberisC. 26., subscribe to that custome of the Roman, & other Westerne Churches? What authority then, had those Trullan Bishops to make them∣selues Iudges of the Roman Church, and of all the Chur∣ches of the West, ouer whom they had no authority, as your selfe well knoweth? And hereby is discouered your folly, that not contenting your selfe with proposing heere this Argument so imperti∣nent, and friuolous, you repeate it afterwards againe say∣ingPag. 220. 221. that, S. Augustine approuing the custome of the Easterne Church, wounds the Papacy, and signifies that the Roman Church had not then any peremptory authority to determine all causes: for the Roman Church then did, and still doth allowe variety of Customes in diuers Churches, though sometimes contrary to her owne, when they are not repugnant to fayth or good manners. Such was the Easterne custome of not ob∣seruing the Saturday-fast, which therfore she allowed. How then doth S. Augustine wound the Papacy, in al∣lowing the Orientals to obserue their custome, since the Roman Church agreeth with him, in allowing the same? To proue out of S. Augustine that the Roman Church had not then authority to determine all Ecclesiasticall causes, you should haue shewed, that he held endlesse, and indeter∣minable any cause, which she had once determined; or that he allowed, what she had once condemned: which whiles you do not, you spend your breath in vaine. Finally, wheras you askePag. 127. Whether the Church of Rome would at this day swallow, and disgest such an hoat morsell, as the Trull an decree was, you insinuate, that then she could, and did swallow that morsell: which how false it is, you haue heard; since neither Sergius Pope, nor any of his successors, could euer be brought to confirme that deceee, or the Sy∣nod that made it; which alone sheweth the transcendent authority of the Roman Church in those dayes; for want of whose allowance, and confirmation, that Synod was then, and euer since hath bene reproued, as an impious Assem∣bly:
whose decrees therfore you are ill aduised to obiect in fauor of your cause, against the Roman Church. CHAP: XXIII. Doctor Morton defendeth the hereticall custome of the Asian Bishops against Victor Pope. BELLARMINE, and other Catholike writers, to proue the authority and iu∣risdiction of the B. of Rome practised ouer the Easterne Church, in the first ages after Christ, among other exam∣ples, alleage the sentence of excommu∣nication pronounced by Victor Pope against Polycrates, and many other Asian Bishops, for not celebrating the feast of Easter vpon the Sunday, as the Ro∣man Church did, but according to the Iewish computa∣tion, at the full moone of March, on what day soeuer it sell: wheras (witnesse Eusebius)Lib. 5. hist. c. 22. the rest of the Churches, throughout the whole world, insisting in the Apostolicall tradition, and custome, did neuer obserue their Easter on a∣ny other day, then that, on which our Lord arose from death, which was on Sunday. And so it was decreed to be kept, by the Councells of Palestine, of Rome, of Pontus, of France, of Osraena, of Achaia, and of other Bishops, almost InnumerableEuseb. Ibid.. To which I adde out of TertullianDe praes∣crip. c. 53., that Blastus by persuading the obseruation of that Iewish custome, did endeauour to bring Iudaisme againe into the Church: which also Eusebius testifieth, sayingL. 5. hish. c. 14.: Blastus hauing drawne many into error, did labor to bring in a new Sect, for the de∣struction of truth. Vpon these grounds Victor excommunica∣ted him, and the Asian Bishops for their obstinate defence of that custome, which Pius his predecessor had forbidden.
You obiectPag. 130., that the Asian Bishops stood out a long time against Victor, and contemned his excommunication; and that Poly∣crates pleading their cause, in his Epistle to Pope Victor, alleaged, that they had receaued their custome from S. Iohn, who leaned an our Lords brest; that it was practised by Philip the Apostle, and continued by Polycarp, Thraseas, and Sagonius, all of them Bishops and Mar∣tyrs; and that Polycrates himselfe hauing liued 65. yeares in the com∣munion of the faythfull, was nothing moued with those terrors (mea∣ning of excommunication) which were vrged against him, and the rest. And you addePag. 131. out of Eusebius, that this Act of Victor did not please all other Bishops, who did greatly reproue him for troubling the peace of the Church. These (Syr) are not Eusebius his words, but yours. He sayth, that, they did earnestly exhort Vi∣ctor to peace, & to a diligent care of charity towards his neighbours, and bitterly reproued him, as prouiding vnprofitably for the good of the Church. So indeed Eusebius sayth, according to the tran∣slation of Ruffinus. And both of them, being Heretikes, shew their malice against the See Apostolike, in saying, that, other Bishops did bitterly reproue Victor: for comming to giue an example of this bitternesse, they bring for their pa∣terne, the wordes of S. Irenaeus, in all which there is not one bitter word, but a gentle remonstrance, full of submis∣sion to the person of Victor, and to the authority of his See: for he sayth not, that Victor could not, but that, he should not haue cut off from the body of the Church so many prouinces for so small a cause; which is not to argue him of want of power, but for vsing his power indiscreetly: Irenaeus (sayth Euse∣bius)L. 5. hist. c. 24. did fitly exhort Pope Victor, that he would not vtterly cut off so many Churches, from the body of the vniuersall Church of Christ. And wheras youPag. 132. traduce Christopherson, our learned Bishop of Chichester, for this translation of Euse∣bius, it is a cauill sprung out of your ignorance: for the Greeke verbe , which Eusebius vseth, fignifieth to cut off from the whole masse or body: and so it is proued out of Ruffinus, who translateth thus: Irenaus reproued Victor, for not doing well in cutting off from the vnity of the body, so many, and so great Churches. And so likewise translateth your learned Protestant-brother Ioannes Iacobus Grynaeus, in his Basi∣lean
edition of Eusebius. And in the same manner transla∣teth NicephorusL. 4. c. 38., all of them as well skilled in Greeke, as your selfe, to say no more. And indeed how could Ire∣naeus reproue Victor, for exceeding the limits of his power? he that crieth outL. 3. c. 3.: To the Roman Church, all Churches, and all the faythfull, from all places, must necessarily haue recourse, by reason of her more powerfull principality. Wherfore it was not want of Power that Irenaeus re∣proued in Victor, but indiscreet vsing of his power. But that euen in this, he was instaken, and that Victor failed not, euen in point of prudence, nor vsed ouer-much rigor, appeareth in this, that hereby he repressed the Heresy of Blastus by which many were seduced, as also because the famous Councell of Nice, first, & many others afterwards, confirmed his sentence, and condemned the doctrine and practise of Blastus, & the Asians in this point; in so much that all, which since that tyme haue persisted in the con∣trary custome, haue bene accounted Heretikes, and vnder the name of Quartadecimani registred for such, by the Fa∣thers, that haue made catalogues of heretikes. That the Nicen Councell had iust cause to condemne this Quartadeciman error, you dare not deny; but you deny the same of Pope Victor, & yeld a disparity in these words:Pag. 132. Be it knowne vnto you, that the decree of the Nicen Councell, which ordayned that Easter should be kept vpon the Lords day, ma∣keth nothing for the Act of Victor his excommunicating the Asian Bishops: because as that Councell was celebrated 200. yeares after, so had it far more iust and necessary cause, to make such a decree by reason of the heresy of Blastus, who at that tyme defended an indis∣pensable necessity of obseruing the Iewish ceremonial law. The cause then, for which you approue the decree of the Nicen Coū∣cell, and condemne that of Victor in the same cause, is, by reason of the heresy of Blastus, who (say you) at that tyme (of the Nicen Councell) defended an indispensable necessity of obseruing the Iewish ceremoniall law: which wordes present vnto vs an excellent testimony of your ignorance in eccle∣siasticall history: for Blastus liued not at the tyme of the Nicen Councell (as you affirme) but 130. yeares before,
in the very tyme of Victor Pope, and of S. Irenaeus, who writ against him, as S. Hierome testifiethL. de Scriptor.. And so li∣kewise did Tertullian at the same tyme, sayingDe praes∣crip. c. 53.: Blastus seeketh couertly to bring in Iudaisine; for he teacheth, that Easter is not to be kept otherwise, then according to the law of Moyses. And with them agreeth Eusebius reportingL. 5. bist. c. 14., that Blastus be∣gun to preach and diuulge his heresy in the tyme of Victor Pope. Wherfore you saying, that Blastus liued not in the time of Victor, but of the Nicen Councell, which was more then 100. yeares after, present vs ignorantly with falshood, insteed of truth; & in lieu of impugning the fact of Victor, against your will confirme the same. And by the way I will not omit to aduertise the rea∣der of three things. The first is, that wheras you sayPag. 132.. The Nicen Councell was 200. yeares after Pope Victor excommuni∣cated the Asians, you cannot be excused from another igno∣rant mistake: for it was not much aboue 120. yeares after that tyme; the sentence of Victor being in the yeare 198. and the Councell of Nice, the yeare 325. The second is, that the sentence of Victor being ratified, and confirmed, and contrarily the Iewish custome of the Asians anathematized by the three first generall Councels of Nice, ConstantinopleCa. 7., and EphesusP. . act. 6, as also by the second of AntiochCa. 1., the first of ArlesCa. 1., and that Laodi∣ceaCa. 7., and they that obeyed not the sentence of Victor, registred for heretikes by PhilastriusIn catal. Haer.. S. EpiphaniusHaer. 50., S. AugustineL. de Hae∣res. haer. 29.. TheodoretHaeret. fab. l. 3. cap. 5., S. DamascenHaeres. 50., and NicephorusL. 4. c. 36.37.38., you neuerthelesse blush not, to approue that hereticall custome, and to sayPag. 157. that, the Britans and Scots, in obseruing it, some hundreds of yeares after it was thus condemned, did much more orthodoxally then the Roman Church: which sheweth, that any custome, so it be contrary to the practise of the Roman Church, is to you Orthodoxall, though in it selfe it be damnable, and anathematized as he∣reticall, by neuer so many Councells and Fathers, as this A∣sian custome obserued by the Brittans, and Scots was. 3. And from the same spirit proceedeth your sayingPag. 131. that, Pope Victor was the Schismatke, that troubled the peace of
the Church, and not the Asian Bishops; since they for their obsti∣nacy in defending the Iewish custome, haue bene by all orthodox Fathers and Councels condemned, as heretikes: and contrarily Pope Victor (euen as M. Whit gift your brother acknowledgethIn his Defence pag. 50. was a godly Bishop and Martyr, and the Church at that tyme, in great purity, as not being long after the A∣postles. And wheras, youPag. 131. appeale to our consciences, and bid vs in all our reading shew vnto you, if we can, that Polycrates, and other Asian Bishops, so excommunicated by Pope Victor, were held by any other Catholike Bishops of those tymes, to be therby, without the state of saluation; we contrarily appeale to the conscience of any christian man, whether it be not damnable doctrine, to mantaine (as you do) that these Qartadeciman heretikes, after they knew themselues to be excommunicated by the Pope, and anathematized by so many Councels, if they re∣pented not, but persisted obstinatly in the defence of their heresy, cold be in state of saluation. And lastly wheras you addPag. 131. that, wee full well know, that S. Hierome in his Catalogue of Ecclesiasticall writers numbred Poly∣crates among those who did aduance the Catholike fayth, we know that you speake ignorantly and vntruly: for S. Hierome in that his Catalogue doth not only number Catholikes, but also diuers heretikes that writ of Ecclesiasticall affaires; as Eusebius Caesariensis, whome the same S. HieromeApol. ad∣uers. Ruffin. l. 1. cals, The ring-leader of the Arians. And so likewise, he num∣breth Nouatianus, Donatus, and Photinus, whom in that very Catalogue, he acknowledgeth not only to be heretikes, but authors and propagators of seuerall heresies. And in no o∣ther condition doth he number Polycrates, whom he com∣mendeth not for aduancing the Catholike fayth (as you af∣firme) but hauing set downe a piece of his epistle written to Pope Victor, in defence of his error, sayth, He reports it to shew the wit, and authority of the man: where, by authority, he vnderstands not authority of right, but of fact, that is, the credit which Polycrates had among the Quartadecimans.
CHAP. XXIV. Doctor Morton, in opposition to the Ro∣man Church, defendeth the Hereticall Doctrine of Rebaptization. FIRMILIANVS B. of Caesarea in Cap∣padocia, with other Asian Bishops, out of their great hatred to heresy, decreed in their Councells of Iconium, & Synna∣da, that Baptisme giuen by Heretikes was inualid, and therfore that Heretikes returning to the Catholike Church, were to be baptized a new. This Do∣ctrine from Asia, crept into Africa: and Agrippinus B. of Carthage, hauing layd the first grounds therof, Cyprian with other African Bishops afterwards imbraced the same, so far, that for the authorizing therof, they assembled a Councell of 80. Bishops at Carthage. All which notwith∣standing, that doctrine, as being contrary to the tradition, and practise of the Catholike Church, was forbidden by Stephen then Pope of Rome, in these words: Nihil innoue∣tur, sed seruetur quod traditum est: Let no innouation be made, but that obserued which hath come by tradition. Firmilianus with o∣ther Bishops of Asia, notwithstanding this prohibition, persisted still in their error, and were for that cause excom∣municated by Stephen. Wherat Firmilianus storming, in his fury spued out reprochfull and contumelious words a∣gainst him. But Cyprian, although he defended the same error, yet not as a doctrine of fayth, nor condemning the contrary, nor censuring the Pope, or the rest that defended
it, as any way guilty of Heresy: for as S. Augustine writing against the Donatists, and excusing CyprianL. 2. de Bapt. t. 18. & l. 2. c. 4. sayth: If he held that opinion, it was before it was condemned by a a generall Councell; to which he would most easily haue submitted his iudg∣ment, if any such had bene held in his tyme. And moreouer, if he held it, it was with so great temper, that (as both he him∣selfeEp. ad Iu∣ba. & in Conc. Car∣thag., and S. AugustineL. 1. de Bapt. c. 18. & 19. & l. 2. c. 1.5.6.7.9. & alibisaepe. for him, testifieth) for the de∣fence therof, he neuer forsooke the communion of the Ro∣man Church: but as S. Peter dissented from S. Paul, con∣cerning the circumcision of Gentils newly conuerted, and yet both of them still remayned in Catholike vnity, and peace: so likewise though Cyprian touching rebaptization differed in opinion from Stephen, yet he still remayned in communion with him. And therfore when the Donatists defended their heresy, by the authority of Cyprian, and his Councell, S. Augustine answearedCont. Crescon. l. 1. c. 32. & l. 2. c. 31. & alibi saepe., that Cyprians pa∣tronage could not auaile them, because they were out of the communion of the Roman Church, in which Cyprian li∣ued and dyed. This is the controuersy, as it passed betweene Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, and Stephen Pope, briefly related. And you in obiecting it against the Popes authority, shew impiety, folly, and falshood. Impiety, 1. In taking part with Firmilianus & Cyprian, in their opposition to Pope Stephen, and approuing their doctrine, which you know to be erroneous, & that soone after being condemned by a generall Councell, it hath euer since bene held for an ab∣solute heresy, not only by Catholikes, but also by Prote∣stants. And doth not S. Augustine sayL. 2. de Bapt. c. 2., that, albeit Cy∣prian Bishop & Martyr were a man of great fame and merit, yet not of greater then Peter the Apostle, and Martyr, in whom the principa∣lity of the See Apostolike was so eminent: which sheweth that Cyprian ought to haue borne respect to Stephen Pope, sit∣ting in the See, & inuested in the authority of Peter Prince of the Apostles? And doth he not shewL. 2. Cont. Crescon. c. 32., that Cyprian erred herein, and that the Epistles which he writ of this subiect are of no force, because the contrary was decreed by the au∣thority of the whole Church, which is to be preferred be∣fore
the authority of Cyprian, or of any one man whatsoe∣uer? And doth he notL. 5. de Bapt. c. 23. & seqq. learnedly confute the Epistle which Cyprian writ to Pompeius, in defence of his error? And wheras you to iustify Cyprian, obiectPag. 134., that, he ga∣thered a Councell of 87. Bishops, which concluded contrary to the Pope and his Councell celebrated in Italy, you know that S. Au∣gustine doubtedL. 1. cont. Crescon. cap. 32., whether any such Councell were euer held: and if it were, whether the greater part of the Votes were not against Cyprian, because the Donatists could reckon but 50. Asian, and 70. African Bishops, that adhered to Firmilianus, and CyprianS. Aug. cont. Crescon. l. 3. c. 3. wheras many thousands held with Stephen Pope, against them. And the same S. AugustineL. 6. de Bapt. per tot. answeareth, and confuteth seuerally, euery one of the verdictes of the Bishops, which were said to be giuen in that Councell assembled by Cyprian. 2. You cannot be excused from impiety, in obiectingPag. 137. against the Popes authority, the words which Firmilia∣nus and Cyprian in their passion let slip from their mou∣thes against Stephen: for S. AugustineL. 5. de Bapt. c. 25. held them vn∣worthy to be mentioned, and couered them with this ex∣cuse: The things which Cyprian in his anger spread against Stephen, I will not suffer to passe vnder my pen. But as ChamGen. 9.22. deligh∣ted to lay open the shamefull parts of his Father, so you glory in publishing the faultes of the Saintes, when you can espy any error or frailty in them, though afterwards they repented themselues as Cyprian did: for S. Augustine reporteth as most credibleL. 2. de Bapt. c. 4. & ep. 48. ad Vincent. that he changed his opinion before his death; and as absolutely certaine, that by his glo∣rious Martyrdome, he washed out with his bloud, the ble∣mish which he had contracted by defending that error. 3. In making this Argument you shew great folly, it being so far from disprouing the Popes authority, that it is an vnanswerable proofe therof, as that ancient and lear∣ned Father Vincentius Lyrinensis in his golden Treatise against the prophane nouelties of heresies, conuinceth in these wordsCap. 9.10.11.: In tymes past Agrippinus of venerable memory Bishop of Carthage, the first of all mortall men maintained this as∣sertion against the diuine Scripture, against the rule of the vniuersall
Church, against the minde of all the Priests of his tyme, against the custome and tradition of his fore Fathers, that Rebaptization was to be admitted, and put in practise. Which presumption of his procured so great domage to the Church, that not only it gaue a paterne of sacriledge to all beretikes, but also ministred occa∣sion of error to some Catholikes. When therfore all men euery where exclaimed against the Nouelty of that doctrine, and all Priests in all places, each one according to his zeale did repugne; then Pope Stephen of blessed memory, Bishop of the Apostolike See resisted indeed with the rest of his fellow Bishops, but yet more then the rest, thinking it, as I suppose, reason so much to excell all others in deuotion towards the fayth, as he was superior to them in authority of place. To conclude, in his Epistle, which then was sent to Africa, he decreed the same in these words: Let nothing be innouated, but that obserued which came by tradition &c. What then was the end of this whole businesse? what els, but common, and vsuall? Antiquity was re∣tained, nouelty abandoned. But perhaps that new inuention wanted patrons; and defenders? To which I say on the contrary, that it had such pregnant wits, such eloquent tongues, such number of defen∣dants, such shew of truth, such testimonies of Scripture, but glosed af∣ter a new, and naughty fashion, that all that conspiracy & schisme should haue seemed to me inuincible, had not the very profession of nouelty it selfe, so taken in hand, vnder that name defended, & with that title recommended, ouerthrowne the very ground of so great a schisme. To conclude, what force had the Councell or decree of Afri∣ca? By Gods prouidence, none; but all things there agreed vpon, were abolished, annulled, abrogated, as dreames, as fables, as superfluous. And, O strange mutation of things! the authors of that opinion are iud∣ged to be Catholikes, and the followers accounted heretikes: the mai∣sters discharged, and the schollers condemned: the writers of those bookes shall be children of the kingdome of heauen, and the maintai∣ners of them shall burne in bell. All this is of Vincentius Lyrinensis, who tels you that albeit Cyprian, and other his Colleagues, authors of that doctrine, be Saintes in heauen, yet they that maintaine it now, after it hath bene condemned by the vniuersall Church (as you do, iustifying Cyprian in his defence ther∣of against Stephen Pope) shall burne for euer in hell;
which I wish you to looke to in tyme, & to obserue how properly you are discribed by Vincentius a litle after, com∣paring such as you are, to Cham, and expressing liuely your imposterous dealing in theirs. 4. As in this obiection you shew folly, arguing against your selfe, so you cannot be excused from fraud: for wheras we answeare, that Firmilianus and Cyprian, with the o∣ther Bishops, that assented to them, when they saw their doctrine reproued, and condemned by the Church, ack∣nowledged their error, & retracted the same by a new de∣cree, contrary to that which before they had made in their Councell of Carthage, you shift it of, sayingPag. 138.. I passe it ouer as a vaine presumption; and so it is proued to be. By whom? for∣sooth by your Reuitius, a man of as much credit as your selfe. His answere set downe by you in Latin in your margent, as also what he bringeth out of Dionysius Ale∣xandrinus, and S. Basil, you may see confuted by Baro∣niusApud Bisciol. anno 258. pag. 148., S. Hierome, and other ancient Fathers. The blessed Cyprian (sayth S. HieromeAduers. Lucifer. stroue to auoid the miry lakes, & not to drinke of strange waters; and vpon this subiect addressed the Synod of Carthage to Stephen B. of Rome, who was the twenty sixth after S. Peter: but his strife was in vaine. And in the end they which had decreed that such as were baptized by heretikes, must be rebap∣tized, returning to the ancient custome, set forth a new decree, say∣ing: What do we? So it hath bene deliuered to them, by their ance∣stors, and ours. And Venerable BedeL. quaest. q. 5.: Cyprian with his Bi∣shops in Africa, made a decree contrary to the custome of the Church, that heretikes should be rebaptized: but because in his sense (which he conceaued to be right) he endeauored to enrich himselfe with good workes, he deserued to be soone reformed, and by the instruction of spirituall men, to be reduced to the vniuersall custome of holy Church. And S. Augustine testifiethL. 3. cont. Crescon. c. 3. that, The orientall Bishops, which had met at Icomium, and Synnada, reuoked their decree, and corrected their iudgment. And finally Dionysius Alexandrinus certified Pope StephenEp. ad Stephan. apud Euseb. l. 7. hist. c. 4. & Nice∣phor. l. 6. c. 7. that the same was done not only by the Orientall, but also by other forraine Churches euery where. Wherfore your obiecting of Firmilianus and Cyprian,
as opposing the Pope in this conuouersy, and inferring that you may likewise oppose him in your Protestant Te∣nents, is, as if you should proue out of S. Peters deniall of Christ, that it is lawfull for you to deny him: for as S. Peter repented his fall, so did those Bishops retract their error. And hereby also appeares the fraud of your Reuitius, seeking to limit this retraction of Firmilianus and other Bishops, to those of the East only: for you haue heard S. Hie∣rome, Bede, S. Augustine, Eusebius and Nicephorus testify, that S. Cyprian with his African Bishops, and all others, vbique locorum, in all place, were reconcileds and this not only among themselues, as Reuitius ridiculously glosseth (for they dissented not among themselues) but also with Ste∣phe Pope, returning to the ancient custome & practise of the Church, as he had commanded. Wherevpon Dionysius Patriarke of Alexandria writ to him a congratulatory let∣terExtat apud Au∣thor. cit. that he with them all might reioyce in the peace restored to the Church by his meanes. And in another to Xistus his suc∣cessorApud Euseb. l. 5. hist. c. 4., he declareth the Popes authority ouer all those Bishops, beseeching him to pardon their offence, & restore them to his communion: I writ to Stephen (sayth he) an Epi∣stle for all those Bishops. To conclude, you adde another falshood, sayingPag. 135., that we grant Stephen Pope, to haue excommunicated not only Fir∣milianus, with other Eastern Bishops, but also S. Cyprian: and you proue it by the testimony of Cassander, and hereticall and prohibited Author, whome you contrary to your owne knowledge cite as a Catholike writer, that so you may haue some colour to call his lies, our Confessions, as here you doe. And indeed what man of common sense, can persuade himselfe, that the Roman Church would honor S. Cy∣prian as a glorious Saint, and Martyr, (as she doth) if he had died out of her communion, and especially if he had contemned her excommunication? Lastly I must aduertise you of another absurdity, whiles you tell vsPag. 138. that, we should aduise in this case rather with Fir∣milianus, a Bishop liuing in the dayes of S. Cyprian, then with S. Augustine, who came 150. yeares after: for this is to tell vs,
that we must rather belieue Firmilianus, a party, and for a tyme, guilty both of the heresy of the Quarta decimans, & of Rebaptization, then S. Augustine, an Orthodox Doctor, and an impartiall witnesse. But yet, if we aduise with Firmilianus, he will condemne you. 1. Because he retracted his errors before his death, returning to the communion of the Roman Church, and (witnesse S. BasilDe Spir. S. ad Amphil. c. 29. was ad∣mitted among the Catholike Bishops in the Councell of Antioch, held against Paulus Samosatenus. And 2. because in his Epistle to Cyprian, he acknowledgeth Stephen to be successor of S. Peter, on whom the foundations of the Church were layd. And the reason which he yeldeth for his not obeying Stephen, is, that he must rather obey God, then man:Extat apud Pamel. pag. 198.: which is a reason, not to be giuen, but by one, that knowes himselfe bound to obey him that commands, if his command be not contrary to the commandment of God, as he thought Stephens to be, though erroneously, as you haue heard. CHAP. XXV. Other Arguments of Doctor Morton our of S. Cyprian, answeared. FRom this your mayne Argument of the opposition of Firmilianus and S. Cyprian, you passe to other obie∣ctions, shewing (as you say)Pag. 134. in tit. sect. 4. the full opposition of S. Cyprian and other Bi∣shops, against Stephen B. of Rome. But see∣ing you acknowledgePag. 291. & alibi. the Roman Church to haue bene pure and free from error for the space of 600. yeares, and the Popes that liued in S. Cyprians time, to be glorious Saints and Martyrs of ChristPag 172.178.181.287., with what conscience do you make S. Cyprian fully opposite to
them, and to differ in masters of fayth from them? for what els is that, but to make S. Cyprian an heretike, that so he may seeme to be like to your selfe? Now to your obiections of the full opposition of S. Cyprian to Pope Stephen. The first isPag. 134., that S. Cyprian impugned the Popes pretended power of appeales to Rome: in proofe wherof you produce ignorantly the examples of Fortunatus and Felicissimus: for they appealed not to Pope Stephen, but to Cornelius, betwene whom and Stephen sate Lucius an∣other Pope. Againe, the obiection is impertinent: for the definitions of Councells confirmed by the Popes, and the decrees of the Popes themselues, ordeyne, that maior causes, that is to say, of fayth, and of Bishops, be referred to the See Apostolike; but that minor causes, that is, of the liues & man∣ners of Priests, and inferior clerkes, be finally sentenced; & ended in their owne prouinces, by their Bishops, and Me∣tropolitans, or by the Councells of their Prouince. This is declared by S. Augustine, who speaking of Cecilianus B. of Carthage, that had bene condemned in Africa, by a Coun∣cell of 70. Bishops, saythEp. 162:: There was no question then of Priests, or Deacons, or other Clerkes of the inferior order, but of the Colleagues, that is so say, of Bishops, who might reserue their causes intire to the iudgment of the other Colleagues, and principally of the Churches Apostolike: and therfore that Cecilian might haue contem∣ned the multitude of his enemies conspiring against him, for as much as he saw himselfe vnited by communicatory letters, with the Roman Church, in which the soueraignty of the See Apostolike had alwayes florished. This sheweth the futility of your obiection. For Fortu∣natus and Felicissimus were not Bishops, but simple Priests, who hauing bene iudged by their owne Bishops, ought not to haue appealed to Rome: and therfore Corne∣lius reiected their appeale, and excommunicated them (as S. Cyprian declares in that very Epistle, which you obiect) and returned Felicissimus back into Africa, with other his associates sent by Fortunatus: for Fortunatus himselfe went not in person to Rome (as you mistake) but sent Fe∣licissimus with other Schismatikes like himselfe. And that
S. Cyprian by complaining to Pope Cornelius, of these rebellious sugitis, did not deny his power of appeales, not the subiection of the African Churches to the See of Rome, his words in that very EpistleEp. 55. three lines before (to goe no further) plainly declare; when speaking of these Schismatikes he sayth: They presume to saile to the Chaire of Pe∣ter, and the principall Church, from whence sacerdotall Vnity is deri∣ued, and to carry betters from schismaticall and prophane persons, not hauing in mind, that the Romans are they, whose fayth was praised by the mouth of the Apostle, and to whome vnfaithfulnes can haue no accesse. Your second obiection isPag. 134. that, the Councell of Carthage did deny to any whomsoeuer, the title of Bishop of Bishops. This is an vntruth: for the words are not of the Councell, but of S. Cyprian, who speaketh only of his fellow Bishops of A∣frica, assembled with him in that Councell: and to them only he directs his speach, wishing them to deliuer their opinion freely, without regard to the authority which he as their Primate had ouer them. But in what sense soeuer you take the words, they are of no force, as being vttered in an erroneous Councell, which the Church hath condem∣ned, which S. AugustineL. 6. de Baptism. per tot. hath confuted, & from which S. Cyprian himselfe afterwards disclaymed, retracting his error. Your third isPag. 134. that, S. Cyprian would not acknowledge the name of Pope per antonomasiam, to be proper to the B. of Rome, as we teach: because at the tyme of his Martyrdome, being demanded of the Proconsull: Art thou he, whom the Christians call their Pope? He ans∣weared him: I am. And I answere you, that this is a friuolous obiection: for as Onuphrius hath notedTract. voc. obscur. Eccles. the name of Pope anciently, vntill after the tyme of S. Gregory, was common to all Bishops of great Cities, as of Rome, Car∣thage, Alexandria, Antioch, Hierusalem, and the like: and you afterwards shewing the futility of your obiection, proue the samePag. 241.. Wherfore S. Cyprian acknowledging that the Christians of Africa (of whome only both he and the Proconsull spake) did call him Their Pope, and that he was so, did not acknowledge himselfe to be Pope, per anto∣nomasiam
(for in that sense the name of Pope was not then vsed) but to be B. of Carthage, that is to say, the chiefe Fa∣ther, and Primate of all the Christians of Africa. How then proueth this, that the name of Pope, being from the tyme of S. Gregory appropriated to the B. of Rome, to signify his supreme authority, doth not since that appropriation, de∣clare him to be Pope per antonomasiam? For words signify ad placitum, that which according to the common vse and ac∣ception of men they import. And finally, that the name of Pope when it is applied to the B. of Rome, importeth a singular dignity, proper to him alone, is conuinced by the Epithets which ancient Fa∣thers speaking to him, adde to that name, as when they call him Vniuersall Pope: for so he is styled by the Councell of CyprusEp. Synod. ad Theodor. Pap., by S. Athanasius, and all the Bishops of AegyptEp. ad Marc. Pap.. CHAP. XXVI. The Councells of Carthage and Mileuis acknowledged the supreme Authority of the B. of Rome. AGAINST the prerogatiue of appeales to Rome you obiectPag. 141. the Councell of Mileuis, held Anno 402. And yet after∣wards you say, that the same Coun∣cell was held in the yeare 416. and cite Binius as your Author for both. Binius speaketh of two different Councells, held at Mileuis in those seuerall yeares, and vnder different Consuls; and you confound them, taking them both for one, and father your ignorance on Binius. And with like ignorance you affirmeIbid. the decree touching appeales to haue bene made by the Councell of Mileuis Anno 402. for
the Councell held that yeare, was the first of Mileuis, in which the decree concerning appeales was not made, but in the second Anno 416. 2. You must remember, that when Bellarmine in proofe of the Popes vniuersall authority, among other arguments, produceth examples of African Bishops instituted, or de∣posed by him, as also the ancient custome of appealing to him out of Africa; you answearePag. 289. & 304., that the Africans are within the Popes Patriarkeship (which you call his Dio∣ces) and therfore rather subiect to him, then to others. If then the Africans were within the Popes Dioces, they were subiect to him as to their lawfull Iudge, and had right to appeale to him, and he to admit their appeales, and iudge their causes. Wherfore if in the Mileuitan, or any other Councell, or occasion whatsoeuer, the Africans inhibited appeales out of Africa to the Pope, their inhibition was an act of disobedience, and rebellion against their lawfull Su∣perior; and no lesse a crime, then if the subiects of a tem∣porall Monarke, should forbid appeales to their Soue∣raigne. With what face then can you iustify them therin? But the truth is, that you slaunder them iniustly: for as there is nothing more euident, then that the Councell of Carthage and this of Mileuis held in the cause of Pelagius and Celestius, did fully acknowledge the supreme authori∣ty of the Pope, and professed their obedience to him, both in words and deeds; so there is nothing more certaine, then that they denied not his prerogatiue of Appeales, without which his authority cannot consist. If the African Bishops did not belieue the soueraigne power of the See Apostolike, why did S. Cyprian addresse his Councell held in fauor of Rebaptization to Stephen PopeS Hierom. aduers. Luci∣fer.? And why did the Councell of Carthage, held against Pelagius and Celestius, send their decrees to Inno∣centius Pope, to be confirmed by his authority, sayingAug. ep. 92.: This our proceeding (holy Lord and Brother) we conceaued we ought to represent to your Charity, that to the statutes of our mediocrity, might be added the authority of the See Apostolike for the defence of many mens saluation, & also for the correction of some mens froward∣nesse?
Nor do they require this of Innocentius by way of charity only, but require him, as their Pastor, to take compas∣sion on them, Pastoralibus visceribus, with the bowels of mercy, which he as their Pastor oweth to them as to his sheep. And hauing rehearsed the opinions of Pelagius and Celestius, they con∣clude: What other things soeuer are obiected by them, we doubt not but that your Reuerence, when you haue examined the decrees of the Bishops, which are said to be made vpon this occasion in the East, will frame such a iudgment, wherat we all may reioyce in the mercy of God. Innocentius hauing receaued this Epistle, praised the Fathers of the CouncellAug. ep. 91., that, Antiquae traditionis exempla sequentes following the examples of ancient tradition, and knowing: what is due to the See Apostolike, they had sent their decrees to be ap∣proued by his iudgment; for as much (sayth he) as we all that sit in this place, desire to follow the Apostle himselfe, from whom the Epis∣copall office, and the authority of this name hath proceeded: the which Apostle we following, do now as well know, how to condemne euil things, as to approue those which are worthy of prayse. And then de∣claring what that is, which the ancient tradition hath deli∣uered, he addethIbid.: The Fathers haue ordeyned, not by humane, but by diuine sentence, that they should not account any thing that is treated in prouinces distant, and far of, to be ended, vntill first it were come to the knowledge of the See Apostolike, to the end that the sen∣tence, which should be found iust, might be confirmed by the authority of the same See; and that from thence all other Churches▪ as streames flowing from their Mother source, and running with the purity of their originall, through the diuers regions of the whole world, might take what they ought to ordeyne, and what to auoide. In like manner the Councell of Mileuis writ to the same Pope, as to their PastorAug. ep. 92.: Because our Lord by the guift of his speciall grace, hath placed you in the Apostolike See, vouchsafe, we beseech you, to apply your pastorall diligence, to the great dangers of the weake members of Christ. And S. Augustine, who was present at this Councell, and Secretary therof, writ to Hi∣lary of the same subiectEp. 94.: When I did write these things, we knew, that a decree had bene made against them (Pelagius and Celestius) in the Church of Carthage, to be directed to the holy and
Venerable Pope Innocentius. And we likewise had written from the Councell of (Mileuis in) Numidia, to the same Apostolike See. And what did they write? We hope (sayth the CouncellAug. ep. 92. these men which hold so peruerse & pernicious opinions, will sooner yeld to the authority of your Holinesse, drawne from the authority of the holy Scriptures, by help of the mercy of our Lord Iesus-Christ, who vouchsafeth to gouerne you consulting with him, and to heare you praying vnto him. To this Epistle of the Councell Innocentius answearedAug. ep. 93.: You prouide diligently, and worthily for the Apostolike honor &c. following, in the consultation of difficult things, the forme of the ancient rule, which you know, as well as I, to haue bene alwayes ob∣serued by the whole world. But I omit this, for I thinke it is not vn∣knowne to your wisdome: for why els did you confirme this by your deeds? but because you know, that answeres do alwayes flow from the Apostolicall fountaine throughout all Countries, to those, that aske them: And especially as often, as matter of fayth is in question, I con∣ceiue that all our brethren and fellow-Bishops ought not to referre what may be profitable in common to all Churches, to any but to Pe∣ter, that is, to the author of their name, and dignity, as your Dilection hath done. If you answeare, that Innocentius writ this, but spake vntruly in his owne cause, S. Augustine will satisfy you, who highly prayseth both these answeares of his. Vpon this affaire (sayth S. AugustineEp. 106. relations were sent from the two Councells of Carthage, and Mileuis, to the Apostolicall See &c. And besides the relations of the Councells, we writ also priuate letters to Pope Innocentius of blessed memory▪ in which we discoursed more largely of the same subiect. And he answeared vs to euery point, as it was conuenient, and fitting the Prelate of the Apostolike See should answeare. And againeEp. 157.: Pelagius and Celestius hauing bene the authors, or most violent promotors of this new Heresy, they also by meanes of the vigilancy of two Episcopall Councells (with the help of God, who vndertakes the protection of his Church) haue bene con∣demned in the extent of the whole world, by two reuerend Prelates of the Apostolike See, Pope Innocentius, and Pope Zozimus, vnlesse they reforme themselues, and do pennance. Out of this it is euident. 1. That it was the ancient tra∣dition
and custome, that Councels should send their de∣crees to the Pope to be confirmed by his authority. 2. And that it is so ordeyned, not by humane, but by diuine sen∣tence. 3. That all other Churches of the world compared to the Roman, are as streames, that flow from their mo∣ther source, and are to imbrace as pure, whatsoeuer do∣ctrine she deliuereth, and reiect whatsoeuer she condem∣neth. 4. That the Fathers of both these Councels did ack∣nowledg the Pope to be their Pastor. 5. And that they did belieue his authority, to be takē out of the holy Scriptures. 6. That Christ guideth him in his consultations and de∣crees of fayth. 7. That the custome & ancient rule beareth, that in doubts especially of fayth, the See Apostolike is to be consulted, and nothing determined, vntill answeare had from thence. Now to your obiectionPag. 141. & seqq., that, the Councell of Mileuis denied any right of Appeales from Africa to the Church of Rome, which in your eyes is so forcible, that you repeat it after∣wards againePag. 321.322. & seqq., and descant on it at large against Bel∣larmine, who shewethL. 2. de Pont. c. 24. it to be wholly impertinent, and from the matter: for the question of appeales to the B. of Rome, is not of Priests, and inferior Clerkes (of whom only the Councell of Mileuis speaketh) but of Bishops: for the Councell of Sardica, which hath declaredCan. 4. & 7., that Bishops may appeale to the Pope, hath withall decreedCan. 27. that Priests and inferior Clerkes are to be iudged by their owne Bishops: & that if they conceiue themselues to be wronged by them, they appeale to other Bishops of the same prouince. And the same had bene ordeyned not long before by the Councell of NiceIulius ep. 1.2.3. apud Bin. to. 1. pag. 399. & seqq.: and afterwards by S. LeoEp. 84. ad Anastas. Thessal., & S. GregoryL. 2. in∣dict. 11. ep. 6., ordeyning that maior causes be iudged in the first instance by a Councell of Bishops of the same prouince; & by way of appeale by the See Apostolike. And to goe no further the same was answeared by the holy Pope Innocentius, to whom the Councell of Mileuis sent their decrees to be confirmed.Aug. ep. 92. For when Victricius B. of Rhoan desiring to order the gouerment of his Church according to the Roman discipline, required instructions
from him, heEp. 2. addressed vnto him diuers rules to be ob∣serued: of which the third is, that, If dissentions arise betweene Priests, or other Clerkes of the inferior order, they are to be iudged & ended by the Bishops of the same Prouince, as the Councell of Nice hath determined. And for the causes of Bishops, he addethIbid.: If they be maior causes that are in question, let them after the Epis∣copall iudgment, be referred to the See Apostolike, as the Synod of Nice, and the ancient customes ordeyne. This Epistle of Innocentius was cited by the Bishops of France, in the second Councell of Tours 700. yeares since. And his very words concerning the appeales of Bishops to the See Apostolike are inserted in forme of a Law into the Capitulary of Charlemaine. And Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes in his epistle to Nicolas PopeErodoard. histor. Eccles. Rhem. lib. 3., repeating the same decree of Innocentius, sayth: We Metropolitans trauil∣ling in our prouinciall Councels, haue care after iudgment to referre the maior causes (that is of fayth) and of maior persons (that is of Bishops) to the determination of the soueraigne See. And spea∣king of Priests and inferior Clerkes: Let it not please God, that we thould depise the priuiledge of the first and supreme See of the holy Roman Church, as to weary your soueraigne Authority, with all the controuersies, and quarrels of the Clergy, as well of the superior, as of the inferior order, which the canons of the Nicen Councell and the de∣crees of Innocentius, and other Popes of the holy See of Rome com∣mand to be determined in their owne Prouinces. From hence it followeth, that the Canon of the Coun∣cell of Mileuis, which you obiect against appeales to Rome, makes nothing at all for your purpose; your peremptory conclusion isPag. 141., that, the Councell of Mileuis denieth any right of appeales from Africk to the Church of Rome. To make this good you should haue shewed, that the Councell of Mileuis for∣bids the appeales of Bishops from Africa to Rome; for of them only the question is. But insteed of prouing this you produce a Canon, in which (euen as it is reported by your selfe) no mention is made of Bishops, but only a com∣mand giuen, that Priests, Deacons, or other inferior Clerkes appeale not from the Bishops of their owne prouince, ey∣ther to Rome, or to any other transmarine Church: which
no more impeacheth the soueraigne power of the Pope, or disproueth his right of appeales out of Africa, then it would impeach the authority of the King of France, if to preuent the multitude of vnnecessary suites, and keepe his people in awe of their immediate Superiors, his Maiesty, and his Courts of Parliament with his assent, should prouide by a speciall law, that in minor causes, no appeales be made frō them to himselfe. To this I adde, that Innocentius confirmed this Coun∣cell of MileuisAug. ep. 93., which he would not haue done, if it had prohibited the appeales of Bishops to his See, which he himselfe in his epistle to Victricius claymeth, and proueth out of the Councell of Nice to be lawfull. And the same is confirmed out of S. Augustine, who was present at the Councell of Mileuis, and speaking of Cecilian Archbishop of Carthage, that had bene iniustly condemned by the Do∣natists in a Councell of 70. Bishops, faythEp. 162.: Cecilian might haue contemned the multitude of his enemies conspiring against him, for as much as he knew himselfe to be in the Communion of the Roman Church, in which had alwaies florish't the principality of the See A∣postolike; & that he might haue reserued his cause entire, to be iudged a new there, because it was not a cause of Priests, or Deacons, or other Clerkes of the inferior order, but of a Colleague, that is to say, of a Bishop. This discourse of S. Augustine conuinceth that Bishops may appeale to Rome, though Priests, and other inferior Clerkes may not. How comes it then to passe, that you sayPag. 323. Bellarmine when he sayth, that, S. Augustine in the place alleaged doth iustify appeales (of Bishops) beyond the sea to Rome, speakes so still, as though be were scarse able to report a truth? Bel∣larmine may indeed with truth tell you, that when you saydIbid., The case of Cecilian (which S. Augustine speaketh of) was not a case of appeale, but of delegation (by the authority of the Emperor) to the Pope, and to other Bishops, you speake as one, that is scarce able to report any thing out of him without an vntruth: for he speaketh not of what passed de facto, in the case of Ce∣cilian, but of the right that Cecilian had to appeale to the Pope; which right S. Augustine could not haue alleaged,
vnlesse he had belieued, that Bishops in their wrongs might lawfully appeale to him. And that the case of Ceci∣lian was not a case of appeale to the Pope, but a delegation from the Emperor, is an vntruth that shall be confuted he∣reafterChap. 30. sect. . From hence Bellarmine collecteth, that albeit the Councell of Mileuis prohibited the appeales of Priests and inferior Clerkes to Rome, yet they nether did, nor could prohibite the Pope to admit of such appeales, if they were made. Against this you replyPag. 322. that, where there lyeth a prohi∣bition against appealing to a Iudge, that Iudge is not held a superior Iudge. False, if it be taken vniuersally without limitation: for a prohibition may be iniust, as being made without sufficient authority: such is the prohibition of Protestants forbidding all Appeales to Rome. Againe, a prohibition may be made with dependance on the will and confirma∣tion of a Superior; to whom the right of appeales belon∣geth. Such was the prohibition made in the Councell of Mileuis; which therfore without the Popes confirmation was inualid, and is not valid further, then he confirmed it. Wherfore though by confirming it, he did authorize the Africā Bishops to impose on their Priests & other Clerkes, a command of not appealing to Rome, yet by graning them that authority, he cannot be thought to renounce his owne right, so farre, as that, if a Priest appeale vnto him, he may not admit his appeale, when he shall finde it expedient: as it may be, in case the Priest or Clerke can make euidence of his innocency, prouing by sufficient wit∣nesses, that he hath bene iniustly condemned by the Bi∣shops of his owne prouince, out of misinformation, or o∣ther motiues.
CHAP. XXVII. Appeales to Rome, proued out of the African Councell, which was the sixth of Carthage. SECT I. The state of the Question. APIARIVS, an African Priest, of the Citty of Sicca, being of a lewd & scan∣dalous life, was excommunicated by Vrbanus B. of the same City. He tra∣uelled twice to Rome, and making his complaints to Zozimus Pope, appealed to his iudgmēt. Zozimus sent him back into Africa, wishing the African Bishops to examine his cause diligently. And for as much as not only Apiarius, but (as it appeareth out of two Epistle of the African Bishops to Boniface, and Celestine, successors to Zozimus) some Bishops also had appealed vnto him out of Africa, and the African Bishops complained therof, he sent vnto thē three Legates, Faustinus B. of Potentia, Philip, and Asellus Priests; and with them, the Canons made in the Coun∣cell of Nice concerning appeales to Rome. The Africans not finding those Canons in their copies of the Nicen Councell, sent Deputies into the East, to procure authen∣ticall copies from Cyril Patriarke of Alexandria, and Atti∣cus of Constantinople. But when they came, their copies were found to containe no more then 20. which is the nū∣ber
exstant in our Latin editions, and in which there is no mention of appeales to Rome. This obiection hath bene often vrged by Protestants, and as often answeared by vs: and particularly by the most eminent Cardinals BaroniusAnno 419., BellarmineL. 2. de Pontif. c. 25., and Pe∣ronRepliq. l. 1. Chap. 49.. In them you may read the solution: It will be sufficient for me to giue the Reader out of them, and other Authors, a touch of your vnsyncere dealing, wherby he may also come to vnderstand what the issue of this contro∣uersy was. First therfore Bellarmine, PeronLoc. cit., and BrereleyProt. A∣pol. tract. 1. sect. 7. Sub∣diu. 2. n. 3. shew, that the ancient Fathers and Councels, and in par∣ticular the Africans themselues, whom this matter most concerned, highly commend those three Popes, Zozi∣mus, Boniface, and Celestine, with whom this contro∣uersy was, and grace them with titles of great reuerence & honor, calling Zozimus, The most blessed Pope Zozimus; Zo∣zimus of venerable memory: that they call Boniface, The venerable Bishop of the Roman Church; The most blessed Bishop of the City of Rome; The holy and blessed Pope; The Reuerend Pope Boniface; Boniface of holy memory; The most blessed and our honorable brother, Boniface; and that S. Augustine dedicated to him one of his principall workes. And finally that they qualify Celestine with these titles: Our most beloued Lord, and honorable brother, Celestine; Celestine of blessed memory; & that the famous Coun∣cell of Ephesus cals him, New S. Peter. This sheweth the impudency of your Centurists, who (as Peron, and Bellarmine aduertiseLoc. cit., vpon occasion of this African Controuersy, traduce almost all the Popes of those times, inuerting and peruerting their names, by cal∣ling Innocent, Nocent; Boniface, Maleface; Celestine, Infernall; and the most holy and learned Pope S. Leo the great, A roaring Lyon, and a hellish Wolfe. To this impudency of the Centurists you adde your Vote, whiles in your late sermon before his Maiesty at Durham, speaking of Vrbane the se∣cond, you sayPag. 29. Pope Vrbane called by the nick name of Turbane. So indeed he is nicknamed by your selfe: but that he was euer so nicknamed by any one els, I thinke you cannot
shew. And to make your selfe more like to the Centurists, in this your Grand imposture, you brand Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, with the black marke of Falsaries, charg∣ing them with forgery of a false Canon of Nice: which censure you might haue spared, if you had considered, that the African Fathers themselues (with whom this contro∣uersy was) were so farre from laying any such aspersion on them, that contrarily, they honored them with titles of great reuerence, as you haue heard. And how vniustly you charge them with forging a Canon of Nice, may ap∣peare by the testimonies of antiquity, wherby I haue pro∣uedChap. 16. & 26. that the Canons of appeales to Rome, which Zozi∣mus sent to the Africans, were true Canons of the Nicen Councell. But because afterwardsPag. 301. & seqq. you make a digressi∣on, to proue, that the Nicen Canons were no more but 20. you shall heare receaue your answeare before hand. SECT. II. That the Nicen Canons were more then 20. in number: and that the Canons concerning appeales to Rome, were true Canons of the Nicen Councell. YOur words arePag. 302.: Your authors instance in multitudes of particular points, as being handled in the Councell of Nice, which they call Canons of that Councell; but erring, for want of that paire of spectacles (for so we may call a distinction) which their owne Ie∣suit Pisanus reacheth vnto them, who distinguisheth thus. The things (sayth he) handled in the Councell of Nice, were partly Constituti∣ons, or Acts belonging to doctrines, and partly Canons, which con∣cerne Ecclesiasticall Policy. So now all the examples, which your ob∣iectors haue collected out of the testimonies of Fathers and Councels, as though they had bene Canons, are easily answeared by the former distinction, to proue them to haue bene Diatyposes, Constitutions, Acts only, not Canons, as your Iesuit Turrian doth also manifest: which we grant, and oppose against all your instances. So you, not without wilfull imposture: for though Pisanus obserue that in the Councell of Nice, there were not only Canons,
but Diatyposes, or Constitutions, yet he is so farre from saying, that the Nicen Canons were but 20. in number, that be∣sides the 20. vulgarly acknowledged, he setteth downeApud Bin. pa. 348. other 24. taken out of the second Epistle of Iulius to the Arians, in which that holy Pope reprehendeth them seue∣rely for their proceeding against Athanasius and other Ca∣tholike Bishops, whom in their Councell at Antioch they had iniustly condemned, infringing the Canons of the Nicen Councell, which command (sayth he) that no Councells be held, praeter sententiam, without the allowance of the B. of Rome. And this Canon out of the said Epistle of Iulius is in like manner reported by the Sardican Councell, by Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Nicephorus, and other ancient au∣thors, Whose testimonies PisanusL. 3. in Conc. Nicen. apud Bin. to. 1. pag. 349. 350. setteth downe at large. 2. And no lesse effectuall are the words he alleageth ofIbid. pag. 347. Iohn that famous Orator of the Latins in the Councell of Florence: for when Marcus the Greeke disputant impu∣ted to the holy Pope Zozimus the same crime of forging a false Canon of the Nicen Councell, which you now do, & in proofe therof alleaged that the Nicen Canons were but 20. in number, Iohn in his owne name, and in the name of all the Latins answeared, that the most ancient Epistles of Iulius, and Liberius Popes, which Iulian Cardinall of S. Sabina had shewed to the Grecians, in that Councell, did euince, that Athanasius being persecuted and condem∣ned by the Arians, writ to Felix, Marcus, Iulius, and Libe∣rius, all of them successiuely Bishops of Rome, for a true copy of the Actes of Nice, all that were in the East being corrupted by the Arians, and that their answere was, They would not send the originall Actes, which being written in Greeke and Latin, & subscribed by the Nicen Fathers, and sealed with their seales, were kept by the B. of Rome with great Veneration; but that they would send him co∣pied out seuerally those Canons, which were for his pur∣pose. Moreouer he shewed, that when Athanasius appealed from the Councell of Antioch, to the See of Rome, & the Arians reproached it vnto him, as a thing vnlawfull, Libe∣rius
promised to send him copied out the Nicen decree, for the lawfullnesse of appealing to Rome: and that Iulius in his Epistle sharply rebuked the Arians, for presuming to call a Councell, without the authority of the See Aposto∣like, shewing to them out of a decreee of the Councell of Nice, that, no Synod was to be held without the authority of the B. of Rome. 3. And in proofe of the same verity, he alleageth out of Isidore the testimonies of the Councell of Constantino∣ple, of Marcus, Stephanus, and Innocentius Popes, of A∣thanasius, and the Bishops of Aegypt, of Theophilus Pa∣triarke of Alexandria, and other Orientalls, of Marianus Scotus, Iuo Carnotensis, and Gratian; giuing vs therby spe∣ctacles to see your imposterous dealing, who are not asha∣med to produce his authority for your number of the 20. Nicen Canons, where he professedly proueth the contra∣ry. Yea in that very place which you cite, thogh he distin∣guish the decrees of that Councell which you cite, into Ca∣nons, & Constitutions; yet he presently addeth that Onu∣phrius reportes the Nicen Canons to be 84. in number; but that out of Athanasius, we know them, not to be aboue 70. or 80. at the most: and that the number of 84. reckoned by Onuphrius peraduenture belongs to the Constitutions. So Pisanus. Can you then be excused from a wilfull falsifica∣tion in cutting of his words, and alleaging him for your 20. Canons; in that very place, where he addeth immediatly out of S. Athanasius, and proueth afterwards out of so ma∣ny ancient and learned writers, that they were many more? But leauing him, and returning to Iulius, he in his third Epistle which S. Athanasius hath inserted into his second Apology, intimating to the Arians the right of the B. of Rome to haue the hearing and finall dicision of the causes of Bishops, sayth: Are you ignorant that the custome is, that we be first written vnto, that from hence may proceed the iust decision of things? If therfore any suspicion were conceaued against the Bishops there, it ought to haue bene referred hither to our Church. And therupon he denounceth to them, that in condemning A∣thanasius
without expecting his sentence, they had done contra canones, against the Canons, namely of the Nicen Coun∣cell, which he setteth downe in his second Epistle to them: and that aswell Athanasius, as other Catholike Bishops whom they had condemned, in appealing from their Councell to him, as he in repealing their Actes, in resto∣ring the Appellants to their seates, and in summoning their aduersaries to Rome, had done, quod Ecclesiastici Canonis est, according to the Canons of the Church. If therfore the holy Popes Iulius, Felix, Marcus, and Liberius, that liued soone after the Councell of Nice; if S. Athanasius that was personally present; if Iohn the learned Orator of the Latines, speaking in all their names in the councell of Florence; if Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Nicephorus and many other ancient writers deserue to be credited; and if they knew how to call things by their pro∣per names, there were in the Nicen Councell more then 20. Canons properly so called: which is also acknowled∣ged by your Protestant brethrenBrereley Prot. Apol. Tract. 1. sect. 7. subdiu. 2. Oecolampadius (who chargeth the Latin copies of the 20. Canons as defectiue) Caluin, M. Iuell, and M. Bilson, mentioning a Canon of the Nicen Councell concerning the Sacrament; and lastly by Doctor WhitgiftBrereley ibid. prouing out of the second Coun∣cell of Arles, S. Hierome, and other approued authors, di∣uers Canons, which are not to be found in those 20. The testimonies which you obiect for the contrary, vrge not: Not that of Pope Stephen, for though he say that in the Roman Church there are 20. Chapters of the Nicen councell, yet he immediatly addeth, that, it is vncertaine by what negli∣gence the rest are wanting: which words you wittingly leaue out, mangling the sentence, that so he may seeme to fauor your opinion of the 20. Canons. Theodoret and Nicepho∣rus speake only of 20. Canons, or lawes made pro confor∣mandis moribus, for ordering or reforming of manners; wher∣as notwithstanding (as Pisanus out of their owne words hath obserued) els where they acknowledg that the A∣rians in condemning Athanasius had infringed the Nicen Canons; and that Athanasius in appealing to him, had done according to the same Canons.
Wherfore it the two Patriarkes Cyrill, and Atticus knew not of more then 20. Nicen Canons, it was because the A∣rians hauing cast out the Catholike Bishops, and possessed their seates, (as we read in Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, and NicephorusBrereley ibid., had corrupted the Canons of that Councell; and suppressed those which declared their pro∣ceedings to be vnlawfull, & contrary to the Nicen Canons. And howsoeuer those Patriarkes thought, you cannot de∣ny that your 20. Canons were not the only, nor all the true Canons of Nice, vnlesse you will grant the Canons of Ruffinus (which you allow) to be corrupt and false: for (as Osiander confessethEpit. Cent. 4. pag. 122., those 20. of Ruffinus differ ordine & rebus, both in order and matter, from the others, which Cyrill & Atticus sent out of the East. And the same is yet made more euident out of the Councell of Florence, affir∣mingSess. 20., that by the testimonies of many ancient, and ho∣ly Fathers, the African Councell it selfe did know those Canons which they receaued out of the East, to be corrupt, and false. It resteth therfore that neither they, nor the other of Ruffinus comprehend all the true Canons of Nice, but that there were others, declaring the primacy of the Ro∣man Church, her authority to call, & confirme Councells, and in particular her right of appeales, as Pisanus hath proued, whom therfore you abusiuely alleage for the con∣trary. Nor is your dealing better with Turrianus: for albeit he grant that, as in the Councell of Chalcedon, so likewise in that of Nice, beside Canons, there were among the Actes, other Decrees or Constitutions, and that of this number are the seuerall Decrees which you set downe out of him; yet with what conscience do you conceale the rest? for in the words immediatly preceding, he sayth: In illis Actis &c. In those Actes was also contayned that Canon of Appeales, which Zozi∣mus Pope in the sixt Councell of Carthage, witnesseth to be of the Ni∣cen Councell; and which after the Nicen Councell, was renewed in the Councell of Sardica C. 7. And is not this very point here in question? Our dispute is not verball, whether the decree of Appeales to Rome made in the Councell of Nice, were
a Canon properly so called, or, a Constitution. Words of this kind are by the best authors vsed promiscuously. The canons of Councells are somtimes called Canones; somtimes Capitula; somtimes Leges; somtimes Decreta; somtimes Cōstitutiones. The reall difficulty betweene vs is, whether appeales to Rome were decreed in the Councell of Nice by any either Canon properly so called, or by any Law, or, Constitution. That they were decreed, hath bene proued, and that not only ancient writers giue it the name of a Canon, but enen Pisanus, and Turrianus, those very two, whome you produce for the contrary. I conclude therfore, that as this your discourse is a digres∣sion from the truth, so it is from the purpose; and a trifling shift, to put of the reall difficulty, by reducing it to a que∣stion de nomine. And that which most sheweth your folly, is, that by trifling, you wholly ouerthrow your cause: for you grantPag. 302. all the examples, which our Authors collect out of the Fathers and Councells, as though they had bene Canons of the Nicen Councell, to be Constitutions of the same Councell, though not Ca∣nons; which is to grant, that in the Nicen Councell there was a Constitution wherby Appeales to Rome were de∣creed: for this is one of the examples, which our Authors collect out of the Epistles of Iulius, out of Socrates, Sozo∣men, Theodoret, Nicephorus▪ and other ancient writers. And this alone is sufficient to shew, that as you deny the same without ground, so you conclude your digression falsly, sayingPag. 303.: that the decree which the Popes alleaged for ap∣peales, is not to be found at all, either among the Canons, or the Con∣stitutions of the Councell of Nice. SECT. III. Whether if there had bene no Canon for appeales to Rome in the Councell of Nice, it had bene forgery in Pope Zozimus, to alleage a Canon of the Sardican Councell, for a Canon of Nice. SOme Catholike writers coniecture that the Canons of appealing to Rome, which Pope Zozimus directed to
the Africans, were Canons of the Councell of Sardica, but sent by him vnder the title of Nicen Canons. You sayPag. 145.: These Canons of Sardia mun be iudged fictions; and that it is suffi∣ciently proued to be a falhood, that any such Canons were extant in the Councell of Sardica. I cannot but meruaile at so great bold∣nesse: for, that those Canons were extant in the Councell of Sardica, is a truth proued, not only by all editions of the Councells, and all Catholike writers, but auerred by the Magdeburgians, by Osiander, Peter Martyr, and Iohn CaluinBrereley Protest. Apo∣log. tract. 1. sect. 7. subdia. .. It is true, that Caluin accuseth Zozimus of hai∣nous impudency, and fraud, in citing the Councell of Sar∣dica, for that of Nice. But his accusation hath no other ground then his hatred to the See of Rome: for were it true (as it is not) that the Canons which Zozimus sent, were not of the Councell of Nice, but of Sardica, and that he had sent them as Canons of Nice, it had not bene fraud or for∣gery in him; as it was not in S. MathewCap. 27.. to cite Hieremy for Zachary, because it was the same Spirit of God that spake in both those Prophets: And so likewise the Coun∣cell of Sardica was of no lesse authority, then that of Nice. Againe, the Councell of Sardica consisted in great part, of the same Fathers, that the Nicen Councell did, and was an explication and confirmation therof. Wherfore the Sardi∣can Canons might not vnfitly beare the name of Nicen Canons, as the Constantinopolitan Creed, because it is an explication and confirmation of the Nicen, beares the name of the Nicen Creed. Moreouer the ancient Fathers numbring the Councells, after that of Nice, euer reckon immediatly the first of Constantinople, which they do v∣pon no other ground then because they repute the Coun∣cell of Sardica, to be an Appendix of the Councell of Nice, and therfore as all one with it. For these reasons, Zozimus might without any forgery or falshood, haue cited the Canons of the Councell of Sardica, vnder the title of Nicen Canons, as it is the cu∣stome of the Greekes, to cite the Trullan Canons vnder the title of the Canons of the sixth generall Councell, be∣cause they pretend the Trullan Councell to be an Apen∣dix,
and supplement of the sixth Councell generall. And so in like manner S. Gregory of ToursDe gst. Fran. l. 9. c. 33. citing a Canon of the Councall of Grangres, without either fraud or forge∣ry, calls it a Canon of the Nicen Councell, because the Councell of Gangres was a branch, and slip of the Councell of Nice. Finally, and if these Canons were not indeed of the Councell of Nice, but of Sardica, how can Zozimus be thought to haue vsed any fraud or forgery, in alleaging them, as the Councell of Nice, since it had bene more ad∣uantagious for his purpose, against the Africans, to haue al∣leaged them, as Canons of the Councell of Sardica? for as much as the fifth generall Councell beareth witnesseAct. ., that in the Councell of Nice, there was no other B. of Afri∣ca, but only Cecilian Archbishop of Carthage; wheras in the Councell of Sardica, were present and subscribed 30. A∣frican Bishops, who are all named in particular by S. A∣thanasiusApol. 2.; which might haue bene a great motiue to the Africans, to submit to those Canons, as being approued, and signed by so many Bishops of their owne nation. But the truth is, that albeit the Africans had notice of a Councell held at Sardica, yet (as Peron learnedly proueth)Repliq. l. 1. Chap. 49., the Donatists had suppressed in Africa the copies of the true Councell of Sardica; and those which the Africans had in the tyme of S. Augustine, and the sixth Councell of Car∣thage, were copies of the Anti-councell which Sozomen mentionethL. 3. c. 10. held by the Arians at Philippopolis, neere to Sardica, which they (to gaine credit to it, and to their cause) called The Councell of Sardica, and published it in A∣frica vnder that name. And this is the reason, why S. Augu∣stine professethEp▪ 163. & Con. Creson. l. 3. c. 34. that he knew no other Councell of Sar∣dica, but that of the Arians, in which S. Athanasius was condemned; wheras the true Councell of Sardica iustified S. Athanasius, and confirmed the Councell of Nice. This true Councell of Sardica you acknowledge to haue bene a generall Councell of the whole ChurchPag. 144. fin. 14.. This the Cen∣turists haue copied out, and inserted into their fourth Cen∣tury. And this it is, in which as well they, as also Caluin,
Peter Martyr, and Osiander acknowledge the Canons for appealing to Rome, to haue ben made: wherof if the Afri∣can Fathers had notice, they would not haue replied to Pope CelestineEp. ad Ce∣lestin.: We find it not to haue bene determined by the Fathers in any Synod, that Legates should be sent from your Holi∣nesse, to order matters heere: for it is expresly decreed in the Councell of SardicaCan. 7. that, if it shall seeme good to the B. of Rome, he may send Legates to iudge the causes of Appellants in their owne Prouinces. This sheweth, how vntruly you deny, that in the Coun∣cell of Sardica, were extant any Canons for Appeales to Rome. And since your owne brethren acknowledge them, with what conscience do you iustify the Africans in their deniall of them? or blame the Pope for defending his right against them? especially since you confessePag. 289. & 304., that the A∣fricans were subiect to the Pope, as to their Patriarke. SECT. IV. Vntruthes and falsifications of Doctor Morton discoue∣red, and his Obiections answeared. FIrst you obiectPag. 145., that 217. African Bishops (S▪ Augustine being a principall one) shew, that the Popes claime of Appeales, had no patronage from the Councell of Nice, but rather, that there was in that Councell another Canon to controle it, and that maketh much against such appeales, by determining, that Popes being so far remote from Africk, could not be so competent iudges in such causes: Except (say they) some will thinke, that God will inspire one singular man with iustice, and deny that grace to innumerable persons as∣sembled togeather in a Synod. These words, Syr, are not of the Councell of Nice, but of the African Fathers in their Epi∣stle to Celestine Pope. Is it not then a mere delusion to ob∣iect them, as a Canon of the Nicen Councell, to controle appeales to Rome? They speake not of matters of fayth: for the same Fathers a little before had sent to Innocentius Pope, to confirme with his authority, the sentence of Con∣demnation, which they had pronounced against Pelagius
and Celestius, in the Councells of Carthage and Mileuis▪ acknowledgingAug. ep. 2. that. God did guide him in his consultations of fayth, and therfore hoping that those Heretikes would more easily yield to his authority, drawne from the authority of the holy Scriptu∣res, then to the authority of their Councells. Wherfore in the words obiected, they speake only of particular and per∣sonall causes of fact, ciuill and criminall, in which (as those Fathers declare) witnesses were to interuene, that could not without much difficulty passe the seas, for the debility of sexe, or of age, or other impediments: In regard wherof, they requested the Pope, not to be facill in admitting ap∣peales of that nature. 2. You obiectPag. 146.151.: If it were granted, that the Canons for appeales were to be found in the Councell of Sardica, yet the Popes Monarchy would stil stand vpon but humane authority: for the grant of appeales made in that Synod to Iulius Pope, was but vpon fauor, & not vpon duty; not an old custome, but a new constitution: If it please you (say they) so much to honor the memory of Peter, let vs write to Iulius B. of Rome &c. And againe: If you all be pleased &c. From these words you inferre, that the grāt of appeales to Rome is no more but ad placitum; and that, if the Pope for his preten∣sion, could haue drawne a two edged sword, ex iure diuino, he would not haue fought with this wodden dagger of humane Constitution. This wodden Argument you thinke to be of such moment, that for want of better, you repeate it afterwards againePag. 302.303.. Your reasō I know not: for the very words which you ob∣iect, shew, that the Councell of Sardica did not ground ap∣peales to Rome vpon humane Constitution, but vpon di∣uine right: for what is it, to honor in the Pope, the memory of Peter, but to acknowledge him to be S. Peters Successor, and consequently Head of the Church? And therfore what in their Canon they expresse in these words, That we may honor the memory of Peter, let it be written to Iulius B. of Rome &c. they declare in their Epistle to the same Iulius, saying: It is very good, and fit, that from all Prouinces the Bishops haue reference to their head, that is to the See of the Apostle Peter. Wherfore as the dignity of Head of the Church had belonged to the See of S. Peter from all antiquity, by diuine institution (as the A∣frican
Fathers in the Councel of Mileuis haue declaredAug. ep. 92., professing the Popes authority to be taken from the authority of the holy Scriptures) so likewise had the right of Appeales impli∣citly conteined in that dignity. And on this right was grounded the custome of appealing to Rome from all an∣tiquity, as it appeareth out of the Epistle of Iulius PopeApud Athan. A∣polog. 2. written to the Arians before the Councell of Sardica: Are you ignorant (sayth he) that the custome is, that we be first written to, that from hence may proceed the iust decision of things? and ther∣fore if there were any suspicion conceaued against the Bishops there, you should haue written to vs. And by this right it is, that Atha∣nasius, Paul, and other Bishops of the East being driuen from their seates by the Arians, appealed to Iulius Pope be∣fore the Councell of Sardica, and he restored to each of them their Churches, by the prerogatiue of his See, and because the charge of all belonged to himSocra. l. 2. c. 12. Sozom. l. . c. 7.. Wherfore the Councell of Sardica did not then first institute appeales to Rome, as you pre∣tend, but only reduce into a written law, that, which had belonged to the See of Rome by diuine right, and had bene formerly practised by custome only. And this written Law it is, which Osius proposed to be made, saying: If is please your Charity, that we honor the memory of Peter &c. In which sense Nicolas the first truly saidEp. ad Mi∣chael. Imper.: The priuiledges of the Ro∣man See were giuen by Christ our Lord, celebrated and honored by the Councels, but not giuen by them. And before him Gelasius an African, and scholler to S. Augustine, with a Councell of 70. Bishops:In Decret. de Apocryph, Scriptur. The holy Roman Church hath not bene preferred before others, by any constitutions of Synods, but hath obtained the primacy by the voyce of our Lord and Sauiour in the Ghospell, saying; Thou art Peter &c. And the same truth had bene professed long before that tyme, by Iulius Pope in his first Epistle to the Easterne Bishops, in the cause of AthanasiusExtat a∣pud Bin. to. 1. pag. 399.. Nor is it new for a Councell, to make a written decree for the presetuation and obseruance of that, which former∣ly had bene practised in the Church by custome only: why els did the first Councell of Constantinople speaking of the ordination of Bishops by their Metropolitans, sayApud Theodore. l. 5. hist. c. 9.. It is (as you know) a law, both grounded on custome, and on the deci∣sion of the Councell of Nice?
The example of a King wherwith you conclude this point, is against your selfe: for although she dignity of a King include a supreme right of appeales to be made vnto him, yet it is no derogation to his Royall dignity, to haue a written law enacted in Parliament for the preseruation of that right, against all such, as shall either iniustly deny the same, or at least, shall thinke the practise of them to be in∣conuenient. 3. You sayPag. 146.: Antiquity hath denied, that any Canon for ap∣peales was to be found in the Councell of Sardica. This is an vn∣truth sufficiently refuted by what hath bene saidSect. 2. & 3., and by your owne Confession, pretending that the right of Ap∣peales is not by diuine institution, but by humane, because the decree which the Councell of Sardica made in fauor of them, was a humane constitution. But that you may not seeme o speake without ground, you falsify SalmeronPag. 147.: He speaking of the reseruation of cases in the inward court of conscience, that is, in the Sacrament of pennance, saythIn 1. part. 5. disp. 8.: In S. Cyprians tyme, non erant casus peculiares conscientiae ipsi Ponti∣fici reseruati, No peculiar cases of conscience were reserued to the Pope: You to make him speake of the contentions Court, & to deny, that any Appeales were anciently reserued to the Pope, peruert his words, thus: Tempore Cypriani non erant ca∣sus peculiares reseruati conscientiae Pontificis: In the tyme of Cy∣prian, there were no peculiar cases reserued to the conscience of the Pope; or as you english, In the dayes of S. Cyprian there was no re∣seruation of any such cases (namely of appeales) in vse; for of them you speake. Answere now: Is it all one to say, non erant casus peculiares conscientiae ipsi Pontifici reseruati, as Salmeron sayth; & to say, non erant casus peculiares reseruati conscientiae Pontificis, as you say? No: there cannot be a more wilfull fal∣sification. For 1. you misplace Salmerons words. 2. You turne Pontifici into Pontificis. And 3 you put conscientiae, into the construction of the datiue case, which Salmeron hath in the genitiue. How can this iuggling be excused? 4. You sayPag. 144.: The African Fathers in the end, descended to a flat and peremptory resolution in opposition of the Papall claime of appeales. This is a flat and peremptory vntruth: for the Afri∣cans
neuer contested with the Pope, about appeales in mat∣ters of fayth, but acknowledged that they ought to referre them to him, as appeareth out of the practise of the Coun∣cells of Carthage and Mileuis, which sent their decrees of fayth to Innocentius Pope, to be confirmed by his authori∣tySee aboue Chap. 26.. Their contestation was about Appeales of the infe∣rior Clergy, in ciuill and criminall causes. Of them they writ to Zozimus Pope. but he being dead before the ariuall of their letters, they writ againe to Boniface his Successor, acknowledging that they had receaued from him, Mandata & literas, Commandments and letters, which, what was it else but to professe him to be their Superior? And withall they represented to Boniface, the great troubles, which the late appeales out of Africa to Rome had brought vpon them: & that therfore great caution ought to be vsed, lest other such, or worse should happen. And because they had not found in their copies of the Nicen Councell those Canons con∣cerning appeales, which Zozimus had sent in the instru∣ction of his Legates, they required tyme to send into the East, for authenticall copies of the Nicen Canons: but in the meane tyme, they obserued the commandment of Zozi∣mus, restoring Apiarius to the communion, & to his Priest∣hood. Apiarius (say they to BonifaceEp: ad Bonifac. crauing pardon hath bene restored to the communion. And againeIbid.: It hath pleased vs, that Apiarius should retire from the Church of Sicca, retayning the honor of his degree. And in their Epistle to Celestine: Apiarius had bene formerly restored to his Priesthood. Nor did they shew their obedience only in restoring Apiarus: but moreouer in attending the comming of the Easterne Copies of the Nicen Councell, they promised with great humility, and with all respect protested, to ob∣serue from point to point, all that was contained in the in∣struction of the Popes Legates. For Daniel, Notary of the Councell, hauing read the first article, which was, that Bi∣shops may appeale to the Pope, Alipius saidConc. A∣fric. c. 4.: We protest to obserue these things, vntill the coming of the perfect copies. And the second article being read, which was, That the causes of Priests, and inferior Clerkes were to be finally determined
by the Bishop of their owne Prouince. S. Augustine saidIbid. c. 7.: We protest also to obserue this article sauing a more diligent in∣quiry of the Councell of Nice. And the whole Councell spea∣king of both these articles, to Boniface Pope, saidCap. 101. in Ep. ad Bonif.: These thinges which in the fore-said instruction haue bene alleaged vnto vs, of the appeales of Bishops to the Priest of the Roman Church, and of the causes of Clerkes to be ended by the Bishops of their owne Pro∣uinces, We protest to obserue, vntill the proofe of the Nicen Councell: And we trust in the will of God, that your Holinesse also will helpe vs in it. By this it appeares, that the Canons of Appeales to Rome sent by Zozimus were admitted, and the practise of them in Africa allowed by the whole Councell, vntill the comming of the Nicen copies out of the East: which shew∣eth that their contestation was not about the Popes right of appeales (els they would haue forbidden them absolute∣ly, euen in that interim) but about the expediency of them, and the manner of prosecuting them by Legates, and executors sent from Rome. Which is yet further confirmed by these their words to Pope CelestineEp. ad Celest.: Wherfore premi∣sing the office of due salutation, we beseech you affectionatly, that here∣after you will not so easily admit to your eares, those that come from these partes, nor vestore to the communion such, as haue bene excom∣municated by vs. And a litle after: To the end that they, who in their owne Prouince haue bene depriued of the communion, may not seeme to be hastily, and otherwise then is fit, restored to the commu∣nion by your Holynesse. These words are another remonstrance of their acknowledgment of the Popes power ouer them, and of their subiection to him: for they say not to Celestine, that he had not authority to restore the Communion to those that had bene excommunicated by them, but humbly beseech him not to do it easily, and without mature delibe∣ration; but rather, that he will send them back into Africa, to be iudged vpon the place, where their causes might be discussed more exactly, and the truth more certainely knowne by the attestation of witnesses, which could not without much difficulty and charges passe to Rome. And wheras the Councell of SardicaCan. 7. hath decreed
that, if a Bishop appeale to Rome, and the Pope esteeme is iust that the examination of his cause be renowed, it shalbe in the Popes power, if he please, to send Legates from Rome, to ioyne with the Bishops of the same prouince from whom the appeale is made, that by them the cause may be tried, and iudged a new, the Africans denied not this power of the B. of Rome; nor any way excepted against the sending back of the Appellāts into Africa, to haue their causes tried againe by the Bishops of their owne prouince, but only beseeched him, that he would be pleased not to send Legates, who by prosecuting the causes of Appellants too violently; did somtimes giue occasion of complaint. Wherfore beseeching Pope Celestine, they say:Conc. Afric. c. 107 That you wil not send your Clerkes executors, to all that demand them, nor per∣mit that we may seeme to introduce the smoaky pride of the world into the Church of Christ, which propounds the light of simplicity, and the day of humility to them, that desire to see God. The motiue which the Africans had to make this petition, was the insolent ca∣riage of Antony B. of Fussala in Numidia, who (as S. Au∣gustine reportethEp. 261. for his enormous crimes being depri∣ued of his Bishoprick, by procurement of the inhabitants of Fussala, and left with the bare title of Bishop, fraudulently got testimoniall letters of his innocency, from the Primate of Numidia, at the very time of this sixth Councell of Car∣thage, and appealed to Boniface Pope; who answeared with great caution, that, he should be restored si nulla in eius nar∣ratione surreptio intercessisset; if there were no surreption in the rela∣tion of his cause. Boniface dying and Celestine succeeding, they of Fussala prosecuted their suite earnestly against him. And he contrarily threatned, that Celestine would send Clerkes executors, and (if need were) souldiers to restore him to his Bishoprick. He threatned them (sayth S. Augu∣stineIbid. with secular power, as if they were to come to execute the iudgments of the See Apostolike, so that the miserable inhabitants be∣ing Christians, and Catholikes, feared more grieuous vsage from a Catholike Bishop then they did (when they were heretikes) from the lawes of the Emperors. This was the cause, why S. Augustine, and this sixth Councell of Carthage beseeched Celestine not to grant
Clerkes executors to all Appellants. And this conuinceth you of an vntruth in sayingPag. 145. fin. 151. that, the African Fathers call that Papall presumption (of Appeales) a smoaky secular arrogan∣cy, which they will not indure: for it is not the Popes clayme of appeales that they qualify with the name of typhe, or smoaky secular arrogancy, but partly the vexation and insolence of Apiarius, and other Priests, despising and shaking off the yoake of Episcopall discipline; and partly the force & mi∣litary Violence which the executors, sent from Rome, did somtimes vse in executing the iudgments of the See Apo∣stolike. For speaking to Boniface Pope of the insolency of Apiarius, they sayConc. A∣fric. c. 101.: But we hope by the help of Gods mercy, that your Holinesse gouerning in the Roman See, we shall no longer suffer this typhe. And because the executors did somtimes make vse of secular forces, they beseech CelestineIbid. c. 105., not to grant Clerkes executors to all that demand thē, lest the typhe of the world be introduced into the Church. Which is agreeable to the decree of the Councell of Ephesus, forbidding Iohn Patriarke of An∣tioch to make vse of any military power to hinder the Bi∣shops of Cyprus from electing to themselues an Archbi∣shop without his consent, lest (sayth the Councell) vnder pretence of executing sacred things, the typhe of secular power be introduced into the Church. And in the same sense the AuthorCap. 26. of S. Fulgentius his life said, that Ful∣gentius commanded nothing with the typhe of secular do∣minion. And no lesse vntrulyPag. 145. fin. you make the Africans say in their Epistle to Celestine, that, they will not indure the Papal presumtion of appeales, there being no such thing to be read in that Epistle. For what they speake, of not induring, hath no relation to Appeales, but to the crimes of Apiarius. As for the wretched Apiarius (say they) he hauing bene already cast out of the Church of Christ, for his infamous crimes, by our bro∣ther Faustinus, we are no more in care; for as much as by the meanes of the approbation, and moderation of your Holinesse, Africa will no longer indure him. 5. You sayPag. 155.: This Councell denounced excommunication to all, that thinke it lawfull to appeale beyond the seas. This is an∣other
vntruth: for the Councell speakes not of Bishops, but of Priests, and inferior Clerkes only: & so much you con∣tradicting your selfe, had acknowledged a little before, set∣ting downe the very words of the Councell thusPag. 146.: If any Priest shall thinke, that he ought to appeale beyond the sea (meaning to Rome) let him not be receaued any longer into the communion of the Church of Africke. You replyPag. 155., that this answeare is a sophistry confuted by the consequence of the Councell: for if inferior Clergy were prohibited, much more was the same prouision made in behalfe of Bishops. This consequence we deny as false sophistry: for albeit they pro∣posed this, among their requests to Pope Celestine, yet they made no decree, nor prouision therof: nor (if they had) cold it haue bene of force, as being directly contradictory to the Canons of the two famous Councels of Nice, and SardicaSee aboue Chap. 26.; and also to the beliefe of S. Augustine saying,Ep. 162. that, Cecilian might haue appealed beyond the sea, because he was not of the number of Priests, or other inferior Clerkes, but of Bi∣shops. And moreouer he represented to Celestine PopeEp. 261., that wheras Antony B. of Fussala (being depriued of his Bishoprick by the Bishops of Africa, and left only with the bare title of Bishop) had appealed to Boniface his prede∣cessor, he would be pleased to confirme the sentence of the Bishops of Africa, because (sayth he) there had bene many like sentences in Africa, euen the See Apostolike pronouncing the iudgmēt, or confirming the iudgment of others, as of Priscus, Victor, and Law∣rence, Bishops of the Cesarian Prouince. SECT. V. Whether this Controuersy of Appeales, wrought in the Africans, any separation of Communion from the Roman Church? TO make your argument more plausible, you sayPag. 148. that by reason of this controuersy, between the Afri∣cans, and the Bishops of Rome, Aurelius B. of Carthage, & his fellow Bishops of Africk (with whom S. Augustine did consent) were
for the space of an hundred yeares separated frō the Church of Rome. Of all the vntruths vttered in this your discourse of the sixt Councell of Carthage, this is the greatest, which therfore you haue reserued to the last place: Finis coronat opus. For that the African Fathers, euen of this sixth Coun∣cell of Charthage, during the very tyme of this controuer∣sy, remained still vnited to the See of Rome, is proued: 1. By the clause of their Epistle written to Pope Celestine in the end of this controuersyApud Bin. to. 1. pag. 646.: Our Lord keepe your Holi∣nesse many yeares, praying for vs, Lord and Brother; which were the very worlds of peace and communion vsed in Formed letters, that were neuer giuen to any but to Catholikes of the same communionAug. ep. 162.163.. 2. Out of S. Augustine, who in the current of this difference writing to Boniface Pope, & dedicating one of his chiefest workes vnto him saydCont. duas ep. Pelag. ad Bonifa. l. 1.. Thou disdainest not, thou who art not high minded, though thou pre∣sidest higher, to be a friend of the humble. 3. Out of the testimony which Pope Celestine gaue of S. Augustine after his deathEp. ad E∣pise. Galliae c. 2.: Augustine a man of holy memory, for his lyfe & merits, we haue had alwaies in our communion: nor hath the rumor of any sinister sus∣picion, euer so much as touched him: which Epistle of Celestine to the French, is alleaged by Pettus DiaconusL. de in∣carn. & grat., and by ProsperCont. Col∣lat c. 42. to iustify S. Augustines doctrine against the Pe∣lagians. 4. And the same ProsperL. de pro∣miss. & pre∣dict. par. 3. c. 38. calles Aurelius Archbishop of Carthage (vnder whom the African Councell was held) after his death. A Father, and Bishop of worthy memory, and a Citizen of the heauenly country; which praise he would not haue giuen him, if he had died out of the communion of the Roman Church: for Prosper in that very bookePart. 4. c. 5. sayth, that, a Christian communicating with that Church, is a Catholike, but if he be separated from it, he is an heretike, and Antichrist. 5. Capreolus immediat successor to Aurelius, writing to the Bishops assembled in the Councell of EphesusAct. Conc. Ephes. to. 2. c. 9.: Wee pray you to resist all nouelties, with such constancy, as the authority of the See Apostolike, and the seuerity of the Prelates assembled in one, may not seeme to permit, that the doctrine of those, whom the Church hath long since condemned, come to be borne againe. 6. Eu∣genius
another successor to Aurelius, being pressed by the Lieutenāt of Hunericus Lord of Africa, to enter into a pu∣blike disputation with the Arians, answearedVictor Vtic. l. 2.; He would not do it, without writing to his fellow Bishops, and chiefly to the Ro∣man Church, which is the Head of all Churches. 7. S. Fulgentius saythDe incarn. & grat. c. 11.: Which the Roman Church, which is the head of the world, holdesh and teacheth, and with her the whole Christian world doth, both without hesitation belieue to iustice, and also doubts not to confesse to saluation. And when the same Sainct was going to the wildrnesse of Thebais in Aegypt to fastAuthor vitae S. Fulg. c. 12. to. 6. Bi∣bliothec. Pat., he desi∣sted from his intent, when comming to Sicily, he vnderstood from Eulalius B. of Syracusa, that those Countries were separated from the communion of the Roman Church, lest desiring a more per∣fect life, he should runne hazard of loosing the true fayth. And in∣steed of gong into Aegypt, he went in pilgrimage to Rome, to visit the Sepulchers of the holy Apostles Peter, & Paul. 8. The African Bishops consulted S. Leo the great in their doubts of fayth; and S. Leo writ to them a famous decretall EpistleLeo ep. 87.. 9. Almost all the African Bishops 220. in num∣ber being banished into Sardinia by Thrasimundus the A∣rian King, Symmachus Pope relieued & maintained them at his owne chargesPaul. Diac. l. 17. re∣rum. Roman., which he would not haue done, if they had bene separated from his communion. 10. Posses∣sor a famous African Bishop writ to Hormisdas PopeEp. ad Hormisd.: It is fit and expedient that we haue recourse to the Heard, as often as the health of the members is treated of: for who hath greater solicitude of his subiects, or from whom is more to be required the stability of fayth that is wauering, then from the President of that seate, whose first Gouernor heard from Christ. Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church? 11. Victor Bishop of Vtica reportethL. 1. de per∣sequut. Van∣dal. that the Arians in Africa did call the Catholikes, Romans (as you now call vs, Romanists) which they did vpon no o∣ther ground, then because the African Catholikes were of the Roman Communion. 12. And that the possession which the Bishop of Rome were in, of appeales out of A∣frica, was not interrupted by the sixt Conncell of Car∣thage, is proud out of Ferrandus, a Deacon of that ChurchBreuiar. Can. art. 59. & 60., which liued soone after that tyme, & hath re∣gistred
in his collection of Canons, this, as the fifth, & sixth Canon of the Councell of Sardica, That a condemned Bishop may, if he will, appeale to the See Apostolike, and that during the ap∣peale no other can be ordained in his place. By these, and many other euidences (which may be produced) it is manifest, that by this Controuersy of Ap∣peales the Africans were not separated from the commu∣nion of the Roman Church, and that therfore to affirme (as you do) that they remained in the state of separation for the space of 100. yeares, vntill the tyme of Boniface the second, is a notorious vntruth: for all the examples here al∣leaged, are of African Bishops, that liued within the com∣pass of 100. yeares, after the sixth Councell of Carthage. Against this truth, confirmed by so many euident and vndeniable proofes, that the African Church was not (in the dayes of Aurelius Primate of Africa, and S. Augustine) seuered by Schisme from the Roman Church; you vrge the Epistle of Boniface the second, wherein he testifieth, that the A∣frican Church was in his dayes reconciled vnto them Roman. In the Body of your Councells (sayPag. 148. you) there isApud Suriumtom. 2. Concil. pag. 384. So you quote him falsly, for it is Tom. 1. Con∣cil. pag. 1057. extant the Epistle of Boniface the second, wherein about the yeare 606. the same Pope complaineth, that Aurelius with his fellow-Bishops of Africa (with whome S. Augustine did consent) had by the instigation of Satan (for so the Epistle speaketh) been sepa∣rated from the Church of Rome, vntill now, after an hun∣dred yeares space, Eulalius (Bishop of Carthage) acknowled∣ging his offence, seeketh and desireth to be reconciled to the Church of Rome. Thus farre the Epistle of your Pope. Do you belicue this Epistle, concerning the Excommunication of the Chur∣ches of Africk? Then had you best stand aside a while, for scare of knocks. For behold there are at hand children of the Tribe of Dan, angry fellowes, that lay about them. 1. BellarmineBellar. lib. 2. de Pont. Rom. c. 25.; I greatly suspect (sayth he) that this Epistle is counterfait. 2. It is full of fraud, saythBinius Tom. 1. Conc. in hanc Epi∣stolam. Binius. 3. Which (sayth Baronius) some wicked Impostor hath fayned &c. Do not you belieue this Epi∣stle of Boniface to be true? Then harken to yourLindan. Panopl. l. 4. c. 89. Lindan: This E∣pistle (sayth he) is not supposititious, but true &c. Thus you. And then finding in Baronius, that during those hūdred yeares,
there were whole troopes, and armias of African Martyrs, and holy Confessors, you triumph, and bid vs takePag. 150. this your Syllo∣gisme to ruminate vpon: No true Christian Martyrs dye out of the state of Saluation: Diuers true Christian Martyrs dye, out of Obedience to the Ro∣man Church. Ergo, Diuers dying, out of Obedience to the Roman Church, dye not out of the state of Saluation. Thus you dispute in your fancy victoriously, as hauing by this your discourse, and Syllogisme, knock't the Ro∣man Church on the heal. I shall first discouer the weake∣nesse and vanity of your Syllogisme; then shew the multi∣plicity of your falsities and fraudes, supposed and cunnin∣gly contriued into your relation of the Story; lastly lay o∣pen the reasons why that Epistle may be suspected, yea re∣iected as being Counterfait. In your Sollogisme, I grant the Maior Proposition. That no true Martyr dyeth out of the state of Saluation. In your Minor, or Assumption, Diuers true Christian Martyrs dye out of obe∣dience to the Roman Church, I distinguish sundry Kinds of Disobediences. First there is disobedience Heretical, which re∣sists the doctrines & decrees of Fayth, deliuered by the Ca∣tholike Roman Church; yea denieth the prime article of Christian vnity, the headship and supreme authority of her Bi∣shop. In the state of this Disobedience there can be no true Martyrdome, no hope of Saluation. Secondly, there is Disobe∣dience Schismatical, which belieuing firmely the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and acknowledging the Supreme authority of her Bishop, excepts against the present Bi∣shop and Pastor, as not being true Pope, and cleaueth to one opposite vnto him: men dying in the state of this Diso∣bedience, cannot possibly be true Martyrs, nor be saued. Thirdly there is Disobedience moral, in matter of good life & manners, against precepts enacted by the Church, for the better auoyding & punishing of ill behauiour. Now in the state of this kind of Disobedience men may be saued: for the disobeying of these kind of orders and commands, may proceed either from contumacy and contempt, or from errour
and ignorance. If out of contempt, then is it damnable, so that none dying therin can be Martyrs, or goe to heauen. But with Disobedience of the second kind caused by ignorance, Sal∣uation and Martyrdome may stand: for their ignorance may be inuincible, or else probable, and grounded vpon good seeming reasons. Or if it be vincible and faulty, yet may it be abo∣lished by their contrition for all their sinnes, or falce Marty∣rij. by the sickle of Martyrdome done away. This supposed, I say, the Disobedience of the African Bi∣shops was not Heretical; because in all matters of sayth they were conforme to the Church of Rome, and by manifold practise shewed, that about doubts, and controuersies of this kind, they held it necessary to haue recourse toEp. Con∣cil. Mileuit. 92. inter E∣pist. August. the Pastorall Chayre. and care of Peter. to theCypr. l. 2. Ep. 10. l. 4. ep. 8. Roote, and matrice of the Catholike Church; to the Rocke which theAugust. Psal. cont. part. Donat. proud gates of Hell do neuer ouercome; to the maine indeficient fountaine, which with the streames of wholesome doctrine watereth all Christians ouer the whole world. The ancient rules (say they (the foure Primates of A∣frike)Ep. ad Theodor. Pa∣pam, Extat in Concil. Late∣ran. 1. consult. 2. Bin. to 2. p. 1075. haue ordayned, that whatsoeuer is treated in Prouinces di∣stant and farre of, should not be deemed to be ended, vntill first it were come to the knowledge of the See Apostolike, to the en that the sen∣tente, which should be found iust, might be confirmed by the authority of the same See; and that from thence all other Churches, as streames flowing from their mother source, might take the beginning of their preaching, and the Sacraments of Saluation. Their Disobedience then could not be Heretical: nor was it Schismatical, because they acknowledged the Pope, euen that Pope with whome they did disagree, to be their Pa∣stor and Superior, whoseAugust. Epist. 157. Iniuncta no∣bis à Venera∣bili Papa Zozimo Ec∣clesiastica ne∣cessitas. lawfull Commaunds they were bound to obey; & that all Maior causes, all matters & controuersies aboue Iurisdiction of greater moment, to wit, such as concerne sayth, and the life, and gouernment of Bishops, are to be referred vnto him, and to be finally and infallibly decided by him. Neither, thirdly, was their Disobedience ioyned with contumacy and contempt; because though they refused to de∣ferre vnto the Appeales which Priest, & infertour Clergymen might make to the Pope: yet they do it with great humility
and respect, and by way of submissiue intreaty, in theirEp. ad Cae∣lestin. apud Sur. Tom. l. Coucil. pag. 520. letter to Pope Celeftine: Praefato debitae Salutationis officio, im∣pendio deprecamur, vt deinceps ad aures vestrashinc venientes, non fa∣cilius admittatis: The behoofe of due Salutation or Reuerence being premised, we humbly beseech you, that those which come from hence (with their Appeales) you will not admit them vnto audience ouer-easily. Therefore their disobedience was out of ignorance; for they did not doubt, but the Pope had power to com∣mand the Bishops of Africa, to yield vnto the Appeales, that were made vnto him; but they esteemed the practise of that power not to be (in those circumstances) for the good of the Church of Africa. They saw, by appealing to Rome. that dissolute and vnruly Clergymen, would cause much vexation vnto the Bishops their lawfull Iudges, prolonge the cause, differre the sentence, and many times escape de∣serued punishment; which impunity might easily grow in∣to liberty, and audacity, and extreme disorder. Wherefore the power giuen of Christ to his Church, and Vicar on earth being giuen. Cor. 1.10. for edifying, not for destroying, they were persuaded, that the Pope could not prudently command them to deferre vnto such Appeales; and if he did that they should not be bound to obey therein. You demandPag. 150, whether the Pope of Rome, whom we entitle Monarch of the Church Catholike, and Bishop of Bishops would accept it as a matter of subiection for Protestants, with S. Augustine and those other African Bishops; to deny that any ought to be called Bishop of Bishop; and not to yield to his demands in point of Iurisdiction vpon any pretence of Diuine Law, but to exact of him proofe by a Canon of an ancient Councell? I answere. The African Bishops deny the title of Prince of Bishops, to any Arch-bishop or Primate within Africke, but not to the Ro∣man Bishop; yea they entitle him in expresse termesAruob. in Psal. 138. Ter∣tullian. lib. de pudicit. c. 1. Stephanus Mauritaniae in Africa Episcopus Epist. ad Da∣masum. Bishop of Bishops, the Holy Father of Fathers the soueraigne Bishop of all Bishops and Pastors; they call his Authority, the Prince∣dome of the Apostolike Chayre, euer vigent in the Roman Church; they acknowledge that they are bound to obey all his iust commandes; that all Christians may, and must Ap∣peale to him about Controuersies of Religion and the Ca∣tholike
Fayth;August ep. 12. A posto∣litae Cathedrae principatum. Item, the foure Prima∣tes of Afrike in their Syno∣dical Epistle to Pope Theo∣dor. in Conc. Lateran. 1. Consul. 2. Bin∣tom. 2 pag. 1078. Patri Patrum & summo omnium Praesulum Pontifici Theodoro. By which is answered what you alleage pag. 46. out of the 26. Ca∣non of the Councell of Carthage. yea Bishops also in criminal causes from the condēnation giuen against them by their fellow-Bishops. But that the Pope should admit the Appeales so easely of euery African Priest and Clergyman. hereof they doubt whe∣ther it be expedient for the African Church. Now Bishops may be sometimes excused, if they do not obey the Pope in matters that are extremely burthensome, and hard; special∣ly when they haue probable reasons, that it is not prudent∣ly commanded, nor will proue for the good of soules. But Protestants, you are disobedient vnto the See of Peter, and the Soueraigne Bishop of all Bishops in points of Iurisdiction, al∣lowed vnto him by ancient Councells. Your disobedience is ioyned with Contumacy, contempt, contumely, and base language. You deny Appeales vnto him in matters, and doubts about Christian Fayth. Wherefore you want that dutifull subiection to Peters chayre, without which none can be of the number of Christ his sheepe, nor consequently be saued: yea you are guilty of that damnable disobedience whereof S. Leo saythEpist. 93. c. 2.; Whosoeuer shall deny vnto him (Peter, and his Successor) the Princedome of care and power; shall neuer be able to depresse his dig∣nity, but puffed vp with pride shall drowne himselfe into Hell. Your Syllogisme then is vaine, the Minor thereof being manifestly false, That the African Martyrs dyed out of obedience to the Roman Church. I come now to your falsifies, and falsifications of the Story, and tenour of the foresaid questioned Epistle of Boni∣face the Second. Two especially are very exorbitant: first, that the Pope denounced, or thundred outPag 148. & pag. 150. excommunication against the Churchs of Africa: that these (Aurelius and S. Augustine) & all other Bishops of Africa, were excommunicate by the Pope for their Opposition against the Church of Rome. Which notorious fal∣shood you seeke to make good, by a notable falsificationPag. 149., telling vs, That our Costerus, and Turrian, both Iesuites, and also M. Harding do greatly magnify our Popes, for discharging their office in excommunicating the Bishops of Afrike. You neither cite any wordes, nor quote any place of Tur∣rian, but referre vs in your margent to your Sadeel, whome we trust as litle almost as we do your selfe. You cite the
wordes of the Iesuite Costerus, Bene fecerunt Romani Pontifices &c. but you peruert them, and turne them to another mat∣ter and purposeCosterus Enchirid. Controuers. de summo Pontifice pag. 159.. Costerus proposeth your Protestant Ar∣gument: The Bishops of Africa in the dayes of S. Augustine, did bitterly inueigh against Pope Celestine, who after Pope Zozimus, challenged authority ouer the African Churches; and admitted the Appeales of Clergymen from their Bishops vnto him. This is the ob∣iection; vnto which he makes Answere in the wordes by you cited, Rectè, & ex officio fecerunt Romani Pontifices &c. The Roman Bishops did well, and according to their duty; and the Afri∣can Bishops were to blame, who euen then (as doth testify Boni∣face the 2.) were inclining to a defection from the Roman Church, to their owne great losse: because soone after they were conquered, and came vnder the Dominion of the Arian Wandals. Blessed Augu∣stine subscribed not vnto those bitter letters, for he did euer beare singular veneration towards the Apostolike see. Thus Costerus; af∣firming that the Pope did well in admitting the Appeales of the Clergymen made vnto him; and that herein he did discharge the office of a good Pastor: but that he did excom∣municate Aurelius, and all other Bishops of Africa, and that in so doing he did discharge his duety, this Costerus doth not say. No, nor that the Africans were Schismatically deuided from the Church of Rome; bur only that they seemed euen then to thinke vpon some such thinge. M. Harding in like manner saythAnswere to M. Iewels Challenge fol. 218. A.; that the Churches of Africa had continued in Schisme, and withdrawne themselues from the obedience of the See Apostolike, through the entisement of Aurelius Bishop of Carthage: but that all the Churchs of Africa, or any one Church was excommunicated by the Pope, this M. Harding doth not say. So that the Excommunication of all the Churches and Bishops of Africa by the Pope, is not recorded by any Author; not by Costerus, not by Harding, not by the foresaid Epistle of Boniface the second; it is a meere fiction of your owne head. The Africans were no further separated from the Church of Rome, then they eloyned themselues from it, by their own voluntarily departure and fault. But they did not depart from the Obedience of the Roman Church, by denying the Christian fayth thereof, nor by denying the Popes
power and Iurisdiction ouer them, but only dissented in a ProblematiqueAn ex∣pediret ea po∣testate vti, & omnibus in locis, non sine causa dubita∣cum est. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Rom. Pon∣tif. c. 25. §. Ad hoc eorum. Question, about what was fit to be done by the Pope, about the Appeales of African Clergymen of inferiour degree. Although this falshood & falsification may seeme grosse inough, yet the second is greater. The Iesuite Salmeron (sayPag. 149. you) and Sanders, do confidently hold, that all the African Bishops were seuered from the Church of Rome, from the dayes of S. Cyprian vntill the time of the said Boniface the Author of the Epistle. Can any thinge be said or deuised more openly, notoriously, & palpably false then this? You say in the wordes that pre∣sently follow the aboue cited, that, You doubt not but that we stand halfe agast. Verely so it is; we stand more then halfe agast, (not, that there be different opinions among our Authors about the said Epistle of Boniface the second, but) that Prote∣stants can endure, that such notorious falsities should be so confidently vttered, and layd for grounds, and principles in your discourse, to iusly their reuolt from the obedience, doctrine, and discipline of the Roman Church. But the Ie∣suit Salmeron (say you) and Sanders do confidently so hold. If this be true, we shall remayne agast at their madnesse, & thinke their writings worthy of the fire: if they do not so hold; if they affirme the contrary in plaine termes; if these wordes All the African Bishops were seuered from the Church of Rome▪ from the dayes of S. Cyprian, vntill the time of Boniface the second, which you allege in a distinct letter as verbally theirs, be supposititious and forged; how ought Protestants to re∣maine agast? What course ought they to take with your writings? Sanders then, to begin with him, doth not say all the Bi∣shops, but the contrary in these very wordesSanderus de visibili Mo∣narch. pag. 330. n. 247.: Non ergo, (vt somniant Magdeburgenses, aut potiùs calumniantur) omnes A∣fricani Patres opposuerut se Pontifici Romano; sed potiùs multi cu∣piebant rem adipsum referri. In the Controuersy about Ap∣pellations, all the African Bishops did not oppofe the Bishop of Rome, as the Magdeburgians dreame, or rather calumniously report; yea rather many of them desired, that the matter might be referred to the Pope. For though Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and Primate of
all Africa, may seeme to haue been somewhat crosse, and to haue affe∣cted an absolute Primacy in matters of discipline and behauiour; yet there be many signes, wherby it appeareth, that others were otherwise minded, yea that Aurelius himselfe did acknowledge the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, and appealed to him in matters of fayth. Thus Sanders. Who further against your peremptory affirming, that namely S. Augustine concurred with Aurelius in this point, he produceth the wordes of Bishop Faustinus the Po∣pes Legat in the Councell of Carthage vnto Aurelius, reque∣sting him, that about Appeales made by Clergymen of inferior de∣gree vnto Bishops, his Holinesse would vouchsafe to write to Venerable Pope Boniface, remitting the matter to his deliberation, and conclu∣sion ficut Sanctus Augustinus statuere dignatus est, as Holy Au∣gustine hath been pleased to determine by his suffrage. By which wordes sayth Sanders, it is apparent, that S. Augustine would haue had the matter, of Appeales, referred to the Pope, and ordered as he should thinke best. So that where∣as you cite Sanders saying, All the African Bishops were seuered from the Church of Rome, his true wordes import the direct contradictory; Non omnes Episcopi Africani, All the Bishops of A∣frike did not oppose the Roman Bishop. You also alleage him de visibili Monarch. pag. 368. n. 411. where he hath nothing to your purpose, but only alleageth the wordes of Eulalias of Carthage his recantation, We anathematize all those that proudly lift vp their neckes against the Holy Roman and Apostolical Church. From these wordes can you gather your dismal assertion that, All the African Bishops from the dayes of Cyprian vntill Boni∣face the second, that is, for three hundred yeares, were excommu∣nicated by the Pope, and seuered from the Communion of the Ro∣man Church? The Iesuite Salmeron sayth no more, thenSalmeron tom. 12. tract. 68. §. Ad Canonem. that in the dayes of S. Cyprian, the African Bishops began to be seuered from the Roman Church; and that in the dayes of Pope In∣nocent, and Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, they were bitter and displeased against the Church of Rome. But he doth not say, that all the African Bishops were so; nor that they with∣drew their Communion and obedience from the Roman Church. Yea in the dayes of S. Cyprian, though he, and fou∣rescore
African Bishops were displeased with Pope Stephen; because he did strongely and constantly oppose their im∣pious doctrine of Anabaptisme; yet they neuer proceeded to make a Schisme, and separation from the Roman Church. Contrariwise the very same fourescore Bishops who had made a decree for Anabaptisme, met together againe, as S. Hierome doth testifyHieron. Dialog. cont. Lucifer. Illi ipsi Epis∣copi qui Re∣baptizandos haereticos cum Cypriano statuerunt, ad antiquam consuetudi∣nem reuluti, nouum emis∣re decretum. and repealed their decree, which might haue caused their separation from the Romā Church: So false is it, that all the Bishops of Africa from the dayes of S. Cy∣prian vntill the time of Boniface the second were seuered from the Church of Rome, that euen those very Bishops of those dayes were not seuered. By the Epistle of Boniface the second (grant it be true) no more is proued then, that Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, super∣bir cepit, was somewhat arrogant and proud against the Pope; and that Eulalius of Carthage did (against the exam∣ple of his other Predecessors) imitate Aurelius therin; as he doth testify saying in the said Epistle of Boniface, that he felt himselfe, Peccatis Aurelij praegrauatum, ouer-burthened with the sinnes of Aurelius. But that all the Christians of A∣frica, namely those many Martyrs that suffered persecution vnder the Arian Wandalls, were tainted with this bitternes of distast and Schismaticall dis-vnion against the Roman Bishop, is a fable by your selfe newly coyned, and vented abroad. Now to the third point proposed, although the Epistle of Boniface do not iustify your slander against all the Bishops & Martyrs of Africa, that they were excommunicated by the Pope, and out of the communion of the Roman Church; yet there be many Arguments that may seeme to euince, that the same is counterfeit, the relation thereof being inco∣herent. First youPag. 148. The Epistle of Boniface the second, wher∣in about the yeare 606. the same Pope complaineth &c. say, that the reunion of the Church of Africa to the Church of Rome, happened about the yeare 606. and in the time of Boniface the second. These thinges hange not togeather, and consequently are false: for Boniface the second dyed in the yeare 531. that is almost an hundred yeares before the yeare 606. Secondly the said Epistle of Boniface the Second affirmes, that Eulalius his reconcilia∣tion
with the Church of Rome was performed in the daies of Iustine the Emperour, &Iustini elementissimi Principis O∣rientis sacra∣rum litera∣rum exem∣plaria ad vo destinauimus. that this Emperour writ letters to the said Boniface about it. Now Iustine the Emperour was dead three or foure yeares before Romiface the Second was chosen Pope. Thirdly the Epistle of Boniface is written to Eulalius Bishop of Alexandria. But the Bishop of Alexandria, in the dayes of Boniface the second was not named Eulalius, but Timothaeus, an Heretike, and an Aduersary of the Roman Church. You saw this difficulty, and to auoyd it, feare not to do against the command of the Holy GhostVide ti∣tulum Psalmi 58. & Augu. tract. 117. in Ioan. Ne cor∣rumpaes Tituli inscriptionem. For the Title of that Epistle in Su∣rius being Epistola eiusdem (Bonifacij) ad Eulalium Alexandri∣num Episcopum,Pag. 248. in marg. at (x). you change it, and make it to be, Epistola Bonifacij ad Alexandrum Episcopum, the Epistle of Boniface to Bi∣shop Alexander; nor do you tell vs of what Church or See this your Alexander was Bishop. Fourthly in the time of Boniface the secōd, Gilimer the Arian Wandal was King of Africa, during whose reigne, there was no Catholike Bishop in Carthage,See Baron. Anno 620. & seqq. nor in any Church of Africa, but only Arians. Finally your Apostata-Bishop of Spalato, Antonius de Dominis, in hisDe Repub. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 8. n. 34. London-writings, which he published vnder your nose, & with your so great approbation and applause, doth so lay a∣bout him, against the Epistle of Boniface; that you who are so stiffe a defender therof had best to stand aside for feare of knocks. In the Controuersy about Appellations (sayth he)Commu∣nio inter A∣fricam & Ro∣mam non est abrupta. the Commu∣nion between Africa and Rome was neuer broken, as Baronius and Binius do proue very well▪ The reconciliation, or recantation made by the Church of Carthage vnto Boniface the Second. which some one hath faignedMara est impostura. is a meere Imposture, as the said Authors demon∣strate. Thus he. May you not number this man among the Chil∣dren of the Tribe of Dan, and angry fellowes, who doth so perem∣ptorily auerre the Epistle of Boniface to be a meere forgery, and a grand Imposture, with greater reason, then you haue done Bel∣larmine, for only saying, I suspect it is counterfeit? In fine, these Arguments abundantly shew, that this Epistle of Boniface may be questioned and reiected; and yet all the other Epi∣stles of ancient Popes set downe in the Body of our Coun∣cells
cells subsist firme, against which the like implicancies and incoherencies cannot be vrged. As for Bishop Lindan, he speaketh against them, who discard this Epistle voluntari∣ly, and without euident proofes, saying, that they might as∣well infringe the credit of any ancient history: which his inference is of no force against them, who refuse it as counterfeit, not voluntarily, but constrained by the pregnant incompossi∣bilities thereof, with other knowne vndeniable truthes. CHAP. XXVIII. Whether the Britans, and Scots not cele∣brating Easter after the manner of the Roman Church, were for that cause separated from her Communion. AMONG other examples of ancient Churches, which you pretend to haue bene separated from the Church of Rome, and yet in state of saluation, you produce for your last instancePag. 156. 157. 158., the Britans, and Scots, who kept their Ea∣ster if not wholly after the Iewish man∣ner, yet contrary to the custome of the Roman Church, & of the whole Christian world: Wherin you are guilty of diuers vntruthes. For first, you speake of this their custome, as ancient a∣mong the Britans; wheras BedeL. 2. hist. Anglo. c. 19. recordeth, that Hono∣rius Pope about the yeare 635. and Iohn the fourth a few yeares after, writ to the Britans and Scots, letters full of autho∣rity and learning, for correcting this error & that Pope Iohn in the beginning of his EpistleExtat a∣pud Bin. to. 2. pag. 1029. manifestly declareth nu∣perrime temporibus istis exortam esse haeresim hanc: that this heresy
was very lately sprung vp among them: which Florentius Wigor∣niensis also testifieth, sayingIn Chron. an. 628.: Eo tempore &c. At that time Honorius Pope did reproue the error of the Quartadecimans in the ce∣lebration of Easter, sprung vp among the Scots. 2. You attribute this custome to the Britans & Scots in generall. as if they had bene all guilty therof; wheras Ve∣nerable Bede attributes it not to all the Britans, non totis, (sayth heL. 3 hist. cap. 25. not to all of them, nor to all the Scots, but espe∣cially to such as dwelled in Ireland, and also to some of them that dwelled in Britany. Besides, the whole English Church in a manner was free from that error. 3. You assumePag. 190. as granted by vs, that, the Britans and Scots were schismatically diuided from the Church of Rome, but not heretically. That their opinion was Hereticall, you haue heard Bede testify, saying, that this heresy was very lately sprung vp among them. And who knoweth not, that (as hath bene prouedChap. 23. the Quartadecimans had bene long before that time anathematized by the three first generall Coūcells of Nice, Constantinople, and Ephesus, and the maintainers of that error, registred for heretikes by Philastrius, S. Augu∣stine, Theodoret, and others? All which notwithstanding, you are not ashamed to sayPag. 157. init., that, the Britan Church did Orthodoxally in following the Quartadociman rite, contrary to the custome of the Roman Church. 4. Though the Britans and Scots, in this their obser∣uation did disagree from the rest of the Christian world, yet because they did it not, with a schismaticall intention, but out of simplicity, and ignorance of the Ecclesiasticall computation, they liuing in a corner of the world, whither no learned Catholike Calculator of times had as yet come vnto them, the See Apostolike did still retaine them in her communion, deeming this error pardonable in them. And therfore when the Abbot Colmanus in the famous confe∣rence held betweene him, and Wilfridus, concerning this matter, vrged in defence of their customeApud Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 25., that, they could not belieue that their Reuerend Father Columba, and his successors, being men so beloued of God, did contrary to the holy Scriptures in ce∣lebrating Easter, as vntill that tyme they had done, Wilfride ans∣weared
Ibid.:I deny not, but that your Fathers were seruants of God, and beloued of him, whom they loued with a rude kind of simplicity, but with a godly intention. Nor do I thinke, that this their obseruation of Easter was greatly hurtfull vnto them, so long as none had come to them, to informe them of the decrees of more perfection, which they ought to haue obserued. For I belieue, that if a Catholike Calculator had come vnto them, they would haue followed his admonitions &c. And therfore (sayth BaroniusAnno 604. n. 5.: It seemed not good to the Catholike Church, to blotout of the Catalogue of Saints, such men, as had liued among them, eminent in sanctity, and whom God had il∣lustrated with miracles. 5. But to proue that the Scottish and Brittish Chur∣ches were not subiect to the Roman, you alleagePag. 157. marg. Gal∣fridus out of the Centurists, saying: Dinothus a learned Abbot proued with many Arguments, that they owed no subiection to Augu∣stine, whom S. Gregory had sent to preach the fayth of Christ to the English. This is a falsification, which therfore you vent in the Centurists name: for Galfridus hath not any one word of the Britans or Scots no-subiection to the Church of Rome, but only a passionate and cholerick speach of the Britans, not acknowledging any superiority of Augustine ouer them, seing he was sent only to the English, and that the authority of their owne Archbishop was not taken a∣way by his comming for ought they knew: which que∣stion of iurisdiction falleth out daily between Bishops, e∣uen where the Popes authority is most acknowledged. Yea moreouer that both the Britans and Scots acknow∣ledged the authority of the B. of Rome ouer them, Galfridus against you, and your Centurists beareth witnesse, repor∣tingL. 9. c. 12. & 11., that on the day of Pentecost at Chester, King Ar∣thur being present, there was a great meeting of Princes, Lords, and Bishops for his Coronation: And that of three Archbishops, which Britaine had at that time, of Chester, London, and Yorke, Dubritius Archbishop of Chester, be∣ing Primate of Britaine, and Legate of the See Apostolike, did the office of the Church, and crowned King Arthur. If therfore the Pope had his Legate in Britaine, and that no lesse a man then the Primate of all Britaine, it is mani∣fest,
that the Britans acknowledged the authority of the See Apostolike oer them. Which is yet made more eui∣dent, because (as your BaleDe script. Eceles. fol. 30. confesseth) Dauid that fa∣mous Welsh Bishop was canonized by Pope Calixtus the second: and not only Bale, but S. ProsperChron. n. 432.434., BedeL. 1. hist. c. 13. & 17. and Marianus ScotusChron. an. 430. write, that Celestine Pope sent Palladius and Germanus learned Bishops into Britaine, to extirpate the Pe∣lagian heresy, and to reduce the Scots to true piety; and Patricius who had studied Diuinity in Rome, and was a man most excellent in learning and sanctity, to the Irish, and Scots, to defend them from the same heresy. All which sheweth that aswell the Britans as also the Scots, & Irish, euen before the comming of S. Augustine, were in the communion of the Roman Church, and that the Pope had supreme care ouer them in spirituall affaires, since he ap∣pointed them Bishops from Rome. Iustly therefore may we conclude, that your denying the subirction of the British, Scotish and Irish Churches to the See of Rome, at the time of S. Augustines coming into this Iland to preach to the English, is grounded wholly on falshood, & imposture: as likewise is your affirming that the Africans from the time of Celestine Pope to Boniface the second were separated from the communion of the Roman Church: for setting aside all other Arguments, since you cannot deny, that she in her Kalendar of Saints, placeth many most glorious African Martyrs, and Confessors of that time; what man euen of common sense can persuade himselfe, that she would honor them, as Saints, if they had died out of her Communion, and obedience.
CHAP. XXIX. Of the great Reuerence of ancient Chri∣stian Emperors and Kings to the Pope. BELLARMINEDe officio Principis Christia. l. 1. c. 4. & 5. proueth that Empe∣rors and Kings owe subiection to Bi∣shops in sprirituall affaires, as to their Pastors, and especially to the Pope, as to the supreme Couernor of the vniuersall Church, and Father of all Christians. And lest he might seeme by this Do∣ctrine to derogate from the Maiesty of Emperors or Kings, or any way to lessen the reuerence due to their persons and dignity, he proueth by the vndoubted testimonies of Scrip∣ture, of S. Chrysostome, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory, and other learned Fathers, as also by the acknowledgment of the most godly Christian Emperors, and Kings themselues, that the Episcopall and Sacerdotall dignity excelleth the Imperial, as farre as gold surpasseth lead, and the Soule the body; that not only Constantine the great, but God himselfe hono∣reth Bishops, and Priests, with the name of Angells and Gods; that the Bishop is the Father, the Doctor, & Pastor aswell of the Prince, as of the people; and that Christian Princes, when they speake of the B. of Rome, or write to him, ex∣presse their acknowledgment of his supreme dignity, by giuing him the title of Holy Father, and, Most Blessed Father. From whence it must follow, that as Disciples owe obe∣dience to their Doctor, Children to their Father, & sheepe to their Pastor, so Christian Princes in the affaires of their soules, owe obedience to their Prelates and Pastors, and es∣pecially to the Pope, who is the Father, the Archpastor, & chiefe Doctor of all Christians.
Vpon this ground S. Gregory Nazianzen for his pro∣found learning surnamed, The Deuine, feared not to say to the EmperorOrat. ad ciues suos timo. percul. & Princip. irascent.: Will you heare me with patience, to speake my mind freely vnto you? which truly you ought to do for so much as the law of Christ hath made you subiect to my power, and to my tribunall for we (Bishops) haue an Empire also, and that more perfect then yours, vnlesse you will plead, that the spirit is inferior to the flesh and heauenly things to earthly. But I doubt not, but that you will take in good part this my freedome of speach, you being a sacred sheepe of my holy flock and a Disciple of the Grand Pastor, rightly instructed by the holy Ghost, euen from your yong yeares. And vpon the same ground it was, that holy S. Bernard gaue this admonition to Conradus the EmperorEp. 183.: I haue read; Let euery soule he subiect to higher powers; and he that resisteth power, resisteth the ordinance of God. Which sentence I greatly desire, and by all meanes admonish you to obserue in yelding reuerence to the soueraigne, and Apostolike See, and to the Vicar of blessed Peter, as you will haue it exhibited to you, by the whole Empire. These learned Fathers did vnderstand right well the ho∣nor due to Emperors and Kinges, & that by reason of their dignity, they are to be held in great Veneration: and yet neuerthelesse conceaued it no vilifiyng of their Maiesty, nor abasing of their Persons, to require from them obe∣dience in spirituall affaires to their Bishops and Pastors; & especially to the Successor of S. Peter, the supreme Bishop of Bishops, and Pastor of all Pastors. This is Bellarmines Doctrine, and the summe of his dis∣course; which puts you so farre out of patience, that not be∣ing able to confute what he hath so solidly proued, you be∣gin to raile at the PopePag. 160.164. for permitting his feete to be kissed, as tasting rankly of Luciferian pride: Which, though it be no Argument either against the fayth or supremacy of the Pope, and Church of Rome, but a friuolous cauill no way pertinent to the question in hand, hath bene already satis∣fied to the fullChap. 10.. 2. You goe on in the same streame, telling vsPag. 160., that, we make a barbarous boast our Popes, in not admitting of two Em∣perors, Henry the fourth, and Frederick Barbarossa to their presence,
without a me kind of subuission; the one, by appoathing vpon his bare seet; the other, by subiecting his neck vnto the Popes feet; while as the Popes one may brag of more fauor then the first, and his asse, thou the second. So you: but your scoffes rebound vpon your owne head, and turne to your shame: for Henry the fourth, a most flagitious Emperor, was excommunicated by Gregory the seauenth, moued and solicited therto, by the many complaints, and extreme importunity of all the Princes Ecclesiasticall, and secular of Germany. Henry see∣ing himselfe for saken by them all, and fearing, least they would depriue him of his Empire, vnlesse he reconciled himselfe to the Church, and procured absolution from the excommunication he had incurred, came of his owne ac∣cord to the Pope, and presented himselfe vnto him, in a pe∣nitentiall habit, and bare-foot, crauing absolution: which after three dayes instance the Pope granted him, & hauing inuited him to dinner courteously dismissed him. This in briefe is the story related more at large by BaroniusAnno 1077., who hauing proued, that this pennance was no way extorted by the Pope, but freely done by the Emperor, con∣uinceth Ben no (that affirmed the contrary) of a most im∣pudent lye, told, reclamantibus omnibus Authoribus, against the agreeing consent of all Authors. Wherfore you in alleaging Ba∣ronius for your author, that, we make a barbarous boast of the Popes not admitting this Emperor without approaching on his bare feet, impose falsly on Baronius, as Benno did on the Pope. And as litle truth do I find, in that your other tale of Fredericus Barbarossa: for we are so farre from making any boast therof, that we know it to be a mere fable; in proofe wherof, you bring nothing but the bare testimony of Mas∣sonius, who whether he report it or no I know not, nor is it worth the examining: for you know him to be a mo∣derne, fabulous, and forbidden AuthorIn indice lib. prohib., and that this fa∣ble of his is disproued by BaroniusAnno 1177. n. 86.87., and Bellarmine,in Apol. c. 16. out of the testimonies of Roger Houeden an historian of that time, & Romualdus Archbishop of Salernum, who being present, and an eye witnesse of all that passed, wri∣teth, that Frederick falling downe prostrate at the Popes
feet, the Pope with teares did most courteously lift him vp in his armes. But what if that Pope had carried himselfe proudly towards the Emperor, is that any Argument to disproue the Doctrine & Primacy of the Roman Church, or any excuse to you for your leauing the Catholike fayth, and departing from the Church of Christ? But such Argu∣ments are fittest for a grand Imposture. 3. Because you cannot answeare Bellarmines Argu∣ments, nor deny the truth of his Doctrine, otherwise then by giuing the lye to the holy Saints, and renowned Do∣ctors of Gods Church, you passe ouer their testimonies, & his whole discourse out of them, with a fraudulent reticence of the particulars, and thinke to be euen with him, making vp by scoffing, what you cannot by arguing: Bellarmine (say you)Pag. 160. sin. 161. in his last worke intitled, the Duty of a Christian Prince, dedignifieth, and abaseth Princes, by wresting violently to a generall rule of office and duty, all the examples of honor be could rake out of the ashes of Princes, Kings, and Emperors, yeilded either to Popes, Bishops, or Priests, in the superlatiue excesse of their humility, zeale, and deuotion; and with extreme dotage exacteth very soberly a prebition, and drinking of Bishops, and Priests before them. These are your words, in which you cunningly reduce all Bellar∣mines proofes to examples, that by scoffing at the example of S. Martin (for you mention no other) you may seeme to haue answeared all the rest of his proofes, in which not only Princes by their examples, but the holy Doctors with most cleare and vnanswearable words, auerre the truth of his Doctrine. Nor, is it Bellarmine, whom you condemne of extreme dotage, but in him, that most ancient, venerable, & renow∣ned Bishop of Tours, S. Martin, a man of Apostolicall san∣ctity, that was (sayth S. Bernard)Serm. in festo S. Mar∣timi. rich in merits, rich in mi∣racles, rich in vertues; that raised three dead men to life, that restored light to the blinde, hearing to the deafe, speach to the dumbe; that hea∣led the halting and lame, the withered and dry; that escaped great pe∣rills by his diuine vertue; that repelled the flames of fire opposing his owne body against them; that clensed a leper with a kisse, cured the palsy, euercame Diuells; saw Angells, and prophesied things to come.
This Apostolicall Prelate being earnestly inuited to din∣ner by the Emperor Maximus, when diuers of his fellow Bishops assembled in a Prouinciall Synod were present at Court, and seeing them vse base and obiect flattery to the Emperor, and other temporall Princes, making themselues and their Episcopall Dignity contemptible to the Laity, with no small dishonor to Gods Church, and hurt as well to their owne, as to lay-mens soules, he, in whom alone (sayth Seuerus Sulpitius)Vita 8. Martin, c. 23. Apostolicall authority remained, to ad∣monish the Emperor and Princes there present, of their re∣uerence due to their Pastors, and also to let the Bishops & all other Pastors, see their basenesse, in vilifiyng them∣selues to their sheep, giuing them occasion to contemne, & disobey them, in things important for the good of their soules: he (I say) when at dinner the Emperors owne cup was first presented vnto him, by the Emperors command, hauing drunke therof, gaue it not to the Emperor, but to his Chaplaine, because (sayth Sulpitius) he thought no man there more worthy to drinke after himselfe, then his Priest. This is the example of S. Martin, alleaged by Bellar∣mine, reported and commended by Sulpitius, and many o∣ther ancient and iudicious authors, that haue written his life, as an heroicall act of true Episcopall magnanimity and grauity. If you, and such as vilify the Episcopall function, and lay it (as S. Ambrose saythEp. 32. vnder lay-mens feet, relish it not, tis no wonder: but that being the fact of Martin the myrror of Prelates, you should scoffe at it, and at Bellar∣mine for reporting it in proose of Sacerdotall dignity; who can but wonder, and thinke you to faile not only in iudg∣ment, but euen in point of ciuility, & good manners, that will offer to controle S. Martin, and teach good manners not only to him, but to Seuerus Sulpitius, a man of most noble parentage, borne and bred vp in Rome, the Head & Mistres of Ciuill Policy and Vrbanity. But when you say, Bellarmine hath raked out of the asbesof Princes, Kings, and Emperors, all the examples he could, of honor yielded either to Popes, Bishops, or Priests, in the superlatiue excesse of their humility, zeale, and denotion, and wrested them to a generall
rule of office, and duty, I must craue pardon if I thinke you to ouerlath, and that willingly: for Bellarmine could haue told you, that the holy Bishop and Martyr IgnatiusEp. ad Philadelph., so ancient, that (as he writeth of himselfe) he saw our Sauiour in mortall flesh, prescribing that order of obedience in Christs Church, wherby vnity may be preserued in all, ad∣monisheth Princes and soldiers to obey the Emperor; Priests, Dea∣cons, and all the rest of the Clergy and people, whosoeuer they be, sol∣diers, Princes yea the Emperor himselfe, to obey the Bishop, the Bi∣shop Christ, as Christ obeyeth his Father, that so vnity may be preser∣ued in all. And in his Epistle to the Christians of Smirna he∣aduiseth them in the first place, to honor God, next the Bishop as bearing his image and then the King. He could haue told you, that the 318. Fathers assembled in the Councell of Nice, (one of the foure, which S. Gregory reuerenced as the foure Ghospells) decreedCon. 80  Grac. & A∣rab. as a doctrine to be belieued by all Christians, that the B. of Rome is aboue all Christian Prin∣ces, and people, as being the Vicar of Christ our Lord ouer all people, & ouer all the Christian Church. He could haue told you, that when pennance was enioyned to Philip the first Chri∣stian EmperorEuseb. l. . hist. c. 7. for faultes that were bruited of him, he willingly performed what was enioyned him by the Priest shewing by his deeds, that the feare of God, and a great esteeme of Religion liued in him. He could haue told you, that the most religious Em∣peror Theodosius being excommunicated by S. AmbroseThd., . c. 7. was so farre from denying the authority of S. Ambrose ouer him that he submitted himselfe with all humlity, and crauing absolution with harty repentance and teares ob∣tained it. As Arcadius also in like case did of Innocentius PopeNiceph. l. 13. c.33. Ce∣dren. & Gly∣cas in Arcad.. He could haue told you, that Iustinian writ to Pope Iohn: We yield honor to the Apostolike See, and to your Bles∣sednesse (which is and euer hath bene our desire) and honor your Ho∣lynesse, as it becometh vs to honour our Father. He could haue told you of Charles the Great, who as he was inferior to no Prince that euer was, in wisdome and valour; so he most excelled in true piety, deuotion, and zeale to Gods cause, & most especially in his filiall affection, and obedience to the See Apostolike, in so much that he hath left an especiall
Constitution, as a perpetuall monument therof, to the worldApud Gratis. d. 19. c. 30. & in Conc. Tribu∣rieu. c. 30.. He could haue told you, that Basilius Macedo being present at the eight generall Councell, in his Oration to the Fathers there assembled, madeAct. 6. append. open profession of his obedience to be Bishop and Church of Rome; and that he gaue this memorable aduice to the LaityOras in fine Conc., that, where∣as not they, but Bishops haue the charge of gouerment in the Church, with the power of binding and loosing, the dignity of Pastors belongs to them: and that as well himselfe, as all lay-men are sheep to be fed, to be sanctified, to be bound, and losed from their bonds by them. And if from Emperors he had passed to Kings, he could haue told you, that howbeit in the time of Lucius the first Christian King of this Iland, there were many Churches sounded in Germany, France, and Spaine, yet he desiring to be made a Christian, required not the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme from any Bishop of those Countries, nearer at hand, but writ, and sent Embassadors to Eleutherius Pope, that from him, as from the supreme Pastor and Gouernor of the vniuersall Church, himselfe, his Queene, and people might receaue so necessary a Sacrament, as they did by the hands of Fugatius, and Damianus, whom Eleutherius sent for that purpose into BritaineBed. hist. Augl. l. 1. c. 4. & de sex ae∣sat.. He could haue told you, that Of win King vnderstanding that the keyes of Heauen were giuen to S. Peter, and that the Bishop of Rome was his Successor, resolued not to oppose him, but so farre forth as he knew, and was able to obey his decrees in all thingsBed. hist. Augl. l. 3. c. 25.. He could haue told you, that Pope Adrian the first being dead, and Leo chosen in this place, Kenulphus King of the Mercians writ to himConti∣nuat. histor. Bode l. 1. c. 12., giuing thankes to God, that he had prouided for his flock so solicitous a Pastor, to whose commands (said he) I thinke fit to lend humbly an obedient eare. And hauing asked his benediction, he addeth: This benediction, all the Kings of the Mercians, which haue gone before me, haue obtained. And that which I humbly craue, and desire to obtayne from you, O most holy, is that you accept of me, as your adopted Child, as I choose, and with all obedience, reuerence you, in the place of a Father. He could haue told you, that S. Edward the Confessor writing to Nico∣las PopeAlred. Rieual. in vi∣ta S. Edward., addressed his letter to him, with this inscri∣ption:
To the soueraigne Father of the vniuersall Church, Nicolas, Edward by the grace of God, King of England, due subiection. If from England he had passed to other Countries, he could haue told you, that the most Christian King of France, Lewis the eleauenth, writing to Pius the second, saluted him with this titleEp. ad Pium 2.:To our most blessed Father, Pius the second, Pope, filiall obedieuce. And in the Epistle: We haue you that are the Vicar of the liuing God, in so great veneration, that with a willing minde, we are ready to heare your sacred admonitions (especially in Ecclesiasticall affaires) as the voyce of our Pastor: for we professe, and know you to be the Pastor of our Lords flock, and we obey your commands. And among the documents which this holy King S. Lewis, on his death-bed left in writing to Philip his Sonne, this was oneNangius de gest. S. Lu∣dou. & Su∣rius 25. Aug.: Be thou deuout and obe∣dient to the Roman Church, as to a Mother; and shew thy selfe dutifull to the Bishop therof, as to thy spirituall Father. It were not difficult to adde more testimonies in the same kind of other Kings of France, as of Charles, and Hugh: of Alphonsus the wise, and Ferdinand the Catho∣like of Spaine: of Leo King of the Armenians; of Sigis∣mund of Poland &c. But these may suffice to persuade any iudicious reader, that the most wise, and godly Christian Emperors, and Kings that Christendome hath bred, haue belieued the Pope to be their Pastor, and spirituall Father, and themselues bound to yeld obedience to him in the af∣faires of their soules; and withall to shew the falshood of your contrary Tenet. CHAP. XXX. Whether Christian Emperors haue inue∣sted themselues in Ecclesiasticall affaires. YOV maintaine the affirmatiue, which you proue with seuerall examples, all of them directly against your selfe.
SECT. 1. Constantine the Great inuested not himselfe in Ecclesiasticall Causes. IN the first place you alleage the example of Constantine the great, who was so farre from medling with Eccle∣siasticall causes, that being solicited in the Councel of Nice, to heare and determine certaine controuersies of Bishops, he answearedRuffin. l. 1 c. 1.8. Greg. l. 4  72. Ba∣ron. an. 32.: God hath constituted you Priests, and giuen you power to iudge of vs: and therfore we are rightly iudged by you; but you cannot be iudged by men. Wherefore expect yee the iudgment of God alone, and let your quarrels, whatsoeuer, be referred to his di∣uine iudgment: for God hath giuen you to vs, as Gods, and it is not fit, that man should iudge Gods, but he alone, of whom it is writtenPsal. 81.1. God stood in the congregation of Gods, and iudgeth Gods in the mid∣dest of them. In these words Constantine acknowledgeth the Episcopall power to be aboue the Imperiall, and that a Priest in Ecclesiasticall causes hath power to iudge of an Emperor, if he be in his Parish: wheras contrariwise the Priest cannot be iudged by the Emperor, more then the Pastor by his sheep, or God by men. But you obiectPag. 161. Constantine iudged the cause of Ce∣cilian B. of Carthage. And this you esteeme to be so choice an Argument, that afterwards you repeate it twice againe,Pag. 21. & 327. but very vnaduisedly; this very example alone being of it selfe an abosolute demonstration of the falshood of your Doctrine; for first the Donatists, that required iudges from Constantine in the cause of Cecilian, were heretikes, who as they had forsaken the communion of Gods Church, and (as S. Augustine saythEp. 1. were guilty of the horrible crime of erecting Altar against altars so in their recourse to Constantine they violated the lawes of the Church: for, it is (said S. Mar∣tin (Seuer. Sulpititius ist. scra l. 2. to the Emperor Maximus) a new and neuer heard of impiety, that a secular iudge should iudge a cause of the Church. And
S. AthanasiusEp. ad So∣lit. What hath the Emperor to do with the iudg∣ments of Bishops? Hath it euer heue heard, since the beginning of the world that the iudgments of the Church did take their force from the EmperorEp. ad Constant ex∣tat aud Ba∣ron. anno 355.? And Osius admonishing Constantius the Arian Emperor: Intermeddle not (O Emperor) in Ecclesiasticall causes, nor take vpon you to command vs in this kinde, but rather learne those things from vs. To you, God hath committed the Empere; the affaires of the Church to vs. And as he that maliciously carpeth at our gouer∣ment, resists the ordinance of God; so take you heed that in assuming to your selfe those things which belong to the Church, you make not your selfe guilty of a most hainous crime: for it is written giue to Cesar those things, which are Cesars, and those which are Gods, to God. The like reprehension was giuen to the same Emperor by Leontius, that famous B. of Cesaraea, who had bene present at the Councell of Nice, & whom Cregorius PresbyterSpoud anno 32. . . tearmeth. equall to the Angells. I wonder (said he to Constan∣tius)Suid. in Leou. that you being appointed to order, and gouerneone thing do meddle with others: you are chiefe commander in military, and ciuill affaires and you presume to ordaine what Bishops shall do in things that belong to Bishops alones. And when the Captaine of the he∣reticall Emperor Valens required the Priests and Deacons of Edessa, to submit to the Emperor in matters of religion, representing to them, that it was madnesse to resist so great a Monarch; Eulogius a Priest of the same City answeared pleasantlyTheodor. l. 4. hit. c. .: What? hath Valens together with the Empire got∣ten also the place and dignity of a Bishop? And when Dalmatius the Tribune with a publike Notary, was sent by Valenti∣nian the yonger, to summon S. Ambrose to a disputation with Auxentius the Arian Bishop, and others of his sect, in the Emperors pallace, before him, and his Courtiers:L. . op. 3. I ans∣wered (sayth S. Ambrose to the Emperor) the same, that your Father of glorious memory, not only answered in words vpon like oc∣casion but also established by his lawes, that in causes of fayth, and Ec∣clesiasticall order, Priests only are to iudge of Priests: yea further, that if a Bishop should be questioned for his manners, this iudgment should likewise appertaine to Bishops &c. When haue you euer heard, mst clement Emperor, that lay: men did iudge of Bishop in matters of fayth? You are yet youg in yeares: you will by Gods grace, and the
maturity of age, be better informed; and then you will be able to iudge what manner of Bishop he is to be accounted, that subiects the right of Priesthood to lay men. Your Father being a man of riper yeares, said: It belongs not to me to be a Iudge among Bishops: and will your Clemency now say, that you ought to be their Iudge? So S. Am∣brose. But what need we further proofes? Did not Constan∣tine himselfe, whom here you obiect, refuse to heare the causes of Bishops, answearingRuffin. l. 1. c. 1. S. Greg. l 4. ep. 72.: That Bishops had power to iudge of Emperors, but not Emperors to iudge of Bishops, shewing therby that he acknowledged himselfe to haue no power of a Iudge in Ecclesiasticall causes? Yea and this very fact of Constantine which you obiect, is so farre from yelding any precedent for secular Princes to iudge Ecclesiasticall causes, that it manifestly concludeth the contrary: for when the Donatists required him to giue them Iudges in the cause of Cecilian B. of Carthage, he stood amazed at their impu∣dency. He durst not (sayth S. Augustine)Ep. 166. iudge the cause of a Bishop. And OptatusL. 1. cont. Parmen.: He answeared them with a spirit full of indignation: you aske of me iudgment in this world; of me (I say) that do my selfe attend the iudgement of Christ: You would haue me to make my selfe a Iudge of the Ministers of Christ, I that do my selfe expect the iudgement of Christ. Wherfore though Constantine at the importunity of the Donatists, granted them Iudges of the Gaules, as they required, he did it not without making this protestation before hand, that it belonged not to him to meddle with the iudgement of Christs Ministers. And notwithstanding that the Donatists who demanded Iudges, and the Iudges which Constantine assigned them, as also Constantine himselfe, were then all actually present in France, yet he caused the Donatists together with the Iudges which he had giuen them, to trauaile to Rome, that according to the ancient custome and lawes of the ChurchAthan. Apol. . So∣zom. l. 3. c. 9. And See aboue Chap. 26. the cause might be iudged by the Popes direction, and vnder his pre∣sidency. And this remission of the cause from his owne Court to the Popes tribunall, was not by way of commission or de∣legation
from himselfe, as from a Superior Iudge to the Pope, as to an inferior (as you falsly suppose) but by way of remission to him, to whom he knew that iudicature in right to belong: for how could the Emperor that professed himselfe to haue no right of a Iudge in the causes of Bi∣shops, giue power and commission vnto others, to iudge the cause of Cecilian? Wherfore, although S. Augustine in regard of the Donatists intention, call this remission, a dele∣gation, yet withall he declareth, that the reason of this dele∣gation, was, because the Emperor durst not iudge the cause of a Bishop: which sheweth, that it was not a delegation of au∣thority, and power, but a relegation or remission of the cause, to whom the iudgement therof in right appertained. Nor doth it import, that he remitted not this cause to the Pope alone, but to him, and other Bishops his Colleagues: for he remitted it not to them equally, but to the Pope, as to the chiefe Iudge, and President, and to the others, as to the Pope Assessors. Melchiades (sayth S. AugustineCont. Iu∣lian. l. . c. 2. Bi∣shop of the Apostolike See being President, Reticius was present as a Iudge, with others. And againeCont. Par∣men. l. 1. c. 5.: By the arbitrement of Con∣stantine, the cause was heard by Bishops Iudges, ouer whom presided Melchiades B. of the Citty of Rome. Behold, how exactly S. Augustine attributes to euery one, what belonged vnto them. Constantine was an Arbitrator: the other Bishops present as Iudges assessors to Melchiades, and as witnesses of his proceedings: Melchiades chiefe Iudge, and Presi∣dent. And therfore he, as hauing full authority, did not con∣tent himselfe with taking for his Assistents, the three French Bishops nominated by the Emperor; but by his owne au∣thority, added to them other fifteene of Italy whose names Optatus rehearsethCont. Par∣men. l. 1.: wheras if he had not bene abso∣lute Iudge by his owne authority, but only by delegation from Constantine he could not haue added any other Iud∣ges to those three which Constantine nominated. Againe, his authority appeared in this, that none of the Assistants, but he in the name of the whole Councell, and as Presi∣dent therof, pronounced the sentence: How innocent (sayth S. AugustineEp. 2. was the definitiue sentence pronounced by blessed
Melchlades, how entire, how prudent, how peaceable? in so much that S. Augustine greatly commendeth him for it, sayingIbid.: O blessed man! O sonne of Christian peace, and Father of Christian people! Neuerthelesse, those rebellious Donatists rested not but from the iudgement of the Pope, appealed againe to the Emperor; which he so much misliked, that he called itEp. ad E∣pisc. Cathol ad calc. gest. pur∣gat. Cecil. & Felic., A great phrensy, incredible arrogancy, a thing not fit to be spoken, or heard, a mad impudency of fury, a recourse to a secular iudgement from an heauenly, and a contempt of Christes authority. And yet out of a great desire he had to gaine them yelding to their importunity, or (as S. Augustine saythEp. 166. giuing way to their peruersnesse, and hoping, that what he did would be auowed by the See Apostolike, he granted them another Councell of 200. Bishops at Arles, which hauing duely examined their cause, confirmed the Popes sentence, & therfore gaue them no more satisfaction, then the Roman Councell had done. Wherfore from this Councell, they had recourse againe to the Emperor, beseeching him to take the examination of the cause into his owne hands; which he did, but yet, A sanctis antistitibus postea veniam petiturusS. Aug. ep. 162., with intention to aske pardon afterwards of the holy Bishops, for medling in a cause, that belonged not to his Court, but to theirs. But what? did Constantines iudgement appease the fury of those ob∣stinat heretikes? No: The Emperor (sayth S. AugustineIbid. is chosen Iudge the Emperors iudgement is despised. But no won∣der: for what els could be expected from such rebellious spirits, but that as they had refused to stand to the sentence of the Church, so also they should contemne the iudgement of the Emperor? Who is there then, that seeth not how far this history is from prouing that Constantine acknowledged in him∣selfe any authority to meddle in Ecclesiasticall causes since he durst not iudge the cause of a Bishop? and charged the Dona∣tists with neuer heard of impudency, arrogancy impiety fury per∣nersnesse porensy, and contemp of Christs authority, in flying from the iudgement of the Church to his secular tribunall? And
that if in this cause he did any way assume to himselfe the person of a Iudge, it was with protestation to aske pardon of the holy Bishops, and in hope it would be auowed by them, for as much as what he did, was out of a desire to quiet the Donatists, and reduce them to the peace and communion of the Catholike Church. And how far this example of the Donatists is from hel∣ping your cause, or hurting ours, S. Augustine will yet bet∣ter informe youCont. lic. Petil. l. 2. c. 92. & Ep. 166.: for as when they were condemned by the Church, they fled to Cōstantine, so when they were repulsed and condemned by him, they despised his iudge∣ment, and appealed to Iulian an Apostata from Christian religion, and a professed enemy to Christ, beseeching him to restore vnto them the Churches which Catholike Prin∣ces had taken from them, and to that end honored him with this ElogyEp. 166. That in him alone all iustice remained: which gaue S. Augustine cause to say vnto themIbid.: If it were in your power, you would not now call against vs Constantine a Chri∣stian Emperor, because he defended the truth; but you would rather raise Iulian the Apostata from hell. How far these words of S. Augustine may touch you, for producing this example of the sacrilegious Donatists, as a precedent of your doctrine, and Constantine as a paterne for secular Princes to meddle in Ecclesiasticall iudgments, I leaue to the readers censure: for if (as you pretend) this example of the Donatists flying from the iudgment of the Church to Constantine, be of force to proue, that the Popes iudgement will suffer an hi∣gher appeale, why shall it not also be of force to proue, that the iudgement of Constantine will suffer an higher ap∣peale to Iulian the Apostata? for the example of these Do∣natists is a precedent for the one, as well as for the other. A second history which you obiectPag. 16. to proue, that the Popes iudgement will suffer an higher appeale, is, that in the case of Athanasius. Constantine chargeth all the Bishops of the Prouince of Tyre, to appeare before him without delay, and to shew how sincere∣ly and truly the had giuen their iudgements. The case is this: Di∣uers hereticall Bishops of the East, Arians, Meletians, and Colluthians, assembled themselues at Tyre, to accuse A∣thanasius
of many crimes, which themselues had mali∣ciously forged, and suborned false witnesses to testify a∣gainst him, that so they might seeme to haue iust occasion to abstaine from his communion, & condemne him. Con∣stantine being informed therof, at the intreaty of Athana∣sius, call's them to him to yeld accompt of their procee∣ding, Ergo (say you) the Popes iudgment will suffer an higher ap∣peale. A false consequence: for S. Athanasius fled from the said Councell of Tyrus, vnto Constantine, not as to his competent Iudge, but as to the Protector of Innocency, and of the Church, to be maintayned in the possession of his Bisho∣pricke, honor & life; against which his Arian aduersaries were with such violent and insuperable malignity bent, as he had no meanes to auoyd so great mischiefs, tending to the ouerthrow of Catholike Religion, but by imploring the ayde of the supreme secular Power. That in this case Cler∣gymen and Bishops may haue recourse vnto the arme of temporal Princes, S. PaulAct. 28. Coactus sum appellare Caesarem. shewed by his example, asAthanas. Apolog. 2. ad Constantium. S. Athanasius, andAugust. Epist. 48.50. & 204. S. Augustine, and out of them SuarezSuarez defensio fidei lib. 4. c. 10. n. 5. obserueth. Lastly you obiectPag. 161. fin. 162., that, When the cause Ecclesiasti∣call requireth, Constantine proceedeth to denounce punishment by his owne authority, against whomsoeuer that shall honor the me∣mory of those Bishops, Theognis, and Eusebius. These two Bi∣shops were Arians, and great fyrebrands of that blasphe∣mous sect, which had bene condemned, & an athematized by the holy Councell of Nice; and moreouer had commit∣ted many other most enormous crimes, some of which Constantine hauing mentioned in his Epistle to the people of Nicomedia, addethTheod. l. 1. hist. c. 20.: If any one shall be so temerarious, and audacious, as to goe about to praise, and honor the memory of those plagues of the Church (Theognis and Eusebius) he shall presently be punished by me for his folly. These words of Constantine shew, that he did not threaten punishment to any Eccle∣siasticall person, but to the people of Nicomedia, if they should audaciously presume to honor those Heretikes, whom the Church had condemned: which was not to as∣sume any Ecclesiasticall authority to himselfe, but to do his
duty, and what the lawes of God, and his Church require at the hands of euery good Christian Prince, which is to de∣fend and maintaine the authorities and iudgements of the Church. But I must aduertise you, of some ignorant mistakes: you sayPag. 161. out of S. Augustine, that Constantine commit∣ted the cause of Cecilian to Melchiades Pope. But in three other placesPag. 221. 327. 328. contradicting your selfe, and S. Augustine, you say, he committed it to Pope Iulius, shewing therin your ignorance in Ecclesiasticall history: for if (as S. Au∣gustine truly sayth) it was committed to Melchiades, how could it be committed to Iulius, who was not chosen Pope, till aboue 20. yeares after Melchiades his death, and betweene whom, and Iulius, were other two Popes, Syl∣uester, & Marke? With like ignorance you sayPag. 161., The Em∣peror chargeth all the Bishops of the Prouince of Tyre to appeare be∣fore him: for Tyre hath not many Bishops, nor is it a Pro∣uince, but a City in the prouince of Phenicia, in which the Arians held their wicked Councell against S. Athanasius. SECT. II. Doctor Mortons second Example of Theodosius examined. THat Theodosius acknowledged no subiection to the B. of Rome, you proue by his interesting himselfe in Ecclesiasticall affaires. Of the Emperor Theodosius (say youPag. 161. we read, that he gaue to the Bishop Dioscorus, authority, and superio∣rity of place, to moderate causes in a Councell. This you speake of that most godly and religious Emperor Theodosius the el∣der: for here, and in your Index of the tenth Chapter pre∣fixed before this your Grand Imposture, you name him immediatly after Constantine, and before Theodosius the yonger: and both in the same Index, and page 167. you ex∣presly declare that the Emperor which you obiect against vs immediatly after Constantine is Theodosius the elder. And finally because vnlesse by this Theodosius, you meane
the elder, you obiect nothing at all out of him against vs, which yet in the places alleaged you professe to do in this Chapter. Wherfore I must make bold to tell you, that in this your instance you discouer extreme ignorance in Ecclesiasticall history: for Theodosius the elder died the yeare 394. which was 50. yeares before Dioscorus was made Bishop. How then could he giue to Dioscorus authority and superiority of place, to moderate causes in a Councell? If you had not bene ignorant, and willing to lay hold of any thing, true or false, to help your selfe in the defence of a bad cause, you should haue said, that Theodosius (not the elder, but) the yonger, sauo∣ring the Arch-heretike Eutyches, and seduced by his high Chamberlaine Chrysaphius an Eutychian Heretike, gaue authority to Dioscorus an hereticall Bishop of Alexandria, & of the same sect with Eutyches, to moderate causes, not in a true Councell, but in a sacrilegions Conuenticle at Ephe∣sus, in which Eutyches was absolued, his heresy approued; the Catholike Bishops that had condemned him in a Sy∣nod at Constantinople, vnder Flauianus Patriarke of that City, not permitted to speake; all such as were knowne to be zealous maintainers of the Catholike fayth against Eu∣tyches, deposed; others sent into banishment; the Popes Le∣gates thrust out of the Councell; the holy Patriarch Flauia∣nus by the faction of Dioscorus barbarously misused, bea∣ten, and wounded to death; the Bishops that figned, com∣pelled therto by famin, and force of armes, the Emperors soldiers ruling all by violence and tyranny, and many o∣ther outragious villanies committed: in so much that this Conuenticle hath neuer deserued the name of a lawfull Councell, but by all writers is called Synodus Piratica, and Latrocinium Ephesinum, The piraticall Synod, and the Ephesine thee∣uery, or (as Socrates termeth itL. 1. c. 9. & 10. Vesanum Ephesi Conciliabu∣lum, The frantike Conuenticle of Ephesus: And the Acts therof were soone after condemned by Leo PopeEp. 24., and repea∣led by the holy Councell of ChalcedonAct. 1.. I appeale now to the Reader, whether you haue not shewed great ignorance, and in the highest degree wron∣ged
that most religious Emperor Theodosius the elder, in making him patron of the Eutychian heresy, and charging him falsly with assembling that sacrilegious Synagogue of Ephesus; and most of all, in producing him for your Prote∣stant doctrine against the Roman Church? to which he so firmely adhered, that he held her to be the Head, and cen∣ter of Catholike communion. And therfore intending to establish the true fayth, and free the whole Empire from the pernicious doctrines of diuers heretikes, which liued in those dayes, he made that famous Law, which Iustinian hath inserted into his Code, and marcheth in the front therofCod. tit. 1. L. 1.: Our will is, that all the people ruled by the Empire of our Clemency, shall liue in the same religion which the diuine Apostle Pe∣ter deliuered to the Romans, as the religion insinuated by him wit∣nesseth vntill this present day, and which it is manifest, that the high Priest Damasus followeth, and Peter of Alexandria, a man of Apo∣stolicall sanctity: that is to say, Peter, who being driuen out of his Seat of Alexandria by Lucius the Arian intruder, ap∣pealed to RomeSocrat. l. 4. c. 36., and had bene newly restored & con∣firmed by Damasus in the Patriarchall seat of that City. And the same, or not vnlike to this law of Theodosius, is that, which Gratian that gouerned the Empire together with Theodosius, made, to reduce all heretikes to the true Church, and fayth of Christ: He made a law (sayth Theodo∣retL. 5. hist. c. 2. by which he commanded the holy Churches to be deliuered to them, that agreed in communion with Damasus: which command∣ment (as he further expressethIbid. c. 2. init. was without contradiction executed throughout all Nations. By this it appeares, that if Do∣ctor Morton had liued in the dayes of Theodosius, & Gra∣tian, they would haue taken from him the Church of Du∣tham, & deliuered it to a Bishop of the Romā Cōmunion. SECT III. Doctor Mortons third instance of Theodosius the yonger, and Honorius, examined. YOu go on, obiectingPag. 162. out of the Glosse in C. Renouantes: Theodosius the yonger, and Honorius, both Emperors, say, that
the Patriarke of Constantinople hath the same right ouer those in subiection to him, which the Pope hath euer his. Why do you falsify? The Chapter is taken out of the Trullan Synod vnder Iustinian the yonger, who liued long after Theodosius & Honorius. Againe the words of the Glosse are, Imperator di∣cit, The Emperor sayth: but mention of Honorius or Theodo∣sius there is none: thats your false comment. The Glosse ci∣teth the Emperor in Authentica, de Ecclesiasticis titulis, which was not written by Honorius, nor by Theodosius, but by Iustinian the elder. And how far he was from equalling the B. of Constantinople with the Pope, you may vnder∣stand, not only by other his LawesSee Sect. sequent., but euen by this very Authentica, which out of the Glosse you obiect: We ordaine (sayth he)Authen. de eccles. tit. c. 2. according to the definitions of the holy Coun∣cells, that the most holy Pope of the elder Rome is to be the first of all Prelates, and that the most blessed Archbishop of Constantinople, new Rome, shall haue the second place after the holy See Apostelike of old Rome, and shall be preferred before all the other Sees. But you vrge: the Glosse alleageth the Emperor saying, that the B. of Constantinople hath the same right ouer those in sub∣iection vnder him, which the Pope hath ouer his. True: but the same Glosse declareth (which you conceale) that this simi∣litude of rights between them, is not in all respects, but in quibusdam, in some, which the Glosse nominateth. Yf you compare them precisely, as Bishops of their peculiar Dio∣ceses of Rome, and Constantinople, or as Patriarkes, he of Constantinople hath the same rightes in his Dioces, and Patriarkeship of Constantinople, that the Pope (considered precisely as Bishop and Patriarke) hath ouer his Dioces of Rome, & Patriarkeship of the West. But besides these two dignities, the Pope is Chief of all Prelates, and Gouernor of the vniuersall Church; to which titles the B. of Constan∣tinople hath no right, but in regard of them is inferior to the Pope, and subiect to him. And so much you might haue vnderstood, if from the Glosse, you had turned your eyes to the texts of that, and the precedent Chapter, which declare that the Pope is aboue the B. of Constantinople, and hath power to depose him, when there is cause. And you might
also haue called to minde, that many Patriarkes of Con∣stantinople haue bene deposed by diuers Popes, & among them Anthymus by Agapet, in the very City of Constan∣tinople, in the presence of Iustinian, which neither he, nor Theodora the Empresse that protected Anthymus would haue permitted, if they had not acknowledged the subie∣ction of the Patriarke of Constantinople, to the B. of Rome. SECT. IV. Doctor Mortons fourth instance of Theodosius and Valentinian, examined. THe Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian (say you)Pag. 162. in their letters to Cyrill, require all Bishops without exception, to be present at the Councell of Ephesus, as they meane to auoid the sentence of condemnation vpon themselues. Wherupon Pope Leo is glad to returne an answeare, excusing his not coming by the exigence of time, and his other instant occasions, within his owne Dioces, which would not permit him to be absent from his See, and therefore hopeth (his owne words) to obtaine so much pardon, and fauor, that his Le∣gates may be accepted of in his stead. These your words are full of ignorance and falshood: for first, the letters of Theodo∣sius and Valentinian to Cyrill were to call him, and other Bishops to the first Councell of Ephesus, which was held & finished in the tyme Celestine Pope, nine yeares before Leo was created B. of Rome. Is it not then palpable igno∣rance, to say, that, Leo is glad to returne an answeare excusing his not comming by the exigence of time, and his other instant occasions within his owne Dioces, when as the letters were written nine yeares before he had any Dioces at all, and were neither directed to him, nor any way concerned him? 2. If Theodosius and Valentinian called the Bishops to the first Councell of Ephesus, it was not by their owne authority, but by the authority of Celestine Pope.See aboue Chap. 18. sect. & 2. & Bar. anno 430. 3. Howbeit Theodosius in the yeare 449. which was 19. yeares after the writing of that letter to Cyrill, by his
owne authority assembled the Piratioall Synod of Ephe∣sus in fauor of the Eutychian heresy; yet knowing, that no Councell can be valide, which is not celebrated by the consent and authority of the B. of Rome, he writ to Leo then Pope, inuiting him to it. And this letter it is, which you ignorantly confound with the other written to Cy∣rill, who: was dead siue yeares before the writing of this to Leo. But Leo knowing the error of Eutyches to haue bene condemned already in a Councell at Constantinople, and to be in it selfe so manifestly impious, that (as he writ to the holy Patriarke FlauianusEp. 1., another Councell might no way seeme necessary for the condemnation of it; and withall fore-seeing the great mischiefes that were like to ensue out of the Councell intended by Theodosius, endea∣uored to diuert him wholly from that purpose, or at least to perswade him, that if a Councell were called, it might be held in Italy. But seeing he could draw the Emperor to neither of these conditions, least on his part any thing should be wanting which might seeme auaileable for the destruction of Heresy, and peace of the Church, he sent Legates in his steed to preside in the Councell, at which himselfe could not be present for the reasons expressed in diuers of his epistlesEp. 12.17.18.: in which also he declareth that he sent them armed with his authority, either to restore Eu∣ches to the Catholike communion, if he would renounce his errors and aske pardon of them (as by libell presented to the See Apostolike he had promised to do) or els to pro∣nounce the last sentence of condemnation against him. But wheras you to make good, that the calling of Coun∣cells belongs to Emperors, sayPag. 162.: Leo's owne words are, that he hopeth to obtaine so much pardon, and fauor, that his Legates might be accepted of in his steed, you speake not truly: for his words are: Because you know, that my presence at Rome importeth for the common good, so that, saluâ Clementiae Vestrae veniâ▪ by the good leaue of your Clemency, I might not deny my selfe to the loue, and requests of the Citizens, thinke me to be present in these my brethren whom I haue sent in my steed, and giuen them full instructions, what ought to be obserued. And it is to be noted, that these words are not
spoken by Leo to the Emperors (as out of your discourse it may seeme to our English reader) but to Pulcheria, a wo∣man, who (witnesse the Apostle1. Cor. 14.34. may not speake in the Church, much lesse assemble Councells, or moderate Ec∣clesiasticall causes. Nor do they import any subiection to her in ecclesiasticall affaires; but are merely words of ciuill respect, and vrbanity, fit to be vsed to the person of so great a Lady. And your illation out of them, that Emperors haue power to moderate Ecclesiasticall causes, and assemble Councells, is a consequence, that suiteth not well with your iudgment, and learning. SECT. V. Doctor Mortons fifth instance of Iustinian examined. THe last Emperor you obiect, is Iustinian, Who (say youPag. 162. will hardly please vs, because he authorized vnder his owne hand, the Code, or bookes of Constitutions, and Pandects, for the regulating of the Clergy, as well as of the Laity. That this will hard∣ly please vs, you proue out of Baronius, saying, that herein he is iustly reproued by many, as one inuading vpon, and intruding into the office of diuine Causes. He is indeed reproued by diuers, that thinke him to haue made ecclesiasticall lawes by his owne authority. But by others he is iustly excused, and in parti∣cular by BaroniusAnno 528., alleaging for his iustification (as you confessePag. 166., that he being a man wholly illiterate, his Ec∣clesiasticall Constitutions were made by Epiphanius and Menas Patriarkes of Constantinople, but publised in his name, to the end they might be better obserued; which was no way hurtful, but profitable to the Church, whose lawes were neglected, and contemned by vicious Emperors, and hereticall Prelates and people (which at that tyme aboun∣ded in the East) and especially by the Patriarkes of Con∣stantinople, many of them hauing bene infected with he∣resy. This is apparent out of the expresse testimonies of Iusti∣nian
himselfe, who not once, but often professethNou. 1 de Monast, & monach. Nou. 81.123.133.137., that concerning Ecclesiasticall affaires, he decreed nothing, but according to the prescript of the holy Canons: and therfore Iohn the second Pope of that name, in an Epistle to himExtat a∣pud Baron. anno 534. approueth, and confirmeth his Lawes, being informed by two Bishops Hypatius and Demetrius his Legates, that they were made by the interuention, and consent of Bi∣shops, according to the Doctrine of the See Apostolike, & decrees of the holy Fathers. Wherfore Iustinian in those constitutions did nothing, but what a Catholike and reli∣gious Prince might lawfully do, without preiudice to the authority of the See Apostolike, or inuesting himselfe in any part of Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction. Moreouer that by his Lawes, he intended not to derogate any thing from the authority of the Bishop, or Church of Rome, his Lawes themselues beare witnesse: We preserue (sayth he in his law to Epiphanius Patriarke of Constan∣tinopleCod. tit. 1. L. 7. the estate of the vnity of the most holy Churches, in all things, with the most holy Pope of old Rome, to whom we haue also written the like: for we will not suffer any thing to passe, concerning the affaires of the Church, which shall not be referred to his Blessed∣nesse, because he is the Head of all the holy Prelates of God. And in the Law Inter clarasCod. tit. 1. L. 8., into which is inserted that famous Epistle which he sent by Hypatius and Demetrius, with a solemne Embassage to Pope Iohn, against Cyrus and Eu∣logius, Legates of the Acemites, he sayth: Yielding honor to the Apostolike See, and to your Holynesse, (which is, and euer hath bene our desire) and honoring your Blessednesse as it becometh vs to honor our Father, we haue speedily giuen notice to your Holynesse, of all things, that belong to the ecclesiasticall state: for we haue had great care, to preserue the Vnity of your Apostolike See▪ and the state of the holy Churches of God &c. And thersore we haue made hast to sub∣iect, and vnite all the Priestes of the East partes to the See of your Holynesse: nor do we suffer, that any thing belonging to the state of the Churches (be is neuer so cleare, and vndoubted) be vnknowne to your Holynesse, who are the Head of all the holy Churches. To these restimonies of Iustinian you haue deuised di∣uers answers. 1. With some petty Protestant Lawier you
cauill at his Epistle to the Pope, and the Popes answere to him, as fictitiousPag. 256.. But this to be a calumny, is learnedly proued by the two famous lawiers AlciatusParerg. l. 4. c. 24., and CuiasObseru. l. 12. c. 16.. 2. By Liberatus a writer of the same tymeIn Breu. c. 20., who re∣portes Iustinians embassage sent to the Pope, by Hypatius and Demetrius, and the Popes answeare to him, which are extant in the same Law. 3. By the testimony which Iusti∣nian himselfe giues therof in his Law to Epiphanius Pa∣triarke of ConstantinopleCod. tit. 1. L. 7., and in his Epistle to Agapet Pope. 4. By Leunclauius a Protestant Lawier, who hath translated and printed Iustinians Epistle to the Pope, and the Popes answeare to him, as the eight Law of the Code. 2. Wheras Iustinian call's the Pope, The chief, and Head of all Bishops, and the Roman Church, The Head of all Chur∣ches, you answearePag. 256., that, we haue heard how common the word Caput hath bene, without any sense of Monarchy. We haue indeed heard you sayPag. 50. & 110., that the similitude of Head, and Mem∣bers implieth no superiority of iurisdiction, but only of order, that is, of priority of place, of voyce, and the like. But you also haue heardChap 11. & Chap. 17. sect. 2., how vntrue, and repugnant not only to the be∣liefe of antiquity, but euen to common sense, this is. 3. You obiectPag. 256.: If this Rescript of Iustinian be taken so rigidly, as we would haue it, it is contradictory to another Constitu∣tion of his, in which he grants the chiefe right in ecclesiasticall causes, to belong to the Gouernor of euery Prouince. We know, that as while Iustinian was Catholike, he made no Lawes, but with the consent of Bishops, and confirmation of Popes, so if after he fell into heresy, and contemned the authority of the Church, he made lawes repugnant to the Catholike fayth, and discipline of the Church, t'is no wonder. That proueth against you, that heretikes are they, which make lawes contrary to the fayth, and discipline of the Roman Church; and that if Iustinian had still remained a Catho∣like, he would haue made no such lawes, as he did not be∣fore he fell into heresy. 4. You obiectPag. 166.: Iustinian before he fell into heresy, bani∣shed two Popes, Siluerius, and Vigilius. To proue that he bani∣shed Siluerius, you set downe these words, as of Baronius:
Siluerium Papam mittit in exilium, Iustinian sendeth Siluerius Pope into banishment. But you abuse Baronius: He hath no such words; nor attributes the banishment of Siluerius to the Emperor, but sayth, he was sent into exile by Bellisarius and Antonina his wife; partly at the instigation of the hereticall Empresse Theodora, offended with him, because he would not replace in the See of Constantinople, Anthymus an Euty∣chian heretike, and an inuader of that See, whom therfore Agapet Pope had iustly deposed; and partly for certaine crimes forged against him by her, and Vigilius. Yea Baro∣niusAnno 538. witnesseth, that the Bishop of Patara comming to the Emperor, and shewing him how displeasing it was to God, that the Pope, who is ouer the Church of the whole world, & to whom no King in the world is comparable, should be driuen from his See, he presently commanded him to be recalled from the place of banishment, to Rome, that the accusa∣tions against him of Treason might be examined. But if Baronius had said, that Iustinian himselfe, euen before his fall into heresy, had banished not only Vigilius, (as he doth) but also Siluerius (as Bozius by you cited sayth he did) doth it therfore follow, that he had done well? May not among Catholikes, Children sometimes forgetting their duety, rise against their Parents, and sub∣iects against their Superiors, spirituall, or temporall? May not Catholike Princes be in passion, & displeasure against Bishops, and vpon suspicions, mistakes, and misinforma∣tions, do against them, that, which afterwards they must repent, as King Henry the second did the death of S. Tho∣mas of Canterbury? Did not Constantine misinformed by the Ariaus, banish S. AthanasiusAthan. Apol. 2. So∣crat. l. 2. c. 22.23. Epipha. haer. 66.? And was not S. Chry∣sostome condemned by a Councell of Catholike Bishops, and banished out of a Catholike Citty, by Arcadius a Ca∣tholike Emperor, at the instance of Eudoxia his wyfe, a Catholike Empresse? And yet both he and she were so far from not beliueing the supreme authority of the Roman Church, or thinking it lawfull to liue out of her commu∣nion, that being for this fact excommunicated by Inno∣centius Pope, they humbled themselues, and crauing abso∣lution
with sorrow for their fault, obtained it. What therfore Iustinian did in his wrath, either against Siluerius, or Vigilius, is no Argument to proue his no sub∣iection to the B. of Rome, whom he called and acknow∣ledged to be his Father: but it proueth that in laying vio∣lent hands on Vigilius, he behaued himselfe not like a child, but like an enemy, and persecutor of the Church. For which offence, as also for the great wronges he offered to Eutychius, a most holy Patriarke of Constantinople, for his heresy, auarice, and cruelty, God punished him with a suddaine death. And albeit NicephorusL. 17. c. 31. report, that he died penitent, and in hope therof the sixth Synod, Agatho Pope, and S. GregoryApud Baron. amo 565. with other late writers make ho∣norable mention of him, yet Euagrius & ProcopiusApud Baron. ibid. eye witnesses of those times, report otherwise. The truth will be knowne at that day, when the secrets of all hartes must be reuealed. Lastly you obiectPag. 256., that, Iustinian, which made a Law declaring the Roman Church to be the Head of all Churches, shewed his authority in breaking it, when he called the Church of Constanti∣nople, the Head of all other Churches. This obiection hath no other ground, but your mistake: for Iustinian speakes of the Church of S. Sophia, which is the Cathedrall Church of Constantinople; and this he call's, The Head of all other Churches, not of the whole world, but of that Patriarkeship, as it appeareth by the contexture following, and by his o∣ther LawesCod. tit. 1. L. 7. & 8., in which he declareth the Pope to be Head of all the holy Prelates of God; and ordaineth, that the See of Constantinople be second after Rome: We ordaine (sayth heNou. 131. according to the definition of Councells, that the holy Pope of old Rome shall be the chiefe of all Prelates, and that the blessed Arch∣bishop of Constantinople, new Rome, shall haue the second place after the See Apostolike of old Rome. If therfore the Church of Con∣stantinople be the second after Rome, she cannot be Head of the Roman Church, and therfore not Head of all Chur∣ches of the world.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Authority and place of Em∣perors in Councells. THAT no Councell is valid, which is not called and approued by the B. of Rome, is a truth already demōtratedChap. 17. sect. 6.; as also that the first eight generall Coun∣cells in particular were assembled & con∣firmed by his authorityChap. 16. & seqq.. Cusanus his Concordia, which you obiect for the contrary, is of no force, as being a prohibited booke, and which (you know) Cusanus himselfe hath retracted. Concerning Priority of place in generall Councells, whether it be due to the Pope, or to Emperors, some ghesse may be had, by what already you haue heardChap. 29. & 30. for if the Episcopall dignity be aboue the Imperiall, as far as gold is aboue lead, and the soule aboue the body: and if Christian Kings and Emperors be sheep of Christs fold, & the Pope their Pastor; if they his children, and he their Fa∣ther: will you say, that priority of place is due to the lesser dignity aboue the greater? that the sheepe ought to sit a∣boue their Pastor, or the Children aboue their Father? Con∣stantine the Great said to the Bishops in the Councell of NiceRuffin. l. 1. c. 1. Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 72.: God hath placed you as Gods ouer vs, and we being men, haue no power to iudge you, that are Gods, but you are to iudge vs men. For Leo de Castro vpon those words of IsayEp. 60.14.: The children of them that humbled thee, shall come crowching to thee, out of an ancient Record of the order of S. Benedict, concer∣ning the customes of the Catholike Church, reporteth, that Kings in ancient times going to the Synods of Bishops, did
prostrate themselues before them, and kisse the ground, not rising vntill the Bishops deseding from their seates, did lift them vp in their armes. So far were the greatest Princes in those dayes, from thinking, that priority of place was due to them, either before the Pope, or other Bishops. And v∣pon the same motiue it was, that Emperors and Kings ne∣uer signed the Actes of generall Councells, but either after all the Bishops, as Constantine Pogonate did in the sixth Councell, or at least after the Popes Legates, and all the Patriarkes, as in some others, in which for honors sake, it was granted to Emperors, to signe before other Bishops inferior to Patriarkes. And if the most religious Emperors, and Kings, haue held the Pope in so great veneration, that because they knew him to be the chiefe Vicar, and Lieutenant of Christ on earth, they haue honored him, with kissing his feet, and per∣forming the office of yeomen of his stirropSee about Chap. 10.; If, Iustine the Emperor receauing Iohn the first Pope of that name in the City of Constantinople adored him prostrate on the groundSpond. anno 525. n. 1.; if Iustinian the elder did the like to Pope A∣gapetusSpond. anno 536. n. 5., and the younger Iustinian hauing his Impe∣riall crowne on his head, and meeting Constantine Pope fell downe prostrat as his feet, and kissed themSpond. an. 710. n. 1.; how can it be conceaued, that these Emperors and Kings did thinke priority of place, to be due to thēselues, aboue the Pope? Oh but (say youPag. 163. when we aske the question, why none of your Popes were euer personally present in any of the first generall Councells, though they were present in the same City, as was Vigi∣lius, when the fifth generall Councell was celebrated, Bellarmine ans∣weareth, that the Greek Bishops would haue preferred the Empe∣rors in place aboue the Popes, which was not to be endured. So you. But is this all? Doth not Bellarmine giue another reason of far more weight? Why do you conceale it? But be it as Bellarmine coniectureth, that if the Popes had bene per∣sonally present, the Greeke Bishops would haue giuen prio∣rity of place to their Emperors, how do you proue, that in so doing, they should haue done well? for they would like∣wise haue placed Epiphanius Patriarke of Constantino∣ple,
in a seate equall to Iohn the first Pope of that name, but that the supreme dignity of the See Apostllike enforced them to desist from that attempt, and to set the Pope in a more eminent throne, exalted aboue that of Epiphanius in his owne ChurchNicephoe l. 17. c. 27.. Nor is it likely, that the most reli∣gious Emperors of the East, who haue professed themselues dutifull, and obedient Children to the See Apostolike, wold haue taken place of the Popes their spirituall Fathers & Pastors, if it had bene offered vnto thē by their Bishops. But beside Bellarmines reasons, there are others. As 1. That the Popes being aged men, and separated by a large distance of sea and land from the East, in which the eight first Generall Councels were held, were not fit to vnder∣take so long iourneys. 2. Because (as the Fathers of the first Councell of Arles sayd to Siluester,Ep. ad Syl∣uestr. expressing their griefe, that they could not haue his presence at their Coū∣cell) his residence was more necessary at Rome, where the Apostles continually sit, and where their bloud without intermission, giues testimony to the glory of God. 3. And for that, before the hol∣ding of those Easterne Councels, the Pope did vsually hold Councels in the West, and send his Legates into the East, with the votes of the Westerne Bishops, arming thē with authority, to preside in his place, and with direction how to order things in those Easterne Councels. As for Vigilius Pope, though he were present at Con∣stantinople, when the fifth generall Councell was held in that City, he would not assist in person, because he being then lawfull Pope, by election of the Clergy of Rome, would giue no occasion of renewing the memory of his entrance into the Papacy by intrusion, & simony, whiles Siluerius his predecessor was liuing; and chiefly, because seeing the Emperor violently bent to haue the Three Chap∣ters (which were the subiect of that Councell) condemned, though in his particular, he condemned them, yet for feare of breeding a schisme in the Church, he would not be personally present at a Councell, in which they should be publikely condemned, without the assistance of the We∣sterne Bishops, who earnestly withstood their condem∣nation.
CHAP. XXXII. Whether Popes haue challenged ciuill subiection from Emperors, and Kings, Christian or Heathen. YOV set downePag. 169. as an vndoubted principle of Catholikes, that, Popes of after ages challeng ciuil subiection of Princes not only Christian, but also Ethinck and Heathen, vnto them. This you proue by examples of Popes, and other argu∣ments, which I shall briefly exa∣mine. SECT. I. Your first Argument, out of Innocent the third, examined. POpes of after ages (say you)Pag. 169. haue challenged an ab∣solute power directly, or indirectly, ouer all secular Prince∣dome, not only Christian, but also of Ethnick and Heathen Em∣perors, as well by corporall, as by spirituall punishments, euen to the depriuing them of their Kingdomes, and liues. And that they may seeme to exact this plenitude of authority by diuine Law, Pope Innocent the ihird maketh this Papall Decree, concluding the Em∣perors to be subiect to the Popes, because it is written, God made two great lights, the Sunne to rule the day, and the Moone to gouerne the night.
This argument you take out of an epistle of Innocent, written to the Emperor of Constantinople, who concea∣uing that Innocent in a letter had reprehended him, for his irreuerence to the Patriarke of Constantinople, wondred therat. And the cause of his wonder was, because S. Peter sayth1. Pet. 2.13., Be ye subiect to euery humane creature, whether it be to the King, as excelling or to the rules sent by him, to the reuenge of those that do ill. Innocent in his answere hauing proued eui∣dently, that the Emperor misunderstood S. Peters words, addeth, that he might haue learned the prerogatiue of Priesthood, by what God himselfe spake, not to a King, but to a Priest; Behold I haue constituted thee ouer kingdomes and nations &c. But in that whole Epistle he maketh no decree, either for deposing, or excommunicating Kings, or Emperors, or for punishing them corporally, or spiritually, or for depriuing them of their Kingdomes, and liues, or concerning any other mat∣ter; but only proueth the receaued doctrine of the ancient Fathers, that the Episcopall dignity excelleth the Imperial, as for as the Sunne surpasseth the Moone, & the soule the body: Which (sayth he to the Emperor) if your Imperiall Highnesse did pru∣dently consider, you would not cause▪ nor permit the Patriarke of Constantinople, a great, and honorable member of the Church, to sit on the left syde at your footstoole, being that other Princes rise with re∣uerence to their Archbishops, and Bishops (as is fit they should) and appoint them a Venerable seate, neare to their owne persons. Nor did I write to you, by way of reprehension, though I might with reason haue reprehended; because (as there he explicates) Christ made Peter, and in him, his Successors, Pastors of his whole flock, not exempting Kings or Emperors. This is the summe of Innocents Epistle, in which you see, he doth not so much as check the Emperor, but in a sweet and Fatherly way, admonish him of his want of res∣pect to the Patriarke of Constantinople. Is it not then in∣tolerable falshood to say, this Epistle is a Papall decree, wherby Innocent and other Popes of after ages challenge an absolute power by diuine Law, ouer all Christian and Heathen Kings, and Emperors, to punish them, as well by corporall, as by spirituall punishments, euen to the depriuing them of their Kingdomes, and liues? Is any such
thing mentioned in that Epistle? If this be not dishonest dealing, and excessiuely imposterous, what is? But to iustify this imposture, you sayPag. 170.: Vpon this Glosse the Deuines, and Canonists (the popes Parats, and Parasites) con∣clude, that euery Emperor borroweth his power from the Pope, as doth the Moone her light from the Sunne, be the Emperor Christian, or Ethnick, and therfore is to submit himselfe to the Pope; and that. Not by the order of Charity but by duety of subordination, and subiection. The Authors whom you are pleased to call, The Popes Pa∣rats, and Parasites, and to produce as witnesses of these your falsities, are Bozius, Bellarmine, and Carerius: Of which three, the two first, Bozius and Bellarmine, where you cite them, are so far from drawing any such conclusion from that Glosse, that they make no mention at all of the Glosse. And the later sentence, deinde neque hoc habet (Papa) propter ordinem charitatis, sed propter subiectionem, & subordina∣tionem ad deponendos Reges, & disponendum de regnis, which you set downePag margi. as Bellarmines, is not his, but patched vp of di∣ners words taken out of seuerall places of his, and knit into one sentence, to make him dance after your pipe, & speake as best fitteth your designe. Yea Bellarmine out of that very Epistle, and out of those very words of Innocent which you obiect, proueth els whereL Pont, that the Pope hath no tem∣porall dominion ouer Christian Princes; whome therfore you slander falsly, fathering on him the contrary, to make him, & all Catholikes, as much as in you lieth, hatefull to Chri∣stian Princes. The third author, which is Carerius, I haue not seene: but how vnsincerely you haue heretofore cited him, in this very matter, F. Persons in his Treatise tending to Mitigation, against the seditious writings of Thomas Morion Mini∣ster, hath shewed long sinceCh 162.17.. And because he truly ob∣serueth, that you hardly cite any Author without some sleight or other, I suspect that here you deale no otherwise with Carerius.
SECT. II. Your second Argument, out of Hieremy the Prophet, examined. SEcondly you sayPag. 170., Popes exact of Emperors, be they Chri∣stians, or Ethnickes, subiection and subordination (when they meane to dispossesse them of their kingdomes, or depriue them of their liues) from pretence of Scripture, alleaging in their Bulls for their warrant, that saying of the Prophet: Behold I haue constituted thee aboue nations and kingdomes, to plant and roote ont, to build and de∣stroy, Ierem. 1. So they. Wherunto also accordeth the decree of Boni∣face the eight. Good God, that the world should be so bewitched by them, as to account them Pastors of the Church, who feed their people with thornes, swords, daggers and pistolls. For what els meane these grosses, wherby the word of God is so notoriously prophaned for patro∣nizing of rebellions and murders? All these are your words, false I am sure, and slanderous; and whether not also rayling, & virulent, let the Reader iudge. My intention heere is not to dispute, what authority the Pope hath ouer Kings, and Emperors, in temporall mat∣ters. I write against you, and my intention only is, to shew; that as in other matters, so also in this, you wrong the Popes, and falsify the Fathers, with other Catholike au∣thors. And to begin with S. Bernard, you sayPag. 170.: He writing to Pope EugeniusL. 2. de Considerat., condemneth the Papall Glosse to his face, tea∣ching, that in this text, vnder the figuratiue speach of rurall sweat, is expressed the spirituall labour &c, shewing therby, that your Popes might haue proued for their aduantage, out of that text, rather a right to become gardeners and carpenters, for roting out weeds, and de∣stroying of buildings, then Generalls of Hoasts, for conquest, and sub∣iection of kingdomes. That S. Bernard out of this text gathe∣reth no power of Popes to depose Kings, or other secular Princes or people, I grant. He only admonisheth Euge∣nius, that being placed in a seat of eminēcy, from whence, as from a watch-tower, he beholdeth all, he neither giue
himselfe to idlenesse, his function being an office of spiri∣tuall labor, nor be puffed vp with pride, but gouerne in humility, which he calleth, The chiefest gemme among all the ornaments of the high Priest, and to that end representeth vnto him, the admonition which S. Peter gaue to all Prelats1. Pet. 5.2., not no dominier in the Clergy, but to become paternes of the flock from the hart, and the example of Christ, who was in the middest of his Disciples, as one that waytedLuc. 22.27.. But yet to shew against you that Eugenius had spirituall iurisdiction ouer the vniuersall Church, he sayth to himL. 2. de Consid.: What person bearest thou in the Church of God? Who art thou? A great Priest, the chiefe Bishop. Thou art the Prince of Bishops, thou the heyre of the Apostles: thou art Abel in primacy, Nōe in gouerment, in Patriarkship Abraham, in or∣der Melchisedech, in dignity Aaron, in authority Moyses, in iudica∣ture Samuel, in power Peter, and by Vnction Christ. Thou art he to whom the keyes were giuen, to whom the sheepe committed. There are other porters of Heauen, and Pastors of flocks; but thou as in a dif∣ferent, so in a far more glorious manner, hast inherited both those na∣mes. They haue their seuerall flockes assigned vnto them; to thee all are committed, one flock to one shepheard. Thou art not only Pastor of the sheep, but Pastor of all Pastors. Dost thou aske how I proue it? Out of the word of our Lord: for to which (I will not say) of the Bi∣shops, but euen of the Apostles were the sheepe committed so absolutely and without exception? If thou louest me Peter, feed my sheepe. What sheep? Of this, or that City, or Countrey or Kingdome? My sheep, sayth he: To whom is it not manifest, that he designed not any, but assigned all? where no distinction is put, no exception is made &c. The power of others is confined within certaine limits: Thy power ex∣tendeth euen to them, that haue receaued power ouer others. If there because, canst not thou shut vp Heauen to a Bishop? Canst not thou depose him from his Bishoprick, and deliuer him to Satan? All these words are S. Bernards, which I haue transcribed, that the reader may see, he belieued the Pope to be Pastor and Gouernor of the vniuersall Church, and acknowledged in him absolute power to depose Bishops, which you could not be ignorant of, but conceale it, because it toucheth your copie-hold, and mention only deposing of Princes, of which S. Bernard speaketh not one word. Yea more ouer
he doth not only acknowledge, that the Pope hath power to depose Bishops, but withall sheweth how falsly you al∣leage him, to proue, that in the text of Hieremy, nothing is expressed, but spirituall labor vnder the figuratiue speach of rurall sweat: for writing to the same Pope EugeniusEp. 237., he reque∣steth him to depose the Bishops of Winchester & Yorke, as intruders, and wicked men, that opposed the Archbishop of Canterbury, a religious Prelate, and of good fame; and out of this very text of Hieremy, proueth his authority to do it: for to that end (sayth heIbid.) thou art placed ouer nations and kingdomes, to pull vp, and destroy, to build, and to plant: which power he declareth againe in another EpistleEp. 239., out of the same text of Hieremy, speaking to Eugenius, of deposing a wicked Bishop of the Ruthenians. Nor is it S. Bernard only, that interpreteth Hieremy in this sense: for 630. Bishops assembled in the Councell of ChalcedonIn relat. ad Leo. alleage the same text, to iustify their depo∣sing of Dioscorus, and require Leo Pope to confirme the same. The like interpretation is made by 32. Bishops in the Councell of Hierusalem, and reported in that of Constan∣tinople vnder MenasAct. 4., to iustify their sentence of depo∣sition against Anthymus B. of Trebizond. And Theophi∣lus Patriarke of AlexandriaEp. ad Epi∣phan. apud S. Hieron. Ep. 67. a familiar friend to S. Hie∣rome (as their mutuall Epistles declare) out of the same text proueth the power of condemning heresies, giuen by Christ to his Church, which (sayth he) we see now performed: for the Church of Christ with the Euangelicall sword hath cut off the heads of Origens serpents. And finally this text is alleaged to the same purpose, by Petrus CluniacensisL. 6. ep. 14., & Alexander of HalesPart. 3. q. 40. memb. 2. the Irrefragable Doctor, and Maister to S. Thomas of Aquine. All which sheweth, that either the Fa∣thers and Councells vnderstood not the words of the Pro∣phet, or els that you deny the true sense, misinterpreting them in fauor of your false Doctrine. But returning to S. Bernard; That which most of all discouereth your ignorance, if not rather fraud, is, that you say, Boniface the eight prophaneth the word of God notoriously, for patronizing of rebellions, and murders, making from pretence of
Scripture a Decree to dispossesse Emperors, Christian and heathen of their kingdomes, & depriue them of their lines. It is to be noted that this decree of Boniface, on which you are pleased to inflict so seuere a censure, are the very words of S. Bernard, taken out of his fourth booke of Consideration to Eugenius. Wherfore you must confesse, that S. Bernard prophaned the word of God notoriously for patronizing rebellions and murders, and dispossessing Kings of their kingdomes, and liues, or els you must acknow∣ledge, that you wrong and slander Pope Boniface, who sayth nothing, but what S. Bernard said before him, and in S. Bernards owne words. I cannot but vehemētly suspect, that a man of your reading, could not but know, that the words were S. Bernards: but because you durst not for shame of the world, impute such horrible wickednesse to so glorious a Sainct, and whom Caluin himselfeL. 4. de Consid. c. 11. §. 11. ac∣knowledgeth to speake in those his bookes of Consideration, as if Truth herselfe did speake, you lay it on Boniface Pope, that so you may haue some colour to raile freely at him, & in his name, to charge S. Bernard with that impiety, of which neither of them both was guilty. The second Father whom you alleage, is S. Gregory, who, as he is frequent in Moralls, so he explicateth these words of Hieremy, in a morall sense, of pulling vp Vices, and planting vertues by preaching, in the soules of the hea∣rers. But that they may haue another more litterall sense, the Fathers and Councells haue informed you. Nor was S. Gregory so ignorant, as to thinke, he had no other way to reforme the disorders of Bishops, and others vnder his char∣ge, but by preaching only: for his writings, his practise, and your owne confessions beare witnesse to the contrarySee aboue Chap. 15. sect. 3.. Your third profe is out of Lyra, to whose words you adde gratis the aduerbe Tantùm, to inferre, that Bishops haue no other meanes to represse vices, and remedy disorders in their subiects, but only by preaching: which if it were true, how could the Councels of Ephesus and Chalcedon haue deposed Nestorius and Dioscorus, not to mention a thou∣sand such exāples, of which Ecclesiasticall histories are full? Yea the word denuntiare which Lyra vseth, doth not obscu∣rely
import so much: for not only preachers, but ecclesiasti∣call Prelates denounce punishment to offenders, to deterre them from sinne. And so do secular Iudges, when they threaten them with corporall chastisements. SECT. III. Your third Argument, out of the examples of Popes, examined. SOme Popes (say you)Pag. 171. haue not bene idle, but haue put their positions in practise, by deposing Kings and Emperors, sporting themselues with tossing the crownes from their heads, not for any note of heresy, but only for not subiecting themselues to the Popes dignity and dominion. Why do you not tell vs, that when 200. Bi∣shops in the Councell of Ephesus, and 630. in the Councell of Chalcedon, deposed Nestorius, and Dioscorus, they did it to sport themselues with tossing the myters of Patriarkes from their heads? If any Popes haue deposed Kings or Emperors, my assumpt is not, either to defend, or dispute, by what right they did it. The first Pope, whom you accuse,Pag. 171. 174. is Zacharias; who being chosen by diuine ordinationSee Ane∣stasius, Plati∣a, Yllescas in his life., performed heroical acts for the publike good of the Church. He bare singular loue to the clergy, and people of Rome, and generally to all Christians, being ready to spend his life for them. He built, repaired, and adorned with rich furniture many Churches within, & without Rome. He reduced to peace all Italy, which he found in combustion of warrs, going himselfe in person to effect it. He established & confirmed Bishopricks and setled the affaires of Christian religion in Germany. He was of a most sweet, and malde disposition, adorned with all vertue, and goodnesse, slow to anger, & most ready to mercy, and compassion, rendring to no man euill for euill, but to the imitation of Christ, ouercoming euill with good; in so much, that being made Pope, he aduanced to honors those, who formerly had bene his eni∣mies, and bestowed rewards on them. And finally, for his
singular vertues he is reuerenced as a Saint, and his feast yearely celebrated by the whole Church of God.Martyrol. Roman. 15. Martij. The second Pope you traduce, is Gregory the seauenth who (sayPag. 171. 174. you) deposed Henry the third. Now this Gregory, whom you so often, and so intemperatly reuilePag. 40. 171. 174. 179., was one of the most admirable Prelates, that hath possessed the chaire of S. Peter: A man (sayth NauclerusChronol. genral. 37. religious fear∣full of God, a louer of iustice and equity, constant in aduersity, and that for God feared not to enterprise whatsoeuer was iust. A man (sayth SchafnaburgensisHist. re∣rum German. an. 1977. of great constancy, and inuincible courage against auarice. The signes and wonders, which God did worke by the prayers of Gregory, and his most feruent zeale for God, and the lawes of the Church, did sufficiently defend him against the poysoned tongues of his detractors. He was (sayth Otho Frisin∣gensisL. 6. hist. c. 32.34.36. alwayes most constant in Ecclesiasticall rigor; a paterne to his flock, shewing by his example; that which in words he taught: a va∣liant champion, that feared not to oppose himselfe, as a wall, for the house of God, and whose death bred no small griefe to the Church, because she saw herselfe depriued of so worthy a Pastor; who among all Priests, and Bishops of Rome, was of most especiall zeale, and au∣thority. A man, in whose defence S. Anselme that famous Bishops of Luca (renowned for his learning, and sanctity, and illustrious for miracles in his life, and after his death) writ against Guibertus, the Antipope, set vp by the wic∣ked Emperor Henry the fourth: and among other praises, giueth him the same, that S. Cyprian in like occasion gaue to the holy Pope Cornelius. I may affirme (sayth he) of Gre∣gory our Father, that which Blessed Cyprian writ of Cornelius: He was made Bishop by the iudgment of God, and of his Christ, by the te∣stimony of almost all; nay, to speake more truly, of all the Clergy with∣out exception, by the verdict of the people that were present, by the Colledge of ancient Priests, and good men, none other being created before him, when the place of Alexander, that is, when the place of Pe∣ter, and the degree of the Sacerdotall chayre was vacant. And how true this testimony of S. Anselme is, appeareth by the for∣mall words of his election set downe by PlatinaIn vita Gregorij 7., wher∣in Cardinalls, Bishops, Abbots, Priests, all degrees of Ecclesiasticall men, and laicks, made choyce of him, as of a man modest, sober, chast,
of singular learning, of great piety, wisdome, iustice, constancy, and religion. How thinke you Doctor Morton? was this man likely to sport himselfe with tossing the crownes of Kings, and Emperors from their heads? You pleadPag. 174., that his proceeding against Henry, was not for any note of heresy, but only for not subiecting himselfe to the Popes dignity and dominion. Read the testimonies of graue writers almost 40. in numberApud Bellar. l. 4. de Pont. c. 13. & cont. Barcla. . 9. & Gene∣brard. in Chro∣nico an. 1087., many of which liued in his tyme; and you shall find that Henry is censu∣red, as an Arch-pirate, an Arch-heretike, an Apostata, a persecutor of soules more then bodies: and for his behauiour and manners, that he contemned the Princes of the Empire, oppressed the Nobles, exalted base fellowes, and married to them the daughters of Noble men at his pleasure: that not contenting himselfe with ordinary sinnes, be inuented and committed others neuer heard of before in the world, and to many men altogether incredible. And with these authors Caluin agreeth, sayingL. 4. In∣stit. c. 11. sect. 13., that he was light, temerarious, of no iudgment, of great boldnesse, of dissolute life, and that he had all the Bishoprickes (he might haue added, and all the Archbisho∣prickes, and Abbacies) of Germany, in his Court partly exposed to sale, partly to prey, and rapine. Finally so abhominable was his lust, so execrable his simony, so great his oppression of Germany, his life in all respects so flagitious, and his per∣son for that cause so hatefull, that (as Vrspergensis repor∣teth)Chron. an. 1106. when he died, there was not any one found in the whole Christian world, that sorowed for his death; nay, that did not excee∣dingly reioyce therat, euen as Israel reioyced at the drowing of Pha∣rao in the red sea, or as the people of Rome exulted in the triumphs of their Emperors. Much more in this kind is reported by the afore-cited Authors, to which Marianus Scotus an historian of that tyme, addethChron. an. 1075., that the Catholikes, which liued then in the Church, seeing and hearing the horrible and vnheard-of crimes of Henry, inflamed with the zeale of God for the house of Israel, in imi∣tation of the Prophet Helias, sent messengers to Alexander then go∣uerning the See Apostolike, and complained, expressing their griefe with sighs and lamentations, both by letters and words. Wherupon (sayth William B. ofL. 1. debel∣lo sacro c. 13. Tyre) Gregory his successor be∣fore
he proceeded against him, sent thrice vnto him, and with the loue and affection of a Father, admonished him, seeking to reclaime him, & winne him to his owne good, but preuailed not. I appeale to the iudgement of any impartiall Reader, whether you haue not slandered, and wronged Gregory in the highest degree, saying, that he sported himselfe with tossing the Emperors crowne from his head, and this not far any note of here∣sy, but only for not subiecting himselfe to his dignity, and dominion. Beware in tyme, lest you, which possesse the place of a Bi∣shop be not punished by God, as William B. of Maestricht was, who (sayth Lambertus ScafnaburgensisHist. r∣rum Germ. being sud∣dainly surprised with a most grieuous sicknesse, cried outwith mise∣rable shrikes before all, that by the iust iudgement of God, he had lost both this present, and eternall life, for hauing taken part with the Emperor in his sacrilegious enterprises, and in hope of gaining his fa∣uor, wittingly reproached the most holy B. of Rome, a man of Apostoli∣call vertue, and innocency. Not vnlike to this, was the miracu∣lous punishment of Imbrico B. of Ausburg, for the same fault, related by BartholdusIn Chron. an Historian of the same time. And finaliy, our holy Archbishop of Canterbuty S. Anselme, if he were liuing, would say to you, as he did to Wlramus, that he would refraine from saluting you, for taking part with Henry the Emperor against Gregory, that being no lesse a crime, then to take part with the successor of Nero, and Iulian the Apostata, against the successor, and Vicar of Peter the Apostle. I haue dwelled a while in this history of Gregory, be∣cause of all the fower Popes, against whom you here ex∣cept, you raile most intemperatly against him: for therby the reader may vnderstand, that as you slander him so you do also the rest: for how excellent and godly a Prelate Za∣charias was, you haue heard: and of the other two, Histo∣rians report no lesse. Of Innocentius they write, that he was one of the most excellent Popes for good life, and rate learning in many kindes, that for many hundreds of yeares held the See of Rome: to which his many workes full of singular eruditi∣on, piety, and contempt of the world, giue witnesse. By
his meanes Liuonia receaued the fayth of Christ. He built, repaired, & adorned many Churches with rich gifts. He sounded and endowed with great reuenewes that famous Hospitall of Sancti Spiritus in Saxia, in which so many di∣seased, and sicke persons euen to this day are cured, and so many poore children, and orphans bred vp and mantai∣ned. He confirmed the religious orders of S. Dominick, of S. Francis, of the Heremits of S. Augustine, of the Carme∣lites, of the Croched Friers for the redemption of Captiues, and others, which haue yeilded innumerable men, that with their sanctity, and learning, haue bene a most sin∣gular ornament to the Church of Christ, and to whom the whole world is in debted for their great labors vndertaken for the glory of God, for the conuersion of Infidels, reducti∣on of heretikes, reformation of manners among Catho∣likes, and for the excellent monuments of their workes in all faculties of learning. Finally so great was the fame of Innocentius his sanctity, and excellent gouerment, that among other authors, Blondus writethDcad. 2. l. 7. pag. 297.: Suauissimus e∣rat in Gallijs famae odor, grauitatis, saenctitatis, ac rerum gestarum eius Pontificis. The fame and sweet odor of this Popes grauity, holi∣nesse of life▪ and greatnesse of his actions was most fragrant through. out all France. And as Blondus reporteth that he writ libros doctrina plenos; so others witnesseGeneb. in Chronico an∣no 1198. Cica∣rollus & Pla∣tina in vita Innocent. 3. that he writ more then almost all the Popes before his time put togeather. And finally Clement the fixth, as you may reade in Pla∣tion, Yllescas, and othersIn vita Clementis 6., was a man of great, learning and eloquence, liberall to all, of most courteous and sweet conuersa∣tion, and adorned with many excellent vertues. From whence e∣uery man of iudgement will easily vnderstand, how vn∣truly you charge him, with tossing the Emperors crowne from his head, to sport himselfe &c. SECT IV. Doctor Morton contradicteth himselfe. TO shew your splene yet more against Gregory the sea∣uenth, of whom, beside what hath bene said, Martinus
Polonus writethApud Ge∣ned. an. 1087., that by his prayers he wrought great mira∣cles, and Lambertus SchafnaburgensisA pud Geneb. ibid., that he was en∣dowed with the gift of prophesy, you sayPag. 174. sin. 175.: It is confessed, that no Pope in all the succession of S. Peter, did depose any Emperor before Gregory the seauenth, that is, vntill a thousand and sixty yeares after Christ. You bring for your author Otho Frisingensis, who (though otherwise a learned and pious Bishop, yet) being grand-child to Henry the Fourth, whom Gregory depo∣sed, writeth partially in his fauor, and contradicteth him∣selfe: for he confessethL. 5. c 3. & l. 4. c. 34.35.36., that Zacharias Pope, who liued 300. yeares before Gregory the seauenth, deposed Chil∣dericus King of France. And the same, you likewise con∣tradicting your selfe acknowledgePag. 171.174., producing the same example of Zacharias, which Otho doth. Nor could you be ignorant of others more ancient alleaged by Bellarmine in that placeL. 5. d Pent. c. 8., from whence you toke this of Gregory the seauenth: but you mention not them, that you may haue the better colour to inueigh against him. CHAP. XXXIII. Doctor Mortons late Sermon preached in the Cathedrall Church of Durham, answeared. AS the maine drift of your writings, is, to make Catholike religion odious, and to exasperate the mindes of Protestants against all the professors therof; so there is nothing more frequent with you, then to slander Catholikes in generall with seditious Tenets, which are not theirs, but the knowne Principles of your brerhren, Luther, Caluin, Beza, Buchanam, Knox, Goodman, Gilby, and othersSee M. Patison Mo∣narchomacbia per toi. and Brereley Prot. Apol. Preface to the Reader.. The answeare giuen you by your ancient
friendP. Per∣sons. in his Treatise tending to mitigation against the sedi∣tious writings of Thomas Morton Minister, might haue seemed sufficient, to make you ashamed of opening your mouth a∣gaine in that kind. But I find, that in your later writings you are as bitter, as euer; and to that end, haue lately prea∣ched a Sermon before the Kings most Excellent Maiesty, in the Cathedrall Church of Durham, which is nothing, but a peece of your Grand Imposture printed long since, & now againe newly preached, and reprinted vnder the name of a Sermon: which I suppose some of your Auditors, that had read your booke, could not but marke, and thinke it a thing vnworthy of so great a Rabbin, to present his Maiesty with a peece of an old Imposture, insteed of a new Sermon. Because I haue vndertaken the confutation of your Grand Imposture, I will in like manner answere the particulars of your Sermon, noting withall, the places of your Grand Imposture, out of which you haue borrowed them. SECT. I. The sense of S. Pauls words, which Doctor Morton tooke for his text, declared. THe text of your Sermon, are these words of the Apo∣stle, which you call A sacred and diuine Canon: Omnis ani∣ma &c. Let euery soule be subiect to higher Powers &c. In these words the Apostle speaketh not of all soules, and all Powers vniuersally, els he should command all higher Powers, (for they also are soules) to be subiect to other higher Powers v. g. the King of France, to the King of Spaine; the King of Spaine, to the King of England; and the Emperor, to the great Turke. Wherfore by higher powers be vnder∣standeth Superiors: and by euery soule, all subiects. But since there be Superiors of seuerall kindes, the next question will be, what Superiors he meaneth, by higher powers; and what subiects, by euery soule. You by higher powers, vnderstandSerm. pag. 4. the Temper all Magistrate that carieth the sword. I deny not, but
that diuers learned expositors seeme to be of opinion, that the Apostle speaketh wholly, or chiefly of temporall Prin∣ces, and other secular Powers subordinate to them. But then it is euident against you, that as S. Paul speaketh to the Christians of Rome, and in them to all others; so he doth not command them to obey secular Princes in mat∣ters of Religion, but in temporall affaires only: for the Roman Emperors, to whom the Christians of Rome were then subiect, being Heathens, enemies to Christ and Perse∣cutors of his Church, to bid the Christians obey them in matters of religion, had bene to bid them disobey Christ, and renounce their sayth. And this you must confesse to be true: for you saySerm. pag. 7. Imposture pag. 175. 176. 276. 278., that Popes and other Christians for the space of 600. yeares performed this Obedience, com∣manded by S. Paul; and yet they neuer yielded to Nero (vnder whom S. Paul writ his Epistle to the Romans) or to any other Heathen Prince, Obedience in Religion, but in temporall affaires only. And of this Obedience, the Greeke Fathers Chrysostome, Oecumenius, Euthymius, Theodoret, and Theophilact speake, when they say, that S. Paul excepteth not from this Obedience, Apostles, E∣uangelists, or Prophets: for all Christians Ecclesiastiks, and Laicks, are bound to obey the Lawes of temporall Princes, in whose dominions they liue. And this Obedience was performed by the Popes of Rome, whiles they were not temporall Princes themselues. But now being, and hauing bene for many yeares temporall Monarkes, as absolute in their estates, as other Princes in theirs, it can no more be in∣ferred out of your text, that Popes are subiect to Kings, then that the King of Spaine, is subiect to the King of France. There is not (say you out of TullyPag. 289. a greater degree of fu∣tility, then for any man to obiect that, to which, when it shall be re∣torted vpon himselfe, he shall not tell what to say. If when you came downe from the pulpit, some prudent man (that had heard you inferre from this text, that the Pope is subiect to temporall Princes) had desired to learne of you, to what temporall Prince the Pope is now subiect, he being an ab∣solute
Prince himselfe; what could you haue answeared? You must haue confessed, that you had ouer shot your marke, and out of a desire to be speaking against the Pope, misinterpreted the words of your text, & wrested them to a false sense contrary to the true meaning of the Apostle. S. Bernard a man endowed with the spirit of God, com∣mended by CaluinL. 4. Instit. c. 7. §. 22. & cap. 11. §. 11. and MelancthonArt. 5. & 27., and estemed by your selfe as a Saint, was so far from thinking, that these words of the Apostle import any subiection of Popes to temporall Princes, that contrarily out of them, as out of a sacred Canon, he teacheth the Emperor Conradus to yield obedience to the Pope, as to his Pastor, and spirituall Fa∣ther. Legi &c. I haue read (sayth heEp. 23. to the Emperor,), Let euery soule be subiect to higher powers, and he that resisteth power, re∣sisteth the ordinance of God. Which sentence I wish and admonish you to obserue, in exhibiting reuerence to the chiefe, and Apostolike See, and to the Vicar of blessed Peter, as you will haue it yielded to you by the whole Empire. And in other places he reckoneth vp the chiefe Kings of the Christian world professing obedience to Innocentius the second Pope of that name, as to the Pa∣stor, and Bishop of their soulesEp. 124. & 126. prope fin., as children to their Father, and members to their HeadEp. 125.. To S. Bernard, I adde other ancient, holy and learned Expositors, who by Higher Powers vnderstand not, the Temporall Magistrat only, but also the spirituall; and proue, that S. Paul in these words, commandeth obedience of subiects to all Superiors, as well spirituall, as temporall. So Prima∣sius, S. Remigius, S. Anselme, Lyra, and CarthusianusIn eum locuin.. And in confirmation of this sense, Primasius by the sword giuen to higher powers, vnderstandeth not only the mate∣riall, but also gladium spiritus, the spirituall sword, giuen to S. Peter, wherwith he punished Ananias, and Saphira. The same sense is followed by S. BasilConstit. Monast. c. 23. who confirmeth the same out of another passage of the ApostleHeb. 2.17., where spea∣king to all Christians, without exempting any temporall Power, neuer so high, he sayth: Obey your Prelates, and be subiect to them: for they watch, as bring to render account of your soules. Which inference is also made by that holy & learned Pope
Gregory the seauenth, who explicating your text saythL. 1. re∣gist. Ep. 22.: Seeing therfore the Apostle commands obedience to worldly powers, how much more to spirituall, and those, that haue the place of Christ among Christians? And if these Expositors be not of credit with you, Iohn Caluins doctrine isL. 4. in∣stit. c. 10. §. 5., that, if obedience must be exhibited to secular Princes for conscience sake, it must also be yielded to Ecclesiasticall Superiors. Wherfore the more probable Exposition is, that the A∣postle, by Higher Powers, vnderstandeth not the temporall Magistrate only, but speaketh generally of all Powers, as well spirituall, as temporall, and requireth obedience vn∣to them both, in their degrees. Which being true, you can no more inferre out of his words, that the Pope is subiect to temporall Princes, then the contrary: especially, he being not noly a temporall Prince, but also a spirituall; so great, that (as the B. of Patara admonished Iustinian the Emperor)Liberat in Breu. c. 22. Albeit there be many Kings in the world, yet none of them, as the Pope, who is ouer the Church of the whole world. More proofes in this kind are not needfull. You haue heardAboue Chap. 29. the Councell of Nice, declaring, the dignity of the B. of Rome, as being the Vicar of Christ, and gouer∣nor of the vniuersall Church, to surpasse the dignity of Kings. You haue heardIbid. the most religious Emperors, & Kings, professing obedience vnto him, as children to their Father, and sheepe to their Pastor. And if S. Pauls words be trueHeb. 7.7., that without all contradiction the lesse is blessed by the greater, the dignity of an Emperor, who is blessed, conse∣crated, and crowned by the Pope must be lesser, then the dignity of the Pope, that blesseth, and crowneth him. This you will better vnderstand, if you call to minde, that the holy Martyr S. Ignatius teacheth Christians next after God, to honor the BishopEp ad Smyrnen.. And that all people, who euer they be, Soldiers, Princes, yea the Emperor himselfe must obey the Bishop, to the end that vnity, and order may be obserued in allEp. ad Phi∣ladelph.. And why els do the learned Fathers S. Martin, S. Chrysostome, S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory the great preferre the Episcopall and Sacerdotall dignity before the regall, and ImperiallSee aboue Chap. 29.? Why did S. NazanzenOrat. ad ci∣ues timore perculsos, & Princ. irasc. call
the Emperor, A sheepe of his sacred flock, and say vnto him, The law of Christ hath made you subiect to my power, and to my Tribu∣nall: for we (Bishops) haue an Empire also, and that more perfect then yours, vnlesse you will say, that the spirit is inferior to the flesh, and heauenly things to earthly? And what els do the greatest Monarkes of the world, but make profession of this, when the Priest sitting, and couered, they kneele downe with all humility at his feet, and confesse their finnes vnto him? Is not this to acknowledge, that they come as persons guil∣ty, to accuse themselues, and that the Priest in that court of conscience, is their lawfull Superior, and Iudge? This S. Chrysostome expressed, sayingL. 3. de Sacerd. that, Priests, as if they were already transported into heauen, and exalted aboue humane nature, haue a Princedome which giueth them power to bind soules, in comparison wherof, the power of Kings is as far inferior, as earth to heauen, and the body to the soule. This S. Ambrose, when he saidL. de dig∣nit. Sacerd. c. 2.: You see the heads of Kings, and Princes, humbled to the knees of Priests, and that kissing their hands, they belieue themselues to be protected by their prayers. This Basilius the EmperorOrat. in fine Conc. Gen. 8., when alluding to the words of Christ spoken to his Apo∣stlesIoan. 20.23.. Whose sinnes you forgiue, they are forgiuen, he professed, that Bishops and Pastors haue the power of binding, and losing in the Church, and that all lay men are to be sanctified, to be bound, and le∣sed from their bonds by them. And finally, this professed Con∣stantine the great when he saidRuffin. l. 1. c. 1. S. Greg. l. . ep. 72., that Bishops were consti∣tuted by God, as Gods among men, and therfore had power to iudge of Emperors. I conclude therfore, that if the doctrine of the holy Fa∣thers of Gods Church be true, if the most religious Chri∣stian Emperors haue belieued aright; the Episcopall, and Sacerdotall dignity, and especially the Papall, excelleth the Imperiall, and the Pope is in the number of higher Powers, to whom obedience in spirituall things is due, euen from the greatest Kings, and Emperors, as their practise witnes∣seth, and the Apostle hath commanded, sayingHeb. 13.17., Obey your Prelates, and be subiect to them.
SECT. II. Ancient Popes obiected, and falsified by Doctor Morton. YOur ancient AntagonistP. Per∣sons, Treatise tend. to mitig. Chap. 6. . 34., and Cardinall BellarmineL. 1. de Conc. c. 13. haue told you long since, that howbeit the B. of Rome was euer Head in spirituall matters ouer all, euen the Emperors themselues, yet in temporall affaires, he did anciētly subiect himselfe vnto them, as hauing at that time no temporall estate of his owne, and therfore did then ack∣nowledge them to be his temporall Lords, and make sup∣plication vnto them, as for other things, so particularly for the assembling of Synods in their Cities, which could not be done without their authority, and licence. And in this respect, the Popes of those tymes yielded due reuerence to the Emperors, and had recourse to them as to their tempo∣rall Lords: but that any Pope euer acknowledged subie∣ction to Emperors in Ecclesiasticall affaires, is a false Te∣net, which to make good, you misconstrue, mangle, and corrupt the testimonies of ancient Popes. First, you sayImpost. pag. 178.: Liberius professed patience in suffering in∣dignities from the Emperor, and intreated for mercy. And Vigilius be∣ing banished, sued for peace and fauor. What then? A Christian suffering indignities from the great Turke, may sue for mercy and fauor: Doth he therfore acknowledge in the Turke right to persecute him, or to offer indignities vnto him for his fayth, as Constantius the Arian Emperor did to Liberius, and Theodora the Eutychian Empresse to Vi∣gilius? 2. You obiectImpost. pag. 178. Ser∣mon. pag. 5. Simplicius, professing continuall reuerence to all Christian Princes. True: but did he therfore professe that euery Christian Prince was his Soueraigne, or that any Prince had right to command him in Ecclesiasticall af∣faires? Reuerence is due from euery Christian man to all Princes; and yet euery Christian man is not subiect to all Princes, euen in temporall affaires, much lesse in Spirituall.
But why do you conceale that Simplicius writeth that E∣pistle to the Emperor Zeno, as to his spirituall child, and pro∣fesseth, that by reason of his Apostolicall Chaire, and gouerment, he was bound to instruct him, and declare the causes of fayth vnto him? 3. The testimony of LeoImpost. pag. 178. Ser∣mon pag. 5. making supplication to the Emperor to command a Synod to be celebrated in Ita∣ly, hath bene already proued to make wholly against your selfeSee aboue Chap. 30. sect. 4.. 4. You produce GelasiusImpost. pag. 178., saying to the Emperor Anastasius, that euen Bishops obey his lawes. Bishops I grant o∣bey the Lawes of secular Princes for the course of tempo∣tall gouerment: but withall Gelasius declareth to the Em∣peror, that, Albeit he be chiefe President in temporall affaires, he knoweth and acknowledgeth himselfe in spirituall affaires subiect to Priests, and especially to the B. of Rome, and that from them, he is to receaue the decisions of fayth, and the heauenly Sacraments. Why did you not in your Sermon, giue notice of this to his Ma∣iesty, and the rest of your hearers? 5. Hormisdas (say you)Impost. pag. 178. taketh notice of the Emperors command for gathering of a Councell, as a motion from God, and further acknowledged, that he had receaued warning, and that he ought to be present therat. In proofe of this, you set downe in your margent these words, as of Hormisdas in his fifth Epi∣stle to Anastasius the Emperor: Futuram Synodum indicari mandas, cui nos interesse debere ijsdem literis Deo (vt credimus) tibi imperanti, commonuisti. Ad liter as vestras respondi. In this briefe passage there are diuers vntruthes, and falsifications. For 1. those words, Futuram Synodum indicari mandas, which you set downe as the words of Hormisdas, are not his, but forged by your selfe: there is no mention of any command from the Emperor to him. 2. And those words, Ad literas vestras res∣pondi, are also feigned by your selfe, and shew your igno∣rance in grammer: for if Hormisdas had spoken to the Em∣peror in the singular number, saying mandas, and, tibi impe∣ranti commonuisti, which you cite as his words, he would not haue added in the plurall number, ad literas vestras. 3. When you say. Hormisdas taketh notice of the Emperors command for ga∣thering a Councell, acknowledging that he had receaued warning, &
that he ought to be present therat, it is a plaine Imposture: for in that very Epistle, he protesteth to the Emperor, that wher∣as he had warned him to be present at a Councell, there is not in former ages any example, or precedent of such a fact, extant in bookes, or in the memories of men: but yet that at his inuitation, he is willing to impose on himselfe that burthen, without any precedent therof, receaued from his predecessors: al∣waies prouided, that the Emperor would performe those necessary conditions, which both in that Epistle, and in the instruction giuen to his Legates he proposed vnto him, for the peace of the Church, which were to abiure the here∣sies of Nestorius, and Eutyches, to receaue the Councell of Chalcedon, with the witings of S. Leo Pope, and to blot out of the sacred records, the names of Dioscorus, Acacius, and other heretikes. The Emperor feigned himselfe willing to performe the conditions, hoping therby to compasse his intent, but neuer performed them; and therfore Hormisdas wold not assent to the gathering of a Councell. Wherupon Anastasius growing into a great fury, writ threatning let∣ters to him, and raised a great persecution against Catholi∣kes: for which, as also for his obstinacy in heresy, and diso∣bedience to the See Apostolike, he ended his life in a most horrible manner, being strucken dead with a thunder-bolt from Heauen. This is the doctrine you ought to haue deli∣uered to your readers: and not to haue deceaued them with falsities imposed on Hormisdas, to iustify yours. 6. You obiectImpost pag. 178. Serm. pag. 5. Pelagius the first, saying: Holy Scrip∣ture commandeth vs to be subiects to Kings. That Epistle of Pela∣gius is written to Childebert King of France, as to his Sonne, for so he stileth him, and declareth to him, that the holy Scripture commandeth subiectes to obey their Prin∣ces; which all Catholikes belieue, and teach as a doctrine of fayth. But where doth the Scripture command Popes to yield subiection to Princes in Ecclesiasticall affaires? Or where doth it command them, fince they haue staies of their owne, to yield temporall subiection to other Princes? Your Argument therfore is impertinent. 7. You alleageImpost. pag. 179. Ser. pag. 5. Martin the first, praying the Emperor
to vouchsafe to read his letters. The Epistle is not of Martin alone, but of the whole Roman Synod, which hauing condemned the Monothelites, sent their decrees to Constans the Emperor, desiring, and exhorting him for his confir∣mation in the Catholike fayth, to read them attentiuely, & by his Lawes condemne, and publikely declare the Mono∣thelites to be heretikes. Can there be a more childish illa∣tion, then to inferre from hence, that Martin acknowled∣ged himselfe subiect to the Emperor? If a Prouinciall Sy∣nod gathered by the Archbishop of Canterbury, should send the like instruction to a Peere of this Realme, his spi∣rituall subiect, exhorting him to read it, would it therfore follow, that the Archbishop did acknowledge himselfe subiect to that Peere? Who then seeth not your arguing to be trifeling? 8. You sayImpost. pag. 179. serm. pag. 5., Adrian the first deuoted himselfe to the Emperor by letters, as one in supplication fallen downe prostrate at the soales of his feet. O Imposture! Adrian writ that Epistle to Constantine, and Irene his Mother, against the Image-brea∣kers, heretikes of that time, whose heyres you are. And ha∣uing proued effectually out of Scriptures, and Fathers, the veneration due to sacred Images, with all loue, as if he were at Constantinople present with them, and prostrate at their feet, besee∣cheth and requireth them before God, and coniureth them (for so are his words which you alter and mangle) that re∣nouncing, and detesting the craft of those wicked hereti∣kes, they would cause the sacred Images to be restored, and set vp againe in the Churches of Constantinople, and of all Greece, to the end, they might be receaued into the vnity of the holy Catholike, Apostolike, and irreprehensible Roman Church. But that it may appeare how you abuse your readers, and hearers, inferring from hence, that Adrian acknowledged subiection to the Emperor, it is to be ob∣serued, that in that very Epistle, he often calleth Constan∣tine, and Irene, His belieued children, and exhorteth them by the examples of Constantine the great, Helena his Mo∣ther, and the rest of the Orthodoxe Emperors, to exalt, ho∣nor, and reuerence the holy Catholike Apostolike Roman
Church, as their spirituall Mother, from which all Chur∣ches haue receaued the documents of Fayth, to embrace her doctrine, to admit of her censure, to loue, honor, and reue∣rence the Successor of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, to whom our Sauiour gaue the keyes of heauen, with power to bind and loose on earth. And as he hauing receaued from Christ, the principality of the Apostleship, and pastorall charge, sate first in the Apostolike See; so by command∣ment from God, he left it, with all the power and authori∣ty that Christ had giuen to him, to his Successors for euer: and therfore, that the sacred Scripture declareth of how great dignity that chiefe See is, and how great Veneration is due vnto it from all faithfull, throughout the world. So Adrian, as if he had written purposely to shew your lack of iudgment and honesty, that would aduenture to pro∣duce his Epistle as a selected Argument against the supreme authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome, and vent it for such both in your Imposture, and againe in your late Sermon before his Maiesty. And not vnlike to this is an o∣ther obiection you makeImpost. pag. 179. serm. pag. 5. out of an Epistle of Agatho Pope, to Constantine in the sixth Councell generall. 9. You cull certaine Latin words out of two Epistles of S. Gregory the great, and patching them vp into one English sentence, adding to them, these two adiectiues of your owne, Vestris and Vestrae, you make him say: As for me, I performe obedience vnto your commands, wherunto I am sub∣iect. Both the Epistles out of which you botch vp this sen∣tence, are written to Mauritius, who though he were a Ca∣tholike Emperor, yet S. Gregory sticketh not to compare him to Nero and Dioclesian, and reprehendeth him shar∣pely, for his tyrannizing ouer the Roman Church, the Head of all Churches, and seeking to subiect her to his ear∣thly power, against the commandment of Christ, who committed his Church to S. Peter, when he gaue him the keyes of the kingdome of heauen. The one of those Epistles he writeth against the arro∣gancy of Iohn Patriarke of Constantinople, styling him∣selfe Vniuersall Bishop. And as he praiseth Mauritius for desi∣ring
the peace of the Church, to hinder the garboiles of warres, and in the procuring therof professeth himselfe rea∣dy to obey his commands; so he reprehendeth him for not repressing the pride of Iohn, wherby not he alone, but the peace of the whole Church, was disturbed. And if in the o∣ther, he also professed obedience to the same Emperor, it was only in temporall affaires, and because with humble and submissiue words, he sought to worke him to his owne good, whom he cold not dissuade, nor otherwise hinder from publishing an iniust Law, wherby he prohibited sol∣diers, and all such, as had bene employed in publike ac∣compts of the Common wealth, to become Monkes. And therfore in one of the Epistles, which you obiectPag. 179. & 234., he de∣clareth to the Emperor, that he vsed not his Episcopall au∣thority, nor speaketh in the right of the Common wealth, but writeth as a priuat person: yet adding that he stood greatly astonished at such a Law, because it did shut vp the way to heauen vnto many. Wherfore he dealt earnestly with him to abrogate the Law, or els permit it to be mo∣derated so, that it might stand without preiudice to Chri∣stian liberty. Wherunto the Emperor at length yielded, as S. Gregory declareth, sayingL. 7. ep. 11. indict. 1.: Qua de re Serenissimus & Chri∣stiantssimus Imperator omnimodò placatur: concerning which mat∣ter, our most Clement and most Christian Emperor is wholly pleased. And therfore S. Gregory hauing corrected the Law, and reduced it to a reasonable lawfulnesse, and temperate mo∣deration, to wit, that they which had borne offices of charge in the Common wealth, and desired to become Monkes, should not be receaued vntill they had giuen vp their accompts, and obtained publike discharge for the same: and that soldiers should not be admitted to Monasti∣call habit, vntill they had ended three yeares of probation in their secular apparell. Wherfore though S. Gregory yiel∣ded to publish the Law, yet withall he shewed his Pasto∣rall power, and care, in limiting and moderating the Em∣perors law, according to the law of God. Which if you had not concealed, the futility of your obiection wold haue bene apparent to euery reader.
But you sayImpost. pag. 179., Heere wee are arrested by your Cardinall, in the name of this Pope Gregory, from his Deeree, concerning the Monastery of Medardus, enioyning, that whatsoeuer secular Prince should violate that same Decree, should forthwith he depriued of his honor. As if this one Act of this only Pope were so authentike, and of so suffecient authority in it selfe, as to be made a Precedene for euer, vnto all Popes of succeeding ages. I dispute not of what au∣thority this Act of S. Gregory is: my intention only is to discouer your imposture: for Bellarmine in that very place which you mētionCont. Barcla. c. 40., & againe before in the same booke,Cap. 8. doth not only vrge this one Act of S. Gregory, but also another, & that in words more effectuall, which the same S. Gregory granted at the in treaty of Brunichild & Theo∣doricus, whom he calleth The most excellent Kings his children. This decree you thought best to passe ouer in silence, be∣cause it is without all exception, and to persuade your rea∣der, that Bellarmine mentioneth only the former which is sufficiently vindicated from Doctor Iames his Cauills. which here you oppose, by the authority of Gregory the seauenth, a most holy and learned Pope, who liuing al∣most 600. yeares nearer S. Gregories ie, then Doctor Iames or your selfe, alleageth this decree as his, whole ther∣fore vndoubtedly it is. Your railing against Gregory the feauenth I omit, as not deseruing an answeare. SECT. III. Other Fathers and Catholike authors obiected by Doctor Morton. FIrst you obiectSerm. pag. 6. Impost. pag. 282.: When the Archbishop of Sens in France challenged the priuiledge of immunity from all subiection to the King, he was encountred by S. Bernard, and arrested by vertue of this Canon, Omnis anima, saying: Forget you what is written? Let euery soule be subiect to the higher powers. Qui te tentatexcipere, tentat decipere. i. He that seekes to exempt, doth but labor to delude and seduce you. O stange imposture! O insufferable bold∣nesse! By what authority do you presume to rake vp the
ashes of a holy Archbishop deceased 500. yeares since, and slander him, with challenging immunity from all subiection to the King, as well in temporall, as in spirituall affaires? for immu∣nity from all subiection importeth as well the one, as the other. Is there mention of any such challenge in S. Bernards e∣pistle? No. It is a tale framed on your fingers ends, that you may make S. Bernard reprehend the Archbishop for a fault of which you without any ground are pleased to accuse him, and father on vs that doctrine of Disobedience to Princes, which we condemne and detest. But I see not, how you agree with your selfe: for in your Grand imposture, you obiect S. Bernards words, as a reprehension to Popes, for not obeying Princes: but in your Sermon, you produce the same words, as a reprehension not to Popes, but to the Archbishop of Sens; neither the one, nor the other being true, but inuentions of your owne, to slander the Arch∣bishop, and the Popes, and to make S. Bernard guilty of the same fault. The Archbishop of Sens hauing in great esteeme the wisdome, learning, and sanctity of S. Bernard, required some spirituall documents from him, as S. Bernard in the begining of his EpistleEp. 4. declareth; adding on the one side, his vnworthinesse to write vnto so great a Prelate, and on the other, the feare he had not to obey his commands. Wherfore yeilding to his command, he writ along epistle, in which hauing discoursed at large, of Chastity, and Cha∣rity, two singular ornaments of Priestly dignity, he addeth the third. which is, Humility, reprehending the pride of Clergy men, that hauing obtayned one place, still aspire to others of greater dignity: & not contented with one, they striue to loade themselues with many honors at once; all which yet they will part with, for one Bishopricke. Nor will they rest there, but factus Episcopus, Archiepiscopus esse de∣siderat, he that is made a Bishop desireth to passe from a Bi∣shopricke, to an Archbishoprick. And then turning his speach to the Archbishop of Sens, to whom he writeth, & to other Ecclesiasticall Prelates, he exhorteth him & them to Humility and Obedience, saying: Vt securè praeesse possitis,
subesse & ves, si cui debetis, non dedignement. That you may command securely disdaine not to yield obedience, if to any you owe it. And to this purpose he bringeth those words of the Apostle, Omnis anima &c. If euery soule be subiect, yours also: Who seekes to exempt you from all? If any one seeke to exempt you, he seeketh to de∣ceaue you. This is S. Bernards drift, and discourse. And can you in∣ferre from hence, that the Archbishop of Sens denied Obe∣dience to the King, in temporall affaires, or that S. Bernard subiecteth the Papall dignity to the Regall? Yes: for presently after (say youImpost. pag. 182.) the same Father applieth the same Doctrine to the Popes themselues. How proue you this? Out of these words of S. Bernard: Sunt qui dicunt; Audite Pontifices, seruate hono∣rem &c. sed aliter Christus; Reddite Caesari &c. There are that say, Heare O yee Popes, Mantaine your honor: But Christ said otherwise, Yeild to Cesar &c. So you, but most falsly: for, Audite Pontifices, are not S. Bernards words, but forged and thrust into his text by your selfe. 2. If they were his, your illation were vaine: for Pontifex is not necessarely taken for the Pope, without the addition of Summus, or, Maximus. 3. Yea S. Bernard out of those words, as he exhorteth those that owe tribute to Cesar to pay it; so he inferreth that if Christ would haue secular powers to be obeyed, much more would he haue the Ecclesiasticall, and that they who are sedu∣lous, and carefull in the affaires of Kings, ought much more to be sub∣iect cuicunque Christs Vicario, to whatsoeuer Vicar of Christ, and chiefly to the Pope, his supreme Vicar on earth, as he writ to Conradus the Emperor, teaching himEp. 183. to obey the See Apostolike, out of this very text, Omnis anima, which you produce for the contrary. 2. You obiectImpost. pag. 175. serm. pag. 36. S. Ambrose, saying, That his prayers and his teares were his weapons, and that he neither might, nor could make any other resistance. If S. Ambrose said so, it was to shew, that when Emperors vse secular forces, against the Priests of their dominions, Priests being no soldiers, must not de∣fend themselues by the sword, but by teares, and prayers to God. But that S. Ambrose knew himselfe to haue beside teares, and prayers, spirituall power, he shewed, when he
excommunicated. Theodosius the great, and first Emperor of that name. And Theodosius acknowledged this power in S. Ambrose, obeying with all humility, and performing the pennance enioyned him. 3. You obiectImpost. pag. 175 serm. pag. 19.36. Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and S. Gre∣gory Nazianzen, professing, that Christians do not take reuenge against the iniust violence of their enemies. We follow and im∣brace their doctrine: for what Catholike Diuine euer taught reuenge, or rebellion to be lawfull? If any teach or practise otherwise, we abiure their doctrine, as hereticall, & hate their practise, as damnable. SECT. IV. Doctor Morton slandereth Vrban Pope, and with him all Catholikes. ARguments failing (for what hitherto you haue pro∣duced are nothing but falsifications and vntruthes) you breake forth into such intemperate railingImpost. pag. 177. ser. pag. 28., that I disdaine to passe it vnder my pen: and I suppose, that euery honest minded reader, though neuer so zealous a Prote∣stant, will be ashamed to see such venime, together with so shamefull vntruthes, to fall from the mouth of a man of your yeares: especially, since what here you write, hath no other ground, but your vnconscionable slandering of Vr∣ban the second (whom you nickname TurbaneSerm. pag. 9. as if by a Rescript of his, he had authorized Assassines to inuade & kill excommunicated persons at their pleasure. The case is this. Certaine lewd and dissolute Clergy men excommunicated by the Church, tooke armes, & were laine in the feild in a battaile fought betweene the sacrile∣gious Emperor Henry the fourth, and Eghert Marques of Saxony. Vrban being consulted, declared the soldiers that killed them, not to be murtherers, nor to haue incurred the sentence of excommunication, pronounced against such, as lay violent hands on Clergy-men. From whence it fol∣loweth, that it is no sinne to kill excommunicated persons
(be they Priests or other Ecclesiasticks) in a iust warre, and when they inuade our liues. But your inference, that it is lawfull for any man to kill excommunicated persons by Assassines, or any other way by his owne priuate authori∣ty, is not allowed by Vrban, nor asserted by any Catholike Diuine, but an Imposture of yours, to enrage the mindes of Protestants against Catholikes. Yea to shew your Impo∣sture, Innocentius the fourth, and the whole Church as∣sembled in the generall Councell of Lions, haue ordeyned Excommunication, and other most grieuous punishments, for all persons whatsoeuer, that shall murther, or goe about to murther any one by Assassines. The decree is extant in the Canon Law, which I shall set downe, to the end, the reader may see your dealing, and learne neuer to credit your words hereafter. Wheras (sayth Innocentius)Sext. De∣cret. de homi∣cid. tit. 4. they that with such horrible inhumanity, and barbarous cruelty, so thirst after the death of others, as that they cause them to be slaine by Assas∣sines, procure not only the death of their bodies, but also of their soules (if they be not fensed with abundant grace of God, as with spirituall armor) &c. We being desirous to preuent so great a danger of soules, and to beate downe such impious presumptions with the sword of Ec∣clesiasticall censure, to the end that feare of punishment may be a stop to so great audaciousnesse, ordayne with the approbation of the holy Councell, that whatsoeuer Prince, Prelate, or other Ecclesiasticall, or secular person, shall cause, or command any Christian to be killed by assassines, although death follow not therby, or that shall receaue, de∣fend, or conceale them, do, ipso facto, incurre the sentences of Excom∣munication, and deposition from his dignity, honor, order, office, or benefice, which therfore may freely be conferred an others by them, to whom the gift of these thinges belongeth. And let him with all his worldly goods, as an enemy to Christian religion, be cast out for euer, from among Christian people. And if sufficient proofe he made against any one, that he hath committed so execrable a wickednesse, let no o∣ther sentence of Excommunication, deposition, or dissidation against him be required. This is the decree of Innocentius, and of the whole Church assembled in the generall Councell of Lions. Nor is it any obscure thing, but a Canon published and inserted
in forme of a Law, into the Decretals of the Romā Church, Goe now, and raile against the Pope for quitting the con∣sciences of them, that shall kill others by Assassines. Tell vs: Can the Church possibly deuise any punishments more grieuous for any malefactors, thē these which she inflicteth on all them, that shall ether kill, or endeuor to kill others by Assassines, although the effect follow not? Doth she grant any exemption from these punishments to them that shall kill excommunicated persons? Is not the Decree ge∣nerall, and in fauor of all men, without exception, a∣swell Heretikes, and Schismatikes, as Catholikes? And as well excommunicate, as not excommunicate? Let the rea∣der then iudge of your conscience, what censure you de∣serue for slandering Vrban Pope, as allowing the murther of excommunicated persons by Assasines. SECT. V. Doctor Morton obiecteth the Bull of Maunday Thursday. TO make good your slanderous doctrine of our allow∣ing excommunicated persons to be murthered by As∣sassines, you sayImpost. pag. 177. ser∣mon. pag. 30.: Goe you now, and complaine, that you are vniustly persecuted, or banished by Protestants out of seuerall King∣domes, when as, they are all yearely excommunicate at Rome for Heretikes, and Schismatikes by the Bull of Maundy thursday, & con∣sequently made obnoxious vnto the blinde deuotion of euery Romish bloudy assassine, who may be perswaded that he shall merit of God, by the slaying of those supposed Schismatikes. Two things may here be questioned: the one, whe∣ther heretikes are to be excommunicated: the other, whe∣ther Protestants be comprehended in the number of here∣tikes excommunicated in the Bull of Maundy Thursday. What your opinion is concerning the former, I know not: but I know, the practise of the Catholike Church hath e∣uer bene, to excommunicate Heretikes. Why els did she in her Primitiue tymes. Excommunicate the Arians in the
Councell of Nice? the Eunomians in the first of Constan∣tinople? the Nestorians in that of Ephesus? the Eutychians in that of Chalcedon? and others in other Councells? A∣gaine, I know, that the Church hath learned this from Christ, commandingMath. 18.18., that he who being thrice war∣ned, will not beare the Church, be to vs as the Heathen, and the Pu∣blican. I know that S. Paul hath saidTit. 3.10.: Auoid a man that is an heretike, after the first, and second admonition. And againe2. Cor. 6.14.: what participation hath iustice with iniquity? or what society is there bet∣weene light and darkenesse? and what agreement with Christ, and Beliall? or what part hath the faythfull, with the Infidell? I know that S. Iohn speaking of an heretike saythEp. 2. vers. 10.: If any man come to you, and bring not this doctrine, receaue him not into the house, nor say vnto him God saue you: for he that sayth vnto him, God saue you, communicateth with his wicked workes. Wherfore it cannot be denied, but that the now Church of Rome in excommu∣nicating heretikes, doth nothing, but what Christ, and his blessed Apostles haue commanded, and what the primitiue Church, and Councells haue taught her to do. But then the second question is, who be heretikes, and who not? S. AugustineDe vtilit. credendi c. 1. distinguisheth between an here∣tike, and, one that belieueth heretikes. An heretike he definethDe ciuit. Dei l. 18. c. 51. to be one, that vnder the name of a Christian, professeth obsti∣natly erroneous doctrine in matter of Fayth. For my part, I cannot conceaue, but that this definition adequately agreeth to Do∣ctor Morton: for you not only maintaine erroneous Tenets in matter of fayth; but are so wilfully obstinate therin, that hauing bene heretofore often admonished and euidently conuinced by Catholike writers, of your shamefull ouer-la∣shing, as also of your corrupting the Fathers, Councells, & other writers, in proofe of those your Tenets, you still hold on the same course in your Grand Imposture, and other your later writings, to your owne shame, and the great discredit of your cause; which if it were good, needed not such iugling to defend it. But the greatest part of Protestants, either wanting lear∣ning, or meanes to examine the truth of points in contro∣uersy, and thinking you not to be only learned, but also
sincere in deliuering the truth vnto them, (which I know you not to be) simply giue credit to you, and such as you are, and thinke they may safely embrace your doctrine, and rely vpon your word: They (I say) are not Heretikes, but men deceaued and misled by heretikes, or to vse S. Augu∣stines phraseDe vtil. creden. c. ., Credentes haereticis, men that blieue heretikes, and therfore are not comprehended in the excommunica∣tion of Bulla cana, which is pronounced against such only, as by reason of their wilfull obstinacy, are true and formall heretikes, or as S. Paul saythTit. 3.11., that sinne, being subuerted, and condemned by their owne iudgment. I deny not, but that many of these men, being of excel∣lent iudgement, and vnderstanding, may, by what they haue heard, or read, haue iust reason to doubt of the truth of Protestancy: and therfore if such out of slouth and careles∣nesse, or for feare of dishonor, and disesteeme in the eyes of the world, or of temporall lostes, and troubles they see Ca∣tholikes exposed vnto, omit to examine the truth, I know not how to excuse them from culpable negligence in the most important affaire of their saluation, which without true fayth cannot be atchieued. SECT. VI. Other slanderous accusations of Doctor Morton answeared. YOur good will to Catholikes makes you rake vp in your Sermon, and Imposture, all the examples you can call to mind, to make them hatefull to Protestant Princes, and people. To this end, you so often mention the Powder treasonSerm. pag. 29. Impost. pag. 177. 405., of which some vnaduised headlong gentlemen were guilty, yet other Catholikes were freed from the guilt therof, by the long and exquisite search of Iustice, made for the discouery of all partakers therin; as also by the confes∣sions of those vnfortunate gentlemen themselues, who be∣ing strictly, seuerally, and often examined, constantly pro∣fessed, that no man els was guilty of their designe, nor priuy
to their intentions, but they only, whose names were alrea∣dy giuen vp to the State. And finally the Protestant Mini∣ster, Author of the booke intituled, Triplici node, triplex cuneus, testifiethPag. 2. that our late Soueraigne King Iames, of fa∣mous memory (by whose allowance, or rather appoint∣ment that booke was written) did not hold other Catholi∣kes guilty of that damnable plot, as indeed they were not. The equity of his Maiesty (sayth he) is such, as he professed in his Proclamation, and Parliament speach, that he would not vse other Catholikes the worse for that; which sheweth that he held them guiltlesse. All this being true, as it is, how comes it to passe, that you make no end of vp brayding and defaming all Catho∣likes with this action? of exprobrating to an infinite num∣ber of innocent, that, of which a few nocent were guilty? of slandering them with this designe that had no part in it, many of them being not borne when the thing passed? or if borne not capable of such designes? or if capable, yet ab∣horred the same as much, if not more then your selfe? If I were disposed to deale with you, by the art of Re∣torsion, which manner of Argument you often vse against vs, in this your Grand Imposture, I could tell you, of your Protestant brethren, that in our dayes at Antwerp they placed a whole barke of gun-powder in the vaulted great street of that City, to blow vp the Prince of Parma with his Nobility and commanders of warre, being to passe that way. I cold tell you, of another zealous brother in Hage, that would haue blowne vp the State-house with the whole Counsell of Holland vpon priuat reuenge. And I could tell you, that at Edenbrough in Scotland, the like traine of powder was layd for the cruell murther of our gracious Maiesties Grand-Father, which not succeeding, hindeath was archieued by another no lesse bloudy, and barbarous violence. Would you thinke it reason, or con∣science in me, if I should impute these temerarious actions of a few Protestants, to you all? If I should exprobrate them to the innocent, as well as to the nocent? Pardon me therfore if I impute to you, lack of that equity and con∣science,
science, which ought to shine in a man of your ranke, as in a patterne, not only of morall honesty, but also of ciuill, & courteous behauiour. With like preiudice of conscience, you vpbraid vs with the Massacre of ParisImpost. pag. 405., to which not we, but your good Brethren, the Huguenors of France, by their Traiterous plots gaue occasion, and therfore are iustly censured, as the true Authors therof. In the yeare 1572. August 23. Collig∣ni the Admirall of France, a most wicked man, and fyre∣brand of the Huguenots in that kingdome, being woun∣ded in both his hands, and one of his armes, with a Mus∣quet discharged out of a house in Paris, Charles the ninth then King of France, being greatly offended therat, vsed all diligence, to finde out the malefactor, and not only sent often messengers to the Admirall, to vnderstand of his health, but went himselfe in person, with the Queene his wife, his Mother, and his brethren, to visit & comfort him, promising to punish the malefactor seuerely, according to his deserts, if he could be discouered. Neuerthelesse the Ad∣mirall suspecting without ground, that he had bene woun∣ded by the Kings appointment, entred into priuate Coun∣sell with the King of Nuarre (then newly married to Margaret sister to the French King) with Prince Condē, and other his confederates, plotting traiterously with them, to kill the King, the Queene his wife, his Mother, and bre∣thren, and so at one blow to cut of the whole family, and proclame the King of Nauarre, King of France; appointing withall, what Nauarre himselfe, what Condē, what Cap∣taine Pilie, and what Montgomery his associates were to do, and what passages to take, for the effecting of this his treacherous designe. Which being disclosed by some that were priuy vnto it, the King out of hand called to him the King of Nauarre, and Condē, who confessing the plot, and asking pardon, obtained it. But because delaies were dan∣gerous in a case, wherin the life of the King, and of many other Princes, with the destruction and ruine of the whole Kingdome did run so great hazard, the Admirall by his command was killed the next day, in his owne house: and
the Citizens of Paris, breaking into the houses of Hugue∣nots killed many of them. The like they did at Lions, Roan, Orleans, and diuers other places. This is the history of the Massacre of Paris, reported by SuriusComment. rerum in or be gest. anno 1572., out of the relation printed at Paris, and out of the King of France his letters, written with his owne hand, to the Princes of Germany. Which though it be a liuely ex∣pession of the barbarous cruelty of your French brethren, yet they are not ashamed in their printed bookes, to reuile the most Christian King, and exaggerate his cruelty for this facts; when as they (witnesse Surius)Ibid. in the space of a few yeares, by their owne priuate authority, without, and contrary to all order of Law, haue murdered many thou∣sand Catholikes in France, and would peraduenture re∣ioyce, if by their hands, the King had likewise dispatched all the rest. And what your loue to the Catholikes of En∣gland is, these obiections are a sufficient testimony, which serue for nothing els, but to exasperate the King, and State against them. SECT. VII. The same matter prosecuted. YOu goe on, obiectingPag. 172. 176. Tolosanus a Lawier, who writeth, He had not read in any history, that for the space of 300. yeares after Christ, Christians euer rebelled against Kings, or plotted against their gouerment; which Barklay extendeth to a longer time of 1000. yeares. We ioyne with Tolosanus, & Barklay therin. And if any Christians before, or after those times, haue rebelled, or held it lawfull to rebell, against their Soueraignes, we disclaime from them, as from furies, and plagues of the Christian Common wealth: We detest their Doctrine, as impious, and hartily wish, that all your new Reformers, and some others more ancient, not vnlike to them, and well liked of by you, were of the same mind: for who knoweth not, that Wickliffe a predecessor to you in many pointes of your doctrine, and a Foxian SaintIanuar. 2.,
teacheth, that if a Prince gouerne ill, or fall into sinne, he is no longer a Prince, but that his subiects may take armes a∣gainst him, and punish him at their pleasure? Who hath not heard of Luthers Doctrine, in his Articles condemned by the Catholike ChurchIn bulla Leonis 10., that Christians are free & exem∣pted from all Princes Lawes; and that therupon imme∣diatly followed in Germany, that tumultuous rebellion of the Pesants against their Lords, wherin were slaine aboue an hundred thousandSuris Comment. re∣rum in or be gest. anno. 1525.? And who is ignorant of Caluins Doctrine, that Princes Lawes oblige not in conscience, but only for externall and temporall respectsL. 4. instit. c. 10. §. 5.? You (I know) haue labored to excuse him from these, and other seditious Tenets: But I likewise know, that Brerely hath truly told youProt. A∣pol. praefa. sect. 11., that, your excuse consisteth vpon violent compa∣ring of phrases, vnworthy your iudgment, vnworthy your learning, & vnworthy of reply therto. Caluins words areIn Daniel. c. 6. vers. 22.25. Apud Brerel. cit.. Abdicant se pote∣state terrent Principes, dum insurgunt contra Deum &c. Earthly Princes do bereaue themselues of authority, when they erect themsel∣ues against God: They are vnworthy to be accompted in the number of men, and we must rather spit vpon their faces then obey them. Can these words admit any glosse? Are they not euidently sedi∣tious? Doth not Doctor WilkesBrereley. ibid. obiect them to the Pu∣ritanes, as such? They were (sayth heBrereley ibid. your Teachers, who ac∣compt those Princes who are not refined by their spirit, vnworthy to be accompted amongst the number of men, and therfore rather to be spit∣ted vpon then obeyed. They were your Teachers, who defend rebellion against Princes of a different Religion &c. But what need haue we of Caluins, or his Brethrens words, when we haue the vnanswearable proofe of his deeds? Doth not M. Sutcliffe confesseBrereley ibid. sect. 11., that they of Gene∣ua (at the instigation of Caluin and Farellus) deposed their Liege Lord, and Prince, from his temporall right, albeit he was by right of succession the temporall Lord, and owner of that City, & ter∣ritory? And doth not M. Bancroft speaking of the chiefe Mi∣nisters of Geneua (which were Caluin, Farellus, and Beza) sayBrereley ibid.: It hath bene a principle with them, that if Kings and Prin∣ces refuse to reforme Religion, the inferior Magistrates, or people, by direction of the Ministery, may lawfully, and ought, if need require,
euen by force, and armes, to reforme it themselues? From whence, but from these Principles, haue Caluin, Beza, and other their Successors to this day conuinced the same vnlawfull vsurpation? And to come nerer home, did not King Iames of famous memory in his , complainL. 2. c. 40. & 41. of the perturbation and confusion of the kingdom of Scotland, wrought by the fiery spirits of your Ministers; & in particular of the calamities brought vpon his Grand-Mother and Mother by them, and of their seditious plots against himselfe in his yonge age? And from whence, did the late rebells of Scotland learne their lesson, but out of the same Schoole, and from the same Maisters? Do not you acknowledgeSerm. pag. 38., that they defend their rising in armes a∣gainst his Maiesty, by the authority of Luther, Caluin, and Beza? I know your pretend to quit them from that imputa∣tion: but the Scots were to conuersant with their doctrine, not to vnderstand it. And besides what hath bene said, it were easy, if worth the labor, to shew, that notwithstan∣ding your defence of their innocency, all the water of the Ocean is not able to wash them cleane from the filth of those doctrines. But if you please to be further satisfied in this point read M. ParisonMonar∣chomachia per tot., Breerley,Prot. A∣pol. praef. tot. and Endaemon IoannesApol. pro Henr. Garn. c. 3., who set down so many particulars of the ack∣nowledged doctrines and practises of Protestants in that kind, in the expresse words of your owne writers, that im∣pudency it selfe cannot gainesay them. And as it is certaine, that you can neuer free your bre∣thren from these doctrines, so it is no lesse, that you charge Catholikes falsly with the same: for who knoweth not the constant doctrine of all our Diuines to be, that rebellion of subiects against their Liege Lords and Soueraignes is vn∣lawfull in any case, in any occasion, vnder any pretence, or to any end whatsoeuer? This is taught by the Angelicall Doctor S. Thomas of Aquine, not in one, but in many pla∣ces of his workes. This is the doctrine of Caietan, of Sotus, Valentia, Bellarmine, Tolet, Serarius, Becanus, Richeome Salmeron, Lessius, Gretserus, Hessius, Eudaemon Ioan∣nes, and in a word of all Catholike DiuinesOf this see Patison pag. 367. and Eu∣daemon Ioan. Paralell. Tor∣ti ac Tortoris. c. 5 pag. 224. & seqq.. This they
proue out of the holy Scripture, out of S. Augustine, out of the practise of the Catholike Church, and that with solid and forcible reasonsSee Va∣lent. in 212 d. 5. q. 8. punct. 3.. But you tell vsSerm. pag. 24. of a principle of ours, That subiects must obey, whiles they cannot resist. In proofe of this, you alleageSerm. p. 35. Alane, In his moderate defence; but you neither mention any words of his, nor any Chapter in particular: and with good reason; for Alane hath no such doctrine. You produceSerm. pag. 24. Creswell in his Philopater, and Bellarmine. The one, you slander falsly: The other, you vnderstand not, or els (which I feare) wittingly misconstrue his meaning. For Creswell Eudaemon IoannesApol. pro Henr. Garn. c. 3. pag. 58. hath made answeare long since, to Syr Edward Cooke, who cited Creswell in his Philo∣pater, as you do, borrowing your obiection from him. The answeare is (and of certaine knowledge, I know it to be true) that, you temerariously vent the fictions of your owne braine, for truthes. Philopater was not Creswell: He neuer writ any such booke. And who-euer Philopater was, the booke is of a competent bulke, and you cite out of it some nine or ten words cut off from the frame of their contexture, diuided into two different sentences, and this also at randome: for the booke being diuided into Chapters, and the Chapters into numbers, you neither specify Chapter, nor number; which if you had done, Philopater, might haue spoken for himselfe, and shewed the wrong you do him. And no lesse is the iniury you offer to BellarmineSerm. pag. 24.. His opinion is, that the Church had authority to depose Nero, Dioclesian, or other heathenish Tyrants, that perse∣cuted Christ, but did prudently abstaine from the vse ther∣of: for wanting forces, the vse of her authority could no way auaile Christians, but giue occasion of raising greater stormes of persecution against them. Which opinion of his canot quit you from accusing, & slandering him wrong∣fully: for doth he euer say, or insinuate, that those Emperors were not lawfull Princes? or that they being so, it was law∣full for Christians, or any other their subiects, to rebell a∣gainst them? This is the Doctrine you impute to him, and this you should haue proued to be his, but cannot, & ther∣fore
change the state of the Question, to father on him, the seditious Doctrine of your Lutheran, and Caluinian bre∣thren, and to suggest to his Maiesty, that the Scots haue learned the Principles of their rebellion from vs, which by their owne confessionSerm pag. 38. they professe to haue learned from Luther, Caluin, and Beza. Lastly, as I haue admonished you, of slandering Vrbane Pope, and other Catholikes, so must I aduertise you of the like wrong done to Garnet the Iesuit, whom (say youSerm. Ibid. I knew at his arraignement to confesse, that he heard of the powder-treason out of Confession. Belike, you knew it, by hear-say, from some one that was deafe; or if he were not deafe, made no scruple of lying: for no man that was present, and had his hearing, would be so shamelesse, as to say he heard him confesse that, which it is certaine, he neuer spake, but di∣rectly the contrary, and toke it vpon his death; which may yet be proued by the attestation of so many, and such wit∣nesses, that if it were as free, for Garnets friends and kins∣folkes, to sue you with an action of slander, as it is free for you with controlement, to write your pleasure against them, that haue not freedome to answeare for themselues, your accusation of Garnet, wold proue aswell to your cost, as to your shame you cōfesseIbid., that, at his death he publikely exhorted the Romish professors, to auoid all acts of treason. And it is no lesse certaine, that in his life time, he neuer taught other Doctrine: & that when he heard of that damnable plot in Confession, he enioyned him, of whom he heard it, to vse his vttermost endeauor, to diswade, and hinder it: yea mo∣reouer (as Eudaemon IoannesApol. pro Henr. Garn. c. 1. pag. 8. 9. reporteth from relation of them that had best meanes to know the truth) the very hearing of it in Confession, was so great a torment to his mind, that he could not sleep, nor take any rest for many dayes, and that with prayers and sacrifices he did beg of the diuine goodnesse most earnestly, to prouide some remedy for so execrable a designe, which he could not disclose to the Magistrates without violating the seule of Sacramen∣tall secrecy, which Christ himselfe hath commanded to be kept inuiolable. I conclude therfore that Garnet, Cardinall
Alane, Bellarmine, Creswell, and other Catholikes, whom you defame with false accusations, are in the number of them, of whom our Sauiour saidMath. 5.11.12.. Blessed are yee, when they shall reuile you, and persecute you, and speake all that naught is, a∣gainst you vntruly, for my sake: be glad and reioice, for your reward is very great in heauen. CHAP. XXXIV. Doctor Mortons doctrine condemneth the Saintes, and Martyrs of God. HAVING now gone through your Ser∣mon preached to his Maiesty, out of your grand Imposture, I returne to the continuance of my answere to the same Imposture. You had before obiected some Fathers, and hauing parted with them lōg since, now after many Chap∣ters, you come to scrape acquaintance with some of them againe. But their Doctrine is to anci∣ent, to haue any commerce with your Nouelties. SECT. I. S. Polycarpe obiected by Doctor Morton. YOu beginne your twelth Chapter opposingPag. 183., that S. Polycarpe going to Rome, in tyme of Anicetus Pope, to consult with him about the celebration of Easter, would not yeild to forsake the Asian custome contrary to that of the Roman Church: and yet neuerthelesse, Anicetus and Polycarpe, did still com∣municate with ech other. True, but if the Asian custome had bene then condemned by the Church, and the mantayners
therof anathematized as heretikes, as afterwards they were by Victor Pope, and the holy Councell of Nice, Anicetus would not haue held Polycarpe in his communion, vn∣lesse he had forsaken the Asian custome, and conformed himselfe to the Roman, practised by all other Churches in the world. Nor would Polycarpe haue stood out in de∣fence of the Asian custome, had he not seene, that Anicetus (though he misliked it, yet) did not condemne it, but per∣mit him still the practise therof vntill the Church defined otherwise. Which Anicetus did, being desirous to giue him all content, for the great reuerence due vnto him, as well for his yeares, as also because he had bene disciple to S. Iohn Euangelist, and was then actually Bishop of Smyrna a principall Church of Asia. But how great reuerence Polycarpe bare to Anicetus, and to the Church of Rome, appeareth in this, that being a person of so great dignity, and very aged, he vndertake so long, so laborious, and so dangerous a iourney, to de∣clare vnto Anicetus, the reasons of his persisting in the A∣sian custome; which if Anicetus had then condemned, it is not to be doubted, but that Polycarpe would haue de∣parted from it, as all orthodoxe Bishops did when they saw it condemned by the Church, and the defenders of it declared to be heretikes. SECT II. S. Cyprian obiected by Doctor Morton. TO proue that Cyprian belieued not any necessity of vnion with the Roman Church, you repeate herePag. 185.188. what you had sayd before, of his being excommunicated by Pope Stephen, & contemning the excommunication: for which you bring no other proofe, then the testimony of Cassander, an heretike Primae classis, whose workes you know to be forbidden, and yet shame not to cite him as a Catholike author, that you may call his lies, Our confessions; for that they be lies, I haue already prouedChap. 24..
And so much the more reproueable you are, because S. Cyprians testimonies, which shew him to haue beleeued the Roman Church to be the Catholike Church, and all that are diuided from her, to be Schismatikes, you shift offPag. 186., with an answeare of Goulartius, that Cyprian spake them of his owne only authority against Schismatikes▪ who troubled his iuris∣diction. Which to be a false, and vnconscionable answeare, you, and your Goulartius may learne from the Centurists, who reprehend S. CyprianBrerel. Protest. Apol. tract. 1. sect. 3. subdiu. 10., for teaching, that our Lord hath built his Church vpon Peter; that one Chaire by our Lords voyce is built vpon Peter, as vpon a Rock; that there ought to be one Bishop in the Catholike Church; & for calling Peters chaire, the prin∣cipall Church, from whence Sacerdotall vnity is deriued; and for teaching, that the Roman Church ought to be acknowledged of all others, the Mother, and Roote of the Catholike Church. To these testimonies, acknowledged by the Centurists, I adde, that CyprianL. 4. ep. 2. exhorteth Antonianus in time of Schisme, to adhere to the Pope, and hold fast his communion, that is (sayth he) the communion of the Catholike Church, and expres∣sly affirmethL. de Vnit. Eccles., that, Who-euer resisteth the Chaire of Peter, nether holdeth the fayth, nor is in the Church. And speaking of some certayne heretikes, he obiecteth vnto them their great boldnesse, in presuming to saile to the chaire of Peter, and the prin∣cipall Church, from whence Sacerdotall vnity is deriued, not consi∣dering that the Romans are they▪ whose fayth was praised by the voice of the Apostle, and to whom perfidiousnesse can haue no accesse. To this you answearePag. 186.: No Father of the primitiue times is more vrged by you, then S. Cyprian; no Epistle more insisted vpon, then this; no words more inculcated, then these; and (we may adde) no Father, no epistle, no sentence more egregiously abused and peruerted: for he speaketh not of perfidiousnesse in doctrine, but only in discipline, by the false and perfidious reportes of schismaticall fellowes &c. If this sentence of S. Cyprian be peruerted, not we, but you peruert it. And so it will appeare to any impartiall Iudge, that shall read the words, not cut short, as you rehearse thē (that the sense may not be vnderstood) but entire, as I haue set thē downe. The Nouatians were not only Schis∣matikes, but heretikes, as S. Cyprian in that epistle, & els
where often, calleth them. And in the words alleaged, when he opposeth their perfidiousnesse to the Roman fayth com∣mended by the Apostle, by perfidiousnesse he vnderstandeth error in doctrine, or misbeliefe, which is oposite to fayth, not perfidiousnesse in discipline, for that hath no opposition at all with fayth. Wherefore he reprehendeth the Nouatians, that hauing not only diuided themselues by schisme, from the chaire of S. Peter, which is the principall Church from whence sacerdotall vnity is deriued, but also forsaken the Roman fayth praysed by the mouth of the Apostle, they dare notwithstan∣ding presume to saile to Rome, in hope to deceaue that Church, and get their doctrine approued by her, not conside∣ring, that the Romans are they, whose fayth being praysed by the Apostle, misbeliefe can haue no accesse to them. Which doctrine S. Hierome seemeth to haue taken from this place of Cy∣prian, when speaking to Ruffinus, he saithApol. ad∣uers. Ruffin. l. 1.: Know that the Roman fayth commended by the voice of the Apostle, admitteth no delusions, and that being fensed by S. Pauls authority, it cannot be altered &c. SECT. III. S. Athanasius obiected by Doctor Morton. THat S. Athanasius beleeued not the necessity of vnion and subiection to the Roman Church, you prouePag. 190., for that being excommunicated by Liberius Pope, he regarded not his excommunication. This we deny: It is peraduenture true though not altogether certaineOnuphr in Not ad Plati. Ruffin. l. 1. histc. 27. So∣zom. l. 4. c. 14., that Liberius wearied out with two yeares banishment, and other vexations by Constantius the Arian Emperor, yeilded to signe the con∣demnation of Athanasius, and entred into communion with the Arians, and thereby became a Schismatike. But that he excommunicated Athanasius, is not reported by any writer: nor is it true, but a fiction of yours. And were it true, the excommunication had not only bene iniust, as being pronounced against an innocent person, (and ther∣fore no way obligatory) but also inualid; for as much, as
Liberius by forsaking the communion of Catholikes, and entring into communion with heretikes, was fallen from his Papacy, and had no power to pronounce excommu∣nication against Athanasius: or if he had pronounced it, Athanasius had not bene bound to obey. To proue, that Athanasius regarded not the excommunication of the B. of Rome, you should haue proued that whiles Liberius was true Pope, he excommunicated Athanasius, and that A∣thanasius refused to obey; which you proue not, and ther∣fore your obiection is impertinent, and your assertion false. For who knoweth not, that Athanasius acknowledged the supreme power of the Roman Church, when being cast out of his Bishoprick, he appealed to Iulius Pope, and Iulius by the dignity and prerogatiue of the Roman See, restored him againe to his ChurchSocrat. l. 2. c. 11. Sozom. l. 3. c. 7. ? And what els did he meane, when he and the rest of the Aegyptian Bishops, writing to Marcus Pope, endorsed their letter, To the holy, and Venerable Lord of Apostolicall Eminency, Marke, Father of the holy Roman, Apostolike See, and of the vniuersall Church? And in the letter: We desire, that by the authority of the Church of your holy See, which is the Mo∣ther, and Head of all Churches▪ we may deserue to receaue the copies of the Nicen Canons, by these our Legates, for the instruction, and comfort of the faythfull, that being fensed by your authority &c. And againeEadem Ep.: We are yours, and with all that are committed to vs, are and will euer be obedient to you. And in his Epistle to Fe∣lix Pope: For as much as our Predecessors, and we, haue alwayes re∣ceaued assistance from your holy Apostolike See, and haue had expe∣rience of the care you haue of vs, we following the decrees of the Ca∣nons, fly for succour vnto it, as vnto a Mother, from whence our pre∣decessors haue receaued their orders, doctrine, and reliefe. And a∣gaineIbid.: Which by no meanes we dare presume to do (to wit to define matters of fayth) without consulting you, the Canons com∣manding, that in maior causes nothing be determined, without the B. of Rome &c. For therfore Christ hath placed you, and your predeces∣sors in the height of Eminency, and commanded you to haue care of all Churches &c. And he addethIbid., that, It belongs to the Pope to iudge the causes of all Bishops.
If therfore to appeale to the Pope, as to his Iudge; if to acknowledg in him, power, to restore the greatest Pa∣triarkes to their Sees; if to professe that the iudgment of Bi∣shops belongeth to him, and that all maior causes are to be referred to his tribunall; if to belieue the Roman Church to be the Head, and Mother of all Churches, and the Pope to be Bishop of the vniuersall Church; and finally if to pro∣fesse actuall, and promise perpetuall obedience to the See Apostolike, be Arguments of S. Athanasius his beliefe of the soueraigne authority of the See Apostolike, & of his o∣bligation to obey her, and to liue in vnion with her, and in subiection to her; then are you guilty of Imposture, in o∣mitting these, and other pregnant testimonies of the same kind, extant in his second Apology, and obiecting in lieu of them, a false tale of Liberius excommunicating Athana∣sius, deuised by your selfe to seduce your readers. And hereby you are conuinced of another vntruth, in sayingPag. 191., that, Athanasius sought not any vnion with Felix, who was Pope insteed of Liberius: for these his testimonies shew, that he was in communion with him, and acknowledged him∣selfe subiect to him, as to the Gouernor of the vniuersall Church. But you sayPag. 190. (and that impertinently to the matter in hand, which is to proue S. Athanasius his no subiection to the Roman Church) that, When we esteeme Felix to be the legitimat Pope, and Liberius a Schismatike remoued from the society of Catholikes, and from his Papall function, wee fight notably a∣gainst our owne principles, which are: 1. That there cannot be two Popes together: and 2. That no Pope can be deposed vnlesse he appeare to be a manifest heretike; which if he be, he ceaseth to be Pope, with∣out any iudgement at all. That there cannot be two Popes to∣gether, we acknowledge to be a principle of ours. Nor did it happen otherwise, in the case of Liberius: for when he returned to the Papacy, it was by acceptation of the Clergy & people of Rome equiualent to a new election; and this, not vntill after Felix his death. For as Sozomen prudently obseruethL. 4. c. 14.. God by his speciall prouidence called Felix out of this life soone after Liberius returned to Rome, lest the
See of Peter should be defamed with the note of schisme, two Popes gouerning at once, contrary to the lawes of the Church. The second principle is not ours, but an ignorance of yours: For a Pope ceaseth to be a Catholike, & consequētly falleth from his Papacy, not only by publicke profession of heresy, but also by making publicke profession of Schisme, and out∣ward communion with heretikes, though in his hart he detest their doctrine: for to be a Catholike, it is not only necessary to belieue the Catholike fayth inwardly, but also to make profession thereof outwardly, abandoning the cōmunion of heretikes. Wherfore the syllogisme which here you makePag. 190. sin. 191., concludeth nothing; the Minor propositi∣on, that, Liberius notwithstanding his consenting to the condemna∣tion of Athanasius, and communicating with heretikes, was a Catho∣liks Bishop, is absolutely false. And wheras you professe, to set downe this Minor as the words of Bellarmine, you fal∣sify him: for albeit he say, that if a Pope become a mani∣fest heretike he ceaseth eo ipso to be Pope, yet in the same placeL. 2. de Pont. c. 30. §. Eadem est sententia. he sufficiently expresseth, that not only here∣tikes, but also schismatikes are out of the Church, and loose all spirituall iurisdiction ouer those, which are in the Church. SECT. IV. S. Basills beliefe of the supreme authority of the B. of Rome proued; and Doctor Mortons obiections answeared. IT seemed to vs (sayth S. BasilEp. 52. writing to Athanasius) to be to good purpose, that we write to the B. of Rome, that he consider the affaires of these parts, and giue his iudgement, to the end, that being there is difficulty, in sending from thence persons by a com∣mon and Synodicall decree, he may vse his authority, and choose men capable of the labour of such a iourney &c. And that hauing with them the Acts of Arimin, they may disanull those things which haue bene done by force. BellarmineL. 2. de Pont. c. 15. bringeth this testimo∣ny: you except against him, as peruerting S. Basil by false translation, which you proue out of Baronius: for where
Bellarmine translateth, vt res nostras videas, that the B. of Rome see, or view our affaires, Baronius rendreth, vt res nostras conside∣ret, that he consider our affaires. But who seeth not this to be a mere cauill? for what difference is there between intreating the Pope to take the affaires of the Easterne Churches into his conside∣ration, as Baronius readeth, or, to see and looke into them, as Bel∣larmine translateth? Whether you follow the one or the o∣ther, it is manifest, that S Basil thought it a fit way to re∣dresse the calamities of those Churches, that the Pope should take them into his consideration, or haue a vigilant eye ouer them: the requiring wherof from him, liuing in a Countrey so re∣mote, and in another Patriarkship, sheweth, that S. Basil belieued some charge of visiting those Churches to belong to him, superior to that which the Easterne Patriarkes had. Nor doth your answeare satisfy, sayingPag. 195., He required not from the Pope, any help or visitation of dominion, or iurisdiction, but only of confortation, of louing and brotherly consideration, hoping, that the persuasions of stangers, especially being indued with Gods grace, would be more preualent with the Easterne people, then the Counsell of their owne Bishops: for this euasion is conuinced of falshood, by the very words of S. Basil. It is fit (sayth he)Ep. 52. that we beseech the Pope to shew his authority in the busines, sen∣ding men that may bring with them the Acts of Arimin, and disannull the thinges done by force. And immediatly after, he professeth himselfe ready to be corrected by the Popes Legates, if in any thing he had erred, and acknowledgeth in the Pope authority of a Iudge: We are ready (sayth he) to be iudged by you, prouided that they which slander vs, may appeare face to face, with vs, before your Reuerence. Doth all this import nothing, but, a request of louing, and brotherly visitation, or consideration? Could S. Basil in more effectuall words expresse the Popes power, and iurisdiction ouer the vniuersall Church, then by requesting him, to send his Legates with authority to annull the Acts of a generall Councell, as that of Arimin was? No: they are testimonies so forcible, that with no glosse can be eluded. But you replyPag. 194. against Bellarmine, that he will needes haue S. Basil to desire the Popes Decree, wheras Baronius readeth, Counsell, or Aduice. Here againe you cauill: for
the Greeke word is, , which by interpretation of Budaeus, signifieth voluntatem, sententiam, iudicium. Why then was it not lawfull for Bellarmine to say, S. Basil desired the Popes decree? for to desire him to giue his sentence and iudge∣ment, what was it els, but to acknowledge in him the au∣thority of a Iudge, with power to sentence, to iudge, to decree Ecclesiasticall causes in the East? Which power he also declareth in other places of his workes: for do not both heEp. 73. al. 74., and S. Gregory NazianzenEpist. ad Clede. testify, that Eustathius B. of Sebaste, by vertue of Libe∣rius his letters presented to the Easterne Bishops, in the Councell of Tyana, and by vertue of his command intima∣ted in them, was receaued into the communion of the whole Easterne Church, and restored to his See? Eustathius (sayth S. Basil to the Bishops of the West) hauing bene cast out of his Bishoprick, because he was deposed in the Synod of Meli∣tine, aduised himselfe to find meanes to be restored, trauailing to you. Of the things, that were proposed to him, by the most Blessed Bishop Liberius, and what submission be made, we know not: Only he brought a letter, that restored him; which being shewed to the Councell of Tya∣na, he was reestablished in his Bishops seat. Againe, doth not S. BasilEp. 77. compare the Church to a body, wherof the Westerne part by reason of the Roman See, is the Head, and the Eastern the Feet? And doth he not from this very Metaphor, denominate the B. of Rome, Head of the vniuersall Church, and all other Bishops fellow-members of the same bodyEp. 70. ad Episc. transmar. edit. Paris. an. 1603. ? Againe, doth he not beseech Pope DamasusIbid. to send Legates with order to examine the accusations laid to his charge, and to appoint a place for him to meet them, that his cause might be iudged by them, and he punished if he were found guilty? And doth he not require the same PopeEp. 74. to giue order by his letters, to all the Easterne Chur∣ches, that they admit into their communion all such, as ha∣uing departed from the Catholike truth, shall disclaime from their Errors? and to renounce the Communion of them, that shall persist obstinatly in their nouelties? And lastly, declaring the Popes authority in determining all
doubts and controuersies of fayth, he sayth: In very deed that which was giuen by our Lord to your Piety, is worthy of that most ex∣cellent voyce, which proclamed you blessed, to wit, that you may dis∣cerne betweene that which is counterfeit, and that which is lawfull and pure, and without any diminution may preach the fayth of our Ancestors. I conclude therfore that if S. Basil beleeued aright, the Pope hath authority to restore Bishops deposed, to their Sees, to send Legates with power to dissolue the Acts of generall Councels, to condemne hereticall doctrines, to iudge the causes of Bishops, to punish delinquents. And is this nothing els, but charitable aduice, but perswasion, but counsell? Is it not to vse authority, to exercise iuris∣diction? But you obiectPag. 16. that S. Basil in his owne name, and in the name of his fellow Bishops in the East, hauing writ∣ten often to Pope Damasus, and other Westerne Bishops, and sent to Rome foure seuerall legations, requiring helpe, and com∣fort from them in their afflictions, could not receaue any answeare, in so much that S. Basil taxeth them with supercilious pride & haugh∣tinesse, and that they did neither know the truth, nor would learne it. This you obiect out of Baronius, from whom you might haue taken the solution, which is, that S. Basil was oppres∣sed, and as it were, ouerwhelmed with waues of sorow, and affliction, not only for the common calamity of the O∣rientall Church, but also for his owne particular; for as much, as by Eustathius B. of Sebaste, and others, who hi∣ding the venime of their heresy, feigned themselues to be Catholikes, he was accused, and defamed of heresy in the East, and brought into suspition euen with his owne Monkes, and his dearely beloued Neocaesarians. And this made him likewise not to be well thought of in the West: in so much, that Damasus Pope for a time, desisted from that familiar communication by letters (which Basil expe∣cted) and differred the sending of Legates to examine his cause, and cleare the truth, which he had required, & great∣ly desired: Yet (as youPag. 198. confesse) was he then a mem∣ber of the Catholike Church, and held communion with
the Church of Rome, both in fayth and charity. Nor was Damasus so wholly wanting to his comfort, but that euen then when he was suspected of heresy, vpon his letters he called a Councell at Rome, in which he condemned A∣pollinarius, Vitalis, and TimotheusBaron. an∣no 373. Sozo. l. 6. c. 25.; called Vitalis to Rome, and excommunicated Timotheus, as he testifieth in his Epistle to the Easterne BishopsApud Theodo. l. 5. histor. c. 11., expressing withall, the profession which they had made to him, of their beliefe of the supreme authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome. Now if S. Basil in these afflictions (and grieuing at the intermission of such communicatory letters from the Westerne Bishops, and chiefly from Damasus, as he expe∣cted) let fall from his mouth some hasty words, as other holy men (whom BaroniusAn. 373. nameth) in like occa∣sions haue done, is that by you to be reproached vnto him? or is it any argument of his deniall of the Supremacy of the B. of Rome, which he hath taught so clearely, so con∣stantly, so effectually, in so many places of his workes? Yea albeit S. Basil gaue a litle way to the motions of nature, yet by vertue he soone recalled himselfe, retracting what he had said, as his letters full of humility, written soone after to Damasus, & the other Westerne Bishops ex∣presse. You (saythEp. 1. in addi. he) are praised by all mortall men, that you remaine pure, and without blemish in fayth, keeping entire the doctrine taught you by the Apostles. It is not so with vs, among whom there are some that presume to bring in nouelties, wherby the Churches are fal∣len into heresy. Wherfore, O beloued brethren, you as Phisitians, cure our soules &c. So S. Basil, freeing the Westerne Churches, & especially the Roman (to which he chiefly writ) both from pride, and error. Wherfore when you obiectPag. 197., that S. Basil expressing his griefe said; The Westerne Bishops neither knew the truth themselues, nor would learne it, he taxeth them not of error, or ignorance in the true fayth, as you falsly interpret, but that being ignorant of the Asian af∣faires, they were not carefull to vnderstand them from him, and other Catholike Bishops, that might rightly in∣forme them, but gaue to much credit to the lying reportes of heretikes, who slandered him falsly, as you haue heard.
SECT. V. Whether S. Hilary excommunicated the Pope. TO persuade, that S. Hilary B. of Poictou (so you write him, he being not Bishop of Poictou, which is a Pro∣uince of France, but of Poictiers the chiefe Citty of that prouince) held it not necessary, to be in the communion of the B. of Rome, you sayPag. 199.: S. Hilary no sooner vnderstood, that Pope Liberius (as your Cardinall hath confessed) had subscribed to haue communion with the Arian heretikes, but he made bold to excommunicate the Pope out of his communion, and fellowship, say∣ing, I anathematize thee, O Liberius, and thy fellowes. And you adde, that Hilary had iust cause to do thisPag. 199. sin. 200., because it was alwaies lawfull for any Catholike Bishop to excommunicate any here¦ticall Bishop, that is, to abandon his fellowship, and communion. Here you shew great ignorance in the ordinary principles of Di∣uinity: for to excommunicate a Bishop, or any other per∣son, is not only to abandon his fellowship, and commu∣nion; els euery man, yea euery woman, may excommuni∣cate her Bishop, or any other person whatsoeuer: for she may abandon his fellowship, and communion, denoun∣cing Anathema vnto him. There are two kindes of Anathema: the one, iudiciary, that is to say, an Ecclesiasticall Censure pronounced by an Ecclesiasticall Superior, against them ouer whom he hath lawfull power and iurisdiction, wherby he abandoneth their fellowship and communion, and commandeth all o∣thers to do the like, and withall depriueth them of the be∣nefite of the Sacraments, and seruice of the Church. This Anathema is an Excommunication. And this is so certaine, that howbeit euery Protestant Minister, may at his pleasure abandon the fellowship, and communion of any other man, and in that sense, denounce Anathema vnto him, yet neuer any was so absurdly ignorant, as to thinke, he could excommunicate any one, ouer whom he had not Ecclesia∣sticall power, and iurisdiction. And who knoweth not,
that when you excommunicate Catholikes, or others, you do not only deny them your owne fellowship, and com∣munion, but by vertue therof, forbid all others to haue commerce and communication with them? In this sense, the Councell of Nice pronounced Anathema against the A∣rians, in these wordsSocrat. l. . hist. c. 5.: They that say, there was a time when the Sonne was not, the Catholike Church anathematizeth them, that is, depriueth them of the vse of the Sacraments, and commandeth all men to renounce their fellowship and communion. In this sense S. Hilary neither did, nor was so ignorant, as to thinke, he could denounce Anathema to Liberius, being not his Superior: and therfore neither did, nor could excommunicate him. Another kind of Anathema there is, which is not iudi∣ciary, but only executory, wherby euery particular person ecclesiastick, or laick, man, or woman protesteth, and decla∣reth to hold for Anathema, such as are excommunicated by the Church. In this sense S. Hilary pronounced Anathema to Liberius, for hauing subscribed to the banishment of A∣thanasius, and therby entred into Communion with the Arians. The iudiciary Anathema, that is, the sentence of excom∣munication had bene pronounced before, by the Councells of Nice and Sardica against the Arians in generall, into whose communion Liberius was entred. There was no need of pronouncing a new sentence of Anathema against him, but of applying the sentence of the Councells vnto him, by abiuring and abhorring him, as one fallen into the sentence which the Councels had pronounced against the Arians. And therfore S. Hilary addes to his Anathema, these words, For my part, saying: For my part, Anathema to thee, O Libe∣rius, to shew, that he spake not with a iudiciary, but with an abiuratory Anathema. In this sense Iohn Patriarke of Con∣stantinopleEp. ad Hormisd. anathematized Timothy the parricide, sur∣named Aelurus, whom Felix Pope excommunicated. And In the same sense, Iustine the EmperorEuagr. l. 5. c. 4., denounced Ana∣thema to all heretikes, condemned by the Church, who yet being a secular Prince, had not power to excommunicate
any. I conclude therfore, that you confound these two A∣nathema's; and because S. Hilary pronounced an abiurato∣ry Anathema against Liberius, inferre ignorantly that he ex∣communicated him. But if for arguments sake I should grant, that the Anathe∣ma pronounced by S. Hilary, was indiciary, and that he ex∣communicated Liberius, it would make nothing for you against the Pope: for when Hilary pronounced this Ana∣thema, Liberius was not Pope, but fallen from his Papacy, and Felix substituted Pope in his place. This I haue said, not questioning, but supposing Libe∣rius his subscription to the condemnation of Athanasius; which yet some haue deniedSee Bellar. l. 4. de Pon∣tif. c, 9.. But be it true: it followeth not, that he was therfore a formall heretike in his iudge∣ment, belieuing the blasphemous doctrine of the Arians, but only interpretatiuè, for so much as signing with them the condemnation of Athanasius, and out wardly communica∣ting with them, he gaue to some (that iudged of him by his outward actions) occasion to thinke, he belieued their do∣ctrine. And in this sense only it is, in which some Catho∣like writers condemne him of heresy, and in no other. For the very Arians themselues neuer pretended that Athana∣sius agreed in fayth with them, but condemned him only for other crimes, which they had maliciously composed a∣gainst him: wherin though Liberius for a tyme yeilded outwardly to them, yet he was euer most constant in the Catholike fayth, as you may see testified by antiquityApud Io∣doc. Cocci. to 1. l. 7. art. 11.. Lastly I must aduertise you, that wheras you often re∣peate as an article of our fayth, that out of the Roman Church there is no saluarion, herePag. 199., and afterwardsPag. 345. a∣gaine you say, part of that our article is, to belieue, that in matters of fayth the iudgment of the Pope is infallible. This you proue by imposing on Bellarmine your owne fictions. His opinion is, that the Popes iudgment in matters of fayth is infallible, and that the contrary is erroneous, and neere to heresy: but he is so farre from affirming this his opinion to be anarticle of fayth, or the contrary to be hereticall, that he directly saythL. 4. de Pont. c. 2. it is defended by Gerson, and Almain Doctors of
Paris, as also by Castro, and Adrianus sextus; and that it is tolerated by the Church. Do not you then ouerlash, say∣ing, that Bellarmines opinion is part of our beliefe necessary to saluation, when he so expresly teacheth the contrary? SECT. VI. S. Hieroms iudgment, concerning the necessity of vnion with the Church of Rome, and subiection to the Bishop therof. HE declared his iudgmentEp. 77., when to assure himselfe to be in the communion of the Catholike Church, he regarded not the communion of Paulinus, in whose Pa∣triarship of Antioch he liued, but professed himselfe to stick fast, to the communion of Damasus Pope, that is, to the chaire of Peter, vpon which (sayth he) I know the Church to be built. You answearePag. 203., that, by chaire he meant not the See, and Bisho∣prick of Rome, but the true Doctrine of fayth then preached at Rome, euen as Christ spake of the chaire of Moyses, that is (sayth S. Hie∣rome) the law of Moyses. This satisfieth not, both because whē some Fathers expound fayth to be the Rock, on which Christ built his Church, they exclude not, but include the person of Peter; and chiefely, because S. Hierome follo∣weth not that exposition, but euer vnderstāds the person of Peter, & his See, to be the Rock, on which Christ promised to build his Church. Christ (sayth heAd cap. 16. Math.) gaue to Simon, that belieued in him, the name of a Rock; and according to the Metaphor of a Rock it is rightly said to him, I will build my Church on thee. And a litle after: Christ did not then actually build his Church on Peter, but promised to build it on him afterward, saying: I will build my Church on thee, and I will giue to thee the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen. Wherfore as he promised not to deliuer the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, to Fayth, but to Peter and his Successors, so on him and them, he promised to build his Church. And the same is manifest out of the contexture of this his Epistle to Damasus: for doth he not say: I am ioyned in communion to your Blessednesse, that is, to the chaire of Peter? vpon
this Rock I know the Church to be built: Whosoeuer shall eate the Lambe out of this house he is prophane: If any one shall not be in the arke of Nöe, he shall perish in the deluge. These words conuince, that S. Hierome by the chaire of Peter, vnderstands not fayth, but the Church built on him, and his Successors: for the house out of which no man can eat the lambe (that is, offer sacrifice) is not fayth, to which the denomination of a house cannot agree, but the Church built vpon Peter, which S. AmbroseIn 1. Ti∣moth. 3.15. calleth, The house of God, wherof Da∣masus was then Gouernor. And the same is euident out of S. Hierome himselfe: for fayth is not the Arke of Nöe, but the Church of Peter, out of which whosoeuer shall be, at the comming of the deluge, shall perish. And I cannot but admonish you of a fraudulent reti∣cence: for being you make so great accompt of Erasmus, & produce him for your only authorPag. 204., that S. Hierome by the chaire of Peter, vnderstandeth fayth; why do you con∣ceale, that vpon this very passage, Erasmus sheweth S. Hie∣rome to condemne your doctrine of falshood? Here (sayth he)Anotat. in Ep. 77. S. Hieron. Hierome seemeth to be wholly of opinion, that all Churches ought to be subiect to the Roman See▪ or surely not diuided from her, which peculiarly glorieth in this Apostle, that had the soueraignty a∣mong the Apostles, and which is so Orthodoxall, that of all Ortho∣doxall Churches, she is the chiefest in dignity. This you know to be the true meaning of S. Hierome, but shift it of, repeating often, and with great variety of words, that, if S. Hierome pointed out the Church of Rome as the Arke of Noah, yet therby he conceaued not a perpetuity therof; that Virgin Hierusalem may become a harlot, and that she hath no priuiledge neuer to apostatate. But this euasion I haue already disprouedSee aboue Chap. 12. sect. 1. & 2. by the promise of Christ made to S. Peter and his Successors, that their fayth shall not faile, and that the gates of hell shall not preuaile against the Church built vpon them. To this I adde, that S. Hierome acknowledgeth Dama∣sus to be his PastorEp: 77., and therfore Pastor of the vniuersall Church: for when he writ that Epistle, he was an inhabi∣tant of Palestine, which being in the Patriarkship of An∣tioch, Paulinus that was then Patriarke of Antioch, was
actually his Pastor, and he actually a sheep of Paulinus, & therfore could not at the same time be actually a sheep of Damasus, if the sheep of the Patriarkship of Antioch were not actually subiect to the pastorall authority, and iurisdi∣ction of the B. of Rome. Yes, say youPag. 202., He might be held a sheep of the B. of Rome, in respect of his baptisme. But this I deny: for he that being bap∣tized in one Dioces, leaueth that, and becometh an inhabi∣tant of another, eo ipso becometh a sheep of that Dioces which he inhabiteth, and leaueth to be a sheep of the for∣mer in which he was baptized. And as the Bishop, vnder whom he was baptized, can haue no authority ouer him, after he hath left his Dioces, vnlesse he be superior in power, and iurisdiction to the Bishop, whose Dioces he now inhabiteth; so neither could Damasus be actually Pa∣stor to S. Hierome, hauing left the Dioces, and Patriark∣ship of Rome, and inhabiting that of Antioch, if Damasus had not had pastorall authority ouer the sheep of the Pa∣triarkship of Antioch. Now to your obiections. The first is:Pag. 205. S. Hierome twi∣ted, and taunted Damasus, saying: But away enuy, and let the ambi∣tion of the Roman height depart: which he did not say so much in re∣gard of Damasus his owne pride (otherwise an excellent godly Pope) as for the pride of the Roman top, or height, namely the ambition of his state. This is impertinent, and vntrue. Impertinent; for were it true (as it is not) that S. Hierome reprehended the pride of the Roman Church; pride is not an error in fayth, but a fault in manners, and therfore no warrant for you, to disauow the fayth, or forsake the Communion of the Ro∣man Church. It is also vntrue; for S. Hierome doth not on∣ly not twite Damasus, but professeth himselfe to be ioyned in communion with his Blessednesse. And much lesse doth he taunt his See, which he acknowledgeth to be the Rock on which the Church is built. And indeed who but you, would haue char∣ged S. Hierome with twiting and taunting Damasus, an excellent godly Pope (whom you acknowledge to be his pastor, and spirituall Father) & that not for any fault of his owne, but for faults feigned by you against other Popes? Those
words, Away with enuy, let the ambition of the Roman height de∣part, were not spoken by S. Hierome to taxe the person of Damasus, or his Seate, of pride; but to signify, that albeit his Seat were placed in Rome, which being the imperiall City, & head of the world, gloried in her owne greatnesse, yet he was and ought to be free from pride, as being Suc∣cessor to a fisher man, and a disciple of the Crosse. In regard wherof, he deemed it no presumption in himselfe, to write vnto him, that by his authority, he might know whose communion to imbrace, and whose to auoyd. Your second obiectionPag. 206., is a repetition of what you haue formerly sayd of Liberius his fall from the Catholike fayth, into heresy, by subscribing to the condemnation of Athanasius, & communicating with the Arians. You haue bene answeared, that Liberius assented to his condemnatiō, not for any error in fayth, but for crimes forged against him by the Arians: in so much that Athanasius himselfe euen in that excuseth him, sayingEp. ad So∣lit.: He was compelled therto by force of torments, and therfore that which terrors and feares extorted from him, ought not to bethought his sentence, but that which he pronoun∣ced freely, when no violence was offered vnto him. Thirdly you obiect: S. Hierome in despight, and indignation, calleth Rome Babylon and land of captiuity, and tearmeth it a pur∣ple whore, and strange land, wherin he could not sing the Lords song, concerning the holy Ghost: yea he bespots the whole Clergy of that City with the note of ignorance: and at last (after the death of Dama∣sus) he quit Rome, as a land of bondage that he might enioy his liberty in Iudaea, among the Christian Iewes. Could this be said of a City pri∣uiledged with a perpetuall residence of the holy Ghost, and deseruing the title of Motherhood ouer the whole Catholike Church? This is your question; and my answeare is, That S. Hierome, when he calleth Rome, Babylon, a land of captiuity, and a purple whore, giues those names to Rome, not as to the seat of Religion, but of the Empire; not to the Church, but to the Imperiall Court, and Senat; not to the ecclesiasticall, but to the poli∣tike state of Rome; to the troopes of Courtiers, solicitors, & negotiants; & finally not so much in regard of secular Chri∣stians, as of Monkes, by reason of the distractions, that the
noyse, confusion, and tumult of men, and affaires, in so great a city, brought to Monastical silence & recollection: for so it is plaine out of his Epistle to MarcellaEp. 16., in which though inuiting her to leaue Rome, and go to Hierusalem, he call Rome Babylon, yet he presently addeth, It is true, that in that City, is the holy Church: there are the trophies of the Apostles, and Martyrs: there is the true confession of Christ: there is the fayth cele∣brated by the Apostle, & the Christian name euery day exalted by the depression of Paganisme troden vnder foot. But the ambition, the po∣wer, and greatnesse of that City, to visit and to be visited, to salute & to be saluted, to flatter, and detract, to heare, and speake, nay to see, though vnwillingly so great a multitude of men, are things farre from the purpose and quiet of those, that would follow a monasticall life. This sheweth, that when S. Hierome cals Rome Babilon, & purple whore, he speakes not of the Church, but of the tempo∣rall state of Rome. And when he cals it a land of captiuity, he speakes it in regard of the noyse, confusion, and tumult, not suiting with the retirement of Monkes: which inconue∣nience he noteth also in the City of Hierusalem, which o∣therwise (saythEp. 13. ad Pauli. de in∣stit. Mona∣chis he) by reason of the places of the Crosse, and Resurrection, were a dwelling much to be de∣sired by Monkes. The second part of your obiection, that S. Hierome bespote the whole Clergy of that City, with the note of ignorance, is your false comment. He complaineth only of a few Priests, and Deacons of Rome, who being iealous of his faour with Pope Damasus, and enuiyng the great reuerence which the deuout Ladies of Rome bare to his person, Damasus being dead, toke boldnesse to raise slanders against him, accusing him, that he had translated Didymus an hereticall Author, that he had conuersed too familiarly with the great Ladies of Rome, and persuaded them to quit their Countrey, chil∣dren, and friends, to leaue the world, and shut themselues vp, as recluses, in the Monasteries of Palestine. Which com∣plaint no way toucheth the fayth of the Roman Church, nor the succession of S. Peter, nor the communion of the See Apostolike, nor maketh against the perpetuall resi∣dence of the holy Ghost in that Church, S. Hierome him∣selfe
crying outAduers. Ruffin. l. 3., that her fayth suffereth no delusions, and be∣ing fensed by S. Pauls authority, cannot be altered. Your fourth obiectionPag. 207. out of his Epistle to Eua∣grius, of the Deacons of Rome sitting in presence of the Priests is already answearedAboue Chap. 15. sect. 2. But you adde to itPag. 208. & 218. as a fifth Argument, that, euery Patriarke hath a principality & height of a pastorall watch-tower, by reason of the greatnesse, and dignity of his Patriarkship, aboue all Metropolitans, and Bishops whatsouer: and yet haue they not ouer all Bishops power of iurisdiction, but only principality of order. If by principality of order, you vnderstand priority of place, euery Patriarke hath in that sense priority of or∣der, ouer all Bishops, that are not Patriarkes. And in the same sense the Pope hath priority of order, ouer all Bishops, & Patriarkes. But if by principality of order, you vnderstand the Sacerdotall and Episcopall dignity, conferred on them by their ordination & consecration, your Doctrine is vntrue: for the inequality of Bishops cōsisteth not in any principa∣lity of Sacerdotall or Episcopall orders, which one Bishop hath ouer another, but in the inequality of Pastoral power and iurisdiction. A Bishop in his orders is equall to his Me∣tropolitan; the Metropolitan to his Patriarke; and the Pa∣triarke to the Pope himselfe. In this sense S. Hierome sayth,Ep. ad E∣uag. Whersoeuer there shall be a Bishop, either at Rome, or at Eugu∣bium; at Constantinople, or at Rhegium; at Alexandria, or at Tanais, he is of the same merit, and Priesthood: because all Bishops, if we consider only the dignity of their orders, and Priesthood, are equall; euen he of Eugubium, a small City in Italy, to the Pope. Erasmus his Comment vpon this passage of S. Hierome, which you bringPag. 208. to proue, that the inequality of Episcopall iurisdiction is not measured by the amplitude of Diocesses, I approue not. And much lesse, do I allow your inference out of his comment, that according to the diuine Law, the Pope hath not any greater iurisdiction then whatsoeuer other in∣ferior Bishop: for Christ, when he gaue to S. Peter the charge of feeding his sheep, and lambesIoan. 1.15 16., gaue him an vniuersall Pastorall power, and iurisdiction ouer his whole flock, throughout the world: which power and iurisdi∣ction therfore S. Augustine, and the whole Councell of
MileuisApud Aug. ep. 92. acknowledge Innocentius Pope to haue from the authority of the holy Scriptures, that is, by diuine Law, from the mouth of Christ himselfe. Your sixth obiection isPag. 208.209., that S. Hierome disagreed from the Roman Church in matter of necessary and Catholike doctrine. You told vs euen nowPag. 205., that, the Church of Rome was then sound in fayth. If therfore S. Hierome disagreed from her in matter of necessary, and Catholike Doctrine, S. Hierome was an here∣tike: for all doctrine contrary to the Catholike fayth, is he∣resy. But you regard not what you say of that renowned Doctor, if you may make him like to your selfe in disagree∣ing from the Church of Rome, in matter of necessary and Ca∣tholike doctrine. But let vs heare in what he disagreed: Because S. Hierome sayth, that although formerly all other Churches in the East, did account S. Pauls Epistle to the Hebrewes, Canonicall; yet it was not receaued as Canonicall in the Latine, or Roman Church. From whence you tooke these words I know not: for no such are to be found in his Epistle to Euagrius, out of which you alleage them. Part of them I find in his Commentary vpon Isaias, and in his Epistle to Dardanus, where he saith: The Epistle to the Hebrewes is receaued as Canonicall, by all the Greeke Churches, though the custome of the Latines receaue it not: But that the Roman Church receaues it not, is an impo∣sterous addition of yours to S. Hieromes text: for when he sayth, The custome of the Latines receaues it not, that by the cu∣stome of the Latines, he vnderstands not all the Latine or Roman Church, he declareth, sayingEp. ad Euag.; All the Greekes re∣ceaue the Epistle to the Hebrewes, & nonnulli Latinorum, and many of the Latines. Yea when he infinuateth that some of the Latines receaued it not, he speaketh not of the Latines of his time, but of some that liued before him, as Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Lactantius & Arnobius, who in their workes are not found to alleage this Epistle. But since the tyme of Lactantius, the Latine Fathers haue bene so far from ma∣king any doubt that it is Canonicall, that PhilastriusIn Catal. haeres. a Latine Father and Bishop of Bressa in Italy, more ancient then S. Hierome, ranketh them among heretikes that deny it to be Canonicall. And in S. Hieromes time, Innocen∣tius
PopeEup. ad Exuper., and soone after him, Gelasius with a Coun∣cell of 70. BishopsDecret. de lib. sacr. & Eccles., reckon the Epistle to the Hebrewes in the number of Canonicall Scriptures. If therfore Gela∣sius Pope, with a Councell of 70. Bishops, and Innocen∣tius, belieued it to be Canonicall, with what forehead do you say, that the Roman Church denied it to be Canoni∣call? or how can it be thought that S. Hierome differed in any point of Catholike beliefe, from the Church of Rome, he that prescribeth to DemetriasEp. 8. ad Demetriad., as a secure way to a∣uoid the snares of heresy, that she hold fast the fayth of S. Inno∣centius Pope? And finally how cold he dissent from the Ro∣man Church in this, or any other point of necessary and Ca∣tholike doctrine; he (I say) that so often commendeth and re∣commendethEp. 6.8.68. the Roman fayth, and defineth him to be a Catholike, that holds the fayth of the Roman ChurchAduers. Ruffi. l. 1. ? What followeth of this, you know; namely that by affir∣ming S. Hierome to disagree from the Roman Church, in matter of necessarie and Catholike doctrine, you make him an he∣retike. Is not then your Argument a Grand Imposture? And no lesse it is, that the Councell of Trent hauing de∣fined the bookes of Hester, Daniel, Baruch, Ecclesiasticus, Wis∣dome, Iudith, Tobias, and the two bookes of the Machabies, with all their parts as they are in the vulgar edition, to be canonicall, youPag. 209. in disproofe therof obiect these words, as of Bellarmine: S. Hierome sayd of these bookes, that they were not within the canon of scriptures: for Bellarmine in that place maketh no mention of Hester, Daniel, & Baruch. And though he grant S. Hierome to haue bene of opinion, that the other bookes mentioned, were not canonicall; yet why do you conceale his reason, which is, that S. Hierome was of that opinion, because the Church had not then defined the contrary in any generall Councel? And how do you proue that S. Hierome in that his opinion disagreed from the Roman Church, in matter of necessary, and Catholike doctrine, since it was no matter of necessary and Catholike doctrine, to belieue these bookes to be Canoni∣call, vntill the Church had defined it in a generall Coun∣cell, as in S. Hieromes time she had not done, sauing only of the booke of Iudith, which afterwards he re∣ceaued,
vnderstanding that the Councell of Nice had so declared? But from hence you take occasionPag. 302. fin 303., to inueigh against Bellarmine, and other our Doctors, for imputing to the Councell of Nice, a decree, wherby they condemne Protestants as sacrilegious persons, for not admitting the booke of Iudith into the number of Canonicall scriptures, and alleaging S. Hierome, as a wit∣nesse to proue that, which he neuer spake; and for profe of a doctrine, which himselfe doth vtterly abandon. In this charge you are twice reproueable: first, for saying, that we falsly impute that constitution to the Councell of Nice: for that the Coū∣cell did make such a Constitution, S. Hierome witnesseth, sayingPraefat. in Iudith.: Librum Iudith Nicena Synodus in numero sanctarum scripturarum legitur computasse: The Nicen Councell is read to haue reckoned the booke of Iudith in the number of holy scriptures. The same is testified by RupertusDe diuin. offic. l. 12. c. 25., who repeating S. Hie∣romes doctrine concerning this booke, and almost his words, sayth: Hoc volumen &c. This booke is not canonicall a∣mong the Hebrewes, but by the authority of the Councell of Nice, it is receaued for the instruction of holy Church. Secondly you are reproueable in pretēding that S. Hie∣rome in these words, declareth not that booke to be cano∣nicall: for being requested to translate it, out of the Chal∣dean tongue, in which it was written, into Latin, he sayth: The Iewes reckoned this booke among the hagiographes, whose autho∣rity is sufficient to decide controuersies. And thē opposing against them, the authority of the Nicen Councell, he addeth; But because the Councell of Nice is read to haue registred this booke in the number of holy scriptures, I haue yeilded to your request. In these words he plainly she weth the Church to be of a different beliefe from the Iewes, touching this booke, & to receaue it, in that sense, in which the Iewes did not receaue it, to wit, as sufficient to decide controuersies of fayth. And in confirmation herof he numbreth this booke among other canonicall scriptures, sayingEp. ad Principiam., Ruth, Hester, Iudith were of so great renowne, that they gaue names to sacred volumes. And in o∣ther his workes he often citeth it, as diuine scriptureEp. 9. ad Salu. Ep. 22. ad Bustoch. & in Isa. c. 14.. But to proue, that he held it apocryphall, you obiect
StapletonPag. 303., Salmeron, Lindanus, & Acosta, whom you call our lesse precipitant Authors. Stapleton you falsify, citing him l. 2. de authorit. Script. cap. 4. for he hath no booke so in∣tituled, and much lesse any such words, as you set downe for his. Yea he is so far from saying, that S. Hierome de∣nieth this booke to be canonicall, that he sayth directly the contrary: for discoursingDe prin∣cip. doct. l. 9. c. 6. how some bookes of scripture which before the definition of the Church had bene held apocryphall, or doubtfull, were afterwards by her autho∣rity certainly beleeued to be canonicall, he exemplifieth in this of Iudith, which (saith he) S. Hierome moued by the autho∣rity of the Councell of Nice, held to be Canonicall, hauing formerly accounted it to be apocryphall. This is Stapletons doctrine. Are you not ashamed to produce him as a witnesse for the con∣trary? And as little truth hath your citation of Salmeron: for he alleageth S. Hieromes words expresly declaring, that the rule to distinguish Canonicall Scriptures, from apo∣cryphall, is the authority of the Church. Wherupon Salme∣ron truly sayth, that, if S. Hierome should deny this booke to be Canonicall, his authority alone could not be preualent against the whole streame of Ancient Fathers, holding the contrary. Their testi∣monies you may read in Iodocus Coccius. Lindanus and Acosta I haue not seene: but you that haue dealt so with Stapleton, and Salmeron, may be presumed to deale no better with them. SECT. VII. S. Ambrose his iudgment concerning the necessity of Vnion, and subiection to the Bishop, and Church of Rome. S. Ambrose declared his iudgment, when reportingOrat. de obitu Satyri., how his holy brother Satyrus in his returne out of A∣frica, was cast by ship wrack vpon the isle of Sardinia infe∣cted with schisme, he said: Satyrus not esteeming any fauor to be true, but that of the true fayth, called vnto him the Bishop of that
place, and asked him, whether he agreed with the Catholike Bishops, that is (sayth S. Ambrose) with the Roman Church? This shew∣eth, that S. Ambrose, and Satyrus, belieued the Roman Church to be the Catholike Church, and all that were not in her Communion to be schismatikes. You answearePag. 213., that, the reason why Satyrus would not communicate with any Bi∣shop that agreed not with the Roman Church, was, because Sardinia was then diuided into diuers schismes, by hereticall spirits: No mar∣uell therfore, though Satyrus asked of a Bishop, whose fayth he suspe∣cted whether he belieued as that Church did, whose fayth was known to be truly Catholike; euen as if in tyme of rebellion, the Citizens of some one City (for example Yorke) were more generally knowne to professe loyalty to their Soueraigne, an honest man comming into the kingdome, might aske the inhabitants, whether they agreed with the City of Yorke, therby to know, whether they were loyall subiects: and yet it would not follow, that therfore Yorke is the head of the king∣dome. This your answeare framed to puzzell an ignorant reader, is easely reiected. Satyrus did well know, and it was generally knowne both in the East, and West, that at that time, not only the Church of Rome, but also that of Milan (of which Ambrose his owne brother was then actually Bishop, and famous ouer all the world) was sound in fayth, and truly Catholike. Why then did not Satyrus, to informe himselfe whether that Sardinian Bishop were Ca∣tholike, aske him, whether he agreed with the Bishop and Church of Milan, but because he knew, that neither the Church of Milan, nor any other, but the Roman, was the head of Catholike Communion, as S. Ambrose himselfe teacheth, sayingL. 1. Ep. 4. ad Imperat., From the Roman Church the rights of Vene∣rable Communion do flow to all? And why els did he say this, but because he knew, that neither to the Church of Milan, nor to any other, but the Roman, Christ hath promised, that her fayth shall not faileLuc. 22.31., and that, the gates of hell shall not preuaile against herMath. 16.18. ? In regard wherof it is said, that (not to the Church of Milan, but) to her all Churches, and all the faith∣full from all places must haue recourseIren. l. 3. c. 3.. And vnlesse you can shew, that Yorke hath an especiall Priuiledge from God, not to faile in her loyalty, as the Roman Church hath, not
to faile in the Catholike fayth, and profession therof, your example is impertinent. Yorke may faile in loyalty, and therfore to be a citizen of Yorke, and to be a good subiect, are not termes conuertible. But the Roman Church can neither faile in the Catholike fayth, nor in the profession therof: and therfore to be a Catholike, and to agree with the Roman Church (as in themselues they are so) were they held by S. Ambrose, by his brother Satyrus, and by the ge∣nerall accord of antiquity, to be all oneSee aboue Chap. 1. sect. 3.. 2. S. Ambrose declared his iudgment, when he called Damasus Pope, Rector of the house of God, which is his ChurchIn cap. 3. prioris ad T∣moth.. You answeare, that we mistake the words (respectiuely) spoken to one person, Pope Damasus, and circumstantially for one tyme, as if they were absolutely so meant for the persons of all Popes, at all times. This answeare is not respectiuely, but absolutely insuffi∣cient: for what dignity, superiority, or power of gouerment had Damasus ouer the whole Church in his person, and for his tyme, which euery Pope hath not had in his person, and for his time? The power of Ruler & Gouernor of the whole Church which Damasus had, was by his Popedome. And as he by the right of his Popedome was, so all his predecessors and successors in that See, haue by the same title and right, bene Rectors, and Gouernors of the whole Church. This is so certaine, that you passing lightly ouer this first answeare, fly to a secondPag. 212.213., that the title of Rector, or Gouernor of the whole Church, argueth not Damasus to be Head of the Church, because, Athanasius, Basil, & Gregory Nazianzen haue receaued titles equiualent, if not more excellent, as of Prop, and Buttresse of the Church and fayth, Eye of the world, and others; in which ascriptions (say you) there is not any acknowledgment of authority, but a commendation of their care and diligence, iudgment, and directions in behalfe of the whole Church In the citation and application of these attributes, you deale not vprightly, as is to be seene in Canisius, from whom you tooke themCatechis∣init. in En∣corn. Pat.. But leauing that to the readers examination, your owne answeare destroyeth it selfe: for those ascriptions (you con∣fesse) import no authority. But doth the title of Rector or Gouernor import no authority? As the power & authority
of the Head of a Colledge, or Gouernor of a cōmonwealth cannot be better or more effectually expressed, then by say∣ing, He is Rector of the Colledge, or, Gouernor of the Common∣wealth: so if S. Ambrose, had studied to confute your ans∣weare, and expresse the Popes Monarchicall power & au∣thority ouer the whole Church, he could not haue done it more effectually, then by stiling him, Rector, or Gouernor of the house of God, which is his Church: for that title neuer was, nor can euer be giuen to any other, but to the Pope of Rome, whom Christ hath made Pastor & Gouernor of his whole flockIoan. 21.15. & seqq. And to this S. Ambrose alludethL. 10. ep. 81., when wri∣ting to Siricius Pope, he calls him, A watchfull, and pouident Pastor, that with pious solicitude defends the flock of Christ from wolues, that is, from heretikes. 3. What S. Ambrose his iudgment was concerning the infallibility of the Bishop and Church of Rome, he decla∣reth, when writing to Siricius Pope of certaine heretikes whom he had condemned, he saythIbid.: Whom your Holinesse hath condemned, know that we also hold them condemned, according to your iudgment. S. Ambrose was fare more learned then Si∣ricius, and yet by reason of the infallibility of the Roman Church, in determining causes of fayth, and condemning heresies, he submitteth to the iudgment of Siricius. Imper∣tinently therfore do you obiectPag. 214., to proue S. Ambrose his no-subiection to the Church of Rome, that the Pope asked his iudgment concerning the day of Easter: for a Counsellor may be more learned then a King, & the King may aske his iudgment; and yet the authority of determi∣ning the cause is not in the Counsellor, but in the King. And the Counsell or though he be more learned, is subiect and bound to obey the King, as S. Ambrose was, and ack∣nowledged himselfe bound to obey Siricius. Nor do you find vs to hold, that the Pope in his determinations, ought not to proceed prudently, asking the aduice of learned men. 4. To proue that S. Ambrose acknowledged no subie∣ction to the Church of Rome, you reportPag. 214. out of Baro∣nius, that certaine Clergy-men of Milan 670. yeares after
the death of S. Ambrose, called the Bishoprick of Milan, S. Ambrose his Church, and withstood Petrus Damianus the Po∣pes Legate, alleaging, that the Church of Ambrose had bene al∣waies free in it selfe, and neuer subiect to the lawes of the Pope of Rome. But why do you conceale the truth of this history? The ancient splendor, and beauty of the Church of Milan being defaced, and greatly decayed, partly by the impurity of Clergy-men, that being infected with the heresy of the Nicolaites, liued incontinently, and obstinatly defended the same to be lawfull, and partly by Simoniacall Priests; the people of Milan sent Legates to the Pope, beseeching him to commiserate the lamentable state, and cure the des∣perate diseases of that famous Church. The Pope (not Leo the Ninth, as you mistake, but) Nicolas the second (bet∣ween whom and Leo there were other two Popes, Victor and Stephen) condescending to so iust a request, sent two holy and learned men, Petrus Damiani Cardinall of Ostia, & Anselme B. of Luca, as his Legates, to visit that Church, and armed them with his owne authority, to correct the offenders, and ordayne whatsoeuer should be thought ex∣pedient, for the reformation of so great disorders. The Le∣gates being ariued at Milan, had no sooner intimated their Commission, but the people stirred vp by those lewd, and factious Clergy-men, began to oppose them, alleaging that the Church of Ambrose had bene alwais free in it selfe, and neuer subiect to the Lawes of the Pope of Rome. These are the only words, which you cull out of Baronius whole narration, leauing out what precedeth, and making no mention of what followeth; which is, that Petrus Da∣miani stepping vp into the Pulpit, after he had quieted the people, proued effectually the soueraigne authority gran∣ted by Christ, to the Roman Church, ouer all Churches, & that whosoeuer denies that authority, is an heretike. The people giuing eare to his words, were appeased, and with one accord promised to do whatsoeuer he should ordayne. There was present a great number of Clergy-men, and scarce any of them, that had not bene promoted to orders by Simony. For the remedy of so great a mischiefe, the Le∣gats
required from Guido the Archbishop, an inuiolable caution and promise, not to admit any from thence for∣ward to holy orders for money; and also to roote out the heresy of the Nicolaites. Wherunto he willingly yeilded, with imprecation of Gods wrath, and reuenge on himselfe, if he performed it not. He gaue this caution in writing, & the Priests and Clerkes subscribed vnto it. Which being done, he prostrated himselfe on the ground, asking pen∣nance of the Legates for his offence. And in like manner the Clergy-men admitting pennance, were reconciled in tyme of Masse, and receaued new ornaments from the Bi∣shops hand, hauing first made a profession of their fayth, in which they anathematized all Heresies extolling themsel∣ues against the holy Catholike and Apostolike Church, & particularly those of the Nicolaites and Symonians. This is the story: and what greater folly can there be, then to ar∣gue, that S. Ambrose a most holy and learned Doctor, op∣posed the authority of the Roman Church, because a few lewd hereticall Clergy-men of Milan 670. yeares after his death, disclaimed from the obedience of the B. of Rome, to the end they might hold on their damnable courses, and es∣cape that punishment which their offences so iustly deser∣ued? And can there be a greater Imposture, then to alleage a few rash words vttered by the people at the instigation of those heretikes, & to conceale that they togeather with the people & Archbishop being admonished by the Popes Legats, acknowledged their error with harty sorrow, and promise of amendment, and obedience to the See Aposto∣like? By this a iudicious reader will perceaue, that you nei∣ther regard what you alleage, true, or false, nor stick to pa∣tronize vice and heresy in them, that with you will oppose the Bishop, and Church of Rome. But you that follow them in their disobedience, why do you not also follow them in their repentance? When Theodosius in excuse of the great slaughter he had made at Thessalonica, alleaged to S. Ambrose, that King Dauid also had offended, com∣mitting adultery and murther; S. Ambrose answearedPaulinus in vita Am∣bros., Sequutus es errantem sequere poenitentem: As you haue followed Da∣uid
in his finne, so follow him in his repentance. And if he were now liuing, he would in like manner answere you, that as you haue followed some wicked Clergy-men of his Church, in their disobedience to the See Apostolike; so fol∣low them in their repentance: and both he and they would condemne you of great perfidiousnesse, in proclaiming their sinne, and concealing their amendment. 5. You obiectPag. 214.215. that S. Ambrose refused to follow the Church of Rome in the custome of washing the feet of infants is baptized, which (say you) the Church of Rome iudged to be superfluous, but contrariwise, Ambrose and the Church of Milan held to be necessary. Your custome is to borrow Arguments from Catholike writers, and suppresse their solutions. This you borow from BellarmineL. 2. de Pont. c. 16., as you do many others. In him read the answere. It shall suffife me to tell you, that the Roman Church obligeth not other Churches, to vse, or omit all the rites, and ceremonies, which she vseth, or omit∣teth in administration of the Sacraments, or other Ecclesia∣sticall offices. In such as are of themselues indifferent, she commandeth nothing, as you haue heardChāp. 2. sect. 3., but leaueth freedome to other Churches, to follow their owne custo∣mes. Such was the ceremony of washing the feet of infan∣tes baptized, which though she practized not, she condem∣ned not: and therfore it was free for the Church of Milan to vse it, without any disobedience at all to the Church of Rome. If you had not bene minded to trifle, you should haue proued, that S. Ambrose disobeyed the Roman Church in matter of fayth, as you do. This you cannot proue, both because S. Augustine hath testifiedCont. Iu∣lia. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2. that in the workes of Blessed Ambrose the Roman fayth greatly shineth; & also, because he himselfe defineth a Catholike Bishop to be one that a greeth with the Roman ChurchOrat. de obitu Satyri., and prote∣steth to SiriciusL. 10. ep. 81., that whom the Roman Church con∣demneth, he following her iudgment, holdeth in like manner condemned: of which number you are one.
SECT. VIII. S. Augustines iudgment concerning the necessity of vnion with the Church of Rome, and subiection to the Bishop therof. S. Augustines iudgment was, that the Roman Church is the Head of all Churches, which he professed sayingEp. 162. In her hath alwaies florished the Princedome of the See Apo∣stolike: Princedome (I say) not only Principality of Order (as you comment) but of true power and authority ouer all the Churches of the world, as hath bene effectually prouedChap. 17. sect. 2., and the ensuing testimonies of S. Augustine shall further confirme. For heerein he declared his iudg∣ment, when together with all the Fathers of the Mileuitan Councell (to which he was Secretary) he writ to Innocen∣tius PopeEp. 2.: For as much as God by the gift of his principall grace, hath placed you in the Apostolike See, and granted you to be such in our dayes, as we ought rather to feare, that it should be imputed to vs for a crime of negligence, if we should conceale from your Reuerence those things, which for the Church ought to be represented to you, then to imagine that you can receaue them disdainefully, or negli∣gently; we beseech you, to apply your Pastorall diligence, to the great perills of the weake members of Christ. You deny not but that S. Augustine with the whole Councell in these words requi∣reth the Popes Pastorall diligence, for the repressing of the Pelagian heresy in Palestine and Africk; but your answere isPag. 218., that, Iohn the first writing to an Arch-bishop, granteth, that the charge of the Church for the helpe of all, in repressing of heresies, was committed to him, as well as to himselfe: & that euery Patriarke hath a Principality and height of a Pastorall watch-tower aboue all Metropolitans, and Bishops: and yet haue they not ouer all Bishops power of iurisdiction. But these euasions I haue already proued to be vaine, and not without ImpostureSee aboue Chap. 19. sect. 3.. That euery Bishop ought to concurre to the help of all in repressing of heresy, we deny not: but we deny, that e∣uery Bishop hath a watch-tower of pastorall authority to
iudge and condemne heretikes whersoeuer out of his owne Dioces, as S. Augustine, and the Mileuitan Fathers ack∣nowledge the Pope to haue out of his Dioces and Patri∣arkship of Rome, requiring him to condemne by his pa∣storall authority the Pelagians in Africk & Palestine. And that the Popes power herein, exceedeth the iurisdiction of all other Bishops, S. Augustine professeth, writing to Bo∣niface PopeCont. duas Epist. Palag. l. 1. c. 1.: Thou disdainest not to be afrend of the humble, though thou be placed in a higher gouerment. And againeIbid.: The pastorall watch is common to vs all, that haue the office of Bishops; but thou art supereminent in a higher degree. And yet further he de∣clareth this supereminent power and iurisdiction of the Pope to extend it selfe ouer all the world, writing to Op∣tatusEp. 157.: Pelagius and Celestius by the vigilancy of two Episcopall Councels, with the helpe of God, who vndertakes the protection of his Church, haue bene condemned in the extent of the whole world, by two reuerend Prelats of the Apostolike See, Pope Innocentius, and Pope Sozimus. If then S. Augustine belieued aright, the Pope hath Pastorall power to represse and condemne heretikes, throughout the whole world, which other Bishops haue not; their pastorall power being confined to the limits of their owne Diocesses. Your obiections against this, are, 1.Pag. 219.210. That S. Augustine speaking of Stephen B. of Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage, calleth thē, Two Bishops of most eminent Churches, Ergo, the B. of Rome hath not iurisdiction ouer the B. of Carthage: for there can∣not be, Two most Eminents. Your consequence is vntrue: and such you must confesse it to be: for the B. of Rome, being Patriarke of all the West, the B. of Carthage is subiect vnto him, as you forgetting your selfe afterwards acknowledgePag. 29.. Wherefore S. Augustine calling Stephen and Cyprian, two Bishops of two most eminent Churches, intended not to deny the subordination of Cyprian, to Stephē; nor of the Church of Carthage, to that of Rome; but only to signify, that as the Roman Church is most eminent, by reason of her Pa∣triarchall power ouer the West, and her Primacy ouer the whole world; so the Church of Carthage is also most emi∣nent (though in an inferior degree) by reason of her Pri∣macy
ouer all Africa. And in this sense both those Churches e most-Eminent, the one ouer all Africa, and the other o∣uer all the world. Your second obiection of the Saturday-fastPag. 220.; your third of the deniall of Appeales out of Africa to RomePag. 221.; your fourth concerning the cause of CecilianIbid.; your fifth of the Epistle to the Hebrues, whether in S. Augustines dayes the Roman Church held it canonicallPag. 222., are all re∣petitions of your former Arguments, which in their due places haue bene answearedChap. 22. sect. 3. Chap. 25.26. tot. Chap. 30. sect. 1. Chap. 34. sect. 6.. But to them you adde here a Consideration of your iu∣dicious CasaubonPag. 223., requiring vs (who accompt the only note of Schisme to be diuided from the Roman Church and Pope thereof), to answeare, Why S. Augustine, who in seauen Bookes, besides many other places, confuted the Schismaticall Donatists, yet neuer spake word of the Monarchy of the Pope, or of the infallibility of his iudge∣ment, whereby to reduce them to the vnity of the Church, and truth. Your iudicious Casaubon shewed great lack of iudgment in making this Argument; and that he had not read S. Au∣gustine, or if he had, that he did not vnderstand him; or if he had read, & did vnderstand him, then you know what he sheweth in concealing the truth. For throughout all those seauen Bookes against the Donatists, there is nothing which S. Augustine so often obiecteth, nor so much vrgeth against them, as their separation from the Roman Church, repeating the same not once or twice, but almost in euery Chapter of some of those bookes. For when the Donatists did striue to defend their heresy of rebaptization by the au∣thority of S. Cyprian, S. Augustine answearedL. 1. de Bapt. c. 18.19. l. 2. c. 1.5.6.7.9. Contra Crescon. l. . c. 32. l. 2. c. 3. & alibi saepè., that Cyprians patronage could not auaile them, because they were out of the Communion of the Roman Church, in which S. Cyprian liued & died. And doth he not in other his writings against the Donatists often vrge the succession of Bishops in the Roman Church? If (saythEp. 165. he), the order, and succession of Bishops be to be obserued, how much more assuredly, and safely indeed do we begin our accompt from S. Peter himselfe, to whom as he represented the whole Church, our Lord sayd,Math. 16.18. Vpon this Rock I will build my Church? For Linus succeoded to
Peter, Cletus to Linus &c. And so reckoning all the Popes vnto Anastasius, who then sate in the chaire of S. Peter, he concludeth against the Donatists. In this order of succession, there is not one Donatist to be found: to which I adde no, nor yet one Protestant. And reckoning the motiues that held him in the Church, among them he setteth downe the suc∣cession of Bishops in the See of Rome: There are (sayth he)Cont Ep. Fundam. c. 4. many thinges, which with greatest reason hold me in this Catho∣like Church. 1. The vniforme consent of people, and nations (which is not to be found in the Protestant Church, confined to a few Northern countreyes, in a corner of the world.) 2. A certaine authority, begun by miracles (which Protestants confesse themselues not to haue.) 3. The succession of Priests, euen from S. Peter, vntill this present Bishop. Wherfore since that Church in which there is a continued succession of Bishops from S. Peter, cannot be the Protestan: Church, (which hath no such succession) but the Roman, it followeth that S. Augu∣stine held the Roman Church to be the Catholike Church. And therefore expressing to the Donatists how much he grieued to see them ly cut of from this Church he saidPsal. cont. part. Donati.: It greeueth vs to see you ly, so cut of. Number the Priests euen from the See of Peter, and consider in that ranck of Fathers, who succeeded whom. Thats the Rock which the proud gates of hell ouercome not. Here againe S. Augustine sheweth the Roman Church to be the Catholike Church, built vpon Peter, and his suc∣cessors, as vpon a rock, against which heresies & schismes, which are the proud gates of hell, shall neuer preuaile, and all that are out of her communion to be as branches out of from the Vine, and deuoid of all spirituall life. And as he held all that are out of the Roman Church, to be in miserable state, so contrarily he held all that liue in her Communion, to be most hapy and secure from error in fayth: for so he deemed Cecilian Archbishop of Carthage to be, notwithstanding all the plots and conspiracies of the Donatists against him: He might (sayth S. Augustine)Ep. 162. contemne the conspiring multitude of his enemies, because he knew himselfe to be vnited by communicatory letters both to the Church of Rome, in which the soueraignty of the See Apostolike hath alwaies
florished, and to other Countries, from whence the Ghospell came first into Africa. These few passages among many others, shew, that your iudicious Casaubon failed much in iudgment and truth, when he aduentured to say, that, S. Augustine in his workes a∣gainst the Donatists, neuer spake word of the Monarchy of the Pope, nor of the infallibility of his iudgment, wherby to reduce them to the vnity of the Church, and truth. And as he vrged the authority of the See Apostolike, a∣gainst the Donatists, so hath he testified, that by the same au∣thority taken from the authority of holy ScripturesAug. Ep. 91., the Pela∣gians were condemned: who therfore seeing themselues esteemed as Heretikes throughout all the Westerne Church in which they liued, sought to the Churches of the East, ho∣ping to be admitted into their Communion, as the Prote∣stants of Germany writing to Hieremy Patriarke of Con∣stantinople didSee Iustus Caluinus Apol. pro Eccl. Rom. pag. 10.; whom therfore we may check with S. Augustines words written against Iulian a chiese mantai∣ner of the Pelagian heresy: I thinke (sayth heCont. Iu∣lia. l. 1. c. 4. that part of the world ought to suffice thee, in which our Lord would haue the chiefe of the Apostles to be crowned with a most glorious Martyrdome: To the Gouernor of which Church, Blessed Innocentius, if thou woldst haue giuen care, thou hadst ere this, freed thy dange∣rous youth from the Pelagian snares: for what answeare could that holy man giue to the African Councells, but that, which from an∣cient times the Roman Church with all others perseuerantly holdeth? And els where he notethL. 2. de grat. Christi & pecc. orig. c. 8., that albeit Pelagius had drawne others into error, he could neuer deceaue the Ro∣man Church: for the most Blessed Pope Sozimus considered what opi∣nion his predecessor worthy to be imitated, had of his proceedings, and what iudgment the fayth of the Romans to be commended in our Lord, had made of him. But you obiectPag. 225., It is mere sophistry, to inferre a necessity of vnion with the Church of Rome, to be professed of all Christians, at all times, because the Fathers required it in their times. By this Ar∣gument a Pelagian, a Donatist, an Eutychian, or any other Heretike may iustify his departure from the Roman Church, pretending (as you do) that the necessity of vnion
with her, was not for all times. Her fayth is built vpon the word of Christ, promisingMath. 16.18. that, the gates of hell shall neuer preuaile against her, andLuc. 22.32. that, the fayth of Peters See shall ne∣uer faile. Wherfore as it is impossible, that Christ should faile in the performance of his promise; so is it impossible, that the necessity of vnion with the Roman Church should not be perpetuall. Lastly, you bring examples of antiquityPag. 125. requiring vnion with other Churches, as well as with the Roman. This Argument you haue prosecuted beforePag 100.101., out of your owne obseruations of antiquity, with many examples, some of which you repeate here, adding others vnto themPag. 229.230.. The answere you haue receauedChap. 15. sect. 9.; to which I add, that your Argument is, as if you persuading rebells to ioyne not only with their Soueraigne, but also with other his loyall sub∣iects, I shold lay to your charge, that you hold loyall sub∣iects▪ to be of equall authority with their Soueraigne. It is true, that while subiects stand loyall to their Prince, he that ioynes in loyalty with them, is a loyall subiect. But the rea∣son why he is a loyall subiect, is not because he ioyneth with them, but because both he, and they ioyne in obe∣dience and subiection to their Soueraigne: In like manner it is true, that whatsoeuer Churches are in Communion with other Orthodoxall Churches that agree with the Roman (in which the soueraignty of the See Apostolike hath alwaies florishedAug. ep. 162. they are to be accompted Ortho∣doxall, and Catholike Churches; but the reason why they are to be accompted Catholike, is not for their agreement among themselues, but because they all agree with the Church of Rome, the Head and originall Source of Ca∣tholike communion: for which cause S. Cyprian explica∣ting what a Catholike is, makes no mention of other Apo∣stolicall Churches, which were extant in his dayes, but ab∣solutely definethL. 4. Ep. 2. & 8., that to be a Catholike, is, to communi∣cate with the B. of Rome. And S. AmbroseOrat. de obitu Satyri., that, to agree with Catholike Bishops, is, to agree with the Roman Church, from which (sayth heL. 1. ep. 4. ad Imperat.) the rights of Venerable Communion do flow vnto all other Churches, she being the source, and they streames, de∣riued
from her, as from their natiue fountaineInnocent. apud Aug. ap. 91.. And S. IrenaeusL. 3. c. 3. pronounceth it necessary for all Churches (not excepting the Apostolicall) to agree with the Church of Rome, by reason of her more mighty principality, that is, because her sayth cannot faile, she being the Rock on which the Catholike Church is builtHieron. Ep. 57. ad Da∣mas., and against which the gates of hell cannot preuaileAug in Psal. cont. partem Do∣nati., as they haue done against all the other Apostolicall Churches. SECT. IX. S. Hilary B. of Arles acknowledged himselfe subiect to the B. of Rome. THe last witnesse you bringPag. 225. to proue the no-neces∣sity of vnion and subiection to the Pope & Church of Rome, is S. Hilary B. of Arles in France; who though he deserued great commendation for his labors against the Pe∣lagian heresy, and defence of S. Augustines workes, yet for a tyme he stayned his glory, when exceeding the limits of due moderation, and insisting in the steps of Patroclus an inuasor of that See, he presumed to vsurpe to himselfe the rights of the Metropolitans of Vienna and Narbona, ordai∣ning & deposing Bishops in their districts; a thing which no way belonged to him, and had bene forbidden by the Councell of TurinC. 13.. This being complained of against Patroclus, first to Boniface, and then to Celestine Popes, & lastly to the blessed Pope Leo against Hilary, that he had presumed to depose Celidonius a Bishop of the Prouince of Vienna, and he being still liuing, to ordaine Proiectus in his place, he was so far from persisting in this crime to the end of his life, that he went himselfe in person to Rome, in a most submissiue, and penitent manner, to make satisfa∣ction for his offence: He vndertooke (sayth the author of his lifeApud Cuiac, obser∣uat. l. 5. c. 38. a iourney to Rome, on foote, and entred into the City, with∣out any horse, or beast of cariage, and presented himselfe to Pope Leo, reuerently offering him obedience, and humbly intreating, that he might ordaine the state of the Churches after the accustomed manner &c. but if it were not his will, he would not importune. And a∣gaine:
Ibid.: He applied himselfe wholly to appease the spirit of Leo, with a prostrate humility. Hauing pleaded his cause, & being found guilty, he departed from Rome, without staying his sentence, and returned presently to Arles, neuer laying any further claime to the iurisdiction, which formerly he had vsurped, as appeareth out of the Epistle which Leo writ a∣gainst him to the Bishops of the Prouince of ViennaLeo Ep. 89., wherin hauing fully declared, and proued the supreme au∣thority of the See Apostolike to be instituted by Christ himselfe, he annulled what had bene iniustly presumed by Hilary, and prescribed a rule to be obserued in the creation of Bishops. And lest Hilary shold raise tumults, seeking to support his cause by force of armes (as formerly he had done) Leo required of Valentinian the third, that if any such attempt were made, he would cause it to be suppressed by Aetius, commander of the soldiers in France. This the Emperor performed, writing to Aetius that famous Rescript, which afterwards Theodosius the yonger inserted in his new Constitutions, intituling it, The Law of Theodosius, and Valentinian, in which he relateth the whole story of Hilary, and professeth his great veneration of the See Apostolike, and of the Popes supreme authority ouer all Churches, & Bishops, and particularly his right to conuent them before him, and prescribe Lawes vnto them; ordaining withall, that if any Bishop being summoned by him, shall refuse to appeare, the Gouernor of the Prouince shall enforce him to obey, to the end (sayth he) that in all things, that Reuerence be obserued, which our Parents bare to the Roman Church. This is the history of Hilary truly related out of the au∣thor of his life, out of the Epistle of Leo, & out of the Res∣cript of Valentinian. Is it not then vnshamefastnesse in you to sayPag. 225.. that we without any proofe would make you belieue, that at length Hilary yeilded to the Pope, making no further apolo∣gy for the defence of his cause? What? Is the relation made by the Author of his life, no proofe? Is the epistle of that re∣nowned Pope S. Leo the great, no profe? Is the Rescript of Valentinian inserted into the ciuill law, by Theodosius, & neuer doubted of by any man of learning or iudgment, no
proofe? But you tell vs that Iacobus Capella your fellow-Nouellist saythPag. 225.: The Imperiall Rescript is either forged by some Gnatho of Pope Leo, or els forced from the Emperor, by the impor∣tanity of Leo himself. Good God! If the asseueration of a fayth∣lesse man, vttered merely vpon splene and hatred to the See Apostolike, may be belieued, what may not be called in question? what though neuer so false, may not be desen∣ded? what neuer so true, may not be denied? Your answeare, that when all is done, this Rescript is but a humane Constitution, cannot auaile you: for Valentinian performing the duty of a godly Emperor, made this humane Constitution, to defend, and mantaine that authority, which by diuine institution was giuen to S. Peter, and his successors, and which (witnesse the Councell of MileuisAug. Ep. 91., is taken from the authority of the holy Scriptures. But you sayPag. 225.: Hilary, notwithstanding the displeasure of Pope Leo, was worthy for singular sanctity, to be registred in the Ro∣man Martyrologe of Saints. True. King Dauid also is a Saint, but not for his adultery committed with Bethsabee, nor for his murthering of Vrias. He is a Saint for his vertuous life before, and his great pennance after the committing of those siunes. So like wise Hilary is a glorious Saint, cano∣nized not for transgressing the limits of his iurisdiction, but (sayth BaroniusAnno 445. for his zeale in the Catholike fayth, for his great labors against the Pelagians, for his pious liberality to the poore, & other his excellent vertues: and finally, because though for a tyme defending (as he supposed) the right of his See, he exceeded the limits of his iurisdiction, yet that serued him for a spurre, to returne to him∣selfe, with greater courage, feruor, and humility. And I cannot but maruaile at your sharpe sight, that in this history can espy any thing to argue in S. Hilary diso∣bedience to the Pope of Rome. Was his entrenching vpon the priuiledges of other Bishops, done to oppose his autho∣rity? No. It was (as he supposed) to defend the rights of his owne Church. When he was cōplained of to the Pope, did he deny his authority? Nay, did he not of his owne ac∣cord, goe to Rome, to giue account of his proceedings to him, as to his lawfull Superior? And when he was conuin∣ced
of his error, did he shew himselfe refractary? Did he, not presently returne to Arles, desisting from his claime, & neuer so much as once opening his mouth, to make any the least complaint against Leo? If therfore a mist of hatred to the See Apostolike had not obscured your eyes, you would haue seene, that as this history of S. Hilary doth no way infringe, but many wayes confirme the authority of the Pope; so it doth also shew your inconsideration, who to disgrace S. Hilary, report his offence, but conceale his re∣pentance, yea & deny it; that so he may seeme to haue died impenitent, because that fitteth your purpose, and suiteth best with your spirit, which whether it be good, let the rea∣der iudge: for what spirit can that be, which teacheth you to publish the imperfections of the Saints, and deny their vertues? CHAP. XXXV. Of Titles attributed to the Pope. THE Titles giuen to Popes by the ancient Fathers and Councells, shew, that their vniuersall iurisdiction was belieued, & acknowledged in the primitiue tymes of the Church. Concerning the titles giuen them by Councels, you say nothing, but what hath bene already answeared. One only testimony you adde herePag. 237. of the Coūcell of Con∣stantinople vnder Menas, calling not only the Pope, but also Menas Patriarke of Constantinople, Oecumenicall Patri∣arkeAct. 5., that is to say, Vniuersall. True: but that Title was neuer giuen to him nor to any other Patriarke of Constan∣tinople in the West, but in the East only: and that not in regard of any vniuersall iurisdiction, which those Patri∣arkes had equall with the Pope, but vnder the Pope, and in respect of the Patriarkes of the East only, as hath bene prouedSee aboue Chap. 19. sect. 4.. And the same appeares out of the seauenth Law
of the Code, where Iustinian calls Epiphanius Patriarke of Constantinople, Oecumenicall Patriarke; and yet in the same Law, he calls the Pope, Head of all the holy Prelates of God. And Constantine Pogonate in the sixt CouncellEp. ad Sy∣nod. Apost. in 6. Syn. Act. 18., intitles the Pope, Vniuersall Arch-Pastor, and Protothrone of all Patriarkes, and the rest of the Patriarkes, Synthrones to the Pope. The testimony of S. Gregory Nazianzen, which here you obiectPag. 236. as aboue also you had donePag. 140., is borowed out of Salmeron, whose discourse whoeuer pleaseth to read, will soone find your dealing to be imposterous, and that you curtall Nazianzens words to your owne aduaritage, lea∣uing out the later part of them. The Titles attributed by ancient Fathers to the Pope, you seeke to elude by parallells, of equall titles, giuen to o∣ther Bishops. But in vaine. 1. For albeit some of the titles, which anciently were, & are still giuen to the Pope, if you regard the sound of the words only, may haue bene giuen in some occasion to other Bishops, yet you proue them not to parallell the Popes titles, vnlesse you can shew, that they were giuen to any other Bishop, in the same sense, in which they haue bene alwaies giuen to the Pope. Christ said of himselfeIoan. 9.6., I am the light of the world: And the same title he gaue to his Apostles, saying to themMath. 5.14., You are the light of the world. Againe he is called a Rock1. Cor. 10.4.; & the same title he gaue to S. PeterMath. 16.18.. Loe here parallells like to yours: Be∣hold the same titles, in words, giuen to Christ, and his Apo∣stles. But doth this proue, that the titles of Rock, and Light of the world, do equally, and in the same sense agree to Christ and his Apostles? Do they import the same excellency, and dignity in the Apostles, that they do in Christ? No: & ther∣fore your disprouing the Popes supremacy by parallelles of titles, like in words, giuen to the Pope, and to other Bi∣shops is mere sophistry: for as the titles of Rock, and Light of the world, if you regard the sense, import a far greater dignity in Christ, then in his Apostles; so like wise, though some ti∣tles giuen to the Pope, and to other Bishops, may be equi∣ualent in words, yet not in sense: for they importe a far greater dignity in the Pope, then in any other Bishop.
The title of Pastor, may be giuen to other Bishops, and Priests, but in a degree far inferior, then to the Pope. He is called, The chiefe Pastor, Prince of Pastors, Vniuersall Arch-Pastor, Pastor of all the sheepe for which Christ shed his bloud, Pastor that feeds the flock of Christ committed to him, throughout the whole world, Pastor of our Lords flock, and Gouernor of the vniuersall Church, Pastor of the sheepe, not of one City, nor of one Countrey, but of all the sheep of Christ, without any exception, or limitationSee all this proued aboue Chap. 14. sect.. In this sense the name of Pastor was neuer giuen to any other Apostle, or Bishop, but only to S. Peter, and his successors. The rest of the Apostles (sayth S. BernardL. 2. de confideras. obtayned each of them, their peculiar flocks: Iames contented with Hierusalem, yieldes the vniuer sality to Peter. And long before him, Eucherius, that famous and learned Bishop of LionsHom. in Vigil. S. Pe.: Christ first commit∣ted to Peter his Lambes, and then his sheepe, because he made him, not only a Pastor, but Pastor of Pastors: Peter therfore feedeth the Lam∣bes, and the sheepe; he feedeth the yong ones, and the dammes: he go∣uerneth the subiects and the Prelates, and is therfore Pastor of all; for besides Lambes, and sheep, there is nothing in the Church. Your eua∣sionPag. 243. n. 20., that, if by Pastor we vnderstand, curam & studium, care and study, towards the good of the vniuersall Church, in this all other Bishops are Pastors, as well as the Pope, is impertinent: for charity obligeth not only Bishops, but euery Christian man and woman to haue a care and study, towards the good of the vniuer∣sall Church, according to their abilities. But the Pope is not only bound to a charitable care and study, as all others are, but by reason of his Pastorall office, and function, is the guide, and Gouernor of the vniuerfall Church throughout the whole world. And vntill you can shew the like Pa∣storall power, and iurisdiction attributed to any other Bi∣shop, you must confesse his title of Pastor, to be without pa∣rallell. The like hath bene prouedAboue Chap. 14. sect. 3. of his titles of Doctor, of PopeChap. 23., of Vicar of ChristChap. 14. sect. 2., of Apostolicall manChap. 14. sect. 3., and Apo∣stolate, applied to his person, and function; and of Apostolicall See, to the Roman Church. Nor is it hard, to proue the same of all the other titles mentioned by Bellarmine. He is cal∣led Father of Fathers, and Prince of Priests; which titles, though
they may, in a true sense, be giuen to euery Patriark, and Archbishop, in respect of other Bishops subiect to them; and to euery Bishop, in respect of the inferior Pa∣stors of his Dioces, yet not in the same sense in which they are giuen to the Pope. In like manner the name of Pontifex, and Summus Ponti∣fex, are sometimes giuen to other Bishops, but not as to the Pope: for he is called by the foure Primats of AfricaSee Spond anno 646. n. 1., & their Synods, Pater Patrum, & Summus omnium Praesulum Pon∣tifex, the Father of Fathers, and the chiefe Bishop of all Bishops. And Venerable BedeL. 1. hist. Angl. c. 1. sayth of S. Gregory, that, in toto orbe ge∣rebat Pontificatum, that, his Episcopall power was ouer the whole world: which S. Anselm also expressed, dedicating his booke, De incarnatione, to Vrbanus Pope with this inscri∣ption, Domino & Patri vniuersae Ecclesiae in terra peregrinantis, Summo Pontifici Vrbano: To the chiefe Bishop Vrbanus, Lord & Fa∣ther of the vniuersall Church militant on earth. Where do you find any parallell to this title of the Pope? The like I say, of the title of Rector domus Dei, Ruler or Go∣uernor of the house of God: for albeit each of the Apostles were Rulers and Gouernors of the Church (and so S. Andrew is so called in the Collect vsed on his festiuall day) yet the or∣dinary Episcopall authority, and iurisdiction of none of them, nor of any other Bishop whatsoeuer but only of S. Peter, and his successors, extends to the rule, & Gouerment of the vniuersall Church. For which cause Valentinian the third intituleth the Pope, Rector of the Vniuersality of Chur∣ches. And both he and Theodosius sayConstit. Nouell. Tit. 24.: So the peace of the Church shallbe conserued by all, if the Vniuersality acknowledge her Rector. And Theodoret being deposed in the second Coun∣cell of Ephesus, appealed to Leo Pope, because (sayth he)Ep. ad Re∣nat., The holy Roman See hath the sterne of gouerment of all the Churches of the world. Where do you find the title of Ruler or Gouernor of the Church, attributed to any other Apostle, or Bishop, in this sense? The same I say of the title of Head of the Church: for in the Nicen CouncellCan. 39. ex Graec. & A∣rab., the B. of Rome is called, Head and Prince of all Patriarkes. The Councell of SardicaInsert. in fragment. Hi∣lar. & citatur expres∣seth
the same in their Epistle to Pope Iulius:à Nicol. c. i Ep. ad Episc. Gal. It is very good & fit, that from all the Prouinces, the Bishops haue reference to their Head, that is, to the See of the Apostle Peter. In the Councell of EphesusPart. 2. Act. 2., when the Legates of Celestine Pope arriued thither, they gaue thankes to the Fathers there assembled, that, by their holy and religious voices, they had shewed themselues holy members to the blessed Pope, their holy Head. The Fathers of the Councell of ChalcedonIn relat ad Leon. call Leo Pope their Head & themselues his members, and acknowledge himIbid. to rule ouer them, as the Head doth ouer the members. And his Legates in the same Councell saidAct. 1.: We haue the commands of the Pope of Rome, who is the Head of all Churches: and the Councell contra∣dicted not, but presently obeyed his commands. S. Prosper saythL. De in∣grat. c. 2.: Rome the See of Peter, is made the Head of Pastorall ho∣nor to the world, possessing by religion, what it doth not by force of ar∣mes: which S. Leo also expresseth sayingSerm. 1. in Nata. Apost. Petri & Pau∣li.: Rome by the sa¦cred See of Peter, being made Head of the world, hath a larger extent of gouerment by diuine religion, then by earthly dominion. Eugenius B. of CarthageVict. V∣ticen. l. . calls the Roman Church, The Head of all Churches. S. FulgentiusDe incarn. & grat c. 11., The Top of the world. And En∣nodius saythLib de Sy∣nod sub Sym∣macho habit.: The dignity of the See Apostolike is Venerable throughout the whole world, whiles all the faithfull are subiect vnto it, as being the Head of the whole body. Iustinian intituleth the PopeCod. Tit. 1. L. 7., The Head of all the holy Prelates of God, and, the Head of all Churches. And the Bishops of the lower MaesiaApud Bin. to 2. pag 154. pro∣fesse Leo B. of Rome to be, Truly the Head of all Churches. You answere firstPag. 242., that S. Basil calls Athanasius, Top or crowne of the head of all. S. Basill meanes not that Atha∣nasius was the top, or head of all, but, omnium nostrum, of vs all, as the Latine translation hath, that is to say, of all the Or∣thodoxe Pastors, which in those Easterne parts applied themselues to remedy the calamities of that distracted Church. 2. You sayIbid.: Cyrill in a Councell (the first of Ephe∣sus) is called, The Head of the assembly. True; he presided in that Councell, as Vicar to Pope Celestine, whom therfore Cy∣rill, and the whole Councell acknowledged to be their HeadSee aboue Chap. 18. sect. 1. 3. You sayPag. 243.: S. Chrysestome calls Antioch, The head City of the whole world. S. Chrysostome by the whole world, vn∣derstandeth
not all the nations vnder heauen, but the East only, as a litle before he had declared, speaking of Flauia∣nus: He knew well, that the busines (of his embassy to the Empe∣tor) was not for one City, but for all the East: for of all the cities seated in the East, our City is the Head and mother. If you can shew that the Fathers and Councells, when they call the Roman Church, The head of all Churches, and the B. of Rome, The Head of all the holy Prelates of God, explicate themselues to speake of the West only, or of any part of the world, your answeare shall be accepted: but vntill then, it shall stand for sophistry, as it is, and you well know it to be. The rest of your answeares to the titles giuen to Popes by the ancient Fathers, are of the same straine: but to dwell in the exami∣nation of euery patticular, is a superfluous labor, especially the supreme authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome, being vnanswearably proued, by the Titles, which I haue declared. But you obiectPag. 258., that of later times, blasphemous titles are giuen to the Popes by their Parasites, and swallowed vp by them, as their spirit, and vitall breath. I cannot but meruaile, that a man of your learning, yeares, and calling, should make such ob∣iections in good earnest, which consist merely, in your owne violent wresting of words, contrary to the sense, & meaning of them that spake them, and contrary (I dare say) to your owne knowledge: for you cannot be so simple, as to thinke, that those titles were euer giuen to any Pope, in that sense, in which you misconstrue them. But your good will to the Bishop, and Church of Rome, is such, that so you may make them hateful to your readers, you regard not how you delude them, nor how you wronge our Au∣thors. First then, the Pope is called, Sponsus Ecclesiae, The bride∣groome of the Church. This title you except againstPag. 246.251., as blas∣phemous, because the ChurchIoan. 3.29. is called, The Spouse of Christ. But why may not the name of Bridegroome, which is one of the titles of Christ, without blasphemy and without wrong to Christ, be giuen to his Vicar on earth, in an in∣ferior degree, as the name of Light of the world (another of his
titles) is without blasphemy or wrong to him, giuen to his ApostlesMath. 5.14. ? Shall we thinke, that 500. Reuerend Bi∣shops in the second Generall Councell of LionsC. vbi pe∣ric. De elect. in 6. blasphe∣med, when they approued that title vnto the Pope? Shall Doctor Morton now after 350. yeares, come to controle them, and teach them how to speake? But you askePag. 246., how S. Bernard did like of this diuinity? He (say you) writing vnto Pope Eugenius admonisheth him not to call himselfe the Bridegroome of the Church, which is the spouse of Christ; for, sayth he, Nemo commit∣tit sponsam suam Vicario: No man will commit his spouse to his Vicar, Can there be a more wilfull falsification? S. Bernard hath no such words: They are yours, and directly contrary to S. Bernards words and Doctrine, who in that very Epi∣stleEp. 237., sayth to Eugenius, Tibi commissa est Domini tui sponsa, The spouse of thy Lord is committed to thee. And to Innocentius PopeEp. 191.: To thee is committed the spouse of Christ: thou art a friend of the Bridegroome: It belongs to thee, to present a chast Virgin, to one man Christ. In what sense therfore S. Bernard admoni∣shed EugeniusEp. 237. to call the beloued spouse of Christ, Prin∣cesse, & not my Princesse, these passages of his giue sufficiently to be vnderstood, and our authors haue declaredSee Bellar. l. 2. de Pont. c. 31.. Nor can this diuinity seeme strange to any man that is a Diuinor for although there be but one chiefe Bridegroome of the Church, which is Christ, and in respect of him, all Bishops are but Paranymphes, & friends of the Bridegroome, yet who knoweth not (what Demetrius B. of Bulgaria wri∣ting to Constantinus Cabasilas, hath rightly obserued) that as in carnall marriage the Bridegroome by a ring weddeth himselfe to his Bride, so a Bishop hath a ring giuen vnto him, to signify the spirituall mariage betweene him, & his Church. And as euery particular Bishop, without any wrōg to Christ, is a Bridegroome of his particular Church vnder Christ, cooperating extrinsecally with him, to beget children vnto him, by preaching his word, & administring his Sacraments, so likewise in the same sense, the Pope is Bridegroome of the vniuersall Church, and she his spouse, without any wrong to Christ. 2. You obiectPag. 251. out of Bzouius; Innocentius the eight was called by Abrahamus Polonus,
Regno & vnctione Christus prae participibus sui: In Royalty, and vn∣ction Christ aboue his fellowes. This title also you will haue to be blasphemous, because S. PaulHeb. 1.9. giues that name to Christ. But what then say you to S. Bernard, whoL. 2. de consider at. calls Eugenius Pope, Peter in power, in Vnction Christ? Did he not know how to speake? Did he blaspheme? And if he did not, why do you misinterpret Polonus his words, who spake in the same sense S. Bernard did? 3. You obiectPag. 251.; The Orator of the Venetians called Paul the second, Celestiall Maiesty. But what say you to Bassianus B. of Ephesus, who in his petition to the Emperors Valen∣tinian, and MartianIn Conc. Chalced. Act. 11., sayth: I cast my selfe at your Diuine feet, quatenus dignetur Vestra caelestis Potestas &c. that your cele∣stiall Power may vouchsafe to write to the Councell &c. Et vestram Diuinitatem exoro, And I beseech your Diuinity &c. What to that learned Doctor Theodorus Studites and his fellow Regu∣lars sayingIn Ep. ad Michael. Im∣per. to Michael the Emperor, If your diuine Magnifi∣cence seeme to doubt of any thing, or not to belieue, the declaration is piously to be required from the Pope. What to the Bishops of the Councell of Mopsuestia sayingEp. ad Vi∣gil. to Vigilius Pope: The things which concerne the state of the Churches, are to be referred to your Diuinely honored Blessednesse? Did not these men know, how to speake? Or will you presume to charge them with blasphemy? Wherfore, as they by Celestiall power, by Diuinity, and Diuine Magnificence, did not vnderstand the increated power and Maiesty of Almighty God, but the great digni∣ty, and power giuen by him to Emperors, and Popes vpon earth; so if you had not bene minded to cauill, and spend paper in obiecting silly sophismes, insteed of solid Argu∣ments, you might haue knowne, that the Venetian Orator, by the title of Celestiall Maiesty giuen to the Pope, vnder∣stood nothing els, but the great power and dignity of su∣preme Gouernor of Gods Church, giuen him from heauen. 4. You obiectPag. 251.; Galbus Embassador of France, called Pius the fourth, The voyce, and oracle of Truth, proper to Christ, who sayth, I am the truth. So likewise Christ saythIoan. 9.6., I am the light of the world: doth he therfore blaspheme, that calls the Apo∣stles, and Doctors of the Church, lights of the world? This Syr
is not to argue, but to trifle. If it be blasphemy, to call the Roman Church, or the definitions of the B. of Rome. The oracle of truth: what thinke you of 289. Bishops assembled in the sixt Councell generallAct. 8. & 18., calling the Epistle of Aga∣tho Pope, The suggestion of the holy Ghost, dictated by the mouth of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles? And what of the Bishops of France, who speaking to Leo Pope of the instructions of fayth which he had sent them, saidInter Ep. Leonis post Ep. 51.: From the See Aposto∣like, spring forth still the Oracles of the Apostolicall spirit? which what are they, but Oracles of truth? for the Apostles were pen-men of the holy Ghost, and guided by the spirit of truth. And why did the Councell of Mileuis sayAug. Ep. 92., that God ruleth the Pope in his consultations of fayth? And why S. Au∣gustine speaking of the Roman chaireEp. 166, that Christ in the chaire of vnity, hath placed the doctrine of Verity? And why did Christ assure S. Peter, that his successors shall not faile in their definitions of faythSee this proued aboue Chap. 12. sect. 1. & 2., but because the definitions of the See Apostolike are of truth? 5. If an orator of Portugall, speaking of the dignity of the B. of Rome, called it, A dignity aboue all Principalities, and Powers; why may not you vnderstand, that he vseth that manner of speach, to professe, that so great a dignity hath not bene conferred on any other, either Man, or An∣gell? Which if to you it be Blasphemy, is to Orthodoxall people, a certaine Truth: for to be the supreme Vicar of Christ on earth, and gouern or of the vniuersall Church, is a dignity, that hath bene giuen to no man, nor Angell, but only to S. Peter, and his successors. 6. If BellarmineCont. de Rom. Pont. Praefat. called Sixtus Quintus, The Corner∣stone in Sion, proued, precious, and chiefe foundation, what was it els to say, but as Christ sayd to S. Peter, & in him to his successors, that he was the Rocke, and foundation of the Church, signified by Sion? and that wheras, the rest of the Apostles are secondary foundations, Peter & his successors are in that ranck the chiefest, and next vnto Christ, and therfore in a secondary sense participate with him, and as his Vicars, the title of Corner-stone in Sion? 7. You bid vs, stop our earesPag. 25., that we may not heare
Stapleton call Gregory the thirteenth, Supremum in terris Numen, which you english, Power, Might, and Maiesty of God on earth. But you must be put to your Grammer againe, to learne, that Numen doth not only signify the increated po∣wer and Maiesty of God, but any great earthly Power: why els did Cicero sayPhilip. 3.. Magna est vis, magnum Numen, v∣num & idem sentientis Senatus? And why did Iustinian say,Authen. ad Ioan. Pap. Vt Eccles. Rom. Necessarium duximus fontem Sacerdotij speciali nostri Numinis lege sancire? Stapleton therfore blasphemes not, but you fal∣sify, obtruding for his sense, your owne ignorance of gram∣mer, or (which is worse) your wilfull misconstruction of his words. 8. You obiectPag. 252. that the Glosse calls the Pope, Our Lord God the Pope. This is a malicious cauill: for the word Deus, God, is not in the Roman copy; not in the ancient e∣dition of Paris, anno 1522. by Thielman Keruer, Printer to that famous Vniuersity; nor in the edition of Turin per Nicolaum Beuilaquam anno 1520. Only I finde it in the Parisian edition of the yeare 1585. which hath no name of printer, and therfore giues cause of suspicion, that it is of an hereticall printer: or if he were a Catholike, why may it not be thought to be an error in the print, or that, wheras the Pope is somtimes called, Dominus Dominus noster Papa, & in the second place Dominus for breuity sake, is wont to be expressed only by the letter D, the Printer thinking that Do∣minus was not to be repeated twice, for Dominus in the se∣cond place, said Deus? But to giue you your greatest aduan∣tage, let the edition be Catholike, let the words be, as you obiect them: must you presently cry blasphemy, and bid vs stop our eares? Doth not Deus often signify an earthly digni∣ty? Did not DauidPsal. 81.1. call Magistrates, Gods, when he said, God stood in the assembly of Gods, and in the middest iudgath Gods? Did not God himselfeExod. 7.1. call Moyses, the God of Pharao? Did not Christ sayIoan. 10.35. to all that are his children by grace, You are all Gods? Did not Constantine the GreatL. 1. hist. c. 2. speaking to the Bishops of the Nicen Councell, say. You are constitu∣ted Gods by the true God, and therfore end your strefes among your selues; for it is not fit, that Gods should be iudged vs vs? And did
not S. GregoryL. 4. ep. 31., alleaging this testimony of Constan∣tine, adde vnto it, that God himselfe in the holy Scripture hath honored Priests with the name of Gods? And did not our late Soueraigne King Iames sayPraefat. monit. that Kings are Gods vpon earth? Did he, or any of the other heere named, blas∣pheme? I suppose you will not presume to lay so foule an aspersion on thē: or if you do, we shal make bold to tel you that you blaspheme, whiles in your late Sermon preached at Durham before his Maiesty, you call Kings Mortall Gods. Yf then the name of God, may not only without blas∣phemy, but in a true, Catholike, and pious sense, be giuen to all Kings, to all Magistrates, to all Bishops, to all Priests, to all Gods adoptiue Children; shall it be blasphemy only to giue it to the chiefe of all Priests, to the Bishop of Bishops? Did S. Bernard blasphemeL. 2. de confiderat., when he called Eugenius Pope, The God of Pharao, as God called Moyses? Did Ladis∣laus, that famous King of Hungary, blaspheme when he called Nicolas the fifth, A God vpon earthOrat. ad Nicol. 5. ? Acknow∣ledge then, that this your obiection is an imposterous ca∣uill against the Bishop and Church of Rome, or rather a calumny inuented to mantaine a bad cause, which with o∣ther Arguments you cannot vphold. CHAP. XXXVI. The nullity of Doctor Mortons answeares, to the testimonies of ancient Fathers, discouered. SECT. I. Some of his Answeares examined. WHAT hath bene produced hitherto, out of antiquity, conuincingly proueth the vniuer∣sall Authority, and Iurisdiction of the B. of Rome, to haue bene acknowledged from the beginning by all the Catholikes of the world.
Here you vndertake to answeare the testimonies of ancient Fathers, alleaged by Bellarmine, but performe it not. Some of them you passe ouer, not only without answeare, but without any mention of them; as of Valentinian the Em∣peror. Venerable Bede, S. Anselme, Hugo de S. Victore, and S. Bernard, whom yet CaluinL. 4. instit. c. 7. §. 22. cites for himselfe, & acknowledgeth to be a Saint. 2. To the testimonies of S. Ignatius, and Irenaeus, you answeare, but satisfy not, as hath bene prouedChap. 15. sect. 5. & 6.. And the like hath bene shewed of your answeares to the testimo∣nies of S. BasilChap. 34. sect. 4. and IustinianChap. 30. sect. 5. the Emperor. 3. Of S. Prosper you sayPag. 270. fin. 271. init.: His meaning might haue bene better knowne, if he had written in prose, and not assumed vnto him the liberty of a Poet. But who seeth not this to be a mere shift, void of truth? for as in verse he saydL. De ingrat. c. 2., Now Rome the great Apostle Peters seat, Head of Pastorall Honour here below; Hath by fayths Empire made her selfe more great, then she by all her armed powers could grow: So likewise he said in proseDe vocat. gentium c. 16.; The soueraignty of the Aposto∣licall Priesthood hath made Rome greater by the Tribunall of religion, then by the Throne of Power. Bellarmine alleageth both the one, and the other; as well in prose, as in verse. But be∣cause both of them are vnanswerable, you vnder colour, that the one is in verse, reiect S. Prosper, as fabulous in both: for the liberty which Poets assume vnto them, is to report fables insteed of truthes. This is the reuerence, you beare to that holy and renowned Father: and such the solutions, wherwith you shift off the testimonies of antiquity; and yet beare your Readers in hand, that you belieue as they belieued. 4. The B. of Patara in LiciaLiberat. in Breu. c. 22., vpon the banish∣ment of Pope Siluerius, represented to the Emperor Iustinian the iudgment of God, vpon the expulsion of the Bishop of so great a Seate, saying: There are many Kings in the world, but not one of them, as the Pope, who is Head ouer the Church of the whole world. You answearePag. 156. Liberatus, who reported this history, was an author deceaued by heretikes, & belieued not himselfe, what
he reported for the Pope. Giue vs any one author that excep∣ted against this relation of Liberatus before your selfe, or that sayd, he himselfe beliued not, what he reported for the Pope? If it shall be lawfull for you to reiect testimonies of anti∣quity vpon no other ground, but because they are against your selfe, what authority may not with such answeares be eluded? You know this not to satisfy, and therfore haue inuented another, that this Greeke Author must be taken in the Greeke sense of Primacy of order. This satisfieth as litle as the former: for the B. of Patara compares the spirituall autho∣rity of the Pope, with the temporall of Kings, protesting that no King hath temporall power ouer all the King∣doms of the earth, as the Pope hath spirituall ouer the Church of the wholeworld. Againe, that the Popes Primacy in the Greeke sense is not Primacy of iurisdiction, but of Order only, is said gratis, and vntruly. The Greeke Fathers in the Councell of Chalcedon spake in the Greeke sense, & yet they acknowledgedIn relat. ad Leon. the Pope to be their Head, and to rule ouer them, at the Head doth ouer the members. Theodoret spake in the Greeke sense, when he saidIn Ep.  Renat.. The See of Rome hath the sterne of gouernment, ouer all the Churches of the world. Theo∣dosius spake in the Greeke senseConst. . Nouel. The 24., when he called the Pope, Rector of the vniuersality of Churches. This therefore is the Greeke sense, and in this sense the B. of Patara spake to Iustinian. 5. S. EpiphaniusHaeres. 58. reporteth, that Vrsacius & Valens Bishops, & chiefe sticklers of the Arians, touched with re∣morse for their treachery against Athanasius, went vp to Rome, and presenting libels of pennance to Iulius Pope, craued pardon for their offence, and promised to stand to his iudgment: which sheweth, that they acknowledged him to be the Head and Iudge of Bishops. This testimony though set downe in your Latine margent, curtalledPag. 254., yet in your English you make no mention of it, but pre∣tending to answeare by a similitude, tell vs a tale of a tubbe of A. R. in the County of Suffolke crauing pardon of the Sheriffe of Middelsex for a notorius offence done vnto him. But (to omit that hereby the English reader can haue no notice at all of the
force of this testimony) your answeare is nether similitude, nor solution, but petitio principij, a false supposition, that Vrsacius, and Valens asked pardon of Iulius for a notorious offence done vnto him. Their offence was not against Iulius, but against Athanasius: and yet of this offence, they asked pardon of Iulius, because they knew that to him, as to the Head of the Church, it belonged to remedy the disorders of the Church; and that as he had power to punish them for their offence, so he had also to pardon them, vpon their submission, and promise of amendment, which to that end they made. 6. No lesse impertinent is the other flimflam, which you addePag. 254., as an answeare, to the testimony of Diony∣sius Alexandrinus, of two Gentlemen, the one being a Iustice of peace, agreeing to haue their difference to be ordered by another Iu∣stice of peace: for when Dionysius Patriarke of Alexandria, was fallen into suspicion of heresyAthanas. de sent. Dion. Et de Sin. A∣rim. & Se∣leuc., the Catholikes of Ale∣xandria went vp to Rome to accuse him before the Pope: The Pope admonished him to cleare himselfe; and he obeying, presently sent vp a booke of defence▪ and apology: which sheweth that both the people & Patriarke of Alexandria acknowledged that the cause of Bishops, and of fayth were to be tried at the Popes tribunall: and that the Pope knew himselfe to haue, and practised the same authority. 7. Not vnlike to these, are the answeares you giue to S. AthanasiusPag. 254., S. Chrysostome,Pag. 255. and Theodoret, who being iniustly deposed from their Bishoprickes appealed to to Iulius, Innocentius, and Leo Popes with manifest ac∣knowledgment of their authority ouer all Bishops and Churches of the world, as shall be proued. SECT. II. Others of Doctour Mortons Answeares, to the ancient Fa∣thers, examined. SOme Easterne Bishops, who with great scandall of the Church, and perturbation of the people, refused to in∣sert
the name of Chrysostome into the Dyptikes, or tables of publike records, were for that cause excommunicated by Innocentius, with command, that they should not be admitted into the peace, and communion of the Roman Church, vntill they restored him. This though it be an Argument of the supreme power of the B. of Rome, you wrest it to a contrary sense. Among them, that refused to restore the name of Chry∣sostome were, Alexander Patriarke of Antioch, and Aca∣cius Bishop of Beroë: but these two, to the end they might be admitted into the Communion of the Roman Church, restored his name, and performed what els Innocentius in ioyned themSpond. anno 408. n. 11.. Of these two you are silent: they were not for your purpose. But because some others stood out for a time, you lay hold on them, who vpon due examina∣tion will proue as litle to your purpose, as the two you conceale. Your first examplePag. 258.259. is of Theophilus Patriarke of Alexandria, who stood out vntill the end of his life. But God, that would not haue a man so well deseruing of his Church, to die in the state of excommunication, ordained by his prouidence, that the soule of Theophilus could not depart out of his body, vntill an Image of S. Chrysostome being brought vnto him, he adored it, doing pennance for his former error, and by that meanes restored himselfe to the peace of the Church. This his recantation is reported by Isidorus Diaconus, and out of him by S. Iohn Damas∣cenL. 3. de imag. prope fin.. Wherfore your deniall of it, is a falsity framed with∣out ground by your selfe, out a desire, that Theophilus should haue died out of the Communion of the Roman Church, as you liue. Your second examplePag. 257., is of Atticus Patriarke of Con∣stantinople, who being excommunicated for the same cause, persisted sometime in his error: but at length moued by the example of Theophilus, and Maximianus a Bishop of Macedonia making intercession for himBaron. anno 408., Innocen∣tius yeilded to absolue him; prouided, that he would him∣selfe aske absolution, and restore the name of Chrysostome.
Hereupon Atticus (witnesse TheodoretL. 5. hist. c. 34. sent many em∣bassages to Rome, to obtaine the communion of Innocen∣tius, but could neuer obteine it, vntill partly by perswasion of the Emperor, and partly fearing a tumult of the people, he restored the name of Chrysostome, and writ letters to Cyrill B. of Alexandria, persuading him to do the like. Wherfore Baronius truly saythAnno 425., that Atticus restored Chry∣sostome by the command and compulsion of Innocentius, and not by the distraction and tumultuosnesse of the people only, as you comment: for if he feared the tumult of the people, it was in regard the people were incensed against him for not restoring Chrysostome, as Innocentius had comman∣ded. And if (as you obiectPag. 258. he called two Bishops, that had died in the communion of the Roman Church, Schismatikes, he spake in passion, seing himselfe excōmunicated by the B. of Rome, and knew (as you also do) that he spake vntruly: for if it were thought Schisme to be in the communion of the Ro∣man Church (as you say he did,) why did he so earnestly desire, and send so many Embassages, to be admitted into her communion? Was is to make himselfe a Schismatike? Nay was it not to free himselfe from schisme? Why do not you imitate him? Your third examplePag. 259.260.261. is of Cyrill Patriarke of Alexan∣dria, who if for a tyme he obeyed not Innocentius, in re∣storing the name of Chrysostome, it was because he iudged the command of Innocentius to be against the Canons, witnesse his owne words alleaged by your selfePag. 259. fin.. But his iudgment was erroneous: and because what he did, was out of a pious zeale, as he conceaued, God reduced him by a miraculous Vision, wherin he saw himselfe cast out of the Church by Chrysostome, and a troupe of Saints that assi∣sted him therin; but that the Blessed Virgin Mary did make intercession for him, as one that had defended her honor a∣gainst Nestorius. Cyrill moued with this vision, condem∣ning his owne iudgment concerning Chrysostome, and calling a Prouinciall Synod restored his name to the sacred records, as the other Patriarkes had done. To this you make two replies: firstPag. 261. you call this, A tale
of Nicephorus, a fabulous Author, that liued 800. yeares after Cy∣rills death. But you wrong Nicephorus: for he reportes it out of Nicetas, that liued almost 500. yeares, nearer Cy∣rills tyme, then himselfe, and out of other ancient histo∣rians. Hoc (sayth heL. 14. c. 28. in arcana Nicetae Philosophi historia, & apud alios inueni. 2. You replyPag. 261., that, Cyrills restoring Chrysostome cannot any whit serue our turne, because he did not simply by submission to the Popes decree, but by vertue of a Vision in a dreame. Surely you seeme to haue bene in a dreame, when you deuised this answeare: for there cannot be a greater Argument of the Popes authority, then that God by a miraculous vision, should notify to Cyril, that by reason of his resistance made to the decree of Innocentius, he was out of the Church. And in how great Veneration did Cyrill hold the B. of Rome; he (I say) that being greatly exasperated against other Bi∣shops for the name of Chrysostome, yet neuer let slip from his mouth any the least irreuerent word against Innocen∣tius? And who can be ignorant, that he firmely belieued the supreme authority of the Roman See, when he presided in the Councell of Ephesus, as Vicar to Celestine PopeSee aboue Chap. 18. sect. 1. ? Without whose order, as he durst not depart from the Communion of Nestorius, so he executed on his person punctually, what Celestine commanded. And finally his beliefe was, that saluation cannot be had out of the Ro∣man ChurchSee aboue Chap. 1. sect. 4.. SECT. III. Doctor Mortons Answere to the testimony of Acacius examined. A Cacius Patriarke of Constantinople writing to Sim∣plicius Pope, professed, that the care of all Churches be∣longed to him. You answearePag. 161. fin. 162.: The vniuersall care of all Chur∣ches was applied to S. Paul, in the dayes of Peter, and to other Bishop, in whom there was no Monarchicall Popedome. This satisfieth not: for the vniuersall care of all Churches may be of Charity
only: this euery Bishop, and euery Christian is bound to haue, according to the measure of his ability. Or it may be of Iustice: and such is the care or charge, which euery Bi∣shop hath of his owne Dioces, and the Pope of the Vniuer∣sall Church: for to him by reason of his office of supreme Pastor, belongeth not only a charitable care, but the rule & gouerment of the vniuersall ChurchSee this proued Chap. 17. sect. 2. Chap. 19. sect. 3.. In this sense Aca∣cius spake, when he saidEp. ad Simplic., Simplicius Pope had the care of all Churches. And the Fathers euermore speake in this sense, when they say, that to Peter, and his Successors in the See of Rome, was committed the care of the vniuersal Church. In this sense S. Chrysostome saidHom. 87. in Ioan.: The care of the whole world was committed to Peter: and what he meaneth by Care, he explicateth sayingHom. 80. ad pop.: The gouerment of the Church through∣out the whole world was committed to Peter. EuthymiusAd c. 21. Ioan.: Christ committed to Peter pascendi curam, & gubernationem, the care of feeding, and gouerning his flock. So SozomenusL. 3. c. 7.: Iulius Pope restored to their seates Athanasius, and other Bishops bani∣shed by the Arians, because the care of all belonged to him by rea∣son of the dignity of his See. S. Leo speaking to Anastasius B. of ThessalonicaEp. 84., and making him his Vicar in the East, To the end (sayth he) thou maiest supply the place of my gouer∣ment, and help me in that care, which by diuine institution I owe to all Churches, and in person visit those Prouinces remote from the See Apostolike. And to Anatolius Patriarke of ConstantinopleEp. 46.: If they who haue so grieuously offended against Flauianus, offer satisfaction, let relation therof be made to the See Apostolike, that our solicitude may ordayne, what is to be obserued. S. GregoryL. 4. ep. 32.: To all that know the Ghospell, it is manifest, that by the voyce of our Lord the Care and Princedome of the whole Church was committed to Peter Prince of the Apostles. And againeL. 7. ep. 70. indict. 2.: By the care of our vnderta∣ken gouerment, we are enforced to extend with vigilancy, the solici∣tude of our office. S. BernardSerm. 3. de 7. misericord. frag.: Witnesse Peter, to whom the Pa∣storall care of the whole Church was committed. These and a thousand more testimonies conuince, that when the ancient Fathers speake of the care of all Churches committed to the B of Rome, by Care, they vnderstand the Pa∣storall charge and obligation of ruling and gouerning the
Vniuersall Church, and therby condemne you of falsity, who to the testimony of Victor Viconsis, calling the Ro∣man Church, the Head of all Churches, answearePag. 271., that he calls it not Head of all Churches in power, and iurisdiction; and that we could neuer proue this out of any ancient Father: for you haue heard it proued by their most expresse and vnanswearable wordsAboue Chap. 17. sect. 2. Chap. 19. sect. 3.. Yf the fore to expresse this vniuersall authority, and iurisdiction of the Pope ouer all Churches, they vse somtimes the word, Care, rather then Gouerment, it is be∣cause (as S. ChrysostomeHom. 3. in Act. speaking of the Pastorall au∣thority of S. Peter ouer the other Apostles, hath noted) Emi∣nency of spirituall power is a care of subiects, not a Lord-like do∣minion. And this sheweth the wrong you do to CosterusPag. 235. when to disproue the Popes vniuersall iurisdiction you al∣leage him calling it, Care: for with what conscience could you possesse your reader, that by Care he vnderstands not power, and iurisdiction, but only a charitable solicitude, knowing (as you do) that in the same ChapterEchirid. Tract. de Pont. solut. 7. he pro∣ueth out of Scripture, and Fathers, the Pastorall charge of ruling and gouerning the vniuersall Church, committed by Christ to S. Peter, and his Successors? He that readeth this in Costerus, and alleageth him for the contrary, what can his intention be, but to deceaue his readers? YouPag. 262. obiect Acacius his deedes full of pride and arro∣gancy against the Roman Church, so that Baronius (for his defending Peter Mogg by him established in the Bishopricke of A∣lexandria against the will of the same Pope Simplicius) calleth him a Francirke man violently opposite vnto the Bishop of Rome. I ans∣were: that Acacius, so long as he continued Catholike, did both by word and deed acknowledge the supreme autho∣rity of the Roman Bishop: but it is grosse ignorance in you, not to know, that afterward he fell to beEuagr. lib. 3. c. 20. Libera∣tus in Breu. c 18. Niceph. l. 16. c. 17. Spondom. An. 484.488. a stiffe mantayner of the Entychian Heretikes, namely of Peter Mogg in those dayes the chiefe defender, pillar and Patriarke of that damnable Sect: for which cause he was excommuni∣cated by the Pope, & dying obstinate in his sinne, his name was blotted out of the Dyptiches, euenSpond. An. 51. with the con∣sent
of the Bishops of Constantinople his successors; wher∣by we learne this lesson, that men so longe as they be Or∣thodoxe Christians, still honor & obey the Pope and Ro∣man Church; so they are no sooner blasted with the spirit of heresy, but they become Frantike opposers therof, as your Lu∣ther was. And wheras to make men belieue, that this Acacius was of great authority and esteeme, euen in the Latin Church, you bid vs rememberPag. 263. that the two Patriarkes Cyrill and A∣cacius were they that sent the Copies of the Canons of Nice vnto the African Bishops, by which our Popes were conuinced of fraude &c. We can remember no such matters but wonder how a man so learned as you would be thought, could be so childishly mistaken, seing Acacius was made Patriarke in the yeare 472. that is, fourty eight yeares after the sending of the Ni∣cen Canōs to the African Bishops; the Copies wherof (sent by Atticus, not by Acacius) to haue been imperfect, where∣in many Canons were wanting, we haue already demon∣strated. As for the decree and sanction of Leo Emperour in be∣halfe of the Church of Constantinople, and Acacius the then Patriarke thereof, wherein he termeth the Church of Constantinople, the mother of all Christians of the Orthodox Re∣ligion; whatsoeuer might be the meaning of these wordes in Acacius (who moued the Emperour to make that decree) his ambitious conceits which Baronius censureth; yet accor∣ding to the mind of the Godly Emperour, they import no more, then Mother of all Orthodoxe Christians in the Church of Constantinople, as is cleere by the text, Mother (sayth he) vnto our Piety, and vnto all Orthodoxe Christians, and of this Royall Citty the most sacred See. You make the Emperor sayPag. 263.. the Mother of all Orthodoxall Churches, noting the wordes in a di∣stinct letter, as the very phrase of his Sanction manifestly against his meaning. For in that very Sanction, or Decree, he declareth, that the cause that moued him to publish it, was to disanull the attentats, and Innonations against the Ve∣nerable Churches, aswell those wherof the Patriarke Acacius hath the Priesthood, as those placed in other sundry Prouinces; which se∣cond
part, about other Churchs and Prouinces, youPag. 26. leaue out in your Marginal Latin, to deceiue the Reader, in making him to thinke, that Constantinople is stiled absolutely Mo∣ther of all Orthodoxall Churches; that thereby you may more colourably elude the like Titles, attributed vnto the Ro∣man Church. So as nothing is related, or alleaged by you without fraudulency and falshood. SECT. IV. Doctor Mortons Answeare to Vincentius Lyrinensis confuted. VIncentius to proue, that the Latine Churches agreed in Doctrine, with the Churches of the East, produ∣ceth as witnesses, Felix and Iulius Popes, calling them the Head of the world, and S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose, The sides of the world. You to put off this testimony, offer violence to Vincentius his wordsPag. 271., interpreting him to meane, by Head of the world, not the Bishop, but the City of Rome. But knowing this to be a false comment, you adde as a se∣cond answeareIbid., that if he vnderstood the B. of Rome to be the Head of the Catholike Church, we must also belieue, that Cyprian of Carthage, and Ambrose of Milan, were alwayes to continue the sides of the Catholike Church. This we deny: for the Churches of Charthage and Milan, haue no promise from Christ, that the gates of Hell shall not preuaile against them, nor that their fayth shall not faile, as the Roman hathSee aboue Chap. 1. sect. 1. & 2.. But to bolster vp one falsity with another, you sayPag. 271.: If Lyrinensis, by Head of the world, vnderstood the Ecclesiasticall Or∣be, he cold meane no more▪ then that the Pope is Head of the Westerne part therof. But this hath bene already disprouedSee Chap. 17. sect. 2. Chap. 19. sect. 3. Chap. 3. by the testimonies of Councells, and Fathers, Greeke, and Latine, directly affirming, that the B. of Rome is Head of all Churches, and faythfull whatsoeuer, throughouth the whole world; and that his spirituall power extends euen to them, whom the temporall forces of Rome could neuer subdue. And to goe no further for proofes, Lyrinensis him∣selfe
declared thisCap. 9.10.11., when he said, that all Priests in all places made resistance to the doctrine of Rebaptization defended by Agrippi∣nus, & Cyprian, but Stephen B of Rome more then the rest, thinking it reason to excell all others in deuotion towards the fayth, so much as he was superior to them in the authority of his place. And what els doth he throughout that whole Treatise, but declame a∣gainst you, who haue brought nouelties into the Church, contrary to that ancient truth which you found in it when Luther began, and when (as Caluin professeth) you made a separation from the whole world. SECT. V. Doctor Morton, in his Answeare to Optatus, contradicteth himselfe. OPtatus proueth the Roman Church to be the Catho∣like Church, by the succession of Bishops in the chaire of Rome, numbring them all from S. Peter to Siri∣cius that liued in his timeL. 2. cont. Parmen., and defineth all them to be schismatikes, and sinners, that are separated from the com∣munion of that only singular chaire. You answearePag. 269., that Optatus, by One chaire meant not the particular chaire of Rome, but the whole vniuersall Church. But the contrary is e∣uident: for he reckoneth not the succession of Bishops in any other Church, but only in the Roman, and saythL. 2. cont. Parmen., that the Episcopall chaire was set vp in Rome for Peter, to the end, that in that chaire vnity might be preserued to all, and that he might be a schismatike, and a sinner, that against this only chaire should set vp another. What expression can be more effectuall to proue you to be a schismatike, and a sinner, then these words of Optatus, who condemned the DonatistsIbid. of bold and sa∣crilegious presumption, for fighting against this Chaire of Peter, as you do. But you replyPag. 269.: The particular Church of Rome is but a portion of the vniuersall Church, and therfore Optatus obie∣cteth against the Donatists their want of vnion with the Churches of Asia, commended by S. Iohn in the Reuelation, as well as with Rome.
This you repeate afterwards againePag. 273., and had obiected the same beforePag. 100. 101. 229. 230.. Your answere you haue receaued al∣readyChap. 15. sect. 9. Chap. 34. sect. 8., to which I adde, that as he who should obiect to rebells their want of vnion with their Prince, & his loyall subiects, doth not therby deny the supreme authority of the Prince ouer all the subiects of his dominions: so Op∣tatus obiecting to the rebellious Donatists, the want of vnion with the Roman Church, and other Orthodoxall Churches of Asia subiect to her, doth not therby deny her authority ouer all the Churches of the world. But you sayPag. 270.: Rome hauing departed from the sincerity of the Apostolicall profession (as Asia hath done) the departure from that, must dissolue necessity of Vnion with Rome. You grant then that the Asians haue fallen from the Apostolicall profes∣sion, as Rome hath done: and Rome (if we belieue you) hath fallen so far, that her doctrine is false, impious, hereticall, blasphemous, damnable, sacrilegious, Antichristian, Satanicall &c. Ergo the Asians hauing fallen from the Apostolicall pro∣fession, as Rome hath done, their doctrine is also damnable, hereticall, blasphemous, Satanicall &c. And yet afterwards you sayPag. 407. the Asians haue continued visible partes of the Catholike Church, and Protestants stand in Christian vnity with them. I con∣clude therfore, that when it is for your purpose, the Asians are truly professed Christians, and partes of the Catholike Church, and Protestants stand in Christian Vnion with them: and when it is not for your purpose, they haue fallen from the sincerity of the Apostolicall profession, as Rome hath done: from whence it must follow, that it is as vn∣lawfull to be in vnion with them, as with Rome, whose doctrine to you is Hereticall, blasphemous &c. SECT. VI. Other vntruthes of Doctor Morton discouered, & his cauil∣ling against the Title of Holinesse giuen to the Pope. YOu set downePag. 273. this Thesis as of Bellarmine: When the Fathers say, that the Church of Rome cannot erre, the word
(cannot) is not to be taken absolutely, and simply, but with this can∣tion, so long as the Apostolicall See continueth at Rome. This is not a Thesis of Bellarmine, but of a few other Deuines, who hold that S. Peter fixed his See at Rome not by diuine or∣dination, but by his owne free election: and therfore that if the Successors of S. Peter should remoue their See from Rome, the Roman Church in that case might erre. This o∣pinion (sayth BellarmineL. 4. de Pont. c. 4. is not hereticall, nor manifestly er∣roneous: but he holdeth and proueth the contrary, namely, that the See of S. Peter was fixed at Rome by especiall command from Christ, and cannot be remoued from thence, and therfore that when the Fathers say, The Roman Church cannot erre, the word (cannot) is to be taken simply and absolutely, without the caution which you falsly as∣cribe to him. You addePag. 273. Bellarmine should haue said with you, that the Roman Church cannot erre, so long as the an∣cient and sincere fayth is preserued at Rome, which is to say, that she cannot erre, as long as she erres not. Bellarmine was of more iudgment, then to proue idem per idem. But you sayPag. 276.: The list of all the Fathers which Bel∣larmine in the strength of his learning, and iudgment hath produced to guard, & defend the Monarchy of the Church and B. of Rome, is, of the Greeke Fathers, but thirteene, & of the Latin, not aboue eleuen, within the space of the first 600. yeares. This is notoriously vntrue: for in the two Chapters immediatly preceding, he produceth the testimo∣nies of aboue 1340. Fathers in the foure first Generall Councells, and that vnder Menas: and of 26. Popes, the greater part of them, glorious Martyrs, and the rest holy Confessors, as S. Iulius, S. Damasus, S. Siricius, S. Zozimus, S. Innocentius, S. Leo, S. Gelasius, S. Gregory. Were not all these Fathers, that liued within the first 600. yeares, which you call the primitiue times? But what if Bellarmine had produced no more, but thirteene Greeke, & eleauen Latin Fathers? Doth not Cardinal Baronius throughout his lear∣ned Annals? Doth not Iodocus CocciusTo. 1. the∣sau. l. 7. art. 4.5.6.7.8. ? Do not Do∣ctor SandersVisic. Mo∣nar. tot. & Clau. Dauid. tot., and other Catholike writers produce testi∣monies of Popes, Councells, and of the most religious Em∣perors,
and Kinges, that haue liued since Christ, in great numbers, all of them professing their beliefe of the vniuer∣sall iurisdiction of the Pope, and necessity of vnion with the Church of Rome? Why do not you subscribe to so great a cloud of witnesses, rather then to Martin Luther, and a few Sectaries broaching Nouellisme, & opposing all Or∣thodoxe antiquity? Lastly to close vp your answeres to the Fathers, you produce TertullianPag. 277. after his defection into Montanisme cal∣ling the Pope, The blessed Pope, and the chiefe Bishop of Bishops; but that he did it by Irony, and scorne. So indeed sayth Massonius a forbidden author. But be it true, that he spake it by Irony: yet that very manner of speach sheweth, it was then the custome of the faythfull, to giue those titles to the Pope. If Tertullian called him so by Irorny, and scorne, it was because he was an heretike. And so you imitating him, cauill at vs, for instiling the Pope, Your Holinesse: which title say youIbid. being first giuen to Pope Leo, for his Holinesse sake, and sanctity of life, is continued to Popes, who haue bene most wicked, and retayned only in respect of their functions. The case is this: Benedict the cleauenthExtrau. l. 5. C. Dudum. calleth Boni∣face the eight, his Predecessor bona memoria, of good memory. The glosse sayth: If a Pope haue defiled the Church, with exactions, si∣monies, and filthy speaches, he is not therfore to be instiled mal me∣moriae, not of euill, but of good memory, according to the ciuill Law, determining that regard is not to be had, to what he did, but to what it was fit for him to do, that is (sayth the glosse) not to his person, but to his dignity: for although his person haue offended, his dignity hath not: and his personall offence is not to redound to the domage of the Church. And howsoeuer Prelates haue offended, they are Presi∣dents, and Fathers of the whole community, and therfore to be hono∣red, as the Philosopher teacheth, & also the Ciuill Law, calling them, Gods, for the Excellency of their Order, and dignity of their office. And for the same cause Kings, albeit wicked in their liues, are instiled Clara memoria▪ vel Inclyta memoria, of famous or re∣nowned memory; and Emperors, Dina memoria, of soueraigne, or diuine memory. To which I addeAct. 24.25., that S. Paul cal∣led Festus President of Iury, Optime Fest, Most excellent
Festus, and this, nor for his Vertue, or Honesty, (for he was a wicked man) but for his Office, the custome being, that all Presidents of Prouinces were so instiledBaron. Anno 58. n. 33. All this I suppose you will allow: for hauing read most of it in the Glosse, you except not against it, or if you do, your exception is without ground. Other Prelates therfore although they be of vicious liues, may be instiled Bonae memoriae: Kings, Clarae, vel Inclytae memoriae: Emperors, Diuae memoriae: Temporall gouernors may haue the title of Optimi, yea, and be called Gods, for so you call KingsSerm, be∣fore his Ma. at Durham pag. 14.. The Pope only (forsoth) who is the Vicar of Christ on earth, because it displeaseth you must not be saluted by the title of Your Holinesse, whiles he liues, nor be said to be, Bonae memoriae, after he is dead. Other gouernors must be honored by reason of their dignities, and offices: The Pope only must be excepted: and Doctor Morton to helpe out the matter, must falsify the Glosse, making it say, that an ill Pope after his death is to be intituled, Of blessed Memory; which words, howsoeuer youPag. 277. set them downe, as of the glosse, and in great letters, to make your falsification more remarkable, are not of the glosse, but feigned by you. And finally, whether an ill Pope after his death, be or be not, to be intituled, Bonae, or Malae memoriae, what makes it to your intent, which is to proue, that Saluation may be had out of the Roman Church? But if your volume had not bene stuffed with such impertinencies, it cold not haue risen to so Grand an Imposture.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the authority of the Epistles of ancient Popes. AS the Arians and other Heretikes haue contemned the Epistles of the Bishops of Rome; so all orthodoxe Christians haue euer held them in great veneratiō. Eusebius CaesariensisL. 3. hist. c. 12. writeth, that the epistle of Clement Pope to the Co∣rinthians, was so highly esteemed, that the custome was to reade it publikely in the Churches: which also he reportethL. 4. hist. c. 22. of the Epistle of Soter Pope. And how greatly these Epistles were reuerenced, may ap∣peare out of S. Irenaeus, who highly commending the E∣pistle of ClementL. 3. c. 3., setteth downe a summary therof. And in like manner Clemens AlexandrinusSerm. l. 4. c. 7., and S. HieromeAd cap. 52. Isai. haue set downe certaine fragmēts of the same epistle, to the end that what was not lost of it, might come to the knowledge of posterity. And for the authority of the Epistles of Popes in generall, we haue the third Coun∣cell of Toledo (vnder Ricaredus King of Spaine, newly conuerted from Arianisme) which for the clensing of that kingdome from heresy, and restoring it to the purity of the Catholike fayth, among other decrees, ordaynedCapit. 1. that the Synodical Epistles of the Bishops of Rome remaine in their force. And how great a crime it hath euer bene held to contemne them, the Councell of Tours, vnder Landramus Archbi∣shop of that city declaredInter Ep. Lupi Ferrar. ep. 84., condemning and threatning excommunication to Nomenoius Prior of Britaine for not obeying the Popes Epistle.
SECT I. Of the Epistles of Popes liuing within the first 300. yeares after Christ. BEllarmineL. 2. de Pont. c. 14. in proofe of the Roman Primacy, allea∣geth the Epistles of 14. holy Popes, that liued within the first 300. yeares after Christ; which though he dare not affirme to be vndoubtedly certaine, yet he proueth to be most vndoubtedly ancient, and conuinceth the Centu∣riss of a lye, in saying; That no Author worthy of credit cited thē before the time of Charles the Great. For he pro∣ueth that an ancient Councell in the time of Leo the first, 350. yeares before Charles, (which was not long after the first 300. yeares) cited the epistles of S. Clement, as now they are. He proueth, that Ruffinus 60. yeares before that tyme cited other of those Epistles. And that Isidore 200. yeares before the same Charles, out of a Councell of 80. Bishops cited the epistles of Clement, Anacletus, Euaristus, and the rest of those Popes. Againe you know, that Tur∣rianus hath written an especiall volume in defence of the Epistles of ancient Popes, and learnedly dissolued the ca∣uils of heretikes against them. Of all this you take no notice, but to disproue the Epi∣stles of ancient Popes, liuing within the first 300. yeares after Christ, obiectPag. 279. Cusanus his Concordia (which you know he hath retracted) and Robert Cooke a Protestant Minister, who (say you) proueth the obiected Epistles to be vn∣doubtedly bastard, and adulterate, partly by the errors that are ap∣parent in them, no lesse absurde, then to turne Cephas into Caput, A stone into a Head. This he proueth, or you for him, by the testimony of Bellarmine, out of the third epistle of Ana∣cletus, the first of Clement, and the first of Anicetus. But his and your dealing is vndoubtedly fraudulent: for Bel∣larmine in that placeL. 2. de Monachis c. 40. makes no mention at all of Ana∣cletus, nor of Clement; and much lesse, of turning Cephas into a Head. Wherfore you, and your Cooke falsify Bellar∣mine,
and with him those holy Popes: for Anicetus in his first epistle, makes no mention of Cephas. Clement sayth; Peter by the merit of true fayth was appointed to be the foundation of the Church, and for that cause, by the diuine mouth of our Lord, surnamed Peter: but of turning a stone into a Head, or of Cephas there is no mention at all. Anacletus sayth; A Domino con∣cessum est Petro, vt reliquis omnibus praeesset Apostolis, & Cephas 1. caput, ac principium teneret Apostolatus. It was granted by our Lord to Peter, to be the chiefe of the Apostles, that is to say, that he should haue the Head and principality of the Apostolate. If this be to turne Cephas, into Caput, why do you not for that fault (if a fault it be) blame Optatus that most learned and holy Bishop, highly esteemed by S. Augustine? Doth he not sayL. 1. cont. Parmen. c. 2. & l 2. de do∣ctri. Christi c. 40., Thou knowest that the Episcopal chaire was first set vp in Rome for Peter, in which first sate the Head of all the Apostles Peter from whence he hath bene called Cephas? Optatus alluding to the Greoke word, , which signifies Head, and resembles the Hebrew word Cephas, that signifies a Rock, declared, that because Peter was Head of the Apostles, and foundati∣on of the Church, our Sauiour called him Caphas, that is, a Rock: for in buildings the foundation is the same, that the Head is in the body. And in this explication other learned and ancient writers agree with Optatus. Philo Carpathi∣us time-fellow with him, fayth:Ad cap. 5 Cant. vers. 11. Petrus, qui & Cephas, caput Ecclesiae futurus eràt: Peter who is also Cephas, was to be Head of the Church. And Vigilius PopeEp. 2. a∣pud Bin. to. 2. pag. 481.: The election of all the Apostles was a like; but it was granted to Peter, that he should be a∣boue therest; from whence he is called Cephas for as much as he is the Head, and chiefe of all the Apostles. And an ancient manuscript of the Bauarian LibraryTract. cont. error. Graecor. di∣stinct. 4. pag. 530., set forth by Petrus Steuartius, Vice chancellor of the Vniuersity of Ingolstade: Our Lord sayd in the Ghospell to Peter: Thou shalt be called Cephas, which is in Latin, a Head, that by the very imposition of his name he might shew him to be Head of the Church. Wherfore as it were a vaine ca∣uill to except against the writings of these ancient and lear∣ned Authors, for explicating Cephas applied to S. Peter, to import the same that Head; so it is in Cooke, and your selfe, to reiect the epistle of Anacletus, as apocriphall, vpon the same ground.
2. Anicetus commandeth Priests crownes to to be sha∣uen: from whence you inferrePag. 282. the epistle not to be his; because Bellarmine proueth out of all antiquity, that not, Rasura, but Tonsura, not shauing, but poling, was the cut of Priests in those daies. You might haue solued your owne argument, toge∣ther with Bellarmines doubt, if you had pleased to obserue that in the very same sentence, the author of that epistle v∣seth the words, rasura, and tonsura indifferently, taking thē both for the same. And therfore when he commandeth that Priestes haue their heads shauen, his command it not, that it be done by a rasor precisely, but only, that they weare not long haire, but keep it short, by shauing, or poling. His words areAnicet. ep. 1.: Clergy men (who ought to be a paterne of ver∣tue, honesty, chastity, and grauity to lay people) command them with the Apostle, not to weare long hatre, but to shaue the crownes of their heads, in forme of a sphere, because as they ought to be discreet in their conuersation, so likewise to shew themselues discreet in ton∣sura, & in omni habitu, in their poling, and in their whole habit. Whereby it is euident, that by shauing he meaneth nothing els, but keeping the haire short, either by rasure, or tōsure. And this sheweth your exception against this Epistle to be of no force. 3. You exceptpag. 28. against the Epistle of Pius, because you will not belieue him to haue commanded, that if any drops were shed out of the Chalice, in the Eucharist, they should be licked vp, and the board scraped You belieue not this, because you belieue not the reall presence of the body and bloud of Christ in the Eucharist, but thinke it reue∣rence inough, if your Clerke take home your bread that re∣maines, and crimble it into his potage, and drinke vp the wine merily with his guests at dinner: and yet some of you tell the people, it is the body and bloud of Christ. How∣soeuer, your Argument is wholly from the matter: for this command of Pius, is not in his first Epistle, which you de∣ceiptfully cite in your margent, nor in any of his Epistles, but in his decrees which the Church approuethBreuiar. Roman. Iul. 11.: from whence to inferre that his Epistles are apocryphall, is a con∣sequence which I suppose you will not grant, & I am sure,
euery one will see to be absurd. The error which out of Baronius you mentionPag. 282. in two of Pius his Epistles, might easily creepe into the copies, by negligence, or mi∣stake of the Scribe, and therfore is no sufficient Argument to disauthorize them, and much lesse the rest, in which there is no such mistake. 4. You reiectIbid. the Epistles of Soter and Alexander, because you cannot thinke the vse of Incense at the Altar, nor the expiation of small offences by holy water to be so ancient. For your better instruction cōcerning the ancient vse of incense at the altar, I remit you toL. 1. de ri∣tib. Eccles. c. 9. Durātius (who sheweth how foolishly it is relected by heretikes) to Bel∣larmineL. 2. de Missa c. 15., and Brereley in his Liturgy of the MassePag. 40. n. 12 & pag. 94. lit. D.. Concerning the antiquity of holy-water for the expiation of small offences, casting out of Diuels, and other great mi∣racles, wrought by sprinkeling therof, read BaroniusSpoud. Indic. V. A∣quae Beed. antiq. vsus., BellarmineL. 3. de Eccles. trium∣ph. c. 7. & l. 2. de Missa c. 15., DurantiusL. 1. de rit. c. 21., and BrereleyLiturg. pag. 64. lit. u. & x. & pag. 94. l. b. &c.: They will certify you, that both these ceremonies are Apostolicall traditions vsed in the Church from the beginning, & shew your reiecting of those ancient Epistles, because they are mentioned in them, to be cauilling without ground. 5. Because Cooks findeth in some of those Epistles a word, or a phrase, which some one Author thinkes not to be so ancient in that sense, or (forsooth) not so elegant and Ciceronian, you are pleased to call them all, horrid and barba∣rousPag. 279.: & to help out the matter, you exemplisy in Caius, which is none of the fourteene alleaged by Bellarmine. But you consider not, that diuers of those Epistles were written in Greeke, and that the Latine phrase is not of the authors, but of the translators. And as Nicolas the firstEp. 8. apud Bin to. 3. pag. 682., speaking to the vngodly Emperor Michaell, of Latin translated in∣to Greeke, sayth: If it beget barbarismes, the fault is not in the La∣tin tongue, but in the Translators, striuing not only to keep the sense, but vsing force to render word by word: so I say to you; if in the Epistles of ancient Popes, you find some words, or man∣ners of speach, not so vsuall, the fault is not in the Epistles, but in the Translators, striuing to render them, word by word. And to go no further for the confutation of this ca∣uill,
you obiect against vsPag. 291. out of an Epistle of Adrian the first, that liued almost 800. yeares after Christ, these words: Consecrationes Episcoporum, & Archiepiscoporum, sicut oli∣tana constat traditio, nostra dioecosis existentes: in which, whe∣ther you regard the word, olitana, or the phrases, sicut olitana constat traditio, &, consecrationesnostrae dioecesis existentes; you may vnder colour, that the phrase of this Epistle is horrid and bar∣barous, reiect it, with as much ground, as you do the Epistles of Popes that liued in the first 300. yeares after Christ. The truth therfore is, that you reiect those, because they make wholly against you; and receaue this, because you find something in it, which may serue you for an Argument a∣gainst vs, though without ground: for Adrian in that Epi∣stle most effectually proueth the authority of the Roman See, wherof something hath bene spoken alreadyChap. 33. sect. 2.. SECT. II. The nullity of Doctor Mortons answeares to the testimonies of Popes, that liued in the second 300. yeares after Christ. THere is no stronger Argument, then that, which is drawne from the confession of the Aduersaries: for (as Tertullian obseruethIn Apolo∣get. No man lieth to his owne shame: and therfore he is soner to belieued that confesseth against himselfe, then he that denieth in his owne behalfe. Which truth the Father of the Roman eloquence vnderstood by the light of nature, sayingOrat. P. Qui.: Thy testimony, which in another mans cause is litle to be regarded, when it is against thy selfe is of great weight. And you acknowledgeAnswere to the Prot. Apol. Epist. Dedicat., that the testimony of the aduersary is the grea∣test reason of satisfaction. Let vs then see, whether you wil not beare witnesse for vs against your selues, that the Popes of the first 600. yeares after Christ, acknowledged, and exer∣cised their authority, and iurisdiction ouer all the Chur∣ches of the world, and this chiefly in their Epistles; for of most of them there are no other writings extant. Their te∣stimonies in this behalfe, are plentifully alleaged by Mai∣ster
BrereleyProtest. Apologtra. 1. sect. 3. sub∣diu. 10. & sect. 7. subd. 5.: and in particular concerning the Popes of the second 300. yeares, of whom our question here is, he sayth: They (Protestant writers) consesse and say, that in the fifth age the Roman Bishops applied themselues to get, and establish dominion ouer other Churches. To this end they vsurped to themselues the right of granting priuiledges, and ornaments to other Archbishops: they confirmed Archbishops in their Sees, deposed, excommunicated, and absolued others, arrogating (also) to themselues power of citing Archbishops to declare their causes before them; and that against a Bishop appealing to the Roman See, nothing should be determined, but what the B. of Rome censured: That they appointed Legats in remote Prouinces, which were somtimes no meaner men, then some one or o∣ther of the Patriarkes: That they challenged authority to heare, and determine all vprising controuersies, especially in questions of fayth: That they tooke vpon them power of appointing generall Councells, and to be Presidents in them, and euen by their Deputies, when them∣selues were absent. These testimonies of your owne Brethren are so many sharpe wedges in the hart of your cause, and shew in you either ignorance, or lack of cōscience, in denying so mani∣fest a truth. Nor do your Writers testify this of those Popes in generall, but in particular euen of those very twelue, whose testimonies you heere seeke to elude. Of Iulius (whom youPag. 2841 call, the first man of the inquest) they sayBrerel. ibid. n. 60.61., that wheras the Ecclesiasticall canon decreed, that no Councell should be celebrated without the sentence of the B. of Rome, Iulius made challenge therby: for which Danaeus reproueth him and other Bishops of Rome. M. Cartwright and the Centurists say of himIbid n. 63., that in the Councell of Antioch he ouer-reached in claiming the hea∣ring of causes that apperteyned not to him: and M. SymondsIbid. n. 64., that he decreed, that whosoeuer suspected his Iudge, might appeale to the See of Rome. And wheras in his Epistle to the Easterne Bishops, extant in the second Apology of S. Athanasius, he expresseth the authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome ouer all others, in these words: An ignoratis &c. Are you ignorant, that the custome is, we should be first written vnto, and that from hence the iust decision of things should proceed? And that if any suspicion were conceaued against your Bishops there, you should
haue written to this Church; for the things which I signify to you, we haue receaued from the blessed Peter? You answearePag. 184.; Iulius plainly speaketh of document, and instruction receaued from Peter, not of dominton or iurisdiction: which may be an answere to many of the rest. But this answeare is refuted, not only by the ancient historians (as afterwards you shall heare) but also by the Centurists, who set downe these very words of IuliusCent. 4. col. 746., andCol. 529. reprehend him for them; and out of that his Epistle shew, that with the authority of a Iudge he summoned the Easterne Bishops, commanding them to come to Rome, assigned them a day of appearance before him to be iudged, and hauing heard the whole cause, gaue sentence, rebuking the Eusebians, and by the preregatiue of his See, restored the Catholike Bishops to theirs. The same Epi∣stle is alleaged by D. Philippus NicolaiDe reg. Christ. l. 2. pag. 149. a learned Pro∣testant, who out of Socrates, Sozomen, and the Epistle it selfe, witnesseth, that Iulius doth more then once declare himselfe alone by especiall priuiledge to be Bishop of the primary See; and that by diuine ordinance the right of calling Councells, and of iudging the causes of Bishops, and other weighty affaires of that nature belonged to him alone. I conclude therfore, that Iulius speaketh not, of document and instruction, receaued from Peter, but of authority, and iurisdiction. Not vnlike to this answere, is your affirmingPag. 284. fin. 285., that the Bishops of the East challenged Iulius for writing to them alone, & by his owne authority: for there is no such challenge in their EpistleExtat Ep. apud Bin. to. 2. pag. 401.: Yea, as SozomenL. 3. c. 7. testifieth, and the begin∣ning of the Epistle it selfe sheweth, in it they professe the primacy of the Roman Church, though otherwise falsly obiecting to Iulius, the breach of the Canons; a thing not to be wondred at: for they that wrot, were Arians, & in ha∣tred of him, because he had annulled their Councell of Antioch, and restored Athanasius. And as the Epistle was written by Arians, so it is also reported by Socrates, and Sozomen, from Sabinus, a Macedonian Heretike, who tooke part with the Councel of Antioch against the Pope, and against the Councell of Nice; to which as also to Atha∣nasius, and to the Blessed Trinity it selfe, he was a profes∣sed enemy. In regard wherof their Epistle is of no more
weight, then if Lutherans, or Caluinists should now write the like. And hereby it appeareth, how vntruly you sayPag. 185. that, Some (of the testimonies of ancient holy Popes expres∣sing the vniuersall iurisdiction of the Roman See) may be confuted and indeed confounded by as ancient opposisions of the O∣rientalls against Pope Iulius &c. for those Orientalls were he∣retikes. Hauing thus shifted off the testimony of Iulius, (whom you call the first man of the inquest) you passe immediatly to S. Gregory, the last of the twelue, which Bellarmine allea∣geth, omitting all the rest. And wheras he out of the works of this holy Pope, produceth diuers testimonies, clearely conuincing the subiection of all Churches to the Roman, you omitting the rest, as being vnanswearable, find meanes to except against onePag. 284., which is: Who doubts, but that the Church of Constantinople is subiect to the See Apostolike, which the most religious Lord the Emperor, and our brother Eusebius Bishop of the same City continually protest? This testimony of S. Grego∣ry you reject, vpon pretence, that the Epistle is suppositi∣tious and counterfeit. Some (of the Popes alleaged by Bel∣larmine (say you) speake not, but their counterfeites, as the last Iurist, Pope Gregoryin an Epistle, wherin Eusebius B. of Constanti∣nople is said to haue bene subiect vnto him, when as (as our Doctor Reynolds hath proued) there was no Eusebius B. of Constantinople in the dayes of S. Gregory. But to Doctor Reynolds I oppose the most eminent Cardinall Peron, a man of greater re∣nowne, learning, & authority; who answearethReplip. l. 1. Chap. 34. 1. That Cyriacus, which was then Bishop of Constantinople, might haue two names, and be called Eusebius Cyriacus, as S. Hierome was called, Eusebius Hieronymus. 2. That Eusebius might be there taken adiectiuely, and signify pious, or, reli∣gious, as when AriusA pud Theod. l. 1. hist. c. 5. writ to Eusebius B. of Nicomedia, , Farewell Eusebius, truly Eusebius, that is, truly religious. And 3. that it is an error of the Exemplarist, who of eiusdem ill written, and blotted, made Eusebius: for the ancient copies of this Epistle current for the space of 200. yeares after S. Gregory, make no mention of Eusebius, but read simply, and our brother B. of the same City, as it ap∣peares
out of the relation of Amalarius Fortunatus, who liued 800. yeares since, and setteth downe this whole Epi∣stle of S. Gregory, word by wordDe dini. offic. l. 4. c. 2. in Biblioth. Pat edit. Co∣lon. to 9. part. 1.: and his testimony alone, liuing 800. yeares nerer S. Gregories tyme, then Do∣ctor Reynolds, or your selfe, is a sufficient proofe of the au∣thority of this Epistle against you both. But what? Though you except against this Epistle, yet in the next, which no man hath doubted of, S Gregory in like manner saythL. 7. ep. 64.: For wheras, he (the B. of Constan∣tinople being accused of a certaine crime) profefieth himselfe subiect to the See Apostolike, if any fault be found in Bishops, I know not what Bishop is not subiect vnto it. Doth not this testimony immediatly follow in Bellarmine? Yes, and it is so euident that CaluinL. 4. Iust. c. 7. § 1. on the rack of truth is inforced to confesse, that, S Gregory in no place of his workes vanteth more of the great∣nesse of his See, then in these very words; and that in them, he attribu∣teth to himselfe the right of punishing Bishops, when they offend. Is it not then imposterous, to conceale this so cleare an eui∣dence, and others brought in by Bellarmine, and reiect them all, because you haue found a way to cauill at one; es∣pecially since not only out of S. Gregories workes, and the testimonies of your Protestant Brethren, it is a truth not to be denyed, that he belieued himselfe to haue, and practi∣sed iurisdiction ouer all Bishops whatsoeuer? But you sayPag. 285.: If Gregory in some tearmes seeme to speake somwhat loud, as though he were very Great, yet be confined him∣selfe to the Constitution of Iustinian. He resolueth according to the constitution of Iustinian, that the triall of Bishops cau∣ses in the first instance, belongs to their Metropolitan, as the cause of the Metropolitan doth to his Patriarke. But withall he teachethL. 2. ep. 6., that they may appeale to the See Apostolike; and furthermore addethL. 11. ep. 56., that, If a Bishop haue no Metropolitan, nor Patriarke ouer him, then (sayth he) his cause is to be heard, & decided by the See Apostolike, which is the head of all Churches. And this is agreeable to the profession which Iustinian himselfe made in the Law Inter clarasCod. tit. . l. 8., and in the Law to Epiphanius Patriarke of ConstantinopleCod. tis. 1. l. 7.. In the rest of this SectionPag. 284., you tell vs, that n of those
Popes (eited by Bellarmine) call the Church of Rome, and Bi∣shop therof, Head of all Churches, or one that hath the care of all Churches, or one hauing principality. They do so: and withall so vnanswearably affirme the Vniuersall iurisdiction of the Roman Church, that you thought best not to mention their words, but to put them off, saying: The like attributes haue bene anciently ascribed to other Churches, and Bishops: which how false it is, you haue already heardChap. 17. sect. 2. Chap. 19. sect. 3. Chap. 35. Chap. 36 sect. 3.. To giue a good farewell, you conclude thusPag. 285. fin. 280.: There are diuers other testimonies out of Leo, Gelasius, and other Popes, who breathed out many sentences full of ostentation of their owne great∣nesse. Hitherto you haue held vs in hand, that the primitiue Popes did not challenge any iurisdiction ouer the vniuer∣sall Church: but now you say, that, S. Gregory in some termes seemes to speake somwhat loud, as though he were very Great; and that Leo, Gelasius, and other Popes breathed out many sentences, full of ostentation of their owne greatnesse; but whatsoeuer they vented out, it was typhus saecularis, and a swelling impostume, which was lanced (that it bled withall) by the Councell of Carthage vnder S. Cyprian, and the Councell of Africke vnder S. Augustine; and that selfe-loue bewitching many Popes of the more primitiue tymes, they boasted themselues to be the only Vicars of Christ, and have bene taxed for their great arrogancy▪ by the ancient Fathers of their owne tymes. And afterwardsPag. 303. fin. 304. you compare S. Leo, and S. Gregory to Adonias, that sought traiterously to pull the crowne from his Fathers head, and make himselfe King, to which he had right. This (forsooth) is the reuerence you beare to the pri∣mitiue Popes, whom antiquity hath had in so great vene∣ration, as of S. Leo, and S. Gregory in particular you haue heardChap. 15. sect. 3.. Truth (which enforceth testimony from her ene∣mies) compelleth you to confessePag. 172.178.182.287., that the Primitiue Popes were, Holy Popes, Holy Fathers, excellently goodly, & lear∣ned, and that many of them are glorious Martyrs, and Saints, whose memory is blessed. And yet the same truth enforceth you heere to confesse, that those Popes acknowledged themselues to be, the only Vicars of Christ on earth, to haue an vniuersall authority, and to haue practised the same: for which, albeit you taxe them with great arrogancy, yet in adding, that the ancient Fa∣thers
of their owne time, did the like, you passe the limits of modesty, and truth. And who seeth not the absurd manner of arguing which in proofe hereof you vse? Your words arePag. 286. in titulo sect. 13.: Our generall discouery of the vanity of your proofes of Papall Monarchy, from the mouthes of Popes themselues, who haue bene anciently noted of pride. Your assumpt then is, to disproue the Papall Monarchy from the mouthes of Popes themselues. But you produce not any one testimony, nor any one word of any one Pope, but make a briefe repetition of your Arguments, which in their seuerall places haue bene proued to be part∣ly impertinent, partly false, and partly hereticall. Imperti∣nent, as of Tertullian: False, as of the African Councell, S. Cyrill, S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine: Here∣ticall, as of Polycrates resisting Victor, and of the Arians, whom (to conceale that they were heretikes) you call, The Orientalls. And finally, part of them, of such as for a time defended the false doctrine of Rebaptization, as S. Cy∣prian, and his Councell of Carthage, which though S. Au∣gustine haue answearedL. 6. de Baptism. per tot., and confuted word by word, you take no notice therof, but vrge it as currant, and of au∣thority, against the B. of Rome; yet that all may not seeme to be repetitions, you bring forth one new ArgumentPag. 286., as drawne from the mouthes of Popes themselues, which is, that one Flaccidius relying on the greatnesse of the Citty of Rome, equalled the Deacons of Rome, with Priests. This you ob∣iect, as the testimony of S. Augustine himselfe, pointing at the vaine boasting of Rome: wheras it is not S. Augustines, but of the Author quaestionum noui & veteris Testamenti, whom here∣toforePag. 52., when he was not for your purpose, you reiected as an hereticall author: but now his words are of S. Augustine himselfe, and an Argument drawne from the very mouthes of ancient and holy Popes. Necessity enforceth you to such absur∣dities: for better Arguments are not to be found in such a cause. The blindnesse of your zeale permitted you not to see the inconsequence, & contrariety of your doctrine, whiles you professePag. 287., that the primitiue Popes were Holy men,
and yet, that they were proud, arrogant, and challenged dominion aboue others, beyond the limits of their owne iurisdiction. Yes (say youIbid., why not? They were holy Disciples of Christ, who ambi∣tiously wished, that they might sit, the one on the right hand of Christ, and on the other on the left in his kingdome. They were holy Apostles, that sought among themselues, without any ordinance of their Lord, who should be chiefe. They were indeed Disciples, and Apo∣stles of Christ, but as yet imperfect: nor did they arrogate to themselues, & much lesse seeke to practise superiority ouer the Church of the whole world, as the Popes from the be∣ginning haue done. Which, if it were not giuen them by Christ, could not stand with Christian Modesty, & much lesse, with sanctity: for such a claime is not a small blemish, nor a veniall offence, but the very height of Luciferian pride (for so you call itPag. 336., and the very marke of Anti∣christ himselfe. Againe, the ambition of the Apostles was reformed, and they perfected, and confirmed in grace, by the cōming of the holy Ghost. But there is no testimony of antiquity, that any one of the primitiue Popes (whom you taxe with pride, and great arrogancy) did at any tyme, be∣fore their death, relinquish that claime: yea contrarily, all of them constantly mantained their authority, as giuen them by Christ, in S. Peter, and exercised the same ouer all the Churches of the world vntill their dying day. And if this were in them great arrogancy▪ and Luciferian pride, they were far from being holy Saints of God: which yet you truly con∣fesse them to haue bene, condemning therby your do∣ctrine against their supremacy, of falshood, and your selfe of slandering Gods Saints with Luciferian pride and arro∣gancy. Your last refugePag. 286., that Popes are not fit witnesses in their owne cause, was refuted aboueChap. 15. sect. 3..
CHAP. XXXVIII. The Vniuersall iurisdiction of the B. of Rome proued by the Exercise of his Authority ouer other Bishops. AS among the Arguments for the Popes vniuersall iurisdiction, there is none more conuincing, then that from the first ages after Christ, by their authority they haue ordayned, deposed, and resto∣red Bishops, throughout the whole Church; so there is none, which with more sleights you seeke to clude. That the Popes anciently exercised this authority, is a thing so certaine, that Danaeus a learned Protestant is enforced to acknowledge the truth therofResp. ad Bellar. part. 1. pag. 117., and answeare: It followes not, that because the B. of Rome vsed that right, he had therfore that right: for certainely he had no right to do this, but only tyranny, and vsurpation. Which to be an vnconscionable answeare, no man can doubt: for the B. of Rome, as now he doth, so much more did he then, want temporal power, to cōpell Bishops, especially in Countres far remote from Rome, to obey him, which yet he must haue had, if that vse of his power had not bene from a true right, giuen him by Christ, but only by tyranny and vsurpa∣tion. Wherfore you finding this answeare of Danaeus not to satisfy, haue made a bold aduenture, to deny, that the an∣cient Popes exercised any such power: which how vntrue it is, the ensuing Sections shall demonstrate.
SECT. I. The Popes vniuersall authority proued; by the Institution, and confirmation of Bishops: and of the vse, and sig∣nification of the Pall, or Mantle granted to Archbishops. YOur first position isPag. 288.: Anciently, Institutions of Metropo∣litans, and Patriarkes, were done by communicatory letters to the chiefe Patriarke, which were letters of correspondence, to shew their agreement in fayth: in which case, the B. of Rome sent his Pall in token of his consent. That the B. of Rome hath euer accustomed to institute Bishops in the most remote Prouinces of the world, appea∣reth out of the booke intituled, Vitae Romanorum Pontificum, written by Damasus, or (as others more probably thinke) by Anastasius Bibliothecarius, in which are reported the ordinations of Bishops made by Linus, immediate successor to S. Peter, and successiuely by all other Bishops of that See. The letters you mention, of Metropolitans, & Patriarkes, written at the tyme of their Institution, to the chiefe Pa∣triarke (the B. of Rome) were not only of correspondence, to shew their agreement in fayth: for howbeit they did containe a profession of their agreement in fayth with the Roman Church, that therby they might be receaued into her com∣munion, and haue the title of Catholike Bishops: yet mo∣reouer, they contayned an oath of Obedience, and subie∣ction to the B. of Rome. And by the same letters, they asked his Pal, which (S. Gregory witnessesL. 7. ep: 5. indict. 1. was granted to none, vntill they did humbly, and earnestly desire it. It is true, that the Pope by sending his Pal to Archbi∣shops, did expresse his consent to their Institution. But if they did not owe subiection to him, there had bene no need of requiring his consent, and much lesse, of asking his Pal: for the Pal did not only containe an expression
of the Popes consent to their Institution, but a grant of great authority, and power, which by the Pal was signi∣fied, and giuen vnto them. So testified the irrefragable Do∣ctor Alexander of Hales 400. yeares since: When the Pal is giuen (sayth hePart. 4. q. 10. memb. 5. art. 2. §. 6. there is giuen fulnesse of Pastorall power; for before a Metropolitan be honored with the Pal, he is not to ordaine Priests, consecrate Bishops, or dedicate Churches. And before him the fourth Councell of Lateran consisting of 1280. Fathers, declaredC. 5., that after the Patriarkes of the East haue taken their Oath of Fidelity, and Obedience to the B. of Rome, and haue receaued the Pal from him, as a token of the plenitude of Pontificall office, they may grant it also to their Suffragans, receauing in like manner from them an oath of Obedience both to themselues, and to the Church of Rome. And before the Councell of Lateran, Innocen∣tius the thirdMyster. Missae l. 1. c. 63.: The Pal containes the fulnesse of Pontificall of∣fice, for as much as in it, and with it, the fulnesse of Pontificall office is conferred: for before a Metropolitan be honored with the Pal, he ought not to ordaine Priests, consecrate Bishops, or dedicate Churches, nor haue the Name of Archbishop. Which also was testified before him, by Honorius the secondEp. ad suffragan. & Episcop. Tyri., and by S. BernardVitae S. Malach. cap. 19. reporting of S. Malachias, that hauing founded a Metropo∣litan See in Ireland, and knowing it to want authority, vntill it were confirmed by the See Apostolike, he trauel∣led to Rome in person, to procure the Pal, as well for that See, as also for another, which Celsus had founded. And be∣fore him Wilfrid an English Abbot, who for his great la∣bors in preaching the Ghospell to the Germans, and con∣uerting that nation to Christ, hath deserued to be intituled, The Apostle of Germany, coming to Rome, and bring consecra∣ted Bishop by Gregory the third, and in his consecration called Boniface, after he had taken the oath of obedience to the See Apostolike, as all Bishops vsed to doSpond. an. 723. n. 1. & Author Vitae eius apud Sur. 5. Iunij., returned into Germany, & Gregory sent him the Pal, conferring on him the authority of an ArchbishopGreg. 3. ep. 2. ad Boni∣fac.. And before him S: Gregory the GreatL. 4. Ep. 8., writing to Iohn Bishop of the first Iustinianea: The relation of our brethren, and fellow-Bishops (of Illyria) hath declared vnto vs, that thou art called to the Episco∣pall
dignity, by the agreeing consent of dall the Councell, and by the will of the most excellent Prince (Mauritius the Emperor) wherunto we also giue our consent &c. And send thee the Pall according to the custome, and decree, by a reiterated innouation, that thou exercise the Vicarship of the See Apostolike. And before him, Celestine Pope sending the Pal to Cyrill Patriarke of AlexandriaBalsom. in Nomocan. Phot. tit 3. c. 1. Niceph. l. 14. c. 34., made him his Vicar with full power, to preside in the Councell of Ephesus, and iudge the cause of Nestorius. And againe before him, Marcus Pope granted the Pal to the B. of OstiaVit. Rom. Pontif. in Marco., confirming to him, and his successors, the authority of consecrating the B. of Rome. All this sheweth, that the Pal which the Pope sendeth to Archbishops, is not only an ex∣pression of his assent to their election, and institution, but a grant of most ample power, and authority, which they re∣quire from him, by asking the Pal, and receaue from him, together with the Pal. And moreouer, that their letters to him, are not only to professe their agreement in fayth with the Roman Church, but also to acknowledge their subie∣ction, and to promise obedience to him. Which promise was likewise made by all Bishops, at their returne from Schisme, to the Catholike Church, as appeareth by the forme of oath, which Hormisdas PopeApud Baron. anno 517., S. GregoryL. 10. Ep. 30., and the eight generall CouncellBin. to. 3. pag. 923. Ca∣nus l. 6. c. 6. pag. 200., prescribe to be taken by them; as also, by the profession, which Iohn Patriarke of ConstantinopleEp. ad Hormisd., made to Hormisdas Pope. And fi∣nally, the ancient custome (which Sophronius Patriarke of HierusalemEp. ad Honor. Pap. calls. An Apostolicall tradition) was, that when Bishops were first instituted, they should send a pro∣fession of their fayth to the B. of Rome, which he appro∣uing, did therby confirme them in their Bishoprikes. This custome (sayth Sophronius) we following, write vnto you, who haue the knowledge of diuine things, to the end we may giue testimo∣ny of what fayth we hold: We write, I say, to you, who haue know∣ledge not only to discerne true doctrines from false, but are able to sup∣ply whatsoeuer is wanting.
SECT. II. A shift of Doctor Morton reiected. YOur second answeare isPag. 288., that as the sending of the Pall to Archbishops was only a declaratiō of the Popes assent to their institution, so his deposing of other Bishops without the Roman Dieces, was but an expression to others that he thought them iustly deposed: & that his power in restitution of others that had bene deposed, was the like manifestation of his consent to haue such, and such restored; euen as other Patriarkes often did. These are words, but not an answeare. For any inferior, as a Suf∣fragan Bishop, or a lay man, may expresse his opinion, or his assent, that his Metropolitan is to be deposed, or if he be already deposed, that he is iustly deposed, and yet nether depose him, nor any way concurre to his deposition, but leaue him in the state he found him: for deposition (whether it be of an Ecclesiasticall Prelate, or of a temporall Officer) is iuridi∣call sentence, wherby a Superior actually exerciseth the au∣thority of a Iudge, and really depriueth his inferior of a dignity wherof he was possessed; and therfore can be per∣formed by none, but by him, that hath power of a Iudge to condemne his inferior. And so likewise, the restitution of a Bishop to his seat, is an operatiue act of power, wher∣by the sentence of deposition pronounced against him is reuersed, and annulled: which therfore can be performed by none, but by one, that is Superior in power, as well to the Bishop deposed, as to the Superior that deposed him. In this manner, the Fathers of the Councell of Chalcedon requested the Legates of Pope Leo, Presidents of the Coū∣cell,Act. 3. to pronounce sentence of condemnation against Dioscorus Patriarke of Alexandria, which they accordin∣gly performed, deposing him in Leo's name, from his E∣piscopall dignity, and from all Sacerdotall function. And the Ecclesiasticall histories are full of examples of the same nature.
SECT. III. The Popas power of instituting, and confirming Bishops, proued by Examples. YOur third answeare isPag. 288.: You produce no one example. wherin it can appeare, that the Pope could either institute, con∣firme, depose, or restore any Bishop by his owne authority alone, with∣out the help of a Councell. This answeare is a shift, vaine, as the former was, and withall a notorious vntruth. A shift; for when his Maiesty makes a law, with the assistance of his Parliament; or the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury an Ecclesiasticall decree, with a Councell of his Suffragās, were it not sophistry to argue from thence, that his Maiesty is not supreme gouernor in his dominions, or that the Ar∣chbishop of Canterbury hath not iurisdiction ouer his Suf∣fragans? No lesse then it is to argue, that the Pope hath not iurisdiction ouer other Bishops, because he deposeth, or restoreth them not, without a Councell. For as it is not necessaty, that a King in his kingdome, or an Archbishop in his Dioces, exercise all actes of Iurisdiction, alone, with∣out the aduice, or helpe of their subiectes: so neither is it, that the Pope institute, depose, or restore Bishops, alone, without the aduice, and helpe of a Councell. And so much the more, because when Councels haue proceeded to the deposition of Bishops, they haue acknowledged the last desinitue sentence to belong to the Pope. So did the Coū∣cell of Ephesus, professing themselues to depose Nestorius, by the command of Pope CelestineSee aboue Chap. 18. sect. 1. and in reseruing to him the last sentence against Iohn Patriarke of AntiochSee Ibid. sect. 2.. And when the Councell of Chalcedon was to depose Dioscorus, they beseeched the Popes Legates, as represen∣ting his person, that was supreme gouernor of the vniuer∣sall Church, and Iudge of all Bishops, to pronounce the sentence of condemnation against him, which the Legates performedSee aboue Chap. 19. sect. 2.. And when they admitted Theodoret, that had bene deposed in the second Councell of Ephesus, to
enter, and take his place among the Bishops, they did it vpon this ground, that the most holy Archbishop Lee had restored him to his BishoprickSee aboue ibid.. And as this your third answeare is a shift, so it is an vn∣truth: for euen BellarmineL. 2. de Pont. c. 18., against whom you write, and in that very place which you cite for the contrary, pro∣ueth, that all Archbishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarkes were instituted, or confirmed by the Pope, and that by sending them the Pal, he conferred on them, the plenitude of Pastorall power: which being an act of supreme autho∣rity, & a conuincing argument of his vniuersall iurisdicti∣on, and performed by him alone, proueth vnanswerably, that he instituted Bishops by his owne authority, alone, with∣out the helpe of a Councell. And to proue the same by particular examples: When Agapetus Pope came to Constantinople, he deposed An∣thinus in the Imperiall city, in the presence of Iustinian the Emperor, and this alone, without the helpe of any Coū∣cell, yea and without any support at allSee this proued aboue Chap. 20. sect. 2.. And Honori∣us the first Pope of that name (as appeareth out of his epi∣stles to Edwin King of England, and Honorius B. of Do∣uer)Extant E∣pistola apud Bin. to. 2. pag. 994.995. according to the petition made to him by Hono∣rius, sent to him, and Paulinus two PallsBeda hist. Anglor. l. 2. c. 17. with Apo∣stolicall authority, that the Superuiuer of the two, might ordaine an Archbishop in place of him that first departed this life. And S. Gregory a litle before that tyme, sent the Pal to Augustine Archbishop of CanterburyBed. l. 1. hist. Angl c. 29., who con∣uerted vs to Christ, giuing him therby full authority, to or∣daine Bishops subiect to him, and to erect a new Arch∣bishoprick at Yorke. And doth not Socrates reportL. 7. c. 35., that Perigenes being ordained B. of Patras in Achaia, and the Citizens not receauing him, the B. of Rome commanded, that he should be Bishop of the Metropolitan Church of Corinth (the Bishop of that place being dead), and that he gouerned in that Church all the dayes of his life? And when in the false Councell of Ephesus, Anatolius had bene ordai∣ned Patriarke of Constantinople, and Maximus of An∣tioch, by what meanes was their Ordination legitimated,
and they confirmed in those Sees, but by the authority of Leo Pope alone? You wish vsPag. 296., in good fayth, to tell you, whether we can belieue, that Maximus of Antioch, was iuridically in∣stituted, or confirmed by Pope Leo, because his owne Legates said so? We tell you in good fayth, that you are quite mistaken: for not only the Legates of Pope Leo said so, but also Anato∣lius Patriarke of Constantinople, with approbation of the whole Councell of ChalcedonConc. Chale. Act. 10.: My voyce is (sayth he) that none of the things ordayned by the pretended Councell of Ephesus, remaine firme, but only that, which was done for Maximus B. of great Antioch; for as much as the most holy Archbishop of Rome, Leo, recea∣uing him into his Communion, hath iudged that he rule the Church of Antioch. And because you aske vs in good fayth, we must needes say, that you are no lesse mistaken concerning A∣natolius: for when Theodosius the Emperor requested Leo Pope to confirme him in the See of Constantinople, Leo answearingEp. 33., beeseeched the Emperor, not to take it in ill part, if he did not confirme him, vntill he had performed the things, which he ordained. And when Anatolius had performed them, Pulcheria the Empresse giuing notice therof to LeoEp. ad Leo. inter Ep. pream bul. Conc. Chalced., he confirmed him, verifying, that by his as∣sent Anatolius obtained the Bishoprick of so great a City. But what if there were no other proofe extant, but the bare affirma∣tion of Leo? Was not Leo a most holy Prelate, worthy of all credit? And when he said that Anatolius by his assent ob∣tained the Bishoprick of so great a City, did he not speake it to Martian the Emperor, who knew the truth of that busi∣nesse? But what need we to dwell in the rehearsall of more particulars? Did not S. Leo, aloneEp. 84., without any Coū∣cell, make Anastasius B. of Thessalonica his Vicar in the East, with full power to confirme the ordinations of Bi∣shops lawfully made in the Orientall Churches, & to an∣null those, that were made against order? And did not S. GregoryL. 4. ep. 7. write to the Bishops of Illyria, following the de∣sires of your demand, wee confirme by the consent of our authority, our Brother Iohn in the Bishoprick of the first Iustinianca? And this power it is, which S. Bernard expressed sayingEp. 131.: The
Roman Church ath power is rect new Bishopricks, where hitherto no haue bene: Of those that are in being, the way depresse some & aduance others, as reaso is shall ctare vnto her: so that of Bishops, she hath power to make Archbishops; and contrarity, if is seeme con∣ient. SECT. IV The Popes power of deposing Bishops without a Councell, proued by Examples. IF the Pope haue not authority to depose Bishops alone without the helpe of a Councell, why did S. CyptianL. 2. ep. 13. ad Steph. write to Stephen Pope, that by his letters addressed into the prouince, & to the people of Arles, Marcian Bishop of that city might be deposed, and another substituted in his place? And S. Cyprian did so title doubt of Stephens authority in this kinde, that he beseecheth him, to let him vnderstand, who was instituted in Marcians place at Arles, to the end, he might know, to whom to direct his brethren, and letters. Wherfore you are much mistaken, when you sayPag. 295. text. & marg., Stephens letters were but admonitory, signifying that Marcianus ought to be deposed. If you will not beleeue S. Cyprian, belieue Danaeus your Protestant Brother, who speaking of this very exampleRespons. ad Bellarm. part. 1. pag. 317., findeth it so conuincing, that he is enforced to confesse, that the Bishops of Rome did anciently depose other Bishops; which (sayth he) they had no right to do, but only tyranny, and vsurpation. So he, confu∣ting you, and confessing against you, & himselfe, that Cy∣prian speaketh absolutely of deposing Marcian, not of admo∣nishing that he ought to be deposed. This power was likewise acknowledged, when the Fa∣thers of the first Councell of Constantinople beseeched Damasus Pope, to depose Timothy, an hereticall Patriarke of Alexandria, and Damasus answearing them saidApud Theodoret. l. 5. hist. c. 10.: Wheras your charity (my deare children) yeildeth due reuerence to the Apostolike See, it shall turne you to great honour &c. But what need was there to require from me, the deposition of Timothy, seing he was long since deposed were, with his Maister Apostimarius, by the iudg∣ment
of the See Apostolike. And againeIbid. paulo superiùs.: Know yea brethren, that we haue long since deposed that prophane Timothy, disciple to A∣pollinarius the heretike. And Theodoret reporting the sameIbid.: Damasus a man most worthy of all praise, as soone as he vnderstood that this sect was broached, deposed not only Apollinarius, but also Timothy his Disciple. The same appeareth by the authority, which the Popes of Rome haue shewed in the deposition of eight Patriarks of ConstantinopleNicol. primus Ep. 8. apud Bin. to. 3. pag. 688., Maximus, Nestorius, Acacius, An∣thymus, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus, Petrus: for not to dis∣pute, whether all of them were deposed without Coun∣cells, it cannot be denied, that Agapet Pope cōming to Constantinople, deposed Anthymus, in the very Imperiall City, in presence of the Emperor Iustinian, that fauored him, and excommunicated the hereticall Empresse Theo∣dora, that protected him; & this not only without a Coun∣cell, but being very poore, and without assistance; yea con∣trarily the Empresse tempting him with promises of great rewards, if he would leaue Anthymus in that seat, & with great threats, if he deposed him: The Empresse in secret (sayth LiberatusIn Breu. c. 11. promising great presents to the Pope, if he would leaue Anthymus in his seat; and on the other side tempting him with threats, the Pope persisted in not harkening to her demand. And Anthymus see∣ing himselfe cast out of his seat, gaue vp his mantie to the Emperor, & retired himselfe, where the Empresse tooke him into her protection. And then the Pope for the Emperors sake, ordained Menas Bishop in his steed, consecrating him with his owne hands. The same is re∣ported by Iustinian himselfeNouel. 42., and by Victor of TunesIn Chron., set forth by Ioseph ScaligerAd calc. Chron. Euseb., adding hereto: the ex∣communication, which Agapet pronounced against the Empresse. To this I adde, that Celestine Pope by his authority a∣lone commanded Cyrill Patriarke of Alexandria to depose Nestorius an hereticall Bishop of Constantinople, writing thus vnto himIn Cont. Ephefro. act. 1.: Adding to thee the authority of our See, and with power the representation of our place, thou shalt execute exactly and seuerely this sentence, namely, that if within ten dayes after signi∣fication of this admonition giuen to Nestorius, he do not in expresse
words anathematike his wicked doctrines &c. thy Holinesse shall prouide for that Church without ay, and decl him to be wholly cut off from our body. In like manner S. Leo the Great depriued Hilary B. of Arles from the authority of ordaining Bishops in the Pro∣uince of Vienne, which he had iniustly vsurped. Hilary is to know (sayth Leo to the Bishops of VienneEp. 89. that he is depri∣ued of all power ouer the Prouince of Vienne, which he had vsurped vnlawfully. And Valentinian the Emperor acknowledging that Leo might for this fault haue iustly deposed Hilary, from his Bishoprick of Arles, saidNou. Theod. . 14.: The Popes clemency alone, permitted Hilary to beare still the title of a Bishop. And Ge∣lasius 40. yeares after, speaking of the power of Leo Pope, saydDe ana∣them. vinc.: Flauianus hauing bene condemned by the Congregation of the Greeke Bishops, the See Apostolike alone, because he had not con∣sented thereunto, absolued him: and contrarywise by his authority condemned Dioscorus Prelate of the second See, who had bene there approued; and alone annulled the wicked Synod, in not consenting to it; and by his authority alone, ordained that the Councell of Chalcedon should be kept. In like manner, when Iohn Archbishop of Larissa in Thessaly, had iniustly condemned Adrian B. of Thebes, one of the Bishops of his iurisdiction, that had appealed frō him to the See Apostolike, S. Gregory exempted the B. of Thebes from his iurisdiction. We ordaine (sayth heL. 2. ep. 7: indict. 11. to Iohn Archbishop of Larissa) that thy brotherhood abstaine from all the iurisdiction which thou hast formerly had ouer him, and his Church &c. And if at any tyme, or for any occasion whatsoeuer, thou that attempt to contradict this our statute, know that wee declare thee depriued of the sacred communion, so as it may not be restored to thee, except in the article of death, but with leaue of the B. of Rome. Finally omitting other examples (of which Ecclesiasti∣call histories are full) to these I adde the testimony of S. Bernard, who speaking to Eugenius Pope, saidL. de Con∣siderat.: The power of others is confined within certaine limits; thine extendeth e∣uen to them, who haue power ouer others. Hast not thou power if there be cause, to shut heauen to a Bishop, to depose him from his Bi∣shoprick and deliuer him to Sathan? And vpon this knowne
right of the Pope, he required him to depose the Bishops of YorkeEp. 217. and Winchester, & likewiseEp. 230. a wicked Bi∣shop of the Ruthens. SECT. V. The Popes power of restoring Bishops without a Councell, proued. ANastasius Patriarke of Hierusalem that liued 1100. yeares since in acknowledgment of this power, writ to Felix B. of RomeEp. ad Be∣lic.: The prerogatiue of your Apostolike See, hath euer bene, to restore by the authority of your power, them, that haue bene iniustly condemned, or excommunicated, and to returne vnto them, all that hath bene taken from them, and by the Apostoli∣call priuiledge, to punish those, that condemned, or excommunicated them, as we know it to haue bene done, both in our, and in former tymes. The practise of this authority is no lesse certaine, out of the Ecclesiasticall writers. Eustathius B. of Sebaste in Armenia, being deposed from his Bishoprick by the Coū∣cell of Melitine, trauelled to Rome, and bringing letters of restitution from Liberius Pope, the Councell of Tyana in Cappadocia, obeying, receaued him, without inquiring of the conditions, by meanes wherof he had bene restored. The thingsS. Bafil. Ep. 74. that were proposed to him, by the most blessed Bishop Liberius, & what submission he made, we know not: Only he brought a letter, that restored him, which being shewed to the Councell of Tyana, he was reestablished in his Bishops seat. Againe, when the Emperor Valens had driuen Peter that famous Patriarke of Alexandria (whom Theodosius and Valentinian callCod. titulo 1 l 1. a man of Apostolicall sanctity) from his See, and placed in it Lu∣cius an Arian heretike, Peter going to Rome appealed to Damasus Pope, & obteined letters of restitution from him. Peter (sayth Socrates)L. 4. c. 30. being returned from Rome to Alexan∣dria, with letters from Damasus B. of Rome, which confirmed the creation of Peter, the people encouraged, draue away Lucius, and re∣stored Peter in his place. And whē Theodoret B. of Cyre bor∣dering vpon Persia, was deposed from his Bishoprick by
the Councell of Ephesus, he was restored by Leo Pope. Wherupon the Senators which assisted at the Councell of Chalcedon, saydAct. 1.: Let the most religious Bishop Theodoret come in, that he may take part in the Councell, because the most holy Archbishop Leo hath restored him to his Bishoprick. These examples shew, that the venerable Councels were so far from thinking, the Pope could not restore Bi∣shops, without their help, that they made thēselues execu∣tors of his authority, & caused the letters of restitution which he he had grāted to Bishops iniustly deposed, to be obeyed. SECT. VI. Doctor Morton, to crosse the Popes Authority in restoring Bishops deposed, takes part with the Arians, and iusti∣fies their impious proceedings against S. Athanasius, and other Catholike Bishops. TO proue the Popes authority of restoring Bishops, by his letters, & authority alone, we haue for precedents the examples of the great Prelates, Athanasius Patriarke of Alexandria, Paul of Constantinople, Marcellus Primate of Ancyra in Galatia, Asclepas B. of Gaza in Palestine, & Lucius of Adrianopolis in Thracia, who being iniustly de∣posed by the Arians, appealed to Iulius Pope, and he by his authority restored them to their seats. You not knowing how otherwise to auoid the force of these examples, haue thought best to take part with the Arians against S. Athana∣sius, to iustlify their opposition against Pope Iulius, & man∣taine their contempt of his authority. To this end, you sayPag. 290.: Among those Easterne Bishops (which condemned A∣thanasius in the Councell of Antioch) there were many ortho∣doxe. There were indeed in that Councell according to the relation of S. AthanasiusDe Synod. and SocratesL. 2. c. 5., 90. Bishops: and according to S. HilaryL. de Syn.. 97. or if we beleeue Sozo∣menL. 3. c. 5., 96. Of this number there were only 36. Arian Bishops. These only were they that plotted the deposition of Athanasius; these only made the decrees of that Councell
and subscribed to them, as Iulius in his Epistle afterward written to them, and out of it AthanasiusApolog. 2. testify. These only were they, that capitulated with Iulius Pope, to haue commu∣nion with him, not vpon condition, that he should communicate with those Bishops, whom they had ordeyned, (as you ignorantly af∣firme), but, vpon condition, that he should abandon the communion of Athanasius, and the other Catholike Bi∣shops, which being deposed by them, had appealed to him for redresse, and by his authority recouered their Churches againe. And because the decrees of that Councell were made by Arians only, they haue euer bene held to be abso∣lutely hereticall: The Arians (sayth SozomenL. 8. c. 20. after they had with calumnies circumuented Athanasius, and cast him out of his Church of Alexandria, fearing lest things might be brought about a∣gaine, made this Canon, endeauoring to haue their plots against him remaine indiscussed. The same is expresly affirmed by S. Chry∣sostomeApud Niceph. l. 13. n. 18.; against whom, when his aduersaries, that had deposed him, to iustify their fact, and blame him for retur∣ning to his Church, alleaged a Canon of this Councell of Antioch, he answeared; It is not a Canon of the Church, but of the Arians. And the same is testified by the holy Pope Inno∣centiusApud Niceph. l. 13. c. 31., so much commended by S. Augustine. Wher∣fore you cannot be excused from an vntruth, in saying, that among those Easterne Bishops (that condemned Athanasius, & reproued the Pope for restoring him) there were many Ortho∣doxe: for none of the Orthodoxe Bishops consented therto. But that the Arians, who had spit in the face of Christ, and trampled his Diuinity vnder their feet, should also con∣temne the Pope, his Vicar on earth, ti's no wonder; as nei∣ther it is, that you should therin bandy with them: for no heretike euer fell from the Church, but he toke the Pope for his enemy at the same tyme. 2. To iustify your disobeying, and resisting the autho∣rity of the Church of Rome, and Bishop therof, you sayPag. 295. lit. O. marg. & text.: The Orientals (to wit the Arian Bishops) resisted, and excom∣municated the Pope: and in proofe herof, you set downe in your margent, these words, as of Sozomen l. 3. c. 7. Illi Iu∣lium Episcopum Romanum, quòd cum Athanasio & Paulo communi∣caret,
abdicarunt. Sozomen there hath no such words. He sayth, They obiected to Inlius, as a crime, that he communicated with Athanasius, and the Bishops that were with him; and accused him that in annulling their Councell, and abrogating their sentence, he had done against the Ecclesiasticall Law (so they called the hereticall Canon, which themselues had made in the Councell of Antioch to iustify their impious proceedings) and promised to communicate with him, on condition he would confirme the deposi∣tion of Athanasius, and the Orthodoxe Bishops, which had fled to him for succor. 3. You sayPag. 306. fin. 307.: The Popes command to the Orientals (who had deposed Athanasius) to receaue him againe, was answeared with con∣tempt; and they argued, àparibus, with him. What els cold be ex∣pected from sacrilegious Arians? or what from you, but to obiect against vs, their resistance to the Bishop and Church of Rome, as lawfull, to make good yours, not vnlike to theirs? But what did all their arguing auaile them? for not∣withstanding their contempt, and all the resistance, they were able to make by themselues, and by the power of Constantius the Arian Emperor, their abettor and patron, Athanasius, Paul, and the other Bishops, whom they had deposed, were by vertue of Iulius his letters, restored to their Churches, and their restitution imbraced as iust, by vniuer∣sall consent of all the Catholikes in the world; in so much, that when the Arians meeting at Philippopolis, required the Orthodoxe Bishops assembled in the Councell of Sar∣dica, to abstaine from the Communion of Athanasius, and those other Catholike Bishops, protesting, that otherwise they would haue no communion with them, the godly Bi∣shops there assembled, and representing all the Orthodoxe Bishops of the world, answearedSozom. l. 3. c. 10., that they neuer had, nor would now abstaine from their Communion; and principally, because Iulius B. of Rome hauing examined their cause, had not condemned them. But that the Arians were not so refractary to the Po∣pes authority, as you are, and would make them to be, to countenance your error, is a truth easily proued: for at last Vrsacius, and Valens, the two principall aduersaries of S. A∣thanasius, departed from their pursuite, and went to Rome,
to aske pardon of the Pope: They came in person (sayth Seue∣rus Sulpitius)Hist. sa∣craae l. 2. to aske pardon of Iulius B. of Rome. And themselues in the Act of their PennanceAthan. Apol. 1.: Your Piety in your naturall goodnesse, hath vouchsafed to pardon our error. And at the end of their Act, they made this protestationAthanas. ibid.: Moreo∣uer we promise, that if vpon this occasion, those of the East, or Atha∣nasius himselfe, shall maliciously appeale vs in iudgment, we will not depart from what you shall ordaine. 4. You tell vsPag. 306. lit. k. out of Sozomen; The restoring of S. Athanasius to his Bishoprike againe (by Iulius) was only by his communicatory letters, to declare, that he thought him worthy to be restored: for if we inquire after the authority, wherby Athanasius was restored, it was by the command of the Emperor Constantius, as the same historian recordeth. These are your words, then which none can be more vntrue: for that Iulius in his letters, did not only giue his aduice, declaring that he thought Athanasius worthy to be restored, but operatiuely exercised his power, & authority, and by vertue of them effectually and absolutely restored Athanasius and those other Bishops, is a truth not only acknowledgeth by your Protestant writers (as you haue heardChap. 37. sect. 2., but in it selfe so certaine, that I thinke no man, but Doctor Morton could haue the face to deny it. Iulius B. of Rome (sayth Socrates)L. 2. c. 11. by reason of the priuiledge of his Church aboue others, defended their cause, and sent them back with letters written to the Easterne Bishops, wherby each of them might be restored to their place; and reprehended seuerely those that had rashly deposed them. And they going from Rome, and relying vpon the letters of Iulius recouered their seates againe. Which is also ex∣pressed in the title of that Chapter: The B. of Rome (sayth Sozomen)L 3. c. 7. hauing examined their complaintes, and found, that they agreed touching the Decrees of the Councell of Nice, receaued them into his communion, and because by reason of the dignity of his See, the charge of all belonged to him, he restored to each of them his Church. And in the title of that Chapter: Athanasius & Paul, by the letters of Iulius receaued their seates againe. Are not these words cleare inough? But yet moreouer, doth not Nice∣phorus sayL. 9. c. 8. that, Iulius by the greatnesse of his See, and out of the ancient priuiledge & prerogatiue therof, knowing that the charge
of all Bishops whersoeuer, belonged to him, as to a Iudge, armed ech of them with powerfull letters, and sending them back into the East, restored their Churches vnto them? And do not he, and Sozomen addeIbid., that he rebuked the Arians, for that they had rashly depo∣sed those Bishops, and troubled the Churches, not standing to the de∣crees of the Councell of Nice; and commanded, that some of them in the name of all should on a set day appeare at Rome, to giue account of the iustice of their sentence; and threatned, not to let them passe with∣out punishment, vnlesse they did cease to innouate? And doth not Felix PopeEp. ad A∣thanas. & cet. Episc. Aegypt., who liued soone after that tyme deliuer the same in most cleare and effectuall words? And finally do not he, TheodoretL. 2. hist, c. 4., SozomenL. 3. c. 7., and S. Athanasius him∣selfeApolog. 2., out of the vndoubted Epistle of Iulius report, that Iulius following the Ecclesiasticall Law, commanded the Arian Bi∣shops to come to Rome, and summoned the diuine Athanasius canoni∣cally to present himselfe in iudgment; and that as soone as he receaued this citation, he transported himselfe in diligence to Rome; but the Authors of the tragedy went not, because they knew, their lies would be openly discouered. How thinke you now? Did not Iulius with the autho∣rity of a Iudge, restore those Orthodoxe Bishops to their Churches? and that, by the prerogatiue of his See, and because the charge of all Bishops belonged vnto him? Did he not command, and Canonically cite both Athanasius, and his aduersaries to appeare in iudgment at Rome, and appoint them a day for it? And finding A∣thanasius to be free from the crimes, which his enemies had maliciously forged against him, did he not threaten to punish them, vnlesse they desisted to innouate, and trouble the Churches? Is this nothing, but to declare, that he thought those Ortho∣doxe Bishops worthy to be restored? Is it not to exercise the authority of a Iudge? And this sheweth the falshood of your additionPag. 306. fin., that the authority wherby Athanasius was restored, was the command of the Emperor Constantius. For he being an Arian, was so far from commanding him, or any of those Catholike, Bishops to be restored, that (as Socrates writethL. 2. c. 12., when he heard that Paul B. of Constantinople was restored by the letters of Iulius, he stormed therat, and caused the Prefect of the
City, by his secular power to thrust him out againe, as he in his owne person once before had doneSee Spon. anno 342. n. 7. & 8.. And the Arian crew supported by him, so molested Athanasius, that they enforced him to fly againe to Rome: and Constan∣tius himselfe perseuered in persecuting him, as long as he durst, which was (witnes SozamenL. 3. c. 19., and TheodoretL. 2. c. 11. & 12. vntill Athanasius, and Iulius made complaint therof to his brother Constans, a Catholike Emperor, who assisting the Ecclesiasticall authority of Iulius, with his Imperiall power, writ threathing letters to Constantius, and so effe∣ctuall, that he durst resist no longer, but permitted Athana∣sius according to the iust sentence giuen by Iulius, to re∣turne to his Church, and affisted him therin. And how far Constantius was, from hauing any power to restore Bi∣shops, or to forbid them from returning to their seates, ap∣peareth in this, that when he commanded the Bishops as∣sembled at AriminumSocrat. l. 2. c. 29., not to dissolue their Councell, but to expect his answere, they sent a peremptory message vnto him, and neglecting his command, as of one that had no authority to meddle in Ecclesiasticall affaires, presently dissolued their Councell, and returned to their Churches. Let the reader now iudge, how many vntruthes you haue told in this one history; and whether you may not be thought guilty of impiety, in defending, and canonizing the outragious proceedings of blasphemous heretikes, and iultifying the sacrilegious violence offered to Catholike Bishops, for not subscribing to their heresy; and finally in answearingPag. 285., that the testimonies of ancient Popes in proofe of their authority, may be confuted, and indeed confoun∣ded, by as ancient oppositions; as of the Orientals, against the authority of Pope Iulius? Such examples we allow you, to mantaine your doctrine, and disobedience to the Bishop & Church of Rome. But I presume, that euery vnderstanding Prote∣stant, will disclaime from such an Aduocate, and thinke that by such precedents his cause is not defended, but dis∣graced, condemned, and parallalled with Arianisme.
SECT. VII. Other passages of Doctor Morton examined. BEllarmine in proofeL. 2. de Pont. c. 18. of the Popes authority, allea∣geth that Sixtus the third deposed Polychronius. You sayPag. 195. margin lit. l.; He numbreth him as one of the eight Patriarkes which Nicolas the first of that name, reckoneth in his Epistle to Michaell the Emperor. This is another vntruth: The eight Patriarkes which Bellarmine mentioneth out of the Epistle of Nicolas, were of Constantinople; namely Maxi∣mus, Nestorius, Acacius, Anthymus, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Pau∣lus, Petrus. All these were deposed by the Bishops of Rome, and are so many witnesses against you, of the Popes autho∣rity, acknowledged, and practised ouer the Bishops of Constantinople. Polichronius was B. of Hierusalem, and deposed by Sixtus Pope, as Bellarmine proueth out of the Acts of Sixtus: which acts (witnesse BaroniusAnno 432. fin. are cited by Nicolas the first, by Petrus Damiani, and other later wri∣ters. And if (as you obiectPag. 295. Baronius found no other Records of any Polychronius, that was B. of Hierusalem at that tyme, doth it therfore follow, there was none such? To omit the later writers he mentioneth, Petrus Damiani, and Nicolas were men eminently learned: the one liued 600. the other 800. yeares nearer the time of Sixtus, then Baronius did: and the Acts of Sixtus are yet more ancient then either of them. Wherefore in those dayes Record might be extant of Polychronius, and his deposition by Sixtus, reported in those Acts, which before Baronius his time were lost; or if not lost, yet might not come to his knowledge. 2. You answearePag. 295.: Your Popes must be thought to haue restored Bishops only, by endeauoring, and desiring, that they might be restored. You exemplify in Basilides, whose cause sheweth, it was a knowne truth in those dayes, that the Pope had authority to restore Bishops deposed: for why els did Basi∣lides trauaile from Spaine to Rome, to procure letters of re∣stitution
from him? Of this Basilides you sayPag. 289. fin. 190.: Cyprian constituted Sabinus Bishop, insteed of Basilides, whom he had depo∣sed. But you shew great ignorance in Ecclesiasticall history: for Cyprian neither deposed Basilides, nor cōstituted Sabi∣nus in his place. Basilides was not an African, nor any way belonging to Cyprians iurisdiction (who was Primate of Africa only) but Bishop of Leon in Spaine; and for his e∣normous crimes being iustly deposed by the Bishops of that Countrey, fled to Stephen Pope, and by a false infor∣mation of his owne innocency, deceaued him, that by his authority, and command, he might be restored to his Bi∣shoprick. The Bishops of Spaine, who had condemned him▪ sent Sabinus and Felix into Africa to informe S. Cy∣prian truly of the case, to aske his aduice, and require his in∣tercession to the Pope, that he would not restore Basilides. S. Cyprian approued their proceeding, and answeared, that if Basilides had obtayned from the Pope any sentence of restitution, it was surreptitious, by reason of the false infor∣mation he had giuen; which alone was sufficient to make his restitution void, as not only the CiuillCod. cont. ius L. Etsi., but also the Canon LawDe Res∣crip. C. Di∣lectus. declareth, decreeing in a case like to this of Basilides, that sentences procured from the See Apostolike by surreption, are inualid, and of no force. Wherfore S. Cy∣prian rightly answeared, that albeit Stephen for his incir∣cumspection, might be argued of negligence, in giuing so easy credit to a false information, and suffering himselfe to be deceaued; therby yet the chiefe fault was in Basilides, who with lies had sought to iustify himselfe. This is all that antiquity recordeth of this controuersy; which shew∣eth, that in those ancient times, the custome of Bishops, when they thought themselues wronged by their Metro∣politans, was, to appeale to the Pope, as Basilides did: a∣gainst which custome, nor against the Popes authority to admit of Appeales, neither the Bishops of Spaine, nor S. Cyprian excepted, as appeareth in this, that they blamed not Basilides, for appealing to one that had no power to reiudge his cause, but for his surprise made vpon the Pope, and the Popes want of circumspection in suffering himself
to be deceaued by a false information. 3. You sayPag. 290.: Cyprian confirmed the election of Pope Cor∣nelius, whose communion both he (as himselfe speaketh) & his Col∣leagues, and fellow-bishops gaue approbation vnto. To confirme the election of a Bishop, is an Act of iurisdiction, which therfore can proceed from none, but a Superior. This au∣thority though you deny to the Pope, yet out of a desire to annihilate his authority, you ouer-shoote your marke so far, as to make him inferior to all the Bishops of Africa, and to stand in need of their confirmation; a thing, which S. Cyprian mentioneth not. He only signifieth to Cornelius, that Nouatianus hauing made a schisme in the Church, and set himselfe vp, as Antipope, in opposition to Cornelius, and the Africans being doubtfull, which of the two they should acknowledge and obey, as true Pope, S. Cyprian sayth, he exhorted all that sailed (out of Africa to Rome) to a∣bandon Nouatianus, and adhere to Cornelius, and procured let∣ters from his brethren at Rome, to those of Africa, that be∣ing fully certified of the truth, they might (sayth he to Cor∣nelius) acknowledge and firmely imbrace you, and your communion, that is to say, the communion of the Catholike Church. All therfore that you haue gained out of S. Cyprian, is to proue your selfe to be out of the communion of the Catholike Church: for to be of the Catholike communion, and to be vnited to the Pope, in S. Cyprians beliefe, is one, and the same thing. 4. The like abuse you offer to S. Gregory, saying,Pag. 29. that he sought approbation from the foure Patriarkes. As soone as this holy Pope was placed in the chaire of S. Peter, following the custome of his Predecessors, he writ a circular, or Synodi∣call letter (for so anciently those letters were called) to the foure Easterne Patriarkes, that hauing notice of his electi∣on, they might know, whom to obey, and whom to haue recourse vnto in all doubts of fayth, and other maior causes: which was no more to seeke confirmation, or approbation from them, then if a King of Poland, or any other electiu Prince being chosen, should write a circular letter to hi Nobles, giuing them notice of his Election, and admon∣shing
them of their duty and allegiance vnto him. This to haue bene the effect of those Synodicall letters, is proued out of Gelasius: Because (sayth he to Laurence Bishop of Lignidis) with fraternall loue, you put vs in mynde, that we should send a forme of fayth, as a certaine medicine, to the Bishops through∣out Illyria, and others; although this hath bene most amply performed by our predecessor of Blessed memory, yet because the custome is, that when a Bishop of the Roman Church is newly made, he send a forme of his fayth to the holy Churches, I haue endeauored to renew the same in a compendious breuity, to the end, the reader by this our Epi∣stle may vnderstand, in what fayth he is to liue, according to the ordi∣nations of the Fathers. And as the Popes when they were chosen, did send these Synodicall letters, prescribing a forme of fayth to be obserued by all Bishops; so likewise, all Metropolitans did send to the Popes newly chosen, a profession of their fayth, to the end, it might be approued by the See Apostolike. So did S. Cyprian to Cornelius Pope, calling itL. 2. ep. 10. a diuine tradition, and an Ecclesiasticall insti∣tution: and moreouer adding, that he had commanded all the Bishops of his Prouince to doe the like. SECT VIII. Doctor Mortons ignorance concerning Excommunication: And of heretikes excommunicating the Pope. EXcommunication is a most grieuous Ecclesiasticall censure, which can be inflicted by none, but an Eccle∣siasticall Superior, that hath iurisdiction & power to binde, and loose, to punish, & absolue the person excommunica∣ted. A thing so certaine, that no puny-Diuine can be igno∣rant therof. Wherfore you discouer more then vulgar igno∣rance in definingPag. 290., Excommunicating of others, to be, but, a denying to haue communion with them. By this definition, euery subiect may excommunicate his Superior, Ecclesiasticall, or temporall: for euery subiect of neuer so meane a ranke, Ec∣clesiastick, or laick, may deny to haue communion with his Bishop, or his Soueraigne, and therby excommunicate
them: Yea by the same definition, any Heretike may ex∣communicate the Pope, or any other Bishop, or Councell, by which he is condemned; for he may deny to haue com∣munion with them. Is this good Diuinity? And yet it is yours; who from this definition, as from a true principle, deduce, that when ancient Popes excommunicated here∣ticall Bishops of the Easterne Church, it was no act of iu∣risdiction in them ouer those Bishops, butIbid. only a disuni∣ting of themselues from them, by denying to haue communion with them which also the same Bishops might deny to haue with the Po∣pes And vpon this ground, you iustify (as well you may) the Arians, who being excommunicated by Iulius Pope, toke to themselues liberty to excommunicate him, in their false Councell at PhilippopolisSozom. l. 3. c. 10.. And vpon the same ground (when Dioscorus Patriarke of Alexandria grew to so great a height of madnesse, as to pronounce a sentence of excommunication against Leo the Great, and first Pope of that name, because he had con∣demned Eutyches, and his heresy) you sayPag. 290. fin. 291., He did it vpon the knowne iudgment of the Easterne Church, and vpon a common right, and hability to do it: which as it is an answeare full of ig∣norance, so I know not how to excuse it from impiety: for although Dioscorus were an Arch-heretike, though con∣trary to the Lawes of the Church, he had by his owne au∣thority assembled a Councell at Ephesus, and approued in it the heresy of Eutyches, and condemned the Orthodoxe Doctrine, and not only excommunicated, but beaten, and wounded to death, Flauianus Patriarke of Constantino∣ple, a stout champion of the Catholike fayth; yet none of these crimes were alleaged against him, as the cause of his excommunication, and deposition, but only his presum∣ptuous attempting to excommunicate the Pope, and his disobedience to him. Dioscorus (sayth Anatolius Archbi∣shop of ConstantinopleConc. Chalced. Act. 9. Socrat. l. 2. c. 18. speaking to the Councell of Chalcedon) hath not bene deposed for the fayth, but because he had excommunicated my Lord the Archbishop Leo, and that hauing bene thrice cited, he would not appeare. And the Councell of Chal∣cedon it selfe writing to LeoRelat. ad Leon.: After all these things, he hath
extended his phrensy euen against him, to whom the guard of the Vine is committed by our Sauiour, that is to say against your Holinesse; & hath moditated an excommunication against you, who hasten to vnite the body of the Church. So enormous a crime did this ho∣ly Councell iudge it to be, for any Bishop (euen the grea∣test Patriarke of the East, as Dioscorus was) to pronounce sentence of Excommunication against the Pope. But to make this matter more euident, what Christian euer heard, that the iudgment of any Bishop could be va∣lid against the Bishop of the primary See? which (sayth the Councell of SinuessaNicol. Pa∣pa Ep. ad Mi∣cha. Imper. is to be iudged by no man. The primi∣tiue Fathers thought it so vnlawfull to be separated from the B. of Rome, that they pronounce all that are diuided from his communion, to be branches cut of from the Vine, which is the Catholike Church, to be heretikes of a peruerse iudgment, or els presumptuous selfe-liking schismatikes, and sinners, not to gather, but to scatter; not to be of Christ, but of AntichristSee aboue Chap. 1. sect. 4.. And finally, so absurd a thing it was euer held, for any Christian, to ex∣communicate the Pope, that the Emperor Martian wri∣ting to certaine hereticall Monkes of Palestine, who being enemies to the Councell of Chalcedon, had presumed to excommunicate Leo Pope, telleth themApud Bin. to. 2. pag. 144.. that therby they had (and with good cause) made themselues a laughing stook to the Heathens themselues. What you obiectPag. 290. out of Nicephorus, that Menas Pa∣triarke of Constantinople excommunicated Pope Vigilius. Cardinall Peron hath learnedly proued to be a mere fable: and were it true, it was an vnlawfull attempt, and inualid, as you haue heard. SECT. IX. Adrian, and Nicolas Popes, obiected by Doctor Morton. ADrian, and Nicolas, the two first Popes of those na∣mes, required of Constantine, and Michaell Empe∣rors of the East, the restitution not only of the temporall patrimony of S. Peter, iniustly taken away from the Ro∣man
Church, by hereticall Emperors, their predecessors, & still with-held by them; but also of the Ecclesiasticall right of ordayning, and gouerning ten Prouinces of the East, as their peculiar Diocesse, according to the custome of their predecessors. This obiection youPag. 291. 292. tooke from BaroniusAnno 800.: He hath giuen you an answeare; to him I remit you. But wheras you say. These Popes did not thinke themselues to haue iurisdiction ouer the whole Church of Christ, it is worth the no∣thing, that they, euen in those very Epistles, which you ob∣iect, not only affirme, but most effectually proue the iuris∣diction of the B. of Rome, ouer the whole Church: and of Adrian, somthing to this purpose hath bene said alreadyChap. 33. sect. .. SECT. X. Of the deposition of Flauianus Patriarke of Antioch. BEllarmineL. . de Pont. c. 18. produceth many examples of Easterne Bishops, deposed by the Pope. In answeare wherto, you sayPag. 295. fin. 296.: The chiefest example which your Cardinall may seeme principally to insiston, is, that Pope Damasus (as he calleth it) depo∣sed Flauianus Patriarke of Antioch. And therfore haue I singled out this example, for a singular Argument of retorsion, to proue the no∣iuridicall, or iudiciall authority of the Roman iurisdiction, ouer the Patriarkes of Antioch. Bellarmines first, and chiefest exam∣ples are of eight Patriarkes of Constantinople, which are so many witnesses of the Popes authority against you. A∣mong these, he chiefly inssisteth on the example of Anthy∣mus, whom Agapet Pope deposed in the City of Constan∣tinople it selfe, as you haue heardIn this Chap. sect. 4., and he proueth out of Nicolas the first, Liberatus, Zonaras, and Gelasius. The reason therfore why you passing ouer these examples, single out that of Flauianus, is not, because that is the chiefest Bellar∣mine insisteth on, but because in that you find something to quarrell at, which you finde not in the rest. But vpon exa∣mination, the euidence of this very example singled out by your selfe, will shew how vnanswearable the rest are. The ease is this. The Church of Antioch being in schisme,
two Bishops, Paulinus, and Meletius pretending right to that Patriarchall seate, and some adhering to the one, some to the other, not without danger of a great tumult, they came to agreementSocrat. l. 5. c. 5. Sozom. l. 7. c. 3., that all such Ecclesiasticks, as were thought fit to gouerne that Church, or were in expectation therof, (which were sixe in number) should bind them∣selues by a solemne oath, not to admit of that Bishoprick, so long as either Paulinus, or Meletius liued; and after the death of either of them, to let the superuiuer peaceably en∣ioy that seat alone. Meletius being dead, the Antiochians, contrary to their oath, aduanced Flauianus to the Bi∣shoprick, in opposition to Paulinus; and he contrary to his oath admitted therof: at which Damasus Pope, and all the Bishops of the West were greatly offendedSozom. l. 7. c. 11.; & not with∣out cause, by reason of the new schisme it caused, not only in that Church, and in a great part of the East, but also be∣cause it was contrary to the agreement made by oath, and a great wrong to Paulinus, who was very old, and a per∣sonage of so great veneration, for his sanctity, and merit, that Valens an hereticall Emperor driuing many Catho∣like Bishops from their Churches in to banishment, neuer offered to touch himS. Hieron. Bp. 61. ad Pa∣mach. Socrat. l. 4. c. 2.. Wherefore Damasus, and the rest of the Westerne Bishops, writ communicatory letters to him, as to the true Bishop of Antioch, but abstayned from the communion of Flauianus, and excommunicated Dio∣dorus, and Acacius that had ordayned himSozom. l. 7. c. 11.. And wheras the Councel of Constantinople vnder Nectarius, had con∣firmed Flauianus, they (the Westerne Bishops) annulled that confirmation, and by their letters accompained with others of the Emperor Gratian (vsing also therin the helpe of Theodosius, who writ to the same effect) they com∣māded the Councell of Constantinople to come to Rome,S. Hiero. Ep. 27. ad Eu∣stoch. Theod. l. 5. hist. c. 8. fin. &c. 9. & put the election of Flauianus againe in triall, at a ge∣nerall Councell assembled there, giuing withall to both parties assignation to appeare. Flauianus distrusting the e∣quity of his cause, appeared notTheod. l. 5. hist. c. 23., but had recourse to ex∣cuses, and to the Emperor. But Paulinus obeying, trans∣ported himselfe to Rome, in company of other Bishops,
and renowned personages of the East. Wherof S. Hierome speaking saythEp. 16. ad Princip.: The Ecclesiasticall necessity drew me to Rome, with the holy Bishops Paulinus, and Epiphanius, whereof, the one gouerned the Church of Antioch in Syria, and the other the Church of Salamina in Cyprus. And againeEp 17. ad Eustoch.: When the Imperiall letters had drawne to Rome, the Bishops of the East, and West, Paula saw there the admirable men, and Bishops of Christ, Paulinus B. of Anti∣och, and Epiphanius B. of Salamina in Cyprus. Wherby it appea∣reth, that albeit the election of Flauianus had bene confir∣med by the Councell of Constantinople, Paulinus was still held to be the true B. of Antioch, and Flauianus his competitor, in reputation of an intruder, for want of con∣firmation from the See Apostolike. And therefore as he ap∣peared not, so neither did the Bishops of the Constantino∣politan Councell which had confirmed him, but by let∣ters written to to the Pope, and Councell of Rome, excu∣sed themselues. You (say they)Theod. l. 5. hist. c. 9. moued with brotherly chari∣ty, called vs, as your members by the letters of the most religious Em∣peror &c. But beside, that our Churches being newly restored, (if we should haue done this) had bene wholly abandoned, it was a thing, which many of vt could no way put in execution; for as much as we trauailed to Constantinople, vpon the letters of your Reuerence, sent the last yeare, after the Councell of Aquileia, to the most religious Em∣peror Theodosius, hauing prepared our selues for none, but that iourney of Constantinople only, and hauing gotten the consent of the Bishops, remaining in the Prouinces, for none but that. And in the end of the same Epistle they make intercession for Flauianus, fea∣ring lest the cause of Paulinus would be fauored by Da∣masus, by reason he had bene ordayned Patriarke of An∣tioch, by Lucifer a Sardinian Bishop, and Legate to Libe∣rius, predecessor to Damasus. The businesse standing thus, Paulinus died; but the schisme liued still. For his Disciples created to themselues Euagrius a new Bishop, in opposition to FlauianusSocrat. l. 5. c. 15. Sozom. l. 7. c. 15.: wherby not only that Church, but the whole world was sha∣kenAmb. Ep. 78., and brought into danger of schisme: for remedy wherof, Siricius Pope called a Councell at Capua; to which, though the Bishops of the East and West resorted in
great numbers, yet Flauianus still appeared not. Flauianus (sayth S. AmbroseIbid. hath cause to feare, and therfore he flies a triall. And againeIbid.: One only Flauianus not subiect to Lawes, as it seemes to him, appeareth not when we are all assembled. The Councell to preuent further danger of schisme, ordained, that whiles the cause was in agitation, commu∣nion should not be denied to the Catholikes, that adhered to either party: and to make an end of that long strife, com∣mitted the examination, and decision of the whole cause, to Theophilus Patriarke of Alexandria, both by reason of the great authority of his See in the East, as also because his Pa∣riarkship bordered vpon that of Antioch, where the parties were present; and finally because he was a man impartiall. The sacred Synod (sayth S. AmbroseIbid. writing to Theophi∣lus) hauing committed the right of examining this cause to your vnanimity, and to our other Colleagues of Aegypt. it is necessary, that you summon againe our brother Flauianus. And moreouer he ad∣uertiseth Theophilus, that he ought to cary the businesse so, as that the finall decision therof might be reserued to the B of Rome, and confirmed by him. We conceaue (sayth he)Ibid. that you ought to referre the cause to our holy brother B of the Ro¦man Church: for we presume, you will iudge so, as cannot displease him. And al use after: When hauing receaued the tenor of your acts, we shall see, you haue iudged things so, as the Roman Church shall vndoubtedly allow therof, we will receaue with ioy the fruit of your examination. By this it appeares, that S Ambrose held the B of Rome to be the supreme Iudge of Bishops, and that to him apper∣tained the finall decision of their causes. And the same ap∣peares yet further in this, that S. Iohn Chrysostome, who was then Archbishop of Constantinople, and fauored Fla∣nianus, as hauing a litle before bene a Priest of his, besee∣ched TheophilusL. 8. c. 3. to labor with him, and helpe him, to make the B. of Rome propitious to Flauianus; and to this end, by mutuall consent of both were chosen (as Legates to be sent to Rome) Acacius B of Beroea, & Isidore Priest. And the same is confirmed by SociatesL. 5. c. 25.: Theophilus (sayth he) sending the Priest Isi∣dore, appeased Damasus that was offended, and represented to him,
that it was profitable for the concord of the Church, to parson the fault of Plauianus: and so the Communion was restered to him. Finally, notwithstanding that the Emperor fauoured Flauianus, and tooke vpon him to plead his cause in iudg∣ment at Rome, yet he neuer was receaued as Patriarke of Antioch; nor his Legates admitted, vntill the Pope at the intreary of so great personages, had pardoned his fault, and confirmed him in that See. This is the true history of Flauianus, which you haue singled out, as an especiall example of retorsion against Bellarmine, to proue the Popes no-iuridicall authority ouer the Patriarkes of Antioch; but you performe it not: for this example euidently sheweth the Popes authority exercised ouer the Easterne Churches, many wayes; as 1. In annulling the Confirmation of Flauianus made in the Councell of Constantinople. 2. In calling those Bishops to Rome, to put the cause in triall againe: nor did they in their answeare except against his authority, to call them, but humbly acknowledging him to be their head, and themselues to be his members, excused their not coming for want of time, and other reasons expressed in their Epistle. 3. In calling not only the Westerne, but also the Easterne Bishops to the Councell of Capua, they obeying his command. 4. By the Epistle of S. Ambrose, wishing Theophilus to procure a confirmation of his sentence from the B. of Rome. 5. By the intercession of Theophilus, of S. Chrysostome, and of the Emperor Theodosius himselfe, made to the Pope to pardon Flauianus his fault, and to confirme him in the Bi∣shoprike of Antioch. And 6. by the Legates, which Flauia∣nus himselfe in the end was faine to send to the Pope, be∣fore he could be receaued, as true Bishop of that See: which he needed not to haue done, if his confirmation had not depended on the Popes approbation. All this being manifest out of Socrates, and Sozomen, (whom Bellarmine citeth) and also out of S. Ambrose, impartiall relators of this cause, you mention not any of them, but fasten vpon the relation of Theodoret, who be∣ing a Suffragan of the Patriarkship of Antioch, and a crea∣ture
to one of Flauianus his Successors, was a great fauores of his person, and hath reported his cause, with more rela∣tion to fauor, then to truth. For firstL. 5 c. 23. he makes Flauianus absolute and lawfull Successor to Meletius; and Paulinus an iniust pretender to that See: wheras contrarywise Pau∣linus was the true Successor, and Flauianus an inder, as being bound by oath, not to permit himselfe, nor any other to be ordained Bishop in place of Meletius, but to let Pauli∣nus enioy that dignity alone, and peaceably, whiles he li∣ued. 2. He mentioneth not this oath of Flauianus, but signi∣fieth, that he came to the Bishoprike, by a lawfull and Ca∣nonicall election, without breach of any oath. 3. To make good the cause of Flauianus against Euagrius, he reporteth, that Paulinus alone, before his death, ordained Euagrius, contrary to the Lawes of the Church, when as SocratesL. 5. c. 15. and SozomenL. 7. c. 15. impartiall writers testify, that Eua∣grius was not ordained by Paulinus, but by his Disciples after his yeath. 4. Nor is he to be credited in his report, that Theodosius hauing heard Flauianus at Constantinople, did not presse him to goe to Rome, but bid him returne home to Antioch, and that coming himselfe afterwards to Rome, he vndertooke to answeare for Flauianus, and to plead his cause in iudgment. And yet notwithstanding, euen this relation of Theo∣doret (partiall as it is) proueth the iuridicall authority of the Pope ouer the Patriarkes or Antioch, if it be taken enti∣rely, as it is set downe by him, and not mangled as you re∣port it: for he saythL. 5. c. 23., The Bishops of Rome, not only that admi∣rable man Damasus, but also after him Siricius, and Anastasius suc∣cessor to Siricius, inueighed greatly against the Emperor, telling him, here pressed them that practised tyranny against himselfe, but left vn∣punished those, that by tyranny sought to ouerthrow the lawes of Christ. Wherupon, as the Emperor before had commanded him, so now againe he labored to compell him, to goe to Rome, to haue his cause iudged there. This sheweth that the Emperor acknowledged no lesse obligation in the greatest Patriarkes to obey the Pope, then in the subiects of the Empire to obey the Emperor; and that such Bishops, as
shew themselues disobedient to him, violate the Lawes of Christ, and deserue no lesse punishment, then subiects that rebell against their Prince. Againe: The Emperor (sayth TheodoretIbid. comming long after that tyme to Rome, and being blamed againe by the Bishops, for not repressing the tyranny of Fla∣uianus, said, he would take vpon himselfe the person of Flauianus, and pleade his cause in iudgment: which last clause, you in your re∣lation of Theodorets words omit, because it sheweth, that the iudgment of Flauianus his cause belonged to the Court of Rome: for the pleading of causes in iudgment, is only before them, that haue authority to iudge. Finally, though Theodoret relate partially this story of Flauianus, yet that he intended not therby, to deny the au∣thority of the Pope ouer the Bishops of Antioch, appeareth, not only by what hath bene here proued to the contrary, but also because in expresse words he professethIn Ep. ad Kenat. that, the Roman See hath the sterne of gouerment ouer all the Churches of the world; and therfore he being a Suffragan of the Patriarke∣ship of Antioch, when he was deposed from his Bisho∣prike, by the second Councell of Ephesus, had not recourse to his owne Patriarke, for redresse, but appealed to Leo Pope, and by him was restored. He likewise knew that Iohn Patriarke of the same See had bene deposed by Cele∣stine PopeSee aboue Chap. 18. sect. 2., and Maximus confirmed in that See by Leo the GreatSee this Chap. sect. 3.. All this sheweth, how vntruly you sayPag. 296. fin., that Damasus deposed not Flauianus, nor executed any act of iuridic all proceeding a∣gainst him but that he was confirmed in his Bishoprike by the Empe∣ror: for Damasus annulled the sentence of the Councell of Constantinople that had confirmed him, and cited both the Fathers of that Councell, and him, to appeare at Rome, to haue his cause tried there; and therupon the Emperor once, and twice vrged him to goe: and Siricius successor to Damasus, gaue to Theophilus Patriarke of Alexandria, power to iudge his cause. And notwithstanding all the Emperors fauor, he was not confirmed in the Patriark∣ship, vntill at the intreaty of Theophilus & Chrysostome, the Pope had pardoned his offence, and he himselfe had
sent Legates to obtaine his confirmation. If this be not suf∣ficient to proue the Popes authority ouer the Bishops of Antioch, what is? And when you askePag. 297., Whether the Christian Churches could be good Catholikes, and in state of samation, that communica∣ted with Flauianus, at the time of his opposition, to the Pope, it is a question sprung from ignorance: for the cause of Flauianus being in agitation, it was so far from being vnlawfull to communicate with him, or with them that adhered either to him, or Paulinus, and Euagrius, that for auoyding of further schisme; the Councel of Capua ordained that Com∣munion should be denied to neither party. SECT. XI. Doctor Morton in defence of his Doctrine, chargeth an∣cient Bishops, with exercising Acts of authority out of the limits of their owne iurisdiction. VVE haue proued the Popes to be supreme Gouer∣nors of the vniuersall Church, because they haue exercised acts of iurisdiction ouer the greatest Bishops of the East and West. You make your apposition (as you sayPag. 297. by parallels, and examples of other Bishops in antiquity, executing Acts of confirming, and deposing Bishops, without the limits of their owne iurisdiction: which is tacitly to contradict your selfe, confes∣sing that the Popes haue confirmed, and deposed Bishops out of their owne Patriarkship (to which you confine their authority.) but that they had no iurisdiction our those Bi∣shops. The falsity of this answeare, who seeth not? for con∣firming and deposing of Bishops, is an act of iurisdiction, which no Bishop hath power to exercise out of the limits of his iurisdiction. And therfore to say, that either the Popes or other Bishops, haue executed acts of confirming, or deposing Bishops, without the limits of their owne iurisdiction, is to accuse them of pride and iniustice, in arrogating to themselues liberty to transgresse the limits of their iurisdiction, executing acts of authority, where they had no right. But as to deny the
vniuersall iurisdiction of the Popes, you wrong them; so to make good your deniall of their authority, you wrong the other Bishops in whom you instance. The first is S. Athanasius B. of Alexandria; who (say you)Pag. 300. appointed a Bishop ouer the Indians. This Bishop, though you name him not, was Frumentius, who hauing liued a∣mong the Indians, and returning from thence, informed S. Athanasius of the great hope he conceaued of their Con∣uersion to Christ, if preachers were sent vnto them. The fayth which Frumentius preached, was the Roman fayth, and he serued God after the manner of the Roman Church and induced all Christians that traded with the Indians to do the likeRuffin. l. 2. c. 9. Sozom. l. 2. c. 2.3.. S. Athanasius, with the aduice of his Cler∣gy, created him Bishop at Alexandria, and sent him with other Priests, to preach the Ghospell to the Indians, and re∣duce them to the Communion of the Roman Church. Where do you find in all this, that S. Athanasius instituted, or confirmed any Bishop without the limits of his owne iurisdiction? Did he not consecrate Frumentius Bishop in his owne Church at Alexādria? Did he send him to preach, or exercise iurisdi∣ction, within the Dioces of any other Bishop? No. He sent him to a barbarous people, to reduce them to the fayth of Christ, and obedience of the Roman Church; which was then, and is still lawfull for any Bishop, in like case to do, that being no where forbidden, nor contrary to any Law, diuine, or humane, nor any way derogating from the au∣thority of the B. of Rome, but most gratefull to him, whose greatest desire is, to reduce the whole world, to the fayth of Christ, and whose approbation for such enterprises is al∣wayes iustly presumed: especially since therby the glory of the Roman Church is increased, and her iurisdiction en∣larged, as by the conuersion of both Indies, in these later tymes, we see. Your second examplePag. 300. is, of Theophilus B of Alexandria, laboring to ordaine Chrysostome to be the B. of Constantinople. For this you alleage Sozomen, who saythL. 8. c. 2. that Chryso∣stome being famous for his Vertue, & learning, through∣out all the Roman Empire, by voyce of the Clergy, and
people of Constantinople, and of the Emperor himselfe, was chosen Archbishop of that Imperiall City: but that Theophilus Patriarke of Alexandria resisted his ordina∣tion, laboring to promote to that dignity, Isidore a Chap∣laine of his owne. This is the relation of Sozomen: why do you report it vntruly? Your third exampleIbid., is of S. Gregory Nazianzen, vnto whom (say you) Meletius B. of Antioch, and Petrus of Alexan∣dria confirmed the See, and Patriarkship of Constantinople. For this you bring TheodoretL. . hist. c. 8., and Gregorius Presbyter. Theodoret sayth no such thing; but only that albeit the Canons to preuent ambition, forbid the remouing of Bi∣shops from one See, to another; yet the opinion of Meletius was, that in those circumstances, Gregory might hold the Bishoprick of Constantinople, by reason of the great do∣mage that Church sustained for want of a Bishop, in so dangerous a time: But that Meletius designed, or ordained him Bishop, Theodoret sayth it not; nor is it true: for he was crea∣ted Bishop by the Councell of Constantinople, which Theodoret in that Chapter mentioneth. And the same is verified by other historians. Gregory (sayth Socrates)L. 5. c. 5. by the common consent of many Bishops was transferred from the Bi∣shoprike of the City of Nazianzum, to the Bishoprike of Constanti∣nople. And SozomenL. 6. c. 17.: Gregory by the voices of many Bishops, was designed B. of Constantinople: for no Catholike Bishop, nor Church of Orthodoxe people, being in that City, the doctrine of the Councell of Nice, was in danger to be wholly exploded. How then could you say, that Meletius, and Petrus of Alexandria confirmed vnto Gregory Nazianzen, the See of Constantinople? Especially since Theodoret in that very Chapter expresseth the names of diuers of those Bishops which in the generall Councell of Constantinople conferred that dignity on him, and re∣pressed the insolency of Maximus, whom Timothy B. of Alexandria would haue intruded into that See. Your fourth examplePag. 300., is Moyses, who being a man fa∣mous for miracles was ordained Bishop by certaine exiles. It is true: for the Romans, vpon agreement of peace, with Mauia Queene of the Saracens (who desired to haue Moyses crea∣ted
Bishop of her Nation) brought him to Alexandria to be consecrated by Lucius, then Patriarke of that city, who being an Arian heretike. Moyses refused to be consecrated by him: and therfore the Arians were enforced to permit him to be consecrated by the Catholike Bishops of the Ro∣man CommunionRuffin. l. 2. c. o. Socrat. l. 4. c. . Sozo. l. o. c. 38., who though banished by the Arians had not therby lost their iurisdiction, and therfore might ordaine Moyses, without entrenching on the liberties of other Bishops, or passing the limits of their owne. And what they did, was confirmed by Damasus Pope, who (saith SocratesL 4. c. 30. by his letters approued the fayth of Moyses, and con∣firmed the creation of Peter, that is to say, of that renowned Patriarke, successor to S. Athanasius, who being expelled by Lucius, appealed to Damasus Pope, and by him was restored to his Church of Alexandria. Wherfore this exam∣ple sheweth the Roman Church to be the Head of Catho∣like communion, and that if Moyses had bene brought to to you to be consecrated Bishop, he would haue shunned you, as he shunned Lucius. Your fift examplePag. 300. is of Athanasius B. of Alexandria, depo∣sing Bishops without AEgypt. This you report out of Socrates,L. 3. c. 20. who hath no such words, nor treateth of any such sub∣iect. Your last examplePag. 300. is of Cyrill of Hierusalem, who was cast out of his Bishoprick by Acacius B. of Casarea. This ma∣keth against your selfe: for the B. of Hierusalem was Suf∣fragan to the B. of Cęsarea, who therfore might depose him without exceeding the limits of his iurisdiction. It is true, that the Metropolitan cannot without iust cause depose his Suffragan: and therfore because Acacius being an Arian, deposed Cyril merely out of hatred to the Catholike faith, and for certaine crimes which himselfe had feigned against him, the deposition was iniust, and iudged to be such by the Councell of SeleuciaTheod. l. 2. c. 27. Sozo. l. 4. c. 24. So crat. l. 2. c. 35. Niceph. l. 9. c. 19., where Acacius durst not ap∣peare, to haue the cause of Cyrill examined: and therfore both he, and his complices for the wrong done to Cyrill, and for other their hereticall machinations, were themsel∣ues deposed, and Cyrill restored to his seat at Hierusalem.
These are your sixe examples, which vpon examination proue all against your selfe: and therfore your horned ar∣gument, framed out of them, doth nothing els, but goare your owne bowels. CHAP. XXXIX. Of Appeales to Rome, decreed in the Councell of Sardica. SECT. I. Whether the Councell of Sardica were a generall Councel. IN the Councell of Sardica, it was de∣creedCap. 3.4.5.. 1. That if in the cause of a Bishop, who thinkes himselfe to be wronged, a new iudgment be required, the B. of Rome is to giue the Iudges. 2. That if a Bishop deposed by the next Bishops, say, his cause ought to be iud∣ged againe, none is to be placed in his See, vn∣till the B. of Rome haue pronounced vpon it. 3. That a Bishop accused may haue recourse to Rome, by way of Appeale. Against the authority of the Councell of Sardica you obiectPag. 301. 1. That Bellarmine produceth in this place this Councell as a sound argument, which elswhere heranketh among those Coun∣cels, that are to be partly allowed, and partly reiected: as if coyne partly mixed, and counterfeit, ought to be taken for good payment. This argument is an imposture: for to the Councell of Sar∣dica came 376. Bishops, of which 300. were Catholikes: the other 76. AriansSocrat. l. 2. c. 16.. These 76. refused to enter into the Councell at Sardica, vnlesse Athanasius, and Paul were expelled: which condition the Catholike Bishops admit∣ted not, but answearedSozom. l. 31. c. 10.: They neuer had, nor would now ab∣staine
from the communion of Paul, and Athanasius, especially be∣cause Iulius B. of Rome, hauing examined their cause, had not con∣demned them. Hereupon those 76. Arian Bishops, separating themselues from the body of the Councell, held an Anti∣synod of their owne, at Philippopolis (a City not far from Sardica) which is reproued, as being a Conuenticle of A∣rians. Of this Bellarmine speaketh, when he sayth; The Councell of Sardica is partly reproued. But the decrees for appea∣ling to Rome, were not made in this mock-Councell (yea this reproued Athanafius for appealing, and Iulius Pope for admitting his appeale) but by the true Councell held at Sardica, which hath euer bene approued by the Church, & in no part reproued. This Councell of 300. Bishops it is, which Bellarmine alleageth in proofe of Appeales. How then can you be excused in saying, that he produceth this Councell in this place as a sound Argument, which elswhere he ran∣keth among those Councells, that are to be partly allowed, and partly reiected? for he neuer sayth, that this Councell of 300. Bi∣shops is in any part to be reiected. 2. You obiectPag. 302., that this Councell, is not a gene∣rall Councell: for (say you) though in respect of the calling of it by Constantius, we may not vnworthily say, that it was generall yet if we obserue, that it was afterwards distracted, and diuided into two places, we may rather esteeme it particular. This vrgeth not: for the distraction consisting in so small a number of Bishops, and they Arians, their absence could not take from the true Councell of Sardica (which represented all the Catholike Bishops in the world) the name of a generall Councell, which had bene imposed on it at the first calling; no more then the Anti-Synod held at Ephesus in fauour of Nesto∣rius, by the Bishops of the Patriarkship of Antioch, hindred the true Councell of Ephesus, from being perfectly and ab∣solutely generall. And in conformity to this you els where suppose and confessePag. 144. sin. 145., the Sardican Councell to be a ge∣nerall Councell; according to the testimonies of S. Atha∣nafius, Socrates, Seuerus Sulpitius, Iustinian, Baronius, & Binius. To which number you might haue added Vigilius that anciēt. B. of TrentCout. Eu∣cych. l. 5.. TheodoretL. 2. c. 8., & HincmarusOpuse. . c. 20..
Nor did Constantius alone call this Councell, but also his brother Constans; and that not by their authority, but by the authority of Iulius Pope, who (as it is plaine out of So∣crates)L. 2. c. 16. called the Bishops, and appointed a day for them to meote at Sardica, to begin the Councell. SECT. II. Other obiections of Doctor Morton, against Appeales to Rome, answeared. YOu third obiectionPag 302., that the right which the Pope can claime for Appeales, dependeth altogeather vpon humane constitutions, hath bene already answearedAboue Chap. 27. sect. 4.. 4. You exceptPag. 304. against some of the examples (which Bellarmine produceth of Appeales made to the Pope) as being of such, as were within his owne Patriarkship and therefore rather subiect to him, then to others: from whence to inferre, that appeales out of other Patriarkships may be made vnto him, is (say youIbid. as if a Proctor should say: My Client had tith in his owne parish, therfore do the next Parishes adioyning owe their tithes vnto him. But this example condemneth your Doctrine: for if all that are in the Patriarkship of the West, be the Popes subiects, and haue right to appeale vnto him, why do you Protestants (who cannot deny your selues to be within his Patriarkship) disclaime from his obedience? Why do you not submit to your lawfull Superior? Why do you forbid appeales, and all recorse vnto him? And if (as here you con∣fesse) he hath as much right to the appeales of them which are within his owne Patriarkship, as a Parson hath to the tithes of his owne Parish, why do you defend, that it was lawfull for the Africans (whom you acknowledge to be within his owne DiocesPag. 289., and therfore rather subiect to him then to others,Pag. 304. to forbid appeales vnto him? Why do you so often inueigh against the Popes, for requiring and mantaining their owne right herein? 5. You exceptIbid. against other appeales, because they were of heretikes, or other persons notoriously impious, as of Ba∣silides,
Marcion, Fortunatus, and Felix, or Felicissimus, for so you should haue said. But by this Argument you may as well proue, that a King hath no right of Appeales in his kingdome: for who knoweth not, that not only persons that are wronged by inferior Iudges, but also others, which haue bene iustly condemned, do sometimes appeale: the former to be righted, and the later in hope to procure their iust condemnation to be reuoked by fauor, or by misinfor∣ming their Soueraigne? Wherfore as it were sophistry, to inferie, that a King hath not soueraigne authority in his kingdome, because some that appeale vnto him, are wicked persons; so it is to except against the Popes supreme autho∣rity, because some that appeale vnto him, are wicked per∣sons, that haue bene iustly condemned by their immediat Superiors. Your inference should haue bene, that because all sortes of persons, nocent, and innocent, haue appealed to the Pope from all partes of the world, it rightly followeth, that he is supreme Iudge of the vniuersall Church. SECT. III. Examples of innocent Appellants. IN proofe of the ancient custome of appealing to Rome, we produce the examples of S. Athanasius, S. Chryso∣stome, Theodoret, and Flauianus. You answearePag. 304.: They addressed their requests to the B. of Rome, not as to a peremptory Ludge, but as to a Patron, and arbitrary Days-man. And of Theo∣doret, and Chrysostome you had said beforePag. 255.: They only required from the Bishops of Rome a subsidiary help, as one King may from another, and as the B. of Arles, may from the B. of Paris. But this to be false sophistry, I shall easily proue, if first I giue the reader a taste of your ignorance, concerning the anti∣quity of Appeales to Rome from remote Nations in ge∣nerall.
SECT. IV. Doctor Mortons ignorance, concerning the Antiquity of appealing to Rome from remote Nations. THeodoret being iniustly deposed from his Bishop∣ricke of Cyre, a City bordering vpon Persia, appealed to Leo Pope, sayingEp. ad Leon.: I attend the sentence of your Apostolike throne, and beseech your Holinesse to succour me, appealing to your right and iust iudgment; and to command that I be brought before you, and verify that my Doctrine followes the Apostolicall pathes. You startling at these so vnanswearable words of Theo∣doret, bid vsPag. 255. marg. lit. m. note, that the phrase of appealing to the Pope from remote nations, was very vncouth in those dayes, giuing vs therby a good testimony of your ignorance in Ecclesiasticall hi∣story: for that the phrase of appealing to the Pope from remote na∣tions, was not very vncouth, but very familiar in those dayes, and long before those dayes, euen from the first ages of the Church, who knoweth not, that is versed in anti∣quity? For 1. Sixtus Pope, that liued 300. yeares before Theodoret, ordaynethEp. 2.. that, if any Bishop be wronged he appeale freely to the holy, and Apostolike See. 2. Marcellus the first, declarethEp. 1. ad Episc. An∣tioch. Prou., that accoding to the constitutions of the Apostles, and their successors, all Bishops, when there is occasion, may appeale to the See Apostolike. 3. Felix the secondEp. ad Syn. Alex.: As often as Bishops shall thinke themselues wronged by those of their Prouince, or by their Me∣tropolitan, or haue them in suspicion, let them appeale to the See of Rome. 4. The same is ordained by VictorEp. ad Theoph. cate∣rosque Episc. Aegyp., by Zephyri∣nusEp. ad E∣pisc. Sicil., by FabianusEp. ad Hi∣lar., and MelchiadesEp. ad E∣pisc. Hispan.. 5. And what these ancient Popes decreed, the holy Councell of Nice re∣lated by IuliusEp. 2., confirmed; ordaining, that all Bishops ac∣cused of grieuous crimes, may freely appeale to the See Apostolike, & fly to it, as to a Mother, for defence, and succour. The authority of this Canon is proued by PisanusL. 3. Conc. Niceni apud Bin. to. 1. pag. 350.: And that the Nicen Councell made such a decree, S. LeoEp. 25. testifieth, and you els where forgetting your selfe, acknowledgePag. 308. marg. lit. r.. 6. The Councell of Sardica related not only by Catholike wri∣ters,
but also by the Centurists, decreethCap. 4., that if any Bi∣shop being deposed by the next Bishops, and protesting, that his cause ought to be iudged a new, fly for succour to the B. of Rome, no other is to be installed in his See, after he hath put in his Appeale, but that his cause be sentenced by the B. of Rome. 7. And when Iohn, surna∣med Talaia, Patriarke of Asexandria, was cast out of his See by the Emporor Zeno, and Peter Moggus set vp in his place, Iohn (sayth LiberatusLiberat. 6.18. addressed himselfe to Calendion Patriarke of Antioch, and hauing taken from him Synodic all letters of intercession, appealed to the Pope of Rome Simplicius. 8. When Flauianus Patriarke of Constantinople was condemned by the false Councell of Ephesus, Valentinian the Empe∣ror writ to Theodosius his Father-in-LawExtat Ep inter Ep. preamb. Conc. Chalced., that Fla∣uianus according to the custome of Councells, appealed by petition to the Blessed Bishop of the City of Rome. And LiberatusCap. 12.: That, sentence hauing bene pronounced against Flauianus, he appealed to the B. of Rome, by petition presented to his Legates. 9. And LeoEp. 8. writing to the same Flauianus: Eutyches protestes, that in full iudgment he presented to you a request of appeale, and that it was not receaued. 10. And Flauianus answering LeoExtat Ep. inter Ep. Leo∣nis ante Ep. 7.: Eutyches hath informed you, that in the time of iudgment, he presented to vs, and to the holy Councell heare assembled, libells of appeals to your Holinesse which was neuer done by him. 11. And the same LeoEp. 25. writing to Theodosius the yonger, beseecheth him, that for as much as Flauianus being wronged by the false Councell of E∣phesus, had presented a libell of appeale to his Legates, he would command a generall Councell to be held within Italy: for the Nicen Canons require this necessarily to be done, after the putting in of an Appeale. To these I adde Theodoret, testi∣fying in expresse words that he appealed to Leo Pope. These witnesses shew, that the phrase of appealing to the Pope from remote nations, was not very vncouth, but very fa∣miliar in the dayes of Theodoret, and in former ages: and that the right of appealing to the Roman See was ack∣nowledged, and testified by holy Popes of the primitiue times, by generall Councells, by Emperors, by Bishops, and by all ancient writers. And the same might be proued by other examples, if these were not sufficient to shew your
ignorance in denying, if not rather your boldnesse, in out-facing so knowne a truth. SECT. V. That S. Athanasius appealed to Iulius Pope, and Theodo∣ret to Leo, as absolute Iudges: and that by their au∣thority, both of them were restored to their Churches. THat S. Athanasius appealed to Iulius Pope, and by his authority was restored to his seat, hath bene effe∣ctually prouedChap. 38. sect. 6.. And to what there was said, I adde here the testimony of Liberatus, who speaking of Iohn Pa∣triarke of Alexandria deposed by the Emperor Zeno, sayth:In Breuia. c. 18. He appealed to the B. of Rome, as also Blessed Athanasius did. And that Theodoret appealed to Leo, as to an absolute Iudge, that had power to command him, and sentence his cause, he himselfe witnesseth, as you haue heardSect. prae∣ced. init.. Neuer∣thelesse you taking vpon you to know, what passed in Theodorets cause, better then Theodoret himselfe, sayPag. 304.: He addressed his requests to the B. of Rome, not as to a peremptory Iudge, but as to a Patron, and arbitrary dais-man, & one vpon whose authority he depending, acknowledgeth in expresse words his reason, to wit, the integrity of the fayth of the Pope; and promising to abide his award, with the assistance of others. And before you had saidPag. 255. marg. lit. m.: The euent sheweth, that there was in this busines no iuridicall procee∣ding at all: Only Theodoret vpon his confession of his Orthodoxe fayth, was receaued into communion with Leo, as Leo might haue ben with Iohn of Constantinople, in like case. These are your words, to proue, that Theodoret appealed not to the Pope, as to an absolute Iudge, that had authority to annull the sentence of the Councell that deposed him, and restore him to his See, but only as to an Arbitrator, by reason of the integrity of his fayth; when as he contrarily in expresse words besee∣cheth RenatusEp ad Re∣nat. to perswade the most holy, and most blessed Archbishop (of Rome) to vse his Apostolicall authority, and com∣mand him to appeare before his Councell (that is, his Consistory) because that holy See hath the guidance, and gouerment of all the
Churches of the world. And writing to Pope Leo, he saythIn Ep. ad Leon.: I attend the sentence of your Apostolike throne, and beseech your Holi∣nesse, to succour me appealing to your right, and iust iudgment, and to command, that I be brought before you &c. And I promise to stand to your iudgment, contenting my selfe with that which you shall de∣termine, what euer it be: And I beseech you, that I may be iudged ac∣cording to my writings. If Theodoret had studied to expresse the Popes iudiciall authority, to sentence his cause, could he haue done it in more cleare, and effectuall words then these? It is true, that as he acknowledgeth the Roman Church to be priuiledged aboue others, for many causes, so especially, for that she hath remained free from all blemish of heresy, none hauing euer possessed that See, which hath held any thing contrary to truth, or which hath not kept the Apostolicall grace entyre and without blemish. The reason why he mentioneth the pu∣rity of fayth alwayes preserued in the Roman Church, is, because he had bene accused, and deposed as guilty of here∣sy in his writings. And therfore he appealeth confidently to the Pope, as to one, whose iudgment in matters of fayth is is infallible, and to whom the decision of all such Contro∣uersies belongeth, acknowledging withall (as you haue heard) the Roman Church to be the Head of all Churches, and the Pope to be his absolute Superior, and Iudge, with authority to command him, and sentence his cause. And Leo Pope accordingly vsing the authority of a Iudge, de∣clared him free from heresy, and restored him to his See: wherupon the Senators, that assisted at the Councell of Chalcedon, said with the approbation of the whole Coun∣cellAct. 1.: Let the most Reuerend Bishop Theodoret come in, because the most holy Archbishop Leo hath restored him to his See. Who then seeth not the insufficiency of your answeare, that Theodoret appealed not to the Pope as to an absolute Iud∣ge, but made his requests vnto him, as to an arbitrary Dais-man? for appeales are not made to Arbitrators, but to abso∣lute Iudges. An Arbitator is he, to whom the determina∣tion of a controuersy is remitted by agreement of both parties, which in Theodorets cause can haue no place: for his aduersaries neuer agreed to haue his cause remitted to
the Pope. If therfore the Pope had not bene an absolute Iudge, Theodorets appealing to him, had bene in vaine: nor could he haue recouered his seat by the Popes sen∣tence: for a sentence pronounced without authority, is of no effect. And though, after the Councell of Chalcedon had ad∣mitted Theodoret vpon the Popes restitution, to take his place amongst the Bishops, some of them doubting of his fayth, because he had written against Cyrill of Alexandria in fauor of Nestorius, and therfore fearing the Pope might haue restored him vpon misinformation, vrged him to ana∣thematize Nestorius againe, yet that no way helpeth your cause, nor derogateth from the Popes authority: for when Theodoret had anathematized Nestorius, the Councell proceeded not to a new sentence of restitution, but subscri∣bing to that of Leo, cried out all with one voyceAct. 2.: Long liue Archbishop Leo: Leo hath iudged the iudgment of God. SECT. VI. That S. Chrysostome appealed to Innocentius Pope, as to an absolute Iudge, and by his authority was restored to his Church of Constantinople. S. Chrysostome being deposed from his Patriarchall See at the procurement of Eudoxia the Empresse, wife to Arcadius Emperor of the East, by a Councell of Bishops, vnder Theophilus Patriarke of Alexandria, had recourse by letters of appeale to Innocentius Pope. This you deny, sayingPag. 307. n., that wheras Bellarmine and Baronius referre you to the story it selfe, you can finde nothing lesse in it, then the matter of Appeale: for (say you) Chrysostome made his requests not to the Pope alone, but to the other Reuerend Bishops within the Roman Pro∣uince, together with him. But this is a mistake proceeding from your ignorance: for as the Syrians to expresse, Mayster, or Lord, vse the word, Rabbi, which hath a plurall significa∣tion, because a person of quality containes in himselfe the authority of many; so when we write to an Honorable
person, it is vsuall to speake vnto him in the plurall num∣ber, to signify that he hath in himselfe the dignity and au∣thority of many. So writ Eusebius B. of Milan to Pope Leo aloneExtat in∣ter Ep. Leo. post ep. 52.; God hath placed yee Prelates of the Apostolike See, worthy Protectors of his worship. So writ Theodoret to the same Pope aloneEp. ad Leon.: Vos enim per mnia conuenit esse primos. So writ the Bishops of Syria to Iustinian the EmperorConc. Constant. sub Mena. Act. 1.: Our Lord preserue yee deuout and zealous guardians of the fayth. So writ the Councell of Mopsuestia to Vigilius PopeIn Conc. 5. Act. 5.: It is conuenient, O most Holies, that since you hold the chiefe dignity of Priesthood &c. And so did Chrysostome write in the plurall number to Innocentius Pope alone, as it is manifest, both out of the inscription of his Epistle, which is singular, and directed to Innocentius alone, as also out of PaladiusIn vita Chrysost., who cites it, as addressed to him alone. 2. You sayPag. 307.: Chrysostome made his requests to the Pope, not to cite the parties complained against, but only to write vnto them, and this not by any peremptory charge, but only by reproofe of their vmust dealing, and of admonition &c. Heere I accuse you of somthing more then ignorance: for the words of Chryso∣stome to Innocentius areEp. 1. ad In∣nocent.: Vouchsafe to write, and ordaine by your authority, that these things so wickedly done, I being absent, and not refusing iudgment, may be inualid, as of their owne nature they are: and that they who haue proceeded so iniustly, may be submitted to the punishment of the Ecclesiasticall Lawes: And command, that I, who am innocent, and not conuicted of any crime, be restored to my Church. And againeEp. . ad Innocent.. One thing I beseech your vigilant Soule, that albeit they, which haue filled all with tumulies, be sick of an im∣penitent, and incurable disease, if yet they will remedy those things, that then they may not be punished, nor excommunicated. What more expresse forme of appeale, or what more euident ac∣knowledgment of the Popes authority, & iudiciall power, then this? Doth not Chrysostome beseech Innocentius, to disannull by his letters & authority, the Acts of the Coun∣cell which had deposed him? To abrogate their sentence pronounced against him? to replace him in his Bishoprick? and to punish his aduersaries, according to the Lawes of the Church, but yet to spare them, if they would repent? Is not
this to acknowledge in him the power of an absolute Iudge? And is not this extant to be read in Chrysostomes Epistles, and in his life written by Palladius? You to keep this from your readers, set not downe any of Chrysostoms words, in the text of your discourse. And though in your margent you set downe some of them in Latin, in a small letter, yet euen that you do not without imposture: for you mangle them, leauing out those, in which he besecheth the Pope to vse his authority, in punishing his aduersaries, ac∣cording to the Ecclesiasticall Canons, and in restoring him to his Church. Againe, you are guilty of vntruth, in sayingPag. 307., that Chrysostome made not any requests to the Pope, to cite the parties complained against. For doth he not sayEp. ad In∣noc. apud Pal∣lad. in vita ip∣sius.: But yet if the au∣thors of wickednesse will declare, for what crimes they haue iniustly deposed me, let their euidences be giuen in: Let processes be produced: let my accusers come: let a true, and incorrupt iudgment sit: I refuse it not: I decline it not; yea I earnestly desire it: let vs be iudged? I his to request the Pope to write to his aduersaries not by any peremptory charge, but only by way of reproofe, and admonition, for their vn∣iust dealing? Doth he not beseech him, that his aduerlaries may appeare, and bring in their euidences against him, and that his cause may be tried a new by him, as by a iust and in corrupt Iudge? But you sayPag. 30.: When all the Pope cold do is performed, what the last refuge was, he did signify in his letters to the Orientalls▪ say∣ing: The only remedy of curing these euills is the calling of a Councell: and vntill then, the matter is to be committed to the will and pleasure of God Here you are accusable of an iniust reticence of what Innocentius did, and how he shewed himselfe, alone, and without a Councell, to be an absolute Iudge: for doth not Palladius sayIn vit. Chrys.: Innocentius decreed, that the iudgment of Theo∣philus should be abrogated, and annulled? Doth not Sozomen in that very place which you alleageL. 8. c▪ 26. testify, that Innocen∣tius condemned those things, which were done against Iohn? And by this single sentence of Innocentius alone, without any Sy∣nod. Iohn was absolued, as Gelasius an Author of the same age reporteth, sayingEp. ad E∣piscop. Dar∣dan.: A Synod of Catholike Bishops hauing
condemned Iohn of Constantinople, of holy memory, the See Apostolike alone, because it consented not therunto, absolued him. Nor did he shew the authority of a Iudge, only, in absoluing Iohn, and condemning his aduersaries, but especially, in that hearing of his death, he excommunicated the Emperor Arcadius, & the Empresse Eudoxia his wife, who had bene the chiefe causes of his condemnation, and banishment: for as Nice∣phorusL. 13. c. 33., and Georgius Patriarke of AlexandriaIn vita Chrys. an Au∣thor of 1000. yeares antiquity, cited by S. Damascens and PhotiusIn Georg. Alex., and followed by CedrenusIn Arcad., GlycasIn Annal. in Arcad., & other Greeke Authors testify,L. 1. de I∣maginibus. Innocentius hauing seuerely reprehended them both, for the enormity of their offence, pronounced Excommunication against them, in these words: And therfore I the meanest, and a sinner, as Depositary of the Throne of the great Apostle Peter, cut off thee, & her from the parti∣cipation of the immaculate Mysteries of Christ our God, and ordaine that whatsoeuer Bishop, or Clerke of the holy Church of God, which shall presume to administer them to you, after he hath read this my Censure, shalbe deposed. All this is to be read in the history of Chrysostome, to which (you say) Baronius and Bellarmine referre you. Had it not then bene honesty, to take notice of these parti∣culars? but that was not for your purpose. This also conuinceth you to speake vntruly, when you sayPag. 308.: The Pope confesseth insufficiency in himselfe, and that the only remedy is in the iudgment of a Councell: for in case of an ap∣peale, two things are necessary: the first is, to iudge whe∣ther the cause be lawfull; if it be, to admit of the appeale; to annull the sentence pronounced against the Appellant, and restore the cause to the same state in which it was before his condemnation. This Innocentius performed in the cause of Chrysostome. He admitted his appeale: he absolued him: he annulled the Councell that condemned him: he ex∣communicated the Emperor, and the Empresse, by whose procurement he had bene condemned: and vpon their re∣pentance absolued them. All this he did without a Coun∣cell, shewing that he acknowledged not insufficiency in him∣selfe, nor thought the only remedy to be in a Councell. The se∣cond
thing required in case of an Appeale, is, to proceed to a new iudgment, naming Iudges, either of Bishops of the adioyning Prouinces, or els by sending Legates from Rome, with authority to iudge the cause, together with the Bishops of the Prouinces adioining; or if the weight of the cause require it, to call a general Councell, in which it may be determined with satisfaction of the whole Church, as the Councell of Nice hath prescribedLeo Ep. 25.. This also was exactly performed by Innocentius Pope, in the appeale of Chrysostome. Innocent (sayth Palladius)In vit. Chrysost. hauing receaued both parties into his Communion, determined, that the iudgment of Theophilus should be abrogated and annulled, saying: They should hold another Synod irreprouable, of the Prelates of the West, and East. This was Innocentius his desire, which (as Sozomen re∣porteth) he proposed by fiue Bishops,L. 8. c. 28. and two Priests of the Roman Church, to Honorius, and Arcadius, wishing them to appoint a time, and place for the Councell; but could not effect it, not for want of Ecclesiasticall authority to call the Bishops, (as you misinterpret) but because (as Sozomen declarethIbid. the enemies of Chrysostome oppo∣sed it, being supported by the temporall power of Arca∣dius, and Eudoxia, without whose consent a Councell could not be held; the cities in which it should be held, be∣ing subiect to them, and at their command. Wherfore In∣nocentius did not acknowledge any Ecclesiasticall autho∣rity in the Emperor, to call a Councell (as you comment) but only requested him, as being Lord of the Empire, to ap∣point a time, and place, when and where in some City of his, the Councell might be held, which he by his spirituall power intended to call. It resteth therfore, that whatsoeuer you haue obiected out of this history of Chrysostome, against the Popes au∣thority, is nothing but vntruthes, and ignorant mistakes; a∣mong which I will score vp one other, which is, that in this matter of Appeales to Rome, you sayPag. 307. m.: both your Car∣dinalls (Baronius and Bellarmine) giue for instance the exam∣ple of Chrysostome B. of Antioch. Those Cardinalls were not so ignorant, as to call Chrysostome, B. of Antioch: that's your
mistake fathered on them. He was a Priest of the Church of Antioch, and after the death of Nectarius Patriarke of Constantinople, by a Councell of Bishops chosen▪ Pa∣triarke of that Imperiall City, and by meanes of the Empe∣ror Arcadius brought from Antioch thither, and there con∣secrated Bishop. SECT. VII. That Flauianus appealed to Leo Pope, as to an absolute Iudge. AN other example of appealing to Rome, is of Flauia∣nus, to which you answere two things, shewing ig∣norance in the one, and falshood in the other. Ignorance, in sayingPag. 308. fin 309. iuit., that of this same Flauianus you haue said inough al∣ready. You haue indeed already spoken of Flauianus i∣nough, to the discredit of your causePag. 296.297.; but not, of this same Flauianus: for Flauianus of which there you spake, was B. of Antioch, and liued in tyme of Damasus Pope. But Fla∣uianus, of which now you speake, was B. of Constantino∣ple, and liued in time of Leo the Great, 70. yeares after the other. Is it not then too great a mistake, in a man that pro∣fesseth so much learning, to shift of what we alleage in proofe of Appeales, from the example of the one, by what you haue said of the other, especially their cases being farre different? To ignorance you adde falshood, sayingPag. 308. fin.: It will be a hard matter for you, out of the example of Flauianus, to collect a right of appeale to the Pope, from his appeale to a Synod. To proue that Flauianus appealed not to the Pope, but to a Synod, you rehearse in your margen a Latin sentence of Leo writing to Theodosius the Empetor, which you English not; be∣cause Leo sayth not, that Flauianus appealed to a Synod (that's your false comment) but expresly affirmeth, that he put vp a petition of Appeale to his Legates, which was not to ap∣peale to them, but to him whose person the Legates repre∣sented. Yea the very words of Leo, which you recite, dire∣ctly
testify, that he which required a Councell, was not Flauianus, but Leo himselfe, yielding for his reason, the Ni∣cen Canons, which command, that after the putting in of appeale in causes of such weight, the calling of a generall Councell is necessary. Moreouer that Flauianus appealed, and not to a Synod, but to the Pope, is a truth declared, not only by the words of Leo, but testified also by other writers. Flauianus (sayth LiberatusCap. 1. appealed to the Apostolick See, by petition presented to his Legates. And the Emperor Valentinian the third writing to Theodosius the second, Emperor of the EastIn ep∣praeambul. Concil. Chl∣ced.: We ought in our dayes to preserue to the Blessed Apostle Peter, the dignity of reuerence proper to him, inuiolate, that the Blessed Bishop of the City of Rome, to whom antiquity hath yeilded the Priestood ouer all, may haue way to iudge of Bishops, and of fayth: for therfore Flauianus B. of Constantinople, following the custome of Councells, hath appealed to him by petition, in the contention moued concerning fayth. And if you belieue not these witnesses, belieue the Centurists, who testify against youCent. 5. col. 778., that somtimes Bishops condemned in Synods, appealed to the See of Rome, as did Flauianus in the Coun∣cell of Ephesus. What testimonies more expresse then these? Is it not ma∣nifest out of Liberatus, out of Valentinian, out of the Cen∣turists, yea and out of the very words of Leo (which you produce for the contrary) that Flauianus appealed not to a Synod, but to him? Who but Doctor Morton, could deny so inuincible a truth? And no lesse apparent it is, that anti∣quity acknowledged in the Pope, authority, to iudge of Bishops, and of fayth, and that appeales vnto him, were or∣dained by the ancient Councells: for why els did Valenti∣nian say to Theodosius his Father-in-Law, that Flanianus appealed to the See Apostolike, according to the custome of Coun∣cells?
SECT. VIII. Of Nilus equalling the B. of Constantinople with the Pope, in his right of Appeales. NIlus an hereticall Bishops of Thessalonica, and a pro∣fessed enemy to the Roman Church (as all heretikes are) against Appeales to Rome obiecteth the Councell of Chalcedon, in which (sayth he) it was decreed, that if a Clerke haue a cause against a Clerke, it is to be iudged by the Bishop; if a∣gainst a Bishop, by the Archbishop; if against an Archbishop, by the Primate, or of the Bishop of Constantinople. To this obie∣ction the holy, and learned Pope Nicolas the first, ans∣weared neere 800. yeares sinceIn Ep. ad Michael. Imper., that by Primate (which is there in Greeke , and signifies a Prince) is meant the B. of Rome. This explication Tur∣rianusPro Ep. Rom. Pont. l. 3. c. 4., BellarmineL. 2. de Pont. c. 2., and BiniusTom. 2. pag. 129. confirme, both because the title of Prince more fitly agreeth to him, then to any other Primate; as also because, it cannot be shewed, that in time of the Councell of Chalcedon, there were (especially in the East) any Primates, distinct from the Archbishops, and Patriarkes. Wherfore the sense is, that if a Bishop haue a cause with his Metropolitan, it is to be iudged by the Pope, or by the B. of Constantinople, if the parties be neerer to him, and willing to stand to his iudg∣ment. This (say you)Pag. 309. it false: for the Canon vseth a Climax, or gradation from Clerke, to Bishop; from Bishop, to Archbishop; from Archbishop, to Primate, or the B. of Constantinople: from whence you inferre, that, if our exposition be true, the B. of Constantinople is aboue the Pope, as a Generall is aboue a Coronell, because in gradation of Appeales, the last is alwaies the highest, and most excellent. A thing, not only contrary to the Councell of Chalcedon (which acknowledgeth the Pope to be su∣preme Head of the whole Church)In relat. ad Leon., but neuer so much as dreamed of, by any of the Greekes, nor by the Bishops of Constantinople themselues, who by their claime of equal priuiledges, neuer challenged authority aboue the Pope,
nor equall with him ouer the whole Church, but only, that as he by the institution of Christ is supreme Iudge of all causes ecclesiasticall, throughout the world; so they in the second place, vnder him, and by his permission, might haue authority to iudge throughout the East, the causes of all, that should be willing to accept of their iudgement: which authority the Pope though intreated by the Coun∣cell of Calcedon refused to grant vnto them, as being a wrong to the other Patriarkes. And therefore BellarmineL. 2. de Pont. c. 22. out of Leo, and Liberatus, rightly obserueth, that this Canon obiected by Nilus, was neuer receaued in the Church, as being vnlawfully made in absence of the Po∣pes Legates, who presided in the Councell. This is the sub∣stance of this controuersy, in the prosecution wherof, you falsify the Councell of Calcedon, and are guilty of some other errors, of which I shall briefly aduertise you. 1. Therfore Bellarmine truly sayth, that custome (the best interpreter of lawes) plainly sheweth, it was neuer lawfull to appeale to the B. of Constantinople, but only from places within his owne Patriarkship: and that no ex∣ample can be giuen of an Appeale made to the Easterne Church, out of the West, South, or North. You to crosse Bellarmine, sayPag. 310., that the Councell of Calcedon speaketh ge∣nerally of euery Church; and in proofe therof falsify the Coun∣cell, adding to the beginning of the Canon, these words. In quacunque Ecclesia, In euery Church, putting them downe in a different character, as the words of the Canon, and ci∣ting both it and them out of Binius, who hath this CanonTom. 2. pag. 129., of three different versions, and yet no such words in any of them. 2. You haue hitherto pretended, & afterwards repeate, againe, that no one man can be Head of the whole Church on earth. Yet now vpon condition, that the Pope may not haue that dignity, you are contented to allow it the B. of Constantinople. For you sayPag. 302. fin.: We confesse, that the su∣preme right of appeales is proper to a Monarke, it being as essentiall a part of his Monarchy, to haue the right of appeales, as it is for him to be a Monarke: from whence it will follow, that you here
granting to the B. of Constantinople, a supreme right of appeales from all the Churches of the world, make him a Monarke ouer all the Churches of the world. 3. Out of the gradation which the Councell maketh from Clerke to Bishop; from Bishop to Archbishop; from Archbishop to the Pope, or the B. of Constantinople, you inferre the Bishop of Constantinople to be aboue the Pope which is a senselesse paradoxe, collected from a false groūd: for if because an Archbishop is to be iudged by the Pope, or by the B. of Constantinople, you may inferre the B. of Constantinople to be equall with the Pope, or aboue him; you may by like consequēce inferre, that in an army, a Co∣ronell is equall to the Generall, or aboue him, because a cō∣mon soldier is to be iudged by his Captaine, & the Cap∣taine by his Generall, or by his Coronell: for in this gra∣dation the Coronell is the last, and therfore by your rule, the highest, and most excellent. With such sophistry you an∣sweare our arguments, and frame your owne. 4. Bellarmine sayth: The Councell is to be vnderstood of the first iudgement: But this (say you)Pag. 311. euidently crosseth the Popes exposition. False: for the Pope alloweth to the B. of Con∣stantinople permissiuely the first iudgement of Easterne causes, if the parties be willing to accept of his iudgment; but not the second by way of appeale, out of his owne Pa∣triarkeship. 5. Why do you conceale, what Bellarmine, and Binius adde? namely, that if we should grant to you, your inference out of this Canon, it would not follow, that the B. of Constantinople is of equal authority with the Pope: for the Popes power extendeth not only to right them which are wronged by their Metropolitans, but also to iudge the Metropolitans, and Patriarkes themselues, and to right thē, euen when they are wronged by whole Coun∣cels of Bishops; as the examples of Athanasius, Chryso∣stome, Flauianus, Theodoret, and others conuince.
SECT. IX. The rest of Docter Mortons Arguments against Appeales to Rome. THe rest of your instances against appeales, as of Fortu∣natus, and FelicissimusPag. 311. taken from S. Cyprian, of the Councell of MileuisPag. 321., of the cause of CecilianPag. 324.325. from S. Augustine, haue ben alreadyChap. 25.26. & 30. sect. 2. answered. One only remaineth, taken from an Epistle (as you say)Pag 318. of Da∣masus Pope. It is not among the epistles of Damasus, but of S. Ambrose: and yet his it cannot be; for in it mention is made of him, as of a third person. Wherfore whose the epistle is, is a thing vncertaine. Many thinke it to be of Da∣masus; and his you will haue it to be. But the contrary is manifest: for the epistle speaketh of Bonosus, an Arch-here∣tike, who had bene condemned by Iudges appointed in thē Councell of Capua, which was not held in time of Damasus, but of Siricius successor to Damasus. It is there∣fore euident, that the request of Bouosus (which you obiect out of this epistle) to haue his cause heard againe, could not be to Damasus, his first condemnation being not vntill after Damasus his death. When you can shew this epistle to be of Damasus, you shall receaue an answeare, which it were easy to giue you now, if I listed to spend time, in re∣futing your tedious discourse of racking the verbe Competit, to a strict sense, and which, not one, but many wayes, is deficient, as all your arguments for the most part are. Your additionPag. 318. marg. l., that if the epistle be not of Damasus, it is certainly of some Pope, and that all hold it so, is affirmed by you gratis, and as easely denied by me.
CHAP. XL. Whether the Easterne Churches be at this day, accordant in Communion with Protestants. SECT. I. The state of the Question. THE nine first Sections of your fourtenth Chapter, you spend in prouing, that the Grecians, Aegyptians Aethiopians, Assy∣rians, Armenians, Russians, Melchites, and other remote nations, at this day dis∣sent from the Roman Church, and are accordant in Communion with Prote∣stants. The foundation of your whole discourse, you lay in these wordsPag. 330.: Whatsoeuer Christians haue not ruinated any fundamental article of sauing fayth, set downe in our ancient Creeds, and are vnited vnto the true Catholike Head, Christ Iesus our Lord, by a liuing fayth, all Protestants esteeme them, as true members of the Catholike Church; and (notwithstanding diuers their more tolera∣ble errors, and superstitions) to be in state of saluation, albeit no way subiect, or subordinate to the Roman Church. These are your words, which containe in themselues open implication; namely, that, one may be vnited to the true Catholike Head Christ Iesus by a liuing fayth, and be in state of salua∣tion, and yet be out of the Catholike Church, which to be none els, but the Roman, and that out of her there is no
saluation, hath bene already prouedChap. 1. sect. 2.3.4.. From this false principle you deduce, that the Grecians, Asians, Aegyptians, Assyrians, Aethiopians, Africans, Mel∣chites, Russians, and Armenians, notwithstanding their se∣paration from the Roman Church, are at this day, truly pro∣fessed Christian ChurchesPag. 379., partes of the Catholike ChurchPag. 406. fin 407. init., faythfull Christians, professing the fayth of the ancient FathersPag. 417., & in state of saluation, and raile bitterly at the Church of Rome for denying the same. But how great ignorance, and im∣piety you shew; and how many most shamefull vntruthes you vtter in the prosecution of this Argument, it is easy to declare. Some of them I shall present to the Readers view. And to proceed methodically, I will reduce what I am to say, to two heades. 1. I will proue, that as the Chri∣stians of these remote nations anciently were, so many of them, at this day, are accordant in beliefe, and communion with the Roman Church, & yeild obedience to the Pope, as to the Vicar of Christ on earth, and as to the supreme Pastor, and Gouernor of the vniuersall Church. 2. That the inhabitants of these nations, which are not Roman Ca∣tholikes, are not of one beliefe, or Communion with Pro∣testants, but wholly dissent from them, holding most blas∣phemous, and damnable heresies, acknowledged for such by Protestants themselues. From whence it will follow, that you affirming them to be faythfull Christians, of the same beliefe with the ancient Fathers, charge the ancient Fathers with blasphemous heresies, and make them incapable of saluation. SECT. II. Whether the Grecians of the primitiue, and successiue times, agreed in fayth, and Communion, with the Bi∣shop, and Church of Rome, and particularly at the Councell of Florence. THat the Greekes in the first Councell of Constantino∣ple, and afterwards in that of Calcedon, endeauored
to giue to their Patriarke of Constantinople, the second place of dignity in the Church, next after the Pope, and before the other Patriarkes, we acknowledge: But that they sought therby to exempt themselues from their obe∣dience and subiection to the Pope, hath bene effectually disprouedChap. 17. sect. 5. Chap. 19. sect. 4.. I speake not this, to deny, that anciently there were of the Grecians, many Heretikes, which opposed the Roman Church, and by her authority were condemned; and that eight Patriarkes of Constantinople in particular, as also Eutyches an Arch-heretike of the same City, were anathematized, and east out of the Church for heresy. And wheras the Westerne Church, by the example, and dili∣gence of the Bishops of Rome, was preserued from heresy; the Churches of the East (new heresies daily springing vp) were so pitifully torne, and ten in peeces, that S. Hierome complaining therof to Pope Damasus, saidEp. 57.: Because the East striking against it selfe by the ancient fury of the people, teares in litle morsells the vndeuided coate of our Lord, wouen on high; and that the foxes destroy the vine of Christ, in such sorte, that it is diffi∣cult, among the drie pits that haue no water, to discerne where the sealed fountaine, and the inclosed garden is; I haue therfore thought, that I ought to consult with the Chaire of Peter, and the fayth prai∣sed by the mouth of the Apostle. This was the miserable state of the Easterne Churches in those dayes, being gouerned somtimes by Catholike Bi∣shops, that acknowledged subiection to the Church of Rome, and somtimes by Heretikes that opposed her autho∣rity; vntill at length Photius hauing iniustly driuen Igna∣tius Patriarke of Constantinople from his See, and intruded himselfe into his place, and being for that cause often ex∣communicated by Nicolas the first, and Iohn the eight, Po∣pes of Rome, to mantaine his iniust title, withdrew him∣selfe from their obedience: and to the end he might haue some colour to perseuer in that separation, cauilled at the doctrine of the Roman Church, which teacheth that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Sonne, and writ against it. And the Greekes following him in this er∣ror, separated themselues from the Communion of the Ro∣man
man Church: Yet not so, but that they haue often (eleauen times sayth S. AntoninusHist. par. 2. tit. 22. c. 23. acknowledged their error, and reconciled themselues to her, and especially thrice in most solemne manner, in three seuerall Councells, of Ba∣rium in Apulia, of Lions in France, and of Florence in Tuscany; but still returning to their error against the holy Ghost, and disobedience to the Church of Rome, as dogs to their vomit, Almighty God punished them with a heauy hand, deliuering them vp to a miserable captiuity, & ser∣uitude, vnder the Turke. And that they might know the cause of Gods wrath against them, to be their obstinacy, in defending their error against the holy Ghost, he ordained by his prouidence, that vpon the very day of Pentecost, their Citty of Constantinople should be taken by the Turke, their Emperor slaine, and their Empire wholly ex∣tinguished. A thing, which S. Brigit foretoldReuel. l. 7. c. 19., almost 100. yeares before it happened, denouncing to them, that their Empire, and dominions should not stand firme, vn∣lesse with true humility, they did submit themselues to the Roman Church, and fayth. All this you were ignorant of, or if you were not, dis∣semble it, and quarrell at vs, for reporting that the Greekes in the Councell of Florence renounced their errors, and submitted themselues to the Church of Rome, and Bishop therof. Some (say you)Pag. 338. would scrape acquaintance with the Greeke Church, in the yeare 1549.You should say 1439. at the Councell of Florence, as though all then had bene subiects to the Pope. So you: but with what conscience you know, and so do we: for not only Catholike writers, but your Protestant brethren, M. Mar∣beckCommon plac. pag. 258., and OsianderEpit. Centu. 15. pag. 477. testify, that in the Councell of Florence, the Grecians, Armenians, and Indians were vnited to the Church of Rome. And the same is apparent out of the Coun∣cell it selfeIn lit. vnionis.; in which, after the Grecians had abiured their two chiefe errors, the one, concerning the procee∣ding of the holy Ghost from the Father alone, and the o∣ther of Purgatory, they made open profession of their obe∣dience and subiection to the B. of Rome, in these wordsIn lit. v∣nionis.: Mareouer, we define, that the holy Apostolike See, and B. of Rome,
hath the primacy throughout the whole world; and that the same B. of Rome is the successor of Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and the true Vicar of Christ, and Head of the whole Church; and that he is the Father, and Doctor of all Christian; and that to him was gi∣uen by our Lord Iesus Christ, full power of feeding, and gouerning the vniuersall Church, as it is also declared in the Acts of the Oecumeni∣call Councells, and in the sacred Canon. Benewing moreouer the or∣der set downe in the Canons, concerning the other Venerable Patriar∣kes, that the Patriarke of Constantinople be the second after the B. of Rome. And the like profession of their beliefe, they had made before in a priuat Session of their owne, in the Emperors Pallace, none of the Latins being presentConc. Flor. sess vlt. apud Bin. to. 4 pag. 474. fin. 475. init.. To this profession subscribed the Emperor of the Gre∣cians, & all their Bishops assembled in that Councell, he of Ephesus only excepted: and not only they, that were then liuing, but also Ioseph their Patriarke, who before the end of the Councell, finding himselfe strucken with deathes dart, set downe in writing this profession of his fayth, which after his death was found in his closetIbid apud Bin pa. 474.: I Ioseph by the mercy of God, Archbishop, and Oecumenicall Patriarke of Con∣stantinople, new Rome, because I am come to the end of my life, by the mercies of God, according to my duety, I publish by this writing, my verdict to my beloued Children: For I professe, that I hold, and belieue, and giue full assent to all those thinges which the Catholike and Apo∣stolike Church of our Lord Iesus Christ of old Rome, shall iudge, and ordaine. And I refuse not to grant, that the most Blessed Father of Fa∣thers, the chiefe Bishop, Pope of old Rome, is the Vicar of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that there is a Purgatory for soules. Would you thinke, gentle Reader, that any Christian man could put on so brazen a face, as to deny, that the Gre∣cians in the Councell of Florence were vnited to the Church of Rome, or that they acknowledged themselues subiect to the Pope, as to one, whom the sacred Councells de∣clare to haue the primacy throughout the whole world, to be the succes∣sor of S. Peter, the true Vicar of Christ, the Head of the whole Church, the Father, and Doctor of all Christians, and that to him was giuen by Christ full power of feeding, and gouerning the vniuersall Church? Are not these their very words? And yet you, Do∣ctor
Morton, deny all this sayingPag. 331.: Vpon due examination, you your selues find the Grecians there, to haue bene so farre from subiection to the Pope, that they would not permit him to constitute a Patriarke among them, professing, that they could do nothing with∣out the consent of their owne Church. So you with your wonted fidelity; both for that you set downe the first part of these words in a different character, as the Grecians answeare to the Pope, when as they are not their, but your words, and contrary to truth: for that the Grecians vnited themselues to the Latines, and acknowledged their subiection to the Pope, and Church of Rome, is there testified by a publike declarationIn lit v∣nio. apud Bin. to. 4 pa. 476.476., in the Letters of Vnion, subscribed by Ioan∣nes Palaeologus the Emperor, and by all the Prelates, Greekes and Latines, that were present in the Councell. And after this perfect accord was made, the Pope calling vnto him the Grecian Bishops, not by way of command (as not wil∣ling to irritate them) but of perswasion to that which was most decent, and conuenient, exhorted them before their departure, to choose a new Patriarke in place of him, that was deceased, that they might not returne home, without a Head. They answeared, that the custome of the Grecians was, to choose, and consecrate their Patriarke at Constan∣tinople; and that the Emperor, who was not ignorant of their ceremonies, and customes, would not permit them to doe otherwise. Wherupon the Pope vrged no further, but with all courtesy dismissed them. How can you inferre from this, that the Greeke Bishops denied subiection to the Pope? It mattereth not where their Patriarke was chosen, since (as you haue heard) they acknowledged both them∣selues, & him, as being members of the vniuersall Church, to be subiect to the Pope, as to their Head, and to be gouerned by him, as sheepe by their Shepheard, and as children by their Father. But you sayPag. 331.: They were farre from subiecting themselues in doctrine: for when some few points were propounded, they answeared the Pope, that they had no licence to treat of such matters. This is an other euasion, as vntrue as the former. For the next day, after that the Greekes being conuinced, had yeilded to the Latines in that mayne controuersy, concerning the Pro∣cession
of the holy Ghost from the Father, and the Sonne, for the decision wherof, that Councell was chiefly called, the Pope desired, to haue some of their Bishops sent vnto him. They sent foure, to whom the Pope saidTom. 4: pag. 474.: We by the grace of the holy Ghost are vnited, and so fully agreed in the chiefe question, which was most in controuersy, that no further speach ther∣of is necessary. But that our agreement may be so absolute, & firme, that hereafter there be no difference betweene vs, it will not be amisse, that we treat of the fyre of Purgatory, of the primacy of the Pope, of celebrating in leauened, or vnleauened bread, and of Transubstantia∣tion. Those Bishops answeared: We, O most holy Father, haue no licence to treat of these things; which words you set downe as the answere of all the Greeke Prelates, when as they were spoken only by foure of them, who hauing receaued no commission, to treat of those Questions, refused to make answere vnto them, in the name of all their brethren: But neuerthelesse (which you conceale) they declared their owne iudgment, concerning the three first, to be confor∣mable to the doctrine of the Roman Church; adding mo∣reouer, that of the fourth, which was Transubstantiation, they could not treat, without the authority of all the Easterne Church. How doth this proue, that the Greekes in the Councell of Florence agreed not in doctrine with the Roman Church? especially, since these foure Bishops de∣clared to the Pope, that concerning the three first points of the foure proposed by him, they belieued as the Roman Church did: and concerning the fourth, as at that time, they did not affirme it, so neither did they deny it: and sone after not only they, but all the rest of the Greeke Bishops, and Abbots, together with their Emperor, in the Letters of V∣nion, expresly declared, that not only in the three first, (na∣mely of the Popes supremacy, of Purgatory, of the lawful∣nesse of celebrating Masse in vnleauened bread) they belie∣ued as the Roman Church did, but also in the fourth of Transubstantiation, saying, that by the Priest vpon the Altar, of bread is made the very body of Christ. All this you could not be ignorant of, and yet blush not to deny it, and to adde another vntruth, sayingPag. 331. fin. 332. init.: Yea and
their Emperor Palaeologus, that was so earnest to peece them together, was himselfe but hardly welcomed home, to the Greeke Church, which was now much more exasperated against the Roman Church: in so much that they did now pronounce their Patriarke of Constan∣tinople, the supreme and chiefe of all Bishops. These your words cannot be freed from a notable imposture: for you falsify Bellarmine, alleaging these words in a differēt letter as his: The Greekes did now (to wit after their returne from the Councell of Florence) pronounce their Patriarke of Constanti∣nople the supreme, and chiefe of all Bishops. Bellarmine speaketh of their fall from the Roman Church, the yeare 1054. which was not after the Councell of Florence, but almost 400. yeares before it. You to perswade your reader, that he speakes of their fall after their returne from that Councell, cunningly insert into his words this aduerbe Now, and fal∣sify the yeare, putting in stead of Anno 1054. (which Bel∣larmine hath) Anno 1454. Can there be more wilfull fraud then this? But you shew no lesse folly, then fraud: for wher∣as you sayPag. 331., the Councell of Florence was the yeare 1549. to proue, that the Greekes after their returne from that Councell, denied the primacy of the Pope, you sayPag. 332., Now (to wit the yeare 1454. which was (in your account 100. yeares before that Councell) they did pronounce their Pa∣triarke of Constantinople, the supreme, and chiefe of all Bishops? I deny not, that the Greeks, a few yeares after the Councell of Florence, returned to vomit, and that a great part of them still persisteth in the errors which then they abiured. I only speake here of your simplicity, who to proue, that they fell from the Roman Church, after their returne from the Councell of Florence, sayPag. 332. marg., they fell the yeare 1454. which according to your account, was 100. yeares before that Councell. With these impostures you delude your rea∣ders, who not doubting of your fidelity, take your doctrine vpon your word.
SECT. III. That many of the Grecians, at this day, are of the Roman Communion, and professe subiection to the B. of Rome. THat many of the Grecians are at this day accordant in fayth, and Communion with the Roman Church, & professe subiection and obedience to the B. of Rome, is a thing notorious: for who is ignorant, that as in Rome there is a Seminary, wherin many youthes of our English na∣tion are trained vp in vertue, and learning, to the end, that being ordained Priestes, and returning into England, they may help to reduce their Countrey to the Catholike fayth; so likewise, there hath bene many yeares another of Gre∣cians for the reduction of Greece? And who knoweth not, that (as Cardinall PeronRepliqu. Chap. 22. aduertised our late Soueraigne K. Iames) in the Iles of Malta, Cyprus, Candia, Xante, Chios, Naxos, and other Greeke, and Asian Islands, the Roman fayth, and Communion hath place, euen at this day, either wholly, or for the greatest part? And if it be true that (as you affirme)Pag. 335. Russia, a good part of Polonia Dalmatia, and Croatia, belong to the Greeke Church, and are vnder the iurisdiction of the Patriarke of Constantino∣ple, with what forehead can you challenge the inhabitants of these Countreys in generall to dissent in fayth & com∣munion from the Church of Rome, when it is notorious, that in Dalmatia, Croatia, Polonia, as also in Lituania, and Transiluania, the fayth and Communion of the Roman Church, is not only allowed, but publikely professed? And for the Russians, Michaell Hipation, and Cyrill, with the rest of the Bishops of that Nation, haue lately submitted themselues to the same Church, as both their Epistle, and profession of fayth, addressed to Clement the eight, in the yeare 1595. abundantly testifyApud Cocci. to. 1. l. 7. art. ..
SECT. IV. Of the Aegyptians. YOur second example of remote nations dissenting from the Roman ChurchPag. 304.342.400.409 417., is of the Aegyptians. To shew your error herein, these euidences may serue: for (as Iaco∣bus NauarchusEp. Asi., CocciusTom. 1. l. 7. art. 6., and Doctour SandersMonar. Visib. l. 7. n. 1121. relate) Eugenius Pope hauing actually vnited the Greekes, and Latines, in the Councell of Florence, and wrirten to the Patriarkes of the East to the same effect, they in their Epistles to him, writ back Honorably, Catholikely, and resolutely of the Latin Church, and authority of the Pope. And in particular Iohn Patriarke of Alexandria (that is to say, of the Christi∣ans of Aegypt, and of all the countreys, which first belon∣ged to the Empire of Aegypt, and afterwards to the Pre∣fecture therof) styleth the B. of Rome, The perfection of Pri∣esthood, the Apostolicall Father of all Churches, the Prince of Priests, the Guide of Pilgrimes, that shews the way to the rest, the Physitian of the diseased. And his Vicar of Hierusalem, Andrew, a Sy∣rian AbbotNauarch. & Sand. ibid., calls the Pope, Head and Doctor of the whole Church. To which I adde out of Surius, & GenebrardIn Chron. anno 1565., that the yeare 1565. arriued at Colen, an ancient man, sent from Thebais in Aegypt, by Alexander then Patriarke of Alexandria, to present by letter, his obedience to the B. of Rome. The like acknowledgment of subiection, extant in the end of the Councell of Florence, was made by Isaias B. of HierusalemApud Bin. to. 4. pa. 495.. And againe, since that tyme, Gabri∣ell Patriarke of Alexandria sent Embassadors to Rome, with letters to Clement the eight, professing in them his beliefe of the Catholike fayth, and obedience to the See Apostolike. And they, both in his, and their owne names, made solemne, and publike confession thereof, which to∣gether with the letter of that Patriarke, Baronius hath set downe at large in the end of his sixt Tome, writing it in Rome, when the thing had newly passed, Pope Clement being then liuing, and not only the City of Rome, but all
Europe (through which this fact was publike) being ready to beare witnesse of the truth thereof against you, who by carping at Baronius, as hauing in this related a fable, gaine nought els, but to declare your folly in carping at that, which you wish were false, but cannot disproue. SECT. V. Of the Aethiopians. FOr the Aethiopians, whom you producePag. 340.342.409. in the third place, as Christians dissenting from the Roman Church we haue for the contrary, the testimonies of Helena Em∣presse, and Dauid her Grand-child, Emperor of Aethio∣pia, who the yeare 1524.Gene∣brard. in Chron. pag. 123. Bozi. de ig. Eccles. to. 1. l. 4. c. 3. sent letters, and Legates to Clement the seauenth then Pope of Rome, promising o∣bedience to him, and crauing his blessing; and withall de∣claring their great desire, of frequent recourse to the Court of Rome, if they were not hindred by the distance of place, and the kingdome of Mahumetans, which ly in their way. These letters were turned into Latin, by Paulus Iouius, & Petrus Aluarez, as also Damianus Goes, a knight of Por∣tugallLib. de vita & morib. Ae∣thiopum., haue set them downe at large, together with the profession of the Catholike fayth▪ made at Rome by Zaga Zabo, an Aethiopian Bishop, the chiefe of these Legates. And Helias LeuitesIn lib. Bbur. mentioneth, and setteth downe the conference he had with them. The like profession was made by Nicodemus, and Peter, both of them Aethiopian Abbots, in their epistles to Eugenius the fourth, and Paul the third Bishops of RomeCocci. to. 1. l. 7. art. 6.. And who knoweth not, that (as Iacobus NauarchusEp. Asia∣tica., Doctor SandersMonar. visib. l. 7. n. 1057.1508. and other moderne historians re∣cordFranc. Sa∣chin. hist. Soc. Iesu l. 1. n. 49., after that the Portugall Marchants, did not only traffick in Aethiopia, but with licence of the King maried there, and both liued themselues, and instructed their wiues to liue in the fayth, and obedience of the Roman Church, the Pope at the instance of Iohn King of Portugall, sent to the Abyssines, with the title and dignity of Patriarke,
Iohn Nunnez, a Priest of the Society of Iesus, who had labored with great fruit in Africa, among the Saracens, & Christians that liued there. And though Andreas Ouido a man of singular prudence, and fortitude, whom the Pa∣triarke by aduice of the chiefe Gouernors of the East In∣dies, sent before him, was at his ariuall entertained with all courtesy, the yeare 1556. yet the King that then liued, be∣ing dead, both he, and the Patriarke found great difficul∣ties, which they suffered with inuincible courage, vntill at length by their patience, industry, and labour they con∣uerted many of the Abissines, and since their death, the King himselfe, and his brother, with a great part of that nation, by their successors, haue bene reduced to the fayth, and obedience of the Roman Church, as the Annuall re∣lations sent from thence continually testify. SECT. VI. Of the Armenians. YOur fourth examplePag. 340.379. is of the Armenians, of whom Myraeus testifiethDe notit. Episcopat. l. 1. c. 16.17.18., and especially of them which are called Franck-Armenians, with the Iacobites, and Geor∣gians, that they haue often, and lately made profession of their obedience to the Pope, & of their accord in all pointes of fayth with the Roman Church. And Cardinall PeronRepliq. Chapit. 21. speaking to King Iames, of famous memory, auerreth, that in Armenia the greater (which was formerly subiect to the King of Persia, but is now vnder the Turke) there were, and are many Christians of the Roman communion, and many Monasteries of S. Dominick. And the same is testifi∣ed by M. Edward Grimston your Protestant Historian, in his Description of countriesPag 1050:: In Asia (sayth he) there are many Christians, assisted in spirituall things, by the Religious of the orders of S. Francis, and S. Dominick: And those of Armenia, haue their Archbishop of the Order of S. Dominick, who is made by the Chapter of the Religious of that Order, and then confirmed by the Pope. And he addethIbid. pag. 1052., that they hold themselues to be confor∣mable
to the Roman Church, & celebrate Masse in vnleauened bread, contrary to the Greekes, and remember their first conuersion from the Church of Rome, in the time of Syluester Pope. And in the end of the Councell of Florence is extant the Decree of Eugenius Pope, in which the Vnion of the Armenians with the Church of Rome, is testified by their Legates sent to the same Councell. SECT. VII. Of the Russians. YOur fifth examplePag. 340. is of the Russians, no lesse false thē the former: for the Bishops of Russia, in the yeare 1595. submitted themselues to the Roman Church. Their epistle to this purpose written vnto Clement the eight, together with the profession of their fayth, who pleaseth may read in Iodocus CocciusTo. 1. l. 7. art. 6.. SECT. VIII. Of the Assyrians. YOur sixth examplePag. 338. is of the Assyrians, like to the rest: for Abdisus their Patriarke comming to Rome in tyme of Pius the fourth, to be confirmed by him in his Pa∣triarkship, made publike confession of the fayth, and pri∣macy of the Church of Rome, and of belieuing whatsoe∣uer the holy Oecumenicall Councels, and in particular, what the Councell of Trent belieueth. This profession he made, not only in his owne name, but in the names of all the Metropolitans, and Bishops subiect to him, many of them, being in the Dominions of the great Turke, diuers in the territories of the King of Persia, and others in the East Indies, vnder the Kingdome of Portugal. The truth of this is testified by Surius and GenebrardChro. an. 1562., by Doctor SandersMon. vi∣sib. l. 7. n. 1555.1556., by CocciusTo. . l. 7. art. 6., and by the Protestant edition of the Acts of the Councell of Trent, in which it is ack∣nowledged,
that this profession of Abdisus was made in presence of two Cardinalls, and subscribed by them. All which notwithstanding, youPag. 338.339. reiect this wholy story, as a tale of Robin Hood, and merely fabulous; which argueth in you much vnshamefastnesse. For who is so litle versed in the histories of these tymes, as not to know, that albeit the Christians of the East Indies liuing so many yeares vn∣der Heathenish, or Mahumetan Princes, were debarred from entercouse with the Church of Rome, and runne in∣to diuers errors, yet they thought themselues still to retaine entirely that fayth, which the Apostle S. Thomas had prea∣ched vnto them? And when they came to be vnder the King of Portugal, being instructed by Preachers sent out of Europe, they reformed their errors, and yielded due sub∣iection to the Church of Rome, and in particular those ve∣ry places, which Abdisus in his Profession nameth, to wit Cuscho, Cananor, Goa, Calicut, and Carangol; and ma∣ny more are named by Iacobus Payua, and RadiusL. de orig. Soc. Iesu., who testifieth, that euen in those beginnings, in his time, to the number of 80000. of those Indians were reduced to the Roman Church. Who likewise knoweth not, that Ormus, and other places vnder the Persian, which both Abdisus, & Andradius nominate, are of the Roman fayth, and Com∣munion? and that the King of Persia hath giuen licence to preach the fayth of Christ, and for Religious men (which goe thither to that end) to erect houses, & build Churches in his Dominions, by which meanes many are conuerted, and liue in the Communion, and obedience of the Roman Church? All which notwithstanding, you boldly pro∣nounce, that these Christians acknowledge no subiection to the Church of Rome, & stand in Christian vnion with Protestants: which to be a grand Imposture no man can deny.
SECT. IX. Of the Antiochians. YOur seauenth examplePag. 330. is of the Antiochians, whom with their Patriarke you vntruly deny to communi∣cate with the Church of Rome, or to acknowledge any subiection to the Pope: for the Patriarke of the Maroni∣tesPeron Repliq. Chap. 22., which is one of the branches of the Patriarkship of Antioch, with all the Bishops of his iurisdiction, hath yet to this day alwayes liued, and perseuered in the commu∣nion of the Roman Church; wherof your Historian M. Grimston speakingDescript. of Countreys. pag. 1053., sayth: The Maronites haue for these 400. yeares made profession of following the Roman Church. And the same is acknowledged by their Patriarke in his Epistle to Leo the tenthCocci. to. 1. l. 7. art. 6.. Moreouer (as Genebrard recordeth)Chron. an. 1555. Moyses Mardenns being sent out of Mesopotamia, by the Patriarke of Antioch, and comming to Vienna in Au∣stria, after he had procured the new Testament to be set forth in the Syriack tongue, and character, at the charges of the Emperor Ferdinand, went to Rome, and as well in his owne name, as in the name of his Patriarke of Antioch, made a publike and solemne profession of the Catholike fayth, and Obedience to the See of Rome, which Andreas Masius hath translated out of the Syriack originall into La∣tin, and both CocciusCocc. to. 1. l. 7. art. 6. & SandersMon. vis. l 7. n. 1494. haue inserted into their workes. Moreouer the Nestorians of Seleucia, who belong to that Patriarkship, hauing abiured their heresy by perswa∣sion of Iulius Pope the yeare 1553. writ an Epistle to him, professing their beliefe of the Catholike fayth, and their subiection to the B. of Rome, and sent it by three chiefe men of their nation, and with them, Sind, a Monke, whom they beseeched Iulius to ordaine, and send back vnto them consecrated as their PatriarkeCocc. Sand. loc. cit..
SECT. X. Of the Africans. YOur eight examplePag. 341. 406. 407. 409. is of the Africans, among whom, the kingdome of Congo is of the Roman fayth and CommunionPeron. Re∣pliq. Chap. 21. Geneb. Chron. an. 1503.. And an Embassador that came from thence a few yeares since, and died in Rome made publike profession therof, from before Luthers tyme. And it is no∣torius, that all the Christians which liue in the borders of Africa, vnder the conquest of the Kings of Spaine, & Por∣tugal, are of the Roman fayth, and Communion. SECT. XI. Of the Asians. YOur ninth examplePag. 341. 406. 407. 409. is of the Asians, as vntrue, as the rest: for the Antiochians, Armenians, and Maroni∣tes, whome with their Patriarkes, we haue already proued to be of the Roman fayth, and Communion, are Asians. And who knoweth not, that in Asia, since the ex∣pulsion of Godfrey King of Palestine, and of Boemond Prince of Antioch, the guard of the holy Sepulcher of Hie∣rusalem, hath alwaies remained to the Christians of the Roman Communion? CHAP. XLI. That in the aforenamed Countries, there are no Christians that agree in fayth, & communion with Protestants. HAVING proued, that in all the Churches of remote nations, which you haue nominated, there to be many Catholikes of the Roman fayth and Communion; it resteth, that your deniall of so certaine a truth, either proceedeth from grosse
ignorance, or is a grand imposture. And no lesse is your af∣firming the same Churches to be of your Protestant Com∣munion: for the Christians of those nations which are not Roman Catholikes are damnable heretikes, and haue no communion at all with Protestants, as the following se∣ctions will demonstrate. SECT. I. The Grecians, which are not of the Roman Communion, are absolute heretikes: and Doctor Morton falsifieth Catholike Authors to excuse them. THat the Grecians dissenting from the Roman Church (whom therfore you challenge as accordant in com∣munion with Protestants) are absolute Heretikes, erring fundamentally in their doctrine of the Blessed Tinity, by denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the Father, and the Sonne, is a thing most certaine out of the Councell of Florence, where the chiefe dispute betweene the Greekes, and the Latines was of this subiect; and the Greekes being conuinced, acknowledged their error, as the Letters of V∣nion extant in the end of the Councell record. The same is testified, not only by the Latin writers, but also by Lao∣nicus Chalcondylas a Greeke Historian. The Greekes (sayth heDe reb. Turcicis l. 6. in the Councell of Florence, first defend, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father alone: but afterwards being conuinced with the arguments of the Latins, they confesse him to proceed also from the Sonne: yet after their returne inte Greece, they obstinatly defend their former opinion. And when Hieremy Patriarke of Con∣stantinople sent a profession of his fayth to the Lutherans of Germany, in the first Article therof (which is concerning the blessed Trinity) he affirmed and labored to proue, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father alone: which er∣ror of the Greekes, is also testified, and learnedly confuted, by that famous Cardinall Bessarion, and by Gennadius
Scholarius in two speciall Treatises of this subiect: and be∣fore them by S. Thomas of AquineOpusc. contr. error. Graec., against whom, writ Nicolaus Cabasilas, whose booke is extant in the Va∣tican, & was soone after confuted by Demetrius Cidoinus a Greeke Catholike. And (to omit other Protestant writers) Thomas Rogers in his booke of the 39. Articles, perused, & by the authority of the Church of England allowed to be publike, saythArt. 3. propos. 3. pag. 25.: This discouereth all them to be impious, & to erre from the way of truth, which hold, and affirme, that the holy Ghost proceedeth from the Father, but not from the Sonne, as this day the Grecians, the Rus∣sians, the Muscouites mantaine: and in proofe therof, he allea∣geth other Authors. Finally the same is testified by Keker∣manSistem. Theolog. pag. 63., and Doctor WhiteWay Ep. Ded. n. 8., affirming, that the Latin & Greeke Churches brake vpon the Controuersy of the proceeding of the holy Ghost. From hence it followeth, that the Greekes, which are not of the Roman Communion, are absolute Heretikes and erre fundamentally: for what error can be more fun∣damentall, then that which is immediatly against the bles∣sed Trinity God himselfe? This you could not be ignorant of but that you may not seeme to be absurd in professing, that Protestants are accordant in communion with here∣tikes, you seeke to free the Grecians from heresy; which you haue no other meanes to performe, but by falsifying Ca∣tholike Authors. 1. Therfore to this end, you alleagePag. 334. lit. q. marg. these words, as of Cardinall Tolet: Gracus intelligens dicit Spiritum sanctum procedere per Filium, quod non aliud significat, quàm quod nos dici∣mus. And in your text you english them thus. The vnderstan∣ding Greekes saying that the holy Ghost proceedeth by the Sonne, sig∣nify therby nothing, but what we our selues professe. O egregious imposture! Tolet there explicating these words of S. Iohn, qui à Patre procedit, expresly condemneth the Greekes of er∣ror in that point, and proueth out of S. Cyrill, that these words of S. Iohn confute their error. Locus prasens &c. This present passage (sayth he)In caput 15. Ioan. An∣not. 25. doth no way fauor the error of the Grecians, but rather confuteth, and ouerthroweth the same: for out of these words, it is plaine, that the holy Ghost proceedeth from the Sonne,
and the Father; which Cyrill though an vnderstanding Grecian, con∣fesseth, saying, that the holy Ghost is of the Sonne, and of the Father, and that he proceedeth from the Father, but by the Sonne: Which sig∣nifieth nothing els, but what we say. These are Tolers words; in which (you see) he chargeth the Greekes with error in their beliefe of the holy Ghost; and therby conuinceth you of an vntruth, in sayingPag. 334., that Tolet freeth them from heresy in this point. But to make good this vntruth, you corrupt his words: for whereas he speaking, not of the later Greekes, but only of that ancient, and Orthodoxe Father S. Cyrill, sayth, Cyrillus Graecus intelligens &c. Cyrill an vnderstanding Gre∣cian, sayth in this point, no other thing, but what we professe, you both in your Latin and English, leaue out Cyrillus, as if To∣let had not mentioned him; and translate Graecus intelligens in the plurall number, The vnderstanding Greekes; which you do purposely, to perswade your reader, that Tolet spea∣keth not of S. Cyrill, nor of any particular man, but in ge∣nerall of the Later Grecians, and freeth them from that error of the holy Ghost, with which you haue heard him so ex∣presly charge them. Can there be a more wilful falfication then this? 2. But your dealing with others, is no better: You citePag 331. lit. a. Castro to proue, that the Greeks haue bene diuided many hundreds of yeares from the Latines. But because you would haue your Reader conceaue, that Castro holds them not to be heretikes, and out of the state of saluation, you set downe these words, as his: Per multas annorum centu∣rias Graci à Latinis diuisi, with is a plaine falsification: for Ca∣stro's words are: Duodecima haeresis est, quae negat Spiritum san∣ctum procedere à Patre, & à filio. Hanc haeresim docuerunt, & tutati sunt Graeci per multas annorum centurias, itae vt haec fuerit vna ex praecipuis causis, propter quas à Romana & Catholica Ecclesia diuisi sint. The twelth heresy is that which denieth the holy Ghost to proceed from the Father, and the Sonne. This heresy the Greekes haue taught, and mansained many hundreds of yeares, in so much, that this is one of the chiefest causes, for which they are diuided from the Roman, and Catholike Church. Here therfore you māgle Castro's words. And to mantaine your vndertaken falsity, that the Greekes
notwithstanding their diuision from the Roman Church, are partes of the Church Catholike, and in state of saluati∣on, you conceale that he affirmeth them to be heretikes, and that the chiefe cause of their diuision from the Roman Church, is their heresy concerning the holy Ghoast. 3. With like preiudice of conscience, you citePag. 335. Azor, who in that very placeInstit. l. moral. part. 1. l. 8. c. 20. §. Decimo., directly affirmeth the Greekes to be heretikes; and that although some thinke, that concerning their beliefe of the fire of Purgatory, and some other few points of fayth, they differ not from the doctrine of the Roman Church, really, and in sense, but only in words, and in that respect are not heretikes but schismati∣kes; yet he concludeth, that whatsoeuer their beliefe con∣cerning these articles is, they are Heretikes, and perhaps in these very points, because they erre culpably in them; but that wee often call them Schismatikes, because we retaine the ancient manner of speach: for first the Greekes diuided themselues often from the Church by schisme, and in pro∣gresse of time brought heresies into the Church. 4. You citePag. 334. Suarez, saying, that the Greekes are schismatikes, because they erre in those things which belong to the vnity of the Church, though indeed they be heretikes also, because they deny the vnity of the Head. And immediatly be∣fore he had alleaged out of S. Hierome, that all Schismati∣kes feigne to themselues some heresy, to the end they may seeme not to haue departed from the Church without cause. Agayne he expresly saythDe Deo trino & vno l. 10. c. 1. n. 2. that the Greeks erre in holding the holy Ghoast not to proceed from the sonne, and that for this error a∣mong many others, the Greeke Church hath diuided it selfe from the Roman Church, denying obedience to the Pope. These are the Authors, which you produce to saue the Greekes from the infamous note of heresy; wherin you haue done nothing, but bring witnesses against your selfe: for all of them condemne the Greekes of heresy, and conuince you of a notorious vntruth, in saying (l),Pag 336. that in our iudge∣ment the Greekes are no heretikes, excepting for the denying a neces∣sity of subiection, and vnion to the Church of Rome. Nor do these only censure them for their heresy of the holy Ghost; but
other writers more ancient condemne them, as guilty of o∣ther errors. SECT. II. Of the Lutherans of Germany writing to Hieremy Patri∣triarke of Constantinople, to be admitted into the Communion of the Greeke Church: and his answeare to them. THe Pelagians being condēned by the Roman Church, pretended to be of the communion of the Church of Greece; which S. Augustine speaking of to Iulian the Pe∣lagianCont. Iu∣lian. Pelag. l. 1. c. 4. said: I thinke that part of the world ought to suffice thee, in which our Lord wold haue the chiefe of his Apostles to be crowned with a most glorious Martyrdome: to the President of which Church, blessed Innocentius, if thou woldest haue giuen eare, thou hadst ere now, freed thy dangerous youth from the Pelagian snares. The same wee say to you, who haue imitated the Pelagians in your pretence of vnion with the Greeke Church. Your German brethren writ to Hieremy Patriarke of Constantinople, sending him a prosession of their fayth, and desiting to be admitted into the communion of his Church. He answea∣red them, addressing his letters to the Protestants of Prague in Bohemia. These letters of Hieremy, set forth by the Lu∣therans of Wittemberg, you obiectPag. 334., to proue that Pro∣testants accord in fayth, and communion with the Greeke Church; but with your wonted syncerity: for as it appea∣reth out of the edition of Stanislaus Socolouius, Deuine to the King of Poland, printed at Colen Apud Maternum Cholinum 1582. that epistle, as it is set forth by the Lutheran Deuines of Wittemberg Anno 1584. is corrupted, and falsified, and for that cause iustly forbiddenIn Ind. lib. prohib.. Neuerthelesse, that very edition of Wittemberg, is sufficient to shew the claime you make to the Grecians, as to men of your communion, to be a Grand imposture: for it expresseth, that the Greeke Church to this day teacheth inuocations of Saints and Angels, ve∣neration of Relikes, worship of Images, Transubstantia∣tion,
with the Masse, and significant ceremonies thereof, Auricular Confession, inioyned satisfaction, all the seauen Sacraments, & in particular Confirmation with Chrisme, and extreme Vnction, prayer, sacrifice, and almes for the dead, free will, Monachisme, Vowes of chastity, the fast of Lent, and other set fasting dayes, that Priests may not mary after orders taken, that the tradition & doctrine of the Fa∣thers is to be kept; with many other things, as M. BrereleyProt. A∣pol. tract. 1. sect.  sub. 12. pag. 202. sheweth, setting downe exactly the Page, and part of the Page, where euery one of these particulars, is to be read in that protestant edition. And the same is confirmed out of Syr Edwin Sands, who in his Relation of the estate of Religion vsed in the West parts of the world, in the fifth leafe before the end, affirmeth, that the Greeke Church agreeth with Rome in opinion of Transubstantiation, & generally in the sacri∣fice, and whole body of the Masse, in praying to Saints, in auricular Confession, in offering sacrifice, and prayer for the dead, Purgatory, Worshiping of pictures &c. And I must not omit the testimony of Iustus Caluinus, who being brought vp in Protestancy, was afterwardes conuerted to the Catholike fayth: and being taxed for it by many of his friends, writ a Booke to satisfy them, and the world; in which he declareth the moriues of his conuersion, and a∣mong them, the agreement of externe Churches with the Roman in condemning Protestants. And he insisteth par∣ticularly on this Epistle of Hieremy Patriarke of Constan∣tinople, and the censure which in it is giuen of the Prote∣stant doctrine, acknowledging that therby he was greatly confirmed in his beliefe of the Roman Church. For (sayth hePag. . fin. & seqq. the Greekes, and Latines agree so precisely in the chiefest Heads of doctrine that, I wonder much, the Nouellists haue not the same opinion of the Patriarke of Constantinople, that they haue of the Pope: for if the one be Antichrist, the other must of necessity be Anti∣christ, by reason of their accordance in doctrine And so much more to be pitied is the simplicity of some of them, who dreaming still of I know not what accordāce with the Greeke Church▪ cease not to inquire of the doctrine of the East, by sending letters and Catechismes. What? haue they so soone forgotten, how fatally the Confession of Augusta was re∣iected,
and how deepely censured by the Patriarke of Constantinople? Let them goe to Tubinga, and inquire: Crusius will informe them. Or if the iourney seeme teadious, let them read the Oration of Chytraeus, printed at Francford, Of the estate of the Churches in Greece, Asia, Bohemia &c. There p. 113.115.116.133. They shall find som∣thing to this purpose: but chiefly pag. 132. where out of Crusius he set∣teth downe a summe of that Censure, in these few propositions. First the Patriarke laboreth to proue, that the holy Ghost proceeds only from the Father. 2. He attributes too much to freewill. 3. He holds that man is iustified by fayth▪ hope, and charity. 4. He alloweth seauen Sacra∣ments. 5. He inuocateth Saints deceased, and Mary the Mother of God, and the holy Angells, and adoreth their sacred Images, not with Latria (for that is due to God alone) but coniunctiuely, that is, not in regard of the matter, but of the Saints represented by the matter, and with an amicable affection, declaring the veneration, and honor due to the Saints. 6. He defendeth Monasticall institute, as an ange∣licall profession. 7. He takes his proofes out of the Fathers, and Coun∣cells. 8. He inuiteth vs courteoussy to agree with them. This is the summe of the whole Censure related by Crusius; which if any one with vs please to read at large throughout, he shall find more and greater arguments, to condemne the new Fayth, and especially these words, which the Patriarke addeth for a conclusion: We had resolued absolu∣tely to be silent, and giue no answeare to these your writings, which so manifestly wrest both the Scripture, & the expositions of the holy Do∣ctors to your fancy since we haue this exhortation from Paul; Anoid an heretike, after the first, and second admonition. But because with our silence, we might seeme to assent vnto you as if you did vnderstand, and belieue a right and that you had the Scriptures, and holy Fathers on your side; we haue thought good to set downe these things, in de∣fence of the truth, albeit we are fully satisfied, out of your writings, that you can neuer accord with vs, or rather with truth. And in the same place, in the end of the third answeare, pag. 370. Wherfore we desire you not to trouble vs hereafter, nor to write, nor send to vs any writings concerning these things▪ for you treat the Diuines, which were lights of the Church, otherwise then is fit: you honor, and extoll them in words, but with your deeds reiect them, seeking to wrest out of our hands, their holy and diuine words, with we might vse to confute you. Wherfore for as much as concernes vs, you haue freed vs from
care: and therfore going on in your owne wayes, write no more to vs of your Doctrine, but only for friendships sake, if you please. All these are the words of Iustus Caluinus, related out of the Censure, or Epistle of Hieremy Patriarke of Con∣stantinople, by Chytraeus, and Crusius two chiefe Prote∣stants of Germany, where Iustus Caluinus liued, & writ, Chytraeus and Crusius being then liuing; who might, and would haue taxed him of falshood, if he had misalleaged them. Wherfore I cannot sufficiently admire your bold∣nesse, who to proue that the Grecians accord in doctrine with Protestants and dissent from the Church of Rome, dare aduenture to alleage this Censure of the Patriarke, out of which it is so manifest, not only by the Catholike edi∣tions, but euen by that of Wittemberg, and by the relations of Chyrtraeus, and Crusius, that the Greekes in very few points of those which are in Controuersy between Prote∣stants and vs, dissent from the Roman Church; and that they condemne the contrary doctrines of Protestants, as hereticall, & auoid them as heretikes, for so you haue heard the Patriarke call them. But yet, as Iustus CaluinusPag. 1. fin. rightly obserueth, the accordance of the Greekes with the Roman Church in so many chiefe Heads of doctrine, is not sufficient to excuse them from schisme, and heresy: for if they were not guil∣ty of other errors, their obstinate denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the Sonne, is alone sufficient to make thē absolute schismatikes and heretikes, incapable of saluation, as S. Athanasius hath expresly declared in his Creed. You therfore haue told a most solemne vntruth, in sayingPag. 330. that the Greekes which dissent from the Roman Church▪ haue not ruinated any fundamentall Article of sauing truth.
SECT. III. A particular instance of Ignatius Patriarke of Constanti∣nople, produced by Doctor Morton, to proue that he dissented from the Roman Church, examined. FOr the corroboration of your former Arguments, you producePag. 387. Ignatius Patriarke of Constantinople, as an especiall patterne of disobedience to the Roman Church The case is this: The people of Bulgaria, hauing sent for preachers to Rome, and being instructed by them in the fayth of Christ, submitted themselues voluntarily to the Pope, and in spirituall things were gouerned immediatly by him, as part of his Roman DiocesseSpond. anno 869. n. 13.. Neuerthelesse, because the Grecians challenged the temporall state of that Prouince to belong to the Emperor of the East, Ignatius supposing the spiritualty of it, to belong in right to his Dio∣cesse, vsurped it to himselfe, and consecrating a Bishop by his owne authority, sent him thither, with other Priests: for which he was checked by Adrian PopeSpond. an∣no 871. n. 1., and after∣wards excommunicated by Iohn the eight, if within thirty dayes after notification of the sentence vnto him, he did not desist from that vsurpation. He died before the arriuall of the sentence at ConstātinopleSpond. anno 878. n. 1. & 8.; which if he had recea∣ued before his death, it is not to be doubted, but that he would haue surceased from that claime which he made, not out of any desire, or intention of opposing the See A∣postolike, whose authority ouer the Church of Constanti∣nople he acknowledged, both in appealing to it against Photius, who had intruded himselfe into his Church, and also in his epistle to Nicolas PopeExtat Ep. in Syn. 8. Act. 3.. And finally that he alwaies liued & died in communion of the Romā Church, appeareth by diuers letters of Iohn the eight, written after his deathSpond. anno 878 n. 8.. His example therfore can be no help to your cause.
SECT. IV. The Aegyptians, Aethiopians, Armenians, Russians, Mel∣chites, Africans, and Asians which call themselues Christians and be not of the Roman Communion, are absolute Heretikes. THe Aegyptians and Aethiopians, that are not of the Roman fayth, and communion, imbrace the Heresy of Eutyches, which holdeth but one nature, one will, and operation in Christ, and was for that cause anathematized, and cast out of the Church, by the holy Councell of Chal∣cedon, twelue hundred yeares since. And they, which are not of the Roman communion, still persist in the same er∣ror, in so much, that when of late yeares, Gosaluus Roderi∣cius of the Society of Iesus was sent into AethiopiaPran. Sa∣chin. Hist. Soc. Iesu l. 1. n. 49., to prepare the way for Ioannes Nunnez, whom the See Apo∣stolike had sent thither, honored with the title and dignity of Patriarke, Claudius then King of Aethiopia answeared, that he had no need of a Patriarke from Rome, hauing in his owne kingdome, men that were able to gouerne the Patriarkship of Rome it selfe: Moreouer that he would by no meanes approue the Councell of Chalcedon, nor allow of Leo Pope; and that Dioscorus had done well, in excommunicating him. Finally the obstinacy of the Aethiopians, and Aegyptians, in this particular error of Eutyches, is the sole cause of their continuance in schisme, and separation from the Roman Church: for as Cardinall PeronRepliq. Chap. 63. answered our late Soueraigne K. Iames, they haue often offered, and are all ready at this day to acknow∣ledge the Pope, whom they confesse to be the Successor of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, if they might be receaued into his communion, without obliging themselues to ana∣thematize Eutyches, and Dioscorus. The Armenians which are not of the Roman fayth, & communion, are guilty of many heresies. They acknow∣ledge but one Nature in Christ with the Eutychians. They
deny his diuinity, with the Arians. They affirme the holy Ghost to proceed from the Father alone, with the Gre∣cians. They rebaptize them that haue bene baptized in the Roman Church, with the Donatists. And finally, they hold many other grosse and damnable heresies related by Pra∣teolusL. 1 tit. 67. out of Guido Carmelita, and Nicephorus Calix∣tus, who therfore rightly tearmeth them, A sinke of all here∣sies. The Russians agree with the Grecians, in deniing the holy Ghost to proceed from the Sonne. So hath confessed your Minister Thomas RogersArt. 3. propos. 3. pag. 25.. Moreouer they defend other hereticall Tenets, to the number of 40. related by Ioannes SacraniusElucid. error. & rit. Rhuten., and PrateolusL. 6. tit. 4.. Wherunto I adde, that Stanislaus Socolouius, in the attendance of the King of Polonia, whose Diuine he was, visiting those Nor∣therne countries, and coming to Leopolis, the Metropoli∣tan city of Russia, reporteth of itPraefat. Censura O∣rient., that although it hath imbraced many other errors, yet it deserueth this singular praise, that by the speciall gift of God, it hath kept it selfe free from the heresies of this age, and with greatest care, & diligence made resistance vnto them. And how farre the Russians, euen those which are not of the Roman communion, are from allowing your Pro∣testant doctrine, you may learne from M. Grimston, who in his Description of CountriesPag. 697. 698., writeth that the Rus∣sians haue the Masse, that they pray to the Virgin Mary, & the Saints, and keep their Bodies with great reuerence; that they neuer passe by any Crosse, but they kneele downe, & pray; that they often blesse themselues with the signe of the Crosse; that they haue many Monasteries of Monkes of S. Basils Order, who in their quires in the night sing praises to God; that they vse the Sacrament of Confes∣sion, and receaue absolution, and pennance; that they keep the holy Sacrament in their Churches in one kind for the sicke, and in that kind alone administer it vnto them; that they say Masses for the faythfull deceased. And not to conceale, what other Protestants write of the doctrine of the Russians, and all the other nations,
which you affirme to be of your beliefe, and communion, OsianderEpit. Centur. 16. pag. 970. speaking of all the Easterne Churches, inge∣nuously confesseth, that they haue not sincere Religion, but are in most part of their articles, Popish. Doctor Philippus Nicolai te∣stifiethL. 1. de regno Christ. pag. 22., that not only the Greeke Churches, but also the Ruthens, Georgians, Armenians, Indians, Aethiopians that acknowledge Christ, hold the reall presence of his bo∣dy, and bloud in the Eucharist. And speaking of the Arme∣nians in particular, he reckonethPag. 35. among their errors, In∣uocation and intercession of Saints, and oblation of the Sacrament. Of the Indians, he saythIbid. pag. 45.46., that they offer the sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ, preparing them∣selues vnto it by confession of their sinnes; that at their en∣trance into the Church, they sprinkle themselues with ho∣ly water, as the Papists do; that they pray for their dead, & bury them with the same ceremonies the Papists vse; that their Priests shaue their Crownes; that they obserue strictly the fastes of the foure Ember weekes, as also of Aduent, & Lent; and that they haue Monkes and sacred Virgins re∣clused in seuerall Monasteries, where with great religion, they strictly obserue Abstinence, and Chastity. These doctrines, though they be in themselues Ortho∣doxall, and Catholike, yet Protestants reiect them as false, and superstitious: and your selfe in particular censure the doctrine of the reall Presence and sacrifice of the Masse as idolatrousPag. 403., not blushing to compare Christ in the Eucha∣rist, to the Idoll Moloch, and calling our adoration of him, The adoration of our Romish Moloch in the Masse. Wherby it appeares, that albeit you condemne these doctrines in vs, as hereti∣call, and Idolatrous; yet you are contented to allow them in the Russians, and other nations, which you claime to be of your Communion, and to canonize their blasphemous errors against Christ and the holy Ghost, with other their impious heresies, for Orthodoxe doctrines; and to tell your reader, that the Russians, Aethiopians, and other nations, which professe themselues to be Christians, & diffent from the Church of Rome, are truly professed Christians parts of the Catholike Church, in state of saluation, and in accordance of commu∣nion with Protestants.
Of the Melchites, your Historian M. Grimston in like manner reportethPag. 1051., that they hold all the errors which were condemned in the Councell of Florence, and that there are also Nestorians among them. And this sheweth, how vntrulyPag. 341.406.407.409. you affirme, that the Asians, and Atricans are not guilty of fundamentall errors: for the Aegyptians, Aethiopians, Melchites, and Armenians, what are they but Asians, or Africans? And so likewise are the Iacobites, of whom M. Grimston reportethPag. 1052., that they follow the heresy of Dioscorus, and Eutiches. Of the Persians he like∣wise writethPag. 797., that among them there are Nestorians. And of the Tartarians, that they follow the heresy of Ne∣storius, and hold him for a Saint, as also Paulus Samosate∣nus, Theodorus of Mopsuestia, and Diodorus Tharsensis; and that they condemne S. Cyril of Alexandria, and reiect the Councell of Ephesus: And yet neuerthelesse, all these are to you, good Christians, and members of your Prote∣stant Church. But among all the vntruthes, which you haue vttered in your discourse of the Churches of remote Nations, there is none more remarkable, then that speaking of the Chri∣stians, which in those nations are not of the Roman Com∣munion, you sayPag. 336., that in our owne iudgments they are not he∣retikes, excepting for the denying of this false Romish article, Of ne∣cessary Subiection, and Vnion to the Church of Rome. And enlar∣ging this vntruth, you addePag. 340.341., that we dare not directly charge them with heresy, and that there are scarse any among them chargea∣ble for any fundament all heresy: for (to omit the error of the Grecians, denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the Sonne, which if you belieue the Creed of S. Athanasius makes them incapable of saluation) the heresies of Nesto∣rius, and Eutiches against Christ are against the most fun∣damentall doctrine of the Church of which S. Paul sayth,1. Cor. 3.10. None can lay any other foundation beside Christ. And S.2. Ioan. 7. If any confesse not, that Iesus Christ income in flesh, he is a sedu∣cer, and Antichrist. And againeIbid. vers. 10. & 12.: If any one bring not this do∣ctrine, receaue him not into your houses, and say not to him, Well be it with thee: for whosoeuer sayth to him, Well be it with thee, commu∣nicats
in his wicked workes. I conclude therfore, that the here∣tikes of remote natios, of whom we haue spoken, erre fun∣damentally, if any error can be fundamentall: and that, as you, by professing your selfe to accorde in Communion with them, shew your selfe to be of their spirit, and to be out of the Church of Christ, as they are; so on the contrary, the Roman Church by excluding them, and you, from her communion, she weth herselfe to be the true Catholike Church, and of the same beliefe with the holy Councells of Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, in which those heretikes were anathematized, and condemned. CHAP. XLII. Doctor Mortons plea for his Protestant Church. AS profuse as you haue bene in your in∣uectiues against the Church of Rome; so briefe and succinct you are in setting forth your Protestant Congregation, which affords you so litle matter of dis∣course, that coming to treat professedly of herPag. 341., you confine her praises, to lesse then a small leafe of paper. You commend her, for foure things: for great Extent; for the purity of her Do∣ctrine; for her freedome from Vice; and from Schisme. SECT. I. The small extent of the Protestant Church proueth her not to be the Catholike Church. VVHen first you began to appeare in the world, Luther complainedPref. in 1. tom & cont. Reg. Augl. fol. 497., that he was alone, that he
alone stood in the battaile forsaken of all, and holpen by none. The CenturistsSleid. praef. hist. confesse, that your beginning was slender, and al∣most contemptible, Luther bearing the brunt of all the world. Then you boasted your selues to be the Pusillus Grex, which Christ speaketh of in the GhospellLuc. 12.31.. But now, Luthers brood being increased, partly by his disciples, and partly by the ac∣cession of many new Sects sprung from him, & knowing that the Catholike Church, according to her name must be vniuersally spread throughout the whole world whersoe∣uer Christ is acknowledged, you haue thought best, to lay claime to all those Sectaries, and to shake hands with anciēt heretikes, that you may seeme to haue a Church of large ex∣tent. If (as BellarmineCap. 14. Apolog. aduertised our late Soueraigne) you draw into your Church all the Nestorians, Eutychians and other heretikes of the East, and South, of which I haue spoken, if all the Hussites, Lutherans Zuinglians, Suinkfel∣dians, Anabaptists, Confessionists, Caluinists, Brownists, Familians, Arians, Samosatens, and many other Sects, with are at this day in the Prouinces of Europe by you na∣medPag. 341., they will (I confesse) make a great rable of Secta∣ries, that are so farre from being one Church, that they ana∣thematize, and damne each other, to the very pit of hellSee Coc∣cius to. 1. l. 8. art. 7.8.9.10.. Againe, these sectes being confined, some to one, and all which here you claime as parts of the Protestāt Church, to a few Prouinces of Europe, (and yet those not wholly theirs) none of them, nor all of them togeather, can be the Catholike Church, for she (sayth S. AugustineEp. 170. ad Seuer. & cont. Gaud. l. 3. c. 1. must be , secundum totum, that is, diffused through out the whole world, as well where these Sects are, as where they are not. The Catholike Church (sayth heCont Lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 104. hath this certaine marke, that she is knowne to all nations: the Sect of Donatus is vn∣knowne to many nations, and therfore that cannot be she. So like∣wise the sects of Luther, of Caluin, of Zuinglius &c. are vn∣knowne to many nations, and therfore no one of them, nor all of them togeather can be she. By this Argument Optatus proued the Donatists, (and by the same we proue Protestants) not to be the Catholike Church, because she
is not only in a corner of Africa, or in a few Prouinces of Europe, where they are, but in many other places of the world, where they are not. Which passage of Optatus ther∣fore I know not to what end you alleagePag. 342., vnlesse it be to proue your Church to be a Conuenticle of heretiks. The same Argument S. Augustine vsethDe vnit. Eccles. c. 20.: The Catholike Church by the denine, and most certaine testimony of holy Scriptures, is desig∣ned to be in all nations. And therfore whatsouer is alleaged vnto vs, by them, that say, Heere is Christ, there is Christ, if we be his sheepe, we must rather heare the voyce of our Shepheard, who sayth, Belieue them not: for these are not to be found in many places, where she is; and she who is euery where, is also whersoeuer they are. This therfore euidently proueth the Roman Church to be the Catholike Church: for she is not only in England, Scotland, Den∣marke, Norway, Swedland, in a part of Germany, Polonia, Bohemia, Hungaria, France, Heluetia, and Ireland, which are all the Prouinces you cold name for the extent of your Church, but in the rest of the world, where you haue no footing: for her Communion hath place either wholly, or in part, in all the Nations of Europe, in the East, and West Indies, in the Philippines, in Iaponia, in Chyna, in Per∣sia, in all the islands of the Ocean, and Medeterranean, and in many of the South Sea, in Greece, Aegypt, in Aechiopia, Armenia, Assyria, and finally in all the foure parts of the world, whersoeuer the Christian name is acknowledged. And vntill you can shew your Protestant Congregation to haue the same extent, you must confesse, that she is not , not vniuersally spread ouer all the parts of the Earth, and therfore not the Catholike Church. Whosoeuer (sayth S. AugustineIbid. c. 4. do so dissent from the Church, which is the body of Christ, that their communion is not with the whole whersoe∣uer diffused, but with themselues seuerally, in some part, it is manifest that they are not the Catholike Church.
SECT. II. Whether the Protestant Church be free from Error in Doctrine. TO proue that your Church is free from Error in do∣ctrine, you sayPag. 342.: The greatest error you can impute vnto Protestants, is that they for their fayth immediatly depend vpon Christ Iesus, as the Head of the Catholike Church. In these words you seeme tacitly to insinuate, that we depend not immediatly vpon Iesus Christ, as the Head of the Catholike Church: which is an vntruth, that needeth no refutation. We impute not that to you, as your greatest Error, nor as any Error at all; we stedfastly belieue, that Iesus Christ is the only prin∣cipall immediat Head of the Catholike Church. But we impute to you, as an Error in fayth, that you belieue not the B. of Rome to be the Lieutenant, and Vicar of Christ, and vnder him the secondary, and ministeriall Head of the Catholike Church on earth. But this is not your only error in fayth: for you hold many other old condemned heresies; as with Simon Magus, that only fayth iustifieth: With Ac∣rius, you deny Purgatory, and prayer for the dead: With Iouinian you equall Mariage with Virginity, yea and pre∣ferre it, surpassing him therin. With Virgilantius, you deny inuocation of Saints, & all religious Veneration of their relikes. With Manichaeus, you deny free-will: With the Ico∣noclasts, you pull downe, and breake the Images of Christ and his Saints, and deny that honor is to be exhibited vn∣to them: With Berengarius, you deny Transubstantiation. All these (to omit that you reiect fiue of the Sacraments, & race out of the Canon of holy Scripture, diuers canonicall bookes) are heresies anciently condemned, and anathema∣tized by the whole Church of Christ. And if S. Augustine sayDe haeres. fin., that whosoeuer holdeth any one heresy, is not a Catholike Christian, and S. AthanasiusIn Symbo∣lo. that, whosoeuer holdeth not the Catholike fayth entire and inuiolate, cannot be saued; what may we thinke of them, that hold so many certaine and vndoubted
heresies? or what Christian hart can forbeare to compas∣sionate their estate? SECT. III. Doctor Mortons pretended purity of Manners, in his Protestant Church. TO proue that your Protestant Churches are free from Vice, you sayPag. 342.: The greatest Vice you can impute vnto Protestants, is, that they impugne the Popes indulgences, the nourse∣ries of all Vices. Your denying and impugning the Popes in∣dulgences, we reckon not among your Vices, but among your Errors against fayth. Of your Vices. I forbeare to speake: your owne men both abroad, as Luther, Caluin, Melancthon, Brentius, Bucer, Eberus, Wigandus, and di∣uers others; and at home M. Geffrey, M. Stubs both of them great Preachers, and the Puritans in their Milde defence haue done it for me. Reade them, and they will informe you, that, vnder the Papacy, men were religious, and giuen to the practise of good workes; but that the professors of your Ghospell relying on their iustification by only fayth, are become carelesse of good workes, disso∣lute, proud, enuious, malicious, disdainefull, couetous, ambitious; that your eyes ought to gush out with teares, to behold the misery of your supposed Church, the great ignorance, the superficiall worship of God, the fearfull blasphemies, and swearing in howses and streets, the dis∣honor of Superiors, the pride, cruelty, fornications, adulteries, drunken∣nesse, couetousnesse, Vsuries, and other like abhominations; that youth among you becomes daily lesse tractable, and more bold to commit those vices which in former times men of yeares knew not; that in∣stead of fasting you haue brought in bibbing, and banketing, and in∣steed of praying swearing. And finally, that you equall the Iewes in hypocrisy, the Turkes in impiety and the Tartars in iniquity. All this, and much more to the same effect, is the free confession of your Brethren, faithfully set downe in their owne words, in a late Treatise of the Protestant priuat spirit.Chap. 9. sect. 8. subdi∣uis. 4. And it is so strong an Argument against your pretended refor∣mation, that your learned brother Eberus sticketh not to
sayPraefat. Comment. Philip. in Ep. ad Cor., that in regard of the enormous wickednesse of your Ministry, and Church, any man may iustly doubt, whether you be the true Church. And yet you blush not to say, that the greatest vice we can impute vnto Protestants, is, that they impugne the Popes indulgen∣ces, which you falsly call, the noursery of all Vices: for by this it appeares, that not the Popes indulgences, but your new Protestant Ghospell is the noursery of all Vices; and that in lieu of a reformation, which you pretend, calling your sel∣ues The reformed Churches, you haue made a deformation of the Church of Christ. SECT. IV. That Protestants by Schisme haue diuided themselues from the Catholike Church. TO proue that we censure your Protestant Church of Schisme, iniustly, you sayPag. 341.: The greatest schisme you can impute to the Churches of Protestants, is, that they wilbe diui∣ded from the Church of Rome, which proudly and impiously diuideth herselfe from all other Churches of the world. And a litle be∣forePag. 340., you had taxed Bellarmine, for holding, that if those of the East were but only Schismatikes, by denying subiection to the Church of Rome, yet that alone without any suspicion of heresy, might be sufficient to conclude them in the state of damnation. Two things may here be disputed: the one, whether schisme alone, without heresy, exclude men from saluation: the other, whether Protestants be Schismatikes. Concer∣ning the first, that Schismatikes though no way guilty of heresy, for the very fault of schisme alone, are incapable of saluation, is a thing so certaine, that no man that vnder∣standeth euen the ordinary principles of Diuinity, or is versed in the writings of the ancient Fathers, can be igno∣rant therof: for schisme being of it selfe, a diuision or separa∣tion from the Catholike Church, as it is impossible, that he who is out of the Catholike Church be saued; so it is, that a schismatike dying in schisme be saued. God (sayth S. Ire∣naeus
L. 4. c. 62. shall iudge those, that make schismes in the Church, ambi∣tious men, not hauing the honor of God before their eyes, but rather imbracing their owne interest, then the vnity of the Church; and for little, and light causes diuiding the great and glorious body of Christ &c. For in the end they cannot make any reformation so important, as the euill of the schisme is pernicious. S. CyprianL de Vni∣tate Eccles.: Do they that assemble themselues without the Church, thinke Christ to be with them in their assembly? Although they should be dragged to death for the confession of the name of Christ, yet this spot is not wash't away from them, with their bloud; the inexpiable and inexcusable crime of discord is not purged with death it selfe: he cannot be a Martyr, that is not in the Church. S. ChrysostomeIn Ep. ad Ephes Hom. 11.: Nothing doth so much stirre vp the wrath of God, as the diuision of the Church. Although we should do innumerable good workes, if we diuide the Vnity and ful∣nesse of the Church, we shall be punished no lesse seuerely, then they who tore his (naturall) body. S. AugustineEp. 152. ad popul. factio. Donat.: Whosoeuer is di∣uided from the Catholike Church, although he thinke himselfe to liue neuer so laudably, yet for this only crime, that he is diuided from the vnity of Christ, the wrath of God abideth on him. And speaking of Emeritus an hereticall BishopSerm su∣per gest. cum Emer.: He cannot haue saluation, but in the Catholike Church. Out of the Church, he may haue honor, he may haue Sacraments, he may haue the Ghospell, he may haue, and preach beliefe in the name of the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy Ghost; but saluation he can find no where, but in the Catholike Church. And againeEp. 204.: Being out of the Church, and diuided from the heap of Vnity, though thou sholdest he burned aliue for the name of Christ, yet thou sholdest be punished with eternall death. S. Ful∣gentiusDofide ad Pet. c. 39., Belieue this, as most certaine, and vndoubted, that no heretike, nor schismatike, though baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, though he giue neuer so great almes, yea though he shed his bloud for the name of Christ, can possibly be saued. It being now certaine, that a Schismatike dying in schis∣me, cannot be saued, the question is, whether Protestants be schismatikes. And certainly, if S. AugustineEp. 170. & cont. Gau∣den. l. 3. c. 1. & cont. lit. Peti. l. 1. c. 104. rightly concluded the Donatists to be schismatikes, because they had separated themselues from that Church, which was spread ouer the whole earth, his Argument hath the same
force against Protestants: for if (as he hath taught) the Ca∣tholike Church is vniuersally spread ouer the whole earth, and therby, as by an vndoubted marke, is knowne, and distin∣guished from all other congregations; it followeth by ine∣uitable consequence, that the Roman Church (and none els but she) being vniuersally spread ouer the world, as well in Europe, where Protestants are, as in all other parts of the world, where they are not, either she is the Catholike Church, or els that there is no Catholike Church on earth. And therfore with great reason all antiquity hath held the Roman Church, and the Catholike Church to be termes conuertible, and that whosoeuer is diuided from her, is a schismatike, and incapable of saluation. The testimonies of the ancient Fathers in this behalfe I haue copiously allea∣ged in the first Chapter of this Apology, which to repeate heere, were actum agere. And this sheweth, how falsly you slander the Roman Church, with diuiding herselfe proudly, and impiously from all o∣ther Churches of the world. S. Augustine said to the Donatists,L. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 52. that with sacrilegious fury they had separated themselues from the Chaire of S. Peter: and I wish the same might not be truly said of you: That Church, when you began, was, and still is, and shall euer be spread ouer all the world where Christ is knowne. You first liued in her, and afterwards diuided your selues from her, as all Heretikes haue done, she (sayth S. Augustine)De Symb. ad Catechum. l. 1. c. 6. remaining still in her roote, in her Vine, in her charity. From hence it is, that the same Father hauing recko∣ned by name all the Popes from S. Peter to Anastasius, who was then B. of Rome, compareth that Church to a Vine, and the Donatists, to branches cut off from her, as you like∣wise are. Wherfore as he said to themPsal. cont. part. Donat., so we say to you: Come brethren, if you please, that you may be ingrafted into the Vine. It is a griefe toys, to see you lye so cut off. Number the Priests from the very seat of Peter &c. That is the Rock, which the proud gates of hell ouercome not. And you must remember, that the same S. Augustine is he, that saidTract. 8 in Ioan., A branch cut off from the Vine, is fit for nothing but the fire.
CHAP. XLIII. Of the Head of the Roman Church, com∣pared to the Body therof. YOv compare the B. of Rome, who is Head of the Roman Church with the Body thereof, in many respectsPag. 343. 344. 345.: all which you attribute to vs as Articles of our fayth, to be belie∣ued necessarily, vnder paine of dam∣nation. SECT. I. Whether it be matter of Fayth, that the Pope is aboue a Councell. VVE belieue, that the Pope is the Vicar of Christ on Earth, and Gouernour of the Vniuersall Church: to which you addePag. 344., that according to our fayth, there is a necessity of belieuing, that the Pope is aboue a Councell. In proofe of this, you alleadgeIbid. marg. Bellarmine l. 1. de concil. c. 7. who in that very place expresly teacheth the contrary: and you afterwards, contradicting your selfe acknowledge so muchPag. 355. lit. e., setting downe these words of his; The matter is still questionable vntill this day: which also you prouePag. 116. init. out of Stapleton, saying, It is not yet defined by any publike Decree. And in confirmation hereof, you addePag. 115. fin. that the contrary is mantained by our Doctors of Paris. When ther∣fore
it is for your purpose, it is an Article of our fayth necessarily to be belieued with diuine fayth, that the Pope is aboue a Councell: and when the contrary is more for your purpose, then it is no Article of our fayth, nor yet defined by any publike decree, but matter of opinion and questionable vntill this day. These are your propositions: Reconcile them. SECT. II. Whether it be matter of fayth, that this indiuidual person, v. g. Vrban the eight, is true Pope, and true Head of the Church. YOu set downe herePag. 345.. and afterwards againePag. 351. 353., as a receaued Article of our fayth, that it is necessary for euery man, to belieue with diuine fayth, that this determi∣nate man, for example Vrban the eight which now sitteth in the Chaire of S. Peter, is true Bishop, and true Head of the Church. In proofe of this you alleage Salmeron, and Suarez, but very deceiptfully: for although that be the pe∣culiar opinion of Salmeron and Suarez (whose proofes you mention not, because it passeth your skill to answeare them) yet they deliuer it not, as matter of fayth, defined by the Church, or taught by all Catholike Diuines, which you cold not be ignorant of: for Suarez in that very place which you citePag. 24. & 345., professeth the contrary opinion to be taught by Turrecremata, Albertinus, Caietan, Bannes, Canus, Vega, Corduba, Castro, and other Catholike Di∣uines, mantaining, that we cannot haue diuine fayth of this indiuiduall man, that he is true Head of the Church, but morall certainty only. And this they hold sufficient to oblige all men to yield perfect obedience vnto him, and to belieue his definitions ex Cathedra. And you contradi∣cting your selfe, had formerly acknowledgedPag. 2. this to be the opinion of many of our Schole-Doctors. With what conscience then, do you now charge all Catholikes, with holding the contrary as necessary to be belieued with di∣uine fayth, and vnder paine of damnation, which so many
of our learned Schole-Doctors deny, and which in them was neuer censured by the Church, nor euen by their ad∣uersaries, as any way opposite to fayth? But what censure you deserue for doubting of the ordi∣nation, or election of Gods Priests, not I, but S. Cyprian shall tell you, who saythL. 4. Ep. 9., that it is no other thing, but to be∣lieue that Priests are not appointed in the Church from God, nor for God; that it is not to belieue in God, but to be rebellious against Christ and his Ghospell. SECT. III. Whether the Church of Rome be at any time a Body headlesse. It is a Thesis of yoursPag. 34. that the Church of Rome is a Body headlesse, so long as there is a vacancy in the See betweene the death of one Pope, and the election of ano∣ther: Which to affirme, is as ridiculous, as if you should call the Empire An headlesse Empire, because there is no Em∣peror, betweene the death of one, and the election of an other. And by the same argument, you may proue Bohemia, Polonia, and other kingdoms, and States, whose Princes are electiue, to be headlesse kingdoms, and states. There is not alwaies so precise necessity of a Pope in the Church, but that, as it was gouerned 300. yeares without Councels; so if by reason of schismes, or other difficulties it fal out, that after the death of one Pope, some tyme passe before the e∣lection of another, God may not for that time gouerne his Church without a Pope, especially all other Bishops, and inferior Pastors remaining in full possession of their autho∣rity ouer their seuerall flocks. Nor is the Church for that time left so wholly destitute of an vniuersall gouernor on earth, that the elergy of Rome may not in many things supply his place, as you may learne from S. Cyprian, who in sundry occasions aduised with the Clergy of Rome, witnesse his epistles to themL. 3. ep. 5. & 21. l. 5. ep. 4. & 5., and theirs to himL. 2. ep. 7. l. 5. ep. 13.. But herePag. 346. you take occasion to calummitate Bellar∣mine,
for saying, that by the Keyes, which Christ gaue to S. Peter, and in him to his Successors, in vnderstood, the principality of Ecclesiasticall power ouer all the Church; & that when the Pope dieth, this power remaineth not formally in the Church (ex∣cepting only so farre forth as it is communicated to the inferior Mini∣sters) but immediatly in the hands of Christ. And when a new Pope is chosen the Keyes are nether brought by him, nor giuen to him by the Church, but by Christ; and this not by a new donation, but by the ancient institution: for when he gaue them to Peter, he gaue them to all his Successors. These are Bellarmines words, which you cut from the example he addeth, for the explanation of his doctrine, that you may haue occasion to exclame against him, and scoffe, sayingIbid., O depth of delusion! Will you see a Iugler? Yes: we see him but too perfectly in Doctor Tho∣mas Morton: for doth not Bellarmine say; It happeneth in this case, as if a King, when he makes a Vice-Roy of any Countrey, should declare his pleasure to be, that the Vice-Roy being dead, they should nominate another, and that he granteth vnto him, now, the same power, he gaue to his Predecessor? What depth of delusion, or what iuggling do you find in this case? And is not the other wholly like to this? And doth not Bellarmine declare it, with this very example? Wherfore your questionIbid.. Whether the keyes of S. Peter do indeed fly into heauen, at the death of euery Pope, though you make it (forsooth) to shew your selfe acute, and witty, is (God wot) a silly conceipt; to which that renowned Do∣ctor Theodorus Studites hath answearedEp. de ima∣gin., saying: that when we speake of keeping Peters Keyes at Rome, it is not to be vn∣derstood, that Christ gaue any materiall Keyes to him, but only, that by his mouth he gaue him▪ power to bind and loose. And as it is a poore conceipt; so it is a cauill, to which your selfe must answere in the other example of temporall power: for tell vs: Do then indeed the Vice-Royes keyes, when he dieth fly to the Kings Court? But you goe on askingPag. 346.: What power then is it, which re∣maineth formally in the inferior Ministers of the Church, at the death of the Pope? If it be the Keyes of Principality, then is euery inferior
Priest, a Pope: If it be the Keyes only of Order, and absolution, then shall it not be lawfull for any Bishop to exercise any power of iurisdi∣ction by precept, or punishing by excommunication, during all the time of the Vacancy. So you, either not vnderstanding, or wittin∣gly concealing Bellarmines doctrine: for doth he acknow∣ledge no Ecclesiasticall power, but only of principality ouer the whole Church, which is proper to the Pope, or els of Order and Absolution, which is common to euery Priest? Doth he not, with all Catholike Diuines, hold, that euery Bishop be∣sides his power to absolue in the inward Court of Con∣science, hath also power of externall iurisdiction, to go∣uerne, and command his Diocesans, and inflict punish∣ment vpon them by excommunication, and other Eccle∣siasticall censures according to the measure of their offen∣ces? And doth he not sufficiently expresse this power, when speaking of the Popes authority ouer the Church, he sayth, that the Pope being dead, it still remaineth in the Church, so farre forth as it is committed to inferior Ministers, which are the Bishops, and other Pastors vnder the Pope? And by this it appeares, how vntruly you addePag. 347., that Bellarmine is driuen (forsooth by this your subtle Argument) into a most vncouth, and extreme corner, where neuer any ancient Fa∣ther before him, set so much as the least print of his shoo. This you proueIbid. out of Binius, whom you make to say, that in the Inter-regnum, or vacancy betweene the death of Pope Agapetus, and his Successor, there was called a generall Councell at Constantinople, which is an Act proper to the Papall primacy. But as in the rest, so in this you want fidelity: for Binius sayth not, that this Councell was generall, but directly the contrary, to wit, that it consisted of such Bishops only, as were neare to Constantinople, and some others, which at that time were resident in the city. Wherfore it was no generall, but a par∣ticular Councell, in which Menas presided, not as Vicar of the See Apostolike (as Binius mistaketh) but only as Pa∣triarke of Constantinople. And much lesse did any Le∣gates of the Pope preside with him: for albeit the Italian Bishops, which had bene Legates to Pope Agapetus, assi∣sted at the Councell; yet they assisted not, as his Deputies
(for their legation was finished, and their commission ex∣pired before that time, by the arriuall, and especially by the death, of Agapetus at Constantinople) but for honors sake, and as Exlegates, and not as Legates. It is not therfore Bel∣larmine, but you, that are driuen into such an vncouth and extreme corner, that you haue no way to get out, but by fathering on Binius your owne fiction of a generall Councell, which Binius neuer dreamed of, and (which is yet worse) by con∣tradicting your selfe: for beforePag. 238. lin. 11. you had said that this was not a generall Councell. These then are your words: The Coun∣cell vnder Menas was a generall Councell: The Councell vnder Menas was not a generall Councell. Agree them. It resteth therfore, that according to Bellarmines Te∣net, a generall Councell which hath authority to decide controuersies of fayth, cannot be called without the Popes authority; you hauing not bene able to produce any one example, or proofe to the contrary, but only your igno∣rant mistake of a particular Councell for a generall. SECT. IV. Whether the Roman Church haue, at any time, a false Head. YOur assertion is affirmatiue: for proofe, you remit vs to your former argumēt already answeared, to which you adde heerePag. 349. init., that God neuer ordained a Head no bigger then of a wren to stand vpon the sholders of a man; and so litle (in respect) is one Bishop of one City of Rome, to be set ouer the Church vniuersally dispersed throughout the whole world. But you confider not, that the Church of Christ being the most perfect of all com∣mon wealthes, ought to haue the most perfect gouerment, which is Monarchicall. S. CyptianDe vnit. Eccl., OptatiusL. 2. cont. Parmen., and S. HieromeL. 1. cont. Iouin. haue taught, that our Sauiour made S. Peter Head of the Apostles, to the end, that all being subiect to one, occasion of schisme among them might be taken away. This passage you alleaged out of S. Hierome, in your lae Sermon preached at Durham before his MaiestyPag. 42., to proue the
necessity of Bishops, against the Scots. A Bishop then is necessary, to appease the contentions, that may happen a∣mong your Ministers. But contentions, and strifes may also arise among Bishops: An Archbishop therfore is neces∣sary, to quiet them. But they may likewise arise betweene Archbishops, as they did betweene Theophilus, & Chry∣sostome; Flauianus, and Dioscorus; Cyril, and Nestorius: who shall end them? If you say a generall Councell; who shall summon that Councell? Not a temporall Prince, for no one hath power ouer all nations, from whence the Bishops are to be called: besides, that temporall Princes are often at variance among themselues. And when a generall Councell is called, what if the Bishops agree not, or de∣cline from the truth, as in the Councel of Ariminum, & the second of Ephesus they did? Who shall compose their dif∣ferences, and iudge their causes, vnlesse some one Head of the whole Church be appointed by Christ, whose iudge∣ment is infallible, and to whose censure all are bound to submit? Wherfore the Puritans argument propounded by M. CartwrightSecond Reply part. 1. pag. 58. concludeth euidently against you, that, This point of keeping peace in the Church, is one of those, which re∣quireth aswell a Pope ouer all Archbishops, as one Archbishop ouer all Bishops, in a Realme. From this vnity of the Head, the Church of Christ vni∣uersally spread ouer the earth, takes her vnity. Euen as there are (sayth S. Cyprian)De vnit. Eccles. many beames of the sunne, and one light, many bowes of one tree, and yet one strength founded in one roote, and many brookes flowing from one fountaine, & a vnity therof conserued in the spring: euen so, the Church of our Lord casting forth her light, displaieth her beames euery where, throughout the world, and yet her light is one: she extends her bowes ouer the whole earth, and spreads her flowing riuers farre and neere, and yet there is one Head, one beginning, and one fruitfull and plentifull Mother. And lest you might answeare, that this one Head of the whole Church mentioned by S. Cyprian, is none other, but Christ, he de∣clareth himselfe, sayingIbid.: Our Lord to manifest vnity hath constituted one chaire, & ordained by his authority, that vnity should haue beginning from one. And explicating who this one is, he
saythIbid.: Vpon Peter being one, he buildeth his Church, and to him commendeth his sheepe to be fed &c. The primacy is giuen to Peter, that the Church may be shewed to be one. And therefore he cals the Chaire of PeterEp. 55., The principall Church, from whence Sa∣cerdotall vnity proceedeth. S. AugustineL. de pa∣stor c. 13.: Our Lord committed his sheepe to Peter, to commend vnity in him. There were many A∣postles, and to one it is sayd, feede my sheepe. S. LeoSerm. 3. de assump. sua.: Peter being one, is chosen out of the whole world, to be constitated ouer the vocation of all nations, ouer all the Apostles, and all the Fathers of the Church, to the end that although there be many Priests, and many Pastors in the people of God, yet Peter may peculiarly gouerne them all, whom Christ also principally ruleth. And S. Bernard speaking to Eugenius PopeL. 2. de con∣sider.: Thou being one, art Pastor not only of the sheepe, but of all Pastors &c. Christ committed all his sheep to one, to commend vnity in one flock, and in one shepheard. Where there is vnity, there is perfection. If therfore Christ committed his whole flock to Peter being one, if one Head among twelue Apostles were ne∣cessary, to take away occasions of Schisme among them, their number being but small; how much more necessary was it, that for the same cause, the whole Church (which by reason of the multitude of Bishops, and people, is more liable to schisme) should be gouerned by one Head? Who although he be a weake man, Christ praying for himLuc. 22.32., hath secured vs, that his fayth shall not faile; and to the end, he may confirme all his brethren, hath placed himAug. ep. 166. in the chaire of Vnity, in which euen ill men are enforced to speake good things▪ And though he be but one, yet he is assisted by other Bishops, as his Coadiutors, and they by inferion Pastors, that so the Bi∣shops watching ouer the inferior Pastors, and the supreme Pastor ouer the Bishops, the gouerment of the Church, & labor therof, might be diuided among many, and yet chie∣fly committed to one, to whom the rest were to haue re∣course, as the Apostles had to Peter. Among the most Blessed Apostles (sayth S. LeoEp. 84. there was in the likenesse of honor, a dif∣ference of power: And although the election of them all was alike, yet it was granted to one, that he should be aboue the rest in authority: from which modell, the distinction of Bishops hath proceeded, & with
great prouidence it hath bene ordained, that all should not claime all things to themselues, but that in seuerall Prouinces, there should be se∣uerall Bishops, whose sentence should hold the first ranck among their brethren: and againe, that others constituted in the greater cities should haue a more ample charge; and that by them, the gouerment of the vniuersall Church might flow to the seat of Peter, and that none might euer dissent from their Head. This was the doctrine of that renowned Father; and the same hath bene the beliefe of all Orthodoxe Christians. And you that oppose it by telling vs a tale of a wrens head placed vpon the sholders of a man, shew your selfe not to vnderstand the things of GodMath. 16.13.▪ but to measure them by your shallow capacity, not considering that according to his promise, the supreme Pastor to whom he hath committed the charge of his flock, is gouerned by the holy Ghost in his consultations of fayth; and that as without his assistance, no multitude of Prelates is able to gouerne the whole Church; so with his helpe, one may performe it, as experience teacheth. But you obiectPag 350., 1. That we cannot haue certitude of any B. of Rome▪ because his ordination dependeth vpon the inten∣tion of the Ordainer, then which what can be more vncertaine? This you had obiected before, and haue receaued your ans∣wereChap. 5. sect. 7.. And S. CyprianL. 4. ep. 9. hath told you, that to raise such doubts is to doubt of the prouidence of God, and to rebell against his ordination. 2. You obiectPag. 350., Iohn the twelth wanting yeares, and other conditions necessary for that dignity, tooke pos∣session of the Roman Church, by intrusion, and that ther∣fore in his time the Church had no true visible Head (such as we require) because of him it could not be said, This is the B. of Rome This obiection you borowed from BaroniusAnno 955., who though he acknowledge, that the electon of Iohn was void, because no true forme was obserued in it, yet you passe ouer what he addeth, as not being for your pur∣pose, namely, that the Church afterwards consented to his election, wherby the defects that interuened in his former election, were supplied, and he receaued, and reuerenced, as true Pope by the whole Church. And wheras you say, that
this Pope was for his life monstrous, it hath bene prouedAbou Chap. 12. sect. 2., that the ill liues of Popes, or other Bishops, are not Arguments, to disproue their authority. God is able to teach by Balaams Asse, and the Euangelist tells youIo. 11.49. that notwithstanding Caiphas was a wicked man, yet be∣cause he was high Priest he prophesied, or rather God by him. And our Blessed Sauiour foreseeing, that Cauillers would arise, hath by S. AugustineEp. 165. long since answered this your Argument, to a wrangling Donatist, and in him to you, saying: If any traitor in those dayes had by surreption crept into that ranck of Bishops which is deduced from S. Peter himselfe, euen to Anastasius (or Vrbanus) who at this present sitteth in that chaire, it could worke no preiudice to the Church, and to innocent Christians, for whom our Lord prouideth, saying of wicked Prelates: Do yee what they say, but what they doe, doe it not; for they say and do not &c. And speaking to Petilianus another Donatist, af∣ter he had reprehended him for separating himselfe from the Roman Church with sacrilegious fury, he addethCont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.: Why dost thou call the Apostolike See the chaire of pestilence? If in respect of the men, whom thou thinkest to speake the Law, and not to fulfill is, did our Lord Iesus Christ for the Pharisees (of whom he sayth, they say and do not) any way wrong the chaire in which they sate? Nay, did he not commend that chaire of Moyses, and reprehend them, pre∣seruing entire the honor of the Chaire? If you would thinke vpon these things, you would not for the men whom you defame, blaspheme the Apostolike Chaire, with which you do not communicate. So S. Augustine to Petilianus; and so we to you. SECT. V. Whether the Roman Church, at any time, be diuided into many Heads. HOw ill aduised you are to obiect either the multi∣tude, or the long continuance of Schismes, which haue bene in the Roman Church, you haue heardSee aboue Chap. 7. prope sin. & Chap. 12. sect. 7.. But because in time of Schisme when there are two or three that pretend right to the chaire of S. Peter, the faithfull can∣not
certainly know, which of them is true Pope, you aske,Pag. 352.. What resolution our Church can haue in such a case? adding moreouerPag. 353., that our article of belieuing this only singular Roman Pope, without which fayth none can be saued, damneth two of the three parts of our Roman Church at that time. Your question is a doubt springing from ignorance, and your addition an vn∣truth. To your question S. AntoninusPart. 3. is. 21. c. 2. & seqq. hath answeared; who treating of the schisme, which happened in time of Vrban the sixth (against whom the French Cardinalls, earing his seuerity, and flying to Anagnia, created a new Pope, calling him Clement the seauenth) prescribeth this rule, that in time of Schisme, when two or more at the same time, hold themselues to be true Popes, it is not necessary for saluation, to belieue any one of them determinatly to be the true Pope, but disiunctiuely him, that hath bene Ca∣nonically assumpted: And which of them determinatly that is, faythfull people are not bound to know, but may follow the iudgment of their Prelates, and Superiors. To which GersonDe modo hab. se temp. Schism. addeth, that in this case, it is temerarious, iniutious, and scandalous to hold as excommunicated, or out of the state of saluation, those, that adhere to either part, or that carry themselues noutrally: and that it is law∣full to communicate with either party, and to obey either of those Popes, as occasion shall serue, while the right of neither is certainely knowne. And this he confirmeth by the answere which S. Ambrose gaue to S. Augustine con∣cerning the lawfulnesse of fasting, or not fasting on Satur∣daies, according to the diuersity of times, places, and per∣sons. I conclude therfore, that your so often repeating as an article of our fayth, that for saluation it is necessary to be∣lieue that this determinat man is true Pope, and true Head of the Church, if you speake of belieuing it with diuine fayth, you confesse the contrary to be held by many of our learned Diuines; and that their opinion hath neuer bene censured by the Church. But if you speake of belieuing it at least with morall certainty, it is granted by all Catholike Diuines, when there is but one determinat person, whom
the whole Church receaueth and obiecteth, as her vndoub∣ted Head, and as the Vicar of Christ vpon earth. But yet neither that is necessary in time of Schisme, when of two or three, it is doubtfull, which is the true Pope: for then it is sufficient to belieue him to be true Pope, which is Canoni∣cally chosen, without determining any of them in particu∣lar, as S. Antoninus, and Gerson haue taught, instructing you, how to carry your selfe in such a case. But I feare, you haue no desire to learne. SECT. VI. Whether the Roman Church be doubtfully headed. TO proue that the Roman Church is doubtfully hea∣ded, you alleagePag. 354.355.356., that after 1600. yeares, it is not yet determined, whether the supreme Iudge in our Church, be the Roman Pope, or a Councell: collecting from thence, that the Roman Church should not take vpon her to determine Controuersies of fayth against, Protestants, before she haue satisfied Protestants in this one, whether Pope, or Councell be indeed the supreme Iudge. So you, as you are wont: for you are not ignorant that this diuision is inadequate, since beside the Pope alone without a Coun∣cell, and a Councell alone without the Pope, there is a third member, which is the Pope together with a Coun∣cell, whose iudgment in matters of fayth all Catholikes hold to be infallible. Nor did any euer defend, that a gene∣rall Councell confirmed by the Pope can erre, either in de∣finitions of fayth, or manners. This is the sense and mea∣ning of Catholike Doctors, when they say. The Church cannot erre: for by the Church, they vnderstand not the Pope alone without a Councell, nor a Councell alone without the Pope, but both of them together, as they make one whole Church, consisting of the Pope as Head, and of the Councell as the representatiue body therof. This is that supreme Iudge, which condemned the Arians in the Councell of Nice; the Macedonians in the first of Constan∣tinople; the Nestorians in that of Ephesus; and the Euty∣chians
at Chalcedon. And the same hath condemned you in the Councell of Trent, and in others formerly, in which some of your Protestant Tenets haue bene censured as hereticall. To the sentence of this Iudge all Christians are bound to submit, our Blessed Sauiour hauing comman∣dedMath. 1▪ 17., that whosoeuer heareth not the Church (that is to say, the Prelates of the Church, for so the Fathers expound) be esteemed as a Heathen, and a Publican. But you cunningly diuert from this, which is certaine and out of dispute, to another question, whether the Pope be aboue a Councell, or a Councell aboue the Pope: And although you had said abouePag. 115. fin., that to hold the Pope to be a∣boue a Councell is a flat heresy long since condemned by our Councells of Constance and Basil, because then that was best for your purpose; yet herePag. 355. fin. 356. because the contrary fitteth you bet∣ter, you say, It is no matter of fayth, but a thing disputable on both sides among vs: & you make a pitifull complaint, that so principall a case as this, after 1600. yeares, should not be resolued by the Church. And why is all this your soli∣citude? mary to the end, you may take occasion to traduce Stapleton, whom you will hauePag. 356. to be our fore-man and to speake for vs all, saying, that, although this case haue not bene de∣cided by any absolute Decree, yet it is defined by the tacit and secret consent of the Doctors of the Church, scarce any one Diuine holding any other opinion herin, then that which (before that of late this controuersy was moued) was anciently in force; namely, that the Pope is aboue a Councell, as the Head is aboue the Body. As if he should say, Sirs, if the question be, whether Iohn an Oake, or Iohn a Stile be heire to that land, because the witnesses conceale their meaning, with∣out question they by a tacit consent are for the Complainant, that Iohn an Oake must cary the land. O Quack-saluer! So you; who whiles you striue to play vpon Stapleton, make your selfe ridiculous: for you cite those words out of Stapleton Doctr. pr. l. 13. c. 15. who in that worke hath no more but twelue bookes in all. Wherfore the words are either coined by you, or if they be Stapletons, he is not only miscited, but egregiously abused by you: for doth he not say in expresse words, that among Catholike Diuines scarcely any one is of another
opinion, then that the Pope is aboue a Councell, as the Head is about the Body? What els is this to say, but that Catholike Diuines in their bookes published to the view of the world, haue expressed themselues, and vnanimously declared, that the Pope is aboue a Councell? And this their accord expressed in their writings, Stapleton with great reason calls, A tacit definition, that is to say, an expression and accord equiualent to a definition: euen as he who should tell a man, that he speakes often vntruly, (as you in your Grand Imposture do) should tacitly, or virtually tell him, that he were not a silent witnesse, nor a dumbe Iudge against you; so nether are the Diuines alleaged by Stapleton, silent witnesses, or dumbe Iudges in the question proposed. I conclude therfore that Doctor Stapleton is not the Quack-saluer, but Doctor Morton; & your Argument so poore, that Iohn an Oake, or Iohn a Stile might easily haue framed a better. SECT. VII. Of the Councell of Constance, defining a Councell to be aboue the Pope. TO proue that a Councell is aboue the Pope in matters of direction of fayth and manners, you obiectPag. 356.357. the fourth Canon of the Councell of Constance, which Coun∣cell (say you) was expresly confirmed by Pope Martin, to be held inuiolabia in matters of fayth. True. But your dealing is not true: for as Turrecremata, Campegius, Sanders,Apud Bell. l. 1. de Pont. c. 19. Ca∣ietanOpusc. de autho. Papae & Conc. and CanusL. 5. c. 6. §. Ad octau. haue obserued, the Councell when that decree was made, was not a generall, but a particular Councell: and the decree it selfe was not vniuersall for all times, but only for that time of schisme, when it was vn∣certaine, which of three that actually pretended right to the See of S. Peter, was true Pope; or indeed whether any of the three were true Pope or no. And were it granted, that in a case of vncertainty, as this was, whether there were any true Pope in the Church, a Councell is superior to the
doubtfull Popes, and hath authority to depose them, and prouide a certaine and vndoubted Head for the Church, it would not follow, that when an vndoubted Head is chosen, the Councell is superior to him: for he hath not his authority from the Councell, but from Christ. Againe, wheras no decree of any Councell can be of force, if it be not confirmed by the See ApostolikeSee aboue Chap. 17. sect. 6., this was not only not confirmed, but reiected, and (as you know BellarmineL. 1. de Concil. c. 7. & BiniusIn not. ad hoc Concil. haue noted) absolutely condemned by the Councels of Florence, and Lateran. And lastly, it was inualid, because the Bishops that adhe∣red to two of the three, which held thēselues to be Popes, consented not to itBellar. ibid.. The decrees of faith which Martin Pope cōfirmed, were only those the Councell made against the heresies of Iohn Wiclef, Iohn Hus, & Hierome of Prage (Saints of your Protestant KalenderSee Pxe Ian. 1. May 2. Iune 1., as appeareth out of his Bull of confirmation annexed to the Councell, in which this de∣cree of the Councels superiority to the Pope, is not men∣tioned, much lesse confirmed. But you obiectPag. 357. sin.; when the Councell of Constance fayth, The Councell hath its authority immediatly from Christ, the meaning is▪ (as you are taught) that the Popes authority is not of diuine, but of humane institution. This is your comment, false in it selfeSee aboue Chap. 19. sect. 9., and directly contrary to the meaning of the Councell of Constance, which setteth downe this your propositionSess. 1., as the ninth article of Iohn Hus, and con∣demneth it as hereticall, together with other articles, in which Protestants agree with him. And in like manner it definethSess. 8. against the articles 37. and 41. of Wiklef, that the Pope is immediate Vicar of Christ, and that for saluation it is ne∣cessary to belieue his authority ouer all Churches, and that the Roman Church is the chiefe of all others: In which condemnation whe∣ther Protestants holding the same errors, be not inuolued, I leaue to your iudgment. Finally, the same Councell (as you reade in the last ses∣sion) was dissolued by authority and command of the Pope (the Councell it selfe so requiring) and the condemnation
of all the errors of Wiclef, and Hus, ratified, and confirmed by a speciall Bull of the Pope, with command that all sus∣pected of those heresies, should be demanded whether they belieue that S. Peter was the Vicar of Christ hauing power to bind and lose vpon earth; and whether they hold, that the Pope canonically chosen (his proper Name expressed) is the Successor of S. Peter, & hath supreme power ouer the Church of God. These are the doctrines of that Councell, which shew, that your obiecting it against the authority of the Pope, and Church of Rome ouer all other Bishops and Churches, is a Grand Imposture. SECT. VIII. The same matter prosequuted out of the Councell of Basil. THere was (say you)Pag 358. a Councell gathered at Basil by the authority of Pope Martin the fifth. What? A generall Coun∣cell called by authority of the Pope? Then it appeares, that the Pope is supreme Head, and gouernor of the vniuersall Church: for as a King cannot by his authority call a Par∣liament of those, that are not his subiects; so neither could the Pope by his authority haue called a generall Councell, had not his authority extended it selfe ouer the vniuersall Church. So vnaduisedly are you caught in your owne snares. You addeIbid. out of Binius, that this Councell was after con∣firmed by Eugenius. How confirmed? Were the Acts, or de∣crees of that Councell confirmed by Eugenius? So would you perswade your reader. But Binius speaketh not of the confirmation of any Act, or Decree of the Councell, but only of ratifying the calling, and beginning of it, vnder the presidence of Iulianus Caesarinus his Legate, according to the Order of his predecessor: which is also obserued, and proued by CanusL. 5. de loc. cap. postrem.. It was therfore begun, and for a time continued by law∣full authority, but afterwards became schismaticall, and was iustly condemned by the generall Councell of La∣teran
Sub Leon. 10. sess. 11. as a Conuenticle schismaticall, sedition, and of no autho∣rity. 1. Because (as Turrecremata a learned writer of that time, aduertisethSum. de Eccl. l. 2. c. 10., contrary to the custome of all ge∣nerall Councells, they refused to acknowledge the autho∣rity of those, whome the Pope had sent to preside in the Councell. 2. For that they presumed to pronounce a sen∣tence of deposition against Eugenius Pope, and that in a most temerarious manner, because there was then no Le∣gate of his in the Councell; all the chiefe Bishops being departed, & a certaine Cardinall of Arles, by his owne au∣thority, had vsurped the place of President: and because there wanted voyces of Bishops, to make vp number, they tooke into the Councell, a great multitude of Priests; so that now against all order and forme of Councells, it was not a Councell of Bishops, but of Priests. 3. (as Turrecre∣mata witnessethIbid., the decrees of that Councell (euen such as they were) were not vnanimously agreed vpon, both because many Prelates, and Doctors, as well of Ca∣non, as of ciuill Law, made resistance vnto them; and also because vnderstanding, that Embassadors sent by the Kings of England, and Castile, were on their way, and neere at hand, they hastned fraudulently to define such things, as they knew those Legates would not assent vnto. 4. Be∣cause (as S. Antoninus reportethPart. 3. tit. 22. c. 10. §. 4., Iulianus the Cardi∣nall, whom Eugnius had appointed President, leauing that schismaticall Conuenticle, returned to the Pope, who by Apostolicall authority dissolued their assembly. But they stopping their eares, began to summon Eugenius, being so∣licited therūto, by the Duke of Milan, his professed enemy. On the other side, Sigismund the Emperor, and the Vene∣tians dissuaded them from any further proceeding: Which notwithstanding, they pronounced sentence of deposition against Eugenius, and erected to themselues a new Idoll Amadaeus Duke of Sauoy, calling him Felix the fifth, to whom obedience was yeilded in his owne territory. Thus S. Antoninus. Wherby it appeares▪ that Felix, whom the Councell created, being acknowledged no where but in his owne Dukedome, the whole Church adhered still to
Eugenius, belieuing, that the Councell had no authority to depose him: Yea Felix himselfeSee Binius in Not. ad hoc Council. pag. 406. acknowledging the same, resigned his vsurped title, by perswasion of the Em∣peror, and euen by his owne iudgment, condemned all the Acts of that Councell (by which he had bene chosen) as of a schismaticall Assembly. And hereby is discouered the falshood, of what you al∣leagePag. 359. out of a Synodicall Epistle of that Councell, de∣manding, whether the Pope will condemne for schismatikes, all the Cardinalls, Bishops, and the Emperor himselfe, with Kings & Prin∣ces, yea and the whole Church, which did approue that Councell? This (I say) is a shamefull vntruth: for all the chiefe Prelates seeing that Councell grew to open Schisme, had forsaken it: there was remaining one only CardinallSee Bin. to. 4. pag. 121., and he an enemy to the Pope; the maior part of them that remained, were not Bishops, but Priests, and they disagreeing among themselues, as appeareth out of another Synodicall Epistle of theirsApud Bin to. 4. pag. 146.; in which also they confesse the paucity of their number, partly excusing it by reasons, and partly lay∣ing the fault on Eugenius, that he had drawne away so many Prelates from them. How then is it true, that all the Cardinalls, Bishops, the Emperor, with Kings and Princes, and the whole Church were present there, and approued this Councell? How is it true, since it is certaine that three yeares before the dis∣solution of this Conuenticle, was assembled that famous generall Councell of Florence, in which this Basilean Sy∣nagogue was condemned, and the Vnion betweene the Greeke and Latine Church established, Pope Egenius himselfe assisting in it, as President, the Emperor of the Grecians being present in person, the Emperor of the La∣tines by his Legates, together with all the most famous Prelates of the Greeke and Latin Church, aboue 1400. in number. This sheweth which of these two assemblies was the law∣full Councell, which the schismaticall: yea, and God him∣selfe interposing his verdict, declared the same: for those Schismakikes obstinatly refusing to breake vp their assem∣bly, so often annulled by the Pope, he according to his
promise made to S. PeterMath. 16.19., and in him to his Successors, confirming the sentence of Eugenius from hauen, son a∣mong them a most horrible plague, of which many of them dying, the rest were enforced to breake vp, and de∣part, as Aeneas Siluius recordethIn histor. Conc. Basil., who hauing bene pre∣sent at that Councell, and seeing their emerations obsti∣nacy against the Roman See, forsooke it, and detesting it, writ earnestly against it. All this being true, as it is, with what fidelity do you sayPag. 350., that in this case, the Pope is the schismatike, and not the Councell? But I wonder not that you take part with Schismatiks: Belike you are of opinion, that some obsti∣nate Puritans in Parliament standing out against his Ma∣iesty, he and not they, are the rebells: for the case is alike, sa∣uing only that this is a temporall cause, and that a spiri∣tuall. But you demandPag. 360. with Nilus, and Erasmus, to what end generall Councells should be called, with so much cost, trouble, and labour, if the Pope haue infallibility of iudgment? I answere; to the same end, that S. Peter the first Pope of Rome, notwithstanding he had infallibility of iudgment, called a Councell at AntiochAct. 15.6.7.. If you desire more reasons you haue them in BellarmineL. 4. de Pont. c. 7., who hath answeared this Argument: but you were wise inough, to take no notice therof. SECT. IX. Doctor Mortons instances of France, and England, to proue the no-necessity of Vnion, with the Church of Rome. THere hath bene published by some of your Nouellists, a pamphlet, intituled, Fasciculus rerum expetendarum, & fugiendarum, stuffed with so many lies, that the Author was ashamed to haue his name knowne. It is prohibitedIndic. li∣bro. prohib., and therfore what you report out of it, not to be regarded. But
your additionPag. 361., that the Councell of Trent is not admitted within the Kingdome of France, and that therfore the French are yet at liberty to belieue as much therof as they list, is a famous vntruth: for although that Kingdome haue not admitted generally all the decrees made by that Councell for the reformation of Ecclesiasticall discipline; yet who knoweth not, that as the Catholikes of the world haue, so hath that most Chri∣stian kingdome with them admitted, and imbraced all the decrees of fayth, made in the Councell of Trent, and that the most Christian King, with all his Catholike subiects, belieueth them no lesse stedfastly, then the decrees of fayth made in the foure first generall Councells, which you ad∣mit. Not vnlike to this, is your additionPag. 361. fin. 361. out of B. Gardi∣ners Oration of true obedience, that, in the time of King Henry the eight, all sortes of people (in England) were agreed vpon this point, with most stedfast consent, learned, and vnlearned, both men and women, that no manner of persons bred, or brought vp in England, had ought to do with Rome: for albeit some persons infected with Lutheranisme, & some flatterers for their owne ends, soo∣thed King Henry in his opposition to the See of Rome; yet who knoweth not, that the face of the kingdome was then generally Catholike, as for the space of almost 1000. yeares before it had bene? And who can be ignorant, that in defence of the authority of the See of Rome, B. Fisher, & Syr Thomas More, writ most learned bookes, which are yet, and will euer be most highly esteemed throughout the Christian world; and that what they writ with their pens, they sealed with their bloud? And who knoweth not, that Cardinall Pole (a man of so great worth, that he wanted but two voyces for the Popedome) not only writ most learnedly in the same kind, but suffered (and his friends for his sake) great vexations, and persecutions at the hands of King Henry for the same cause? And that many persons of worth suffered imprisonment, and death for the same cause? among which, were all the Charter-house Monkes of London, with their Prior? It is therfore a famous vn∣truth to say, It was then the fayth of the Church of En∣gland,
that, no person bred, or brought vp in England, had ought to do with Rome. Moreouer you know this Oration of B. Gar∣diner to be prohibited by the ChurchIn indic. lib. prohib., and that he a∣shamed of it, retracted it; which yet you are not ashamed to obiect. CHAP. XLIV. Whether Luther, and his followers, had any iust cause, to separate themselues from the Roman Church. WE are come to the last Chapter of your Grand Imposture, in which to free your selfe from the note of Schisme & heresy, you brand the Roman Church with both, & labor to proue that Lu∣ther had iust cause to separate himselfe from her Communion; and that you continuing in the same separation, are more iustifiable then Luther was in his departure from her, and may more iustly plead soules saluation, then any of them that remaine in Vnion with her. Your Chapter you diuide into foure parts, and these parts into Theses; which I shall examine the more briefly, because many of your proofes are repeti∣tions of your former Arguments already answeared. SECT. I. Whether any Protestants haue held, that the Catholike Church before Luthers fall, was wholly extinguished. YOur first Thesis isPag. 364.: Many Papists in their aduersnesse to Protestant, whom they seeke to traduce, do impute vnto them
this faythlesse Paradoxe, as to say, that the Catholike Church is some∣times extinguished: A false doctrine (say you) which Protestants neuer taught. If Protestants neuer taught this faithlesse doctrine, why did Luther when he began to erect your new Church, sayPraef. in 1. tom. & cont. Reg. Angl. fo. 497., He had none to assist him, but was left alone, and alone stood in the battaile forsaken of all? Why did Caluin sayEp. 141., It is absurd, that since we haue bene enforced to diuide our selues from all the world, we shold now in our very beginnings disagree among our sel∣ues? Why did he say,Respons. ad Sadolet., It is publike, and notorious to all, learned and vnlearned, that when the Principality of the B. of Rome was ere∣cted, the kingdome of Christ was prostrated, his glory extinguished, Religion abolished, the Church destroyed, and hope of saluation vtterly ouerthrowne? Why did Milius sayAugust. Confess. explic. art. 7. de Eccl. pag. 137., If there had byn right belieuers before Luther, there had bene no need of a Lutheran reformation? Why MorgensterneTract. de Eccles. p. 141.; It is ridi∣culous (to thinke) that in the time before Luther, any had the pu∣rity of Doctrine, and that Luther should receaue it from them, and not they from Luther: It being manifest to the whole Christian world, that before Luthert time, all Churches were ouerwhelmed with Cy∣merian darknesse, and that Luther was diuinely raised vp to discouer the same, and to restore the light of true doctrine? And in regard therof Luther boasted, sayingEp. ad Argentin. anno 1525.: Christum à nobis primò vul∣gatum audemus gloriari. Why did Camierus sayEp. Iesuit. part. altera Geneu. 1601., That error did not only possesse a part of the Church, as in time of the Arians, but that the whole body of the Church by Apostacy was fallen from Christ? Why did Simon de Voyon a Geneuian Minister in his Ca∣talogue of DoctorsPraefat. ad Lect. say, That in the yeare 605. falshood pre∣uailed, and then was the whole world ouerwhelmed in the dregs of Antichristian filthinesse, abhominable traditions, and superstitions of the Pope? And of our English Protestants, why did Iuel sayApol. part. 4. c. 4., The truth was vnknowne at that time, and vnheard of, when Martin Luther, and Hulderick Zuinglius first came vnto the know∣ledge, and preaching of the Ghospell? Why PerkinsExpos. of the Creed. pag. 307., That du∣ring the space of 900. yeares, the Popish heresy spread it selfe ouer the whole world, and for many hundred yeares an vniuersall Aposta∣cy ouerspread the whole face of the earth? I conclude therfore, that when you deny, that the Church
of Christ was extinguished before Luthers time, you out-face, and cōtradict your best learned brethren, domestick, & forraine. Nor is it a sufficient answere, to tell vsPag. 406., of a sentence of Caluin, in which he acknowledgeth the Church not to be perished in Africke, Aegypt, Asia, and among the Gre∣cians: for you haue heard the testimonies not of Caluin on∣ly, but of many others. If Caluin deny that, which toge∣ther with them he affirmed, he contradicteth himselfe, And since both he, and you hold the Church to be inuisible, I desire to know, how you came to find out, and see in A∣frica, and Greece, a Church that is inuisible, and indeed that is not in being? for in those nations, there is no Church but of Roman Catholikes, all the rest which in them beare the name of Christians, being absolute heretikesSee aboue Chap. 41. sect. 4.. But you sayPag. 369., To charge Protestants with holding a decay, & error from fayth in the whole Catholike Church, vnto Bellarmine see∣med in effect to be a lewd slander. You vnderstand not Bellar∣mine, or els wittingly misinterpret his meaning. He rightly obseruethL. 3. de Eccles. milie. c. 11. that Protestants hold two Churches; the one visible, the other inuisible: wherof you speaking, sayPag 10. fin. 11. init. that by some you are slandered with making two Churches. But this to be no slander Bellarmine proueth out of the Centurists, whose doctrine it is. And the same I proue a∣gainst you, out of other Protestants: We say (quoth Whita∣kerCont. 2. q. 1. c. 14. fol. 125. there are two societies of men in the world, that is, two Churches: To the one the predestinat belong, to the other, the Re∣brobate. The one of these he affirmeth to be wholly inuisi∣ble; the other, visibleIbid. q. 2. c. 1. & q. 1. c. 3.7.8. & q. 4. c. 1.3.. The same is stifly mantained by FulkeIn cap. 3. Math, sect. 3. & in c. 22. sect. 3.. When Caluin and other Protestants say, The Church cannot perish, they speake of the inuisible Church, which Bellarmine and all Catholikes hold to be a Platoni∣call idea, and a mere Chimaera, no where existent but in your deluded fancies. The true Church of Christ all Catholikes with the holy Councell of Nice hold to be One: and that Bellarmine proueth to be visible. And you (sayth he) hold that to haue perished, and your inuisible Church only to haue remained, which in his doctrine, and in verity, is to say, that the true Church of Christ on earth wholly perished, no∣thing
remayning, but a Chimaera of a supposed inuisible Congregation, which hath no reall existence, but only fan∣tastike in your imaginations. And that you wrong Bel∣larmine, in producing him as a witnesse, that an absolute de∣cay of the Catholike Church was neuer taught by Protestants, you may not deny: for afterwardsPag. 406. you confesse, and proue out of his words, that he (as also Bozius) parifieth you with the Donatists, which held the Catholike Church to haue wholly perished throughout the world, and to haue re∣mained only in a few Professors of their Sect in a corner of Africa: which doctrine differeth not from yours, who hold the Catholike-Church to haue bene vtterly destroied for many yeares, and now to haue no being, but where your Protestant professors are. Wherfore I aske you, as S. AugustinL. 3. con∣tra Parmen. c. 3. did the Donatists: How can you vaunt to haue any Church; if the haue ceased for so long time? And againeDe bapt. l. 3. c. 2.: If the Church were perished so long time, from whence did Donatus (or Luther) appeare? From what earth is he sprung vp? From what sea is he come forth? From what heauen is he fallen? I conclude ther∣fore, that we may iustly exclaime against you, as S. Augu∣stine did against the DonatistsIn Psal. 101.: Gods Church of all nations is no more, she is perished: so say they that are not in her. O impudent Voyce! They say the whole Church is perished, and the relickes re∣maine only on Donatus (on Luther, or Caluin) his side. O proud, and impious tongueAug. de agon. Christ. c. 29.! SECT. II. Whether the Catholike Church, assembled in a generall Councell, may erre in the definitions of Fayth. IN your second ThesisPag. 369. you define, The Church Catho∣like properly so called (as it is militant) to be multitude of all Chri∣stian belieuers, whensoeuer, and whersoeuer dispersed throughout the world. This, you say, cannot erre. But your third Thesis isIbid. that the representatiue body of this Church, that is to say, all the Prelates of this Church assembled in a generall Councell may erre in their decrees of fayth. This thesis de∣stroieth the former: for if all the Prelates of the Church,
which are the lightes of the worldMath. 5.15., and whom GodEphes. 4.12.14. hath prouided as Pastors and Doctors, vnto the edifiing of his Church, and giuen to vs, that we be not like little ones wauering, & carried away with euery blast of erroneus doctrine, may themselues be carried away, and seduced with false doctrine; they may also preach the same to the people▪ and leade them into error. What meanes then is left to preserue the whole Church from erring? But you sayPag 366.: That generall Councells may erre in their de∣crees of fayth, some of your owne Romish Schoole haue auouched. These some (if we belieue you) are Cusanus, Occham, Turrecremata, Gerson, and Canus. But we cannot belieue you: for those workes of Cusanus, and Occham are forbid∣denInd lib. prohib.: and Cusanus hath retracted his. Turrecremata speaketh not of the Church representatiue, that is to say of Councells, which consist only of the Pastors, and Prelates of the Church, but of the whole body of the Church, as it comprehendeth all the faythfull, both Pastors and people, which (sayth he) cannot erre in fayth, though some mem∣bers therof may. But withall he proueth against youSum. de Ecce. l. 4. c. 2., that the verities of fayth defined by the Church in generall Councells are to be held infallible, though not expressly contained in the Canon of holy Scripture: and that no de∣finitions of Councells can be of force, vnlesse they be con∣firmed by the B. of Rome; &Ibid. l. 3. c. 5.8 30. that all former Councells haue required their doctrines to be confirmed, and autho∣rized by him. Why do you then produce him as a witnesse for the contrary? Gerson and Canus are both falsified by you: for Gerson in the place you cite, hath no such doctrine, but the contrary, which els where he expressethTo. 1. in Consider. de pa. Consid. 1. saying: Constat quod in materijs fidei terminandis, error non cadit in Conci∣lio generali &c. It is manifest, that in deciding controuersies of fayth a generall Councell cannot erre: And the Doctors yeild the reason; be∣cause of the speciall assistence of the holy Ghost and of Christ gouer∣ning the Church, and not permitting it to erre in those things, which it cannot attaine by humane industry. Canus sayth, that generall Councells lawfully gathered may erre in fayth, as the second of Ephe∣sus did. This is his second conclusion; which you lay hold
of, concealing that in his third conclusion, which he pre∣sently addeth, he sayth, That a generall Councell confirmed by the Pope cannot erre; and condemneth your doctrine as absolu∣tely hereticall. Is it not then extreme perfidiousnesse, to Fa∣ther on him the contrary, and to make Catholike Doctors Patrons of your Errors? But to declare, what is necessary, that a generall Coun∣cell may not erre, you addePag. 66. fin. 367.: The difference betweene the Roman Church, and the Church of the Protestants, is no more, but this, that the Romanists say, that all generall Councells may erre, ex∣cept they be confirmed, and authorized by the Pope: but Protestants say, that all generall Councells may erre, except they be directed by the spirit of Gods word. This indeed you say, and yet leaue the question vnansweared: for we likewise say, that euery Councell, which is not directed by the spirit of Gods word, may erre. The question is, how it may be knowne, when a Councell defineth according to Gods word, and when not: for Gods word may be misinterpreted: Wherof Tertullian speaking truly saidL. de praes∣crip.: An adulterate glosse doth as much outrage to the truth, as a false pen. And S. HilaryL. 2 de Tri. init.: There haue bene many, who haue interpreted the heauenly words other∣way then the truth did require, according to the sense of their own will, not for the establishing of truth: for heresy, is not in the writing, but in the vnderstanding: the fault is not in the word, but in the sense. And doth not S. Hierome likewise sayIn Ep. ad Gal. c. 1., The Ghospell is not in the words, but in the sense? And doth not S. Augustine cry outIn Ioan. tract. 13., Heresies and peruerse doctrine which entangle soules, & cast them headlong into hell haue their birth nowhere, but from good Scriptures ill vndeestood? And againeDe Gen. ad lit. l. 7. c. 9.: Heretikes were not here∣tikes, but that misunderstanding the Scripture, they defend obstinat∣ly their owne false opinions against the truth therof. And in ano∣ther placeEp. 2.: All heretikes which receaue the Scriptures, thinke they follow them when they follow their owne Errors. Of the same subiect Lyrinensis discourseth largely and learnedlyChap. 1.30.37., shewing that, the Diuel alleaged Scriptures against Christ, & that all Heretikes alleage them against the Church in de∣fence of their errors: which made S. Hierome sayIn Ep. ad Gal. c. 1., that there is great dāger in speaking in the Church, for feare lest by a wrong
interpretation, the Ghospell of Christ be made the Ghospell of man, or (which is worse) the Ghospell of the Diuell. And speaking of the LuciferiansAduers. Lucifer. versus fin. who boasted of the Scriptures, as Protestants doe: Let them not statter themselues to much, because they seeme to haue Scripture for what they affirme: for euen the Diuell hath allea∣ged Scriptures, which consist not in reading, but in vnderstanding. Wherfore it is not sufficient to alleage Scriptures: We alleage them, and you alleage them: but we disagree con∣cerning the true sense, and meaning of them: from whom shall we learne it? If Luther may, as your fore-man, speake for you all, you, and none but you, and that by your pri∣uate spirit, must deliuer the true sense of them. We (sayth Luther)L. de ser arbit. receaue nothing but the Scriptures, and them so also, that we our selues only, haue certaine authority to expound them. As we vnderstand them, so was the meaning of the Holy Ghost: what o∣thers bring, be they neuer so great, neuer so many, preceedeth from the spirit of Sathan, and from a mad and alimated mind. So Luther. And as he challenged to himselfe this priuiledge of deliue∣ring the true sense of Scripture, so his disciples haue chal∣lenged the same to themselues. This spirit it is, which hath hatched so many viperous sects, no lesse disagreeing among themselues, then all of them straying from the truth. And yet you all boast of Scripture, and all proclaime, that you follow the word of God. And no maruaile: for the Diuell (sayth Lyrinensis)Cap. 37.3. knoweth right well, that when wicked er∣rors are to be broached, the readiest way to deceaue, is to alleage stifly the authority of diuine Scripture. What then shall Catholike men, & Children of our Mother the Church do? Let them interpret the diuine Canon according to the tradition of the vniuersall Church. The truth of Scripture (sayth S. AugustineCont. Crescon. l. 1. c. 33. is held by vs, when we do that, which pleaseth the vniuersall Church, whom the authority of the same Scriptures recommendeth. And againeIbid. c. 31.: Whosoeuer feareth to be deceaued through the obscurity of this question, let him consult with that Church, which the holy Scripture hath designed, without any ambiguity. This Church it is, of which God pronounced by the mouth of IsayIsa. 54.17., Thou shalt iudge euery tongue, that resisteth thee in iudgment. Of this, Christ hath promisedMath. 16.18., that the gates of hell (which are Errors) shall not preuile against her.
Of this he hath saidMath. 18.17. that whosoeuer heares her not, is to be held as a Heathen, & a Publican. In this he hath placedAd E∣phes. 4.11 17. Apostles, Pro∣phets, Euangelists. Pastors, and Doctors &c. that we may not be litle Children, wauering, and carried away with euery blast of doctrine. This Church, these Pastors, these Doctors, all Christians must heare, and imbrace their exposition of Scripture, as the true meaning of the holy Ghost, Christ himselfe hauing saidLuc. 10.6.. that who heareth them, heareth him; and S. Iohn. Ioan. 4.6. by this marke distinguisheth Orthodoxe people from Here∣tikes: that the Orthodoxe heare and obey the Pastors and Doctors of Gods Church, which heretikes refuse to do. We are (sayth he) of God: he that knoweth God, heareth vs: He that is not of God, heareth vs not. In this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of Error. And if at all times the Pastors of Gods Church are to be heard, then surely most of all, when they are assembled in a generall Councell, Christ professing himselfe to be then in the middest of themMath. 18.20.. By their authority the sayth is maintained, and heresy condemned. When Fir∣milianus and Cyprian, with many other Bishops defended the Error of Rebaptization by testimonies of Scripture (but, as Lyrinensis notethCap. 10., glossed after a new, and naughty fashion) by what authority was that error condemned, but by the custome and tradition of the Church, the prohibi∣tion of Pope Stephen chiefly cooperating therto? for (as S. Augustine truly saythL. 5. de Bapt. c. 23. the Apostles had deliuered nothing in writing concerning that point. And when the Arians in the Councell of Nice alleaged, and misinterpreted Scriptures in proofe of their heresy, by what meanes were they confu∣ted and condemned, but by the tradition of the Church de∣liuered by the Venerable Bishops assembled in that CouncellSe aboue Chap. 16. & chiefly by the authority of the B. of Rome, by whom that Councell was called and confirmedIbid., and without whose confirmation no Canon of any Councell can be of forceSe aboue Chap. 17. set. 6.? And from hence it hath proceeded, that as all the generall Councells which the B. of Rome hath confirmed, are held by the whole Church to be of infalli∣ble authority, no one Father or Doctor euer doubting therof; so contrarily the Councell of Ariminum, the second
of Ephesus, and all others, which he hath reproued, haue bene euer reputed spurious assemblies, and of no authority. And with great reason: for his authority in defining con∣trouersies of fayth, Christ himselfe declared to be infallibleSee aboue Chap. . sect. 1. & 2., when he prayed for him, that his fayth might not faile, & commanded him to confirme his brethren: and likewise, when he promised that heresies, which are the gates of hell, shall not pro∣uaile against the Church built vpon him. I conclude therfore that you mistake the state of the que∣stion. We agree with you, that a Councell which is not directed by the spirit of Gods word, may erre: but the difference bet∣weene vs is, who is to be the Iudge, whether a Councell proceed according to the direction of Gods word, or no. Luther, and you his disciples casting of the yoke of obe∣dience to your lawfull Pastors, and refusing to heare them, will haue no other Iudges, but your selues; to the end, that if a generall Councell condemne your doctrine, as that of Trent hath done, you may reiect it, vpon pretence, that it hath not bene directed by the spirit of Gods word; which is an ex∣cuse common to all Heretikes: for what heretike will not (and may not, with as faire colour as you) pleade, that the Councells which condemned him, were not directed by the shirit of Gods word? Vpon this pretence the Arians, that of E∣phesus: the Eutychians, that of Chalcedon: the Monotheli∣tes, the sixth Councell: the Image-breakers, the seauenth. Vpon the same pretence you reiect the Councell of Trent, and make profession to reiect all Councells whatsoeuer, that shall not allow you to be the only Iudges of the sense of Gods word, and grant vnto euery one of you, that infal∣lible authority, to expound it, which you deny to a whole generall Councell. When Councells haue defined, (sayth Lu∣therArt. 11. then will we be Iudges, whether they be to be accepted, or not. And the same is the doctrine of CaluinL. 4. in∣stit. c. 9. tot.. We contrarily insisting in the steps of all Orthodoxe antiquity (whose te∣stimonies are plentifully alleaged by CocciusTo. 1. l. 7. art. 21. acknow∣ledge, that the Pastors, which are the representatiue body of the Church, assembled together with the B. of Rome, as their Head, is an infallible Iudge of the true sense of Gods
word, and that what they define in matters of fayth, is of vnod authority, & to be reuerenced as the Ghospells of Christ: for so antiquity reuerenced the generall Coun∣cels which haue beene held before their timeSee Coce. .: and so we reuerence the rest, that haue beene held since their time, all of them being assembled, and confirmed by the same authority of the See Apostolike, and directed by the same Spirit of truth, that the first Councells were. And who seeth not, that you denying this authority, take away all the vse of Councells in the Church, making controue; sies of sayth indeterminable, and arguing Christ of lack of wis∣dome, and prouidence, in not leauing any certaine meanes to end dissentions, and preserue Vnity in his Church. SECT. III. Whecher Protestants hold the Church of Christ to be inuisible. YOur fourth Thesis isPag. 167.368.369.370.: Protestants hold not any greater inuisibility, or rather obscurity of the Church Catholike, then that, which the Romanists are forced to confesse. This Thesis is manifestly false: for you haue heard your grand Maister Caluin, & other your brethrenHere aboue sect. 1. confessing, that before Lu∣thers time, the Church was wholly destroyed, euen as mans life is, when his throat is cut: that it is ridiculous to thinke, there were any true belieuers when Luther began: that not a part, but the whole body of the Church was fallen away by Apostacy. And you cannot be ignorant that other Protestāts haue testifiedBrereley Prot. Apol. tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 11. sub. dict. 3. that she was not only obscured as in the time of the Arians, but inuisible, and could not be shewed. IuellIbid.: that the truth was vnknowne at that time, and vnheard of. PerkinsIbid.: that a vniuersall Apostacy ouerspread the whole face of the earth, and that your Church was not then Visi∣ble to the world. MiliusIbid.: that if there had bene any right belie∣uers before Luther, there had bene no need of a Lutheran reforma∣tion. FrancusBrerel. Ibid. tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4.: that for 1400. yeares the Church of Christ was no where externall, and visible. NapperIbid.: that for 1260. yeares, Gods true Church was most certainly latent, and inuisible.
These are the confessions of your brethren, conuincing you to speake vntruly, when you say, Protestants hold not any greater inuisibility, or rather obscurity of the Church Catholike, then that, which the Romanists are forced to confesse: for our Te∣nets, which we haue learned from the holy Scripture, are; that the Church of Christ is a magnificent throne, as resplendent as the sunnePsal. 88.38.; A lofty City placed vpon a mountaineMath. 5.14., which (sayth S. Augustine)Cont. Parm. l. 3. c. 5. cannot be hid, but shalbe knowne to all the coastes of the earth: To a mountaine prepared in the top of moun∣taines eleuated aboue the little hills; vnto which all nations shall flowIsa. 2.2.; to a Tabernacle seated in the sunnePsal. 28.6.; of which S. Augustine speaking, saythIn um Psal.: He placed his tabernacle in the sunne, that is to say, his Church, in manifestation, or open view, not in a corner, not such as is hidden, as if it were couered &c. In the sunne he placed his tabernacle: what doest thou meane, O Heretike, to fly into darknesse? To a light that is not hidden vnder a bushell, but set vpon a candelstick: Which if Protestants see not. How (sayth S. Augustine)Tract. 2. in 1. Ep. Ioan. can I call them other then blinde, that see not so great a mountaine, and shut their eyes against the Lampe set vpon the candelstick? But what meruaile: for (sayth he)L. 2 co. Parm. c. 3. it is the condition of all here∣tikes, not to see the thing which in the world is most cleare, constitu∣ted in the light of all nations; out of the vnity wherof, whatsoeuer they do, can no more warrant them from the wrath of God, than the spiders web from the extremity of cold. Finally we belieue with S. AugustineCont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 104., that the Catholike Church hath this certaine marke, that she cannot be hidden. This is the doctrine and beliefe of all Catholikes: Do you herein accord with vs? Do you hold the Catholike Church to be alwaies visible, and alwaies as conspicuous as a lamp vpon a Candelstick, as a city vpon a mountaine, as a tabernacle in the sunne? Why then do you say, that she was so many yeares latent, and inuisible, that she could not be shewad; that she was vn∣knowne, and vnheard of; that she was no where externall, and visible; that she was wholly destroied? With what modesty then can you say, that Protestants hold not any greater inuisibility, or rather obscurity of the Church Catholike, then that, which the Ro∣manists are forced to confesse? But in proofe of this Thesis, and in opposition to the
holy Scripture, and S. Augustine, you say to vsPag. 367. fin., you re∣gard not, that the Church of Christ, as it is somtime in lustre glo∣rious as the sunne, so againe, it is (according to the iudgement of S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose) somtimes as the moone, which hath her increases, and decreases. Yes, we regard it well: and you ought to haue regarded, that although S. Augustine compare the Church to the moone, in this respect, that her externall lu∣stre is somtimes diminished by persecutions, and her glory obscured by the ill liues of some of her children, yet he fre∣quently compareth her to the sunne, and belieueth with the ProphetIsa. 60.29., that her sunne shall neuer set, and her moone shall not be diminished: andEp. 48. that, when by scandalls her light is most obscured, etiam tunc in suis fortissimis eminent euen then she is emi∣nent in her most steedfast Champions, and in them remaineth resplendent, and glorious, displaying beames of light ouer the whole earth. So farre is S. Augustine from your absurd paradoxe of the inuisibility & totall decay of the Church. And in what sense S. Ambrose compareth her to the moone, he declareth, sayingL. 4. Hexam. c. 2.: The Church hath her times of persecution, and of peace: she seemeth to decay, as the moone, but decaieth not. She may be shadowed, she cannot perish: because she is diminished by the fall of some in persecutions, to the end she may be filled with the confessions of Martyrs, and that being illustrated with trophies of the bloud shed for Christ, she may diffuse greater light of her deuotion, and fayth throughout the whole world. If Costerus, Castro, Lindanus, and Stapleton affirme, that the Arian heresy in a short time infected almost all the Churches of the world; so haue Lutheranisme, Caluinia∣nisme, Zuing lianisme, with other new Sects sprung from them in these later times, infected many prouinces of Eu∣rope. But therfore is the Catholike Church in those Pro∣uinces inuisible? How then do you see Catholikes to per∣secute them, to imprison them? And euen so, & much more, when the Arian heresy was in the greatest ruffe, the Ca∣tholike Church was euery where still eminently visible, as that very passage of Liberius proueth, which here you produce for the contrary: for Constantius the Arian Em∣peror hauing by threats drawne many Bishops, especially
of the East, to subscribe to the condemnation of Athana∣sius, and (as Theodoret out of his Apology reporteth)L. 2. histor. c. 15. the rest that refused to subscribe, either concealing themsel∣ues for feare, or being sent into banishment, he called Li∣berius vnto him, and vrged him not to communicate with Athanasius, saying, he was condemned by the whole world, and defended by none, but by him. Liberius ans∣wearedTheod. l. 2. hist. c. 16.: Esto, quod solus sim &c. Be it, that I am alone; the cause of the fayth is not therfore the worse: for there was a time, when there were but three Children to resist the Kings command∣ment. These three Children were brought by Nabuchodo∣sor out of Iury, into Babylon. As then there were none in Babylon, to defend Gods cause, but only those three; so (sayth Liberius, and out of him Salmeron here obiected by you) be it, that I am now left here alone, to desend the cause of Athanasius, the cause of the fayth is not therfore the worse. This you bring to proue, that the Church was then, or may somtimes be brought to so low an ebbe, that there be but three, yea only one Orthodoxe man remaining. But it is an ignorant mistake: for albeit there were then in Baby∣lon three only Children to resist Nabuchodonosor, yet in Iury there was remaining a numerous Church of Ortho∣doxe people. And so likewise, though there was then no other Bishop present, to withstand Constantius, yet there were in the Church of God at that time, many Catholike Bishops, renowned for their learning, and constancy, and diuers of them then actually in banishment, whose restitu∣tion to their Churches Liberius in that very Dialogue of∣ten demanded of Constantius. And who knoweth not that beside many Catholike Bishops reckoned by S. Athana∣siusApud Theod. l. 2. hist. c. 14.15.16. there liued at the same time other most eminent Prelates, and Doctors, as Saint Hilary, Pacianus, Di∣dymus, Titus Bostrensis, S. Cyrill of Hierusalem, Opta∣tus, Eusebius Vercellensis, S. Ephrem, S. Gregory Nazian∣zen, S. Epiphanius, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nyssen, S. Am∣brose, and many others? And as there were many Catho∣like Pastors, so were there Catholike people gouerned by them. Yea who knoweth not that both the Roman, and all
the Westerne Church at that time was full of Orthodoxe Pastors & people; in so much that after the Roman Matrōs by aduice of their HusbandsTheod. ibid. c. 17., had presented themselues before Constantius, and obteyned Liberius his returne from exile, the Bishops of the East sent Legates vnto him, and to all the Bishops of Italy, and of the whole Westerne Church, humbly crauing to be admitted into their com∣munion; and to declare themselues free from suspicion of heresy, with which they had bene charged, protested, that they did not belieue otherwise, then the Fathers of the Ni∣cen Councell did; and that they had held formerly, did still hold, and would euer hold till their last breath, the same fayth with them. Wherupon Liberius willingly ad∣mitted them into the communion of the Westerne Church, and addressed a letter to fifty nine of them by name and to all the rest in generall, expressing the great ioy he concea∣ued, to vnderstand, that they had alwaies agreed in fayth with him, and with the rest of the Bishops of Italy, and of all the other Westerne countries: for so are his words. This is the story truly set downe. What reliefe do you finde here for your inuisible Church, since in the very height of the Arian heresy (which is the greatest wayne you can sinde in the Catholike Church) she abounded, and shined like a sunne most gloriously, with orthodoxe Pa∣stors and people, both in the East and West? Shew vs such a Protestant Church before Luther, or els confesse the truth, that you had no Church before Luther. But you tell vsPag 369., with how great a cloud of obscuri∣ty the Church shalbe couered in the time of Antichrist, & proue it out of the Rhemists, who make wholy against you: for albeit they grant, that then there shalbe no publike seat of gouerment in the Church, nor publike exercise of Ecclesiasticall functions, nor publike entercourse with the See of Rome, (as there is not this day in Cyprus, nor in England) yet there shall not want Orthodoxe Pastors, and people, remaining in due obedience to the Roman Church, and communicating with her, not only in hart, but practi∣sing the same in secret, and making publike profession ther∣of
of, if occasion require it. This is the doctrine of the Rhe∣mists, and of all Catholike writers. Wherfore, as Catholikes are not in England at this day inuisible, nor yet so obscure but that their cōstaney is knowne and renowned through∣out the Christian world; so likewise shall the faithfull be in the dayes of Antichrist. Nor do Costerus, Ribera, Pere∣rius, Acosta, Viegas, or any of the Fathers which you ob∣iectPag. 370., teach ought to the contrary. The testimony of S. Hilary which you obiectPag. 38. S. Au∣gustine hath answeared long sinceEp. 48.: for it was obiected to him, by Vincentius the Rogatist, of whose spirit and be∣liefe you shew your selfe to be, vrging against vs the same testimony he vrged against S. Augustine, who not only in that place (as you haue heard) teacheth that, if the Church be somtimes obscured, and as it were shadowed with cloudes, by the multitude of scandalls, that is, persecutions, when sinners bend their bow to wound her in the obscurity of the Moone; yet euen then, she is eminent in her most constant professors, but also in his bookes Of the City of GodL. 20. c. 8., speaking professedly of the state of the Church in the dayes of Antichrist, he sayth, she shall not be so obscured, that either Antichrist shall not find her, or when he hath found her, be able with his persecutions to ouerthrow her; but that euen then faithfull Parents shall with great deuotion procure baptisme for their children; & that, as many shall fall from the Church, so others shall stand constant, and others shall enter a new which before were out of her, and in particular the Iewes, who towar∣des the end of the world shalbe conuerted to ChristS. Aug. ibid. c. 29.. And the same is testified by S. GregoryHom. 12. in Ezechiel., whom you mis∣citePag. 370.: for the words you obiect out of his Moralls on Iob, are not there to be found. SECT. IV. What causes may suffice to depart from the Communion of a particular Church. YOur fifth Thesis isPag. 370.: All particular Churches are not to be forsaken for euery vnsoundnesse in either manners, worship, or
doctrine. In the first part of this Thesis, we agree with you, but you agree not with your selfe: for before you tould vsPag. 11.12., that the Catholike Church is in euery part perfect, and consi∣steth only of the sanctified elect of God. But here you sayPag 371., that there is scarce to be found any one example of any particular Church consisting only of sanctified professors. It scarce any particular Church can be found consisting only of sanctified professors, how is it true, that the vniuersall Church consisteth only of the sanctified elect of God? for the vniuersall Church consisteth of all the particu∣lar Churches in the world. Againe here you inueigh against the Separatists, for di∣uiding themselues from you, for only scandall taken at the wic∣ked liues of your professors. May not wee then iustly except against you, for obiecting so often the vices of some few Popes, to make your departure from the Roman Church more iustifiable? The second part of your Thesis is false: for no worship, no rite, or ceremony which the Roman Church alloweth, or permitteth to particular Churches, in the administrati∣on of the Sacraments, or in any part of their seruice, is vn∣sound. And therfore as such difference is not a sufficient cause for one particular Church to separate it selfe from o∣thers; so on the contrary, if a particular Church vse any Ecclesiasticall obseruation, or ceremony disallowed and condemned by the Church of Rome, the Mother of all Churches, that worship is vnsound, and such a Church is schismaticall, and to be forsaken: and if it persist obstinat∣ly in that schisme, becometh hereticall. So many of the A∣sian Churches persisting obstinatly in the celebration of Easter according to the Iewish custome, after the prohibi∣tion of Pius the first Pope of that name, were iustly con∣demned, and cut of from the vniuersall Church by Victor a boly Pope, and Martyr: and his sentence was confirmed by the Councell of Nice, & many others; in so much, that the obseruers of that custome haue euer since bene iudged heretikes, and registred as such vnder the name of Quartade∣cimani by all Ecclesiasticall writers, that haue made Catalo∣gues of heresies.
The third part of your Thesis, that all particular Churches may erre in some points, as the Corinthians did in denying the Resurrection, and the Galatians in teaching a necessary ob∣seruation of the Law of Moyses together with the Ghos∣pell of Christ: and yet S. Paul1. Cor. 1.2. Galat. 1.2. calleth them both Chur∣ches, and Churches of God, because they were ready to be re∣formed, and being admonished of their error, to abandon it, and obey the truth. But not to be willing to learne, and not to yeild to truth sufficiently proposed, is proper to the Synagogues of Sathan, and the Churches of the malig∣nant. All this you allow as true doctrine taken out of Bel∣larmine. What then may we thinke of your Protestant Congregation? For many of your Tenets haue bene con∣demned in ancient Heretikes, and held euer since for here∣siesSee aboue Chap. 42. sect. 2. And yet that you are not ready to be reformed, but are most obstinate in your defence of them (which is the es∣sentiall character of heresy) is most easily proued: for it we speake of Luther, he acknowledged his new Tenets to be contrary to the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and Do∣ctors of Gods Church: For (sayth heColloq. mensal. Cap. de Patr. Eceles. In the workes of Hie∣rome, there is not a word of true fayth in Christ, and sound religion: Tertullian is very superstitious: I haue held Origen long since accur∣sed: Of Chrysostome I make no accomp: Basil is of no worth, he is wholly a Monke, I weigh him not a haire: Cyprian is a weake Deuine. Againe he preferreth his owne collected sense of Scripture before the expositions of all the Fathers, sayingTom 2. Witemb. l. cont. Reg. Aug. fol. 34. b.: The di∣uine Maiesty makes for me, so, as I care not, if a thousand Augustines, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand King Henry Churches stand against me; & concludeth sayingTom. 2. Witemb. printed 1554. fol. 290. b.: Be it that the Church, Augustine, and other Doctors, also Peter, Apollo, yea an Angell from heauen teach otherwise; yet my Doctrine is such, as setteth forth Gods only glory &c. Peter the chiefe of the Apostles did liue, and teach extra verbum Dei, besides the word of God. And speaking of all the ancient Fathers in generall, and preferring his owne iudgment & doctrine before theirs, he saythTom. . Witemb.  no 1551. l. de seruo arb. sol. 434.: The Fathers of so many ages haue bene plainly blind▪ and most ignorant in the Scriptures: they erred all their life time, and vnlesse they repented before their death, they neither were Saints, nor appertained to the Church.
And if we come to the Councells, he regarded them as little as he did the Fathers; and was resolued with a most peruerse and obstinate mind to deny, and contradict what∣soeuer a Councell should determine though neuer so true; and to maintaine stifly the contrary, though neuer so im∣pious, and damnable: for speaking of communion in both kindes, he saythDe formu∣la Missae & Hospin. hist. Sacramen. part. 2. fol. 13. a.: If a Councell should in any case decree this, then least of all, would we vse both kinds: yea rather in despight of the Councell, and that decree, we would vse either but one kind only, or neither, but in no case both. In like manner he teachethTom. 2. German. fol. 214., that if a Councell should grant Church-men liberty to marry, he would thinke that man more in Gods grace, who during his life, should keep three whores, then he, that should marry according to the Councels de∣cree: and that he would command vnder paine of damnation, that no man should mary by permission of such a Councell, but should either liue chast, or if that were not possible, then not to despaire, though he kept a whore. And speaking of the eleuation of the Sacra∣mentIn parua Confessione.: I did know the eleuation of the Sacrament to be Idola∣tricall, as making for sacrifice: yet neuerthelesse, I did retaine it in the Church at Witemberg, to despight the Diuell Carolstadius. Finally, notwithstanding he himselfe acknowledged, and many of your Protestant brethren confesseSee the next Section., that he learned the chiefe points of his doctrine from the Diuell, he was not ashamed to sayApud Zuing l. to. 2. ad Luth. con∣fess. fol. 478. a., If I be deceaued, God hath deceiued me &c. I am certaineLuth. to. 2. Witemb. fol. 333. a., that I haue my opinions from Heauen &c. They shall continue. I would haue you knowAduers. falso nominat. Eccles. stat., that hereafter I will not vouchsafe you so much honor, as to suffer either you, or the Angells of heauen, to iudge of my doctrine &c. For seeing I am certaine of it, I will in respect of it, iudg both of you, and of Angells. And yet for all this vaunting that he had no perswasion of the truth of his doctrine, is a thing manifest; both for that he had great re∣morse of ConscienceTo. 2. Ger. Ien. fol. 9. b. to. 2. Witemb. anno 1562. l. de abrog. Missa priu. fol. 24.4. b. & tom. 5. Annot. bre∣uiss., his hart beating within him, and repre∣hending him, that he being a sole man, and of no accompt, should a∣lone oppose himselfe against the Church, the Fathers, the Councells, the customs, the multitudes and greatnesse of wise men, censuring them all to haue liued in ignorance, and error, and himselfe only to be wise; as also because he offered to submit to the PopeTo. 1. Wi∣temb. fol. 215. b. M. Cooper Chron. printed 1565. fol. 278. a., and to sup∣presse his new doctrine, so that he might not be compelled
to recant. Wherby it is manifest, that he was resolued to goe against his owne knowledge, and conscience, either in preaching his new doctrine, knowing it to be false, or els in offering to suppresse it, knowing it to be true. If leauing Luther, we come to Caluin, whereas the ho∣ly Scriptures instruct vs in our beliefe of the Diuinity of Christ, and of the truth of that most sublime and incom∣prehensible mystery of the Blessed Trinity, and the holy Fathers out of them proue the same; Caluin accuseth them of misinterpreting the Scriptures, and by his blasphemous doctrine, destroieth those diuine misteries, the first Princi∣ples and ground of Christian religion. The particulars are set downe at large, and very punctually by M. BrereleyCaluins life sect. 3. pag. 136. & seqq. out of Caluins owne workes, and confirmed by the testi∣monies of other Protestants. And the thing is so certaine, that (as Iacobus Andreas, Schlusselburg, Hunnius, and Pelargus testifyIbid. the troupes of Arians now raging in Transilua∣nia, Poland, and Hungary, are but Colonies sent from Geneua; all the chiefest of them hauing bene at first Calui∣nists, and so continue to this day, in other points of their doctrineGratianus Prosper In∣strum. doctri. printed Loschi 1586., reputing themselues to be the most pure re∣formed Caluinists, by reason of their deniall of the Blessed Trinity, which they reiectOsiand. Cent. 16. l. 2. c. 22. pag. 209. fin., as being the three-headed Cerberus, the deuice of Antichrist, and the chiefe part of Popish Anti∣christian corruption. From this knowne foundation of the A∣rians Doctrine, Adam Neuserus a Caluinist, and chiefe Pastor at Heydelberg (who reuolted from thence to Arianisme) writ from Constantinople to Gerlachius a Protestant prea∣cher, sayingOsiand. ibid. pag. 208.: I know none in our time, to haue bene made an Arian, that was not first a Caluinist, as Seruetus, Blandrata, Paulus Alciatus, Franciscus Dauid, Gentilis, Gribaldus, Siluanus, and o∣thers, all of them Caluinists reuolted to Arianisme. Wherfore (sayth Neuserus) whosoeuer feareth to fall into Arianisme, let him take heed of Caluinisme. And as Caluin opposed the holy Scripture, and all Christian Antiquity in their beliefe of the Diuinity of Christ, and the blessed Trinity; so did he in the rest of his doctrines to the number of 23. confessing point by point,
that the contrary was held by the primitiue Church, and Fathers thereof, whom he nameth, noteth of error, and re∣iecteth in a scornefull and contemptible manner, as you may read in his lifeSect. 5. a. pag. 146. ad 265., in which the particulars are faith∣fully expressed in his owne words. And Iacobus GaulteriusTab. Chro∣nog. saecul. 16. a pag. 757. ad 795. hath related more of his errors, to the number of 100. shewing, that in many of them, he iumpeth with anci∣ent condemned heretikes. These two are the Maister-builders of your Protestant Church, whom you (to honor them) callIn your late Serm. at Durham pag. 38. Stellae primae magnitudinis, & Protestants generally haue in great esteeme, as men raised by Gods extraordinary prouidence to enligh∣ten the world. Their doctrines you follow, and with them reiect the ancient Fathers as Papists: for that you acknow∣ledg the Fathers to be against you, in the chiefe heads of Doctrine wherin you differ from vs, is exactly proued by your owne confessions expressed in your owne wordsBrereley Prot. Apol. ferè per tot.. I appeale then to any impartiall Iudge, whether you be not iustly accused of error, and of obstinacy in the man∣tainance therof: for to confesse, that you hold against the primitiue Fathers, and Church, and yet not to reforme your selues, after so many admonitions giuen you by the Church, which hath condemned your errors, and learne∣dly confuted them by her Doctors; what is it, but to con∣fesse, that you erre and are obstinate in error? especially since many of your Tenets are precisely the same which pri∣mitiue heretikes haue heldSee aboue Chap. 42. sect. 2., and in them haue bene con∣futed by the primitiue Fathers, and anathematized by the primitiue Church. If therfore (as you professe) not to be willing to learne, and not to yeild to truth sufficiently proposed, be proper to the Synago∣gues of Sathan, and the Churches of the malignant, I leaue it to your iudgment, whether your Churches may not be iustly reckoned in that number.
SECT. V. Of Luthers Excommunication, and of his Conference with the Diuell. YOur seauenth Thesis isPag. 373.: No vniust excommunication out of a true Church can preiudice the saluation of the excommuni∣cate. So farre we accord with you, and allow what you bring out of ToletIoan. 9.34., that the blinde man, whome the Iewes cast out of their Synagogue, was happy therin: but wheras you adde, that Luther whilest he continued in our Church, was as one borne blind, and when Christ opened his eyes was excom∣municate by our high Priest, for acknowledging the diuine light, you are to remember S. Augustines words,Tract. 45. in Ioan. that, There are many who boast, not only that they see, but will seeme to be enlightned by Christ; and those are heretikes. Luther speaking of his owne life and manners before his reuolt from the Catholike Church said of himselfeTo. 2. Wi∣temb. fo. 233. a., that during that time he was, iuuenis & monachus, pietatis studiosus, a yong man, a Monke studious of godlinesse, and liued in his MonasteryVoyon Catal. of Doct. printed in En∣glish 1598. pa. 180. Luth. v∣pon the Galat. Englished. in c. 1. vers. 14. fo. 350., punishing his body with watching, fasting, and prayer: that he honored the PopeLuther ibid. of mere conscience, kept chastity, pouerty, & obedience; and whatsoeuer I did, (sayth he) I did it with a syncere hart, of good zeale, and for the glory of God, fearing grieuously the last day, and desirous to be saued, from the bottome of my hart. In so much, that ErasmusEp ad Thom. Card. Ebor. re∣porteth of him, that for some smal time after his reuolt, there remained yet in him some reliques▪ or sparkes of former sanctimony. But afterwards, he was much altered, and so farre transported from the obseruance of Chastity, that now he professeth to the contraryIn Pro∣uerb. 31. vers. 1.: Nothing is more sweet, or pleasing vpon earth, then the loue of a woman if a man can obtaine it. And againeTom 7. Wittem. Ep. ed Wolfing. fol 505. a.: He that resolueth to be without a woman, let him lay a side the name of a man making himselfe a plaine Angell, or spi∣rit. And yet moreBrer. Luth. life Chap. 3. sect. 6. pag. 71. h. Luth. Col∣loq. German, cap. de ma∣trim.: As it is not in my power, to be no man, so it is not in my power, it be without a woman &c. It is more necessary, then to eat, drinke, purge, make cleane the nose &c. In so much that he acknowledgethColloq. mensal. fol. 526. a. & 400. a. himselfe to haue bene almost mad
through the rage of lust, and desire of women; exclaming out yet furtherTo. 1. Ep. Latin. fol. 334. ad Philip., and saying: I am burned which the great flame of my vntamed flesh &c. Eight daies are now past, in which I neither write, pray, or study, being vexed partly with temptations of the flesh, part∣ly with other trouble. But (sayth heIbid. fol. 345. it sufficeth, that we haue knowne the riches of the glory of God: from him sinne cannot draw vs, although we should commit fornication, or kill a thousand times in one day. And finally, not long after, with breach of his vow, he maried Katherine Bore, a runnagate NunneMelancth. Ep. ad Ioac. Camer. de Luth. coning. inter Theol. Consil. Melan∣cth. part. 1. pag. 37.: for which by the most ancient Imperiall Lawes, made soone after Constantine the GreatSozom. l. 6. c. 3. fin. & lex extat Cod. l. de Epise. & Cler., he should haue lost his head. These were his beginnings: and by degrees he grew to be so wicked, that Caluin was enforced to confesse, Magnis vitijs laborat, that Luther was subiect to great vices. And in the end, he grew to be so dissolute, that he was censured by his owne followers; who, when they would giue themselues to dissolution, were wont to sayMorgen∣stern. tract. de Eccles. printed 1598. pag. 221., Hodie Lutheranice vi∣uemus: This day we will liue Luther-like. Which corruption springing from Luther, as from the roote, grew and spread it selfe so farre, among his followers, that as he himselfe confessethPostil. in Euang. Do∣minic. 1. Ad∣uentus., they grew daily worse, being more reuengfull, coue∣tous, licencious, then they were before in the Papacy. And what te∣stimony hereof other Protestants giue, you haue partly heard alreadySee aboue Chap. 42. sect. 3.: and who pleaseth to read more of the same kind, let him peruse a late booke intituled, The triall of the Protestant priuat spirit, whereChap. 9. sect. 8. subdiu. 4. pag. 333. & seqq. he shall find the inge∣nuous confessions both of English, and forraine Prote∣stants to the same effect. By this it appeareth, that if Luther were blind whilest he was with vs, and his eyes opened when he went from vs; it was not Christ that opened them, but his familiar friend the Deuill, who (witnesse Ioannes Manlius, Luthers owne scholler, and Physitian)Loc com∣mun printed at Basil 1562. Luth. tom 1. Germ. ad Se∣nat. Ciu. haunted him from his youth, and appeared often to him in the night, in forme of flying firebrands. And Luther himselfe speaking of these his visions, and familiar conuersation with the Deuill saythColloq. Germ fol. 283. & Calu. ad. mon. vlt. ad West ha cit. à Schlussel. l. 2. Theol. Calui. art. 1.: I haue a Diuell, or two, that waite vpon me diligently, & they are not petty Deuils, but great ones, yea and Doctors of Diuinity
among the rest of the Diuells. And againeTom. 2. Germ. Ien. fol. 77.: Belieue me, I know the Diuell very well; for now and then, he walkes with me in my Chamber: When I am with company be troubles me not: but when he takes me alone, then he teaches me manners. And shewing that he was so familiar with him that they did eat together, at the same tableInoncio. Dom. Remi∣niscere fol. 19. apud Co∣chlaeum.: I am (sayth he) throughly acquainted with the Di∣uell; for I haue eaten a bushell of salt in his company. Yea he ack∣nowledgeth that he was his bedfellow, and lay with him oftner, and closer to his side, then his Kate the Nunne didColloq. German. fol. 275.281.. And yet more, that the Diuel did somtimes dance to & fro in his braines, in such sort, that he could neither write, nor readIn lit. ad Elect. Saxo∣niae.. But that which most of all sheweth, who it was that opened his eyes, is the long Conference, or Disputation, which the Diuell had with himLuth. to. 6. Ger. Ien. l. de Missa ang. fol. 28. & tom. 7. Witerub. an∣no 2558 l. de Missa ang. & vnct. Sacerd. fol. 28., and therin persuaded, and ouercame him with his Arguments, to abandon the Masse, inuocation of Saints, and some other points of the Catholike fayth: which conference is set downe at large by Luther himselfe (b), and acknowledged by many of your best learned, Protestants. For first Caluin cited by Conra∣dus SchlusselbergL 2. Theol. Caluin. art 1. sayth: Luthers doctrine concerning the sup∣per, is an opinion suggested by the Diuell. Secondly HospinianHist. Sacr. par. 2. fol. 131. reciteth our of Luthers workes a part of his conferēce with the Diuell, saying: Luther tells many things of this disputation; the summe of which is, that he was taught by the Diuell, that Masse was naught, and that being conuinced with the Diuells Arguments, he abo∣lished it. And in his first Alphabeticall table, prefixed before his booke, among other Colloquies, or Conferences, be set∣teth downe this of Luther vnder the title of, Colloquium Lu∣theri cum Diabolo, in quo instruitu, de erroribus Missa: The confe∣rence of Luther with the Diuell, in which he is instructed concerning the errors of the Masse. Thirdly Dauid Paraeus saidIn praelect. Catechist. l. 5. c. 17. pag. 257.: Luther affirmeth, that he learned from the black spirit the Diuell, his reasons to condemne the Masse, Ergo (sayth Paraeus) he was the Diuells disciple. 4. Erasmus a man of esteeme among Protestants. saythCont. Ep. Luther. non sob., that Luther bringeth in the disputation of the Diuell in his booke, De Missa angulari: affirming moreouer from Luthers words, that the Diuell did impugne Luthers mind about the Masse. 5. The Caluinian Deuines of Zuricke, in theirPag. 25.26.127. Confession,
terme Luther; The minister of Sathan, and say, that he writ his bookes impulsu spiritus Satanae &c. by the suggestion of Sathan, with whom he disputed, and (as it seemes) was therin ouercome by Sathan. I know that you out-facing all these witnesses, and de∣nying the truth of their report, sayApol. Cath. part. 2. c. 1. and in your direct Ans∣weare to Theophilus Higgons pag. 5.: Since that time (to wit of Luther) haue risen vp spirits of a lying malignancy, that haue blurred and bespotted his life with all the reprochfull notes of mon∣strous infamy; as if he had familiarity with the Diuell, and was a wine-bibber. But whether you be not guilty of that lying ma∣lignancy, which you impute to vs. I leaue to the censure of any impartiall Iudge, being that Luther in so many pla∣ces of his workes giueth euidence against himselfe of his great familiarity with the Diuell, & setteth downe at large the whole Conference he had with him, concerning the Masse; and that so many of your best learned Protestants, who liuing nearer Luthers time, & that had better meanes to know the truth then you, are herein witnesses against you. Why do you conceale all these particulars? Why do you not deale ingenuously, giuing your Reader notice of them? Nay, why do you professe (o), that you had seriously in∣quired into Luthers confession hereof, with a purpose, that if any such thing should sensibly appeare, then vtterly to abhorre Luthers name, & suspect all his doctrine? We finde, and it is manifest, that your meaning agreeth not with your wordes: for vndertaking to answeare for Luther, you answeare not, but confesse the thing, and insteed of answearing, obiect another story, which Delrius reporteth of the Diuel appearing to an Ab∣bot, in forme of an Angell, and persuading him to say Masse. If this were true, it could be no reliefe to Luthers cause. But to make it true, you falsify Delrius: for he sayth not, that the Diuell perswaded an Abbot to say Masse, but that he perswaded a Monke, that was not a Priest to say Masse: which as it was a perswasion fit to proceed from the Diuell, so is it a very fit example to iustify Luthers instru∣ction and doctrine receaued from the Diuell. It is therfore most certaine, that the Diuell appeared to Luther, and disputed with him, and that Luther being ouercome with his arguments, abandoned the Masse. And
his Disciples of Wittemberge, moued by his example, did the like: and, as he did, so also did they set forth a booke of their reasons, which (as Brereley hath noted)Luthers life Chap. 1. sect. 2. pag. 20▪ are the very same the Diuell proposed to Luther, and which Protestants at this day alleage against the Masse. Finally other Protestants are not wanting to testify, who it was, that opened Luthers eyes. Your Tigurine Di∣uinesTract. 3. cont. suprem. Luth. con∣fess. protest, that he was full of Diuels, and of such speaches, as are hardly thought to passe from the furious Diuell himselfe. No meruaile thē if Oecolampadius in his answeare to Luthers Confession of fayth, passe this verdict on him: He began his former booke with the Diuell, & now he endeth this with the Diuell. No wonder, if Conradus RegiusLib. cont. Ioan. Hess. de coena Dom. testify of him that, God for his great pride did take from him the spirit of truth, as he did from the Prophets mentioned in the third booke of Kings, Chap. 22. and in place of that his spirit, gaue him an angry, proud, and liyng spi∣rit. And (to omit other testimonies) Ioannes Campanus a famous ZuinglianIn Colloq. Lat. Luth. to. 2. fol. 351. passeth this censure on him: Quam cer∣tum est Deumesse Deum, tam certus & Diabolicus mendax est Lu∣therus: As certaine as it is, that God is God, so certaine it is, that Luther is a lyer and belongs to the Diuell. And therfore in the end he tooke him, as one that belonged to him: for hauing one euening eaten, & drunken very liberally, he was the next morning found dead, in a most horrible mannerCochl. in vita Luth. & alij passim., so v∣gly and deformed, that it was not hard to ghesse at the au∣thor of his death; which was such as he himselfe expected when he saydEp. ad Spalat. to. 2. Epist. Latin. not long before: I daily wait for death, and for the deserued punishment of an heretike. I conclude therefore with OrigenHom. 3. in Exod. ante med.: Orandum nobis est &c. We are to pray, that our Lord vouchsafe to open our mouth, that we may be able to conuince thē that contradict, and stop that mouth which the Diuell opened. SECT. VI. Whether the Roman Church, be as subiect to errors, as any other Church. YOur Thesis is affirmatiuePag. 374.: your Proofes, repetitions of arguments already answeared. One only you adde
heere, & repeate afterwards againePag. 397. & 400., which is, The Church of Rome hath erred in matter of fayth, Ergo she may possibly erre. I deny your Antecedent. You proue it: The administration of the Eucharist vnto infants vpon necessity of saluation, was taught, & continued in the Church of Rome, for the space of 600. yeares toge∣ther: but you confesse, there is now no such necessity, Ergo, in those former times the Church of Rome erred. It is a knowne principle in Scholes, that he argueth absurdly, who proposeth an ar∣gument, that makes as much against himselfe, as  his aduersary, & to which therefore himselfe in  is bound to answere▪ Such i this of yo  of Rome erreth not now in  the Eucharist to  ¦testants herei  no such necess professe, tha  error in fayh fo Pag. 276. 178. hold now the  leeued the doctri  charist to infants vpon  ding to your principles) red  you can make, I know not. Sure  denying, that the reall administration  ¦fants, is necessary for their saluation, can g  solution to this difficulty; which yet in the princ  Catholike doctrine is easily answeared. Wee haue learned two sacred principles from the mouth our Sauiour: The former isIoan. 3.5.: If one be not borne againe water, and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of Go If therfore we will enter into the kingdome of God, we mu receaue the Sacramēt of baptisme really, or at least i  Whosoeuer is growne to perfect age, when he ca  ceaue it really, it is sufficient for saluation, to  intentionally in desire, by fayth, and other good Act, of which infants are not capable; and therefore the re ecea∣uing of the Sacrament of baptisme is necessary for them to saluation. If thou wilt be a Christian Catholike (sayth S. Augu∣stin)De anima & eius orgi. l. 3. c. 9. neyther belieue, nor say, not teach, that infants dying with∣out
baptisme can be saued. And the contrary doctrine he repor∣tethL. de hae∣res. ad Quod∣vuls. haer. 88. as an Article of the Pelagian heresy. The other principle isIoan. 6.34.: Vnlesse you eat the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you shall not haue life in you. It is therfore necessary to saluation for all, as well infants, as others, to receaue the holy Eucharist either really, or at least in vow. And this vow may eyther be explicit, that is a desire of receauing it, when it cannot really be had; or els  as in the Sacrament of baptisme: for that in bap∣  vow of the holy Eu∣  the firstRescrip. ad Concil. Mile∣uit. Ep. 25., S. Augu∣  omas of Aquine, as  proued by the great  e two most Eminent  nRepliq. l. 2. troiseme Ob∣seru. Chap. 11..To. 3. in 3. part. disp. 40. sect. 2. §. Hinc 4. The words of  s purpose: It is in no  himTom. 6. in c. 10.1. ad Co∣rinth. Ven.Tom. 3. Contr. l. 1. de Euchar c 7. Bade)  partakerof the body &  er of Christ in baptisme;  of that bread, & of that  d, and drinke of that cup,  d in the vnity of the body  pation and benefit of that  which the Sacrament sig∣  ius, and S. Augustine  essity of baptizing in∣  for them, to receaue  ceaued before the be  aptisme, which is the  all the aments, righy followeth against the lagians, tha Baptisme is absolutely necessary for infants, to the end tht therby they may receaue the Eucharist at least in vow, without which they cannot be saued. In this sense, and in no other, these Fathers, and the Church of Rome with them, haue taught a necessity of ad∣ministing the Eucharist to infants, to wit, so farre forth, as it is contained implicitly, and virtually in Vow, in the Sa∣crament of baptismer: for that a reall administration of the
Eucharist vnto them was necessary for saluation she neuer taught; which you, and other Protestants not vnderstan∣ding, impute the contrary doctrine to her, assuming it as an argument, that she hath erred in varying from that doctrine which once she taught. To this Thesis you adde an otherPag. 375., that, The Roman Church is more subiect to error, then any other Church Christian: which to be a shamefull vntruth, appeareth out of the pro∣mise of our Sauiour made to S. Peter, and his successors, that the gates of hell (which are errors in fayth) shall not preuaile a∣gainst the Church built on them; and out of his prayer made for them, that their fayth shall not faile: for that this promise of Christ, and this prayer were not made to S Peter, nor for him, as he was a priuat man; but as he was Head of the Church, and therfore extend to all his successors in the Ro∣man See, to secure them from error in their definitions of fayth, hath bene the beliefe of all Orthodoxe antiquitySee aboue Chap. 12. sect. 1. & 2.. Nor do you produce here any thing to the contrary, which hath not bene proued to be imposterous, excepting only that here you charge the new Church of Rome (for so you call it) with belieuing, the conclusion of the Pope in matters of fayth to be infallible, albeit he vse no diligence at all for the directing of his iudgment; which is (say you) the strong breath of an Ana∣baptisticall, and Enthusiasticall spirit. We are well assured, what spirit guydeth your pen. Do you find this doctrine autho∣rized by the Church of Rome? In what Councell? By what Pope? In your margent you cite Valentia in the sea∣uenth Chapter of his Analysis: which is to cite at randome, and falsly: for that worke of Valentia consisteth of eight bookes: you specify none of them; nor are the words, you obiect, to be found in the seauenth Chapter of any one of those eight bookes. I find some such in the third Chapter of his last booke; where, as also afterwards againeAnaly. l. 8. c. 10., he professedly disputeth, what meanes the Pope is bound to vse in his definitions of fayth, and whether the infallibility of his iudgment depend vpon those meanes? In which question Valentia teacheth nothing, but what is the most receaued opinion of Deuines, and most agreeable to truth.
There seemeth to be some disagreement in this point a∣mong the Schoole-Doctors, some saying, that the Pope cannot erre, if he proceed maturely, hearing the counsell of Pastors, and Learned men: Others (of which number Valentia is) affirming, that he cannot erre, though he de∣fine alone, without deliberation, and consultation. But these two opinions differ in words only, not in reality of truth: for when the authors of the former opinion say, that to define, the Pope is bound to proceed maturely, taking the aduice of a Councell, or of men wise, learned, and skil∣full in the matter which is to be determined, to the end he may not erre; they say not this, to signify, that the infallibi∣lity of his definition consisteth in, or proceedeth from the wisdome, and learning of his Counsellors, but only to shew, that he is bound to proceed prudently, and maturely. And so likewise, when Valentia, and authors of the second opinion say, that if the Pope should define alone, without a Councell of Bishops, or aduice of other learned men, he could not erre; they say it not to deny, that he is bound to vse such meanes, but to signify, that the infallibility of his definition consisteth not in them, but in his owne authori∣ty and warrant which he hath from Christ of not erring. And this is the meaning of Valentia, as in that very place he expresly declareth. Nor do I see, what you can find ther∣in, either absurd or vntrue. But if you curiously demand: Whether the Pope may erre, in case he proceed to define inconsideratly and rashly? Valentia, and all Catholike Doctors will answeare, that your Question implieth a Condition impossible: for the Pope in his definitions cannot proceed immaturely. The Philosophers say, Qui dat formam, dat consequentia ad formam: He that giues the forme, giues also the dispositions necessary for the forme. And he that giueth the end, giueth also such meanes as are necessary for the attaining of the end. Wherfore Christ hauing made promise to the See Apostolike, that the gates of hell shall not preuaile against her, and that the successors of S Peter shall not faile in confirming their brethren, it belongeth to his diuine prouidence, so to direct, gouerne, and assist
him, that he proceed not to define, without sufficient deli∣beration, and maturity. If (sayth S. Augustine)De vtil. ered. c. 10. the pro∣uidence of God be not the Gouernesse of humane affaires, no regard is to be bad of religion. But if all this variety of Creatures do, I know not with what interior knowledge, mooue vs to seeke God, and to serue God; surely we ought not to be diffident, but that there is some au∣thority constituted by the same God, wheron we relying, as vpon a certaine step, may ascend vnto God. SECT. VII. Whether there be in the Scripture any Prophesy, that the Church of Rome shall fall from the fayth. THat Christ hath prophesied of the Church of Rome, that she shall neuer fall from the fayth, hath bene alre∣dy prouedChap 12. sect. 1. & 2.. Your third Thesis to the contrary is; that there is not in all the Scripture any prophesy of the fall of any Church Christian from the fayth,Pag. 377. but only of the Church of Rome, from which it may somtime be necessary to depart. Which is in effect to say, that there is in the Scripture a prophesy, that the Church of Rome shall fall from the fayth. In proofe of this you re∣mit vs to the testimony of two Iesuits Ribera, and Viegas, that the city of Rome shall in the end of the world be the seat of Antichrist; which is not their doctrine, but a calum∣nious slander of yours. They hold with the ancient Fa∣thers, that not Rome, but Hierusalem shall be the Seat of Antichrist. The Euangelist (sayth Ribera)Ad cap. 11. Apocalyp. n. 20. fin. 21. init. calling Hierusalem a great city, signifieth not obscurely that she shall be great at that time in power, and in number of Citizens, to wit, when Anti∣christ shall raigne in her, being receaued of the Iewes, and honored as the true Messias. This city both because she killed our Lord, and be∣cause then she shalbe the Court of Antichrist, full of all wickednesse, and impiety, he calleth Sodome, and Aegypt &c. for what sinne and impiety will she not be guilty of, Antichrist raigning in her? So Ri∣bera; from whom Viegas dissenteth not. Say now; Can there be a more shamfull imposture, then to impute to these learned Authors, your owne falsities, & theron to ground
your calūnies against the Church of Rome, as vpon truthes asserted by them? Such Arguments are indeed fit proofes to iustify your departure from her. But were it true, that the City of Rome in the end of the world shall be the Seat of Antichrist, doth that any way iustify your present depar∣ture from the Roman Church? Looke back vpon what hath bene sayd, & you shall find, how little those words, Goe out of Babilon my people, make for you, and that euen ac∣cording to your Protestant Expositors they are wholly a∣gainst you. In your fourth ThesisPag. 378., which is, That the Church of Rome hath long bene, and still is, the most schismaticall Church of all other Churches Christian, that carry in them a visible face of a Church, you bring nothing, but what hath bene already an∣sweared point by point. SECT. VIII. Whether Luther were iustly excommunicaeed. TO proue, that he was iniustly excōmunicated, you sayPag. 381.: Luthers excommunication by Pope Leo, must haue bene either for manners, or doctrine. I answeare: for both; and that most deseruedly. If we looke into his manners, he was a sacrilegious Apostata, that fled out of his Monastery: he cast off his religious habit, and burning with flames of ra∣ging lust, to satisfy his fleshly desires, married a vowed Nunne; a crime so hainous, that according to the ancient Imperiall lawes, he was to be punished with deathSozom. l. 6. c. 3. Cod. L de Episc. & Cler.. His pride was such, that he preferred himselfe before all the Doctors of Gods Church, contemning a thousand Cy∣prians, a thousand Augustines, a thousand K. Henry Chur∣ches, so farre, as that he scorned to be iudged by any man, but would himselfe be Iudge of men, and Angells. His rai∣ling was most intemperate, base, and scurrill, traducing and reuiling euen the greatest Princes. One exāple of K. Hen∣ry the eight may suffice, against whom he ragingly acted the part of Hcules frens, tearming him, an enuious mad foole;
babling with much spight in his mouth: a damnable rotten worme, a basiliske and progeny of an adder, a lying Sycophant couered with the title of a King, a clownish wit, a doltish head, most wicked, foolish, & impudent Henry: saying yet further, He doth not only lyelike a most vaine scurre, but equalleth, if not exceedeth a most wicked knaue: thou liest in thy throat, foolish and sacrilegious King. These and many other like speeches against K. Henry, are his; some of them being so base, and beastly, that modesty forbiddeth to english them. If from Princes, we come to other his aduer∣saries, he called them insathanized, supersathanized, and persa∣thanized, and that the Diuell was infused, perfused, and transfused into their mouths; in so much that your Tigurines sticked not to say of him, that he was full of Diuells, and vsed such speeches, as could hardly be thought to proceed from the furious Diuell him∣selfe. He was voyd of all conscience, being obstinatly resol∣ued to condemne whatsoeuer a Councell should deter∣mine, though neuer so Orthodoxe, and holy; & to allow, and defend whatsoeuer a Councell should condemne, though neuer so wicked and hereticall. To which I adde, that to spight Carolstadius, he retained in the Church of Wittemberg, the eleuation of the Sacrament, which he thought to be idolatrous. He was inconstant in his doctrine, teaching one day one thing, another the contrary; in so much, that Iodocus CocciusTo. 1. l. 8. art. 6. pag. 1038. & seqq. hath faythfully taken out of his workes, and set downe 80. Articles, in which he had contradicted himselfe, gainsaying what before he had taught, and shewing himselfe to be guided by the spirit of contradiction, and lying: Of which, as also of his conten∣tious and wrangling spirit, his life affordeth you good examplesBrereley Luthers life Chap. 3. sect. 2.. Finally to shew, that Luther was no very great Saint, his familiar conuersation with the Diuell is a sufficient euidence. I insist not in the proofe of these parti∣culars, hauing spoken of some of them already, and espe∣cially because Brereley, in Luthers life, hath proued them all out of Luthers owne workes, and by the testimony of other Protestants. Nor can I find, that you with all your study haue bene able to produce any thing to the contra∣ry, but only these few wordsPag. 381. out of Erasmus, Si Luthero
fauerem, vt viro bono, quod fatentur & hostes; which how truly they are cited, I know not: for I know that Erasmus saidIn soi ad  ton. Christum agnosco, Lutherum non agnosco. But howsoeuer, Eras∣mus is a partiall witnesse, of whom it was said, Erasmus laid the eggs, and Luther hatcht the Scorpions; and whom Doctor Humfrey, and Doctor Reynolds challenge as a man of your religion, and Foxe hath placed in your Kalendar of Saints. And finally, if by Luthers enemies, you vnderstand Catholikes, you cannot nominate any one, that hath euer esteemed other wise of him, then as of a most wicked, and sacrilegious Apostata. If you could, you would haue bene ready inough to do it, without any prouocation from vs. If leauing his wicked life we come to his doctrine, we shall find it answearable to his manners. First he taught, that Gouernors of Churches, and Pastors haue power to teach, but that the sheep must be Iudges of their doctrine; and that the Bishops, and Councells ought to giue place, and subscribe to the censure, and iudgment of the sheep. 2. He taught to the great danger of Christendome, that to warre against the Turkes, is to resist God visiting our sin∣nes by them. 3. He cut of from the Canon of holy Scrip∣tures, the booke of Ecclesiastes, saying, there is in it neuer a per∣fect sentence; the Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrewes; the Epi∣stles of S. Iames, and S. Iude; the second of S. Peter; the se∣cond and third of S. Iohn, with the Apocalyps. 4. He held the heresy of Simon Magus, that man is iustified by fayth alone; and in proofe therof corrupted the text of S. Iames. adding to it this word alone: and being admonished therof, he raged, protesting, that he repented himselfe, he had not translated worse. 5. He taught, that Good-workes are not only not necessary to saluation, but hurtfull: & that the ten commandments belong not to Christians. 6. That if the wife will not come, or cannot by reason of infirmity, let the maid come. 7. That among Christians, no man ought to be Magistrate, but that each one is equally subiect to each other. 8. He maketh the power of administring the Sacra∣ments common to lay men with the Clergy. 9. He taught that Christ in his passion, did not only suffer in his human,
but also in his diuine nature. 10. Concerning the Blessed Trinity, he had the diuine nature to be threfold, as the per∣sons are 11. That God worketh wickednesse in the wic∣ked; and that it is not in the power of man, to auoid it: which what is it els, but to make God the Author of sinne? 12. He maketh Virginity inferior to mariage. 13. To pre∣uent praying to Saints, and Purgatory, he affirmeth the soule to sleepe with the body. 14. He denieth that there is any locall hell, before the day of iudgment. All these do∣ctrines are proued to be his out of his owne workes, & out of the Confessions of many other Protestants, exactly and faythfully related in his life, by M. BrereleyChap. 2. per tot. From whence I conclude, that if euer any man was, or may be iustly excommunicated for wickednesse of life, or for here∣ticall and blasphemous doctrines, Martin Luther, by both these titles, hath bene most iustly excommunicated, & cast out of the Church. SECT. IX. Of the first occasion of Luthers reuolt from the Church: and that Doctor Morton to defend his doctrine a∣gainst Indulgences, falsifieth sundry Authors. POpe Leo the tenth hauing giuen out certaine Indul∣gences for the people of Germany, that would contri∣bute any almes to the building of that sumptuous Church, which Iulius his predecessor had begun in honor of S. Pe∣ter, Cardinal Albert B. of Mentz, and the Marquis of Bran∣deburg (to whom the publishing of the Indulgences, and collecting the almes was committed) for the publishing of the indulgences, made choyce of Tetzelius a famous prea∣cher of the Order of S. Dominick: Wherat the Friers of S. Augustines Order, and especially Staupitius the Vicar ge∣nerall, and Martin Luther being offended, opposed them∣selues, hoping by fauor of Frederick Duke of Saxony, to get the place for themselues. But missing of that, they began to reprehend the abuses committed (as they pretended) in
the promulgation of those indulgences. But Luther being of a fiery nature, and of a contentions spirit, rested not here, but published in print 95. propositions about the nature, institution, end, and effect of indulgences; diuers of which were censured by Tetzelius as hereticall, and Luther ther∣vpon complained of to the Pope, and cited to appeare at Rome. But by mediation of friends which he procured, the hearing of his cause being remitted to Cardinall Caietan, who was then the Popes Legate in Germany, Luther ap∣peared before him, and gaue vp a protestation of his sub∣mission, promising to follow the holy Roman Church in all her sayings, and doings, present, past, and to come. But neuerthelesse being gotten from the Cardinall, he went forward in his former contentions, and beside a publike disputation, which he held with Eckius at Lipsia against indulgences, he diuulged many other scoffing pamplets, & treatises, to call in doubt, and bring in contempt, diuers o∣ther points of religion: from whence hath followed all the calamity, that in these parts of the world hath ensued since that time, in the Church of God. This was the occasion, these the beginnings of Luthers reuolt, proceeding merely from his couetousnesse, pride, enuy, and grudging, that the promulgation of those indul∣gences was not committed to him, and his Order: for he protested afterwards, at that time he neither intended nor dreamed of any change, but fell into those contentions ca∣sually, and against his will, not well knowing then, what Indulgences meantSee Brerel. Luthers life. Chap. 1. sect. 1. Now you come in, to act your partPag. 381. fin. 382. init. and promise to proue by a cloud of witnesses, the falshood and impiety of the Popes doctrine concerning indulgences, and the iniquity of his practise, hea∣ping vp riches by them. And first you except against the PopePag 383., for condemning this proposition of Luther, It is not in the power of the Church, to make new articles of fayth. This hath bene alleady answearedSee aboue Chap. 4., and declared what power the Church hath, or hath not herein. 2. To prone, that the doctrine of Indulgences is a new article of fayth, you produce many AuthorsPag. 382. 383. 384. 385. 386. 389., which may
be reduced to three classes. The first is of heretikes, as Corne∣lius Agrippa, a Magicians; Paul, a Venetian Fryer, condemned a few yeares since for heresy; Fasciculus rerum expetendarum; Acta Concilij Tridentini; Controuersiae memorabiles; all of them be∣ing Treatises of Protestants, set forth without names of their authors, and prohibited. To these you adde ThuanusPag. 385. whom you call our noble Historian: but we bequeath him to you, as one whose writings shew him to be yours. Nor are you contented to cite him, as a Catholike author, but falsify him. He raileth against Pope Leo, for ordaining, that when a Bishoprick or Abbacy in France is vacant, for the auoiding of simony, and other inconueniencet, a per∣son fit for those dignities be presented by the King, & ordai∣ned by the Pope. His words in Latin, as you cite them, are, Peccatum in sacris muneribus dispensandis Leo mox grauiore cumu∣lauit &c. In which words he makes no mention of indul∣gences, but only of conferring sacred or Ecclesiasticall dig∣nities, and offices. But you, to make them serue, your turne against indulgences, corrupt them, translating in sacris mune∣ribus dispensandis, thus: of ill dispersing indulgences. Leo (say you) to his sinne of ill dispersing indulgences, added a farre greater. Is not this a great imposture? And the like you commit againePag. 389., when speaking of Luthers separation from the Roman Church, you say: Luther was a passiue therin, as appeareth out of the proceedings of Pope Leo against him: Els why is it, that your owne Thuanus speaking of this separation, sayd, That some in those dayes laid the fault vpon Pope Leo. This is a greater imposture then the former: for Thuanus speaketh not those words of Lu∣thers separation from the Church of Rome, but against al∣tering the custome formerly obserued in the election of Ec∣clesiasticall Prelates in France; which he attributeth to An∣tonius Pratensis, Chancellor of that kingdome; though out of his owne splene against the Pope, he adde, that there were not then wanting some, that laid the fault vpon Pope Leo. What con∣nexion hath this with Luthers reuolt from the Church of Rome, or with the doctrine of indulgences? You cannot excuse it from a Grand Imposture. To the second classe, may be reduced Massonius, Polydore
Virgill, and Erasmus, who speake not aggainst the doctrine of Indulgences, but against the abuse of them. And for as much, as in many other things, and particularly, in that very point, they speake temeraiously and ouerlash, those their workes, you know, are forbidden by the Church: Why do you alleage them, as of authority against vs? The third classe is of approued Catholike Authors, of whom you first producePag. 384. fin. Roffensis, saying: There was no vse of indulgences in the beginning of the Church Christian. But you change the state of the question, passing from the vse of in∣dulgences (of which Roffensis speaketh) to the doctrine of indulgences; and inferre, that because Roffensis found not the vse or practise of them, in the begining of the Church, he denieth the doctrine, and lawfulnesse of them, which in that very article he effectually proueth out of the power of binding, and losing, giuen by Christ in the Ghospell to S. Peter, and his Successors. 2. He yeildeth the reason, why there was not so much necessity of vsing thē in those beginings, as afterwards. 3. He sheweth, that Catholike Deuines proue the vse of them, to be most ancient, out of the stations so much frequented in Rome; and that S. Gre∣gory the great granted some in his time. 4. His owne opi∣nion is, that it is not certainly knowne, when they began first to be vsed in the Church: from whence it must follow by the rule of S. AugustineL 4. de Baptism. c. 24., that the practise of them is from the Apostolicall time. The second author you producePag. 135., is Alphonsus de Castro, who sayth: Neque tamen hac occasione sunt contemnendae (indulgentiae) quod earum vsus in Ecclesia videatur sero receptus: which words you peruert changing videatur, into fit; but most of all, by translating them falsly: for you render them thus; Indulgences are not therfore to be contemned, as being admit∣ted but of late: which is not only a false translation, but a manifest peruerting of the sense: for Castro speaketh not of the doctrine or lawfulnesse of granting indulgences, but de earum vsu, of the vse of them, which therfore in your english you cunningly omit, that ou of him you may proue the doctrine of them to be new. Yea, and concerning the very
vse of them, he proueth it to be most ancient, by the same arguments Roffensis before him had done, concluding, that you, and all others which contemne a thing practised so many hundreds of yeares by the Catholike Church, and established by generall Councels, are iustly accounted heretikes. So farre is Castro from fauoring Luthers cause. The third Author is Bellarmine, out of whom you cite these wordsPag. 385.:Thesaurus Ecclesiae spiritualis est fundamentum indulgentiarum: Which words you english Thus: The ground of indulgences is the spirituall treasury of workes, consisting in the sa∣tisfactory, and meritorious workes of supererogation, done by the fai∣thfull. Which treasury to haue bene anciently wanting, you proue also out of Bellarmine, setting downe these words as his: Hoc caruisse dicunt Ecclesiam Doctores Louanienses. This your Doctors of Louaine, and some Scholemen (as you know) affirme, was anciently wanting in the Church. So you: and then you tell vsIbid. out of Suarez, who those Schole men were, namely Mayzo, and Durandus. In this short passage of yours, there are almost as many vntruthes, and falsifications, as words. For first the Latin words are not Bellarmines, but your owne fathered on him. And so also are the English, (which ne∣uerthelesse you set downe in a different character as his) & not only disagree from the Latin, but containe false do∣ctrine repugnant to all Catholike Diuines, and in particu∣lar to Bellarmine, who in that very placeL. 1. de In∣dulg. c. 2. pro∣posit. 2. teacheth, that meritorious workes, as such, cannot be applied to others, nor belong to the treasure of the Church, but only as satis∣factory. 3. You falsify, making Bellarmine to limit the spi∣rituall treasure of the Church to workes of supererogation only; which is ignorantly spoken, and not taught by Bel∣larmine, nor any Catholike Diuine. 4. You father on him falsly those last words, Hoc (thesauro) caruisse dicunt Eccle∣siam Doctores Louanienses: for they are not his, nor doth he attribute any such doctrine to the Deuines of Louain, nor so much as once name them in all that Chapter. Is it not then great perfidiousnesse, so to abuse and falsify both him, and them? Nor is your dealing better with Suarez: for (to omit
that in the place you cite, he treateth of no such matter) ne∣ther he, nor Bellarmine euer say, that Duraud denied this treasure of the Church, but only, that he held it to consist of the satisfactions of Christ, and not of the Saints. Which yet he speaketh by way of doubt, & Theologicall dispute, rather then affirmatiuely: for coming to deliuer his owne opinion, he sayth plainly and resolutely4. Dist. 20. q. 3.: Est in Ecclesia &c. There is in the Church a spirituall treasure of the passion of Christ, and his Saints, who suffered farre greater torments, then their sinnes deserued: And therfore the Church out of this treasure may communicate to one, or more, so much as may suffice to make satisfaction for their sinnes, either in part, or in whole, according as the Church shall please to communicate this treasure, more or lesse, which is nothing els, but the sufferings of Christ, and his Saints communicated to vs, to satisfy for our sinnes. Wherfore indulgences auaile by way of payment, for so much, as by Christ, & his Saints, the paine, to which we are lyable, is paied. But if he had held that the spirituall treasure of the Church consisteth of the satis∣factions of Christ only, that would auaile you nothing: for he defendeth Indulgences, which you deny: and if he er∣red in any thing, he errred not with obstinacy, as you do, but submitted all his workes to the correction of the holy Catholike Roman Church, as you haue read in Bellar∣mine, but conceale it. I conclude therfore, that the great cloud of witnesses, which you haue brought to iustify Luthers doctrin against indulgences, is either of Heretikes, or of Catholikes in workes prohibited by the Church, or if not prohibited, abused and falsified by you. SECT. X. The causes giuen by Doctor Morton, in excuse of Luthers departure from the Roman Church. THe causes you haue deuised to iustify Luthers depar∣ture from the Roman Church, are partly impious, part∣ly false, and imposterous. Impious, as your excepting a∣gainst
the MassePag. 387., to which Luther was persuaded by the Diuell, calling it Idolatry, as you do. And not vnlike to this, is your example of FirmilianusPag. 388., who being for the time an obstinate mantainer of Rebaptization, was excom∣municated by Stephen a holy Pope; and notwithstanding that Stephens sentence was imbraced by all the Catholikes of the world, and the doctrine of Firmilianus condemned by the holy Councell of Nice, and euer since esteemed he∣reticall, not only by Catholikes, but also by Protestants; you shame not to iustify FirmilianusIbid., and all the rest, that followed the same heresy with him, & to condemne Pope Stephen, as a Schismatike, for excommunicating him. Such examples. I confesse, you may find to defend Luthers de∣parture from the Roman Church. The rest of the causes, which you alleagePag. 387., are false, and imposterous: as that the Roman Church mantaineth new ar∣ticles of fayth, and Satanicall doctrines; that she blasphemeth the truth, and tyrannically forceth men to subscribe: which as they are false, and slanderous accusations, so you vtter them gratis, and without any proofe at all, and say nothing to iu∣stify Luther, but what a Donatist, an Arian, or any other heretike neuer so blasphemous will say for himselfe, & may, with as good ground, as Luther, or you for him. But you alleagePag. 389. Cassander whom you call our Cas∣sander, notwithstanding that heretofore you haue had a double admonitionSee aboue Chap. 2., that he was a wicked heretike Pri∣ma classis, whose workes being condemned and prohibited by the Church are of no more authority with vs, then your Grand Imposture. And not vnlike to this, is your other exam∣ple of Stephen Gardiner B. of Winchester, as already hath bene shewedIbid.. And as little to your purpose is another example, which here you addePag. 392. of an Epistle of Robert Grosthead B. of Lincolne, taken out of the history of Mathew Paris, which was set forth corruptedly by English Prote∣stants, and then by the Tigurine Lutherans, who haue added many things both in their marginall notes, and in the text in selfe against the authority of the Roman ChurchSee Bellar. l. de Scriptor▪. Out of this Epistle of Grosthead to Innocentius the fourth, you
obiect a long passage, in which he acknowledgeth in most effectuall words his beliefe of the supreme authority of the B. of Rome. For in the very first words of his Epistle, he sayth: Be it known to your Wisdome, that I obey the Apostolike man∣dats, with filiall affection deuoutly, & reuerently, and that I make resistance to those things, which are against the Apostolike mandats, zealing the honor of my Father; for to both I am bound ex diuino mandato, by the commandment of God: for the Apostolike manda∣ts neither are. nor can be any other, then the doctrines of the Apostles, and of our Lord Iesus Christ, Maister, and Lord of the Apostles, whose place and person our Lord the Pope chiefly holdeth in the Hierarchy of the Church. A iudicious reader would thinke it a hard mat∣ter, for any man out of these words, and doctrine of Grost∣head, to frame an argument against the authority of the Pope and Church of Rome; and yet are you so witty, that you haue done it: but by what art? By cutting, and man∣gling the Bishops words, as the reader will see, if he please to compare them with the Latin set downe in your Mar∣gent: and euen that Latin mangled, and falsified as it is, you thought best not to english, because it would haue gi∣uen light to a iudicious reader, to see your dealing. What you addePag. 394., of the Bishops not receauing a Prouision sent by the Pope, maketh nothing for you: for by the whole discourse of his Epistle, it appeareth that he iudged the Prouision, to be procured fraudulently by surreption, & therfore not to be a true mandate of the See Apostolike, and vpon that ground he made resistance vnto it, which the ciuillCod. Si cont. ius L. Etsi. & Canon lawDe res∣cript. C. Dile∣ctus. in such cases declare to be law∣full. without any impeachment to the authority of the Pope, and Church of Rome. SECT. XI. Whether Protestants had any Professors of their fayth before Luther. THere is no way more expedite, or effectuall, to con∣uince heretikes to be such, & their doctrines to be pro∣phane
nouelties, then to require of them a Catalogue of primitiue Fathers, and learned men, which haue agreed with them, and dissented from the Roman Church in all those points, in which they dissent from her: as contrarily there is no way more effectuall, for an Orthodoxe man to proue himselfe to be such, then to shew, that the Fathers & Doctors of Gods Church, in all ages from the beginning, haue professed and taught the same doctrine, he professeth and teacheth. To this triall S. Athanasius challenged the Arians: Behold (sayth he to them)In decret. Nic. Syn. cont. Euseb. we haue proued the suc∣cession of our doctrine, deliuered from hand to hand; from-Father, to sonne: you new Iewes, you children of Caiphas, what predecessors of your names can you shew? To the same triall that most reli∣gious Emperor Theodosius prouoked the heretikes of his time: for (as Sozomen recordeth)L. 7. c. 11. hauing called toge∣ther the chiefe of the Nouatians, Arians, and Macedonians, he demanded of them, whether they thought, that the an∣cient Fathers, which gouerned the Church before those dissensions in matter of Religion fell out, were holy and Apostolicall men? whether they did allow of their exposi∣tions of holy Scripture, and would accept of them, as of competent Iudges, for the triall of their cause, and ending of all controuersies? Those Heretikes highly praysed the do∣ctrine, and expositions of the Fathers, but yet could not a∣gree among themselues, to haue the bookes of the Fathers produced, and their owne doctrines tried by them. Wheru∣pon Theodosius forbid them all exercise of their religion, and inflicted other punishments vpon them. With him accorded herein the Emperor Iustinian, pu∣blishing by an especiall LawL. 5. & 6., that to confute the lyes of impious Heretikes, and represse the madnesse of those, that giue assent vnto them, it is necessary to manifest vnto all, what the most holy Priests of God haue taught, and to follow them, How often doth S. Augustine stop the mou∣thes of the PelagiansCout. Iul. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2. l. 2. versus fin. l. 5. c. 17. & cont. duas Ep. Pelag. l. 4. c. 12., with the testimonies of almost all the famous Bishops, and Doctors both of the East & West, specifying them by their names, somtimes twelue, somtimes fourteene together, & adding to them the rest in generall?
The same kind of Argument was vsed by S. Leo the GreatEp. 97., when hauing vrged against the Nestorians and Euty∣chians the testimonies of the holy Fathers Athanasius, Hi∣lary, Ambrose, and Chrysostome, Theophilus Alexandri∣nus, Basil the great, and Cyril, he concludeth thus to the Emperor, to whom he writeth: To these testimonies if you vouchsafe to attend, you shall find, that we teach no other thing, then what our holy Fathers haue taught throughout the whole world, and that no man dissenteth from them, but impious heretikes. Lastly the same manner of arguing from the testimonies of Fathers was vsed in the sixth generall Councell, against the Mono∣thelites, in the second of Nice, against the Image-breakers; and in the Councell of Florence, against the error of the Gre∣cians, denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the Sonne. To this triall learned Catholikes haue often challenged the Sectaries of this age: & to that end haue set forth Cata∣logues of the most learned Doctors of Gods Church, from the very time of Christ, shewing them to haue bene mem∣bers of the Roman Church, and to haue belieued and taught the now Roman fayth, not only in the generall heads, wherin Protestants agree with vs, but also in each of the seuerall points, in which they dissent from vs; & to haue held them to be hereticall, and confuted them as such, euen as we do, alleaging their testimonies at this day against Protestants. The truth of this is to be seene in Iodocus Coc∣cius a German, who (as it is declared in the Preface to his first Tome) being in his youth a Lutheran, afterwards part∣ly by frequenting the Sermons of Catholike Preachers, partly by hearing disputations in Schooles, partly by ob∣seruing the meruailous concord of Catholiks, and the fatall discord of Protestants in matters of fayth, partly by conside∣ring seriously, and weighing with himselfe, that the Chur∣ches of Protestants were confined to a few Prouinces, and not spread ouer the whole world, as the Church of ChristIsa. 49. was prophesied to be, and that they wanted succession, and continuance, being newly sprung vp; and lastly by a diligent perusall of the writings of ancient Fathers, whom be found to agree wholly with vs, and dissent from Pro∣testants,
abandoned them and abiuring their doctrine, east himselfe into the armes of his Catholike Mother the Ro∣man Church. And aswell for the confusion of heretikes, & confirmation of Catholikes, as also to yeild vnto all men, a reason of his fayth, he vndertooke an immense labor (in which he spent 24. yeares) of reading the workes of all the ancient writers of the Greeke and Latin Church, and out of them, hath in two large Volumes (which he intitu∣led (Thesaurus Catholicus) demonstrated most exactly, that they were all of the beliefe of the now Roman Church, & detested the contrary doctrine of Protestants, as hereticall; no lesse then at this day the Roman Church doth. The like hath bene performed by the most eminent Cardinalls Ba∣ronius, and Bellarmine, the one in his Annals; the other in his learned Volumes of Controuersies. The like paines hath bene taken by Doctor Sanders in his Monarchia visibilis, by Iacobus Gaulterius in his Tabula Chronographica, against the French Huguenots, and by Doctor Norrice in his Anti∣dote & Appendix against English Protestants. The like haue other learned writers done out of the workes of diuers an∣cient Fathers; in particular Theodorus Petretus, out of S. Cy∣prian. S. Leo, S. Gregory, and S. Bernard; Ioannes Nopelius, out of S. Ambrose; Cornelius Schultingus, out of S. Hierome; and Hie∣ronymus Torrensis, out of S. Augustine, intituling their workes the Confessions of those Fathers, and conuincing clearely in them, that they were all Roman Catholikes, and in all points of the same beliefe we professe at this day. This it is which we so often require of Protestants, a Catalogue of learned men, who in all ages since Christ, haue agreed with them, and dissented from vs in all those Tenets, which they mantaine against the fayth of the now Roman Church. This the best learned Protestants knew they could not performe, and therfore were enforced to say (as you haue heardSee heere aboue sect. 3. the Church of Christ was altoge∣ther inuisible, yea for many ages vtterly perished, & extin∣guished. But you with other late English Protestants asha∣med of so faythlesse a paradoxe, mantaine that the Church of Christ (which you hold to be yours) was neuer wholly
Errors in the Print, to be corrected. In the Text. PAg. 13. line 11. Ermodius read Ennodius. Pag. 14. lin. 37. true, read the true. Pag. 18. lin. 21. then read men. Ibid. lin. 24. which read with. Ibid. lin. 37. also read them also. Pag. 21. l. 28. his read if his. Pag. 24. lin. 15. nouthes read monthes. Pag. 29. l. 38. Nicolaus Augustus read Iacobus Augustus. Pag. 50. l. 31. being read bring. Pag. 65. l. 10. Church read Churches. Pag. 68. l. 19. misplacing read miscōstruing. Pag. 75. l. 37.38. to the thing read of the thing. Pag. 78. l. 3. ingeniously read ingenuously. Pag. 80. l. 11. misbelieue read misbeliefe. Pag. 94. l. 15. this read his. Pag. 98. l. 19. odorned read adorned. Pag. 106. l. 33. a great Non seq. read as great a Non seq. Pag. 108. l. 13. first of read first Bishop of. Pag. 110. l. 23. The third read The first. Pag. 112. l. 35. which read with. Pag. 118. l. 38. piuat read priuat. Pag. 125. l. 14. Augustine to Zozimus read Aug. to Bonifacius. Pag. 134. l. 38. Samleron read Salmeron. Pag. 141. l. 20. first time to Hierusalem read the first time from Antioch to Hierusalem. Pag. 148. l. 37. him read them. Pag. 153. l. 27. contentions read contentious. Pag. 164. l. 18. no, read nor. Pag. 169. l. 6. but read out. Pag. 169. l. 12. the read her. Pag. 171. l. 10. Christian read Christians. Pag. 178. l. 19. blot out (k) & put a (*) in place of it, and in the margent ouer a∣gainst it, read thus (*) Apud Ʋincent. Lyrin c. 26. Pag. 179. l. 13. whom read when. pag. 184. l. 25. speake read spake. Pag. 188. in the 7. line, adde (k) corresponding to the margent. Pag. 189. l. 36. (sayth he) read (saith he Epist. 48.) Pag. 190. l. 2. present lawes read present Emperors. Pag. 191. confired read confidered. Pag. 202. l. 27. which read with. Pag. 325. you read your. Pag. 334. l. 5. of mediocrity, read of our medio∣crity Pag. 338. l. 23. second Epistle read third Epistle. Pag. 349. l. 31. out read your. Pag. 372. l. 30. the Patriarkes read their Patriarke. Pag. 373. l. 13. The 150. read That the 150. Pag. 374. l. 26. seud read sent. Pag. 380. l. 28. fouored read fouored. Pag. 389. l. 6. defaining read defaming. Pag. 399. l. 10. nistaken read mistaken: Pag. 407. l. 7. retraction read retractation. Pag. 419. l. 16. Epistle read Epistles. Pag. 425. l. 36. this very point, read this the very point. Pag. 428. l. 10. as the read as of the. Pag. 429. l. 3. had notice read had had
notice. Pag. 431. l. 1. Bishop read Bishops: Pag. 436. ouer a∣gainst the 18. line, adde in the margent Concil. Ephes to. 2.c. 4. in append. Pag. 439. l. 6. which read what. Pag 493. l. 7. dele and. Pag 442. l. 31. aboue read about. Pag. 444. falsi∣fies read falsities. Pag. 457. l. 21. prebition read prebibition: Pag. 458. l 4. obiect read abiect. Pag. 466. l. 3. authorities read authority. Pag. 470. l. 34. as Socrates read as Eua∣grius. Pag. 475. l. 2. our read your. Pag. 476. l. 38 lawier read lawiers. Pag. 480. l. 33. For Leo de Castro, read, And Leo &c. Pag. 493. ouer against liue 32. adde in the margent An∣selm. l. de ferment. & azim. init. Pag. 499. l. 15. noly read only: Pag. 502. l. 3. Apostolicall chayre, read Apostolicall charge. Pag. 514. l. 29. which some read which though some. Pag. 516. l. 29. Pilie read Pilier. Pag. 519. l. 3. cōuinced read conti∣nued. Ibid. l. 12. do not you read do not they. Pag. 521. l 20. with read without. Pag. 528. l. 17. vndertake read vnder∣tooke. Pag. 538. l. 21. But away read Put away. Ibid. l. 25. his state read his seat. Pag 544. l. 26. sufficient read insufficient. Pag. 567. l. 4. they approued read they gaue. Pag. 569. l. 18. are of truth, read, are oracles of truth. Pag. 570. l. 18. anno 1520. read 1620. Pag. 576. l. 17.18. if it were thought schisme read if be thought it were schisme. Pag. 582. ouer against the 9. line adde in the margent Caluin. ep. 141. Pag. 589. l. 13 after the words by S. Augustine, adde (c) and in the line following insteed of (c) put (d) and ouer against it in the margent adde Optat. l. 2. cont. Parmen. Pag. 590. l. 10. it not, read is not. Pag. 597. l. 26.27. had right, read had no right. Pag. 602. l. 3. bring read being. Ibid. lin. 31. Gregory the third read Gregory the second. Ibid. l. 34. Gregory sent him, read Gregory the third sent him. Pag. 615. l. 20. acknowledgeth read acknowledged. Pag. 618. l. 28. Re∣cord read Records. Pa. 629. l. 18. yeath read death. Pag. 655. l. 11. is easy read is not easy. Pag. 664. l. 17. kingdome read kingdōes. Pag. 667. l. 18. and Radius read Andradius. Pag. 668. l. 31. Sind a Monke read Siud a Monke. Pag. 672. l. 28. with read which. Pag. 702. l. 1. obiecteth read obeyeth. Pag. 714. l. 30. be multitude read be the multitude. Pag. 719. l. 23. the Arians, that of Ephesus, read the Arians reiected the Councell of Nice; the Macedonians, that of Constantino∣ple; the Nestorians, that of Ephesus. Pag. 727. l. 7. your Thesis that, read your Thesis is, that. Pag. 731. l. 3. it be, read to be. Pag. 738. l. 20. the new Church read the now Church.
Pag. 745. l. 12. al her sayings read al his sayings. Ibid. l. 16. pamplets read pamphlets. Ibid l. 38. To prone read To proue. Pag. 760. l. 5. haer. 60. read haer. 60. & in Anacephal. In the Margent, to be corrected. PAg. 12. (u) l. 1. ep. 30. corrige l. 10. ep. 30. Pag. 13. (d) c. 36. corrige c. 80. Pag. 22. ouer against the line 22. adde in the margēt Bed. l. 5. hist. c. 19. Pag. 46. (*) disp. 9. n. 6. cor. disp. 9. sect. 1. n. 6. Pag. 48. (*) d. 9. n. 11. cor. d. 9. sect. 1. n. 12. Pag. 70. (k) in psal. 106. & l. 5. decurand. &c. cor. in psal. 116. & l. 9. de curand. Pag. 80. (d) ep. 74. cor. ep. 75. Pag. 89. (d) l. 9. ep. 38. cor. l. 9. ep. 39. Pag. 90. (h) tom. 2. c. 10. cor. tom. 2. c. 16. Pag. 96. (g) In cap. 2. Act. cor. In cap, 2. ad Gal. Pag. 104. (z) see aboue nu. 24. cor. see aboue cap. 9. n. 3. Pag. 108. (*) Aboue n: 21. cor. Aboue cap 7. Pag. 117. (i) & Pag. 120. (x) cor. Ep∣ad Micaēlem Imper. cor. Ep. ad Micaēl. Constantinop: Ibid. (t) l. 4. ep. 3 cor. l. 4. ep. 32. Pag. 121. (a) Ad cap. 22. Luc. cor. In psal. 43. Pag. 124. (q) l. 1. Apol. cor. l. 3. Apol. Pag. 129. (r) serm. 10. deverb. Dom. cor. serm. 13. de verbis Dom. Pag. 143. quasi diceret cor. quasi discretione. Pag. 155. (o) l. 1. Apol. cor. l. 3. Apol. Ibid. Pag. 155. (p) Ep. 6. cor. Ep. 65. Pag. 178. (i) cont. Gaudent. l. 1. c. 23. cor. l. 1. c. 33. Pag. 187. (g) l. 1. Apol. cor. l. 3. Apol. Pag. 196. (g) cont. Gaudent. l. 3. c. 1. cor. l. 2. c. 2. Pag. 198. (s) Ibid. cor. Ibid. l. 3. Pag. 199. (x) Ep. 6. cor. Ep. 65. Pag. 301. (b) anno 451. n. 34. cor. n. 33. Pag. 314. (a) ep. 42. cor. ep. 24. Pag. 349. (u) l. 7. ep. 65. cor. l. 7. ep. 30. indict. 1. Pag. 376. (e) pag. 347 cor. tom: 2. pag. 470. Pag. 407. (g) Euseb. l. 5. hist. cor. l. 7. hist. Pag. 432. (m) In 1. part. cor. In 1. Petri. Pag. 442. (q) Bin. to. 2. pag. 1075. cor. pag. 1073. Pag. 459. (x) Can. 80. ex Grec. cor. Can. 19. ex 80. Grec. Pag. 459. (y) Euseb. l. 6. hist. c. 7. cor. c. 17. Pag. 459. (a) Niceph. l. 13. c. 33 cor. c. 34. Pag. 462. (l) & Pag. 664. (z) Ruffin. l. 1. c. 1. S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 72. cor. Ruffin. l. 1. c. 2. S. Greg. l. 4 ep. 31. Pag. 471. (d) Socrat. l. 4. c. 36 cor. Socr. l. 4. c. 30. & Sozom. l. 6. c. 39. Pag. 471. (f) Ibid c. 2. cor. Ibid. c. 3. init. Pag. 478. (k) Socrat. l. 2. c. 22.23. Epiphan. haer. 66. cor. Socrat. l. 2. cap. 23. Epiph. haer. 68. Pag. 480. (u) Ruffin. l. 1. c. 1. Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 72. cor. Ruffin. l. 1. c. 2. S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 31 ibid. pag. 480. (y) ep. 60.14. cor. cap. 60.
14. Pag. 485. (n) Chap. 5. n. 161.171.172. cor. Chap. 5. pag. 171.172. Pag. 489. (e) l. 4. de consid. cor. l. 4. instit. Pag. 493. ouer against the line 23. adde in the margent, Anselm. init. lib. de ferment. & azimo. Pag. 525. (c) Apol. aduers. Ruffin. l. 1. cor. l. 3. Pag. 532. (f) Theod. l. 5. hist. c. 11. cor. c. 10. Pag. 536. (z) ep. 77. cor. ep. 57. Pag. 540. (m) ep. 16. cor. ep. 18. Pag. 558. (l) c. 13. cor. c. 2. Pag 576. (f) l. 5. hist. c. 34. cor. c. 24. Pag. 570. (z) Spondom. cor. Spondan-Pag. 587. (u) serm. l. 4. cor. strom. l. 4. Pag. 606. (l) Epistola cor. Epistolae. Pag. 613. (p) Niceph. l. 13. n. 18. cor. cap. 18. Pag. ibid. (q) Niceph. l. 13. c. 31. cor. cap. 32. Pag. 622. (p) Socrat. l. 2. c. 18. cor. Euagr. l. 2. c. 4. Pag. 626. (l) Ep. 17. ad Eustoch. cor. ep. 27. Pag. 627. (t) l. 8. c. 3. cor. Sozom. l. 8. c. 3. Pag. 632. (k) Sozom. l. 2. c. 3. cor. c. 23. Pag. 675. (u) pag. 200. cor. Pag. 203. Pag. 682. (z) pag. 797. cor. 712. & 797. Pag. 690. (l) l. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 25. cor. c. 51. Pag. 714. (o) l. 3. cont. Parmen. c. 3. cor. c. 2. Pag. 717. (s) ibid. c. 31. dele c. 31. FINIS.
