C2742 [ocm]19729296 205621
HIS MAJESTIES REPLY, TO THE ANSWER OF both Houses concerning a treaty of Accommodation. ALSO, The humble Petition and Answer of the Lords and Commons to the said REPLY sent to the Kings most Excellent Majesty by the Lord Spencer. Die Jovis 8 Septemb. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Reply together with the Answer be forthwith printed and published. J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed for J. Wright. Septemb. 9. 1642.
His MAJESTIES Reply to an Answer sent by the two Houses of Parliament to His Majesties Message of the 25. of August, concerning a Treatie of Accommodation. WE will not repeat what meanes We have used to prevent the dan∣gerous and distracted estate of the Kingdome, nor how those means have been interpreted, because eing desirous to avoid effusion of blood, We  willing to decline all memory of former tternesse that might make Our Offer of a Treaty lesse readily accepted. We never did Declare, nor ever intended o Declare, both Our Houses of Parliament Traitours, or set up Our Standard against hem, and much lesse to put them and this kingdome out of Our Protection: We ut∣erly Professe against it before GOD and the
World. And further, to remove all poss Scruples which may hinder the Treaty much desired by Vs; We hereby Promise, that a day be appointed by you for the rev¦ing of your Declarations against all Perso as Traitours or otherwayes, for assisting Vs, Wee shall with all cheerefulnesse up the same day recall Our Proclamations a Declarations, and take downe Our Sta¦dard: In which Treaty, We shall be read to grant any thing that shall be really for th good of Our Subjects; Conjuring you consider the bleeding condition of Ireland, a the dangerous condition of England, in high a degree as by these Our Offers W have declared Our Selfe to do: And assuri you that Our chiefe desire in this World to beget a good understanding and mutua confidence betwixt Vs and Our two House of Parliament.
royal badges of house of Stuart: Tudor Rose, Scottish Thistle, Fleur-de-lys, Harp To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY, The humble Answer and Petition of the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, Vnto the KINGS last Message. May it please Your Majesty, IF we the Lords & Commons in Parliament assembled should repeat al the waies we have ta∣ken, the endeavours we have u∣sed, & the expressions we have made unto Your Majesty to prevent those distractions and dangers Your Majesty speakes of likely to fall upon this
Kingdome, we should too much enlarge th Reply; Therefore as we humbly, so shall w onely let Your Majesty know, that we canno recede from our former Answer, for the rea∣sons therein expressed; For that Your Majesty hath not taken down Your Standard, recal∣led Your Proclamations and Declarations, whereby you have declared the actions of both Houses of Parliament to be treasona∣ble, and their persons Traytors; And you have published the same since your Message of the 25 of August, by Your late Instructions sent to Your Commissioners of Array: Which Standard being taken downe, and the Decla∣rations, Proclamations, and Instructions re∣called, If Your Majesty shall then upon this our humble Petition, leaving your Forces, re∣turne unto Your Parliament, and receive their faithfull advice, Your Majesty will finde such expressions of our fidelities and duties, as shall assure you that Your safety, honour, and greatnesse, can onely be found in the affecti∣ons of Your People, and the sincere counsels of Your Parliament, whose constant and un∣discouraged endeavours and consultations have passed thorough difficulties unheard of,
onely to secure your Kingdomes from the vio∣ent mischiefes and dangers now ready to fall pon them and every part of them, who deserve etter of Your Majesty, and can never allow hemselves (representing likewise your whole Kingdome) to be ballanced with those persons hose desperate dispositions and counsels pre∣aile stil so to interrupt all our endeavours for the elieving of bleeding Ireland, as we may feare our abours and vast expences will be fruitlesse to hat distressed Kingdome. As Your presence is hus humbly desired by us, so is it in our hopes our Majesty will in your reason beleeve there is o other way then this to make Your selfe happy nd your Kingdome safe. FINIS.
