C2617A B.J.5[54] R225782 99886277 188467
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown BY THE KING. ¶ A Proclamation for the inhibiting all manner of Oathes, other Abuses and Propha∣nations by any of His Majesties Army; as likewise strictly Commanding the due and constant frequenting of the Service of God, by all the Officers and Souldiers of the same. WHEREAS by the Orders Military established by Us, for the better Order and Govern∣ment of Our Army, it is in the first place strictly commanded (under the penalties therein ex∣pressed) that no man shall presume to Blasphem, nor use unlawfull Oathes, Execrations, or any Scandalous Acts in derogation of the Honour of God; nor shall wilfully absent them∣selves from Sermons, and morning and Evening-Prayers: Notwithstanding which We have, to Our great Griefe, and high Displeasure, observed a generall Liberty taken in the breach of the said Orders, which cannot but provoke Gods Judgements to be powred out upon them, and this Nation. For prevention whereof, We do straitly charge and Com∣mand all the respective Officers of Our Army, to cause all Articles established against Blasphemy, Oathes, Drun∣kennesse, Whoredom, and all other scandalous Actions, in derogation of the Service of God; as likewise for the neglect of frequenting Divine Service and Sermons, to be duly and severely put in Execution, and to cause all persons offending against any of them, to be punished as their offences shall deserve, and the Articles direct, with∣out favour or partiality; as they, or any of them will answer the contrary. And to the end the Service of Al∣mighty God may be duely celebrated, (Whereby We must expect a blessing upon Our Army and their undertakings) Our expresse Will and Command is, That the respective Chaplaines of the severall Regiments of Our Army duly attend their Callings, and continue with their Regiments duly reading twice every day Divine Service at the head of their respective Regiments (all yeelding due reverence according to the Lawes made in that behalfe) at which We require all the Officers and Souldiers of the same to be present; They to preach to them every Sunday-morn∣ing, and to expound some part of the Chatechisme (by Authority set forth in the Book of Common-Prayer) in the Afternoon: And to administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper unto them the first Sunday of every Moneth. And that Our Pleasure herein be not in any sort neglected, Our Will and Command is, That Doctor Rives, and Doctor Sherwood the Chaplains Generall of Our Army, inform themselves of the Severall Chaplaines of the Re∣giments, and to see that every of them perform their Duties, and Our Commands herein expres'd, We expecting an Account from them of the due performance thereof. And that this may be speedily and effectually done, We do hereby give the Chaplaines Generall power to Summon the Chaplaines of Our Army to give them these Orders in charge, to require an Account of them, and to inform Us what Obedience is yeelded unto them. Further Our Plea∣sure is, That the respective Chaplaines of every Regiment, or some other person appoynted by the Colonell, read publiquely every second Sunday the Military Orders, to the end every Officer, and Souldier, may the better know their Duty towards God, Us, and their Superiours. These Our Commands We require forthwith to be Printed, and published at the head of every Regiment of Our Army, and to be fully observed by all both Officers & Souldiers of Our Army, as they & every of them will avoyd Our high displeasure for their neglect of all, or any part of them. Given at Our Court at Oxford, the Thirteenth day of Iune, in the Nineteenth yeare of Our Raigne. God Save the KING. Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.
