C3153A R35938 [ocm]15579917 38590
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, Saturday March 8. 1672/3. In Answer to their Humble Petition and Address. By His Majesties special Command. C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1672/3. CƲM PRIVILEGIO.
His Majesties Most Gracious SPEECH To Both Houses of Parliament, Saturday March 8. 1672/3. My Lords and Gentlemen, YEsterday you presented Me an Address, as the best means for the satis∣fying and composing the minds of My Sub∣jects, to which I freely and readily agreed, and shall take care to see it per∣formed accordingly. I hope on the other side, you Gen∣tlemen of the House of Commons, will do your part: for I must put you in mind, it is near Five weeks since I de∣manded a Supply, and what you then Voted unanimously, did both give life to My Affairs at home, and dishearten My Enemies abroad; but the seeming Delay it hath met withall since, hath made them take new Courage, and
they are now preparing for this next Summer a greater Fleet (as they say) then ever they had yet; So that if the Supply be not very speedily dispatch∣ed, it will be altogether ineffectual, and the Safety, Honour, and Interest of England must of necessity be exposed. Pray lay this to heart, and let not the Fears and Jealousies of some, draw an inevitable Ruine upon us all. My Lords and Gentlemen, If there be any Scruple yet remaining with you concerning the Suspension of Penal Laws, I here faithfully promise you, That what hath been done in that particular, shall not for the future be drawn either into consequence or ex∣ample. And as I daily expect from You a Bill for My Supply, so I assure You I shall as willingly receive, and pass any other you shall offer Me, that may tend to the giving you Satisfaction in all your just Grievances. FINIS.
