H1162c 99832184 198919
Having laid before this Honourable House THAT the Glass Manufacture is so improved in England, as to outdo all the World, even to a Prohibition thereof. That the same, much to the Advantage of this Nation, Manufa∣ctures its own Commodities, and those of a very small value, (viz.) Clay, Sand, Ashes, Mageness, Wood, Coals, Red and White Lead, &c. and al∣so Imploys many Thousands in Collecting and Gathering the same together. That thereby the Crown receives Advantage in the Consuming Bursilla, Pulverene, Pot-ashes, Saltpetre, Smalt, &c. which are Imported, and pay considerable Custom. That to Manufacture our own Commodities (especially so mean things) to turn to so good account as Glass doth, to vend at home and send abroad, and to manufacture Forreign Commodities here, is one of the chiefest Advan∣tages England can have in the Ballance of Accompt. That Forreign Parts, who have for some years indeavoured to attain the same Art from us, now find what Effects so great Duties as 20 per Cent. upon White Glass, 12 d. per Dozen upon Bottles, being near 70 per Cent. must un∣voidable have in England, do erect Works, and give all possible Encourge∣ment for the procuring our said improved Manufacture: And to that end, Ireland hath laid so great a Duty on Glass, as will prohibit the Importation thereof there, having got some of our Artists there already, and hath sent to Invite some others of our Chiefest Artists over to set up Glass-Houses there, as appears by a Letter from Ireland of the Tenth of February last, shewn to several Members of this Honourable House, and ready to be produced. That little is received, though the Duty is great; inasmuch as it is Evi∣dent, not 5000 l. is come clear to the Crown the two last Quarters, draw Backs and Sallaries being deducted. That there is no probability of Receiving more in the following Quarters, is evident, If we consider that by a printed Paper about Three Weeks ago, given to the Members of this Honourable House by Mr. Gutteridge, Mr. Nel∣son, Glass-makers of Ratcliff, it appeared they had then near 20000 Dozen o Bottles by them, which had then paid 1200 l. Duty, (for note 'tis Bottles must advance the Accompt, not White Glass) And 'tis most certain there is above 20000 Dozen of Bottles before-hand at other Houses besides what the Glass-seller or Potters have by them unsold. So that if there be near 50000 Dozen of Bottles now made before-hand, which has some of them helpt to swell the first Quarters Accompt, it may be easily guest that the following Quarters will produce so little, as there will be no need of asking any other Tax to put in the room of this; for this will answer no end, were there to be as much Glass made in England as hath been; But if the Duty continue, it will come to nothing at all in one years time That the Artists of this Nation may not be forced out thereof, have by their Petition most humbly represented their Case to this Honourable House, in hopes, the Premisses being considered, they will be graciously pleased to take off the said Duty, by which the said Artists, and the said Manufacture, will be continued in this Nation, and many Thousands of Poor, which depend thereon, keep their Imploys.
