H1291a 816.m.14[22] R224747 99885632 185475
Heads of some of those Advanta∣ges this Nation might enjoy, by encouraging the Tobacco Trade to Russia, and the Loss it suffers by fetching our Naval Stores from the Suede's Dominions. I. WE might probably in a short time Vend in Russia, 5000 Hogsheads a Year, which may yield there 120000l. over and above the Czar's Custom, and would be so much new Addition to the Nations Stock, II. The Spinning and Manufacturing that Tobacco here, in England, would give a new Employment to above 1500 people, besides those that would be employ'd in Planting, Packing, &c. of it, in Virginia, and Ships and Sea-men to bring it from thence. III. The Manufacturing of it here, and other petty Charges upon 5000 Hogsheads, will amount to upwards of 26000l. which will be distributed amongst our Labouring Peo∣ple. IV. The Carrying so much Tobacco to Russia, and bringing Returns from thence; for it will give a new Imployment to a great number of our Ships and Sea-men. V. His Majesty's Revenue will be encreased between 5 and 6000l. per Annum, by one half of the Subsidy that will not be drawn back; for tho' some People may fancy, that the Exportation of 5000 Hogsheads of Tobacco Yearly, in a new Trade, will lessen the King's Revenues by the Custom to be Repay'd upon them; yet if they consider, that no more nor less Tobacco will be consumed here, by our Carrying, or not Carrying Tobacco to Russia, and that His Majesty keeps only the full Custom, of what we con∣sume at Home, they will be of another Opinion; Besides 'tis certain, the greater Vent we have for Tobacco here, the better Price 'twill yield, and consequently encourage the Planting of more in Virginia, where there is Land enough to produce more Tobacco than all Europe can consume; and undoubtedly the Planters will make Improvements in their Plantations, proportionably to the Encouragement they have from hence. These Consi∣derations may satisfie any Man, that His Majesty cannot suffer any Dimuniion in His Customs, by encouraging the Exportation of Tobacco to Russia, but on the contrary en∣crease them, as hath been observed above. VI. If this Trade be encouraged, we shall bring the greatest part of our Naval Stores from Russia in our own Shipping; whereas now, we have almost all those Stores brought us from Sueden, and in Suede's Ships, by which this Nation suffers several ways: As, 1. We give the Suedes a greater Price for Naval Stores, than they can be bought for in Russia, which difference in the Prime Cost, is so much loss to the Nation. 2. The Nation loseth all the Fraight we pay the Suedes, which is in some sort of Goods, almost as much as their first cost. 3. By Employing Suedes, we discourage our own, and encourage their Navigation. 4. The Suedes take little of our Manufactures, therefore we are forced to send out our Mony to purchase their Goods: which in Russia might be bought with the proceed of our Tobacco, &c. 5. By depending wholly on the Suedes for our Naval Stores, we put our Selves in their power and the Danes, to shut up the Sound, and to hinder us from such a supply of them, as may be absolutely needful for us in Time of War. And lastly, the Suedes put very great hardships upon our Merchants, and Shipping in the Ports of Sueden, whereas had we an opportunity of getting our Naval Stores in Russia, and bringing them home in our own Ships, we might bring the Suedes to such a Treaty of Commerce, as would be advantagious to us, both with respect to our Shipping and Manufactures, and Liberty for our Merchants to reside in their Countrey, which now they are not permitted to do above 4 months in the year. This Nation hath now Liberty for a Free Importation of our Tobacco into Russia, purchased by private persons for a very large Sum: A priviledge that hath been long wished for by those that have studied the advantages of Foreign Trade, but never grant∣ed to any people or Nation before; and if made use of, will doubtless turn the Ballance of all our Northern Trade in our favour: which hath been, is at present, and without this new Trade, is like to continue very much to our disadvantage. And if the Under∣takers have not suitable encouragement here at home, to enable them to perform their part of the Contract with the C'zar; it is more than probable the C'zar will take that Advantage, to make void his Grant, and never more put into our hands, a Prize we once despised and neglected.
HEADS of Advan∣tages this Nation might enjoy, by Encouraing the Tobacco Trade to Russia.
