H1546C 99829166 207100
Here beginneth The second Part of the FRYER and the BOY. Many a merry Jest Herein is exprest. depiction of friar and pipe-playing boy LONDON, Printed by A.M. and R.R. for Edward Brewster the Crane in St. Pauls Church-yard, and are to be sold by James Gilbertson next door to the Sun and Bible on London-bridg, 1680.
depiction of friar and pipe-playing boy
The second Part of the FRIER and the BOY. LEt Venus fair that fits above, And eke Cupid the God of Love, and Pan assist withall; And give true lovers each good thing, Who listen to me when I sing, let blessing them befall. The story that I shall relate, Is of a Youths unhappy fate, and eke his Iests withall. Some call'd him John, some call'd him Jack But sure he was a merry Crack, and witty eke withall. Then listen what I say to you, And of these Lines come take a view: they'l purge your melancholy. Come laugh your fill and do not spare, Let all that hears me laugh their share come let's be blithe and jolly.
You oft have read that merry toy Of the Fryer and the Boy, how sweetly he did play Vpon a sweet and merry Pipe, That made mens senses quick and ripe, and dance both night and day. And of his Step-dames cruelty, And the report that she let fly, and of the Fryers intent, And of his dancing in the bush, When that he went to catch the Thrush, how all his Clothes were rent, How every man start up and danc't, Proctors, Priests and Sumners pranc't, so long as they could stand. All persons that this Pipe did hear, Were fill'd with mirth and merry cheer, all was at Jacks command. His manly tricks I will recite, Filled with mirth and much delight; how he revenge did take, Vpon Tobias that stout Fryer, And for his tricks gave him his hire, himself amends to make. Jack departed from his Step-dame, And went to serve a Gentleman, and pleas'd him wondrous well, And with his maid he fell in love,
ch unto him did faithless prove, for truth as I here tell. depiction of effect of pipe-playing This Fryer us'd to her bed-side, And did no more but up and ride; all this poor Jack beheld; This caus'd Jack her to despise, To see her fall and the Fryer rise; revenge in's heart then swell'd. Venus and Cupid he implores, The which all true lovers adores, to grant him his request, And Pan the Piper for to grant, To help him play a new corant, he held it to be best.
depiction of effect of pipe-playing Above you may behold and see, How he is prostrate on his knee, and in his hands a Cat; Desiring that his love may turn Into that shape, and ever mourn, and catch both Mouse and Rat. Go on and prosper Venus said, Fall to thy sports, be not afraid to use thy utmost skill. I granted have thy full intent, But see thou use't in merriment, no blood of life to spill, The Fryer he was kneeling there, And when he these words did hear, they pierc't him to the heart: Now out alass the Fryer said, I am in danger and afraid, 'tis I shall feel the smart.
Next night after he did spy The Fryer in the maids bed to lye, stark naked both they lay; Then he pul'd out his Pipe and play'd, And he like one that was afraid, ran into the high way: Both Fryer and maid leapt out o'th bed, The Fryer fell down and broke his head, thus danc't into the street; Both old and young, both rich and poor, Some out at window some, at door, laughing each other greet. depiction of effect of pipe-playing: nakedness, cavorting animals The Cattel hearing of the same,
Straightway from their pastures came, and merrily did dance; The horses that most fast were 'd Came galloping on every side, and stately they did prance; Also the swine aloud did cry, And presently pull'd down their ty, and these full high did capor, Also the Bears began to roar, And presently the stable tore, they altogether vapor. Like wild the Cats came dancing in, Each one of them did youl and grin, and made such harmony; The Dogs came skipping and did houl, Also much store of feather'd foul, they danc't prodigously; Also the Goats hearing the same, From the mountains skipping came, and knock't their horns together. Their clattering horns made such a noise, No man could hear each others voice, like wind and stormy weather; Mean while a mighty storm did rise, And darksome clouds made dark the skys, snow, rain and hail together; Which did so supple their joynts, Made many of them untruss their points,
in spight of wind and weather, At this sight all men did muse That stood on hills, how could they chuse? but none durst come them near; Thinking both men and cattel mad, This made the Countrey-men full sad, and run away for fear, But one more wiser than the rest, Remembring the former jest, with wool stopt both his ears, And whilst Jack did pipe aloud, The old man prest into the croud, as one quite void of fears, And from him snacth't his pipe away; Fryer take the pipe, thus did he say, I give it unto thee, Jack said, Fryer give to me my pipe, Or it shall cost thee many a stripe, assured shalt thou be: Thy pipe he said thou shalt not have, For thou art an unlucky knave, I know unto my sorrow; Seest thou not how we are tir'd, We never yet the pipe desir'd, call thou again to morrow. At this the rabble did still stand, And those that danced hand in hand, the Fryer and the maid.
Every one at them did scoff, To see them naked and clothes off, how they were both betray'd. But Jack he knew not what to say, Because his pipe was ta'ne away, this made him very sad: He vow'd revenged for to be, Or else hew down the Fryers best tree, the best fruit-tree he had: And as you shall understand, A fair wood-ax was near at hand, to felling straight he went; The Fryer hearing of the sound, He straightway came into the ground, to know Jacks full intent; The Fryer he began to threat, ow evilly Jack he would intreat, said surely he should dye: Not so, Tobias, said the youth, hope you do not now speak truth, peccavi I do cry. h good Tobias then he said, onder's a troup makes me afraid: the Fryer turn'd him round; ck over his head did cast a line, hich about his arms did twine, and to a tree him bound. cks senses then was quick and ripe,
And from the Fryer he took his pipe, and made him sing a mass; His Leman hearing of the noise, And knowing well the Fryers voice, came like a loving lass; Belly to belly he did them tye, Both fast to th' tree assuredly, and then his pipe 'gan play; The Fryer then knockt the tree amain. So that the blood ran down again, cry'd Jack I pray the stay. Betwixt the Fryer and his lass, Such a jumbling then there was, the like was never seen; The blood ran down on every side, Our bones are broken they both cry'd, against this tree so green: But Jack so left them in this sort, And bids them take their fills of sport, said thus, I you befriend. He straight repair'd unto the town, And unto them full many a clown, did thither quickly send; Which when they came, did laugh amain, To see the Fryer and's lass half slain; thou holy Fryer they said, Dost thou love the flesh so well, That this gay tree thou mean'st to fell,
and kill this comely maid. Long after this good Tobias Would needs go preach where Jack was, and thither he doth weand; The serving-men with wine him ply, Before he doth ascend on high, their kindness to commend. He sate by th' fire, as it is said, And's book upon the dresser laid; Jack stole away his notes. When that he began to preach, His notes were all out of his reach, he can prove nothing he quotes: From pulpit straight then he came down, Like unto a block-headed clown, and nought could say at all: The people then laught him to scorn; This made the Fryer to seem forlorn, for pardon he did call. It fell out on a holyday, Tobias went to th' kirk to pray, having drank ale and wine: Having sung mass he was to preach, And his towns-men he would teach. how they should be divine. A long psalm he then did call. The hundred and nineteenth all, good order for to keep
The Clerk aloud the same did cry; The people made such harmony, the Fryer fell fast asleep: And having sung a full large hour, The Fryer to wake had not the power, they sung so merry a strain. The people thought he had been dead, And that life from him was fled; they sate amazed then. The sexton took him by the arm, And shook him, but did him no harm, so that he did him maze. The glass is out the sexton cry'd, The worse for me rhe Fryer reply'd, fill't round again straight wayes: The Fryer remembring of the house, Where that morn he did carouse, cry'd with a merry strain; All persons that do sit or stand, Obey my words, I you command, fill all the pots again, Then start up that jovel croud, And every one laught out aloud: some to selves did mumble: Some over the pews did skip, And some over the forms did trip; they altogether tumble: Jack he first goes out o'th door,
And doth run the croud before, and then with pipe aloud, He leads them straight unto a green, Where all at once were dancing seen, a mighty mixed croud: depiction of effect of pipe-playing: general capering ch man did take a married wife, d danced about for love and life; fine pastime to behold: ch batchelor did take his maid, d nimbly pranc'd as it is said, so long as breath did hold. ttle children did dance a round, if their feet could feel no ground,
rare pastime they did make; Also the lame that could not go, Did then the art of footing know, and lameness did forsake. The Fryer had left his pulpit, and Did dance as long as he could stand, amongst the jovial crew; The Officers that liv'd about, Came for to view this merry rout, and of them took a view. And as I bear, the truth to tell, The officers to dancing fell, and call'd upon the Fryer, That he some merry song should sing, As they were dancing in the ring, which he us'd in the Quire. The Fryer rais'd his voice so high, And all the people, verily, strange ecchoes did rebound, Their singing was exceeding rare, Their voices sounded in the air even from sky to ground. The officers protested then, As they were all living men, the piper he should dye, Except the boy had so much wit, Presently from that place to flit, his liberty to buy.
The piper he start up as then, And spake both unto maids and men, and loud to them did hollow: Now I'le play you the wild-goose-chase, See that you follow me apace: so he plaid, follow, follow. So all at once aloud did sing, And danc'd in ranks, files and ring, into the woods so fair: The officers did then protest, If Jack would let them take some rest, better that he should fare. Peace, said the Fryer, I do thee charm; See that thou do us no more harm, for we all weary be: Then Jack unto them did protest, He freely gave them leave to rest, and from dancing let them free. Then had they some merry chat, Some talkt of this, and some of that, and some wry faces make: Some laught till they were almost brast, And some did hold their sides full fast, because they sore did ake. The Fryer complained of his fate, And to the officers did prate, of this unhappy lad: rotesting then assuredly,
That of that surfeit he should dye, if no redress he had. The officers said surely we, of the Fryers side must be, or else wee'st fare full ill. ood officers then said the Fryer, I will complain unto the Prior, that he this rogue may kill. The Fryer with's heart full of care, Straight to the Abby doth repair, and falls upon his knee▪ My Lord some pity on me take, Then for our Ladies sake, revenged let me be. There is a youth in our precinct, Lord I'le tell you as I think, the like hath never been: He hath a pipe assuredly, Will make men dance and caper high, the like was never seen. Then said the Prior, fain would I see, The thing that thou hast told to me, it must be passing trim. Heavens forbid then said the Fryer, Pray let me from this place retire, if that you will hear him. The Prior did all the Fryers command, Before him presently to stand,
a Court there he did hold, He for the Prioress did call, And all the Nuns both great and small, his mind for to unfold. He summoned all sorts of Monks, The Dunces, and the famous Punks, unto him to repair: For many others then he sent, Declaring of his full intent, and of his prudent care. Then gave he Tobias charge, And commission very large, to bring Jack him before; Then took he a mighty guard, Promising a great reward, of gold and silver store. They brought Jack before the Prior, With Tobias the dancing Fryer, which to him did complain: My Lord, this boy is very base, I wish your Lordship would him chase, revenge I might attain. The Prior said, let me hear the sound Of this same pipe that's newly found, what musick it can make? Heavens forbid then said the Fryer, That ever I should hear that lire▪ some pity on me take:
y hands and feet together bind, th before, and eke behind, so that I may not move. hey bound him in his gown and cope, ith a strong and trusty rope, the effect ot'h pipe to prove. ipe on my son then said the Prior, nd likewise so said every Fryer, let's hear thy melody. hen Jack his pipe then did advance, ll the Fryers began to dance, the Prior capered high. me Prioress nimbly trac'd the ground, nd all her Nuns did dance her round, brave pastime to behold. Nun that with a Fryer did lye, ame skipping in immediately clad in a Fryers coul. he Fryer it'h Nun's attire was seen, hich did declare where they had been, appearing in this sort. he cook came dancing with his spit, d as he danc't the Fryers hit, which added to the sport. he scullion with his dripping-pan, ame dancing in like any man: and as he turned round, e hit the Fryers upon the face,
As he round about did trace; then tumbled on the ground, The Fryer that did lye fast bound, Lay wallowing upon the ground, and beat against the stones: And many a crack he did let fly, Which did amaze the company. he almost burst his bones. The Prior and dame Prioress, As they still danc'd, they still did kiss, as they danc'd in the hall. The Prior he lightly leapt about, Pearking his legs now in, now out, and so catcht many a fall. The Fryers all like hare-brain'd fools. Leapt over tables and ore stools, and also brake their shins. In heaps they roul upon the ground, Whilst that Jacks musick it doth found, and burst their face and shins, The Prior with dancing was so sore, That he said boy do thou give ore, thou shalt receive no harm: No man shall do thee any wrong, Neither with his hand nor tongue, so well I will them charm. My Lord, said he, you have your will, I will forbear; they all stood still,
some laugh, and some do rage; Some weary, to the ground do fall, Some lean their backs against the wall, their laughing to asswage. Thus was he from the Abby sent, The Fryers and Nuns had all content, he had a great reward: Their grief of heart he did asswage, And also did appease their rage, the Prior did him regard. Then homewards straight he did repair, Singing, hey hoe, away the mare, still piping as he went: A crew of labourers he meets, As they marcht home along the streets, they wondred what he meant: Then straight to dancing all they fell, The reason why they could not tell, with pick-axes and spades: They swung the same about their heads, As if they had been feather-beds; they pranct like merry blades. Some oyster-women passing by, And hearing of this harmony, thrust in amongst the throng: The labourers to fighting fell, The women spar'd them never a deal: they scorned to take wrong,
Till some officers came by, And parted them immediately: thus I conclude my song. FINIS. Books Printed for Edward Brewst at the Crane in St. Pauls Churc¦yard, 1680. The Famous History of Guy Earl  Warwick. The most Delectable History of R¦nard the Fox, both parts, with ma others, &c.
section of frieze [unrelated to this text?]
