H2726 R2284 [ocm]12691138 65842
PYRRHUS King of EPIRUS.
PYRRHUS King of Epirus. A TRAGEDY, ACTED At the NEW THEATRE, in Little Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, By His MAJESTY'S Servants. Written by Mr. HOPKINS. Solum primos da versibus annos. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Briscoe, in Covent-Garden; Peter Buck, at the Sign of the Temple, and Daniel Dring, at the Harrow and Crown, in Fleet-street, 1695.
TO HIS ILLUSTRIOUS HIGHNESS THE Duke of GLOUCESTER. May it please Your HIGHNESS, THE HERO of this Tragedy, was one of the most Famous that ever any Age produc'd; and his Story is humbly Dedicated to a Young PRINCE, who, so very early, promises Things as Great. All Noble Actions have been done, in imi∣tation of Others that preceeded Them; and often They that imitate, have out∣done their Originals. Wonderful Things may be expected from Your Highness's Manhood, who in so Green an Age, has promis'd so much. The Eyes of EƲROPE are on YOU;
the Hopes of Three Kingdoms live in YOU: And, That YOU may live to Out-do even All Men's Expectations; live to be as Great as the HERO was, for whom I have presum'd to beg Your Highness's Patronage; or, to go yet beyond Him; That YOU may live to be as Great as Your Royal UNCLE, Shall ever be the Prayer of Your HIGHNESS'S Most Devoted, Most Humble Servant, C. H.
PROLOGUE. By Mr. CONGREVE. OƲR Age has much improv'd the Warriour's Art; For Fighting, now, is thought the weakest Part; And a good Head, more useful than a Heart. This Way of War, does our Example yield; That Stage will win, which longest keeps the Field. We mean not Battel, when we bid Defiance; But starving one another to Compliance. Our Troops encamp'd are by each other view'd, And those which first are Hungry, are subdu'd. And there, in truth, depends the Great Decision: They Conquer, who cut off the Foe's Provision. Let Fools, with Knocks and Bruises, keep a pother; Our War and Trade is to out-Wit each other. But, hold: Will not the Politicians tell us, That both our Conduct, and our Forefight, fail us, To raise Recruits, and draw new Forces down, Thus in the dead Vacation of the own? To muster up our Rhimes, without our Reason, And forrage for an Audience out of Season? Our Author's Fears must this false Step excuse; 'Tis the First Flight of a just-feather'd Muse: Th' Occasion ta'en, when Criticks are away; Half Wits and Beaux, those rav'nous Birds of Prey. But, Heav'n be prais'd, far hence they vent their Wrath, Mauling in mild Lampoon th' intriguing Bath. Thus does our Author his First Flight commence; Thus, against Friends at first, with Foils we fence: Thus prudent Gimcrack try'd if he were able (Ere he'd wet Foot) to swim upon a Table. Then spare the Youth; or if you'll damn the PLAY, Let him but first have His; then take Your Day.
Drammatis Persona. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus. Helenus, Son to Pyrrhus. Dion, His General. Antigonus, King of Macedon. Demetrius, Son to Antigonus. Aristeon, Son to the late Ty∣rant of Argos. Aemilius, A Roman. Martius, Another Roman. WOMEN. Lanassa, Queen of Epire. Antigone, Daughter to the King of Macedon. Ptolemy, The dead Son of Pyrrhus. Ghost of Alexander the Great.
PYRRHUS King of EPIRUS. ACT I. SCENE I. SCENE, The City of Argos besieged by King Pyrrhus; the Camp of the Epirotes on the one side, and that of the Macedonians, who came to the Relief of it, on the other. Pyrrhus Solus. The Time Night. Thunder and Lightning. Pyrrh. IF Heaven is wont to mourn the Death of Princes, And Gods above are sensible of Grief For their Vicegerents here: If Nature sickens, And looks with sad Concern, when impious Fate Strikes at her Darling Sons; if Groans of Ghosts, That leave their empty Tombs to stalk on Earth, And scream in open Air, are justly call'd The Voice of Fate, that of the King of Macedon, Or mine, is near at hand; for all the Prodigies, And all the Horrors, that fore-run the Funerals
Of dying Heroes have been seen to Night. Approach my General, why so slow a March? Dion entring. Why dwells that mournful Cloud upon your Brows? Why look you more opprest with Grief than Years, As all the Anger, and the Frowns of Heaven, And the loud Tumult of a troubled Sky, Could bend a Heart made firm with Age, like yours? Dion. No, Royal Sir, not these outragious Tempests, Not massy Bolts teach'd by the brawny Cyclops, Hot from the flaming Forge, and driven by Jove Through the scorch'd Skies, can shock your Souldier's Soul: But oh! imagine Prince what most would move you, Drive you to Rage, make you fall out with Fate, And rail at Heav'n. Pyrrh. Could any thing do this, It were the loss of Battle, a shameful Overthrow From an inglorious Enemy. Dion. You've lost more. Much more than this. Pyrrh. There is but one that can be; And if my Queen be safe, not slain, nor seized By those that forc'd Her from Her Throne in Epirus, I dare the utmost Malice of my Destiny. Dion. She's safe, and coming on apace to seek you: Our outmost Scouts descry'd her glitt'ring Chariot, Drawn by white Steeds, that ran as swift as Wind; And long before that rising Sun appear With his full Orb of Light above you Hill, You'll see her in your Tent. Pyrrh. Then be it as it will. Thou might'st have told at first, and not have fear'd: It would not overwhelm me. Dion. To him that loves, the loss of his Belov'd Is Misery enough; and to the Warriour, Who seeks in bloody Fields for Fame and Glory, An Overthrow is yet a greater Ill: But for a Father to lose a Princely Son; And such a Son as Ptolemy, so like his Father, Outweighs all other Ills. Pyrrh. Alas, I thought not That Fate would wound me there. Dion. Would it had struck at any other Life,
Any but yours; my Breath I had resign'd With Joy, and laid my Bosom naked, for a Javelin. Now all the Soldiers hang their drooping Heads, Which late they bore aloft; they break their Launces, And cry, No more to War, the Prince is gone That taught us how to conquer; no more to Battles, Since He who won them for us is no more. Pyrrh. If they grieve thus, sure he was well belov'd, And died as did become him. Dion. He fell so brave, No History can produce the like Example, And no Tongue dare to say I'll shew his Equal. Pyrrh. Stop not: Say on, my Soldier. Dion. Sir, I dare not: His Praises but renew the sad Remembrance, And I would spare your Sorrow. Pyrrh. No, go on, I bear it as I should do. Dion. When joyful Sparta saw your Tents took up. And all your Camp remov'd, she gave a Shout That eccho'd to the Skies; fierce Ptolomy rag'd To hear their Boasts, and loyt'ring with some Troops Far separate from the Body of your Army, The Force of Lacedaemon sallied on him, And yet he scorn'd to shun the unequal Combat. 'Twas then that he employ'd his utmost Strength, Performing more than Man, none scap'd unhurt, From his strong Arm: His single Sword flew more, Than those of all the Combatants besides. What could he do, by Multitudes oppress'd? At length he fell, high on a heap of Spartans, Whom himself kill'd, and smil'd, and look'd in Death, As who should say I conquered. Pyrrh. One thing more, And then eternal Peace be with Him. Tell me, Who got his Body? Dion. His Soldiers all fought round it. When word was brought me of the fierce Engagement, I gather'd all the Forces next at hand, and flew to rescue him; but all too late, I only could revenge him, which I did; For thousand Spartan Ghosts took flight that day
To wait on his. Pyrrh. Why yet 'tis well. He was a Soldler, and he died as such, As such he shall he buried. See him brought hither, That we may pay him all the Rites he merits From a just King, and an indulgent Father: And since Revenge and Rage inflame my Breast, I vow to all the Earth, by all the Gods, By all the Furies that are kindled in me, To Night to lay him in his Tomb in Argos. Dion goes out, and returns with Soldiers bearing in the Prince. Dion. See here, my Lord, behold your hopes lie blasted, Your Darling gone, first of thy Royal Off-spring, And most resembling thee. Whom have we now, When all thy youthful Vigour shall be spent, Thy Arms grown tir'd with wielding of the Sword? When old Age shall encroach, and seize thy Limbs, Compelling thee to sit at home in quiet? Who then shall lead thy Armies to the Battel, And conquer in thy Cause? Who then shall fight As thou hast done without the loss of Glory, That the deluded Foe shall find no difference 'Twixt him and Thee? Who then shall bring fresh Laurels To crown the aged Temples of their King? Pyrrh. Cease, good old Man, cease this unmanly Grief, Lest I mourn too; l, who would brave the Fates, And rise beneath the weight of all their Bolts. Speak Comfort to me, urge me to Revenge, And drive me to the Field: And you, his Soldiers, Take up your Prince, and bear him to his Tent, Attend his mournful Hearse with weeping Eyes, Till the loud Trumpets send their Notes to Heaven, Till the Drums beat to Battel, and the big Voice Of Vengeance calls you forth; then rush to Arms. Learn to forget your Griefs in heat of Combat: Remember not you saw your Leader dead; But fight as if he conquer'd at your Head. Dion. Shall we go arm our selves, my Lord. Pyrrh. We will. The early Sun climbs o'er the Hills apace,
His Beams are darted upward to the Heavens; And the first God that wakes, puts forth his hand To draw aside the Curtains of the Skies, And let the day light out. How many Thousand That rise this dreadful Morn, all gay and healthful, Must e'er it yet be Noon lie down again, And rest for ever. Call the Athenian Min'strel, I want some Musick: Let me have that Song Sung at the Royal Banquet, made in Babylon The last great Feast of Alexander. SONG. HArk! the big Drums they beat to Battel, The Voice of War is loud as Thunder. Hark! How the Clashing Armours rattle, And lo! the Squadrons marching yonder. Now, now they meet, the Word is given, The Shields are lifted, Swords are drawn; The Shouts of Warriours rend the Heaven, And every Chief comes raging on. Hundreds fall, and Thousands yield, Blood and Slaughter fill the Plain; And Fate Triumphant through the Field, Colossus-like, bestrides the Slain. The Business of the World dispatches, decided thus in some few hours, Death quickly ends the vanquish'd Wretches, And Laurel crowns the Conquerours. Enter an Officer. Dion. Is the Queen coming? And so near at hand! By Mars she's welcome, though the first of the Sex That e'er was so to me. My Lord, the Queen Is in the Camp, will you not go to meet her?
Pyrrh. How, my Queen! Dion, see, she's here already. Enter the Queen. Oh! I am the last in Love, as well as Honour. Welcome my Love, by th dear Self, a Welcome, Great as the Man that loves like me, can give. No Mother, that has mourn'd her long lost Infant, Rejoices half so much to find her Darling, Or view the lovely Babe with half the Fondness I look on thee. Queen. Answer me, Gracious Heaven, What God has saved my Pyrrhus yet unhurt, Even in the Mouth of Slaughter? What kind Deity, With a stretch'd Arm, held the broad Shield before him, Oppos'd to Destiny, Does he still live? And do I live to clasp him? Pyrrh. I live my Love, And sure I shall not dye now thou art come, My better half of Life. Queen. But yet I fear, Lest Heaven at last grown weary of its Favours, Should sullenly withdraw its bounteous hands: And Fortune that has wound so many Victories In one round and constant String, Should rashly in a Pett unravel all. Pyrrh. What greater Proof could I desire from Heaven Of its continu'd Goodness, than thus to send thee, The Omen of my Conquest? Sure ill Fate Durst never yet assume a shape so lovely, Or put on Looks like thine. Queen. Alas, my Lord, Methoughts I met it with a dreadful Aspect. Late as I lay entranc'd, I saw you, Pyrrhus, Far different, far unlike what now you are. I thought I saw you stretch'd upon the Earth, All pale, and ghastly, and your gaping Wounds Still freshly bleeding: All the mangled Bodies Of your defeated Army, in heaps beside you. No more that awful Warriour, whose Name alone Has shook the vast Foundations of the Capitol. I saw you, oh my Pyrrhus, cold and dead,
That lovely Face besmear'd with Blood, those Lips Fast clos'd for ever, had not power to answer To the loud moan I made you; Oh! my Lord, How was I daunted at a sight so dismal? I almost died to have dreamt it, and unable To bear the horrid Vision any longer, I burst the Chains of my distracted Sleep. Pyrrh. 'Twas but a Dream caus'd by your tender Fears. Queen. Yet by those Fears, And by the Love I bear you (and oh! if Heaven Loved half so well, it would be kind and constant) My bleeding heart begs of you not to fight, But instantly to raise the fatal Siege; For something tells me with a dreadful Whisper, Epirus ne'er shall see her Monarch more. Pyrrh. How art thou alter'd, Love, since first I knew thee! Thy Spirit once was Masculine and Brave; Thy self wer't wont to help me to my Arms, And bid me hasten to the Glorious Field; And when I talk'd of War, the Tale would please thee As much as that of Love, What now has chang'd thee? Queen. I am not us'd to fear; yet something bodes, I know not how, nor what; I and I conjure you By all I have heard you swear, by all your Sighs, By all your Vows, deferr the great decision; And if I ever had the Power to move you, O let me charm you now, or now or never. Pyrrh. Oh! hold my Love, cease the unkind request, I can deny you nothing; yet I beg You would not ask me what I must not grant You shou'd consult my Honour more than thus; When all my tow'ring Thoughts were fix'd on Glory; When all the Languishings of Love were fled, And Mars alone had fill'd, and swell'd my Breast, Thus with thy Tears to cool my heated Soul, To turn me back from the bright track of War, And melt me down again to Woman's Fondness. Queen. Then let it melt this obstinate heard heart. Thus will I fold thee in my longing Arms, Embrace thee thus; thus shalt thou listen to me: Thus, whilst I hang upon my Pyrrhus's neck, What loud Alarm of Drums, or what shrill Trumpet?
What dreadful roar of War shall charm him from me? Pyrrh. Why dost thou press me thus? Forbear to urge me, To drive me on, and force me to deny thee: Not fight Lanassa! What Request but this Could I refuse thee? This I cannot grant. Oh what, what would the murmuring Soldiers say, Already rang'd, preparing for the Fight, They wait my coming: Should I not haste to head them, How would they storm to see themselves abandon'd? Queen. Enough, my Lord, I have heard enough, and am at last convinc'd My Tears are dry'd, and all my Prayers are ended. No more will I push back your Coming-Glory, Nor strive to crop your growing Wreaths of Lawrel: Go then, my Pyrrhus, go, and fight, and prosper, Lead your impatient Squadrons to the Field, Rear all your Standards, let your warlike Ensigns Loose all their golden Streamers to the Winds, Rush to the War, may Conquest crown your Arms, And your triumphant Garlands flourish ever. Pyrrh. It shall be Battel now, and, by you Heav'n, It seems auspicious, that my Love has said it. I thank thee for the Conquest; and methinks Already I behold Antigonus vanquished. Oh! Hadst not thou, my better Self, been willing, Had you not spoke it, had your Assent been wanting, I had not fought with half my usual Bravery; But now, Whole Pyrrhus pours upon the Foe, And fights with Forces not divided now. Queen. Yet grant me this, my Lord, my much lov'd, Pyrrhus, You must not, ought not to deny me this: Swear to me by your Honour, by your Arms, By all the Oaths a Soldier holds as Sacred; Swear somewhat to enliven your fainting Queen, That when the dreadful Tug at last begins, When the last Trumpets urge you to the Battel, And Arms and Heads are lop'd, and shivering Launces, Sharp Spears, and all the Darts of Death fly round you, When all your drooping Soldiers fall in Heaps; And the tall Youths that stood but now erect, Lye breathless on the Plain, swear then, my Love To guard your own dear Life as much as possible,
To seek no Dangers Prudence bids you shun, And Glory will permit, and not rush wilful Into the Arms of Death. Grant me but this, And half my Fears are vanish'd. Pyrrh. No more, I grant you this, but ask no more. Retire, my Love, I hear the shouting Soldiers Cry for their Chief, and my old General yonder Is come to call me hence: I go to reap The Noble Harvest of a bloody Field, Whose Crop shall all be thine. Queen. Success attend thee, And all the mighty Gods of War and Love Take part with thee, guide, and direct thy Arms, And Heav'n restore thee to me. Pyrrh. One Embrace, Such as the Queen of Beauty gave to Mars, When he march'd forth to the Overthrow of Giants In the Phlegrean; and doubt not, Love, I go to Conquest as assured as his, And will return more glorious to thy Arms, And bring new Trophies to thee. When after drawn in thy triumphant Carr, Thy self the beauteous Goddess of the War; Whilst Kings shall walk in Fetters by thy side, And even the Conqueror's Self before thee bleed; Whilst all my Wreaths thy lovely Temples bind, And all the Laurel-Crowns I won are thine, And all by Crowning thee become divine. From ev'ry part shall vanquish'd Princes come; Thou shalt pronounce the Royal Captive's Doom, Each Vassal shall bow down his suppliant Knee, And all the Earth receive their Laws from thee. Leads her out, and returns. Enter Helenus. Hel. My Lord, the Enemy Have all their Forces ready, and their Trumpets Have sounded twice to Battel. Pyrrh. Did not ours sound As often, in answer to them?
Dion. They did: Our Men are all in order too as theirs, We only wait for the third Call from them; Then sound on our side too, and march to meet them. Pyrrh. We'll give them the third Call our selves, Trumpets sound. Not stay to take it from them. Sound all the Trumpets, So loud a Blast, that Heav'n and Earth may hear us. What Order is Antigonus's Army in? Hel. Himself at the Head of his Auxiliaries, The Romans marching foremost. Pyrrh. Helenus, you have lost a Princely Brother, His Spirit be infused in thee, his Fires Added to thine, with all thy Force revenge him; Fight in his Cause, as he has done in thine, And be a Ptolomy to me. Dion. Heaven make him like In all things, but his end. Pyrrh. Hark, we are answer'd. Trumpets sound. Now they begin to march. Dion. By Heav'n, in gallant Order, Rome's Legions, and the Macedonian Phalanx Are rang'd in Noble Discipline. Hel. Methinks we move like Clouds beneath the Sky, Driven by the breath of Winds our Fire's conceal'd Until we come so near to meet, and strike, And then the Lightning follows. Pyrrh. My Blood boils high, And all my Sinews stretch themselves for War: Draw all, and follow with your lifted Sword, Strike for the Revenge, let Ptolomy be the Word; Send loud defiance forth from every Breath, And wound as sharply, and as sure as Death. Exeunt.
ACT II. Enter Antigonus, Demetrius, Aristeon, Martius. Antig. IS Pyrrhus then invincible, and does the Fortune Of Alexander wholly wait on him? He marches as securely on to Battels, As others do to Triumphs, and he wins them, As sure as if he were a God, exalted Above the Chance of War. Dem. He is the Darling of it, The best-lov'd Son of Mars; our Macedonians That once knew how to conquer, fly from him As Persians did from them. Mart. My two best Legions Are lost entirely, and the rest so shatter'd, They are not serviceable. Imperial Rome, In the wide Progress of her spreading Arms, Has never met such stops as now she finds, When e'r she encounters Epirus's King. Antig. All his Success is wonderful, himself Does things prodigious, and beyond belief: An Army led by such a King, so daring, That goes the foremost on, and fights the first, With his own Sword, opening the way to Victory, Must needs prevail. Arist. I sought him in the Battel, And found him to my Cost; his second Blow Struck me to Earth, so weightily, that I fansy'd All Heav'n was fall'n upon me. Dem. I saw him then, When he rode swiftly through your Argive Troops, As fatal as the Lightning, and as fast, And distributing Deaths like Jove himself. Antig. Now we lie here besieg'd, shut up in Walls, And have not Forces left to take the Field, 'Tis doubtful if these Ramparts can withstand him,
Till Succours shall arise. Arist. Argos to him Will be as Oxydrate to Alexander; Yet Victor as he is, we will resist him, And put the War on the extremest Proof, When he dare try it. Dem. That will be to Night; For I am told he swore to interr his Son In the Goddess Juno's Temple. Mart. No doubt he'll act As boldly as he vows. Antig. 'Tis almost certain He will assault us here this very Night. The Trumpet that we sent him is return'd; But Truce is only granted till the Night, And that speaks something. Dem. The Gates are open'd, And the glad Argives walk about in Fields, Where an hour since it had been Death to tread; Already they begin to taste the breath Of the refreshing Peace. Mart. Soldiers on either side, That very lately fought with mortal hatred, Now join in friendly Meetings. Arist. Yonder I think, Two of a nobler Aspect than the rest, Seem to come strait to us; I know their Arms, The same the Prince and General wore in Battel. Antig. When you are met, I charge you to be careful How you observe the Peace; let nothing break it. No Words inrage you, and no Rage transport you To violate our Truce; but when it ends, Appear your selves again, resume your Fury Fiercer than ever; Summon all your Forces For one great blow to crown the dreadful Upshot. Prepare th'extremest Chance of War to try, Resolve to conquer, or resolve to die. Exit Antigonus. Enter Helenus, Dion. Dem. Much sweeter are the looks of gentle Peace Than those of horrid War.
Hel. One of them Looks like some Beauty in her best attire, With all her richest Ornaments upon her; The other like some rough and unhewn Warriour, Clad in hard Iron. Mart. Not long since it was dangerous for the best of us To meet so near: We now may join our hands, And clasp each others warlike Arms unhurt; Which was not so this Morning. Dion. And will not be this Night. Arist. Short as you please, we are ready to receive you. Dem. Till then all Peace, hush'd as the Sea becalm'd; For so should we look now: No angry Frown On our smooth Brows, no Fury in our Eyes, Nothing of Enemy in us. Hel. By Mars I am pleas'd That we meet thus. Arist. The Conquerors may be pleas'd, And proud on't too, and chiefly such as take it A kind of Triumph to them. Dion. We take it not as such, Although we are the Conquerors. Arist. When you've won all, you may. Hel. And all is Ours To very little. Dem. Less than that little we have, Has oftentimes been known to bring back all. Arist. Argos is ours, a formidable City, The Walls are large, and high, and Men within them That dare defend them. Hel. And there are those without As daring to assault them. Dion. And you have prov'd, They are not to be scorn'd; this day is witness To the great Fall of Thirty thousand Soldiers Of Argos, Rome, and Macedon, and they lie yet Unburied in these Fields. Dem. Heav'n was against us: But the next time Fortune may smile on our side, And lop a greater number of your Armies Than we lost from ours.
Dion. I were mad my self If I gave way to Mad-men. Hel. Old stubborn Man, as impotent as envious, Were not thy Vigour gone, thy Veins grown dry, And every drop of sprightly Blood exhausted, And can'st not meet my Arms with equal Forces, I would punish thee for this. Dion. Oh! that thou wer not Son to God-like Pyrrhus, The Man I love of all the World the best, And even above it all, and next to Heav'n, This aged Arm, and withered as it is, Could I make crush the Man that dares to tempt it. Hel. Do you know me? Dion. Aye, better than you do your self, And love you more. Hel. You seem not to do either. Remember I'm Heir to the Epiran Crown: Long may my Father wear it; but when he dies, If I survive, 'tis mine, and thou esteem'd No other than a Traytor. Dion. Thou'rt worse, A Traytor to thy Father, and thy King; And Ruine to thy self. Hel. Yet let me pass. Dion. Your Actions have enraged me so of late, That what you do, does not concern me now. Go where you please; for I will to the King, And tell him all. Hel. Tell what thy Malice can, Perverse old Dotard, past the Years of Manhood. Dion. Thy Father shall know what thou art. I'll tell him How you first broke the Truce; how in the Battel, When I had singled out the King of Macedon, And held my Sword advanc'd above his head Ready to strike, and put a happy end To the Long War, You rush'd betwixt, and stopp'd my falling Arm, And cry'd out, Spare the King. Hel. In that I did Nothing, but what was due to Royal Blood; Kings are too sacred, and too dear to Heav'n To fall by impious hands.
Dion. You lov'd the Daughter, And therefore sav'd the Father. Curs'd Love, The bane of gallant Deeds and gallant Men: Good Gods! that any one so form'd for Greatness As this most excellent, but unhappy Prince, Design'd by Heav'n for all imperial Dignities, Cast in the noblest Mold, and stamp'd divine, No Fault through all his Frame, the best of Princes, And bravest Soldier, should be lost by Love. Remember but your Brother Ptolemy, Your Royal Father wish'd you were like him, And oh! I beg of all the Gods you were. Would he do this, would he forsake his Honour, And leave a conqu'ring Army for a Woman! O think what pains I took to instruct your Youth In the great Trade of War, and how I joy'd To see the noble Art improv'd in you; Then call the old Man, Dotard, past his Manhood, Thank me in Terms like these. Hel. Forgive me, General, Shame and Distraction seize me both at once. I know not what to say; alas, I know not What I resolv'd to do, you've held a Mirror, And shewn me to my self, and I am soul As She I love is fair. Dion. Return with me Back to our Camp, and all again is well; Where you shall meet in Triumph all the Chiefs Shining in Golden Arms, the Prancing Steeds Bearing with Pride their Riders on their Backs, And neighing to the sound of Warlike Trumpets, Whilst all the joyful Soldiers loudly answer In Songs of Io Paan. Hel. How little shall I share the general Joy, That have the Foe within me. Do but view me, And think that when a Conqueror grieves as I do, Even whilst his Arms are on him, and his Sword Still stain'd with Blood, nothing but Love cou'd cause it Dion. I see it plain you love her too, too well: But Glory us'd to be the charming Mistress, And most admir'd by Princes; slight not that For any other Idol.
Hel. Heav'n can witness, That tho' I love her more, far more than Life, Yet I love Honour better than them both. Dion. Why did you then go to throw that away, Even when you were not certain of the other, And rashly run to Dangers which had cost you Your Life and all? Hel. O do not press me thus; My guilty Soul wou'd lose the black Remembrance, But you take care to keep it still alive. Dion. No, it shall die for me; and since I see you So sensible of Honour, so nice of that, In heighth of Love I will my self instruct you To farther your Designs. Hel. Oh tell me how, My good General, tell me, and your Prince Shall bless those aged lips that gave the Counsel. Dion. See her no more. Hel. Again you dash me Down from the top of my aspiring hopes Into the lowest Valley of Despair. Dion. Nay, hear me out; not see her till the Night: To Night, when your great Father bids us arm, And march to mount yon Walls; then you shall go The foremost on, to seize your lovely Prize, Revenge your Brother, and receive Antigone. Hel. Oh! you have fired me; by the Gods, I wish The Night already come: Fall down thou Sun From Heav'ns high Battlements, to Seas beneath; And the kind Heav'ns draw all your darkest Curtains Around your shining Orbs, and shut in day; For I will do such most amazing Deeds, As are not fit for your bright eyes to view. Yon Argos shall be levell'd in the Dust, Flames in her Tow'rs, and Murder in her Streets, Death in all Forms, and horrid in them all; Only my Love be free, in general Ruine, Whom I will bear safe through th'wondring Flames, Whilst the scorch'd Daemons of the Air shall beg For such a Champion to relieve themselves. Dion. Prince, I dare trust you farther yet than this; I know you truly noble; only swear,
That if I let you go to her you love, As you may do disguis'd in time of Truce, Swear to return when the first Trumpets call, And the Alarm is heard; not lose your Part In the great Action, swear by something sacred, And you have leave to go. Hel. By all that's sacred, By her I love, I swear I will return, Though from the clasping Arms of her I love. Dion. Remember only this, and then farewel: Behold you Ramparts higher than the rest; 'Tis there your Father storms, be sure be there. Hel. Doubt not I will, only till then adieu. I go with none but lambent Fires to love; But will return with burning heat to Battel, And all my rising Spirits turn'd for Glory. Glory and Love usurp my ravish'd Soul, They have my heart, and they possess it whole. Exit. Dion. I let him go, and yet Heav'n knows how loth; But had I not, his noble Heart had broke. He is brave, and worthy of his Royal Birth; And were it not for Love, the most accomplish'd, And nearest to a God, of any Mortal, Penurious Heav'n, and ye so timorous Deities, That dare not suffer this one gallant Youth To be completely perfect, lest he draw Your Adoration from you; no, you dare not Grant your Assent, that ought of Humane Race Shou'd ev'ry ways be happy; then alas He were too like your selves; What other blemish, But that of Love has tainted him? Woman, Woman, Whence comes your Empire over us? Whence the Power That chains us all your Slaves? Sure we at first Were meant the Masters; but by some strange turn, Some most prodigious Whirl of unfix'd Fate, The subtil Sex has chang'd the Laws of Heav'n. Heav'n, when it made them, meant them to obey, Design'd them Slaves, who now have learnt to sway: To them the Hero's of the Earth fall down, Pleas'd when they smile, but dying if they frown: To them we offer up our frequent Prayers; They move above our Heads in higher Spheres, And the large Rule of all the World is theirs. Exit.
ACT III. SCENE I. Enter Aristeon with Antigone. Arist. WHat Pleasure could a tender Soul like yours Receive from looking on the dismal Objects Those Fields afford? Antig. That wretched one of Pity. Arist. Shou'd I have shar'd your Pity, lovely Princess, Had I lain there high on the fatal heap, Th' upmost of th' Dead? Antig. No doubt you shou'd: I mourn for ev'ry gallant Man that falls, Serving his King and Country. Arist. How much more shou'd you mourn me? I, who serve none but you; I, who am subject to no King nor Country, Whom no Ambition, no Desire of Glory, Drives to the Field, no Lust of Sovereign Power, But only your Defence has drawn my Sword. Oh! give me now the Pity that I beg, Now while I live, to save me from the Death You say you'd mourn. Antig. I do not see you need it: You have my Father's Thanks, the Army's Praise; That might suffice a Soldier. Arist. Oh! Antigone, There is another Name would make me prouder, Than Soldier, Chief, or Conqueror. Antig. The last of those Might have been spar'd; for you maintain it ill. Arist. No wonder that the Victory was not ours, Since you, nor wish it were, nor pray'd it should be, How should our Arms prevail? Antig. How dare you to tax me With that Impiety? I wish'd the War Were at an end; I wish'd as did become me.
Arist. Oh! Madam, if I durst explain your meaning, Which of the Armies was your chief Concern, And which you offer'd up your Prayers for most? It should be that you wish the King of Epirus A Conqu'ror here in Argos, o'er your Father, Rather than that his Son, the lov'd Helenus, Shou'd fall on Argive Swords. Antig. Lest you interpret My Thoughts with so much boldness any longer, And to confound you more than doubt can do, Learn the most secret Wishes of my Soul; I pray'd my Father might return in safety From all the Dangers of the bloody Field: Heav'n heard me; and it sent th' Prince you nam'd, When he stood most in need of such an Aid, To save him from the then descending Sword. My Pray'rs were next for safety of th'Prince, Who sav'd my Father: You might had the same For the same Action; but your Arms were busy'd At too great distance to have brought relief. Arist. Curse on my Stars, that give my Rival all, All the Occasions to be brave and noble, And will allow me none. Antig. Acknowledge rather The Stars are equally the Friends of both: 'Tis only he takes care to seize on all, While you with heedless Eyes let all pass by. Arist Yet this same Prince, whose Cause you plead so well, Your Father does esteem his mortal Foe, And will pursue his hated Life as such. Antig. Now you've charg'd him with that foul Ingratitude, As you did me before, with want of Piety: Be judge your self, whether the Prince of Epirus, Or you are most our Enemy. Arist. This Night will show't. My Orders are to guard the Palace-Gates, Where you are lodg'd; and be assur'd I'll die In your Defence rather than yield you up; And will your Prince's Proofs of Love be such? When you shall see him breathing bold defiance, March his Epiran Army to your Doors, Slaught'ring your Subjects in your very sight,
And scatter Fires about the flaming City, Nor spare the gilded Roofs that cover you. Ant. If I must lose my liberty at night To be your Prisoner, leave it me till then; Yet thus much I may tell before I go, I'll make my Duty, and my Love agree, As much at variance as they seem to be: All I shall pray for in the fatal Strife, Shall be my Father's and my Prince's Life: To you, immortal Gods, the rest I trust, You best know how to act, and will be just. Exit. Enter Helenus. Hel. Thus far I have pass'd unknown by all their Guards; But Love, that adds more sharpness to the sight Has made the Prince of Argos find me out. I see he knows me, and it is as vain As base to fly. Arist. Ha! wou'd you shun me, Prince? Think not, that this Disguise can keep you hid From piercing Eyes like mine. Hel. I wou'd not have it. Next to th'meeting those I came to seek, I'm glad to meet with thee: Make no Enquiries; For whatsoever was my Errand hither, This is my Business now. Draws. Arist. So forward, Sir? You know not that you are within th'Walls, Where at my Call, my Slaves cou'd come, and crush you, Without my trouble to unsheath my Sword. Hel. I know it, and that drives me forward yet To end with thee, e'er thy base odds arrive, And push this Ghost before me down the Shades. Fight. Arist. (Wounded) The first, the second time disarm'd Gods: ye are kind, do but take Life and all, And then I'll thank you. Hel. They have spar'd you that, And I restore you this. Arist. I scorn to take it; I scorn to owe my Life, or Arms to thee. Hel. You shall not need, for I first ow'd you mine;
I do but pay the Debt. Arist. Instruct me, Sir, Hel. When you resolv'd to fight me hand to hand, And drew not in your Multitudes upon me, Then I was made your Debtor. Arist. What! then you thought your self secure from harm In single Combat with me, proud Triumpher? Hel. No, but I knew you cou'd securely vanquish, By calling in your Guards. Arist. And cou'dst thou think So meanly of me, that I wou'd use their aid? Hel. I still expected what thou did'st; and what, Had I met thee within my Father's Camp, I too had done. Arist. Now I'm lost indeed: Whilst I found Rage and Fury like my own, I cou'd storm on; but Kindness melts me down. Give me thine hand, and tell me, gen'rous Prince; Your noble Carriage forces me to ask you; Say, is it possible we can be Friends? Hel. Not whilst we love, and hardly whilst we live. Glory and Love makes us eternal Foes; Which should we strive to meet, like raging Seas, Wou'd rush between our Fold, and throw us far asunder. Arist. What shall we do? Hel. Why? One of us must die To make the other happy. Arist. On those Terms then, I take my forfeit Sword: We'll meet to Night, Resolve to end our difference in our Death; And lest the Darkness shou'd not make distinctions, Antigone be th'Word, and this th'Place, Hel. That charming Name shall draw me to th'Combat, Ev'n from the Rere of all my hindmost Troops; The very mention of it wings me to thee, Swift as it flies to me. Arist. You will not fail. Hel. I will not, tho' my Father shou'd deferr His purpos'd Storm; tho' I were sure I mov'd To certain Ruine, and a thousand Prodigies Foretold my Fall, tho' all th'Skies forewarn'd me, Heav'n flam'd above, and the Earth yawn'd beneath,
I'll on to win my Love, or meet my Death. Arist. Stay, generous Prince, I owe a mighty Sum, And have a Soul that scorns to be ungrateful: Oh! what, what Reparation can I make? Hel. That of your Sword to Night. Arist. That heaps on more, And plunges deeper in th'desperate Debt. I owe e'en that to you, nor can I turn The fatal Point against the Prince that gave it; Yet there is a way, but a dear costly way, At a large over-rate, to pay back all. May I not guess your Business was to Argos To see the Princess? Hel. I must confess it was. Arist. Down, swelling heart; Oh! Heav'n, I wou'd do something, But that my struggling Soul rebells within me: It shall, it shall have vent; Go see th Princess, She only waits till she sees me withdrawn, To fly into your Arms; but then remember Your gallant Usage is repay'd with Int'rest. And we may fight again with boundless hatred. I grudge the Ransome, that I give for Life; But go, e'er I repent, and beg to die. Go now, the great, unwilling Grant is past; And, oh! believe I let you look your last. Exeunt. Re-enter Helenus with Antigone. Hel. Oh! my Antigone, after six Year's Absence; A tedious Age in the Records of Time, But vastly longer in Accounts of Love. What shall I say, to tell thee that my Soul Is full with Joy, how shall I pour it forth In Thnks to Heav'n, that in one happy Moment Has recompenc'd an Age of Torments past? To see thee still the same, no Beauty faded: To see this matchless Truth, to see thee mine, Is all the Gods cou'd grant, or I cou'd ask. Antig. Nor are my Joys and Transports less than yours. I give an equal share of Thanks to Heav'n, And equal Love to thee; but oh! my Lord, I can't see you in an Enemy's Town, (Such  must think them, who are so to you) Wout a great allay of Grief and Fear.
Hel. The Gods have yet preserv'd us from our Youth; Should we mistrust them now, by that we break The League our selves, and fall out first with Heaven. No, Love; the Powers above are Just and Kind, And when they mould, such heavenly forms as yours, They grow our Rivals in their Beauteous work, And place the Carefull'st Genius for your guard. Ant. I fear not for my self, for you I fear, Exposed to all the horrid rage of War, In Bloody Fields, the Shaft that reaches you, Brings Death to both, for it would wound me too. Hel. Vanish such Thoughts, and let the little time That Heav'n allows, be wholly spent in Love: Speak then, but speak the tend'rest things you can, Such as did first express our Infant Passions, When I Return'd from our last Wars in Macedon, Laden with Spoils, and you my Richest Prize, Were made my Prisoner, in my Father's Court. Ant. Oh! would this War, had such an End as that, And I again your Captive. Hel. You had the Name, And oh! the Name of Captive was too much, Too much for you to bear, but still, my Love, 'Twas I that drag'd the Chains, and drag them still. Ant. That happy time first Joyn'd our youthful hearts, And oh! may none divide them. Hel. No time, Antigone, No date of Years shall make our Flames expire, But Every one that lengthens out our lives, Shall add unto our loves. Ant. Hear heav'n, and Judge us then, the happy'st Pair Your hands have made; and oh! if I prove false, False to the Prince to whom I give my Soul, And Life, and Love; may that detested Name I scorn to mention, brand me whil'st I live. Hel. Oh! hear me too, and let our Vows ascend Together to your Skies, and some good God Enroll them there, if ever I forget thee, If I neglect to pay that awful Love, I only Swear to thee, or ever look With the least wishing glance, on other Beauties, May Fortune, in my Battles, Change like me;
May Fame fly from me, and I fly from Fame; May all my Laurels wither on my brows, And Cowards snatch them thence. Ant. Methinks, at two such Passions Heav'n should smile, The Jocund Orbs roul on in better Order, The Earth be wrapt in quiet, War should Cease, And Golden Peace be Prosp'rous. Hel. Oh! go on, Speak yet a little more, a little longer, For by the Gods, that listen to our talk, 'Tis Heav'n to me to hear you, not the Tongues Of Deities plead so well, my Heart leaps up, And pants at all you utter, each pointed Syllable, From those dear lovely Lips, runs to my Soul, And Circles in my Blood. Ant. Remember, Love, What golden days we at Epirus past, When every Rouling day brought new Delights, Sometimes we trod the Mazes of the Woods, And sometimes stretch'd beneath a spreading Shade, We lay, and listen'd to each others talk Sometimes we heard the Huntsman's distant Voice, And in one Chariot both pursu'd the Chace; And sometimes sailing in a gilded Barge, We saw the pleasing Wonders of the deep. Ambitious Waves, that strove to climb the Rocks That bound them in, and roar'd to be repuls'd, And Monsters mounted on the back of Waves, When with full Sails, returning to the Court, You'd point me out, the then descending Sun, Scatt'ring his beams about him, as he sinks, And gilding Heav'n above, and Seas beneath With paint, no mortal Pencil can express, And still our Talk was Love. Hel. Remember too, how I alarm'd your Soul, When I began the harsh discourse of War; The hazards that my Youth has yet escap'd, With all my earliest Combats in the Field, Here was my first appearance in my Arms, Here my first Actions, such my first Command, Here wounded, and dismounted from my Horse, My Father timely rescu'd me from Death,
Then would you Clasp me in your fearful Arms, And start at every mention of my Danger, And beg, with trembling Lips, to end my Story. Ant. Stop, stop it now, for all my fears return, At the sad thought of what is yet to come, The gath'ring Clouds urge on approaching Night, Which falls with baleful influence o'er the Earth, It labours with the Birth its Womb contains, Which soon must be disclos'd: methinks I see it, Soldiers, and Chiefs, all mingled in the War, A Thousand Deaths among them, and you, my Prince, In the thick press, amidst a Thousand Dangers. Gods! Gods! preserve my too, too venturous Love. Hel. 'Tis done, they cannot hear you beg in vain, Thou shalt behold me come with Conquest back, Crowns in my gift, to place upon thy Head, And Kingdoms to dispose of at your Feet. Ant. I take the happy Omen from your self, Your sprightly looks, your dauntless mein, and gesture, Your Every Action speaks a sure Success, Yet, Oh! let me remember Duty still In all the hottest fury of the Fight, Even then, when merciless Death makes no distinctions, My Father, and my Brother, be your Care, As you are Heav'ns, and mine. Hel. They die that dare Once offer at their lives; should Pyrrhus self Engage them in the Fight, I'd stop his Sword, And seize his thund'ring Arm. Ant. Good Heav'n defend them, And Chiefly you, for oh! thy Death, my Love. Hel. Again that fear? Ant. Forgive me for 'tis past, And yet it makes me weep, to think we're mortal, That the Cold hand of Death, at last must come, That two, who love as we do, should be forc'd Ever to part, the Rent will be like that Of Soul and Body. Hel. Fate is yet far off, It seems aloof, as on some distant Coast, And all the Darts it hurls, are swallow'd up In the wide Seas that roul betwixt us,
We may enjoy whole Ages in our Loves E're it can reach us here, but when at last, Our death, that necessary Ill, will happen, We'll take our flight together. When thou by pleasant Journeys shalt arrive To those blest Seats, where all the happy live, Whilst all the shining Host of Heaven make room, Wait at their Azure gates, till thou shalt Come. Then shall some God, the Chiefest, most Divine, And most Imperial of the Heavenly Line, Receive thee in his Arms, and lead thee in, Whilst all the Joyful Powers, no longer poor, Smile at their Wealth, proud of their new got Store, And never were so vastly rich before. Exeunt. ACT IV. Enter Pyrrhus and Dion. Thunder and Lightning. Pyrrh. THE Day is fled, and dismal Night descends, Casting her Sable Arms around the World, And folding all within her deadly Grasp, Ghosts are abroad, the Monuments are emptied, And Heroes, that have slept till now, have left Their quiet Tombs, and once more walk the Earth. Dion. All this is Strange, yet all is as it ought to be. Methinks, when two such Rival Armies meet, As Macedons, and ours, the high Concern Of Heav'n should be no less: methinks the Clouds Should melt and rain down Blood, and Gods should mourn In all the Pomp of Grief, their slaughter'd Sons. Pyrrh. And yet, my General all this rack of Heaven, Those burning Orbs, and the loud Peals of Thunder, Those starting Stars, and yonder falling Meteors, Are Common things to us, the usual huddle Of, Jarring Elements: but how, my General, How do the Souldiers bear them?
Dion. They rear themselves from Earth Streight as the Spears, and brave as you can wish; All put their Gauntlets on, and grasp their Armour, All Eager for the Onset. Pyrrh. There's Life in this. Go, and prepare them for the Noble grapple, And I will March them on. Exit Dion. Ye Gods? I pay Just Reverence to your Altars; I bow with awfull Worship to Your shrines, And more submission than my slaves show me, But when some Infant Power, some puny Deity, Some Ape of Jove, that's fond of making mischief, Asserts your Empire, and your Rule of heav'n, And with weak hands tosses your fires about, Forgive me, if I cannot stoop to Fear, But, spite of Prodigies, pursue the War. The Ghost of Alexander the Great Rises before him all in Armour. Thunder and Lightning. Ghost. Well does this Noble Confidence become you, And Oh! it glads the Soul of the dead Alexander, To see you thus, behold you thus unmov'd, Even when the Powers above are at a loss Which way to turn themselves. Pyrrh. Ha! Alexander, Thou should'st be He, and yet how Chang'd, how alter'd From what thou wert alive? Oh! for what Cause Hast thou forsook the Mansions where thy Spirit Had room to extend it self, and rove at large, While we walk here, Encomber'd with a Body, That holds our Souls from mounting to the Skyes, And barrs all onverse with our Kindred Gods? Ghost. My Love and Care for thee, the bravest Prince, I Left to share my onquests on this Earth, Has drawn me hither, to impart the News Of warm Debates betwixt the Courts above, And those beneath, the Realms of Jove and Fate, To tell thee, tho thou yet draw'st vital Air, Canst from thy Tent behold the Marshal'd Squadrons, And lead the Warlike Phalanx to the Field, Mu shortly leave all this, and be at last, Just such as I am.
I never Entertain'd one thought of Falshood. Pyrrh. Then you refuse my Friendship. Aemyl. No I beg it, As I would beg Blessing from the Gods, If I could make you first the friend of Rome, Then you might make me yours; till then in Vain Are all the Royal Offers that you made To heap Preferments on me in your Court, To give me the Command of all your Armies, The Gallantest indeed, I e'er beheld, Excepting Rome's. I heard you with the Attention Due to a King, but did no more than hear; It went not to my Soul; in vain you sent Those Presents of Inestimable Value, That yet remain untouch'd. I am but Poor, I have no Wealth, and yet I would have none, I would not be a Traytor to be Rich, Or infamously great. My only treasure Lies in my truth; and if that once were lost, What has Aemylius left, to make him worthy To be a Son of Rome, or Friend of Pyrrhus? Pyrrh. This matchless faith makes me but prize you more, Since your fidelity to Rome is such, Who acts as if she knew not how to value it What would it be to me, who know the worth Of Constancy like thine? Aemyl. Suspect me rather If once I forfeited my faith to Rome, When any new Occasion should present, I might be false to you. I love you, Sir, As I love all brave men, and you of all The very bravest; I have seen you fight, Where other Gallant Cheifs have stood at distance, As if there Business were to look on you; And they had no employment in the Field. I have seen you break the battle of the Romans, And pierce resistless through those Marshal'd ranks, Where never any Enter'd, till your self; Success still hung upon your Conqu'ring Sword, And Fate descended with it, where it fell. I have envy'd, and admir'd you, both at once, And as my Eyes still followed you in Fight,
Fix'd on the Wondrous Actions you perform'd, I have often wish'd my self Epiran born, But oftner you a Roman. Blush not to hear these Praises from a mouth, That wou'd not give them if they were not due, For Flattery is a thing as base as Treason. Dion. Go on, most noble Roman, all is truth, And, by the Gods, I thank you that you speak it. He would not suffer me to praise him thus. Aem. 'Twas there, my Lord, there in the Bloody Field, Your God like Prowess won an Enemies Soul, That Treasures cannot tempt, nor Power betray, But open'd to receive the love of Vertue, And give it full Possession, I tell you nothing, But what I'have dared to tell the Roman Senate, As they have sate assembled in the Capitol. I beg you, Royal Sir, to seek no more: Be satisfi'd, I have a Just Esteem, For such transcendent worth as dwells in you. Oh! seek not to Corrupt a poor old Man: My Honesty is all the Wealth I have, But that's my own, not subject to the Chance That waits on other Fortunes; that alone I can Call Mine; that lies within my Power. Should all the Princes of the Earth conspire, I may, and will, preserve my Faith intire. Pyrrh. Say, have I many Enemies like you? Aem. If all the World, Dread Sir, were such as I am, You would not have an Enemy; if you mean, Whether the numerous Sons of Rome are such, They are, my Lord, braver by far than me, And all I hope as faithful. Pyrrh. Then their Conquest Will be an Enterprize beyond my Powers, Impossible for humane Arms to Atchieve. Aem. Believe me, it will be no bloodless Victory, When ever it is obtained. Pyrrh. Though it seems dangerous To Arm a foe, so terrible as you, Yet I' have a Present to bestow upon you, Which you may take without a Breach of Faith: Receive this Sword, it has been u'sd to Conquer,
And I dare Promise, it will hold its Vertue In Roman hands. Aem. I take it on my Knees, As given by the dreadful God of War: Fear not, its Vertues shall be kept Entire, Unless it grows ungrateful to its Lord, And turns against the God like Prince that gave it, Where every Sword must fail. Pyrrh. Prepare a Convoy, To wait the good Aemylius to the Confines. See all the great Battalions rang'd in Order, To Shout his farewel, as he passes by. Once more, my gallant Warriour, to my Soul, Where thy Idea deeply is impress'd, Farewel with all the Friendship and Esteem, That mutually should dwell in Noble Minds, Thou wondrous Man, of wondrous Faith, farewell. Aem. Yet ere I go, hear me, Illustrious Prince, I give my thanks to you, my Prayers to Heaven, That you may still be prosperous your royal Carriage; Has wrought this Just resentment in my Soul: Still may you Triumph, your Success be Ever Such as your matchless Worth may justly Claim, Distant your end of Life, no end of Fame: May you Reign long, for numerous Years to come, And your Arms flourish against all but Rome. Exit. Enter Lanassa. Lan. Oh! my lov'd Lord, Lanassa was afraid You'd have been hurri'd to the dreadful Battle, Without the giving her one last Farewell. She heard the Trumpets call you, thought you listn'd To them alone, and no soft gentle Whisper Of Love could reach your Soul. She saw your Ranks Of Souldiers, glittering in their gilded Arms, Spite of the horrid Darkness, so she hastned Ere yet you march'd them to the Walls of Argos, Once more to gaze upon you, once more see you, Print on your Lips one last dear Kiss at parting, And if I then can speak it, bid Farewell.
Pyrrh. Leave but your Fears behind, and then, my Love, We may despise whatever Fate can do; And bear our parting brave, as Princes should, With all the Greatness of Heroick Minds; Yet tenderly withall. Lan. Alas, my Pyrrhus, Deny me not the Privilege of my Sex; Women, that always start and shrink at Dangers; Women, whose Courage is not less than Mens, Only their Love is more: My Lord, I come not To beg you to defer the dreadful Battle; For, though a Thousand ominous Signs forewarn me, The sudden Doom of Pyrrhus now is fix'd; Yet his Resolves are firmer fix'd than Fates: I only come to offer up my Prayers In thy lov'd Presence, though I fear the Gods Will be as deaf to them as you have been. Pyrrh. Such were your Fears this Morning, Love; and now, How vain and needless do they seem to have been? Unhurt, unwounded from the Field I came, And bought a Conquest at an easie Rate; Now I shall only march against a Foe Already half o'ercome. Lan. Supposing then Argos were yours, the Crown upon your Head, And you upon the Throne: Suppose the War Were finish'd as I wish, which I dare scarce Suppose it will be; will your toils end there? Or, what will next be done? Pyrrh. The Romans yet Remain Unconquer'd, they again shall try My Forces in Arms, and my Victorious Squadrons, Fighting with better Fortune than at first, May hurl their soaring Eagles to the Earth. Lan. If Rome were won, and that triumphant City, That never yet obey'd a foreign Lord, Submitted to your Sway, their Senate broke, And you their Royal Master in their stead; Where march you then? Pyrrh. Sicily is at hand, And I may pour my Armies on their Coasts, Destroying all the Isle with Sword, and Fire Hotter than that of Aetna.
Lan. Suppose that Sicily Shar'd the same Fate with Rome. Pyrrh. Then Sun-burnt Africk Shall groan beneath the weight of Castl'd Elephants, And its own Brood be turn'd against it self. Lan. Granting that you had Conquer'd Africk too, What Enterprize is next? Pyrrh. The search of Glory and of Fame is endless; New Countries will afford new Conquests still. Lan. If all were won, all the wide World were yours, What Fruit, my Pyrrhus, would you reap from all? Pyrrh. When War is to be had no more, my Love, We will sit down upon the conquer'd Globe, Enjoy our selves in Peace, and laugh at Fate. Lan. And why, my Lord, why can't we do so now? Cannot one Kingdom furnish full Enjoyment? What has the World in store? what Pomp, what Pleasures? What can the lavish hands of Nature give, That Epirus has not yielded to her Lord? But oh! my Love, Kings are like other Misers, Greedy of more; they use not what they have As Merchants, venturing on the faithless Seas For needless Wealth, are driv'n by sudden Storms On Banks of Sands, or dash'd against the Rocks, And all they have is sunk, and lost at once. Kings rush to Wars, more faithless than the Seas, Where more inconstant Fortune waits their Arms; Where in a Minute one unhappy Blow Ruins the Progress of an Age before: Delay not your Enjoyment, till you've all; O! do it, while you've any, while you may; While yet the gath'ring Storm wants wings to reach you. Pyrrh. Did you Plead thus in any other Cause, You could not be deny'd; but rigid Honour Has arm'd my Heart against the grant of this. Retire, my Love; for loe, the Night grows darker, The Voice of Heav'n more loud, and the big Winds More forcibly have shook the nodding Tents; The drouzy Souldier, waken'd by the Tempest, Starts from the Earth, and crys, away to Battle: Retire, my lov'd Lanassa. Lan. Oh! my Lord, When shall we meet again?
Pyrrh. Heav'n knows, my Love; But I too know that we shall meet in Heav'n, Where everlasting Joys shall Crown our Loves, And never more be sunder'd. Lan. Oh! were that true, wretch that I am to doubt it; For sure there is a Place reserv'd for thee; A Throne prepar'd for Pyrrhus, my Love, my Lord: The noblest Demi-god of all the Skies, And foremost Heroe in the Host of Heav'n. Pyrrh. No more: one last Embrace, and now no more, For the Adieus of Lovers never end: I wish that we were gone our several ways, And yet I cannot be the first to go. Lan. Then how should I, a weak fond helpless Woman! Oh! Stay, my Lord; since we must part at last, Say but farewell, for your Lanassa cannot. Pyrrh. Farewell, with all the force of Love, farewell. Lan. Oh! Pyrrhus! Pyrrhus! whither go you now, To the dire War? where partial Death resides; Death, that was ever wont to lop the Noble And spare the Vulgar; Oh! turn back a little; Stay till I fall thus prostrate to the Earth, Torn by my Passion, till I beg the Gods In thy behalf: Oh! save him all ye Powers; Make him the whole Concern of all your Skies; Oh! let this humble Adoration move, Be good, ye gracious Gods, and save my Love. Preserve him Heav'n from all the Rage of War, Divert the threatning Point of every Spear, Shield him some God, and let no shaft come near. ACT V. SCENE I. Enter Dion and Aemylius. Dion. THese are our Limits, which I must not pass, For all beyond, the Argive Lands extend: I hear their Guards upon their march to meet you, And leave you to their Convoy.
Aem. Thou good old General of a Godlike Prince, All health to him, and next to him, to thee. Dion. I grieve to part, since you must go to Argos, And I am loth to have you for a Foe: There will be Action there, and Roman hands Are never Idle at a time like that. Aem. Yet now I shall not draw my peaceful Sword; For as I'm sent Rome's Envoy, not her Souldier, I stand exempted from the Call of War. Dion. How will the joyful News transport the King, That though Aemylius would not side with him, He will not fight against him! He shall be told, And his great Soul shall give a due Acknowledgment In sparing Romans for a Roman's sake. Aem. Gods! why are Kings your Images beneath, The liveliest Portraitures of heavenly Powers, Created subject to Eternal Discord? Why is War wag'd for ever on the Earth? Why are not less malignant Planets plac'd To guide their Actions, to preserve their Peace, And influence their Lives to run on smoothly With the same Harmony that moves your Spheres? Dion. Boundless Ambition, vast desire of Empire, And Fame for gallant Deeds perform'd in War, Still spur them forward through the dusty Field, While Reason all in vain would hold them back. Aem. Why should our hands rebel against our hearts? I love a gallant Enemy in my Soul, And with regret encounter when I meet; The Breasts where Vertue dwells are sacred Seats, Nor should they be prophan'd, no more than Shrines; No Wounds should enter there; but base Plebeians, Sordid, and void of Spirits as of Sense, True mortal Stuff, should gorge the maw of Death. Dion. O let me be secur'd of such a Friend, If my great Master has not all your Soul, Let the remaining part be given to me, And place a Loyal Subject next this Lord. Aem. Sure we are ally'd, our Age and Hearts alike, And thou wer't meant a Roman, but thy Stars At thy Nativity mistook the Soil, And cast thee on a too too distant Clime Far from the Bounds of Rome.
Dion. My Fate has placed me, Where, if I had not found a Lord, like Pyrrhus, I would have chose a Consul to command me, And offer'd him my Service. Aem. The sound of trampling Horse encreases still, Which speaks them near; time steals away insensibly, And old Mens talk is tedious as their Years, Who after several Farewells, still talk on. Dion. But now the Night urges our last adieu, And wakeful Birds, impatient for the Morning, Already do begin to call it forth With Notes like Trumpets sounding a Retreat: Short is the Souldiers Ceremony, a Hand and Heart Is all we give at parting. Aem. And that is all That the most ardent Lovers have to give: Once more, all health to Pyrrhus, and to thee. Exit. Enter Helenus. Hel. Oh! how I grudge the hated Steps I take, To lead me farther off the dear Apartments That hold my Love; how eager to return. I burn with Fires more scorching than before, And heightned Charms dilate the rising Flame; Heav'n has took pains to work her to a Miracle: A wondrous Faith, joyn'd with a matchless Form. Dion. You are welcom, Prince: I thank you that you have deceiv'd my Fears, And by returning thus, outrun my Hopes. Hel. Oh Dion! when will the War begin? Dion. Still better; in that strain you speak Success, A Praelude to a Paean; soon, I hope, And soon the Conquest follow. Hel. You have seen me fighting. Dion. And doubt not but to see you so again, With the same fortune as you have fought before. Hel. I tell thee Friend, I will outdoe my self; My rising Soul strains to a higher Pitch Than e'er it reach'd till now; Revenge and Love, Fury and Jealousie, and thirst of Honour, All rage and roul within my troubled Mind,
And work the Tempest high: Lead me, my General, lead me to the War; And oh! employ your interest with the King To hasten on the too too tedious hour. To me the flying Minutes seem but slow; E'er this I would have been amidst the Foe, Forcing my dreadful Passage with my Sword, Possess'd of all that Conquest can afford: Through thickest Ranks, I would like Lightning break; Love and Revenge make all resistance weak. Enter Pyrrhus and Souldiers. Pyrrh. See your dead Prince plac'd on the highest Elephant, That all the Army, at the dismal Object, May with more Fury kindle to Revenge. To them. Oh! Dion oh! Helenus Son and General, Where have you loiter'd? now our busie Fates Call for all Hands. Dion. Mine, Royal Sir, are ready; And my Heart joins them, it strikes out with Vigour, And beats thick knocks against my aged Breast. Pyrrh. Helenus, lead the Van, Ten thousand Men, Are order'd to attend you to the On set: March to the Ramparts, South of Juno's Temple, And while our warlike Trumpets sound to Battle, And the great Squadrons mingle in the Wars; Suspend, ye Gods, the Thunder of your Skies, Withold your Bolts, that play with idle Rage, And fall with harmless Flames on Mountains tops. Look on more dreadful Actions done beneath, See our Swords strike, with more dispatch, in death. SONG. I Wretch'd in a Dark and Dismal Grove, A poor abandon'd, hopeless Maid, Thinking on her departed Love, Cry'd, whither does Ambition lead?
From the dear Joys that Love can yield, From the soft Circle of my Arms He rushes to the fatal Field: Mistaken Swain, have Danger's Charms? Fond of a loud, yet empty Name, Notions of Honour you pursue; And fansying Happiness in Fame, For a false Bliss forsake the true. Lovers, with Scorn, and Hatred curs'd, When all their Passion fail'd to move, Found out this Tyrant Honour first, In pure Revenge to ruine Love. A Battle sounded. Enter Lanassa. Lan. I, now it is begun; alas, my Pyrrhus! How my Soul shakes within me when I think What Dangers thy dear Life is thus expos'd to! Ah! whither does he run? he rushes fearless On pointed Swords, the Arm of Death lifts at him; But yet he shall not perish unattended. If Fate ordains our fall, we'll fall together: Together walk through all the gloomy Arbours, The Grots, and Mansions of the Blessed dead; Together stretch'd o'er the black Banks of Lethe, Look down upon the Stream that glides beneath us. Oh! Blissful prospect of a future state, Delightful Ecstasie in Thoughts of Death! Methinks, through all the vast and verdant Meads No Rose lies blasted, and no Myrtle fades; But ever bloom, where my lov'd Pyrrhus treads: Through all Elyzium, all the flow'ry Groves, Each ravish'd Ghost with wonder sees our Loves. Pleas'd with the View, they point us out, and cry, Loe! Yonder, where the happy Lovers lie! Urg'd by their transport to forsake their Bowers, They wait on us, and all the Train is ours. Exit.
SCENE, Changes to the City of Argos, as Besieged. Enter Antigonus, Demetrius and Aristeon. Ant. Already Pyrrhus has begun the Storm; His Elephants, like huge Machines of War, With their Broadsides lie pressing on our Walls; And from the Castles planted on their Backs Pour forth an Army down upon the Town. Heard you that Shout? Dem. We did; it follow'd something Loud as it self, that sounded like the burst Of Brazen Gates. Enter Martius. Mart. All's lost; The Foes are enter'd; The Torrent rouls this way. Ant. Undaunted yet; With Bravery, that deserves a better Fortune, We'll strive to change the partial face of War. Exeunt. Manet Aristeon. Arist. I hope 'tis Epire's Prince has made his Entrance. If so, Antigone's Name will draw him here. Helenus from within. Antigone— Ant. Hark! 'Tis already answer'd. He caught it like the Echo, at distance, And closely follows its return himself. Enter Helenus. Hel. Now, now, the wish'd for time at last is come, While publick Interest draws the Swords of others, To end one private Quarrel by our selves. Arist. Let's not spend a Minute in our talk; The Hours are precious, and our Swords can plead Our Cause the best, and stop our Tongues for ever. Enter Antigone. Fight. Aristeon falls. Ant. Methoughts I heard you, Love; but knew not well Whether it was the Voice of Fate, or you.
Arist. Oh! 'twas the Voice of Fate to me; it spoke The loss of Life and Love; yet in my Death I joy to see you with my closing Eyes, To take the farewell View before I go, And bear thy dear Idea to the Skies. There, as I glide along the Bowers of Heav'n, And view the celebrated Beauties there, But find none fair enough to move my wonder, No heavenly Excellence of force to Charm me, Ev'n there I'll think once more upon Antigone. [After a Pause.] What not a word? But do not, do not speak; There is an Eloquence in silent pity Beyond Expression. Farewell thou dear, but cruel Fair, farewell. Oh! I had many wondrous Things to say, And wondrous Love should shine in all I said; But that my fleeting Soul out-flies my words, And leaves my Speech unfinish'd. Too happy Prince, farewell. Black Mists have overcast my dying Eyes, I cannot now dispute the Beauteous Prize: All my last Hopes, I, with my Life, resign; The Conquest, both in War and Love, is thine. Ant. Oh! Lead me Love; where I may hide my self From Sights of Horrour that affright my Soul. To me, the War is dreadful as the Sea To unexperienc'd Mariners; and I tremble At every blast that blows: Heav'n send the Calm. Hel. Thither, my Love, retire to yonder Tow'r; These Souldiers be your Guard: Methinks my Father Upbraids me for my stay; I'll on to meet him, And help to Crown the Conquests of this Night. Ant. I go; But I conjure you, Prince, to be More careful of your self, and less of me. Two Souldiers enter, and carry Arist. off. Exeunt severally. Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter Pyrrhus, Dion, and Souldiers. Pyrrh. Push on the Fight, and follow Fortune close, She flies before with all her Sails upon her;
And gath'ring in the fullest gusts of War, Will quickly reach the Port. The Scene Draws, and Discovers the Image of a Bull and Wolf Engraven in Copper, and placed at the Entrance of the Forum. Dion. Why stop you, Sir? Pyrrh. Oh! Dion, shall I tell you? I'm afraid. Dion. Do not, Sir; You would not be believ'd although you did. Pyrrh. Look on those Figures there. Dion. And what of them? Pyrrh. I had a Message sent me from the Gods, To tell me, where I met two such as these, There Fate should meet with me. Dion. Who brought their Message? Pyrrh. A God himself, one who was lately made; And mingling in the Councils with the rest, Reveal'd this Part to me. Dion. And you believe him? Pyrrh. 'Twere impious to do otherwise; yet, my Friend, I cannot fear him yet. Dion. Then give me leave To fear for you; Their-Warning has been Kind, And ought to be Obey'd. Pyrrh. Shall we then lose So fair a Prospect? Dion. We may lose our selves By venturing to obtain a nearer View: We seem to lean over some hanging Clift, O'er-looking of the Wreck that Floats below. Should we stretch more, beyond the Verge, we fall Infinite Fathoms down, and sink for ever. Pyrrh. You have prevail'd, the Gods shall be obey'd; It is no Cowardize to yield to Heav'n: Some other Night shall recompence for this Less full of Fate. Go order the Retreat; I'll be the last my self. Exit Dion.
Enter Martius. Pyrrh. What art thou, That haunts me still in fight? I've seen thee thrice Fixing thy glaring Eyes on me alone: And with a Pride that scorns a smaller Conquest, Aim only at my Life. Thy Arms are Roman; If thou wouldst Kill me, do it with a Gallantry Worthy thy Place of Birth. Mart. I am a Roman; I have sought thee in the thickest Ranks of Battle, And watch'd all Night to have thee my self; But the throng'd press that still encountred you, (For I saw not one who dar'd to meet you single) Have held me off till now. Pyrrh. I cannot think Thou hast receiv'd a hire to give me Death. Mart. I have; My Fame and Honour bribe me high, And thus I strive for purchase. Pyrrh. Thou hast it there Fight. Martius falls. At a dear rate; Fate seems not near me yet, Spite of its menace; the Retreat begins, And makes our distance greater. Exit. Shout from within. Enter Lanassa, Supported Bleeding. Lan. I heard the Argives shout the death of Pyrrhus, And rush'd into the War, where to my Wish I met my own. Oh! hold a little Fate; Could I but see my Lord before I dy'd, Contentedly I am thine. Re-enter Pyrrhus, Dion, both Wounded and Supported by Helenus. Pyrrh. 'Tis done; my Fate has caught me in my Flight. Art thou here Love? and art thou wounded too? Nay, then it takes me whole. Lan. It was well contriv'd, To Summon me that hour it call'd for you; Else I had come unsent for.
Pyrrh. So you do. That Death was none of thine, and Heav'n will wonder To see an unexpected guest arrive. Lan. Receive, my Love, my last and sad Adieu: The fleeting Souls of others, when they die, Are breath'd into the Air, and vanish there; But I pour mine into thy lovely Lips, Its wish'd for Lodge: Thus dying both together, We seem as at the Altar once again, Renewing Vows of Everlasting love, And joyning hands and hearts before the Priest; But now we Wed more firmly than at first: For Hymen's Office is perform'd by Death. Death surer than our Nuptials ties us fast, And these are Bonds that will for ever last. Dies. Pyrrh. And so they are, I shall not stay behind: And yet, ye Gods! 'twas strange, 'twas wondrous strange A Life so made of Miracles as mine; Preserv'd till now at the expence of Prodigies, Should end at last so meanly, by a Stone Hurl'd by a Woman's hand; the very Thought Urges my Death the swifter. Dion. Heav'n! what a suddain whirl of Fate was here? Just as we had hunted Fortune to the toils, And almost had her sure; then, then to let her Break the involving Net, and change the Chase, Pursuing those by whom she was pursu'd, Is such a Caprice that has no Excuse. Pyrrh. I had forgot, how goes the Battle on? Hel. As Ships in stormy Seas, their Pilot's lost, Drive backward with the Tide. Pyrrh. But one thing more: Oh! Close those Bleeding Wounds that gape so wide; Thrust off your Death awhile, and live my General; Live to entreat the fortunate Antigonus To use Helenus well. Hel. There needs not that; For I can put my self beyond his Power, And own no other Sire or King but you. Pyrrh. By Heav'n you should; did not Fate differ here: Your Love still lives for you, mine dies with me; You have a Bribe sufficient for your Life,
And I have mine for Death: Farewell, my Son. My Eye-balls now begin to swim in Death, And my Queen dances in my dizzy Sight; I'll seize her thus, thus make her mine for ever. As Merchants, that remove to foreign Climes, Carry their Families with them, my Love, my Self, My good old General, to make up the Third: Three such as we, shall Charm the Eyes of Heaven; And their Discourse shall be of nought but us. Their Tongues shall in our Praises be imploy'd, Our Loves and Wars the Theme of every God. Dies. Dion. Methinks old Men do linger in their Death As much as in their Lives; my Blood moves slowly, And drop by drop falls from my withered Veins, Distilling like an Icicle, 'till at last, 'Tis quite dissolved. After this Loss, life could no Joys afford; Death pleases best, that sends me to my Lord. Dies. Hel. Farewell, Illustrious Father, Vertuous Queen And good old Man, farewell; while here I gaze, My struggling Soul is doubtful which to choose; To live with her I love, or dye with you. But oh! She comes, she comes to end the Strife, And Love for her makes me in love with Life. Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter Antigonus, Demetrius, Aemylius, Antigone. Aem. See what a stately Pomp of Death lies here, And where the Princely Mourner stands; the sole Survivour of the royal Race of Pyrrhus, And almost of the War, Oh! grant, ye Gods, That every Son of Rome, that falls in Battle, May fall as brave as these. Dem. Death was this Night devouring as the Deluge, And all the World of Epiran seems swallow'd up; And but one Person sav'd.
Ant. I'll add another Again to stock their Earth. Here, gallant Prince, Receive this Pledge of an eternal Friendship, Gives Antigone to Helenus. And let your Father's Kingdoms be her Dow'r. See the great Pyrrhus Royally interr'd, And lay his much lov'd Ptolomy by his Side. Short are the Glories that our Lives can boast, And our aspiring Thoughts in Death are lost. FINIS.
EPILOGUE. IN Summer every living thing on Earth Seems new created, and receives new Birth. Beauties abroad their blooming Sweets display, Flowers open, Fruit-trees blossom, Beau's are gay, Summer's a time for all things—but a Play. The Summer does the Labourers Harvest yield, Fleets put to Sea, and Armies take the Field. Bold was the Ship (so we are told by Horace) Which first launch'd out, and this his tale makes for us. For greater is the risk of Vent'rous Wit, Which rashly dares an untry'd Bark commit To the smooth Deep of a deceitful Pit. Yet you have been on these Occasions Kind, And our Young Authour hopes from you to find A flowing Tide, and favourable Wind. Let me Plead for him then; Pray show him favour, For if we lose him now, he's lost for ever. Should He fail quite in this; I know his Nature, Too bashful to attempt to mend the Matter: Young Poets still their Modesty discover, But theirs, like ours, or yours, is quickly over. To the Pit. Let this, against your judgment stand the Test, Show Mercy now, and judge him in the rest.
Books Printed for Samuel Briscoe, Peter Buck, and Daniel Dring. MArriage-Hater Match'd. Richmond Heiress. Don Quixot; First and Second Parts. Very Good Wife. Country Wife. Rehearsal. Old Batchellour. Incognita: Or, Love and Duty reconcil'd; a Novel. Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning. By Mr. Wotton. Account of the Controversie between the Church of Eng∣land and Dissenters, Octavo. Brutes turn'd Criticks, Twelves.
BOADICEA Queen of Britain. A TRAGEDY, As it is Acted by His Majesty's Servants AT THE THEATRE in Lincolns-Inn-fields. Written by Mr. Charles Hopkins. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, near the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet-street. 1697.
TO Mr. Congreve. LET other Poets other Patrons Chuse, Get their best Price, and prostitute their Muse. With flattering hopes, and fruitless labour wait, And Court the slippery Friendship of the Great: Some trifling Present by my Lord is made, And then the Patron thinks the Poet paid. On you, my surer, nobler Hopes depend, For you are all I wish; you are a Friend. From you, my Muse her Inspiration drew, All she performs, I Consecrate to you. You taught me first my Genius and my Power, Taught me to know my own, but gave me more,
Others may sparingly their Wealth impart, But he gives Noblest, who bestows an Art. Nature, and you alone, can that confer, And I owe you, what you your self owe her. O! Congreve, could I write in Verse like thine, Then in each Page, in every Charming Line, Should Gratitude, and Sacred Friendship shine. Your Lines run all on easie, even Feet; Clear is your Sense, and your Expression sweet. Rich is your Fancy, and your Numbers go Serene and smooth, as Crystal Waters flow. Smooth as a peaceful Sea, which never rolls, And soft, as kind, consenting Virgins Souls. Nor does your Verse alone our Passions move, Beyond the Poet, we the Person Love. In you, and almost only you; we find Sublimity of Wit, and Candour of the Mind. Both have their Charms, and both give that delight, 'Tis pity that you should, or should not Write; But your strong Genius Fortune's power defies, And in despight of Poetry, you rise. To you the Favour of the World is shown, Enough for any Merit, but your own. Your Fortune rises equal with your Fame, The Best of Poets, but above the Name.
O! may you never miss deserv'd success, But raise your Fortunes 'till I wish them less. Here should I, not to tire your patience, end, But who can part so soon, with such a Friend You know my Soul, like yours; without design, You know me yours, and I too know you mine. I owe you all I am, and needs must mourn, My want of Power to make you some return. Since you gave all, do not a part refuse, But take this slender Offering of the Muse. Friendship, from servile Interest free, secures My Love, sincerely, and entirely, yours, CHARLES HOPKINS.
PROLOGUE. Spoke by Mr. Betterton. DO you not wonder, Sirs, in these poor Days, Poets should hope for Profit from their Plays? Dream of a full Third Day, nay, good sixth Night, (Especially considering how they Write.) But so it is; and thus I go to show it, Wo to us Players, every one turns Poet. All Write alike, and therefore every Brother, Free from all Envy, stands by one another; They live more peaceably than Bees, no doubt, Since not one drone of all is driven out. Our Author is so green, and young a thing, 'Tis hard if he can yet have lost his Sting! Those Boxes! He may beauteous Gardens call, Fair are the Flowers, and he sucks Sweets from all; Nor is he less oblig'd to Masks and Beaus, Who pay for Plays; even when they borrow Cloaths. On your united Favours he depends, And thinks you all his, and our House's Friends. Tho' you hate Blood-shed, out of pure good Nature, As Poets, Criticks, or as Fops hate Satyr. Be not to Day afraid to see as Bleed, But let for once, a Tragedy succeed.
EPILOGUE. Spoke by Mrs. Bowman. WHO of you all can guess a Poet's trouble, Which is in these Religious Days grown double? Once only smutty Jess could please the Town, But now (Heav'n hlp our Trade,) they'll not go down. Our Liberties this hrd restraint infringes; For all our Authors are beside their Hinges. You Sparks, who kew the Story of this Play, Thought to have seen two Ravish'd Maids to day. But by our Bashful Youth one half is stifl'd, My Sister only (o my sorrow) rifl'd. Pray, tell me, Gntlemen, and tell me true, Might not I wel have claim'd that kindness too? Maids may indeed in such a case Miscarry, But what are Rapes to us wise Folks that Mrry? Thieves may bot easily into open Houses, And Force will still excuse us to our Spouses. Stay—on my Conscience now, our Author knew, The way to plese, was to save one for you. Pray, after sch an Obligation, speak; Can you do oo much for the Poet's sake? And yet he oubts the worst, and is asham'd Before-hand of the Fate of being damn'd; Ease him, by your applause, of his suspicion, And thin, one day it may be your Condition. For Forune is her self a very Woman, And Hman Chance to all alike is Common, Musks, Beaus, and Criticks, will be true to No Man.
Dramatis Personae. BOadiea, Queen of Britain. Mrs. Barry. Her Daugh∣ters. Camilla, Mrs. Bracegirdle. Venutia, Mrs. Bowman. A British Prince, General of their Armies. Cassi∣belan, Mr. Betterton. ROMANS. Joint Gene∣rals. Paulinus, M. Kynston. Decius. Mr. Hudson. Favourite to Paulinus. Fabian, Mr. Freeman. Favourite to Decius. Caska, Mr. Sanford
BOADICEA Queen of Britain. ACT I. SCENE I. SCENE the City of Verulam, with the British Army En∣camped under it, and the Romans at some distance. Enter Cassibelan, and Camilla. Cass. MOurn not, my Love, because the Roman Arms Have once more fill'd our Island with Alarms. By Heav'n, I rather thank their forward Care, Who with such readiness supply the War. Who let me every Day gain new Renown, To make the Beauty whom I love my own. Thou shalt the Center of my Wishes be, The Sum of my Desires is set in thee. Cam. Take all the Love a Lover e'er could claim, I own, my Charming Prince, an equal Flame. Let your Camilla all she feels confess, And glory that her Passion is not less. The tender'st Love of Woman-kind is due, When 'tis solicited, dear Youth, by you. Cass. O Words! to Charm an Angel from the Skyes, O lovely, loving Maid! thou Heaven of Joys!
Let me run out, thus ravish'd, on the Foe, My Soul is rais'd, shall I not Conquer now? Encourag'd thus, o'erthrow the Roman Bands, Love guides my heart, and that shall guide my hands. Cam. Still let me lock you in my longing Arms, Gaze on you still, for ev'n your Fury Charms. Well might this Rage the Roman Legions fright, But what disheartens them, gives me delight: Such Love as mine, might ev'n Love's Goddess yield, For so look'd Mars in the Phlegraean Field. Cass. Throw then thy snowy Arms about my Crest, And let me crush thy Beauties to my Breast: Thy Tenderness this Martial warmth inspires, Thy Softness kindles these transporting Fires. Thou first enflam'st me to the fiercest heat, And after Battel mak'st my Blood abate. Cam. Let others boast their Beauty, or their Youth, Or what is more, their Constancy, and Truth. Let Nature all her Richest Gifts bestow, And in full Tides let their smooth Fortunes flow; Heav'n shower upon them Blessings from above, Teach them (the greatest Blessing) how to Love. All these are yours, yet there's one Charm in store, Of wondrous Gallantry, which Merits more: In all your Words, your Actions, and your Meen, There's something more than Human to be seen. That Godlike Something has peculiar Charms, And that endears you to Camilla's Arms. Cass. Heaven! what a Spirit do thy Charms impart, Strength to my Arms, and Courage to my Heart. Thy Love is all my Spur, thy precious Smiles The purchase of my over-rated Toils: Let others Fight for Empire, or for Fame, And the vain hopes of an Immortal Name; I would not to the Field of Battel move, For any Recompence that's less than Love. Cam. What Woman might not such dear words subdue, To hear such Passion spoke by such as you?
But see, the Queen, with all the Court appears, Her Royal Look Majestick Sorrow wears, Her Eyes dart Fires, and scorn to melt in Tears. Enter Boadicea, Venutia. Boad. Rome is not yet the Mistress of our Isle, Still Fortune sheds on us an equal Smile, Nor shrink we underneath the Warlike Toil. Let Earth submit to her Tyranick Sway, No Britain born, can servilely obey. Their Swords at liberty our Souldier wields, Draws as strong Bows, and lifts as pondrous Shields, Disputes as desperately the Bloody Fields. Cass. The Lust of Power has set proud Rome on flame, And Universal Empire is her aim; Her Warlike Eagles spread from Pole to Pole, Let Winds blow where they list, or Billows roll; Thro' Woods and Wilds they force unbeaten ways, Then steer more desperate Courses o'er the Seas. New Legions now are Landed on our Shores, And with fresh Troops relieve their shatter'd Powers; From Vanquish'd Gaul their Conquering Arms are led, And the Fam'd Decius Marches at their Head. Cam. Yet will those Conquerours act with prudent Care, And proffer Peace, e'er they proceed to War. Well do they know our Resolute Britain's Force, And think it best, to take the mildest Course. Reviewing what their Ancestors have done, They find they cannot boast of much they won. Here, the Great Julius met his first Defeat, Glad was that Godlike Victor to Retreat; Compell'd to own, when he forsook our Shores, No force on Earth could equal Rome's, but ours. Boad. He the first Rudiments of Conquest lay'd, Then we were bravely fought with, now betray'd. He shew'd how far Ambitious Spirits dare, Bold were his Hopes, but his Pursuit was Fair. Now with mean Arts Rome props her falling Cause, Caesar degenerates from what Caesar was.
Our dying Lord, ensnar'd by Nero's wiles, Won by false Friendship, and deceiv'd by smiles, Left him to be the Guard of us, and ours, Left him the Charge of all his Hostile Powers, His well-fill'd Armories, and Naval-Stores. To Rome's Rich Lot did all his Treasures fall, And faithless Rome has made a Prey of all. Cass. Is Britain of her former Fires bereft, Has she no Brave, no Gen'rous Spirits left? I find our Vengeance strugling for a vent, Shall Rome provoke? and shall not we resent? Let her make all the World besides her own, Nature has made us for our selves alone. She fix'd our Isle, cast the wide Seas around, Made the strong Fence, and shall not hands be found In Britain, to maintain the British bound? Boad. Prince, in your Valour I repose my Trust, Strong are our Armies, as our Cause is just. Alike in both, does your pleas'd Queen confide, And Righteous Gods will take the Righteous side. Then let the Romans like the Gyants rise, To fall, as they did, from revengeful Skyes. Cass. I hear their Trumpets sound the notes of Peace, Trum∣pets from within. As they draw near, the pleasing airs encrease. A Bloody Field was once my sole Delight, My Business, and my Pleasure was to Fight; 'Till your dear Beauties melted down my Heart, And your kind Pity took your Beauties part. Then was your Conquest absolute and free, And now my Pleasure in the Peace shall be, That I have leave to Love, Live, Die with thee. Enter Decius, Caska, Attended. Dec. To you, Great Princess, from Imperial Rome, Sent on a peaceful Embassy I come. With you alone, will our Dread Empress Treat, And freely to your Choice she leaves your Fate. All Nations else without Dispute Obey, And Homage, as her vanquish'd Vassals, pay.
But from his Love to your dead Consort due, Our Coesar condescends to Terms with you. Bo. Well, was his Love, and well his friendship shown, Making those Realms, he swore to guard, his own: But we (if lawful Princes could) rebell'd, And secret Fraud with open Force repell'd. Survey our Fields, your slaughter'd Legions count, Learn to what numbers all your dead amount. When her repeated Losses Rome shall know, She will no more contemn, but court her Foe. Dec. The World's dread Master, Rome's Imperial Lord, His Souldiers ravage in your Realms, deplor'd; He knew not, while their Avarice urg'd them on To those injurious Wrongs, what Wrongs were done. Now Conscious of their guilt, I'm sent to sue For Peace; which never Roman us'd to do. See here, his awful, all-Commanding Hand, Shows a Scroal of Parchment, subscribed, Nero Caesar. Sign'd to whatever Reason can demand. Here Peace, or War, upon your Voice depends; Think; and declare us either Foes or Friends. Bo. Such have our Sufferings been, Rome's Treachery such, You cannot grant, nor we demand too much: But on these Terms, we chiefly shall insist, First, let your numerous Forces be dismist; Your Garrisons from strong-Wall'd-Towns withdraw, No British Subject shall be kept in awe. We will have all Prerogatives restor'd, And Rome shall be our Ally, not our Lord. This yielded to, will make us some amends; Now 'tis in your decision, Foes or Friends? Dec. All this does Rome's indulgent Emperour yield, Your Wish unbounded had an ample Field. Now, peaceably, let Rome's pleas'd Eagles fly, And sweep with noiseless Pinions through the Skye. Let Britain's waving Streamers all be furl'd, And Universal Rest brood o're the World. Let Winds forbear to rage, and Waves to roar, But curling Floods come dancing to the shore; Let all be Peace; for War is now no more.
Bo. The sev'ring Clouds disclose a glorious Scene; Bright Sun-shine smiles on Britain once again, And all the Heavens around us look serene. Let us retire a while, our Terms to sign, Where Caesar's Hand has led the way to mine. Then let all Britain at her Bliss rejoice, And you, brave Prince, my lov'd Camilla's choice, to Cassib. Have now your grateful Boadicea's Voice. From your blest Bed let long Succession spring, And every Royal Heir prove such a King. Cass. Now Hymen light thy Torch, and hold it high, And scatter Sparks of Love about the Sky. This day all fears of future Wars removes, And all the rolling days to come, are Loves. Exeunt. Re-enter Decius, Caska. Dec. O Caska! She's the same, the very same I saw before in Medway's silver Stream, And now the second sight revives my Flame. All-ravish't on the flow'ry Bank I stood, Viewing her Beauties through the liquid Flood: Which when the Chaste, and Charming Virgin knew, With trembling haste, all blushing, she withdrew, Shot thro' the stream, and vanish'd from my view. I might have known her then of Royal Race, For lovely Majesty and Heavenly grace, Shone bright in all the Features of her Face: But now, I know her better, to my Cost, And found again, I find her ever lost. What might not I have suffer'd by this Truce? Or what will my fantastick Fates produce? No Wars shall cease, no Souldier's Arm shall rest, If by this Peace my Rival should be blest, All Peace must fly from my distracted Breast. Cask. Is this the Woman then? I'm glad she's known. Be rul'd by me, she shall be still your own. Now shall your lingring Fever be remov'd, And you be what you were before you lov'd.
When I have helpt to ease you of your pain, I'll turn your Soul, new form'd, for War again. Let not one rising doubt your Thoughts perplex, There are a thousand ways to win the Sex. Dec. She's too, oh! too far gone, too great a length, E're to be reach'd by Stratagem or Strength. Not all the dangers of the bloodiest Field, (You know, my Friend) can make my Courage yield; Inur'd to Camps, in noise of Battels Nurst, Death in all Forms I've seen, and brav'd the worst. Nought but her loss, my settled Soul could move, Nor can I stoop to any God but Love. Fixt like a Rock, amidst a rapid Flood, Beat on all sides by Waves, unshook I stood; 'Till Love, did like resistless Lightning shoot, Run thro' and thro', and rend me to the Root. Cask. Suppress your Jealousy, your Rage abate, Nothing is got by this immoderate Heat. To gain your point, wrong measures you pursue, Which smooth deep Policy alone can do: In these Concerns we must with caution move, Less Artifice belongs to War than Love. Dec. See me, my Friend, as calm as Lovers sighs, Silently listning for your kind Advice. My Life, my Love, depend upon your Breath, Plott with dispatch, for all delay is Death. Cask. Far off, indeed, your present Hopes appear, Cassibelan believes his Bliss is near. But he, shall like some foolish Stripling run, Who thinks on the next Hill to seize the Sun; But when he climbs the Mountain he design'd, He sees his Errour; and that Prince shall find, Who thinks himself so near, how far he's left behind. Dec. Let them not meet, nearer than Pole to Pole; Distract their Loves, as they distract my Soul. Consult with Gods or Fiends; take any course, And try what may be done, by Fraud or Force. Rack your Invention for the speediest way, To drive their hopes; far as you rolling Sea
Divides their World from ours; if e're they join, All Heav'n meets in their Souls, all Hell in mine. Cask. War must proceed, and Peace must be supprest, Or you be never of your Wish possest. The Peace confirm'd, your Rival's Joys ensue, His Nuptials then are solemniz'd, and you Shall have your Mistress Married in your view. But bloody Fields, and Battels loud alarms, Will still detain him from her longing Arms. Dec. Speak on a little longer, quickly speak, O! tell me, what Evasions can we make, Or what Pretensions have we now to break? Cask. Since either side on every term agreed, No doubt the Peace will on their part proceed. Let us some new unthought of point suggest, Which will be certain to confound the rest: Demand your Mistress in your Colleague's Name, Absent, he cannot know he bears the blame, And that again will set us all on flame. Nay, to go farther yet; declare you come With this Commission from the Court of Rome. Say the great Bravery by Paulinus shown, Now fully to Imperial Caesar known, Makes him, by favour to the Britains led, Propose a Consul to Camilla's Bed, That by their Nuptials either Empire ty'd Firmly, for ever may remain Ally'd. Dec. Enough, the Queen, and all the Council's come, I'le throw the Dice, what ever be my doom. Thus far the War must favour my design To cross his Hopes, altho' it Crowns not mine. Enter Boadicea, Camilla, Venutia, Cassibelan. Bo. Britain and Rome are Friends from Pole to Pole, Winds waft the joyful News, and Waters roll. Let every Voice, where Seas and Shore extend, Aloud proclaim, that Rome is Britain's Friend.
Let fearful Virgins sleep in quiet now, Let well-pleas'd Hinds with chearful labour Plow, And Peace be seen to sit on every Brow. Tides of full Joy swell high in every Breast, For the long harrass'd Earth is now at rest. Dec. Still, mighty Queen, does one great Point remain, And that not granted, all the rest are vain. To you, fair Princess, am I sent to move to Camilla. For my brave Colleague, in the Cause of Love. Long has Paulinus sigh'd his silent Vow, But never would he make it known till now. Caesar declares himself his Souldier's Friend, And on these terms decrees your Wars shall end: By this Alliance will your Realms become Link'd to the Interest of Imperial Rome; So shall Hostility for ever cease, And Rome and Britain have eternal Peace. Cass. War! rather let it be eternal War; Let the whole World in endless Discord jar. Run out, my Souldiers, bid our Trumpets sound, Let in their Notes the Voice of Peace be drown'd: Bid every Britain hasten to his Arms, And rouze the nodding World with new Alarms. We'll dare the worst, whatever Heav'n prepares, Be Death or Conquest either ours, or theirs. Bo. Fir'd with a just Resentment and disdain, Britain shall never hear of Peace again. Not tho' your Caesar could command our Fate, Shall Boadicea condescend to treat. Would but my Daughter once her self resign, Tho' to an Emperour of the Roman Line! By Heav'n I'd use her as my deadliest Foe, Scarce should I use a faithless Roman so. Cass. Tell the bold Rival of my sacred Flame, Tell him, Cassibelan shall sound his Name Thro' all the embattell'd Squadrons, if he dare Catch at the Sound, and meet his Rival there. Dec. Britain, assure your self you shall be met, Now silence yours, and hear a Roman Threat.
Those Swords are drawn, whose cruel Edge shall spare No Sex or Age, in the reviving War, Those Souldiers are incens'd, whose desperate Bands Dare act whatever Rage, and Lust commands. They'l set your Temples and their Gods on Fire, While Heav'n in vain sees the bold Flames aspire. Chaste Matrons, shall like common Strumpets burn, And Infants from the Breasts they suck, be torn. Your Virgins shall on Shrines their Rapes deplore, And pray to helpless Powers who suffer more. Too late you will repent this rash Retreat, Wish for these Articles again too late, When all your losty Towers shall shine in Flames, Death Riot in your Streets, your Silver Thames Roll down into your Seas a purple Flood, And all your Chalky Cliffs look red with Blood. Exeunt Decius, Caska. Cass. Thro' the wide World let War's loud Voice be sent, Let the sad Earth her dying Sons lament, And Nature sicken for the dire Event. And you Imperial, but regardless Powers, Who unconcern'd sit smileing in your Bowers, Let from your Hands the strugling Lightning fly, And toss your flaming Bolts about the Skye. Let all your Thunder speak your loud Applause, And Heav'n, and Earth, join with us in our Cause. Bo. Beyond my Sex my towring Spirit dares, Which shrinks not at the shrillest sound of Wars. We stand on Terms as good as Rome's, and ours Equal at least, if not exceed their Powers. And Poets, who shall write in sacred Rhimes, Our Actions to be read by future times; If they take care to learn what each has lost, Shall find that Rome has no great cause to boast. Exeunt. Manet Venutia sola. Ven. Both sides with equal hopes for Arms prepare, I'm left alone, abandon'd to Despair. How hard, alas! is my unhappy Fate, Compell'd to love whom all my Nation hate?
Duty, and Love, my doubtful Heart divide, Which, at a loss to choose, takes neither side. Britain must fall, if Conqu'ring Rome succeeds, If Britain prospers, my Paulinus bleeds: Why should I call him mine, who breaks the Vow He made me once, but makes my Sister now? My other Griefs could, while he lov'd, be born, But now I sink with his unlook'd for scorn: For tho' he should persist to use me ill, I find it in my Fate to love him still. ACT II. SCENE Changes to the Roman Camp. Enter Paulinus solus. Paul. SURE 'tis the best Estate when Mortals prove None of the Sweet or Bitter Draughts of Love; The Sweet can ravish the transported Soul, But still the bitter makes the larger Bowl. Let those that will in such a state remain, Share in no Pleasure, to partake no Pain; But I, above that dull indifference rais'd, Would live in Pain to be but sometimes pleas'd: For in the Bliss that Beauty can bestow, One hour of Joy outweighs an Age of Woe. Enter Fabian. Fab. I left, my noble Lord, our Arms Engag'd, And now the bloodiest War again is wag'd: Never did Romans greater Bravery show, Nor ever were receiv'd so well as now. Here British Troops, there Roman Legions yield, And drive by turns each other thro' the Field. Here Fierce Cassibelan, there Decius storms, While Fate attends them both, in all its Forms; Each Party Fights as certain of Success, Nor can their Losses make their Courage less.
Enter Fabian, and runs betwixt them. Fab. Hold, I conjure you, hold, your Rage suspend, And save your Foe, if you would save your Friend. To Decius. Paulinus venturing for your sake too far, Shares the same Fortune with the Prince in War. Fate gives you this Occasion to Redeem Your gen'rous Colleague, by releasing him. Cass. Rather than so my Liberty regain, Contentedly I'll drag the weightiest Chain. Tho' I should live in shameful Bonds confin'd, I will not go, and leave my Love behind. Terms such as these, what Lover would embrace? To send his Rival to supply his place. So foolish an Exchange shall never be, Nor shall your Gen'ral be releas'd thro' me, If you would free him, set Camilla free. Dec. Her freedom is not in my power to grant, Concerns like those, will his Concurrence want. Tho' you may view him with a Rival's Eyes, Let not the smallest jealousie arise, His Virtue will secure the Charming Prize. Think on the way a Wise Man would pursue, The Romans want him, and the Britains you. Let each his former Station take, then treat Of Boadicea's, and her Daughter's Fate. Cass. Stay—Let me first the lovely Prisoners see, And know if they consent to set me free; I'll do what e'er the Captive Queen desires, And act as she Commands, and Love inspires. Ex Cassib. and Fabian. Dec. Here, Caska, let your Gen'ral's Sufferings end, Love shall be mine, since Fortune is my Friend. Go now, and send my Rival off—but stay, Form some Design to stop him in the way, I would not have Paulinus here to day. Thus does the Plunder of a prosp'rous Field, All I could ask propitious Fortune yield. Since then I won her, with extreamest toil, What hinders, but I now partake the Spoil?
By Heav'n, it shall be so, there lyes my Game, Yet will I softly first confess my Flame, With all the low submission Love can Claim; If Prayer should prove an ineffectual Course, Rather than fail, I'll seize on Heaven by force. With Manly Passion to possession move, And all the Joys in one blest minute prove, She would deny an Age of whining Love. Exit. Re-enter Cassibelan leading in Boadicea, Camilla, Venutia following. Cass. Not all the spiteful Fates have Power to do Could move me, were they kind, or just to you. I should not at my own mischance repine, If your Misfortunes had not doubled mine. O! could I ever think your sight would be A Torment, as it grows, alas! to me, To Camilla, Now I have no way left to set you free. It calls the mounting blood into my face, And makes my troubled Spirits pant a-pace. Yet Heavn's my Witness, when I saw you seiz'd, To what transporting Rage my Soul was rais'd; Forward I rush'd with an impetuous Course, Provok'd to Deeds exceeding humane force. But our ill Fates my best Efforts withstood, For sure no Mortal opposition cou'd. Boad. All the Malignant Stars at last have shed Their venom down on my devoted head. Your vent'ring in the Fatal Field so far, Has put an end to our unhappy War. Did you but lead our yet remaining Powers, Had you your freedom, we might hope for ours, But Britain now, no gallant Chief can boast, In you, the Kingdom, and the Queen are lost. Cass. Fortune does here her utmost Malice show, I dare not now be free, I dare not go, And leave my lov'd Camilla with my Foe. If to my proffer'd Liberty I move, I send a Conquering Rival to my Love,
Paulinus shares my Fate, shall I release, Or would you have the Roman fill my Place? First let me in my Bonds resign my breath, And rather find my Liberty in Death. Cam. Doubt not, my Prince, my Constancy, and Truth, Once trust a Woman in her blooming youth. Have I not Sworn by all the Powers Divine, I never would to other Arms resign, Never be any Mortal Man's but thine? Shall I repeat again the frequent Vow, You must, I know you do believe me now. Go then, my Love, no Conquering Rival fear, He shall not gain another Conquest here. Go Lead again impatient Britain's Powers, And having got your Freedom, hasten ours. Cass. Guide of my Actions, Monarch of my Heart, Who only from your self can make me part. No Jealousies of you disturb my rest, But doubt of Gods, and Fortune, rack my Breast. I doubt the Roman Virtue quite forgot, I doubt, (Oh! my sick Soul) what doubt I not? A thousand dreadful shapes around me fall, Of thousand ills—and Lovers fear them all. Yet in despight of all my fears I'll go, Since you, O! Soul of Love! would have it so. I'll pay a blind Obedience, and be free, And live, if possible, a while from thee. Cam. Heav'n knows, unwillingly I send you hence, But oh! I cannot with our Fates dispence. The sad necessity your self may see, And you must part, my Prince, to rescue me. Such means for Bliss, to all Mankind are giv'n, Ordain'd to dye, e'er they arrive at Heav'n. My rising griefs work up to that excess, That Soul and Body severing, suffer less. But go, while I can bid you, for anon My hands will hold you, tho' I wish you gon. Go, and the Gods, in pity to our pain, Will surely let us meet in Bliss again.
Cass. Oh! shut not up your Lips, nor lock your Tongue, My Soul for ever on their Sound had hung; On your dear looks my famish'd Eyes would dwell, A thousand things my faultring words would tell, I'd, talk and touch, and kiss, and then—oh! then farewell; Another, and another last Embrace, Embracing her. I'le print them on your lovely Lips apace, And spread ten thousand thousand o're your Face; Oh! turn not yet away, for now I go. When shall we meet again, ye Powers! that know, Boad. go∣ing to lead her off. Oh! tell me, shall we meet, and when, and how? My Thoughts, like Waves, roll o're each other fast, The first confus'dly swallow'd by the last: My throbbing Heart beats thick, and something bodes I know not how, nor what; propitious Gods! If ever pangs like mine were felt above, From my wrack'd Soul my mortal Fears remove, Ex. seve∣rally. Show your Compassion; and preserve my Love. Manet Venutia. Ven. It cannot sure be true, it cannot be, Paulinus should so soon abandon me; 'Till from himself I can his falsehood know, I will not, for my ease, conclude him so; But then—Oh Heaven! if he confesses—then What Woman will believe a Man again? Our Sex is govern'd by severest Laws, Mutes only in our most important Cause: We walk like troubled Shades with silence Curst, And must not speak, 'till those we haunt, speak first Stronger than Men's are all our mad Desires, And yet we struggle to suppress our Fires; In vain, alas! we think to keep them pent, While every look and action give them vent: Our Passion breaks through all the thin disguise, Our panting Heart speaks what our Tongue denys, The Love that tears our Breasts, will tremble at our Eys. t.
The SCENE draws, and discovers Camilla asleep; she wakes, and comes forward. Cam. Where am I! or, oh Heav'n! where have I been? And what distracting Visions have I seen? Methoughts within some dark and dismal Grove, I lay lamenting my departed Love: Fierce Wolves howl'd loud, and Lyons roar'd a-round, And Tygers bounded o're the Neighbouring ground. The savage Satyrs from the Woods advanc'd, And all about in Antick Measures danc'd; The sight of them my killing Fears increast, But Man came next more Savage than the rest; He seiz'd, and clasp'd me close, and sternly, swore That I should ease, at last, the Pangs he bore; He press'd and struggl'd hard, and I at length Must have surrendred to the Tyrant's strength; When, in compassion to my fearful Pains, The God of sleep loos'd his perplexing Chains. Enter Decius. Dec. Stay, charming Princess, stay; oh! do not flee, Turn, lovely, barbarous Beauty, turn, and see The wondrous force and rage of Love in me; 'Tis not a sudden Heat, or new-born Flame; From your first sight, long since, my Passion came. In Medway's Flood, you kindled my desires, And shot into my Soul resistless Fires; My Flames grow now too fierce, too wild to move In the known Tracks, or beaten Paths of Love. They scorn to go by just Degrees about, But break, at once, like hasty Lightning out. You look astonish't, and the strange surprize Rolls wildly in your lovely charming Eyes. You start, as from a Dream, and seem to take Time to consider if you're yet awake, While your amazement will not let you speak.
Cam. Well may amazement seize a Captive Maid, By cruel Stars to faithless Foes betray'd, Nor know I whither your Discourse can rend, You spoke before in favour of your Friend; But know, that both so little I esteem, I scorn it equally from you or him. Grow as renown'd as Caesar in your Wars, Get your great Name enroll'd among the Stars, Ride on triumphant o're the Conquer'd Ball, Your being born a Roman ruins all. Dec. That more confirms your Power, and serves to show Love only could reduce a Roman Foe. To such a pitch my wing'd Affections soar, I love not now my Fame or Honour more; Your Sighs within your swellng Bosom keep, Dry up your Tears, for here you must not weep. I'le make your Liberty again your own, I'll seat you on Imperial Britain's Throne, Whence all around, your Royal Eyes shall see No Slave so proud to serve, as I should be. Com. Tho' Liberty is all I wish or want, Of you, I will not ask, or take the grant: Know then, to show you your desires are vain, I loath your Person, and your Love disdain. Let Hounds and Fawns, let Wolves and Lambs be join'd; Each Creature coupling with a different kind; Then by the same blind Change of Nature led, Let Britains with the barbarous Romans wed. Dec. Take heed, injurious Fair, and blow not up My Flames, already grown too fierce to stop; Rather with milder words my Pains asswage, Or Love rejected will convert to Rage: Now, by the Gods, I must, I will be blest, Those Beauties were ordain'd to be possest, holding her. And you, who broke it, shall restore my rest. Cam. Pollute me not with your detested touch, breaking from him. My Ears already have endur'd too much. Heaven will no farther let me be betray'd, But work some Miracle to save a Maid.
I see dread Jove on high Olympus stand, And hear the Thunder grumbling in his Hand, Ready to hurle it on your impious Head, And if you dare to wrong me, dash you dead. Dec. Weak Fancies of some undigested Dream, Do what we will, the Gods are still the same; Stretch'd at their Ease within their blissful Bowers, They mind their Pleasures, and disturb not ours; But tho' they should on your behalf appear, They shall not force me from a Bliss so near, I love too well, too fiercely to forbear. Cam. Heav'n! I must let my just Resentments fall, They but provoke him more, and ruin all. Aside. If you would have your Passion understood, To show your Love, act as a Lover shou'd. Possession is the least and poorest part, Not worth your taking 'till you win the Heart; Then only is the Bliss entire and whole, When with the Body you enjoy the Soul. Long Services alone should that obtain, And not one hasty Love Confession, gain. With humble Looks, and awful Homage sue, With doubts, despairs, and deep distractions woo, Give me those proofs, and try what they may do. Dec. Believe I love, That I already have not snatch'd the Heav'n Within my reach, but waited 'till 'twere given: You see me strangely chang'd from what I was, A change which none but you could ever cause. In all my former Wars when Towns were won, And prostrate Beauties crouded up my way, My boundless Rage forbore to rifle none, Seizing on whom I pleas'd as lawful Prey, Scorn'd when enjoy'd, and cheaply cast away. Ambition govern'd all my life before, None of these tender Sentiments I knew, 'Till first I saw you in a happy Hour; When with my Eyes, fix'd upon yours, I drew The welcome Pain, and pleasing smart from you.
Love started late, but fled with wondrous haste, Using his utmost speed to reach the Goal, On his stretch'd Wings he shot himself so fast, He sits enthron'd already in my Soul, Diffus'd as soon as enter'd, thro' the whole. Choose then, dear Charmer, choose the mildest Course, Kneeling. Yield quickly, yield those Joys, my Heavenly fair; I cannot forfeit, and I would not force, Yield to this Love, to this submissive Prayer, And do not, do not drive me to despair. Thus let me take possession of your Charms, rising and hold∣ing her. Thus trembling with the Transport grasp my Bliss, Thus fold your Beauties in my ravish'd Arms; Print on your balmy Lips this burning Kiss, Faint with an extasie of Joy like this. Cam. What shall I say to move the Tyrant's Soul? Aside. [to him] O take the Kingdoms I was born to rule, Your Sway, let my revolted Subjects own, Seize on the Scepter, and ascend the Throne. Gladly I would the World's large Rule resign, And leave you all, leave but Honour mine. Dec. The World is not a Ransom for your Charms, Nor Men, nor Gods, shall snatch you from my Arms. Take Courage, Fair, dispel your Virgin Fears, And let my longing Lips drink up your Tears; With transport to your Ravisht Lover move, Crown both our Joys, and give a loose to Love. Thus let me pour my sighs upon your Breast, And softly lull my Feverish Soul to rest. Thus let me run your Beauties o're and o're, Enjoying all, yet still desiring more. Embracing her. Cam. Change me to something, Heaven! deform'd and foul, Blot from my Face the Charms that fir'd his Soul. Give me the Monstrous Gorgon's dreadful Head, That I may look this fouler Monster dead: Make me as loathsome, and as hideous be, As much abhor'd by him as he's by me. Dec. O! still continue thus, relentless fair, Rack me with doubts, and drive me to despair;
Sure if you wound so deeply with your scorn, Your kindness cannot be by Mortal born: O! still refuse to meet my fierce desires, My own are hot enough, suppress your Fires; And yet your lovely Cheeks begin to glow, And strugling warmth strikes out— why, let it now? Your yielding Heart, would to my Wish incline, Methinks I feel it beat, and leap at mine. Your panting Breast sends up your sighs apace, And soft Consent sits blushing on your Face: Love Dawns, and his resistless Fires arise, And now they lighten fast from both our Eyes; Ye Gods! if one must perish in the Fire, Let Semele be safe and Jove expire. Cam. Oh! that my Eyes like Basilisks could roll, And dart their pointed glances thro' thy Soul. Still will you, Cruel Heaven! your aid deny? Is it so hard to give me leave to dye? Gods! if you ever are concern'd to know, The barbarous Crimes done hourly here below, Exert your selves, and show your Justice now. Without distinction, let your Vengeance strike, Confounding Guilt and Innocence alike; Drive us on Precipices, Daggers, Flames, Dash'd against Rocks, or dround in rapid Streams, So either dies, 'tis all your Suppliant claims. Dec. Death! I shall trifle all the time away, Now my desires will brook no more delay. Who waits within? Hence with this foolish Maid, Enter Sold. And see the Charge I gave you be obey'd. 'Tis your own fault, I take the roughest course. Kneel not, rejected Love knows no remore; she kneels, and holds by him. Tear off her hold, and drag her hence by force. The Souldiers drag her along the Stage as she speaks. Cam. Oh! now, good Gods! now let your succour come, Gape Earth, gape wide, and hide me in your Womb; Fall Heav'n, and crush me with the pond'rous blow, O're my drown'd Coarse, let rolling Oceans flow. Forsake me Life, fly my detested Breath From my curs'd Lungs, give me some hold of Death.
'Tis done; I thank you, Gods, my Fears are o're; And Tyrant, I am now beyond your Power. Swoons, and is carried off in the Souldiers Arms. Dec. Away, she shall not long entrans'd remain, I'll quickly bring her back to Life again. My Soul is straining to the full delight, Gods! let me have this one, this charming Night; Put but my Pleasures out of Fortune's power, Then come whatever can, I've had my Hour. Exit. ACT III. SCENE 1. Enter Decius, Camilla. Cam. LOOK down, relentless Heav'n! look down, and see All that is greatly wretched, here in me. Winds cease to blow, and weeping Clouds to Rain, And ruffled Seas grow still and smooth again. Stars take their turns to glitter in the Skies, The Silver Moon, her Brothers place supplies, And the descending Sun again will rise. But an unhappy Virgin, once deflour'd, Can never have her rifl'd Wealth restor'd: No Remedy is known, no cure is found, When our wrong'd Honour has receiv'd a Wound: For ever lost, if once it suffers Wrack, Nor Men, nor Gods themselves, can give it back. Dec. Not wrack'd, but safe within the Port you ride, And harbour'd thus, may stem the strongest Tide. embra∣cing her. By Heav'n, I love you better than before, The rich Enjoyment has enflam'd me more. Nothing my setled Passion can divert; You Conquer'd, and you keep my Captiv'd Heart: Devoutly will I still my Bliss pursue, And fix that happiness I found in you. Cam. Oh! what a wretched Creature am I now? And what a most Inhumane Villain thou?
Where are your Bolts? ye Gods! long suffering Heav'n! Why are no Signs of your Resentment given? If any longer Vengeance is delay'd, And you refuse to right an injur'd Maid, Lewd Poets shall no more be thought prophane, But all their Scandals will Belief obtain: How you your selves have often acted Rapes, Often deceiv'd the Nymphs in sundry Shapes; Often debauch'd your Heav'n, and fill'd your Skies With Maiden shrieks, and rifl'd Virgins Cries. And now grown Conscious of your Crimes, your fear Keeps you from punishing this Monster here. Dec. In vain, you let your fruitless Passion rise, In vain, you hurl your Anger at the Skyes, Your unregarded Wrath moves no Replies. Turn hither, dear mistaken Charmer, turn, Behold, with what a constant Flame I burn, And 'till you are forsaken, cease to Mourn. In me repose your Cares, and do not grieve, For only I, who wrong'd you, can relieve; Lull in my Arms, your anxious Thoughts to rest, And seek to lose them on your Lover's Breast. Cam. Love cannot in that barbarous Bosom dwell, The Brand that fir'd thee, had its Fires from Hell. Nor is there one of all the Fiends below, So Monstrous, or so much a Fiend as thou. How shall I fly from thy detested sight? How, since thou mad'st me loath it, shun the Light? I'le take no Food, but stop my stifl'd Breath, And find at last, some Path that leads to Death, Then, when I reach the dreadful Thund'rer's Throne, I'll make him hurl his sloathful Vengeance down. Dec. Thou shalt not yet go hence, tho' not the Fear Of either Earth, or Heav'n, detains thee here. I will not change my Bliss for theirs above, Yet theirs consists, like mine, in nought but Love. In making thee, their Art was at a stand, And if they would, they cannot mend their Hand. Cam. Talk this, but talk it to the troubled Sea, Or Winds that bear it on their Wings away.
My Soul works high with Grief, as Waves with Wind, Shame and Confusion, Rage and Vengeance join'd, Roll like swol'n Seas in my Tempestuous Mind. Now Curse upon the Stars that rul'd my Birth, Curse on all impious Ravishers on Earth; On all Injurious Power a double Curse, Men, as they grow the greater, grow the worse. Curse on my Fate that will not set me free, Curse on my self, for wasting words with thee. Dec. The more Men speak, the more their words are lost, When most they show their Love, they suffer most. Nature design'd your Sex to be controll'd, Proud to the fawning, cringing to the bold. And since so much my proffer'd Love you slight, You teach me now to use a Conqu'rour's right. Love shall no more the sole Dictator be, But you shall act whatever I decree, And only live and die, as pleases me. Cam. Why liv'd I not, ye Gods! in such an Age, When Virtuous Maids endeavouring to escape, By their vain flight, the lustful Followers Rage, No longer able to out-run the Rape, Could, to preserve their Honour, lose their shape? Fair Daphne thus by youthful Phoebus woo'd, Whom long she shun'd in an unequal Race, Finding her self at last too close pursu'd, Timely Transform'd, beguil'd the God's Embrace, Who clasp'd a Laurel in the Virgin's place. But since my harder Fortune could deny Such wondrous Succour to prevent my shame, Oh! yet relent, ye Gods! and let me die, Here let my Sufferings end, 'tis all I claim, Who cannot be more wretched than I am. Make me forget this my most mortal wrong, And that I ne're may wound you with my moan; Rob me of Thought, deprive me of a Tongue, Change me to stupid Trees, or senseless Stone, Contrive my quiet to secure your own. Exit.
Re-enter Caska. Cask. Love sits in Triumph on your ravish'd Brow, And Beauty waits on Fortune's Chariot now. In your glad Looks, immortal Pleasure's seen, Dawns at your Eyes, and dances through your Meen. You took the surest, and the speediest Course, For Women only wish and wait for Force. They dare not of themselves resign the Field, But strorm'd, like Frontier Towns, rejoice to yield. Dec. Yes, 'tis my Triumph now; her rifl'd Charms. Are richer Spoils than e're I won in Arms: By all the Gods, she is beyond compare, Not of the Mould that other Women are. Joys after Joys in her possession roll, And Tides of springing Bliss beat fast upon the Soul. Heav'n seems to swim before the dazled sight, And Thought it self lies drown'd in deep delight. Cask. Since then you've run the mighty Pleasure o're And she can give, and you desire no more; Since she has nothing new to raise your Flame, But all her Beauties will be still the same, Call your forgotten Glory to your aid, Turn back to War, and send away the Maid. Dec. Go, bid some God, lull'd in delight, on high, Forego his Pleasures, and forsake his Skye; Bid Jove, whom constant Cups of Nectar feast, Starve in full Banquets, and forbear to taste; And if the immortal Powers their Heav'n resign, Bid me, by their Example, forfeit mine. Cask. Yet such a Feast, at last, may dangerous prove, And you grow surfeited with too much Love. You've only tasted yet, the Sweets that swim, Round the deceitful Bowl's delicious brim; But if you go too deep, and drink it up, Some Dreg at last, may poison all the Cup. Dec. If fearful Sea-men, when a prosp'rous gale, And slowing Tide invites them, will not sail;
If then, they dare not unknown Worlds explore, And run to distant Climes for Golden Ore, They ought to languish in their Wants on Shore. Cask. But if rash Mad-men, when a troubled Sky, And swelling Seas presage a Tempest nigh, When raging Winds work roaring Ocean's high; If then they venture o're the tumbling Wave, And meet at last the Ruin which they brave; On them, the Justice of the Gods is shown, The Fault is not their Fortune's, but their own. Dec. No more, since only she can make me blest, Of her I am, and will remain possest; Let Gods repine, and Fortune do her worst, I will not be by ought, but Death, divorc't. From vengeful Foes I can my self defend, And have a Gift that will secure my Friend. Venutia to Paulinus I'le resign, And by Consent preserve Camilla mine. Both march in Love and War, triumphant home, And force the vanquish'd Queen to Peace with Rome. He comes, and in his Looks his Joys appear, Wild with his haste, to meet his Princess here. Enter Paulinus. Paul. My Decius, my Deliv'rer, oh! my Friend, Where shall my Praise and Thanks begin, or end? My Joys would altogether silence break, But Men speak least, where they have most to speak. Our Eager Words stand strugling on the Tongue, And push each other backwards in the Throng. Where much is due, still mute returns are shown, And Words are needless where the Soul is known. Dec. If any debt but mutual Friendship's due, 'Tis I, and only I who owe it you: You set me in the midst of danger free, And lost your Liberty, relieving me. Now Fortune, to the full, has Cround our Toils, And all her Charming Face is drest in Smiles.
Britain is made to feel the Roman Powers, And both her Beauteous Heiresses are ours. Paul. Something unknown, struck with a strange surprise, And, deaden'd at the News, my flowing Joys; Doubt's hang upon me still, which won't remove, But doubts inseparably link'd to Love. Should my Venutia for her freedom pine, Can I have any Comfort left in mine? While but the Name of Captive she retains, I seem to bend beneath the weight of Chains. Dec. Methinks you should not to your Prisoner sue, Make her by Manly Love submit to you. Confine the little God in Fetters now, And let, for once, insulting Beauty bow. Let o're the strugling fair the Net be thrown, And seize, and keep the lovely Prize your own. Paul. That little God laughs at our feeble Power, The more withstood, he wounds us still the more. Men must with humble adoration move, That only works upon the Powers above, And that alone secures success in Love. I know the generous Decius will incline His Heart to favour the desires of mine. Their freedom to the Charming Pris'ners grant, Which, 'till restor'd them, I my self must want. Dec. What, will you then draw back, when Fortune stands Stretching her Blessings out with both her Hands? She is not often fond, and once refus'd, She will not be the second time abus'd. If presently not seiz'd, she does not stay, But flies, for ever, with disdain away. Snatch at her Favours while her Front's in view, If past you once, you will in vain pursue: Those Minutes she vouchsafes to smile, improve; She gave you Conquest, and she shows you Love. Paul. I'le take the blest occasion, she shall see, Her kindness shall not be abus'd by me. I'le go, and to my Love my homage pay, At her dear Feet her proffer'd Freedom lay, And show, that she still reigns, and I obey.
Dec. You still are on your own destruction bent, But I must stop you in the steep descent. Our Wars are at a happy period now, And Britain must to Conqu'ring Caesar bow: By their Release, she would again revive, And their faint hopes would still be kept alive; The War again begun, will never cease, And now at pleasure we may make our Peace, Nor will your Love a better Fortune know, While they regard you as their mortal Foe, And the proud Queen rejects and treats you so. Paul. Then I have try'd too far, too far, I fear, The Friendship, which I thought like mine sincere. Had I been put, by you, to such a Test, I should not have refus'd the small request. Dec. Stretch it to any proof excepting this, I cannot grant, nor you demand amiss; In ought besides your boundless Interest use, This is the only thing I can refuse. Urge it no more, my Friend. Paul. Suppose it done, This very thing which you except alone, Suppose your Prisoner's freed. Dec. I'le not suppose, What in a Friend so base, and Monstrous shows, And know it was not in the power of Foes. Paul. 'Tis not your Foe has done it, they are free, And your Consent unquestion'd, freed by me, This single Tryal will your Truth assure, And 'tis not much for Friendship to endure. Dec. O Gods! should any other Man but he, Unpunish'd, tempt me to the last degree? Believe my Friendship now sincere and true, To show how much it makes me bear from you, One of the Sisters was my Mistress too. Paul. But not the same with mine? Dec. No, not the same, But one I love with as entire a Flame. Together you, your own, and mine, betray, And drive what both desire, at once away.
Paul. They are not gone, not yet, but hither bent, They come, at my desire, for your Consent. When you the Charming mournful Beauties see, And are the Lover you pretend to be, You will prevent my Wish, and ask Consent of me. Cask. Furies and Hell! could ought that's worse befall? Now the storm rises that will wrack us all. How fatal may this Ominous meeting prove? Aside. But, what could ever better come of Love? Plague seize 'em, choak them Pestilential Air; Hell swallow them, let them make mischief there. Had he took my Advice to lt them go, All had been well; let Heav'n look to it now. Dec. Run, stop them, Caska,—stop them quick—but stay, I'le haste, and send them with dispatch away. Their Liberty you need no longer fear, Going out. They're free to go, come any where— but here. Paul. Hold, neither of you stirs; for I must see Venutia, e're my self will set her free. strugling with both. Dec. I'le send your Mistress to you; Love is grown So strong in me, so high the Flame is blown, It makes me fearful to behold my own. gets loose, and is going out. Paul. See! they are here already; at the view Of mine, methinks that I grow fearful too, Whom Custom should embolden more than you. Enter Boadicea, Camilla, Venutia, Fabian. Bo. Have our remorseless Fates, in all their Store, More Mischiefs still? or can we suffer more? Why come we hither? do your Hearts relent? Or can a Roman of his Crimes Repent? Rather, insultingly you go to tread On the sad Ruins which your selves have made. To spurn your wretched Prey, already torn, First show your Cruelty, and then your Scorn. Paul. Oh! stop not, why? speak, why are we accus'd? How have we guilty been, or you abus'd?
Your looks and words run through me, and I feel Something fore-boding some unheard of ill. Your Sighs have shook my Heart, the drops that roll Down your swollen Breast, distill upon my Soul. Oh! stop not; once again unlock your Tongue, Produce the Villain, and proclaim your wrong. Why Reigns that Royal Sorrow on your Brow? Why do those Tears so prodigally flow? What is the cause of this so solemn Woe? Bo. Are our Inhuman Wrongs unknown to you? But sure they are, since you are injur'd too. We have no Wrongs, no Sufferings to deplore, But you, unhappy you, alone, have more; Your sharing in our Woes, your Fame secures, For all our Miseries are doubly yours. Paul. Oh, all ye Gods! rack me not thus with doubt, Let, quickly let the fatal Secret out. What impious Villain durst your Wrongs design? And how? Oh! tell me, are your Sufferings mine? Speak but his Name, pronounce it in a word, And you shall be reveng'd with Fire and Sword. Bo. Hear then; to raise your Fury far above All vulgar Rage; hear of your Ravish'd Love. Already Fir'd? Stay 'till my story end; Stay 'till you know her Ravish'd by your Friend; Point∣ing to Decius. There stands the Fiend, there let your Rage descend. Paul. My Mistress? Drawing. Bo. Yes, your Mistress. Paul. And by this? Ravish'd by this Friend here? Bo. Yes, Roman, yes. Her whom he late demanded in thy Name, Her has he forc'd to quench his impious Flame, And drown'd her Honour in eternal Shame. Dec. You are not wrong'd, hold yet, and hear me speak, She raves, and I must clear her mad mistake. Caska enters with Souldiers, who thrust between them. Paul. Off, Slaves; you'l safer seize the Thund'rer's Hand, Advancing to discharge the flaming Brand.
Dec. Go, somewhere else, your sawcy aid afford, Think you that I can fear a single Sword? From you, because you were my Friend, I'le bear This rude Assault; dispel your jealous fear, And drive away your doubts, if you will hear. Paul. Doubts? by the Gods despair, distraction, Death, Hell's kindled in me, and my pois'nous Breath, Shall blast and send thee to the Shades beneath. Ven. Hold, my lov'd Roman, if I've yet a part, Thrusting between them. Or any power o're that disloyal Heart. Hold, I conjure you, my Paulinus, hold, And wait but 'till our Tragick Scene unfold. Paul. If you have any part? why don't you see, That all this Rage and Vengeance is for thee? Can you your self your barbarous Wrongs forgive? Can you desire your Ravisher should live? Ven. I suffer'd not the Rape, your much lov'd Life Was my sole fear in this unequal strife. Cam. But I —unhappy I— Confusion—Shame, Suppress my Words, and choak me at the Name. Swoons. Paul. Look to the Princess there? Oh! barbarous Man, What can repair thy Crimes? sure nothing can. What shall I call thee now? Oh! what can be A Title base, or foul enough for thee? Thou Fiend! Ven. Thou Monster Cam. [recovering] Ravisher. Paul. Barbarian. Bo. Roman. Paul. Survey your Ravish'd Love, and ruin'd Friend, And think, Oh! think, where can our Miseries end? Rome's glory now, no longer seems divine, And thou, to further this, this damn'd Design, Hast took no Name, oh! Gods no Name —but mine. Oh! this abhorr'd, this execrable deed, Will make our wounded Fame for ever Bleed; In all our Annals, thou shalt stand accurst, A second Tarquin, blacker than the first.
Alive detested, unlamented dead, Mention'd with Curses, and with Horror read. Dec. I thank you; once my soft'ning Soul begun To melt, and ready Tears prepar'd to run: But thy Reproaches fire me with Disdain. And Indignation sets me right again. Because I wrong'd thee First, I First forgive, And since thou wert my Friend, I let thee live. Let when you will the Captive Women go, I have no farther Business with them now. Again I'll hunt them o'er the dusty Plain, And make them when I please my own again. Bo. Away, my wretched Daughters, let's away My sickning Soul abhors a longer stay, Exit. cum suis. Where the curst Scene of all our Sorrows lay. Paul. Yet 'ere, you go, the doubtful War suspend, Let the dire Hate of Rome and Britain end. I'll march the small Remainder of my Powers, And muster up my Troops to joyn with yours, Together, we may make the Villain bow, Who is too Strong, alas! for Justice now. With force united, crush and dash him Dead, And shoot at once our Vengeance on his Head. Bo. After our Sufferings Peace? No Roman, no; 'Till Stars forbear to shine, and Seas to flow, 'Till Billows cease to toss, when Tempest blow. 'Till Fire, and Water, Heaven, and Hell unite, And Day is swallowed in Eternal Night; Till all Things to their Dissolutions come; Britain, shall know no Peace with barbarous Rome, Oh! see us Heav'n! with mortal sufferings spent, (Kneeling.) And let at last, your angry Powers relent. Behold us Earth, and say you never bore, Three Wretches, so Forlorn and lost before. Sure, when our Story in an After-Age Is represented on the Tragick Stage, No Savage Eyes their struggling Tears shall keep; But for our Woes the whole sad Audience weep. Exit. cum suis. Paul. Hither I came with a transported Heart, Now, with a Soul quite sunk with Grief, depart.
My Woes fall thick, and my distracted Breast, With a sad Load of deadly Sorrow prest, Never, oh! never must admit of Rest. My future Life, not the least Bliss shall boast, But mourn a luckless Love for ever lost. I thought to've found her full of laughing Joys, A Thousand Cupids dancing in her Eyes; But, oh! ye Gods! to my amazing Fears, I found those Eyes drown'd in a Flood of Tears; I thought but now, my Love might best be shown, Making her Liberty again her own. But this unthought of Chance, this, Headlong Fall Has worse, far worse than ever, ruin'd all. Thus, the wrack'd Mariner a while will strive, With all his Skill in swimming to survive: In hopes, like mine, of better Fate in store, Who, when he just has reach'd the wish'd for Shore, Stretching his Arms to fasten on the Coast, Is by some suddain Wave, dash'd back and lost. Exit. The End of the Third Act. ACT IV. SCENE changes to the City of Verulam. Enter Cassibelan, solus. Cass. THE Morning flutters on the Mountain's Top, And Rising Faulcon-like, goes towering up. The smoaking Mists, and steaming Vapours, flie; And Stars, in stronger Light, grow dim and die. Small Streaks at first, the blushing Skies betray, Then rushes on a-pace the springing Day. And yet it lends us but a glimm'ring Light, Nor willingly succeeds the dismal Night.
When Ghosts in screaming Swarms were seen to fly, When Tempests toss'd the troubled Ocean high, And Peals of Thunder tore the flaming Sky, I dream'd (the while I slept) of Murders, Rapes, A Thousand Horrours, in a Thousand Shapes. I saw, methoughts, my Love with ruffled Hair, Her Robes all torn her, panting Bosom bare; By Heav'n she comes, oh! my prophetick Fears, O welcome to my Soul; but why in Tears? To Camilla entring. How came you hither; Speak, and ease my Pain, No Matter how; since you are here again. Cam. Clasp me not, Prince, with this so kind Embrace, Nor keep your Eyes fix'd on my shameful Face. Oh! give me not, this dear, fond welcome Home, Which you will grudge, when you know, how I come. Curse the vast Ransome I was forc'd to pay, And drive me from you with disdain away. Cass. I cannot grudge a Ransome you could give, One only; which you would not lose to live. I cannot think that Treasure ever giv'n: I know thee true, I know thee, chast as Heav'n. Cam. Heav'n may be forc'd; did not the Giants once Assault the Sky, and scale the Sacred Sconce? Think where I've been; oh! think, unhappy Prince, Since you return'd, think what I've suffer'd since. Betray'd to all the Wrongs a Maid can bear, Which you, unhappy, you who love me, share. Look on your self, poor Prince—but oh! to see The greatest Wretch now living, look on me. To tell you more; ev'n injur'd Virtue's loth, One Hellish Act, one Fiend has ruin'd both. Cass. The Thunder grumbl'd long, before it fell, But now it drives me to the lowest Hell. Tho' Death to Miseries like mine is due, Yet I will live, my Love, to comfort you; Your Tears, within your swelling Eye-Lids keep; You wreck my Soul the more, the more you weep.
Oh! keep those Gales, those Gusts of Sighs supprest, Repose your Sorrows in your Lover's Breast, Lull in my Arms, your anxious Cares to rest. Cam. Thou dearest, best of Lovers, loveliest Youth, How shall I recompence thy matchless Truth? I've been abus'd even to the last degree, Thou too hast been abus'd; — tho' not by me. Oh! should you think, that e'er my Soul agreed, Or e'er consented to the sinful Deed; That, that alas! would double all I bear, Drive me to Madness, plague me with despair, Plunge me in Hell, hotter than Fiends have there. Cass. By Heav'n I know you chaste, the Wrongs you bore, Serve only to endear you to me more. My Passion is the same; the same my Heart, Of which you have not lost the smallest Part. Rather with quicker Beatings, feel it move, And struggle to you with redoubled Love. I love You, by the Gods, to that excess, Which even no Love-sick Poet can expess. Thou wert the dearest Health I had to boast, And Life, in losing thee, was almost lost. But since the Gods indulgently restore, And give thee back; I can but prize thee more, And strive to keep thee better than before. Cam. Sure this unimitable Goodness can Spring only from a God; oh more than Man! Here, in this Kiss, my Prince, receive my Soul, That still was thine, that still is pure, and whole. Oh! hear me, hear me Gods! if e'er I prove Ingrateful to this World of wondrous Love; May I live ever branded with the Name, I dare not mention for the killing Shame. Cass. Gods! 'tis too much for Man, such Charms as thine, Have, as they merit, an effect Divine. While thro' thy Lips the murmuring Accents break, I listen with belief that Angels speak. Each Word with subtle Force a Passage gains, Runs thro' my Blood, and dances in my Veins.
Speak, till I stop you with an eager Kiss, (Embracing) Your Tongue shou'd know no stop—but this—and this. Your Lips are still the same, my Heavenly Dear, I taste no Ravisher, no Roman here. Since thy transporting Sweets continue such, He got but little—Yet he got too much. I wou'd not lose one Look, one Touch of thee, Tho' still the Rapture was reserv'd for me. Cam. Revenge me, Prince, 'Tis all I live for now, Let sudden Vengeance strong Affection show. Gods! give the Villain to me; let him stand Within the reach of this remorseless Hand: I'd set him on the Rack, and see him ply'd With Fire and Sword, long tortur'd 'ere he dy'd. His Soul and Body at a Tread I'd crush, Spurn him, oh! spurn him; tear him, tear him thus. Spurns the Ground, and tears her Hair. Cass. Forbear, thou injur'd Innocence, forbear, And leave your Vengeance to your Lover's Care. If Heaven is not of all its Gods bereft, Or if in Men there's any Valour left, I will revenge; let, quickly let me know The Villain's Name; 'tis all I stay for now. What need I ask? Paulinus? Cam. No: 'Twas he Who pitying our Misfortunes, set us free. But Decius: — curse upon the Monster's Name, He wrought our Woes, and my eternal Shame. Cass. Enough: my violated Saint, adieu, I cannot loiter longer ev'n with you. Now from my Breast let all Remorse be fled, I'll wade thro' Blood, and trampling o'er the dead, Return in Triumph with the Villain's Head. Going out. Cam. Hold yet—though you so nobly can forgive, Nay love me too; yet ought not I to live? I dare not trust my Fame to future Times So far as to survive the Monsters Crimes. See this — ye Gods! had this been mine before I had not been alive that fatal Hour, Drawing a Dagger. But put my self above the Conqueror's Power.
Remember me, my Love, and now adieu, And in my Death believe me chastly true. Nay, come not near me; by my Wrongs I strike The sooner if you do. Cass. I'll do the like: Drawing his Sword. By Heaven we'll go together; if you go, I'll second: By th' Gods, prevent your Blow. Live, or I die. They throw down their Weapons, and run, and embrace. Cam. Hold, my dear Prince, to give, The greatest sign of Love; I'll live, I'll live. The wondrous force of Woman's Passion see, Since I, in rigid Vertue's spight, can be Content to live in Infamy with thee. Cass. Oh! Extasie of Love, oh! Heaven of bliss, All this thou art; and who wou'd part with this? In thy sweet Lips my ravish'd Soul I'll drown, Wash off the Roman taste, and leave my own. Cam. Take yet another Love; and now away; Our Vengeance will not let thee longer stay, But drives thee to begin the dreadful Day. Cass. (Embracing) Oh! thou hast fir'd me; all my Blood boils high; Thou temper'st me like Thunder in the Skie, Mak'st me too hot to hold, then let'st me flie. No longer, righteous Powers, your Aid refuse, Or give me, Gods! the Bolts you will not use. Lend me, ye Furies, your Infernal Brands; And wreath your Snakes round my revengeful Hands. In his curs'd Breast I'll kindle all your Hell; Revenge! Revenge! —Farewel, my Love, farewel. Exit. Camilla, sola. And canst thou weep, and let this Water fall? For Miseries, like thine, must this be all? No, let thy Griefs to raging Tempests rise, Burst thy swoll'n Breast with thy tumultuous Sighs, And roar for Vengeance to regardless Skies.
Loose to the Winds toss thy dishevell'd Hair, Throws a∣broad her Hair, and tears open her Clothes. Tear off thy Robes, thy woful Bosom bare, Seem what thou art, Distraction and Despair. Now rear thy Hnd at Heaven, and curse thy Birth, Now grovel on the Ground, and grow to Earth. Here lie—and rage, and rave, and weep, and howl; Throws her self down. Show (if thou can'st) the Torture of thy Soul. The Dagger! —have I got thee once again? This (if I durst) might case my mortal Pain. But so a double Vengeance wou'd ensue, For my Cassibelan will perish too. O! wou'd I cou'd run mad —my Brain turns fast — I feel it whirle — and shall run mad at last. Break my poor Heart, turn my distemper'd Brain, Start Eye-Balls from your Spheres — And never let me see the Light again. Enter Boadicea. Bo. Poor Girl; what on the Ground? Lie still, my Child; Thy Looks, and all thy Words are justly wild. Lie still, and I will lie beside thee down, Contemplating on Earth, disdain a Crown. Alas! the proudest of us is a piece Of this vile Dirt; and where's the pride of this? Cam. True, Royal Mother, and unhappy I, Am viler than the Dust on which we lie. Here let me take the Measure for my Grave; 'Tis all I hope that I shall shortly have. Bo Way to such Thoughts as these you shall not give: No Daughter, you shall be reveng'd, and live. Our Troops are by your furious Lover led, Who looks like Jove (when thundering) at their head. I came to find you, lest excess of Grief, Shou'd make you run to Death to meet Relief. I heard you moan; one while your Voice was faint, And softly murmur'd out your sad Complaint: Then rising to a bold and angry Strain, You spoke, as might express extremest Pain.
Like troubl'd Seas your noble Rage wrought high, And mounting menac'd the relentless Sky. Gods! cruel Gods! Oh tell me! do you know These Suff'rings, do ye see this Pomp of Woe? Sure if you did, your Light'ning wou'd be driv'n To show the Justice of Offended Heav'n. But ye are Gods; and living at your Ease, You care not whether Earth has War or Peace. Cam. With all the Pains of Hell my Soul is torn, Opprest with Woes too mighty to be born, So high my Passion is, my Pangs so strong, That sure they cannot now continue long. The Tempest rages with so fierce a Blast, 'Tis grown too violent and hard to last. Bo. Oh! let me calm thy Sorrows with my Tears; Speak, say thou wilt not die, and ease my Fears. On thy wrack'd Breast, my much-wrong'd Child, I'll pour These gentle Drops, and this refreshing Show'r. Thus weeping o'er thee, with this falling Rain, Lull thy sad Griefs and lay the Storm again. Thus clasp thee to thy mournful Mother's Breast, And fold thee in these well-known Arms to rest. Cam. Fly; lest ye be infected with my Woe; For all that touches me, must needs be so. Both by the Gods and Fates I stand accurst; It was my Wrongs that made you wretched first. My Loss has made you poor, my fatal Fall Pull'd universal Ruine on us all. Bo. Once more, my Child, raise your sad Spirits up; Like Flow'rs, you are not faded, tho' you droop. Your Charms are still the same; the blushing Rose Tho' shrunk with Wet, next Sun-shine will disclose Her op'ning Sweets, and smiling, show she grows. Your Beauty flourishes in perfect Bloom, And happy Days roll on in haste to come: Your Wrongs your gen'rous Prince's Flame improve, And his Compassion has encreas'd his Love. Relenting Heav'n decrees your Suff'rings o'er, Doubles your Blessings for th' Abuse you bore; Shall one black Day dawn all the White in store.
Enter Venutia Ven. The Priests are ready, and Arabian Gums Have scented all the Fane with rich Perfumes. By Sacred strokes the several Victims fell, And all the sel Entrails bode well. Your Anger in your Royal Looks I see, And am afraid you are enrag'd at me. Bo. Yes, Rebel Daughter, yes, at last I know Your impious Love for our inveterate Foe: But by my just resentments, e'er you joyn With any Monster of the Roman Line; E'er Heaven or Earth shou'd see a Match like this, I'll take your Life, did I not hope for his. Rise, my Camilla, rise; the Druids wait, And now they open wide the Temple-gate. Scene draws, and discovers Temple Prayers, Tears, and Sacrifice shall Heaven atone, Importunately prostrate at their Throne, With holy Force we'll pull their Vengeance down. The Scene draws, and discovers a Temple. The Queen with the two Princesses go and kneel at the Altar, while two Druids sing the following Song. SONG. 1 Druid. PRepare our Altar, make it clean With Blood of Oxen newly slain. Burn our Incense, place it high, And let the grateful Perfumes flie In curling Smoak, and cloud the Skie. 2 Druid. Throw now the strugling Victim on, Press, press him hard, and keep him down: Pierce his Sides deep, and let them pour Into your Golden Bowls their Gore, 'Till they can shed can bleed no more. 1 Druid. No all kneel with me, kneel around, With Adoration kiss the Ground.
Pray that the Gods at last wou'd bless Our British Armies with success, And all our cruel Wrongs redress. 2 Druid. See, see auspicious Flashes rise, Met with like Flashes from the Skies, (It Lightens) We offer'd in a lucky Hour, The thirsty Flames drink up the Gore, And now the Victim is no more. Chorus of both. Hark, hark, hark, hark, the Battle is begun, Now, now the Victors shout, the Fight is done, The Gods are pleas'd, and Conquest is our own. At the end of the Song an Eagle flies into the Temple, and flutters a while about the Flame of the Sacrifice; at last falls in, and is burnt. Bo. I thank you, Gods! for this auspicious Sign; So perish all our Foes: Oh! Powers Divine, If Royal Knees bow'd at your sacred Shrine. If a crown'd Head, wrack'd with unusual Cares Can move your Pity; if a Monarch's Pray'rs Can pierce the Roof of Heaven, and reach your Ears; If we are Types of you, not plac'd for Show, But truly your Vicegerents here below; No longer see your selves, ye Sacred Powers, Abus'd in us; your Strength despis'd in ours. Show that Revenge to Heaven alone belongs; Do Justice to your selves, and right our Wrongs. Cam. If, dreadful Gods! a ravish'd Virgin's Cries Have ever rais'd Compassion in your Skies; If injur'd Honour, and unhappy Love, Are the concerns of any Power above; Oh! now look down, behold a rifled Maid, Thus prostrate on your sacred Pavement laid, Thus groveling on the Ground, implore your Aid. See in my Tears my trembling Eye-Balls roll, And mark the sad Confusion of my Soul.
See what a Wretch lies here, how full of Woe, My Miseries your Omniscience needs must know, And Justice punish him who made me so. Now shower your Vengeance on the Villain's Head, And with some dreadful Judgments dash him dead. Ven. If streaming Tears from Virgin's Eye-Lids rain'd Untouch'd by Villain's Hands, in Thought unstain'd; If such can make your stubborn Pity bow, And melt you to Compassion, show it now. Trumpets sound. Enter Cassibelan and Soldiers; Decius Prisoner. The Queen and her Daughters rise. Cass. 'Tis done; Heaven has at last its Justice shown, And Victory and Vengeance are our own. Our Fortunes equal with our Wishes rise, And Blessings fall profusely from the Skies. Never cou'd Britain Nobler Conquest boast; Pointing to Decius. But this, this Captive Monster swells it most. Ha! Gods what ails my Love? haste, haste and save Camilla swoons. Her Life, or you take back whate'er you gave. Bo. Away, my Soldiers, flie, And quickly make our wretched Prisoners die. This Moment let a Thousand Slaves expire; Tear them with Racks, ply them with Sword and Fire; Send them to Fiends beneath, and let them tell, There comes a greater Fiend than all in Hell. How fares my lov'd Camilla? Cass. Look, my Dear, See your Cassibelan secures you here. Wipe these faint Drops from your fair lovely Brow, Recal your fleeting Soul for Vengeance now. Look up; the Triumphs of our Justice see; Die not with him, but stay and live with me. The Scene draws, and discovers several Prisoners put to death by several sorts of Tortures. Behold, thou barbarous Wretch, those horrid Scenes, To Dec. View theirs, and dread thy own approaching Pains. The Torments they endur'd were small and poor To those which thou art destin'd to endure. Sharp were their Deaths, but short, and quickly past, Thine shall for Hours, and Days, and Ages last.
Then shall ten thousand Curses send thy Soul, Where Fiends in boyling Lakes of Sulphur roll, And Furies in Eternal Tortures howl. Dec. Talk not; but send me to the threatned Death, Life is not worth the waste of Roman Breath. Go, and prepare the Rack, the Sword, the Flame, With all the Cruelty Revenge can frame. Consult your bloodiest Ministers of Rage, And search the Records of the bloodiest Age. To make it crueller than Man can do, Consult exasperated Woman too. Such shall my Courage in my Suff'rings be, My Patience such, you shall astonish'd see How unconcern'd a Roman Soldier dares, Embrace his Fate whatever Form it wears. Is led off. Bo. Here let the Triumphs of our Isle begin, This happy Day makes me once more a Queen. Our Vengeance sure, and Victory compleat; What greater Blessings cou'd we beg from Fate? Now, on our Foes, just Heav'n begins to frown, Thy Wrongs, Camilla, bring their Vengeance down. For ever, shall the Day by them be curs'd When with rash Hands thy Chastity was forc'd. From us the Anger of the Gods is fled, Thou turn'st it all on their devoted Head. Now, let the Joys of of Britain know no bound, But all our Hills, and Shoars, and Seas resound, And Winds upon their Wings, waft the glad Tidings round. Io! Britannia, be the general Cry, Io! Britannia, eccho to the Sky. Exeunt. Manet Venutia sola. Ven. In what a maze of Fate, poor Mortals tread? Blind Wretches, by as blind a Fortune led. What have we suffer'd from malignant Powers? And how deplorable a State is ours? Some dawn of Comfort shines thro' all this Ill, To find my Dear Paulinus faithful still, Much from his Colleague's Guilt, my Sister bore; But had the Guilt been his; I'd suffer'd more. Exit. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE changes to the Roman Camp. Enter Paulinus solus. Paul. WIth what a Load of Vengeance am I curst! Yet Fortune seems not to have done her worst. Venutia's Safety shows some dawn of Joy, But still a dismal Cloud o'er-casts my Sky. Her Sister's Suff'rings cut off all Relief, Nor can she now in Honor ease my Grief. Damn'd Villain! — but the God's thy Crimes pursue, Thy Death must expiate them—if Death can do. The rolling Stone, or whirling Wheel wou'd be A Punishment too small, and light for thee. The much-wrong'd Britain's just Revenge prepare, What art thou here? exempted from thy Share? Then Heav'n is just by halves. To Caska entring. Cask. Heav'n takes its due; So let it, wou'd but you do Justice too. Think what vast Matters on your Arms depend, And give not Fate the leisure to descend, But succour, as you ought, your dying Friend. Paul. Death, and Damnation, be his sudden Doom, Fiends tear him; Furies drag him to his Tomb. Of all Mankind wou'd you have me redeem The Monster? me relieve a Wretch like him? Who, in usurping my much injur'd Name, With all the basest Treach'ry Hell cou'd frame, Ruin'd my Love, and sully'd all my Fame. Cask. Mark who destroys your Fame, when you deny To fight; and tamely let your Colleague die; When you stand here, and see him meet his Doom; How will you answer that, to ame, and Rome? Paul. Is it for you to ask? No Matter how, 'Tis Caesar only has the Right to know. Cask. Yet hear me; since your Honour cannot move, think, and think quickly; who destroys your Love.
For know, when Decius shall resign his Breath, That Hour you rashly yield him up to Death; Know that Cassibelan shall then be led The joyful Bridegroon to Venutia's Bed. Paul. Ha! What? and when? Cask. That Hour that Decius dies, Ruins all yours, and crowns the Prince's Joys. Paul. You rave; meer Riddles, Riddles. Cask. Trust your Fate; You'll find a sad Repentance come too late. Paul. Where is Camilla then? Cask. Why? dead; she play'd, The Roman, as became a ravish'd Maid. Her last Desires, forc'd the poor Prince to vow Love to her Sister, which he pays her now. The Queen, and Court, improve her dying Prayer, At once — the Funeral and the Nuptial Torch prepare, Lest Britain should be left without an Heir. Paul. Ha! sure it cannot be, it is not true; All must be false that ever comes from you. This may be falser than thy self. Cask. It may, Believe it not, nor go to fight, but stay, And with his Life, throw your own Love away. Death to a Roman is not such a Curse, But still the loss of Love is Millions worse. Paul. What shall I think? it may, or may not be; But if it is; Heav'ns! What becomes of me? Perhaps 'tis his Device, some Fetch from Hell, But who will venture where he loves so well? Cask. Nay, do not muse; resolve on something strait, You have not time to dally with your Fate. The Day wears fast, the rolling Hours ride Post, And Opportunity will soon be lost. Paul. Or true, or false, no Devil can design, Contrive, or lay a Plot to match with thine. Nothing till now, could jealous Thoughts suggest, Which your curst Engines kindle in my Breast, And rolling Wild-Fire-like destroy my Rest.
March once more to the Field, ye Pow'rs Divine! To the Soldiers. How hard and intricate a Task is mine? Compell'd at once by so perplex'd a Fate, To save the Maid I love, and Man I hate. Exit with Soldiers. Manet Caska solus. Cask. When Honour, Interest, Hell and Vengeance fail'd, A Woman (as I knew she would) prevail'd. It could have been by nought but Woman done. Woman, who first brought all these Mischiefs on. Now, let all Plagues on Love-sick Fools be thrown, If any Plague is greater than their own. None with their Follies would their Thoughts perplex, If all, like me, could understand the Sex. False is their Grief, dissembl'd is their Joy; This Minute kind, and the next Moment coy. They slight, when woo'd; yet ev'n, tho' slighted, wooe; Fly when we follow, when we fly, pursue. Loose are their Thoughts, yet all their Words reserv'd; By their own Pride, their own Desires are starv'd. Their Faces and their Son's were form'd to cheat; Their Air, and Mien, and Actions are Deceit. Cast Pride and Baseness, Treachery and Shame Up in one Word, and Woman is the Name. Exit Caska. Scene changes to the City. An Alarm. Enter Boadicea. Camilla with Soldiers. Bo. Our Armies move like Clouds beneath the Skies, At whose first Clash th'imprison'd Light'ning flies. Our Fields are cover'd with the Roman Pow'rs, And Stones from batt'ring Engines storm our Tow'rs, Abroad, the British Youth in Battle falls; At home, the thund'ring Rams o'erthrow the Walls. Sharp Javelins now come singing o'er the Plain, And mingling Troops the desp'rate Fight maintain. Fly, fly, my Soldiers, with a fresh Recruit, Where Britain faints beneath the fierce Dispute. To the Soldiers. Rush with Reserves to every stagg'ring Troop; Drive with new force the broken Squadrons up. Sustain this single Day their dreadful Pow'r, And Rome shall never give us Battle more.
Cam. Follow your God-like Leader to the Field, And throw your selves around him as a Shield. Let him not spur too fiercely thro' the War: Let not his Vengeance urge him on too far. Still where he strives to pierce, his Steps pursue, Watch all his Motions, keep him still in View, And fight for him as he has fought for you. With your own Lives his sacred Life redeem, Or you, and I, and all are lost in him Exeunt Soldiers. Bo. Once more, thus low, to you great Gods! I bow. Oh! see our Wars at their sad Upshot now. kneeling. See all things here in wild Confusion hurl'd: See Britain grappling for her little World. Once more, relenting Heav'n! look down in Smiles, And bless once more these late-lov'd happy Isles. Now guide our Arms, ye Gods! direct our Sword; This joyful Day let Britain be restor'd; And save the Nation where you're most ador'd. Exit. Cam. Thus low, low as the Ground that gave me Birth (And oh, that I cou'd sink beneath the Earth:) Kneeling. Thus low, I beg you, if the Fates design The Fall of Britain; still, ye Pow'rs Divine! Tho' you reject her Prayers, refuse not mine. I beg no Conquest in the Bloody Strife; No Crown, no Kingdom, but my Prince's Life. Save him, oh save him, 'midst those loud Alarms; Restore him living to these longing Arms: I'll force him with me to some peaceful Shore Where he shall hear the Sound of Wars no more. Exit. The Alarm continues. Scene changes to a Prison. Enter Decius as from it. Dec. Hark! 'tis the wish'd for Clash of Roman Swords, The Noise of War some Hopes of Life affords. I'm glad once more to grasp thee; and depend On thee; 'tis thou must be my chiefest Friend. To his Sword. I've knock'd my Fetters off, my Goaler slain, And am (methinks) all Roman once again. O! for some British Soldier now to slay, And in his Armour get unknown away.
Ha! here comes one; turn, and your life resign, You could not fall by nobler hands than mine. Enter Caska in British Armour. Kill'd as he enters. Cask. Oh! Decius, what, what has thy rashness done? O! Death and Hell! I find my Life is gone. Falls. What more cou'd my malignant Fortunes do, At once, with me, she sheds her Bane on you. Dec. O! curst, curst fatal Error, damn'd Decree Of spiteful Fates, to make you fall by me. Kneeling by him Curse on my haste in making sure a Foe; Curse on my blindness that believ'd you so. If Heaven this one Advantage will resign, And spare your Life, I'll gladly offer mine. Why was this most unhappy Armour born? Why was this damn'd, this fatal Habit worn? Speak, and some Comfort to your Decius give, Say, have you any hopes? and can you live? Cask. Tis done, this hurry of a Life is past, And Death's cold Hand creeps o'er my Eye-Lids fast. Thus in a moment my Designs are crost, And all my brave ambitious Projects lost. Living I still deny'd; but dying prove That more than Human Wisdom rules above. Dies. Dec. What can the Gods by this Mischance design? Or is thy Death the sad Presage of mine? Distractedly my Thoughts begin to roll, And something wondrous horrid, shocks my Soul. A guilty Conscience shoots its angry Sting; A guilty Conscience! is there such a thing? Yes Heaven! I feel my very Heart-strings bleed And wish undone that execrable Deed. From unhurt Skies our Crimes, like Darts rebound, And on the Wretch who shot them, turn the Wound. My Spirits faint, yet I will rouze them up, Death is the worst, Death cannot make me droop. Let them pursue Revenge with Fire and Blood, I'll perish as a Roman Soldier shou'd. Enter Cassibelan. Ha! art thou here? Of all Mankind I thought To shun thee. Cass. Thee of all Mankind I sought.
The Gods and I have took the nicest time, For the severest Vengeance of thy Crime. Thy Tragedy might have been play'd before, But now so near relief, will spite thee more; As shipwrack'd Men, who perish close at Shore. Dec. Secure within my self unmov'd I stand, And never yet cou'd fear a single Hand: And yet I wou'd this Fight with thee decline, Not for the safety of my Life, but thine. I wrong'd thee; to requite it, let thee live; That Satisfaction's all I have to give. For tho' my Death shou'd from our Strife ensue, The Romans wou'd revenge it soon on you. Cass. Come all the Roman Legions, and in spite Of their loud Threats, I'll kill thee in their sight. And when they find that by my hand you fell Fight. Dec. falls. They'll say you ought not to have dy'd so well. Dec. Curse on my feeble and enervate Arm, It cou'd not strike with strength enough to harm; A sudden numbness on its Sinews seiz'd, And let my Rival wound me where he pleas'd. And yet with pleasure I resign my Breath, Since that has crown'd my Life which caus'd my Death. All her dear sweets were mine, the vast delight Seems still to dance before my swimming sight. I rifled all th'inestimable store, The longest Life could have bestow'd no more, And dying I rejoyce to leave you poor Dies. Cass. Oh! that thou shouldst so brave and nobly fall, Hadst thou a thousand Lives I'd have them all, All for my vast revenge, alas! too small. Thy blood had justly been on Scaffolds spilt, Thy End, as base, and barb'rous as thy Guilt. Honour forbids me to pursue my blow, And not in vain insult a breathless Foe. Ile think no more — but hasten to the Fight, Find out my Love, and perish in her sight. Pour on her balmy Lips my parting Breath, Look her all o'er, and clasp her close in Death.
Sigh out my Soul upon her panting Breast, And with a Passion not to be exprest, Sink at her Feet into Eternal rest. Exit. Trumpets. Enter Paulinus, Fabian, Soldiers. Paul. Make haste, my Friend, and let the Slaughter cease, Thro' all the Streets proclaim a general Peace. Now tell them all our dismal Wars shall end, And Britain still be valu'd as a Friend. Exit Fabian. Ha! what has Destiny had here to do? What, Decius? and his Favourite Caska too? Has Justice reach'd you both? Heaven heard my Vow, And in your Deaths compleats my Conquest now. This is the Palace sure, 'tis time to move, To crown my Fortune, and secure my Love. The Queen with both her Daughters appear above; the Queen with a Bowl in one Hand, and a Dagger in the other. Ha! there she stands; Heaven! what a dismal Scene? What can this pomp of solemn Mourning mean? What means that Dagger? oh! my bleeding Soul, What deadly Poison fills that Golden Bowl? Hither, dread Queen, your mournful Aspect bend, And speak, oh! speak, what Fate and you intend. Bo. In me the Roman Heroine shall be seen; What Fate and I intend, becomes a Queen. Like Gods, I liv'd, while Gods would let me reign, Rob'd of my Realms, they leave me Life in vain. The Blood of Monarchs, circles in their Crown, Thrones buoy them up, and once dethron'd, they drown. Sinking I still may choose a nobler Doom, Than to be led a Royal Slave to Rome. When the most wretched can resolve to die, Most of their Misery's over; here's to try. Offers to drink. Paul. Hold, hold, dread Queen, and look with Pity down, Live, and I'll beg you to receive your Crown, And gladly make your Realms again, your own. Farther than ever, I'll extend your Sway, While Romans, shall like Native Slaves obey. Entire your vast Dominions I'll restore, Exalt your Crown, far higher than before, While Caesars Friendship makes your Greatness more.
Bo. Such Restauration is my single due, Can you restore my Daughter's Honour too? Fate in that Case can no Relief afford, That Loss, alas! can never be restor'd. Paul 'Tis done, look here, and see the Villain dead; Vengeance at last, reach'd his devoted Head. Pointing to Decius. His flowing Blood washes away her Stain, And she, who still was Pure, looks White again. Cam. Tell me what most my bleeding heart would move, To think of Life; can you restore my Love? If he is in the fatal Battle slain, All Offers else to make me live are vain. Paul. Thrice furiously he charg'd the Troops I led, Thrice I retir'd, to shun him, from their Head. I knew the Woes you felt, the Wrongs you bore, And would not in his Loss encrease the Score. But gave my Soldiers in our hottest Strife Strict Orders to preserve your Prince's Life. Shout from within. Cam. What mean those Shouts? Infection seize the Breath, And rot the Tongues that sound my Lover's Death. Drink Mother, and defie Barbarian Power, Rome has prevail'd, and Britain is no more; Drink, for the Business of the War is done, Cassibelan, who led our Armies on, Cassibelan, my lov'd Cassibelan, is gone. Paul. stay I conjure you, I command you stay, I charge you, throw not thus your Lives away. Bo. In vain, mistaken Wretch; you threat'ning stand, Command a Queen, with Death at her command? Roman, I shall not yet my Power resign, Know, that I Reign, while this, or this is mine. This makes a vanquish'd Queen, amidst her Woes, Poison and Dagger. Laugh at the Spite of Fate, and Power of Foes. Drinks Paul. Run Soldiers, run, I'll strive to save my own, Batter the Bulwarks with your Bodies down, He that preserves her, has the British Crown. Bo. Hold; Boadicea all your Power defies, The Moment that you stir, Venutia dies. Sure I am more than Empress on a Throne, I rule your Fate together with my own.
Now my Camilla pledge the Noble Draught, And drink as deep as ravish'd Virgins ought. Cam. Here's to those happy Seats, those blissful Cells, Where Virtue undisturb'd in Safety dwells; Where never Impious Ravisher has been, And never Barbarous Roman enter'd in. This Draught will make me swim in Bliss above, And send me where I soon shall meet my Love. Drinks. Bo. Now do you drink, and hast with us to Bliss, To Ven. Ha! do you start? take either this, or this, Dagger or Poison. Drink with a chearful Look, and noble Mind, For by my Wrongs you shall not stay behind. Paul. Curse maze of Fate, what shall Paulinus do? Make haste, forlorn, lost Wretch, and perish too. She dies alass! if I but dare to stir, If not, she dies; why, die thou then with her. Draws his Sword and claps it to his Breast. Love, in thy Death, let this thy Comfort be, I will not live one Moment after thee. Ven. That wou'd indeed dispel my Fear, and Pain, Were we but well assur'd to meet again, But sure we shall; a Hundred Spirits tell, In Whispers that we shall; till then farewel. Paul. Farewel. She is going to drink, and he to fall on his Sword as Cassibelan enters above, his Breast bloody. Cass. What's here? oh my prophetick Soul! What have you done my Love? give me the Bowl. Takes the Bowl from Venutia Poison must help, my Wounds are slight, and few, Not deep enough to send me hence with you. I ran on Swords, lay'd sev'ral Romans dead, Courted my Death, but Death tho' courted fled. But all their cruel Mercy was in vain, While in thy Death, oh! Soul of Life, I'm slai. Drinks. Bo. Now 'tis thy turn; nor can'st thou now repine, Goes to stab Ven. Our fleeting Souls must needs encourage thine. Cass. The Poison sure usurps your Reason's place, Wou'd you extinguish all the Royal Race? Were Britain of this Princely Fair bereft, Snatching the Dagger. What other Heiress have our Kingdoms left?
Roman, this Gift my Gratitude shall prove, To Paulinus. Since you wou'd give me Life, I'll give you Love. They all descend, and appear on the Stage. Paulinus addres∣ses himself first to Cass. then to Venutia. Paul. To you, most gen'rous Prince, my Thanks are due, And all the Rapture of my Soul to you. I have you now, Thanks to propitious Fate, My Joys are full, and Vict'ry is compleat. Thou Crown of all my Toils, I shou'd not boast The Conquest of the World, if thou we'rt lost. A mutual Love is in your Looks confest; Soft Longings are in short-breath'd Sighs exprest, And murm'ring Words speak Virgin-Passion best. Cam. My only Love, in the black Vale of Death And gloomy Shades which we must pass beneath; Where nought but Ghosts appear before our View, I shall draw Courage from the Sight of you. Cass. Thou Life in Death, if ought in Heav'n above Excels the Bliss and Extasie of Love, Let Gods possess it, undisturb'd and free, And leave me any where possess'd of thee. Cam. My Soul is sick, and all on Fire my Breath; My dizzy Eyes begin to swim in Death. From thy dear Sight I must for ever fly; But do not, do not leave me till I dy. Cass. Nor then, by Heav'n, if Poyson will not do, With Wounds on Wounds I will your Flight pursue, O'ertake you quick, and be the Guide to you. Bo. Death clasps me with a cold, but close Embrace And chill, but heavy Damps o'erspread my Face. My fleeting Soul 'twixt two Extremes is lost, Now scorch'd with Fire, and now benumm'd with Frost. Yet in the midst of all my mortal Pain, Tho' raging Madness strives to tear my Brain, Honour forbids a Monarch to complain. These petty Kingdoms let the Romans share, If Heav'n is just, I have an Empire there. Falls and dies. Cam. Poor Mother, art thou fall'n? Farewel, farewel: So in the Fight my faithless Hero fell. Raving.
For he, before he perish'd, grew unkind, And his poor Love no more possess'd his Mind. He call'd me false, and perjur'd, and forsworn, Call'd me a Name, oh Gods! that can't be born: Did you not hear him, Heav'n? Cass. Ye dreadful Pow'rs! How dismal and how hard a Fate is ours? Was there beyond her Death a greater Curse? Why speaks she those mad Words that made me worse? Look up, my dying Dear. Cam. Alas, my Love! My fleeting Soul had almost reach'd the Seat Which Fate has destin'd for its last Retreat: But thou hast call'd me from the dark Descent, And I made haste 'ere yet thy Voice was spent; While on thy Lips the fault'ring Accents hung, And the last Murmurs trembl'd on thy Tongue. Cass. Oh! be not so impatient to be gone; Hold but a little while, I'll lead thee on. My Soul, like Wrecks upon the swelling Main, Is now cast up, and now suck'd back again. Now from my Lips she takes a short Survey Of vast Eternity, repines to stay; But flutters with desire to fly away. Cam. Ha! what is this, I feel, some Hand unknown Ra∣ving again, Has grip'd me fast, and strives to push me down. O! save me, gracious Gods! a Rape, a Rape! Is there no Way? none left me to escape? O! let some Miracle of Aid be giv'n; Unhand me Decius — Villain — help me Heav'n! Now, now the lustful Monster has me fast; Heav'n, will you let his loath'd Embraces last? Gods! 'tis a doing now, 'tis done, 'tis past. I'll come when I can 'scape from him, I'll come, To tell you all the monstrous Crimes of Rome; And oh! to an amazing fearful Summ. Their barb'rous Rapes, Adult'ries, Murders mount I bring you, Righteous Gods! the dread Account. Dies, Cass. Where art thou now my Love? and why become Kneeling by her, and leaning over her. Pale as a Ghost, and as a Statue dumb? Oh!
TO Edward Coke, of Norfolk Esq. SIR, THe greatest, and indeed almost the only ad∣vantage, a Poet reaps from what He writes, is the opportunities he meets with of making himself known to the best, and greatest men of his Age. A Play is first made publick in the Theatre; and when it comes to the Press, if any one has spoken kindly, and favourable of it, in the Representation, the Poet chooses him for his Patron; He having before (ac∣cording to the Authors Construction) chosen him for his Poet. The distance I am at from the City, and ev'n from the Kingdom too, will keep me Ig∣norant for some time, what success this Play (which I Humbly offer to your Patronage) may meet with. If the Town is pleas'd with it, I shall be pleas'd with my self for pleasing them; if they con∣demn it, I shall be apt to conclude so many in the right, rather than my single self. You saw it in Ma∣nuscript, and I have this early and auspicious Ad∣vantage, that You approve of it. Boadicea pleas'd them, and I receiv'd a very great additional satis∣faction, when I understood how particularly it pleas'd You. I will not go to compare that Play, and this together, nor follow the custom, of reckon∣ing the last performance best; and showing the greatest fondness of the Youngest Brat. The Rhime was the only thing that recommended that; and
for ought I know, the only thing too, that can re∣commend this. I could wish for something distin∣guishing in it, because it is sacred to you, and I should desire to be known to you at advantage. If the pains in writing will endear it to you, it cost me much more than the former. It has some sort of design besides (such as it is) but I was never very guilty of Plotting. I can hardly keep the Cha∣racters in my Play, from being as honest, and sin∣cere, as I would be my self in a Dedication. A vi∣cious Character disturbs me while I draw it, and it grates me to delineate a Villain. 'Tis certain no Po∣et can excite any Passion in another, if he does not feel it first in himself. Who then will choose to de∣scribe discontent, envy, or revenge, when they may have such fair Fields as Honour and Vertue, to range in; all there is bright before them, and the Flight the Muse takes thence, is Heavenwards? Such Characters, artfully, and justly drawn, will excite the good and great to be Patrons; and such Patrons as You (Sir) will soon teach Poets to draw such Chara∣cters. You are endow'd with all the Blessings of Nature and Fortune, and you are as Liberal of the gifts of the latter to others, as she has been to You. So great is your Estate, it would be unwieldy to have it more; and such good use is made of it, that envy does not wish it less. It is not consum'd in vain, and superfluous Equipage; but laid out in maintaining the old, open English hospitality. De∣sert, in want, is supply'd; and honesty in distress, is succour'd and sustain'd; great without Titles,
and good above greatness; rich, rather to others than your self; and seeming only as your own Ste∣ward. Your inclinations, and endeavours are the ge∣neral good of mankind; and none ever went from you dissatisfyed; delighted in obliging others, and pleas'd to see them pleas'd with your Bounty. Wishing the welfare of all men, and speaking well of all men, is a sure way to meet with an universal return of good will and good wish∣es. He doubly enjoys his Fortune, who has it wish'd double, by all that know him. Among the Prayers of others accept of the prasi∣es of the Poet; humbly and heartily, tho' feebly offer'd. I now begin to experience, how much the Mind may be influenc'd by the Body. My Muse is confind, at present, to a weak and sickly te∣nement; and the Winter Season will go near to over-bear her, together with her houshold. There are Storms, and Tempests to beat her down, or Frosts to bind her up, and kill her; and she has no Friend on her side but Youth to bear her thro'; if that can sustain the attack, and hold out, till Spring comes to relieve me, one use I shall make of farther life, shall be to show how much, I am, SIR, Your most devoted, humble Servant CHARLES HOPKINS. Londonderry, Nov. 1st. 99.
PROLOGUE. LOng has our Author beat his addled Brains To purchase Fame, but can't find Ways, and Means. They talk of Fame, but 'tis the thought of many, They ne'er regarded that, nor writ for any, But wholly plodded how to turn the Penny. That is the Plot, which every Poet lays; Thither drives all their aim, and now a-days, Faith, 'tis the only Plot you'l find in Plays. Yet when poor Author is in greatest need, Seldom, ah! seldom does his Plot succeed. His way would be in this unlucky Age, Not to write for, but write against the Stage. The monyed men would then his Cause defend: City Security's a special Friend. They'd fit you out, for Ceylon, or Japan, Teach you to Trade, and set you up a man; Make you grow Rich;— that's if a Poet can. What City-like Estates, might one procure at Those Golden Ports, or of Bengale, or Surat? None of our Tribe, e'er made the Voyage yet, As none of theirs Trades with our House for wit. If they were Fools enough to make the barter, How well might they deserve to lose their Charter? But Poets with the love of Courts are Curst, Which leave them Poets, as they found them first: Thought wholly for the smallest trust unfit, And reckon'd useless, for their very Wit: Whose only Wages is their homely board, What Shares, the Back-Stair Pages can afford, Or, when Fate smiles, a dinner with a Lord. The mask of madness has been often try'd, Deep Projects of desiging heads to hide, Who, as time serv'd, still threw their mask aside. Why is there of designing madness mention? Poets have still run mad thro' no intention. 'Twixt Wake, and Sleep, they live supine in slumber, On all occasions, laid aside as Lumber; No Money left, — but Lines exceeding number.
EPILOGUE. MOst Poets spread abroad an idle rumour, They never found an Audience in good humour. Our Poet, having tasted of your favour, Swears it is false, and does his best endeavour To keep you all his Friends; — Amen— for ever. Tho' I have told him, with undaunted Spirit, It was your Goodness only, not his Merit; He Vows he knows not, (be the shame his own) Worse Poets; and a better natur'd Town; Some Criticks there may be, but those are few, Not such Fine-well-drest Gentlemen, as You: To the side Boxes. In finding fault lies all their dear delight, And yet they read as little as they write. If e'er they write, they let no Creature know it, But keep the Poem, and conceal the Poet, To the Pit, and side Boxes. With as much pains as you would take to show it. O! that some Envoy in behalf of Wit, Would make a Truce with the tumultuous Pit: But want of Treasure is our Stages curse, And to Equip him, you must make the Purse. A Peace with Criticks, is our Houses Pray'r; Our Daughters, and our Wives— Our maiden Actresses— if such there are, Implore it from those unbelievers there. Which if you should deny, we must no doubt, Or shut up Shop— Or shut our Journey-men, the Poets, out. How would it balk an Author's expectation, In these good times, to fail to please the Nation, Now that good Wine is come again in fashion? Beau's, our best Friends, we fear, will run to France, And leave us fidling here, while there they dance. Some now will say with a contracted brow, So mad an ending to a mournful show — Yet you have laught at Tragedies e're now; And faith I think, it were not much amiss, (With our good Author's leave) to laugh at this. Ev'n Nature is her self a constant jest, And the whole World, a Stage-Play at the best.
Dramatis Personae. ZOilus, Usurper of Sicily. Mr. Betterton. Maherbal, his General. Mr. Verbruggen. Archias, an Old Nobleman. Mr. Arnold. WOMEN. Semanthe, Wife to Zoilus. Mrs. Barry. Cyllene, her Eldest Daughter. Mrs. Moore. Locris, the Younger Daughter, brought up in Man's Cloaths and Educated as such. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Orythia, Daughter to the Deceas'd King. Mrs. Porter. Soldiers, Men, and Women, Attendants. SCENE Sicily.
Friendship Improv'd: OR, THE Female Warrier. ACT I. SCENE Syracuse. Enter Zoilus, Semanthe. Zo. THUS far the bounteous Gods have blest my Toyls, And crown'd my Labours with their constant Smiles. In rolling Tides my rising Fortunes flow, Bestowing all that Conquest can bestow. Rome fears our Arms, and lately felt our Pow'rs, Compell'd to fly from our Sicilian Shores. Their last Defeat secures me on the Throne, And makes this fair and fertile Isle my own. Sem. No more, my Lord, think of your Wars with Rome, Strive to secure your self from Foes at home. Your Subjects out of Fear, not Love, obey, Their down-cast Looks their Discontent betray, They wish a Change, and only wait a day. Too feeble to revolt, in Peace they dwell, Till gather'd Strength gives Courage to rebel. Zo. No, my Semanthe, Monarchy is gain'd With Pain and Toyl; but is with Ease maintain'd.
Our Empires are establish'd first by Force, Then quiet Government glides on of Course. War, when no more oppos'd by War, will cease, And sink, and soften, of it self, to Peace. Full twenty peaceful Years have crown'd our Isle, And Sicily has seen no Civil Broil. Kings, in the Name of King, their Safety bear, There's something in the Sound that Subjects fear. Sem. Could you expect Protection from a Name, The slain Orontes might have hop'd the same. All Sicily his gentle Sway approv'd, As Prince, they fear'd him, and as Parent, lov'd. Till you were made by curst Ambition blind, And Lust of Pow'r debauch'd your gen'rous Mind. Thrones and Dominions glitter'd in your View, Then fell the good old King— And what I grieve for most, he fell by you. Zo. Thrones and Dominions still in Prospect rise, The Neighb'ring Realms allure my dazzl'd Eyes, Nor will this one of Sicily suffice. My Fleets and Armies shall inlarge my Sway, O're-run the Continent, and plow the Sea. Sardinia, Cyprus, Corsica, and Creet, Shall lay their conquer'd Scepters at my Feet. And fast as they their Royal Crowns resign, I'll spare them from my Head to place on thine. Sem. Oh! Rather would you were some humble Swain, And I your homely Consort on the Plain. Where in a silent and serene Retreat, Our Herds might low, and Lambs around us bleat, And we lye safe from all the Storms of Fate. Forgive, my much lov'd Lord, my tender Fears, And oh! Despise not these Prophetick Tears. Ah! when you must your Life and Empire yield, Betray'd at Home, or fighting in the Field, On whom for Succour shall your Children call, And whither shall I fly; alas! your Fall In one sad Ruine will involve us all.
Zo. I still shall in my Darling Son survive, And seem in Warlike Locris still alive. His Arms your Lives and Fortunes will sustain, His Hands were made for Scepters— His Looks for Royalty, his Soul to reign. Sem. Oh! Never, never shall that Darling Son Possess the Realms his dreadful Father won. Poor Child! thy sad, untimely Death I fear, And now my woeful Soul foretells it near. Fate keeps it yet within her teeming Womb, Till fully ripe, it shoots with Vengeance home. His Doom, alas! is seal'd, 'tis past, 'tis gone, And you, ev'n you his Father urge it on. Remember, and you will not think I rave, The dreadful Answer which the Sybil gave, When you consulted the Cumaean Cave. Your Son, the Goddess cry'd— Unmarried, shall successful Fortune boast, But married, you, or he, or both, are lost. Zo. Can any Danger lurk around the Throne, Where Pow'r secur'd by Peace is all our own. If Heav'n will have his Life, we must resign, But still may save a Grandson of our Line. 'Tis now we must prevent the Spite of Fate, To make her harmless Malice come too late, He shall consummate with Orithia straight. At once with theirs shall Hymen's sacred Bands Joyn brave Maherball's and Cyllene's Hands. Our Subjects Acclamations ring aloud, And this Design has lull'd, and charm'd the Crowd. The sighing Virgin shall no longer stay, Nor shall he squander precious Time away, But be before-hand with his Fate to day. Sem. What Mischiefs would your fatal Rashness form? You, who should strive to lay it, raise the Storm. That Hour you destine for his Nuptial Joys; That Hour, that very Hour your Locris dyes. Locris, unhappy Locris, I deplore, And Zoilus his Race is now no more.
Zo. Your Madness cease, and my Commands obey, In spight of Fate they shall be joyn'd to day. Women by Dreams to idle Fears are driv'n, And then believe the Warning sent from Heav'n. Expect from thence undoubted Aids to find, As busie Gods had nothing else to mind: They made them only at their idle Hours, To grant their Wants would beggar all their Powers. Exit. Sem. Here will our dismal Tragedies begin, Which these unhappy Nuptials usher in; My pious Fraud must be at last reveal'd, For Locris now can lie no more conceal'd. Her Sex will be by her own self betray'd, And the deluded Bride embrace a Maid. Then, when my furious Lord shall come to know That she and I have dar'd to use him so. When he, defrauded of his Darling Son, Finds all his Hopes of Royal Offspring gone, And no Male Heir to settle on the Throne. He'll keep his solemn, execrable Oath, And wreak his Vengeance with the Death of both. Oh! Locris! born under unhappy Stars; Why hast thou scap'd the Fury of the Wars! Why thro' so many Dangers hast thou past, To come and perish in my Sight at last. Enter Locris. Lo. I met my Father follow'd by a Crowd, That sung ill-boding Songs of Triumph loud. With Joy he clasp'd me in the publick Way, And told me this must be my Nuptial Day: The Temple is prepar'd, the Bride is Drest In all the glorious Riches of the East. In vain she puts on all her useless Charms, There is no Bridegroom for her longing Arms. Fate makes her a Fantastick Fortune prove, And plagues a Virgin with a Virgins Love.
Sem. Oh, Son!— My Words will with my Wishes run, Oh! would to all the Gods you were a Son. Ah! Daughter, at thy very Birth betray'd, Destin'd to die, when thou art known a Maid. Thou yet hast been preserv'd, bred up to wield The Shining Sword, to lift the pondrous Shield, And act the fearless Hero in the Field. Heav'n has been kind, and help'd you in your part, And gave you, tho' a Maid, a Manly Heart: But how, alas! ye Gods, instruct me how Shall we continue our Impostor now? Tho' your deluded Sire should never know Your Sex; we cannot cheat Orythia so. From her strict Search the Fraud we cannot hide, Nor e're appease the disappointed Bride. Lo. Oft have I seen you tremble to relate The strange fantastick Malice of my Fate; Thro' what wild Maze I've been already led, And what yet wilder I have left to tread. My careful Sire the longing Bride prepares, And I his Daughter must beget him Heirs. What will ye do with me, ye Powers Divine! Say, is it not with Reason I repine, Since no Maid's Fate was e're perplex'd as mine. To shun my threatned Death conceal'd I lie; But always fearing Death, do more than die. Sem. Heaven! in these Realms let Desolation reign, Let Fire and Sword eternal War maintain, They cannot form a more distracting Scene. Now, treacherously thy Stars deceee thy Doom; A Wife thy Bane, the Bridal Bed thy Tomb. Furies will hold the Torches round your Head, And Fate officiate there in Hymen's stead. For Joys unknown you shall resign your Life; And she no Husband have, and you no Wife: The Bride her Disappointment will perplex; But when your Father comes to know your Sex, When he shall find his mighty Projects crost, And his fair Prospect in your Manhood lost,
Grief and Despight will work him to Despair, His barb'rous Hands will his own Bowels tear, No more a Father he, nor thou an Heir. Lo. Nor will our Subjects on our side engage, No pious Hand protect us from his Rage, With Joy they'll see him of his Hopes bereft, Glad that the Tyrant has no Offspring left. During his Life, they must thro' Force obey, But when at last Fate snatches that away, His House no longer shall possess the Sway. To the right Heir we must the Crown resign, For ever torn from Zoilus his Line. Sem. Oh! Curse on all Ambition, Curse on Thrones, And Curse on those rash Hands that grasp at Crowns. The Storms that now so loud around us blow, Had not been heard, had we continu'd low. Jove's Massy Bolts the Mountain's Top assail, Vast Hills are drown'd in Snow, and dash'd by Hail, The Swain enjoys a sweet and sunny Vale. Would my dread Lord had n'ere aspir'd to reign, Would the Retreat we left were ours again. Where Life's unsully'd Sweets were all our own, And we liv'd best, because we liv'd unknown. Lo. Distracted Tyranny is such a Curse, Nought but my destin'd Nuptials could be worse. Married, we live in greater Plagues and Pain, Clog'd with more Cares than Monarchs when they reign. Enjoyment sweetens some few Hours of Life, But Hours of Pleasure to an Age of Strife, They too are lost, where Maids are Man and Wife. Like Danaus his Sons I mount the Bed, Tho' justlier slain by the deluded Maid. Sem. Hark, how they shout, hark, how the Trumpets sound, While vaulted Fanes, and ecchoing Hills rebound Trumpets sound. Gods! How their Clamours make my Brain turn round. The King and Priests in long Procession go, Little, ah! little, wretched Prince, you know That way will lead you to Eternal Woe.
Hark, now again their ominous Voices rise, And now again are eccho'd from the Shies. Like Niobe, I'll go, and make my Moan, And standing on some barren Cliff alone, Grow dry with Grief, and stiffen into Stone. Manet Locris. Lo. My Spirits pant apace, my throbbing Breath Comes short, my Eye-lids seem to swim in Death. Fear, tho' a Woman, I could never know, And yet there's something makes me tremble now. In such sad Accents was my Story told, Her Eyes with such Prophetick Fury roll'd, Fate must this day some Tragedy design, And not to have it her's, I wish it mine. Ha! What is this I hear, some new Alarms. Drums and Trumpets. Whatever Fate decrees this Musick charms, For next to living is to dye in Arms. Enter Zoilus. Zo. Arm, Locris, arm, like a tempestuous Main, War in full Tides comes rolling on again. Their broad spread Sails the Roman Fleet displays, And their proud Eagles hover on our Seas. My false Sicilians with the Foe combine, All on a sudden in Rebellion joyn, And nothing now but Syracuse is mine. Dejected Hymen at the News withdrew, And murmur'd out in Sighs a sad Adieu. Mars, in his stead, comes formidably down, And aws our Island with his dreadful Frown, While his arm'd Legions compass all our Town. Lo. Here let us then, in this our last Retreat, Resist the Shock, and grapple with our Fate. True Courage in Distress is wont to soar, And we have been reduc'd as low before.
To me those well-known Sounds of War are Charms, More than Love-murmurs in a Maiden's Arms. My daring Soul, the dusty Fields Delight, Beyond the Dalliance of a Bridal Night. This our last Stake against all theirs we lay, Throw boldly; if we win the dreadful Day, Their Fortunes are for ever cast away. Zo. In the mean time shall faithful Archias fly, With all his Speed to Carthage for Supply. Not far from hence their Fleet at Anchor rides; 'Twill reach us here in some revolving Tides: Till then, my Son, go seek your Tyrian Friend, On him and you my present Hopes depend. Let Blood and Battle wear their ugliest Form, By all the Gods we'll face the gathering Storm. Enter Semanthe and Women. What! Art thou here? Thou dire Presage! Thou Wife! Bane of brave Thoughts, Plague every way of Life. Thou com'st to steal away this Youth's Renown, And with thy Tears to melt his Manhood down: Like other Fools, thou wou'dst thy Offspring save, Still wish him living, tho' he lives a Slave. Sorceress, he shall to War; Avaunt, begone; Come, follow me to Arms, to Arms, my Son. Exit. Sem. So Tyrant, may'st thou still mistake my Sence; I'll send him thither, not detain him thence: Tho' in the Battle he may meet his Fate; My Fears are easier than they were of late. There harmless Darts may sing around his Head, But had War stay'd, till he was forc'd to wed, He must have perish'd in the Bridal Bed. Now, by my dawning Hopes, no Servile Fear Dwells in my Soul, but all is calm and clear. Sound all the Trumpets there, beat all the Drums, Not only Locris, but Semanthe comes. I'll grasp a Sword, and to the Battle fly, With Locris conquer, or with Locris dye.
Follow her still, where Fame and Danger call, Share in her Triumph, or partake her Fall. Lo. My Fate has wrought me up, to let me go, With double Rage, and Vengeanee on the Foe. The vanquish'd Rebels shall be tam'd again, And Romans run before me thro' the Plain: In my vast Soul I feel Ambition rise, Within my Reach immortal Honour flies, And Greatness dawns about my ravish'd Eyes. Sem. Ten thousand Gods my darling Heroine Sheild, And all the Pow'rs of Heaven— Guard, and preserve thee in the Bloody Feild. Men ought not to condemn the marry'd Life, But leave that Task to the lost thing, a Wife. Our Husbands of themselves sufficient Curse, Load us with Children, that enslave us worse; Our Fears for them create our constant Pain, And hourly rack the restless Mother's Brain. And yet our Love encreases with our Care, We doat upon them for the Pains we Bear. Heav'en! if some suddain Vengeance you decree; Oh! see me here your Mark, show'r all on me. Kneeling. Spare my poor Locris, when you hurl it down, And drive it on my destin'd Head alone. Rises and Exit. Enter Maherball. Ma. War smoaks, my Friend, along the dusty Plain, And Sicily is still the Noble Scene. From Rome's Imperial Fleet whole Legions pour, While ratling Drums like high-wrought Oceans roar. Around our Shores their Ecchoing Trumpets sound, Their prancing Coursers toss their Foam around, And beat with restless Hoofs the burthen'd Ground. Bellona woes us now with all her Charms, And calls her favorite Locris forth to Arms. The Clash and Din of War your Soul delight, And you love Glory gain'd in open Fight, More than the secret Pleasures of the Night.
By Heav'n, I swear, when Hymen's sacred Tye Was broke abruptly off; a suddain Joy Sprung in my Soul, and yet I knew not why. Lo. My Thoughts no other End but Fame pursue, To fight, to conquer, or to dye with you. Young as I am, I love a glorious Field, More than the Bliss my charming Bride could yeild. Thou art the Center where my Wishes joyn, My Fame, my Friendship, and my Soul is thine. Your very Sight transports me, for I see My Champion and my Genius move in thee. Ma. I love you with a Fondness far above All that was ever known in Woman's love. My Friend —Oh! whither would my Transport tend? Can I say more than what I say? my Friend! Something there is beyond that very Name, Something that sets my Spirits in a Flame, I wish I were a Maid of Form divine, To make your Soul and Body ever mine. Rather I wish that you, dear Youth, could be That charming Maid to be belov'd by me. Friendship alone to wond'rous Heights may soar, The change of one of us would make it more. Lo. Those Metamorphoses, alas! are past, Could Wishes do, mine should not be the last. But from our Theme our Thoughts are wander'd far, We talk of Love, when we were bent for War. And yet your Words such tender Passion move, That I could ever talk with you of Love. Ma. Had not your Arms establish'd your Renown, Were not your vast Exploits and Valour known, By those sweet Looks, that charming Face betray'd, My sight would all my other Sence invade, And make me think you, what I wish, a Maid. Oft have I entertain'd that pleasing Thought, Till my Mistake your manly Actions taught, And spight of them destroy'd the hopes I sought.
Lo. Were I that Maid, already so intire My Love is grown, it never could aspire, To a more Sacred or Coelestial Fire. My Friendship has attain'd to that Excess, Fond as she is, my Sister loves you less. But hark, th' Embattel'd Foe prepar'd to fight, And see the Sun loth to behold the Sight, Sends out a faint and an imperfect Light. Both Armies March apace to stand, or fall; And thund'ring Shouts are the fierce Soldiers Call. Trumpets and Drums summon their Chiefs away, Who want Maherball to begin the Day. Ma. Then farewell Love, leave all those empty Joys, To longing Maids, and to deluded Boys. Believe me, Youth, who know what Women are, The Sex was never worth a Soldier's Care. Hard to be won, inconstant when obtain'd, Like new forc'd Towns, lost with more Ease than gain'd. The foolish Bridegroom makes the Nuptial Feast, But he that gives the Banquet shares the least. Safe in that State, to worst Extreams they fall, They wed but one, their Wishes are for all. Exeunt. ACT II. Scene, A City Besieg'd. Enter Zoilus, Messenger; Zoilus with a Letter in his hand. Zo. IS this the Account, and this the News you bring? Has faithless Archias too betray'd his King? Fate shews her barefac'd Malice here too much, For all are Traytors now; dye thou as such. Kills him. Bury thy Tidings with thee in thy Death, Thou should'st have made a better use of Breath. Against all Heaven and Earth, and Hell I strive, Rebellion only sicken'd to revive, The lawful Prince, ye Gods! is now alive.
Where has he slept these twenty Winters past? Thought dead by all, and yet he lives at last. Here, my false Slave would sooth me to resign, And in the Prince's Name, ye Powers Divine! Presumes to pardon in an other Line; He menaces, and counsels in the next, And here, and here 'tis more and more perplext. Rot his curst Hand, avenging Thunder fall On all their Heads— And tear, and rend them, like this Paper, all. Enter Semanthe. Sem. What sudden Rage is this, what new Despair? Why lyes, alas! that murther'd Soldier there? Look on his Fate, and learn to dread your own, For now long-suffering Heav'n begins to frown. A Thousand Meteors threaten from the Skies, On Earth a Thousand dreadful Phantoms rise. Nought of the whole Creation is at Peace, Earthquakes the Land, and Tempests toss the Seas. Broad Sheets of Flame from Aetna's Mouth are thrown, And Cataracts of Fire fall roaring down. Thro' smoaking Plains, they burn their rapid way, And mix their boyling Surges with the Sea. A Voice in open Air is heard to roar, Tyrants and Tyranny are now no more. Zo. Let it roar on, why tell you me of Storms, Of Flaming Mountains, and Aetherial Forms? Nor troubl'd Ocean, nor tempestuous Air, Nor burst of Thunder should a Monarch fear. Were Heav'n and Earth in wild Confusion hurl'd, Should the rash Gods unhinge the rolling World, Undaunted would I tread the tott'ring Ball, Crush'd, but unconquer'd, in the dreadful Fall. Sem. Why then was all that desp'rate Fury, why By your own Hands did this Sicilian dye? What makes your Blood afresh in Flushes rise, Why sparkles all that Vengeance in your Eyes?
Zo. He told me things, Semanthe, might have made Another Soul both anxious and afraid. He talk'd of Archias, to the Rebels fled, And young Araxes risen from the dead. This wrought my Rage, but wrought at once Disdain, In vain, young Prince, you come and arm in vain, While this is in my Hand, 'tis I that reign. Sem. What dismal Scenes of Fate and Death are here; How dreadful does that Hand, those Looks appear? That fatal Sword shall find a purple Flood, And Sicily shall be the Scene of Blood. O whither shall I fly to shun the Sight? Would I were wrapt in Everlasting Night. Would I were lock'd within my silent Tomb, Or thrown in Aetna's suffocating Womb, Unknowing of the Woes— That threaten from behind, and crowd to come. Zo. Fly where thou wilt, fly to Araxes— do, Act like a Wife, do thou betray me too. Fly from me with thy Train of servile Fears, Thy Conscience, thy Eternal Tongue and Tears. From my domestick Torment set me free, And send ev'n Death it self instead of thee. Sem. Thus then commanded from thy Sight I go, And leave thee to thy self, thy greatest Foe. Yet not to Rebels, nor to Rome I fly, But to those sacred Pow'rs which you defie, And at their Shrines I'll study how to dye. My Pray'rs shall hourly be to Heaven addrest, Heav'n, still our last try'd Friend, but still our best. For all my Crimes I have but once been curst, Then, then, thou Tyrant, when we marry'd first. Exit. Zo. From thence I date my Woes, of that repent, There, Mis'ries never lessen, but augment. In vain with life-long Trouble we contend, Where Women are concern'd, it cannot end. On them we lavish our unhappy Life, The Mistress plagues us first, and then the Wife. Exit.
Enter Locris alone. Lo. What an odd Fortune must I hourly prove, A Woman still prest with a Woman's Love; Narcissus like, the Love-sick Nymph betray'd, Pursues, and woes her own deceitful Shade; She Follows that in following of a Maid. She haunts me like a Ghost where-e'r I see, As I Maherball chace, she chaces me. She courts me for the Bliss I cannot grant, Seeks what I seek, and covets what I want. Her Disappointment on her Wedding-day Do's all th' impatient, longing Bride betray, Torn with Desire, and raging at Delay. Enter Orythia. Ory. Is this, is this, ye Gods! my promis'd Bliss, And am I drest in Nuptial Robes for this? Those Trumpets call you hence, my Warlike Dear, From these fond Arms, too weak to hold you here. To Wounds, to Battle, and to Death you flee, And for the Breath of Fame abandon me. Speak every Voice of War, strike ev'ry Drum, If I have any Charms, he shall not come. Thus while I clasp you in so close a Fold, You shall not let Bellona break my hold. Lo. Think not I go for want of Love away, But Honour calls me, and I must obey. Her rigid Laws now force me from your Arms, And summon me to War with fresh Alarms. New Glory in the dusty Field I'll meet, And lay new Trophies at your lovely Feet. At my return you shall new Triumphs see, New pompous Arches shall erected be, All dedicated to my Love and thee. Ory. But what if you should in the Battle fall, What then becomes of me, of Love and all?
The Clash of Arms, the Cries of Men begin; Now draws the Scene of Death — And on all hands rush desp'rate Actors in. I see the bloody Bus'ness from afar, I see you madly spur amidst the War. Now Death appears in all its hideous Forms, And lops off lofty Heads, and lifted Arms. Sharp Spears and shivering Launces fly around, Wounds wait on Blows, and Fate on every Wound, Men's Blood and Horse's Foam besmear the Ground. Here the tall Youth lye breathless on the Plain, There fights my Locris, and bestrides the slain. Yonder agast our routed Army flies, There, weltrig in his Blood, your Father lyes, And there o'rewhelm'd with Numbers, Locris dyes. Lo. Stop those tempestuous Sighs, those silver Tears, And banish from your Breast your groundless Fears. Heav'n has not been at this Expence and Cost, To save till now and let me now be lost! The same kind Genius all my Steps attends, Hv'n is the same, and the same Gods our Friends. An what will most your anxious Cares remove, T ame my Passion is, the same my Love. Ory. Faintly methinks that Passion you express, Ev'n when you ought to show it to Excess. Lovers, when parting, should confess their Pains, And to Despair and Anguish loose the Reins. Improve their Time, and all their Flames exert, And swell their Eyes with Tears, with Sighs their Heart. But unconcern'd you seem, and look unmov'd, You look, alas! as if you never lov'd. In your calm Cheeks no strugling Blushes rise, No Love, no Passion lightens at your Eyes. No mantling Blood runs flushing thro' your Face, No murm'ring Whispers warm your cold Embrace. Nor do you with a Lover's Awe approach, Nor heave, nor pant, nor tremble at my Touch. No wish'd for Signs of fierce Desire I see, You do not, no, you do not love like me.
Lo. What shall I say to make you think me true, By Heav'n, I never lov'd a Maid like you. You reign sole Mistress of my faithful Heart, No other Fair can claim the smallest Part. Go then, my Love, with this Assurance go; Leave me to meet, and overcome the Foe. Their Drums and Trumpets dare us to the Fight, And high-way'd Swords to bloody Fields invite. The furious King chafes for his loyt'ring Son, While Shouts of rang'd Battalions urge him on, All like grip'd Thunder strugling to be gone. Go, my Orythia, and no longer pine, But one short Hour, I shall again be thine. Go somewhere, whence you may my Actions view, And bless the Sword and Arm that strike for you. Ory. Save him, kind Heav'n! some God his Guardian be, Take care, dear Youth! in your own self, of me. Give me another, and another Sight Of that dear Face in which my Eyes delight, 'Ere thou art lost in Everlasting Night. Let me embrace thee thus, thus fold thee fast, Take this last Kiss, and now another last. With Fear and Hope I stand by turns possest, That tears and rends, this lulls and sooths my Breast, And flatters my tumultuous Soul to Rest. My various Thoughts a Thousand Phantoms frame, One while the conqu'ring Foes your Fall proclaim, Then shifting Fancy shews propitious Scenes, And I'o, Locris, ecchoes through the Plains, I'o, my Locris conquers, lives and reigns. Exit. Locris alone. Lo. Was ever Passion wrought to this Excess, And yet, ye conscious Gods! mine is not less. Her's will be cur'd as soon as I am known, But how? kind Heav'n! how shall I cure my own. I love a Man, from whom I hide my Fires, And with my Sex conceal my fond Desires.
A Man, a Stranger, whom no Kindred claim, Of Parentage obscure, tho' known to Fame. Yet in his Eyes such Sparks of greatness rowl, So charming is his Mien, so vast his Soul. Such Glories in his awful Aspect shine, He cannot come from an ignoble Line. He wants a Crown, but shall Maherball want, When that, in time, will be in me to grant? He best can Guard it with his conquering Sword, And he shall be mine, and my Empire's Lord. going. Enter Cyllene. Cyl. Turn, Brother, lost Cyllene begs you turn, For she will hold you, till you hear her mourn: You were the first occasion of my Pain, And you must help me to my Peace again. Why did you bring that Stranger to our Court? Why have the Gods ordain'd me for his Sport? He knows in what a raging Flame I burn, He knows my Love, but makes me no Return. Your Breath, your Praise first kindled up my Fire, Speak to him then, tell all my fierce Desire: So wild my Passion is, my Pain is such; Tell all that Poets feign, you cannot tell too much. Lo. What can the Gods at last by this design? Theirs is the Sport, the Plague, and Pain is mine. Methinks, in some enchanted Round we move, Lost, and bewilder'd in the Maze of Love. She begs me here to make her Passion known To the dear Youth from whom I hide my own. Your Story Sister, will become you best, To her. Love still should be, by those in Love, confest. Of all Mankind I shall not do you right, Nor represent your Longings at their height. I could not for my self Orythia wooe, But left that part for Zoilus to do; How can you think I should prevail for you? Cyl. Already have I told him all I bore,
And now if possible, I'll tell him more: I'll feize him as he mounts his foaming Horse, And with these Hands stop his impetuous Course. Spight of the Voice of War I will be heard, And e're he goes, he must my Voice regard; Nor shall he from my close Embrace be free, Nor move to Conquest, till he yields to me. Lo. Hark, I am summon'd by the embattled Foe, But take this friendly Council e're I go. Men slight the Love-sick Fool that tells her Pain, As much as Women slight the whining Swain: If you design to fix them, use them ill, Still would you have them follow, fly them still. No favour grant, comply with no request, Still put them off, if you would still be prest. What beauty Conquer'd, let your Pride maintain, To raise Desire, receive them with disdain, Bid them begone, to make them come again. Let not their sighs or Tears your pity move, Be sure you you let them not betray your Love: Your Charm is at an end, when that is found, And they for ever fly the Fairy Ground. Exit. Manet Cyllena. Cyl. Too well, alas! the Truth of this I see; But who can be so wise, and love like me! Already has my Tongue my Pain confest, And what I once have told— Can never more lye buried in my Breast. I've reach'd the middle Sea to shun a Wreck; 'Tis better vent'ring thro', than sayling back. I cannot hazard more; 'tis then decreed, Spight of my first Repulse, I will proceed. Heaven! now he comes; and at his awful Sight, My raging Flames still reach a greater Height; Apace my Breath now sallies, now returns, Apace my Spirits pant, my Bosom burns,
My Pride apace before my Passion flies, Wishes in Sighs, and Flames in Blushes rise, Love dawns, and darts its Rays around my dazzl'd Eyes. Enter Maherball, giving Orders to his Soldiers as he enters, which assoon as receiv'd, they retire. Ma. You to the Walls, the Ram's Assault repair, You, to your Tow'r, and take your station there. The Roman Army shews a noble Form, And marches boldly to begin the Storm. Stones, huge as Rocks, from batt'ring Engines fly, First seem to strike, then tumble from the Sky, And Men, as Thunder-struck, drop down and dye. Why, Madam, do you stand unguarded here, Where Destiny crouds on, and come so near. Why thus expos'd before your Palace-gate? Why, bare of Shelter will you brave your Fate? When Groans around of either Sex are heard, And Death's rude Hand gives Beauty no Regard. Cyll. Why should Maherball ask, who knows her Flame? Knows too the Reason why Cyllene came. I came the passing Pomp of War to view, To bid my Father, and my Friends adieu, I came to see, and take my Leave of you. Love drew me forth, which makes a Woman dare, As much as Heroes in their hottest War. No greater Harms have I to fear, who feel Worse Wounds than e're were giv'n— By poyson'd Arrows, or by pointed Steel. Think that I feel more than I can express, And save a Virgin's Shame— And save her Words, which make her Passion less. Ma. What shall I think; or why should you reveal Wounds which Maherball has not Power to heal? Love only is imaginary Pain— Reason and Thought will make you well again. From an ungrateful Man recall your Heart, And let your conscious Beauty take your Part.
Tho' in the Pride and Bloom of Nature born, A Thousand Heavenly Charms your Face adorn, And you look lovely, as the blushing Morn. No Looks can pierce my Breast, no Charms can move, You cannot conquer, for I cannot love. Cyll. Why are you then of that Coelestial Frame, Which sets all wondring Woman-kind on Flame. Why are your Looks and Actions so Divine, Why to your Charms must I my Soul resign, And you remain unmov'd, untouch'd by mine. Why from your Eyes should Beams of Beauty flow, To scorch my Breast, while yours is cold as Snow? Why should you not the Love you raise return, Why should you freeze, while you make others burn? Ma. Blame not me, fair Cyllene, but my Fate, That form'd me free from Passions, Love or Hate. No warm Desires ruffle my peaceful Blood, Which flows as smoothly as a Summer's Flood, Nor can I work a Tempest, if I wou'd. Nothing but War can move me with Delight, A dusty Field, and well disputed Fight Raises my ravish'd Spirits to their Height. Hark, when I hear such charming Notes as those, Trumpets. Shrill Trumpets, ratling Drums, and shouting Foes, My Heart leaps up with Joy, my Blood around Circles, with shrilling Pleasure at the Sound, And I bound lightly o're the unbeaten Ground. Cyll. Stay but a while, till yonder Squadrons move, I'll hold you fast with all the Force of Love. They march not yet, you shall, you shall be gone, E're the first Brunt of Battle calls you on. Nay, I'll go with you too, your Steps attend, Or in my stead at least my Wishes send. Vows after Vows for your Deliverance make, And bribe all Heaven for my Maherball's sake. These Eyes shall watch you still amdst the Foe, This Heart shall follow you where're you go, And when they strike at you — I'll stretch these Arms abroad to catch the Blow.
Ma. My Soul was form'd fierce, and averse to Love, And yet bear Witness, all you Pow'rs above, How much these soft Endearments melt and move. You've made my haughty, strugling Temper fall, Lower than ever any other shall. Here stop your Conquest, where it first began, For you have conquer'd all that Woman can. Would you could drive your Passion to an end, Or would you were a Man to make a Friend. Cyll. Would I were Locris, would I could pursue, The Chace of Glory to the Goal with you. Would that these Hands the Massy Spear could wield, Would that these Legs could bear me to the Field. Would I could dart the Javelin from afar, And spur my thund'ring Courser thro' the War. Oh! would I were some wond'rous Man to do What'ere Man did, or more than Man for you. Your Harms and Hazards in your stead I'de meet, Dye with your Wounds contented at your Feet. Ma. Then should we never part, but side by side, Thro' broken Ranks in batter'd Armour ride. Urge on our foaming Horses o're the slain, And pant with noble Toyl along the Plain. Our chief Concern should for each other be, I guarding you, and you defending me. Shielding from either's Head the falling Blow, So should we live,—Locris and I live so. But since the Gods have giv'n you other Charms, Not meant for rugged War, or rough Alarms, But melting Love in some young Monarch's Arms. No longer at indulgent Heav'n repine, Nor strive against the Bliss your Stars design, Which destine you for worthier Arms than mine. Cyll. Our Sex should never be the first to wooe, The Case is diff'rent here 'twixt me and you. Has not my Father promis'd you my Bed? And ought not I to love the Man I wed? Ma. To me the Gods that Priv'ledge have deny'd, Nor dare I, till they bid, receive a Bride.
Suspect not this a slight of proffer'd Love, But secret Pleasure of the Powr's above. Cyll. In vain is all those trifling Pow'rs Decree, If I must ever be depriv'd of thee. Down then the strugling Woman in my Breast, I'll forfeit Modesty to purchase Rest. My Passions drive me like the raging Wind, And Love and Pride raise Tempests in my Mind. Honour, Discretion, Reason, Sense unite, Disdain, and kindling Shame, and burning Spight Mix all at once in the tumultuous Fight. All lab'ring to prevail, oppress my Life, And undecided leave the doubtful Strife. Swoons. Ma. Rise, wretched Princess! while I yet have Breath, To bid you rise; for I shall blush to Death. Rise, I conjure you, e're I'm forc'd to part, Ha! By the Gods, she's colder than my Heart. Who waits, Orythia, Julia, here, take Care Of this too passionate, unhappy Fair. Enter Julia. See, she revives, I dare not longer stay, But for our mutual Ease must haste away. And now, the Trumpets sound their last Allarms, Drums, And now, the ready Soldier starts to Arms. Trumpets. Hark, how the Gates on brazen Hinges jar, While eager Troops bolt forward from afar, O'rerun the Plain, and plunge amidst the War. Exit. Cyllene recovering and rising. What? Is he fled, but whither shall I flee? Oh! 'tis no Matter what becomes of me. Was I so mean to condescend to sue? And could a Woman, could a Princess wooe? What Passion mixt with what Despight I feel? Was I so slavish, tell me, did I kneel? O it was time to swoon, to burn, to bleed, To grow distracted after such a Deed. 'Twixt Love and Shame no Peace will e're be had, Till Life is worn away,— Or till my rolling Brain at last runs mad.
ACT III. Scene, The City: An Alarm. Enter Soldiers driving in Archias, Maherball following. Ma. OFF, ye vile Slaves, from this ignoble strife, Dare such as you attempt a Gen'ral's Life. Sold. Ex. Yield Archias; 'tis in vain to fight or fly, Yield to your Friend who would not see you dye. What hast thou, good old Souldier, blindly done? Why forc'd the Fate, which now thou canst not shun? How has thy Loyalty been thus misled, Why hast thou pull'd this Ruine on thy head? Arch. Rather, what hast thou done, and why, why draws The brave Maherball in so bad a Cause? I taught thy Infant-fingers first to fight, But never to maintain a Tyrant's Right. No other Father but my self you know, And will you fight against that Father now? On your own Head a double Guilt you bring, Warring against a Father and a King. Ma. 'Tis true, my other Parents are unknown, You have a Parent been; but not my own. The King I serve first rais'd me up to Power, I owe you much, but owe my Soveraign more. Nor would I for his Crown his Cause decline, But Zoilus shall reign, while this is mine. Sword. Arch. Rash Youth still hurry headlong on their Fate, Still go too far, and still repent too late. You tread as on some Wave-beat Mountain's Neck, Ready to fall, and I would save your Wreck. But vain Young Men still laugh, when old advise, Think us the Fools, themselves alone the wise. Ma. Accuse me not of that; your Words, you know, Have been as Oracles to me till now: No more for my far distant Dangers moan, Mind not my Safety, but consult your own.
Arch. Would that were all; blest should this old Man be, Were there not greater Ills in store for thee. You do not know your self, these Hands did rear, Your Childhood, brought you up to what you are. Due Filial Rev'rence to my Age you bore, You call'd me Father, for you knew no more. Would I had never known— Ma. Nay, speak — Go on, Speak to me as a Father, call me Son. Unload you self of half your anxious Grief, And by dividing Woes, receive Relief. Arch. My Care at first preserv'd your Infant Breath, And since diverted oft your threaten'd Death. Thou hast not sure forgot what Charge I gave, And what Precautions I prescrib'd to save Your much lov'd Life from the relentless Grave. Ma. I know you've often warn'd me not to Wed, But shun, like Destiny, the nuptial Bed; Bid me beware the Syren Woman's Charms, But cheifly fly the fair Cyllene's Arms. Arch. Fly from her Father too, there shun your Doom, Shun him, and shun a thousand Ills to come. That way the Malice of your Stars defeat, The Secret is not ripe for telling yet. O I could mention things would make you start; Parch up your vital Blood, and tear your Heart. But 'tis not yet a time for me to dare To trust your Youth to its own self so far. Why should I mention Ills I cannot cure, And your Humanity would not endure? Ma. No, I will have them from the lowest Hell, For I dare hear what ev'n the Fiends dare tell. Not the wild Rage of a rebellious Town, Not a wrong'd Tyrant's unrelenting Frown; Not Hills of Sand blown 'ore the Lybian Plain, Nor Tempests tossing the Sicilian Main, Not tott'ring Earth from its Foundations driv'n, Nor headlong fall of the fix'd Stars of Heav'n,
Not Balls of Thunder, flaming as they roll, Nor Lightning flashing fast from Poke to Pole Can shock a well resolv'd, Heroick Soul. Arch. The pointed Hour was not arriv'd before, And now 'tis past, and can be found no more. The Tyrant comes with an impetuous pace, Rage in his Motion, Vengeance in his Face: If to prolong my Life my Wish incline, 'Tis but to tell thee how to lengthen thine. Ma. I'll stand 'twixt Thee and Death, my Power is great; And I'll employ it to prolong thy date: Thus be my Natural Affection shown, Be thou my Father till I know my own. Drums, Trumpets; Enter Zoilus victorious, Locris, Soldiers. Zo. Fortune and Fate are mine, my Arms are crown'd Where er'e my Streamers wave, or Trumpets sound: No more rebellious Troops their Standards rear, No more the Roman Eagles tow'r in Air: Let to the Gods our publick Thanks be giv'n, And Incense smoak thro' all the Round of Heav'n. By Heav'n; my Rebels now shall feel my Rage, But cheifly this, had he old Nestor's Age. Speak, Venerable Traytor—tell me—say, Where has Araxes been this dreadful day? I made his Name thro' every Squadron ring, I challeng'd him to meet and fight a King. Speak! Did he perish in the first Alarms? Or does he live, and durst not meet my Arms? Arch. Long may he live; and all his Foes survive; I left him last unwounded, and alive. Not but he fought, thro' the whole Battle ran, Mov'd like a God, performing more than Man. Your bravest Men of War declin'd the Strife, And no Sicilian durst attempt his Life. Zo. Dar'st thou speak this, old Detard— Arch. King, I dare— I'm now so old Life was not worth my care,
Whether I perish'd in the fierce Dispute, Fell by your rage, or dropt like ripen'd fruit. Zo. Yet I'll be calm, for I have power at last, To punish, after all my Questions past: Where is your Prince? all that you know reveal, Tell your whole Plot, not the least part conceal; The Secret of your sudden Flight unfold, 'Tis a King asks; a King that will be told. Arch. Let me be dumb for ever; let the Tomb Gape wide, swallow me quick, and keep me dumb. Lest Whips, Racks, Dungeons, Tortures should prevail, And broke with Torments feeble Nature fail. Zo. Away with him to Racks, and let him feel The burning Pinchers and the bearded Steel. While in a lingring Agony he lyes, Long wishing for his Death before he dyes. Ma. Pronounce not, Royal Sir, so rash a Doom, There's no recalling Secrets from the Tomb. His would be buried with him, if he fell, And you would put him past the Pow'r to tell. You know him obstinate, perverse, and old, Mild ways must win him, leave him me to mould. When Kings of Rebels, and Rebellions hear, Showing their Fury, they betray their Fear. For your own Safety then, defer his Fate, 'Tis rumour'd he can save, or sink the State; Wise Princes will prolong a Traytor's Breath, For their own Use, and then pronounce his Death. Zo. Then be it as you will, my faithful Friend, My Crown your Arms, and your Advice defend. But bear him to the Dungeon, there secure Arch. is led off. His Legs, Hands, Arms, fast fetter'd to the Floor. How shall I recompense what thou hast done, This day wears fast, and the Sun's Course is run, Next day shall see you equal with my Son. When Locris, and Orythia's Hands shall joyn, I'll give my lov'd Cyllene's into thine.
Let victory be now the gen'ral Cry, Beat Drums, sound Trumpets, let your Banners fly, And with expanded Streamers sweep the Sky. Sound while your Emp'rour is triumphant led, Sound while his Son ascends the Genial Bed. Ex. cum Sold. Manet Maherball, Locris. Ma. Revive, ye dying sounds of distant War, Roll with recover'd fury from afar. Strike louder than before the thund'ring Drum, More Romans, more Sicilian Rebels come. In Fields the Godlike Heroe gains his Fame, While neighb'ring Nations tremble at his Name. No Feild is now for any Martial Deed, But drowsy Peace, and droning Wives succeed. Lo. What can the Fates design, my noble Friend, And where will all these threatning Mischeifs end? My desp'rate Father knows when e'er I Wed, Unerring Oracles have doom'd me Dead. Yet his Commands are for my Nuptials given, In spight of Oracles, In spight of every Ordinance of Heaven. Ma. The same was told me by my Father's Ghost, That when I marry'd, I was surely lost. Thrice his shrill Voice denounc'd my doom aloud, And thrice he call'd me Son, and thrice I bow'd. Tho' void of Fear, to Wars, and Dangers bred, Yet such a Message from the mighty Dead Deters me from the Fair Cyllene's Bed. Lo. Saw you the Shape the Ghost assum'd before; What aspect, and what form, or port he bore? Mark'd you the Features— Ma. That, alas! I can Give no account of; Pale he look'd, and Wan, The Shade retaining little of the Man. Lo. None but Cyllene? did the rev'rend Shade Name none besides, except no other Maid?
Ma. None else— Lo. 'Twas strange. Ma. And strangely has it wrought, And still revolves within my labouring Thought; I'll to the King, and beg him to suspend Our threatned Nuptials, till the War shall end. Ev'n that may gain us time, and we may find Some way unthought of yet to change his Mind. If granted not, I'll leave him to his Crown, And fly to foreign Camps to win Renown. He tyrannizes most o're human Life, Who would, against our Will, impose a Wife. Exit. Manet Locris. Lo. Thou shal't not noble Youth, go hence alone, I'll share thy Exile, till thou shar'st my Throne. I'll follow thee, thou Charmer of my Soul, Where ever Tempests beat, or Billows roll. Thro' foaming Seas, and scorching Sands I'll flee, And leave my Parents, and my Crown for thee. Enter Semanthe. Sem. And art thou found again, but do I boast Of finding thee, who must so soon be lost? Fate, like the Sword, hangs threat'ning o're our Head, Held only by a single, slender Thread, Which, when that breaks, will fall, and strike us dead. The furious King with his drawn Sword I see, Now he kills Locris, now he murthers me. Now down the Shore he drags us side by side, And throws our mangled Bodies to the Tide. Lo. Would I had never been, to cause your pain, But yet be calm, take courage once again. The Gods that have by their almighty Aid, Amidst fierce Wars preserv'd a feeble Maid, Will not permit me now to be betray'd.
Sem. Why was Bellona's work so quickly done? Why are the Trumpets Clangors hush'd so soon? Rush to new Wars, new shouting Squadrons Head, Or fight— or fly— Do any thing to shun the Nuptial Bed. How gladly could I here my Life resign? But oh! Your Miseries would not end with mine. Gods! 'Tis too much to bear; Slaves bound in Chains, Broke upon Wheels, and rack'd with mortal Pains, Feel not my Woes, but with more ease expire, Let me go mad, or give me back my Peace. O cruel Husband! O unnatural Sire! O wretched Child! O most unhappy Race! O miserable me! Falls. Lo. Rise, and I'll fall, I'll perish for us both, I'll bear it all. Fate cannot such a just Request deny, For you who gave me Life I ought to dye. Sem. Thou: thou hast been midst desp'rate Dangers taught, From Infancy, to value Death at naught. But I, my Child, in these declining years, Bend with my feeble Age, and feebler Fears. Lo. Then let my Youth your feeble Age sustain, Trust to my strength, you shall not trust in vain. Around my Trunk, like fearful Ivy twine; Yours be the Safety, as the Duty's mine. The Gods will then prevent the threatned Stroke; Their Thunder dares not rend their Sacred Oak, Sem. There are no pitying Gods; or, if there are, Nor you, nor I have ever been their Care. I'll act a Bacchanal, and scour the Plain, Feign madness— that, alas! I need not feign. O're Hills and Dales with desp'rate Fury fly, Make distant Woods restore my frantick Cry, Meet from wild Beasts a less unnatural Doom, Or in the Forest dig our quiet Tomb. Lo. So frantickly, alas! you look, and speak, I feel my stubborn Heart begin to break: Custom has given me Courage, which secures
My Soul from Fears, yet still I fear for yours. Sem. Then I'll be silent, thou no more shall't know, Alas! I've let thee know too much of Woe. But henceforth to my self my griefs shall be, Whate'er I feel, I'll hide it all from thee. Lo. Rather speak on, speak on, and let us share Suffrings alike— am I too weak to bear? Silence, alas! would be too sure a Sign Of desp'rate Grief; one part at least be mine. Yet do not, do not give it such a Scope, Trust on the Gods; there still is room for hope. Sem. Who talks of hope, what flatt'ring Tongue presumes To bid me hope? Can that be found in Tombs? Let Hope from this unhappy Climate fly, For who can hope, that sees my Locris dye? No more the voice of Comfort let me hear, Speak not— Or if you speak, speak nothing but Despair. Look yonder, where the Winds and Waves engage, Hark, how they roar, behold them how they rage! Survey this troubled Earth, that thundring Sky, What cause have they to storm, what not have I? Stand off, and give me leisure to complain, And think—O no,—no, never think again: Stand off, and give me way, 'tis mine to rave, Driv'n by each Wind, and dash'd by every Wave; What art can succour us, what pow'r can save? Exit, supported by Locris. Enter Cyllene. Cyl. I heard Despair pronounc'd, and fain would see That wretched Creature who dspairs like me. Whoe'er thou art, worse Ills thou can'st not prove, For my Despair is the Despair of Love. O Fool, abandon'd Fool! to stoop so low, So to pursue the Man who slights you so. Sure it is thus by some Divine Decree,
Speak Heaven—why ask I you who mind not me, I'll answer to my self— Fate's hand is in it, or it could not be. Enter Maherball Ma. Where's Locris? ha— aside. Cyl. Now hold my beating Heart: What makes thee blush, what caus'd that guilty Start? Am I so monstrous? can my Gorgon sight Put so renown'd a Champion in a Fright? Since our near Nuptials are the Stars Design, Thou should'st have nam'd no other Name than mine. Ma. What am I doom'd to bear? Cyl. What have you born? 'Tis I, fond fool bear all; your Salvage Scorn: Or worse then Scorn; Indifference! cruel Fate! Let him but shew me either Love or Hate. Is that so hard to grant? Ma. For Heavens sake, cease, And give your self, and give Maherball Peace. You wrong me, and in your impetuous Rage Blame me for Pains, which I must ne'er asswage. Cyl. You wrong me more, you wrong my Father's Crown, Who nobly rais'd thee from a Wretch unknown. Brave, gen'rous Proofs of Gratitude you bring, But still 'tis thus with a too gracious King: Should he now know how you disdain my Bed, Instead of giving me, he'd take your Head. Ma. The King thinks better since. Cyl. 'Tis thou hast taught; 'Tis thou, ingrateful, hast inspir'd the Thought: Brave as thou art, thou may'st be yet afraid Of the Revenge of a rejected Maid. Fly to some dismal Cave, or dreadful Den; Herd with your Fellow-Brutes, and not with Men. Go, stupid Wretch! whom Beauty cannot move, Thou art not bless'd with Soul enough to love.
Ma. Humbly I take my leave. Cyl. Hold yet, and stay; O Heav'n! What have I done? What can I say? Hell! how he catch'd the word to haste away! I call'd thee back but to pronounce thy Fate, To show my Rage can like my Wrongs be great. When Love is fled, Revenge supplies his room; Dread then a certain and a sudden Doom. Know, from this time, ingrateful Wretch! I tear Thy Image from my Heart— Or if that will not be, I'll stab thee there. Ex. severally. ACT IV. Enter Locris, follow'd by Orythia. Ory. DO I again my Love in Safety see? Welcome from War, and welcome home to me. Now beats my Heart no longer: Did I say No longer? No, till the next dreadful Day. For tho' Defiance is at distance breath'd, Yet still the bloody Sword remains unsheath'd. Lo. Therefore, while yet you hostile Legions move, It is not time to talk, or think of Love. Prevailing Foes may our Delights destroy, And sunder Lovers in the midst of Joy. When Victory is made compleat and sure, Then Love be crown'd when Conquest is secure. Ory. O make not such a faint and weak Excuse, A flat Denial were a less Abuse: I know my Failing is I want a Crown, Which was my Father's once, tho' now your own. His Loving Subjects uncompell'd obey'd; In Quiet he the glittering Scepter sway'd.
How little should all human Goods be priz'd, He's dead, and I, unhappier I, despiz'd. Lo. Least you should think me guilty of Disdain, Know, that I too was never born to Reign. You cannot yet the Gods Designs discern, Which only I have been allow'd to learn. Ory. You talk in Clouds, speak Locris, ah! speak plain, What do the Gods, or what do's Locris mean? You think that I for base Ambition wooe, But my Ambition centers all in you. My Father's death for you I can forgive, And for you only I desire to live. Some recompense is to my Sufferings due, Who suffers for you, and forgives you too. Lo. I merit no Maid's Love to this excess, Nor can repay you, were your Passion less. I mourn like you, your good old Father's fate, Would mine had by some other means been great. I have no Love to give; but could resign The Crown with ease, and once more make it thine. Ory. Look down, Orontes, from thy Native Sky, And see thy lost, despairing Daughter dye. Yes, Locris, yes, to death, to death I go, Yet dying, bless that hand which gave the blow. Daggers and Wounds before my Eyes I see, Fire, Poison, Sword— But still I will divert them all from thee. O Brother! when Sicilian Squadrons yield, Spare Locris, spare him in the bloody field. O Father! plead with all the Powers above, Not to revenge thee on the Man I Love. Exit. Locris alone. Lo. Unhappy Maid, thy Fortune I deplore, Tho' mine ought justly to be pitty'd more. Your Woes will end, nor can you long lament, But I must dread a sad, and dire Event.
Yet shall this Thought instruct me how to bear, Fearing, is worse; than Suffering, what we fear. Enter Maherbal. Ma. Your Father is resolv'd, I met him late, With Looks that threatn'd nothing less than Fate. At my Approach his Rage began to rise, And Vengeance lighten'd from his glaring Eyes. As I past by, I bow'd, no Word he said, But frown'd, as if he could have look'd me dead. When I spoke to him first, his fierce Reply Was, that we might not Wed, but then must dye. Lo. Dye I'm resolv'd; why, it were death to Wed; Alike with Death I Love Orythia's Bed. Let him be both a King and Father still, No King, no God can force their Creature's Will. From our Creation that is left us free, And I will use it, as it ought to be. Ma. More than what yet is said, he menac'd too, Ev'n tho' his only Son, he menac'd you. Rage choak'd his words at last, and then a Gloom Silently warn'd me to depart the Room. Your Sister just retir'd, as I came in, Thence Springs his Passion, there our woes begin. Orythia's with him now, but all in Tears, And not with such a Look as Vengeance wears. His Eyes pursu'd me as to you I came, And mark'd my Steps that he might take the same. Enter Zoilus leading in Orythia weeping. To what a glorious purpose have I Reign'd, To see my Kindred, and my Blood disdain'd? You shall, you shall my just Resentments know; Yes, Son; yes, Traytor; not my General now. Ma. How! Traytor? Zo. Dare you then the Name deny, When a King speaks, dare you, his Slave, reply?
Go poor Unknown, abandon'd, and forlorn, Go, if thou canst, where thou at first wer't Born. Thy wretched life, out of revenge I grant, And banish thee to live in scorn, and want. Ma. Cease threatning him, that is not to be brav'd, Born with a Soul which scorns to be enslav'd. I was not born thy Subject— Lo. O be gone— Pull not inevitable ruine on. I'll follow you— aside. Ma. No let them fly, who fear The frown of ought on Earth; I'll tarry here. Is this my recompence for all I've done, For all thy Glory in my Battles won? I gave no Crown, created thee no Prince, But still this Sword sustain'd your Empire since. By my past Services too great I grow, And therefore Dungeons must reward them now. Zo. I wou'd have made you greater, you refud, A King's Allyance, and his Love abus'd. Nay, answer not, that aggravates th' offence, Hence from my sight, or I shall spurn you hnce. Ma. Speak not, and look not, and advace not so, Make not the smallest offer of a blow. Zo. Then from this Hand and Sword yur fate receive A Death too glorious for so vile a Slav. Lo. Spare, spare my Father. Ma. disarms him without drawing. Ory. Spare the King. Ma. I know What I should do; where's Pow, where's Empire now? All in this Hand— Why mout I not the Throne? What hinders me from maki all my own? But thus this Traytor gives ou back your Sword, And still confesses you his overaign Lord. Zo. This Artifice shan serve; my Guards— who wait? Guards surround and seize him. Go, bear this Rebel Taytor to his Fate. Loaden with Chains in Dungeons let him lye, Till I contrive, and doom him how to dye.
Ma. Now is the Lyon taken in the Toyl, And yet the timerous Hunters dare not smile. But with a Dread their captive Foe survey, And tho' secure, stand trembling o're their Prey. Zo. Go then, and bind the Lyon in the Den, And see if he can make us tremble then. Loc. O Sacred Sir, O Father! Zo. Ha! Have done, Plead for thy self, not him, rebllious Son. Go, see my Will perform'd— Ma. is led off. Ex. Zo. Ory. Manet Locris. Oh! then adeiu To all that's great on Earth, dear Youth in you. The lovely Cause for ever must remove, But I for ever feel the Rage of Love. Yet if his Death is not the fixt Decree Of all the Faes, still some Relief may be, Some means fond out to save and rescue thee. Enter Cyllene. Cyll. Where have hey sent him, whither is he hurl'd? Driv'n to the Dungeo driv'n from the World. Tell, Brother, tell me, hither is he led; O speak, in Chains, in Bishment, or Dead? Lo. Kind Heav'n! she coes to my own Heart's content, aside. Whate're he suffers, thou, nst thou relent? Dost thou bemoan him, thou whose fatal Breath Denounc'd his Doom, and senenc'd him to Death. Cyll. Death, didst thou say? hs Death? if he must fall, Finall Destruction seize on us and a. The mad Effects of Women's Passion ee, How they can Love and Hate at once n me. Lo. If you would save him, stay to ourn no more, Mankind may perish in a Day, an Hour. Our Fathers Signet lyes in your Comman He Signs his Warrants with Cyllene's Hand.
Cyl. Here, take the Signet then, and set him free; Flee as a Brother, as a Lover flee. To your own Conduct I the rest resign, Tell him the Act was either—yours,— or mine. Exit. Lo. Thy blindness in thy Love my hopes secures, I'll flee, but not to make the Glory yours. If such a little Fraud should seem unjust, To gain their Love, who would not break their Trust? Exit. Scene Changes to a Dungeon; Maherball, Archias in Chains. Arch. With what a sad Confusion in my Face Do I behold thee in this Patal Place? You were the only one I wish'd to see, But not to see you thus, thus chain'd like me. At the first Glimpse, the first surprizing View, I hop'd it was Delusion all, not you. Ma. All is Delusion in this Mortal Life, Ev'n our own Sense is with it self at Strife. Toss'd here, and there, by the Decrees of Heav'n, Our selves not knowing why, or whither driv'n. There's this advantage still, I now may know My Parents; what will that avail me now? Arch. Only heap Woes on Woes, bring no Releif, But fresh Additions to your former Grief. Did I but see you circled with a Crown, Or at an Army's Head to seize your own. Then it were time to tell, till then to keep The Secret in, and let your Father sleep. Ma. Did you name Crowns, or am I grown your Scorn? Yet something tells me I was Princely born. Oh! Speak, say in what part of all the Earth My Parents had their Crown, and I my Birth? Arch. Seek, seek to know no more, for Heav'n's sake, cease, Keep (while you have) the least Remains of Peace. Ma. Tell me the worst, tell, where he liv'd, and dy'd, Where reign'd he, and a thousand things beside. Would I were free to roam, to search, enquire Maherball's Kingdoms, and Maherball's Sire.
To the last Limits of the World I'd fly, Till Strangers tell what unkind you deny. Speak, or you love me not.— Arch. I love too well,— Ye Conscious Gods too much I love to tell. Ma. Longer I find it is in vain to wait, Nor will I tarry for a Traytor's Fate. My death I can accomplish with my Chains, And dash the Prison Walls with bloody Stains. Arch. Hold, sacred Sir, and you, alas! shall know; Yes, you shall learn it to your Mortal Woe, And have that fatal Comfort, e'er your go. Oh! for this knowledge, Prince, you need not roam, 'Tis to be learnt, 'tis to be had at home. Let me take Respit, let me take my Breath, And pause a while, before I give you Death. Ma. Be quick, and let thy Tonue be loose and free, Thy Words may choak thy self, but kill not me. Arch. You told me once you saw your Father's Shade, But know not who he was— Alas! you knew him not alive or dead. Dare you the bounds which I prescribe maintain, And see that awful Spirit once again? Ma. See him, speak to him, ask him how, and who Perform'd the dreadful Deed; I dare pursue Their Lives to death; their spotted Souls to Hell, There torture those by whom my Father fell. Archias unrolling the King's Picture, Orontes King of Sicily, writ in large Letters under it. Arch. Letters, and Seals, and Rings might be of use, But I can more substantial Proofs produce. This I preserv'd intire from Vulgar Rage, From Fire, and Water, and devouring Age. 'Twas taken after Death. Ma. Oh! Heav'n! was this My Father's Semblance? Was this Picture his?
Now by my Wrongs the very same I saw, It strikes me with a strange, unusual Awe. Tell me, most Sacred Shade, am I thy Son? Speak to me— but, alas! thy Speech is gone: Those Wounds say something, for Revenge they gape, No, the curst Author of them shall not scape. Tell me— this cannot tell. to Arch. Arch. 'Tis vain to know, He wears a Crown, who gave the fatal Blow. Vast are his Troops, and num'rous Guards surround His Throne, and keep aloof the threatned Wound. Ma. And I am bound, ye Gods! and I am bound, Or what if Millions did his Throne surround? Who was that King? Arch. He who has now the Sway, And governs Sicily this present Day. Ma. Oh Heav'n!—Heav'n there had nought to do. O Hell! Speak thou no more, the rest let Furies tell. Was it by his curst Hands my Father Fell? That King? whom I but now so blindly spar'd, Whom I disarm'd in view of all his Guard? Who to provoke my Fury, call'd me Slave, And sent me hither for the Life I gave. How did I scape when young?— Arch. I sav'd you, Prince, Till now, curst now; I have secur'd you since. Ma. Would I had perish'd then, or rather now, Would I might live to strike one glorious Blow. Revenge, Revenge; alas! it will not be; Revenge has Bolts, which weigh her down like me. Dash then thy galling Fetters on the Ground, Thy Mother-Earth with thy sharp Irons wound. Spurn with thy Shackles her unhappy Womb, Tear up her Entrails, till thou findst a Tomb; Rattle your Chains at you relentless Sky, Curse thy malignant Stars, run mad, and die. Arch. Raise from the Ground, dread Sir, your Sacred Head, Earth is not fitting for Prince's Bed.
Dare Fate, like Heroes born of Royal Blood, Fall as Maherball and Araxes should. Ma. 'Tis for Revenge I grovel here, and groan; I mourn my Father's Fate, and not my own. Mourn, that I cannot hurl this Murth'rer down To Sulph'rous Lakes, ten thousand Fathom down. Arch. Yet still be calm, and let not Fortune boast; Your Godlike Temper, when she frown'd, was lost. Ma. There is a time, when Nature seems at Peace, And all the Jars in the Creation cease. When Winds and Waves are hush'd, and heard no more, And those forbear to rage, and these to roar. There is a time, when Clowds disperse and fly, No more engendring Thunder in the Sky. A time when Wars no more the World molest; All with a deep, sweet Calm supinely blest; But we are never with our selves at rest. This is the State ev'n of the happiest Men; Then, cruel Gods! Oh! what must mine be then? Arch. Hark, the Doors open, and the Traytor's come. Heav'n! can you suffer so unjust a Doom? Yet, let the Fates decree what-e'er they will, Conceal Araxes, be Maherball still. Ma. Yet will I not die tame, but perish warm; My Hands, instead of Swords, my Bolts shall arm: And tho' I fall in an ignoble Throng, I will make sure to have one Slave along. Enter Locris and Governour of the Prison. Lo. Be quicker; burst asunder all the Doors, This Signet here all I command secures. In what a Posture does my Hero stand? How better would a Sword become his Hand? Quick, knock his Shackles off, and then retreat, And, on your Life, where I appointed wait. Gov. knocks off his Bolts, and Exit.
Ma. Sure, 'tis enchantment all, this Story told, Would make it look like a Romance of old. Lost in amazement, and confusion too, I know not how to give what thanks are due: My want of Power to pay my Debt I mourn, But when 'tis mine, I'll make a full return. Lo. Stay not to thank me, but make hast, and fly: Fly, till Night comes, to some close Thicket nigh. Why are you so dismay'd? so pale? so dumb? Look so upon me? come, I'll guide you, come. Hast, if you wish your self, or me to live; If we are caught, the King will ne're forgive. Ma. Hold yet, for here your Favours must not end, I cannot move till you release my Friend. I owe him for a Life, nor shall he be Left in those Fetters there, while I am Free. Lo. Help to unbind him then; now all away; Fate hovers o'er, and has us, if we stay: He thinks that Fortune leads him; but I prove aside. That I am led, and only led by Love. Exeunt. The End of the Fourth Act. ACT V. SCENE a Grove. Enter Cyllene alone. DEscending Night the neighb'ring Valleys fills, And presses on the brows of bending Hills. Our Fear around us with the darkness flows, And Mankind flies to Shelter and repose. Love Conquers fear, with a regardless Eye, I view the Gloomy Shades, and pass them by. Thro' dismal Caverns unconcern'd I rove, And tread with Dauntless steps the Desart Grove; Driv'n by Despair, and goaded on by Love.
All sleepy nature is to Silence bent, But my Tumultuous Sorrows will have vent. Winds, on your Wings my Mournful accents bear, Sound, Echo, thro' the Woods, Despair, Despair. Bring my Maherbal to me; hark, around Sad Echoes answer from the hallow Ground, He will not come where I am to be found. Fan me, cool Gales; Lull me, sweet Aires to Rest, Flow o'er me some kind Stream, And quench this Burning Fever in my Breast. Snatch me, some Whirlwind, on a sudden up, And bear me to the bleakest Mountains top. Let Rain, and Hail, and headlong Winter fall: Gods! show'r down all your Floods, I want them all. The Wind around in grateful murmurs Blows, Goes in∣to the Grove. The Rain beats fast, and yet my Fever grows, I'll on, and lose at once, my Self, and Woes. Enter Locris alone. Loc. What Wonders have I heard, ye Pow'rs Divine! Is he I Love Araxes? — Ah! since he is, he never can be mine. Now, shall we Fall by his prevailing Pow'rs, Or he (as hard a Fate) must Die by ours. By me our Houses mortal Foe was Freed, By me, who cannot yet repent the Deed. Wistly he Look'd, and full of Lab'ring Thought, Loth to receive the Liberty I brought. Great Spirits, still with Blushes, take a grant, Disdaining chiefly, what they chiefly want. His Struggling yet was more; he Scornd to owe Ought to his Rival, whom he thought his Foe; But Locris is not known while he thinks so. Maherbal, no; I all to thee Resign; My Crown, my Empire, and my Heart are Thine. I'll on, and find thee, if thou can'st be found, Make, till thou hear'st, the circling Woods resound.
Speak, conscious Forests, Speak some vocal Tree, Some Sylvan tell, where can Maherbal be? A thousand Thoughts within my Breast revolve; Something I'll do, but cannot yet resolve. Break thro' these Shades, Maherbal, and appear: Maherbal, Answer, if you live, and hear. Ma. Who's there? who calls? rising from the root of a mossy Tree. Lo. One who was forc'd to rove, And search thee long in vain, thro' all the Grove. Why gaze you thus, with such A wild affright? Why glare your Eyes amidst the gloomy night? Whence all those signs of Mingled rage and woe, Why that Stern look, and that contracted Brow? Ma. Leave me, I charge you, leave me here to die, By our past Friendship, I conjure you, fly. Lo. What said you? did you speak of Friendship past? Could not repeated Favours make it last? Ma. Seek not to tear a Secret from my Breast, Which known, will rob you of Eternal Rest. Ask not the reason, but with Speed retire, Least I should set thee with the World on fire. Lo. Let guilty Men seek Safety by retreat, Those that are Innocent may brave their Fate. I saw you mourn, and came to claim my part, And share whatever should oppress your Heart. Ma. Thou art my chief Oppression; now be gon, Ere thou, like mine, pull'st thy own ruine on. Thine is the Guilt, curse on thy Traitor's Face, For thou hast struck me in the tendrest place. Lo. Would Heav'n I had, all would be then Secure, Aside Nor He, nor I our present Pangs endure. Know, that I Scorn a title so Unjust, to him. Who never in the least betray'd my Trust. Where, how, and when was I so? Ma. Perjur'd Friend; Away, betimes, here let thy Questions end. Know thou hast wrong'd my Honour, now deplore We once were Friends, but must be so no more.
Lo. To raise thy Honour has been all my Aim, More than my own, to spread abroad thy Fame, Give thee, ingrateful! an Immortal name. Once more I charge you, as you were a Friend, Declare your Wrongs, what'er event attend. Speak, under shelter of the Secret Night, If you are wrong'd, my Sword shall do you right. Ma. [Drawing] Thou'st found a way, I take thee at thy word, Nought else could have prevail'd— Nought but the Manly offer of thy Sword. Now if thou dar'st, a strict attention give, In me behold the lost Araxes live. My Father fell by thine, he Seiz'd his Throne. Can after that, his Son and I be one? Now Draw, the Night clears up, the Silver Moon Shines bright, our business will be ended soon. Heaven seems at last to favour my design, Revenge and Empire shall at once be mine. Lo. Hold, I'm no Son to Zoilus— Ma. Ha! take care, Play not with me, fond, Foolish Youth, beware. Lo. Think me his Son, yet am I free from Guilt, Clear of all Blood by Fraud, or Fury Spilt. In my behalf this may Securely plead, I was not Born some Years, when he was Dead. Ma. Let that Speak for you then, and now be gone, Leave me to take Revenge on him alone. Let so much be to our past Friendship due, At once to Pity, and to Pardon you. Lo. Pardon your self, if you, in Justice, can, For your Ingratitude, perfidious Man! Did not I save your Life, last dreadful Feild? Throwing before your Breast by batter'd Shield? Leaving my Bosom naked to the Foe, Did not your now scorn'd Friend preserve you so? Ma. Are not you well rewarded with a Crown? A recompence for greater Actions done. Say, have not I more oft preserv'd your Life? And Sheilded you in a more dang'rous strife?
Some pow'r you give, some strifling Posts resign; You pay me part of what should all be Mine. Not high enough to Guard my self by Force, But high enough to make my Downfal worse. A gracious look, and flatt'ring Smile they show, Who would make Surest when they strike the blow. Snakes may securely lurk beneath the flow'rs, But when they find their Foes within their pow'rs, Springing, they spurn their coverts from the ground, Leap at their Prey, with hisses as they bound. Lo. Can in that Breast such idle fancies grow? We still were Friends, and we may still be so. Ma. A Crown divides us— Lo. Here our diff'rence ends, Divide the Crown; that should not sep'rate Friends. Ma. Crowns will admit no Rivals, I'll resign Not the least Jewel that enriches mine: But I may lose it by my Foolish stay, I talk, and trifle, all my time away. Lo. Now by my fame in Arms, you shall not go, Duty commands detain my Father's foe. If nothing can a bar sufficient be, To stop your passage, you shall pass thro' me. Ma. Go, stop the raging Fire, or rolling Sea, Stop tumbling Torrents in their headlong way. Stop Light'ning as it flashes thro' the Skies, And stop Jove's massy Thunder, as it flies. When such Stupendous things as those are done, Then think of hind'ring me from going on. Lo. Poor man with Frenzy, and Ambition lost, I pity, and despise so vain a boast. Were thy redoubted Sword the Thund'rer's brand, Know, I could wrest it from thy trembling Hand. Ma. Tempt not my rising Fury to destroy, My very Arms would blush to kill a Boy. Be gone, and force me not against my will, Be gone, while I can keep my Temper still. Or let me go—
Lo. Stay, that the Boy may try Whom Fate decrees to Conquer, whom to Die. Beware, and do not slight my tender Age, I dare your Valour, and defy your Rage. Manhood that thinks, is apt to harbour Fears, Courage is oftner found in Younger years. Ma. Hold yet my hands, you lately set me Free, And gratitude forbids me Fight with Thee. Lo. Lay all those Trivial poor excuses by, Know, 'twas Cyllene Set you Free, not I. Ma. Farewel Compassion, then farewel remorse, Pity is fled, and Rage will have its course. Both Drawing. Now dread the Vengeance rumbling o'er thy head, Ready with bursting Clowds to dash thee dead. Lo. Ready for Fury which I cannot fear, Here's my bare Breast, now if thou dar'st, strike here. Ma. O all ye Gods! what Wonders do I See! She loosens her robe a little, her Helmet drops off, and her Hair ap∣pears. What had I like to have done?— How am I Sav'd in not Destroying thee. All that within my boundless wish could fall, Was this—O bounteous Powers! and have I all? Thus low, thou dear Triumphant Fair, I bow, I own to Heaven, and Earth, I'm vanquish'd now. Thus let me from your Lips my Sentence meet, Or Seal my Pardon e're I leave your Feet. Lo. Rise, and no longer on the ground recline, Rise to these Arms, this Heart for ever thine. I wrought your rage, high as I could to see That if (when known) I might forgiven be, And then concluded you could Love like me. Ma. If transport leaves me strength enough I'll rise To thee the Fountain, and the flood of Joys. Divinely Charming, and Divinely good, Thou wert not guilty of my Father's blood. O! for thy sake I could, I doubt, forgive His woeful Fate, and let thy Father live. But if the Gods his Punishment design, Grant he may fall by other Hands than mine. Lo. Our Fates to thee, as to a God we trust, Mild amidst Wrongs, more Merciful than Just,
My being known, this my Assurance moves, Maherbal was my Friend, Araxes loves. Maherbal holding, and Gazing on her. O stand a little off, and let me gaze, For all my Sense is swallow'd in a maze. Art thou a Woman then? O blest surprize! O dawn of op'ning Heav'n! O Heav'n of Joys! Woman! the Tongue to show her tuneful skill, Must utter nought but Woman— Woman still. Invoking you, our tow'ring Souls we raise, You work our Passions, but transcend our Praise. The Gods for your Creation we adore; But still we Worship you their Creatures more. At Shrines we seemingly present our Pray'rs, Yours are our off'rings, Heav'n! our hearts are theirs. From them the Soldier all his Courage draws, Sure of Success, where Woman is the cause. When Ravish'd Poets write, or Prophets dream, Woman is still the dear Transporting theam. Their blood if fir'd their Fancies are Divine, They feel a Fury, and a Flame like mine. Lo. Here all the Warfare of my life is o'er, And I must play the Man's great part no more. Farewel my golden Crest, and glitt'ring Sword, Go, seek my much lov'd Arms, some other Lord. Farewel the Silver Trumpets Charming strains, Farewel the Drums that Thunder o'er the Plains. Farewel the Troops that threaten from afar, Farewel the waving Streamers of the War. Farewel the bloody Spears, and batter'd Shields, Ye long disputed Fights, and dusty Fields, Farewel the Fame that dear bought Conquest yields. Farewel the Tempest-beaten Troops that dwell Whole winters in your stormy Camps —Farewel. Ma. Hear me, My Locris, take my Farewel too, Ye sevenfold Sheilds, and shiv'ring Spears adieu, Farewel to War— to all the World— but you.
I'll clasp you close, and fold you ever thus, I'll crush you to my Heart— And none shall ever Love and Live like us. Why were you thus Disguis'd? O tell me how— But hold— 'tis not an hour for Questions now. We'll wast no time that's lent us to improve; Our Life is all too little for our Love. I'm lost betwixt my wonder and delight, Let's hasten, and Secure the Charming night, When the mute Soul flows out in every kiss, And every nerve swells with excess of bliss. Exeunt. Cyllene comes from the side of the Stage where She stood during the last three Speeches. Cyll. Death! Hell! and Furies! What is this I hear? Now all their close Designs, and Plots are clear. I've been Abus'd, and now too plainly See Out of his Love to her he Slighted me. Now, wrong'd Cyllene, now thou may'st Command A Vengeance worthy of a Woman's hand. O were my Father here to know the Son After his Death design'd to mount his Throne, No bounds would his Revenge, and Rage confine, His would (if possible) be great as mine. Fly all respect of Nature and her Laws, 'Tis Nature bids Revenge in such a Cause. Mother, and Sister shall my Victims fall, And universal Ruine swallow all. Enter Zoilus attended with Torches and Soldiers. Zo. Where from my self shall I a shelter find? Guilt tosses like a Storm my troubled mind? With growing Fears, and gnawing Conscience lost, Each step I take, methinks I meet a Ghost. My Gen'ral and unnatural Son are fled, Ev'n my own Wife forsakes, and loaths my Bed.
Raving with Prophecy, repent, repent She cries, or the Just Gods will ne'er relent. Could Penitence, indulgent Heav'n, atone So cheap, Araxes will not sell his throne. Ha! who is there, Cyllene, O my child, Why look you thus? thus like your Father wild? I hop'd for comfort from you, but I find, That is grown strange to me, and all my kind. Cyll. Ruine surrounds us, Death and Hell's at hand, Ready for plunging on the brinks we stand, While Furies to our Faces shake the brand. Think on your Locris, your pretended Son, 'Tis he that pulls your headlong Ruine on. He, and your curst ingrateful Gen'ral joyn, Their Hellish aim is at your Life and mine. Zo. Ha! what pretended Son? be brief, and plain, Unless your stronger Fears have turn'd your Brain. Cyll. Your Locris is a Woman: Start at this? Once more, if I am one, I swear she is. He who so Bravely, and so Boldly Fought, Ev'n now confess'd the Woman; let this thought Make it seem possible, 'twas Love that taught; Love taught her how to weild the Sword and Spear, Love of Maherbal banish'd all her fear. Zo. Impossible, you trifle. Cyll. Do I wake? Do I see thee, my Father? do I speak? Zo. Cease your mad Questions, and your madder Tale, I saw it newly Born, and saw it Male. Cyll. Might not some Male a while supply her place, That's a stale cheat, oft known in such a case. Once the false Infant is expos'd to view, They strait return him; and take back the true. Zo. By Heav'n, thou rack'st my very brain,— forbear, Too plain, old Credulous Fool, their Plots appear. Be all my kindred, all but thou, accurst, Hell seize on all, but on Semanthe first. Fly, bid my Souldiers arm, all mount the Guard, Hast, and let every Avenue be barr'd.
Would I could once that Hellish Traytress see, What Hell could furnish, should her Portion be, To Punish her, as she has punish'd me. Exit. Cyllene alone. Cyll. Now leap my ravish'd Heart, now mount my Soul, And each extended Arm grasp either Pole. Reach yonder Starry roof, and Chrystal Spheres, And shew the Gods a Genius great as theirs. Then downwards drive, search the deep Plots of Hell, And learn if Women, or if Feinds excel. Make Fate with industry thy task pursue, For thou hast set it work enough to do. If half tir'd Furies at their toyl repine, Give them new Fury; Woman, give them thine. Exit. Enter Semanthe. Sem. How shall I hide me from my Tyrant's sight, How shun the woes which threaten me this Night? All things so full of Fate and Death appear, As sadly tell me that my own is near. Whole Nature is in Pangs, and Groans around, Winds toss the Waters, Thunder tears the Ground, Earth feels, and shakes and staggers at the Wound. Thrice our dead Parents call'd us from the Tomb, Come Zoilus they cry'd, Semanthe come. Hark, 'tis my Husband's voice; the shrieking Ghost Sounds not so Fatal; now, 'tis now I'm lost. Fly to the Temple, have recourse to Pray'r, Alas! thou wilt not find Protection there. Without regard to any power Divine, He'll Stab thee Kneeling, tho' before the Shrine. Scene opens she goes in. Re-Entur Zoilus with Torches. Zo. Hither I come again some ease to find, Lay, where I rais'd the tempest in my mind.
All things are calm but I, no Foe appears, From my own Breast spring my own mortal Fears. Would I knew how, or what the Fates decreed, Or when, or where they destine me to bleed. Conscious, and certain of the worst to come, Secure of Death, I could out brave my doom. Lead to the Temple, either Gods or Fiends, Or Heaven or Hell shall tell what Fate intends. If they refuse to speak, when I invoke, I'll kindle to a Flame the curling Smoak, Their Idols shall be burnt, their Altars broke. The Scene of the Grove draws, and discovers the Temple, which they that bear the Torches open, Semanthe kneeling at the Altar. Sem. Save me ye Gods! Zo. Not all that rule the Sky Shall save you, by my just Revenge you die. I'll spare you yet a while, where's Locris gone? Where is that Daughter? that Impostor Son? You let Maherbal Scape— Sem. 'Tis False— Zo. 'Tis True, As you are False, nothing is False, but you. Bane of thy Husband's and thy Soveraign's Life, Speak, Traytress, Viper, Monster, Woman, Wife! Sem. Alas! I know not. Zo. You know nothing; no; Nor when, nor whither they design'd to go. Unknown to you, I am by you Betray'd, You did not know that Locris was a Maid. All this I've learnt, give me to know the rest, Or Racks and Wheels shall tear it from your Breast. Sem. What would you more, you your curst orders gave To kill a child Heaven destin'd me to Save. Unnatural you caus'd that my Pious Cheat, Come when it will, I glory in my Fate.
Zo. Die, damn'd deceiver Die— stand off ye Slaves Stabs her. If you tread here, you tread upon your Graves. Still Obstinate as False, is this a time? And will you not in Death confess your crime. Die in the true perverseness of your Sex, In Life and Death delighting to Perplex. Stabs again. Sem. Spare yet the short remainder of my Life, For Locris is— Zo. What is She? Speak— Sem. A Wife. Wife to Araxes, your Maherbal's Wife. Zo. What? Wife to both? go on speak yet again, Speak thou — my Wife, till you distract my Brain. Wilt thou not make me Mad — Sem. No more, adieu— Kind Heaven forgive us both, but chiefly you. Dies Zo. What, Speechless? Dead? hold yet, you must not go, For I have many other things to know. She's gone, no strugling warmth, no kindly spark Of Life remains — And I like her must wander in the Dark. Hark, the Loud Trumpets, hark, the thundring Drum, The Romans, and the Conqu'ring Rebels come. Sure I have only Dreamt I was a King, Would it were all a Dream— but Oh! the sting Of Conscience gives at last the secret Wound, But here's to lull it fast, to Sleep so sound, As never more to Dream— Falls on his Sword. Enter Cyllene. Cyll. Ha! what has Fate done here? my Mother Dead? My Father Dying, and my Sister fled? Who should have liv'd, by death's curst error fell, They live, who should have dyed— Mistaken mischief! mangled work of Hell! How could all this be done, whose hands concern'd In the dire Fact? That yet is to be learn'd.
O raise thee up a little from the ground, Tell thy Cyllene in her Sorrows drown'd, to Zoilus. Tell, sacred Sir, who gave the Fatal wound. Zo. Who durst, but I my self? — make no reply, I've many things to ask before I die. What is become of Locris, is she Seiz'd? Tell me she is that I may perish pleas'd. Where is Maherbal, where Araxes? where The Roman Army? further Questions spare, And Answer e're my Soul dissolves in Air. Cyll. Romans and Rebels ravage all the Town, Araxes marches on to Snatch the Crown. Archias Proclaims him at his Army's head, And the War done, he and your Locris wed. Zo. Where is Maherbal then, sits he unmov'd? And lets another take the Maid he lov'd? Cyll. Maherbal is Araxes— Zo. Spiteful Pow'rs! Hell, and Confusion! What a Fate is ours. You rave, and so do I, and all Mankind, We who boast Reason, more than Brutes are blind. Wretches like us by Heav'n decree accurst, For ruine destin'd, still run mad at first. Fate's malice I despise, her rage I slight, In a few moments in her own despight, With me it shall be Rest, and endless Night. Snatch not my Sword, Cyllene— yet you may, I have a surer, and a speedier way. Help me a while to stand erect, and straight, She helps him up. That I may fall with greater force and weight, At once; and all together strike the ground, tears open his wounds & dies. While the Soul rushes from the gaping wound. Cyll. Farewel, great Soul; and now farewel all Fear, I am thy Off-spring, and thy Spirit's heir. Let my Malignant Stars their utmost do, I slight them, while I can escape like you. But hark, the Conqu'ring Troops in Triumph move, My rival Sister, and my Tyrant love.
Hell! must I stifle my Revenge and hate? And herd with Vassals at the Temple Gate? Till the proud Victors shall pronounce our Fate. But 'tis resolv'd, there shall Cyllene stand, Off'ring Petitions with a trembling hand. Suppliant, concealing this envenom'd dart, Drawing a Dagger. Till shooting from their feet, I reach their Heart. Drums, Trumpets. Enter Araxes, Locris, Archias Victorious. Archias leading Orythia. Araxes at the door of the Temple. Arax. From further slaughters let our Soldiers cease, Let War lie buried in profoundest Peace. Let us our Fury, and Revenge suspend, From this blest hour, Blood stanch, and Murther end. Cyll. (kneeling) Yet, e're you enter these Divine aboades, The sacred Mansions of forgiving Gods, Stay, lovely, cruel Conqueror, turn, and stay, Hear a despis'd, unhappy Princess pray. Araxes raising her. Arax. O rise, you need not make your wishes known, Life, Liberty, Dominion are your own. Cyll. Could you but guess, you would recal the grant, 'Tis thus I satisfy what e're I want. [Offers at Locris, but prevented, turns the wound on her self.] Arax. Seize her, disarm her. Cyll. Behold it here, lodg'd in my bloody Breast, Tho' first intended for my Sister's Guest. This Blow will all my pain and shame remove, For failing Vengeance, and rejected Love. Gods! tho' on him your Blessings you conferr, Be Just by halves— heap Plagues— heap Hell on her.
Soon may she Die— shall that poor Curse suffice?— Long may she Live, long slighted, e're she dies. May she most Vertuous be, most chastly good, But he believe her most abandon'd lewd! Then may this Flourishing, yet happy she Die thus Desdain'd, thus in Dispair like me. Dies. Arax. What sad extreams make most of Women's Fate, Raging with love, relentless in their hate: Successive passions in their turns prevail, Less fair their Person's, than their tempers frail. Lo. Oh! All ye Just, but too, too rigid Pow'rs! Let Fate no further reach to us or ours. Tho' still such Judgments such a life attend, Yet our allyance bids me mourn her end. Arax. Enter the sacred Temple, now to bind Our selves by Vows, to be but less confin'd, To mingle Souls, when once our hands are Joyn'd. You too, my Sister shortly must provide To bless young Archias in a wish'd for Bride. His Father here first wrought this turn of Fate, And I will make him, as he made me Great. On that brave Youth you must your Love bestow, For you can Rival me no longer now. Burn all our incense, all our Gods invoke, Let the thick fumes their Silver tunnels choak, And clowd the blushing Bride with Curling smoak. The Temple opens, and discovers Zoilus and Semanthe lying on two Mourning Couches, Mourners attending, and Lamps bur∣ning about them. Arax. What's this? to what a Pomp of Death I come? Speak you, or are you, like those Bodies, dumb? Who did all this? I charge you, hast, and tell, How Zoilus, and how Semanthe fell? Lo. Father, and Mother too— art thou too dead? Then all is past, and I who came to wed, Must make the Grave, as it is thine, my Bed. Swoons.
Arax. Hold her, support her, hast, and gently bow Her body— leave her— She recovers now. Lo. Are these my promis'd Nuptials? must I go Thus to be Wedded midst this World of woe? If under such a weight condemn'd to live, Still I must beg a little time to grieve. Arax. You shall not grieve alone, my Charming Fair, Give me your Sorrows, or at least my share; Too soon your Sex is with your woes opprest, Which would sit better in a manly Breast. That Mournful aspect half my hopes destroys, Those Sighs amidst my Triumphs sink my Joys. In you my Soul would have her full desire, Did not those Tragick sights your Tears require, And prove that pleasure never comes entire. FINIS.
