P3560 t.3*.[46] R232247 99888842 196307
THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE KINGS BENCH BAR AT WESTMINSTER, On the Twenty Eighth past. Giving an Account of the Bailing the Right Honourable Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, William Lord Howard Baron of Escreik, Edward Whittakar, John Will∣more and Samuel Wilson: With the Names of such Persons of Honour, and others, as became Sureties. Together with many other Remarkable Passages. NOvember the Twenty Eighth. This being the last day of the Term, the Right Honourable Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, William Lord Howard Baron of Escreik, Mr. John Willmore and Mr. Edward Whittakar were brought from the Tower of London by the Lieutenant and a Guard of Halberts, in order to their being Bailed, according to the Act of the Thirteenth of His present Majesty. Whereupon, Mr. Williams moved the Court in the behalf of the Earl: and satis∣fied them, that Mr. Attorney General had been waited upon on that occasion: when as the Warrant of his Commitment for High Trea∣son, dated the Second of July, was Read, and Ordered to be Filed. After which, his Lordship insisted upon being set at Liberty, without giving in Bail; saying, that he had had hard Measure, and had been falsly Scandaled, by having such things layed to his Charge as he was altogether Ignorant of. But the Court declaring that they could not set him at Liberty without Giving Bail, his Lordship nomina∣ted His Grace the Duke of Monmouth, Sir William Cooper, Sir John
Sidnum and Francis Charlton Esquire; who were Bound severally in the penalty of Fifteen Hundred Pounds a peice, and his Lordship in the Sum of Three Thousand Pounds, to appear the First Day of the next Term, and not to depart without leave of the Court. Next the Lord Howard's Warrant of Commitment for High Trea∣son was read, being Dated the Fourteenth of June, and Ordered to be Filed. His Lordship alledged, that he ought to have had the Be∣nefit of the last Term, there being a Bill Preferred against him. But the Court told him, they could take no notice of that, by reason it was withdrawn. Then His Lordship named his Bail; which were, the Right Honourable the Earl of Kent, the Lord Clare, the Lord Gray and the Lord Herbert: the Penal Sum being exactly as the for∣mer. Then Mr. John Willmore's Warrant of Commitment being Read, and Ordered to be Filed, Mr. Attorney Declaring he had nothing against him, his Bail were called into Court; whose Names are as follow: James Rawlins, William Jacob, Nicholas Grigson and Alexan∣der Probe; who were bound in Fifteen Hundred Pound a peice, and himself in Three Thousand Pound. Then Edward Whittakar (whose Warrant of Commitment being Read and Filed as the former) produced his Bail; viz, John Jen∣kins, Zacharia Bourn, Samuel Smith and Thomas Wicks; being all Bound in the aforesaid Penalty for him to appear the First Day of the next Term; and so, Die in Diem, till the said Bail should be dis∣charged. Upon my Lord Howard's, Mr. Willmore's and Mr. Whittakar's re-refusing to pay such Fees as the Lieutenant demanded, he complained to the Court. But they told him, he must take his Course at Law; they could not oblige them to pay it, unless they were willing. Up∣on which, My Lord Howard said, that he knew no such Fees due as was demanded; nor would he pay them, unless they appeared due upon Tryal; and offered to give an Appearance: which being ac∣cepted, he nominated Mr. Governough his Attorney. The like did Mr. Willmore. But Mr. Whittakar being an Attorney of the Common. Pleas, the Proceedings against him were referred to that Court. After this, Samuel Wilson was brought from the Gate-house, and Bailed accordingly. LONDON, Printed for Roger Evans.
