P3786 99832848 207430
PROPOSITIONS For the carrying on A Philosophical Correspondence, Already begun in the County of SOMMERSET, Upon incouragement given from the Royal Society. I. THat the Correspondents carefully enquire into all the Rarities of Nature that may be in, or near the places of their respective Residences; such as the more extraordinary Phae∣nomena of Minerals, Plants, Animals, Waters, &c. and whatsoever else may serve to promote, and inlarge the History of Nature: which their Obser∣vations they shall be ready to impart to the Persons, and in the manner hereafter to be men∣tioned.
II. That they make what Moral Observations they can, for the better assisting each other in the knowledge of Humane Nature, &c. III. That if any of the Correspondents shall have any particular Hypotheseis about the Phaenomena of Nature, Providence, or Morality, he be ready to impart such of them, as he thinks fit, to be consider'd by such others of the Company, as shall have a mind to ingage their thoughts in those matters. IV. That if any Correspondent, or his Friend desire the thoughts of any others of the Cor∣respondence upon any Notion of Philosophy, &c. Those others shall be ready to gratifie him in his request; And if any of the Company shall be desirous of the Opinion of learned men in London, or either Ʋniversity, in any matters of inquiry, indeavours shall be used to procure it for him.
V. And if any of the Correspondents who stu∣dies the Universal Character of the Learned Dr. Wilkins, (now Lord Bishop of Chester) shall have any Objections or doubts about it; or else have any thing to suggest for the facilitating, or promoting the learning or spreading of it; he shall impart the same to the Secretary of the Correspondence after to be mentioned: who will endeavour to procure an Answer to such Doubts, or to spread any such Communications, as may tend to the advantage of that noble Design. VI. That in this Correspondence none of us shall presume to determine any thing in Speculative matters, or Controversies of Religion, dogmatical∣ly; but that every one propose his Conceptions modestly in the way of Queries and Hypotheseis, for the preventing and excluding all wrangling di∣sputes. VII. That the Company be rady to pay all respects
to the Royal Society, and to serve them with what intelligence we can procure in the Country to∣wards the promoting their generous designs, VIII. That the persons to be admitted into this Correspondence be only such as are sober, modest, and of good inclination to the promotion of use∣ful knowledge. IX. That all the Members of this Company in∣deavour to bring into the Correspondence, as many persons so qualified, as they shall find in∣clinable to this design. X. That there be a Secretary through whose hands all Enquiries, and Informations shall pass from one, or more of the Correspondents to the rest, and that Mr. Glanvill Rector of Bath be that Secretary.
XI. That the Secretary be allowed an Amanuensis for the transcribing of so many Copies of infor∣mations to be imparted, as shall serve for so ma∣ny Correspondents as may conveniently spread them among the Company. XII. That the Secretary set up a Foot-post to go weekly from Bath, the Place of Intelligence, to Bristol, the Centre of Conveyance, for the receiving, and sending of Letters, which are to be directed to Mr. Tim. Parker upon the Bridge in Bristol, who will receive and transmit them. XIII. That the Correspondents, who live near one another, agree upon one convenient place in their Neighbourhood to which Letters are to be directed for them; and that they acquaint the Secretary with the place so agreed on.
XIV. That every Correspondent allow Half a Crown a Quarter towards the defraying the charges of the Correspondence. XV. That every Correspondent pay in this money Quarterly to the person that ingaged him, which he is to return to Mr. Charles Thirlby of Wells, who will receive it, and clear the Accompts of the Secretary, which are to remain in the said M. Thirlby's hands for any of the Correspondents to see, that desires it. XVI. That the Secretary of the Correspondence hold Intelligence with the Secretary of the Royal Society. XVII. That the Secretary procure for as many of the Correspondents, as shall desire them, the Philosophical Transactions Monthly, and the
Mercurius Librarius; as also such other Books as they shall write to him to get from London. Or if any of them shall desire any of the Philosophical Instruments, as Telescopes, Microscopes, Barome∣ters, &c. care shall be taken for the getting the best sort of them at the cheapest rate. XVIII That the Company have a particular Sta∣tioner, and that Mr. James Collins at the King's-head in Westminster Hall be the Person. XIX. That the Names of all the Correspondents which any one of the persons already ingaged shall procure, with their respective places of abode, be returned to the Secretary; and that upon their Names being entred in the Secretaries Book they shall be reputed as Members of the Company.
Of Education. To Master Samuel Hartlib. By John Milton. Master Hartlib, I Am long since persvvaded, that to say, ot doe ought worth memory, and imitation, no purpose or respect should sooner move us, then simply the love of God, and of mankinde. Neverthelesse to write now the reforming of Education, though it be one of the greatest and noblest designes, that can be thought on, and for the want whereof this nation perishes, I had not yet at this time been in∣duc't, but by your earnest entreaties, and serious conjurements; as having my minde for the present halfe diverted in the persuance of some other assertions, the knowledge and the use of which, cannot but be a great furtherance both to the en∣largement of truth, and honest living, with much more peace. Nor should the lavves of any private friendship have prevail'd with me to divide thus, or transpose my former thoughts, but that I see those aims, those actions which have won you with me the esteem of a person sent hither by some good providence from a farre country to be the occasion and the incitement of great good to this Iland. And, as I hear, you have obtain'd the same repute with men of most approved wisdom, and some of highest authority among us. Not to mention the learned correspon∣dence which you hold in forreigne parts, and the extraordinary pains and diligence which you have us'd in this matter both heer, and beyond the Seas; either by the definite will of God so rusing, or the peculiar sway of nature, which also is Gods working. Neither can I thinke that so reputed, and so valn'd as you are, you would to the forfeit of your own discerning ability▪ impose upon me an unfit and over ponderous argument, but that the satisfaction which you professe to have receiv'd from those incidentall discourses which we have wander'd into, hath prest & almost constrain'd you into a perswasion, that what you require from me in this point, I neither ought, nor can in conscience deferre beyond this time both of so much need at once, and so much opportunity to trie what God hath determin'd. I will not resist therefore, what ever it is either of divine, or humane obligement that you lay upon me; but will forthwith set down in writing, as you request me, that vo∣luntary Idea, which hath long in silence presented it self to me, of a better Educati∣on, in extent and comprehension farre more large, and yet of time farre shorter, and of attainment farre more certain, then hath been yet in practice. Briefe I shall endeavour to be for that which I have to say, assuredly this nation hath extreame need should be done sooner then spok'n. To tell you therefore what I have bene∣fited herein among old renowned Authors, I shall spare; and to search what many modern Ianua's and Didactics more then ever I shall read, have projected, my in∣clination leads me not. But if you can accept of these few observations which have flowr'd off, and are as it were the burnishing of many studious and contemplative yeers altogether spent in the search of religious and civil knowledge, and such as pleas'd you so well in the relating, I here give you them to dispose of.
