R1657A [ocm]48200851 207306
Robin Hood and the Beggar. SHEWING; How Robin Hood and the Beggar fought, and how he changed Clothes with the Beggar, and how he went a begging to Nottinghm? and how he saved three Brethren from being hang'd for stealing of Deer. To the tune of, Robin Hood and the Strner. depiction, probably of various scenes from the adventures of Robin Hood COme light and listen you Gentlemen all, hey down, down, an a down, That mirth do love for to hear, and a story true, Ile tell unto you, If that you will but draw near. In elder times when merriment was, hey down, &c, And Archrey was holden good, there was an Out-law, a many did know, Which Men called Robin Hood. Vpon a time it chanced so hey down, &c. Bold Robin was mrry disposed, his time to spend he did intend, Either with Friend or Foe: Then he got vp on a gallant brave Stéed, hey down, &c. The which was worth angell ten, with a Mantle of gréen, most brave to be séen, He left all his merry-man. And riding towards fair Nottingham, hey down, &c. Some pastime for to spy, there was he aware af a jolly Beggar As re he beheld with his eye. patcht Coat the Beggar had one, hey down, &c. Which he daily did vse for to wear, and many a bg, about him did wag; Which made Robin Hood to him repair. God-spéed God-spéed, said Robin Hood, hey down, &c. What Country-man tell to me. I am Yorkeshire sir, but ere you go far, Some Charity give vnto me. Why what wouldst thou have said Robin Hood hey down, &c. I pray thée tell vnto me. no Lands, nor Livings, the Beggar he said, But a penny for charitie. I have no money, said Robin Hood then, hey down, &c. But a Ranger within the Wood: I am an Out-law, as many do know, My name it is Robin Hood, But yet I must tll the bonny Beggar, hey down, &c. That a bout with I must try: thy Coat of Gray, lay down I say, And my Mantle of Gréen shall lye by▪
The second part, to the same tune: COntent, content, the Beggar he cry'd, hey down, down, an a down, Thy part it will be the worse, for I hope this bout to give thée the rout, And then have at thy Purse. The Beggar he had a mickle long Saffe, hey down, &c. And Robin had a Nut-brown Sword, so the Beggar drew nigh, and at Robin let fly, But gave him never a word. Fight on, fight on, said Robin Hood then, hey down, &c. This Game well pleaseth me: for every blow that Robin did give, The Beggar gave buffets thrée. And fighting there full hard and sore, hey down, &c. Not far from Nottingham Town, they never fled, till from Robin head The blood came trickling down. O hold thy hand said Robin Hood then, hey down, &c. And thou and I will agrée: if that be true, the Beggar he said Thy Mantle come give vnto me. Nay, a change, a change, cri'd Robin Hood hey down, &c. Thy Bags and Coat give me, and this Mantle of mine, Ile to thée resign, My Horse and my braverie. When Robin had got the Beggars Clothes, hey down &c. He looked round about, Methinks, said he, I séem to be A Beggar brave and stout. For now I have a bag for my Bread, hey down, &c. So have I another for Corn, I have one for Suit, another for Malt, And one for my little Horn. And now I will a begging goe hey down, &c. Some charitie for to find. and if any more of Robin you'l know, In this second Part it's behind. NOw Robin he is to Nottingham bound, hey down, &c. With his bags hanging down to his knée, his staff & his coat, scarce worth a groat Yet merrilie passed he, As Robin he passed the Stréets along, hey down, &c. he heard a pittifull cry, thrée Brethred déer, as he did hear, Condemned were to dye. Then Robin he highed to the Sheriffs, hey down, &c. Some Reliefe for to séek, he skipt, and leapt, and capored full high, As he went along the stréet. But when to the Sheriffs doore he came. hey down, &c. There a Gentleman fine and brave, thou Beggar, said he, come tell vnto me What is it that thou wouldest have. No meat nor drink, said Robin Hood then, hey pown, &c. That I come here to crave, but to beg the lives of Yeomen thrée, And that I fain would have. That cannot be, thou bold Beggar, hey down, &c. Their Fact it is so cléer; I tell to thée, hang'd they must be For stealing of our Kings Déer. But when to the Gallows they did come, hey down, &c. There was many a wéeping eye O hold your peace, said Robin then, For certainly they shall not dye. Then Robin he set his Horn to his mouth, hey down, &c. And blew but blastes thrée, till a hundred bold Archers brave, Came knéeling dow to his knée. What is your will Master, they said, hey down, &c. We are here at your command. shoot East, shoot West, said Robin then, And look that you spare no man. Then they shot East, and they shot West, hey down, &c. Their arrows were so kéen; the Sheriffe he, and his companie, No longer must be séen. Then he stept to these Brethren thrée. hey down, &c. And away he had them tane, but the Sheriff was crost & many a man lost, That dead lay on the Plain. & away they went into the merry gréen-wood, hey down, &c. And sung with a merry glée, and Robin took these Brethren good, To be of his Yomandriée. T.R. London, Printed for Francis Grove, on Snow-hill. Entered according Order.
