R2147 C.20.f.9[232] C.20.f.9[233] 99884687 192730
The Royal Recreation Of jovial ANGLERS Proving that all Men are Jntanglers, And all Professions are turn'd Anglers. To the Tune of, Amarillis. Well fayre the plesure that bringes such treasure Hold hooke and line then all is mine OF all the Recreations which attend on Humane Nature, There's nothing sores so high a pitch, or is of such a Stature, As is a Subtle Anglers life, in all Mens Aprobation: For Anglers tricks, do daily mix, with every Corporation. When Eve and Adam liv'd by love, and had no cause for Iangling, The Devil did the Waters move, the Serpent fell to Angling: He Baits his Hook, with God-like look, quoth he, this will intangle her: The woman Chops, and down she drops: the Devil was first an Angler. Physitians, Lawyers, and Divines, are most ingenious Ianglers; And he that tryes, shall find in fine that all of them are Anglers: Whilst grave Divines doe fish for souls Physitians, like Cormudgeons, Do bait with Health to fish for Wealth; and Lawyers fish for Gudgeons, A Polititian, too▪ is One, concern'd in Piscatory; He Writs, and Fights, Vnits & Slights to Purchase Wealth, and Glory; His Plumets Sounds, the Kingdoms Bounds to make the Fishes Nibble; He draws 'em with a Past of Lyes, and he blinds them with the Bible.
The second Part, to the same Tune. Here be your new Fashions Mistris. A Fisher-man Subdued a Place in spight of Locks and Staples, The Warlike Massianello was a Fisher-man of Naples, Commanded forty thousand Men, and prov'd a Royal Wrangler: You ne're shall sée the like agen, of such a famous Angler. Vpon the Exchange, 'twixt twelve & one méets many a neat intangler; Most Merchant-men, not one in ten but is a cunning Angler, And (like the Fishes in the Brooke,) Brother doth fish for Brother; A golden Bait hangs at the Hooke, and they Fish for one another. A Shop-kéeper I next preferr, a Formal Man in black, sir. That throwes his Angle every where, and cryes What is't you lack, sir, Fine Silks and Stuffs, or Hoods & Muffs but if a Courtier prove the Intangler, My Citizen must look too't then, or the Fish will catch the Angler. A Lover is an Angler too, and Baits his Hooke with Kisses; He playes and toyes, and fain would do, but often times he misses: He gives her Rings, and such fine things as Fan or Muff, or Night-hood: But if you'l Cheat, a City Prat, you must bait her with a Knight-hood. There is no Angler like a Wench stark-naked in the Water, She'l make you leave both Trowt and Tench and throw your self in after: Your Hook an Line, she will confine, the Intangled is the Intangler? And this I fear, hath spoyl'd the Ware of many a jovial Angler. If you will trowl, for a Scriveners soul cast in a rich young Gallant: To take a Courtier by the powl, throw out a golden Tallent; And yet I doubt, the draught will not Compound for half the charge on't: But if you'l catch, the Devil at a snatch go bait him with a Serjeant. Thus have I made the Anglers Trade to stand above defiance, For like the Mathematick Art, It runs through every Science, If with my Angling Song, I can with Mirth and Pleasure seaze yee, I'le bait my Hook with Wit again, and Angle still to please ye. London, Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, W. Gilbertson, and I. Wright.
