S282 [ocm]13655349 200428
Sadler's Memoirs: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death Of that Famous Thief THOMAS SADLER. Giving a True Account of his being Fifteen times in the Goal of Newgate, and a Relation of his most Notorious Pranks in City and Countrey. With a particular Description of the manner of his Robbing the Lord High Chancellour of England; For which he was Condemned to Dye, and Executed at Tyburn on Fryday the Sixteenth of March, 1677. With Allowance, Ro. L'Estrange. Printed for P. Brooksby, in Westsmithfield.
Sadlers Memoires. OR, he History of the Life and Death of that Famous Thief Thomas Sadler, &c. CHAP. I. Of Sadlers Birth and Education. TO be well descended, doubles the glory of the Vertuous, but increases the shame of the viti∣ous and degenerate; And in this regard our unhappy Sad∣ler was happy: the scandal of his crimes reach'd little further than his Person; Though he brought himself to an untimely and ignomini∣ous end; yet we cannot say it was any mighty disgrace to his Family, for his birth was so ob∣scure, that we are beholding to Philosophy to prove that ever he had a Father, or had any R∣lation
to some worthy Persons, bearing the same Name; And after a Diligent Inquiry, all the Satisfaction we can obtain, is, that some body, about the Year, 1650. made use of the means to beget him, and that about Three-Quarters of a Year afterwards he dropt into the World, between Fulbam and Hammersmith, in the County of Middlesex: But Hero's seldom are unattended with Prodigies; and if we may Credit Common Fame; This Sadlers Mother during the time she was bigg with him, long'd for a piece of Pork at Brainford-Market, and nothing would serve her turn but she must steal it; so that being a poor Woman of a very honest principle, she was forced to get a Neighbour to a∣gree with the Butcher to give her private leave to Con∣vey it away; By which strange Extravagant desire, Nature gave sufficient Notice of the Inclinations of the Child she went with; which in his very Infancy began to show themselves: yet certainly, had his Parents foreseen it, they would have en∣deavoured to arm him somewhat better against his Fate, by Instructing him in Reading an Accom∣plishment he had occasion enough to be acquainted
with; yet never was Master of; though often al∣low'd the favour of his Book; which in the Colledge of Newgate he learnt to Cant by Rote, though in truth he was not able to distinguish a Letter. CHAP. II. How Sadler was put to the Trade of Brick∣making, and by what weans he came first ac∣quainted with Thieves. THe History of our Grand Thiefs Child∣hood (like that of the Worlds Infancy) is either unknown, or wrapt up in Fables; Some stick not to report that at Four Years of Age he understood the Profound Mysteries of Pocket∣diving, and that before he was Seven Years Old, none of the Neighbours durst trust their Poultry for fear of him, without Convoy; But waveing those Rumors, which have nothing to Vouch for their Credit, but the Idle Breath, and Tattling Suspitions of the Vulgar, This is certain, That when he became Capable of Work∣ing,
he was put forth to the Honest Laborious Trade of Brickmaking; which he followed for two or three years after the Dreadful Fire in Sixty Six, both at Knights-bridge, Soe-hoe, and o∣ther places neer the Town, and had gain'd the Creditable Repute of a Civil Industrious Young∣man; till happening into the unhappy Acquaintance of a Lewd Woman in St. Gileses, she seduc'd him to the Expence of his Money, and neglect of his business; and brought him acquainted with a Gang of thieves; who observing him to be a brisk bold fel∣low fit for their turn, soon entred him into their So∣ciety; but not till he had given a Notable proof of his Dexterity and aptness for the Calling; which was as follows: This crew had observ'd an old Fellow that kept an Ale-house near Bedford-Bury, and were satisfi'd he had good store of money, but could never understand where he laid it; For at several times they had Jilted most of his Closets and Chests, but could not meet with a∣ny thing Considerable; Sadler undertakes to dis∣cover this Concealed Treasure, and by this Stra∣tagem effects it; Going to Drink there one Evening, he slips up stairs and sets the Hangings on Fire; pre¦sently
the Alarum is given, and he pretends to be one of the foremost in quenching it, though in truth all his business was to watch the old Dads Motions; whom he observ'd to run very surprizedly to the house of Office up three pair of stairs; The Combustion was quickly over, without much Damage at present, though the Consequence was loss e∣nough; For three or four Nights after, Sadler and his Confederates get into the House, and takeing up the Boards of the House of Office, under the seat find a kind of Cubboard, and therein three Hundred Pound Baggs, plentiful∣ly cramb'd with ready White; and conceiving it very unfit such Precious Mettal should be laid up so slovenly, took speedy care to remove it to a better Lodging; leaving in the place, nothing but a small pair of Horns, and a large Halter; which being discover'd about a Month after by the Reverend Miser, he decently made use of the last; not being willing to be at the charge of keeping his Soul after he had lost his Money; Whilst in the mean time Sadlers Ingenuity was much applauded by his Accomplices, and thenceforwards they all look'd upon him as a very hopeful Brother.
CHAP. III. How Sadler having committed Burglary, strange∣ly made his Escape like a Ghost. BEing thus Flush'd and Season'd in Ro∣guery, he was fit to attempt any mis∣chief; By I know not what Hellish Intelligence he was Inform'd of a great Quantity of Money, Plate, and Riches in a House in St. Martins in the Fields; but it was so notably fortified with stout Locks, strong Bolts, able Window-shuts, &c. That he could not by the Mediation of Mistris Betty, the aid of Monsieur Le Crown, nor any the like Common Arts, force an entrance; whereupon resolving to enter this Inchanted Castle what ever it cost him, he takes a Lodg∣ing at the next Door, and in the Night gets on the Top of the designed house, and with a Rope lets himself down the Chimney into a Garret; then Rummaging what Rooms he thought fit, and pretty well Loaden with Plate and other portable Goods of Value, he re∣pairs
to the Door, but perceives there was no getting forth; For the Master of the House always us'd to have the Keys carried up into his Chamber; In this perplexity up Stairs again he goes, hoping to escape at some Window; but made such a noise, that he wakened some of the Family, so that the whole House rung with the lamentable Out-cry; Thieves, Thieves! What to do he knew not, till the Devil and his own Natural Impudence suggested a Device; which was, Seeing some Linnen on the Top of a Chest of Drawers, he claps a Sheet all over him, and so boldly walks into the Gentlemans Chamber, who was ready with Sword and Pistol to receive him, but at his approach, concluding it a Spirit, was so frighted that he could not make use of e∣ither of them; so that Sadler without the least Interruption march'd by him, and opening the Window passes into the Balcony, where leaving the Sheet, he slips from thence down into the Street, and brushes off with his Booty undiscovered; whilst the honest Gentleman was saying his Prayers, and making of Crosses to defend himself from the sup∣posed walking Ghost; which in truth was as evil a Spirit as any House could be haunted with.
CHAP. IV. How Sadler went upon the Foot pad, and tyed a Mar∣ket woman to the Gibbet beyond Hampstead. THough Burglary or House-breaking was one of our Famous Sadlers chiefest talent, yet he had a pretty Insight into most other My∣steries, and particularly crafts of Thieving; only for the High-padd he had scarce courage e∣nough to undertake it: for though no man could out do him for Hectoring with the tongue, and verbal Impudence, yet he never had much sto∣mach to dry blows; insomuch that an ordinary single fellow could take him at any time; How∣ever for his Diversion he would now and then venture abroad a free-booting on foot; and one Evening having surprized a Market-Wo∣man in her return homewards, and taken all her money, being about four pound, he ask'd her what she sold? Who told him, Piggs that day? Why then, said he, you have brought your Hoggs now to a fair Market; but in troth; I am very oath to leave you alone in the Night; and therefore m resolv'd you shall have company; saying which, he turn'd her Horse loose, and carried her to the Gibbet where the Man hangs in Chains be∣yond
Hamstead, and tying her fast thereunto, left her. Shortly after this, he was apprehend∣ed for stealing a silver Tankard in St. Mary Islington, and for the same was first marked in the hand for a Free-man of the Old Bayly, in the year, One Thousand, Six Hundred, and Seven∣ty. But the very next Sessions was in again for stealing a Gentlemans Beaver in the Temple Church, no less impudently than profanely, saying in open Court on his Tryal; That the Gentleman should have Watch'd as well as Pray'd; For this he was ordered to be transported, but by certain means he used, got off, and immedi∣ately fell to his own Trade here in England. CHAP. V. How neatly Sadler cheated a Goldsmith of a hundred pounds-worth of Plate. THough Sadler had not the advantages of Schollar-ship, yet nature, besides a come∣ly personage, had bestowed upon him a ready wit and notable subtlery, nor was his brain ever at rest, but always contriving or carrying on some Diabolical Intrigue; Amongst which that which fellows, (which the related to my self once in Newgate, with no small pride and Tri∣umph)
was none of the least remarkable. Hearing of a kind of a Doctor of a good E∣state about Hogsdon, that used to undertake the cure of Mad-men, he repairs to him in good garb, like a Countrey Gentleman, and tells him 'twas his misfortune to have a dear friend and Relation of his somewhat distempered with meloncholly, and that he was advised to him for help; The Doctor inquires how the party was taken; Upon which Sadler tells a most for∣mal story, that he never rav'd, but only talked a little idle now and then, and that he feared it proceeded from setting his heart too much on the World; For, says he, he is always talking of Plate and Money, and will pretend people have got it from him, and asks them to pay him, &c. In short, Mr. Doctor for Twenty Guinneys would un∣dertake to cure him, and the next Morning he was to be brought; But then a new difficulty is started, Sadler pretends his Kinsman so fond of him, that he should be extreamly troubled to get away from him; But the Doctor that had a salve for every sore, to help that bids him bring the young-man into the Hall, and come to him into his Study, and he would let him out
at a back door, and then take his patient into custody when he was gone; This part of the plot being so hopefully laid, to compleat the Tragedy-Comedy, away goes Sadler to an E∣minent Goldsmith that had some small know∣ledge of the Doctor, and with an innocent gra∣vity haveing pass'd some Recommendatory complements, tells him the Doctor resolving to furnish himself with a Cubbord of Plate, de∣sired him to send his man with such and such things, chusing as much Plate as was worth a hundred pounds, or upwards; The Goldsmith not doubting but to have a good customer, rea∣dily consents, and away goes Sadler and the young Prentice; being arrived at the Doctors Hall, he takes the Plate pretending to carry it up to the Doctor and his Lady, and bids the young-man walk a turn or two there; then keeping the prize undiscover'd under his cloak, he tells the Doctor, he had brought his Kins∣man, desiring him to use the best of his skill up∣on him, and he would wait upon him again on the morrow, and so is let out at the back door; The Doctor very gravely comes down, and ha∣ving taken a serious view of his patient, takes
him by the Wrist, and begins to Thumb his pse, the Young-man wondering at his action, begins at last to inquire for the Gentle∣man that came with him: Ah Sweet-heart, qd. the Doctor, The Gentleman will be here presently; The Lad persisting to enquire how he lik'd the plate, Very well, very well, replies the other let not that trou∣ble your mind; you shall have your Plate again, and I will make you as well as ever you were in your life; The Boy further asking him if he pleas'd to pay for it now; Yes, my Sweet Youth, says the Doctor, you shall have Money enough, be not dissatisfied. Then bidding him follow him, he takes him into 2 dark room, and calling some of his Servants, falls to bleeding of him Lustily, and shaves off all his Hair; The Youth made many Protesta∣tions against these Proceedings, telling whose Man he was, and how, and upon what account he came thither, but all in vain, for they inter∣preted these discourses, as extravagant Effects of his distempered Brain; & presently clapt him into a Bed contrived for the purpose, & lock'd him down fast, and went on so dexteriously, ac∣cording to the Method of Art, to cure his sup∣posed Lunacy, till they had almost made the
fellow stark Mad in earnest; The Gold-smith hearing no News of his Return, gets up next Morning by break of day, and comes to the Doctors in Quest of him; And then the Cloud was opened, & they fairly perceived how fouly they were Cheated. CHAP. VI. Of Sadlers often being in Newgate for several Pranks, and by what means he still got off. TO recite all the Roguries committed by this Eminent Thief, would require a Vo∣lumn, for he was perpetually bigg with some mischievous design, and his Brains never lay fallow, unless when he was got into Newgate; In which Colledge he had no less then Fifteen times taken up his residence, and Six times Con∣demned to dye; Once he got off by the Act of Grace: another time being Convicted of a Bur∣glary, he Obtain'd a Pardon; sometimes (as thought) he bought off his prosecutors so hat he could not be found Guilty; In the Year 1675. Being Condemned, he pretended to make Great Discoveries of other Malefactors, and for that Service was saved; and did at seve∣ral Sessions give Evidence against his Accomptices;
and thereby was Instrumental in ridding the World of Diverse Catterpillars that lived on Rapine, and the spoils of Honest Industry; Some have Repor∣ted, That in that service he too much gratify'd his private Spleen, and charg'd some Persons undiser∣vedly; but that we look upon as a Groundless Calumny, and therefore shall not barthen his Memory with those Imputations; The rather, for that he had other Faults too many, which he is now gone to answer for at an All-seeing Tri∣bunal. CHAP. VII. Of the last Grand Burglary, and stealing the Lord High Chancellours Mace, &c. For which he was Executed. BUt now the Squib is run to the end of the Rope, and the fatal minute approaches, which must put an end to all our Heroick Pil∣ferers atchievements; yet like a dying Taper to make a short Blaze before he expires, he ven∣tures on a daring attempt. Having (by I know not what means) got the knowledge, where the
Lord High Chancellours Servants usually laid the Mace and Purse, those glorious Insignia or Badges of that illustrious Office, without weighing the danger, or considering the conse∣quence, he resolves to make himself Master of that tempting booty; To this purpose he with two of his confederates about five a clock one Sunday morning were observed by one that Evidenc'd it at their Tryal to be hawking up and down that street, waiting as 'tis supposed an opportunity for putting their design in Exe∣cution; but missing of it then, they defer'd the business till the Tuesday night following, and then 'tis thought, getting by a Ladder of ropes into his Lordships Balcony, and thence upon a Ledge jutting out of the wall, to the Window of the Closet where those things were reposi∣ted, they broke a pane of Glass, and so opened the Casement, and took away the precious, but fatal prize, valued in the Indictment at One hundred and forty pounds; and being extream∣ly over-joyed at the success, proceeded to that height of insolence and vanity, that as them∣selves since confest, coming over Lincholns-Inn-Fields, Sadler would needs have one of his con∣federates
bear the Mace openly on his shoulder, and the other the Purse before him, whilst he with Hat cock'd, and arms a Kembo, walked af∣ter it in a strutting Grandeur; But these magni∣ficent triumphs were short-liv'd; 'Tis a saying; No less true than antient: quod per dere vult Deus, dementat prius; When Divine vengeance resolves to chastize wicked men, it first infatuates them; so it proved in this case; for Sadler and one o∣ther of his Associates repairing to a Lodging in Knight-Riders-Street, where they had formerly lain; Taking off the Fringe and Jewels from the purse, scattered several small peices of the Gold about the Chamber, and though they had laid up the greatest part of the Mace in the clo∣set, and taken away the Key of it, yet the Wo∣mans daughter of the house going up on the Fryday following when they were all abroad, observing the floor strewed with these illustri∣ous spangles, and withal finding three or four small scattered pearls, could not forbear the curiosity of putting back the closet-lock with a small knife, where to her amazement she found the Mace; the Coronet or upper part whereof, her Ignorance mistaking for the Royal Dia∣dem,
she passionately calls up her Mother, tel∣ling her, The Gentlemen had got the Kings Crown in the Closet; but the good woman advising with one of her neighbours, was soon informed of my Lords loss, and as speedily gave him Intelli∣gence what she had found; Hereupon a Watch being set, a woman coming to Inquire for them was first taken, and next day the three men, Sadler being apprehended by a single man un∣arm'd in the Street without the least resistance. CHAP. VIII. Of his Condemnation, Carriage in Prison, and Exe∣cution. AT his Tryal he appeared very gay in cloaths, and no less impudent in his behaviour, yet con∣fessed the fact; and when condemned, flung his Hat into Court, and his Wigg another away, acting like one Distracted; In person he seemed to have little sense of his desperate condition, but gave himself to Drinking of Sack; and 'tis said, being called from his cups to come to prayers, swore the Parson must stay till his Glass was out; In a Word his end was not un∣suitable to his life: To whose unhappy Memory, a Friend of mine desired this following Epitaph.
EPITAPH. Here Sadler lies! Reader! come not too near, The nimble Ghost may pilfer still, we fear; His Presence Fifteen times did Newgate grace; But Dy'd Opprest with a too Ponderous Mace: So us'd to make all Doors before him flye, His very Coffin dreads a Burglary, And Pluto fears he'l Jilt his Treasury. FINIS.
