S249 515.l.2[96] R219073 99884873 189591
A Sad, but a True RELATION OF A PERSON WHO On Munday the 15th. of this Instant February, was found Dead in a Wood near HIGHGATE; Being First discried by the Dogs of some Gentlemen that were there Hunting. THere is but one way of coming into the World, but many passages out; nothing is so sure as Death, and nothing so uncertain as the time. We may be two old to Live, but can never be too young to Die; for who knows when Death will Summon him, whether in Youth, in Man∣hood, or in Old Age; we have frequent Examples of all; or who knows whether God will take away his Life by a long Death-bed Sickness; whether thou mayst Die by the Sword, or by any sudden Casualty; of all which we have daily Examples in our Weckly Bills of Mortality, and this present Story Relates a Remarkable one, of one supposed by some Papers found about him,
to be named John Higgens, who on Monday the 15th. of February, was in this manner found Dead. Squire Fawcett and some other Gentlemen being a Hunting the day aforesaid, the Dogs running into a wood in the Parish of Finchley, near Highgate, in their Scent found the Body of the aforesaid Mr. Higgens, and made some stop, upon which the Gentlemen coming up saw the said Body lying on one side, and was so putrified they were fain to get the weather side: His Eyes were both Eaten or pocked out, but that which was most remarkable, the inside was eaten with Vermin, and the Skin in a manner whole; he had on a Black French Hat, and a Mourning Hat-band, with a white Cloth bound about his Head; he had also a Black Suit almost New, but that part which was downward Rotted away, by the dampness of the Earth: He had a pair of Fring'd Gloves, a new pair of Shoes, with steel Buckles, a Bam∣boon Cane with a Silver Head. The Gentlemen leave∣ing off their Game, orders were given for his removal to one Mr. Ralph Bradshaw's Barn, after which he was Cried in those parts, but no Relation could be given of him; then the Masters of the Parish sent for Mr. Hari∣son the Coroner, who issued out his Warrant to impan∣nel a Jury, which done, they sat upon the said Body at Mr. Bradshaw's House, formerly the Kings-Arms with∣out Highgate; his Shirt was marked with F. D. In his Pockets were two Neckcloths, some small matter of Money, and three written Sermons, each of which had the name of John Higgins; which Sermons are in the Hands of the aforesaid Mr. Bradshaw, where any Person may go and Read them: The Text of one was in the 19th. of St. Luke. and the latter part of the 13th. Verse, Occupy till I come. The other Isaith 53 the latter part of the 8th. Verse, For the Transgression of my
