S2182 C.20.f.10[69] 99888151 193211
The Seamans adieu to his pritty BETTY: Living near WAPPING; OR, A Pattern of true Love, &c. Sweet William to the Seas was prest, and left his Love behind; Whilst she her sorrows oft exprest and blam'd the fates unkind. To the Tune of, Tender hearts, &c. woodcut of woman and man holding hands woodcut of a flag waving at sea SWeet William and pritty Betty, They were loving, kind, and pritty; none alive could be more true, Yet at last; how they was crost, in brief I will declare to you. He aboard was then commanded, By no means he could withstand it, she was left with grief on shore; Discontented she lamented, for the loss of him therefore. Qd. he, my dearest, cease thy weeping Heavens have thee still in keeping, for if I return alive; Here is my hand, by Sea and Land, no creature shall my Love deprive. Thus with sighs and tears they parted She to him was Loyal hearted, but her tears could not prevail; She was left, of Ioy bereft, for then the Ship was under Sail. woodcut of woman with fan woodcut of ships, one sinking, dashed against the rocks But alas! Tempestuous Weather, Wind and Rain, & Storms together, thus the raging Seas did rore; Quoth he, my dear, I greatly fear, that I shall never see thee more. Thus the Claps of roaring Thunder, Rais'd the waves to all Mens wonder they were cast upon the Sand; The Ship was lost, and they was crost they being many Leagues from Land. Thus their goodly Ship staved, Nothing that they had was was saved but the lives of only three; We on shore, may grieve therefore, to think of their Extreamity. While their grief they were expressing Heavens now doth send a blessing, for a Ship that Sailed by, Which did see them, and did free them from that woful Distany. They were bound for London City, Where they found his true loves pitty, thus they did declare indeed; That William he, was in the Sea, which made her very heart to bleed. O my dearest Love, she cryed, Would I for thy sake had dyed, thou ly'st rouling in the Sea; Hear my Ditty, Lovers pitty, can you now forbear to weep? O ye Rocks and Waves so cruel, You have rob'd me of my Iewel, you have got my hearts delight; O come seize me Death, and ease me, thus she cryed day and night. Then the Messenger came creeping, All her friends was round her weeping seeing of her Misery; Then she cryed, as she dyed, love I long to be with thee. Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel, in Guiltspur-street.
