10174.5 24401707 27638
Articles to be enquired of within the Diocesse of Chester, in the visitation of the reuerende father in GOD, William Bishop of Chester. In the xxij yeere of the reigne of our most gratious soueraigne Lady Elizabeth. &c. Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes Maiestie. decorative border royal blazon with angel holding book and quill on one side and eagle on the other side HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE depiction of woman with shield and flaming sword FIDES depiction of woman holding sheep HVMILITAS depiction of lion with wings and bull with wings
Articles. Church and Churchyards. FIrst, whether your Church, Chappel, or Chaun∣cell be well and sufficiently repayred, and clen∣ly, kept, and the mansion house of your Parson or Vicar, with the buildings thereunto belon∣ging, likewise well and sufficiently repayred, and your Churchyard well fensed, and clenly kept? And if any default be made in the premisses: or your sayde Church, Chappell, or Churchyarde be abused or prophaned by any vnlawfull, or vnseemely acte, game, or exercise, as by Lordes of misrule, Summer lordes, or ladies, Pipers, Rushebearers, Moricedancers, Pedlers, Bearewardes, and such like. Then through whose default, and what be the names of the offenders in that behalfe. Waxe, 2 Whether any man hath pulled downe, or discouered any Church, Chauncell, or Chappell, or any part of any of them, any church Porche, Vestry, or Steeple, Almeshouse, Churchhouse, or such like, or haue pulled downe any belles, or haue felled or spoi∣led any wood, or tymber in any churchyardes? The benefice. 3 Whether your parish church be now vacant, or destitute of an incumbent, or no? Whether any Chappell where diuine ser∣uice hath accustomed to be said vsually, be without a Curate or no? And if they be, how long haue they bene so, and who is the Patrone, and who occupieth the parsonage, or vicarage house with the glebe lande, and taketh other the tythes and commodi∣ties belonging to the same? The parsonage 4 Whether any vitailing, tippling, or ale selling be kept, or vsed within the mansion house of any parson or vicar. Necessary or∣naments. 5 Whether you haue in your churche or chappell all thinges necessary, and requisite for common prayer and administration of the holy sacramentes, specially the booke of common prayer with the newe kalender, the Psalter, the Bible of the largest vo∣lume, the Homilies, both first and second tome, Erasmus Para∣phrasis translated into English, or for want thereof, Marlorates exposition vpon S. Matthewes Gospell, A comely and decent table standing on a frame for the Communion table, with a faire linnen cloth to lay vpon the same, and some couering of silke,
buckram or other such like for the cleane keeping thereof; a faire and comely communion cuppe of syluer, and a couer of siluer for the same, a comely large surples with wyde sleeues, A sure cof∣fer with two lockes and keyes for keeping of the Register booke and all other things necessary for the premisses, with a comely pulpit conueniently placed, and also a chest or box for the poore? Altars de∣faced.6 Whether in your churches and chappels all altars be vt∣terly taken downe and cleane remoued euen vnto the foundatiō, and the place where they stoode paued, and the wall whereunto they ioyned whyted ouer, and made vniforme with the rest, so as no breach or rupture appeare, And whether your Roode loftes be taken downe and altered, so that the vpper partes thereof with the soller or lofte be quite taken downe vnto the crosse beame, & that the said beame haue some conuenient creast put vpon the same? Implements vnlawfull.7 Whether all and euery Antiphoners, Masse bookes, Grailes, portesses, processionals, manuals, legendaries, and all other bookes of late belonging to your church or chappel, which serued for the supersticious Latine seruice, be vtterly defaced, rent, and abolished, and if they be not, through whose default that is, and in whose keeping they remaine? And whether all vesti∣mentes, albes, tunicles, stoles, phanons, pixes, paxes, handbels, sacringbelles, censers, chrismatories, crosses, candlestickes, holy waterstickes, Images, and such other reliques, and monuments of superstition and idolatrie bee vtterly defaced, broken and destroyed: And if not, where, and in whose custody they re∣maine? Seruice.8 Whether common prayer be vsed in your church or chap∣pell vpon Sondayes and holy dayes at conuenient houres, reue∣rently, distinctly, and in such order without any kinde of altera∣tion as is appointed by the booke of common prayer, and the lawes of this Realme? And whether your Minister so turne him selfe and stande in such place of your church or chauncell, as the people may best heare the same? And whether your Parson or Vicar do once euery quarter, at the least, in his owne proper per∣son, saye diuine seruice, and administer the Sacramentes, wea∣ring
a surplesse according vnto the Queenes Iniunctions and the lawes of this Realme? And whether the holy Sacramentes be duely and reuerently ministred in such maner as is set foorth by the same booke? And whether your Minister at al times vpon Sundayes and holy dayes, do we are in time of diuine seruice & administration of the Sacraments, the surplisse yea or no, or doe suffer any other to saye the common prayer, or minister either of the Sacraments in your Church, not wearing the same? Preaching, 9 Whether your Parson or Vicar be a preacher allowed, and hath preached, or caused to be preached foure sermons at the least euery yeere in your church, and what bee the names of him or those that so did preache, and whether they were lawfully licensed so to preache, if any other then your Parson or Vicar did preache the same? And whether if there be no Sermon, your Minister do reade for the most part euery sunday distinctly and plainely, some part of the Homilies appointed to be read, and the Queenes In∣iunctions euery quarter of a yeere or no? Catechisme 10 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do euery Sun∣daye and holy daye openly in the Church, call for, heare, and in∣struct, all the children, apprentises, and seruantes of both sexes that be of conuenient age within your parish, or at the least so many of them by course as the time will serue, and as hee may well heare and instruct for halfe an houre at the least, before or at the euening prayer, in the tenne Commandements, the Articles of the beliefe, and the Lordes prayer, and diligently examine and teache them the Catechisme, as it is nowe last allowed and set forth? And whether for that purpose doth hee take the names of them all, and by course call certaine of them by name euery sun∣day and holy daye, to come to learne the same Catechisme? Superstition & innouation, 11 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or any other within your Parish, be a fauourer of the Romish church or reli∣gion, or hath or doth mainteine or teache and doctrine contrarie or repugnant to any of the Articles agreed vpon by the Clergie in ye conuocation holden at London, An. Dom. 1562. And whe∣ther they haue publikely or secretly taught and doctrine tending to the discredit and dispraise either of the booke of Common
prayer, or of the Preachers and Ministers of the word and sacra∣ments, or of the receiued order for gouernement in the Church of England, or make any other Innouation? And whether they haue permitted any man so teaching or making such innouatiō? And whether any keepe and secret conuenticles, preachings, lec∣tures, or readings, or priuate Communions, contrary to the law, and what be their names? Curate.12 Whether any person or persons not being ordered at the least for a Deacon, or licensed by the Ordinarie, do saye Commō prayer openly in your Church or Chappell, or any not being at the least a Deacon, do solemnize Matrimonie or administer the Sacraments, and what he or they be that so do? And whether the Parson, Vicar, or Farmer of your benefice, do cause or suffer any Curate to serue your Churche before he be examined and admit∣ted by the Ordinary or his deputie in writing, and shew the same to the Churchwardens. Communion.13 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate hath admitted any to the receiuing of the holy Communion aboue xx. yeeres of age that cannot saie by heart the Catechisme, the Lordes prayer, the Articles of the faith, and the ten Commaundementes in En∣glishe, or any aboue xiiii. yeeres of age and vnder xx. that cannot saye the Catechisme set forth in the booke of common prayer, or hath admitted any of any other parish to receiue the holy Com∣munion without reasonable cause or speciall license of their own minister? or whether hath he admitted to receiue the holy Com∣munion and open and notorious blasphemer, fornicatour, adulte∣rer, drunkard, or euill liuer, by whom the Congregation is offen∣ded, without dewe penaunce first done to the satisfaction of the congregation, or any malicious person yt is notoriously knowen to be out of charitie, or that hath done any open wrong to his neighbour by worde or deede, without dewe reconciliation first made to the partie that is wronged? Baptisme.14 Whether your Font be sweetly kept and renewed from time to time with cleane and fresh water, and whether any Mi∣nister leauing the vse of the Font, do Christen or Baptize in any basons or other prophane vessels not customablie vsed in the
Church before time? Or whether your Minister do Baptize or Christen any out of the face of the Church and Congregation, & at any other time then vpon Sundayes or holy dayes without speciall cause, or without Godfathers and Godmothers, & whe∣ther any person or persons bee admitted to answere as Godfa∣thers or Godmothers at the Christening of any childe, except hee or shee haue before receiued the holy Communion, and can saye by heart the Articles of the Christian faith, the ten Commande∣ments of God, and the Lordes praier, and will recite the same be∣fore the Minister if he or she be thereunto required? Register of Christenings▪ 15 Whether the Register booke of all Christenings, Ma∣riages and Burials that happē in your parish from time to time, be duely kept: and the same Christeninges, Mariages, and Bu∣rials, entred into the same booke by your Minister according to the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions? Mariage. 16 Whether your minister hath maried any persons priuatly in any house or corner out of the Church or face of the Congre∣gation, or the Banes not being thrise solemnelie on three Sun∣daies or holy dayes asked in the parish Church where such per∣sons dwelled, or any such person or persons maried at any other parish church or chappell? And whether your minister hath ma∣ried any Infantes, or children vnder age, or any within the de∣grees prohibited by Gods lawes and the lawes of this Realme, or any that hath a husband or wife liuing, and if he haue done so, then who be the parties, & who were present at any such mariage, and in what place was the same solemnized? Churching  women. 17 Whether your Minister do Church any vnmaried wo∣men, after they haue bene deliuered of their children begottē vn∣lawfully, before they haue acknowledged their faultes openly, according to the order prescribed by ye Ordinarie or his deputie? Visitation of the sicke and Buriall. 18 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate be diligent in visiting the sicke, and comforting them, and do moue them ear∣nestly, especially when they make their testaments, to cōsider the neede of the poore, and to giue to their boxe or chest their charita∣ble deuotion? And whether they burie the dead without any popish ceremonies or superstition in such Christian and comely
maner as is prescribed by the booke of Common prayer? Perambulation.19 Whether for the reteining of the perambulation of the circuit of your parish, the Minister and Clarke with the Church∣wardens and certaine of the substanciall men of the parish, in the dayes of Rogacions, walke about your parish according to the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions? And whether doe they vse in such perambulation any banners, crosses, handbelles, or any such like popish ceremonies, other then is prescribed and permitted by the booke of common prayer and the lawes of this Realme? Admonition to the Church∣wardens.20 Whether for ye putting of the churchwardēs & swornemē the better in remembrance of their duetie in obseruing and no∣ting such as offend in not comming to diuine seruice, your Mi∣nister or Reader do openly euery Sunday, after he haue read the second lesson at morning & euening prayer, monish & warne the Churchwardens and sworne men, to looke to their charge in this behalfe, and to obserue who contrarie to the said statute offende in absenting them selues negligently or wilfully from their pa∣rish Church or Chappell, or vnreuerently as is aforesaid, vse thē selues in time of diuine seruice? Pluralities.21 Whether hath your Parson or Vicar any moe benefices or spirituall promotions then one, how many, and in what coun∣trie be they, what are their names, and who is the Patrone of euery of them? Residence.22 Whether is your Parson or Vicar resident, and dwel∣ling vpō his benefice or no? if he be residēt, whether doth he keepe the parsonage or vicarage with the glebe and other his tithes & commodities in his owne handes, or doth he demise the same or any part thereof to his Patrone or any other person or persons? what parcels are so demised, to whom, & for what rent? if he be not resident, or absent aboue lxxx. dayes in the yeere, then whe∣ther doth he demise his benefice to his Curate? and if he be able to dispend xx. pound by yeere, doth he distribute the fourtieth part thereof yeerely to the poore of the parish or no? Symonie.23 Whether you Parsons or Vicars haue come to their be∣nefices by any Symonie, fraude or deceipte, or by any confe∣rence or agreement of friends, or by any other bond, compositiō
or agreemēt, or by any other colourable pact, or vnlawfull meane whatsoeuer, or be vehemently suspected or defamed therof? And whether in performance of any such pact, couenaunt or promise, there hath bene any bond or lease made betweene the Patrone & Incumbent directly or indirectly? Suspected women. 24 Whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate, do keepe any su∣spected woman in his house, or be an incontinent person, giuen to dronkennesse or idlenes, or be a haunter of Tauernes, Alehou∣ses, or suspected places, a Hunter, Hauker, Dicer, carder, Tabler, Swearer, or otherwise giue any euill example of life? And whe∣ther his apparell bee comely and graue as becommeth his cal∣ling and function? Parish Clarke 25 Whether the Parish Clarke be appointed according to the auncient custome of the parish? And whether hee be not obe∣dient to the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, especially in the time of celebration of diuine seruice, or of the Sacramentes, or in any preparation thereunto? And whether he be able & ready to reade the first Lesson, the Epistle, and the Psalmes with answere to the suffragies as is vsed, and whether he keepe not the bookes and ornamentes of the Church faire and cleane, & cause the church & quier, the Communion table, the Pulpit and the Font, to bee made decent and cleane against the feruice time, the Communiō, Sermon, and Baptisme? Churchwar∣dens. 26 Whether haue your Churchwardens assisted your Mini∣ster in his office and function frō time to time, and whether haue they done their diligence to bring such into the Church as stand gazing & talking in the Churchyard, or frequent & lurke in Ale∣houses or tippling houses in ye time of diuine seruice, & whether haue they bene careful and diligent to see good order and silence kept in the Church during the time of Sermons & Seruice, and whether haue they diligently noted the names of all such parties euery Sunday and holy daye, as haue bene absent from diuine seruice at any time, and leuied the forfaiture of xii. pēce for euery absence from common prayer, according to the statute, and put the same to the vse of the poore of the parish? And if they haue of∣fended n any of the premisses, then howe often haue they so of∣fended,
and what be their names, and what particular summes of mony haue bene forfeited that waye, and by whome, since the last visitation, and howe much of such forfeitures haue bene leuied by the Churchwardēs, and by them deliuered to the vse of the poore of the parish, and to whom hath the same bene deliuered? Churchwar∣dens accompt.27 Whether your Churchwardens haue yeerely giuen an accompt of the Church goodes committed to their charge, and of other their receipts and expenses? And whether haue they sold any bels or other church goodes without consent of the Ordina∣rie fist had in writing? And whether haue they employed all such goodes, receiptes, and summes of mony, to the vse of the church or no? and what be the names of the offenders? Churchwar∣dens, concea∣lers.28 Whether the Churchwardens and sworne men in former yeeres, haue of any priuate corrupt affection concealed any crime or other disorder done in their times, and haue not presented the same, and if so, then what faultes haue they so concealed, & what were the names of such Churchwardens and sworne men, so concealing the same? Collectors for the poore.29 Whether haue ye Collectors for the poore of the Parish, and whether do they their duetie in gathering and distributing the Almes of the Parishioners, and whether haue any Collec∣tors any money in their handes not accōpted for, or not bestowed vpon the poore? And whether be there any of abilitie within your parish, that wilfully or obstinatly refuse to giue reasonably to the reliefe of the poore? Ringing and tolling of bels.30 Whether when any Christian bodie is in passing, the bell be tolled to moue the people to praye for the sicke person, especi∣ally in the greater townes where the sicke person dwelleth nere vnto the Church, and whether after the tyme of his or their pas∣sing out of this world, there be any more ringing but one short peale before the buriall, and another short peale after the buriall? And whether on all Saintes day after Euening prayer, there be any ringing at all in your Church or Chappell, or any other supersticious ceremonies vsed, tending to the maintenance of the Popish purgatorie or prayer for the dead, and who they bee that vse or doe the same? And whether there be any ringing on
Sondaies or holy dayes in the seruice time, or betweene Mor∣ning prayer and the Letanie, or at any other times, contrarie to good order or Lawe? Scholema∣sters. 31 What Scholemasters haue you within your Parish or Chappelrie, that teache either opēly or priuately in any schoole, gentlemans house or els where, and whether be they of good & sincere religion, and licensed by the Bishop of the Diocesse to teach, in writing vnder his seale, and whether bee they diligent in teaching and bringing vp youth, and to instruct them in godli∣nes and vertue, and especially in Master Nowels Catechisme lately set forth? And whether teache they any thing contrarie to the religion now godlily established, or do not cause their childrē to resort vnto the Church to heare diuine seruice & Sermons? Deanes Rural and Sumners 32 Whether the Archdeacon, Chancellor, Commissarie, Of∣ficiall, or any other vsing Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction in this Dio∣cesse, their registers or actuaries, Apparitors or Sumners, haue at any time winked at, and suffered any adulteries, fornications, incestes, or other faultes or offences, to passe and remaine vnpu∣nished and vncorrected, for money, rewardes, bribes, pleasure, friendship, or any other parciall or affectionate respect? or haue permitted any penance without special licence of his Ordinarie? Masters and Dames. 33 Whether all fathers, mothers, masters & dames of your parish, cause their children, seruants, and apprentices, both man∣kinde and womankinde, being aboue six yeeres of age, and vnder twenty, which haue not learned the Cathechisme, to come to the church on the Sundayes & holy dayes, at ye times to thē appoin∣ted, or at the least such or so many of them as your Minister shall appoint, and there diligently and obediently to heare, and to bee ordered by the minister, vntill such time as they haue learned the same Catechisme, and what bee the names of those that doe not cause their children, seruants and apprentices, so to come to the Church to be instructed and examined? Absents from the Church. 34 Whether ye people of your parish, especially housholders, hauing no lawful excuse to be absent, do faithfully and diligētly endeauour them selues to resort with their children, and seruants, to their parish Church or Chappell, on the holydayes, & chiefly
vpon Sundayes, to Morning and Euening prayer, and then & there abide orderly & soberly during the time of Cōmon prayer, Homilies, Preachings, and other seruice of God there vsed, reue∣rently and deuoutly giuing them selues to the hearing thereof, & who they be that either negligently or wilfully absent thēselues, or come very late to the Church vpon Sundayes especially, and how long hath any of your parish absented him selfe from his pa∣rish Church, or who be they that walke, talke, or otherwise vnre∣uerently behaue them selues in the Church, or vse any gaming abroade, or pastime in any house, or sit in the streetes or Church∣yarde, or in any Tauerne or Alehouse vpon the Sunday or holy daye in the time of Common prayer, Sermon, or reading of the Homilies, either before noone or after noone? Not Commu∣nicating. 35 Whether there be any in your parish, man or woman, be∣ing of conuenient age, that hath not receiued the holy Commu∣nion thrise at the least this last yeere, and namely at Easter last (or thereabout) for once, and what be their names, and for what cause in your iudgement they do absteine from the holy Cōmu∣nion? and whether any haue receiued the holy Communiō in any other parish Church or Chappell then their owne, and for what causes in your opinion? Christnings out of the pa∣rish. 36 Whether do you know any such parentes, hauing children borne that were not Christened at their own parish Church, and for what cause they haue not bene so Christened there, or do you know, haue heard, or vehemently suspect any such parētes, whose children haue bene Christened by any Popish priest, or otherwise then is now lawfully allowed by her Maiesties Lawes and In∣iunctions? Suppressors of Testaments. 37 Whether there be any within your parish that minister the goodes of those which be dead without lawfull authoritie, or any that suppresse the testamentes or last will of the dead, or any executor that hath not fulfilled the Testators will, especially such as haue not discharged such legacies as are bequeathed to the Church, or to Orphanes, poore maides mariages, highwayes, schooles, or other godly vses, and what be their names? Testaments not proued. 38 Whether do you knowe any housholder or other person
whatsoeuer, within your Parish or Chappelrie, that is deceased, that haue made their last willes & Testament and the same not hitherto proued nor administration taken, from the Ordinarie or other Iudge competent, of the goodes, debtes, and cattals of the said decedent? if any such be, expresse their names, & of them who vnlawfully do deteyne any the said goodes, debts, or cattals. The othe for an Inuētarie. 39 Whether doth your Deane Rural, vsually sweare al such executors and administrators that proue Testaments, or take ad∣ministrations before him, to exhibite a true and perfect Inuenta∣rie of all such goods, debts, and cattalles, as euery such person died possessed of, or for any priuate respectes forbeareth to mini∣ster such oth vnto them, and whether do you know or haue heard your Deane hath done so at any time? Leases not pri∣sed in Inuen∣taries. 40 Whether do you knowe any the Executors or Admini∣strators of any person or persons deceased, that dwelled in your Parish or Chappelrie, that haue not inserted all such lease or lea∣ses, or other demise for terme of one or moe yeeres, in the In∣uentarie of the goodes, debtes, and cattals of the said deceased, at such time as they procured the said Testamentes to be proued, or administration of the said goodes to be to them orderly commit∣ted? or haue not procured the same leases to be prised and valued among other the goodes and cattals of the saide decedent, for the benefite of the wife, children, or of others to whom the benefite of them ought to appertaine, and whether do you know, haue heard or beleeue, your Deane hath borne, winked at, or willingly suf∣fered such lease or leases for his priuate commoditie, to be left out of the said Inuentarie? Hospitals and Spittlehouses 41 Whether your Hospitalles, Spittles, and Almes houses be well and godly vsed, according to the foundations and ancient ordinances of the same? whether there be any placed in them o∣ther the poore, impotent, and needy persons, that haue not wher∣with or whereby to liue? Incest. &c. 42 Whether there be any that be maried in degrees forbid∣den, or that haue maried two wiues, or two husbandes, both li∣uing, or that liue not together with their wiues, and what be their names? any maried that haue made precontractes, any that haue
maried without banes thrise solemnely asked, or that haue ma∣ried foorth of their parish Church, where they ought to haue solemnized mariage? Vsurers.43 Whether any person or persons within your parish, haue committed vsurie contrarie to an Act against vsurie, made in the xxxvii. yeere of the reigne of the late King Henry the eight, and lately reuiued, and what are the names of such Vsurers? & what is the maner of their vsurie? Sorcerie.44 Whether there be any man or woman in your parish, that vseth witchcraft, sorcerie, charmes, or vnlawfull prayer, or inuo∣cations in Latin or English, or vpon any Christian body or beast, or any that resorteth to the same for councell or helpe, and what be their names? Alehouses, Markets and Fayres.45 Whether be there any Inkeepers, Alewiues, Vitailers, or Tipplers, yt suffer or do admit any person or persons in their houses, to eate, drinke, or playe at Cardes, Tables, or such like games in time of Common prayer, or Sermō on the Sundays and holy dayes, and whether there bee any shops open on Sun∣dayes or holydayes, or be there any Butchers, Pedlars, or others that vse to sell meate and other thinges, in the time of Common prayer, Preaching, or reading of the Homilies? And whether in any Fayres or common Markets, falling on the Sunday, there be any showing of any wares before the diuine seruice be done in the forenoone? Contention & Drunkennes.46 Whether there be in your Parish any that be malicious, contentious, or vncharitable persons, seeking the vniust vexation of their neighbours, scoldes, common swearers, or blasphemers of the name of God, any fornicatours, adulterers, incestuous persons, bawdes, or receuiours of such incontinent persons, or har∣borers of women with childe which be vnmaried, conueying or suffering them to go away before they haue done any penance, or make satisfaction to the congregation, or any persons that are vehemently suspected of such faultes, or that be not of good name and fame touching such crimes and faultes, any common drun∣kerds, ribaudes, or other notorious euill liuers? Papistrie, Masse and Priestes.47 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, openly or pri∣uately
saye masse or other seruice forbidden, or heare the same? And whether do you knowe any popish priestes or runnagate persons, that do preach or minister the Sacraments otherwyse then they are now vsed, or that doth vse shrift and auricular con∣fession, or make haliwater, or halybread, or blesse palmes, or prac∣tise any such like Romish ceremonies, or do not frequent cōmon prayer, or els do resort secretly or openly into your Parish. And whose house do they so resort vnto, and of whom are they harbo∣red, & what be the names of such popish priestes or runnagates, & such as so harbour them? and whether know you any that keepe any secret conuenticles, readings, preachings, or lectures, con∣trary to the Lawe? Rebellious bookes. 48 Whether be there any person or persons, Ecclesiasticall or Temporall within your parish, or els where within this Dio∣cesse, that of late hath reteined or kept in their custody, or that reade, sell, vtter, disperse, carrie, or deliuer to others, any English bookes, set forth of late yeeres at Louaine, or in any other place beyond the seas, by Harding, Dorman, Allen, Sanders, Sta∣pleton, Marshall, Bristow, or any of them, or by any other En∣glish Papiste, either against the Queenes Maiesties supremacie in matters Ecclesiasticall, or against true Religion, and Catho∣like doctrine now receiued & established by common authoritie within this Realme, and what their names and surnames are? Beades and Primers. 49 Whether be there any in our Parish that vseth to praye in English or in Latin, vpon beades, or other such like things, or vpon any superstitious popish Primer or other like booke, and what be their names? Adulterers. 50 How many Adulteries, Incestes, and Fornications haue bene committed within your Parish or Chappelrie, since the last visitation, and how many offenders in those faultes haue bene put to penance and openly corrected? W. Cestren.
