11497 99841450 6035
AN APOLOGIE FOR VVOMEN∣KINDE. Odi prophanum vulgus et arceo Fauetc linguis, Catmina non prius Audita Musarum Sacerdos, Virginibus Faemimsque canto. LONDON Printed by Ed. Allde for William Ferebrand, and are to be solde at his Shop in Popes-head Alley neere the Royall Exchange. 1605.
TO THE QVEENES MOST SACRED MAIESTIE. GReat Queene, at first this taske I took in hand, Thinking Eliza and your selfe to sing, And for examples your sole names to bring, As mightye Princes of the Womens band, As two choise rulers of our Britissh Land: As splendent mirrours of dame Natures wealth, The poores, afflicteds, and th'oppresleds health. But when my strength a space I tryed had, Strin in deepe conceits to pen my minde: My wit starke dull I found my sight meere blinde, My hands did tremble and my wordes were bad, Not one rich sentence galntly was clad. Nor wonder was it: form bookes I finde, Some Birds, the Sunnes bright beames do feare by kinde.
Wherefore, soone as I came to see my fall From Sky-built hopes which had borne vp my heart, I straight resolued on another part, Briefly to writ in sence more generall An Elegle, in The me vnmisticall; And hg it by your Princely Altars light: Where Lampes of grace might keepe it still in spight. Your Maties. humble & obedient servant: I. G.
AN APOLOGIE for VVoman-kinde. MVses diuine which on Pernassus dwell, Bathing your selues in Pegasaean well; Infuse high thoughts into my dullard sprite. And guide my trembling hands, whilst I indite The sacred honours of your fellowe Sexe, Which mens vnlawfull tirannye doth vexe. And you three Sisters whome we Graces name, Fayre spotlesse Virgins without fault or blame, Bestowe some beautyes on my rugged rimes That they may please our more then carping times,
And in full health preserue themselues (at least) From sharp-tongue dartes of many headed beast. Immortall Nectar in my minde distill, That I may write (with fauourable quill) Womens admired gloryes and then praise. That may be read in our next Nephewes dayes. And you bright Lampes which to the world giue Light, (Mightie Commaunders of the greatest might) Braue Ladyes, sage Matrones, comely Damoselles, Whose armed thoughts resist all wicked spelles, Be you my Load-starres, guide me without sayle, Direct this little Barque (wherein I sayle) That it may scape the sandes of high disdaine, And to the Porte of fauours safely game. Full well I wot, this subject was more fitte For peerlesse Homers or for Virgils witte, The Florence-Petrarkes, Tassoes, or Ronsardes, Sidnyes or Spencers; vnto whome, rewardes,
Garlands of Bayes by Poets graunted are. Yet sithence one whose temples still are bare, Whose fruitlesse braine is like a barren rocke, A stonye ground, or ouer-dryed stocke, Could thus much sing: what might some others say! Swannes notes excelling on their dying day. Nor is it pride that makes me thus presume A great Atlanticke burthen to assume. A labour which might Hercules beseeme, Or one whose same the world should more esteeme. It's iust dutie, to a cause neglected, By all abler persons vnrespected, That makes me take this Pencill in mine hand (The most vnskilfull Paynter in our Land) And on this playned table vndertake, Of your high worth some portraiture to make. Would God I had renoum'd Apelles skill, Then might my worke well answer to my will.
But why doe I the artes of men desire Who Chymons are, vnlesse first set on fire, By kindely heat, whence all their science flowes, Which afterwards so bright resplendent showes? Within this Laberinth I hope to tread With fearlesse foote led by your beauties thred, So as no vglye Minotaur, of spight Shall dare with hellish mouth at me to bite. Nor gainst me snarling dog tooth'd Momus barke, But say I chaum like to the morning Larke, In musique straines a measur'd harmonye For women-kinde, Natures Epitomye. And as for me: one louing kinde regarde, Or freindly looke, shall be my sole rewarde. Now muse no longer stay, thy race beginne, Declare dame Euahs state before her sinne Was by the Thunder-darter punished, By paines enioyn'd vnto all women-head.
Shewe what in Edens garden she hath beene, Let at the least her gloryes past be seene. When other creatures God created had, And sawe that all were good and none were bad, Al's carelesse man, whome he as best did prize Seated to dwell in earthly Paradize: Then, there he framed passing faire the rest With knowledge and with wisdome chiefly blest. Woman replenished with excellence, Conceipt, and gloden streaming eloquence. Her splendent hayres were Amber coloured. And like fresh flowers in Aprill sauoured. Her smooth forhead that no arte did borrowe Was like the sea which no winde doth furrowe, Her vaulted eyebrowes made of Ebeny, The horned Moone resembled in the Skye. Her sparkling eyes as two cleer starres did shine, Full of sweet grace and maiestie diuine.
Her cares, whose shape my thoughts doe farre surpasse, Were like two Roses in a Christall glasse, Her white pretty Eagle-nose descended, As a mount amidst a plaine it hanged. Enuie herselfe beholding it had shame, Because therein she-nothing found to blame. Two red flowers set in milke, her cheekes did seeme, Where his strong holde the Shooting-Boy did deeme, Her mouth which did embalme the aire about, At Corrall lippes did send hersweete breath out, Shewing two ranckes of pearles well polished, Which hedg'd her tongue by Suada furnished. But what meane I, in short wordes to comprise, That which in ample theame I might deuise? Her body beauties store-house, God did make And not from mudde, but Adames side did take, The matter whence he did the worke compose, (Durt was ore base a subiect to be chose.)
So as her essence, though not different, (As two times flood) was more excellent Then Adams was, my speech I will confirme, Least that I seeme it vainely to affirme. Being the first thinges God did onely giue, The second plancals life the third did liue, Endu'd with sence: reason the fourth obtaind, And so the last more worthinesse still gaind. This certainely well vnderstood the man, When at the first sight boasting he began To say, out of his flesh she had been tooke: (So soone as from his brasen sleepe he wooke.) This perfectly the subull Serpent knew, When her he tempted, with his: Is it true? To winne the man he thought it was no doubt, That was his feare the woman would stand out. Wherefore to her he did addresse his wiles, Wherewith mankinde hee daily still beguiles.
Who though at first she did well shun his sleights, Yet (ah) at length he catch'd her by his baites. Well what did Adam? he did not deny, But cat the fruite forbidden readily, And after deem'd his case could not be bad, Telling by Euahs meanes he sinned had To high lehouah punisher of vice, Which cal'd them foorth hidden in Paradice, And tooke the rule out of the womans handes, Making her thrall vnto subiections bandes. That was before mans pow'rfull gouernesse. His mistresse, loue, his wife, his Empresse. Yet did he not her cast in slauery, Nor any baser foule seruilitye. But lest her guidance to her husbands will, Onely for order yeilding to him still So Abell was subiected vnto Cain, Yet Cadets Iudge th'authoritie is vaine.
And 'tis a point that euery one can tell, The younger borne, most what doe farre excell. Now let some Tyger-bred clowne speake his minde, Rayling his fill against all women kinde, Terming them wanton, lustfull, letcherous, Mincing decemblers, slye, fine, vicious. Let some grimme Syre his Dame in furye strike, Which is his pleasures mate, his half his like, In whose faire face Roses and Lillyes meet, Whose looke is smiling and whose speech is sweet. Sith gainst all lawes and iustice such doe deale, From malefactors well may one appeale. Yet would I fayne their proper vice once learne, Which makes mens talke to be of them so sterne. Are they accustom'd to that filthy sinne, Which is extol'd by beastly Aretin? The shame of Greece, Spayne, Italy and France, Where men gainst kinde doe spend their cheuisance.
Ah, ah noe. Nor is it Venerie, Men brag of that in greatest brauerie: But faultes in diuers subiectes alter not, A blame in one in each one is a blot. Besides, the men are causers of those crimes. That women weakely doe commit some times. Witnesse their carefull suites, their instruments, Their Syrens Songes, their silent allurements. Bribed speakers, inuentions curious, Iustes, daunces, presences, letters amourous, their fained frenzies, harder heartes tomoue, Their oathes, their vowes, their sickenes growne from loue Doth one deny all these and lend none care? With some base Peasant she dooth make good cheare. Plasso reportes, which sought to make her sinne, Tis must keepe out, there is a key within. So as to hinder sinister bad talke, Many doe chuse full secretly to walke.
In wickednesse: thinking faultes hidden small, Though eyes there are which plainly see them all. Well; sundry times of women I haue read, Which for their honours, now long since are dead. As Lucia and chaste Lucretia, The Damesels Hyppe and Orythia▪ But of one man as yet I neuer heard, Who for his chastitie tooke such reward. Then fondlings cease the female sexe to blame, None truth can speake that turneth to their shame. Their very paines by God to them enioyn'd, Shewe how their mindes to goodnes are enclin'd. For 'tis a rule; God sends his troubles such As be his creatures able, lesse or much. Atlas alone hath chargd the heauens to bear, Rich Carbuncles in golde men onely weare, And vertues vnto women proper are. Are you affected vnto pietye,
Deuouter godlinesse or charitye? Example take the Virgin bless'd Mary, Whose wombe conceiu'd our healthfull mistery. Here might I say women did honour more, Christ lowe abas'd, in all appearance poore, Then his Disciples or Apostles durst, 'Tis manly wisdome still to seare the wurst. And here to tell, the labour were not spilt How many Schooles and Hospitalles are built By womens wondrous liberalitie, The true perfect patternes of high bountie. Als' might I well from Pagan writers shewe Who onely rules of blinded reason knewe The famous zeale which they in women deem'd, And therefore iudg'd them by their Gods esteem'd. Hence in large sorte to honour them they raign'd, Many the place of Goddesses had gain'd. As Iuno, Cibell, and Minerua,
Venus, Themis, Ceres and Diana. Hence some aliue to heau'n they haue vp borne, Whose blessed mindes this earthly mudde did scorne. Hence all the vertues female haue they nam'd, As, Peace, and Iustice, Truth, with Faith vnblam'd, And honestye which neuer makes asham'd But I an hundreth other poynts doe see That in my iudgement farre more needfull bee. And now me thinks my selfe am like vnto Some one who doth into a Garden goe, Of greene hearbes a Posie for to gather, Yet there knowes not which to take most rather. So I the best thinges striue for to propound, Yet which are they my wisdome cannot sound' Wherefore me pardon deere Mineruaes brood, If that my choyse or order be not good: Of womens loue to men first will I tell Reasons apparent why to prize them well.
For by these two Gods lawe is full defin'd, Loue vnto him and vnto humane kind. And of this loue our Countrye claimes chiefe part, The next our Parents looke for in our hart. Yoke mates and Children doe a third require, The fourth our neighbours at our hands desire. Now in all sortes women more loyall are Then any men. Long circumstance I spare: Eke many Histories I will omitte, Which to declare this argument are fitte. To ayde her Countrye, faire Macaras Her life did spend also Protogeus, Pandora, Pleria and Theopa, Pasithea with braue hair'd Eubula Did lesse respect their owne prospertie. Then their deere Countries sweet felicitie. The beautifull Dame Cratissiclea, (King Cleominos mother of Sparta
Her selfe an hostage dared to present, And vndergoe a willing banishment From seruitude her Citie for to saue. Such actes as these, some lostye straines do craue. Where were the men which voluntary dy'd When these occurrents fearfull did betide? Where were become their big Thrasonicke wordes, Their glistring armours, and their thrilling swordes? 'Tis true I see, as I haue seene most ofte: The hart's most hardy dwell with tongues most soste. Solynus saith, there was a Roman wife Who with her dugges preseru'd her mothers life, Into the prison hauing leaue to enter, Dayly to viewe her poore staruing mother. So Nicon olde Xantippe nourished Her Father, whome the Iaylor famished. Shewe me more loue, shewe me more constantnes In any men: shewe me more faithfulnes.
I silently passe by Hypsipila, With hundreths more like young Aigena, That haue excel'd in trusty loyaltye, The very band of all societye. Chelon is by Plutarch honoured, For perfect freindship to her spousall bed. Who more esteem'd her husband then a Crowne, Wa'st euer seene mens pride did so come downe? The Spartane Dames their Theseaus did conserue, And from deaths present daunger them preserue: Changing their garments with them secretly, And so restoring them to liberty, Remain'd themselues fell, feirce rage to endure, (For nothing else to looke for were they sure) Alcestis did to saue her husband dye, Admetus King of wealthy Thessaly, Canna no longer cared for liues breath Then that she might reuenge Sinatus death.
Saxo the Dane, Gunilda doth extoll, Porcia the Romane, Liuy doth enroll, Pliny doth praise the fickely fishers wife, Who for to ease his paines despisde her life. So Alexander ab Alexandra, And Aelian, commend full many moe, Which for to worke their husbands case and joy; Their owne griefe nought regarded, or annoy. But vnderstand, it is not mine account The Sunnes bright beames in number iust to count. Likewise a Fountaine that is neuer drye, Doth need many buckets it to emptye. Further how Children deerly they affect, Or else their neighbours friendly doe respect; For me to shewe were meere simplicitie, Sith all confesse thereof the veritie. To proue that fire hath heat, or water colde, Is in no dout or danger to be bolde.
Wherefore Ile túrne me to another theame, Long while enough I sowed haue this seame. In Prudence, Iustice, Liberalitye (Whereof Kings boast) and Magnanimitye: Hereby some short examples ile declare That in no poynt women ought wanting are. Those that can gouerne well, no vertues want, But of braue Queenes the number is not scant That in times past with glory and renowne, Many a Kingdome rules haue and towne. The warlike Almaignes this doe testifie, So doth the Carthaginian Historie. The Blacke Moores brag of hardie Meroe, The Bohemians of their Valasque, Large Siria commends Zenebia, The grim sterne Goths their Amalasuntha. Sage Theodora did the Empire sway, And men vnworthy, thence did chace away.
Semiramis drye Egipt did possesse, Whome Nilus ouce-flowings still doe blesse. And doth not England sing Eliza's prayse, Who farre excelled all before her dayes? Was neuer Prince which ruled with more peace, Or did more gently subjects paines release, And terrors vnto proud high mindes encrease. Out Zoylus and all thy hellish traine, 'Tis not foule spight that can pure vertue staine. Whiles Sunne and Moone their courses keep in vre. Womens heroïcke prayses shall endure: Well haue their woorthy sp'rits this merited, In whome all fine inuentions first were bred. The seauen Artes that men call liberall, Were by the Sisters nine first found out all. Gesture seemely and demeanours comely, We attribute to the Graces onely. Cumea wrote the Romane policye.
Sapho neuer like for Poesie. In Rome a Statue dedicated was To Gracchus mistresle that wel speaking Lasse. Pithagoras learned of Theocia, Wie Socrates of faire Diotina, Plato none indged like Archenassa. With thousands more, which men themselues do note And I it needlesse iudge them all to quote, Whose famous science was by men admit'd, As if that God their knowledge had inspir'd. Yea at this day how many may we see, That heere in England now still liuing bee, Whose pennes and tongues (when as it is their will) Farre doe excell each other humane skill? I silently of purpose passe their names, Sith nought my speech can adde vnto their fames. Ah but men blame all womens secrecye, Their fearfull mindes, changing and cowardly,
'Tis true that malice neuer wants a marke, And huge great fires arise oft from a sparke. For if by reason we this matter trye, We nothing finde therein saue forgerye; Not that I meane all women to excuse, Al's for some fewe I would not all abuse. We say in sinne he sildome ought to moue, who fitly can another well reproue. What thing more common then disloyaltie 'Mong greatest friends professing amitie? Ours is the golden worlde: the loue of golde Is more this day then it hath beene of olde. A somme of Coyne buyes honours, loue and freinds, Men are no longer wolues to men, but fiends, that which you tell to him is to a stone, Yet all he babbles so soone as you are gone. But in times past, that hardy female band, Which in one night, of Danes did free our land;
She who from kinde Pisistratus conceald, That which her torments might haue well reueald, The banquet Cryassau, and Brutus wife, Shew in what silence they can spend their life, As for to fall together by the eares, With Gunnes, and Swordes, with Halberds or with speares For some small toyes not worth the speaking off, A icast in mirth, or merrie nipping scoff, It is not womens custome I professe, Ill should I doe a truth not to confesse, Tis true they judge the fight of armes is least, Man by his reason differs from a beast; Likewise Sage nature hath not wrought so strong, Their Corpes, nor armes, ne yet their legges so long, As mens she hath: but framed them moste fit, To entertaine each combatte with their witte, And mids' a thousand merrie pretty sweetes, Repell an onset twixt a paire of sheetes,
Their handes are made for musicke instruments, Not for to brandish warlike complements, Further I deeme such hommasse fortitude, In woman kinde small vertue doth include, Better doth Venus kerchiefe to them sit, Or lunoes state, with wise Minerues witte, Then brutish, rude, and cruell killing armes, Of bloudy Mars, from whom comes naught but harmes And truth to say, without all spight or hate, Those mannish quean sare moste degenerate: Yet if some others aske for hardinesse, With stout courage, and vndaunted bouldnesse, Well can I shew, so as each one will graunt Women at neede can be full valiaunt. Call me to minde braue lasses of old daies, Who gained pryses in Olimpicque plaies, Remember we their greene banke Tritonida, For fencing, for ryding Themerinda,
Where also 'twas their ordinary guise, To wrastle, runne, and leape for excercise. Forget not we how Archidamia With her great crue, beat Pyrrhus from Sparta. Nor yet the same of one-dugd Amazons, Who in large compasse planted their Cantons. who hath not heard of lewish Deborah? Iudith, and Iael that slewe Sisara? I blush to name the maid of Orleance (Ah shame) which drest our armyes out of France. The fixt King Henryes daughtet of our land, Preseru'd her father from a murth'ring hand. But what meane I to sayle thus farre from shore? Stormes ofte arise, which none did doubt before. If that a thousand tongues possesse I might, And eke ten thousand hands well skild to write, A brest of strong brasse with some Steutors voyce, Yet would I rather if I had my choyce,
The Startes and sandes to number vndertake; Then of all women true rehearfall make, Which for admired vertues mertit praise, A subiect large to taske an hundroth daies. Better I think it heere to stay the course Of my weake pen, vntyr'd in this discourse, Mens hardines I pleased am to sed, Their knowledge, strength, and wisdome liketh mee, Their massye corps I meane not to dispraise, Nor ought besides whence prayses iust they raise. Yet when they needes comparisons will make, And womens gloryes violently take. I say that valour with magnificence, honoured vertue and all excellence, In that sweet kinde doe principally shine, Casing it seeme to be the most diuine. Therefore wise men that choose in verite Wiues, amore, ne, ore, et re
Ought them as equals in each point t' esteeme, And but for order them inferiours deeme, Wherefore fine Ladies, graue Mattons, Damesels, Let your pure mindes withstand al wicked ipels, Yeelde you your selues to ordinance deuine, That your high worth may still more brightly shine, And thou Dame-Fortune neuer doe them blesse, Which by iniustice doe thy sexe oppresse. FINIS.
