11689 S102992 99838751 3139
DISTRACTIONS, OR The Holy Madnesse. Feruently (not Furiously) inraged against Euill Men; or against their Euills. Wherein the Naughty are disco∣uered to Themselues, and Others: and may here see at once, Who they Are; What they Doe▪ And How they Ought. Somewhat Delightfull, but Fruitfull altogether: as Ordered to please a little; but Aymed to profit much. By IOHN GAVLE, Ʋtriusque olim Academiae. LONDON, ¶ Printed by Iohn Haviland, for Robert Allot. 1629.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE BAPTIST Lord HICKS, Baron of Ilmington, Vicount Camden; Health, Honour, Happinesse, both in this, and a better Life. My Honourable good Lord, I THVS (as I am bound) bethink me. Whose ought
Mine to be, but whose I am my selfe? To accept the Parent, is (I presume) not to refuse the Brood. It is but my Duty, to beget any thing to your seruice: and shall bee your Goodnesse, to vouchsafe it enter∣tainment. I must confesse, it had bin better, this win∣dy
Egge should haue beene pasht in the Shell; than been hatcht vnder your Lordships Wings. It is a common Fault; and some beside me, bewaile I toge∣ther with me: Ah that such our worthlesse Brats, so wontedly creep into so honourable Bosomes! What
ouer-insolence is it of ours; that we dare to shroud vs there, where wee ought rather feare to bee detected? This is more than Boldnesse, that I presume now a Patron for my Worke: It shall be but Duty, that I endeuour once a Worke for my Patron. What
haue I here set before you; but what your selfe (before me) haue not onely noted, but hated also; Mens Vanities, and Euils? Oh pardon, that I pre∣sent your Lord∣ship with what you like not to behold: I shall so be tied to make amends with what
(I know) you loue to embrace. To Praise you (as they vse) for your Pietie, Gra∣uitie, Bountie, Clemencie; would be thought to flat∣ter you: To haue named you is (in all these) to haue praised you. Yet will I (maugre all such their imputa∣tion, or exception)
pray for you. May your Lordship liue long dayes, and good: yea, ha∣uing now attained to a good age; let it yet be added to your dayes. May your iustest Ho∣nour (maugre the mutability of these rolling Globes, & Times) neuer be destitute of Conti∣nuance with En∣largement.
May you lastly, for Ho∣nour terrestriall, and fading; enioy an Happinesse ce∣lestiall, and with eternity. So praies, and vowes Your Honours deuoted and dutifull Chaplaine, IOHN GAVLE.
TO THE WISE, and Good, a few Words before-hand; and they in their owne Words, the Words of Sobernesse and Truth. YOƲ, the recouered Sons of a once-Fallen Father; yea, the recounted Sonnes of a Father
euer-liuing: whose Soules hee hath so Gratiously inlight∣ned, so inflamed; and so made you, as J said (in your Manner, and Mea∣sure) both Wise, and Good. You are (J beleeue no lesse, and as much reioyce) as fresh Fish, in this salt Sea; as tried Gold, to this cankred Drosse; as purging
Fires amidst these noysome Dunghills. You are indeed pickt out for Fish; yet is there (you know, and grieue) much Soyle beside you: You are sowne for Wheat; and (a∣las!) what Tares come vp among you? Woe, woe! There will bee Goats; though you be mark't for Sheepe. To you
I come (so please you bid me, for you need me not) in the Spi∣rit of Meeknesse: The Rod only is laid vpon the Backs it was made for; the Backs of Fooles. Nor to those come J thus only; but euen otherwise, as I see oc∣casion. The Physi∣tian of the Body v∣seth not the same Meanes to heale all:
Nor, with that o∣ther, and better of the Soule, is there one way to winne all. To yeeld to Some, is (by that manes) to gaine them to our selues. That J come to Men in their owne Words; is to bring Men to your Minds. Tis but my Bait I haue somewhat ordered to their Appetite: you
see how my Hook is, it hangs vpon. Let my aiming excuse me; and not my Saying, or Seeming only cen∣sure mee before you. Neuer was it but allowed, by none but lauded euer; so to stoope to o∣thers, as thereby to raise them vp. Our Holy Lord vouchsafed himselfe to be made like vs;
so to make vs like vnto himselfe: would take vpon him our silly Offices; so to bring vs to his holy Mysteries. What said that Great Do∣ctor of himselfe? To the weake be∣came I as weake, that I might gaine the weake: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means
saue some. What should J say of an∣cient Authors, of holy Fathers; that haue writ of weake things, of graue things weakly; and both to instruct the Weake? Besides their loue to Good∣nesse and Truth; it was some Art of theirs: so to bend themselues to others, as to draw on others
to themselues. To hit a man home a little in his own humour; hath oft beene the way to stoop to his Capacitie, to touch his Affecti∣ons. Let it then be at leastwise excusable, so to let a Man vnder∣stand what he is; as thereby to bring him to what he ought to be. Let no man iudge mee light, by my Lookes; my Face
(J meane) and Forefront: A more weighty, and pro∣founder Title of a Booke, the Subiect and Stile according∣ly; J obserue (for J haue already been so occasioned) haue soone tired, nay quite deterred a Common Reader: Let not the Better bee against me, sith I thus would winne on the Worse.
What euer the Most may mutter against mee; my hope is, the Best will say somewhat for mee; against whom J ought, J can say nothing: J know (through the impos∣sibilitie of pleasing all) I cannot but dis∣please some. Who can say so well, and warily, which all will approue of;
nay which many will not euen mis∣like? Let no reue∣rend Father, no lo∣uing Brother (whom J humbly obserue, whom heartily I em∣brace) say me male∣content; and there∣fore moued: (as haue also beene many in this Minde, and Mood.) Against or besides our State, and Church; nor haue J
read, haue J obser∣ued; doe I iudge, doe J acknowledge any; so iustly Humane, so religiously Diuine. Accept my Words vpon my Faith; J labour to looke to, and satisfie mee with my selfe: J enuy no Man, J inueigh a∣gainst no more. Nor shall the For∣raine Cauiller vp∣braid vs with our
selues: J say not so of this our Land a∣lone. No: I am a better Bird than so; to defile mine owne Nest my selfe, by saying it so foule. I dare say, other Na∣tions, and their Manners; doe (in a manner) instifie vs, and ours. Yea and our Publican Sins (J perswade me) in this our Church, shall
rise vp in Iudgement against the Phari∣saicall Righteous∣nesse of that other, of theirs. Yet are not wee the Better; that they are the Worse: Nor are wee the lesse to be blamed; though they be the more to be ab∣horred. Let me then disclose to them their Abominations, in our Infirmities.
VVee may toge∣ther shame O∣thers, and blame our Selues. And now, you againe the Wise ones and Good! if J shall doe (in any whit) well, and wor∣thy you; afford it your Fauour: if other∣wise, be pleased yet to Pardon it. So J leaue you, whom J humbly craue; and come to those, whom
J rightly challenge to be my Readers.
A PREFACE APOLOGETICALL to his Readers, touching Himselfe; yea and some∣what Satyricall to the Readers it toucheth: Where the Man so Distraught, tells them all together; the Manner, Motiue, Maine end, and Method of his Madnesse. My Readers. ME thinkes I heare each of you aske with A∣CHISH; Haue J need of mad men?
Not one inferres with FESTVS; Much Learning doth make thee mad. Whether you haue need of the Former; Sure I am, I haue need of the Other, and to no other end. I tell you true, I want Wit to be out of my Wits. It is other than Folly, and Rage, is required to an Holy Madnesse. Nay but I may take those Two vnto me; for I am Mad outright. I had as good say it, as heare it. They haue likewise said, of
Other, and better than I. Haue I need of mad men, that yee haue brought this Fellow, to play the Mad man in my presence? said the gabbling King of GATH, of One that wisely assumed such Behauiour for his bet∣ter Safety. Where∣fore came this Mad Fellow to thee? said the Seruants to IEHV, touching the Prophet, that came about a bu∣sinesse of Weight and
Worth: This Mad Fel∣low  (say they) and wherefore came hee? Though (as it was told them) they knew both the Man, and his Communication. PAVL! Thou art beside thy selfe: said a new Succeeding, and (perhaps) a new Gaping Gouernour; to One that well answered for himselfe: I am not mad; but speake forth the words of Truth, & Sobernesse.
And (which I abhorre to repeat) the worst in this wise, was said of Him, that was the best of All: Hee hath a Deuill, and is mad. Wicked men, and witlesse; iudge of Others, and Bet∣ters, by themselues. Them∣selues are Gracelesse; and the rest (they thinke) are Reasonlesse. The Wis∣dome they apprehend not, they say, is Folly. Hee does Foolishly, that does beside their Drift. Hee talkes Nonsense, that speakes beyond their Con∣ceit.
The Feruent (with them) are Furious: They count of Zeale, but as Rage: And the Saints Earnestnesse, they call his Madnesse. HANNAH is Deuout; and is so thought DRVNKEN: And They were said to bee Full of new Wine; that were filled with the Holy Ghost. Be a man Deuout or Zealous; the world will deeme him either Drunke, or Mad. Are ye so Mad; to think and say so madly of vs? yours (if any) is the
Madnesse: Why nure yee others with your owne Brand? Marke but who hath marked you: I will smite thee with Madnesse. The Wise Man said it of wic∣ked men; Madnesse is in their heart, while they liue. Take now your Tongues from vs; turne them against your selues. You had as good yeeld to confesse at first; as you shall bee constrained at last: We Fooles coun∣ted
his life Mad∣nesse. Themselues are Mad; and they call vs so: that are not Mad, saue mad at them. Shall I moane mee with him in the COMEDIAN? Ay me! they say I am Mad; when none so mad, as they. No. As the PSALMIST rather: J said vnto the Fooles, deale not so madly: Then doubt∣lesse they would not make me Mad. I enioy their Madnesse, while I seeke to shunne it:
Let them care to heed it, and they may doe so by mine. But (as I tell you) I haue taken vpon mee, to play the Mad man. Though not with Him, that did so, for his owne safeguard: but so to saue others, haue I done it. As was said of their Ignorance, and Delusion: so let mee say according to my Knowledge, and Zeale: The Prophet is a Foole, the Spirituall Man is Mad; for
the multitude of thine Iniquity, and the great Hatred. In my sense; a Foole, and Mad am I: for the great Hatred I haue to thine Iniquitie. My Aime is, and therefore my hope is, I may here say with Him: Whe∣ther wee bee besides our selues, it is to God: or whether we be Sober, it is for your Cause. I am in∣different what I seeme to be, so it be for Gods glory,
and his Childrens Good. The truth then is; I am (as I ought) thus di∣straught: For I am both Warranted, and Vrged to it. Warranted. The Pro∣phets, and Holy men, (as they were com∣manded) haue gone vp and downe, some Na∣ked, some Chained, some Loaded, some Wounded: One in a passion, lets fall the Ta∣bles, Another on pur∣pose breakes his Bottles. One will needs haue another to smite him,
Another cannot but must needs smite ano∣ther. They haue be∣dusted their Heads, be∣smeared their Faces, be∣slauered their Beards: They scrabbled with their Fingers, tore their Haires, rent their Cloathes; and (like Mad Men) threw dust into the aire. The Saints of God haue beene some∣times possessed with a Diuine Fury. Our stran∣gest Motions, & Gestures (such as men commonly mocke, and irke) God oft times both bids, and
likes. Euen the Vncouth∣nesse and Abruptnesse, of our both Passions, and Actions, serue to discouer our Zeale, our Indigna∣tion, our Deuotion. The Prophet tooke him a TILE, pourtrayed the CITY, laid a SIEGE, built a FORT, cast a MOVNT, and set a CAMPE against it. He likewise CVT OFF his Haire, WEIGHED his Haire, DIVIDED his Haire: BVRNT a part in the Fire, SMOTE a part with a Knife, SCATTERED a part
in the Wind; and BOVND a Remuant in his Skirts. This was (may I say) a mysticall kind of Madnesse. To haue seene him thus writing vpon a Tile; thus busied about his Haire: who would not haue thought him mad, that knew not what hee meant? Hee that hath made the Foo∣lish things of this world to confute the Wise; hath his good Purposes, in the idle Acts, and (as wee would thinke) but vn∣couth and abrupt Beha∣uiours
of men. In the Foolishnesse of our Do∣ings, as of our Preachings, hath God his wise Art, and Ends. God hath stirred vp weake Actions in his Saints and Seruants; so to stirre vp the weake. Those Practices of theirs that haue borne shew of Weaknesse in their Wor∣king; were not without Worth in their Meaning; and haue had Weight in their Effect. Vrged. None but Stocks, but may be mo∣ued: Especially, how ought wee to be vrged
against Iniquities? I haue cause enough to make mee mad: Nay, should I be so, so oft as I haue cause; I should neuer be but mad. How vn∣quiet shall he be (yea euen vncessantly so) the mo∣tion of whose owne Affe∣ctions must depend vpon others Euils? What mo∣ment shall it be, in which there will not be to moue him? Besides himselfe; euen all are alwayes ready to prouoke him. Vnhappy he! when so many mad him. I could (with Others) haue been Sad,
and Merry; but I haue chosen (by my Selfe) to bee Mad at Euills. While Iehu comes vp against Iezabel; what should he but Driue Furiously? but (as there) march on in Madnesse? There is a mad Knot of Euills in the World; and they aske a mad Wedge to sunder them. I will (and spare not) both Launce, and Seare: Nor shal the Diseased howle, and bawle at mee; but rather thanke himselfe.
An intemperate Patient, and obstinate, makes, and needs a Physitian both hard and harsh. I am sorry for Heraclitus; that was so Sad him∣selfe: because others (hee saw) were Bad. Shall euery Bad man, make mee a Sad man? When (I maruell) shall hee be Merry; whom others Euill may afflict? This were to hurt my selfe, and doe them no good. Alas too tender Philosopher! himselfe was to be wept for; that so wept for others.
I laugh (in like manner) at Democritus, that moc∣king Philosopher; that made such lests at mens Earnests. How should I thinke him serious; that thought all ridicu∣lous? I rather like (with Lampsacus) to mix both, and fall a Madding: to put vpon mee the very Face of a Fury: and (as a Spie come from Hell) to giue the Deuils notice of mens mischieuous∣nesse. There are Euils in the world, to be Sad at, Merry at, Mad at. Wee cannot but waile at mens
Miseries, but smile at their Vanities, but rage at their Iniquities. Errours may prouoke vs; but Im∣pieties will inrage. Aske now no more with Achish; I answer you at once; You haue all need of Mad men. The Diuine Fury is rea∣dy against you; The Furies of Hell are ready for you; a yelling Fury of your owne is within you: Oh suffer another Fury, & shun the other; an Holy Fury! An Holy Fury, to spie out your Euils in your Hearts; to
tel them to your Teeth; to curse them before your Faces; to rend them from your Soules; to damne them to their Hell. Neuer more need of Mad men, than now adayes. No Fiercenesse of men can be enough to curse, and damne the now Sinnes of men: No Fury vnder Heauen; none aboue Hell, is enough to plague them. I will as disorderly reckon the Disorders of our dayes. Now are the Euill Dayes; the Perillous
Times: for now, The whole world lieth in wickednesse. Since the World was, neuer was the World so wicked as now. It was once the Wic∣kednesse of a World; but is now a World of Wicked∣nesse. The Wickednesse that once was, was con∣cluded in a Garden: but the whole World cannot containe the Wickednesse that now is. Nay, the Wickednesse that now is, can containe a whole World: For so he sayes, The whole World li∣eth
in wickednesse: And not Wickednesse only in a World. The World was a Seat of Wicked∣nesse; but Wickednesse is become a Continent of the World. Quite against the Rule of Reason, the Acci∣dent is the receptacle for the Subiect. Wee are now the worst Generation of Men: Euen they vpon whom the Euill Dayes are come indeed. Our Fathers haue left their Faults be∣hind them: which of Euils in them at first; are be∣come Examples to vs af∣ter
them. Wickednesse is now not onely Done, but Taught. Vngodlinesse is growne to a Fashion: In∣iquitie and Euill is so ge∣nerally, customarily, pub∣likely taken vp: that to be Wicked now, is not onely made pardonable, but thought commendable a∣mongst vs. Wee haue ex∣ceeded our Forefathers Euill: and (for our Time) haue set vp Sinne at so high a Pitch; that it were impossible to thinke how Posterity should adde vnto our Iniquities. And this is the woe of all; that
Men are irrecouerably Euill. Their corruption hath brought them to a custome; their custome to an Obstinacy; their Ob∣stinacie to a Necessitie of being Euill: and that Necessity of being Euill, to an impossibility of be∣ing otherwise. As a Di∣uine Philosopher to his Friend; When thou shalt see (said hee) a Multi∣tude in a Market, Theatre, or like frequented place; thinke with thy selfe, there are as many Vices, as Men. I say besides; in a Play-house, Ex∣change,
Hall, Court, and Church; there is euer a greater throng of Sinnes, than Men. For, amongst the throngs of Men, eue∣ry Man hath his throng of Sinnes. Not to the Heads of Men only, but to the Haires of their heads, may their Sinnes bee numbred. Men were neuer so many, but one man might reckon all the rest: But the Sins of one man, are more than he can count; much more, than for which he can giue account. What say we of men, and their Sins? You cannot rec∣kon
more Nations, than you may Abhominations. Besides the Barbarous People, whose Religion it is, to doe Deuils worship; whose Law, to doe Men Wrong: Wee speake of these more Ciuill, more Christian Parts. Loe here! Euery Nation (as I said, and I cannot say more fitly) his Abhomi∣nation. The Germane Gluttonous, the Italian Irefull, the Spaniard Proud, the Frenchman Effeminate, the Dutch∣man Deceitfull, the Irish∣man Idle, the Scottish-man
Soothing, and the Englishman (alas the Eng∣lishman!) Euil. Obserue all manner of Men, and their Manners. Turks are Bar∣barous, Iewes Malicious, and Christians (ah Chri∣stians!) Hypocriticall. I may say of Any, or of All. Iniquity abounds in all both Nations, Per∣sons, Actions: In all which Innocence is not onely rare, but none at all. Hee spake but too true of these Times, and Crimes of ours: In the last dayes, pe∣rillous Times shall
come. For men shall bee louers of their owne selues, Couetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, Dis∣obedient to Parents, Ʋnthankfull, Vn∣holy, without natu∣rall Affection, Truce-breakers, false Ac∣cusers, Jncontinent, Fierce, Despisers of those that are Good, Traitours, Heady, High minded, Lo∣uers
of Pleasures, more than louers of God, Hauing a forme of Godlinesse, but denying the Power thereof. In these Dayes, Men are Borne, Liue, and Die vn∣to themselues: And are become such strange Lo∣uers of themselues; that beside themselues, loue they neither God, nor Man. Their owne Lusts only loue they as their liues. Those vices of theirs that please them, they maintaine: Will
out-face, rather than ac∣knowledge them: rather approue, than forsake them. Euery man now for himselfe: Nay, euery man now one against another. All wilde and sauage Ismaels, His hand against euery Man, and euery mans hand against him. His Brothers Knife, at his Brothers Throat: his Brothers Sword, in his Brothers side. Stranger is not safe with Stranger: Nor is Kinne secure with Kinne: And louing Bre∣thren are as Blacke Swans. The Godly man
most of all, is (in this world of wickedones) as a Lilly amongst Thornes; as a Sheepe in the midst of Wolues: With IOB, a Brother to Dragons; and with EZEKIEL, a Neighbour to Scorpions: A LOT in Sodome; a IOSEPH in Egypt; an ISRAEL in Baby∣lon. Must either be drawn to doe Euill; or forced to endure it. All that is in this World, is either Snares, or Preyes: There is no way for vs to escape our selues; but by seeking to intrap others. The
world is come to such a passe; that wee must ei∣ther doe Wrong, or take Wrong; Kill, or be Killed, Deceiue, or be Deceiued. Religion (it is mani∣fest) is but taken vp vn∣der hand: while Pietie, and Honesty lie so vnder foot. They make some Profession, that so they may wrong with losse Suspition. Men walke like Foxes in Lambes skins, that they may the rather deceiue: and come like Wolues in Sheeps Cloa∣thing, that so they may the sooner deuoure. Pharisee
like, Cleane Outsides, painted Sepulchers, whi∣ted Walls; they deuoure Widowes Houses, vnder pretence of long Prayers. And what more foule Iniqui∣tie, than this so fained Sanctity? How horribly doe men belie their Vices? Their Pride, they call Gracefulnesse, their Flat∣tering, Courtesie; their Tyranny, Iustice; their Auarice, Thrift; their Lewdnesse, Pleasantnesse; their Profusenesse, Boun∣ty; and their Craft and
Subtilty, call they Policy, and Discretion. It was neuer good World since Vice went in Vertues Name, and Habit. The Manners of Men haue now brought Lawes themselues into their Subiection. Neuer more Lawes; none more Lawlesse, than now adaies. What Offences are done daily before the Barre of Iustice? Right is but lit∣tle Defended, euen where Right seemes to bee most Reserued. Lawes are bought, and sold: And he commonly hath the best
Penny-worth of Law; that hath the worst Cause. Lawes are so many, and so abused; that they are made to discourse, and dis∣pute Truth, and Right: Whereas were they fewer, and well executed; they would easily and readily determine, and command them both. Nor doth a Common wealth labour so in the multitude of Lawes, as of Lawyers. (I speake not of iust Iudges, and equall Officers of the Law.) But of cunning Catchpoles, and hungry Pettifoggers; that (like
swarmes of Flies) pester, and infest a land. These (if you knew all) haue robbed many a Church, wronged many a Widow, starued many an Orphan, and vndone many an ho∣nest Man. In foule stirres, and Contentions of Men, these thrust in for more filthy Aduocates. Of these I say; Many Lawyers, many Wranglers. Else, how should these men liue, that are raised by others ruines; did they not make worke for themselues. These Seminaries of Dis∣sention, haue a Cauill, or a
Quirke, to make the Law it selfe (which indeed is a Rule of Peace) set Men at oddes and keep them so. As when you send your Water to a needy Empiricke, you must resolue to take Phy∣sicke: so declare your case to one of these greedie Catchpoles, and you must needs goe to Law. Nay, hee tells you what wrong you haue done your selfe hitherto: and all to bring you (by his meanes) to doe your selfe, and others Wrong. You (like silly sheepe) take this Bryar-Bush to shelter you; and
hee all to tatters your Fleece: you two must tugge together ere you part. His is the Gaine on∣ly in the end, yours (per∣haps) both the Losse, and Shame. This is also a sore euill vnder the Sunne: Ver∣tue is set after Wealth Wealth gets vp a Cocke-horse; while Vertue but holds the Stirrop. Lear∣ning is made but a Page to Riches. The Golden Asse is worshipped; the Ragged Philosopher is contemned. Let a man be Religious, Vertuous, Lear∣ned,
Wise; yet this thing is thought to preiudice his best Parts; that hee is Poore: But let him bee Impious, Vicious, Clow∣nish, Foolish; yet that he is Rich, makes amends for all the Rest. A Man without Money, is abhor∣red like a Monster: but adored as a Goddesse, is Money without a Man. This same Goddesse Wealth, bewitches vs all to her Worship. For her wee plot, and pray; and ride, and run; and digge, and begge. For base Lu∣cres sake, wee are ready
to embrace an Enemy, and fall at ods with a Friend. So ours be the Gaine, wee respect not whose is the Losse; yea though the Losse proue our Soules at last. The World turns round in a Topsie-Turuy; and euery Thing goes the wrong way to worke. The Asse is got to a Harpe; Phaeton will be climb∣ing; and Icarus must goe flie. Euery man irkes his owne Lot: is weary of his present Condition: No∣thing is more tedious to him, than himselfe. Nor
can he containe him with∣in the pale of his proper Calling. Art hath got a tricke to force Nature. Euery Man considers what he Aimes at; not what he is Apt for. Mer∣cury is made out of euery Logge. Dunses goe for Scholars; Wretches are prest for Souldiers; Idiots vsurpe Authoritie; and Knaues creepe into Offi∣ces: Taylors take Orders; and Weauers will bee Priests. Frogs professe Physicke. Wherein is a Mans least Skill; that is his whole Profession. Men
trauell in vntimely Births, labour in vnapt Actions: Like Channels without a Conduit; turne Teachers, when they yet both might, and ought to Learne. They vsually come armed to the Church; goe naked to the Campe: sing at a Fune∣rall; mourne at a Wed∣ding: study hard in a Play-house; sit fidling in a Senate-house: earnest in a May-Game; and slacke vpon their Seruice. One takes vpon him to swim ouer Hellespont on a Horse; Another aymes to ascend Athos in a Ship:
One lies him downe to sleepe in a Waggon; Ano∣ther will goe a iourney on his Bed. One takes butterd Pease on his Knife point; Another eats Eggs with Spoones. Bid him speake, & he is mute: say Whisht, and he babbles. He writes Politicks, ere he yet come into a Common-wealth; Commands peremptorily, where he hath small Au∣thoritie; flatly Deter∣mines, what he least con∣ceiues. Who knoweth him∣selfe? who hath himselfe? who enters into himselfe? who keepes within him∣selfe?
who seekes not himselfe without? No man measures himselfe by his owne Feet; by his owne Parts is no man measured. Asses preferre Straw, to Gold: and Dunghill Birds a Barly Corne, to a preti∣ous Pearle. Baser things are esteemed, and frequen∣ted: Better things they neither know how to prize, nor vse. Fooles and Idiots, let fall Sub∣stances, to catch at Sha∣dowes: let the Bird goe out of hand, and keepe a beating about the Bush. Vncertainties are the
most certaine Purchase. All turne Merchant Ad∣uenturers, (for Places, Offices, Dignities; Tem∣porall, Ecclesiasticall) and buy long Hopes, with a large Price. How many fondly both aduenture, and vndoe themselues, to be well spoken of? Speake him but faire to his Face, and you may haue his Heart out. His Table fur∣nishes him with Friends; and they likewise his Ta∣ble: And now the Cloth scarce taken vp, but they are ready to rise. Men are all for the Present:
And for that, so as it be commodious. What hath formerly beene, is now forgotten. There is in∣deed a quicke Apprehen∣sion, but no good Memory of one anothers Acts, and Offices. If he cannot so doe, as he hath done; he shall not be so thought, as he was. Former things are Frosted. An old Dogge shall bee hanged; an old Seruing-Man dis∣carded; and an old Friend neglected: notwithstan∣ding they haue beene for∣merly so Vsefull, Painfull, Beneficiall. A man cannot
tell whom to trust to; nor how to beleeue him. Beside what his Heart imagines, and Tongue vtters; his very Face betokens Fals∣hood. Hee'll blow hot, and cold both with a wind: Say, and vnsay, nay gain∣say with a Breath. Will promise Mountaines, and performe Mole-hills: and tell you of more in a Mi∣nute, than you shall finde in a Yeare. Nay (which is worst) will both Say well, and Doe well in De∣ceit. As, many a man hath had a Good Turne done him: not altogether
to benefit, but to blinde, and bewitch him rather. A Man speakes a good word for his Friend, and two for himselfe: And commonly so aduises him, as to bring his owne ends about. Two men contend together, and a Third ar∣bitrates to eithers losse. Like Dogges, they snarle at one another, till the Bone bee snatcht away from both Great men easi∣ly take occasion to wrong Inferiours with authori∣ty. And the Poore man hath offended enough; in that hee is not able to de∣fend
himselfe. The Poore man must part with his owne Right; or else hee giues not the great Lord his Due. Rich mens Su∣perfluities are growne en∣uious  Poore mens Ne∣cessities. Like Dogges in Mangers; they haue no need of it, they haue no will to it; and yet they keepe the poore Cattell from their Fodder. If a Man bee once downe the Hill; euery Man is apt to depresse him further. Once gored in the Body of his Estate, how many Hounds pursue him, and trace him
still by the bloud of his Wound? He is soone made more miserable; that is once so. None hath lesse paid him, than he, to whom most is due. Whom his Piety doth most com∣mend; him doth their Charitie least reward. It is both the Rule and Pra∣ctice, to repell Force with Force: and repay Craft with Craft. So are wee wont to doe to others, as we see they haue done; not as we would they should doe, to vs. Doe a Man Good; and this is thankes enough, that hee doth thee
no Hurt. How many are ready to reward Euill for Good: and to wrong him most, of whom he best deserued? What Spiders Webbes are here in the World? Turbulent Waspes burst through; while Im∣potent Gnats are intangled. The Gallowes groanes for great Theeues; and small Theeues only groane vp∣on the Gallowes. What one Man doth, is a Fault, and Punished: What so many doe, is thought well, though worse. Tis strange, that the Greatnesse, and Generality of a Crime;
should make it seeme lesse mischieuous, lesse misera∣ble, lesse punishable. That belike is Lawfull, which comes once to be Common And (which is last, and worst) Men liue, at Mens lusts: So also, Men perish, at Mens pleasures. And to Kill; is both Courage, and Skill. Murder is made a Mans Art: and tis his Credit, to haue handsomely done the Deed. Besides those that are euill to others; how many are so vnto them∣selues? How many Giants are there; how many
Gulfes of their Estates? They carrie all vpon their Backes; These put all into their Bellies: these feed finely, and rot at a deare rate: They goe gayly, till they bee worth not aboue their wearings. He makes a God of his Belly; Hee a Channell of his Throat; He a Sinke of his Heart; He a Lyer of his Tongue; Hee a Theefe of his Fin∣gers; He a Harlot of his Members. Yet (Oh despe∣rate! Oh damnable!) say the Theefe, Drunkard, Blasphemer, Fornicator; their Thefts, Riots, Oaths,
Lusts; are all (if sins) but Veniall Sinnes. No sinne is so great; but is lessened in his Opinion, by whose Mischiefe it is committed. Goodnesse and Truth haue not more Precepts, than Aduersaries thereunto. The Couetous man shrinks and shrugs, at a Lesson of Liberality: It irkes a Prodigall, to tell of Thrif∣tinesse: The Proud man endures not to heare of Humblenesse: The Ire∣full hath no Patience, no not so much as to listen thereunto: The Theefe stops his eares at the
Charge of Iustice: The desperate Cut-throat is ready to dispatch him first, that would disswade him from the Fact: Tis tedious to talke of Chaste∣nesse before the Lustfull: And Sobernesse to a Drun∣kard, is but as a Tale of a Tubbe. These men will euery one sooner marre the Rule, than mend their Fault. Wicked men will rather abhorre the Pre∣cepts, than forsake their Offences. Precepts will doe no Good against them; and Iudgements but make them Worse
I will leaue them there∣fore to the Angels Iudge∣ment; but indeed the De∣uills Precept: He that is filthy, let him bee filthy still. Mad? nay and Mad; and Mad againe. Who burnes not, starts not, frets not? Whose Eares tingle not, Eyes sparkle not, Ioynts tremble not? Oppression maketh a Wise man mad; said the Wise Man: Ini∣quitie (say all Good men) will make a Good
Man Mad. To heare, and see as I haue said; is enough to make Wife, or Good Men Melan∣choly, Moued, Mad. It would make a Horse breake his Halter; to see what Fidling, Piping, Morrice-dancing, Hob∣by-horsing in a May∣game: but to repeat the Vanities, and Euills of Men; is able to fret a Man out of his Wits. It is not possible to looke here vpon others; and yet be our Selues. Whether it come of a Melancholy, a Bloud,
a Choler; it makes me Sad-mad, Merry-Mad, Mad-Mad. See me some∣times bemoaning, de∣riding, and execrating their Iniquities. Any wayes in the world, to tell Men how I lament, scorn, abhor their Euils. While I bewaile the Weak, smile at the Vaine, detest the Wicked; am I so Sad, & Merry, & Mad. Sad-Mad. Our Saui∣our (pardon to the com∣parison!) was ANGRY and GRIEVED toge∣ther. The holy Pro∣phets haue laid Ashes
on their Heads, put Sackcloth on their Loynes; smote their Thighes, and set their Eyes open, as flowing Fountaines, to gush out riuers of Teares; and all because of others Ini∣quities. This is one of our Perfections, to be touched with others Euils, as our owne. Better to bee grie∣ued at, than guilty of ano∣ther Mans Sinne. Not to irke anothers Euill; is as much, as to make it our owne. I shall doe no Man Wrong to bewaile his Wickednesse. I need aske
him neither Leaue, nor Pardon, to be sorry for him. It is a good fault; to afflict our selues, for o∣thers Faults. Merry-mad. God but mockt the Man; Be∣hold, the Man is be∣come as one of Ʋs: And the Prophet, those Idolaters; Cry aloud, for he is a God &c. So the Wise-Man, the young Wanton; Re∣ioyce, O young man, in thy youth, &c. And the Sauiour, the
Traitour; Friend, wherefore art thou come? And so the picture of Patience, his Cauilling Companions; No doubt but yee are the People; and wisdome shall die with you. An Ironie is not vnbeseeming Diui∣nitie. It hath pleased the HOLY GHOST, to be thus faire pleasant in Speech: as to haue the Words of Holy Writ Seasoned with Salt; that so they might Ad∣minister
Grace vnto the Hearers: And especially, by a witty kind of deriding Rhetoricke. Moreouer, Holy Men, and Learned; haue in Weighty Matters, both Answered, and Censured; with a witty kinde of Mockage, and pleasant Disdaine. One askt Au∣gustine, what God did, before he made Hea∣uen, and Earth? He an∣swered well & wittily; He made Hell, for such curious Inquisitors as himselfe. When Iulian
the Apostate, demanded arrogantly, what the Carpenters Sonne was doing? The Christians answered aptly, and ele∣gantly; He was making a Coffin for Iulian. Eras∣mus (when he was askt what Offence Luther did?) prettily replied; Hee tooke away from the Pope, his Head; and from the Monkes, their Bellies. More might be said of Holy Fathers; much more of Wise Philosophers. One told a King, that he had his Eares in his Feet:
sith hee heard not his Petition, till he had there prostrated himselfe. A∣nother answered a Phy∣sitian; Hee kept. his Health, because he vsed him not. Another bade a Bastard (throwing stones amongst a Throng) take heed hee did not hit his Father Not almost an Apo∣thegme of theirs; but thus both witty, and weighty. Nor doe after-Wits come short of the other. One call'd the Pope a Participle; be∣cause hee takes part of
the Clergy, and part of the Laity, without Mood and Tense; meaning, be∣yond Time, and Mea∣sure. Another askt the Pope, if euer he said the Lords Prayer, and those words therein; Our Father, and Forgiue vs our Trespasses: Which if hee did, then was hee neither Holy Father, nor Father How many might hee said of this fort? Wise men, and Good, haue won∣tedly said all against E∣uils; in this Gracefull
kinde of Reproaching. Mens Euils haue beene more easily, and profitably Derided, than Confuted. Euen these pleasant Dis∣daines, haue oft prou'd weighty Arguments a∣gainst Iniquities. Now, say me not Light; If I would haue beene De∣lightfull. I would not in words bee Churlish, nor Clownish: Nor haue I beene Scurrile, nor Illiberall. Haue I iested at Lawes, or Re∣ligion? at the Persons, or Miseries of Men? Except against their Va∣nities,
so ridiculous in∣deed; what haue I said, but soberly? To haue beene aptly Facetious; hath added to the Graui∣ty, and Seuerity of Speech. Whether in some Ap∣pellations, Descripti∣ons, Transitions; what hath beene said, not so seriously: said I it only to make thee laugh? I were more than Mad, so to make thee laugh; as to make my selfe thy laughing-Stock. Where my Words may shew some Lightnesse; my Aime there hath this
Weight: My sober Deri∣sion, my iust Disdaine; thy smoother Reprehensi∣on, thy liberall Delight. Mad-mad. I haue here said enough, not only to excuse mee for it: but (me thinkes) to incourage mee to it. Three speake Truth; one of which is the Mad-man. Thou maist say me Mad: but I speake the words of Sober∣nesse, and Truth. The Truth is; I loue to strip, and whip Mens bo∣some-Harlots before them: and let them
plainly know them∣selues to bee no better, than they are. What should I parable it; with the Woman? J am a Widow, mine Hus∣band is dead, My Sonnes stroue toge∣ther, &c. These were but farre Fetches: I had rather point it, with the Prophet; Thou art the Man: this is plaine to the purpose. If I must speake against Vice; the vicious shall not teach mee what to
say. I should not say, as they were: should I say no other, than as they would. I will not aske counsell of them, to bewray their Coun∣sels: but will make bold, after mine owne minde, to tell Men their Minds. Away with the fawning Curres, and toothlesse; with the buzzing Beetles, and stinglesse: Giue mee the Dogge that will bite home; and the Waspe that will sting indeed. Take away the Tart∣nesse (said a Bold-Spea∣ker,
for the Freedome of his Speech) and Bit∣ternesse from Worme∣wood; and it loseth both the Nature, and Name: Take away my Name too; if you barre me of my Bitter∣nesse. Let your speech (said He) bee seaso∣ned with Salt; tem∣pered (he meant) with Discretion: Yea and (after him, say I) my Speech shall be seasoned with Salt; powdred (I meane) with Seueritie. Abstract the Acrimo∣nie;
and (in my Con∣struction) The Salt hath lost the Sauour. Loe! (thou saist) a very Lamia: The mad Hagge hath Eyes to put in, and plucke out at will. Hee puts his Eyes (as one of those) in his Head, while he walkes Abroad: but keepes them in a Box, when he stayes at Home. So are we wont indeed, to haue Lyncean Eyes to Others: but are as blinde as Moles toward our Selues. True, and tis the property of an
Eye, to see all, but it selfe. I confesse; Wee can sooner finde out others Faults; than mend our owne. But if I blame thee, with what my selfe am also Guilty of; Thou shalt not need vpbraid mee with it: I shall now bee enough to reproach my selfe. If I be no other, than I say thou art: what my Tongue tels to thee, my Heart will not hide from me. What I but call thee once, will it tell mee twice. Double is his both Guilt, and
Blame; when the Fault rebuked by him, doth also redound vnto him. I sup∣pose (with Him) thou maist say, and slander me; Physitian, heale thy Selfe: I abhorre to heare from Him; Thou which teachest Another; teachest thou not thy selfe? But (after mine owne Cure) I here am thy Physitian: and haue so dealt with Iniquities; as doe such with Ma∣ladies. See here thou
maist, the Parues Af∣fections, and their Af∣fected Parts: toge∣ther with their seuerall Signes, Grounds, Fruits, Causes, Cures. I haue taken but Three Pati∣ents here in hand at once: and they more than I looke for Profit by; more (I feare me) than I shall get Credit by. But Three, to the Three Furies, or Mad∣nesses; whom I meane to match against them. Three shall bee all at once; since Three once were all: All that is in
the World (is but Three) the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. One thing is; & I would thee note it: I haue applyed it as a soueraign Remedy, against what∣soeuer Malady: Con∣cluding still with a Me∣ditation of Mortalitie, and Death. Nothing makes a Man more irke his Euill; than to thinke on his End. He that thinkes what he shall then be; will
bee wary what hee now doth. Sinne was the only meanes, that brought a Man to Death: but Death is thus the only meanes, to keepe a Man from Sin. He aimd aright; Re∣member the End, (said he) and thou shalt neuer doe amisse. To meditate on Death, is as a Curbe against all sin∣full Courses: and a Spurre pricking on to pious Du∣ties Pricke the wandring Snaile but with the ME∣MENTO of Deaths Dart; and hee straight
retires into his Shell: Let the Pilot sit close in the End of the Ship; and hee now gouernes it aright. To haue Death before his Eyes; is the ready way, to haue God before his Eyes. He easily contemnes what is Present, and Pas∣sing away: that consi∣ders what is Euerlasting, and to Come. I haue no more (nor needed I so much) to say for my Selfe: Only, against Thee (if thou be of them) haue I yet more. All the Cursed Crue; Men of the
World, Sons of Belial, Children of Darknesse, Impes of Confusion, Limbes of Satan, Fire∣brands of Hell: Ile tell them All my minde, as I meet them. Ile take them, where I finde them: And say no more to thee; till I see thee there.
I'M Mad, say Most; That most are mad, and worse; I say mee so; 'Cause I see them no other. They make mee Moane, Sigh, Smile, Scorne, Rage, and Curse. Nor I my Feruour; Nor their Faults can smother. How can I helpe it; That am made so Mad? Tis Thou must mend it; That hast beene so Bad. BOth Wise, and Good, Will warrant mee my Madnesse; Themselues haue likewise More than moued bin: Will either such (Wise, Good) be for thy Badnesse? Een they that worke ill, Will speake ill of Smne. How can I helpe it; That am made so Mad? Tis Thou must mend it; That hast beene so Bad.
THy sore Mishaps I Moane; I Sigh, so see Such Errours Fraile; Smile, to behold thy Fashions Both sond, and vaine; Scorne thy Iniquitie; Rage, at thy Rudenesse; Curse thy Abhominations. How can I helpe it; That am made so Mad? Tis Thou must mend it; That hast beene so Bad.
The Proud. GOe to then; and whats He? I haue seene the Man but of late; and how suddenly is he altered? True Em∣bleme of his owne Mu∣tabilitie! Hee shewes it, but he heeds it not. To Day hath chang'd him from Yesterday, both in Face, and Fashion: Nor shall you see him the Same to Morrow, that he is to Day. The Man
seemes but as he is; a very Changeling. Nay he so adapts his Hu∣mour also to his Habit; that you shall neuer take him, but in as ma∣ny Minds, as Suits. How he grudges at the stin∣ted Course of Nature, as but niggardly; that at first allotted him but one Face and Skinne, and Bulke, and Shape: but admires the Liberall Inuention of Art; that can still so trimly, and newly proportion him. He thinkes himselfe (I warrant him) a farre
comelyer Creature of a Taylors shaping, than of Gods making. As the one therefore he shames to be seene: but as the other, hee glories to shew himselfe. He is one of ADAMS owne Sonnes, and hath it by Kinde to blush at his bare Selfe. Ah! we could not thus irke our selues, were not our selues con∣scious of some thing other than good: Wee see some vglinesse, which wee would haue none to se. Had we not defaced the Image of God in vs, we
had neuer bin ashamed to let it haue bin seene. Truth desires to beseene naked, as she is: And the Purest things abhor to be couered, or coloured. Painted Wals, painted Sepulchres, you conceiue what they are beside their Painting. Oh but (I see) he hath quite altered the Fashi∣on; and hath made him a new kinde of Catch∣credit, of his old Co∣uer-shame. His sightly Ornament, hee counts it; which was once but his Fore-Fathers beg∣garly Shift. Ah! that
Men can now glory in that Superfluity; whose ve∣ry Necessitie was but the Badge and Liuery of their Shame. We know, twas ADAMS Shame, that he was so driuen to haue them: And wee thinke it our shame, when we are so driuen, that we haue them not. He is not (I see by him) a little proud of him∣selfe: now beclad in a varnisht Excrement; & so bedawbd in a glitte∣ring Rubbish. Who thinkes himselfe the bet∣ter Man, for what he is
glad to borrow of Beasts, and Earth? Is hee the more Man, for what they (before him) were not the lesse Bruits, & Dung? See see! A Sheepe in a golden Fleece: Howso∣euer hee thinkes of his Fleece; I will thinke him but a Sheepe. Hee prances most statelily in his gay Trappings. But I would be loth to buy, or vse an Horse, that is only so valued. It is for him to prize a faire Out∣side; that knowes, nor hath nothing within, wor∣thy more esteeme. How
curiously hee glances vpon himselfe? Hee thinkes, hee is for other eyes than his owne, to be so broadly gazed at. Why cringes he so to his Coat? vnlesse he would in good earnest, which the Philosopher did in iest; Honour that, that honours him. Bucephalus is now royally trapt, and flings at all but Alexander himselfe: dis∣barbe but the Iade, and euery Stable-Groome may bestride him. Many Men as Proud to seeme what they are not: It only
debases them to be seene, and knowne what they are. The Asse carries painted and polished Isis vpon his backe; and (Lord!) how the Vul∣gar Worship him? A wise man will iudge of the Tree, by the Fruit, or Bulke: he is a Foole that doth value it by the Barke, or Huske. A proper Squire hee seemes neere at hand; and (you marke him) well dight vp. Beside a spruce shape, and gay Glosse hee hath about him; see what a lofty
Port, and Gesture hee carries with him. Hee stalkes on in state: I should say, he marches most maiestickly. All his Pace is Measures; and his Hands accor∣dingly keepe Time, to the Tune of his Feet. His Beuer cocks, Fea∣ther waggs, Locks ho∣uer, and Beard stands in print: his Band sprea∣ding (like a Net) about his necke, his Cloake displayd (as a Flagge) vpon his arme, his Dou∣blet hanging by Gim∣mers vpon his shoul∣ders,
and his Breeches button'd about him: His Boots ruffle, Spurrs gingle, and his long Ra∣pier (which he is often tied to) confronts him at the hilt; and toward the point, answers his heeles with a grace. What a supercilious Looke he hath? I war∣rant you, the very blast or sound of his Speech, would make you start. How he reares in the Necke, struts at the Sto∣macke, and traces with his Armes a kemboll: he trips with his Toes
on the Earth, & waues his Hand, as hee would touch the heauens with his Finger. He hath one part and propertie of a Man, which is, to looke vpwards. Hee thinks this same doth preferre him with Reasonables, when we know it doth but distinguish him from Bruits. Heele set his Leggs vpon the Last, rather than lose an inch of his height: I will say one good word for him; and tis the best I know by him: Than this Man in his way, no man
walkes more vprightly. Marke how he heaues, as though hee almost scorn'd to tread: Hee casts vp his Nose into the Wind, looks beyond the Clouds, mantles against the Moone, and busies himselfe wholly to build Castles in the Aire. What an Alder∣mans pace hee comes? Hee prolongs the Pa∣geant for the Beholders take; and hurries nor on too hastily, lest most Eyes finde no leisure to looke vpon him. See see! he stops and turnes in
the mid way, at but the apprehension of a lost labour. Oh doe him not the wrong to looke beside him: for if you see him not, hee comes by to no purpose. The Proud man is not more haughty in his owne, than ridiculous in a wise mans eyes: whereas others looke at him, hee lookes thorow him; and sees plainly the vanitie of his Minde, in that bodily shaping: Hee but smiles at that Carriage of his, which others learne: And thinkes, what Folly there
is in Pride, that faines to it selfe, as it would; and flatters it selfe, as it hath fained. Hee tels her, his eyes are purer, than her painted glory can dazle: nor are they stinted to behold that only, which shee would haue him see. Hee cals her the Ape of Nations, and Fashion∣monger of the World: and tels her plainly, shee hath more Followers of her Fashions, than are either Wise, or Good. Doe you heare Sir? Surely his eares are ta∣ken vp to listen only to
his owne fantasticke Suggestions. Hee is wholly busied about himselfe: and heeds not others, while he thinkes others cannot choose but heed him. At him once more: I pray you Sir—Now he squints at mee ouer the left shoulder, as though he deemd mee at a glance, scarce worth the most carelesse peece of his no∣tice. Perhaps hee likes not the fashion of my phrase, tis too homely for his quaint rellish, and sounds not corre∣spondent
to the scra∣ping of his whole ac∣quaintance. I am not wonted to the fine Flourishes of his Fashi∣onall Rhetoricke. Hee would haue heard mee sooner, had I bespoke him in his owne Dia∣lect; which hee heeds most, and best vnder∣stands. I had forgot to thinke on some curious Complement, and refi∣ned Salute: which him∣selfe hath so often cond, that he hath them at his Tongues end, and there only. Now I remember
me, I haue a whole Me∣thod of them lying by me; which he gathe∣red but by Fragments, and so he vtters them. Saue you noble Sir; How fares your Body? You are fortunately met; I congratulate your happy Fortunes; Sir I honour you; Would I might doe you any Office; I thinke me happy in your Noble Society; I desire your more Acquaintance; I embrace your loue with both armes; I kisse your hands; I a∣dore
your worth, I re∣uerence your shadow; Sweet Sir rauish me with your Presence; blesse me (kinde Sir) by your Fauour. Oh Sir your Seruant; Pray Sir command mee; That I were but worthy to obserue you, Would I might haue enioyed your good company; Happinesse attend you; my Seruice wait vpon you. Vaine Verbalists! whose words are but wind, vttered, and en∣ded in themselues: Light∣ly occasioned, and as lit∣tle
intended. God gaue you your Tongues, to vse them seriously, not to dal∣ly with so deceitfully. Na∣ture hath taught you the faculty of Speech, to tell euch others your minds, and hearts: But you haue coyn'd, and con'd your words of Art, to discourse, and dissemble with. Your words of Course, and Complement; gaine you as little Heed, and Repose from others: as they haue Truth, or In∣tention in your selues. You thinke you haue learnt to speake with a
grace; and talke in a certaine royalty of Speech: When (alas) it is the Vanity onely that is openly heard, and secretly smiled at. I am your poore Friend Sir, doe you know mee? Not? Hee hath but said, as I thought. A proud Man remembers not another; because he hath forgotten himselfe. Yet (if I mi∣stake him not) hee so loues himselfe, whom he knowes not; that he almost hates all others, whom he knowes. He
enuies his Superiour, neglects his Equalls, despises his Inferiour. And for these last, hee neither endures to take notice of them; nor that they should make acquaintance with him Hee hath heard, Fa∣miliaritie brings Con∣tempt: he therefore con∣temnes all kinde of Fa∣miliarity. So does hee glory in what hee is; that than of what hee was, hee is of nothing more ashamed. Hee thinks himselfe a good∣ly Branch, and noble;
but irkes to thinke on the vile and base Stocke he grew vpon. Nothing can more disgrace him, than if his poore Father should meet him, and owne him in the Streets: And he blushes sooner at the meanenesse of his Kinsfolks, than at their Misdemeanours. Who so Proud as hee, than whom none more base? The Begger on horse∣backe, is altogether for the lofty pace. Wretches alwayes wax most inso∣lent, Cowards rigorous, and Peasants haughty.
If he get once to thinke better of himselfe, hee therefore thinkes worse of all: He concerts others vnder him; because hee is now rapt aboue him∣selfe. Tis true I tell you. You know not mee whom you scome; you I both know, and pity Your Name (I take it) is Sir Haughty-Heart, A man of an High De∣scent: Your Great Grand Father (I re∣member) came tum∣bling downe from Heauen. He (let me say
by the way) fell iustly, that was too Proud, to stand vprightly. And you his Generation, like Monsters, you fling Mountains vpon heaps; Yea like Fooles in a Confusion, you build you Babels so high; as though you would reach, and dare Him; against whom your first Father once aspi∣red. I easily obserue, The Proud Man and the Deuill conspire in one presumptuous Fault: it therefore is, hee ha∣zards with him the like
desperate Fall. Nay scowle not, stare not, stampe not, sweare not; keep in your threat∣ning Words, & Weapon. Galled Consciences kicke (like Iades) when their Sores are touched: Giue me leaue a little. My Challenge is to ano∣ther, and better Fray: where the Conque∣rour and Vanquished may part friendly, with Safety and Glory on both sides. Nor is it a single Duell I summon and prouoke thee to; but a set Battell. I can
both number thy Forces; and order mine owne. Disdaine pro∣uokes your Warre, and selfe-conceit maintains it; Rashnesse musters vp, and pride leads out your Bands; Vain-glo∣ry blowes your Trum∣pet, and Insolence is not vpon the Skirmish. But, Humility giues me the safer Ground, Grauity rancks my Troopes, Modesty beats vp my Drumme, Meeknesse receiues the Onse, and Patience gets the Victo∣ry. We yeeld a while,
and you forth with sound an Alarum. Your feather-flanting Braua∣does are at length but a blast before our Wea∣ther-beaten Souldiers: and who now sounds Retrait? Pride is vn∣horst by Humility, Gra∣uity hath giuen Rash∣nesse the foyle, Modesty hath stopt the mouth of Vain-glory, Meek∣nesse hath coold the courage of Disdaine, Insolence is pinioned by Patience, and Selfe∣conceit hath taken heels and is runne away from
thee. Thy Souldiers are thus put to sword, and flight: and loe (as I said) safety, and glory on both sides! Of a base Commander thou art now become an ho∣nourable Captiue: Nor are we otherwise proud of the conquest; than that thou art hūbled in the Foyle. We haue spoi∣led thy Forces, because they were thine; thee haue we spared, because thou now art ours: March on with vs to the fairest Marke in our Field, true Peace and
Liberty. Had thine been the day; we could but haue died honestly: thou maist liue honou∣rably, now it is ours. To embrace an happy, and lasting league, is needfull for thee, and for vs expedient: sith thou hast the Benefit, and we the Credit of the victory. Only thou shalt confesse, and re∣ioyce; the Warre was most iustly begunne, and as happily ended. Happy is hee, whom Ver∣iue hauing conquered, hath made her Captiue,
Tributary, Subiect, Ser∣uant. There is no shame where she foyles; where she spoyles there is nolosse: She striues not with vs, but for our good; nor are wee hurt, but in her re∣pulse. How answerest thou my Challenge? Enter Lists accordingly, and thou shalt finde I haue prophesied the num∣ber, order, and euent of a Mysticall Pfeucho∣machie. What needs all this (thou saift) be∣twixt vs? Thou hast euer profest thee a
Friend to those on my side; nor hast thou en∣tertained the other to thee. In plaine tearmes (so easily thou canst excuse it) Thou ne∣uer knew'st what Pride was; nor yet canst thou tell how to be Proud. No Man hath beene so vicious, but that he hath made Vertue his profession. Euen the most dissolute will not owne their Vices: but will yet vsurpe a name from the former, howeuer the latter bee their practice.
Neuer man was so proud, as to thinke himselfe so: That Pride were more abbominable than was Lucifers, that could be proud of it selfe. But listen, and Ile teach thee how to know thy selfe: Giue eare awhile to thy selfe; I'le describe thee a Man so like thee in all points and proporti∣ons: as that hee that sees you together, must put on his Spectacles, and view all things double, that takes you for two. A Proud Man is one
that climbes the wrong way to ascend thither; from whence his Father fell. Is his owne NAR∣CISSVS, and all Mens TIMON: hating o∣thers, and enamoured of himselfe. One that esteemes himselfe in a Contempt of others: or contemnes others in his owne Esteeme; you can∣not say whether first, or more. Many a thing doth hee contemne in another, and yet ad∣mites it in himselfe. He wonders at what hee hath, & boasts of more.
He reckons his Chic∣kens before they bee hatcht; and all his Geese are Swans. He growes as bigge as a Mountaine, though he bring forth, but a Mouse: and as soone as he hath laid, he Cac∣kles. He boasts of those parts of his; wherein many Beasts excell him, and say nothing. The little he hath so dazles him, that he sees not what a deale he wants. His vices he puts in the backe part, but his Ver∣tues in the fore part of
the Wallet. Them he soone forgets, these hee oft repeats. Swan-like, he carries a stiffe necke ouer his white Feathers, but sees not that his feet are blacke. Others Faults, and his owne Parts are still before him: and thus while he compares, he cannot but preferre himselfe. Because he is somewhat better than the worst; he thinkes him now as good as the best. Hee hath so many Inferi∣ours, that he thinkes no man his Superiour.
Whereas others are to others; this Man is an Hypocrite to himselfe: For he seemes to him∣selfe, what hee is not; and if he be any thing so, yet he thinkes him more than he is. He pro∣mises such things to himselfe, which nei∣ther are, nor are like to bee: and busies, yea pleases himselfe (for the while) in his fained Conceit, as in the reall Fruition. Touching himselfe, he subiects, his Opinions to no Mans: and in anothers
Censure, he yeelds to none before himselfe. His Matter, or anothers; he examines it in the ballance of his owne Iudgement; and is as impatient to remit it, as to haue it contradicted. He takes Chalke, and a Coale in hand: and his White, or Blacke must stand. The Good Deeds he doth (as the Wrongs that are done him) he still remembers He casts to meet the benefited Party in the Street, or a Throng; and there lookes for ac∣knowledgement:
And if it be so old, or were so slender, that he hath now forgot it; he yet takes occasion by the by, to put him in mind of it. He smiles to heare his owne praise in ano∣thers mouth; and yet so minces thereat, as though he would seem to blush: But at length is content to yeeld to others Sooth-sayings, before the Testimony of his owne Consci∣ence: and casily per∣swades him to bee as they say; though they
say nothing so as he is. All Men are Lyers; and the Proud man most of all: for (at once) hee transgresses the bounds of Modesty, and Truth: For while his owne Suggestion makes him talke so largely; your owne Suspicion cannot thinke he sayes truly. Theres not an ill man hates his Fellow, this Man only excepted. A Drunkard accompa∣nies a Drunkard; a Whoremonger embra∣ces a Whoremonger; a Theefe shakes hands
with a Theefe: one Proud man only abides not another: One Tree is not taken notice of, where the whole Wood reaches to the same height and growth. The Proud Man should not be notorious him∣selfe, could he suffer o∣thers to be as himselfe. Loue and Kings (they say) will no Corriuals: nor can Pride (which is the Loue of a mans selfe, and King of other euils) endure an equall. POMPEY will no Mate, CAESAR will
no Master. That Euill must needs exceed all, that cannot endure ano∣ther should match it. Hee steps first into the Roome, and sits him in the vpper Chaire; and (after some pausing, and gazing) roles his Head vpon his Elbow; and conceits with what a grace hee nods toward you, speakes to you, whispers with you, smiles vpon you. Not a Motion of his, not a Fa∣culty, which smels not of Affectation. Nor so much but he Sirs, and
Spits with a grace; and so he Walks, and Talks. He speakes neuer but with a noise; and al∣wayes laughs with a kind of Derision: Com∣mands also with Arro∣gance, and rebukes with Disdaine. He talkes all with Interrogations; as though his words were of Authority to questi∣on euery thing. That you enter his Thre∣shold, is more than a common courtesie; but that you approach his Presence, is a great vouchsafement. What
shall I call him? A THRASO, a POLY∣PHEMVS? To whom shall I liken him? To MAXIMINVS, that made his Senatours kisse his feet? to DO∣MITIAN, that would be stiled a God? or to those diuers POPES, that were guilty of both? or to LVCIFER, the Father of them all? To what shall I compare him? But to a Cocke, that claps, and crowes vpon his owne Dung∣hill; a Peacocke that ruffles in his owne Fea∣thers;
a Toad that swels with his owne poison; an Asse that hath gotten on a Lions skinne, and now he is a Companion for none, but such as he seemes; an Ape that is enamou∣red of his own and vgly Puppets: a Chameleon that gapes after the Aire; a Bladder full of Wind; a shallow Riuer, and bubbling; an empty Caske, and sounding; an addle Egge, and swimming; a Thinne Eare, and blasted, that out-tops the fat and full
Corne; a Cypresse Tree, that hath faire Leaues, but no fruit; a Wine-Bush, that neuer beto∣kened good liquor; a disordered Member, swoln so bigge through its owne Corruption. Haue I now pourtray∣ed thee in thy proper colours? This Glasse re∣flects on none beside thee: Tis (me thinkes) thy liuely resemblance; looke here how thou lik'st thy selfe. For me, I would be loth (like the Painter) to fall in loue with thee, by the
draught of thy picture. Tush! I know thee, and all thy Kinne; and haue been but too much acquainted with all of thine acquaintance. That old Gripe-good, that por'd so long in the Dunghill; was the first that rais'd you al thence, and snow made you looke so high. He vn∣dervalued himselfe to that, which now makes you ouervalue your selues. It was he, left you that which made you Lords: and you haue purchas't this, to
thinke you so. But Ile tell thee; thou hast a faire House, and thinkst it a very Heauen to ma∣ny Houells: step but from thine owne Gates, and see how others build more and greater, BABELS for their Ho∣nour. Thou canst walke so farre and wide on thine owne Ground, that thou thinkst euery Passenger must needs trespasse vpon thee: Take but the Map, and shew me in what part of the World thy Land lyes. Thy Bagges strut
with a refined and im∣printed Earth, and that so swels thee: so did it not the Earth, that might haue said before thee, these are Mine. These Things make thee seeme a Great Man within thy selfe: Silly Grigge! come out of thy Pond and Mud; and thou shalt meet with ouergrowne Con∣gers in the Sea. Pride is called the Worme of Riches: It is the ranknesse of this Weed, to produce such a Vermine. If a Man can but once get to bee
Wealthy, he soone learnes to be Haughty: So hard it is for him not to be puf∣fed vp, that is so cram∣bed vp. He knew the dif∣ficulty, that gaue the Ca∣ueat: Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be not high minded. Not know my Lady Goe-gay, the sprucest Dame in City, or Court? Her father was frugall, forgetting he was Cae∣sar: but shee flaunts it out, remembring she is Caesars daughter.
Me thinkes I now see her, as I saw her last; how trimly deckt in her purple and fine linnen. Shee ware vpon her backe, to what shee neuer laid her hands. Earth, and Wormes, and Beasts, and Nati∣ons, these are, and liue, and labour, for what she soyles, and teares, and spends: Their Ex∣crement, and Sweat, take care to proude her, what shee scarce takes paines to put on. The good Huswife and applauded, seeketh
Wooll, and Flax; she layeth her hands to the Spindle, and her hands touch the Distaffe: and so cloaths both her, and her houshold. Out vp∣on these home-spunne Threeds! These signe like Habit, like Condi∣tion: Farre fetcht, and deare bought are for our Ladies. One Coun∣try and Nation must breed, another kemb, another spinne, ano∣ther weaue, another
dresse, another shape out, and another trim vp their wearings. Alas weake Creatures! they see not their Beggery in these sundry Borrowings: nor mind how fraile a Car∣kasse and vile, is shrou∣ded vnder so gorgeous Happings. Womens sup∣plimentall Art, does but the rather bewray Na∣tures Defects. Perfu∣ming, Painting, Star∣ching, Decking, these make some Annoyance, and Vn∣comelinesse, though lesse apparant, yet more suspe∣cted. Wee gaze with
greedinesse and delight vpon a curious and glori∣ous Sepulchre; and yet notwithstanding we con∣ceiue and abhorre what is within. Me thought she bare her Selfe so nicely and demurely, as though her Body had beene starcht & gumm'd ac∣cording to her Cloaths. Perhaps (shee carries them so answerably) shee tooke aime by her Glasse at once, to set both her Vesture, and Gesture in the right Fa∣shion. Ah their silly Fol∣ly! that Metamorphize
Nature into Art: and carry themselues more like Pictures, than like Creatures. Oh blot not out the louely Image of God; in faining, and framing so vaine a shaping to your selues! How she glitte∣red (Forehead, Eares, Bosome, Wrists, and Fingers) in her Gems, Iewels, Bracelets, and Rings? She likened her Lustre to the Moone, and Stars; and thought her lesse clay, when so bedaubed with a poli∣shed Rubbish. Who might then prize her
Worth, that bare many Good Mens Estates vpon her little Finger? Shee little considered, how many Fingers were worne, and wea∣ried; to make that one Finger shine. This is not only one of our Vanities, but one of our Superstiti∣ons; That we can (against our Reason, and Know∣ledge) beleeue that the whole substance of a great Patrimony, may be va∣luably transubstantiated into the Quantity of a little Stone. Gemmes, what are they, but Gums;
or the accretions, or con∣gelations of brighter Wa∣ter and Earth? They come but from a more sub∣tile compacted Sulphur and Mercury: and yet we thinke the very Hea∣uens concurred with the Earth to their commixti∣on; and so the Sunne left part of his shining in them. Meere notionall is their value; which is in the Opinion, not in the Thing: They are worth nothing, only if you can but thinke them so. The Merchants Aduenture hath transported them,
the Lapidaries Craft hath polished them, the vaine Mans Credulity hath esteemed them, and the Rich Mans Superflui∣tie hath enhaunced them. These be but rich Mens gawdy Trifles; as the painted Gew-gawes bee for their children. CHRIST is not put on with these Toyes, and Ragges. It is for such as wax wanton against CHRIST; to fashion themselues according to this World: For Godly Matrons, the old Fashion
is best; Modest apparell, with shame∣fastnesse and Sobrie∣tie; not with broide∣red haire, or gold, or pearles, or costly aray. Who, Sir Lofty-lookes the Courtier? I saw him tother day in his golden Fetters: and heard him make great boast of (me thought) but a glori∣ous Miserie. Hee hath gotten (he thinkes) to bee more happie than
he was; and hath quite forgotten what he was. Fortune hath exalted him, and how he ex∣alts himselfe? Cleane contrary to the Rule; the Man thinkes his Place hath graced him: and looks chiefly to be obserued according to his place. He is growne to be better clad than his Master; yea and beares an higher minde. It is hard to be chaste in company with a Woman, to bee sober at a Banquet, to be patient in a Fray: as hard to be humble in
the midst of new heaped Honours, & Preferments. How rarely doth he stoope so low; that so suddenly is rapt so high? Like a Moth, or Rat of the Pa∣lace; hee hath oft and much inquired after this mans Life, that mans Office, the other mans Estate: and (after long, and earnest gaping) some, or all these are fallen into his mouth. And now hee hath climb'd so high on a sudden, that you would wonder hee wrought not himselfe out of
breath. To say all of such an one, in summe: Many hee scornes, his Inferiours; Hee enuies Many, his Fellowes: One he soothes, his Lord; One he loues, Himselfe. But what of Captaine Scape-skarre? How hee stalkes vp and downe the streets in his Sha∣moyse, and a Trun∣cheon; that neuer ware an Harnesse, nor scarce can wield a Sword. O but take heed how you wrong him! Hee hath more Badges of his Art and Valour about him;
then a side Belt, or a Buffe Coat. Haue you not heard of his Wounds and Skarres, so many haue beene told of? He bids you see the Gash he gat in his Forehead; and feele the Bullet, that lies in his Calfe: and you must now thinke how hee then hazarded; whereas (perhaps) hee gat the one as he look't backe, the other as hee ran away. It is a maruell he tells you not, how he stood like a Giant amidst the Pigmies: how with the blast of his first
Volley, he made the Enemy quake like leaues; made them flie like Feathers; and scat∣tered them like dust be∣fore the Wind. And you must now beleeue him; or else you doe him the dishonour, as if you should either gainsay, or disproue him. He tels you what a monstrous leape he tooke when he was last in Rhodes: and if you will be pleased (for experience sake) to sup∣pose the Place where he is, to be Rhodes; he will also giue you leaue to
suppose the Leape. Soul∣diers (bee they the most valiant and fortunate, that euer lifted hand or foot, for God, and their Country) lose so much of their glory; by how much their owne mouths are the Trumpets of their Victo∣rie. Modesty is not lesse noble in a Warriour, than is valour. If he haue ta∣ken the City, let his works praise him in the Gate; not his words only, when hee hath now got the Towne vpon his backe. He hath wonne the Field; perhaps with a greater
losse: and why boasts hee of a Prize, when all is too little to make amends? How sayes he, his Ene∣mie is vanquished; when his owne are not recoue∣red? The Day is his; it might haue beene the Ad∣uersaries: and why in∣sults he, where he might haue couched? With what Glory can he boast, where he might haue complained with shame enough? Ah but theres One of you (beleeue me, I could both loue, and honour him; did he not saue me that labour, in
doing the Office to himselfe) No matter for his Name; You may think he is a noted Man. The Man hath good Parts and Gifts in him; you need not tell him so, he knowes it well enough: you should take him for a Beast, should you thinke him ignorant of his owne Strength: He can doe well; yea, and he thinks as well of what he can doe. As it was not ill for MOSES that his Face shone, and the People saw it, though himselfe
knew it not: So were it well for vs, did our light so shine before Men, that they might see our good workes, and we our selues ignorant to boast it. The Harpe sounds no lesse sweetly, though it hear not it selfe: Our good Parts would bee no lesse laudable, though our selues tooke no notice of them. It is both safe and profitable vnto vs, that our selues haue beene ignorant of our Gifts. How vsuall is it, to forestall our best Parts, with a fore Con∣ceit? Many men might
in time haue beene both Good, and Wise; had they not as yet thought them so. This hinders the Per∣fection of Good Parts, when we thinke we haue attained them so soone. God, and Nature haue done faire for him, and hees now not a little proud of himselfe. This hath God done for him, he hath wrought Good out of Euill: this hath he done vnto himselfe, he hath wrought Euill out of Good. Tis strange how Vice here buds from Vertue.
Whereas other Vices are in the Euill; our Pride on∣ly is in the Good we haue: Other Euils openly shew the Worst; this Euill tre∣cherously spoyles the Best we doe. This is the craft and subtilty of the Deuill, that when be cannot at first preuent our Good Deeds, and Duties; hee seekes to preuent them af∣terwards, by making vs Proud of what we haue done. The Vertues that destroy their seuerall Vices; he makes in gene∣rall to nourish this Vice: Prudence, Iustice, Forti∣tude,
Temperance; which banish and abandon Folly, Wrong, Faintnesse, Riot: These neuerthelesse (and such others) occasion Pride, and cherish it. Of all our Vertues, this is the chiefest; not to be Proud of our Vertues. Hee built a Schoole, Col∣ledge, Hospitall; and I read his name in euery Window. Tush! he hath erected him an euerlasting Monument of Letters: in whose very Frontispeece, you may read at once both his Name, and Works: And
you must conceiue, these were not set so neere together for no∣thing: his Name does authorize his Workes; and his Workes immor∣talize his Name. Hee smiles to thinke, how his Name is published, in the inquiry of his Works; and how his Workes are graced, in the mention of his Name. He hath long learn't to exhaust o∣thers, like a Bee: and now at length hath got the Are to euiscerate himselfe, like a Spider.
Others Brood he com∣monly wraps in his owne Clouts; with here and there a new∣fangled Brat, much what like himselfe: and yet he hugges them a∣boue therest; and sayes of his owne inuenti∣ons; O deepe Notions, and mysterious! Orare, and pious Thoughts! Oh how it tickles him to re-repeat the Line, and Saying, hee hath couched so Emphati∣cally! when as (per∣haps) you can scarce conceiue it to be so
much as sensibly di∣gested. Iust like a fan∣tasticke Musician, he chiefly pleases himselfe; while hee leaues the Grounds, to run vpon his Voluntaries. How readily, and rashly, doe we broach our owne Opi∣nions? how largely pa∣raphrase vpon our owne Fancies? yea, wee make them ours also; which be no other, than haue beene said, or thought, saue somewhat otherwise. That we haue made a bare shift to clad, or cloake ano∣ther; this is enough to
owne it to our selues. The Authour boasts what cu∣rious Threed he hath so cunningly wouen from out himselfe, nor (for his Matter, or Method) hath he the least hint from ano∣ther. The Translatour tels you, tis farre more te∣dious to confine his wits to construction, than to en∣large them to Inuention. He bragges of the For∣rainers Learning, and Deuotion; together with his narrow inquiry of his Words, and minde: and now hee compares his Turn'd Coat (though in
many places thred-bare, moth-eaten, fusty;) to any fresh, and faire, spot∣lesse, yea seamelesse Gar∣ment. Briefly, bee it in things of our owne, or o∣thers; If our knowledge be a little beside others; euen they must know it, whose knowledge is farre beyond our owne. Nay, but he is now of ano∣ther Minde; he is not so Prodigall, as Nig∣gardly of what hee knowes. Away (sayes he) with these shallow Cestornes, with these empty Channels; that
hold so little, and powre out so fast: Giue me only the Gulfe of Learning, and a Deuou∣rer of Bookes. I cannot tell what you would say he may be; but he will not (he sayes) bee a Foole in Print. He vp∣braids him with Folly, that thinkes himselfe knowes nothing, vn∣lesse others know what he knowes: and thinks it his owne Discretion, not to communicate his knowledge vnto Fooles. No; As Lear∣ning (he thinkes) be∣gan:
ganue: so hee'le haue it end in himselfe: For (so he perswades him) he knowes so much; that in him knowledge both liues, and dies. The knowledge that this man hath, he will not vent it out: no maruell then it be found in this man, as is said; Knowledge puf∣feth vp. But of all your lofty Crue; haue you heard of him, that is proud of this; That he is not proud? One that glo∣ries vainly, euen in the
Contempt of Vaine∣glory. You haue many of his Sect, and Sort: He seemes lowly, but he grudges to be despi∣sed; He cares not to bepoore, but he is loth to want: He goes bare∣ly, fares hardly, lies coldly; an holy Man (I wis) and mortifi'd! but that he boasts as much of this, as you could of the Contrary. A fained Humility, puffes vp more, then a noted Pride: and is so much the more euill and edious, as it seemes to bee otherwise.
Tush man! (be he as thou wouldst thinke, another to thy selfe) I can as well see his Proud Heart through his torne Coat; as thine through thy slasht Doublet. Thou proud∣ly abhorrest his sordid ragges; he also spurnes and tramples thy gay Garments; and with another kinde of Pride. Thy Ambition vrges thee to giue; and he re∣fuses thy Gift, for he also hath his Ambition. Boast thou before him; Thou art Alexander the
King: and hee'le bragge with thee; Hee's Dioge∣nes the Dogge. Pride is not alwayes from endow∣ments within; nor yet from outward Accru∣ments. A proud Heart oft goes together with a Beg∣gers Purse and Coat. Ile now tell thee of One thou knowest not: Heed him well; thou yet knowest not him whom thou seest. I tell thee (chuse thee whe∣ther thou thinke me so; my ayme is, that thou be so thy selfe) I am not Proud: And good
reason why; I haue no∣thing, I know nothing to be Proud of. Riches, what are they; but a spreading, a mouing, a glittering Earth? Hardly, and euilly gotten; doubt∣full to keepe, and dan∣gerous; soone, and sor∣rowfully lost. Honour, what is it; but an im∣posed, rather a suppo∣sed Hight, and Deeme? a meere nothing in it selfe; but only is more, or lesse, as others rec∣kon it. Men are like Counters, all of the same mould, & stampe:
only when we cast vp their account, we num∣ber them from a Far∣thing, to a Pound. What is Beauty, but a Super∣ficies of Colour, and Proportion; or a sha∣dowed Shape, and Hue? a red clay mingled with Snow: A Flower, which (ere it yet flourishes) is prone to fade: Crop it vntimely, and it lowres while you looke vpon it; Let it stand a while, and it withers vpon the stalke: The Frost of a Feuer makes it droope downwards;
and an aged Winter makes it quite wither a∣way. What is Strength & Stoutnesse, but a stiffer Compact, or more so∣lide Couchednesse of the Ioynts, and Bloud? which (say Art, nor Might can yet subdue) Sicknesse, Age, or Death will once enfeeble. I haue seene a Feather and a Wall more beau∣teous than a Woman: and know an Oxe, or an Oake, to be stronger than a Man. A Lion will outstand a Man, a Tigre out-run him,
a Stagge out-leap him, a Dolphin out-swimme him: It is great Folly, to be Proud of those Parts of ours; which the very Beasts haue not only with vs, but before vs. And for Learning and Know∣ledge, what is it, but an insight of our Igno∣rance; letting vs know only, that we know no∣thing? I will aske him, that knowes the most, and applies it to the best; Who knowes all Things? Who is wise at all Times? The most he knowes, is not the least
of that he knowes not. And can we be Proud of these things of ours, which either are not ours, or are not? These best things of Nature, Industry, For∣tune, how can we cal them ours, and kisse our owne Hands for them; when as they can neither get, nor keepe them to vs? What we here arrogate to our selues, wee steale from God. Oh wretched Man, and thanklesse! What hast thou, thou canst call thine owne, but Euill? God giues thee all that thou art, and hast besides: Let
the Giuer haue the glory of his Gifts. Why is thy heart so puffed vp with∣in thee, and thy Brother so despised in thine Eyes? Who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou, that thou didst not receiue? Now if thou didst receiue it; why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not receiued it? Thou art more Rich, Great, Faire, Strong, Wise, and Holy,
than he; yea, but hee is more humble. God thinks better of an humble Sin∣ner, than of a Iust man proud. Be he neuer so Good; God thinkes the worse of him, for that he thinks the beteer of him∣selfe. It skarres me quite for climbing so high; when I consider, that he who first ventered himselfe, and now vrges others, fell so low. He now and then spurs me on to come after him: but (by his leaue, or rather in his despite)
I hold it easier and safer to sit still; than to rise vp and fall. He hazards that climbes vp the Hill; he that couches in the Dale, hath not whence to fall. It is for Goats to clammer vp the Mountaines; I am a Sheepe, and can con∣tent me to graze in the Vallies. Yet am I not so sheepish, to losh into the Ditch, because the Bell-Weather hath ventured: Shall I rush after him, as though I did only mind his Going, but not vn∣derstand his Drow∣ning?
Let Satan Keepe his poison to himselfe; or drinke his draught to Fiends, not Men. Shall I pledge him in his Cup, whereof (I know) he at first ra∣sted, and perished? The Deuill (I perceiue) was well enough if hee could haue kept him so: He once was (as it were) enthro∣ned on high; hee now is imprisoned below: was once not an Angell only, but the Prince of Angels; is now both a Deuill, and the Prince of Deuils: Was once more faire than the
Sunne, is now as blacke as Hell: Was once a Spi∣rit true, and pure; is now a lying, and vncleane Spi∣rit. I will not pity, but scorne him rather: How art thou fallen from Heauen (O Lucifer) Sonne of the Morning? And will reioyce to heare, and belecue the Witnesse of his Destru∣ction: I beheld Satan, as Lightning, fall from Heauen. If I may giue the Deuill his
Doome; He is worthily throwne lower, that would haue attempted higher than can be imagined: An Hell is too good for him, that would haue vsurped an Heauen: He merits to be confounded to Nothing that so insulted against All things. Did he (thinke you) so ambitiously af∣fect a Diety? Certainly, Diabolisme was too lit∣tle for him. Surely, No finite Creature can be ca∣pable of so infinite an Euill; as to arrogate and attempt Diuine Maiesty to it selfe. I rather thinke
(then he enuyed the Ma∣iesty to the Creatour) be enuyed the Perfection to the Creature; and glo∣ried in his owne. He saw he was a goodly Thing, and mighty; & thought he was so of himselfe, and none was so beside him: Others he dee∣med subiect, and him∣selfe onely indepen∣dant. He ought at first to haue acknowledged his maker; but he then gloried in himselfe. The height then of Satans Am¦tion, was not so much a rebellious attempt to bee
like God; as a Stubborne neglect rather, to bee thankfull to God, for what he was. And what high∣er Contempt could he haue imagined, then so Proud a Neglect? This therefore exiled him his blessed and perfect Seat, and State: and made him (of all Crea∣tures) the most euill and accursed. His Pride threw Satan out of Hea∣uen, and made him a De∣uill of an Angell: Our Pride also will presse vs downe to Hell, and make vs Fiends of Men. Hee
that endured not Pride in Angels; how shall hee suffer it in Men? How shall Dust and Ashes bee lifted vp, without Con∣susion: sith this Princi∣pality gloried not, but to his Shame? Of all Sinnes, God hates, and plagues Pride; as the Pride of Sinnes. There was no Sinne be∣fore Pride; no Sinne now without it: Since euery Sinne is a proud rebellion against the Will of God. What can be more Proud, than to liue a∣gainst his Will, by
whose will we liue? What more vnthank∣full, than to despise his commands; which commands, not onely that he may be knowne to rule, but rather that he may take occasion to reward? Nothing op∣poseth God more than Pride; GOD therefore (of all) Resisteth the Proud. This made him set his Face against all his Creatures, for enill. He therefore cast LV∣CIFER our of Hea∣uen, ADAM out of
Paradise, the Builders out of BABEL, HA∣GAR out of his Ma∣sters house, IEZABEL out of the Window, SAVL out of his King∣dome, NEBVCHAD∣NEZZAR out of his Condition, HEROD out of his Life: He there∣fore cast CORE and his Company into the Earth, HAMAN into the Aire, PHARAOH and his Host into the Water, and the SODO∣MITES into the Fire: He therefore cast IEZA∣BEL to the Dogges,
the BETHEL Chil∣dren to the Beares, and the enuious Lords vn∣to the Lions. All Gods Creatures fight for him, when he sets himselfe to resist the Proud. God is Lord ouer Man, more than Man is Lord ouer the Creatures: Nor are the Creatures bound to serue Man, longer than Man serues God: If he will be so proud, as to kicke against him that is his Maker; they will bee so bold as to striue against him that should be their Master. The bigge
and lofty Creatures; Buildings, Trees, Mountaines, Rocks; these all are obnoxious to euery Tempest, and Thundering: while the low and little shrimps and Shrubs, shroud and stand secure: These are dasht, and These incou∣raged by him; that putteth downe the Mighty from their Seat, and ex∣alteth them of low degree. Pride (we say) will haue a Fall:
This is but the Ladder by which Men climbe to Ruine: This but lifts men vp, to cast them down the more violent∣ly & desperately. When you see a Proud Man neare, thinke Iudge∣ment not farre off. Where there is Pride in the heart, there is certain∣ly a plague at his heeles: Yet a little while, and the Flourishing Bay is gone. Bigge Trees stand seldome till they wi∣ther; but are rather blowne or hewen downe before.
Yea but I am hum∣ble; Nor is it thanks-worthy, that I am little in mine own eyes. since One greater than I made himselfe of no account. How can we make vs low enough; since He whose shooe latchet we are not wor∣thy to vnloose, hum∣bled himselfe at our Feet? How can vile∣nesse be puffed vp; since He that was Great beyond estimation, made himselfe of no esteeme? It is humilitie enough with vs, that we
subiect vs to our Superi∣ours, and preferre vs not before our Equals; but too much (we count) to subiect vs to our E∣quals, and not preferre vs fore our Inferiours: But (O wondrous Humility!) He subiected him to In∣feriours, who among Men and Angels had no Equals. He bowed the Heauens, when he humbled him∣selfe to our Life; Hee bowed the Head, when he humbled himselfe to our Death. Odious was our Pride, the Pride of the Sonnes of Men: That
could not be cleansed, not be healed, but by so rare Humility, the Humility of the Sonne of God. Why are we puffed; for whom our Sauiour was so emptied, why so lifted, for whom he became so prostrate? What Worme of Earth can be lifted vp, when the God of Heauen was brought so low? We that are base, to what can we be abased; when Hee was humbled that was so high? Oh Dust and Ashes! learne to contemne thy selfe; for whom the God of Spirits was despi∣sed.
Learne of him that was humbled, not onely for thy Pride; but to make thee humble. Oh learne of him, that saith; Learne of me; for J am meeke and lowly in heart. I wonder not that the Deuill was so proud; for he was an Angell bright, and perfect: But it makes me start and gaze, to see Man so; that is but Dung, vile & vanishing away. The Deuill had more to be proud of than hath Man: yet
Man will be as proud as the Deuill. What is Man, thus to forget, thus to transgresse his owne Condition? Did he se∣riously consider him∣selfe, this would make him keepe warily with∣in himselfe; at least, not step so lauishly beyond himselfe. Why liftest thou vp thy selfe (O Man!) when thy selfe is enough to pull thee down? Art thou not wret∣ched, mortall, euill? Thy blacke Feet will bow thy stiffe necke, notwithstanding thy
white Feathers. What art thou but a Shadow, a Sepulcher, a Statue, a Glasse, a Bubble, a Blast, Dung, Dust, and Ashes, Wormes-meat; a crazy Body, and full of Corruption, a cankred Soule, and Fraught with euill: whose Being, no Being; whose Life, no Life; whose Life is gone, or going; whose Death is comming, and will come. And now (Earth and Ashes!) how art thou puffed vp; whose Na∣ture, and Lot it is to set∣tle, and sinke? What
should a Giant doe in a Dwarfe; or so high a minde in so vile a car∣kasse? The Sergeant, Purseuant, Catch-poll of the Great King; that knocketh at the doore of Young and Old, high and low, rich and poore, that equals Scepters and Spades, Iron and Straw, Bookes and Babbles: She turns Beauty into Blacknesse, Strength into weak∣nesse, Wisdome into Folly, and layes Ho∣nour in the Dust. Digge vp the Beggers Graue,
open the Princes Tombe; view well both their Skuls, and see how like they looke: compare their Dust, and thou shalt finde no dif∣ference. Why doth Man (in his life) so proudly preferre himselfe to the Most, and Best: whom Death shall once equall to the Least, and Last? No man is proud, but he that is ignorant of himselfe. Know then (O Man) at once, and contemne thy selfe: Know whence thou wert, what thou art, and whither thou
must: Whence thou wert, from a muddy Slime; What thou art, a rotten Dung; Whi∣ther thou must, to the place of Dust and Wormes. In all that was, or is, or is to come; heres nothing to be proud of. How can he be proud of himselfe; whose Birth is a pollu∣tion, whose life is a De∣solation, whose Death is a Corruption? our Life is but a step to Death; or many Deaths to one Death: Youth is the death of Infancie; why
then are we proud in the Toyes of our Infancie? Manhood is the Death of Youth; why then are we proud in the pleasures of our Youth? Age is the Death of Manhood; why then are we proud in the strength ofour Manhood? Decrepitnesse is the Death of Age; why then are we proud in the wisdome of our Age? Lastly, Death is the Death of all, why then are we proud of any? Tush! what of all this? Thou now thin∣kest neuer the worse of thy selfe, for what
thou shalt be. Tell thee (thou faist) not what thou wert, or must be; but what thou art. Its all one for that: what thou hast, thou mean'st to make much of it, while thou hast it. Goe to Great-Heart; thou wilt (ere long) be lesse∣ned. Bee proud yet a∣while of thy selfe: where shall once be thy Selfe, or Pride? Doe, doe; Out-gaze Heauen till Earth gape for thee: and spurne Men, till Men tread vpon thee. Then shall they per∣ceiue
thee to be as vile; as thou couldst conceiue of them. Yea, when thine Honour, Wis∣dome, Beauty, Strength; shall be sowne in Weak∣nesse, Horrour, Folly, and Dishonour: Thus shall they entombe and intitle thee at once.
GOod Reader know, That commest nigh; Here lies he low, That look't so high. Both poore, and nak't; That was gay cloath'd: Of all forsak't, Who others loath'd. He once thought all Enui'd his Worth: Nor Great, nor Small, Now grudge his Turfe. The Heauenly Cope Was his Ambition: Three Cubits scope Is his Fruition. He was aboue all; God aboue him: He did not lone all; Nor God loue him. He that him taught, First to aspire: Now hath him caught, And payes his hire.
The Jrefull, OR Angrie. BVt whither Sir Hot∣spur? what, al in haste? A word (I pray) and you will; yet not (as you vse) a word and a blow. Come prethee, let me walke thee a while, to coole thee. Spur not on too fast; thoul't either jade, or stable thy selfe. I
conceiue thee, and can prescribe. Perhaps, thou hast not the wit to rec∣kon the Greeke letters; not the Grace (perhaps) to repeate the Lords Prayer: yet (may be) the leasure to take a Turne. In good sadnes, thou art angry; something now ayleth thee. Something? The Foole (sure) hath more wit, than to be an∣gry for nothing. One (thou sayest) hath wronged, and vrged thee: Harke a while, and thou shalt heare him say no lesse of thee; than
thou now of him. Men are wont to accuse others, when themselues are in fault. The Angry man (e∣specially) is seldome but guilty of his own allegati∣ons, and Complaints: and oft times wrongs another, in What he sayes, in that he sayes, another hath wronged him. Nought but a glance, a puffe, a snuffe, a frown, a shoulder, a spurne? and (beside these flouts and scornes) neither stay, nor speake? Thus are our Passions hot vp∣on their bent pursuit:
thus disdainfull at their least opposition: thus care∣lesse of the best aduice. Bid him stay, and be adui∣sed. You had as good say nothing: He is resolute∣ly bent vpon his rules (I know) which he as ill vnderstands, as fol∣lowes: That he ought not to be wronged: That he ought to be satisfied for the wrong. Surely the man is lost, or lacking; and is whol∣ly bent and busied, to seeke and ouertake him∣selfe. Or rather, is so ta∣ken vp with himselfe
on a sudden; that he yet hath no leasure to take vp himselfe. He driues on very furiously, and most stiffely bestirres his stumpes: and yet (I war∣rant him) chaes as fast, as he postes; because his feet are so sluggish and vnweildy, that they make no more haste to bring many his other members into action. His spleene which can∣not so soone burst out against another, now boyles and bubbles within himselfe. Out vg∣ly Hagges, and Bell-dame
Witches of our Minds, and Soules! rebells to Reason, and enemies to Sense How doe ye possesse, and mishape vs? With what sophisti∣cating dregges of Exor∣bitancy doe ye skarre vs from our selues: and hurry vs headlong to that in∣conuenience, which we seldome warily recouer; but which we rather shamefully repent too late? If these Tempests hoyse and tosse vs, we rarely re∣couer our harbour; but our Ship is either swal∣lowed of gulfes, buryed in the waues, or split vpon
the rocks. Our Affections (for they haue their Of∣fice in vs, without their Fault) become chaste Hand-maids to our Minds, while carefully and discreetly curb'd and awed: but giue them leaue, and Liberty, and they turne inordinate Prosti∣tutes to our lusts. Sit close to the Sterne, and let these only apply their owne Oares; and the Ship sayles with a merry gale, and prosperous: But let loose the Reines, and (as vntamed Horses) they hurry along; and at last
they throw their Rider. Fire is a good Seruant, but a bad Master; vsefull vpon the hearth, but hurt∣full beyond the bounds: Such are our fiery Affe∣ctions also: we are not Ty∣rants, but must be ma∣sters ouer them: we cannot root them, we must re∣straine them. Let HA∣GAR sit about SARAH, and sheele stirre contenti∣on in the whole House of ABRAHAM. That these Bond Huswiues (our Affections) vsurpe ouer Reason, that Free Ma∣tron, is enough to disturbe
and distract the whole Man. These are the trou∣bled waters, in which we cannot see our faces, and shapes: nay, in which we wallow purposely, that we may not see them. These are the dusky Clouds, that obscure the Sunne of our little world, our Reason. If these boysterous Winds get head against vs; they trouble our Sea, perplex our Pilot, split our Ship, and driue vs all to wrack. But I say no more to my Selfe. We may be∣wayle our Selues in O∣thers; it is in vaine, that
we warne Others within our Selues. Haue after the Haslting; nay, haue at him with an en∣counter as resolute, as speedy. But soft; not too neare him. The man turnes bigge, and sower vpon me. He seem'd Impatient at the first; and now growes Fu∣rious at a next affront. Anger is wont to resistand assault those it meets with, as those it aymes at: and growes as short against the meane occurrences, as against the maine Oppo∣site.
See, see! Hee's all on a froth and fume. Looke on him well, and like him worse. His Head startles, Haires bri∣stle, Browes wrinkle, Eyes sparkle, Teeth chatter, Tongue stam∣mers, lips quauer, Ioynts tremble, Hands clap, Fingers twitter, Feet wander: His Bloud ri∣ses, Stomacke fills, veines swell; His Heart burnes, Breast boyles, Breath shortens, and his Colour goes and comes: Now red as fire, now pale as a clout;
now rashly hot and fla∣ming, now fearefully wanne and chill. What vncouth alterations of Mind? Did you euer see such franticke anticke gestures of Body? In this Glasse (I warne you all) behold, and abhorre yourselues. Did he here also see himselfe, he would scarce know himselfe; yet scarce that, ere loath himselfe. The Man quite marres a good Face of his owne. How vncomely and loath∣some is his Mind now (could you marke it)
that workes these distem∣pers, and distractions in his Body? He seemes (me thinkes) as vgly, as out∣ragious: and his Feature not more vnseemely, than his Feats. Marke him now: Now he stands, now starts, now stampes, now Stares, now shrugges, now scratches, now snuffes, now grinnes, now gapes, now wrings. Such Apish tricks, such Bedlam prancks; as you would iudge him (in his Fitt) either a Foole, or or madman: And who
will thinke you other in his case? Anger is a short madnesse. Ah peeuish passi∣on, that thus distempers and distracts vs! of all our hard and aduerse Af∣fections, the most harsh and churlish. The rest haue some easement; this only will no mitigation. Feare hath some Bold∣nesse; Sorrow some Ioy; Despayre some Hope; this Fury only hath no mer∣cy. They moue vs, but this inrages: They disturbe, but this confounds our quiet. Yet more tricks with
this angry Ape? Come a loft Iack: Sirrah? How doe your fellow Brutes startle and bestirre them in a moued mood? See the Sport: He now rampes like a Lion, bri∣stles like a Boare, fomes like a Beare, kicks like a Horse, stampes like a Bull, pushes like a Ram, grinnes like a Dogge, scratches like a Cat, swels like a Toad, hisses like a Snake, bills like a Cocke, tugges like a Goose, buzzes like a Beetle, stings like a Waspe, and now
mumpes and mowes like himselfe. Nay a∣bout Iacke. He now bends his browes, gnashes his teeth, scrat∣ches his head, teares his haire, beats his breast, wrings his hands, smites the post with his fist, and spurns the dust before him with his feet. The an∣gry Ape said I? I should haue said the Ape of An∣ger. There is no sauage∣nesse of Beasts, which he here imitates not, if not exceeds. Nay, hee'le follow the very Fiends
in his fury. Man is in nothing more Brutish (I yet say not Deuillish) than in his Anger. He is well compared, to what he so well resem∣bles. I shall thinke him neither better, nor o∣ther than a Beast; that suffers his senslesse pas∣sion to blinde and sway the Reason of a Man. No better than a Beast? Much worse. A Beast knowes not how to be an∣gry: Anger is the Anger of a man. Mans is the sin; a Beasts is but the sha∣dow, and shape of Anger:
A Beast oft shewes the vi∣olence; a Man only hath the vice thereof: Such (perhaps) seize, wound, kill; roare, and bray, bel∣low and bleat: yet forth∣with (for all the An∣ger, or Sorrow) fall to Feed, or Sleepe: He only hath this Ground, and Grudge within him. And hereupon, no Man but prone, no Beast but loth to be prouoked: It striues still to shunne, what he oft thirsts to iucurre. My Friend, be faire condition'd; tis best for you to know, and
loue your selfe. Nay my haughty Haire-braines, tis no pishing, tushing, laughing, scowling, scoffing, scorning mat∣ter. Scorne thou my Pi∣ty, while I pity thy Scorne. Another hath wronged thee; alas! and alas that thou therefore wrongst thy selfe: Thou needs must vex thy selfe, because another hath vexed thee. I had thought (howeuer) that thou couldst not so haue ha∣ted Another, as not to loue thy Selfe. But
what carest thou, how thou hazards thee, to hurt him. A Bee hath stung thee, and thou'lt pull the whole Hiue a∣bout thy eares: yea (sil∣ly Bee!) thy selfe wilt also sting, though in the losse of thy Sting, thou lose thy Life. Thou'lt throw thy Dare howeuer, though more by that meanes light vpon thee. It is nothing, if thou perish in his ruine. Ah silly Fencer! but naked, and yet spightfull in thy Frayes; that lookest
only where to hit the the other, not where to guard thy selfe. An an∣gry Man is his owne worst enemy; and of∣fends none more than himselfe: Hee is often more crucified in the Thirst; than the other damnified in the Execu∣tion of Reuenge. Anger is a Fury, that rightly haunts the heart, that harbours it: a Viper that worthily gnawes the wombe, that doth con∣ceiue it. It is but iust, that an inordinate Mind and froward, should be a
Plague, a Torment, a Danger, a Destruction to it selfe. I haue cast thy Wa∣ter: Ile tell thee what thou feeles, which (be∣cause thou feeles) thou canst not tell. Thy Dis∣ease is the spice of an Ague; commonly cal∣led the Physicians Shame; which euery Man is here to himselfe. The Ground is a chole∣ricke Humour, the Seat a naughty Stomack, the Cause a bad Digestion, of hard meats especi∣ally; the Signe a Bur∣ning,
a Shaking Fit; the Effects a Distem∣per of the Body, and a Distraction of the Mind: the Cure is, to be let bloud in a Wilde Veine, to purge gently for Choler, to abstaine from sharpe and bitter Prouocations, and ap∣ply thy stomacke only with pleasant and easie Leniments. Nay if you take it not in time, be∣fore the third Fit at the furthest; it growes to more Diseases, than I can either Cure, or Count. Then is it the
Inflaming of the Bloud, the Swimming of the Braine, the Blearing of the Eyes, the Burning of the Heart, the Bel∣ching of the Stomacke, the Shaking of the Hands: Strifes Inflam∣mation, and loues Op∣pilation; the Drop∣sie of Indignities, and Consumption of all Humanity. The Minds Extasie, casting Reason in a trance: the Bodies Lethargie, lulling the sense asleepe. Name me any thing thats bad; and it is no
better. A roaring Lion, a rauening Wolfe, a sa∣uage Tigre, a wilde Boare, a she Beare, an vntamed Beast, an vn∣brideled Horse, an vn∣yoked Oxe, an vn∣taught Ape: a Cloud, a Wind, a Showre, a Storme, a Sea, a Waue, a Gulfe, a Rocke, a Wracke; a Racke, a Pit, a Hell. All the Ele∣ments out of their ele∣ment. A consuming Fire, a pestilent Ayre, a troubled Water, and a quaking Earth. Thus can I call it all thats
bad; and what shall I say to thee? A foule euill is Anger, and egre∣gious. Theres no Euill, which it either causes not, or matches not. What Euils to Strifes, Enuies, Mur∣ders? and whence are they? What Euills doe men beyond it: and a∣mongst vs Men, What Euils are done beside it? Thou knowst (per∣haps) nor it, nor thy selfe, by these Names of mine: or lou'st rather not to heare on't in harsh tearmes. I now come to thee; thus
mince it with thee. It is forsooth (as you com∣monly call it) an Hasty nature: So; its thus knowne in all: but how call you it each in o∣ther? Oh, tis the Soul∣diers Stoutnesse, the Ministers Earnestnesse, the Womans Pettish∣nesse, the Sicke-mans Peeuishnes, the Young∣mans Rashnesse, the Old-mans Testinesse, the Priuate-mans Cho∣ler, and the Great mans Displeasure. Be it so in the Seueralls; what is it yet in the Summe: E∣uery
man in his Hu∣mour; and yet but one Humour in euery Man. Are Sinnes lesse, for the varietie of Names, and Subiects? Anger may be more impotent in one than other; yet is it not lesse euill. We all haue not our Might answerable to our Mood. It is with more Rancour, than Power, that the very Waspe stings, and Worme turnes againe. But its good (and it be but to sharpen a mans wits) to be angry a lit∣tle, now and then. Why not better, to be al∣wayes
more? A Good thing is not Ill, because it is more. The Thing is meerely euill, whose Increase may make it worse. Vertues onely know a meane: Vices haue a more or lesse. A lesse Euill hath not more Benefit, but lesse Danger: A lesse Anger, is a lesse Euill; it there∣fore Profits not more, but hurts lesse. Who I angry at thee? at thy Anger rather: Nor angry at thy An∣ger I. It is not fitting a Fault should take vp∣on
it, to correct a Fault. Yet let me say; Zeale, and Iustice, reprehend and punish, with ear∣nestnesse, with seuerity; not rage, not cruelty The Philosopher would not smite his Seruant, because he was angry: nor (were I so) would I chide thee. We are not angry at him, to whom we would the Amend∣ment of euill, together with the punishment. Is the Law therefore angry, because it conuicts, the Iudge because hee con∣demnes, the Officer be∣cause
hee executes the Malefactor? It is Pietie that moues here, not In∣firmitie. The sword of Iu∣stice is not put into a Mad mans hand. Autho∣ritie requires not a rash, a lawlesse rigour; to what a graue, and iust seuerity can execute. Are Magi∣strates set for Posts, and Cyphers; idle, and im∣moueable? It is the Spurre of their Office, that now moues them: They are angry at Enor∣mities; the very Cause is enough, to exempt it from that Name: It is not per∣turbation
now, but indig∣nation. Take away this spirit and life of the Common Wealth; and each ciuill Society faints in dulnesse and heartles∣nesse; yea groanes vnder disorder, confusednesse and ruine. These may sin, in being not angry: These may bee angry and sinne not: Thou both art angry, and sinnest. True, true; The Ant (I know) hath her gall, the Flie her spleene, and the Worme will turne againe. Nature (I haue
learned) hath giuen to all Creatures a desire and endeuour to pre∣serue them selues in their proper Being: and hence it is they so resist, or auoid whatsoeuer may oppose, or endanger it. Euen vilest Creatures wax offended, at what may molest their peace and safety: How much rather then is the noblest Creature displeased at in∣iuries, at indignities? A Man is worthily moued at his Friends Wrong, and his owne: and a Christian (aboue all) at
his Gods Dishonour. But what a Man is he, that will wrangle with a Worme; that will fight with a Flie; that a Mouse can moue him? We haue such a sort of touchy Spirits; whose Tinder hearts, apt to receiue the least Sparke of a Flinty offence; kindle forthwith the Match of Contention. Like Thunder and Lightning, a Cracke and a Flash, a Word and a Blow, The Deuill (I thinke.) at first extra∣cted. Salt-Peter from
their moulds and ashes: Their very Nature is Gunpowder; you can no sooner touch it, than it flies in your face. Theres a Sparke, all Fire and Tow; euery blast of breath is the Bellowes to kindle him: and euery. Blocke in his way, is Fewell for his Fire. He is too forward in his Frowardnesse, that fals out with euery Thing, vp∣on euery Occasion. Say no Occasion be giuen him; heele rather faine it, than want it. Say no thing oppose him
hee'le yet be at oddes with himselfe. Anger is oft impatient, euen of Ob∣seruance: and longs to be croft, that so it may get to vent it selfe. Say still as he sayes, to sooth him; yet hee'le hastily bid you (as Caelius the Sena∣tour bade his yeelding Client) say somewhat against him; that so you may be knowne to be one beside him. Hee'le wrangle with you for Goats haire, and stand against you for a Straw. Pinnes, and Points, are enough to
set Boyes together by the eares. He takes it in high disdaine, you so carelesly bedasht his Doublet; and vowes to be euen with you, since you hapt to tread vpon his Toes. You haue either taken the Wall, or not pledg'd the Health; and he must needs fight with you. He frets and fumes at his Fortune; Curses and conjures the Deuill, and the Witch; bites, and burnes Cards and Dice, and now he is satisfied in a silly reuenge. There
is no Trifle, which a Wise man cannot laugh at; or a Foole be angry at. Rather than his in∣iuries shall be vnreuen∣ged; hee'le pursue the Waspe that stung him, bawle with the Dogge that barks at him, beat the Wind that blowes in his face, fight with the Post that with∣stands him, and spurne the very Stone he stum∣bles at. Creatures all as insensible of his Anger and Reuenge; as him∣selfe is of the Euill and Indiscretion. I haue
seene a Childe, that fallen, full Angerly would beat the Ground: Somewhat had of∣fended it, and it did not know what to be re∣uenged of. Children are moued with but ap∣pearances of hurt and wrong: and likewise are appeased but with fained strokes and teares. How Babish are we men in our Passions? We are easily angry, but at what we know not: Something seemes to wrong vs, and we haue some desire of reuenge.
It is a shadow of Offence, that moues vs; and a shadow of Amends, will still vs. A but counter∣feited Appeasement, is enough to a but conceited Indignation. Bid BALAAM hold his hands; and smiteno Asse, but him∣selfe. Can he neither see, nor feele; to strike so at himselfe through her sides? Poore Asse! she had too much of his Load; though he had spar'd his strokes. But hee will needs stab her for stumbling. I haue
knowne such Bedlam Balaams, as would wrathfully reuile and curse, furiously smite and slay their silly Beast, for but failing or falling vnder them; when (alas) already wearied or maimed by them. How shall I thinke him other than Brutish; that will match and mea∣sure his indignation to a Beast? NAAMAN snuffes, because his Physitian would cure him another, and bet∣ter way, than hee thought. He look't he
should heale him by the Sound of a word, by the Touch of a finger: had he not better Wash, and be healed by him∣selfe? Hee thought this was not so good; be∣cause he thought not of it. Reason would haue esteemed that, which was the best: his Rash∣nesse would haue that best, which hee had esteemed. The Reason of  Man alwayes thinkes what is fittest to be done: his Rashnesse only hastens him to doe, what hee hinkes. This Euill hath
Anger also, that it will not be aduised. It (while it opposes euery thing) endures not any thing should oppose it. It iudges after its owne Fancie, and does accordingly; and will by no meanes bee drawne from it selfe. The Truth is but a Tale, that gaine-sayes: and the Right does it Wrong, that oppugnes it. No mans Anger seemes vniust to himselfe. Howeuer, it thinks better of Obstina∣cie, than Repentance: and will repeat rather, than recant the Euill: yea, will
the rather seeme to iustifie it, because it would not seem to accuse it selfe. NAA∣MAN therefore dista∣sted the Waters of IOR∣DAN; because he was only enamoured of the Riuers of DAMAS∣OVS. Many men rashly kicke at, and peeuishly in∣terpret at the worst, what is Said, or Done for the best; only because it thwarts and crosses their peruerse and Obstinate Humour. BALAAM sto∣macks his Asse; and IONAS pets for his
Gourd. Theres no such Impatience of Men, no such Indiscretion; as to be moued at Trifles, to mur∣mure for them. It is but Childish (you will say) to whine for Puppets. What shall I say of these? The Mind is but base like them, that sō values them, to be so an∣gry for them. A gene∣rous Horse will scorne to meddle with a baw∣ling Curre. The vilest Natures are the most querulous and conten∣tious: much more in vi∣lest Things. A Foole, a
Childe, a Woman, a Sicke man, and hee thats twice a Childe, (they of the feeblest Condition, Sex, and Age) name me one be∣side them, so easily and vnaduisedly moued. Be not thou one of them, and let them be all One. So he wisely Counsels thee. Bee not hasty in thy spi∣rit to be angry: for anger resteth in the bosome of Fooles. Haue I rak't vp your
Subble; soone in, soone out; soone hot, soone cold? I must hammer your Wedge too, thats so long in heating, and burnes so sore. The yel∣ping Curre did but snarle and snatch, and I shooke him off: this sullen Dogge will fasten hard, and bite sore (I feare me) he lookes so grimme. But Ile now doe my best to staue him. Ha! The Mad∣man and his sword are ill met: It were safer that the curst Cowes horns were shorter. An∣ger
is so wretched of it selfe, and impotent; that it thunders it, when it hath now gotten autho∣rity and power. Take heed of him; hee hath drawne his blade, and vowes, not to put it vp, till he be reuenged: His Life (he sweares) shall answer for the Wrong. Oh how hee'le hacke him, and hew him, the next hee meets him. Doe you heare him? Hee'le cleaue his Cox∣combe, bumbaste his hide, rattle his bones, split his heart, let out
his puddings about his heeles, and garter him in his guts. His bloud is vp; and will not settle, but in bloud. Outragious and bloudy villaine! irefull Hell-hound, sa∣uage Tigre, Monster of Men, and Deuill of Monsters. Thou goest about to reuenge one, and a petty Indignitie; and so offerest another, and more hatefull Iniu∣rie. Anger (Oh this An∣ger) is not an vnreasonable only, but an vnruly Passion. It knowes nei∣ther Ground, nor Bound;
while it is both Causlesse, and Extreme. Cursed CAIN! looke vpon thy Brother, he is thy Makers Image also; as fearefully and wonderful∣ly made, as thy selfe: his bones, and haires are as strictly numbred, and his bloud more precious in his Markers Eyes. What Fu∣ry of Hell prouokes thee to destroy that Image; which no art, no ability of thine can repaire; no amends can acquit? Tush! whats a Death to a Dishonour? His Life shall but pay for
thy Disgrace: Ah! nor thy Confusion, but for his Life. The LAW (when it was vsed at the most, and interpreted at the worst) allowed no more, than an Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth, a Hand for a Hand, a Foot for a Foot: Stripe for Stripe, Wound for Wound; but Bloud answered not but for Bloud; nor but for Life, was Life required. Do I instance (think'st thou) for thy priuate Retaliation of
wrongs? rather against that ouerplus of Euill, whereby thy reuenge tyrannizes so farre be∣yond the Offence. HE, that knew best how farre that LAW did stretch, and how long it should last; now tells thee otherwise: Yee haue heard that it hath beene said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: But J say vn∣to you, that ye resist not Euill. The Talion
Law (when it was) was for publike Iustice, not for priuate Reuenge: Especially, sith the Re∣uenge of a man knowes no Order, holds no Equalitie, in his owne wrong: So that commonly there is more wrong in the Re∣uenge done, than in the Wrong receiued. Hee hath endammaged thy Goods; must thou therfore assault his Per∣son? He hath torne thy Coat; must thou there∣fore teare his Flesh? He pluckes thee by the Haire; wilt thou ther∣fore
pull him by the Throat? He hath ble∣mished thy Name; and must thou therefore spoile his Life? While thou wilt be thus satis∣fied, for the wrong hee hath done thee: what satisfaction wilt thou make him, for the wrong thou hast done? Hee is the more Offender himselfe, that seekes to auenge him about the Of∣fence. Let it not be plea∣ded, whether hath first, or last: it shall be iudged, whether hath most offen∣ded. Besides the Ground,
and Occasion thereof; this euill hath Anger in the End, and Execution; that it is vniust. His Wrath is iust alone, that shall once render to euery one accor∣ding to his Workes. Thou wicked SERVANT, and mercilesse! wilt thou pull thy Fellow by the throat; and hale him to Prison, for a few Farthing Tres∣passes? Thy LORD shall once binde thee hand and foot, and cast thee into Vtter Darknesse for many Talent Offences. Anger is but the De∣uils Wrath; and the angry
Man but his Weapon: A Weapon wherewith hee kills double, or two at once; ones Soule together with anothers Body. Hel∣lish Instruments of Fury are they all, to set a World in combustion; and bring themselues to confusion. What a spite is this? Thus the Deuill vses Mans hand, for Mans destruction. Thus laughs the Aduersary, that euery mans Sword is in his Fellowes side: thus glories, that Man is his owne, and others ru∣ine. God made Man Mans
God: but the Deuill thus makes Man Mans Deuill. Shall I turne Actor in this balefull. Tragedie of Men, and Dayes; and inueigh against this Fury of the World? Direfull Miscreant, and hatefull Monster of Hell! impatient of our Being, irefull at our Quiet, hurt∣full to our Safetie, and dismall through all our Dayes! Who but SATAN did first enwombe thee? Woe, and alas! that Man did euer enbosome thee. Thy rage hath vndone more Liues, than the
force of Death hath dis∣solued. Thou Plague of Mankind hat hast cost them such measurelesse, such numberlesse, Bloud and Wounds. Not Tigres, not Dogges, not Vipers, but Men, ah Men are growne the impatient, the froward, and stubborne Generation: thus vn∣towardly doe they degene∣rate from themselues. The Lion, the Beare, the Wolfe; feed on the Hart, the Asse, the Sheepe: but Man thirst∣eth after Mans bloud, and the greedy Canni∣ball
gluts himselfe with Mans flesh. Aske why he is so hengry? It is because he is so angry at his Fare: It is his Fury that prouokes him to that Dogged Appetite; and gets him such a Stomack to it. Reuenge is but the Executioner of all those Cruelties, where∣of Anger is the first In∣uentor: That but the Pra∣ctitioner, this the Engi∣neere. Whence come Stabblings, Stranglings, Poysonings, and rufull Maceratings? This first taught, and vrged, to
digge out a mans Eyes, to slit his Nose, to cut out his Tongue, to hew off his hands, to carbo∣nate his Flesh, and shiuer his Bones. Yet more, and worse; Because it will not doe a Man the Fauour to dispatch him: it studies to put him to as many Deaths, as Wounds: and thinkes that if be perish other, or sooner than it would; that he hath as good as escaped, in comparison to what it meant him. Diuers hath this Euill di∣uersly surpriz'd and ru∣in'd.
One in his Bed, another at his Table, another on his Way, another in the Church. Not Time, Place, Persons, Occasions, can forbid An∣gers rash and raging at∣tempts. Widowes and Orphans, Young and Old, lament and curse this Euill; since it vn∣timely tooke away the Husband from the Wife of his bosome, the Pa∣rent from the tender In∣fants head, the staffe of his age from the aged Father. What say I thus of some? This Firebrand
of the World, hath set all Nations together by the eares, hath dilapida∣ted whole Cities, depo∣pulated whole coun∣tries: hath made moun∣taines of Carkasses, Ri∣uers of Bloud, and Mists of gasping Breaths: Outragious Hagge, and odious! had the World but one Head; she (with Cali∣gula) would strike it off at a blow: So she might see the whole Fabricke in a flame; shee (Nero-like) would not grudge her ashes to a second
Chaos. This euill hath Anger thought, and done; and would yet do more: It neuer but had a desire, aboue the power; a thirst, beyond the practice of re∣uenge. Yet it thunders, though it now can dart no more: hauing done the vtmost spite and rage, it yet will threaten worse. Thus (as followeth) haue the Furious vow∣ed and sworne against the liues of their Ad∣uersaries: To giue their Carkasses to the Beasts of the field, to the Fowles of the aire; to
strow their ashes vpon the Sea; to make them they shall neither know, nor say who hurt them; not to leaue so much as one, to carry newes of the rest: That hee'le make them eat their owne dung, and drinke their owne stale; that not their God shall deliuer them out of his hands: That he meanes to ply them with Pow∣der and Pellets, as thicke as mist and haile; that hee'le tread their Gray-haires to
their well nigh retur∣ned dust; strangle the Infant in the Parents eye, and arme; spoile their Virgins, rip vp their Bigge, bereaue their Mothers; Make their Men to draw in his Waggons, to grinde in his Mills, to dig in his Mines: Their Princes necks shall bee but his Footstooles; and their Young-mens backes but the Asses for his loads: Thus roare the Lions, thus hisse the Serpents, thus barke the Dogges. Nought but
spue out their rancour, but breath out reuenge. These haue (I marke) most commonly gone together (I would like Fellowes to the Gal∣lowes) the Angry, and the bloudy minded. Murder was the first fruits of Anger, CAIN rose vp in a Fury against his Brother, and slew him. So, the Brethren in iniquitie: What of them? Fearefull! and to bee detested: In their Anger they
slew a man: And therefore (may such o∣ther, fare no better) Cursed be their An∣ger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it was Cruell. As for me, (and so sayes euery harmlesse Spirit) O my soule! come not thou into their secret: vnto their assembly (mine Honour!) be not thou vnited. Theres yet an old Beare to bait: I would
he were blinde, or toothlesse; it would be good sport to whip him. What must hee such haling to the stake? As loth as hee is to come thither; I would bee loth to trust him there. That bubbling Brooke was more tur∣bulent: but this still and standing Lake is more violent; Old An∣ger (I meane) which makes vp the slownesse, in the weight of Ire. A Monster of a tedious breeding, of an vnfor∣tunate birth; a Serpent
of a Difficult hatch, and dangerous; an ill Li∣quour that being kept too long, hath tarted and tainted the Caske; a Poole that hath for∣merly beene stirred, and yet can finde no time to settle: a Lion that long couches, and slum∣bers sullenly; yet rouzes him in the end, and roares hideously: a Fire that hauing long laine smothered, breaks out at last into a fierce and furious flame: a mote at first, that offends; a Beame at last, that
blinds the eye. Compari∣sons are not here more odi∣ous, than is the Vice. Liken (and you will) the growth of this ill Weed, to any thing that waxeth worse. Marke how to stint, and stop it. Crush the Cockatrice in the Egge, push the Scorpion in the shell, hunt the Young Foxes, while they are yet but petty Cubs; take the Small Brat, and dash his head a∣gainst a stone. Anger is a disease, with more ease, and honesty, preuented; than recouered. This Fu∣ry
doth, as doe many wilde Beasts, and Ser∣pents, namely, change their Names, as they grow in bignesse, and yeares. In the infancy, they call it Haste, and Passion; in the Youth, Anger and Choler; in the Growth, Ire, and Wrath; in the Old Age, Hatred and Malice. Thus doe I distinguish the Age; wilt thou I also deter∣mine it; Anger is then Old, when it liues aboue a Day. It then liues too long, when it suruiues the Ephemeron: which
(they say) liues no lon∣ger; than I said Anger ought to liue. He that bids You Let not the Sun goe downe vpon thy Wrath; forbids withall, you should let the Sun (gone downe) to rise vpon it. Two Suns are too many for an An∣gry man to see. Accession of dayes addes vnto this Euill. Haste is so turn'd batred; For so is it de∣fined. Hatred is anaged, and strengthened Anger: and Anger doubled by dayes, and degrees. Ha∣tred
(for so I now call it) hauing taken long and deepe root in the hearts of Men, is not readily & easily weed∣ed thence. A mans loue oft turnes to hate; his Hate seldome returnes to Loue. Implacable man, and impious! His euill lasts with his Life: Nay, when he is dead, it will be a Question (as was of Sylla) whether Hee, or his Anger died soo∣nest? They story Some to haue hated so while they liued; that dead, and burned together,
their flame notwith∣standing was diuided: And Others, who slaine together, their bloud refused to be mingled. The Sinne of a Man out∣liues himselfe: this Sinne especially. A Good mans Anger (they say) is soone dead: but a bad Man (I see) is sooner dead, than his Anger. How cam'st thou (prethee) to be so cho∣lericke? The Man (I know well) hath it by Kinne, it cost him nought. I was saying, the Hate and Ire of Men
liu'd, when Men were dead. I cannot say, their Hate liues with the Dead: I haue noted, the Dead haue deriued their hatred to the Liuing (I speake not of Enmi∣tie betwixt Nation and Nation; so mutuall, so continuall.) The Man hates, the Sonne hates: and why? his Friend, or Father hated formerly. Hee but euilly succeeds, that will be heire also to his Fathers euills. There is obserued a naturall Antipathie, an hidden Enmitie, or inbred A∣uersenesse
betwixt Trees and Trees; as betwixt the Oke and the Oliue, the Vine and the Cole-wort: betwixt Beasts and Beasts; as betwixt the Elephant and the Dragon, the Panther and Hyaena: betwixt Serpent and Serpent, the Spider and the Toad: Bird and Bird; the Eagle & the Wren, the Owle and other Birds: Fishes & Fishes; the Lamprey and the Conger, and the two great Fishes call Orca and Balana. No such innate
and contrary Qua∣lities are obserued be∣twixt Man and Man: though indeed, the succession of Hatred would giue to note (as it were) a natu∣rall Antipathie betwixt them. Wee know, and say it is their Vice, how∣euer they would make vs beleeue it is their Na∣ture that sets them at so cominuall odds. Harke, O Man? thou that at once proceedest from thy Fathers Flesh, and Fro∣wardnesse: that this kest thou dageneratest from
his Stocke, if from his Vice: There was neuer but one Enmitie worthy, yea necessary the propa∣gating; euen that, which God (at first) prouoked, and proclaimed irrecon∣cileable: J will put Enmitie betweene thee, and the Wo∣man; and betweene thy Seed, and her Seed. Ah thou Traitor to thy God, and Foe to thine owne Soule! why makest thou a Couenant with thine, and thy fore∣fathers
Aduersary? That mortall iarre was only to be deriued to Succession. How many Sonnes haue vindicated their Fathers wrongs to the full? Euen successions of Families haue continued the Strife and Debate, their fore∣fathers began betwixt their Houses. Alas! that an ISRAELITE grudges at, and striues with an ISRAELITE (a Man with a Man, a Christian with a Christian) And yet rather suffers any Iniury, and Slauery; than breake an hard Couenant, a sea∣red
Peace with PHA∣RAOH, the Deuill. O all yee cankred Sonnes of ADAM! Impes toge∣ther of his Loynes, and Lusts: How is it ye haue forgotten the Old Quar∣rell, which though it be∣gan in your First Fa∣ther; yet it equally con∣cernes your Selues? You haue an Aduersary to you all; why wrangle, and struggle yee, one with a nother? Were you not ioyned to him; you could not thus be diuided against your selues! Me thinks, I should
(by this) make thee an∣gry at nothing but thine Anger. If Anger (as I haue said) be a Passion so inordinate, vnseemly, Brutish, Pusillanimous, Enuious and mischie∣uous; if it haue neither Ground, nor End; if neither Delight, nor Gaine; if it obscure Reason, and exclude Grace; if it bee dete∣stable to God, Di∣stastefull to Man, and Preiudiciall to him∣selfe; What Wise man, and Good, will now be anger; Had Anger ei∣ther
Pleasure, or Profit in it; there were some en∣ticement to it: But Anger is an Euill, euery wayes so euill; that it carries no colour for its entertain∣ment. It is by a shew of profit, or Delight; that other Sinnes insinuate: this sinne of Anger only, intrudes vpon a Man, with palpable vexation, and losse. Yea, but thou canst temper thy selfe, and take vp thine Anger in time; and checke it, ere it rush into these rash, and rigorous Ex∣orbitances.
Tell mee; hadst thou not better quite exclude it; than (hauing admitted it) now busie, and trouble thy selfe, to guide it? It is safer to keepe out, than get out of a Fray: and better not to hazzard the Disease, than pre∣sume vpon the Remedy. The Courser (by your leaue) is not so soone taken vp; when now on his race, now in his speed: The Rocke is steepe, and thou art heady; how readily, and easily, dost thou now
fall past recouery? Thy Sea is troubled, thy Ship is tossed, Anger sits Pilot; and (ere thou thinkst on an An∣chor, an Harbour) be∣hold a Wracke. A man may with more ease for∣bid his Anger; than hee can command it: with more safety may hee pre∣uent it, than recall it. The Entrance of many things are in our hands, but not their Issue. While yet it is not, Anger is the power of the Man: when it now is, the Man is in the power of his Anger
Set Anger once on foot, and it runnes, not so farre as you will let it; but will hale you rather as farre as it list. I cannot but smile, thou'lt needs ac∣count thee Captaine, and This thy common Souldier; to fight vnder thee, for thee: Lead him warily on, heele scarce come fairely off. While thou'lt sit Iudge, to passe the Sentence; and make it thy Cryer, to put thee in mind, and mood: be wise; thou maist soone condemne thy selfe.
How Man? Call and account thee a Coward, an Asse, an Idiot, a Blocke, a Stoicke, a Stocke? And why? be∣cause thou wantest an Heart, a Spirit, the Va∣lour, the Courage, to be angry at them; to check and curbe in thy Fury, the Indignities they doe thee. Tell them (and thou wilt) from me; They only are so; that so say; so thinke. What a Madnesse of Men is this, and Folly of theirs? Are we therefore senslesse, because not impatient of
our Wrongs? Base minds! thus to play vpon not Patience. It is for Fooles, and Peasants, to iudge them sottish; whom they finde not peeuish: For Knaues, and Vil∣laines, to doe him the next Wrong; because he so calmly put vp the first. I tell thee, (and so say) the Best, and Wi∣sest) Anger addes Cou∣rage to no Man, that is not so without it; But rather, basely inthralls him to anothers Power, and Mercy; while hee is not in his owne. Than the
Peeuish, none more Sla∣uish: So base an Affecti∣on, lurkes not but in ba∣sest brest. Vilest wret∣ches are the rather mo∣ued; because they would, but cannot be reuenged. What thinkst thou of the Body, that yelpes and yexes, at any small push, at euery sudden motion? is it not too too crazy? To cry out you hurt it, when you scarce touch it. Verily, the Minde is as corrup∣ted and cankred, as the Body vlcerous; to shrinke and shrike, at
euery push and pricke. To stumble, and wrangle at euery Offence; argues but the Minde wretched, and infirme. I neuer saw any Man in this case; whom I iudged not Boyish, Womanish, Foolish, Sickish, or (at least) Old and Peeuish. Now on the contrary: None so magnanimous (in my minde) as he that forgetteth iniuries. Nor am I of another minde, than the Wise Man: Jt is the glory of a Man, to passe ouer
a Transgression. It must needs be a right noble minde he beares; that he can, but scornes to be reuenged. A Man is a Lord in his Fauour: in his Anger is Man but a Slaue. He hath fought a stout, and stately Fight; that hath subdued his Af∣fections. I will euer thinke the best of such an one, and speake no worse. Bold Heart, and Braue! that hath alrea∣dy curbed his Passions, and cured them to a skarre: hauing only re¦maining
in himselfe, but as it were the Sha∣dowes, and Suspitions of his Affections. But a Coward is he (will I be bold to tell him) and base! that (could hee winne a World) can∣not here conquer him∣selfe. Thus much I of Thee; and (vnlesse bet∣ter) too much. Now heare mee of my Selfe. Credit mee; I either so am, or (at least) would be so; as I now will shew mee to thee, though so I boast mee
not. It is Honestie, and but Modestie, that wee would so set forth our selues; as willing Pat∣ternes, for others to imi∣tate: and not as idle Pictures only, to be ga∣zed at. I am not (Feather∣like) stirred and tossed at euery puffe and blast of Discontentment: but striue rather to stand stedfast (as a Pil∣lar) maugre the winds and stormes of iniurie, and offences. I set mee like a stayed Rocke, to repell their surging, vr∣ging
Waues: and (like a Wall of Marble) re∣tort their angry darts into their owne faces and throats. Men shall see my Contempt, in a no notice of theirs. Though he would ac∣knowledge his Of∣fence; I will (with Cato) not so much as acknowledge mee of∣fended. This is a stayed∣nesse, is an Happinesse of our Minds; that we daine not to answer Fooles in their Folly. You aske mee, why I doe not re∣quite the Wrong? I an∣swer,
because I feele it not. No wrong (as I take it) is done to him, that will not take it to himselfe. I take Wrong, as Honour: Honour is not in him, that is honou∣red; but in him that ho∣nours: nor is Wrong in him that hath, but in him that doth the Wrong. Me thinks, A mans Reuenge is but the Confession, or the complaint of his owne vexation. Mine then would but tell them, how they haue troubled me. And vile Minds (I know) will the rather
doe it, when they know how to vex me. It is enough to me; I may, but will not quit the euill. Hee that will still doe all he can; it were bet∣ter he sometimes could doe nothing. Shall I (like my Dogge) barke and bawle at the first push or rush; not knowing whether it be my Friend or Foe that knocks at my doore? Theres no greater Folly, than to be an∣gry at we know not whom; and for wee know not what. Or, will I bawle
with the Dogge that barkes at me? Theres no folly, to the enterchange of spightfull speeches. The Tongue (I know) pro∣uokes more than the Hand: and Men are apt to sto∣mack rather what is Said, than what is done against them. I will not blow the coales of Ire with bitter Words: my soft Answer shall rather striue to appease his Wrath. Nor (when it is past) shall he boast how he awed me, in my pre∣sent yeeldance: sith I so guided him; that had
neither the wit nor power, to rule himselfe. It is not Awe, but Discre∣tion to forbeare a Foole. I smile at BALAAM, that could be so angry at his Asse: and thinke, whether was more bru∣tish, her Condition, or his Affection? He is but a Brute himselfe, that thus will match himselfe a∣gainst a Brute. I laugh to read the angry Letter Xerxes wrote against the Mountaine Athos: threatning it that (vn∣lesse it would make way to his Forces, and De∣signes)
he would hew it downe, digge it vp, and cast it into the Sea. Was not hee a bold champion, that durst menace, and make vnto himselfe, so huge an An∣tagonist? It still moues my Diaphragme, what once mou'd the spleene of Cyrus; that he vow∣ed in a rage, (and accor∣dingly atchieued) to drean the profound Ri∣uer Gyndes, so that Wo∣men and Children might goe drie-shod in it: and all was, because the base and vnman∣nerly
Billowes presu∣med to beat in the Kings face; and spared not to drowne one of his Maiesties Coach∣horses. While he thus laboured to make it not a Riuer; I would thus haue iudged, he made himselfe not a Man. It is a ridiculous Folly of Men, to wreake their Anger vpon such Things; as neither can feele it, nor doe deserue it. I shall thinke that Man out of his right minde, that is angry at that thing, which neuer had
a minde to offend him; no nor had a Minde. Brute Things and inani∣mate, may haue the Hap to hurt vs; they haue no Will to wrong vs. Ha, ha; will a man be no wiser than his Dogge, to snarle and snatch at the stone, because it is flung at him? I abhor the vn∣equall Ire of Pollio, that condemned his Slaue to be deuoured of his Lampreyes; for but the casuall breach of a Cry∣stall Glasse: and applaud withall the iust displea∣sure of Augustus, that
therefore caused all his glasses to be broken, and his Deuourers to be stifled. It was good the vilest Dust should choke them, whom the noblest Flesh should but haue satisfied. Ah the lightnesse of such Men! whom such light things, and occasions can prouoke. The glimme∣ring of a Colour wil pro∣uoke a Bull, the wagging of a Shadow will moue an Aspe, the wapping of a Towell will vrge a Beare, the squeezing of Grapes will incense
an Elephant: And what is a Man vnlike these; whom a Feather, a Straw, a Toy, a Trifle can thus incense, vrge, moue, prouoke? This is the Folly of Mans Anger; when the Passion is more, than the Cause. I am summoned, challenged, yea cowar∣ded with indignities: and yet I lothly enter the lists of Strife; or ra∣ther enter not. Shall I there hazard me, where to be conquered is grie∣uous, to conquer is but inglorious? Will I raue
and trample the Dung and Dirt, whereby (the more I bestirre me, yea howeuer I behaue me) I am but the rather an∣noyed, but defiled. The pursuit of Anger is as a Suit in Law: the Plain∣tiffe, the Defendant, both are losers in the end. To contend thus with my Superiour, were dan∣gerous; with my E∣quall, were doubtfull; with my Inferiour, were base. (Anger is but a wretched euill, and for∣lorne; that is authori∣zed, is patronized in no
Degrees of Men.) With my Superiour will I feare, with my Equall will I blush, with my Inferiour will I scorne to contest. Hath one or other offended me? if he be vnder me, I will be so Good, as sauour him: if aboue me, I will be so Wise, as sauour my selfe. I will winke at the Childe, and Old man, for the weaknesse of their Age; at the Wo∣man, for her Sex; at the Foole, and Mad-man, for their Condition. Yet so, as to let them know,
it was not well done, but rather taken so. This is a Mans both quiet, and renowne; that he can forbeare. His Mildnesse shall pacifie his Aduersa∣ries, while they cannot but wonder at it; shall proeure him Friends, while they needs must af∣fect it. My Affections are in my Custodie, and shall keepe within my Com∣passe. I will so hold the reines, as that I can curbe, or loose them; not so much when it is my pleasure, but when
I see my time. We must leaue our liues, if we will auoid Offences: And of these, though many (when they come) may be borne with; yet are not all to be neglected. We cannot (oft times) but be mo∣ued at the Euill of things. I that must loue my neighbour as my Selfe: may notwith∣standing so hate his Vi∣ces, as mine owne. An vnreasonable Patience, is little better than an in∣ordinate Anger. This kind of Dulnesse would not only incourage the
Bad, but euen incite the Good, to doe euill. The Zeale of a Man is ena∣moured of the Vertuous; nor can it be but displeased at the Vicious Displeased, not at the Party, but his Vice: Displeased at the Euill he hath done; not so much because hee hath now so done, but rather that hee may doe so no more. I now can be an∣gry; yet so, as my Anger be not a worse Fault, than the Fault I am an∣gry at. I can be thus an∣gry; to resist, to checke, to punish: yet not be∣cause
I am now prouo∣ked, but because I now ought so to be. If (while I dispute against Anger) a saucy Fellow should spit in my Face, pur∣posely to prouoke mee: I would not now doubt (with Diogenes) whether I ought so to be? but let him truly and iustly know, and feele, I am angry; for so I ought. But if this Passion (as it is wont in most) proue exorbitant, and fall to range (yea and rage) beyond her Pale;
prouoking mee still to hurt the other, and vex my selfe: What remedy now but Patience? I turne mee aside (with Plato) and now forget him whom I was angry at; and minde rather to reuenge mee vpon my angry selfe. I now draw mee apart, take some time to bethinke mee in, let Reason breathe a∣while; and the Fitt is past. Pause then an houre, disturbe not thy stomacke; and the Hard-meats are dige∣sted. This Disease of An∣ger
(contrary to many) is soonest helpt by De∣layes. I take the coun∣sell of Athenodorus to Augustus; count my Letters: or rather that of S. Ambrose to Theo∣dosius; say my Prayers. And while my Deuoti∣on warmes, my Passion cooles. Thus is it awhile delayed, thus allayed at the last. Withdraw but the Fewell of Rashnesse from this Passion, and the Fire is abated: Let but the Sun of Reason shine vpon it, and the Mist is vanished. Ah the
Frowardnesse of a Man! that his Ire can glow and burne, a Moneth, a Yeare, a Life throughout: which a Weeke, a Day, an Houre, might (if not extinguish) otherwise asswage. It is strange to thinke, how Anger one way deferred, languishes: although ano∣ther way prolonged, it is the rather enraged. Ar∣chitas, Socrates, Plato; these were but Hea∣thens, yet would not so much as beat their Seruants in their Anger: Shall I that am a Chri∣stian, rise now against
my Brother? Shall my Stomacke serue others one way, as I (another way) would serue my Stomacke: onely eat when I am hungry; only beat when I am angry? By no meanes. I am wiser, than to launch forth in a storme: If he haue offended mee, if prouoked mee; the of∣fence will notwithstan∣ding remaine, when the Prouocation shall bee past. Theres no hurt to take another, and better time, to punish, or admonish: I shall so
shew me the Wiser; and (perhaps) make him the Better. Oh doe no∣thing in your Anger! for then you will doe any thing. What profit haue you? What credit? to commit that suddenly, which you may repent at leisure. Many a Man be∣cause hee hath beene so causelesly angry at Ano∣ther; hath had cause enough (after) to be an∣gry at Himselfe. The End of sudden Anger, was al∣wayes the Beginning of late Repentance. Another hath done
mee wrong; I might haue done no lesse to him: His might like∣wise haue been the Sor∣row, & the Euill mine. Wee are all offensiue each to other; and may need each others Pardon. Hee is liuelesse (they say) that is faultlesse: And whose turne (can you tell) shall it next be, to craue mercy for his Fault? Should wee not winke at our mutuall Of∣fences; there would be no end of Strifes, & Plagues, betwixt Man and Man, yea betwixt God and them
both. Doe wee looke to finde others inexorable; sith our selues are so im∣placable? Full oft hath a Man beene driuen to begge Forgiuenesse of him, to whom he denied it: and now to kneele to him for Grace, whom hee some∣times spurned in disdaine. I will deale with mine Aduersary, as to tell him how I am dealt with∣all: so to teach him how hee should deale with mee. My Brother hath of∣fended mee: Alas! and I my God. My Brother
me once, and in one thing: I my God alwayes, and in all. If Iupiter (said He) should thunder downe his Darts, so oft as Men prouoke him; he should soone leaue himselfe Weaponlesse, and Men Liuelesse: If my God (thinke I) should haue beene angry with mee, so oft as I haue offended him; I should not haue yet beene, whom my Bro∣ther might now offend. Hee is one, and the same Clay with mee; that now lifteth vp the hand against mee: I that am
a vile Worme, haue kit∣ked the heele against the God of Maiestie. With what face, can I begge pardon of my Lord, and Master; when I haue de∣nied it to my Fellow-Ser∣uant? One Man (saith a WISE MAN) beareth Hatred a∣gainst another; and doth he seeke pardon from the Lord? He sheweth no mercy to a Man, which is like himselfe: and doth he aske forgiuenesse
of his owne Sinnes? How doth the mercifull Lord checke the merci∣lesse Seruant? Shouldest not thou also haue had compassion on thy Fellow Seruant, euen as J had pitty on thee? Oh that Men would therefore Doe, as they Pray! Forgiue vs our Trespasses; as we forgiue them that trespasse against vs. I will doe to another, as I would another, yea
as I would my God should doe to mee: Ouercome euill with Good. My Sauiour stood as a Sheepe before the Shearers; they smote him on the one cheeke, and hee gaue the other: they reuiled him, and in his mouth were no re∣proofes. And is the Ser∣uant aboue his Lord? What Losse, or Shame is it for mee to suffer, as CHRIST suffered? What Profit, or Credit will it be for mine Enemy, to doe as IVDAS did? Oh call
but thy Sauiours Suffe∣rings to mind (the Wrong, and Scorne he tooke) and what can be too hard for thee to beare? And I, and mine E∣nemy; Who are wee, and what? Men both, and Mortall: Men mor∣tall in our Nature, im∣mortall only in our An∣ger. Ah that we would be each against other euerlastingly; that are for our selues but a while. Nothing will more work vpon this our fierce Affection; than to thinke vpon this our fraile Con∣dition.
The Man is mor∣tall, as hee ought; why should his Anger (as it ought not) be immor∣tall? This is also a great Euill vnder the Sunne, Ʋexation of Spirit: That a Man will adde Vn∣quietnesse to the Short∣nesse of his Dayes; and so make them still not onely Few but Euill. But Thou strengthe∣nest thee in this inhu∣mane Fiercenesse; vn∣mindfull altogether of thy humane Weaknesse. Thou now thinkest to
acquit thee, ere such a time: Alas! that thou thinkst not, that Time (perhaps) may be beyond thine owne. Thou woul∣dest the Death of thine Enemy: Oh wish it not, attempt it not: Yet a little while, and Death her selfe will doe it; without thy Trouble, and Sinne. The Mouse and the Frogge fought so long, till the Kite came and tare them both to pee∣ces. Oh striue not so long, till Death come and part the Fray; and so take you both away, him
Wounded, and thee Ble∣mished. When thou art now gone with, or after him: thy Name shall yet suruiue a while, as odi∣ous as thy Life. When Death shall haue cooled thy courage, weakned thy hands, stopt thy mouth; Men shall thus write vpon thy Graue:
HEre lies a Fury, hight Sir Ire; That bred, and earn'd immortall Fire. He 'gan to wrangle from the wombe; And was a Wrangler to his Tombe. A Peeuish, and a Foolish Elfe: Foe to his God, his Saints, his Selfe. He hated Men; Men did not loue him: No Euill, but his owne, might moue him. He Was; and was Earths Load, and Care: He Is; and is Hels Brand, and Share.
The Couetous. IS it you (& be naught) old Pouch-penny? Me thought, twas some such Scrape∣ling; he came so snea∣king on. It is many an honest Mans lucke (more than mine) to stumble vpon such Blocks in euery street. I would none beside mee, had more need, or vse of such; saue onely
to know them with me: They should not seeke him long; I soone could spie him out. A Couetous Man is easily inquired, and determined, by him that is not so: But he that sees him, and is like him; can no more discouer the other, than expresse him∣selfe. Pouch-penny did I call him? But hee's not so known to euery one. Hee hath more Names, than euer he was Christ∣ned with. The Best call him no better, than you would call a Wretch; Silly, Needy, Cark, Snig,
Gripe, Sharke, Droyle, and Plod: And for the Most, they call him no more, than you would call a Dogge; Snap, Catch, Pinch, Holdfast, and the like. Wee may iustly, and modestly (and then iustly, when modest∣ly) call the Naughty, no better than they are. Call mee a Spade, a Spade; a Wretch, a Wretch; a Knaue, a Knaue: Neuer goe behinde his backe, and so beslander him with the Truth. Tell a Man his Euill to his teeth: yet so, as not to
reuile him; but repre∣hend him rather. Wearish Wretch; so like a Flea-biter hee lookes. Say as you see; is he not mostly Wry-Neckt, crompe-shoul∣dred, pale-fac't, Thin-cheekt, Hollow-eyed, Hooke-nos'd, Beetle-brow'd, Purse-lipt, Gaunt-belly'd, Rake-backt, Buckle-hamm'd, Stump-legg'd, Splay-footed, Dry-fisted, and Crooke-fingered: with a learing Looke, slow Breath, stealing Pace, squeaking Voice: His
tall Hat, and tatterd Cloake, Threed-bare Buskins, and cobbled Shooes; a swagging Pouch, and a Spadle-staffe: And if you rec∣kon him onely by his Coat, and Carcasse; one would scarce bestow the hanging of him, to haue them both. They say commonly, ill Hu∣mours, ill Manners: but here certainly ill Man∣ners, ill Members. For (could you see into him) he is not more ill-fauoured, than ill-con∣ditioned: Theres cer∣tainly
more vglinesse in him, than appeares by him: A mind more mi∣shapen, than can be fi∣gured in a Carcasse neuer so disfigured. How mon∣strous a Vice is Auarice, and odious? It distorts the Body, and distracts the Soule: Is Natures very Enormity, and an vtter Anomie to Grace; here quite sweruing, there farre out of frame. It makes a Man looke vgly, and to be loathed; but odious inwardly, and to be abhorred: makes him seeme a Monster on the
outside; but makes him a very Deuill within. Flocke here my pret∣ty Birds; heres an ill fac't Owle, will finde you all worke to won∣der at. See how strid∣ling hee stands; hee couches and crouches vpon his Staffe; nor lookes he at you, but vnder his elbow: and say what you will; he neuer speakes but when his mouth is open. Come on then, looke and laugh, and hollow, and whoot, and whistle, and hisse; gibe and
jest, frumpe and flour, point and play: heres a broad Butt to hit, and an Asses backe to beare all. It were good sport, to laugh and scorne him out of his skinne, for his Coyne. Loe the Co∣uerous Carle! what a needy Niggard it is? Oh tis a scraping Churle! Out on him greedy Gripe! A very Gut-head, he hath Asses Eares direct; a Fore∣head & it were to set his Leekes on; He sees well, and his Eyes were vn∣cast; I wonder he is
not ring'd for rooting; you may see your face in his so transparant Cheekes; a Head he hath like a Moule, and his nailes were growne; and a Foot to shouell the Street before him. Hatefull Misereant! how hath he worne and wre∣sted himselfe from Gods good Making? His stee∣ple Hat hath harboured many a Thousand; and his woollen Cap scrues to keepe warme his Wits. His weather-bea∣ten Cloake he had by Inheritance; and hee
meanes to make it in his Will. He hath for∣got the Making of his Doublet; but it puls him (euer and anon) in minde of repairing. His Breeches are in the Fa∣shion, not so much for pride, as to saue Cloth. But how bare soeuer be his Backe, and belly thinne; his Bagge is well lin'd, and he keeps it warme. Theres not a hole in his Hose, and yet not a place where there hath not beene a hole. His shooes haue cost him more the
maintaining, than would prouide him Shooes. He keepes a free house; you may as soone breake your Necke, as your Fast: and a cleane withall; you may as readily wet your Shoos, as your Lips. The Man is oft-times so melan∣choly at Home; that he is glad when he may cheare vp himselfe at his Neighbours Boord: And (vpon many occa∣sions) growes so de∣sperate, that hee cares not what becomes of him; only he is loth to
be at the charges of ma∣king himselfe away. What chattering about a Night-Bird? and who can keepe Countenance at so absurd an Obiect? Couetousnesse is as well worthy Scorne, as Ha∣tred: and the Folly there∣of as much to be laughed at, as the Iniquity to be abborred. God, and Men, haue thought Vice not odious only; but ridicu∣lous. Whom God hath ab∣horred, them also hath he laughed to scorne. The Couetous especially, haue beene oftner counted, and
called Fooles, than Fiends. Ironies are an approued Rhetoricke, and an earnest Argument against Impieties. And some Euils are more pro∣fitably derided, than re∣prehended. In good sooth (for all this) he lookes but sparing on't. Whatso∣euer he lacks of the Spi∣rit; You would iudge him a mortified Man according to the Flesh. He forbeares oft-times to feed so full as Nature requires; Though Grace was neuer in his mouth
or minde, either before meat, or after. Hee sel∣dome cats but sparing∣ly; though temperate∣ly neuer. Thereason of all is, because he so eats, not to subdue his Bo∣die; but to saue his Meat. Like Tantalus, he stands vp in Water to the chinne, and Apples hang by closters hard at his Lips; and yet hee pinches and pines in the midst of meat and drinke. An artificiall Chymicke; he hath true Mydasses Touch: all that he should eat and
drinke, he turnes into Gold: I would hee had Mydasses Eares withall, it would make him more knowne, and laughed at. Like one that sold a Ratt for two hundred Pence, and dyed of Hunger himselfe: so will he oft times starue his carcasse, to crambe his Pouch. A Couetous Mans Mind is a slaue to his Mony; and his Body a staue-to his Mind: He will not satisfie the Appetite of the one; because the other hath an Appetite wil not be satisfied. Oh basenesse of
Men! to vnder-value their Affections to base Drosse; and their Liues to base Affections. Ah their Fol∣ly and Wretchednes! to haue the Creatures of God, and vse them not; which they therefore haue, to vse: to preferre their Wealth to their Health, their Gettings to their Beings, their Mo∣ny to their Body; their Gold to their God, their Siluer to their Soule; and rather possesse it, than en∣ioy themselues. Suppose him now set at anothers Table: His
Knife (answerable to his Stomacke) is the first drawne, and not the last in the Dish. Now not a word with him: Aske him any thing; and he answers all with Yea, and No; not aboue a monosylla∣ble at the most. Looke how hee loads a Bor∣rowed Trencher? His Cheekes strut, Teeth walke, and Chaps plie apace: And lest you might hap to cut him, not where he likes not, but not enough; hee saues you the labour of
a Carner. He now feeds full vpon Free-Cost: and sayes with Diogenes, That Wine is best, and most pleasant to him, which he payes not for. Now makes hee a full amends to his whining Stomacke, and his Guts leaue grumbling: But as the Wolfe eats one good Meale for three Dayes: so though hee feast his Body now a∣broad; hee will make the poore Carcasse pay triple for it at Home. Yea and (all this while) if his Host be beholden
to him for more than his Company; he eats double: out eats him, and eats him out. The Couetous is one of a raue∣nous Generation: A very Harpy, Tigre, Wolfe, Beare, Dogge, Deuill, Pit, Gulfe, and Hell. A Cormorant begat him; The Daughter of the Horsleach bare him: and he like a cursed Cater∣piller, is continually gnaw∣ing: Deuouring Widowes houses, and sucking the very Bloud from the hearts of the Fatherlesse.
Oh all ye damned Deuou∣rers! that eat vp Gods people, as if it were Bread, Bloud-suckers of BELI∣AL! Surfeit yet a while in your hellish Insaciacie: Ye shall once spue out your Bowels; and empty your selues into a Pit as bottomlesse, as euer were your desires. But I will home with him, and see what an House he keeps. Let me tell you, he keepes an open House: but you may vnderstand, it is the Roofe vnthatcht, or Windowes vntrellessed;
for the Doore is neuer vnbolted. The Grasse growes greene vpon his Threshold; and his Dog is as good as a Por∣ter, to keepe Beggars from his Doore. His Chimney smokes but seldome, and Dawes make nests in euery corner. You cannot come to visit his Beere, but you shall finde it at a very low rate, low estate, if not dead out∣right: And for his Bread, Age and Experi∣ence haue brought it to an hoary head. He is
now at his owne Fin∣ding, and marke how his Boord is furnished: His stall and Garnor furnisht the Market, and that his Coffers: his Garden-plot only fills his Table, & that fils his Belly. Roots and Herbs he cals his First, and Se∣cond Course: and three hungry Sallets supply the places of so many hearty Seruices. He cuts vp a Carrot, and pickes out a dainty bit in a Turnep: Beets are his best Fare; and he thinks how he riots amongst
his Leekes and Lettice? He shiues out his Bread by weight or measure; an Ounce, or an Inch; and at euery Cutting obserues the Loafe. You would thinke he hum∣bred his Morsels: Hee goes so farre, and no further; not because he would eat no more, but would no more should be eaten. He eats the more Pottage on purpose, to spare the Flesh. He seldome eats like an Epicure, to please his Palate; neuer like a Man, to nourish
his Body; but com∣monly like a Hogge, to fill his Belly. A belly full is a belly full, and it be of Buttermilke. He may eat Gold; and yet hee feeds but grossely. Like a Tradesman, that sells off his best wares at a good rate; and keepes the worst for his owne vse: Or like him, that sells out the good Li∣quour; and reserues the Dregges for his owne drinking: Like an Idi∣ot, he hath the best to chuse on, and makes choice only of the worst;
Leaues the good for o∣thers, and takes the bad vnto himselfe: Or like That Asse, that carried dainty Cates vpon his backe; and notwith∣standing fill'd his belly with Hay, and Straw. But if he be a Worship∣full Miser, and of an∣cient standing; Not the Cognisance only, but the Coat also is the selfe same, his Great Grand-sire gaue before him. He must doe, as his Father before him; or else how should he vphold the House?
Now hath be more Dogges, than Men to wait vpon him: and his Table fills more Eares, than Bellies; and more fils Eares, than Bellies. He now quar∣ters a Capon, and roasts halfe a Rabbet: and tels you an old Tale of an Hare, and another of a Pigge, that was pro∣portion'd to three seue∣rall Spits, Fires, Dayes, Dishes, Meales: But an approued Story, how that the Loyne of a Cocke was once a Ser∣uice for a King. His
Taylour hath not halfe so many wayes to turne his Breeches, as his Cooke to dresse his Dishes: he sends vp the same Dish seuen dayes together, disguised only in seuen seuerall Sauces. And for the cold Pie, it is so long since it came hot out of the Ouen; that it hath got on a Freize coat to keep it warme: and at last is faine to flit from his Table, to his Trough. He grudges to bestow any thing vpon him∣selfe; and brawles with
Wife and Children, as the daily meanes of his vndoing: And when he must needs dispend, he shrugges it out, and kisses euery Peece he parts from. How should a Couetous Man be good to any? since he is not so to himselfe. Will he feed the hungry; whose owne Sto∣macke still complaines? Will he cloath the naked; that only shrouds him∣selfe in shreds? Will hee giue to the Poore; that cannot be perswaded him∣selfe is rich? Well he re∣leeue others Necessities;
that thinks there is no∣thing beside him, which he wants not himselfe? Vn∣profitable Earth-load is he; borne to doe good to none, no not himselfe. Nei∣ther and Wife, Children, Friends, Neighbours the better for him: And for himselfe; he is, but liues not; because he is to no pur∣pose: he hath, but inioyes not; because be vses not what he hath. Tis bed time by this; and (not once minding, or mentioning his God) hee commends himselfe to the keeping
of his Bolts and Barres. Wife, Children, Friends, Seruants, he askes them all once, and againe, if they haue made all sure? and being accor∣dingly answered, he yet rises at last to resolue himselfe. Than the Coue∣tous Man, none more di∣strustfull. His Wife hee thinkes is false vnto him; and his Children cosen him: His Seruants he ac∣counts no better than Theeues. If they be his Friends, they come to sharke vpon him if Stran∣gers, to steale from him:
His Superiour he suspects of extorting, his Equall of defrauding, and his Infe∣riour of purloyning: Yea, he is oft-times anxi∣ous of himselfe; nay, and will trust his God no fur∣ther than he sees him. Now is the Gate shut, Bridge drawne, Doore barr'd, and Trunke lockt; and now he lyes him downe to wake; for why, he cannot, or else he dares not sleepe. The Wise Man knew his dis∣ease, and tells the Cause: The Abundance of
the Rich will not suf∣fer him to sleepe. Thoughts are entred in∣to his head, and Sleep is departed from his eyes. It is his Care to get more, will not let him rest with what he hath. He now lyes imagining mischiefe on his Bed; and takes counsell of his Pillow how to deceiue, and wrong. How to adde his neighbours House, and Field vnto his owne? How to dou∣ble his Talent by the sa∣fest meanes, and in the
shortest time? How to take vp, and put off at the best hand? How to let out Mony with good Security, and for the most Aduantage? How to bring about such a Bargaine? How to fore∣stall such a Market? How to ingrosse, how to inhance such a Com∣moditie? How to pur∣chase such a Liuing? How to inueigle such an Estate? No euill can be thought, which Coue∣tousnesse doth not both thinke and plot. It cares not to deceiue the simple;
nor makes a Conscience to oppresse the poore: Neither regards it the Widowes Teares, the Bloud of the Fatherlesse, nor the Labourers Sweat. It takes no notice of Fa∣ther or Mother, spares not his owne Brother, and affords not the least Fa∣uour to his best Friend. It measures Honesty by Profit; and thinks no∣thing not lawfull to it selfe, which may make for its owne aduantage: and so it goe away with the Gaine; it cares not who liues by the losse. Oh
cursed Auarice! the Me∣tropolis of all Euils, and Charibdis of Iniquity: Through its euill insti∣gation; did EVE take, and taste the forbidden Fruit; LABAN grud∣ged the goods of IACOB, His Brethren sold IO∣SEPH to the ISMAE∣LITES; BALAAM tooke paines to curse IS∣RAEL; ACHAN in∣ueigled the exercrable Wedge; DALILAH deliuered her Husband into the hands of his Ene∣mies; AHAB massacred NABOTH; GEHAZI
belyed his Master; and IVDAS betrayed CHRIST. Hee rightly said; Coue∣tousnesse is the root of all euill: that fully con∣sidered, what Euills come by Couetousnesse. It nei∣ther feares God, nor re∣uerences Man: Profanes the Temple, forestalls the Market, corrupts the Court; swayes Authoritie, impugnes Iustice, vio∣lates Lawes; Defraudes the Innocent, oppresses the Poore; blindes the Eyes from beholding E∣quity, stops the Eares
from hearing the Truth, hires the Tongue to rati∣fie Falshood with an Oath, sets the Hands to worke wickednesse, and makes the Feet runne to shed Bloud. What Euill hath Hell inuented, hath the Deuill suggested: which Couetousnesse hath not en∣tertained, not put in exe∣cution? Yet tumbling and tossing; but as yet no folding of the hands to sleepe. No, no, alas; his Braines are too busied, to be setled on a sud∣den. He hath a World
in his Head, and it makes him study how to get a Country into his Hands. Such a Field (he thinkes) lies com∣modiously for him; such an House is plea∣santly seated; is of a safe and free Tenure, and may be had at a reaso∣nable rate: Such a Com∣modity is both rare, and saleable; thus and thus may he ingrosse a good parcell of it; thus and thus inhaunce the price. These and these sealed Bagges are in such a Chest; and these
and these Bonds and Bills in such another. And thus lyes he coun∣ting all the night long. And if you were brought into his Bed-Chamber at midnight; (as was Mycillus the Cobler, into Grypheus the vsurers) you should euen then finde him waking: Nay, if the Deuill should come about that time to fetch him; he should hardly take him napping. The Riches of the Couetous trouble and torment him on euery part; whether of
Body, or Minde: He Conscience hath no peace, his Knowledge finds no truth, his Desire gets no appeasment; His Belly wants food, his backe ray∣ment, his Heart wants ease, his Eyes sleepe, and his Bones want rest. Si∣gismundus the Empe∣rour, when he could not sleepe the night throughout, for taking thought, what hee should doe with all his Gold, was newly sent him: the next day hee dealt it amongst his Captaines and Connsel∣lours;
and could say afterwards, Now I am rid of a Tormentour; I shall now sleepe in quiet. I would a Many should not so sleepe, till they had done likewise. Gape, and yawne, and turne, and tosse, and muse, and moane, and sigh, and quake yee restlesse Wretches! I will not pirty you; since you may ease your selues, if you will. But if (thus tired with Thoughts) he fall at last into some faint Slumber; Oh how
short it is how vnquiet? Hee dreames all the while he is posting to a Faire, crouded in a Mar∣ket; either Buying, Sel∣ling, Chopping, Chan∣ging, Hiring, Letting, Writing, Sealing, Coun∣ting: His Mind still runs vpon Mony, Wares, Chapmen, Cheatours, Theeues, or Deuills. Harke, harke; his Dog barks at Moon-shine; & he now wakes & starts at the apprehension of Theeues and Robbers: It is the Winde whiskes by his Window; and
he imagines he heares them whisper: He hears but the Doore creake; and he thinks they now are breaking in. Vp he gets, and loudly calls vpon lusty Dicke, and Robbin, and Ralfe; when there is no more but little Iacke to heare him: Bids bring the Pistoll, Musket, Sword, and Speare; when his whole munition is a Spirit, or a Pitchforke. His Colour changes, Haire stands vpright, Heart pants, Breast throbs, Ioynts quake;
and all this while hee suffers so much through his Feare, as he feares to suffer. Who would trou∣ble themselues to get Ri∣ches; that thus trouble them that haue them? Trouble to get them, trou∣ble to keep them, and trou∣ble to leae or lose them: Here plodding and toy∣ling; there Watching and caring; and sighing and groaning there: Ma∣king a Man here sollici∣tous, anxious there, and there againe forlorne. Molesting the Man, that his Goods are not increa∣sed;
and againe mole∣sting, lest his Goods should be diminished: It both vexes him, that he hath no more; and vexes him, that he may haue lesse. It troubled AHAB, to adde NABOTHS Vineyard vnto his owne: It trou∣bled the RICH-MAN, to conserue, & enlarge his Possesions: It troubled the YOVNG-MAN, to part with his Goods vn∣to the Poore. HE knew well how restlesse a thing was Riches, who likened them to THORNES: Like Thornes in the sides,
they suffer not a Man to sit still: Like Thornes in the Fingers, they hin∣der a Man from labou∣ring with his hands: Like Thornes in the Eyes, they blinde a Man from beholding the Truth: Like Thrones in the Heart, they barre a Man from embra∣cing the Right: Like Thornes in the Feet, they let a Man for going about any thing that is Good. To what shall I now liken the Riches of the World; but to all the infesting plagues of AEGYPT? Their Riuers were tur∣ned
into Bloud; and these haue made euen Riuers of Bloud: Frogs came into mens Bed-chambers; and these creepe into mens Bo∣somes: The Dust of the Land became Lice; and this Dust of the Earth is turned to such like Tor∣mentours: Swarmes of Flies infested Aegypt; and these corrupt the Land: The Murraine slue the Beasts of the Land; This (what with toyling, ryoting, spoyling) hath slaine them the whole Earth thorowout: The Men could not stand
at ease, by reason of Boyles and Botches; nor doe these suffer men to sit at rest: The Haile destroy∣ed the Beasts and Trees; and these haue done the like destructions: Locusts were brought into the Land; and these cause many a Caterpiller: Dark∣nesse was ouer AEGYPT so thicke that it might be felt; and these while they are grop't and felt with the hand, they blind the eyes: All the first borne were slaine at Mid-night; and these haue torne the prime Youngling from
the Mohers Belly, Breast, and Bed. Who is now the Rich man of the World, that is not richer in Plagues, than he is in Possessions: That a∣bounds not in Restles∣nesse, more than in Reue∣nues. It was a Wise re∣uenge of One, alwayes to inrich his Enemies, and Offenders: affirming, it was punishment enough to make them rich: mean∣ing, Wealth can want no Woe; and he that hath great Riches, hath little Rest withall. But (say the Couetous Carles of our
dayes) punish them so, and hurt them sore. Silly Asses! they are burdened most, and yet they thinke they are most rewarded: They take it for a Bles∣sing, not knowing that it proues a Snare. In the Worlds eye, he is the Hap∣py Man that hath House by House, Field by Field, Flocke by Flocke, Bagge by Bagge, and Chest by Chest. He goes cloathed in purple and fine Linnen, and fares deliciously euery day: Fine fed, and gay clad; His Cates and Rai∣ments both farre fetcht,
and deare bought: and the Substance and Mat∣ter of neither are thought good enough for him; but both are made better, if Cost and Art can make them so. One Backe and Belly of his, how many doth it exercise and em∣ploy, thus to clad, and feed? Besides, all men seeke to him; serue, ho∣nour, and applaud him. O happy be! He hath an Heauen vpon Earth; that thus hath the World at will. Fooles! that con∣ceit those happy, whose Miseries they conceiue
not. They view the Pain∣ting, but not the Rotten∣nesse: See the best by them, but know not the worst is within them. You behold laughter in the Face; but you now con∣sider not the Heart is hea∣uy: You reckon what Pleasures, Profits, Ho∣nours; but thinke not what Feares, Cares, Dis∣contents. An honest poore Man would not haue the rich Gluttons Estate, to haue his Mind. The one hath little, and wants lit∣tle; the other wants as much as he hath: The
one could eat, and he had it; the other hath it, and cannot eat: Theres health and hunger; heres plenty and paine: This is alway timorous, that other still secure: This is Free, the other Bond: This sleepes, while the other wakes. Many a poore Man hath made merry with a belly full of Bread and Water; and after slept soundly vpon an hard Cratch: while many a Rich man hath sighed bitterly at a Banquet of Wine; and waked carefully vpon a Bed of Downe.
Alas poore man, and perplexed! his last Nights ill rest hath made him an early ri∣ser: He is soone vp, and full sore at hisDeuoti∣on. A man indeed is he of a daily deuotion, but of no Religion: for he scarce comes to Church aboue once a Quarter. What need he trauell to sacrifice; or come a∣broad to worship? hee hath a Chappell in his Chest, and a God of his owne, his MAMMON. Each Part of his Body, and Power of his Soule;
hath he commanded, (as did that King his Sub∣iects) that they forth∣with fall downe, and worship the GOIDEN-IMAGE. Hee scornes and contemnes blinde, and sluggish: BAAL, Asse-headed AN A ME∣LECH; DAGON the deceitfull; and the vn∣mercifull MOLECH: calls BAAL-ZEBVB but a Flie-catcher; and thinks BELL and DRA∣GON but Gluttons both. He cals none Good, but God: and of Gods, none more than
MAMMON, the God of Goods. Other Gods are either chargeable, or not beneficiall; but as for him (to make good the Deuills words) hee serues not his God for nought: Only he is oft times perplexe; lest (with LABAN) he might at any time lose his God: His God (he knowes) is Currant; and therefore tis his greatest care to keepe it. Yea and his Gods are so many of the same Mat∣ter and Mould; that all his Seruice is to num∣ber
them. Hee makes much of his Mony, for the Figures sake, more than for the Vse: and thinks he hath it to in∣grosse, rather than to imploy. Euery New Peece is a new Picture of his Worship: which at first he examines by the Balance of his best Beleefe; and after ad∣mits it as an Image of his Adoration. HE well saw his Superstition, who called the Couetous Man an IDOLATOVR. Why did God oppose himselfe to MAMMON? but
for that they who serue MAMMON, oppose them∣selues to God: He there∣fore told them truly; Ye cannot serue God, and Mammon. Of all others then, none sothwartly idolatrous, as the Couetous. Others haue worshipped the Creatures of Gods making; but these the Works of their owne hands: Now by how much the Workes of God are more worthy, than the handy Workes of Men; by so much is this kinde of Idolatry more euill and
odious, than the other. Nor is the Couetous Man more spiritually Idolatrous; than ciuilly Slauish. The Drosse is but base; but the Couetous Mans af∣fections are baser than the Drosse: Else, how could he vnder-value himselfe to it? vnlesse he saw some∣what in it, more worthy than himselfe. They call him the Mony-Master; butyou may call it the Master-Money: For which he toyles Night and Day; bides Heat and Cold; runnes through Fire and Water; hazards
Body and Soule. Silly Slaue! thus to become a Drudge to his Seruant: As not possessing, but pos∣sessed rather; not vsing it, but imployed himselfe: not daring to dispend it, as a Master ouer it; but faine to guard it, as a Seruant to it: whereof he hath the trouble only of the Custody; but no pro∣fit of the Inioyment. All the day long; and yet neither idle, nor well imployed. Yet makes he Time very pretious to him: For he (together with his
Coyne) lets time also out to Interest. His Mo∣ny flies out (like Stales, or Quoyes) to fetch in more: And (cleane contrary to Natures rule, or practice) hee makes euen senslesse things to generate their like. What a Monster now is a Mony-breeder, that brings forth thus against Nature? The Greekes not vnaptly call Vsury by the name of a Birth: be∣cause there a Penny be∣gets a Penny, and a Pound brings forth a Pound. Now what need
Gods Creatures increase and multiply for the vse of Man: since Man can make these Creatures of his owne, increase thus beside God, to inrich him∣selfe? An Vsurer thus ac∣cuses both God and Na∣ture, of ignorance and improuidence; in that he hath found out more waies of aduantage, than euer they ordained. Of tame Beasts, take heed of an Vsurer; he is an old Ape, a subtle Fox, and rauens more than a Tigre, Li∣on, Wolfe or Beare. Marke what hurt hee
does you, when you are the most beholden to him. What an Vsu∣rer lets out, he parts with but for a time; but the other must quite part with, what comes in againe. Doe you not know, you may haue another mans Mony so long in your hands; till you come to haue none of your owne? You so may soon conuert your whole Estate into Debt. It is a Rule more experi∣enced, than obserued; All that an Vsurer hath,
is in other Mens hands: till all that other Men haue, be in his. Take an Vsurers Mony into your hands; and you take a Serpent into your bosome: It stings like an Aspe, makes you sleepe insensi∣bly, and you neuer after awake your owne Man: It eats like a Canker, eue∣ry sound Part: and burns like a Fire, while any Fewell lasts. But not∣withstanding, what a sort of Idiots daily seeke, and sue to him, to vndoe themselues? Nay they thinke, pr∣mise,
witnesse them∣selues beholden to him, for their owne vn∣doing. The plaine Country Fellow comes in with a couple of Ca∣pons; the Gentle Man with a goodly Gelding; the Grazier with a fat Oxe; and the Great Man with a brace of Bucks. And hee takes these now, with Con∣dition of what he must haue hereafter. They must first freely take his Seruant by the hand, after, as kindly salute his Wife; and so they
make way to whisper himselfe in the eare. He now takes them apart; pleasures them with the Presse-mony of en∣gagement and thral∣dome to a Churle; charmes them with a Number, and set Forme of words; binds them with their owne Hands; and (perhaps) at last hires others hands to lay hold vpon them. Oh damned Vsury, and detested! Whether Vsu∣ry directly, or indirectly; yet directly damned. What is it at the best, but a ne∣cessary
Euill; like a Wo∣man, which a Man can neither well haue, nor want: but an vndoing Benefit; like an ill Ser∣uant, that eats more, than he earnes: but a tolera∣ted Theft; Like a Sore, that is suffered, only to preuent a worse Disease: But as it is made; what it is, but the Spoyle, and Shipwracke of Estates, and States? Of Estates; for how Many haue beene thus impouerisht, to inrich One? Of States; for how should a Priuate Wealth, but hurt the
Common-Wealth. But (thinke you) is an Vsurer all he is? Tush Man! hee's any thing for Aduantage. Any Gaine is good, how are it be got. Em∣perour-like, hee smells Gaine well from Pisse and Stale: nay Pope∣like, imbraces it sweetly from the Stewes. He takes vp all Trades to thriue on: Now a La∣bourer, now a Farmer, now an Artificer, now a Merchant, now an Officer: now an In∣grosser, and sells all by
whole sale; now an Haberdasher of small wares, and sells all by retale. Nay worse than these; An Infor∣mer, Promoter, Pet∣ty-fogger, a Pillager, Poller, Toller, a Mono∣polizer, Market-mon∣ger, Corne-hoorder, Huckster, Broker, Re∣gratour, a Mounte∣banke, Catchpole, Cut∣purse, Carder, Cheater; and many such more than good: Of such like Trade, or rather Craft; which turne the In∣dustry of Nature, and
Inuention of Art, into no better but Deceit, and Wrong. There are many wayes for a Man to inrich himselfe, with∣out his Euill. A due Time, and good Meanes, will bring in Gaine enough, to no Mans losse. That only is well got, for which no Man is the worse. A Man ought both to labour in, and liue by his Calling. And may (doubtlesse) so wisely, and iustly con∣triue his Affaires, as to doe himselfe good thereby, and no body hurt. And there∣fore are vocations of
Men well inuented: Men only abuse them, when they make ill Inuentions, their Vocations. When Men will not labour, for that is painfull; when Men will not venter, for that is doubtfull: But will rather defraud and cir∣cumuent, taking it to be easily and certainly gain∣full: Hauing neither the Patience, nor Honesty to expect, till Time, and in∣dustry may aduantage them; But hauing a reach beyond both, to rise of a Sudden: And so they be hastily, they care not
how vniustly rich. Nay but I now come neere the Man, that is so neare himselfe. Why (God be thanked) Man, thou hast enough. E∣nough? No, no; For∣tune hath giuen to him (as she hath to Many) too much: but hath not giuen him (as shee hath to None) Enough. Enough 3 Theres two of the Enoughs (hee sayes) and his (hee thinkes) is little E∣nough. It mattereth not, how much hee hath with another;
sith it seemes but small vnto himselfe. Little, or Much, it skilleth not; Little would haue no lesse, and Much would still haue more. And therefore, his Hooke hangs continually, and all is Fish, that comes to his Net: He hath a Plow in euery Mans Field; an Iron in euery mans Fire; and an Oare in euery mans Boat. Like a hungry Dogge, he gapes at euety Bit, and snatches at euery Bone: Like a greedy Kite, ere hee haue yet
quite swallowed the first gobbet; he gapes and creekes for another: At once puls one Hand vnto him, with what he hath gotten, and keeps close his Fist; and o∣pens the other Hand, and holds it out for more. He labours of a Disease, the remedy whereof does rather in∣crease the malady: a Feuer, a Dropsie, a Dog∣gish Appetite. Meat makes him but hungry; and the more he drinks, the dryer he is; and all you can apply, addes
but Fewell to augment his Fire. The Serpent Situla hath stung him, and (doe what you can) heele die of an vn∣quenchable Thirst. Powre in while you will, his Mouth is like a Sieue, or Tunnell; still open and empty: and all that is put in, doth rather stretch out, than fill vp his Belly. All o∣ther Desires of men, rest satisfied in their accom∣plishment: This hungry desire of Hauing only, the more it is fulfilled, it is enlarged. The Beasts
can forthwith suffice their Appetites, only this beastly Appetite of Man will not bee satisfi'd What shall I call this Couetous∣nesse? a Ditch, a Graue, a Gulfe, a Whore, a Hell: infinite all, and insati∣ate altogether. The Daughter of the Horseleach still cries; Giue, Giue: but neuer saith, Jt is Enough. He that lo∣ueth Siluer, is doomed not to bee satisfied with Siluer. For, Couetousnesse
is the Hunger of the Soule; and Mony is but a corporall Sustenance: It may well then fill his Purse; but shall neuer suf∣fice his Mind. The Coue∣tous Man that loueth abun∣dance, shall not be satisfi'd with Increase: Because the loue of his riches in∣creaseth together with the Heape. A Poore man hath little, and wants lit∣tle: a Rich man hath much, and wants more than he hath. The One rests content with what he hath; and thus is hee
filled with good Things: The Other coueteth to haue more; and so is he sent empty away. How much bet∣ter is it, to bee Full with little; than Empty in the midst of much? And how are they Riches; which once increasing, Pouerty is increased also? That Man is Rich, not that hath much; but that wants little: And he wants the lesse, that hath the least. He that hath but lit∣tle, esteemes well of a little Profit: but he that hath
much, sets light by a small Gaine; because he lookes for more. The Man that desires many things, to him a Many things seeme a Few: but he that is con∣tent with few things, to him doe euen a Few things seeme a Many. A Beggar thinkes him rich with a Penny; a Rich man scarce thinkes him so with a Pound. Many a Man hath thought such a Thing too much for him, before hee had it: which when hee hath, hee now thinkes it not enough. The Reason is, because he so seekes to
haue, as that he sees not what he hath. Hee sees not, how he hath, what others want: but thinks he wants, what another hath. What another hath, he wants; yea and wants what he hath himselfe. But, he that will haue what he hath, and haue enough; Let him not get more, but craue lesse: For the only way to make a Man Rich, is not to aug∣ment his Substance; but rather lessen his Desire. He that eats much, and is not filled; that drinkes oft, and is not slaked: Ex∣pletion
but increases the Malady; and there is no way to cure him, but by Purgation. A Man can∣not haue all that he will; this he may, he may nill what he hath not. He that would but a little, may soone haue all he would. I will desire no more, when I would be sure to haue my Desire. What (I maruell) would the Man doe with more? Hee hath more already than is well bestowed, or than he well knowes how to bestow. It is his Goods
Increase he minds only, not their Vse. How vn∣worthy is be of the Talent, that binds it in a Nap∣kin, and hides it in the Ground? What is he bet∣ter to haue a thing and vse it not, which is no∣thing but the vse? What then would the Man with more Wealth? What? I'le answer for him; prouide for an hard Winter, and keepe in store against a deare Yeare: (yea it is the thought of an hard Win∣ter, makes him he dare not inioy the Summer.)
He will therefore (he sayes) so dine, as he may sup; and so goe to day, as he may to morrow. Yea (Oh misery, and fol∣ly of Men!) therefore will he certainly scant himselfe, lest perhaps he may be scanted: and want that alwayes, which he feares he may sometimes want. But would you know why he yet so scrapes and heapes? His most end is; He therfore would haue more, that others might haue lesse: Otherwise, he is not satisfied, while
there is any thing be∣side him. Hee aduises himselfe in this case (as a Tyrant did his Offi∣cers) to consider how many things he wants; and to lee that no o∣ther haue any thing but he. What he hath, doth himselfe no good, doth others hurt: for he hath it purpolely to keepe it from others, rather than keepe it for himselfe. Like the Dragon that kept the Golden Ap∣ples; and that other than kept the Golden Fleece: Like the Griffins in the
Hyperborean Moun∣taines, that had no vse of the Gold and preci∣ous Stones were there; yet would suffer none to take them thence. Or (to compare him with what hee's acquainted with) like a Dogge on a Hay-Mow, he lies there not to eat him∣selfe, but to keepe the Cattle from their Meat: Yea like a Daw, hides Mony, not that he hath need of it, but that o∣thers might not find it. A Couetous Man doth good to none, no not himselfe:
doth hurt to himselfe, and all. Wife, nor Children are the better for him; for whom Neighbours, and Strangers are the worse. He counts it an indignitie, to haue Equals neere him; and a miserie to haue Neighbours by him: And could wish there were no more men in the World but he: that so he might haue a World vnto himselfe. ADAM (hee thinkes) was well blest, when there was no more to inhabit a whole Earth but hee: but now (hee sayes) the World is
waxt so populous, that men haue much adoe to liue one by another. His endlesse coueting hath made his Possessions boundlesse: And yet (hee thinkes) he scarce hath enough; when hee now knowes not what he hath. I will now say to him, and all; and so as my words are warranted: Goe to now ye rich Men (ye that ioyne House to House, and Field to Field; till there be no roome left for
the Poore) weepe, and howle for your miseries that shall come vpon you; your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten: your Gold and Siluer is cankered, and the rust thereof shall be a witnesse against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were Fire: you haue hea∣ped vp treasures to∣gether
for the last dayes. Vnhappy Wealth, and euill! that doth no good to those that haue it not; and doth hurt to those that haue it: Troubling their Liues, blotting their Consci∣ences, damning their Soules: and from a hell they made vnto them∣selues: bringing them to the Hell prepared for them. Oh cry him mercy! he disclaimes him that can claime any thing of him; that can say What,
or Whom he hath Op∣pressed, vndermined, polled, ingrated, spoy∣led, cheated, circum∣uented, or extorted. Whose House hath he hired from ouer his head, or Field from vn∣der his hands; or snatcht his meat from out his mouth, or pull'd his Raiment from off his backe: Hath hee beene a carelesse execu∣tour, an vnequall Ar∣bitratour, an vniust Guardian? Whose Wa∣ges hath hee with-held? Whose Estate hath he
intangled? Whose Feof∣ment hath hee im∣bezilled? Whose Pledge hath he not restored? What Promise hath he not performed? and what Debt hath he not discharged? Or who can say, this was his, or is, or so ought to be? He de∣fies a World; what he hath, he came honestly by, and it is his owne. His Neighbour (for what he euer wrought, or thought against him) hath yet both House, Wife, Child, Ser∣nant, Oxe, Asse, and
euery thing that is his. Excellent Pharisee! He hath kept the Com∣mandements: But one thing is lacking; let him goe and sell all that he hath, and giue vnto the Poore. He is iustifi'd (he thinkes) because he hath done no man Wrong: Not knowing he is guilty, for that he hath done good to none. Others did he ne∣uer injure; and so he is free (he perswades him) not considering he is bound to succour o∣thers. Call him Coue∣tous;
and he tells you, he neuer held others from their owne: But I tell him, he is Coue∣tous; because he holds his owne from others. Not only he that greedily inuades anothers, but he that niggardly detaines his owne, he also is Coue∣tous. He hath slaine, that saues not; he hath hurt, that helpes not; he hath spoyled, that rewards not; he hath starued, that che∣rishes not; he hath stript, that cloaths not: and he that hath not giuen, euen he hath taken away. The
Fault is no lesse his, that bestowes not on him that hath not; than his, that exacts from him that hath. The Corne which thou hoordest, is the Bread of the hungry; the Wooll and Flax which thou transportest, is the Cloth of the naked; the Gold and Siluer which thou dost so heap and hide, is the Price of the Poore: He that wisely gaue it thee for them; shall once (in their behalfe) as se∣uerely require it of thee, and thy like: J was an
hungred, and ye gaue me no meat; J was thirsty, and ye gaue me no drinke; I was a Stranger, and yee tooke mee not in; Naked, and yee cloathed mee not; sicke, and in Pri∣son, and yee visited me not. Nay and you talke of Giuing, he is gone: This is (he sayes) no World to Giue; him∣selfe is (as others are)
on the Taking hand. Quite of another mind from the Scripture; It is a more blessed thing (he sayes) to Receiue, than to Giue: And (cleane contrary to the Prince, that thought that day lost, in which he had giuen nothing) he thinkes it all lost, in that day that he giues. You cannot beat Boun∣ty into his Braines with a Beetle. A very Truant is he (and you examine him) at a lesson of Libe∣rality: and if you take in hand to tutour him;
he makes any excuse, takes any occasion to busie him otherwise, than about his Booke. You would not thinke how hee delayes the Dole to the Poore; and what Shifts he hath to shun a Beggar. If he but suspect there sits a needy Crauer neare to such a Corner; he there either turnes another way, or lookes another way: He either mends his Pace, chats to his Com∣panion, or makes him∣selfe musing on some hasty Matter: Now li∣stens
he to the other side, and the Poore-man is on his deafe eare. It is not the first, and a faint asking will auaile him any thing; hee must dogge him to it, for what he does. But if you once come so neare him, and follow him so fane, that hee must needes take notice though not of Your Want, yet of your Noyse: he neuer stands Iesuitically to equiuo∣cate with you; I haue it not that is (he meanes) not for you: but tels you
blunt out at once; I haue not for you. Aske him a Farthing, and he sayes a Farthing is too little for him to giue; aske a Shilling, and hee replies, a Shilling is too much for you to re∣ceiue: Aske more, or lesse; he minds to serue you with a matter of nothing. Tell him you'l pray for him, if hee'l be pleased to giue; and he tells you, hee can haue Prayers better cheape: Say you'le pray for him, whether hee'le giue or no; and hee'le trust you
(he sayes) for once. (A poore Cauill is it, to flout out anothers Necessitie.) And yet he thinkes, he hath thus put you off with as good a Grace, and as much Credit; as ano∣ther could haue plea∣sured you. But if hee be drawne to Giue, he giues so difficultly, so frowningly, with such vpbraidings and reui∣lings; that he giues you a Fish, and a Serpent at once; and together with Bread, he puts a Stone into your Poke.
You had better bee without his Gift; it is not so sweet in the ha∣uing, as bitter in the re∣ceiuing. Salute him with a Suit; and hee stampes that he cannot stay to heare you: Hee now turnes, and talkes to euery one that comes by him: and cries, I come Sir, to any one that but opens the case∣ment toward him. Pre∣sent him with your Pe∣tition, and he puts you to petition the second time for an answer to the first: Heele put on
his considering Cap, and bids you come a∣gaine for an answer: and so you must spend more Time, Labour, Cost, for (perhaps) a further Delay; or (more likely) a flat Deniall. The Churle hates to be Poore; nor would he willingly be thought Rich: verify∣ing the Saying; He had rather be rich indeed, than so accounted. (Contrary to many wauering Cre∣dit-mongers, that seeke to be so accounted; ha∣uing scarce wherewith
to make vp their ac∣counts.) Especially, how little doth hee set by himselfe at a Leuie, Sessment, Loane, Tax, or Subsidie? And all is because hee would doe as little good as hee could, to King, Church, and Poore. He abhors to be charged with an Office of Charge: will Fine for a City Sheriffe; and will be ready to cut his owne throat, to be made Sheriffe of a Shire. He hates Papistrie for one Point especially, because they teach, A
Man may merit Salua∣tion by his Works: He heares it, but he cannot beleeue it; No, no, his Hope is, Faith will come to saue him, though Charity be away. Ah Charity, Charity! thou faire Fruit of the Faith∣full; and laudable witnesse of a Soule Sanctifi'd: Oh thou that art the Greatest of all Graces for Abiding; where dost thou now a∣bide? O Loue! O Doue! to whither hast thou ta∣ken thy Wings? How art thou flown out of the Arke of a wretched World?
how art thou gone out from vs, not to returne vnto vs? Alas! how is thy beauty stained, Strength weakned, light darkned, and Heat coo∣led? Helpe, Oh helpe! come once againe vnto vs, and do some good amongst vs: Now thou art gone, theres no good to be done. The Hungry pine, while there is none to feed them; the Naked starue, while there is none to cloath them; The Sicke languish, while there is none to visit them; the Captiues call and cry,
while there is none to deli∣uer them; the Poore com∣plaine, while there is none to right, or pitty them. No man remembreth the Afflictions of IOSEPH. Neuer more need of an ANGEL to conuay Su∣stenance to him prisoned in the Den; or of a RA∣VEN to fetch Food for him banished in the Wil∣dernesse: For, LABAN diminishes the Wages of IACOB; NABAL will not part with a crumme of Bread, or a drop of water to the Son of ISHAI; and DI∣VES
denyes LAZARVS to dine with his Dogges. Who releeues him with a Penny, whom CHRIST redeemed with his Blood? Who thrusts not out CHRIST in a stranger, rather than takes in a Stranger for CHRIST his sake? As the swinish GERGASENES thrust CHRIST out of their Coasts: So with a many hoggish Churles, away with the Begger (the stur∣dy I meane not, but the needy) to the next Consta∣ble, Stocks, House of Cor∣rection. Their care is but
to be rid of them; they care not to releeue them. Oh ho, now I haue him. Could you not thinke all this while, to what end he is so great a gatherer? You must not thinke What onely, but Whom he is to leaue behind him. Hee hath laid vp (with the Glutton in the Gospell) for many Yeares: Yea and (beyond him too) for more Yeares than his owne. Iust one of them, that Haue their Porti∣on
in this Life, and leaue the rest of their Substance for their Babes. It is a Fatherly affection that vrges him thus to scrape and heap: A Father (he thinkes) does not halfe loue his Children as he ought; that plots not by all meanes to make them rich. To beget Chil∣dren, and bestow them, is (thinks he) a Fathers Whole: and to endow them largely is the only Education. Better not beget, than beget to Beg∣gery;
is an Apothegme of his owne: but the old Rule he remem∣bers not; Better vn∣borne, than vntaught. No matter for Instructi∣on, they shall haue Wealth enough. Goods are more than Good∣nesse: What cares he whether they learne to liue well; his care is to leaue them well to liue. It is all one to be such an ones Hogge, Horse, Dogge; as his: Sonne: Nay, his Hogges shall haue a Swineheard, his Horse a Rider, his
Dogges a Futerer; but no Tutor for his Child. He will haue a Shep∣heard in his Field, a Bayly in his yard; but scarce a Minister in his parish: A Clarke for his Bonds, a Steward ouer his lands; but no Schoolemaster to his Sonnes. He will looke that his land be well manured; but respects not though he that must haue it, be neuer so ill mannered. What an Idiot it is, thus to decke and dresse the Seruant; whose master notwith∣standing
must be but a Slouen. Oh their base∣nesse, and folly! Lesse Cul∣ture shall be bestowed vp∣on the Owner; then vp∣on his Possessions Sonnes, or Daughters; No mat∣ter what they are, but what they haue: Be shee blacke, shee's Penny white; be she crooked, her Wealth will make her stract; be she neuer so bad, her Goods are e∣nough to make her Good Be he base, hee's Gold Noble; Be he sheepish, he hath a Golden Fleece, be his Demeanour neuer
so foule, he hath a faire Demeanes. What Vn∣comelinesse or Euill will not Wealth make a man winke at? O Fooles! Whether is better, and to be preferred; Wealth, or Instruction? the one a grosse Heape, the other a rare Endowment; the one as vile to the other; as is the Body to the Minde. And whether is worse, and rather to be despised; a Begger, or a Foole? the one hath no Mony, the other hath no Wit: and what the one wants of a Rich man, the other wants of a Man.
And is it He, for whom thou dost so toyle, and plod? Like thy Oxe and Asse then, thou art not for thy selfe. Thou art but the Conduit-Pipe, and he the Cesterne: It comes thorow thine hands, but is laid vp for him. Thou therefore makest thee poore, to make him rich. And what good will it doe thee when thou art gone, that thou left'st a rich Heyre behind? Yea, more Rich (perhaps) than Good. Thou hast gained for him, and so
hast lost thine owne Soule. Did it DIVES any good, that his Bre∣thren (after him) liued merrily; and (great-like) of his Goods? Say they dranke Wine in Bowles; yet neuerthelesse his Tongue was tormented in that Flame. When thou diest miserably, what art thou the better that thy Children liue neuer so brauely? What is it, that they beget iollity to them, and horrour to thy Selfe? Hereby haue they Pleasure perhaps, but it but short: but
thou hast torment both certaine, and endlesse. A wealthy Sonne profiteth not a guilty Father: No, though he would giue all he left him, for Masses, Dirges, Pardons, and Prayers; it could not (what ere Men faine) re∣deeme his Soule from Hell. Indeed, Happy (they say) is he, whose Father is in Hell. For (say they againe) A rich man is either a bad man, or a bad mans Heire. If himselfe be bad, it will once goe worse with him: but if he only be
heire to a bad man; he is happier himselfe, in that his Father is gone to the Deuill for him. Yet further; What faist thou, but another after thee may proue as la∣uish, as thou hast beene scraping; as riotous, as thou sparing; and may scatter that in a Yeare, which tooke thee a Life to gather: and what pro∣fit hast thou, that thou hast laboured for the Wind? Tis true, and iust; both said, and Found: After a great Getter, there commonly
comes a Spender. Goods ill gotten, are ill spent: The First Heire may haue them, and a Second per∣haps; all which a Third scarce comes to heare of. Nay but (I now be∣thinke me) thou hast neuer an Heire: For whom is it now thou dost so toyle, and irke, yea and damne thy selfe? Thou knowest, thou must not haue them; and who must haue them, thou knowest not. Perhaps, one that neuer knew thee, or will neuer thanke thee. HE puts
thee in minde of such thy Frailty, and Folly at once: Man Wal∣keth in a vaine Sha∣dow, and disquieteth himselfe in vaine: he heapeth vp riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. Tush! why tell you him? If no Body will lay claime to it; let it fall to the King, Church, Commons, Poore of the Parish. But for feare of such a Forfeit, thou hast chosen thee an Heire
vnto thy selfe: One that thou louest well; yea better it seemes than thine owne Soule. One that loues thee well; and well he may, and it be but for the loue hee hath to thine. He can∣not chuse but loue thee horribly, while he loues Thine so impatiently: That is, he could wish Thee, and Thine at once, both hang'd, and had: yea, to haue Thine, what cares he to curse Thee to Hell? He is one of the same Name (I am sure)
though not one of the Kinne. So, so; Keepe the House howsoeuer in the same Name; belike the Line was not worthy of it. ABSOLON hath no Childe for his Name to liue in; shall he rot therefore out of remem∣brance? no, not while ABSOLONS Pillar stands. If he haue no Monument of his Loynes; he can haue a Pillar of his Name: and thats enough to vphold his House. This is one of the last, but not the least follies of Men, to let a Title
carry it, before the Right: To make Kinsmen Stran∣gers, and a Kinsman of a Stranger: With the whole Price of an Heire∣dome, to buy the Name of an Heire; or an Heire of the Name: To purchase a lying Affinity with a costly kinde of Adoption. Nay but the Heire that must be, is a Poore Si∣sters Sonne: The poore rag'd Knaue (I can tell you) is like to be Lord of all. He shall one day owne all that is his Vn∣cles; though his Vncle now scarce will owne
him. Not a Farthing will he allow him to educate, and maintaine him; though leaue him all at last, to waste per∣haps, or else ingrosse. You shall finde him set the first in his Will; which neuer was suffe∣red to sit the last at his Table. It is the manner of the Couetous, to part with nothing while they liue; no not to those, to whom they mind to leaue all at their Death. While he liues, all is too little for himselfe; but let him take all to him, when he
dies. His Heire is now beholden to him, not for what he hath be∣stowed; but for what he could not keepe: And will therefore thanke him, when he shall not heare him; will pray for him when it shall doe him no good. Thou now liest gas∣ping, and thine Heire is gaping: Euery looke he lets vpon thee, accuses the slownesse of thy Death: For he thinkes it his Wrong and Hurt that thou liuest. Hee sighs and wailes before
thee, not that he cares for thy losse; but hopes for thy Gaine: How he howles and blubbers, while thy hands quake, Teeth guash, Eyes close, Breath stops, Heart choaks, and Soule flits; & all, not so much that thou art now dead, as that thou diedst not ere this. No Mans Death is more desired, than the Co∣uetous Mans: It is al∣wayes expected, plotted often, yea and sometimes vntimely effected. All therefore wish him dead; because (like the Hog in
the Pot) he doth good to none, but after his Death. Well, thou'lt there∣fore shake off these Sha∣dowes; and mind'st (I heare) to build some Hospitall, Schoole, Col∣ledge; or doe some cha∣ritable Deed withall. Sayes he so? The Man liues poore (I perceiue) with purpose to die rich: and dies rich, to doe good after his Death. Yea, then doe Good, when he can doe no longer hurt. He hath robbed Peter all his Life; and will now pay Paul
at his Death. That is no Liberalitie to giue, when he can no longer haue: no Charitie to releeue one, with what he hath wre∣sted from another: no Pietie to doe Euill, that Good may come thereof: and no Equitie to get ill, with a purpose to bestow it well. I would not wish thee to goe to Hell all thy Life, with an intent to win Heauen after thy Death. Dost thou of∣fend still, with purpose to make amends? Wealths well bestowing, is not enough for the
Fault in the getting. Sa∣tisfaction may appease the Hurt; it cannot wipe away the Guilt of Fraud, or Oppression. But if thou wilt doe Good withall; I would aduise thee to doe it, while thou hast it in thine hand to doe. Doe well with it, while it is yet thine: What thanks is it to thee, what Good is done with it, when thou hast left it. Doe then resigne it, be∣fore thou must needs bequeath it. thou hadst as good doe Good by thy selfe, as others. Euen
now feed and cloath the Poore, that their Loynes and Bowels may blesse thee, before thou diest. He is but a silly Traueller, that so orders for his Iour∣ney, as to haue his Proui∣sion sent after him, when himselfe is already gone so farre before: He may well want it, ere it ouer∣take him. Good Workes goe merrily with, or be∣fore vs: they follow but slowly afterwards. I dreame but too well of him; theres no such matter he meanes. He meanes (as Hermo∣crates)
to make him∣selfe his owne Heire: and wishes still that his Goods might fall by succession to himselfe. Or else (with Another) will he deuoure his Gold before his Death; and so bury it in him: Or (with such Another) sow it in his Sleeue, and appoint it to be buried with him. Ah this be∣witching Wealth! ha this Gold, this Gold! how it ties Mens Hearts vnto it? Once Couetous, and alwayes so. Auarice is com∣monly the Vice of old Age:
Whereas other vices then fade, this grows afresh. And as it begins with Age, so it ends not but with Life. A Couetous Man growes the fonder of his Gold, the sooner he must forgoe it: Yea, when it must needs Leaue him; euen then is he loth to leaue it. I haue now said so much of thee, that I had almost forgotten my selfe. Who (thinkst thou) am I? Euen no better than I would; no other than thou oughtst to be. Will I (like thee) abase mine
Affections vnto Earth; when I am bound to ayme at nothing vnder Heauen? To what can I stoope to in a World, that am aboue a World? I am more worthy, than to welcome base Pelfe vnto me, so as to wor∣ship it: My Minde came from Heauen; My Gold comes but from Earth: I doe not meane to set Earth aboue Heauen, in letting my Gold ouer∣rule my Minde. If it will dwell with me, it shall be my Seruant; I intend to bee no Slaue
vnto it. Riches can I contemne, and not de∣sire, and vse: can vse the World, as though I vsed it not; can passe by this present Life; be∣cause I am to passe through it to another, to a better Life. Yea, can content me with a pre∣sent Scantnesse, for hope of the Fulnesse I am to haue hereafter. It is not an Earth that I would; nor can an Earth suffice and appease my Will. My Heart is a true fra∣med Triangle, a coyned Circle cannot fill it. No∣thing
can satisfie my Soule, but All things: He only is enough vn∣to it, in whom it is. No∣thing lesse than God, can suffice the Soule that is capable of God. Euery Creature is but vile to him, that knowes but his Creator. A whole Earth is too strait for him, that lookes as wide as Heauen. The whole Ocean of the World is but as a drop to a thirstie Soule; to whom one drop of the riuer of Paradise is plenteous re∣freshment. Hee counts Mammon but base, that
prizes God: And the wise Merchant cares not to part with all, to purchase the pretious Pearle vnto him. Did my Will em∣brace a World, it would still aske more; A World is not enough to my Will: What then should I de∣sire, but what onely and fully can answer, and ap∣pease my Desire? I haue but little, tis true; and the best is, I want but little. I haue but little, yet enough: and that can neuer be little, that is enough; and what is not enough, when
it is at the most, is not much. I lacke but little; I haue chosen the better part than so, to be care∣full for many things, when one thing is ne∣cessary. Godlinesse with Contentment is great Gaine; said One, that for his Knowledge, knew both how to want, and how to abound: and for his Experience, Hauing nothing, yet possessed all things. Godlinesse
with Contentment saies he? Why thats enough for Man or Christian: Nature inuites the one, to be content with a little: and Grace aduises the other, Hauing food and Raiment, there∣with to be content. A Man will Content him with Natures lot and li∣mit: so will a Christian bee content with what measure God hath mett out vnto him. Content is all: The least Portion is enough, the lowest Condi∣tion happy, with the
aequanimitie of the Bea∣rer. The Man is likest to God, that lacks the least; whose propertie it is, to haue need of Nothing; and to be sufficed with himselfe. The Contented Man is rich in the midst of Pouertie: whereas the Couetous is poore in the midst of Riches. He that can be content with what he hath; wants not, what he hath not: he that is not so, wants what he hath. The Patriarch cared for no more, but Bread to eat, and Raiment to
put on: The Wise Man craued neither Pouer∣tie, nor Riches; but Conuenience onely. I will make that enough to mee, which God hath gi∣uen mee with a sparing hand. God saw no more was good for mee, he ther∣fore gaue mee no more Whether God giues little, or much, he giues for the best. Better is a little with the Feare of the Lord; than great Treasure, and trou∣ble therewith. Or say
my Estate be not e∣nough to my Will; I can make my Will e∣nough to mine Estate: Namely, while it an∣swers not mee accor∣dingly; I can accor∣dingly apply my selfe to it. Hee that cannot make his owne enough; will neuer haue enough, though all were his owne. Mee thinks I yet see how Crates threw his Gold into the Sea: And heare how Phocion told Alexander, that himselfe was richer, who needed not his great Gift; than
was hee who gaue it: And thinke how Fabri∣cius thought it a King∣dome, to contemne the Wealth of a King. These knew Gold and Siluer was but an elaborate Dust; Wealth was but a toylsome Heape; and all manner of Riches, not such as their owne Worth, but the Errours of men had prized, and brought into request. This vnnecessary Trash (they knew, & proued) was but an impediment to Vertue; and an in∣ticement to Euill: They
therefore (whose best Vertues, were but the best Vices) despised that for Vertues sake, which they knew to be the matter and meanes to Vice. Did the Nations abhorre, and doth Israel adore the Golden Idoll? Is Mony lesse Earth and Drosse, than it was of old, or are Mens Affecti∣ons now become more vile and earthy? Haue Chri∣stians more neede of Wealth, than had Pagans? Nay haue they not a nea∣rer, safer, fuller Proui∣dence within; than haue
they that were, and are without? How is it now, they preferre the things of this Life before them, that had neither the Knowledge, nor Hope of another and better Life? To leaue and contemne the Wealth of the World, is an ordinary Lesson of Philo∣sophie: To heape and adore them then, can be no good Diuinitie. If Nature could teach Them to neglect them; because they did them no Good: Grace (mee thinkes) should the rather in∣struct mee not to regard
them, because they doe mee hurt. Yea (as I fay) doe me hurt: and more hurt, then for which a World can make amends. Both staine my Soule, and damne my Soule: and can a World now both wipe, and quit, this both Guilt, and Losse? What shall it profit a Man, if hee shall gaine the whole World; and lose his owne Soule? (saith HE, that doth as much
as quite deny, what hee doth thus demand) or what shall a man giue in exchange for his Soule? An whole World (belike) is not worth a Soule. I were vnwise then to hazard my Soule, though it were for a world. I will tell the Worldling what I know, and what hee finds. Riches staine the Soule: For a Man doth not lightly and easily become rich, without his Euill and Sinne. Why doth he call it the
Ʋnrighteous Mam∣mon? but because Ri∣ches and Righteousnesse seldome goe together: But it is common to haue Wealth and Wickednesse at once. How gets a Man his Wealth, but by Fraud and Oppression? how spends a Man his Wealth, but vpon his Pride and Lusts? That must needs be bad out∣right; which is purchased by bad meanes, and im∣ployed to bad Ends Riches are but base in their Na∣ture; but are euen bad in
their Effects. He might haue beene Poore and In∣nocent together; that is now growne both Guilty, and Rich. Is a man to more good for his Goods? I will neuer thinke: Man the better for his Meanes; since (I see) it is the meanes to make him worse. But I must tell him withall, what I feare, and what hee would loth to finde: Riches damne the Soule. It is (woe, ah woe!) too true. Before he beginne his Gaine, he hath quite lost himselfe: yet consi∣ders
not, how he loses all in the losse of him∣self. The acquisition of his Pelfe was at the first sealed with the damna∣tion of his Soule. Who but THEY (the De∣uill and his Angels) were to fetch away the Rich mans Soule? He bids you vnderstand how headlong he hur∣ries downe to Hell; that tells you how hardly he gets vp into Heauen: Saying: Jt is easier for a Camell to goe thorow the eye of a
needle; than for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdome of God. Briefly, He tells plainely of their Ble∣mish and Vengeance together: They that will be rich fall into temptation, and a Snare; and into ma∣ny foolish, and hurt∣full Lusts, which drowne men in de∣struction, and perdi∣tion.
Ah but tis a miserie (me thinkes) to bee poore: And there is (we say) No Woe, to Want. The Parenthesis was well put in, both for the pith, and Truth of the Saying. Pouerty is a Misery, but it is to them that so make it, because they take it so. Pouertie is no burden to him, that can beare it out: None feeles the weight of it, but he that feares to vnder∣goe it. Not trouble some is it to him that beares it; but to him that will not beare it. Nothing is hard
to a willing Mind: to an vnwilling is nothing easie. Pouerty is grieuous to no man; but rather many a Man is so to it. This is the misery of it, that a man will needs make it so to himselfe. I am worthily wretched, when I will not be otherwise per∣swaded, but that I am so. In my Minde, Hee's not poore, that would not be rich: and hee lacks nothing, that craues not many things. Tush, tush: No man is poore indeed: and (but in conceit) is no Man rich.
He is Poore indeed, that cares to be rich: Hee's rich enough, that feares not to be Poore. Reach indeed to the Opinion of Men, and who is Rich? But stoope to the Condition of Men, and who is Poore? Na∣ture hath limited a Man to liue with little: And shall a Man thinke him Poore when he hath not wherewithall to trans∣gresse Natures Bounds? There is a kinde of Meannesse, and Scant∣nesse to many a Man: It is their pecuishnesse
to call it Basenesse, and Beggery: and to re∣proach it so, and abhor it. Men doe miscall, what they know not how to esteeme. And as Children are skarred at Bugge-beares, and fa∣bled or fained Hob∣goblins: so Fooles flie this Ghostly and gastly appearing Pouerty by Fire and Water, Sea and Land. Let others thinke Pouerty a wofull mi∣sery; I will deeme it (as I well proue it) an happy Security. The Poore Man, he does no hurt;
he feares no hurt: Hee is not enuied, not hated, not cursed; incures not the treacherous Enmi∣ties of Men: He sings, and dances before the Theefe; sleepes safe and sound vnder euery Hedge. Nothing hath he, he feares to lose; and lies so low, as whence he cannot fall. I should therefore like Pouerty the better, because it is lesse obnoxious to Feare, and Losse; Who would still trouble him to possesse Riches; that must once be more troubled in
their Losse? It is safer a great deale, not to Haue, than to Lose: And hee farre merrier, whom For∣tune neuer respected; than whom she hath now forsa∣ken. The Lesser I am; I am Greater, than whom Change, or Chance may indam∣mage. But say Pouerty were worse than it is; and I poorer than I am: I am ot other than Others, yea and my Betters haue likewise beene. What should I tell of poore Kings, Prophets, Apo∣stles,
Fathers, Saints? CHRIST himselfe was Poore: borne of a poore Woman, brought forth in a poore Stable, lapt in poore Clouts, laid in a poore Manger, liued a poore Life: HE, euen he hungred, he wanted; he had not wherewith to pay the Due; he had not whereon to lay his Head. Now Worme of Earth, how is it thou couetest so to be rich; sith the God of Heauen and Earth, was so willing to be Poore. What was there in the World, was worthy
of God? What cared he then for the worth of a World? Why would hee want these Things of ours? but to tell vs, that we our selues might well bee without them: Why contemne them? but to teach vs not to desire them. My SAVIOVR cared not to bee rich, feared not to bee Poore: to bid me not trouble my selfe with so need∣lesse Feares, and Cares. One thing is, (let the World goe the worst with me) I cannot liue poorer, than I was
Borne; and so must Die. Naked (said the Poore man) came J out of my Mothers Wombe; and naked shall I returne thi∣ther. And the wise man; As hee came forth of his mothers wombe, naked shall he returne to goe as he came: and shall take nothing of his Labour, which bee may carry away in
his hand: Jn all points as he came, so shall hee goe; and what profit hath he, that hath laboured for the Wind? Come naked, Goe naked; Bring nothing, Carry nothing: To what pur∣pose then doe Men get and gather those things which they once had not; and once must not haue? These things of ours; here only we haue them; and wee leaue them here. Said I of
Ours? How are they Ours, which at first were not so; and at last shall not so be? That is ours, which we bring with vs; but that anothers, which we get vnto vs: That is Ours, which we keepe with vs; but that anothers, which wee leaue behind vs. That is a mans Owne, which is not added to a Man; which is not taken from a Man; which is not one mans more than anothers. A Mans Soule is a mans owne: Riches are not so. Oh hazzard not your
owne, to haue the Things that are not yours! He fitly called them vn∣certaine Riches: They vncertaine to vs; and we likewise to them. They Vncertaine: Now ours, now others; now gotten, now gone. Nothing is Certaine in Riches, but vncertainty. So He expresly; Riches Certainly make themselues Wings, They fly away, as an Eagle towards Hea∣uen. An Eagle flies
suddenly, flies swiftly: So are Riches gone in∣stantly, gone irrecouera∣bly. These things of ours, they goe from vs by more wayes than one. Either thy Fade of themselues; or we Consume them; or others Depriue vs of them. Our Food is sub∣iect to putrefaction; our Garments to the Moth, and fretting; our Gold and Siluer to the rust and canker; our Lands to barenesse and bar∣rennesse; and our Hou∣ses to rottennesse and ruine. Fire may deuoure
them, Water swallow them, Enemies spoile them, or Theeues pur∣loyne them. O vaine Man! How is it thou now trustest in a Thing so vaine? Trust not in vncertaine Riches: Set not thine eyes vpon the Thing that is not: Yea, let mee say to One, and All of you: Lay not vp for your selues Treasures vp∣on Earth, where Moth and Rust doth
corrupt; and where Theeues breake tho∣row and steale: But lay vp for your selues Treasures in Hea∣uen, where neither Moth and Rust doth corrupt, and where Theeues do not break thorow and steale. We also are vncertaine: Did not Riches leaue vs; yet must we leaue them at last. Death is not drawne to partiali∣tie; nor can she be cor∣rupted:
Gold and Siluer will not hire her to winke at the Wealthy. As dieth the Poore Man: so dieth the Rich. Shee knocks as readily, and equally at the Kings, as at the Beggers Doore. Death (when she comes) comes not to take his Wealth from the Rich man; but rather the Rich man from his Wealth. That Rich Glut∣ton had laid vp enough in store for many yeares: but that Night They (Death and the
Deuill) they fetcht away his Soule. His Goods were yet laid vp; but his Soule now was fetcht away. Trustlesse, yea and Witlesse Wretch he was! Trustlesse, in that (denying the Proui∣dence of God) he laid vp for so many yeares: Witlesse, not conside∣ring how (for his owne Frailty) he could not promise that Night vn∣to himselfe. To what end should I lay vp for many Yeares; when I am not sure, my yeares shall bee many? Why
should I so greedily get That to me; which I know not how readily I may be fetcht from, or it from me? Where∣fore should I prouide for so long, when my Iourny is not farre? The little I haue, may (for what I know) out-last my Life. I haue (I know) but a little way Home; and I doe not meane to make a Burthen of my Prouision. I would haue my Shooe but fit∣ted to my Foot: a Cloake too large or long, would but tire mee to
trauell in. It is to Liue, as to Swimme; easiest for him that is the lightest. So I haue sufficient for to Day; let to Morrow take care for it selfe. Why should my Care be for the Morrow; when I am not sure the Morrow shall be mine? He that likes not my Resolution, let him read my Warrant, and vnderstand it. Take no thought for the Morrow; for the Morrow shall take
thought for the Things of it selfe. Sufficient vnto the Day is the Euill thereof: I doe not meane to make it the worse to me, by ad∣ding mine owne vnto it. Neither will I riot and waste, because I may die to Morrow: nor yet Couet and scrape, be∣cause to Morrow may be mine to liue. He that so spends the Things of the World, as if he were to Die now; so spares, as if he wert to Liue yet: the
same vses the World, as if he vsed it not: And is richer in the Inioyment of a small Portion; than is the other in the Keeping of the largest Heape. Churlish Death! (thou saist) and the rather so; to threaten a Separation betwixt Thee & Thine: than betwixt Thee and thy selfe. Thou irkest lesse (I know) thy Body and Soules finall Disso∣lution; than thy Mind & Monies least Diuision. Thou art married to thy MAMMON: ty'd in a Knot vnto it, which
Death onely must vn∣doe. Thou art one with thy Wealth: and ere thou wilt not be coue∣tous, thou wilt not Be. Hugge thy Heapes yet a while; and kisse euery Face of thy Coyne: Where thy Treasure is, there let thy Heart yet be: Death shall scatter thy Treasure, when she hits thy Heart. While thou thinkst on what thou hast laid vp; that Night (thou thinkst not on) shall come. Then shall their Heape stay behind thee; and their
Guilt onely shall goe with thee: And thy Money moreouer shall merit thee this Memo∣riall:
BEneath this Stone, There lieth One; No matter for his Name. But base by Birth; He once kept Earth: And now Earth keepes the same. For all his Store, He was but Poore; Euen wanting what he had: Making himselfe A Slaue to Pelfe; No Slaue so base, so bad. His Thoughts were caring, Carcase sparing; To pamper vp his Purse: He liu'd a Hogge; Di'd like a Dogge: And's gone with many a Curse. HIs Mind was Gold; His Corps is Mould; Which now lies rotting here: This, with the Dust, That, and the Rust, Shall once againe appeare. God, Friends, and Health, Were all to Wealth Neglected, and Contemned: Wherefore to Deuils; Foes, Woes, and Euills; Hee's iustly now Condemned.
