12693 99839503 3931
ONE OF THE SERMONS Preach't to the Lords of the High Court of Parliament, in their solemne Fast held on Ashwednes∣day, Feb. 18. And by their appoint∣ment published: By Ios: Exon. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Nath. Butter. 1629.
Acts 2. 37, 38, 40. 37, Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we doe? 38, Then said Peter vnto them, Re∣pent and be baptized, &c. &c. 40. And with many other words did he testifie, and exhort them, saying, Saue your selues from this vnto∣ward generation. WHo knowes not that Simon Peter was a Fisher? that was his trade both by Sea and Land, if we may not rather say, that as Simon, he was a Fisherman, but, as
Peter, he was a fisher of men; He that call'd him so, made him so; And surely his first draught of fishes, which, as Simon, he made at our Sauiours comand, might well be a true type of the first draught of men, which, as Peter, hee made in this place; for, as then, the nets were ready to cracke, and the ship to sinke, with store; so here, when he threw forth his first drag net of heauenly doctrine, & reproofe, three thousand soules were drawne vp at once. This text was as the sacred cord, that drew the net together; and pull'd vp this wondrous shole of conuerts to God; It is the summe of Saint Peters Sermon, if not at a Fast, yet at a generall humiliation, which is more and better; (for wherefore
fast we but to be humbled? and if wee could bee duely hum∣bled, without fasting, it would please God a thousand times bet∣ter, then to fast formally, without true humiliation; Indeed, for the time, this was a feast, the feast of Pentecost; but for the estate of these Iewes, it was dies cinerum, a day of contrition; a day of deepe hunger, and thirst after righteous∣nesse, Men and brethren, what shall we doe? Neither doubt I to say, that the festiuity of the season ad∣ded not a little to their humiliati∣on; like as wee are neuer so apt to take cold, as vpon a sweat: and that winde is euer the keenest, wch blowes cold out of a warm coast; No day could be more af∣flictiue then an Ashwednesday,
that should light vpon a solemne Pentecost; so it was here: Euery thing answered well; The Spirit came downe vpon thē in a migh∣ty winde; and behold, it hath rat∣led their harts together; the house shooke in the descent, and behold here, the foundations of the soule were moued; Fiery tongues appea∣red, & here their brests were infla∣med; Clouen tongues; and here their hearts were cut in sunder. The words were miraculous, be∣cause in a supernaturall, and sud∣den variety of language; the mat∣ter diuine, laying before them both the truth of the Messiah, and their bloody measure offered to that Lord of life, and now Com∣puncti cordibus, they were pricked in their hearts. Wise Salomon sayes,
The words of the wise are like goads, and nayles; here they were so; Goades, for they were, compuncti, pricked; yea, but the goad could not goe so deepe, that passeth but the skin; they were nayles, driuen into the very heart of the auditors, vp to the head; the great Master of the Assembly, the diuine Apo∣stle had set them home, they were pricked in their hearts. Neuer were words better bestowed. It is an happy blood-letting that saues the life, this did so here: wee looke to the signe commonly in phle∣botomy, it is a signe of our idle and ignorant superstition, Saint Peter here saw the signe to be in the heart, and he strikes happily, Compuncti cordibus, they were pricked in their hearts, and said,
Men and brethren, what shall we doe? Oh, what sweet Musick was this to the Apostles eare? I dare say, none but heauen could afford better; what a pleasing spectacle was this anguish of their woun∣ded soules? To see men come in their zealous deuotions, and lay downe their moneyes (the price of their alienated possessions) at those Apostolike feet, was no∣thing to this; that they came in a bleeding contrition, & prostrated their penitent and humbled soules at the beautifull feet of the messengers of peace; with Men and brethren what shall we doe? Oh when, when shall our eyes be blessed with so happy a pro∣spect? How long shall wee thunder out Gods fearfull iudgements
against wilfull sinners; how long shall wee threaten the flames of hell to those impious wretches, who crucifie againe to thēselues, the Lord of life, ere we can wring a sigh, or a teare from the rocks of their hearts or eyes? Woe is me that wee may say too truely, as this Peter did of his o∣ther fishing; Master, we haue tra∣uailed all the night and caught no∣thing. Surely, it may well goe for night with vs, whiles wee la∣bour and preuaile not. Nothing? not a soule caught? Lord what is becomne of the successe of thy Gospel? Who hath beleeued our report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord reuealed? Oh God, thou art euer thy selfe, thy truth is eternall, hell is where it was; if we be lesse
worthy then thy first messengers; yet what excuse is this to the besotted world, that through ob∣durednesse and infidelity it will needs perish? no man will so much as say with the Iewes, What haue I done, or with Saint Peters auditors, what shall I doe? Oh foolish sinners, shall yee liue here alwayes; care ye not for your soules; is there not an hell that gapes for your stubborne impe∣nitence? Goe on, if there bee no remedy, goe on, and dye for euer; we are guiltlesse, God is righte∣ous, your damnation is iust; But, if your life bee fickle, death vna∣auoydable, if an euerlasting ven∣grance be the necessary reward of your momentany wickednes, Oh turne, turne frō your euill waies;
and in an holy distraction of your remorsed soules say, with these Iewes, Men and brethren what shall we doe? This from the ge∣nerall view of the occasion; wee descend to a little more particu∣laritie. Luke, the beloued Physitian, describes Saint Peters proceeding here, much after his owne trade; as of a true spirituall physitian; who finding his Countrymen the Iewes in a desperate, and deadly condition, gasping for life, struggling with death, enters into a speedy and zealous course of their cure; And first hee begins with the Chyrurgicall part; and finding them rancke of blood, and that foule, and putrified, hee lets it out (compuncti cordibus)
where wee might show you the incision, the veine, the lancet, the orifice, the anguish of the stroke: The incision, compuncti, they were pricked; The veine in their hearts; Smile not now, ye Physitians, if any heare me this day, as if I had passed a solaecisme, in telling you these men were pricked in the veine of the heart, talke you of your Cephalica, and the rest, and tel vs of another cistern from whēce these tubuli sanguinis are deriued; I tell you againe (with an addi∣tion of more incongruities still) that God and his diuine Physiti∣ans doe still let blood in the me∣dian veine of the hart; The lancet is the keene and cutting reproofe of their late barbarous cruci∣fixion of their holy and most innocent
and benigne Sauiour; The orifice, is the eare, (when they heard this:) what euer the lo∣call distance bee of these parts; spiritually, the eare is the very sur∣face of the heart; and whosoeuer would giue a medicinall stroke to the heart must passe it through the eare, the sense of discipline and correction: The anguish be∣wrayes it selfe in their passionate exclamation; Men and brethren what shall we doe? There is none of these, which my speech might not well take vp, if not as an house to dwell in, yet as an Inne to rest and lodge in; but I will not so much as bayt here; onely wee make this a tho∣row fare tothose other sacred pre∣scriptions of sauing remedies:
which are three in number. The first is, euacuation of sinnes by a speedy repentance ; The se∣cond, the soueraigne bath or lauer of regeneration, Baptisme. The third, dietticall and prophylacti∣call receipts of wholesome cauti∣on: which I meane (with a determinate praeterition of the rest) to spend my houre vpon, Saue your selues from this vntoward generation. But, ere I pitch vpon this most vsefull and seasonable particularity, let mee offer to your thoughts the speedy application of these gracious remedies; The blessed Apostle doth not let his patients languish vnder his hand in the heats and colds of hopes and feares; but so soon as euer the word is out of their mouthes,
Men and brethren, what shall we doe? hee presently administreth these soueraigne receipts, Repent, be bap∣tized, saue your selues. In acute dis∣eases wise physitians will leese no time; onely delay makes some di∣stempers deadly. It is not for vs to let good motiōs freeze vnder our fingers; How many gleeds haue dyed in their ashes, which if they had beene speedily blowne, had risen into comfortable flames? The care of our zeale for God must be sure to take all opportu∣nities of good; This is the Apo∣stles () seruing the time; that is, obseruing it; not for con∣formity to it when it is naught, (fye on that basenesse, no let the declining time come to vs, vpon true and constant grounds, let not
vs stoope to it, in the termes of the seruile yeeldance of Optatus his Donatists, Omnia pro tempore, nibil pro veritate) not, I say, for confor∣mity to it, but for aduantage of it; The embleme teaches vs to take occasion by the forelocke, else we catch too late. The Isra∣elites must goe forth and gather their Manna, so soone as it is faln; if they stay but till the Sunne haue raught his noone-point, in vaine shall they seeke for that food of Angels. Saint Peter had learnt this of his Master; when the shoale was ready, Christ sayes, Laxate retia, Luk. 5. 14. what should the net doe now in the ship? When the fish was caught, Christ sayes, Draw vp againe, what should the net doe now in the Sea? What
should I aduise you Reuerend Fa∣thers and brethren (the Princes of our Israel, as the Doctors are called, Iudges 5. 9.) to speake a word in season; what should I presume to put into your hands, these apples of gold, with pictures of siluer? What should I perswade you (to these ) to wing your words with speed, when the necessity of endangered soules calls for them? Oh let vs rowe hard whiles the tyde of grace serues; when we see a large doore, and effectuall opened vnto vs, let vs throng in, with a peace∣able and zealous importunity to be sure; Oh let vs preach the word  In season, out of season; and carefully watch for the best aduantages of preuailing, and
when the yron of mens hearts is softned by the fire of Gods Spirit, and made flexible by a meet hu∣miliation, delay not to strike, and make a gracious impression, as Saint Peter did here Repent, bee baptized; Saue your selues from this vntoward generation. Now to the maine, and all-suf∣ficient Recipe for these feeling di∣stempers; saue your selues. This is the very extracted quintessence of Saint Peters long Sermon; in wch alone is included and vnited the soueraigne vertue of Repen∣tance, of Baptisme, of whatsoeuer helpe to a conuerting soule; so as I shall not need to speake expli∣citely of them, whiles I enlarge my selfe to the treating of this vniuersall remedy, Saue your selues
from this vntoward generation. Would you thinke that Saint Luke hath giuen mee the diuision of this, whether Text, or, sermon of Saint Peter? ye shall not find the like otherwhere; here it is clearly so: . He testifies, he exhorts; he testifies what he thinkes of the times; he exhorts or beseeches, (as the Sy∣riacke turnes it) to auoyd their danger; both of them, as St. Austen well, referre to this one diuine sentence: The parts whereof then, are in Saint Lukes diuision; Peters reprehensory attestation, and his obtestation; His repre∣hensory attestation to the com∣mon wickednesse, ; His obtestation of their freedome and indemnity, ; Saue
your selues. To beginne with the former; what is a generation? what is an vntoward generation? Either word hath some little mist about it; The very word, generation, hath begot multiplicity of senses: without all perplexednesse of search, wee will single out the properly intended for this place; As times, so, wee in them, are in continuall passage; euery thing is in motion; the Heauens do not more moue aboue our heads, in a circular reuolution, then we here on earth doe by a perpetuall alte∣ration; now all that are contained in one list of time, whether fixed, or vncertaine, are a generation of men; Fixed; so Suidas vnder-rec∣kons it by seuen yeares; but the
ordinary rate is an hundred; It is a cleare text, Gen. 15. 16. But in the fourth generation, they shall come hither againe; when is that? (to the shame of Galatinus, who cloudes it with the fancy of the foure kinds, or manners of mans existence:) Moses himselfe inter∣prets it, of foure hundred yeares, vers. 13. Vncertaine; so Salomon; One generation passeth, another com∣meth; The very terme implyes transitorinesse: It is with men, as with Raspices; one stalk is grow∣ing, another growne vp, a third withered, & all vpō one root; Or, as with floures, & some kinds of flyes, they grow vp, and seed, and dye; Yee see your condition, oh ye great men of the earth, It is no staying here; Orimur, morimur; after
the acting of a short part vpon this stage, ye must withdraw for euer; make no other account, but, with Abraham, to serue your ge∣neration, and away; ye can neuer more fitly heare of your mortali∣ty then now, that yee are vnder that roofe which couers the mo∣numents of your dead, and for∣gotten Progenitors. What is an vntoward generation?  It is promiscuously turned froward, peruerse, crooked; The oppositiō to  is,  All is as one, what euer swarues from the right is crooked; The Law is a right line, and what crooked∣nesse is in nature, frowardnesse, and vntowardnesse is in morali∣tie. Shortly, there is a double crookednesse and vntowardnes;
One negatiue, the other, positiue; The first, is a failing of that right we should either haue, or be; The second, a contrary habit of vici∣ous qualities; and both these, are, either in credendis, or agendis; In matter of faith, or matter of fact. The first, when wee doe not be∣leeue, or doe what we ought; the second, when we mis-beleeue, or mis-liue. The first is an vntowardnesse of omission; the second of com∣mission. The omissie vnto∣wardnesse shall lead the way; and that, first, in matter of beleefe. This is it whereof our Sauiour spake to the two Disciples in their warme walke to Emaus, O fooles, and slow of heart to beleeue; where∣of the proto-martyr Stephen to his
auditors, (;) The stiffe necke, the vncircumcised eare, the fat heart, the blinded eye, the ob∣durate soule (quae nec mouetur pre∣cibus, nec cedit minis, as Bernard) are wont to be the expressions of this vntowardnesse. If these Iewes, then, after so cleare predictions of the Pro∣phets, after so miraculous demon∣strations of the diuine power of Christ; after so many graues ran∣sackt, dead raysed, deuils eiected, limmes and eyes new-created; after such testimonies of the starre, Sages, Angels, God himselfe; after such triumphes ouer death and hell, doe yet detrect to beleeue in him, and to receiue him for their Messias, most iustly are they, in this first kinde,  a froward
generation; And so is any Nation vnder heauen, that fol∣lowes them in the steps of their peeuish incredulity, more or lesse; shutting their eyes vpon the glo∣rious light of sauing Truth; like that sullen Tree, in the Indies, which, they say, closes it selfe a∣gainst the beames of the rising Sunne, and opens onely to the dampish shades of the night; where wee must take this rule with vs; a rule of most iust pro∣portion; that the meanes of light to any Nation aggrauate the hay∣nousnesse, and damnablenesse of their vnbeleefe: The time of that ignorance God regarded not, but now: saith Saint Paul to the Athenians, Acts 17. If I had not comne, and spoken to them,
they should haue had no sinne; saith our Sauiour, Ioh. 15. 22. Those that walke in Cimmerian, in Egyptian darkenesse, it is nei∣ther shame, nor wonder, if they either erre, or stumble; but, for a man to stumble the Sunne in the face, or to grope by the walles at noone in the midst of Goshen, is so much more hatefull, as the oc∣cecation is more willing. The later, which is the nega∣tiue vntowardnesse in action, is, when any Nation failes palpably in those holy duties of Piety, Iu∣stice, Charity, which the royall Law of their God requireth. Of this kinde are those vsuall com∣plaints; The feare of God is not before their eies. God looked to see if there were any that looked
after God, and behold there was none; The righteous is perished from the children of men; Be∣hold the teares of the oppressed, and none comforted them. The Prophets are full of these queru∣lous notes; there is not a page of them free; yea hardly shall yee meet with one line of theirs, which doth not brand their Isra∣el with this defect of holinesse. From the negatiue, cast your eyes vpon the positiue crooked∣nesse, or vntowardnesse; That is, in matter of faith, the mainte∣nance of impiety, mis-beleefe, he∣resie, superstition, atheisme, and what euer other intellectuall wickednesse. In matter of fact, Idolatries, profane cariage, viola∣tion of Gods dayes and ordinances;
disobediences, murders, adul∣teries, thefts, drunkennesse, lyes, detractions, or any other actuall rebellion against God. Behold, I haue drawne forth before you an hellish rabble of sinnes, enow to marre a world; what euer Nation now or succession of men abounds either in these sin∣full omissions, or these haynous commissions; whether in matter of iudgement, or manners, is  an vntoward generati∣on; That which makes a man crooked, or vntoward, makes a generation so; for what is a gene∣ration, but a resultance of men? their number doth not vary their condition. But let not our zeale (as it oft doth) make vs vnchari∣table; when a whole generation
is taxed for vntowardnesse, think not that none are free, No, not one, saith the Psalmist; by way of seruent aggrauation; All seeke their owne, saith the Apostle; all, in comparison: but, neuer times were so ouer growne with ini∣quity, as that God hath not left himselfe some gracious remain∣ders; when the theeuish Chalde∣ans and Sabeans haue done their worst, there shall be a messenger, to say I am escaped; Neuer was haruest or vintage so curiously inned, that some gleanings were not left in the field; some clusters among the leaues: But these few, if they may giue a blessing to the times, yet they cannot giue a style; the denomination still followes the greater (though the worse)
part; let these bee neuer so good; the generation, is, and is noted for euill. Let me therefore here com∣mend to your better thoughts these three emergent considerati∣ons: 1. The irreparable wrong, and reproach that lewd men bring vpon the very ages and na∣tions where they liue. 2. The dif∣ference of times, and ages, in re∣spect of the degrees of euill. 3. The warrant of the free cen∣sure of ill-deseruing times, or Na∣tions. It were happy if the iniury of a wicked man could bee confiued to his owne bosome, that he on∣ly should fare the worse for his sins;  &c. as the Greeke rule runnes; If it were but selfe-do, selfe-haue, as the old word is;
But as his lewdness is (like some odious sent) diffused through the whole roome where he is; so it reacheth to earth and heauen; yea to the very times and generati∣ons, vpon which he is vnhappily falne. Doubtlesse there were many worthy Saints in these ve∣ry times of Saint Peter; there was the blessed mother of Christ, the paragon of sanctity; there was a beauye of those deuout, and holy dames that attended the do∣ctrine, bewayled the death, and would haue embalmed the corps of our blessed Sauiour; there were the twelue Apostles; the seventie Disciples; the hundred and twen∣ty names that were met in one roome at Ierusalem, Acts 1. 25. The iue hundred brethren that
saw Christ after his glorious and victorious resurrection; besides those many thousands, that be∣leeued, through their word, in all the parts of Iudea, and Galslee, yet, for all that, the Apostle brands this with , an vntoward ge∣neration. It is not in the vertue of a few to drowne the wickednesse of the more; If we come into a field that hath some good plenty of corne, and some store of weeds, though it be red with poppy, or yellow with calocke, or blew with wild bottles or scabious, we still call it a corne field; but, if we come into a barne-floore, and see some few graines scattered a∣mongst an heape of chaffe, we do not call it a corne-heape, the quantity
of the offall deuoures the mention of those insensible graines: Thus it is with times, and nations; A little good is not seene amongst much ill; A righte∣ous Lot cannot make his City to be no Sodom; wickednesse as it helps to corrupt, so to shame a ve∣ry age. The Orator Tertullus, when hee would plead against Paul, sayes, We haue ound this man () a pestilence Act. 24. 5. Foolish Tertullus, hat mis∣tooke the Antidote for the poy∣son, the remedy for the disease▪ but had S. Paul beene such s thy mes-prison supposed  he had beene such as thy vniust  now makes thy sele, () the plague of thy people▪ A
he infects the world with sinne, the very age with infamy; Malus vir malum publicum, is not a more old, then true word; Are there then in any nation vnder heauen lewd miscreants, whose hearts are Atheists, whose tongues are blasphemers, whose bodies are  stewes; whose lips are nothing but a factory of close villany; let them please themselues, and let others (if ye will) applaud them for their beneficiall contributions to the publike affaires, in the style of bonu ciui a good patriot; as men whose parts may be vsefull to the wle-publike; but, I say, such men are no better then the bane of their Country, the stayne of their age; Turpis est pars quae suo toti on neit as Grson well;
It is an ill member, for which all the body fares the worse: Heare this then, ye glorious sinners, that bragge of your good affections, and faithful services to your deare Country; your hearts, your heads, your purses, your hands (yee say) are prest for the publike good; yea, but are your hearts godlesse? are your liues filthy? let me tell you, your sinnes doe more dis∣seruice to your nation, then your selues are worth: All your valor, wisedome, subsidiary helps can∣not counterpoise one dramme of your wickednesse; Talke what yee will; sinne is a shame to any people, saith wise Salomon; yee bring both a curse, and a disho∣nor vpon your Nation; It may thank you for the hateful style of
() a froward generation: This, for our first obseruation. Neuer generation was so straight, as not to be distorted with so me powerfull sinnes, but there are differences; and degrees in this di∣stortion; euen in the very first world were Giants, as Moses tells vs Gen. 6. 4. which, as our My∣thologists adde, did () bid battle to heauen. In the next, there were mighty hunters; proud Babel-builders; af∣ter them followed beastly Sodo∣mites; It were easie to draw downe the pedegree of euills through all times, till wee come to these last, which the holy Ghost markes out for perillous; yet some generation is more emi∣nently sinfull then other; as the
Sea is in perpetuall agitation, yet the Spring tydes rise higher then their fellowes; hence Saint Peter notes this his generation with an emphasis of mischiefe () here is a transcendency of euill; what age may compare with that, which hath embrued their cruell hands in the blood of the Sonne of God? That roaring Lyon is neuer still, but there are times, wherein he rageth more, as he did and doth in the first, in the last dayes of the Gospel. The first, that he might blocke vp the way of sauing truth; The last, for that hee knowes his time is short. There are times that are poyso∣ned with more contagious here∣sies, with more remarkeable villa∣nies, It is not my meaning to spēd
time in abridging the sacred Chronologies of the Church, and to deduce along the cursed succes∣sions of damnable errours from their hellish originall; onely let me touch at the notable difference betwixt the first, and the last world; In the first (as Epiphanius observes) , there was neither di∣uersity of opinion, nor mention of heresie, nor act of idolatry, : onely piety, and impiety diuided the world; wher∣as now, in the last (which is the wrangling and techy dotage of the decrepit world) here is no∣thing but vnquiet clashings of o∣pinion, nothing but foule heresie, either maintained by the guilty, or imputed to the innocent, nothing
but grosse idolatry in paga∣nisme, in mis-beleeuing Christi∣anity; and (woe is me that I must say it) a coloured impiety shares too much of the rest; My speech is glided, ere I was aware, into the third head of our discourse; and is suddenly falne vpon the practise of that, which S. Peters ex∣ample here warrants, the censure of ill deseruing times: which I must craue leaue of your hono∣rable & Christian patience, with an holy and iust freedome, to prosecute. It is the peeuish humour of a factious eloquence to aggrauate the euills of the times; which, were they better then they are, would be therefore cryed down in the ordinary language of malecontented
spirits, because present; But, it is the warrantable, and ne∣cessary duty of S. Peter, and all his true Euangelicall successours, when they meet with a froward generation, to call it so. How commonly doe we cry out of those querulous Michaiahs, that are still prophesying euill to vs, and not good? No theme but sinnes, no sawce but vineger: Might not one of these galled Iewes of S. Peters auditory haue started vp; and haue thus chal∣lenged him for this tartnesse; what meanes this hard censure? why doe you slander the time? Salomon was a wise man, and he sayes, Say not thou, what is the cause that the former dayes were better then these? for thou dost
not enquire wisely concerning this: this is but a needlesse rigor; this is but an enuious calumny: The generation were not vnto∣ward; if your tongue were not vncharitable. The Apostle feares none of these currish oblatrati∣ons; but contemning all impo∣tent mis-acceptions, calls them what he findes them, A froward generation: And well might hee doe so; his great Master did it be∣fore him, an euill and adulterous generation; and the harbinger of that great Master fore-ranne him in that censure, O generation of Vi∣pers, Mat. 3. 7. and the Prophets led the same way to him in eue∣rie page. And why doenot we follow Peter in the same steppes wherein Peter followed Christ,
and Christ his fore-runner, and his fore-runner the Prophets? Who should tell the times of their sinnes, if wee be silent? Pardon me, I beseech you, most noble, reuerend, and beloued hearers; necessity is layd vpon me; in this day of our publique mourning, I may not be as a man in whose mouth is no reproofes. Oh let vs bee thankfull for our blessings, wherein, through the mercy of God, we outstrip all the nations vnder heauen; but withall, let vs bewaile our sinnes, which are so much more grieuous, because ours. Would to God it were no lesse vniust, then vnpleasing to complaine of this as an vntoward generation; There be oure things that are wont both to make vp
and euince the prauity of any ge∣neration; (woe is mee that they are too apparently met in this) multitude of sinnes, magnitude of sinnes, boldnesse of sinne, im∣punity of sinning; Take a short view of them all: you shall see that the multitude is such, as that it hath couered the earth; the mag∣nitude such, as hath reacht to hea∣uen; the boldnesse such as out-fa∣ceth the Gospel, the impunity such as frustrates the wholsome lawes vnder which we liue. For the multitude, where is the man that makes true conscience of any the Lawes of his God? and if euery man violate all the lawes of God, what do all put together? our forefathers sinnes were but as drops, ours are as torrents. Instance
in some few; Cannot we our selues remember, since a de∣baucht Drunkard was an Owle among birds, a beast of men, a monster of beasts; abhorred of men, shouted at by children? Is this sight now any newes to vs? Is not euery Tauern a stye of such swine? Is not euery street inden∣ted with their shamefull stagge∣rings? Is there not now as much spent in wanton smoake, as our honest forefathers spent in sub∣stantiall hospitality? Cannot we remember, since oathes were so geason, and vn∣couth, that their sound startled the hearer, as amazed at the strange language of treason against the God of heauen▪ now they fill eue∣ry mouth, and beat euery eae in a
neglected familiarity? What shold I tell you of the ouergrowne fre∣quence of oppressions, extortions, iniurious and fraudulent transac∣tions, malitious suites; the neigh∣bour walls of this famous adioy∣ning Pallace can too amply wit∣nesse this truth, whose roofe if (as they say) it will admit of no Spiders, I am sure, the floore of it yeelds venome enough▪ to poy∣son a Kingdome: What should I tell you of the sensible declinati∣on to our once loathed supersti∣tions; of the common trade of contemptuous dis-obediences to lawfull authority, the scornefull vnderualuing of Gods messen∣gers; the ordinary neglect of his sacred ordinances; what speake I of these and thousands more?
There are Arithmeticians that haue taken vpon them to count how many cornes of sand would make vp the bulke of heauen and earth; but no Art can reckon vp the multitude of our prouoking sinnes. Neither doe they more exceed in number, then magnitude; Can there be a greater sinne then Ido∣latry? Is not this (besides all the rest) the sinne of the present Ro∣mish generation? One of their owne confesses (as he well may) that were not the bread transub∣stantiate, their Idolatry were more grosse, then the heathenish; loe, nothing excuses them but an im∣possible figment▪ Know, O yee poore, ignorant seduced soules, that the bread can bee no more
turned into God; then God can be turned into bread, into nothing; the very omnipotent power of God barres these impious contra∣dictions. My heart trembles ther∣fore and bleeds to thinke of your highest, your holiest devotions. Can there be a greater sinne then robbing of God? This is done by our sacrilegious Patrons: Can there bee a greater sinne then tea∣ring God out of heauen with our bloody and blasphemous oathes; then the affamishing of soules by a wilfull, or lazie silence; then ren∣ding in peeces the bowels of our deare Mother the Church, by our headstrong, and friuolous dissen∣tions; then furious murders; then affronts of authority? These, these are those huge mountaines
which our Gyantlike presump∣tion roles vpon each other, to war against heauen. Neither are the sinnes of men more great, then audacious; yea it is their impudency that makes them hainous; bashfull offences rise not to extremity of euill; The sinnes of excesse as they are opera tenebrarum, so they had wont to bee night-workes, They that are drunken are drunke in the night, saith the Apostle; now, they dare, with Absaloms beastlinesse, call the Sun to record: Saint Bernard tells vs of a Daemon meridianus, a noone∣Deuill, out of the vulgar mis-trans∣lation of the 90. Psalme; Surely, that ill spirit walkes about busily, and haunts the licentious conuer∣sation of inordinate men.
Vniust exactions of griping Officers had wont to ceepe in vnder the modest cloke of volun∣tary curtesie, or faire considerati∣ons of a befriended expedition, now they come like Elies sonnes, Nay but, Thou shalt giue it me now, and, if not, I will take it by force, 1 Sam. 2. 16. The legall thefts of professed vsurers, and the crafty compacts of slie oppressors, dare throw downe the gantlet to iustice; and insolent disobediences doe so to authority; And when wee de∣nounce the fearfull iudgements of God against all these abhomina∣ble wickednesses; the obdured sinner dares ieere vs in the face, and▪ in a worse sense aske the dis∣ciples question, Domine quando fient
haec; Master when shall these things be? yea their selfe-flattering incre∣dulity dare say to their soule, as Pe∣ter did to his Master, Fauor thy selfe, for these things shal not happen to thee. Neither, lastly, would sinne dare to be so impudent, if it were not for impunity; it cannot bee but cowardly, where it sees cause of feare; Euery hand is not to be layd vpon euill; If an error should arise in the Church; it is not for euery vnlearned tradesman to cast away his yard-wand, and take vp his pen; Wherefore serue Vniuer∣sities, if euery blew apron may at his pleasure turne Licenciate of Diuinity, and talke of Theologi∣call questions which hee vnder∣stands not, as if they were to bee measured by the elle. O times! Lord whither will this presumption
grow? Deus, omen, &c. If folly, if villanie bee committed in our Israel, it is not for euery man to be an Officer; Who made thee a Iudge? was a good question, though ill asked. But I would to God wee had more cause to com∣plaine of the presumption of them who meddle with what they should not, then the neglect of thē who meddle not with what they should; Woe is me the flood∣gates of euill are (as it were) lift open, and the full streame gusheth vpon vs; Not that I would cast any aspersion vpon sacred soue∣raignty; No, blessed bee God for his deare anointed; of whom we may truly, and ioyfully say, that in imitation of him whom he repre∣sents, hee loues iustice, and hates
iniquity; It is the partiality or slacknesse of the subordinate in∣feriour executions that is guilty of this preualence of sinne; what can the head do where the hands are wanting? to what vse is the water deriued from the cesterne, into the pipes, if the cocke be not turned? What auailes it that chil∣dren are brought to the birth, if there want a midwifry to deliuer them? Can there possibly be bet∣ter Lawes, then have in our times beene enacted, against drunken∣nesse? where, or when are they executed? Can there bee a better Law made for the restraint of too too common oathes? who vrges, who payes that iust mulct? Can there be better lawes against wil∣full Recusancy, against Symony,
against Sacriledge? how are they eluded by fraudulent euasions? Against neglect of Diuine Ser∣uice; yet how are they sleighted? against the lawlesse wandring of lazie vagabonds; yet, how full are our streets, how empty our Correction-houses? Lastly, (for it were easie to be endlesse) can there bee better lawes then are made or the punishment of for∣nications, adulteries, and all other fleshly inordinatenesses? how doth bribery & corruption smo∣ther these offences, as if the sinnes of men serued onely to enrich couetous Officers? Now, put all these together, the multitude, the magnitude, the boldnesse, the im∣punity of sinne, and tell me whe∣ther all these doe not make this of
ours, generationem prauam, a fro∣ward generation; So as wee may too wel take vp Esayes complaint, Ah sinfull nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of euill doers, children that are corrupters. Esa. 1. 4. Ho∣norable & beloued, how should we be humbled vnder the hand of our God, in the sense of our many, great, bold and lawlesse sinnes? What sackcloth, what ashes can be enough for vs? Oh that our faces could bee couered with confusion; that wee could rend our hearts, and not our gar∣ments; Be afflicted, and mourne, and weepe, and thus Saue your selues from this froward generation. And so from St. Peters attesta∣tion to their wickednesse, wee descend to his obtestation of their
redresse, Saue your selues. We must be so much shorter in the reme∣die, as we haue beene longer in the disease. The remedy is but of a short sound, but of a long ex∣tent, . I vrge not the passiue∣nesse of this aduise; that it is not, Saue your selues, but, Be ye saued: God is iealous of ascribing to vs any power vnto good; we haue ability, we haue will enough to vndoe our selues; scope enough to hell-ward; neither motion nor will to good; that must bee put into vs by him that giues both posse, & velle, & posse velle; po∣wer to will, and will to do. This (Sauing) comprises in it three great duties, Repentance for our sinne; Auoidance of sinners; Re∣luctation to sin and sinners.
Repentance. Perhaps, as St. Chrysostome, and Cyril think, some of these were the personall execu∣tioners of Christ; If so, they were the worst of this generation; and yet they may, they must saue them∣selues from this generation, by their vnfained repentance: How∣soeuer, they made vp no small peece of the euill times, and had need to bee saued from them∣selues, by their hearty contrition; Surely those sinnes are not ours, whereof we haue truly repented; The skin that is once washed is as cleane from soile, as if it had neuer beene foule; Those legall washings, and rinsings shewed them what they must do to their soules, to their liues; This reme∣die, as it is vniuersall, so it is perpetuall;
the warme waters of our teares, are the streames of Iordan to cure our Leprosie, the Siloam to cure our blindnesse, the poole of Bethesda to cure all our lame∣nesse, and defects of obedience; Alas, there is none of vs but haue our share in the common sinnes; The best of vs hath helpt to make vp the frowardnesse of our gene∣ration; Oh that we could vn-sin our selues by our seasonable re∣pentance; Cleanse your hands ye sin∣ners, and purge your hearts yee dou∣ble minded. Auoydance is the next; Auoi∣dance of all vnlawfull participa∣tion; There is a participation na∣turall, as to liue in the same ayre, to dwell in the same earth, to eat of the same meat; this we cannot
auoid, vnlesse wee would goe out of the world, as St. Paul tells his Corinthes. There is a ciuill participation, in matter of com∣merce, and humane necessary conuersation; This we need not auoid with lewes, Turkes, Infi∣dels, Heretickes. There is a spi∣rituall participation in morall things, whether good, or euill: In these lyes this ; and yet, not vniuersally neither; wee are not tied to auoid the seruices of God, and holy duties for the commixture of leud men, as the foolish Separatists haue fancied; it is participation in euill that wee are here charged to auoid; al∣though also intirenesse, euen in ciuill conuersation, is not allow∣ed vs with notoriously wicked
and infectious persons; The Is∣raelites must hye them from the Tents of Corah; and, Come out of her my people. Chiefly, they are the sins from which wee must saue our selues, not the men; if, not rather, from the men for the sinnes; Haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of dark∣nesse, saith St. Paul, Ephes. 5. 12. commenting vpon this  of St. Peter. There is nothing more ordi∣narie with our Casuists, then the nine wayes of participation, which Aquinas, and the Schooles following him haue shut vp in two homely verses, Iussio, consili∣um, &c. The summe is, that we doe not saue our selues from e∣uill, if either we command it, or
counsell it, or consent to it, or sooth it, or further it, or share in it, or disswade it not, or resist it not, or reueale it not; Here would be worke enough (you see) to hold our preaching vnto St. Pauls houre, midnight; but I spare you, and would be loath to haue any Eutychus: Shortly, if we would saue our selues from the sin of the time, wee may not command it, as Iezebel did to the Elders of Ies∣reel; we may not aduise it, as Iona∣dab did to Amnon; wee may not consent to it, as Bathsheba did to Dauid; wee may not sooth it, as Zidkijah did to Ahab; wee may not further it, as Ioab did to Dauid; we may not share in it, as Achi∣tophel did to Absalom; we may not forbeare to disswade it, as Hira
the Adullamite to Iudah; to resist it, as partiall Magistrates; to reueale it, as trecherous confessaries. But, of all these, (that we may single out our last and vtmost re∣medy) here must bee a zealous re∣luctation to euill; All those other negatiue cariages of not com∣manding, not counselling, not consenting, not soothing, not a∣betting, not sharing, are nothing without a reall oppugnation of sinne. Would we then thorough∣ly quit our selues of our froward generation? wee must set our fa∣ces against it to discountenance it; wee must set our tongues against it, to controule it; wee must set our hands against it, to oppose it; It goes arr that of the Apostle, Yee haue not yet resisted vnto blood
striuing against sinne, Heb. 12. 4. Loe here is a truely heroicall exer∣cise for you great Ones; to striue against sinne, not ad sudorem only, as Physicians prescribe, but ad san∣guinem; Ye cannot better bestow your selues then (in a loyall assi∣stance of sacred authority) vpon the debellation of the outragious wickednesse of the times. These are the Dragons, and Gyants, and Monsters, the vanquishing wher∣of hath moralized the Histories of your famous Progenitors. Oh do yee consecrate your hands, and your hearts to God in beating down the headstrong powers of euill; and as by repentance, and auoydance, so, by reluctation, Sue your selues from this vntoward generation.
Now, what need I waste the time in dehorting your Noble and Christian ingenuity from partici∣pation of the Epidemicall sinnes of a froward generation? It is e∣nough motiue to you, that sinne is a base, sordid, dishonourable thing; but, withall, let me adde only one dissuasiue from the dan∣ger, implyed in the very word Saue; for how are wee saued but from a danger? The danger both of corruption, and confusion. Corruption; ye see before your eies that one yawning mouth makes many; This pitch will de∣file vs; One rotten kernell of the Pomegranate infects the fellowes; Saint Paul made that verse of the heathen Poet, Canonicall, Euill conuersation corrupts good manners;
What wofull experience haue we, euerie day, of those, who by this meanes from a vigorous heat of zeale, haue declined to a temper of lukewarme indifferen∣cie and then, rom a carelesse me∣diocrity, to all extremity of debau∣chednesse; and of hopfull be∣ginners, haue ended in incarnae deuills? Oh the dangerous, and insensible insinuations of sinne; If that crafty tempter can hereby worke vs but to one dram of lesse detestation to a familiarly inured euill, hee promiseth himselfe the victorie; It is well noted by Saint Ambrose, of that chast Patriarch Io∣seph, that, so soone as euer his wan∣ton Mistresse had laid her impure hand vpon his cloake, he leaues it behinde him, that he might
bee sure to auoyd the danger of her contagious touch; If the Spouse of Christ bee a Lilly a∣mong thornes; (by the mighty protection of her omnipotent husband) yet take thou heed, how thou walkest amōgst those thornes, for that Lilly: Shortly▪ wouldest thou not bee tainted with wickednesse, abhorre the pestilent societie of leud men; and by a seasonable subduction, thus, Saue thy selfe from a froward generation. The last and vtmost of all dan∣gers is confusion; That charge of God by Moses is but iust, Numb. 16. 18. Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye perish in all their sinnes; Lo, the very station,
the very touch is mortall. In∣deed, what reason is there to hope or to plead for an immunity; If wee share in the worke, why should wee not take part of the wages? The wages of sinne is death; If the storke be taken damage fai∣sant with the Cranes, shee is in∣wrapped in the same net, and can not complaine to bee surprized. Qui cum lupis est, cum lupis vlulet, as he said; Hee that is with wolues, let him howle with wolues: If we bee fratres in malo, brethen in euill, we must looke to bee inuol∣ued in the same curse; bee not de∣ceiued; honorable and beloued, here is no exemption of greatness; nay, contrarily, eminence of place aggrauates both the sinne, and the iudgement; when Ezra heard that
the hand of the Princes and Ru∣lers had beene chiefe in that great offence, then he rent his cloathes, and tore his haire, Ezra 9. 3. Certainly this case is dangerous and fearfull, whersoeuer it lights; Hardly are those sinnes redressed that are taken vp by the great; Easily are those sins diffused, that are warranted by great examples: The great lights of heauen, the most conspicuous Planets, if they be eclipsed, all the Almanacks of all Nations write of it; whereas the small Starres of the Galaxy are not heeded; All the Country runs to a Beacon on fire, no body re∣gards to see a shrub flaming in a valley; Know then, that your sins are so much greater, as your selues are; and, all the comfort
that I can giue you with out your true repentance, is, That mighty men shall bee mightily tormen∣ted; Of all other men therefore be ye most carefull to keepe your selues vntainted with the com∣mon sins; and to renew your co∣uenant with God; No man cares for a spot vpon a plaine, russet, riding suit; but we are curious of a rich robe, euery mote there is an eye-sore; Oh, bee yee carefull to preserue your honour from all the foule blemishes of corrupti∣on; as those that know vertue hath a greater share in nobilitie, then blood; Imitate in this, the great frame of the Creation, which still, the more it is remo∣ued from the dregs of this earth, the purer it is; Oh saue yee your
selues from this vntoward gene∣ration, so shall yee helpe to saue your nation from the imminent iudgements of our iust God▪ so shall ye saue your soules in the day of the appearance of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ; to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one infinite God, be all honour, and glory ascribed, now, and for euer. FINIS.
