17664 99847728 12786
THE POVVERFVLL FAVORITE, OR, The life of AELIVS SEIANVS. By P.M. Nec tibi regnandi veniat tam dira Cupido. Virg. 1. Georg. Printed at Paris. 1628.
The life of AELIVS SEIANVS By P.M. SEeing that Princes dispose so∣ueraignely of their hearts;The heart of the Prince is free, and is not guided but by the hand of God. and that they forme in them loue and hatred, to whom and how they please; Wee had need therefore to desire that their affections to parti∣cular men might be iust and well regulated. For if they bee disordered they draw with them publike ruine:Excalcntur & ad staturam su∣am redent. Sen. they render Prin∣ces hatefull, and their Fauourites miserable; when the play is done, and that they are vnshod of their high shooes that eleuated them aboue o∣thers, they are dispoyled of the habits of these personages they represented, they returne to their first forme and they come to know that wee must not measure the Statua by the basis that susteynes it, nor iudge of a man by his dignitie or fortune. The heauens being prouoked against the Ro∣mane Empire, permitted this deuiating in the minde of Tiberius, through the excesse of fauour which hee bare to Aelius Seianus, vniting in his person those charges which should haue beene
parted amongst many, and making him so great that it was difficult for him to vnmake him. In the end the ruine of the estate which was the founda∣tion of his greatnesse, was likewise the cause of his fall. He was the son of Seius Strabo, a Knight of Rome, borne in Vulsinus, a country of Tuscany. In his youth he serued Caius Caesar the nephew of Augustus. Hee shared in the inordinate and a∣bominable vices of Apicius,The expences of Apicius his Kitchin, a∣mounted to more then 2. millions of gold. H.S. Millies in culi∣nam congessit. Sen. Illi tam prauae mentis homini vltima potio sa∣luberrima fuit. Sen. that rich prodigall, that famous glutton, who hauing eaten vp his e∣state, and finding by his accompt that he had no more then 200000. crownes remayning, thought himselfe poore, and that this sufficed not to main∣tayne his luxury: whereupon he conceyued such an extreame apprehension, that death seemed more supportable to him then his pouerty: and tooke downe a glasse of poyson, hee neuer dranke a better draught then this last which stopped the furious course of his dissolutenesse. Seianus ha∣uing attained some name in the profession of Armes, Strabo his father presented him to Tibe∣rius, to permit that he might associate him in the charge of Colonell of the Pretorian Guardes; and from henceforward the Prince began to take plea∣sure in his watchfulnesse and viuacity, and belee∣ued that this Spirit might one day by his disci∣pline become an instrument apt to doe any thing. Hee followed Drusus the Prince whom the Em∣perour had made Generall of the Army to reduce vnto obedience those who were reuolted in Au∣stria and Hungarie.Rector iuueni & caeteris peri∣culorum praemi∣orumque osten∣tator. The first demonstration of Tiberius affection to
him was to elect him for Tutor to this Prince, and to giue to others the example of merit to attaine rewards, and of valor to expose themselues to danger. He knew the inward disposition of Tiberius, and conformed his owne so perfectly thereunto,Tiberium obscu∣rum adversus a∣lios, sibi uni in∣cautum inte∣ctum{que} effecit. Tacitus. that both their hearts see∣med to haue but one motion. This conformitie enter∣tayned the affection, and from thence grew that entire confidence that Tiberius who distrusted all men, di∣strusted not Seianus, nor withheld any thing secret or hidden from him. This fauour attracted all hearts, all eyes followed this new light; the Senate communicated to him their weighty affayres; and from his mouth receiued their most important dispatches:Turba saluta∣trix. euery where one might see ceremonious troopes which searched or attended for him to doe him reuerence. The great ones held them∣selues honoured by his commands; if hee speakes hee obligeth them, if he regard, they are contented: they wayt in the morning at the gates of his house; they are there at his rising and going to bed; others endure the affronts of his doorekeepers whom they bribe to be at the first opening or admission.Duras fores ex∣pers somni colit. Sen. And when they pre∣sent themselues to the Idoll which they adore, happy is hee that can faine the greatest admiration to prayse him, or seruitude to flatter him. To speake after the minde of some great man, to consent to all that is said, to admire all that is done, to approoue all that he will, these are the principall peeces of complement; and ad∣miration is euer one continuall part in the office of flat∣tery.Incipiente po∣tentia bonis con∣silijs innotescen∣dum. Tacit. In the growing of his grace he was desirous to haue it conceyued that he was founded in a firme resolution
to aduance the seruice of the Prince, and the good of the weale publique, and onely to admit iustice in his a∣ctions,Palam composi∣tus pudor, intus summa adipi∣scendi libido. Tacit. prudence in his counsayle, and modesty in his fortune: he carried in outward appearance moderati∣on, but inwardly ambition: but hee flew out in his wastefull expences and prodigalities, in the magnifi∣cence of his houshold furniture and pictures, in the ex∣cesse of his sumptuous feasts as if they had beene sacri∣fices,Industria & vi∣gilantia haud minus noxiae, quoties parando regno finguntur. Tac. and in the pride of his Palaces gilded as if they had beene Temples: hee was industrious and vigilant to attaine to his ends: he had a ready vnderstanding to discouer and to apprehend all sorts of formes, accom∣modating himselfe to plainnesse or seuerity according to the occasions. Being sole captaine of the Praetorian guards, he cau∣sed them to lodge within a quarter of a mile of the ci∣ty, that when there was occasion he might haue them ready at his disposing, representing to Tiberius that souldiers being dispersed liued without discipline;Lasciuit miles deductus. Tac. and that seeing them euery day assembled together in one place, the number might breed security to themselues, and feare to others, and that keeping them farre from the debauchements of the City, they might the better be kept in order. Vallum statua∣tur procul vrbis illecebris. Tac.This being assented vnto, and a lodging assigned, he began by little and little to gaine credit and respect in the hearts of the souldiers visiting them in their Corps du Guard, calling them by their names, endearing the Captaynes and Tribunes,Neque ambitu Senatorio absti∣nebat, clientes suos honoribus aut prouincijs ornando. Tac. feeding the one with hopes, the other with gifts, and all with good words, whereof he was nothing couetous or sparing. To strengthen his party he dressed his speeches and
intelligences in the Senate, and procured that his friends should be prouided of Commissions, and ho∣noured with charges and gouernments, knowing that it was not sufficient to hold authority with the Soldi∣erie, if he wanted it with the Senate and Iusticiars, who held so great estimation among the people. In all his designes he found in Tiberius so great fa∣cility and affection to his desires, that he needed onely to aske and giue thankes; hee neuer denied him any thing, and oftentimes he preuented his request, and a∣uowed that he deserued much more. Wherefore not onely in priuate, but also in the Senate hee called him companion of his labours,Seianus socius laborum Tibe∣rij. Tac. Effigies prae the∣atra, fora & in principia legio∣num. Tac. and commanded that his pourtrayture should be honoured together with his in the streets, respected in the Theaters, and carried in the standards of his armies. This is for a Prince to anni∣hilate himselfe to please his seruant: for it cannot goe well when the people perceiue that fauour transfer∣reth soueraigne honours of superiours vpon an inferi∣our, and that the Prince suffereth a companion in the kingdome to assist him to gouerne.Firmius Hercu∣laea ceruice pe∣pendit. Claud. Hercules saw well that Atlas eased him, but he made it bee knowne that Olympus stood more secure vpon his shoulders, then vpon any others. A kingdome at one and the same time can neuer be diuided betweene two. He framed all Tiberius his actions to rigour and se∣uerity, to the end that hee might lose the affections of the people, who could not wish him well that did no∣thing but intreat them ill. It was no hard matter to perswade him to cruelty, all his inclinations running that way, and in his childehood Theodorus his Tutor in Rhetoricke called him Clay tempered with bloud:
so that Seianus had no more to doe then to spie and search out occasions to excite his choler, and to exer∣cise his cruelties which would neuer be appeased with∣out sacrifice. The charges and dignities were conferred vpon his recommendation. It was enough to approoue their merit that they were neere him by kindred or alliance, and to sweare by his fauour; and yet notwithstanding Tiberius would it might be knowne, that hee conside∣red more one then another to eschew blame, to take away from vertue to giue to Fortune. Tiberius had named two Proconsuls of Affricke, Lepidus and Blae∣sus; and to free himselfe from the ill will of him which should be excluded, he recommended to the Senate the election of the most capable. The one of them was a man of excellent parts, the other was vnkle of Seianus, and in that regard alone sure to carry it. Lepidus who would not enter into concurrence with the most pow∣erfull and most fauoured, excused himselfe through his indisposition, the yong age of his children & a daugh∣ter ready to marry,Avunculus Se∣iani Blaesus at{que} eo praevalidus. Tacit. the Senate tooke him at his word, for they followed the winde of fauour; Blaesus made semblance to refuse this charge, and all the flatterers cried, that none but he could deserue it. The same fauour which had raysed him, still suppor∣ted him, and honoured his best seruices with greatest recompences. After that he had not defeated but rou∣ted the troopes of Tacfarinus, Tiberius commanded the Legions to salute him Emperour, hee ordayned him the triumph which neuer did belong to any, but to an entire victory, and by all meanes declared, that this was done for the loue of Seianus his nephew. He
that had Seianus his protector,Vt quis{que} Seia∣no intimus ita ad Caesaris ami∣citiam validus: contra quibus▪ infensus esset metu & sordi∣bus conflicta∣bantur. Tacit. needed not with any great labour search for honours: hee that had him his enemie languished vnder disgrace and misery. None had any honour without his fauour, and none could deserue it with innocency and vertue. He caused Iuni∣us Otho to be admitted into the Senate, who neuer had beene of any other profession then a schoolemaster. He serued his turne to ruine Ca. Silanus Proconsull of Asia: he accused him of extortion, and in his gouern∣ment to haue giuen greater authority to money then to iustice. This was something, but they added other accusations, out of which the most innocent could hardly haue woun themselues.Proprius metus exercitam que{que} eloquentiam de∣bilitat. Tacie. They brought to speak against him the most famous orators of Asia, although he was assisted by no man, nor had yet accustomed himselfe to speake in publike, and that feare that trou∣bled the best speakers and the most hardy eloquence, had disordered his discourse. Tiberius pressed him both by voice and by gesture so liuely,Saepe etiam con∣fitendum erat ne frustra quae∣svisset. Tacit. and by his demands so frequent and spritefull that he was as it were astonished, neither durst he con∣tradict for feare of prouoking him; and seeing him∣selfe constrayned to confesse lest hee should make the demands ineffectuall. O what misery was this! The respect of the Prince obligeth the accused to betray his owne innocency. Amongst the number of his accusers, Iunius Otho a creature of Seianus, was the most passionate;Obscura initia impudentibus ausis propollue∣bat. Tacit. for be∣ing newly entred into this charge of Senator, he sought occasions to aduance the obscurity of his beginning by the impudence and shamelesnesse of his counsels, holding the most extreame the most safe: Silanus
chose rather to haue recourse to the goodnesse of Tibe∣rius,Excusatius ac∣cipiuntur quae siunt ab exem∣plo. Tacit. then to trust to his owne defence, he presented him one request, to implore of him; but Tiberius who meant to ruine him, declared that in this accusation, he pursued but the intention of the law. And forasmuch as that which is done by example, carries it's excuse, hee caused to be brought out of the Registers, a iudgement giuen vnder Augustus, against Volesus Messala, who had also beene Proconsull of A∣sia; but if their qualities were alike, their liues and their charges were in euery thing different. The one cruell,O rem regiam. Sen. the other couetous; this was an inhumane man, who passing by a place where hee had caused 300. heads to be cut off in one day, called it a Royall place and of great magnificence. When they came to deliuer their opinions for the sentence,To praise cle∣mency and to conclude with rigor. Lucius Piso hauing cast out some clawing words in praise of the clemency of the Emperour, was of opinion that they should prohibite Silanus from water and from fire; and that they should banish him into the isle of Gyara.Anteire caeteros parat, absurdam in adulationem progressus. Tac. This opinion was pursued by others: Lentulus added, that the goods that came by the mother should bee left to the sonnes. Tiberius ap∣prooued it. But Cornelius Dolobella flattering more yet, and sharpely blaming Silanus his actions, sayd, that thencefoorth they should not giue the gouerne∣ment of Prouinces but to those which should bee of vnreproachable life, and of sound reputation; and with the iudgement of the Emperour.Legibus delicta ptuntur, quan∣to melius provi∣deri ne peccare∣tur. Tacit. For although Law were ordained to no other but to punish offences, yet is it certayne, that it were much better if the com∣mitting of them might be hindred, both for those who
should be honoured with such charges, and for those vpon whom they should be exercised, for these should conserue their innocency,Loquax & in∣geniosa in con∣tumeliam prae∣fectorum pro∣vincia, in quâ qui vitaverit culpam non ef∣fugit infamiam. Sen. and the other their quiet and repose. Tiberius heereupon made a discourse worthy of his prudence and of his knowledge which he had of the people, who are but too prone to denie the actions of Magistrates, as it is now sayd of Aegypt that it a∣bounded in speeches and artifices to calumniate their gouernours; and that though many haue eschewed the punishment, yet haue they not freed themselues from the infamy, he spake in this manner: I am not ignorant of any thing that is now publish∣ed against Silanus,Non ex rumore statuendum. Ta. but I must neuer resolue any thing vpon bare reports. Many haue gouerned Prouinces o∣therwise from that they haue hoped or feared,Quidam ad me∣liora excitantur, magnitudine re∣rum hebescunt alij. Tacit. for the greatnesse and difficulty of affaires which present them∣selues, rayseth the courage of some, and astonieth and a∣baseth it in others. And forasmuch as the knowledge of a Prince cannot extend it selfe to all, and may not be di∣uerted through the ambition of another: Lawes are or∣dayned for things done;Leges in facto constitutae, quia futura in incer∣to sunt. Tacit. for those things that are to doe are vncertaine. Therefore our Fathers haue ordayned, that if crime preceded, punishments should follow. You ought not to change that,Sapienter reper∣ta & semper placita non ver∣ienda. Tacit. which hauing beene once sagely ordayned, hath beene in all times allowed. The Prouin∣ces are charged with affaires enough: they haue autho∣rity enough:Non utendum imperio, ubi legi∣bus agi potest. the rights diminish when the power increa∣seth; and we must not vse commandement in those mat∣ters for which the Law hath prouided. This discourse was approoued,Prudens mode∣randi animus, si propria ira non impellitur. Tac. and the place of the banishment changed to Cythara, because Gyara was too rude and wilde; Tiberius shewed, that he was able
to moderate his spirit when he was not in choler.Prudens mode∣randi animus si propria ira non impellitur. Tac. Insula Gyara immitis & sine cultu hominum. Tac. Qui dabat olim imperium, fasces, lgiones &c. duas res tantum anx∣ius optat Pan∣num & Circen∣ses Iuuen. The Theater of Pompey was dedicated to Ʋenus. Tertul∣lian called it Arcem omnium turpitudinum. Seianus onely disposed of Offices and Commissi∣ons: the people medled no more in the election of Se∣nators; they sold no more their suffrages, nor their canuassings; and for the right which they had to the Commanders ouer the Magistrates and the Legions, they contented themselues with shewes and Circensi∣an playes, and the cloth which was giuen them for their Liueries. There was no man now liuing, that had seene the Common wealth, the markes of the an∣cient liberty were quite defaced. The greatest ornament of Rome was Pompeies The∣atre, of such extent, that it was able to lodge 40000. men. It happened to be on fire accidentally: Seianus quenched it, and hindered it so, that the ill of the acci∣dent could goe no further. Tiberius purposing to ree∣difie it, commended in full Senate the diligence and vi∣gilancy of Seianus. The Fathers to please him, ordai∣ned, that his Statua should be erected neere the The∣ater. Labore & dili∣gentia magna vis intra vnum damnum sisti∣tur. Tac.But as Princes doe nothing without some speciall drift or purpose, Tiberius in fauouring Seianus had one, and Seianus in seruing Tiberius framed to him∣selfe another: There is neyther affection nor faythful∣nesse without gratuity. Tiberius desired that the good will which hee bare to Seianus might oblige him to serue him, without any condition to ascertaine his au∣thority:Non tam bene∣uolentia proue∣xit, quam vt cu∣ius ministerio a fraudibus libe∣ros Germanici superueniret. Sucton. and Seianus in seruing the Emperour aspired to the Empire, and would keepe secret his ambition. This was not affection in Tiberius, but necessity; for he desired to serue himselfe by the plots and deuices of Seianus to ruine Germanicus his house, and to raise his
owne; and Seianus purposed to rise to the Empire by the ruine of them both: his power went not so fast as his will that encountred with great hindrances. For Caesars house was yet entire; the sonnes yong and lu∣stie, the grandchildren great, he could not ruine so ma∣ny at once: for treason will haue some space of time in its wicked proceeding: and hee thought best to begin with Drusus, at the same time that Tiberius had resol∣ued to make away with Germanicus. For as the spirit of a man apprehends more dangers farre off, then pre∣sent, Tiberius saw no other thing that gaue him more cause of iealousie then his brother; and nothing gaue him more cause to feare the ambition of Seianus, then his sonne. The worst counsell which euer hee gaue him was to change that which Augustus had ordayned, and hate that he had loued: for the extreame hatred which he bare to Germanicus his house, cooled that first affecti∣on which he found when he came to the Empire,Romae ruunt in ruitium Con∣sules, Patr, e∣ques. Tac. the people seeing him runne with such fury to the ruine of their liberty, and throwing them headlong like a huge stone into the gulph of seruitude without hope euer to get out. Germanicus was both cherished and loued of the people, because he was the sonne of Drusus, who had formerly endeuoured to restore the ancient gouerne∣ment of the Common wealth, and had communicated the proiect to Tiberius his brother:Credebatur si re∣rum potitus fo∣ret libertatem redditurus. Ta▪ but hee had be∣wrayed it and discouered it to Augustus. It was thought that the sonne would haue pursued the design of the father to haue reuiued the liberty: and that if he had had the soueraigne authority, hee would not haue
vsed them with such rigour as Tiberius did, but sweet∣ly as Augustus,Augustus ciuile rebatur misceri voluptatibus vulgi. Tac. who was a Prince and seemed a Citi∣zen, and disdayned not to beare a part in popular re∣creations. For this cause Germanicus reigned in the hearts, and Tiberius but in the Prouinces; and when it was aduertised that he had pacified Almaigne, that Agrippina his wife also had done all which a Chiefe or Generall of an army could doe, to shew her courage to her enemies, her liberality to the souldiers, her pru∣dence in appeasing seditions, straightwayes hee waxed iealous, and that iealousie degenerated into a mortall hatred.Nil relictum Imperatoribus, vbi foemina ma∣nipulos interui∣sat, signa adeat, largitionem ten∣tat. Tac. What remayned more to the Emperour (sayd he) then for a woman to command ouer men, to visit the Corps du Guarde, obliging the souldiers by good words, and great rewards. Seianus, who loued not Agrippina, and knew Ti∣berius his humour, who could not brooke that any should bustle with the soueraigne authority, which was so delicate and tender, that it would take hurt by the least touch,Odia in longum iaciens quae re∣conderet aucta∣que promeret. Tac. wanted no discourse to entertaine the iea∣lousie and suspitions; and added defiance to suspitions, and to suspition feare, preparing long before, hatred a∣gainst this Prince, to the end that at his determined time it might fall vpon him to his destruction. Germanicus returning from Almaigne, all the City was in a iollity. Tiberius commanded that onely two Companies of the guardes should bee sent to receiue him.Populus omnis vsque ad vicesi∣mum lapidem se effudit. Suet. All the people ranne with great haste, to the end they might speedily enioy the sight of him whom they had so long a time desired and expected. Tiberius heer∣upon conceyued so great despite, that hee resolued to make an end of this braue Prince, who had scarcely
entred into the fower and thirtieth yeere of his age, and had already attayned so much reputation as any other could attaine in his whole life. This letted Seianus who being vrged with the de∣sire to raigne,Sceleratis inge∣nijs & plusquam ciuilia cupiei∣bus non do a∣ri instar serui∣tutis est. thought that this great power which he had in the managing of affayres was but seruitude, so long as hee was to acknowledge any superiour. Tibe∣rius by his aduice sent Germanicus into Sclauonia, vn∣der the colour of honouring him with the most princi∣pall commands of the Empire, hee appointed for his Lieutenant Cn. Piso a malicious, proud and violent man, with power to watch ouer his actions, and to thwart his designes. It is reported that Seianus gaue him charge in writing to put this poore Prince to death. He put it in execution.Apis manum Germanici Cae∣saris auersatus est, haud multo post extincti. Germanicus went into Ae∣gypt, and being there, was desirous to see their Oxegod Apis, to know what his fortune should bee. Apis would take nothing at his hand; and this was taken for a certaine presage of his death. Hee was stricken with a long and greeuous sickenesse, and the opinion that he was poysoned, increased the violence, for he held it in∣curable. The report heereof came to Rome,Fama ex longin∣quo aucta. Tac. and was made greater then the euill; for the distance of place augmented it. Then was nothing heard but teares and complaints. Is it for this (say they) that they haue sent him to the worlds end, that Piso is made Lieutenant, these are the plottings of the Empresse with Plancina his wife. Poore Rome that canst not haue them to be belo∣ued that loue thee, nor dare wee murmur against those that ruine thee. And therewith all brake foorth into mortall and vehement imprecations against Seianus.
Laetiora statim redita, statim vulgata. Tac.It was aduertised by some merchants of Aegypt, that he began to recouer. This good newes was assoone beleeued as published; and the streets were too nar∣row for the concourse of people, which ran to the tem∣ples to giue thankes vnto the gods.Pronior in tene∣bris affirmatio. Tac. The night fauou∣red the rumour, and the beleefe thereof seemeth more easie and costlesse in the darke. Tiberius himselfe is a∣wakened in the night with their ioyfull acclamations. No words can be heard but these:Salua Roma, salua patria, sal∣uus Germani∣cus. Suet. Rome is safe, our Countrey is safe, Germanicus is safe. After that the poyson gently violent, had consumed all the heat and moysture in this poore body, all his friends conceyued that he should haue no need to haue or to see a Cocke to sacrifice to Aesculapius; and that the gods would not grant him his life because they would not restore liberty to the Romane Empire.Germanicus could not en∣dure the crow∣ing, nor the sight of a cock. Plut. In this extreame weakenesse he expressed from his mouth these his last words, to imprint them in the heart of his wife and his friends, that griefe euen melted them to teares, and rented their hearts in sunder. Qui praematuro exiturapitur illi etiam aduersus deos iustus dolor. Tac.If I had died according to the course of nature, I might iustly complaine against the gods, that they had snatcht me away before the time of my parents, of my children, of my countrey, and of the yeeres of my youth. But now since my course is interrupted by the wickednesse of Piso and Plancina,Ʋltimas preces pectoribus vestris relinquo. Tac. I will leaue within your hearts my last re∣quests. I coniure you to represent to the Emperour, my Fa∣ther and my Vukle, how that after I was wronged by these cruell iniuries, and perplexed by these strange dis∣loyalties,Miserrima vita pessima morte finitur. I finished my miserable life by a death which yet is more miserable. Those that haue followed my hopes
who are of the same blood with me, and those same that haue borne me enuy when I was in the world, will be grie∣ued to see me ruined by the treacherie of a woman, then when I was flourishing,Erit vobis locu queendi apud Senatum, inuo∣candi leges. Ta. & when I had escaped death in so many battailes: & you also shal haue a subiect to complain of to the Senate, and implore the assistance of the Law. The chiefest duty of friends is not to follow the de∣ceased with cries and weeping,Non decet de∣functum ignao questu persequi. Tac. Vendicabitis vos si me potius quàm frtunam meam fauebitis. Tac. which serue to no other purpose, but to be mindfull of what they desired and to performe that which they appointed. Germanicus wanted not teares; they to whom this nothing at al apperteines & haue not known him at all, will bewaile him, but you will auenge him if you loued more his person then his fortune. Let the people of Rome see the Neece of Augustus, the wife of Germanicus and the children which he leaueth behind him,Fingentibus sce∣lesta mandata aut non credent homines aut non ignoscent. Tac. Compassion will make them be of my side when they shall accuse the Authors of my death, and if those that shall be accused shall seeke to colour it and to inuent some execrable commandement; (this touched Seianus who had giuen order to Piso to doe it) good men will not beleeue them, or at least will not permit that they should remaine vnpunished. All that were present sweare in the hand of Ger∣manicus to dye, or to reuenge his death,Magnitudinem & grauitatem summa fortuna retinuit, inuidi∣am & arrogan∣tiam effudit. Tacit. euery one deplored the losse of so braue a Prince who in his de∣portments reteined the greatnesse and grauity of his fortunes, and had nothing in his words but of sweet∣nesse and of Curtesie. He turned towards his wife, he coniured her by the loue which she had borne him, by the memory she should haue of him and for their childrens sake which they had had together,Fortunae saeui∣enti submitien∣dus animus. Ta. to mo∣derate and humble a little her heart, and to accommo∣date
it to time and to make it pliable to the rigor of fortune, waiting till she should sweeten her selfe. Aboue all (my deere wife) take heed when you at at Rome of giuing occasion of Ielousie to those that are more powerfull then you,Emulatione po∣tentiae validic∣res haud irri∣tandi. Tac. and imply not that good will which you shall find in the hea ts to the Senate and people, to make any concurrence to their fauor and ambition. This was the most sound counsaile that he could giue her, but she should haue beene held vnworthy to be the Neece of Augustus the wife of Germani∣cus, and mother of those children, if she had made greater accompt of the estate of fortune then of ver∣tue,Quasi rursus e∣reptum acriùs doluit. Tacit. and should seeke to attaine the fauors of the Emperor by those of Seianus. When the people of Rome knew that Germanicus was dead,Cremati cor in∣ter ossa incor∣ruptum reper∣tum est, cuius ea natura vt tactum veneno igne confici ne∣queat. Suet. their greefe was so much the greater, by supposing him taken away from them, and was nothing there seene but griefe and afliction. It was doubted, whether he were made away by poyson or by witchcraft, the one they beleeued because his heart did not burne; and the other was bruted abroad be∣cause they found about him dead menes bones, Cha∣racters and Charmes. Germanicus his friends published euery where that Piso had beene the cause of his Death,Piso intempe∣ranter accepit Germanicum excessisse, caedil victimas, adit templa, magis indolescente Plancinâ. Tac. that Agrippina would reuenge it: but receiuing the newes of his death in the Isle of Cio, he caused sacrifices to be made, Plau∣cina his wife visited the temples, he cared not for the theatnings of Agrippina, & thought of nothing but to settle himselfe in the gouernment of Syria, supposing that the seruice which he had done to Tiberius was
sufficient to guard him from the feare of this ven∣gance and to assure him of the recompence of his merit. Vpon this his resolution to goe into Syria his sonne aduised him to go to Rome,Suspiciones im∣becillae aut ina∣nia famae non pertiescenda. Tac. without appre∣hending these vaine reports and feeble suspicions to infringe or preuent the disignes of his enimies, and to gaine the aduantage of the first impressions.Apud milites re∣cens Imperatoris memoria prae∣le. Tac. That he should not suppose to put himselfe so soone in the gouernment of Syria, seeing that Sentius was proui∣uided therof, that he could not expect great obedi∣ence of an Army, that as yet deplored the death of Germanicus and conserued with bitternesse his memo∣ry, That he repented himselfe drawing vpon him the blame of a Ciuill warre. Domitius Celer on the contrary side:Ʋtendum est e∣uentis. that he ought to take againe the charge which he had taken away and to fill the place that was void, That it were im∣prudence and perill to goe to Rome at the same time that Agrippina would be there,Relinquendum rumoribus tem∣pus quo sene∣scant, plerunque innocente re∣cen inuidiae impares. Tac. and that the people would be moued by her cryes and her complaint; That it was needfull to leaue to time these first re∣ports to make them wax old, and that innocency can hardly resist the violence of a new springing enuy. That he ought to goe to Syria to take the Command of the army and the authority of the gouernment, and that he had no other way then to take armes in hand and to iustifie himselfe in the field,Multa quae pro∣uideri non pos∣sunt fortuito in meltus recidun. Tac. and that the things which are often apprehended as dangerous, become more secure then one can prouide for, or expect, That he should feare nothing since the Empresse was in∣teressed in his cause, and Tiberius obliged to disin∣gage
him,Est tibi Augustae conscientia, est Caesaris fauor, sed in occulto. Tac. but that fauouring him in secret he did con∣ceiue worse then if he did hasten this affaire to force him to sustaine it publikely, that it was certaine that those that were most pleased with his death made shew to be most afflicted therewith. Perisse Germa∣nicum. Haud magna mo∣le Piso promp∣tus ferocibus. Tac.Piso whose spirit enclined more willingly to dange∣rous resolutions with courage then to easie ones with prudence, followed this counsaile and went into Syria: but he found Gn. Sentius opposit vnto him, who because he would neither haue nor suffer a companion in his charge, draue him out of the Prouince and be∣sieged him in a Castle of Cilicia, and constrained him to render him and to take his iourney to Rome. Whilst this was doing Agrippina embarqued vp∣on the Sea with the ashes of Germanicus her husband,The Tribunes and the Cap∣taines wee∣ping, carried the vessels wherein the a∣shes of Germa∣nicus were, vp∣on their shoul∣ders. Agripp. appel∣lant Decus pa∣triae, solum Au∣gusti sanguinem, vnicum antiqui∣tatis specimen. Tac. Tiberius & Au∣gusta publico ab∣stinuere, ne om∣nium oculis vul∣tum eorum scru∣tantibus falsi in∣telligerentur. Tac. and landing was receiued with great honours of all the Estates of Rome, who manifested an extreame griefe for the death of her husband, and an incredibile ioy for the returne of the wife and children. The people call Agrippina the honour of the Countrey, the sole and true bloud of Augustus, the example of the ancient glory; and added to their cryes, vowes and prayers for the safety of his widow and yong children, and for the ruine of their enemies. Tiberius was much offended with these Plaudits and would not be seene at this entertainement, doubting that his face might bewray that contentment of minde which he felt inwardly for the death of Germanicus, and commanded the people to moderate this sorrow, and to beare it, as they had done the defeat of their ar∣mies and the losse of their Captaines, the ruine of their great families.
Piso arriued there presently after, regarding so little the threatnings of Agrippina, that Marcus Vibius a friend of Germanicus telling him that he must goe to Rome to cleere himself,Eludens respon∣dit ad futurum vbi Praetor qui de veneficijs quaereret, reo atque accusato∣ribus diem prae∣dixisset. Ta. he answered sodeinly & in scof∣fing manner. You shal see me there, when the Praetor that giues information of the witcheries shall haue appoin∣ted a day for the accused and the accusers. He entred into Rome with a great number of At∣tendance magnificent and proud, his wife braue and ioyous, the Gates of his house being deckt with Lawrell, whereby the people were the more prouo∣ked. The day following he was accused of the death of Germanicus and Tiberius desired to take notice of the Cause. Piso he desired it,Fuit inter irri∣tamenta inuidiae domus foro im∣minem festo or∣natu. Tac. because he feared the af∣fection of the Senators to the memory of Germanicus, and assuring himselfe that his warranter should be his Iudge, coueted rather to depend on the authoritie of one alone, then on the passion of many. Tiberius saw himselfe in a streight how to con∣demne the guilty, and to absolue his owne Conscience,Ʋera aut in de∣terius credita iudice ab vno facilius discer∣nuntur, od um & inuidia apud multos valent. Tac. for he knew the reports that truth had made current euery where against him and his mother, and that Piso was but the instrument of this Parricide. He would handle the businesse with as little businesse as he could, and heard the accusers, in the presence of Seianus and some of his most confident and familiar friends, They demanded iustice,Haud fallebat Tiberium moles cognitionis, qua∣que ipse fama di∣straheretur. Ta. Paucis familia∣rium adhibitis, minas accusan∣tium & preces audit. and added threatning to requests. We neede not to doubt therefore that he was aduised to let Piso perish, raher then to per∣mit his reputation to be wronged, and Princes some∣time serue themselues of men no longer then they haue neede of them.
Facinorum om∣nium repertor. Tac.But because the history names Seianus the inuentor of all these mischiefes, he passed on further and sayd; That the Emperour ought not to meddle in these af∣fayres, by condemning Piso hee should too much in∣crease the pride of Agrippina, and in declaring him innocent, he should shew that fauour would ouercome iustice, hee durst not say that the complice should ab∣solue the guilty.It is needfull to walke wisely and heedfully in dangerous things, where the reputation of the Prince runnes any ha∣zard. That it was necessary to remit it to the Senate, and that if he were condemned, the iudge∣ment might be attributed to the passion of Germani∣cus his house, if discharged, the blame should lie on the Nobility. Seianus went to instruct Piso what hee should say, assuring him of impunity of all other crimes, prouided that he did not confesse the secret of this;The frame of the puissance of a Prince is altogether founded vpon his reputation. that the Em∣perour would quench the fire that was kindled, and not permit that the sicke party should die of the sicke∣nesse whereof he was the cause, and that his reputation the only frame of his authority obliged him rather to lose himselfe, then not to saue him. Piso appeared in the Senate, and there were some orators assigned to speake for the accusers, and others to defend the accused; the subiect was worthy of the eloquence of the most able, and of such as did not seeke for businesses,Eloquenti exop∣tat pretium liti∣um numerus. Sen. Quanta fides a∣micis Germanici quae fiducia reo, satinne cohibe∣ret ac premeret sensus suos Tibe∣rius, an prome∣ret. Tac. but who were sought out for businesses, and who esteemed more the importance and the qua∣lity then the number and multitude of them. Tiberi∣us made a discourse with such a temperament between the accusation and the accused, that any might well perceiue the contriuing thereof was premeditated. All the City listened to know what the credit of Germani∣cus his friends would be, the assurance of the accused,
the countenance of Tiberius; and if he could well con∣ceale and keepe backe the sence of his passion, or that hee would permit it to breake out. And the people who otherwise regarded not affayres,Popus multum  aut inspicatis silentij per∣tit. Tac. in this gaue themselues much liberty against the Prince, and either in secret communication they shewed their spleene, or in silence they discouered their suspitions. You know (my Fathers, sayd Tiberius) that Piso at other times hath beene the friend of Augustus my Fa∣ther, and Lieutenant of the Army of Spaine; and that by the aduice of the Senate he was giuen to Germanicus my Nephew to assist him in the gouernment of the af∣fayres of the East. This now considered,Integris animis iudicandum. Ta. it is meete you should iudge him with pure and syncere spirits, if through his arrogancy or through excesse of authority he hath offended the minde of this yong Prince, if hee hath reioyced at his death, or if he hath trayterously and wic∣kedly beene a cause of his death. For if in this charge of Lieutenantcy hee hath excee∣ded the limits of duty,Legatus officij terminum aut obsequium erga imperatorem non exuit. Tac. if he hath quitted the respect due to a Generall, if hee hath manifested contentment in his death and my sorrow, nothing can hinder it, but that he must incurre my displeasure; I sweare to you that I will chase him from my house, and auenge my iniury not in quality of a Prince, but as a priuate person. And if you shall discouer any wickednesse which ought not only to be auenged in this death,Facinus in cu∣iuscunque mor∣talium nece iu∣dicum. Tac. but in any other you will; I coniure you to consider in this your griefe, that of Germanicus his children, and ours, who are so neere to him, neither refuse to vs a iust consolation. Consider on one side how Piso hath carried himselfe in the Army, if he hath caused any trouble or sedition,Quaesap am∣bitionem studiae multum. Tac. if
he hath inueagled the hearts of the souldiers to aspire to command;Falsa in maius vulgant accusa∣tores. Tacit. and after that Germanicus had taken away his charge, if he did assay to gaine it againe by Armes, con∣sider on the other side, if these false and forged matters haue beene vented by the Accusers for true, and of grea∣ter consequence then they are. As for mee, I cannot conceale that I am not mooued with the passion which they haue manifested.Incerta adhuc sunt scrutanda. For if they be not as yet well assured of the cause of the death; and if they haue need to bee informed thereof, to what purpose haue they exposed his naked body in the publique place of Antioch,Reus cuncta pro∣ferat, quibus in∣nocentia eius subleuari possit. Tac. Obiecta crimina pro approbatis non accipienda. Tac. and haue left it to be handled and viewed by the vulgar people; if this were not done to make the speech goe among strangers, that hee was poysoned; and by this report to draw foorth more of bitternesse then of truth. In good sooth, I am sorry for Germanicus my sonne, and shall be sorry for him all my life long; but I will not hinder that the accused shall not produce all hee hath to vphold his innocency, and prooue the wrong which Germanicus hath done him. Si cui propin∣quus sanguis aut fides sua patro∣nos dedit, quan∣tum quisque e∣loquentiâ & cu∣râ valet iuuare periclitantem. Tacit. In accusations where the grief of the Prince is ioyned with the cause, wee must not re∣gard his inte∣rest.I coniure you therfore, that you receiue not these char∣ges for proofes, vnder pretext that this cause is ioyned to my griefe. And you others, who by right of kindred or of friendship haue vndertaken the defence of the ac∣cused, imploy that industrie and eloquence that you haue to draw his innocency out of danger: I exhort the accu∣sers likewise constantly to prosecute the cause: all the fa∣uou that wee shall shew to Germanicus aboue the Law shalbe no other, then to bee enformed of the cause of his death, rather in the Senate house, then in the common place of iudgement, rather by the Senate then by the or∣dinarie iustices. In all other matters wee shall vse equal
moderation. Regard not the teares of my Brother Dru∣fus aboue his sonnes, nor mine aboue my Nephewes; and lesse all that wicked malice can faine against vs. It was heereupon giuen out,Strange pro∣ceedings, where time is giuen to the accused to an∣swer that which is in his owne know∣ledge, and to the aduocates to colour their answers. that the accusation should be framed within two dayes, that the parties accused should haue sixe dayes to prepare themselues to answer; and that in three dayes they should make their answer. She was bold to refute the empoysoning; her boldnesse bred some fauourable presumption of her innocency; but she faultred in other crimes. In the first session Vitellius and Veranius reported to the Senate the last words of Germanicus, which en∣clined their heartes to pitty,Trionis ingeni∣um auidumque fama malae. Ta. as affection had prepared them to fauour. Fulcinius Trio, to whom it was all one to weepe and to speake eager to gaine reputation by doing ill, began the accusation: but because he pro∣duced nothing but generall matters,Vetera ac ina∣nia quae neque conuicta nova reo. Tac. and old inquisiti∣ons of that which Piso had done, the Senate tooke no regard of it; for all this could neither hurt the partie accused if he should bee conuicted, nor serue to his ab∣solution if hee should bee cleered, if other where hee might be attainted of greater crimes. Vitellius accompanied the vehemency and force of his discourse with a great grace and grauity,The considera∣tion of the quality of the accusers, ren∣ders the accu∣sation more strong. speaking in this manner: Although (yee conscript Fathers) the quality of those who lament themselues is worthie to bee considered, yet is it good for none but those who seeke for aid, otherwise then by the course of iustice, and the rea∣sons of their owne complaining. This cause carries with it fauour,A cause weigh∣ty in it selfe needs no other fauour. and needs no other aid then that of the Law, which is not denied to the mea∣nest in the world. I could say that those who now implore
it,The authority of a Prince maintaines the estate, and that cannot subsist when there is a neglect of punishing in∣iuries. are of such quality, that if it be denied them, the Em∣pire haue no more to doe either with the Law or the Senate. The issue of Augustus demandeth iustice, the people expect it, the Iudges ought to administer it, and thou Caesar are obliged both as a Prince and as a kinsman. Pretend not to bring any fauour to this accusation, since in representing the offence as a Prodigie,Ingens luctus prouinciae & circumia centi∣um populorum; indoluere exterae nationes reges{que}. Tac. the offen∣der as a Parricide, the deceased for such a one as euery man laments; forreine nations haue admired, the con∣federates haue sorrowed, this citie hath praised modera∣tion in all things, except in this one so iust sorrow. Ger∣manicus is no more; O what sorrow! we haue lost; O what misfortune! Germanicus the delight of the world, the loue of the country; so bountifull towards the citizens, so courteous towards strangers, was slaine miserably and traiterously.Illi comitas in socios, mansue∣tudo in hostes. Tac. And by whom? by Piso, a wicked and vngratefull man. By whom also? by Plancina, a fury disguised in shape of a woman. By what meanes? by charmes and poysons. Who are the compli∣ces? Sorcerers fetcht out of hell. And wherefore? To auenge the iniury and to vsurpe Command. The spirits of wicked ones (conscript fathers) depraue not themselues all at once,Nemo tantum à naturali lege de∣fciuit & homi∣nem exuit, vt a∣nimi causa ma∣lus sit. Sen. neither can any espouse wicked∣nesse by pleasure alone, they forme their designes from a farre off, and carry them to extremities; Piso by light faults is ascended vp to greater, by couetousnesse to rapa∣citie, from thence to practices, then to ambition, and from ambition to the violating of the authority of the law, to come to the dispising of the power of the Gods. He hath giuen to Spaine the proofe of his auarice, to Syria of his ambition, to the house of Germanicus of his impiety.
Assoone as you had honoured him with the charge of being Germanicus his Lieutenant,Haud inuito im∣peratore ea fier occultus rumor incedebat. Tac. he kept it not close that he desired that of the Generall, and vsed practices in Rome to render him hatefull to his Father and in the army to cause him to be despised of the Souldiers. He practised then to drawe them to his deuotion, chased a∣way the tribunes that would not depend of him, filled their places with bold persons, and to make himselfe be∣loued of the men of warre,Desidia incastr licentia in vrbi∣bus. Tac. permitted idlenesse in the campe, and disorders in the Cities, insolencies in the field: and thenceforth he was called the Father of the Legions: on the other side Plancina went cheeke by iolle with A∣grippina, and enterprised things aboue the modestie of women, she was found sometimes vsing the exercise of knights and running courses of light horse. And although this was rude to a spirit whose acti∣ons were all ciuill,Secreta studia pati non potet animus ad Ciui∣lia erectus agen∣dique cupidus. Sen. yet he desired rather to cloake them, then to offend the Emperor his Father, with im∣portunate complaints He commanded Piso to lead a part of the Legions into Armenia, or at least to send his sonne thither, but he would doe neither, the one nor the other,Si quando adsi∣deret atrox ac dissentire mani∣festus. Tac. and thereby lost the occasion of doing great seruice to the Emperor. When he was in counsaile neere Germanicus, or in the seate of iustice vnder him, he stifly and im∣prudently opposed all his opinions. I will rehearse vnto you an incredible insolencie, but so certaine that none dare deny it, to shew that sottish∣nes and malice were companions and sisters in all his actions. Being at the feast of the king Nabates, when he saw that the crounes of gold which were giuen him, were neither of the beautie nor the weight of those of Ger∣manicus or of Agrippina, he threw them on the ground,
and being no lesse foolish then malicious, he began to reproue the sumptuousnesse of the feast, and discoursing against Luxurie, said, that such expence was proporcio∣nable to an Emperor, and not to the sonne of the King of the Parthians. Poore sot, didst thou thinke euer after this to find credit in the heart, or securitie in the following of Germanicus, whom thou hadst so impudentlie offended? although he was blamed because he was too good and that he endured too much. Thinkest thou that there was in the world a safe retiring place, to guard thee against the rage of a Prince of Augustus bloud? Hast thou heard it said, that hearts of such breeding, haue beene offended and not punished? And loe therefore Plancina, who esteemed not her selfe could be happie so long as Agrippina was happie, said that she must needs either perish or reuenge her selfe, and pull this thorne out of thy hart, or permit that she might pluck it out of thy breast. It is a gene∣rous kinde of reuenge, to let ones enemy see that hee can a∣uenge himself.Yee (conscript Fathers) admire the goodnesse and generousnesse of this Prince, who hauing beene so often and so to the quicke offended by Piso, was alwaies con∣tented to let him know he could auenge himselfe and saue him when he might haue ruined him. He came to find him at Rhodes, and being well aduertised of all the plots he had framed against him,Nescius quibus insectationibus peteretur, man∣suetudine tamen agebat. Tac. yet he bare him∣selfe towards him with so much equalitie and modera∣tion, that vpon the aduertisement which he had receiued, that fortune had cast him vpon some shelues, he sent him certaine Barkes to fetch him off,Potest quando{que} interitus inimi∣ci ad casum re∣ferri. Tac. although if he would haue deserted him, he could haue blamed none other then chance, and that fortune had conspir'd for his auengment.
Germanicus visiting Aegypt had the curiositie to see the heads of Nile,Nilus cuius in narrabilis natu¦ra est, cum mun¦do traxit princi∣pia. Sen. (that memorable riuer which had its beginning with the world) and at his returne found that Piso had changed the order in which he had left affaires at his departure, that which he had secured was shaken,Amici acceden∣dis effusionibus callidi. Tacit. and that which he had commanded was de∣spised. He grew angry, his seruants animated him to resent it, and his dissembling kept not backe his choler, but that it was made manifest by his words, & his re∣uenge by his threatnings, Piso retired himselfe: Germa∣nicus fell sicke: Piso who knew how farre the disease would goe, went not farre off, and the violence of the poyson hastened his death. Ah cruell! Heare the words of this Prince when he was dying and those dying words which shall eternally liue in the memory of the Romans.The last words of a dying Prince in∣crease the complaint a∣gainst the au∣thors of his death. I dye miserablie in the flower of mine age by the treason of Piso and Plancina. I coniure you my friends to make it be seene to the people of Rome, that these wickednesses haue cut the throat of the Nephew of Augustus, and of six small children. What hearts are these, which these words will not bray and bruse? And dost thou yet liue Piso? and doth the Sun yet giue thee light? Thy con∣science not knowing where to hide thee,Tutum aliqua res in malâ con∣scientiâ praestat, nulla securum. Sen. hath conducted thee hither to be punished, and could not consent to the security which thou soughtest after elsewhere, so that as she hath failed thee to dissolue this crime, she her selfe hath betraied thee to conduct thee to punnishment. What hast thou done after this Parricide?Subdola mora scelerum proba∣tiones subuertit. Tac. Thou visitedst the Cities of Asia: Thou spentst thy time at the faire houses of Achaia. This was done to no other end but to make the proofes vaine, the witnesses to die, wee
must now (O yee conscript Fathers) put Piso in the estate of a vanquished man to reduce him to that of an accused. Mihi fasces & vis Praetor, mi∣hi legiones dare. Tac.He did not as that honest man Valerius Publicola did, who being accused quitted his house of Velia and lodged in the village, to the end that they might take no paines in searching for him, He that is innocent shuns not iudgement, and he that is culpable keepes him∣selfe a loofe from the iudges. When great ones are accu∣sed, they ought to suffer them∣selues to bee found easily.If any man had accused him for taking Armes, he purposed to haue shadowed it vnder the Command which he had in Syria vnder Germanicus his Generall, if to haue medled with the monies of the publique, he perswaded himselfe that that parte thereof which he should keepe for his friends might saue the cost. Hee may free himselfe for a little who hath stolen much. Ʋenenum nodo crinium occulta∣tum, nec ulla in corpore signa sumpti exitij re∣perta. Tacit.If Martina that famous sorceresse and empoysonnesse, the great friend of Plancina had not bin dead, she would haue discouered al the secrets of this treason. The friends of Germanicus would haue had her beene brought to Rome, but when she was at Brundusium she dyed sud∣denly, and the poyson hid in the knots of her haire ap∣peared not at all in her body. Suorum insidijs externas inter gentes occidit. Tacit.If the truth may be ayded by presumptions, no man can say that this Prince, who hath sound lesse securi∣tie among his owne then amongst strangers, was killed by any other then Piso who durst haue enterprized it? he had offended no man but him, and for the resent∣ment of this offence, he was declared his enemy and thrust himselfe into his charge, and euery man knowes it is hard to seuer the desire of death from that of the succession.
One once in this place of a Proscript man who to en∣ioy the goods of his wife,So Leponina fllow d  husband Iuls Sabinus in Vespasians time told her that he would kill him∣selfe, she added that she would accompanie him. He pre∣pared the deadly drugge but with such cunning, that he drinking first left the poyson, which by reason of the ponderousnesse thereof, sunke downe to the bottome for his wife to drinke: she died; he was well enough and en∣ioyed the goods which she had left by her testament. Seldome any scape of that poyson which is giuen by an heire. Who reioyceth more at the death of any then he that hath procured it, and who desireth it more ardently then he that hath waited for it more impatiently? How did Piso take this? He sacrificed and slew burnt offeringes: Plancina was so transported with this ioy,Luctus laeto cul∣tu mutatus. Ta. that she laid a side her griefe which she began to apprehend for the death of her sister, and adorned her selfe in the richest and best garments she had. This accusation abounded with so many diuersities, and the resolution to make an end of Germanicus was furnished with so many Mischiefes, that they oppressed him,Nil ordinatur quod praecipiatur & properat. Se. and carried him headlong into the folly of this dis∣course, and he had much to doe to range it into any order. I had forgotten to shew how Piso sent spies to discouer the weake estate of Germanicus, and the acci∣dents that hapned thereupon. This grieued the sicke person and vexed his soule, not for feare, for he was neuer afraid of death, but for anger and sorrow, appre∣hending that assoone as breath was out of his body Piso would vsurp the command of his forces, and his wife should be at his appointment. Piso also was some∣what wearie that the poyson wrought so slowly and
that it had no sooner wrought it's effect, and entered into Syria, to be more neere the legions and to serue himselfe with them vpon occasion: This was the cause why Germanicus said of his distresse:This is a very sensible griefe to die in the sight of ones enemy and to leaue his wife and his chil∣dren to his power. Well then, if I must needs dye by the cunning of mine enimy and that he must see me render vp my spirit, what shall be found out for my wife? How shall she be dealt with∣all? What shall become of my children, who in this accident will not want teares to bewaile me, and will haue no words at all to lament themselues? Let that come to passe which the heauens haue determined, Piso hath taken away my life: but he hath left me the courage,When the Ro∣mans would breake friend∣ship with any one, they would adver∣tize him of it and forbad him their house. Titus Livius. and I doe not finde my selfe brought to that weakenesse, that I euer will consent that the mur∣therer shall gaine his reward by my death. Vpon this he sent a letter vnder his hand, importing that he held him his enimy, that he forbad him to come into his house, and so to soiourne there in that Prouince. For none doubted but that the witchcraft seconded the poyson, when they saw the bones of dead men pluckt from their members and tyed to the walles and seeling of his Chamber,Maleficijs ani∣mae numinibus infernisacrae. Tacit. the characters of charmes and impre∣cations, Germanicus his name ingrauen in plates of Lead, of ashes halfe burnt and made into paste with the putrifactione of vlcers and other witchcrafts and impieties, which they vse to do vote any one to death sa∣crificing him to the infernall gods. Although this Prince was dying and euen at the last cast,Moderatur cur∣sui, qui vult proprius regredi. Tacit. yet Piso feared & by his commandement loosed the Anchor and retired himselfe: but he went not very farre, that he might not haue farre to returne when hee should haue aduertisement of his death. And if
all this put together serues not to conuince them, where would he the truth should seeke out proofes? So that (yee conscript Fathers) you see before your eyes a man who hath brought from the wombe of his mother violence and the spirit of rebellion, for he is sonne of a father who followed the partie of Brutus and Cas∣sius: He is not onely an extortioner, but a theefe,Cicero said the offence of Ver∣res constrained the Iudges to condemne him. not a quarreller but a raiser of sedition, not an enimy but a rebell, not a murtherer but an assassin; neuer any delin∣quent hath giuen you more pressing cause to dispatch him then he; for the accursednesse of his crime will constraine you to condemne him, and if in despite of the gods and of men, you pardon him, it will be impossible to saue him out of the hands of the people, who attend this businesse: and hearken (O yee Conscript Fathers) how they cry in this pallace, there i not a woman so little that doth not promise to her selfe to teare of some haire of his head. Represent to your selues that the ioy of the people is when they see the chiefe Authors of rebellion drawne behind the triumphant Chariot,When he that triumpheth passeth by the Capitoll he sendeth his prisoners to the Magi∣strates and dares not leade them to his owne house. ILictor, colligae manus, caput  obnubito, arbori infoelici suspen∣dito. Cicero. and on the morrowe after executed in reparation of the inhumanities and cruelties they haue done in the Prouinces, they will be more content when they shall see Piso go to be punished. The people will loose their patience if you pronounce not speedily the solemne sentence: Hangman take this Parricide, this robber, this rebell, bind his hands, blind his eyes, tye him to a miserable gallowes: And who knoweth if this multitude transported with griefe and sorrow will stay there; if they wil content themselues with one alone, and that they fall not vpon those who fauour this wicked man esteeming them more wicked then he.
Non maius scelus in R. P. com∣misit reus quàm ij qui eum à tam nefarijs sceleri∣bus sententia sua liberam. Cic. In case of iudgement of persons of quality, we must consider the time and the reason of State. Eloquentia nulli tota contingit. Sen.No no: (yee conscript fathers) they will not bee mocked, the matter is too important, the consequence too great, and this man such a one that there is too much danger to commit a fault in his case. Beleeue I pray you, that neither the accused, nor the time, nor the place, nor the reason of state, nor the qualities of the parties can consent that they should be bereaued of the example, that he should be deliuered in secret, or that hee should not be executed in publique. Marcus Lepidus who had asmuch eloquence as he possibly could haue, for neuer any man had all, speaking for Piso answered the accusers in this manner: Great honors are burthens which tyre those that beare them. Ludos facit for∣tuna. Sen.It is a great vnhappinesse (yea conscript fathers) for poore Piso to haue beene happy. Great honors serue sometimes to the felicitie of them that deserue them not at all, and those who haue first merited them shall finde their ruine by a strange extrauagancie, or a iugling of fortune, who giuing to others contentments, to this man giues nothing but trouble. The great seruices performed by Piso to Augustus obliged the Emperour to make him Lieutenant to Ger∣manicus,Vnhappy is that dignity which hath no credence at all with the Prince. but this honor was accompanied with so many thwartings that his faithfulnesse found no fauour, nor his counsell any credence in the heart of this young Prince, who being not affrighted by encountring of things im∣possible eleuated his thoughts aboue his dutie, threatning the Sunne of obscuritie, the Ocean of bondage, whence a∣rose those thoughts of greatnesse which troubled those of the Emperor. His affection to his Countrey, his faith to his Prince obliged him to watch ouer his actions, which he found al∣waies
so bold and high,Nec in astra len∣ta veniet vian∣ter ruina quaeret. Sen. Tr. that he beleeued that this young Hercules had not yet attempted to mount aboue the Starres neither handsomely nor peaceably, and that hee would enter by a breach to the ruine of the Empire. These designes of an vnbridled ambition could not come to any happy end, and Piso was not a whit astonished,Necesse est op∣primant onera quae ferenti ma∣iora sunt. Sen. when the Priest of the oracle of Apollo told him at Co∣lophon that he should not continue there very long, for the charge which hee had vndertaken was too weighty for his forces. But as Princes loue better to be flattered in their errors than aduertised in their duties,Malo veris of∣fendere quàm placere adulando. Sen. he presently re∣mained distasted, that Piso loued rather to displease him with truth, than to be agreeable to him with flat∣tery. He conceiued that his freenesse was presumpti∣on, when he shewed him the way from which hee had swarued and that which he ought to hold, especially when he told him that he did wrong to the Maiestie of the Empire, when he treated common men so respe∣ctiuely and so courteously that sinke of Athenians,Quod colluviem illam nationum comitate nimia coluisset. Tac. who alwaies followed the party contrary to ours, neither was it euer without some practise of reuolt towards vs, hauing assisted Mithridates against Sylla & Antony a∣gainst Augustus.Inter alia domi∣nationis arcana Augustus veti∣tis seposuit Aegiptum. Ta. Levi praesidioin∣gentes exercitus coercentur. Tac. Was it by the counsell of Piso that he went into Aeypt against the ancient ordinance of Augustus, who left it you for a secret of estate neuer to to permit great persons to goe into Aegypt, because reuolting against vs they might there with a few men resist a great army, and prohibiting the bringing of corne from thence might famish Italy. Call to your memory (O Caesar) (but let nothing of importance escape you) the displeasure you receiued
when Piso aduertised you that this young Prince di∣rected all his actions to vanity and ambition;In vulgus grata, sine milite ince∣dere pedibus, in∣tectus & pari cum Graecis a∣mictu. Ta. that to gaine the hearts of the people, he gaue them great gra∣tuities of mony and of corne that he marched with∣out guards, on foot, meanely attended, and went ap∣parelled after the Greeke manner as at another time Scipio had done. All the furies of hell could not inuent a more dete∣stable Calumny then of this poyson whereof Piso is accused,Tenus mendaci∣um pellucet. Se. but it is so minced and subtile, that falshood may be transparently seene through it. How is it pos∣sible that you Vitellius who haue your eyes open and a cleare iudgement,Non minus vi∣tandum super∣vacanea dicere quam contraria. Sen. not to speake of superfluous things, you now affirme contrary. What apparance is there that Piso eating at the table of Germanicus who alwaies obserued him diligently, had the leisure to take the poi∣son to rub his fingers to waste his victualls.Absurdum inter aliena seruitia & tot astantium visu. Tacit. Is this easie in another mans house in the presence of a Prince to whom they giue so much trust, who hath so many eies that watch ouer all. Si patrem pul∣saverit, manus ei praecidatur. Se.If this be true let Piso consent, not that the hand which hath done this Parricide may be cut off, but that the heart which hath conceiued it may be pluck't aliue out of his breast,Offerebat fami∣liam reus & ministrosin tor∣menta. Ta. and that to finde out the truth none may hinder but that the racke may be giuen to all his family and all his seruants. There is no∣thing so foule as an iniury which retur∣neth against him that hath spoken it. Plut.He is not altogether without fault, there is no man exempt, Diamonds haue their blemishes, the fairest visages their spots, but he is neither wicked nor a traitor. Those that reproach him of pride are not without ar∣rogance; if he be cholerick they are violent, he neuer attempted against the life of princes.
If he hath exercised any seuerity in his charge hee rather did it out of duty then of his owne inclina∣tion. It is for Princes to seeke to make themselues to be beloued,Magistrates ought to be more curious to make them∣selues to bee feared than to be beloued. There is no∣thing so natu∣rall as to hat those who per∣secute vs. and for Magistrates to make themselues to be feared. If he failed in his respect and affection to∣wards Germanicus, it is also a very hard matter to be constrained to loue those who haue resolued and sworne ones ruine. Germanicus, as all great men, had written the seruices of Piso in the sands and all his offences in Marble, if wee may so call those sincere and faithfull aduises which he gaue vnto him for his good gouernment. He confessed that Germanicus his death had drawne out of his heart a growing thorne, and a wearisome feare that he was very ioyfull to see his house deliue∣red from so puissant an enemy, Tiberius from a Nephew so ambitious, the Empire from a Prince so vndertaking: Germanicus would haue ruined Piso and the heauens ruined Germanicus, and by his death made him know that there is a Iustice aboue,The Eagle ha∣uing snatcht vp the little rabbets the damme vnder∣mines the tree and throwes downe the Ea∣gles nest, and the Eaglets re∣maine at her mercy. Mala & impia consuetudo con∣tra Deos dispu∣tandi, sive ex a∣nimo id fiat si∣ve simulate. Cic. that auengeth the violen∣ces of the great ones vpon the little ones. It is permit∣ted to them to spit in our faces or to set their feete vpon our throates to raise themselues aboue vs, yet the smallest liuing Creatures haue had Iustice ouer the Eagle. There is nothing so sweete as reuenge, what soeuer it cost, this is a viand which one may swallow downe without chewing. But Piso neuer attempted against his life, although he desired his death, and being assured that it was natu∣rall, this is a great wickednesse to faine that it was vio∣lent: the gods would haue it so. It is not permitted to dis∣pute neither with studied arguments nor by way of dis∣course of their power.
If he had sought to gaine any credite amongst the men of warre this was but onely to lessen that of Germanicus.Prompta Pisoni Legionum stu∣dia. His ambition tended to ruine, that of Piso to conseruation: the one administred iealousie to Tiberius and the other was a bridle to Germanicus. If he gained the goodwill of the Prouinces was hee forbidden to cherish it?Amor affectus liber qui vices exigit. Plin. Are not affections free? what harme is it then if they be rendred reciprocally. But he affected rather to submit himselfe to the bounty of Caesar then obstinatly to put himselfe to the defence of his innocency. He implored with ioy∣ned hands this Royall vertue which detesteth the brutish thirst of bloud,Ferina rabies sanguine gaude∣re. Sen. and beseecheth you great Prince to imitate the heauens which haue more thunder to make men afraid, then lightning to punish them. If all bee inexorable, and that the accusers hasten to take and snatch away that soule which they haue already so stirred and turmoyled,Nihil tam peri∣culosum fortunis innocentium, quàm tacere ad∣versarios. Cic. he will dye with this Consolation, that his innocency hath found no protection and that he chose rather to perish then to offend those who might saue him. There was some obscurity in the accusation of the empoysoning, this was a Pyramide which shewed not it selfe all at once, for of three sides there is al∣wayes one which cannot be seene: Piso and Plancina his wife appeared, but the third hid Tiberius and Tibe∣rius Sejanus. A tribuno dedu∣ctus, vario rumo∣re, custos salutis an mortis ex∣actor. Tac.This first audience being finished Piso came forth, and the people were so much prouoked against him, that if they had not put him into a Coach with some to guard, it he had neuer retorned to his house neither safe nor aliue. That which the vulgar sort could not
doe to his person they did to his representation drawne to the Gibbet. Plancina his wife who had promised him to runne alike fortune with him,Portia said, that she was not partner onely at the bed and at the table of her husband, as a concubine: but that she was compani∣on of his good and ill fortune as his wife. Plut. This opinion was common and Iosephus as∣sureth it. One dranke in a siluer vessell a franticke loue potion in stead of Greeke wine and a∣midst Ambrosia one tooke Arsenicke in a golden plate which tooke a∣way his life. forsooke him to fall to light∣nesse, a vice naturall to that sexe: and being assured of her life by the fauour of the Empresse she cared no more for that of Piso, and abandoned him as if she had neuer married him, but to partake of his prosperity. The Iudges out of diuerse respects were implaca∣ble against the accused. Caesar would haue had him put to death because he had entred into the Prouince in armes, the Senate beleeued assuredly that Germanicus was poysoned, and amongst violent deaths poyso∣ning was held to be the greatest execration: so much the rather that because thereby persons most deere and precious were snatch't from the Commonwealth: that poyson entred and mingled it selfe more easily in vessells of gold then of earth. There is no Antidote which is of greater vertue or efficacy against poyson, then a private Condition, which feareth not that a∣varice can vsurpe vpon his goods nor enuy vpon his dignities. It was certaine neuerthelesse that this em∣poysoning was neuer clearely proued, nor confidently affirmed by the accusers.Ʋeneni crimen accusatores non satis firmabant. Tac. It was neither spoken of in Antioch or in Rome but according to the affection that men bare towards the deceased, or the hatred to∣wards the liuing. Tacitus saith that it was not certaine that any tokens of poyson appeared vpon his death; Suetonius,Praetulerit ve∣neficij signa, pa∣rum constitit. Tac. that he was seene couerd ouer with Purple spots, a foame a∣bout his mouth and that his hart was found whole a∣mongst
the ashes.Livores toto corpore, spumae per os fluebant, cor inter ossa in∣corruptum Sue. Genere morbi defensus est Pi∣so. Plin. Negatur cor cremari posse in his qui cardiaco morbo obierint & veneno in∣teremptis. Plin. Pliny, that Vitellius pressed Piso hard vpon this who made the arrowe rebound a∣gainst them that shot it; and as some affirmed that Germanicus hauing beene poysoned, his heart resisted the fire, others maintained that Germanicus dying of a disease of the heart, his heart could not be burnt. Thus the Hypothesis alwayes remained in question and aswell the one as the other had truth on its side, being alike true according to Pliny that the heart of those who dye of poyson or of the disease of the heart consumeth not in the fire. But the worst piece of Pisoes proces was the extream boldnesse of the people, who taking the report for proofe cryde out at the gate of the Pallace that they would doe Iustice vpon Piso if it were not done.Nullo magis exterritus est quam quod Ti∣berium sine mi∣seratione sine ira obstinatum clausum{que} vidit. Tac. All this astonied Piso very much, who the second day appeared before the Senate, to see if they were any whit changed from their former seuerity. He found the ayre quite of a contrary temper, Tiberius so cold that for feare to discouer himselfe he inclined neither to choler to ruine him nor to pitty to giue him any hope. He conceiued thereupon that he had no other refuge nei∣ther for his innocency nor for his truth. Seianus told him neuerthelesse that Tiberius would strike the stroke when it should be fit time, and that he would not suffer him to perish.He that is con∣uinced of one crime is puni∣shed for many. In offences a∣gainst the State they make no recompence at all according to the merit of the offence. Others affright him saying that al∣though he were declared innocent for the death of Germanicus, they would put him to death for other crimes. For Tiberius was so altered vpon that, that he was entred in armes into Syria, that he would make an him example, not permitting that his seruice should make compensation for his fault.
Seianus cared not at all to loose Piso and proui∣ded alwayes that he spake not of the secret Comman∣dement, but he feared that seing him condemned he might not complaine to the Senate of the Iudgement, and of his punishment to the Emperor, and that al∣though he spake not against Tiberius, yet he might against him.The interest of children pre∣uayleth aboue that of the pa∣rents. The consideration of his children ex∣tinguished in his minde all the resentment of the iniurie which he suffered, and seeing himselfe about to perish he was desirous to perish alone. And to the end their innocency might bee seuered from his punishment, hee writ a letter to Tiberius be∣seeching him to take pittie vpon them, and this be∣ing done hee resolued to make an end of himselfe by cutting his owne throate. He dyed not for feare of death, but that he might not die according to the pleasure of his enemies.This is a fury, to die for feare of death. If there be any thing irksome in a publique death, it is especially for the griefe and shame of the contentment that one giues to their enemies. When this death was reported to the Senate,Caesar flexo in moestitiam ore. Tacit. one might obserue griefe in Tiberius his countenance, but it was feined and to stupifie these Iudgements which any might make to the preiudice of this accident, and to assure his countenance for his discourse hee in∣formed amongst other things of that which Piso had done the day before and how hee passed the night.Plera{que} sapien∣ter quaedam in∣con s. Tac There were some of them that answered discreetly, others more inconsideratly as in such oc∣casions, some there are who will not seeme to know that which one would haue them ignorant of. Vpon this Tiberius read the letters that Piso had
written to him in this manner.Conspiratione inimicorum & invidiá falsi cri∣minis veritati & innocentiae nusquam locus. Tac. Since that (Caesar) I see my selfe oppressed thorough the conspiracy of mine enemies, and the violence of a false accusation which permitteth not any place in the Senate, neither for the truth, nor for my innocency, the gods are my witnesses that I haue neuer failed of faithfulnes to∣wards you, nor of reuerence towards your mother, and in that respect I beseech you to thinke vpon my children. Gn: Piso ought to haue no part in my fortune what∣soeuer it bee, for he hath not stir'd from Rome. M: Piso disswaded mee from going into Syria, and I wish that the Father had accommodated himself to the youth of the Sonne,Qualiscúnque fortunae meae non est adiun∣ctus. Tac. and that the Sonne had not giuen way to the age of the father. For this cause, I beseech you, with great earnestnesse that his innocency beare not the punishment of mine obstinacy: and seeing my selfe in that state that I shall neuer desire any thing more of you. I coniure you by 45. yeeres seruice; by the accompt that Augustus your Father held of mee, when I was his Colleague in the Consulship,ravitatis poe∣nas innoxius non luat. Tac. and for the friend∣ship which you haue borne towards me to saue my poore children. He spake not at all of his wife, and how should he be mindfull of her, who had forgotten him in this extreame distresse, and who had perhaps pro∣mised the Empresse and Sejanus to open his cham∣ber doore to let in murtherers to kill him.Nihil quicquam post hac rogatu∣rus salutem in∣foelicis filij rogo. Tac. Tiberius hauing read the letters said, that although Piso had deserued this mishap whereinto hee was headlongly rushed: yet he pittied him for the alone respect of his house; that it was reasonable notwith∣standing to conserue the branches of the tree which was cut downe, and not to cause his punishment to
passe vpon his innocent children,Patris iussa fil∣us non p test de∣trectare. Tac. that absence dis∣charged the one and the command of the father ex∣cused the other, and that for this cause they ought not to be comprised vnder the offence of taking of armes. As for Plancina, he intreated the Senate to yeeld her to the intreaties of his mother. The whole assembly was offended at the impudency and impie∣ty of this demand, honest folke murmured against this woman, as the cause that Germanicus was dead and that Piso was slaine.Fas aviae inter∣fectricem nepo∣tis adspicere, ad∣loqui, cripere Senatui? Tac. Well then (said they) the Empresse shall haue the credite of sauing the murthe∣rer of her Grandchild to see her, to comfort her for the death of her husband, to snatch her out of the hands of the Senate. Will not the Lawes grant that to Germanicus which they deny not to the meanest Citizen? Vitellius & Veranius who had no correspondency which Germani∣cus haue deeply lamented his death,Venena & artes semel foeliciter expertae in alte∣rius exitium fa∣cile vertuntur. Ta. and shall Augustus his Grandfather defend Plancina who hath beene cause of his death? and who can expect other from her, then that the force of her poysons and witcheries hauing had such fortunate successe, she may imploy them also against Agrippina and her children, to satisfie the thirst of their Grandsire and the Vncle with the bloud of this mise∣rable family, and to appease the wrath of Sejanus. The opinions being recollected Aurelius Cotta said,Nomina scelera∣torum è fastis radenda. Ta. that the memory of Piso ought to be extirpa∣ted, and his name raced and blotted out of the pub∣lique Registers and Annales, the moity of his goods confiscate, the other parte giuen to Gn: Piso his son to change his name:Concessa Planci∣nae incolumitas ob preces Augu∣stae. Tacit. that M: Piso should bee depriued of his Offices, and banished for ten yeares with 500. Sesterces for his entertainement, that Plancina should
haue her life granted to her in regard of the requests of the Empresse. Euery one allowed of this aduise. Pudore flagitij princeps placabi∣lior fit. Tac.Tiberius who had what he desired sweetned the rigor of this iudgement, for the hatred of the absolution of Plancina made him lesse seuere towards her sonnes, not holding it conuenient that hee should pardon the mother being a Murdresse to condemne the innocent children. He said that the name of Piso should remaine in the Kalenders, aswel as that of Antony who had made war against his Country. Messalina said, that he ought to hang vp a golden ensigne in the Temple of Mars the auenger and Caecinna Seuerus an altar to reuenge. No (saith Tiberius) that is not fitting but only in case of vi∣ctories gotten of strangers;Domestica mala tristitiâ operien∣da. Tac. we must couer domesticke miseries with sadnesse. Fulcinius Trio who had so mightily declaimed a∣gainst Piso besought him to ayde him, with his fauour to arriue to his offices, he answered him. Take heed of precipitating your eloquence through the impetuo∣sity of your passion;Facundia non est violentiâ praecipi∣tanda. Ta. he was angry that he had too much pressed Piso touching this poyson, for all the words which hee spake of this subiect touched him to the quick: he was desirous that he would represent Agrip∣pinaes passion without shewing himselfe passionate.Rerum humana∣rum ubi{que} ludi∣bria. Tac, Audivi ex senio∣ribus qui ad no∣stramus{que} iuven∣tam durauerunt. Ta. Be∣hold how these vanities of humane things end. Tacitus saith to this purpose: I remember that I haue heard in my youth of some of this time who had often seene certaine peeces of writing in the hands of Piso which he neuer published, but that his friends told euery where, that they conteyned the Commission and commands that Tiberius had giuen him against Germanicus; and that he had resolued to haue produced
them in the Senate to conuince the Prince,Elusus à Seiana per vana pro∣missa Piso. Ta. but that Se∣ianus had deceiued him through his vaine promises and that he was not slaine by him, but that he had sent one to slay him in the night. Death freed Piso, but Tiberius and Seianus were ac∣compted neuer the more innocent,Per nocts cre∣berrimè acela∣matum est, Redde Germa∣nicum. Suet. and one might eue∣ry night heare cries about the Pallace. Restore to vs Germanicus. This death whether it were voluntary or forced, di∣minished the hatred of the people against Piso and in∣creased it against Tiberius, and so much the more in that he had saued his wife; and hauing brought this misera∣ble man into the pit would not drawe him forth againe. If Piso had left his cause to the course of iustice and law, and that he had suffered death as one who neuer had feared it, one would haue pittied his misery.Confidence lesseneth the infamy of pu∣nishment. There is no life so odious that ending in publique with constancy and modesty, changeth not hatred into pitty, pitty into fauour, and leaueth not some fauourable opinion of in∣nocency. Germanicus his death gaue lesse contentment to Se∣ianus than to Tiberius, for this Prince held all their re∣solutions in check. Tiberius knew that so long as he li∣ued he should not be Emperor.Our enemies constraine vs to liue regular∣ly and to keepe our life vnre∣proueable, as it were in a thinne dyet. Plut. Seianus despaired that he euer could be, and that he might dispose of the Empire so absolutely as he did afterwards, for this Prince kept him short, and as it were in a strict dyet. The great af∣fection which he held in the hearts of the great ones, middle ones and meane ones, mightily crossed his am∣bition. But after his death fortune bare him vp the wind so, that his pride and insolence split the sayles of his vessell and of his conduct.
Tiberius beleeued that he had more authority, but he was neuer the lesse mistrustfull, imagining that so many friends as Germanicus had left, so many con∣spirators there were and therefore he said, that he held the Empire but as a wolfe by the eares,Lupum auribus teneo. fearing least it should escape him, & being escaped bite him; he feared that euery one had a purpose to take it from him. He caused the natiuities of the principle men of Rome to be cast, and according as it was reported vnto him that their Starres promised some excellency aboue others, he suppressed, banished and put them to death. He vnderstood that Galba might attaine thereunto, and therefore meeting with him the day he was married, he said vnto him, and thou Galba shalt one day tast of the Empire,Dion & Tac. and yet hee enterprised nothing a∣gainst him, because this dignitie was fatally desti∣ned for him. Seianus amongst the precepts of his gouernment had this, to nourish distrust alwayes in the heart of Tiberius, to the end that he trusting none else might put confidence in him. The greater housen which were discended, from those braue and generous spirits, who were sacrificed for preseruing the libertie of their Countrey, were suspected of Tiberius; who de∣sired to raise the principality aboue the foundation of Augustus, and hatefull to Seianus who could not brooke, that vertue should oppose his fortune. Libi Drusus being discended by his father from Augustus,Liboni proavus Pompeius, amita Scribonia, conso∣brini Caesares. Tac. and by his mother from Pompey the great was one of the principall yong men of Rome, and as this birth giuing hope to his courage, gained him respect amongst
the great ones, so the same was the cause of his fall. His youth being forward and without iudge∣ment,Defertur mori res novas. Ta. carryed him to thoughts higher then the times permitted them, and hee was for this cause alwayes so suspected by Tiberius, that being at the sacrifices, hee commanded the Master of the Ceremonies to giue to Libo one of the Sacrificers a knife of lead, to the end that he should attempt nothing against his person. Another time he demaunding audience in secret, he caused his sonne Drusus to come thether, and feining to haue neede to be supported in his walking, hee held fast Liboes right hand, who spake to him, carrying his eye firmely vpon all his moti∣ons. This young man had one of the Romane Sena∣tors his entire friend, who plotted his ruine, consi∣dering that to aduance his fortune the shortest way,Iuvenis impro∣vidus & facili inanibus. Ta. was to ruinate those that shadowed that of Sejanus. Hee possessed this light spirit, that there was some great matter written in heauen for him, hee lead him to debauched courses which drew on excessiue expen∣ces, and he conducted him into those discommodities,Hortatur ad luxum & aes a∣lienum, socius li∣bidinum & ne∣cessitatum, quo pluribus indicijs indagaret. Ta. that this naughty friend did nothing but lull him a sleepe with nothing but vaine hopes. Necessitie made him dreame, to what hee should come, and put him into the curiosity to informe himselfe of Astrologers, of that which the starres had promised him, the ordinary refuge of weake minds that seeke patronage. To know more also, his friend caused him to conferre with Magicians, who demanded of their Deuils that which they knew, and who told him no∣thing true; for a little after all his hopes were turned into despaire.
Tib. non vultu alienatus non verbis commoti∣or cuncta eius dicta factaque cum prohibere posset scire ma∣lebat. Ta.The Senator reported all this to Tiberius, who was glad to see this yong man falne into the pit, and yet neuerthelesse he forbore not to shew him good countenance to giue him the estate of a Praetor, and sent for him often to his Table. Vpon a suddaine he cau∣seth him to be accused to the Senate as of a great enor∣mious and important matter. Behold him brought now into the state of an accused man, he changeth his gar∣ments,Reus obsoletiùs vestiebatur. Cic. the chiefe Ladies of the Citie being a kinne to him sollicite for him; there's no man will meddle with his defence, for when the question is of conspiracy a∣gainst the Prince all intercessions are suspected, and fa∣uours,It was not per∣mitted to sicke persons to goe in their Litter but to the dore of the Senate. crimes. He goeth to the Pallace in a Lectica, for this blow being not fore-seene had abated the vigor of his health, and sustained by the hand of his brother, he entreth the Senate house, and when he saw Tiberius a great way off, he held vp his hands imploring mercy with great humility. This Tigre laid hold with his teeth on all the excel∣lent Spirits of his times. A Poet hauing vttered some free words against him,Quod in Tragoe∣diâ Agamemno∣nem probris la∣cessisset. Suet. was put to death; not for that, but because in a certaine Tragedy he had disgraced Agamemnon, and transgressed against the respect due to Kings. Tiberius punished the offences against Se∣ianus, as rigorously as those against himselfe; for they made him beleeue that hee receiued the Counter∣buffe of all that was done against him. Princes are of∣fended when we blame their fauorites,He that bla∣meth the fa∣uour of the Prince bla∣meth his iudgement. because it seemes we accuse the weakenesse of their iudgements in the e∣lection of a Subiect vnworthy their fauour. The workeman is obliged to protect his workemanship, the painter is angry if one cast durt on the Table he hath pain∣ted,
They seeke out old faults to serue for new exam∣ples of seuerity. The Senate had ordained that Seianus his Statue should be erected in Pompeis theatre, which Tiberius had caused to be reedified, Cordus stung with this iniury done to the memory of Pompey, cried out that that was not the way to doe but to vndoe,Qui non rumpe∣retur supra cine∣res Gn. Pompeij constituere Seia∣num? Sen. and to place Seianus aboue the heades of all the Romans and to set vp a simple souldier on the Monument of a re∣nowned Captaine. He said true, but truth doth not excuse indiscretion, which beareh inconsiderately the censure of great ones. Seianus remembred it, yet ac∣cuseth him not for it,Novum ac pri∣mum auditum crimen. Ta. but disposeth Tiberius to looke into his life, of which, all the parts were found inno∣cent and praiseworthy: but his writings are likewise examined, and a history which he had penned of Au∣gustus, and which Augustus himselfe had read. Hee was accused that he had not sufficiently extolled Caesar nor Augustus, and that he had to much praised Brutus,Plut. and to haue termed Cassius the last man among the Romans. Satrius Secundus and Pinarius Natta were his accu∣sers, Seianus his creatures;Le credit dee accusateurs, cest le deses∣poir del accu∣sées. Seiani clientes, id perniciabile reo. Tac. and this quality made the ru∣ine of the accused vnfallible, and put his innocency in∣to despaire. The Iudge himselfe made him perceiue by his sad countenance and terrible language, that hee was set there not to heare, but to condemne him; not to make his processe but to appoint his punishment;L' innocence des actions doit excuser le faute de parol∣les. Ʋerba mea ar∣guuntur, adeo sum factorum innocens. neither did Cordus moue for the safety of his life, for he was sure to lose it; but for the honour of the truth, and glory of his workes, he spake in this manner, My actions are so innocent, that they accuse onely my words; and yet haue they not offended neither the
Emperor nor his mother, who onely are comprehen∣ded within the law of Maiesty. They say I haue prai∣sed Brutus and Cassius, whose actions are reported by many,Ilny a point d'historien, qui ne se passi∣one pour l'un ou pour l'au∣tre. and there is none who haue reported them without honour. Titus Livius to whom is attributed the prize of eloquence and truth, did so highly com∣mend Pompey, that Augustus called him Pompejan, which neuerthelesse made no breach in their friend∣ship. Scipio perso∣nage digne de toute louange bellique. Plut. Afranius Lieutenant de Pompeie con∣tre les Parthes et Arabes. Plut. Cassius enne∣my de tyrans de fon infance. Plut. Brutus bien∣volu du peuple, aimé des siens estimé de gens du bien, hay de nul. Voy l'epi∣gramme 30 de Catul.He vseth not the names of Robbers and Parricides which now are imposed vpon Scipio, Afranius, this Cassius and this Brutus, but he often stiles them braue and valiant men. The history of Asinius Pollio makes honourable mention of them. Messala Corvinus extolled Cassius as being his generall, and that did preiudice neither of them, but that they were mighty in riches and honours. Caesar the Dictator contented himselfe with answering in a written Oration, as be∣fore his Iudges the booke which Cicero composed rai∣sing to the heauens Cato his enemy. The Epistles of An∣tony and speeches of Brutus reproach Augustus with many fals things, expressing them with much bitternes and audacity. The reading of Bibaculus and Catullus is not giuen ouer though farced with iniuries against the Caesars, Iulius and Augustus haue suffered and contem∣ned them:Convitia sreta exolescunt, si i∣rascare, agnita videntur. Ta. and it is hard to say whether in that they haue shewne more moderation then wisdome, for ca∣lumnies being dispised vanishe away, but in seeking reuenge are confirmed. I doe not speake at all of the Graecians, for not onely their liberty but also their te∣merity escaped vnpunished, and if they haue bin chasti∣zed by any, words haue beene the reuenge of words. But
it was euer free and without reprehension to speake of them whom death hath infranchised, from hate or fauour: will they obiect that I haue moued the people to stirre and take armes for ciuill warres, while Cassius and Brutus were armed in the Philippian plaine? there are sixty and six yeares past since they died, as appeares by their statues which the victorious themselues haue not pulled downe. Writings also preserue their me∣mories. Posterity rendreth to euery one the honour wich to him appertayneth: and if I be condemned, there will be some that will call to minde not onely Cassius and Brutus, but also my selfe. He had cause to enrich his discourse with the ex∣amples of Caesar and Augustus, for in the world there was not any thing which may bee paralel'd to their generous bounty in pardoning obloquies.C. Calvo post fa∣mosa Epigrāma∣ta de reconciliatione per amicos agenti ultro ac prior scripsit. Suet. Ʋaler Catullus perpetuastigmat suis versiculis imposuit Caesari. Suet. Caluus the Oratour and Catullus the Poet had outragiously de∣tracted from Caesar, the truth placed shame in their foreheads, and repentance in their conscience; Caesar contented himselfe with that, and seeing that Calvus desired his friendshp, but durst not require it, he offer'd it vnto him by an expresse letter, and for Catullus he in∣uited him to supper the same day that he had published his poeme against him. For Augustus, I cannot finde his equall, Timagenes a noble Historian, did write against him, his wife,Timagenem Cae∣sar monuit, ut moderatiùs lin∣guâ uteretur, perseveranti do∣mo suâ interdi∣xit: postea in contubernio Pol∣lionis affinis consenuit. Sen. his daughter and all his house; he aduised him both to vse his pen and tongue with greater modesty, especially in his owne house, and towards his friends: for Augu∣stus nourished him. Extreame ingratitude! he conti∣nued his course; Augustus being inforced to inter∣rupt him, desired him to retire himselfe from his house;
Asinius Pollio esteeming more the gentlenesse of this spirit then the respect of the Emperor, lodged and en∣tertayned him; Timagenes wholely declared himselfe the perpetuall enemy of Augustus, burnt the faire hi∣story which hee compiled of his reigne, to make it knowne that he deserued not that he should write of him, or that the good he spake of him was but a lie; Augustus disgested all this, saying onely vnto Pollio you nourish a serpent,Fruere, mi Pol∣lio, fruere. Pollio intending to turne him a∣way to excuse himselfe, he closed his lips saying, keepe him my friend, make vse of him. Is it possible that Rome vnder such a Prince would repine to haue lost her liberty, she hath well tried since, what she hath lost in the change; it was the same flock but not the same shepheard.Subinde iactat in civitate libe∣ra linguam mentemue li∣beras esse debere Wee must needs say that Seianus hath strangely corrupted the nature of Tiberius, rendring him so seuere in punishing the iniuries of his predecessors, who made so small reckoning of his owne, and said that in free Cities,Satis est, si hoc habemus, ne quis nobis male facere possit. D. Aug. mens tongues should not be captiue; Augustus gaue him this counsell, for he complaining of his dis∣simulation against this vnbridled liberty of reproach∣ing him, he writ these words, Tiberius my sonne flat∣ter not your youth, nor your choler to beleeue there is any speakes ill of me, it is sufficient that we may preuent that they doe vs no harme.Non tantum habemus otium, P.C. ut impli∣care nos pluri∣mis negotijs de∣beamus, si hanc feestram aperu∣eritis, nihil aliud agisinetis. D. Tib. As for him selfe he did but laugh at the Satires and Buffonneries which they had published against him, and touching that which the Senate would haue gi∣uen him informations of, hee told them we haue not leisure to imbrake our selues in these broiles, and if we open this window, you will be able to do nothing else,
and you shalbe importuned euery day with particular complaints.Si vivere vellet, Seianus rogan∣dus erat, si mori, filia, ut{que} inex∣orabilis. Consti∣tuit filiam falle∣re. Sen. Cordus hauing so stoutly and elegantly spoken reti∣red himselfe vnto his house, very irresolute what course to take, if he desired to liue, he must intreat Seianus, if to die, his daughter, both were inexorable: his cou∣rage not permitting him to yeeld vnto the one, he re∣solued to deceiue the other;Al'issue du bain on portoit a la chambre du moust des oeufs frais. Quaedam per fe∣nestram, ut vi∣deretur edisse, proiecit, à coenä deinde, quasi iam satis in cu∣biculo edisset, abstinuit. Sen. not to giue any inkling of his resolution he bathed for some dayes, and the better to amuse his daughter after the bath, retired himselfe to his chamber, there to take his refection, and sending away his seruants threw out of the win∣dow some part of that they had brought him, to make them beleeue it was the fragments of that which hee did eat. The houre of supper being come, he told his daughter he had no stomack to eat, and that his for∣mer collation would serue him in stead of a supper; she did not presse him further, beleeuing all was true, and not supposing that what she approued for his health should be for his death.Homini non an∣te septimum di∣em letalis inedi∣a: durasse & ultra undeci∣mum plerósque certum est. Plin. He continued in this rigorous deuize vntill the fourth day, his weaknesse displayed it selfe, his ex∣treame sorrow was agreed with abstinence, which was not violent enough to make an end of him in so few dayes, for famine would dispence with many more. His daughter being so deluded, coniured him by in∣treaties and teares, to liue for her sake, and for his owne; these prayers came too late,It mortis in∣gressus sum & iam medium fe∣re teneo: recare me nec debes nec potes. Sen. his glasse is almost runne out, he is at the last period of his life, and then embra∣ced his daughter and said, Martia I am too farre aduan∣ced in the way of death to retreate, I am more then halfe way, thou neither oughtest nor canst retaine me.
This done, hee caused the Tapers to bee put out, the better to hide himselfe and steale away in darkenesse:Et faueibus avi∣dissimorum lupo∣rum educitur praeda. Sen. Magna res erat in quaestione an mortis rei perde∣rentur: dum de∣liberatur, dum accusatores ite∣rum adeunt, ille se absolverat. Sen. his seruants seeing this his resolution so strong, and so farre aduanced were not a whit sorry that the wolues should misse of their prey: and then it was that his ac∣cusers by the commandement of Seianus ran to the Consuls to tell them that Cordus was a dying, that is to say, that he escaped them, then grew it to a question in Court whether they might hinder an accused person from putting himselfe to death, but while they dispute how to resolue this, and to condemne him he absolues himselfe.Scripta actoris calamitate. Dio. His bookes were burned by the Aedils. The calami∣ty of the author and the excellency of the stile made them more famous and with greater curiosity to bee sought after and studied:Vir Romanus qui subactis iam ceruicibus, om∣nium & ad Se∣iani iugum a∣ductis indomitus sit homo ingenio animo, manu li∣ber. Sen. Praesenti poten∣â non extingui∣tur sequentis ae∣vi memoria. Ta. Martia preserued them and restored them to the world to renew the memorie of her father who had writen them with his owne blood, who remayned firme and inuincible when euery man yeelded his neck to the yoak of Seianus, and had al∣wayes shewed both in his discourse, writings and mind, the ancient liberty. Princes deceiue themselues in being too passionate about smothering such wri∣tings as displease them, the forbidding them whets on mens desires,Punitis ingenijs gliscit authori∣tas. Ta. and difficulty approues curiosity; if feare suppresse them during their liues, they appeare more boldly after their deaths. The punishment of the au∣thor augments the reputation of his workes, the pu∣nishment it selfe is odious; he which inflicts it is bla∣med, and he that suffereth hath the honour. And we finde that this fury against bookes had his beginnig vnder Tiberius: for what had it beene, if the
Triumuirs had proscribed or burnt these of Cicero:Reip. interest ne facta quae poste∣ritati tradan∣tur. Sen. Ca∣ligula, renued these of Cordus, and thought himselfe in∣teressed so to doe that posterity may know the liues and deeds of their predecessors. What contentment is it to see the history of so good a pen, of a courage so free and bold, of such a discourse as that hee made in the Senate, and such an example as Seneca left vs vpon the death of Cicero in these tearmes? Antony receiued great contentment when one brought him the head of Cicero,Non satiatus modo cedendis civibus, sed de∣fectus. Sen. P. and said that his pro∣scription was then at an end, for he was not onely sa∣tisfied, but wearied with the massacre of so many men: he commanded it should be exposed to the view of the people in the publique place where they made the O∣rations.Pijs concionibus multorum capi∣ta servarat. Sen P. In the same place where the people drawne by the reputation of his eloquence pressed to follow him, where they gaue eare vnto his seruiceable speeches which haue preserued so many heads, he is now made a spectacle vnto his citizens, not with the same ioy or in the same manner, they had admired him liuing and intire; but the blood couering his head and disfi∣guring his visage, the same head which in former time commanded in the Senate and was the ornament of the Romane name, now serues for a recompence to him who did seperate it from his body. All their hearts burst forth into teares and lamenta∣tions when they beheld his right hand the instrument of his diuine eloquence made fast vnto his head:Caeterorum cae∣des privatorum luctus exciave∣runt, illa una communes. the death of all besides himselfe were but particularly la∣mented; all did ioyne in mourning for this generall losse, we are not onely to beleeue the greatnesse, but to admire the number of his vertues; when he saw what
they meant to Brutus,Optimè meruit de posteris, ad quos veniet in∣corrupta rerum fides. Cassius, and Sextus Pompeius, he spake these words, euery thing displeaseh me but death. Cordus did write the history of his owne time, and it may be that leauing the truth vntainted to posterity, he spake honourably of those that suffred death in de∣fence of their ancient liberty, for the feare of death ex∣cuseth not him which offendeth against the truth to please fortune. To publish false storie, or to giue false instructions vnto them that write, is but to murther them that passe thorow the high way of beleefe: retai∣ning in his discourse the same liberty which hee had done in his writings, he contemned the pride of Seia∣nus and to deliuer himselfe from the hands of so puis∣sant a man, made it knowne that he was truely a man, with drawing himselfe from the number of miserable men. This misery was not so frequent amongst the Ro∣mans while Germanicus liued,Dion saith that often opinions past against his and that hee was not offen∣ded. these two lions as yet kept in their clawes: feare ruled the actions of Tiberius and necessity bridled the insolency of Seianus: Dion saith, that so long as Germanicus liued, Tiberius did nothing of himselfe, he restored all manner of affaires to the Senate, administred iustice by the aduise of them who assisted him, thought good that euery man should giue his aduise,Tiberius was wont to say, I am Lord of slaues, Empe∣rour of soul∣diers, and prince of all the rest. suffered himselfe to bee contradicted, and sometimes taken vp in his opinions. Hee would not permit himselfe to bee cal∣led Lord, but of slaues, and Emperour onely of the souldiers; he flatly refused the title of Father of the Countrey: in speeches and petitions he passed by the name of Augustus, and in his dispatches to Kings, and contented himselfe euery where else with the name of
Caesar and prince of the Senate: his ordinary wishes were, that the heauens might grant him life so long as the commonwealth should haue need of his seruice. Germanicus liuing,All this was during the life of Germanicus, but after his death all was changed. his birth day was not solemni∣zed; they neuer swore by his fortune, they erected him neither statue nor temple, when he passed thorow the the Citie there was neither Senator, Patrician, Ro∣mane Knight, nor any other Lord of quality in his traine: comporting himselfe in all things, as if hee had liued vnder a popular gouernment, so farre as to make funerall orations for particular persons. If he did commit any violence it was coloured and cloaked with apparances of reason or necessity,Ambition lurks for a long time after to ap∣peare great. or if it were secret; it was so carried that it neuer came to light; Clement a famous Impostor murthered his master A∣grippa Posthumus the grand child of Augustus,The Emperour Augustus to please Liuia did banish him to the Isle of Plauesia. Vetita occultis primum sermo∣nibus crebre∣scunt. Tac. and because they were of the same yeares and proportion, he caused a report to be raised secretly, as a thing dan∣gerous, after published as pleasing newes, that Agrippa was aliue: for it is true that the Emperors mother cau∣sed him to be slaine immediatly after the death of Au∣gustus. Whose memory was so deare and venerable, that vnder this name he found friends in Gaule, suc∣cour in Italy, and credence in Rome, the people crying, and beleeuing that the Gods had reserued him for the good of the Empire. Tiberius considering that fame and legerity supported this fable,Veritas visu & mora, falsa festi∣natione & in∣certis valescunt. and that there could not so little credit bee giuen to it, but that it might preiudice his affaires, made meanes to intrappe him by some who fained themselues to be of his plot: when he was before him he maruelled that hee did so handsomely mannage this imposture, and asked him
by what title doe you make your selfe Agrippa,Percontanti Ti∣berio quomodo Agrippa factus esset, respondisse fertur, quomodo tu Caesar? Tac. the gallant replyed, by the same thou makest thy selfe Cae∣sar? Torments could not wrest from him the names of his accomplices; and although Tiberius knew well that he was assisted with mony and counsell by men of the greatest ranke,Inanis credulitas tempore ipso va∣nescit. yet he made no inquiry after them; he put him to death without noyse, and there was no more spoken of it. Tiberius then had cause to reckon the death of Ger∣manicus amongst the happiest daies of his life, and Se∣ianus ranked it amongst the greatest stroakes of his fortunes: but the same enmity they bore towards the Father, they continued to his Children, dissembling it neuertheles as much as they could, because it should not appeare but in conuenient time, and couering it with shewes of affection towards them, Tiberius intrea∣ted the Senate to dispence with the age of Nero,Neronem è libe∣ris Germanici iam ingressum iuventam com∣mendavit patri∣bus, non sine risu audientium. Ta. Congiarium pleb. Ta. Ʋt illa secundis, ita hoc adversis animis accep∣tum. Tacit.. Iason tyrant of Pheres said that he would die of hunger, if he did faile of the tyranny, for he could not liue Idiot. Idiot is a pri∣uate person. to vn∣dergoe publike offices, and at fifteene yeares to be made a Questor, which office was neuer borne before two and twenty, he was also named high Priest, and at the day of his entry to this office he made largesse of prouisi∣ons to the people, which reioyced to see the children of Germanicus, in a flourishing youthfulnes. For in∣crease of ioy he espoused Iulia the daughter of Drusus, but all was conuerted to disdaine, when they saw that the daughter of Seianus was affianced to Drusus the sonne of Claudius, esteeming this great house to bee dishonoured by that alliance, and that it did but giue too much confidence to one who already had gained the greatest power, and who held himselfe but misera∣ble if he did not command, not enduring to liue as a priuate person; heauen which would haue no fruit
from so bad a tree, disposed of all otherwise. Drusus sporting himselfe in the towne of Pompey threw a peare vp into the ayre, and receiuing it with an open mouth was choaked, and this young maid bearing her part at the miserable end of her father, made her Epi∣thalamium at the foot of the gibbet, as may be seene in its proper place; their hate was not so inraged against Seianus, as there wanted not some who spake, that hee had made this mariage of purpose to dispatch his sonne in law. This opinion could be built vpon no other founda∣tion,Miror fuisse qui traderent à Se∣iano necatum. Suet. but that this young Prince made shew of great disdaine of this alliance, or too much distaste to be the sonne in law of a man so odious, which had no honour in him, his predecessors had acquired him none,Vaine is the praise which commeth not from a com∣mendable man. Plut. nei∣ther could hee leaue his children any; and receiued no praise but from them, whom himselfe dare not commend. Drusus could not endure this insolencie nor that Ti∣berius should prefer strange counsels and affections before naturall,Secreta viri cor∣rupta uxore pr∣duntur. Ta. he ceased not to tell his wife who be∣trayed him, and his friends who deceiued him; that it wanted but a little that Seianus was not Tiberius his fellow as well as hi coadiutor, and his children, kins∣men to Drusus: that his ambition had some deepe ayme, that it was not like to rest there; for the first hopes of rule are difficult,Prima domi∣nandi spes in a∣duo, ubi sis in∣gressus adsunt studia & mini∣stri. Ta. but when men haue gotten vp meanes to maintaine themselues there are neuer wanting, this he said often and to many, they were his ordinary complaints; an afflicted spirit neuer ceaseth to bemoane it selfe, and euer lay his hand vpon his sore.
According to mens natures they receiue their denomi∣nation, for Di∣on saith, that Drusus was cal∣led Castor, and that sharpe pointed swords were called Drusians. Tribunitia pote∣stas summi fastigij vocaba∣tur. Tac.This prince bore an extreame hatred to Seianus and he was so ready to strike, that they sirnamed him Ca∣stor, and being no longer able to endure this gallant that play'd the companion with him, had once his hand vp to strike him, and the other also doing the like toward the blow: Drusus struck him on the face. Dion and Zonaras write that Seianus struck Drusus, but there is no likelyhood he was so bold with the Empe∣rors sonne, which was young, couragious, an associ∣ate in the Empire, and held in the power of tribune, the greatest next to souerainty. A stab is alwayes due for a box on the eare, and is a correlatiue to it, but those blowes which proceed from the princes hand ought to be receiued, but with patience and humility: he that may kill obligeth one when he doth but hurt him. This so fresh an offence reuiued those which time had almost withered in Seia∣nus: the history notwithstanding reports not that hee made any complaint thereof,Tib. Seianum singularem prin∣cipalium onerum diutorem in omnia habuit. Vell. nor that Tiberius did chide his sonne for hauing in such sort abused him whom he had chosen aboue all others to ayde him, to support the principall affaires of the Empire; for it is but a bad exployt to seeke occasions to prouoke the Emperour against the Prince. Not dareing to complaine thereof, hee resolues to be reuenged, and as reuenge is alwayes ingenious to finde the meanes to satisfie the offended, he found no better wedge to cleaue this knot withall than one made of the wood it self;ara est concor∣dia formae atque pudititia. Iuve. & to win the wife to vndoe the hus∣band: she was faire, but her beauty agreed not with her honor, she consented to the sollicitations of Seianus, vn∣to whom none refused to yeeld any thing, seeing that
Tiberius gaue him all: acquaintance begat affection, and that which at the beginning was but loue, became adultery, and the adultery witchcraft: a strange blind∣nesse that a neece to Augustus, the daughter in law to Tiberius, the daughter of Drusus,Se ac maiores & posteros munici∣pali adultero foedabat. Ta. the sister of Germa∣nicus, the Emperors sonnes wife, and the mother of two princes, capable of attayning the Empire, should staine her honour, dishonour her house to consent to the pleasure of a plebeian: but great beauties will bee admired, and powerfull fauours are sought after. Se∣ianus could doe all through his fauour,Vnto a questi∣on made vnto Aristotle, wherefore is it that we loue that which is faire, he an∣swered Tuplou to ero∣tema. and Liuia was beloued of euery one for her beauty; to demand wherefore we loue that which is faire, is the question of a blinde man; but this is farre greater blindnesse to thinke that great men cannot doe whatsoeuer they desire. Hauing the body then at his pleasure, he mana∣ged the heart as he pleased; the first limbe was the bridge to all the succeeding.Foemina 'amissa pudicitia alia flagitia non ab∣nuit. Tac. When a woman hath lost her chastity she hath no more to lose or to refuse: loue had caused the adultery, ambition procured the murther, and from the one they passed on boldly to the other; Seianus infuseth into her spirit a desire to be the wife of an Emperor, she beleeues that he could doe what he said; for Tiberius reigned not, but in his person and vnder his will: she harkeneth thereunto,The fort which will ad∣mit of a parley is halfe ren∣dred. and relisheth it, and the pleasure which she shewes in her attention differs not much from her consent. Their wills which are agreed for loue, are vnited for marri∣age, and conspire to the same purpose to breake all ob∣stacles,Magnitudo faci∣noris metum, pro∣lationes, diversa interdum consi∣lia adfert. Tac. Seianus by diuorcing of Apicata and Liuia by the death of Drusus. But as great mischiefes cannot be soone hatched, for
feare doth breed an irresolution therein, astonishment dela, yand delay augments the difficulty thereof; they were not so much troubled to resolue on the act, as to finde the meanes and the manner. The order and se∣crecy, which ought to be exactly obserued in matters of importance were not forgotten in this abominable act. They resolued to poyson him, and considering that if the poyson were giuen in his meat, some other might be ouertaken and deceiued; they resolued there∣fore to giue it in a medicine which he should take, and which should worke so slowly, that his death should be imputed vnto nature and chance, not vnto violence and treachery.Eudemus amicus ac medicus Li∣viae specie artis frequens secretis. Tac. Adulteria etiam in principum do∣mibus, ut Eude∣mi in Livia Drusi Caesaris. Plin. Rumor Seianum Ligdi spadonis animum stupro vuisse. Ta. Liuia imployed herein Eudemus her physitian, who in this quality, and vnder fauour of his professi∣on, was ordinarily in her Cabinet. Tacitus saith, hee was her priuate friend, and Pliny, her adulterer: Se∣ianus seduceth Ligdus an Eunuch, and one of the most trusty domestick seruants of Drusus; and to vnite his heart more strictly to him, hee most vildly abused his body; who was both young and faire. These infamous persons combine vpon an execrable attempt: Seianus the assasin conceiues it, Liuia the adultresse giues her consent, the ruffian Eudemus compounds the drugge, Ligdus the Ganimed presents the same. Foure persons who deserued to giue their hearts, which deuised and consented vnto so horrible an attempt against the only sonne of the Emperor,Iupiter said vn∣to Prometheus, that he deser∣ued to haue his heart and liuer to be deuou∣red. to be perpetually deuoured by sixteene vultures. They all of them perished misera∣bly, and so may those furies all of them perish which vndertake against the liues of their Princes. Drusus without any mistrust tooke away from Lig∣dus
his Eunuchs hands this mortall medicine, and that which hee beleeued should serue for his health, hastened his death, but with so little violence, that the languishment and length thereof tooke away all suspi∣tion of poyson;Odosceleri per Apiatam Seia∣ni proditus, t∣mentis Eud ac Ligdi patefa∣ctus est. Ta. but time which discouers all things drew the truth out of obscurity, and Apicata wife to Seianus, eight yeares after gaue the first hint thereof. We may wonder that a couragious woman wounded in her honour and banished from her husbands com∣pany, by an adultresse should hold her peace for so long time; but this discourse shall not end before wee take away this astonishment.Seianus facino∣rum omnium re∣pertor habebatur ex nimia carita∣tem eum Caesa∣ris. Ta. The actions of Seianus were so notorious, and Ti∣berius for fauouring him so hated, that being already infamous through so many famous and notable crimes, it was supposed that he had procured Drusus his death by the hand of Tiberius, putting him in the head that his sonne (that he might reigne) had resol∣ued his death, and that he should therefore take heed when he should dine at his house not to drinke the first draught should be offred vnto him;Druso ignaro & iuveniliter au∣riente poculum cunctis suspicio, tanquam metu & pudore sibi∣met irrogaret mortem, quam patri struxerat. that Tiberius re∣ceiuing the cup from the hands of the cup-bearer, had presented it to Drusus, and that shame and feare per∣mitting him not to refuse it, he had swallowed the poi∣son prepared for his father: an imposture without any ground or likelyhood at all. For it had not beene so easie for Drusus to doe this mischiefe,He that made the assay is cal∣led in ancient writings a po∣tione or prae∣gustator Xeno∣phon, oinechoo. because his father tooke nothing without as∣saye, and that Custome had beene brought thither from the Persian Court since Augustus his time. But let them make Tiberius as cruell as they will, they can neuer take from him the honor of being a wise Prince,
subtill and mistrustfull, and he might be taxed of great indiscretion if he determined to put his sonne to death vpon the bare aduice of Seianus, and before hee were exactly informed of the cause and conspirators of this treason.Atrecior semper fama erga domi∣nantium exi∣tus. Ta. This comes but from the malignity of reports which little fauour the actions of Princes, all that Tibe∣rius hath done, hath beene curiously collected and published, and yet there were neuer any found so trans∣ported with hatred or passion to dishonour his memo∣ry,Divulgata at{que} incredibilia avi∣dè accepta non sunt ante haben∣da veris, neque in miraculum corruptis. Ta. who haue taxed him with this Parricide. Wee must not admit without suspition of all that common fame reports, nor prefer matters vncredible though they be credibly sought for, before that which is true, and are often disguised with false apparances, and vaine wonders to worke astonishment in mens minds. Simulatio habi∣tum ac voces do∣lentium induit. Ta.This death gaue the hope of succession vnto Ger∣manicus his children, and although the Senate for Ti∣berius his sake lamented this accident, their teares were but fained, and their griefes without sorrow; for there was no body but was very well content to see that by this death the house of Germanicus began to spring againe,Aselgestatos cai omotatos. Dio. nor was Drusus beloued for the extreme hatred they bare to his father, for he was very debau∣ched.Solus & nullis voluptatibus a∣vocatus moestam vigilantiam & malas curas ex∣ercet. Ta. And as the vices of others displease euen those that are vicious themselues, so his father chid him of∣ten for his leud and proud carriage, which made him very quarrelsome and cruell, but the people excused all this, saying, it was better for him to passe the nights in feasting,Negotia pro so∣latijs. Ta. and the day in the theaters, than to languish with solitary discontent in sad watchings and bad cogitations.
Tiberius his teares being soone dried,The Consuls did sit on high in their seates, and the Sena∣tors below, and after them the Praetors and the Tribunes. he resorts vn∣to the Senate, to seeke for consolation in his affaires; and seeing the Senatours sitting below, caused them to come vp, putting them in minde of the reuerence of the place, and of the dignity of their Offices, vsing these words to comfort their spirits for the griefe they sustained, Fathers conscript,The custome of mourning was not to bouge out of their houses nor to looke vpon the day. Vix dies à pleris∣que lugentium adspicitur. Ta. you may blame me for comming hither in so fresh and vndisgested a sorrow; and I know well, that such as are in heauinesse cannot endure the light, nor the condolements of their nearest friends; but as I ascribe not that vnto feeblenesse of courage, so I desire to witnesse vnto you, that I haue not sought for any greater comfort in my affliction, than the embrace∣ments of the Commonweale. He represented vnto them also, that the extreame age of the Empresse tooke from him all hope of further issue; that his grand-children were very young, that he had already runne more than halfe the race of his life,Germanici lib∣ri unica presen∣tium malorum levamenta. Ta. and that he therefore prayed them to call in Ger∣manicus his children; the onely remedy and consola∣tion for those euils which now afflicted them. Then sent they for Nero and Drusus. The Consuls went out of the Senate to receiue them,Egressi Consules firmatos alloquio adolescentibus deductos{que} ante Caesarem statu∣um. Ta. and after they had said something vnto them to giue them assurance, they conducted them before the Emperor; who taking them by the hands said, My friends, when these chil∣dren lost their father, I sent them vnto my sonne Drusus their cosen, and intreated him although he had children himselfe, to haue as much care of them as of his owne bloud, to bring them vp and conserue them for himselfe and posterity. But now that Drusus is snatched away
from them, I adresse my prayers vnto you, and coniure you before the Gods and our countrey, that in doing that which is my duty and yours, you will take the care and conduct of the Nephewes of Augustus, which are de∣scended from famous and illustrous persons. And then casting his eyes vpon the little ones, he said, My deare Nero and you Drusus, these Lords you see here are your fathers: the condition of your birth is such, that the Commonweale hath intrest both in the good and euill which you doe. The Senate made no answere but by their teares, their vowes, and prayers: and this dis∣course had beene much more for the honour of Tiberi∣us, if he had not added hereunto the very same pro∣mises wherewith he had so often deluded them, that he would restore Rome to her former liberty, and leaue the gouernment either to the Consuls or to some o∣thers. These last words were so farre from the inten∣tion of him that vttered them, and the beliefe of the hearers, that they tooke from the fromer all the beliefe which truth and honesty might haue giuen them. All this was but meere iugling, for this bad Prince thought of nothing more than how vtterly to ruine Germanicus his house,Vana & irrisa vero & honesto fidem adimunt. Ta. which Drusus his death began againe to bring into credit. They performed his fu∣neralls after the same order that those of Germanicus were, and many other magnificences were added there∣unto, for the last flatteries are alwaies the most liberall. Tiberius himselfe made the funerall Oration as Au∣gustus made that of Agrippa his sonne in law.Addit semper aliud posterior adulatio Ta. There was a vaile laid betwixt the dead and him, because he should not see the body, for the high Priest was a sacred thing it was not permitted him to looke
vpon any mournfull obiect;So Philo re∣porteth that the high Priest of the Iewes al∣wayes to keepe his soule pure, neuer saw any mournfull thing. the very Statues of the Gods were couered or transported from those places where any punishment was inflicted; and Claudius caused the Statue of Augustus to bee taken away from the Theatre of the gladiatours because it should not be present at the murthers, or it was alwayes vailed; eue∣ry one wept for him who wept not himselfe at all, for that obiect so sad and feeling had not the power to sof∣ten his gratuity,Flente populo non flegit vul∣tum Sen. obseruing without any preturbation the people who bewayled his losse, whereof himselfe had no feeling. Seianus who stood by him admired his constancy, but made no vse of it,Seiano ad latus stanti experie∣dum si dedit quam patienter posset suos perde∣re. Sen. for this did notably shew of what temper this princes heart was; carrying the losse of so deare a person so patiently: did he thinke that this Prince who had so little relentment of the death of his sonne, would care for that of his seruants; hee should haue beene more subtill to haue knowne the humour of his master, who made vse of him as of a cloake or gabardaine in foule weather, to throw it a∣way when it was past. Seianus dreamed of nothing but to ruine the house of Germanicus, and that accom∣plished, Tiberius will ruine him; for then he will haue no more imployment for him, he serues his turne with him now as with a good horse, when the horseman findes him ready he spures forward, and makes him goe where he pleaseth, and in the end kills him. This mighty power of Seianus was not solely ma∣naged by violence, auarice must haue her part,Quicquid non acquiritur dam∣num est. Sen. and made him thinke all which he acquired, not to be lost. Dion saith, that he was heire to all them that died with∣out children; this iniust cupiditie wrought the death
of Lepida a noble Romane dame; and Suetonius ha∣uing declared how he procured the death of Lentulus the Augure, that he might haue no heire but him, hee addes the pursuite he made against Lepida to be for no other cause,Ingratiam Qui∣ri consularis praedivitis & or∣bi. Ta. but to gratifie Quirinus her husband a ve∣ry wealthy man and without children. The proceeding reported by Tacitus is strange, she kept not company with her husband for the space of twenty yeares when he accused her of adultery poyso∣ning and faining her selfe to haue a child: Tiberius said she consulted with the Chaldeans against his person and his house;Exemit Drusum dicenda primo loco sententia, ne caeteris assen∣tiendi necessitas fierit. Ta. he would not haue Drusus deliuer his mind first in her iudgement, to the end they may freely deliuer their opinions and not to compell them to follow him. There were playes to bee shewen during the pro∣cesse, Lepidae did accompany the chiefest and most il∣lustrious dames of the Citie, enioying the priuiledge of the Romans, who were not imprisoned during their accusation, nor after iudgement, if it were not capitall. Entring the Theatre of Pompey she turned her eyes to∣wards his images which were there in diuers places,Amm Marcelli∣nus Rankes the Theater of Pompey inter decora vrbis ae∣ternae. Adstantes effusi in lacrimas saeua & detestanda Quirino clamitant. and implored his succour, from whom she was descen∣ded. This was with dolefull lamentation and abun∣dance of teares, which moued the people and princi∣pally the women to compassion, and to powre forth reproaches against Quirinus, calling him an vnworthy man, to deale so cruelly with a woman who hauing beene promised to L. Caesar Augustus his sonne,Livia cui semper Emiliorum de∣cus L. Sulla, ac Cn. Pompeius proavierant. Ta. did him a great deale of honour to marry him, as if they would faine say vnto the good man, that because hee was old, had no children, and of a low degree his
wife had cause to make him carry the hornes. The processe being prepared, their opinions incli∣ned to commiseration of a woman of a great house, li∣uing twenty yeares asunder from her husband, and the accusations against her were proued but by slaues. But Rubellius Blandus concluded with banishment,Adsensit Drusus quamvis alij mi∣nores. Ta. Drusus was of his opinion, and reduced those which proceeded not with that rigor. A Prince should not be the first nor the last to deliuer his opinion, he is to conclude and determine.Quo loco cense∣bis Caesar, si pri∣mus habebo quod sequar: si post omnes vereor no impudens dissen∣tiam. Ta. These words were brauely spoken by Piso vnto Tiberius in the beginning of his rigor: Caesar where will you place your selfe in deliue∣ring your censure, if first, I am bound to follow you; if last, peraduenture what I thinke you will not; and so I may vnwittingly commit a great error. Dion obserues an other way to come by the inheri∣tance of a rich man. Sextus Marius had a daughter yong and faire, Tiberius sollicits her, her father retired her to his countrey house, to cause her to returne,To suruiue ho∣nour is to liue too long. they accused her of incest, the daughter speakes these words vnto her father: Let vs not giue them the contentment to dispose of you and me at their pleasure, and to bring vs to that passe, that it shall not be permitted vs to die ho∣nestly; I was not accustomed to make my prayers vnto any but the Gods, I will not be beholding for my life vn∣to Seianus with the losse of that which is dearer to me than a thousand liues. Marius ashamed that his cou∣rage should haue need of the example of his daughter, killed himselfe first, and she followed him. This death was very profitable to Tiberius and Seianus, for they were heires to Marius,The same hand that doth the iniury repaires it. a man so rich that being offended with a neighbor of his, inuited him
to his house and made him good cheare for two dayes space, the first day he rased downe his house, the se∣cond he rebuilt it fairer and larger; the master of the house returning the third day was astonished at the al∣teration: Marius then said vnto him, the one I haue done to reuenge my selfe as your enemy, and the other as your friend for the good I wish you. Delatores genus hominum publi∣co exitto reper∣tum est poenis quidem nun∣quam satis coer∣citum per praemia eliciebantur. Ta.There was no safety in Rome, but for slanderers a pernitious kinde of people; whom disorder hath brought in credit to spoile and ruine all, who were so supported that not onely their calumny remained vn∣punished, but recompenced; the more firme and stiffe they were to vphold falsehood and to braue the inno∣cent the more they were gratified, it being no more lawfull to offend them,Vt quis destrictor accusator velut sacro sanctus e∣rat leves ignobi∣les poenis afficie∣bantur. Ta. than things holy and sacred; others whose consciences would not suffer them to bee obstinate against the truth, were vnregarded and punished. Vibius Seruus Proconsull of the lower Spaine, was accused by his sonne to haue conspired against the Emperour,Miseriarum ac saevitiae exem∣plum reus pater accusator filius Tacit. and to haue sent some among the Gaules to stirre and mooue the people. He appeared couered with the dust and mire which he gathered in his iour∣ney, for he was newly returned from exile; and though he saw his life in danger, yet he carried a bold courage before his Iudges, and with eyes sparkling with indig∣nation and threats he looked vpon his sonne, who was there braue and well accowtred,Multis mundi∣tijs adolescenti, alacri vultufacit. stamping with his feet for anger, and ratling of his irons and chaines; for hee was conducted by the souldiers that had him in guard, he lifted vp his hand towards heauen, and prayed the Gods to send him back into the place from whence
he came, and punish the ingratitude and impietie of bis sonne. Nature so outragiously offended, permitted him these imprecations, and would not suffer him to shew himselfe a father towards this wretch,Whatsoeuer the sonne doth, the fa¦ther should not strip him∣selfe of the office of a fa∣ther, to put on that of a iudge. Pro peccato ma∣gno palulum supplicij sati è patri. In silius ortas vinculus pasc. & dominatos scorpiones occi∣ditis. Petr. who had reuolted from his dutie. A father ought to content himselfe with a slight punishment, put this disloyalty was so strange that it wrested from his heart this praier vnto the Gods for his chastizement, euery where that we finde monsters we stifle them, not asking from whence they come, we nourish the birds which come from Forrests, but wee kill the scorpions which are bred in our houses. This his so setled countenance imprinted in the minde of the iudges an opinion of the innocency of the father, and made them deforme the malice of the sonne; who affrighted with the remorse of conscience, the noise of the people which threatned him with im∣prisonment, the hurling of stones, and the punishment of Parracides, fled to Rauena,Exequi accusa∣tione adigitur. Ta. from whence Tiberius made him to returne, constraining him to pursue his accusation, for he would in any wise be rid of Seruus, keeping still in minde the hatred he bore him for a let∣ter which he had written vnto him eight yeares be∣fore,Haud tutum contumacius loqui apud aures superbas & of∣fensionis primo∣res. Ta. in more arrogant tearmes then by proud eares and tender to be offended could be well brooked. The Senators gaue their opinions hereupon, Gallus Asinius was of opinion that hee should bee banished into the Isles of Gaire or Donuse, which was not found fitting because there was no water neither in the one nor the other,Dandi vitae usus cui vita concedi∣tur. Ta. and that it was reasonable they should giue meanes to liue, vnto such as they had giuen life vnto. O cruell pittie! hee desired that the commodities
of life should serue for the lengthning out and en∣tertainment of the miseries of paine. It was lawfull for the most wicked to assault and wrong the honestest men, to speake iniuriously of them and to offer them affronts;Religion hath giuen vnto the Temple of the Gods freedome and flattery to the Statues of Princes, this custome was put in practise in Rome since Iulius Caesars time. Capitali circa Augusti simula∣crum Seruum caecidisse. Suet. nor durst masters repre∣hend their seruants or correct them. There was no excesse but might be excused for such as could couer it with the image of Caesar. The same franchise which gaue assurance to the criminall, gaue assurance also, and occasion to commit the crime. The great respect which men bore vnto Tiberius was in other places then at Rome, where his Statues were as venerable as these of Iupiter Olimpus, in such sort as the master was condemned of impietie because he hath struck his ser∣uant, carrying about him a peece of mony whereon the image of Caesar was ingraued. Amia Rufilla was condemned of falshood by the Senate at the pursuit of Cestius. Enraged herewith she stayed for him at the entry of the Pallace, neare vnto Tiberius his Statue,The place were Theseus cursed the A∣thenians in the bourge of Gargetus was called Arateri∣an a place of malection. Plut. Principes instar deorum sunt sed necquaquam dijs nisi iustae sup∣plicum preces audiuntur. Ta. from whence as from a place of cursing, she assaulted him with all manner of raylings and bitter speeches, which are the weapons of feeble spirits. Cestius durst not demand reparation because she had wronged him, vnder the fauour and neere vn∣to the image of Tiberius, he made complaint hereof, and spake in the open Senate these memorable words: Princes hold the places of Gods, but the Gods hearken onely to the iust prayers of their suppliants, there is none that will runne to the Capitall nor vnto the other Tem∣ples of the Citie, as to a place of refuge, there to commit any crime. But the lawes are now abolished and ouer∣throwne from the very foundation; seeing that euen in
the publique places, and at the very entry of the Pallace we are constrained to beare iniuries, and to heare threat∣nings without any hope at all to be righted,Non licet i experiri ob effi∣giem imperato∣ris oppositam. Ta. for the re∣spect which is had vnto the Emperours Statue. If the History should haue mentioned nothing also but this, to represent vnto vs the estate of the miserable reigne of Tiberius, it would haue beene enought to discouer vnto vs the violence and disorder thereof; wretched was then the condition of a Romane citizen,Crimen ex silen∣tia ex voce. Ta. there was danger either to speake, or to behold his Peere; thoughts onely were free from tribute and dan∣ger, prouided that their countenance did not make a∣ny shew either of ioy for Agrippina, or of discontent against Seianus. The absolute power he had ouer the goods of the Romanes, made some say that it was a good thing to dwell at Rome, and to haue their estate lying out of the bounds of the Empire. Vacia a rich man, and who had beene Pretor,Vacia nulla re alia quam ocio notus conseruit, & ob ho vnus foelix habebatur. Sen. with∣drew himselfe to his country house, finding no other defence against the violence of the time, than a solitary life. It was a hard thing in those times for men to re∣solue themselues, for they beleeued that he who did it of his owne instigation, did either differ so much from nature, that either he did set himselfe aboue her, with the Gods, or vnder her with the beasts: as often as the friendship of Asinius Gallus, Agrippinaes kinsman or the hatred of Seianus had ruined some one, the peo∣ple of those times would cry out,O Ʋacia solus sis vivere. O Vacia there is none but thee that can tell how to liue. The solitary life was the most assured,Ʋita rustica par∣cimoniae iusticiae ac diligentiae magistra. Cic. the ciuill more perillous, and the country more pleasing, and in∣deed she is the mistresse of sparing, of diligence, of iu∣stice
and simplicity; it hath not beene accompanied with honour, or yeelded such content as in former times,Attilis manus rustico opere at∣tricae salutem publicam stabi∣lierunt. Val. Gaudebat tellus vomere laureato. Plin. when great Captaines went from their triumphs to the plough, from their tillage to armes, and from their farmes to the Senate; the ground tooke delight in those dayes to yeeld fruit in abundance, and to ac∣knowledge the labour of those victorious hands which manured it with a coulter crowned with lawrell. Seianus this torrent of pride and insolence ouer∣flowes: there is none now that stayes it, all that might keepe it in is cast downe.It is not safe to commit so ma∣ny and so great offices into the for∣tune of one a∣lone. Tiberius is blamed to sub∣mit the fortune of the Empire to the discretion of one man alone, and his will to the honour of his groome. Ambition is often gogle eyed when she hath need of a cleare sight and is astray when shee thinkes to goe right: Seianus is lost by her, his designes fall out other∣wise then he expected,Wicked inter∣prises worke the ruine of the vnderta∣kers. he beleeued, Germanicus being dead that Drusus was the onely block that lay in his way, he takes him away by poyson, and now behold the succession remaines without any doubt to the chil∣dren of Germanicus, to assure his tyranny he must de∣stroy them,Ferox scelerum quia prima pro∣venerunt Ta. he vndertooke it the more boldly because his former wickednesse hath had happy successe, and that the father was carelesse to reuenge the death of his sonne. Hee imprints in him a beleefe that his enemies would make their profit of this losse, that Agrippina is resolued to reigne; there needed no art to perswade him,Non dubia Ger∣manici libero∣rum successio. Ta. he sees the succession apparent, and this woman ready to bite at the apple, he is resolued to cut off the mother and the yong ones; Seianus findes himselfe much perplexed, for to corrupt Agrippina as he did
Livia there was no possibility,Spargi veenum in tres non pote∣rat egregia custo∣dem fide & pu∣dicitia Aggrip∣pinae impenitra∣bili. Ta. she was of an invinci∣ble and vndaunted chastity, it was impossible to poi∣son them all three at once, and surely very difficult; so great was the fidelity and vigilancy of their seruants, besides they could not deale with this Princesse or with other women, all the towne is for her. The most bold and shamelest slander dares not take hold of her, she marched vpright betweene the ielousie of Tiberius, and the ambition of Seianus; who found no nearer way to ruine her then to animate the Em∣ror against her, by causing him to apprehend both her courage and her hopes, he lost no time in this, and encountred a little after with a fit occasion to produce this bad designe. They did vse to sacrifice in the be∣ginning of the yeare, an Oxe with golden hornes to Iupiter, for the welfare of the Prince, which was the welfare of the commonwealth. The high Priests, and by their example the rest, recommended vnto the same Gods both Nero and Drusus, not so much for the loue of them as to flatter Tiberius, and to make shew they desired that the Empire should continue in his house: mens manners were then so depraued,Adulatio mori∣bus corruptis pe∣rinde auceps s nulla & ubi ni∣mia est. Ta. that it was no more dangerous to flatter too much, then not to flatter at all. Tiberius was vexed to see those youths goe cheeke by ioule with his age, and asked the high Priests,Primores modice perstringendi. Ta. Mobiles adole∣scentium anim praematuri ho∣noribus ad super∣biam non extol∣lendi. Ta. if they had done this by the entreaties or threats of A∣grippina; and they answering no, he checkt them, but gently, for they were for the most part either of kin to Agrippina, or the chiefe of the Citie. He went of purpose to the Senate about this businesse, and made vnto them a cunning speech there, to shew vnto them,
that from thence forwards the feeble and inconstant spirits of young folkes were not to be spurred on vnto pride by those honours which were giuen them before their time. Seianus made more adoe with this then Tiberius, saying that all was going to wrack; seing they made no difference betweene the Prince and his kinsemen, that the Citie of Rome was deuided as in the ciuill warres when she had three Lords,Facta tribus do∣minis communis Roma. Lucan Caesar, Pompey, and Crastus; that the authority of the Emperor was the weakest,Nullum aliud gliscentes discor∣diae remedium quam unus alte∣rium maxime prompti subver∣tantur. Ta. that Agrippinaes party was already formed, and that vnlesse resistance were made, the number would grow greater, that there was no better remedy for the discord which began to gather head and grow vp, than by a sudden cutting off of one or two of them. He threatned but two, and meant to strike many, but he beleeued that those Sibius and Sabinus would be throwne from that height, that the rest should ap∣prehend their fall; their generous affection towards the house of Germanicus, did not degenerate from the nature of true friendship, although to them it was not onely barren,Amicitia Ger∣manici pernici∣sa utrique. Ta. Turpe ali gra∣tificari per dede∣us proprium. Ta. but vnfortunate; Varro a Consul villa∣nously accommodating his conscience and honour to the passion of Seianus accused C. Silius, and Sosia his wife. T. Sabinus was reserued for another time; and although they represented this pursuit to be violent, and that Varro should expect vntill he were out of his Consulship, yet they made their processe of a crime of maiestie, although they were accused but to haue con∣uerted the publique treasure of the commonwealth to their owne vse, and that there was no man which de∣maunded restitution: but Tiberius was so subtill, that
he gaue the lightest faults the names of most odious crimes. Silius seeing that, made no defence,Proprium Tibe∣rio scelera nuper reperta priscis verbis obtexere. Ta. and if he did speake, it was but to declare that the pursuite was too puissant: and foreseeing that there was no possibi∣lity to scape,Emine dam∣natio voluntario fuit praevertitur. Tac. his courage aduised him to preuent an vn∣euitable death by a voluntary, Sosia was banished. His imprudency and vanity did assist his ruine, he ceased not to vaunt that Tiberius was obliged to him for the Empire, and that if the Legion which he com∣manded in Almaine were reuolted as the rest, hee could not hold it any long time, this reproach did pricke to the quicke the minde of Tiberius, for he did ouerthrow all his fortunes, giuing him no share in the prosperity of affaires, and made it knowne it was not in his power to acquit himselfe of this obligation. When the seruice is so great that it cannot be acknow∣ledged, Princes accompt it an offence,Clytus lost him∣selfe to haue said that Alex∣ander held his life of the Ma∣cedonians. Plut. Beneficia eo vs∣que laeta sunt dum videntur solui posse, vbi multum aure ve∣nere pro gratia odium redditur. Tac. hate holds the place of recompence and affronts of thankes. It is more safe to be obliged to the Master, then to oblige him and seruice that cannot be recompenced makes the seruant importunate. Amongst all this Seianus sees himselfe so eloigned from his hopes that he redoubles his course to arriue vnto them, and by an auengled improuidence discouers them to Tiberius; it is true that he was compelled by the ordinary exclamations of Liuia, who ceaseth not to sum∣mon him with his promise of legitimating their loues, and change the name of Mistresse into that of wife,Reason should say vnto Chol∣ler that which the Nurse saith to her Childe, Weepo not, and you shall haue it. Plu. Se∣ianus giues her words for deeds; she is angry, he ap∣peaseth her; she weepes, he flatters her; and although reason did perswade her as Nurses doe their children, Weepe not, you shall haue it, yet her patience is quite
spent, his heart is like a mine which bursts out with so much the more ruine and noise by how much the more it is stopt vp and constrained,Seianus nimia fortuna secors & muliebre cu∣pidine incensus. Ta. he suffers himselfe to be carryed away with the ambition of this woman, who hoped to espouse with her husband the title of Augustus, and to giue her contentment discouers his designe to the Emperour; beseeching him to agree to this mariage: he presents vnto him his request; and notwithstanding the high fauour he was in, hee brake not the order of treating with the Prince, no otherwise but by writing. Caesar brought in this custome, to the end hee may haue time to consider of that which was demanded; and what answere to returne, and to make the expedi∣tion of his affaires more commodious: for the affluence was so great, the towne of such extent, that it was im∣possible immediatly to satisfie all Augustus did write,Sermones libello habuit ne plus minus{que} loquere∣tur. Ta. all his answeres, because he may not speake more or lesse then that he thought off. The contents of his request being so hardy, he did not tremble in presenting it; a timorous suppliant is more boldly denyed.Qui timidè ro∣gat negare docet. To intreate remisly or carelesly, is to doubt either of the merit of the request, or of the power of him whom we request; he frames a com∣plaint of gratitude and remembrance, for an expert courtier should neuer begin with his demand and addes an impious flattery, saying that he gaue this or∣der of speaking of his affaires sooner to his mistresse then to the Gods.Spes & vota non primum ad principium aures quam ad deos. Ta. It was in these tearmes: The good which Augustus wished me, and that which you haue done me, Caesar in many occasions oblige me not to send forth my prayes and vowes sooner to the eares of the Gods
then to yours.Qui excubias & labore ut unus militum proin∣columitate prin∣cipis mavult haud unquam honorum felge∣rem precatur. Ta. It is to tell you that although I did neuer affect this glittering shewe of honours, and that all my ambition was but to watch and labour as a simple soul∣dier for your safety and prosperity. I haue notwithstan∣ding this contentment which I prize aboue all others; that I was already deemed worthy of the alliance of Cae∣sars by the mariage of my daughter with the son of Clau∣dius: it is the foundation of my hope,Augustus in col∣locanda filia nonnihil de Ro∣manis equitibus consultavit. Ta. and because I haue heard say, that Augustus proposing to giue a husband vnto his daughter, had a thought to haue made election of a Romane Knight; my supplication vnto you is, that if you seeke for a husband for Livia the widow of your sonne, you may be pleased to remember him whom you haue alwayes loued, and who in that has no other designe than the glory of your alliance, without laying aside the offices wherewith you haue honoured me; it sufficeth me that my house may haue a proppe against the enmitie of Agrippina,Satis vixit qui vitam cum prin∣cipe expleuit. and that which I doe is but for the loue of my children, for mine owne part I make no reckoning of my life any longer then I may wholely imploy it in the ser∣uice of such a Prince. Tiberius hauing praised the zeale of Seianus and in few words put him in minde of the fauour hee had extended towards him, added,Tempus ad inte∣gram consultati∣onem necessari∣um. Ta. that the businesse would craue some time to giue a deliberate answere, and spake in this manner, The interprizes of common men do ordi∣narily aime at profit, but the condition of princes is farre otherwise;Praecipua rerum ad famam diri∣genda. Ta. for they ought to referre the principall of their actions and designes vnto reputation and honour; wherefore I will not make answere vnto this request so soone as I might do it: Liuia may of her self resolue whe∣ther she were best to marry againe, or continue still in my
sonne Drusus his house,Matris & Aviae propriora consi∣lia. Ta. she hath more Councellors then my selfe, her grand-mother, and mother, and for my selfe, I will freely giue thee mine aduice concerning the rest, first touching the malice of Agrippina, without all doubt this will the more ardently inflame it, when shee shall see the mariage of Livia deuide the hearts of the Caesars into diuerse parties. Hence wee shall see and heare the noise and strife of womens iealousies, and through their discord my Nephewes shall enter into quarrelling and what a case were it if this alliance should procure a broile.Quid si intenda∣tur certamen. What will it be if they accuse you.Thou deceiuest thy selfe Seianus if thou thinkest to be able to remaine still in the same estate, or that Li∣via is of such a humour as to wax old with a Romane Knight,Vix eum equite Romano senescit quis nupsit Cae∣sari. Ta. hauing married Caesar and after him Drusus, and though I should consent thereunto, thinkest thou that such as haue seene her brothet, her father, and our grand-fathers possessed of the soueraigne dignities, would endure that I should suffer it. Thou resoluest to liue in the state in which thou art,There is not a∣ny desire so well ordered but will em∣brace occasi∣ons. but the Magistrates and the chiefe of the State, who against their will come to visit thee, and demand this aduice in all things, know that thou art not to stay there, that thou hast raised thy selfe aboue the quality of a Knight,Excessit equestre fastigium Seia∣nus. Ta. and that I haue outstripped the tearmes of the affection my father bore thee: they publiquely dissembled this, but in priuate they blame my affection, for the enuy they beare thee. Thou sayest that Augustus had purposed to giue his daughter to a Romane Knight, and verily it is a mar∣ueile,Augusti animus in omnes curas distrahitur. Ta. hauing a spirit so wrathfull ouer all, and hauing foreseene to what a degree of power he might mount him, whom he should by this alliance raise so high a∣boue
all others: he spake of Caius Proculeius, and of some others,Insignis vitae tranquillitas nullis RP nego∣tijs permixto. Ta. which were of a notable tranquilitie of spirit, and which no way medled with any affaires of the commonwealth. And if we be astonished at this his resolution, how much more ought we so to be for marrying his daughtet to Agrippa. This is that which my friendship will not let mee keepe from thee, and therefore I doe assure you, that I will neuer crosse these designes, nor those of Livia. I wil not now tell thee what I am resolued to doe, before the yeere come about, and with what alliance I purpose to ioyne thee vnto me; I will onely tell thee this, that there is nothing so eminent whereunto thy vertue and the alliance thou bearest vnto me, may not raise this;Nihil tam excel∣sum quod non mercantur vir∣tutes. Ta. & when any occasion of speaking hereof, either to the Senate or people shall present it selfe I will not be silent. But Seianus had greater assurance in the thoughts of Tiberius than in his words, his minde was franticke with this ambition, he was no more capable of reason,In the com∣merce of laue and ambition, reason is a coyne which passeth not for curant. he had much adoe to come thus farre; there is no way to passe further, the ascent was very difficult, slip∣pery and stubborne, and being come to the height he shall finde but shiuering, and will behold round about him but a fearefull downe-fall. Tiberius vnwilling he should perish, shewed him how he did but runne headlong vnto his destruction, and did rectifie him: whosoeuer shewes vs the place where we first began to faile,Vincula charita∣tis apud concor∣des, sunt incita∣menta irarum apud infensos Ta. obligeth no lesse then he who shewes vs which way we should go; he giues him to vnderstand that this mariage will be an originall of perpetuall discord in the house of the Caesars, and that the very same things which serue as a ciment amongst
persons which are at agreement, doe forme hatred in the mindes of such as are already at iarre. But Seianus was not so much in paine about the successe of his mariage, as with the suspitions which began to engender in the fantasie of Tiberius against that great and powerfull authoritie which hee had v∣surped in all affaires, which in short time causeth con∣fidence to degenerate into feare, affection into iealou∣sie, and liberty into necessitie. Praecipuum inci∣diū magni prin∣cipis magni li∣berti. Ta. in cuiuscunque animo virtus sit, ei plurimum tri∣buendum. Vell.To haue two great subiects is no good signe of the Princes owne greatnesse, and yet notwithstanding it is the true property of great Princes to raise merit and recompence seruices, for wheresoeuer vertue is found, it will be honoured; it considers more the person then the country, industry more then birth; of all times Rome hath seene new men raised to great ho∣nours; T. Cornucanus High Priest, Sp. Carvius Con∣sul, Ma. Cato Censor, Municus Thriumphius and Mar∣cus six times Consul. It is madnesse for a man to oppose himselfe against the will of the Prince,Consecratus est vnicus sentiens{que} Euthymius ni∣hilque adeo mi∣rum aliud quam hoc placuisse di∣js. Plin. when he saith I will haue it, he renders reason enough of his actions; men wondred to see Euthimius to be placed amongst the number of the Gods before his death, and that in his life time he was sacrificed vnto, but they were satisfied with this only reason, Iupiter would haue it so. Interest reipubli∣cae quod usu ne∣cessarium, & dignitate emine∣re utilitatemque authoritate ini∣mica. Vell.To take from the Prince the power to raise the meane conditioned, and abasing the great ones, this is to snatch the Scepter out of his hand, to make his pow∣er but a shadow, and to quench the liuely light of maiestie. The State hath intrest, that liberality should acknowledge merit, and fauour should sustaine ser∣uices,
the condition of a Prince should be very hard,Dubium an fato principum incli∣natio in hos, of∣fensio millos, an sit aliquid in no∣stris consilijs. Ta. if amongst so great a number of seruants he might not chose some one worthy of a more entire confidence, according the happinesse of the election, or the force of the merit. It is no matter if this fauour procure the iealousie of great ones, the enuy of equalls, or the hatred of inferi∣ors, so it trouble not the order of affaires, that particu∣lar intrest swallow not vp the publique;Ʋt paucis illu∣strentur mundus euertitur unius honor orbis exci∣dium est. Sal. for when this shall come to passe, and that to enrich a few of these fauourites the State is impouerished and all put in disorder, the Prince which so indiscretly distributeth his fauour, is dispised as hauing neither iudgement, nor iustice in his elections,Multum grauius supplicium odio publico. Sen. and the fouourite findes by experience that there is no greater punishment than the publique hatred. If it please the Prince he may cast him downe as low as he hath exalted him,Fluxa fama po∣tentiae no suis viribus nixae. Ta. and there needs but a blast to lay flat such powers as are not sustained by their owne forces; Tiberius was somewhat startled at this great power of Seianus: but the good will which all the people beare to the house of Germanicus doth more af∣flict him, and Seianus who sees his imagination per∣plexed therewithall represents the perill vnto him to be more then it is,Choler is or∣dained as com∣panion to rea∣son, and Basile calls it the nerue of the soule. and reuiues in the heart of the Em∣presse the ancient rancor she bore against Agrippina, this remembrance driues her into choler, and this an∣ger that is the nerue which giues the suddainest moti∣on vnto the soule, makes her thinke, she shall neuer be any thing so long as her enemy is something. To make this apprehension penetrat the deeper in∣to her minde, he employes Mutilia Prisca her confi∣dent,
and to gaine her he practizeth with Iul. Posthu∣mus, who made loue vnto her;Regibus aequa ne dum infirmia insolita sunt. Ta. the Empresse was pre∣sently moued with Agrippinaes hopes, and her feare not onely of taking place beneath her, but of being e∣qualled with her,Facilis foemina∣rum credulitas ad gaudium. Ta. furnished her with deuices enough to make her yet more odious vnto Tiberius then she was before. Moreouer Seianus had some suborned persons that entertained Agrippina with vanities and infused into her minde the sweet hopes of Gouernment, and as pleasing things doe more easily enter into womens be∣leife, she sought for accusations the more freely to ad∣minister iealousie vnto Tiberius and contentment to the people. Tiberij seculo magna pietas fuit nihil impie facere. Sen.But as that age was so corrupted, that it was then a vertue to doe no euill, and pietie not to be impious. Ti∣berius resolued to doe no good to Agrippina, feared notwithstanding to be blamed for impietie and ingra∣titude, if he did her any ill, whereupon his indignation not dareing to ayme directly at her, he first set vpon her friends and kindred: Claudia Pulchra her cosen, was accused of adultery with Furmus, and of charmes, and poyson against Tiberius. Domitius Afer quoque crimine clarescere prope∣rius. Ta.Domitius Afer who at any price would make his fortune, was the accuser, he was one of that number which Seianus entertained, and serued him as a petty instrument to stirre and moue great workes withall: vpon this accusation Agrippina inflamed with choler, as well for the iniury as for the perill of her cosen, came to see Tiberius, and finding him offering a sacri∣fice vnto her father, she said, You should not thus imolate your sacrifices nto Au∣gustus, and persecute his posterity, the spirit of that great
Prince is not in his dumbe statues,Non in effiigies mutas divinus spiritus infusus. Ta. but his true image which is borne of his celestiall bloud, vnderstands well the difference by the bad vsage which is offered her, be∣ing reduced to the miserable state of one accused; there is nothing intended to Pulchra, it is to me: I am sole cause of her ruine, she hath committed no other offence,Pulchrae sola ex∣itij causa quod Agrippinam stulte prorsus ad cultum delege∣rit. Ta. but that shee made no shew of affection but to the seruice of Agrippina, and that improuidently; for shee should call to minde that Sosia Galla was banished for that cause. This discourse did so incense Tiberius, that hauing lost his dissimulation, he brought from the bottome of his heart a bitter speech, and strange to his humour which was neuer accustomed to be so forward; for after telling her that she should moderate her passion, he ad∣ded a Greeke verse, importing thus much, Thou beleeuest daughter, that thou hast wrong done thee, if thou command not. If Agrippina did vnderstand the Greeke tongue this speech passed not without a reply, and it is certaine that Princes of her ranke were learned;Augustus qua∣dam epistola A∣grippinae neptis ingenium colla∣davit & scripta. Suet: Agrippina her daughter composed a history, Augustus commen∣ded the wit of this Agrippina, who remained for a suf∣ficient time in Athens, and in other Cities of Greece with her husband Germanicus, to vnderstand some words. And it is without doubt that this speech pricked to the quick her ambition, and giuing fire to her choler, she could not refraine from speaking these words im∣mediatly or in retiring, Behold we are well seeing the hopes of a woman bring iealousie to Tiberius, and feare to Seianus; if I haue any ambition it is not for my selfe,
my sexe wrongs my courage. If I haue a desire to raign, it is but in my Children? where doe they finde that I should loue them lesse then I doe?Mihi nunquam persuadebunt vt meos amari a me unius vnquā putem. Plin. Agrippina sem∣per Atrox. Tac. Pervicax irae. Tac. Aequi impati∣ens. Tac. I haue part in that which the heauens reserue for them, and I will that they know, that if I affected not their greatnesse, I should not be a mother. Let him call me fierce, proud, impatient, as much as he will, I cannot be otherwise against this hare-brained man, whom he names his companion, and would be so with my children, who is allied to the Claudians, placeth his Statues amongst them of the Caesars, puls downe those of Pompey, who carries his authority aboue that of the Senate, who caused my Husbands death, perse∣cutes my kindred and friends; yes, I am angry that I doe not command, for I would be ashamed to command so vniustly and wickedly. Weaknesse and choller doe not well agree to∣gether.But what doe menaces auaile where power is wan∣ting, there is nothing so vnfit as to be weake and yet cholericke. That of Agrippina did her no good, and aduanced the condemnation of Furnius and Pulchra. Domitius then, who shewed himselfe so eloquent in their accusation,Prosperior A∣fro eloquentiae quam morum fama. Tac. is praised by Tiberius, and placed in the ranke of the chiefest Orators, but with more esti∣mation of knowledge how to speake well then do well, extreame old age did much lessen the reputation of his eloquence, for hauing his spirit weary and spent, hee could not refraine speaking. It is doubted whether these two Lawyers were con∣demned according to the law of Iulia, ordained by Augustus against adultery,Relegation was milder then exile. Namque relega∣tus tum exul. dicr. Ouid. for that was too gentle to satisfie the cruelty of Tiberius, and animosity of Seia∣nus, and more shamefully then seuere, onely relegating the culpable out of Rome.
The number moderated the rigour of the paine, for if it had beene capitall, it would haue made whole fa∣milies desolate. Seneca saith,Argumentum est deformitatis pudicitia: nun∣quam invenies tam miseram tam sordidam vt illi satis sit vnum adultero∣rum par nisi sin∣gulis diuidat ho∣ras, & non suf∣ficit dies omni∣bus. Sen. that this excesse was so common in his time, that shamefastnesse was a signe of deformity, to be wise, it behoued not to be faire; there was not a woman so miserable and beggarly, that could be contented with a couple of seruants, who gaue not each one his turne, and vnto whom the longest day seemed not too short. It was ordained that she who had to her Father or Grandfather, or to her Husband a Roman Knight, would not professe her selfe a whore. Vistilia issued from a Family, a∣mongst whom there had beene Preters, declared be∣fore the Edils, that she would not let her youth passe away in barrennesse, nor her beauty vnknowne: In a word, that she was a Courtizan;Satis poenarum aduersum impu∣dicas in ipsa professione flagi∣tij. Tac. this was all the pu∣nishment which custome ordained for these disorders, to the end that the shamefull declaration of so misera∣ble and infamous a life might be instead of a paine or penalty. Tiberius confined her to the Isle of Seri∣phos. We must beleeue that Seianus made him not any whit the more clement towards Agrippina's Kinswoman his enemy, for outstripping the seuerity of his Predecessours,Aquilciam qud∣quam Consul le∣ge Iulia dam∣nassat exilio pu∣niuit. Tac. he had already caused Aquilia to banishment, although the Consul had put her but to the penalty of the law of Iulia. Agrippina was so incensed to see her kinswoman so vnworthily handled, that shee fell sick thereupon; and after many complementall good wishes of her re∣couery, her griefe soone brought sighes into the mouth and teares to the eyes of the sick person, and hauing deplored her misery and the ruine of her house, shee
besought the Emperor, that to asswage the griefe of her louelinesse,Non aliud probis quam ex matri∣monio solatium. Ta. he would be pleased to permit her to mar∣ry, her youth not being able to continue in that solita∣rinesse; there being left no contentment for honest women of such yeares, but mariage; and that it would please him hartily to embrace the protection of Ger∣manicus his widow and children. The prayer you make (my father) is not that I should be weary of my solitude, that there may bee some thing which would kindle againe my affection; the first is the ashes of Germanicus, and will neuer bee reuiued, there is nothing which may content me, there remaines no ouerplus for me; if the Gods had as yet conferred any grace upon me, they must giue mee a new heart to receiue it, for they haue neuer sent mine owne but bitternesse;The reason of State is a thwarting of ordinary rea∣son, hauing respect to a reason or be∣nefit more vni∣uersall. A deliberate answere disco∣uers neither offence nor feare. Ne of∣fensio aut metus prodatur. Ta. Prima semper irarum tela ma∣ledicta sunt & quod non possu∣mus imbecilli optamus irati Sallust. it can neither containe nor beare delight, I haue need of some one which may comfort not my courage, but may entertaine my patience. Reason of State which goes aboue all reasons of or∣dinary lawes could not consent to this demand, for be∣ing a woman equally beloued for her chastitie and fruitfulnesse, she would replenish a house with Grand-children of Augustus, who one day would sue for the succession of the Empire. Tiberius considering the preiudice the State might sustaine by this demand, made her no answere at all, that he might neither giue notice of the offence hee tooke, or of his feare, and went coldly away without speaking a word; this silence and coldnesse inflamed Agrippina the more, and as the first arrowes of re∣uenge are bitter words, and what we cannot doe for lack of power, we wish it out of the heat of choler, so she
powred forth all she had in her heart; Seianus who could take his time considereth all this, and by an of∣ficious kind of disloyalty sends word to this Princesse that the smouthering flames of the designes, which Tiberius had reserued in his minde against her; were vpon the point to euaporate and breake forth, that he was resolued to poyson her, and that she should take heed of taking any thing at his hand, nor any meat:Solum insidia∣rum remedium si non intelligan¦tur. Ta. Agrippna who in discretion should haue made no shew of this aduice, for the perill there is to make knowne that we are acquainted with Princes intents, presently drew her heart into her brow, and being one time at Table with Tiberius she grew obstinate both in silence and abstinence; when he saw that shee had not tasted of an Apple that he had giuen her with his owne hand, but had giuen it to some that waited at the Table, he turned himselfe towards his mother and rounding her in the eare, said, It is no marueile if I haue beene somewhat seuere heretofore towards this woman, seeing she takes me for an impoysoner.Non mirum si princeps quid se∣verius statuit à quo veneficij in∣simulatur. Ta. Where distrust once begins, there friendship ends; from this instant their mindes became vnreconciliable, and the rumour was spread ouer Rome, that Tiberius would put Agrippina to death, either openly or in secret. Hereupon Tiberius vndertakes a voyage to Naples, which designe had beene often deliberated, resolued,Augustus dyed at Nola. Certus procul urbe degere. Ta. Cum saevitiam ac libidinem fa∣ctis promeret lo∣cis occultabat. Ta. delayed and broken off. He said it was to dedicate a temple to Iupiter at Capua, and an other to Augustus at Nola where he dyed; but he had no other intention then to absent himselfe from the Citie. It is certaine that Seianus knowing his humour counselled this his retreate to haue the meanes to gouerne him as hee
listed, but because he staied there fiue yeares after his death I suppose that he chose out this place to couer the dissolutenesse of his life. Decrepit old age makes the Prince to be despised, Dion speakes it of Tib. and Nerua. Dia togeras ca∣taphro noume∣non. Adrian was the first Emperour which let his beard grow to couer the sla∣shes ouer his face.Some there are that thinke also that it was to couer & hide his old age, which made him contemptible, and to auoide the beholding of his body which was falling in peeces, and the spirit willing to come forth as from a building, whose walls were crackt, and the beames rot∣ten, this bad complexion of his made him ashamed, he was tall of stature, leane and slender, his sholders croo∣ked and sticking out, his head bare and bald, his face full of pimples and Fistulas, knots and bolwaies disfi∣gured with plasters, nor did the haire of his beard one whit couer this deformity, for the Emperours were not any, his nature was best pleased with solitarinesse, and had beene accustomed thereunto at Rhodes, where he eschued much company to couer his Riots, and those of his wife. Soueraigne authority can admit no com∣panion.But one of the most apparrant reasons was his im∣patience being not able to endure any longer neare his Mother, who would doe all, nor could he wrest the au∣thority out of her hands, for hee receiued the Empire by them,Matrem Domi∣nationis sociam aspernabatur. Tac. and vpon euery occasion she would reproach him, that he raigned not but by her meanes, & that he was no lesse beholding to her for his fortune then for his birth. It was true, for Liuia perceiuing that Augu∣stus would haue declared Germanicus his successour vpon the beliefe he had, that his election would be gratefull to the people, who loued and extolled him, she preuailed so much by her prayers and entreaties, that Tiberius was in the end assured to attaine to the Empire after Augustus and Germanicus after Tiberius,
Liuia did put him in minde hereof; this remembrance seemed a reproch,Qui exprobrat reposcit. Tac. this reproch a summoning him to an acknowledgment, and the failing therein ingratitude. He performed this Voyage then to be far from his Mother, and was therein accompanied but with a small traine, to wit, with one Senator named Cocceius Nerua, learned in the Lawes, with Seianus, and with one Knight called Curtius Atticus,Marino partici∣pe Seianus, Cur∣tium Atticum oppressit. Tac. whom Seianus ruined a little after, the residue were learned men, and most of them Graecians, for he passed his time in discoursing with them, and delighted in the beauty and riches of that language the which he spake distinctly, readily, & eloquently: this he could not doe without nature, art, & grace: many speake it, but few know how to speake it well, and to do so, their discourse must alwaies be to the purpose, and the current thereof without confusion. Besides the contentment Seianus had to possesse his Master alone, he managed the affaires with more surety and lesse enuy,He that med∣dles with many businesses giues way vnto for∣tune, to lay more hold of him. Qui assiduos in domum caetu arcet in fringit potentiam: Qui recipit facultate criminantibus praebet. Tac. The souldiers carried the packets and were called speculators. but giuing still leaue vnto fortune to fa∣sten the surer vpon him. His abode at Rome was not so fit for estranging from his house all ordinary compa∣ny, he left his friends, but in receiuing them daily, he made the number to be knowen, & ministred iealousie to his Master, he reaped hereby also another commodi∣ty for he alone receiuing the packets which the souldi∣ers of the Guard brought, he was sole Arbiter of all di∣spatches. All the functions of Tiberius soule were di∣stracted in this hurtfull leasure, and all his strength melted away in these delights, which Seianus alwaies seasoned with some notable example, because this Prince beleeued that his authority would be lost if his seuerity maintained not the reputation thereof. This
solitude produced an occasion which greatly confir∣med the proofe of his fidelity, for as Tiberius on a time dined in a Caue,Hinc metus in omnes & fuga eorum qui conui∣vium celebra∣bant. Ta. the mouth of that falling downe slew fome of his Officers, and he himselfe had beene smothered without the helpe of Seianus, who couered him with his head and hands, his Princes safety being more precious vnto him then his owne,Qui non sui sed principis est an∣xius, cum fide auditur quan∣quanm exitio suadebat. Ta. from thence forth he followed his councels, were they neuer so dangerous, without any consideration either of the ground or consequence, as of a person who had wit∣nessed to haue no other interest therein, then that of his authority. He caused him resolue to rid himselfe of Nero the neerest to the succession, whose hopes trou∣bled his rest, and busied the mindes of the people with a desire of change: he playes the part of a Iudge, and his people about him were the accusers, and condem∣ned him as an offender.Nero quanquam modesta iuventa tamen quid in presentiarum conduceret obli∣tus. Ta. This young Prince had mo∣desty enough in his condition, but little iudgement to take any sudden resolution, and to weigh the councels of his seruants, who ceased not to tell him that his birth carried him to the Empire, that the people desi∣red it; that the legions craued it; that Seianus was wic∣ked enough not to wish it, but not powerfull enough to hinder it.Nihil quidem prava cogitatio∣nis sed interdum voces contumaces & inconsultae. Ta. These words did not infuse into his soule any euill thoughts, but drew from his mouth at vnawares certaine words, which being reported to Seianus, and by him to Tiberius, were taken for a con∣spiracy; when he is in Court they take heed of all that he doth, they blame his words, and his silence also is blamed. All his actions are watched, there is no safety nor assurance in his owne house, and the night it selfe will conceale nothing for him. If he sleepes in his
wiues bosome,A Roman Se∣nator to assay the discretion of his wife, as of a vessell ill closed he would not poure thereunto, ei∣ther wine or oyle but water onely feeding her curiosity with nothing but flammes and guls of his owne inuenti∣ons. Plut. Ne nox quidem secura cum uxor vigilia, somnia, suspiria, matri Liviae atque illa Seiano pateface∣ret. Ta. Iam diù sopita fratrum odia ac∣cenduntur. Ta. euen there he shall finde persidious dea∣ling, for like a vessell that leaks she lets all run out that is put into her, she reports vnto Livia the Emperours Mother his waking dreames, and his very sighes, Li∣via recounts them to Seianus, who bandies his Bro∣ther Drusus against him, giuing him hope of the first ranke, whn his elder Brother whom the hatred of Ti∣berius had already much shaken, should be beaten downe. Drusus was of a fierce spirit, for besides his desire to command, and the emulation which is ordi∣narily betwixt brethren, hee was desperately iealous that Agrippina his Mother loued Nero better then him. Seianus had no better heart, nor bore any greater affection to Drusus then to the other, but knowing that he had courage, and durst carry himselfe stoutly in danger, he supposed it would be more easie for him to lay some ambush to entrap and ruine him. All Germanicus friends were sought after and perse∣cuted, one friend betraied another, the firmest friend∣ship went not so farre as the Altar,Multis simulati∣onum involueris tegitur natura vnius cuiusque frons oculi vul∣tus persaepe men∣tiuntur. Cic. but couered such in humane disloialties as they shewed how dangerous it was for man to trust man, whose forehead is a lyar, his eye a traitor, and his countenance a deceiuer. Sabi∣nus accused with Silius remained not any long time, but that he saw himselfe to be at the same cliffe from whence he was precipitated, but it was by a notable treason. Foure Pretors followed the Consulat,Si consulem vi∣dero aut praeto∣rem omnia qui∣bus onor haberi solet faciam equ deliam, caput aperiam semita cedam. Sen. the supreame honour of our Romane ambition, twelue vshers marched before the Consul, he that sate downe rose vp, and he that was on horseback, or in his Coach alighted, each man was vncouered, and many put by their swords to doe them reuerence. These men ha∣uing
no meanes to obtaine it but by the fauour of Se∣ianus, which could not be acquired by any iust nor honourable waies, knew not what to resolue; to giue him money, he hath no need of it; he hath the dispo∣sall of the riches of the Empire, and of the treasure of the Emperour, which amounts vnto more then 7200. mil∣lions, their nature is too violent and peruerse to fur∣nish him with pleasures, and for honours he is greater then the Emperour,Seiani volun∣tas nisi scelere quaerebatur. Ta. for his will is a law to them of his faction, his Statues are raised as high as those of Cae∣sars, to purchase the fauour of the Oracle he makes a sacrifice of the heads of his enemies. Of this number was Titus Sabinus a Roman knight, who thinking that the friend that falters was neuer a∣ny, continued after the death of Germanicus his affecti∣on towards his children,The friendship that ceaseth was neuer friendship. Sectator domi comes in publico post tot clientes unus. Ta. assisting them in their affaires at home, and bearing them company through the streets abroad, glorying in the constancy of his fideli∣ty, in such a time when their most faithfull friends were become fearefull, and the most obliged ingratefull. Eo apud bonos laudatur gravis iniquis. Ta.This being pleasing to honest men, and incensing the mischieuous, was quickly perceiued by Seianus, who e∣steemed it a brauado and contempt, that a man of that degree should set so litle by his power,Compositum in∣ter ipsos ut Lati∣aris strueret do∣lum caeteri testes adessent. as openly to de∣clare himselfe for his enemy. These men haue notice of the wound in his heart, and go about to plucke out the arrow which stucke in it, Latiaris to betray Seianus becomes the spie, and the rest witnesses, he had some former acquaintance with him, he now renewes, im∣proues, and reinforces it, with a more strict familiarity, beginnes to praise him that he remained so constant in his friendship towards the family of Germanicus, af∣ter
that others flinched away,Florentis domus amici ad stri∣ctam deserunt. Ta. he spoke of this Prince with honour, of his wife with pity, and of his children with hopes, Sabinus thinking to haue found a man truly confident for to poure into his heart his griefes,Molles in cala∣mitate morta∣um animi. Ta. Effudit lachri∣mas iunxit que∣stus audentius onerat Seianum saevitiā superbi∣am spes eius. Ta. as mens hearts are alwaies tender in feeling of calami∣ties, he let drop his teares, then his plaints followed them, and after that reproaches and iniuries against Seianus, he speakes of his cruelties, his pride, and his designes, and as it is difficult to bridle a discourse when choller and passion haue scope, many franke words es∣caped him against Tiberius. This secret passion so euaporated,Species arctae a∣micitiae inter eos qui sermonibus vetita miscuere. and his minde so freely discharged, he beleeued that he was well assured of the amity and freedome of Latiaris; because they haue mixed together their bold complaints, and words dangerous and prohibited. And as afflicted soules know and seeke out one a∣nother, Sabinus went euery day towards Latiaris, still to open him some new wound in his heart,Dolores quasi ad fidissima affe∣ruetur. and that so much the more confidently, by how much hee held him for a most trusty friend; the pore man should spend more time and iudgement to try him. Latiaris related this discourse of Sabinus to three other Senators; but because the proofe of one man a∣lone was not enough to condemne him,Turpis latebra detestanda frat. Ta. they agreed to hide themselues betweene the boards and the fee∣ling, to heare him; in the meane while Latiaris should make him continue and renue this discourse: he findes him in the market place, brings him to his house, and tells him hee had newes to tell him, the chamber being shut, he represents vnto him the dan∣ger past and the present miseries, wherein those times
were but too much abounding;Praeterita & in∣stantia quorum affatim copia ac novos terrores cumulat. Ta. he raises vpon the old plaints new feares, not so much to let him know, that all was desperate, as to make him sing and speake to his owne guise: Sabinus who yet beleeued more, an∣swered, that matters were in that state, as there can be nothing said nor pronosticated, but ill, that there was no expectation of any goodnesse in a gouernment so tyranicall and insolent:Maesta ubi semel, prorupere, diffi∣cilius reticentur. and as we cannot easily retaine plaints and iniuries, when once they haue found a pas∣sage, and it is difficult to conceale that which hurts vs, he made Seianus the instrument of all the calamity priuate and publique. We doe hardly retayne that which hurtes vs. Missis ad Caesa∣rem literis ordi∣nem fraudis su∣um{que} ipsi dedecus narravere. Ta.All this discourse came thorow the holes of the boards into the eares of the three Senators, who as soone as Sabinus was departed, perfected the treason; Tacitus saith that at the very instant by expresse let∣ters they certified all vnto Caesar, expressing vnto him the treason and their infamy,Tosiano charix∣omenos. Dion and Dion saith, that this was done to gratifie Seianus: he should adde there∣unto, that it concerned themselues, for besides that they would draw a recompence of this disloyalty, and attaine to the honour of Consulship in dishonouring themselues in this manner, if any of them had be∣trayed his companion there was an end of their liues. The rumour of this wickednesse being carryed to Caprea, was brought againe presently to Rome, where it marueilously troubled mens mindes set euery man vpon his guarde.Notae ignotaeque aures vitantur muta at{que} inani∣ma & parietes circum specta∣bantur. Ta. The eares of all both knowne, and vnknowne, were suspected, they suspected the very walls and things in sensible, euery where was nought but silence, sorrow and astonishment.
Sabinus is layd hands hands vpon the first day of the yeere. Is it thus (said hee to those that tooke him) that they begin the new yeere, must Seianus haue oblations of this qualitie, what assurance is there then for a Romane Citizen, seeing that amongst our vowes and sacred Ceremonies,Inter sacra & vota verbis etiam profanis abstinere mos. Tac. wherein wee abstaine from the least prophane speech wee may perceiue Ropes to bind and strangle withall, and that in the Temple wee find Pri∣sons. They put him to death presently, not giuing him leasure to defend or iustifie himselfe. His Dog lay downe by his dead body,Cum quidam ex corona cir∣cumstante cani cibum obrecis∣set, ad os de∣functi tulit. Innatauit idem in Tibe∣rim cadauere abiecto susten¦tere conatus. Plini. brought to his mouth the bread that was giuen him, and when hee was cast into Tiber, hee lept after him to keepe him vp that he might not nke into the bottome. All the towne wondred to see such gratitude in a Beast, during so many ingratitudes and inhumanities which then defamed men. All his accusers dyed miserably, and as Princes hate Traytors when they haue gathered the profite of their Treasons, so Tiberius rid them away: for when hee had serued his turne with such bad Instruments, hee brake them and tooke new ones. The Emperour thanked the Senate for freeing the Common-wealth from such an Enemie,Tiberius sce∣lerum mini∣stros vt per∣uerti abais nolebate ta plerumque sa∣tiatus & ob∣latis in ean∣dem operam recentibus, ve∣teres & praegraues afflixit. Tac. and added, that he passed his life in fear and trembling, that the coniurations of his Enemies held him in paine, and although he named them not, it was easi∣ly perceiued that hee pointed at Agrippina and her Children. Asinius speaking according to his accustomed freedome and libertie, said, That it was fit the Em∣perour
should be intreated to discouer his feares,Qui metus fatetur, eos a∣moveri sinat. Tac. Aegrius accipit princeps, ea quae recludit quam quae promit. Tac. and suffer them to remoue them from his heart. Tiberius tooke this to be too bold an aduice, for it sent a bright beame to the bottome of his heart, which hee was not willing to discouer. Seianus pacified him, not for any loue to Gallus, but to the end that his chol∣ler being restrained,Tiberius Ien∣tus i medi∣rando, vbi prorupisset tristioribus dictis atrocia facta coniun∣gebat Tac. his fall might be the more head-long and violent, hauing alwayes obserued, that the more Tiberius meditated reuenge, the more did time and delay sharpen it, and the farther off he threatned, the heauier the stroake fell. Asinius Gallus was of great repute in the Com∣monwealth, but in much more disgrace with Ti∣berius, who feared his courage, hated his vertue, said that his pride was an hereditary disease, blaming Asinius Pollio his Father,Asinius Pollio made a Tra∣gedy of the Ciuill wars. Interroga Caesar quam partem rei∣publicae tibi mandari velis? Tac. Speaking to Princes we must not so much consider that that be true which we speake, as whether they be willing to hearken there∣unto. Iulia Augusta 82. annos vitae Pucino retulit acceptos, non alio vino vsa. Plini. a braue captaine, a very per∣swading Orator, an excellent Poet, a friend to truth in a time when it was very odious. Tiberius (who neuer forgot the stinging speech which Asinius had spoken to him at his first com∣ming to the Empire, when alleaging that hee was capable but of the one halfe thereof, he sodainely asked him which he would haue) cast him in prison where hee languished three yeeres, in the end death set him at liberty, but it is not knowne whether it were naturall or forced. Princes will not be other∣wise treated withall, then thus; wee must speake to them by supplication and remonstrance; to tell them of their faults, is not to correct them, but to offend them. About this time dyed the Emperours Mother a∣ged according to Dion 86. or according to Plinie
82. who referres the length of her life to the quality of the wine she dranke. The Senate ordained for her great honours, but her sonne (not out of modesty, but out of enuy) cut off some part thereof, and by his letters dissembled nothing that he was offended at the fauours of his Mother, taxing the Consull Fuluius, whom the Em∣presse loued: a man fit to attract the loue of wo∣men, and who had the art to speake gracefully, and could giue Tiberius such close girds,Facetiarum apud praepo∣tentes in lon∣gum memoria est, dum acer∣bae sunt. Tac. that would bite him sore, and whose sharpenesse hee had felt: great men doe not easily forget that which neuer so little exceedeth merriment. Tiberius his haires were waxen gray vnder the o∣bedience of his Mother; for neither his age nor his maiestie had freed him from this dutie; that wise Roman said,Parentes non amare Impie∣tas est; non agnoscere In sana. Sen. That who loues not those that brought him into the world is impious, and hee that doth not ac∣knowledge them is mad. But this respect founded vpon the deuoire of nature, did not impeach the libertie of State Reason, which is iealous of any thing that may incroach vpon Authority;Iulia Tiberij nomen suo postscripsit, Tiberius vt inferius Maie∣state principis dissimulaum & graui of∣fensione ab∣didit. Tac. hee was offended that his Mother dedicating an Effigie of Augustus neere the Theater of Marcellus, did place the name of Liuia before that of Tiberius; he thought that Maiestie was wounded in that, and a Prince should not indure it to be touched in any thing. Shee was married to Tiberius Nero, father to the Emperour Tiberius, and Augustus extreamely taken with her loue, rauished her from her husband,Penatibus grauidam in∣duxit, Tac. and that so sodainly, that hee gaue her not time to lye
in the house from whence hee tooke her. It is not knowne whether shee consented to this change, or whether her ignorance gaue her any colour; faire women which haue committed any fault by the perswasion of a Prince,Vitium au∣tho e redemit. Ouid. Matris in ad∣misso fal a sub imagine Iusae error inest, pluvia tctus adulter erat. Ouid. beleeue that Authority ex∣cuseth them: Hellen said, That her Mother offen∣ded not, hauing Iupiter as a warrant for her trans∣gression. Scribonia wife to Augustus was repudiated for hauing too freely complained of the immoderate power of this new friend: her fall assured Liuia, and her fault taught her hus to gaine the heart of her husband, shee must please his humour; where∣fore being asked how shee could so absolutely rule her husband; she answered, in not prying into his acti∣ons, and in dissembling his affections. Neuer did woman giue better aduice to her hus∣band; for seeing that Augustus to haue reigned se∣uerely liued not securly,Quid viuis si perire te tam multorum in∣terest? quis fi∣nis rit suppli∣ci rum? uis sanguinis? D. Aug. and that Cinna did goe a∣bout to kill him in a towne of the Gaules, at such time as hee was to offer sacrifice, and to giue him vp as an oblation for the publike weale. Augustus was much dicontented with this enterprize, and wish∣ed hi death, seeing so many men dsired that hee should die,Se ritate nihil adhuc prof cisti, ten∣ta qumodo tiicdat cle∣mentia: ig∣nosce Cinnae; deprehensus est, iam nocere tibi non po∣test, prodesse faae tuae po∣test. D Liv. and that a man of that qualitie, Nephew of Pompey, should attempt to take away his life: be∣ing in this perplexitie Liuia his wife spake vnto him these memorable words, The Remedies you haue v∣sed haue not preuailed, embrace their contraries; seueri∣ty hitherto hath beene vnprofitable, essay what clemen∣cy will doe, pardon Cinna, his designe is discouered, hee cannot annoy your life, and may increase your repu∣tation.
Augustus was perswaded by her, caused Cinna come vnto him, and shewing him how hee was enformed of his enterprise, said vnto him; I haue already giuen you life as an enemy and rebell, I giue it you now as a traitor and parricide;Contendamus vtrum ego meliore fide vitam tibi de∣deman, tu debeas. let vs speake no more of it, let vs be friends, let vs make it ap∣peare which of vs will doe better, I, in pardoning, or you in repenting. As Tiberius had his fauourite, Liuia also had hers; to obtaine any thing of Tiberius, the passage must be through the discretion of Seianus; and hee that will purchase the fauour of Liuia must sacrifice to Virgulania; whose Authority in the Citie was so great, that none durst enterprize any thing against her, how iust soeuer it were;Amicitia Au∣gustae Vigula niam extulrat supra leges. Tac. for shee did raise her aboue the Lawes; moreouer, shee was a woman so fierce and arrogant, that being called before the Senate, shee refused to appeare, although no per∣son was dispensed withall, not the Vestall Nunnes.Vestales in foro & Iudi∣cio audiri, quoties testi∣monium dice∣rent, vetus mos fuit. Tac. Virgulania monitu prin∣cipis, pugio∣nem nepoti misit. Tac. Tiberius was constrained (for the respect hee bore his Mother) to be troubled for any thing that concerned her, in such manner, that her Nephew hauing throwne his wife out of the windowes, hee incon∣tinently went to visit the Chamber, and saw that this woman did not precipitate her selfe as hr hus∣band did alleadge, for they beheld the markes of the effect to push her, and of her resistance to with∣stand. As long as this Princesse was aliue, hee modera∣ted his will, submitting it (for respect vnto her) to her councels, and Seianus likewise in dutie hum∣bled his designes to her commandements, not da∣ring
to gainsay them;Tunc veluti frnis exoluti proruperunt. Tac. but after this death, all things grew irregular and disorderly, and there was now no more hope or refuge for innocency. Sanctitate do∣mus priscum ad morem, co∣mis vltra quā aiuis foemi∣nis probatum materium po∣tius vxor faci∣lis, & cum ar∣tibus mariti simulatione filij bene composita.C. Caesar who succeeded in the Empire praised her publikely before the Pallace, for that she had religi∣ously gouerned her houshold after the old fashion, not permitting the present time to bring in againe those vanities and curiosities which had so much marred the simplicitie of former ages: a Princesse, gentle and courteous, and of a higher straine of Princely carriage then other women of her time, a mother that would not endure any thing, a wife that had nothing in her vnsufferable, and so discreet that she could sagely fit her selfe to the wisedome of Au∣gustus, and the dissimulation of Tiberius. The Senate receiued Letters from Tiberius against Agrippina and her children. It was thought they had beene written long before, but that the Empresse had detained them,There is no∣thing in man but his ambiti∣on which waxeth not old Thucid. & Plut. foreseeing that they would cause some trouble; and although her ambition was not growne old, yet shee desired to passe the remainder of her dayes in peace. They accused not Nero or Drusus of any crime a∣gainst the State, nor of leuying of troopes, nor of introducing of nouelties, but onely to be debauched; there could be nothing said against the Mother, but to reproach her with her pride and stubbornenesse. The Letters being read, there was some question touching the deliberating thereof;Queis nulla ex honesto spes, publica mal in occa∣sionem gratiae trahuntur. Tac. and as the opi∣nions were more or lesse rigorous, according to the nature of those which were too opne, some Senators whose hopes could not be grounded vpon honour,
who sought for occasion of grace and fauour in the miseries of the publike, were of opinion contrary to the more ancient and wiser, who lifting vp their thoughts higher then these, found that there was no minde so strong and firme but ought to be very re∣serued, in giuing either counsell or iudgement vpon the liberty or life of him who might succeede the Prince. Tiberius had giuen the charge of the Acts and Re∣cords of the Senate to Iunius Rusticus, who hauing neuer before giuen any proofe of constancy or cou∣rage; shewed notwithstanding, that it were good to proceede slowly in this businesse, that they may giue the old man time and space to repent himselfe and reuoke his commandement,Dandum in∣terstitium paenitentiae. Tac. Breuibus mo∣mentis secun∣da verti pos∣sunt. Tac. for things of greatest moment oftentimes change themselues on a sodaine; that nature also was strong and flourishing in the house of Germanicus, but in that of Tiberius weake and feeble. Vpon this contention, the people who would not indure that these Princes should be treated as crimi∣nals, detest this iniustice, and casting the blame therof vpon Seianus, carry the effigies of Agrippinae and Ne∣ro through the Citie, assemble themselues about the Pallace, cry out, these Letters were false and coun∣terfeit,Frebantur sub nominibus consularium fictae in Seia∣rum sententiae. Tao. make Seianus his processe, and faigning the opinions of the Senators, the boldest of the com∣pany hauing gathered them of his companions pro∣nounce against him the sentence of death. And here∣upon there wanted not Satyres to be dispersed a∣broad,Per occultum libido inge∣niorum ex∣crcetur pro∣cacius. Tac. so much the more bitter, by how much the au∣thors were vnknowne, and are the more greedily col∣lected
and sought after, by how much the more they are sharpe and ingenious. Seianus who should haue warded these blowes by his contempt of them, giues contentment to his e∣nemies, as to let them know that this troubles him; lets the Emperour see that his Maiestie is wronged by his iniurie, that the people vndertaking to raise assemblies,Facile populus duces impera∣toresque dili∣git, quorum imagines pro vexillis sequi∣tur. Tac. and pronounce sentences; there remai∣ned to them no other thing, but to take armes, and to choose for Emperour him whose Image they carried for their Ensignes. Tiberius sends new letters to the Senate, continues his plaints against Agrippina and her children, against the timerity and insolence of the people, and against the Senate for inclining more to the cunning of one Senator, then to the reuerence of his commande∣ment, in contempt of his pleasure, and derision of his authority:Integra sibi cuncta postu∣lauit. but he addes further, that he reserues to himselfe the knowledge of him: the fathers ex∣cuse themselues, protesting that they were resolued to punish them to the vttermost, if his commande∣ments had not stayed them. Inestimable losse of the Annals of Cornelius Ta∣citus, not of some few pages but of all things past since the yeare 782. vnto 785.Here all the world laments the vnestimable losse of the bookes of Cornelius Tacitus, by which wee might attaine to the knowledge of Agrippinaes for∣tune, of the coniuration of Seianus, and would ligh∣ten vs with the torch of truth amidst the obscurity of coniectures. Libraries haue preserued many Books, to whom we will willingly resort, for that which is wanting of this excellent Historian, who knew all that hee should know of the affaires of the world.
Now Tiberius ceased not vntill such time as the Senate did content him,Nouissime ca∣lumniatus modo ad sta∣tuam Augusti modo ad ex∣ercitus con∣fugere velle. Suet. and that all his violences were authorised by their iudgement. There was no∣thing did so much further the condemnation of A∣grippina and her children, then the aduice which Se∣ianus gaue to Tiberius, that shee was determined to goe through the Temples of Rome and embrace the Statues of Augustus, to moue the people, and if that way did not preuaile, to direct her course to Almaine to seize the Legions. Agrippina was not more mildely handled then her children,Accusauit p literas amaris∣sime congestis etiam probris, & Iudicatos tristis fame necauit. Suet. and we must beleeue of her the same which Suetonius reports of them: that hee caused them to be declared enemies, and to dye of hunger: Nero was confined to the Isle of Pontia, and Drusus a prisoner in the Pallace; the bruit was, that Nero seeing the Hangman bring a balter and a hooke to make his choise of, killed himselfe;Druso adeo alimenta, sub∣ducta, vt to∣mentum a cul∣citra tentaue∣rit mandere. Suet. and that meate being denied to Drusus, hee had eaten the stuffings of his bed: but the death of these two Princes ar∣riued not so soone, nor in this manner. Suetonius re∣lated this vpon report, which is fraughted as well with fables as truths, they did their worst against Agrippina,Pandatriam relegauit. Suet. and that worst was to banish her to the Isl of Pandatria in the Tirrhenian Sea, where she expected each houre for some to come to strangle her, or that sleeping they would ioyne death to her slumber;Somnium morti ungere. Petr. but Tiberius would haue her life serue her for punishment; and as wrongs are lesse sup∣ported by such as thinke not to haue deserued them, and that the cause is vniust;Odiorum causae grauio∣resquia ini∣quae. Tac. so this poore Prin∣cesse gaue no intermission to her lamentation and
bewailing of the inhumanitie of Tiberius. Seeing wee know the iniurie shee suffered, wee may well guesse the complaints shee vttered; her daily dis∣course was this, but it is not quickened with the grace wherewith her grauitie endowed it, nor the ardour wherewith her choler enflamed it. And cruell, is he content, to see that with a glutted heart hee may now quench in the blood of Augustus this feruent thirst which so much tormented him; and this disloyall Seianus, will he complaine of fortune, that brought vnto his power these three heads which stopped his passage to tyranny. Fuerim tantū nihil amplius doliturae do∣mui piamen∣tum. Sen.The gods haue chosen mine alone to beare all the mi∣series of my house, and the expiation of all others: I demand of them but one fauour, which is death; is it possible that they will deny it vnto the miserable? and what is more miserable in this life,Quid miserius in vita quam velle mori? quid in morte quam sepeliri non posse. Sen. then to desire death, or in death to be depriued of Sepulture? The plaints which are not prohibited to the most wretched, and which giue some ease to misery, are not permitted vnto me; and yet know I not but some body ouer-heares me, who will recount all that I speake, and I am well-pleased therewith, it is a badge of feare and de∣bilitie not to dare speake our oppression. Augustus dis∣couered this secret to Ful∣uius, who told it to his wife, she to Liuia. Augustus was angry with Fuluius, who for spite kild himselfe. Plut.I will poure forth my mones to heauen and earth of the inhumanities of Tiberius exercised vpon the dead and the liuing; he was author of my Vnckles death, who recoiled his hopes; Augustus my Grandfather a little after discouered his intention to Fuluius to call backe Agrippa: This poore Agrippa was the first vi∣ctime slaughtred in the entry of his raigne. Iulia my mother, who for her last misfortune and her third hus∣band
had espoused this cruell man, incontinently posted after her Sonne. Germanicus was impoiso∣ned, his wife banished, Nero exiled, Drusus a pri∣soner, Caligula in their power; what wish they more? I haue beene married, hee hath rauished away my husband from me; I could be sped of another of the chiefest Families of Rome, he hath hindred it: I haue beene a Mother, he depriued me of my children; I was free, he vsed me as a slaue; there is nothing rests me but honour, and he seekes with impudent calum∣nies to wither it away;Tiberus foe∣dicissin is cri∣minationibus, &c. Tac. his obloquies taking no hold of me, he framed an Imposture which carries the stinke of the place from whence it issueth: he saies that Asinius Gallus beares me affection, I doe acknow∣ledge my selfe beholding to him, to deeme me worthy to be beloued of a man whom Augustus held wor∣thy of the Empire; but he is my Brother in law, and I beare not so little respect vnto my Sister Vip∣sania, as to robbe her of the heart of her Hus∣band. My precedent actions will answer the present;It is not fit a woman should haue particu∣lar friends, but to esteme in generall, these of her husband. I neuer knew what it meant to loue any but the friends of my Husband, and as farre as it lay in my power, I haue not fixed my eyes nor thoughts vpon any other. If I had any beauty, I neither beleeued it, nor suffered I should be spoken to of it, and made no reckoning of it but for de∣cencie. They haue reason to say that I was too proud: It is true, my disdaines haue serued my designes, for dis∣dainfull beauties intrap not the hearts. I must needes auow that the passion of loue hath giuen place in my
minde to that of ambition,Agrippina aequi impati∣ens, dominan∣di auida, vi∣rilibus curis faeminarum vitia exuerat. Tac. and that I was more delighted in imployments which doe onely appertaine to manly courages, then to vanities, which please but the effeminate. It is long since I haue quitted the im∣perfections of my sexe, to take male and generous thoughts. But these Impostures are but the smoakes of that burning desire of Seianus to arriue vnto the Empire: for seeing that Rome beares me good will, and that this good will is sustained but by the opinion they conceiue of some merit,The property of good men is to doe well, but of the wicked, to speake ill, and do worse. Plut. hee did defame mee as a wicked woman, but as hee surmounted me in speaking ill, I haue alwayes surpassed him in doing well. Let him content himselfe to haue reduced me to that estate, as he needes no more to stand in feare of me; and I finde consolation that he hath brought me to that point, that he can doe me no worse, for I will esteeme for great fauours the greatest harmes he can doe me. Let him not dread that I will any more oppose his ambition, he is to stand in greater awe of fortune then of me, I doe not thinke she will be more fauourable to a wicked designe, then she hath beene partiall in the protection of a iust and lawfull cause.The Aspect of ambition increaseth by satiety. Tiberius was wont to say, that a man which had passed the age of sixtie yeare, should not streach his hand to the people to haue voice or suf∣frage. Plut. His ambition hath no bounds, sacietie giues him ap∣petite, he was wont to say in the beginning that he did content himselfe with the Office of Colonell of the Gard, he would haue no more. And now, when for his old age he should onely present his hand to the Physici∣an, he would charge it with a Tributes staffe, to be in the next degree to Soueraigne command did he ase his courage whether he were capable of it? hee neuer saw
battell but painted, neuer drew sword but for a show. After all this, his will is, that I should liue, to the end that death may serue me as a punishment,Vici, quem vi∣cerim qaeuris, metum mortis qui victores gentium vicit. Sen. not per∣mitting me to shew that a woman can ouercome the terrour of death, which very victors redoubted, and seemes that all the passages to come to death, or to cause death come to me, are stopt. It must needes be that I shall finde it in my affliction, and that my courage yeelde vnto it; I will not resist his violence,Officium pi∣um sed inutile. Ouid. consolations will redou∣ble it, I will refuse them from what part soeuer they come; these of my friends are commendable in them, but vn∣profitable vnto me. If abstinence, affliction, solitude, and griefe may not with-draw me from this misery:Expectandus exitus quem natura decre∣uit. Sen. And if it must needes be that I liuing dye, and dying liue, I shall attend what end the gods shall be pleased to send me; and hap what will, as I haue liued Agrippina I will dye Agrip∣pina. The smart of her wounds daily inflaming,He that is vn∣der the power of an other, impaires his condition by his impatience and liberty of his complaints she al∣wayes increased and renewed without ceasing the complaints which an exercised grief could not mode∣rate: her words were reported to Tiberius, who was very glad that she continually gaue him occasion to make worse their ill vsage to her; for it would grieue him that her patience would oblige him to any curtesie: hee commanded the Captaine, in whose ward she was, not to let passe these bad speeches without blowes; this cruell man who well percei∣ued that to please Tiberius hee must outrage Agrip∣pina: hearing her to perseuere in her complaints
and reproaches against Tiberius,Conuitianti oculum per Ceturionnem verberibus ex∣cussit. Suet. did so inhumane∣ly and brutishly beate her, that he pulled out one of her eyes. After this barbarous outrage, she would no lon∣ger liue, and no more to attend death, but to goe and meet him: shee remained some dayes without eating,Mori in edia destinanti per vim ore di∣ducto infulciri cibum iussit. Suet. but the Souldiers forcibly opening her mouth constrained her to swallow downe nutri∣ment: shee was in this more vnfortunate then o∣thers, that may dye at their pleasure, and haue no im∣pediment but their will; she would faine die, but they will that she liue;Ad moriendū nihil aliud in mora quam velle. Sen. Non magis crudeles sunt qui volentem viuere occi∣dunt, quam qui mori volentes non sinunt. Sen. Death is the onely receit for her euils, and they keepe her by force from it: those men are not lesse cruell who kill them which desire to liue, then those who doe compell them to liue which desire to dye. Seianus for all this is not where hee weenes: all that hee did to aduance his proiect, recoyles it; for Tiberius being rid of the mistrust of Germanicus, of the iealousie of Drusus, and reuenged of the pride of Agrippina and her children; thinkes of nothing that might more trouble him then the arrogance and vnlimited power of Seianus, this ioynes new suspici∣ons to old feares, and puts in his head that he drea∣med of the Empire. Quos di for∣tuna sequnta est, eos repente velut fatigata destituit. Q Cur.Fortune also began to be weary of following him; for he went too fast, as if she had but raised him to cause him to fall from so high a pitch, as no body should dare to stretch out their arme, or present their bosome to receiue him. Tiberius who loued him, began to feare him, and seeing the Senate to
make more account of him then himselfe,Dion saith that Tiberius see∣ing that Seja∣nus was fol∣lowed and re∣doubted of the Senators, fea∣red least they should make him Emperor. entred into some apprehension that they would make him Emperour; and from thenceforth purposed to plucke this thorne out of his heart: but he did nothing rash∣ly, for it was dangerous not onely to vndertake to ruine him, but to make a shew thereof, he went on ve∣ry slowly, and against the aduice of wise men, who are of opinion that great matters should be sooner done then consulted. This delay proceeded from prudence and affecti∣on; for it vexed him to vndoe a man, who began to serue him before he began to raigne. Notwithstanding, I doe beleeue that if there had beene but this, hee would dissemble it,The good Courtier should know the complexi∣on of his Prince. and would neuer rid himselfe of him; for hee was very proper for his humours, knowing them most perfectly, a∣greeing to his desires, soothing his opinions, drew him so dexterously from dangers, and vntwined his perplexities; he had cut off all the principall heads which brought him either feare or iealousie, and re∣posing himselfe on the vigilancy of a seruant so faithfull and approued, hee did not intermeddle but with great occurrents, but liued at ease in his Isle. And although it be difficult to found the hearts of Princes, and the motiues of sodaine prosperities;See vpon this subiect an ex∣cellent Trea∣tise of M. du Refuge Coun∣celler of State. yet it is certaine, that there is not a neerer way to purchase his good will, then to serue him in such things as are either agreeable or profitable, to con∣duct his pleasures and mannage his purse: all that is honest and profitable should please, but the passion
of pleasure ouercomes the consideration of honour and profit.Rationem fe∣licitatis nemo reddit Auson. To be beloued of a Prince, we must serue him in his pleasures. Seianus was stored with all things that were befitting to entertain the Prince with pleasures, and banish the necessity of affaires, and did so com∣mand his heart, that he gaue it what motion he listed to loue, feare or hate. He hath done him great seruices, and although the consideration of this be not alwayes plausible in the mindes of Princes; for there are some, who the more they are bound the lesse they loue;The Prince should beare respect to ser∣uices, to the end he may be the better serued. yet Tibe∣rius would haue great men vnderstand what they may hope for in seruing him well, but there is no likelihood that if he had not great gifts both of spi∣rit and courage, he should not continue so long neere Tiberius a Prince hard to be pleased, seuere, skilfull, and mistrustfull: the History represents vs with two seuerall portraitures, the one set forth by the pencill of Tacitus,Seianus laboris capacissimus, sufficiente vi∣gore animi compage cor∣poris & actu ociosis simil∣limus. Vell. who layes him downe a wicked person, the other by the hand of Velleius Paterculus who flat∣ters him and giues him all the properties of a perfect Courtier. He saith that The vigour of his body was answerable to the strenght of his spirit, which wrought without paine, and did all things as if hee had done nothing, and in his greatest actions see∣med to be at repose, and as if hee had neither beene busied nor pressed, that he ranne not after occasions, nor ascribed vnto himselfe the honour,Infra aliorum aestimationes se metiens, vultu vitaque tranquillius, animo ex som∣nis. Vell. atchieued all and yet put himselfe beneath the esteeme that was had of him; one that neuer made shew of trouble or emulation in his countenance, his spirit alwayes watchfull and who neuer slept.
But howsoeuer it was Seianus was indeede an a∣ble man, and hauing lasted almost as long as Tibe∣rius, wee may beleeue that if fortune had not re∣uolted against his Counsels, he had constrained her to submit her selfe to his wisdome. Onely I doe wonder, that hauing purchased so many friends, he had want of friends; that a∣mongst so many heads depending vpon his, and could not stand firme if his were cut off, there was none that would speake freely and sincerely vnto him to preuent his ruine.To speake to great men mildly and pleasing, A∣theneus calleth the same, chariglottein. But it is the com∣mon mishap of great ones, all the discourse wee hold with them must be gratefull and soothing, they thinke that truth owes them all that obser∣uance and respect doth lend them; if there were Iudges ordained for flattery, they would haue no doings, for there is none will complaine that they are flattered. Seianus was so vnfortunate that hee had not any friend that would say vnto him sincerely and free∣ly; Sir, moderate your spirit, despite not your fortune, play not with your Master, this time will not last alwaies, patience too much wronged turnes to fury. And if one would haue said so much,Dion saith, that if some god were de∣scended and had assured the ruhe of Sejanus, he would not be∣leeue, for in that time eue∣ry man swore by his fortune. hee would not haue beleeued it, pride did dazell him, hee bragged to haue fire and water in his hands, and that hee would vse them as hee pleased. Tiberius then perceiuing, although too late, that Seianus built his hopes vpon his tombe, and that hee did not onely dreame, but verily thinke, yea
attempt the Empire:Not onely to attempt but to thinke or dream against the State, is an offence. hee resolues to quench the fire of this ambicion with the bloud of the ambici∣ous. The first suspicion he had thereof was for his marriage with Liuia, Drusus widdow. The second was vpon this, that the house of Germanicus being ruined,Summum ad gradum clari∣tatis cum vene∣ris, aegre con∣sistes. Laber. there was no stoppe for his insolency that was mounted so high, that hee could no longer stand vpon his legges. The third was the excesse of his power in affaires of the Senate, of the trea∣sure and Commandments.Improba blan∣ditia, non quae am ciorem sed quae deterio¦rem facit assentando. Alc. The fourth, was his great traine of seruants and attendants, whose ob∣sequiousnesse impaired his complexion. The fift was vpon this, that hee held Drusus prisoner, and C. Caesar at his deuotion, that hee might vpon any occasion produce them, and in their names conti∣nue the gouernment of the soueraignty.Prouidebat Caesarem vr∣gente iam se∣necta, secreto∣que loci mol∣litum munia Imperij facili∣us transmis∣surum. Tac. The sixt was vpon the trickes hee vsed to diuert the Empe∣rour from soiourning in the City, and keeping him as a captiue vnder the pretext of his absence, and of his age. The seauenth, vpon the great and vio∣lent pursuit hee made to gaine the power of Tri∣bune. The eighth, that Seianus should vse cer∣taine words which hee desired rather to be concea∣led then expressed: and when of all this there were but the onely suspicion of aspiring to the State, to what end needed any further to seeke for a greater crime. But Tiberius is blamed for two acts shewing fee∣blenesse of courage: The first for hauing suffered the encrease of so great a power, which cannot be attained with too much pain, nor lessened with too
much seuerity; the tree which at first was but a little twigge, spread its heads and branches so high that it made him a very dangerous shade; that which might haue beene plucked vp with one hand when it began to sprout out,Abundance of blood drawne from the best veine, is well imployed, to defend or ac∣quire one only drop of Au∣thority. tooke such large and deepe root, that it was afterwards hard to pull vp with both; that Prince who hinders not the encrease of Ambition when it doth but begin to grow, re∣ceiues no other profit by his sufferance but repen∣tance and losse; the State cannot endure two Kings no more then the World two Suns, or the Temple two Deities. The Soueraigne authority is a strong Causey, which is not so soone destroyed by the vio∣lence of the current,After that there is once a branch in So∣ueraigne Au∣thority, it fals to wrack. or the weight of the water which it sustaines, as by some small rift or ope∣ning which makes way for the torrent to ouer∣throw it. The second is, for vsing so much ceremony in so vrgent an occasion, so much cunning in so great power, so much trembling and feare in so great as∣surance; for to rid him from him,Quintus Va∣rus npiso. Germanicus & Drusus. he made him his Collegue in the Consulship, and neuer had any as∣sociate without misfortune. When Tiberius wrote to the Senate, hee stuffed his Letters with the merits of Seianus, and his ser∣uice done to the Empire: you should finde often these words therein; Seianus my friend, my Seianus, I say my Seianus. It seemes he had limited the glory of the Empire but to the continuance of his life; his Statues appeared euery where, euery one giues them presents as vnto their tutelary gods, who will
refuse to yeeld honour vnto him vnto whom the Emperour giues it so freely. Vino debemus homines, quod soli animanti∣um non, sitien∣tes bibinms. Plini.This Consulship for fiue yeeres did amaze him, and as the excellency of the Wine vrgeth a man to drinke beyond drought, so sweetnesse of prosperity makes him drunke, and carries him farther then he would goe; whosoeuer is embarked on this Sea where there are so many perils, should neuer trust to calme, but haue his eyes alwayes fixed on the heauens to conduct him to the quiet hauen of his hopes. The solitary and voluptuous life of Tiberius was the ladder of his ambicion, for like another Sarda∣napolus he boasted of nothing but his riotings. Se∣ianus rocked him in this shamefull idlenesse, ha∣uing maliciously accustomed him to preferre de∣lightfull things before graue and serious: who so neglects to play the part of a Master, shall finde ser∣uants bold enough to command him; and whosoe∣uer shewes himselfe a Prince in his Cabinet onely, may chance finde another in the field. Impudency accompanied with pride drew from his mouth these words, which should not haue en∣tred his thoughts; I am Emperour of Rome, and Tibe∣rius is Prince of the Isle: hee represented Playes by bald men, which were conducted backe from the Theater by 5000. Boyes all shauen, to mocke at Tiberius his bald pate.Atheneus ac∣counts them to be 20000. and cals them ante-ambulo∣nes. This number will not be found so strange to them that know that the Romans had troopes and legions of them, and that some haue caused twēty thousand to march before them,
but that hee should cause them to be shauen, for then there was great pride taken to curle and frisle their tresses. Tiberius was presently enformed of this buffone∣ry,Familus ca∣lamistratus. Apul. Crinitus puer. Sen. Praecincti pu∣eri comptique. Hor. and made shew as if he knew it not, although it pricked him to the quicke; but he would haue his dissembled ignorance excuse the slownesse of his assured reuenge: so is there nothing indeede which more neerely toucheth the heart of a Prince, then to see himselfe braued by a man whom hee hath raised from contempt, and the misery of a base condition; it is not lesse grieuous to be reduced vnto the mockery of his seruants, then to the dis∣cretion of his enemies. Vpon newes that the Prisons, a people inhabiting beyond the Rhyne, had broken the peace, and defea∣ted the Armies in battaile: the astonishment was so great at Rome,Aram clemen∣tiae aram ami∣citiae, effigies{que} circum Cae∣saris ac Seja∣ni considere: crebris{que} pre∣cibus efflagita∣bant visendi sui copiam facerent. Tac. that euery one ran to the Altars of clemency and friendship, adoring the Statues of Tiberius and Seianus, which were neere them, pray∣ing them to bring them backe againe to Rome: Ti∣berius and Seianus would haue the Townesmen to iudge by their absence what commodity the pre∣sence of the Court did bring them: nor is it good that a Prince should alwayes remaine in one place; if the Sunne would neuer budge from some one of his twelue houses, all would not goe well: Tiberius therefore approached the Citie, but because hee came but vnto the Suburbs, without entring into the Towne, many thought that the limits of Astro∣logie and lying were not of so neere affinity as some
said; for the Astrologians had reported that Ti∣berius was gone out of Rome vnder such a constella∣tion, that hee would neuer returne againe;Breue confi∣nium artis & falsi. Tac. and there is great likelihood, that if this feare had not seized vpon his imagination, he would neuer haue staied eleuen yeeres out of Rome. These predictions did encourage the complices of Seianus, solliciting him not to temporize any longer, seeing the Starres haue conspired to his designe: and of the other side Tiberius would not be surprized; and as the feare of the danger which hee apprehended pressed him forward, so danger of the remedy kept him backe, but ima∣gining that hee should be preuented, if Seianus had any inkling of it, hee durst not consult but with himselfe of the Resolution hee was to take. Seianus as yet mistrusted nothing, prosperity did blinde his eyes, hee beleeued that Tiberius thought of nothing but of passing away the time at Caprea. There is nothing spoken of him at Rome but as of a Prince that did not Raigne, and liued not but by prayers, could not heare nor see any thing but through Seianus,The King of Persia had min sters whom they cald the eies and eares of the King and by whom he knew of all things that were done or spoken uery where. Apul. who alone was his eyes and his eares, thought of nothing but his pleasure and ease. This was the cause that moued Seianus to carry and presse forward his designes to Soueraigntie with the greater vio∣lence; what blindenesse? hee hath not life for one month, yet hee frames enterprises for a whole age.
It was very hard, but that hee had some suspi∣tion of the Emperours intention; all the Aduer∣tisements that were sent to Caprea, or came to Rome passed through his hands, and hee harkened to all; neither should they which are imployed in great matters neglect any thing;There is not so great a lyer, but will some times tell truth. and although very often they are informed but of fables, yet some truth escapes, they make their profit of all, and they are well payed, if of an hundred aduertise∣ments any one proues true. He held mens mindes at his discretion,Mens hearts are wonne, ei∣ther by hopes or feare, or by benefits. either for feare, or hopes, or for benefits, they who ser∣ued Tiberius depended vpon Seianus, and they who serued Seianus swore by no other name then by that of their Master. Tiberius did nothing but was related to Seianus, and hee was no way aduer∣tised of what Seianus did against his seruice; hee had men fit for any thing, Seneca tearmes them his Dogges, which would fawne on no body but him∣selfe,Acerrimi ca∣nes quos Seia∣nus vt sibi vni mansuetos omnibus feros haberet, san∣guine huma∣no pascebat. Sen. and would barcke at any body else; for hee fed them with mens bloud; if they could not take by the front, they assaulted the flanke, and would imbrace men to stifle them: hee caused it to be noi∣sed that hee was to make him Tribune, writes to the Senate, that without him this great body of the Empire would fall vnto peeces: in all his Letters he writes that Seianus is the Oracle of his designes, the companion of his thoughts. The Senate which thought not of Tiberius dis∣simulation, search for all sorts of honours to
raise Seianus, ordaine that their names should bee inserted together in the same line in Pa∣tents and Inscriptions, their Chaires to bee in the same ranke in Theaters, and in Temples, their Statues to bee put vp in euery place, and that comming to Rome they should goe to meete them. He that in∣tends the ruine of any body, is glad of his ill carriage.Tiberius was not sorry that the Senate did sup∣port the pride of Seianus, to the end that vani∣tie making him more insolent, his deportments would be more hatefull. In the meane while to make Tiberius beleeue that his Designes went not beyond his life, hee caused Germanicus to be accused to haue attempted against the per∣son of Caesar. This man for his Iustification, shewed before the Senate his Testament,He that makes another his heire, thinkes to die before him. by which hee did institute the Prince his heire, a proofe of his affection, and that hee desired not to suruiue him; but this would not saue him: and as hee saw the Questour comming to put him to death, hee thrust himselfe into the bel∣ly with his Knife,Nullum magis aduersarium timemus quam qui viuere non potest, occide∣re potest. Sen. and said vnto him, Goe tell the Senate that I dye as a man should dye: Pub∣lica Prisca his wife being at the Pallace did the like. I doe maruaile that among so many men who died so freely, there was not any that did goe about to kill Nero or Seianus, for hee that cares not for his life, doth easily vndertake to kill.
The favour of Tiberius so ardent, was not coo∣led at the first stroake, it became luke-warme, and after altogether congealed, hee strikes a blow this day for Seianus, and to morrow another against him, hee conferred the dignitie of High-priest vpon his Sonne,Tiberius was accustomed to say when he be∣held Caligula: I doe nourish him as a Ser∣pent to the peo∣ple of Rome, & a Phaeton to the rest of the world. Suet. and although he abhorred Cali∣gula, yet hee gaue him the same honour, and for this onely cause that hee was enemy to Seianus, he gratifies him now in yeeding to his demands, and anon he revoked what he had granted, and keepes his mind in such suspence, betwixt feare and hope; that he knowes not where hee is, and doth not any thing but Amazedly; hee commanded the Senate to absolue a proconsul whom Seianus accused. Tiberius did publikely praise Caligula,Tiberius would haue all to fall to wracke after him, and estee∣med Priamus happie in that he frighted his kingdom with his life. Dio. and made it knowne that hee would declare him his Succes∣sour, not so much for affection, as to make him∣selfe lamented, his Successour being more cruell and wicked then himselfe, in his Letters to the Senate hee doth no more stile Seianus his friend, they finde his name naked in them without additi∣on of the Titles and Recommendations, which he was wont to giue him, assoone as the affection of a Prince takes vent it doth evaporate, and there is much a doe to keepe it alwayes in the same degree of heate. The people did reioyce that Tiberius did begin to affect Caligula,Caligula seeing a great compa∣ny of Senators at his Table, burst into a great laughter, and being de∣maunded the cause, it is said hee, for that it lies in my po∣wer to haue you strangled one after the other. Suet. not for any affection they bore himselfe, who was of an inhumaine and violent na∣ture and delighted in nothing but in blood, but for the honour of the memorie of Germanicus his Father, and the desire of the Ruine of Seianus
whose tyrannie they Apprehended, 1. 2. 120. Tiberius hauing boyled and reboyled his pro∣ject in his heart, conceiued that there was not further any danger to declare himselfe, and to forgoe the Councels dissimulation to put on these of Courage, hee sent an Edict to the Se∣nate, forbidding any Sacrifice to bee done to any liuing man, nor to ordayne any kinde of ho∣nour to Seianus, not enduring to see such ho∣nours done to the Subiect, which he held not decent for the Prince. Yam diu place∣bit quam diu vtilis. Sen.It was then that these men which were friends but of his fortune, declared themselues enemies of his dessignes; Friends of the time, who be∣ing come to drinke returne when the bottles are emptie, and as Thunder commonly happe∣neth when the sky seemeth most cleere, so Seia∣ianus saw himselfe inveloped with a storme in one of the fairest dayes of his fortune, hee had ma∣ny presages of his misfortune;The superstiti∣on of the An∣cient thought it an ill signe, that a Cat should goe o∣uerthwart. the Theater where hee receiued the salutations of the Calends, breake a sunder, and a Cat past ouerthwart the same. Returning from the Capitoll his Guard pressing through the throng to follow and get before him, fell off from the top of the ladders from whence they cast offenders:Tiberius Grace. going to the Capitol, three Crowes flew a∣bout him and there he was slaine. Val. Herevpon he consulted with his Auspicy to know what it presaged: but the birds of good lucke appeared not, hee saw no∣thing but a flight of Crowes, birds of ill lucke, blacke nightingals of hell which fluttered
and croaked about him:Vidimus non se∣mel flammam ingentis pilae spe∣cie, que tamen in ipso cursu suo dissipata est. Vi∣dimus circa D. Augusti exces∣sum simile pro∣digium: vidi∣mus cum de Se∣sauo actum est. Sen. and there was a ball of fire seene in the Ayre, such as had beene at the death of Augustus and Germanicus, but no bo∣dy beleeued that in this flourishing condition hee had beene so neare his Ruine, and for all this they forbore not to call him Tiberius his Companion, not onely in the Consulship but in the vniversall Empire. Tiberius to sound their wills and affections wrote often to Seianus and to the Senate, one while that he was in good health, anon after that he was in the point of death, at some other times that his strength was restored, that in few daies he hoped to see them and returne to Rome;Prudenda mise∣rāda{que} orat one. P. C. precabatur mitterent alte∣in conscilbus, qu suū sed & solum in conspe∣ctum eorum cum aliqu militari presidio perduce∣re. Sen. these fainings did profit him, for according to the joy or affliction that these newes procured; or to the hope or feare, he perceiued who depen∣ded vpon him, or who vpon Seianus, hee entreats the Senate also to send him one of the Consuls with some Convoy to bring him safely. He belieued that the conspiracy was so great a∣gainst him, that he should not be able to resist it, and had therefore prepared certaine vessels to take his flight withall, and caused Centinels to be pla∣ced aloft on the rockes, who by fires made signes of what they discouered. It must be that the Con∣iuration was very great and very ready, or Tiberius very fearefull & abashed, so to lay open the trouble of his spirit, for feare should neuer lodge in the heart of a Prince, who may be well lamented when they who should stand in awe of him doe deterre him.
But the Favorite began to bee troubled, when one told him that he saw the smoake evaporate out of the head of one of his Images, he caused it to be broken to know the cause,We ought not proudly to de∣spise prodegies this neglect lost Alexander. App. Perseus. Iustin Luc. Cras∣sus. D. Hal. and from thence a great Serpent was seene to issue foorth, hee despised not this prodigie, and made a Sacrifice to himselfe for hee was accustomed so to doe, and there was a cord found about the necke of the sayd Statue. Tiberius judged that the Destinies had con∣spired to ruine him with their vengeance, but hee continued his dissimulations, bruiting it abroad, that hee meant to raise him to the greatest Office of the Empire,Dion saith, that to Accuse and intrap Seianus, Tiberius caused it to be bruited in the Senate, that hee would conferre vpon him the digni∣ty of Tribune. but at the same time he sent away Nevius Sertornis Macro, with commaundment to present his Letters to the Senate, to seize vpon Seianus, and to let Drusus being in prison at liber∣tie, that hee might gather his friends together a∣gainst the Common enemy, if then were any op∣position. Nihil nō aggre∣suri sunt homi∣nes si magna co∣natis magna pramia propo∣nantur. Liu.The place of Colonell of the Guards which Tiberius bestowed on Macro, animated this exe∣cution: Princes that will bee well serued, ought alwayes to make the quality of the service to bee seene by the Recompence thereof. Hee came se∣cretly to Rome and communicated the Cause of his arrivall to the Consul Memnius Regulus, and not to his Colleague, for he was Seianus creature; and vnto Gracinus Laco Knight of the Watch, he found them disposed to sacrifice this wicked man to the publike hatred.
The Consul Convoked the Senate for the next day to the Temple of Apollo,The Senate did not sit but in Temples or in sacred pla∣ces. and caused these wordes to bee fixed to one of the pillars of the Gate: In a good houre, Memnius Regulus,This word was bonum factum, to which, may all things pros∣per. shall to morrow at breake of day keepe the Senate at the Tem∣ple of Apollo; Let the fathers Conscript bee there, there are matters of weight to bee handled. The pe∣naltie of the absent is no excuse. To giue example vnto others hee was himselfe one of the first that came,Pruna luce. Cic. hee entred with the bad∣ges of his Dignitie, his purple Robe, twelue Ser∣geants marching before him making cleere the passage, at his entry hee sacrificed Wine and Ho∣ney, takes his place in the Ivorie chaire,Hocillis Curis templum. Virg. the other Senatours doe the like and ranke themselues in their places. Macro meetes with Seianus who was not as yet entred,Qualem quis{que} sortem statum{que} habeat in mea manu profitum est quod cuique mortalem fortu∣na datum villis, meo ore pronun∣ciat. Sen. and seeing him a little troubled that hee brought him no Letters from Tiberius, hee roun∣ded him in the eare, that he had some better thing for him, I bring you the power of Tribune; this stayed him, and his friends were presently ac∣quainted with all, and rejoyced at it, hoping that all which Fortune would bestow on the Romaines should passe through the hands, or from the mouth of their Master. Macro presents his Letters and retired, cau∣seth his Souldiers to bee assembled vnder colour of Imparting vnto them the Emperours Com∣mandements; and by this meanes left for the Guard of the Temple the Souldiers of the
Watch; the rest that followed Seianus went to the Campe and to their Ensignes, beeing there, hee assured them of the Emperours willing∣nesse to acknowledge theyr services and to gra∣tifie them with some Present.These were presents of Armes, Pikes, Ensignes, scarfes, chaines & of Crownes. There were not any but listened hereunto and promised to bee ready in all things, hee chose a competent num∣ber of them to keepe the advenues and the Tem∣ple of Apollo; this done, hee presents his Let∣ters to the Senate and told them his charge, and with-drawing himselfe leaues Laco there, and goes to giue order for the other parts of the Towne. The Princes authority is at the lowest ebb when he dares not declare o∣penly vnto his subiects the cause of his discontent.His Letters are Read and doe shew the pat∣terne of a troubled and trembling Spirit, which dares not expresse but with halfe wordes, that which hee conceiues against the ingratitude and treacherie of his Servant; they were mingled with diuers affaires without order, the beginning with indifferent, the residue with other things of grea∣ter Importance. This was pursued with com∣plaints of the vnmeasurable power of Seianus; then hee descends to other occurrents, praying the Senate to make processe of two Senators Seia∣nus his inward friends, and in the end commands them,This tragicke end of Seianus is well repre∣sented in the French Tiberi∣us, of Monsi∣our Le Maistre chiefe mede∣rin of Monsieur. but faintly, to watch ouer Seianus his acti∣ons, there was not one word of putting him to Death, so much bee feared least the Credit he had euery-where should oppose it selfe, and that in case things should not succeed according to his desire, hee might alwayes haue the libertie of ex∣pressing himselfe.
But as feare beleeues all that it Imagineth,Aliquis{que} pa∣nendo, dat vires fama nulloque authore malorū, quae frigen ∣ment. Lucan, Seianus his friends finding not in his Letter what they expected, separate themselues from him as from a place threatned to bee Thunder-strucke; when the Princes favour abandoneth a man, it is dangerous to come neere him,  grace is Conta∣gious. Dion obserues heere how mens mindes are va∣riable, and sayth, that before the Letters of the Emperour were read, there was not a Senatour but did reuerence to Seianus, and asked him,Cicero reproa∣ches the same to Cateline, Ad∣uentu tuo ista subsellia vacua facta sunt. Cic. how hee would imploy them to doe him service; but finding the minde of Tiberius to be changed, they changed at one instant; they that were farre from him looked awry vpon him, they that were neere him went farre off,They shrunke from one guil∣ty of high treason. Quis in adver∣sis beneficiorum seruat memoriā aut quis vllum calamitesis de∣beri putat gra∣tiam quando fortuna non mu∣tat fidem. Vell. they that thought it an ho∣nour to follow him, thought themselues disho∣noured to sit neare him, and where are those men which call to minde benefittes in aduersitie, or thinke themselues bound to the miserable: great friendshippe must not bee sought for at Court, nor any moderate enmitie: this is the cause, that wise men breake with no body, ill will and hatred are but sad plaints, the fruite they beare is alwayes bitter, it yieldes neither pleasure nor profit, if it bee not that of amendment of man∣ners,Vsyno{que} sapere oportet id erit coeū accrrimū. Cic. because the enemy may not lay hold vpon the life or fortune of him, or overthrow or ruine him. But Seianus should not enter to the Senate when
he saw that Macro brought him no letters, provi∣dence which hath his eye euery where, and which is an assured buckler against fortune, failed him; he should haue retired himselfe, when he had an inckling of what Tiberius wrote in this letter and had beene followd by them of his faction, the rest would Iudge his power by his courage, but fin∣ding nothing to be expressely against him, he be∣leeued it to bee nothing but the vapours of his way-ward disposition,Presumption despiseth sure∣tie. of his distrust and vne∣qualnesse: and that there was none so bold in the company, as to offend him. The Consul Regulus calleth him, he riseth not, not for pride,Words of Cō∣mand are very harsh to them that are not accustomed to obey. for hee was much humbled; but because hee was not accustomed to obey nor to bee commanded, hee calles him the first and second time, and reaching him his hand saith; Seianus come hither? Call you mee, replyed Seianus: the Consul saying, yes; Seianus ad∣vanced himselfe, then Laco Captaine of the Watch goes before him, and all the Tri∣bunes encompasse him, that hee may not scape. Decretum vt 15 Cal. vtriusque necis die per om∣nes annos donū Joui sacrantur.Tac.The day of this memorable stroake was the Eighteenth of October, It is knowne, for that Tiberius ordained that the Fifteenth of the Calends of Nouember should bee solemnized at Rome, as well for the death of Seianus, as that of Agrippina; if we would remarke the yeare, it was the yeare of the foundation of Rome VII. C. LXXXV. of the Empire of Tiberius the Eigh∣teenth, and from the birth of IESVS CHRIST, 34.
There was no danger to goe speedily to his try∣all, nor to begin his processe with his executi∣on,S. C. actum vt poena damnat∣rum in decim semd em diffe∣retur. Suet. for the Law of tenne dayes was not then made. All his life had beene a course of Insolency, pride, violence and fury. Dion saith, that in one day hee was Arrested, Condemned, and Executed, and by the short∣nesse of the time wee Iudge, of the facility of proceedings, which were at pleasure, they gaue them such delay or dispatch as they pleased, they haue made the processe of Lentulus in confederate of Catiline in two dayes, that of Clentulus held out a long time: Seianus was dispatched in one Morning;Aristotle dispo∣sed of the mor∣ning in study∣ing of Philoso∣phy, that was ergon, of the af∣ternoone in E∣loquence, by ergon. The day of seri∣ous affaires ended at Mid-day, what was done after dinner was as much as out of worke, and thinges agreeable and easie, rather then toyle∣some and painefull: and the Trumpet which serued the Romanes for a Clocke, hauing stroake the houre of tenne, there was no beginning of a new Relation. Memnius did not put the letters of the Empe∣rour to Consulation, and that deceiued Seia∣nus who trusted to his friends, for if hee had done so, diuersitie of opinions would marre the businesse: for length of discourse would loose time, and dispatch must haue beene vsed that the faction of Seianus might not stirre. But to shunne the blame of doing all himselfe, hee commanded a Senatour whom hee knew to bee a good Citizen and well affectioned to Tiberi∣us, to deliuer his opinion: Dion nameth him
not,The Consul demanding the aduice of the Senatour he spake these words. the same man spoake these words. The pre∣sent occasion Fathers to conscript, is of so great consequence, that according to the resolution, you will take the Common-wealth is either sha∣ken or confirmed, and we should bee traytors to our Country,The Magi∣strate that dis∣couers a con∣spiracie and shewes himself fearfull to re∣medie it, is as culpable as the offendors thē∣selues. Plat. vngratefull to our Prince, and vniust to our selues, if wee did not vse sinceritie and fidelitie. Caesar represents vnto vs with one hand the mischiefe, and with the other the reme∣die; the mischiefe, the coniuration of Seianus. The Remedie, the imprisonment of Seianus; I make no question but the evill is greater in his know∣ledge, then hee lets vs to vnderstand in his letters, but I thinke the remedie more extreame then hee hath considered:The custodie of Illustrious persons were given to Magi∣strates. Lentu∣lus was in the keeping of Lent. Spencer Cethagus of Q. Conisicus. Sta¦tilius of C. Cesar. Ceparius of On. Terent. there is no securitie of the per∣son of Seianus in remitting him to a Magistrate who would take charge of him; nor to the Guards, he Commands them; nor in committing him to a priuate house, hee would not remaine there any long time; or what suretie to Caution, in that e∣state that matters are. But a Prison is onely for slaues, there is not any for a Romane Citizen, nor for a Consul or Senatour, and much lesse for him who commanded the people, the Senate and the Consuls.The first pri∣son was built by Aucu: Mar¦tius or Tarqui∣nius: T. Liu. Our Fathers would forsake their Sepulchers to defend this priuiledge, the onely token of our ancient libertie, for they estee∣med, that to tye a Romane Citizen was a great offence,Facinus vinci Ciuem Roma∣num, scelus ver∣berari parraci∣dium tcan. Cic to beate him a Crime, to kill him a parracide; the prison is holden as a place of pu∣nishment to the Romanes, and of guard to the barbarous.
They onely who knew not Seianus, or were not acquainted with Caesar may doubt but that it is necessarie to passe further, it were a great wonder if hee were innocent, but extreame mishap if hee did scape our handes, it is ne∣cessarie hee should bee made a president, and that he may not vndoe the Common-wealth, we are to bee sure of him,Diogenes saith, that some drowned them selues in a tem¦pest before the ship was sunke. hee hath Courage e∣nough to drowne himselfe in the tempest, not expecting shipwracke: our Fathers haue seene how C. Liciuius Macer, seeing himselfe lost and the Iudges readie to deliuer their opinions,Liciuius Macer lent these words to Ci∣cero, non dam∣natus sed deu pero. hauing got to the toppe of a house, threw himselfe downe headlong, for to haue the honour to dye not condem∣ned but accused, hee would spare the paines to execute him, and would bee his owne Iudge. Heere is questioned, the publike safetie,Val. Aliena crudeli∣tatis procurati∣onis rationē sus∣cipere. Sen. the safetie of the Prince, the confirmation of the State, of our alters, of our Lawes; I am ashamed to place our interest before the Commande∣ments of Caesar. The safest way is the most Iust.In deliberatiōs we should ra∣ther incline to that course which is safe, thē that which is decent or profitable Dion. Hal. We are to thinke of our safety first, before our liues and honours, there is no meanes to stay the mischiefe but in arresting of Seianus, nor any ar∣resting of him but in prison, the person, the time and the Crime, doe oblige you to assure your selues of him, and chase away the evill by the e∣vill it selfe, Seianus hath raised himselfe vpon the Ruines of the State, the State must raise it selfe vpon the ruines of Seianus.
The Senate was very slacke in enduring so much, Caesar conferres a great fauour vpon the people of Rome, to deliuer them from this Tyranny, let vs not loose the glorie to haue seconded his piety, there will be more honour in following of Seianus into prison, then there was to serue him while he was at liberty; if hee be innocent, the Gods are not Prauidia Consi∣lia in certo sunt.Notwithstanding any amazement which seized vpon the Company, this resolution was Hardy, and this aduice was followed, euery one thinking it reasonable to execute, not to exa∣mine the will of Caesar; they leade him to pri∣son, and would trust none but themselues in the euent of this Conduct, to the end hee may not escape nor be rescued,Cui genua flexe∣rant ac vt Deo sacricauerunt. Dio. so the very same Senators who accompanied him to the Senate, did conduct him to prison, they which sacrificed vnto him as to their God, which kneeled downe to adore him, did skoffe at him seeing him draggd from the Temple to the Iayle, from supreame honour, to extreame ig∣nomy. There were some so transported with rage against him,Pallio coceina ad rasū occluserat cput. Petr. that seeing him let fall a piece of his Robe vpon his eyes, wherewith hee coue∣red his head, (for the Romanes wore no cappes but in the warre or being sicke, nor no hats, but in a journey) they tooke it away from him, stripping him, to doe him the greater affront, and strooke him ouer the face with their fists. The people laughed at his fall, detested his
life, reproached his insolence, Cryed out at the thiefe, and if they were not hindered, hee had not come whole to the prison, for they would drag him instantly to the Sestercium, the most infamous place that was in Rome, and whe∣ther the bodyes of the Slaues were throwne, and Iudging that he was not carried to prison, to let him liue: they ranne to his Statues, they are at one instant broken downe,For joy Dion makes a nota∣ble obseruatiō vpon humane inconstancie. they may be seene dragged with Ropes into the fire to bee moulten, with the peeces of the head which was adored, as the second of the world: and which made the Senate to quake,Lex facie toto or be secunda fiun; vreeoli pelues sartago patellae. Iuuen. they were converted into small implements for kitching vses. There was so small an Interuall betweene his exaltation, and his fall; that hee was no sooner threatned then strucke. And seeing at his comming foorth what was done to his Images;Dion obserues that Seianus saw his Statues beaten downe, and by that judged what would follow. he concluded, that the originall would bee as ill handled, and it was his greatest trouble that hee had not bin prepared long agoe for this misfor∣tune. An ordinarie fault in those which are rai∣sed to high dignities,We must pre∣pare betimes for a fall, and rather goe ou then stay to be put out. who are men wise till af∣ter the blowe, and who hauing the meanes to come downe at their ease, stay still till they bee thrust headlong. After that Seianus passed the wicket, the Consul to loose no time returned not to the Temple of Apollo, but he entred the Temple of Concord which was neere, to make the pro∣cesse of the Prisoner; for we should doe wrong to the reputation of the great Iustice of the
Senate,Formes are ne∣cessarie. Accusatio crimē defiderat, rem vt definiat, homi¦nem vt notet, argumento pro∣het, tisle confir∣met. Cic. Populus Rom: circum subscha coranā facit, Cic. Antigenius be∣ing intreated to adjudge a processe priuat¦ly, he answe∣red, it will doe better in the pallace if wee would doe no∣thing vniustly. Fl. Timor perturba∣tio, suspensus, incircus{que} vul∣tus, crebra colo∣ris mutatio quae fuerunt antea suspitiosa aperta at{que} manifesta faciunt. Cic. if we did belieue that it forgot any forme in any affaire so important, where it was necessa∣rie that the Authoritie of Iustice should cover the defects, which may be in the proceeding for to haue cōmenced the proces by Imprisonment. The accusers, the witnesses, & the accomplices were heard in full Senate: for the Instruction was publike & the people was as in a round, about the chaires of the Iudges, which caused the authori∣ty to be greater; for the Maiesty of the Senate was in sight of all, there was nothing to couer it but the heauens, there was more sincerity vsed; for as many eyes, so many Iudges, and there was more example, all passed with order & discipline. There is no question to be made, but that he had some excellēt Orator assigned him, more for the Ceremony of his defence then for any opi∣nion of his Innocency, and it is certaine that he was commanded to do his endeauour; for the more stoutly he was defended, the more glorious should be the triumph of truth; & therevpon the Iudges obserued the countenance of the accused and the doubts of his Inuention were often clea∣red by the trouble of his countenance, the aspect of which very often holds the place of speech. Sometimes the Senate repor∣teth to the Prince what they haue de∣creed.Macro spoke the word to the Consul, it was Ti∣berius will he should die, there needed no other cōmandement, nor to send him the aduice of the Senate it was necessarie for the state, and though hee had not entred culpable to the prison, his quality permitted not he should depart inno∣cent, the Iudges cannot do amisse when they o∣bey
the commandment of the Prince who viewes his affaires with another eye, and with another af∣fection then his Officers. The Iudges had taken an oath to Iudge accor∣ding to their conscience.Damnaturi Iu∣rant nihil se precibus dare. Sen. P. Neither the Consuls nor the Praetor gaue their vote at all, but recollected those of the others. The number of the Senators was great. Cicero reckoned 75. against Piso.An expectem dū te Septuaginta quin{que} tabellae diripiant. Cic. It was diminished vnder the Emperors and by the Edict of Augustus, there needed but 40. to frame a Sen∣tence: They deliuered their opinions eyther by voyce or by writing in a little Table which they kept in a Boxe, or by silence and gesture; as at this day by the Hat or Cap, a signe of consent, or by passing away those of one side and drawing them∣selues together against the aduerse partie, this they called to goe on one foote.Sometimes in notorious crimes they cryed, Hostis, Hostis. Here there was no o∣ther but one voyce, Let Seianus dye, let his Posteri∣ty dye, let his memory dye, and his goods be confiscate. The Senators were so provoked, that it is certain, that those who knew the advantage they had aboue others, as Albutius in speaking loude, remained al∣together mute to gaine the fauour of the Prince;Albutius in a∣tercatione vires suas nouerat. Sen. P. especially those who had most depended on the will of Seianus, and doubted not a whit but that which they spake amongst the people that had no∣thing to loose,Nunquā si quod mihi credit ama∣ui Hunc hominē. Iuuen. Seianus his friends shewed thēselues most passionate a∣gainst him. they might speake amongst the Senators, who esteemed them for lost who were now his friends. Those were the most sharpe, and faid, that if Cesar had Clemency hee ought to reserue it for men, not to vse it towards Monsters.
If the Senate had not beene zealous to conserue the glory of his gentlenesse, in detestation of hor∣rible punishments, they had caused him to vnder∣goe that of Paricides, they had seared vppe his fundament, they had put shooes with hot burning Coales vpon his feete, or had sowed him in a sacke with a Dog, a Cocke, an Ape, and a Viper, wic∣ked liuing Creatures, companions of a wicked man; afterwards they would haue sent him to the riuer in a Waggon drawne with two blacke Oxen, for a note of the enormity and foulnesse of the Crime. In alijs gloriari licet nuli genti∣um placuisse poe∣nas. T. Liu.But there was neuer any Common-wealth more curious then that of the Romanes, to conserue the ancient glory of gentlenes and faire carriage. Me∣tius Suffetius for his Treason was drawne in pieces by foure Horses.Supplicium ex∣empli parum memoris legam Romanorum. T. Liu. All the people turned away their eyes from such a horror. This was the first and the last punishment of that severitie, which had made the Iudges forget, that the lawes and punishments had been ordained, not for Tygers or for ravenous Beares, but for men. We must represent this execution of the Iudge∣ment against Seianus,In his Iudge∣ment it was obserued; Quo referente quo deceruente & quo primum assentiente. in like sort as the other, but that this was done with more pompe, through the occasion and for example sake, and with more di∣ligence and more Guards for securitie, and that more of the Magistrates were present at it. Heere may be found, that summarily which wee might seeke for in diuers places, and which is reported diuersly and confusedly.
The Iudgement being signed by him who had made relation of the Acts and the Letters of the Em∣perour,Carnifex non modo foro sed etiam coelo hoc ac spiritu prohibetur. Cic. by him who had first opened the opinion which was pursued, and by the Consull who decreed that which was resolued, they sent to finde out an Ex¦ecutioner, who by the law of the Censors might not dwell within the Citie. The Trumpet assembled together the people, it sounded before the gates of the Temples, before the house of the condemned person,Peruersam in∣duit Magi∣stratus vestem. Sen. in the publike pla∣ces. The Consull, or the Praetor mounted vpon his throne, and disrobed himselfe of his Purple garment or put it on backwards, or tooke a blacke one, as in a sad and sorrowfull accident; yet notwithstanding without shewing in his countenance either meager∣nesse or choller,Lex non ira∣scitur sed con∣stituit. Sen. Fi a Praecone silentium. Sen. but retaining the decency and gra∣uity of the Law, which is neuer angry with any man. The condemned person is brought forth, the Hin¦shers command silence, the Consull pronounceth the Iudgement, which is written in the little Tablet,Quibus ani∣maduertere in damnaos ne∣cesse est, non dicut occide, non morere, sed lege age. rude itatem imperij verbo tiore sub∣ducunt. Sen. Novi post terga ligantur manus. Sen. and turning himselfe towards the Executioner, said to him, Doe according to the Law, or more plainly, Goe on. Hee abstained from sorrowfull speeches; kill him, binde him, hang him, and was no more moued, then if hee had commanded one of his ser∣uants to tread vpon a Scorpion or a Worme. The Executioner tyed his hands behinde his back the Trumpets sounded whilst he prepared the punish¦ment, and that the condemned person disposed him∣selfe to death. The time was not left altogether at his discretion: Nero neuer allowed but one houre for a man to make himselfe fit to receiue the deadly
stroake.Adhibentur legitima ver∣ba, canitur ex altera parte classicum Sen. As at Funerals, there vseth to be Instru∣ments which sound with sad and mournfull tunes, with Cornets for the great ones, or with Flutes for the meaner sort, and this they call a Harmony: in like manner at Executions, the Trumpets sounded the battaile, as the alarme, or the bonteselle, to goe to death. Quisnam de∣lator? Quibus iudi∣cijs? quo te∣ste probauit? Nihil horum verbosa & grandis Epi∣stola venit A Capris bene habet nil plus interrogo. Iuven.During this, the people being astonished at a Iudg∣ment so soone done, demanded the cause; one asketh for what crime is hee condemned? who is his accu∣ser, what complices, what witnesses? nothing of all this, saith another. A great and a long letter is come from Caprea saith a third, that is enough, wee must know no more, all goes well. The forme is not expressed other then that which Dion speaketh, and the word which he vseth, signifi∣eth that hee was condemned, or executed. This is certaine, that they found out no new manner of pu∣nishment for him. When any one was condemned to punishment, according to the manner of the an∣cients, that was to banishment, the ciuill death of a Roman Citizen.Supplicium more maio∣rum. Tac. The Gallowes, the Impalement, the Crosse, the casting to Beasts, la hart: the beheading were to slaues and men of no account.Sunt paenae legibus consti∣tutae quibus fine iudicum saevitia & temporum infamia sup∣plicia decer∣nuntut. Tac. Turpeis pro∣ditores hostes∣que publici imponantur. Sen. It was a long time agoe said Paetus Thraseas to Nero since any man spake at Rome of the Hangman, or of strangling; the Lawes haue ordained punishments which punish the crimes without infamy for the times, without cruel∣ty for the Iudges. Traitors, Rebels, enemies of the Commonwealth take their leape from the Tarpeian Rocke. Manlius was throwne downe headlong from a great height vpon the Rocke, and hee had as
Plutarke saith,Locus idem in vno homine & eximiae gloriae monumentum & paenae vlti∣mae suit. T. Liv. the Capitoll for a witnesse of his most valorous deeds, and of his greatest calamity; this punishment was awarded him for hauing attempted against the Commonwealth. A punishment of all the most fearefull, because the Rocke was sharpe, of an extreame height, the midst and sides sticking out with points like to staies,Moles abscis∣sa in profun∣dum frequen∣tibus asperata saxis. Sen. and if the bodies lighted vpon them, they were bruised, or rudely repulsed; there was exceeding horror in the very sight of them; and he that once tooke this leape was sure he should neuer take it againe. They also cut off the heads of Offendors, not with an Axe or Hatchet, as anciently, but with a Sword, after the ciuill warre: and this kinde of punishment was so new, that a Curtizan being at the Table of the Proconsull Flaminius,Nondum ca∣put erat ense rotare Lucan. and saying that shee had neuer seene it, he caused a prisoners head to be strucke off by the Hangman.Vt iste cum amica coenaret iucundius, ho∣mo occisus est. Sen. Valerius Antius gaue the like con∣tentment to a Lady which hee loued. Behold these iolly Magistrates which iest with the liues of men, and with the authority of the Lawes, to content their cruell curiosity, one of a Dame of Plaisance;Maiestas laesa, si ex unti Proconsuli meretrix non summouetur. Sen. the other of a Harlot, whose name was so odious, that if the Hinsher had met her in the passage to the Senate house, and had not chased her away, he had offended against the dignity of his Office. Seianus had not his head strucken off, that punish∣ment was too gentle in a choler so extreame and publike. Iuuenall saith,Sejanus duci∣tur unco spectandus, gaudentomnes quae labra, quis illi vultus erat? Iuven. that he being drawn through the Citie with a long hooke, the people admired his great head, and his great lippes. I imagine that hee was strangled in prison, for that was the most ordi∣nary
punishment, and Tiberius vsed it. After hee had caused Agrippina to be put to death at Panda∣tria,Iactauit Cae∣sar quod non laqueo stran∣gulata, neque in Gemonias proiecta fo∣ret. Tac. hee vaunted that he had done her the fauour to giue command that she should not be strangled, and desired that the Senate would thanke him. His three poore children were carried to prison, his Daughter promised to the Sonne of Claudius was defloured at the foot of the Gallowes by the Hang∣man,Puella a car∣nisice iuxta laqueum com∣pressa. Tac. because it was not permitted to put to execu∣tion one that was a Virgin. Dion saith that shee was slaine by the people. Tacitus beleeued that his Sonne knew what he would doe,Puella adeo nescia vt cre∣bro interroga∣ret quod ob delictum? quo trahere∣tur? neque facturam vl∣tra & posse se puerili verbere moneri. Tac. The Gemoni∣an staires in the 3 Region of Rome, which was the hill Auentin. and the fortune which he ranne. Hee had a Daughter so yong and of so little knowledge, that shee ceased not still to say; What haue I done? whether will they carry mee? who will pardon me? I will doe so no more, there needes nothing but rods to make me more wise. The Hangman tooke these two by the throat and strangled them. The bodies of them so slaine, were tyed to the Gemonian steppes, which bare that name either of the Inuentor, or of the groanes which were heard there. They were like the Pilleries, the shew place of the executions, where they fasten the Por∣traits and Statues of the condemned persons. The Conciergery, the Court where they pleaded, the Treasury, where they registred the Arrests, were built neere together, the stories in the same place, and at the foot thereof Tyber, where they cast in headlong the bodies. Quo die illum Senatus de∣duxerat, popu∣lus in frusta diuisit. Sen.Seneca and Dion doe not agree in this: the one saith, that they drew his body about three whole dayes; and the other saith, that the same day that the
Senate had accompanied him to the Senate, the same day the people cut him in peeces,Ex eo nihil interfuit quod Carnifex tra∣heret. Sen. and that of a per∣son in whom the gods and men had all that which could be great and precious; there remained nothing for the Hangman, that he could catch hold on with his hooke, and draw it into Tyber. To accord them: I suppose that after he was executed, they set him on the staires purposely that the people might see him, and that in this fury they might draw him from thence at that instant, and hauing haled him vpon the the banke of the Riuer, might cut him in peeces, and it might be in 14 parts, so many Regions as the Citie had, and that these peeces were drawne three whole dayes through the streets. All kinds of outrages were done to this miserable body; some through inhumanity, others through re∣uenge, most for example, and all to th'end it might not be beleeued that either they had loued or known him. Iuuenall relateth the discourse which then was at Rome, for euery one gaue the full careere to his Iudgement. Behold here the Prose of those Verses. I conceiue that manie shall dye:Perituros au∣dio multos Nil dubium magna est for∣nacua: Dum iact in ripa calcemus Caesaris ho∣stem, &c. no man needes doubt thereof; the furnace wherein they are to bee cast is great enough. I met the other day my poore Bru∣tidius neere the Temple of Mars, he was very pale and astonished; I doubt not but if Aiax were called he would slay him with his owne hand. But to the end that wee may not be taken to be friends of Seinus, and that wee perish without defence, let vs goe quickly runne to that body whilst it is at the banke of Tyber, and cry out that we tread vnder our feet the enemy of Caesar.
He that is a seruant, let him renounce and quit his Master, let him take him by the necke and stop his throat to draw him trembling before the Commissaries. This is the way to saue himselfe and also to be rewarded. Afterwards the people in secret had this discourse of Seianus. See then who will follow thee, and who will Court thee as Seianus did? haue so much wealth as hee, dispose of Dignities, giue the Chaires of Iuory, command the Armies, be esteemed the Gouernour of the Prince, to performe these affaires during the time he was in the streight Grotte of Caprea, with a troope of Chaldeans and of Astrologians? Wouldst thou haue command ouer the troopes which carries the Pile or the Iauelin with three heads? Wouldst thou command ouer the Cauallery, ouer those braue Troopes which waite at the Pallace to gard the Prince?Principis Au∣gusta Caprea∣rum in rupe sedentis, Cum grege Chaldaeo. Qui nolunt occidere quē∣quam, posse volunt. Vt rebus laetis par sit mensu∣ra malorum. An Fidena∣rum Gabio∣rum{que} esse potestas, Et de mensura vis dicere? Numerosa pa∣rabat. Excel∣saeturris tabu∣lata, vnde al∣tior esset: Sūmus nempe locus: Magna{que} nu∣minibus vota exaudita ma∣lignis. Iu. Why desirest thou not this? Those who doe not de∣sire to kill any person, desire yet the power to doe it. Euery one sees the honour and the riches, which are yet notwithstanding such, that the measure of euils that follow them equals those of the contentment that they bring. Doest thou loue rather to carry the garment of Seia∣nus, whom thou sawest drawne through the streets, then to be Ruler of the Fidenates or the Gabij, or to be Ae∣dile at Vlubra, which is almost vninhabited, and Iudge of Measures, and cause them to be broken which are not iust? Thou must needs then confesse that Seianus ne∣uer knew what he ought to haue desired. For in seeking after those great honours, and those great riches, he did no other then prepare a Scaffold vpon a high Tower, to
fall downe and precipitate himselfe from the greater height. Who turned Crassus and Pompey vpside-downe? and who was he that tamed the old Romans, and brought them to endure the whip like slaues? High places which are mounted vnto by cunning or deceit and great desires, which are heard by the maligne starres become the ruine of them that make them. Few Tyrants haue come quietly to the Sonne in Law of Ceres, and to a naturall death; their death hath seldome beene dry, and blood hath not beene spared to temper with it. Seneca saw this Execution, and yet neuerthelesse hath written nothing of it, although he were of an age that he might well haue obserued it: for he was at Rome fifteene yeeres before the death of Augustus. He was amazed that of the body of so great and so mighty a man; there remained nothing for Se∣pulture. If an ouergreat ioy slew a Mother,Si ad mortem agere matres magnum, gau∣dium, quid magnus dolor? Sen. Cratisiclea had desired that they would put her to death be∣fore her chil∣dren, but the executioners slue them be∣fore her face. Plut. what ought an extreame sorrow to doe? Apicata was assailed with an incredible sorrow when shee saw her children at the Gibbets foot. Cratesiclea the Mother of Cleomo∣nes King of Sparta, whose head Ptolomee caused to be cut off, and his body fastned to the Crosse, seeing his children slaine before her eyes, said, Alas! my children, whether are you going? Apicata said to these innocents which she saw vpon this infamous place; Poore children, where are you? In this extremity of sorrow shee retired her selfe to her house, where shee wrote a Discourse of the death of Drusus, sent it to Tiberius, and that being done, shee slew her selfe.
Ordo sceleris per Aicatam Seiani prodi tus tormentis Eudemi ac Lygdi patefa∣ctus est. Tac.She had not so long forborne to reueale this en∣ormous offence, if the pitie of her children had not restrained her, for shee knew well, that in crimes of treason, they beare the punishment of the Father. She accused Seianus, Liuilla, Ligdus and Eudemus. They being put to the torture, confessed all. Tiberius cau∣sed many to be tormented, to know who were the complices.Errore de∣tecto occidi iussit, ne divul∣garet iniuri∣am Suet. It was told him that a man of Rhodes was arriued, and not remembring what it was his hoste had bad him doe, he caused him presently to be put to the racke, and hauing discouered the error, commanded that he should be slaine, to the end hee should not discouer the wrong he had receiued. This was to conserue the reputation of a iust Prince by a a notorious iniustice. Mihi vita tanti non est, vt armis te∣genda sit. Tac.The death of Seianus gaue much confidence and security to Tiberius: and when hee was moued to choose twenty Senators neere about him armed, he answered, That his life was not so deere, that hee would submit it to be conserued no way but by arms. But he left not for all that his vicious and vnbrideled manners, and not killing his vices before his owne death, he enioyed not that content to see his ene∣mies dye before him. Neuerthelesse hee felt the re∣morse of conscience so violent, that hee protested to the Senate,Tandem faci∣nora & flagi∣tia in suppli∣cium vertun∣tur. T c Vt corpora verberibus itam saeuitia ac libidine Tyrannorum animus dila∣ceratur. Tac. that he suffered death daily. Hee could not naturally endure to be subiect to the iudgement of men, but he remained conuicted in his conscience, that accused, condemned, and executed him. Where∣upon one wise man said who liued in those times, That if the hearts of Tyrants might be seene, they would appeare more vlcerous through voluptuous∣nesse
then the bodies of those they had slain by their cruelty would doe with their wounds. Of all his outrages the most pernicious was the death of that Architect, who so handsomely rebuilt and repaired the Portall of Rome, which was fallen downe; and who hauing presented him a Glasse,Ferunt Tibe∣rio Principe excogitatum vitri tempera∣mentum vt flex bile esset, & totam arti∣ficis officinam ab litam, ne ae is, argenti, auri, metalli pretia detra∣herentur. brake it, and recollecting the peeces, made it vp a∣gaine in the same place; hauing discouered the Art that this materiall the last worke of the fire, might be made obedient and plyable to the hammer. Pliny saith that hee abolished it, to the end that Gold, Sil∣uer, and Brasse might not be lesse prized. What an ornament to the world would this haue beene, if of an hearbe which hath neither beauty nor smell, which is good in the taste neither of men nor beasts, one could haue made a materiall hard, solid and transparent? An Inuention neuerthelesse that precedent ages haue beene ignorant of,Priscis tem∣poribus sum∣mum crta∣men inter ho∣min s, ne quid profuturum seculis diu lateret. Petr. and that the present admi∣red, and that ours will alwayes bemoane: for wee haue not many men that are passionate not to permit that which may profit posterity, to remaine long hidden. Tiberius spared nothing in his excessiue vo∣luptuous and superfluous expences.Malus Impe∣rato, ui ex visceribus pro∣unicialium homines non necessarios nec Reip vtiles alit. Lamp. Hee entertai∣ned with the sweatings and labours of the people an infinite number of persons, not onely vnprofitable but hurtfull to the Common wealth, and put them to death whose industry might bring ornament and profit. O what a disorder both of the times and men! They repine at the recompence of an admi∣rable Art, and Seianus sels one of his Eunuches for 3500. sesterces. But this was during the miseries of
this raigne, and when no man was permitted to re∣proue these profusions. Tiberius rule was yet more terrible and cruell after Seianus then it had beene before. He would not ad∣mit the people by his death to repaire those ils which he had done in his life. The most a∣greable Tri∣bute was the 20. which hey tooke of inhe∣ritances & le∣gatories, the kindred and poor excepted.Augustus had ordained a Military Treasury, which he kept full with three sorts of tributes, as with three liuing Springs, with the twentieth part of Inheritan∣ces, the fiue and twentieth part of the Sale of Slaues, and the hundreth part of all that which was Traf∣ficked for. Tiberius hauing reduced the Realme of Cappado∣cia to a Prouince, supposed that by the increase of this reuenue the people might be so much the more eased, and therefore instead of the hundreth part hee ordained that they should pay but the two hundreth part.Extraneis fa∣cile, domesticis graue. Plin. But after the death of Seianus, as if repen∣ting himselfe of this fauour, hee raised it to the hun∣dreth part againe. The necessity of his affaires ex∣cused him, that could not endure that the Tributes might be touched: this is a fury which taketh the State by the throat, if it be not appeased. They which are destinated to this charge,Da operam, vt omnes intelli∣gant si salui esse velint ne∣cessitat esse parendum. Cic. M. Antony in Asia, after the battaile of Phillippi So Themisto∣cles deman∣ding money of the Audri∣aus, told them that he was accompanied with two Goddesses, Perswasion, & Costraint. Plut. ought to make the people capable of this truth; If you will peaceably possesse your particular estates, you must needes succour the publike necessities. When Anthony the Tri∣umuir was sent into Asia to fetch succours from thence, he represented no other reason then this necessity. To the end (saith hee) that you be not driuen from your Townes and your Lands, you must needes part with
money for the entertainment of the Souldiers. They de∣mand no more then you would giue them freely. You haue giuen in two yeeres to Cassius and Brutus our enemies, the tributes of tenne yeeres. Wee neede onely this to dispatch our affaires, prouided that you giue it at once. Hee raised hereby 200000. talents, which was 20000. a yeere, which came to twelue Mil∣lions. The State if it be weake cannot be maintained in Peace, nor fortified without Armes;By the quality of the Tribute one may iudge of the power of the Tribu∣tary. Nec quies gen∣tium sine ar∣mis, ec arma fine stipendijs, nec stipendia fine Tributis haberi queunt Tac. Malo tondere pecus quam deglubere. Tib. Ames cannot be entertained without money, and money comes not but by Tributes. But there must be a moderati∣on, and the Prince imitating Tiberius must sheere his Sheepe without sarriying them, and must ren∣der the dispensation chase, sincere and pure, as of the blood of swearers, and of the teares of the peo∣ple, for profitable, necessary, and glorious expences, not for profusions, which bring neither contentment nor reputation. Happy is the Prince that findeth honest men in whom to repose the care of his Exchequer, whereon depends the honour of his Designes, the Maiesty of his Crowne, and the tranquillity of his Estate: for these are the sinewes that giue motion, & the veines that preserue life; and as by the resolution or rety∣ring of the sinewes the Naturall body is sometimes depriued of motion and sence; so the politicke with∣out money cannot be moud nor sustained: in one word,Tune conditus imo Eruitur templo multis intactus ab annis Romani census populi. Lucan. with Treasure may euery thing be wrought and brought to an end. He that hath the last Crowne hath the last triumph: They are sacred, the custody thereof is giuen to Saturne, or within his Temple.
Caesar had not knowne how to ruine the liberty, had hee not begun by Sacriledge, despoyling the Treasure of the Commonwealth, which was ramas∣sed together of all the spoyles of the East, and of that which the Fabricij, the Scipioes, the Catoes, and the Pompeys had acquired by their victories. One may draw the first remarkeable note of the desolation of an Estate from the vniust and irregular administrati∣on of the Treasures. It is not enough that those who haue the gouern∣ment thereof,Res familiaris iji rebus quae atura quibus ab est turpicu∣do. Cic. haue their eyes open to see that the expence exceedeth not the receipt: the State hath great interest that the meanes of particular persons, may be mannaged without excesse, with order and modesty, as they ought to be acquired, without base dealing.Conviviorum luxuria & vestium aegrae ciuiatis indi∣cia unt. Sen. The disorders which may be obserued in Feastings in Buildings, in the delights and super∣fluities of priuate houses are symptomes of an estate not onely sicke but dying. Troubles and seditions for the most part are not fomented but by the desperate∣nesse of forlorne people, and who haue nothing to loose;Hoc in Rep. seminarium Catilinarium. of this quality were those that entred into the conspiracie of Catiline. Great and excessiue disorders during the raigne of Tiberius, but such as were des∣cended from farre off, for hee vsed to say that the Romans had learn'd to expend their owne substance from the Ciuill warres, and that of others from stran∣gers. It was a wonder that hauing prouided for so many other excesses hee would not correct the luxu∣ry, nor the dissolutenesse which were ouerflowne by reason of the disesteeming of the Sumptuary Lawes. This it may be hapned, because he would not begin
the example of the reformation in his owne house,Non sum of∣fensionum auidus, graues pro Rep susci∣pio, inanes & irritas jure deprecor. Tac. which surfeited with excesses, or that disorderlinesse was falne into a custome and discipline; or that hee would not pull vpon himselfe vnprofitably and with∣out effect the publike hatred. His greatest reason was that hee would not expose his commands to disse∣steeme, nor open the veine before he had a swathing∣band ready to stay the blood. These excellent words which hee spake to the Se∣nate of this subiect ought to be represented to Kings euer when they make Ordinances, whereof the ef∣fects are doubtfull and difficult.Omittenda ptius prae∣lida & adulta vitia, quam hoc adsequi vt palam fiat quibus flag ij impare sumus. Tac. A Prince ought rather to dissemble an inueterate disorder, and which hath a great many followers or supporters, then to put his au¦thority in hazard, and make his want of power be knowne publikely, and that there be things which he cannot remedy. After the execution of Seianus, the Senate com∣manded that the Statua of Liberty should be erected in the publike place, and that yeerely vpon the same day on which Seianus was slain, a Combat on horse∣backe should be represented, and that diuers kinds of liuing Creatures should be slaine; a thing that neuer was done before. It was ordained also that immo∣derate honours should be giuen to no man, and that none should sweare by any other name then that of the Emperour. All Seianus his friends ranne the like fortune with him, and receiued that which they looked for.Quam male est extra le∣gem viuenti∣bus, quicquid eerunt semper expe∣ctant. Petr. The Prisons were filled, some condemned to death, others banished, all bereaued of their places of Charge. The Citie resembled a field where nought else was to be
seene but bodies dismembred, or Rauens that dis∣membred them. Iacuit immen∣sa strages, omnis sexus, omnis aetas, illustres, igno∣biles. Tac. Feminae quia occupandae reip. argui non poterant ob lacrymas in∣cusabantur. Tac.Tiberius accustomed himselfe in this manner to executions, that he caused all those to be put to death which were in the prisons accused to haue any intel∣ligence with Seianus: they cast forth vpon the pue∣ment a great number of dead men of all ages & con∣ditions, illustrious, noble, base, no man being per∣mitted to stay to behold them, nor to withdraw themselues to bemoane them; for both the one and the other was a crime. Vitia was punished by death for that she had lamented Geminus her Sonne; and because they could not accuse women for attempting against the State, their teares were criminall. Interciderat sortis humanae commercium, vt metus, quā∣tun{que} saevitiae glicebatur miseratio ar∣cebatur. Tac.They iudged of griefe by the countenance, and of passion by the vehemency of the griefe; in such man∣ner, that the bodies which the Riuer Tyber had cast vp vpon her banks remained vnburied; so much had feare broken the commerce betweene nature and compassion. Ausus est am∣plecti amiciti∣am quam cae∣terifalso exue∣rant. Tac.There was none which disclaimed not the friend∣ship of Seianus. Onely one Roman Knight Marcus Terentius being accused to be his friend, auowed it freely then when others seemed to haue renounced him. He spake in this manner before the Senate. It may be I might doe better for my fortune to deny the crime whereof I am accused,Minus expe∣dit agnoscere crimen quam abnuere. Tac. There were 7 of them in all, in the Citie, and 3 in other garrisons. then to confesse it: But what∣soeuer shall happen I will not say but I was Seianus his friend, that I desired to be so, and did reioyce that I was possest of his loue. I saw that he was his Fathers compani∣on in the command of the Pretorian Cohorts, and that at one and the same time he managed the affaires of the Ci∣tie
and of the Warres.Cunctos qui nouissimi consilij exper∣tes fuimus, v∣nius discrimi∣ne defendam. Tac. Non est no∣strum aestima re quem supra caeteros et qui∣bus de causis etollas Tibi summum iudicium dij dedere, nobis obsequij glo∣ria relicta est. Tac. That they that were neere him in friendship were powerfull in the Emperors loue, and all o∣thers in cōtinuall feare & in the estate of accused persons. I will not here alledge any one for example, but I will with the alone perill of my life defend all such as haue had no part in these his last designes. For we did not our ser∣uice to Seianus of Vulsine, but we followed the party of the House of Claudius, whereof by all ance he had made himselfe the chiefe. We did honour (Caesar) your Son-in-Law, your companion in the Consulat, and who exercised your function in the Common-wealth. It belongs not to vs to iudge what he should be, or for what cause you raise one man aboue all others. The gods haue giuen you the Soueraigne disposition of things, and there remaines onely for vs the glory of obedience. We consider what we see, to whom you giue riches and honor, and who may most hurt vs or profit vs, and none can de∣ny but all this was in Seinus. It is not lawfull to sound the depth of the Princes inten∣tions, nor that which he prepareth in secret;Abditos Prin∣cipis sensus & si quid occul∣tius parat ex∣quirere inlici∣tum. Tac. that is doubt¦full, and therefore we cannot arriue to it. Consider not the last day of Seianus, but the sixteene yeeres of his prosperi∣ty, in those dayes we did honour vnto Satrius and Pom∣ponius his Free-men, and it was a great matter to be knowne of his Seruants and of his Porter. What then? Shall we make no difference betweene those which haue serued Seianus as Seruants to the Emperour,Insidiae in Remp. consilia caedis duer∣sum Impetrao∣rem punan∣tur. de ami∣ci ia & officijs idem et te Cae∣sar et nos ab∣soluerit. Tac. and such as haue followed him in his designes against the Emperour? It is necessary that this distinction should be reduced vnto the iust bounds thereof, to the end they may punish the treasons and co spiracies against the State, and the plotting of the Emperors death, but for the friendship and
the respect we haue had of him, one and the same reason O Caesar may well excuse both you and vs. The boldnesse and constancy of this discourse, which had reference to all that other men could think, was of so great force, that those which had beene ac∣cused of being friends to Seianus, were distinguished from his complices, and Tiberius was praised for ha∣uing confirmed the Decree of the Senate touching the Innocency of Terentius, who had not loued his friend, to hate him afterwards or disauowe him. Getulicus effusae clemen∣tiae, modicus seueritate mi∣cum amorem adsecutus. Tac.Lentulus Getulicus went yet another way then Var∣ro. Abudius Rufus accused him to haue treated about the marriage of his Daughter with Seianus his Sonne: this man was in great credit and authority in Almany, by reason of his sweetnesse and modesty. He spake a farre off, and on Horsebacke, and neere the Armies. Tiberius therefore caused his accuser to be banished, and condemned. An Act of the wisedome of a Prince neuer to threaten him that is secure from not being hurt by his blowes. Boldnesse proceedes not alwaies from courage, but from place & from the cause Idem error Principis fine fraude, alijs exitiō non est habendus. Tac.Getulicus was aduertised thereof, and knowing the humour of Tiberius, who was fast to his opinion, reti∣red not himselfe easily, and according to the temper of his choler hasted or foreslowed his reuenge, gaue him to vnderstand that he was in such estate, that hee would not forget his own safety for that of anothers, and sent him this Letter alike proud and bold. The alliance of which (O Caesar) I haue treated with Seianus, is not altogether of my motion, but by your Coun∣saile. It may be I haue beene deceiued after you, but one and the same fault ought not to be the discharge of the one, and the ruine of the other. My faith hath beene en∣tire
hitherto, and shall not change if they doe not raise some party against me,Successorem non aliter quam inditi∣um mortis acceptutum. Tac. and whosoeuer shall come to suc∣ceede in my charge, I shall receiue him as one who hath attempted vpon my life. Let vs agree by way of treaty, let the Empire remaine to you, to me my Gouernment. Nothing but the distance of place excused,Princeps cae∣terarum rerum potiatur ipse prouniciam reine m. Tac. Publico odio & extrema aetate res prin∣cipis stant magis fama quam vi. Tac. the in∣ciuility of this Letter. He alone of Seianus his friends after Terentius saued himselfe: Tiberius held downe his head, and shrunke vp his sholders, for his mat∣ters were sustained more by reputation then by pow∣er. His decayed old age retrenched his hopes, and publike hatred increased his distrusts. Mamercus Scaurus was one of Seianus his friends,Haud minus validum ad exitia Macro∣nis edium qui easdem artes occultius ex∣ercebat. Tac. but his friendship had not so much power to ruine him as the hatred of Macro, who was no lesse sharpe then the other in ruining his enemies, but hee went about it more cunningly and secretly. He was wor∣thy of the friendship of Seianus for the conformity of his humours to his pleasures, which Seneca reporteth to be so beastly, that the onely thinking of them, sul∣lies the Spirit, he tarried not till he was condemned, but beleeued Sextia his wise, who perswaded him to kill himselfe. P. Vitellius who had so constantly vpheld the cause of Germanicus against Piso,P. Vitellius aerari prae∣fectus milita∣rem pecuniā rebus novis obtulerat. Tac. was accused to haue offe¦red to Seianus the monies belonging to the Com∣monwealth, for hee was one of the Officers of the Treasury. His Brothers answered for him, but per∣ceiuing that his processe hung long, he grew weary with languishing betweene hope and feare, and ope∣ned a veine with a launcer. His friends stanched the blood and bound vp that Spirit which was going
out, loathing to lodge in a body which being most ready to dye, stayed not it selfe but with much griefe and sorrow. In custodia morbo perijt, Suet. Dum fortu∣nam aduer∣sam aequus to∣lerat, Tiberio superstes fuit. Tac. Honoribus functus es? Numquid aut tam vi∣uersis quam Seianus? Sen.Pomponius was sicke in the same Hospitall where the rest were, but his patience made him suruiue, Ti∣berius would haue him put to death because Velius Gallus was thrown into his Garden the same day that Seianus was drawne through the streets. Tiberius lamented Seianus not for losse of him, but for his owne interest; for as long as he liued, whatso∣euer he did that was vniust or cruell, hee cast all the blame vpon him, and after his death there was none tooke part with him in the publike hatred. By so much as the prosperity of Seianus had beene admired, by so much his fall ministred terror and a∣stonishment. Neuer any man before him had recei∣ued more great, more vniuersall, more vnlooked for honours; and all the fauours and dignities which all the Kings of Europe could heape together to raise a man, could not be paralleld with these here. He made his power be knowne to all,Diu multum{que} singulis quid posset osten∣dit. Sen. and a long time and eue∣ry where. For sixteene yeeres space hee possessed the soueraigne power of an Empire that commanded o∣uer all the world, and which first had taken for its li∣mits the rising and the setting of the Sunne. Euphrates shut vp the frontires thereof towards the East; the Mont Atlas,Clausam mari aut fluminibut lonquiquis imperium. Tac. the Cataracts of Nile, and the Deserts of Africke towards the South; the Ocean Sea towards the West and Danubius towards the North; so that whethersoeuer the Sunne went, thither went also his commands. What glory euer mounted more high, or descended more low?
Whosoeuer shall behold a high Mountaine pee∣ring ouer a great Valley to be made leuell, to be dig∣ged down & swallowed vp in an instant of time,To see great ones ruined is to see great mountaines levelled. will he not be astonished? yet this is not more strange then to see those great Colossi to be cast downe in a mo∣ment. We finde in it cause of astonishment, and yet neglect the example: Euery man trusts to his owne Iudgement, thinking to walke the same way, but the pssages of some are more secure then of others.Euery man thinks to do better and to guide himselfe more wisely then those that are lost. One onely Vessell which shall be prosperously returned from a long Nauigation is able to make a hundred persons resolute to vndertke the same voyage; and the shipwracke of one hundred Vess ls hath not the power to hinder one onely; for euery one thinks that ill fortune is not ordained for him. Macro Cap aine of the Guard, and Lao Knight of the Watch were better aduised,Great seruice done for the State, ought to be recom∣penced with honor, and not with mo∣ney. the Senate for this great seruice of theirs appointed to them great ho∣nours. To the first the Office of Praetor, with power to sit in the ranke of the Senators, cloathed with a pur∣ple robe at Playes and publike assemblies; and to the second the Office of Quaestor: they refused them, and Dion attributeth the reason of their refusall, to the terror of an example so fresh in their memories. They supposed it would be a great impudence in them to run against the same rocke on which Seianus had perished.Optimum a∣liena insania frui Plni. There be some that can∣not become wise by others examples, but by their owne ruine. It is much better to be taught by ano∣thers misfortune then by a mans owne; the wise man make his profit out of the shame and hurt that touch∣eth not him at all: and as Triacle is made of Vipers, and they extract healthfull medicines from poysons
themselues, so from the fals and miseries of bad men good men may draw precepts for their guidance. Nemo vnquā imperium fla∣git o acquisi∣tum bonis ar∣tibus exercuit. Tac.Seianus shall be euer alleadged as a prodigious ex∣ample of extreame insolency, and of vnfortunate ambition; and his Tragicall end may teach vs that no man can euer vse power well which is ill gotten; that we must not iudge of a mans happinesse before his death,Aluares de Luna, told them who ad∣mire his for∣tune with the K. of Casti e, you do wrong to commend the building, before it be finished. nor of the day before the euening, nor of the building that is not finished; Death, Fortune, Time, and Course change in a moment. That fauour which is acquired by merit or good fortune is lost through insolency, and the most confident and assu∣red ought not to depend but vpon the supreame grace of the Prince. FINIS.
