20709 99854978 20446
AN EXPOSITION OF CER∣taine difficult and obscure words, and termes of the Lawes of this Realme, newly set forth & augmented, both in French & English, for the help of such yong Students, as are desirous to attaine to the know∣ledge of the same. AT LONDON Printed by th'Assignee of Charles Yetsweirt Esq. deceased. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. 1595.
The Table. A. ABatement de briefe n plaint fol. 1. a Abatement en ter∣res fol. 1. b Abbot fol. 2. a Abbettors fol. 2. b Abeyance fol. 3. a Abishersing fol. 4. a Abiuration fol. 4. a Abridgement de plaint ou demand fol. 5. b Accedas ad Curiam fol. 6. a Acceptance fol. 6. a Accessories fol. 6. b Action fol. 7. b Action personals fol. 7. b Action reals fol. 7. b Action populer fol. 8. a Action mixt fol. 8. b Action del briefe fol. 9. a Action sur le case fol. 9. a Action sur le statute fol. 9. b Accompt fol. 10. a Accord fol. 10. b Acquital fol. 10. b Acquitance fol. 11. b Actes fol. 12. a Additions fol. 12. a Adiournement fol. 12. a Admeas. de dower fol. 12. a Admeas. de pasture fol. 12. b Administrator fol. 14. a Admiral fol. 15. a Ad quod dampnum fol. 15. a Aduowson fol. 15. b Age prier fol. 15. b Agreement fol. 16. b Aide fol. 18. a Aide de Roy fol. 18. b Aiel fol. 19. a Alien fol. 19. b Alienation fol. 19. b Ambidexter fol. 19. b Amendment fol. 20. a Amercement fol. 20. a Amercement roial fol. 20. b An, iour, & wast fol. 20. b Annuitie fol. 21. a Appeal fol. 21. a Appellant fol. 21. b Appellor fol. 21. b Appendant & appurtenant fol. 21. b Apportionment fol. 22. a Appropriations fol. 22. b Approuements fol. 24. a Arbitrement fol. 24. a Arrest fol. 24. b Arrerages fol. 25. a Assets fol. 25. a Assignee fol. 26. a Assise fol. 26. Assise de darrain pres. fol. 27. b Ass. de Mortdancest. fol. 27. b Attainder fol. 27. b Attaint fol. 28. a Atturnement fol. 28. b Audita querela fol. 28. b Auerrement fol. 29. a Auerpeme fol. 29. a Auncient demesne fol. 29. a Auowrie fol. 29. b B. ¶ Baile fol. 30. a Bailement fol. 30. b Bailife fol. 30. b Baberind theefe fol. 31. a Bargaine & sale fol. 31. a Barre fol. 31. b Base fee fol. 31. b Bastard fol. 32. a Battaile fol. 32. b Bigamie fol. 32. b Blodwit fol. 33. b Boote fol. 33. b
Broodhalfpenie fol. 34. a Burgage fol. 34. a Burghbote fol. 34. a Burghbrech fol. 34. b Burghenglish fol. 34. b Burglarie fol. 34. b C ¶ Capias fol. 35. a Caruage fol. 35. a Certification in ass. fol. 35. a Certiorary fol. 35. b Cession fol. 36. a Cessauit fol. 36. a Challenge fol. 37. a Champertie fol. 37. b Champertors fol. 38. a Charge fol. 38. a Charters fol. 38. a Chattels fol. 38. b Childwit fol. 38. b Chimin fol. 38. b Chose in action fol. 39. a Cinque Portes fol. 39. b Circuit de action fol. 39. b Claime fol. 40. a Clergie fol. 40. b Clerke attaint fol. 40 b Clerke conuict fol. 41. a Colour fol. 41. a Colour de office fol. 42. a Collusion fol. 42. b Common ley fol. 43. a Common fol. 43. b Condition fol. 45. a Confirmation fol. 46. b Confiscate biens fol. 47. b Conspiracie fol. 47. a Custome fol. 47. a Consultation fol. 47. b Continual claime fol. 47. b Counterplee fol. 48. a Contract fol. 48. b Contra formam collatio∣nis fol. 49. a Contra formam feoffa∣menti fol. 49. b Contributione fac. fol. 50. a Conusance fol. 50. a Corodie fol. 50. b Coroner fol. 51. b Corporation fol. 52. b Corps politique fol. 53. a Corruption de sank fol. 53. a Coooage fol. 53. b Couenant fol. 54. a Couerture fol. 54. a Couin fol. 54. b Cui in vita fol. 54. b Cui ante diuortium fol. 55. a Curtesie dengleterre fol. 55. a D. ¶ Dammage fesant fol. 55. a Danegeld fol. 55. b Darrem presentment fol. 56. a Deane & Chapter fol. 56. a Decies tantum fol. 56. a Declaration fol. 56 b Dedimus potestatem fol. 57. b Defendant fol. 57. b Defence fol. 57. b Demandant fol. 58. a Demeanes fol. 58. b Demy sank fol. 59. a Demurrer fol. 59. a Denizen fol. 59. b Deodand fol. 59. b Departure de son plee ou matter fol. 60. a Departure in dispite del Court fol. 60. a Deputie fol. 60. b Dette fol. 60. b Deuastauerunt bona resta∣oris fol. 61. a
Deuise fol. 61. b Diem clausit extrem̄ fol. 65, a Discent fol. 65. b Disclaimer fol. 66. a Discontinuance fol. 66. a Dismes fol. 66. b Disparagement fol. 67. a Disseisin fol. 67. b Disseisin sur disseisin fol. 68. a Dissesor & disseisee fol. 68. a Disceit fol. 68. a Distres fol. 68. b Diuorce fol. 70. b Donor & Donee fol. 70. b Double plee fol. 70. b Dower fol. 71. a Droit fol. 72. a Droit dentrie fol. 72. a Dum non fuit compos mē∣tis fol. 72. a Dum fuit infra etat fol. 72. b Dures fol. 72. b E. ¶ Eiectione firme. fol. 73. a Eiectment de Gard fol. 73. a Eire Justices fol. 73. a Elegit fol. 73. a Embraceor fol. 75. b Encrochment fol. 75. b Enheritance fol. 76. a Entre fol. 76. b Entrusion fol. 79. b Equitie fol. 79. b Error fol. 81. a Escape fol. 81, b Escheat fol. 82. b Escuage fol. 83. a Esplees fol. 83. b Essoine fol. 84. a Estoppel fol. 84. b Estrangers fol. 85. b Estray fol. 86. a Estrepement fol. 86. a Etate probanda fol. 86, b Excommen gem̄t fol. 86. b Exchange fol. 87. a Execution fol. 87. b Executor fol. 88. a Exigent fol. 88. b Ex parte talis fol. 89. a Ex graui querela fol. 89. a Extinguishment fol. 89. a Extortion fol. 89. b F. ¶ Failer de record fol. 90. a Fait fol. 90. b Farme fol. 94. b Faux imprisonment fol. 95. a Fee ferme fol. 95. a Fee simple fol. 95. a Feoffement fol. 95. b Feoffor & Feoffee fol. 95. b Fealtie fol. 96. a Felonie fol. 96. a Firebote fol. 96. b Fledwit fol. 96. b Flemeswite fol. 97. a Fletwit fol. 97. a Forstal fol. 97. a Forstaller fol. 97. a Franchise roial fol. 97. b Frankalmoigne fol. 97. b Frank fee fol. 98. a Fieri facias fol. 98. b Fine fol. 99. a Formedon fol. 98. b Frankmariage fol. 100. a Franktenement fol. 101. a Freshsuit fol. 101. b G. ¶ Gager deliuerans fol. 102. a Garrātie des ches fol. 102. b Garrantie fol. 103. a Garrantie fol. 105. a
Gard fol. 105. b Gardein fol. 106. a Garnishment fol. 107. a Gauelet fol. 107. a Gauelkind fol. 108, b Geld fol. 109, b Graund Cape fol. 109, b Grand Serieantie fol. 109, b Girthbrech fol. 110, b H ¶ Habere fac̄ sei fol. 110, b Hangwit fol. 111, a Hariot fol. 111, a Heybote ou Hedge∣bote fol. 111, b Hidage fol. 112, a Hotchpot fol. 112, a Homage fol. 113, a Homage an̄cestrel fol. 113, a Homesoken fol. 113, b Homicide fol. 114, a Hornegeld fol. 114, a Housebote fol. 114, a Hundred fol. 114, b Hundredum fol. 115, a I ¶ Ideot fol. 115, a Idemptitatenom̄ fol. 115, b Ieofaile fol. 116, a Illoial assemblie fol. 116, b Imparlance fol. 116, b Imprisonment fol. 117, a Infangtheefe fol. 117, a Information fol. 117, b Iointenants fol. 117, a Indicauit fol. 119, a Ioynture fol. 119, a L ¶ Larcenie fol. 120, a Lastage fol. 120, b Leases fol. 120, b Lessor & Lessee fol. 121, a Leuāt & touchant fol. 121, a Ley fol. 121, b Libertate {pro}banda fol. 122, b Liuerie de seisin fol. 122, b Lotherwit fol. 124, a M. ¶ Maihem fol. 124, a Mainprise fol. 125, a Mannor fol. 125, a Mamunission fol. 125, b Maximes fol. 126, a Mainour fol. 126, b Maintenance fol. 127, a Mesne fol. 127, a Misprision fol. 127. b Monstrans de faits ou Records. fol. 128. a Mortdauncester fol. 128. b Monstrauerunt fol. 128. b Mortgage fol. 129. b Moderata miseriē fol. 130. b Mortmaine fol. 130. b Mulier fol. 131. a Murder fol. 132. a N. ¶ Natiuo habendo fol. 132. a Ne admittas fol. 132. b No omittas &c. fol. 132. b Negatiua preignās fol. 133. a Neiniuste vexes fol. 134. a Niefe fol. 134. a Nihil dicit fol. 135. a Nisi prius fol. 135. a Nomination fol. 135. a Nonabilitie fol. 135. b Nude contratt fol. 135. b Nusans fol. 136. a Nuper obiit fol. 136. b O. ¶ Oredelf fol. 136. a
Outfangtheefe fol. 136. b Oweltie fol. 137. a Oyer de Recordes & faits fol. 137. a Oier & terminer fol. 137. b P. ¶ Pape fol. 138. a Per que seruitia fol. 138. b Parceners fol. 138. b Partition fol. 139. b Parties fol. 141. a Patron fol. 141. b Perquisites fol. 142. a Perambulā fa. fol. 142. a Petit Cape fol. 142. b Petit Serieantie fol. 143. a Plaintife fol. 143. a Pleading fol. 143. a Post disseisin fol. 143. b Possession fol. 143. b Pound fol. 144. a Preamble fol. 144, a Premunire fol. 144, b Precipe in capite fol. 145, a Prescription fol. 145, b Presentment fol. 146, a Pretēsed droit &c. fol. 146, a Priuities &c. fol. 146, b Priuiledges fol. 147, b Proces fol. 148, a Prochein Amy fol. 149, a Procedendo fol. 150, a Prohibition fol. 150, a Protection fol. 150, b Protestation fol. 151, b Purchase fol. 152, b Q. ¶ Quale ius fol. 152, b Quare eiecit infra termi∣num fol. 153, a Quare impedit fol. 153, a Quare incumbrauit fol. 153, b Q. intrusit matrimonio nō satisfacto fol. 154, a Quare non admisit fol. 154, a Quarentine fol. 154, b Quid iuris clamat fol. 154, b Quinzime fol. 155, a Quod ei deforceat fol. 155, b Q. permittat fol. 156, a Quo iure fol. 156, a Quo minus fol. 156, a Quo warranto fol. 156, b R. ¶ Rationabil diui fol. 156, b Reddissseisin fol. 157, a Regrator fol. 157, a Reioynder fol. 157, a Release fol. 157, b Reliefe fol. 158, a Remainder fol. 158, b Remitter fol. 159, a Rents fol. 160, a Repleuin fol. 165, a Replication fol. 165, b Reprises fol. 166, a Receit fol. 166, a Rescous fol. 166, a Reseruation fol. 166, b Retraxit fol. 167. a Reeue fol. 167, b Reuersion fol. 168, a Riot fol. 168, b Robberie fol. 168, b Rout fol. 168, b S. Sake fol. 169, a Scire facias fol. 169, a Scot fol. 170, a Seruice de chiualer fol. 170, a
Shewing fol. 170, a Soke fol. 170, b Sokmains fol. 170, b Socage fol. 172, a Summons ad warranti∣zandum fol. 173, a Spoliation fol. 173, a Stallage fol. 174, a Suit Couenant fol. 174, a Suit custome fol. 174, b Suit reall fol. 174, b Suit seruice fol. 175, a Statute marchant fol. 175. a T. ¶Taile fol. 176, a Taile ap̄s poss▪ &c. fol. 177, a Taxe & Tallage fol. 177, b Tenure in capite fol. 177, b Terme dans fol. 177, a Testament fol. 178, a Them fol. 179, a Thetbote fol. 179, a Title fol. 179, b Title dentrie fol. 179, b Tosse fol. 180, a Treason fol. 181, a Treasure troue fol. 181, a Turne del Vtnt fol. 181, V. ¶View fol. 181, b Vi laica remouēda fol. 182, a Villenage fol. 182, b Viscont fol. 185, a Volunt fol. 186, a Voucher fol. 187, a Vses fol. 187, b Vsurie fol. 188, a Vtlagarie fol. 188, b Vtrum fol. 189, W. Waie fol. 190, a Wae fol. 190, b Warwit fol. 191, a Wast fol. 191, a Wreck fol. 191, b Withernam fol. 192, a Warren fol. 192, a FINIS.
Termes of the Law. 1 Abatement of a writ or plaint. ABatemēt of a writ or plaint, is when an actiō is broght by writ or plaint, wherein is lacke of sufficient and good matter, or els the matter alledged is not certainly set downe, or if the plain∣tife or defendant, or place are misnamed, or if there appeare variance be∣twéene the writ and the specialtie or recorde, or that the writ or the de∣claration be vncertaine, or for death of the plain∣tife or defendant and for diuers other like causes, then vpō those defaults, the defendant may pray, yt the writte or plaint may abate, that is to say, that the plaintifs suit against him, may cease for that time, & that he shal begin again his suit, and bring a newe writ or plaint if he be so disposed to doe. But if the defendant in any action plede a matter in barre, for to adnull the
action for euer, he shal not come afterwards to plede in abatement of the writ, but if after it appere in ye record, that there is some matter apparant, for the which ye writ ought to be abated, then ye def. or any persō as a frind to ye court may well plede & shewe yt in arrest of iudgement. See the titles of writ, Misnosmer & Variance in the Abridgements, and the book called the Digests of writs, in which it is ve∣ry well entreated, especi∣ally of these matters. Abatement in lands. ABatement in lands or tenemēts is whē a mā
dieth seased of lāds or te∣nements, & one yt hath no right entreth into ye same lands or tenemēts before y• heire maketh his entry, this entry of him is cal∣led an abatement, & he an Abator. But if the heire enter first after ye death of his auncestor, & the other enter vpon y• possession of y• heire, this entry of him is a disseisin to the heire. Look in ye book of entries o. 63. c. & 205. d. & 519. c. where this word Abate∣ment is called in latin, In∣trusio, And I think it bet∣ter to cal it in latin Inter∣positio, or Intratio per in∣terpositionem, to make a difference betwéene this worde & intrusion after y• death of the tenāt for life. 3 Abbot. ABbot was y• soueraigne head, or chiefe of those houses, which when they stood were called Abbies, & this Abbot together wt ye monks of ye same house, who were called y• couent made a corporation: such a soueraigne of any such house shal not be charged by y• act of his predecessor,
if it be not by cōmon seale or for such things which commeth to the vse of his house. Also an abbot shall not be charged for the det of his Monke before his entre in religion, though the creditor hanc an espe∣cialtie thereof, except that it haue come to the vse of his house, but the execu∣tors of the Monke shalbe charged therewith. Look for this in the A∣bridgments the same ti∣tle vnder which you shall sée that some of thē were electiue, some presētatiue, And how they were made gouernors, and their au∣thoritie, and in this title are also comprehended all other corporations spiri∣tual, as Prior and his co∣uent friers and Canons, Deane & Chapter. ¶ Abbettors. ABbettors are in diuers cases diuersly takē one kind of abbettors are they y• maliciously wtout iust cause or desert do procure other to sue false appeals of murther or felonie a∣gainst men to the intēt to trouble & greue them, and
to bring them to infamy & slaunder. Abbetiours in murders, are those that command, procure, coun∣sell or comfort others to murther. And in some cas such abbettors shal be ta∣ken as principals, and in some case but as accesso∣ries. So in other felomes. And their presence at the deed doing, & their absēce maketh a difference in the case. There are abbettors also in treason, but they are in case as principals, for in treason there are no accessories. Looke more in the booke called the Plees of the Crown made by the right worshipfull Iudge Sir W. Stamford in the titles of Accessories & damages in appeale. 5 Abeiance. ABeiance is whē a lease is made for terme of life, the remainder to the ryght heires of I. S. which I. S. is liuing at the time of the graunt, Now by this graunt the remainder passeth from the grauntor presente, yet it vesteth not present∣ly,
nor taketh hold in the grantée, that is to fay, the right heire of I. S. but is said to be in abeyance or els as the Logiciens terme it in power, or in vnderstāding, and as we say in the cloudes, that is to wit, in the considerati∣on of the law, That if I. S. dye hauing a right heir, & liuing the lessée for life, then this is a good re∣mainder, & now vesteth & commeth into the right heire in such sort, as that he may graunt, forfait or otherwise dispose y• same, & ceaseth to bée any more in Abeiāce, for that there is one now of abilitie to take it because that I. S. is dead, & hath left a right heire in life, which could not be liuing I. S. for y• during his life none could properly be said his heire. Also if a man bée Patron of a Church, and presen∣teth one to y• same. Now is the fée of the landes and tenementes pertey∣ninge to the rectorie in the parson, but if the par∣son die and the Church is become void, then is the
fée in abeyaunce, vntill there be a newe Parson presented, for the patron hath not the fée, but onely the right to present, and the fée is in the incumbēt that is presented, & after his death, it is in no body but in abeyance, till there be a new incumbent as is aforesaid. Sée Lit. his 3. booke cap. 11. fol. 145. And Park. fol. 12. 6 Abishersing. ABishersing (& in some copies Mishersing) yt is to be quit of amercia∣mēts before whō soeuer of transgression proued. 7▪ Abiuration. ABiuration is an oth that a man or woman shall take wē they haue com∣mitted felony, & flie to the Church or churchyard, or to any other place priui∣ledged for safegarde of their liues, choosing rather perpetual banishment out of the realm, thē to stād to the law & to be tried of the felony, in which case befor the Coroner he shalmake such cōfession, which may
make a sufficient indite∣ment of felony, then the coroner at the comon law shall make him to for∣swere the Realme, & shal assigne him to what Port he shal goe, & shal sweare him y• he go not out of the high way, & yt he shoulde not abide at the port (if he may haue good passage) but one flood & one ebbe, & if he cannot haue passage, then he shall go euery day during xl. daies in the se to the knees, but if such a felon as abiureth go out of the hie way & flieth to another place, if he be ta∣ken he shalbe brought be∣fore the iudge & there shal haue iudgement to be hā∣ged. But if he which so praieth the priuiledge wil not abiure, then he shall haue the priuiledge for xl. daies, & euery man may giue him meate & drinke. But if any giue him sus∣tenance after xl. daies al∣though it be his wife▪ such giuing is felony. Also he that doeth abiure shall be deliuered from one Con∣stable to another, & from one frāches to another, til
that hee come to his port, and if the Constable will not receiue him, he shalbe grieuously amerced. Look the othe in the Treatise de Abiuratione Latronū. And this law was insti∣tuted by S. Edward the Confessor, a king of this Realme before the Con∣quest, and was grounded vpon the law of mercie, & for the loue & reuerence no doubt that he & other his successours did beare vnto the house of God, or place of prayer and admi∣nistration of his woord & sacramēts, which we call the Church. Note this law is now changed by the statutes 21. H 8. ca. 2 22. H. 8. ca. 14. and 32. H. 8. cap. 12. by which it ap∣peareth, that he at this day shall not abiure the Realm, but al his libertie of this Realm, and al his liberall and frée habitati∣ons, resorts and passages from all places of this Realme, to one certaine place in this realm therto limitted by 32. H. 8. ca. 13 & 33. H. 8. ca. 15. Looke more in Stamf. li. 2. ca. 10.
Abridgement of a plaint or demaund. ABridgement of a plaint or demaund is where one bringeth an ass. writ of dower, writ of ward or such like where ye writ of Assise is, De libero ten̄to, as in a writ of dower, the writ is, Rationabilē dotē quae eā contingit de libero tenemento w. her husbād And in a writ of ward the writ is Custod' terrarū & heredis &c. & the plaintife or demaundant, demaun∣deth diuers acres or par∣cels of land, & the tenaunt pleadeth Nontenure, or iointenancy or some other such like plee, to parcell of the land demaunded in a∣batement of the writ, then the plaintife or demādant may abridge his plaint or demand to that parcell, y• is to say, he may leaue out that parte & pray that the tenaunt shall answere the rest to which he hath not yet pleaded any thing. The cause is for y• in such writs, the certainty is not set downe, but the demād rūneth generally, de libe∣ro tenemento, & notwith∣standing
the demandant hath abridged his plaint or demand in part; yet the writ remaineth good still de libero tenemento for y• rest. 9 ¶ Accedas ad Curiam. ACcedas ad Curiam is a writ directed to the shi∣rife, commanding him to go to such a court of some lord or franchise where a plaint is sued, for taking of beasts as a distresse, or any false iudgmēt is sup∣posed to bee made in any suite which hath been in such a court which is not a court of record, and that the shirife shal there make record of the saide suite in presence of the suitors of the same Court, and of foure other knights of the Countie, and certifie in∣to the kings court, and at that day that is limitted in the writ. 10 ¶ Acceptance. Acceptāce is a taking in good part, & as it were an agréeing vnto some act done before, which might haue bin vndon & auoided (if such acceptance had
not bin) by him or them that so accepted, As for example: if a Bishop be∣fore primo Eliz. lease part of the possessions of his Bishopricke for terme of yéeres reseruing rent and dyeth, and after an other is made Bishop, who ac∣cepteth, that is to say, ta∣keth or receiueth the rent when it is due and ought to be paied, now by this acceptaunce the lease is made perfect and good, which els the new bishop might verie well haue a∣uoided & made frustrate. The like law is, if a mā & his wife seised of land in the right of the wyfe oine or make lease by eff∣ment in déede reseruing rent, and the husband dy∣eth, shée accepteth or re∣ceyueth the rent, by this the feoffement or lease is made perfect and good, & shal barre her to bring her writ called Cui in vita. Accessories. ACcessories are in two sorts, theone before the offence, the other after the offence is done, Accessorie
before the fact or offence is he that commandeth or procureth an other to doe felonie, & is not there pre∣sent himselfe when the o∣ther doth it, but if hée be present then hee is also principal. Accessorie after the offence is hee that re∣ceiueth, fauoureth, aeth, ssisteth or comforteth a∣nie mā that hath don any murder or felony whereof hee hath knowledge, such an accessorie shalbe puni∣shed, and shal haue iudge∣ment of life and member aswell as the principall which did the felonie: but such an accessorie shal ne∣uer be put to that till the principall bee attaint or conuict, or bee outlawed thereupon. But a women in such case shal not be ac∣cessorie for helping her husband: in great or high Treason aswell the com∣māders as the assisters & receiuers after be alwais principals. Also one may be acces∣sorie to an accessorie, as if one feloniously receiue an other that is accessorie to felonie, there the receiuer
is an accessorie. See more of accessorie in the said Booke of Plees of the Crown the first booke, cap. 44. 45. 46. 47. 98. 49. & 50. ¶ Action. ACtion is the forme of a suit giuen by the lawe to recouer a thing, as an action of debt and such like. See the Lexicon of the lavv for action. Actions personals. Actiōs personals be such actions wherby a man claimeth debt or other goods and chattels, or da∣mage for them, or dama∣ges for wrong don to his person, and it is properly that which in the Ciuill law is called Actio in per∣sonam, which is brought against him, who is bound by couenant or de∣fault to giue or grant anie thing. ¶ Actions reals. ACtiōs reals be such ac∣tions whereby the de∣mandant claimeth title to
any lands or tomments, rents or commons, in fée simple, fée taile, or for terme of life. 15 ¶ Action popular. ACtion populer is an ac∣tion which is giuē vp∣on the breach of some pe∣nal statute, the which ac∣tion euery man that will may sue for himselfe & the Quéene, by information or otherwise, as y• statute alloweth, and the case re∣quireth. And of these ac∣tions there be an infinite nūber, but one for exam∣ple is: when any of the Iury that are impanelled & sworn to passe betweene partie and party indiffe∣rently, do take any thing of the one side or other, or of both parties to say their verdicts on that side, then any man that wil within the yeere next following the offence made, may sue a writ called Decies tan∣tum, against him or them that so did take to giue his verdict, & because yt this action is not giuen to one specially, but generally to any of the Q. people as
will sue, it is called an Action populer, but in this case when one hath begun to pursue an actiō, no other may sue it, and in this as it seemeth this doth varie from an acti∣on populer by the Ciuil law. Action mixt. Action mixt is a suit gi∣uen by the law to reco∣uer the thing demanded, and also damages for the wrong done, as in Assise of Nouel disses. the which writ (if the disseisor make a feoffement▪ to an other) the disseisée shall haue a∣gainst the disseisor & the feffee or other land tenāt, & therby shall recouer his seisin of the land & his da∣mages for the mean pro∣fits, & for the wrong done vnto him. And so is an actiō of wast & Quare imp. But an action of Detinu is not called an actiō mixt although by it the thing withheld is demanded, & shalbe recouered if it may be found, & damages for y• withholding, & i it cānot be foūd, then damages for
the thing and the retey∣ning. But that is called onely an action personall, because that it should bee brought only for goods & chattels. 17 Action of a writ. ACtion of the writ, is a phrase of spéech vsed when one pleadeth some matter▪ by which he she∣weth that the plaintife had no cause to haue the writ which he brought, & yet it may be, that he may haue another writ or ac∣tion for the same matter: such a plée is called a plée to the action of the writ, whereas if by the plee it should appeare, that the plaintife hath no cause to haue any action, for the thing demaunded, then it shal bée called a plée to the action. 18 Action vpon the case. ACtion vpon the case, is a writ brought against one for an offence done wtout force, as for not per forming promise made
by the defendant to the plaintife or for speaking of wordes, by which the plaintife is defamed, or for other misdemeanor or disceit, where the whole case shall be contained in the writ. Action vpon the statute. ACtion vpon the statute is a writfoūded vpon any statute, where by a∣ny statute an action is giuen to one in any case where no action was be∣fore: As where one com∣mitteth periurie to the preiudice of another, he which is indamaged shal haue a writ vpon the sta∣tute and his case, And the difference between acti∣on vpon the statute and action Populer is, that where the statute giueth the suite or action, to the partie grieued, or other∣wise to one person cer∣taine, that is called ac∣tion vpon the Statute: But where by the sta∣tute aucthoritie is giuen to euery one that will
to sue, that is termed ac∣tion Populer. Accompt. ACcompt is a writ and it lyeth where a Bai∣life or a Receiuer to a∣ny Lorde or other man, which ought to render accompt, will not giue his accompt, then hee to whom the accompt ought to bee giuen, shall haue this writte. And by the Statute of west∣minster 2. Chapter 10. if the Accomptant bee found in arrerages, the Auditours which bee as∣signed to him, haue po∣wer to award him to pri∣son there to abide till he haue made agréement to the partie, But if the Auditours will not al∣lowe reasonable expence and costes, or if they charge him with mo re∣ceites then they ought, then his next friend that will sue for him, shal sue a writte of Ex parte talis out of the Chancery directed to the Shirife to
take foure mainpernors to bring his bodie before the Barons of the Ex∣chequer at a certain day▪ and to warne the Lorde to appeare there at a cer∣taine day. Accord. ACcord is agréemēt be∣twéen two at the least to satisfie an offence that the one hath made to the other, when a man hath done a trespas, or such like vnto another, for the which hee hath agréed with him, to satisfie and content him with some recompence, which if it be executed and perfour∣med, then because that this recompence, is a full satisfaction for the offēce, it shall be a good barre in the law, if the other after y• accord performed should sue againe any action for the same trespas. Note that the first is properly called an accord, the other a contract. Acquitall. ACquital is where ther is a Lorde, mene, and
tenant, & the tenant hol∣deth of the mee certaine landes or tenements in frankalmoigne, frākma∣riage or such like, and the mesne holdeth ouer also of the lord paramount, or about him. Now ought the mesne to acquit or dis∣charge the tenant of all & euery manner of seruice, that any other wold haue or demaunde o him con∣cerning the same lands or tenements, for that the tenant must doe his ser∣uice to the mesne onely, and not to diuers Lords for one tenement or par∣cel of land. The same law is where there is one Lord, mesne, and tenant as aforesaid, & the mesne graunteth to the tenaunt (vpon the tenure made betwéen them) to acquite and discharge him of all rents, seruices, and such like, This discharge is called acquitall. Like lawe is if the te∣nant holdeth of his mesne by like seruices, as the mesne holdeth ouer of the lord, & the tenant doeth or paieth his seruices to the
mesne, but the mesne doth not his seruices to y• chief lord, wherefore he distrei∣neth the beastes of the te∣naunt▪ In this case the mesne for the equalnes of the seruices ought to ac∣quit the tenant of the ser∣uice due vnto the Lord. Acquitance. ACquitāce, is a discharg in writing of a summe of money, or other duetie which ought to bée payd or done: As if one bée bound to pay money vpon an obligation, or rent re∣serued vppon a lease or such like, and the partie to whom the money or dutie should bée paide or done, vpon the receite thereof, or vpon other agréement betwéene them had, ma∣keth a writing or bill of his hande, in discharge therof, witnessing that he is paid, or otherwise con∣tented, and therefore doth acquit and discharge him of the same, which acqui∣tance is such a discharge & barre in the law, that he cannot demand and reco∣uer that summe or duty a∣gaine
contrary thereunto if he shew the acquitance. This worde differeth frō those which in the ci∣uil law be called Accepti∣tatio, or Apocha, because Acceptitatio may bée by word without writing, & is nothing but a fayned payment and discharge, though no paimēt be had, And Apocha is a writing witnessing the paiment or deliuerie of money which dischargeth not vnles the money be paid. 24 Actes. ACtes of parliament, are positiue Lawes which consist of two partes, that is to say of the wordes of the Acte, & of the sence thereof & they both ioined together make the law. Additions. ADdition, is that which is giuen vnto a man o∣uer and besides his pro∣per name & sirname, that is to say, to shew of what estate or degree or my∣sterie hée is, and of what Towne or Hamlett or Countie.
Additions of estate are these, yeoman, gentleman, Esquire and such like. Additions of degrée are those that we call names of dignitye as Knight, Ere, Marques & Duke. Additions of misterie are such, scriuener, pain∣ter, mason, carpenter, tai∣lor, smith, and so all other of like nature, for mistery is the craft or occupation whereby a man getteth his liuing. Additions of towns as Sale, Dale, and such o∣thers, & so of the rest. And where a man hath houshold in two places he shalbe said to dwell in both of them so that his addition in one of them doth suffice. By the statute the first yéere of H. the 5. & Chap∣ter the 5. it was ordeined that in sutes or in actions where proces of vlagary lyeth, such addityons should be to the name of the def. to shew his estate mysterie and place where he dwelleth, and that such writs shall abate, if they haue not such additions,
if the defendant take ex∣ception thereto, but they shall not abate by the of∣fice of the Court. Also Duke, Marques, Earle, or Knight, bée none of that addition but names of dignitie, which should haue bin giuen be∣fore the Statute. And this was ordeined by the said Statute made in the first yeare of king H. the 5. Cap. 5. to the in∣tent, that one man might not bée gréeued nor trou∣bled by the vlarie of an other: but that by reason of the certaine addition, euery man might be cer∣tainly knowen and beare his owne burden. 26 Adiournement. ADiournement is when any Court is dissolued & determined and assigned to be kept againe at ano∣ther place or time, and me thinketh is compounded of two words (ad) or (al) and iour. 27 Admeasurement de Dower. ADmesuremēt de dower is a writ, and it lyeth
where a womā is indow∣ed by an infaunt, or by a gardein of more then shée ought to haue, the heire in such case shall haue this writ, by the which y• wo∣man shall be admeasured, & the heire restored to the ouerplus. But if one a∣bate, y• is to say, one which hath right entreth after the death of the husbād, & endowe the wife of him which is dead, of more then she ought to haue, the heire shall not haue this writ, but assise of mort∣daficester against the wo∣man, & if she plede that she was endowed of the land as of the fréeholde of her husbād, the heire shal shew how she was endowed by the abator & that shée had more then shée ought to haue, & shal pray that hée may be restored to the sur∣plusage, and if it be found he shal be restored. Admeasurement de pasture. ADmeasurement de pa∣sture is a writ & it lieth where many tenāts haue common appendant in an other ground & one ouer∣chargeth
the cōmon with manie beasts: Thē the o∣ther cōmoners may haue this writte against him, & also it may be brought by one commoner onely, but then it behoueth to bee brought against all the o∣ther cōmoners, & against him that surcharged, for y• all the commoners shal be admeasured. And this writ lieth not against him, nor for him y• hath common appurte∣nant or common ingrosse, but thē which haue com∣mon appēdant, or commō by cause of visinage. See the diuersitie of all these cōmons afterwards Also this writ lieth not for the Lorde, nor against the lord, but the lord may distrain the beasts of the tenāt that be surplusage. But if y• lord ouercharge the common▪ the commo∣ner hath no remedie by the common law, but an Assise of his common. 29 Administrator. ADminist. is he to whom the ordinary cōmitteth the administration of the
goods of a dead man for default of an executor, and an action shall lie against him and for him as for an executor, & he shalbe char∣ged to the value of the goods of the dead man and no further, if it bee nor by his ow̄ne false plée, or for that that he hath wasted the goods of the dead: but if▪ the administrator die, his executors bee not ad∣ministrators, but it beho∣ueth the Ordinarie to cō∣mit a new administrati∣on: but if a stranger that is not administrator nor executor take the goods of the dead, & administer of his own wrong, he shalbe charged & sued as an exe∣cutor, and not as admini∣strator in any action that is brought against him by anie creditor. But if the ordinary make a letter ad Colligēdū bona defuncti, he that hath such a letter is not administrator, but the action lyeth against the Ordinary aswel as if he tooke the goods to his own hand, or by the hand of any of his seruants by any other commandemēt.
30 ¶ Admirall. ADmirall is an officer vnder the Quéene, yt hath authority vpon the Sea onely to sée the nauy prepared and maintained to suppresse and chase a∣way robbers and rouers, and to iudge of contracts, betwéene partie & partie, concerning things done vpon & beyond the seas, and for that purpose hath his courte called the Ad∣miraltie. Hee may cause his Citation to be serued vpon the land & take the parties bodie or goods in execution vpon the land. And also he hath cogni∣sance of the death or mai∣hem of a man committed in any great ship fléeting in great riuers in the realm, beneath ye bridges of the same next the sea. Also to arrest ships in the great streames for the voyages of the Quéene & Realme, and hath iuris∣diction in the said stremes during the same viages. 31 ¶ Ad quod dampnū. AD quod dampnum is a writte which ought to
be sued before the K. grāt certaine liberties: As a faire, market, or such like which may be preiudicial to others. And by it shall be inquired if it should be a preiudice to grant thē, and to whome it shall be preiudicial, and what pre∣iudice shal come thereby. ¶ Aduowson. ADuovvson is where a man & his heires haue right to present their clerk to the Ordinarie to a parsonage, or other spi∣rituall benefice when it becommeth void. And he which hath such right to present is called Patron. ¶ Age prier. AGe prier is whē an ac∣tiō is brought against an infant of lands which hee hath by discent, there he shal shew the matter to the court, & shal pray that the action may stay til his full age of xxi. yeres, & so by award of the Courte the suit shal surcease. But in a writ of dovver and in Assise, and also in such actions wher the in∣fant
is supposed to come to the land demanded by his owne wrong, he shall not haue his age. Also note wel that there be many diuersities of a∣ges, for the Lorde shall haue aide of his tenant in Socage for to marie his daughter, when ye daugh∣ter of the Lorde is of the age of seuen yeeres. And also ayde for to make his sonne and heire knight, when hee is of the age of seuen yeeres. Also a wo∣man which is maried at the age of ix. yeeres, if her husbande die seised shall haue Dower, and not be∣fore nine yeres. Also xiiii. yeeres is the age of a woman that shee shal not be in ward if shee were of such age at yt time of the death of her aunce∣stor, but if she were with∣in the age of xiiii. yeres, & in ward of the Lord, then she shalbe in ward till the age of xvi. yeres. And also xxi. yeres is the age of the heir male to be in ward, & after y• out of ward. And also it is y• age of male & fe¦male to sue & to be sued of
lands which they haue or claime by discent, and to make al maner of cōtracts and bargains, and not be∣fore: but if such an infant within ye age of 21. yeeres giue his goods & the do∣née take them, the infaunt may haue action of tres∣pas; but otherwise it is if he deliuer them himselfe. Agreement. AGreemēt, is after this sort defined or expoun∣ded in Master Plovvdens commentaries. Aggrea∣mentum is a worde com∣pounded of two wordes, namelie, of Aggregatio & Mentium, that is to say, agréement of mindes, so that agréement is a con∣sent of mindes in some things done or to be done, and by drawing together of the two wordes, Ag∣gregatio and mentium, & by the hastic and shorte pronouncing of thē they bee made one worde, to witte, Aggreamentum, which is no other thing then a ioyning, putting, cupling and knitting to∣gether of two or moe
mindes in ani thing done or to bee done. (Sée after in testament) And this a∣gréement is in thrée man∣ners. The first is an agrée∣ment executed already at the beginning. The second is an agrée∣ment after an acte done by another, and is an agrée∣ment executed also. The third is an agrée∣ment executory or to be don in time yet to come. The first which is an a∣greement executed already at the beginning is such▪ whereof mention is made in the statute of 25. Edw. 3. cap. 3. of clothes in the 4. statute, which saith That the goods and things bought by forestallers, be∣ing therof attainted shalbe forfaire to the Queen, if the buyer thereof haue made gree with the seller. In which case y• word (Grée) which is otherwise called agreement, shall be vnder∣stoode agréement executed, that is, payment for the things. The second maner of a∣gréemēt is where one doth
a thing, or act; & another a∣grées or assents thereto af∣terwardes as if one doe a disseisin to my vse, & after∣ward I agre to it, nowe I shall be a disseisor from the beginning, and such agre∣ment is an agréement af∣ter an act done. The third agréement is when both parties at one time are agreed that such a thing shalbe done in time to come, and this agrée∣ment is executorie in as much as the thing shall be done after, and yet there, their minds agréed at one time. But because the per∣formance shalbe afterward and the thing vpon which the agréement was made remaines to bee done, that agréement shalbe said exe∣cutorie. And that the sta∣tute of 26. H. 8. cap. 3. doth proue where it saith, that euery vicar, parson & such like &c. before their actu∣all possession, or medling wt the profites of their be∣nefices shall satisfie, contēt &c. or agrée to paye to the Q. the first fruits &c. and if any such parson or vicar, &c. enter in actuall posses∣sion,
&c. this agréement is to be vnderstoode executory as the common vse proues, for it is vsed that hee with one or two with him doe make two or three obliga∣tions for it to bee paied at certaine daies after, and this agreement executorie is deuided into tw̄o points. One is an agreement exe∣cutorie which is certaine at the beginning, as is said last before of the first fruits. The other is where the certaintie doth not appeare at the first, and the parties are agreed that the thing shall be performed or paide vpon the certaintie knowē as if one sell to another all his wheate in such a tasse in his barne vnthreshed, and it is agréed betwéene them that he shall paie for euery bushel xii▪ d. when it is threshed, cleaned and measured. 35 ¶ Ayde. AYde, is when tenaunt for terme of life▪ tenaunt in dower, tenant by curte∣sie, or tenant in taile af∣ter possibilitie of issue ex∣tinct
is impleaded then for that they haue no estate but for terme of life, they shall pray in ayde of him in the reuersion and proces shall bee made by writ a∣gainst him, to come & plead with the tenant in the de∣fence of the land if hee will, but it behooueth that they agree in the plée, for if they vary, the plee of the tenant shall be taken and then the aide prayer is void, but if hee come not at the second writ, then the tenaunt shall answere sole. Also tenant for terme of yeeres, tenant at will, te∣nant by Elegit, and tenant by statute merchant, shall haue aide of him in the re∣uersion, and the seruant & bayly of their master, when they haue done anie thing lawfully in ye right of their master, shal haue aide. ¶ Ayde de Roy. AIde of the king, is in like case as it is saide before of a common person, and also in many other cases where the king may haue losse, although that the tenaunt bee tenaunt in fée
simple hee shall haue aide, As if a rent be demaunded against the kings tenaunt, which holdeth in chiefe, he shal haue aid and so he shall not of a common person. And where a Citie or Borough hath a fée farme of the king, and any thing be demaunded against thē which belongeth to the fée farme, they shal haue ayde for the losse of the king. Also a man shall haue aide of the King in the steede of voucher. Also the Kings Bailife, the Collec∣tor, and Purueyour shall haue ayde of the King, as well as the officers of o∣ther persons. ¶ Ayle. AYle is a writ which ly∣eth where lande discen∣deth from the graundfa∣ther to his nephews▪ s. the sonne or daughter of the sonne of the graundfather, the father being dead be∣fore the entrie by him, and one abateth, the heire shall haue against the abator this writ.
Alien. ALien is he whose father and himselfe were both borne out of the Queenes legeance, and if such an a∣lien being none of the Q. enemies, but an aliē friend come and dwell here in England and haue issue, this issue is not alien but English. So if an En∣glish man go ouer the seas with the Quéenes licēce and there hath issue, this issue is no alien. Alienation. ALienation, is as much to saye, as to make a thing another mans, or to alter or put the possessiō of lands or other thing from one man to another. Ambidexter. AMbidexter, is hee that when a matter is in suit betweene men, taketh mo∣ney of the one side and of the other, either to labor the suit or such like, or if he be of the Iury, to saye his verdict. Amendement. AMendement, is whē er∣rour is in the Proces,
the Iustices may amend it after iudgement. But if there bee errour in gi∣uing of iudgement, they may not amend it, but the partie is put to his writte of error. And in many ca∣ses where the default ap∣peareth in the clarke that writ the Record it shall be amēded: But such things as come by information of the party as the towne, mistery, and such like, shal not bee amended, for hee must informe true vpon his perill. 42 Amercement. AMercement, most pro∣perly is a penaltie asses∣sed by the piers or equales of the party amerced, for an offence done, as for lack of suit of Court, or for not amending of some thing that he was appointed to redresse by a certaine time before, or for such like cause, in which case, the partie which offēdeth put∣teth himselfe in the mercy of the king or Lorde, and thereupon this penaltie is called Amercement.
Amercement royall. AMercement royall, is when a Shirife, Coro∣ner or other such Officer of the Queene is amerced by the Iustices for his ab∣use in the office, séeke if it shall not be said a fine. An, iour & wast. AN, iour & wast, is a for∣faiture whē a man hath committed petit treason, or felony, and hath landes which he holdeth of some comon person, which shall be seised for the Quéene, and remaine in her hands by the space of one yéere & a day next after the attain∣der, and then the trées shalbe digged vp, the hou∣ses shalbee rased & pulled downe, and the pastures & meadowes yred and plo∣wed vp, so yt he to whome the lande should come by eschete or forfaiture do not redeeme it of the King, a thing the more to greeue the offenders and terrifie others to fall into the like, in shewing how the lawe doth detest their offence so farre foorth as that it doth execute iudgement &
punishmēt euen vpō their dumme & dead things. 45 Annuitie. ANnuitie, is a certaine summe of money gran∣ted to another in fée sim∣ple, fée taile, for terme of life, or for terme of yéeres, to receiue of the grauntor or of his heires, so that no fréeholde is charged therewith, whereof a man shall neuer haue assise nor other action, but a writ of Annuitie, and it is none assets to the heire of the grauntée to whome it shall discend. 46 Apppeale. APpeale, is where one hath done murder, rob∣bery or mayhem, then the wife of him that is slaine shal haue an action of ap∣peale against the murthe∣rer, but if he haue no wife then his next heire male shall haue the appeale at a∣ny time within a yéere and a day after the déede, And also he that is so robbed or mayhemed shal haue his appeale, and if the defen∣dant be acquited, he shall
recouer damages against the appellor and thabbet∣tors, and they shal haue the imprisonment of a yeere and shall make fine to the King. An appeale of mai∣hem is in manner but a trespas, for hee shall reco∣uer but damages. ¶ Appellant. Appellant, is the plaintife in the appeale. ¶ Appellour. APpellour or Approuer, is he who hath commit∣ted some felonie which he confesseth and nowe ap∣pealeth or approueth, that is to say, accuseth others which were coadiutors or helpers with him in doing the same or other felonies, which thing he wil approue and therefore is called in latine probator. Appendant & appur∣tenant. Appendant & appurtenāt, are things that by time of prescription haue be∣longed, appertained, and are ioyned to another principall thing, by which
they passe and go as acces∣sarie to the same principal thing, by vertue of these woordes Pertinentijs: as landes, aduowsons, com∣mons, piscaries, wayes, courtes, and diuers such like, to a mannor, house, office, or such others. 50 Apporcionment. APporcionment is a de∣uiding into partes of a rent (which is deuidable and not intier or whole) & forasmuch as the thing out of which it was to be paied is seperated and de∣uided, the rent also shal be deuided hauing respect to the partes. As if a man haue a rent seruice issuing out of landes, and he pur∣chaseth parcell of the land, the rent shalbe apportio∣ned, according to the value of the land. So if a man hold his lande of an other by ho∣mage, fealtie, escuage, and certain rent, if the Lord of whom the lande is holden purchase parcel of the land the rēt shal be apportioned. Also if a man let landes for yéeres reseruing rent, and after a Stranger re∣covereth
part of the lande, then the rent shal be appor∣tioned, that is to say deui∣ded, & the lessée shal pay ha∣uing respect to that which is recouered, and to that which yet remaines in his handes according to the value. But a rent charge cānot be apportioned, nor things that are entier: As if one hold land by seruice to pay to his Lord yéerely at such a feast, a Horse, a Hauke, a Rose, a cherie, or such like, there if the Lord purchase parcell of the land, this ser∣uice is gone altogether, be∣cause a Horse, a Hauke, a Rose, a cherie, and such o∣ther cannot be deuided, se∣uered, or apportioned with∣out hurt to the whole. Appropriations. APpropriatiōs were whē those houses of the Ro∣mishe Religion, and those Religious persons, as Abbots, Priors, and such like, had the aduowson of any parsonage to them and to their successors, and obtayned licence of their
holy father the Pope, and of the Ordinarie & King, that they themselues, and their successors from thēce foorth should bée parsons there, and that it shall bée from thence foorth a vica∣rage, and that the Vicar shall serue the cure. And so at the beginning Appro∣priations were made one∣ly to those persons spiri∣tuall that could minister the Sacraments, and say deuine seruice, as Abbots, Priors, Deanes, and such like. After by a little and little they were inlarged & made to other, as name∣ly to a Deane and Chap∣ter, which is a body cor∣porate consisting of many, which body together could not say deuine seruice, and that more was to Nunnes that were Prioresses of some Nunrie, which was a wicked thing, insomuch as they could neither mi∣nister Sacramentes nor preach, nor say diuine ser∣uice to the parishioners. And all this was vpon pretence of hospitalitie & maintenance thereof. And to supplie these defectes
a vicar was deuised, who should bée Deputie to the Priores, or to the Deane and Chapter, and also at the last to the said Abbots and others to say deuine seruice, & should haue for his labour but a little por∣tion, and they to whom the appropriations were made shoulde retayne the great reuenues, and they did no∣thing for it, by meanes whereof hospitalitie de∣cayed in the place where it ought to haue béen chiefly maintained, namely in the parishe where the benefice was, and where the profits did grow, & so it continu∣eth to this day, to the great hinderance of learning, to the impouerishment of the ministerie, and to the infa∣mie of the Gospel and pro∣fessors thereof. The Vicar shall haue certaine portion of the be∣nefice, and the Abbot and the Couent shall bée par∣sons and shall haue the o∣ther profits: This is cal∣led Appropriation, & then the Abbot & Couent shall bée parsons imparsonées. But such Appropriation
may not bée made to begin in the life of the parson without his assent. But if such aduowsons of the parsonage bée reco∣uered by ancient title, then the Appropriation is ad∣nulled. And it is called ap∣propriation, for that they hold the profites to their owne proper vse. 52 Approuement. APprouement is where a man hath common in the Lordes wast ground, & the Lord incloseth parte of the wast for himself, lea∣uing neuerthelesse suffici∣ent common with egresse and regresse for the com∣moners: This inclosing is called approuement. 53 Arbitrement. ARbitrement is an a∣ward, determination or iudgement, which one or moe maketh at the request of two parties at the least, for, & vpon some debt, tres∣passe, or other controuersie had betwéene the said par∣ties. And this is called in Latin Arbitratus and Arbi∣trium,
and they that make the award or arbitrement are called Arbitri, in Eng∣lish Arbitrators. Arrest. ARrest is when one is taken and restrayned from his libertie. None shalbe arrested for dette, trespasse, detinue, or o∣ther cause of action, but by vertue of a precept or com∣maundement out of some Court. But for Treason, Felonie, or breaking of the peace, euery man hath aucthoritie to arrest with∣out warrant or precept. And where one shalbe ar∣rested for felonie, it behoo∣ueth that some felonie be done, and that he bée sus∣pected of the same Felonie, or otherwise hée may haue agaynst hym that so dyd arrest hym, a writte of false imprisonment. And when anie man shall bée arrested for Felonie, hée shalbée brought to the Gayle, there to abide vn∣till the next Sessions for to bée indicted, or for to be deliuered by Proclamati∣on.
55 Arrerages. ARrerages are duties be∣hinde vnpaide after the dayes and times in which they were due, and ought to haue béene payd whe∣ther they be rent of a ma∣nor or any other thing re∣serued. 56 Assets. ASsets is in two sortes, the one called (assets per discent) the other (assets enter maines.) Assets per discent is where a man is bound in an obligation, & dieth seysed of lands in fée simple, which descēd to his heire, then his land shalbe called assets, that is to say, enough or sufficient to pay the same debt, and by that meanes the heire shall bée charged as far as the land so to him discended will stretch. But if he haue a∣liened before the Obligati∣on be put in suite he is dis∣charged. Also when a man sey∣sed of landes in tayle, or in the right of his wife alieneth the same with warrantie, and hath in value as much landes in
fée simple, which discen∣deth to his heire, who is also heire in taile or heire to the woman. Now if the heire after the decease of his ancestor bring a writ of Formedon, or sur cui in vita, for the lād so aliened, then he shall bée barred by reason of the warrantie and the land so discended, which is as much in value as that was solde, and so thereby hée hath receyued no preiudice, and therefore this lande is called Assets per discent. Assets enter maines is whē a man indebted, as before is said, maketh executors, and leaueth to them suffi∣cient to pay, or some cōmo∣dity or profite is come vn∣to them in right of their te∣statour, this is said assets in their hands. Assignee. ASsignee is hée to whom a thing is appointed or assigned to bée occupied, paide or done, & is alwaies such a person, which oc∣cupieth or hath the thing so assigned in his owne right and for himselfe,
and of assignes there bée two sortes, namely, Assig∣nee in déed and Assignée in law. Assignée in déede is when a leas is graūted to a man, or to his assignes or without those wordes, as∣signes, and the grauntée giueth graunteth or selleth the same lease to an other, he is his assignée in déede. Assignée in awe is euery executor named by the te∣stator in his testament, As if a lease be made to a man and to his assignes (as is aforesaid) & he maketh his executors and dieth with∣out assignement of the leas to any other, Now the exe∣cutors shall haue the same lease, because they are his assignes in law. And so it is in other cases. 58 Assise. ASsise is a writ and it li∣eth where any mn is put out of his landes, or tenementes, or of anie pro∣fite to bee taken in a cer∣taine place and so dissei∣sed of his fréehold. Frée∣holde to anie manne is where he is seised o lands and tenementes or pro∣fite to bée taken in fée sim∣ple,
fée tayle, for terme of his owne life or for terme of an other mans life. But the tenaunt by Elegit, te∣naunt by statute marchant and Statute staple may haue assise, howbeit that they haue no fréehold and this is ordeined by diuerse statutes. Also in an assise it is néedfull alwaies that there be one disseysor and one te∣nant or otherwise the writ shall abate. Also where a man is disseysed and recouereth by assise of nouel disseisin and afterwarde is againe disseised by the same dissei∣sor, hée shall haue against him a writte of redisseisin directed to the Sherife to make inquisition, and if the redisseisin bée founde hée shall be sent to pryson. Also if one recouer by as∣sise of Mortd. or by other iurie or default or by red∣dition, and if he bée an o∣ther time disseysed, then hée shall haue a writte of Post disseisin, and he which is taken and imprisoned for redisseisin shall not bée deliuered without spe∣ciall
commaundement of the King. Sée the Sta∣tutes thereof Merton cap. 3. Marlebridge cap. 8. And westminster 2. Chapter 26. There is also an o∣ther Assise called Assise of Fresh force, & lieth where a man is disseysed of tene∣mentes which are diuisi∣ble, as in the Citie of Lon∣don or other Boroughs or Townes that be Fraun∣chises, then the defen∣daunt shall come into the Court of the said Towne and enter his playnt, and shall haue a writ directed to the Maior or Baylifes &c. and thereupō shal passe a Iurie in manner of as∣sise of nouel disseisin. But it behooueth that he doe en∣ter his plaint within for∣tie dayes as it is said or o∣therwise he shalbe sent to the common law. And if the Officers delay the exe∣cution, then the plaintife shall haue an other writ to haue execution, And a Si∣cut alias, and a Pluries &c. Sée Litt▪ cap. Rents, Assise is a worde of two signifi∣cations.
¶ Assise de darraine presentment. ASsise de darraine pre∣sentment, look therof af∣ter in y• title Quare impedit ¶ Assise de Mortdan∣cester. ASsise de Mortdancester, looke thereof in the title Cosinage. ¶ Attainder. ATtainder, is a conuictiō of any person of a crime, or faulte whereof hee was not conuict before, as if a man haue committed felo∣ny, treason, or such like, and thereof is indicted, arraig∣ned and found guiltie and hath iudgement, then hee is said to be attainted, and this may bee two waies, the one vpon apparāce, the other vpon default, the at∣tainder vpon apparance is by confession battaile or verdict, the attainder vpon default is by processe vntill he be outlawed. ¶ Attaint. ATtaint, is a writ and li∣eth where false verdict is giuen by twelue men, &
iudgement giuen thereon, that the partie agaynst whome they haue passed, shall haue a writ against the twelue men, and when they be at issue it shall bee tried by xxiiii. Iurors, and if the false verdict be found, the twelue men be attaint, and then the iudgement shall bee, that their med∣dowes shall be ayred, their houses broken downe, their woods turned vp, and all their landes and tene∣mēts forfaited to the king, but if it passe against him that brought that attaint, he shall be imprisoned and grieuously raunsomed at the kinges will. Sée the statute 23. H. 8. cap. 3. At∣taint also is when iugemēt is giuē in Treason or Fe∣lonie. 63 Attournement. ATtournement, is when one is tenaunt for terme of life, and he in reuersion or remainder granteth his right or estate to another, then it behoueth the tenant for terme of life to agree thereto, and this agree∣ment is called an Attourn∣ment,
for if he in the reuer∣sion graunt his estate and his right to another, if the tenant for terme of life at∣turne not, nothing passeth by the graunt. But if it be graunted by fine in Court of record hee shalbe cōpelled to atturne, And looke thereof after in the title Quid iuris clamat, looke more of this in Little∣ton Lib. 3. chap. 10. ¶ Audita quaerela. AVdita quaerela, is a writ and it lieth where one is bounde in a Statute mar∣chant, statute Staple or Recognisance, or where iudgemēt is giuen against him for debt and his bodie in execution thereupon, thē if hee haue a release or o∣ther matter sufficient to be discharged of execution but hath no day in Court there to pleade it, then hee shall haue this writte a∣gainst him which hath re∣couered, or against his ex∣ecutors. ¶ Auerment. AVerment, is where a man pleadeth a plée in a∣batment
of the writ or bar of y• action, which he saieth he is readie to proue as the court will awarde, this of∣fer to proue his plee is cal∣led an Auerment. 66 ¶ Auerpeny. AVerpenie, that is to bee quit of diuers summes of money for the kings A∣uerages. 67 Auncien demesne. Auncien demesne are cer∣taine tenures holden of those Manors that were in the hands of Saint Ed∣ward the confessor, and the which he made to be writ∣ten in a Booke called Domes daie, Sub titulo Regis, and all the landes holden of the said Manors bée auncien demesne, and the tenaunts shall not bee impleaded out of the saide Mannors, and if they be, they may shew the matter and abate the writ, but if they answere to the writ, and iudgement be giuen, then the landes become franke fée for euer. Also the tenaunts in auncient de∣mesne, be frée of tolle for all
things concerning their sustenance and husbandry in auncien demesne, and for such landes they shall not bee put or impanelled vpon any inquest. But all the landes in auncien de∣mesne, that are in y• kings hands, bee franke fee and pleadable at the Common lawe. See more after in the title Sokemans. Auowrie. AVowrie, is where one taketh a distresse for rēt or other thing, and the o∣ther sueth repleuin, then he that hath taken it shall iustifie in his plée, for what cause he tooke it, and if he tooke it in his owne right hee ought to shewe that, and so auowe the ta∣king, & that is called his auowry: but if he tooke y• in or for the right of ano∣ther, then when hee hath shewed the cause, hee shall make conusance of the ta∣king, as bailie or seruaunt to him in whose right hee did take it.
B. 69 Baile. BAile, is when a man is taken or arrested for fe∣lonie, suspition of felonie, indicted of felonie, or any such case, so that he is re∣strained of his libertie. And being by law bayla∣ble, offereth surety to those which haue authoritie to bale him, which suerties are bound for him to the Quéenes vse in a certaine summe of money, or bodie for bodie, that hee shall ap∣peare before the Iustices of Gaole deliuerie at the next Sessions &c. Then vpon the bondes of these suerties, as is aforesaid, he is bailed, that is to saye, set at libertie vntil the day appointed for his appea∣rance. Bailement. BAilement, is a deliuerie of things whether it be of writings, goods or stuffe to another, some∣times to be deliuered back to the bailor, that is to saye
to him that so deliuered it, sometimes to the vse of the bailife, that is to saye, of him to whome it is deli∣uered, and sometimes also it is deliuered to a thirde person, this deliuerie is called a bailement. Bailife. BAilife is an officer that belongeth to a mannor, to order the husbandrye, and hath auctoritie to paye quite rents issuing out of the mannor, fell trees, re∣paire houses, make pales, hedges, distraine beastes dooing hurt vpon the ground, and diuers such like. This officer is he whom the auncient Saxons cal∣led a Reeue, for the name Bailife was not yet kno∣wen amongst them, but came in with the Nor∣mans, and is called in La∣tin Villicus. Back berind theefe. BAck berinde theefe is a theefe that is taken with the maner, that is to say, hauing that found vp∣on him (being followed
with the hue and crie) which hee hath stollen, whether it be money, lyn∣nen, wollen, or other stuffe, but it is most properly said, when he is taken ca∣rying those things that he hath stollen in a bundell or fardel on his backe. 73 Bargaine and sale. Bargaine and sale is whē a recompence is giuen by both the parties to the bargaine: as if one bargain and sell his land to an o∣ther for money, heere the land is a recompēce to him for the money, & the mo∣ney is a recompence to the other for the land, & this is a good contract & bar∣gaine, and fee simple pas∣seth notwithstanding hee doeth not saye to haue and to hold the land to him and to his heires. And by such a bargaine and sale landes may passe without liuerie of seisin, if the bargaine & sale be by déede indented, sealed & inrolled, either in the countie where the land lieth, or in one of the Q. courts of record at west∣minster wtin vi. moneths
next after the date of the same writing indented, according to the statute in that behalfe made in the 27 peere of H. 8. ca 16. Barre. BArre, is when the defen∣dant in any action plea∣deth a plee which is a suf∣ficient aunswere, and that destroyeth the action of the plaintife for euer. Base fee. TO hold in Fee base, is to holde at the wil of the Lorde. Bastardie. BAstardie, is hee that is borne of any woman not married, so that his father is not knowen by the or∣der of the lawe, and there∣fore he is called the childe of the people. But by the law of the Romish Church, if one get a child vpon a woman which childe is borne out of wedlocke, and after hee marrie the same woman, then such a childe shall bee saide Mulier, and not ba∣starde.
But by the law of En∣gland he is a bastarde, and for that cause when such special bastardie is allea∣ged, it shalbee tryed by the countrey, and not by the Bishop. But generally bastardie alleaged shalbee tryed by the certificate of the Bishop. And if a woman be great with childe by her hus∣band who dyeth, and shee taketh an other husbande, and after the chylde is borne, this chylde shal be said the childe of the first husbande. But if shee were priuily with childe at the time of the death of her first husbande, then it shalbe said the child of the second husband. But in∣quire farther and see the o∣piniō of Thorp 21. E. 3. 39 Also if a man take a wie which is great with child by another that was not her husband, and after the childe is borne within the espousels, then it shall bee said the childe of the hus∣band, though it were borne but one daye after the es∣pousels solemnised.
Battaile. BAttaile is an auncient trial in our lawe, which the defendant in an appeal of murder, robberie, or fe∣lonie may chuse, that is to say, to fight with the ap∣pellant, for proofe whe∣ther he be culpable of the felonie or not: which combate, if it fall out so well on the part of the de∣fendant that he doth van∣quish the appellant, he shal go quit & barre him of his appeal for euer. But if one be indicted of felony, & an appeal is brought vpon y• same indictment, there the defendant shall not wage battaile: battaile also may be in a writ of right. Bigamy. BIgamy, was a counter∣plea (deuised at y• coun∣cel of Lions, vpon mislike of second mariage) to be obiected when the priso∣ner demaundeth the bene∣fite of the clergye, to wit his booke, as namely to say, that he which deman∣deth the priuiledge of the clergy, was maried to such a woman, at such a place,
within such a diocesse, and that shee is dead, and that hee hath married another woman within the same dioces or within some o∣ther dioces, and so is Bi∣gamus. Or if he haue béen but once maried, then to saye, that shee whome hee hath married, is or was a widowe, that is to saye, the left woman of such a one &c. which thing shall be tryed by the Bishop of the Dioces where the ma∣riages are alleadged. And being so certified by the Bishop, the prisoner shall loose the benefite of the clergie. But at this day by force of the acte made in An. 1. E. 6. ca. 12. this is no plea, but that he may haue his clergie that notwith∣standing. So is Brook titulo cler∣gie placito 20▪ to the same purpose. And hereupon if you bee desirous to sée what reasons they haue that perswade against se∣cond marriages, read a∣mōg many others Frances Petrarche of remedies for both fortunes, the first booke & lxxvi. Dialogue,
intituled of second marri∣age, which Booke now of late Master Thomas Twyne, hath very well▪ & with good grace (as they that can iudge do say) trā∣slated out of Latin into English, and most aptly called it Phisicke against fortune. Bloodwit. BLoodwit, that is, to bée quit of amercementes for bloudshedding, and what pleas are holden in your court, you shall haue the amercementes thereof comming, because (wit) in English is misericordia in Latin. Boote. BOote, is an old worde, & signifieth helpe, succor, ayt or aduantage, and is commonly ioyned with an other worde, whose signi∣fication it doth augment, as these, bridgboot, burgh∣boot, fireboote, hedgeboot, plowboote and diuerse o∣thers such like, for whose significations look in their proper titles.
81 Broodhalpeny. BRoodhalpeny, in some copies, broodhalbeny, that is to be quit of a cer∣taine custome exacted for setting vp of tables. 82 Burgage. TO hold in Burgage, is to hold as if ye Burgeis holde of the King, or of another lord landes or te∣nements, yeelding to him a certain rent by ye yere, or els there, where an other man then burgeis holdeth of any lord lands or tene∣mēts in burgage yéelding to him a certaine rent by yeere. 83 Brugbote. BRugbote (and in some copies Bridgbote) that is to bee quit of giuing aide to the repayring of bridges. 84 Burghbote. BVrghbote, that is to be quite of giuing ayde to make a Borough, cattell, citie, or walles throwne downe.
Burghbrech. BVrghbrech, that is to be quit of trespasses done in Citie or Borough a∣gainst the peace. Burgh English: BVrgh English, or Bo∣rough English, is a cu∣stome in some ancient bo∣rough, that if a man haue issue diuers sonnes & dy∣eth, yet the yongest sonne only shal inherite and haue all the lands & tenements that were his fathers, whereo hee dyed seised within the same burgh by discent, as heire to his fa∣ther by force of the custome of the same borough. Burglarie. BVrglarie, is when one breaketh & entreth into the house of another in the night with felonious intent to robbe or kill, or to doe some other felony, in which cases although hee carrie away nothing, yet is it felony▪ for which hee shall suffer death. O∣therwise it is, if it bee in the day time, or that hee
breake the house in the night, and enter not therin at that time. But if a seruaunt will conspire with other men to robbe his Master, & to that intent he openeth his Masters doores and win∣dows in y• night for them, that they come into the house by that way, this is Burglarie in the stran∣gers, and the seruant is a theee but no Burglar. And this was the opinion of the right worshipfull sir R. Manwood knight, most worthie Lord chiefe Baron of the Eschequer, at the quarter Sessions holden at Canterbury in Ianuary 1579. 21. Eliz. 88 Capias. CApias, looke for that af∣ter in the title Proces. 89 Caruage. CAruage, that is, to bee quite if the king shall taxe al his land by carues. Note that a Carue of land is a Plow land. 90 Certification of assise. CErtification of Assise of nouel disseisin, is a
writ, and lieth where the Batlife of the tenant plea∣deth no wrong, &c. & loseth by the Assise, then if the te∣nant haue a release or o∣ther writing to plead hée shall haue this writ, and the first Iurors shall bée warned to appeare before the Iustices and the par∣ties also, then if it may be found that the release or writings are true & good, hée that recouered in the Assise shall yéelde double dammages, and shall lose the land. Cerciorari. CErciorari, is a writ and it lieth where one is im∣pleaded in a base court, that is of record, and he suppo∣seth that he may not haue equall Iustice there, then vpon a bill in the Chance∣ry comprising some matter of conscience he shall haue this writ to remoue all the Record in the Chancery & there to be determined by conscience, but if he proue not his bill, then the other partie shall haue a writ of Procedendo, to send a∣gaine the Record into the
base court, & there to be de∣termined. And it lieth in many other cases, for to re∣moue records for the king as indictments and other. 92 Cession. CEssion is when an Ec∣clesiasticall persō is cre∣ated Bishop, or whē a par∣son of a parsonage taketh another benefice without dispensation or otherwise not qualified &c. In both cases their first benefices are become void, & be said to become void by cession, and to those that hée had who was created bishop, The king shall present for the time whosoeuer be pa∣tron of thē. And in y• other case the patrō may presēt. 93 Cessauit. CEssauit, is a writ, and it lyeth where my verie tenant which holdeth of mée certaine lands and te∣nements, yéelding certaine rent by the yere, & the rent is behind not paid by two yeres, and no sufficient di∣stresse may be found vpon the lande, then I shall re∣couer the lande, but if the
tenant come into the court before iudgement giuen, and tender the arrerages and dammages, and finde suertie, that he shall cesse no more in payment of the sayde rent, I shalbe com∣pelled to take the arrera∣ges and the damages, and then the tenaunt shall not loose the lande. Also the heire may not maintayne this writte for the cesser made in the time of his an∣cestor, Also this writ lieth not but for Annuei ser∣uice as rent and such other and not for homage and fe∣altie. Also there is an other writ called Cessauit de cā∣taria, and it lieth where a man giueth land to a house of religion to finde for his soule and his auncestors, and his heires, yéerely a Lampe in the Church, or to say deuine seruice or to féede the poore, or other al∣mes, or some other thing to doe, then if the said charge be not done in two yéeres, then the donor or his heirs shal haue this writ against whosoeuer holdeth the thinges giuen alter such
cessure. Sée the Statute w. 2. cap. 41. 94 Challenge. CHallenge, is where Iu∣tors appeare to trie an issue, then if any of the par∣ties suppose that they are not indifferent they may there challenge and refuse them. There be diuers challen∣ges, one is challenge to the array, yt other to the polls. Challenge to tharray, is when the panell is fauo∣rably made by the Shirife or other officer. Challenge by polies are some principall and some by cause as they call it. Principall, is when one of the Iurors is the sonne, brother or cousin, to the plaintife or defendāt, or te∣nant to him or that he hath espoused the daughter of the plaintife, and for those causes he shal be wtdrawen. Also in a plée of the death of the man and in euerie action real and in actions personall, if the debt or dammages amount to for∣tie markes it is a good challenge, that hée cannot
dispend xl. s. by the yéere of fréehold. Challenge by cause, is where the party doeth al∣leage a matter which is no principall challenge, as that the Sonne of one of the Iurors hath espoused the daughter of the plain∣tife, and then hée doth con∣clude, and therefore hée is fauorable, which shall bée tried by others of then∣quest, whether he be fauo∣rable or indifferent, and if they say, y• he is fauorable and not indifferent, then he shalbe drawen out, other∣wise he shalbe sworne. Also a felon that is ar∣raigned may challenge xx. Iurors peremptory with∣out any case, and that is in fauour of life, and as many as he will with cause, but then it shall bee tried if for such cause he be indifferent or not. Champertie. CHampertie is a writte and lyeth where two men bée impleading, and one giueth the halfe or part of the thing in plée to a Straunger for to main∣tain
him against the other, then the partie gréeued shal haue this writ against the straunger. Sée the Sta∣tute Articuli super Char∣tas cap. 11. 96 Champertors. CHampertors be they that moue plées and suites, or cause to bee moued by their owne or others pro∣curement, and sue them at their owne costes, to haue part of the lands, or gaines in variance. 97 Charge. CHarge is where a man graunteth a rent issu∣ing out of his ground, and that if the rent be behind, it shalbe lawfull for him, his heires and assignes to distrayne till the rent bée payed, this is called a rent charge. But if one graunt a 'rent charge out of the land of an other, and after purchase the lād, the grant is void. 98 Charters. CHarters of landes are writings, déeds, euidē∣ces, & instrumēts, made frō one man to an other, vpon
some estate cōueied or pas∣sed betweene them of lands or tenements she wing the names, place and quantity of the land, the estate, time & maner o the doing ther∣of, the parties to the estate deliuered & taken, the wit∣nesses present at the same, with other circumstances. Chattels. CHattels, are in two sorts that is to say, chattels reals and chattels perso∣nels, Chattels reals are leases for yeeres, wards, & to hold at will. Chattels personels are all moueable goods, as mo∣ney, plate, houshold stuffe, horses, kyne, corne, and such like. Childwit. CHildwit, that is, that you may take a fine of your bondwoman, defiled and begotten with childe without your licence. Chimin. CHimin, is the high way where euery man goeth which is called via Regia, and yet the King hath no
other thing there but the passage for him & his peo∣ple, for the freeholde is in the Lords of the soyle, and all the profit growing there, as trees and other things. 102 Thing in action. THing in action, is when a mā hath cause, or may bring an action for some duetie due to him, as an action of debt vpon an ob∣ligation, annuitie, rente, couenant, warde, goods, trespas or such like, and because that they are things whereof a man is not possessed, but for reco∣uerie of them is driuen to his action, they are called Thinges in action. And those things in action that are certaine, the Quéene may graunt, and the gran∣tée may vse an action for them in his owne name onlie. But a common person cannot graunt his thing in action, nor the Quéene her selfe cannot graunt her thing in ac∣tion which is vncer∣tain, as trespasse and such like.
Cinque ports. CInque ports, be certaine hauen townes, fiue in number, to which haue béen graunted long time since many liberties (that other porte townes haue not) and that first in the time of King Edwarde called the Confessor (who was before the conquest) and hath béene increased since, and that chiefly in the daies of the thrée Ed∣wards, the first, the second, and third (since the Con∣quest) as appeareth in the booke of Domesday, and other olde Monuments, which in this work should be too long to recite. Circuitie of action. CIrcuitie of action, is whē an action is rightfully brought for a duetie, but yet about the bushe, as it were, for that it might as well béen otherwise aun∣swered and determined, and the suite saued, and because that the same ac∣tion was more then neede∣full, it is called circuitie of action: As if a man grant a rent charge of x. pounde
out of his manor of Dale, and after the Grauntee disseiseth the grauntor of the same mannor of Dale, and hee bringeth an Assise and recouereth the lande, and xx. pound dammages, the which xx. pound being paied, the grauntee of the rent sueth his action for x. pounde of his rent due du∣ring the time of the dissei∣sin, which if no disseisin had bin he must haue had, This is called circuitie of action, because it might haue béen more shortly an∣swered, for whereas the grantor should receiue xx. pound damages, and pay x. poūd rent, he might haue receiued but the x. li. onely for the damages▪ and the grauntée might haue cute off and kept backe the o∣ther x. li. in his handes by waie of detainer for his rent, and so thereby might haue saued his action. 105 Claime. CLaime, is a challenge by any man of the proper∣tie or ownership of a thing which he hath not in pos∣session, but that which is
withholden frō him wrōg∣fully. Clergie. CLergie, is an auncient libertie confirmed in di∣uers parliaments, And it is when a man is arraig∣ned of felonie or such like before a temporall Iudge &c. and the prisoner praieth his Clergie, that is to say, to haue his Booke, which in auncient time was as much as if hee desired to be dismissed from the tem∣poral iudge, and to bee de∣liuered to the Ordinarie to purge himselfe of the same offence. And then the Iuoge shall command the Ordinarie to trie if he can reade as a Clerke in such a Booke and place as the Iudge shall appoint. And if the Ordinarie cer∣tifie the Iudge that he can, then the prisoner shall not haue iudgement to loose his life. See Stamford. lib. 2. cap. 41. and séeke the statute 18. Eliz. cap. 7. Clerke Attaint. CLerke Attaint, is hee which praieth his cler∣gie
after iudgement giuen vpon him of the Felonie, and hath his clergy allow∣ed, such a clerke might not make his purgation. 108 Clerke Conuict. CLerke conuict, is hee which praieth his cler∣gie before iudgement giuen vpon him of the felonie, and hath his Clergie to him granted, such a clerke might haue his purgation. Note that this purgation was made, when hee was dismissed to the ordinarie, there to bee tried of the en∣quest of clerkes. And ther∣fore now by the stat. of 18 El. c. 7. no such is put to the Ordinarie. 109 Colour. COlour, is a fained mat∣ter, which the defendant or tenāt vseth in his barre when an action of trespas or an assise is brought a∣gainst him, in which hée giueth the demaundant or plaintife a shewe at the first sight, that hee hath good cause of action, where in trothe it is no iuste cause, but only a colour and
face of a cause: and it is v∣sed to the intent that y• de∣termination of the action should be by the Iudges, & not by an ignorant Iurie of xii. men. And therefore a colour ought to bee a mat∣ter in law or doubtfull to y• common people: as for ex∣ample, A. bringeth an assise of land against B. and B. saith that hee himselfe did let the same lande to one C. for terme of life, and af∣terwarde did graunt the reuersion to A. the deman∣dant and after C. the tenāt for terme of life died, after whose decease, A. the de∣mandant claiming the re∣uersion by force of y• grant (wherto C. the tenant for life, did neuer atturne) entred, vpon whome B. entred, against whom A. for that entre, brings this assise &c. This is a good colour because the com∣mon people, thinke that the land will passe by the graunt without Atturne∣ment, where inder it will not passe, &c. Also in an action of trespasse, colour must bee giuen, and of them are
an infinite number, one for example: in an action of trespasse for taking a∣way the plantifes beasts the defendant saith, that before the plaintife had a∣ny thing in them▪ hee himselfe was possesed of thē as of his proper goods, & deliuered them to A. B. to deliuer them to him a∣gaine, when &c. And A. B. gaue thē vnto the plaintif, and the plaintife suppo∣sing the propertie to be in A. B. at the time of the gifte, tooke them, and the defendant tooke them from the plaintife, whereupon the plaintife bringeth an action, this is a good co∣lour and a good plea. Sée more hereof in the Dia∣logues betwéene the Doct. and stud. lib. 2. cap. 13. 110 Colour of office. COlour of office, is al∣waies takē in the worst part, and signifieth an acte euill done by the counte∣nance of an office, and it beareth a dissembling face of the right office, where∣as the office is but a vaile to the falsehood, and the
thing is groūded vpō vice, and the office is as a sha∣dowe to it. But by reason of the office, and by vertue of the office are taken al∣waies in the best part, and where the office is the iust cause of the thing and the thing is pursuing y• office. Collusion. COllusion, is where an action is brought a∣gainst another, by his own agréement if the plaintife recouer, thn such recouery is called by Collusion, and in some cases the collusion shall bee inquired of as in Qure impedit, and Assise and such like, which any corporation or bodie poli∣tique bringeth against an other to the intent to haue the lande or aduowson, wherof the writ is brought into Mortmaine. But in auowrie nor in ane action personal, the collusion shall not be enquired. Sée the Statute w. 2. chapt. 32. which giueth the quale ius and inquirie in such ca∣ses.
Common ley. COmmon lawe, is for the most parte taken three waes, First, for the laws of this Realme simplie, without anie other, as cu∣stomarie lawe, ciuill law, spiritual lawe, or whasoe∣uer else lawe ioyned vnto it, as when it is dspued in our lawes of Englande, what ought of right o be determined by the commō lawe, and what by the spi∣rituall Lawe, or Admi∣ral Court, or suh like. Secondarily it is taken for the kings Courtes▪ as the Kings Bench or com∣mon place, onlie to shewe a difference between them and the base Courtes, as customarie courtes, Court Barons, County courtes, ppowders and such like, as when a plée of lande is remooued out of auncient demesne, because the land is franke fee and pledable at the Common Lawe, that is to saye, at the Kinges Courte, and not in Auncient demesne, or in anie other base Court. Thirdly, and most vsu∣ally
by the common lawe is vnderstood, such lawes as were generally taken and holden for lawe be∣fore any Statute was made to alter the same, as for example, Tenant for le nor for yeres, were not to bee punished for doing wast at the common law, til the statute of Glouce∣ster, ca. 5. was made which doth giue an actiō of wast against them. But tenant by the curtesie and tenant in dower were punisha∣ble for wast at the common law▪ that is to saye, by the vsuall and common recei∣ued lawes of the Realme before the saide statute of Gloc. was made. Common. COmmon, is the right, that a man hath to put his beasts to pasture, or to vse & occupy the grounde, that is not his owne. And note that there be diuers commons, that is to saye, common in grosse, common appendant, com∣mon appurtenant, and co∣mon because of neighbor∣hood.
Common in grosse is where I by my deede grant to another that hee shall haue common in my lande. Common appendant is where a man is seised o certaine lande, to the which he hath common in anothers ground, and all they that shall bee seised of the land haue y• said com∣mon onely for those beasts which compast that lande to which it is appendant, excepting geese, goates & hogges. And alwayes this com∣mon is by prescription and of common right, and it is appendaunt to erable lande onely, and not to any other lande or house. Common appurtenant is in the same manner, as common appendant. But it is with all manner of beastes, as well hogges, goates and such like as horses, kine, oxen, sheepe, and such as compast the ground. And this com∣mon may bee made at this day, and may bee seuered from the lād to which it is
appurtenant, but so can not Common, appen∣dant. Common because of neighborhood is where y• tenants o. Lords which be seised of two townes, where one lyeth nigh ano∣ther, & euery of them haue vsed from the time where∣of no minde runneth, to haue common in the other towne with all manner of beastes comminable. But the one may not put his cattel in the others ground, for so they of the other towne may distraine them Damage fesant, or may haue an actiō of tres∣pas, but they may not put thē into their owne fields, and if so they straye into the fieldes of the other towne, they there ought to suffer them, And the inha∣bitants of the one towne ought not to put in as ma∣ny beastes as they wil, but hauing regard to the inha∣bitants of the other town, for otherwise it were no good neighborhood, vpon which all this matter doth depend.
114 Condition. COndition, is a restraint or bridle annexed and ioyned to a thing, so that by the not performance or not doing thereof the par∣tie to the condition shal re∣ceiue preiudice and losse, and by the perfourmance and dooing of the same commoditie and aduaun∣tage. And all conditions are either Conditions actu∣all and expressed, which bee called conditions in déede, or els they bee con∣ditions implyed or couert, and not expressed, which are called Conditions in Law. Also all conditions are either Conditions prece∣dent and going before the estate, and are executed, or els subsequent and follow∣ing after the estate & exe∣cutorie. The Condition prece∣dent doth get and gain the the thing or estate made vpon condition by the per∣formence of the same. The Condition subse∣quent doeth kéepe & conti∣nue the thing or estate
made vpon condition by the performance or y• same. Actuall and expresse condition, which is called a condition in déede, is a condition knit and annex∣ed by expresse words to the feoffement, lease or grant, eyther in writing or with∣out writing. As if I in∣feoffe a man in landes re∣seruing rent, to be paid at such a feast, vpon conditi∣on, that if the feoffée faile of payment at the day, that then it shalbe lawfull for me to reenter. Condition implied or couert and not expressed, which is called a condi∣tion in lawe, is when a man graunteth to an other the office to be kéeper of a Parke, Steward, Bea∣dle, Baylife, or such lyke for terme of lyfe, and though there be no condi∣tion at all expressed in the grant, yet the lawe spea∣keth couertly of a condi∣tion, which is, that if the grauntée do not execute all pointes appertayning to his office, by himselfe or his sufficient deputie, then it shall bée lawfull to the
grauntor to enter and dis∣charge him of his offce. Condition precedent and going before is, when a lease is made to one for life vpon condition, that if the lessée for life will pay to the lessor xx. li. at such a day, that then hee shall haue fee simple, héere the condition precéedes and goeth before the estate in fee simple, and vpon the performance of the condi∣tion doth get and gaine the fée simple. Condition subsequent and comming after, is whē one granteth to I. S. his manor of Dale in fee sim∣ple vpon condition, that the grauntee shall paye to him at such a day xx. pound or else that his estate shall cease, heere the condition is subsequent and follow∣ing the estate in fée simple, and vpon the performance thereof deoth kéepe & conti∣nue the estate. See more of this in Lit∣tleton lib. 3. ca. 5. And Per∣kins in the last title of Cō∣ditions.
Confirmation. COnfirmation is when one which hath right to anie landes or tenements maketh a déede to an other which hath therof the pos∣session or some estate with these wordes, Ratificalle, approbasse, confirmasse, with intent to inlarge his estate, or make his pos∣sesson perfect and not de∣fesible by him that maketh the confirmation, nor by a∣ny other that may haue his right. Whereof sée more in Lit∣tleton lib. 3. cap. 9. of Con∣firmations. Confiscate goodes. COnfiscate goodes are goods to which the lawe entitleth the Queene whē they are not claymed by anie other. As if a man be indicted that he feloni∣ouslie stole the goodes of I. S. where in trueth they are his owne goodes, and they are brought into the Court against him as a maineur, and then hée is demaunded what he saieth to those goods, and he deni∣eth them, now by this de∣nying
of them, he shall loose those goods, although that afterward he be acquited of the felonie, and so mo∣ther like cases. 117 Conspiracie. COnspiracie is a writ and it lyeth where two or more knit themselues to∣gether by oth, couenant, or other maner of aliāce, that euery one shall helpe other for to indict or appele any man of felonie, then hee which is by such maner indicted or appealed shall haue this writ, But this writ lieth not against the indictors. Sée more herof in Stam∣ford lib. 3. cap. 12. 118 Custome. CVstomes and seruices is a writ, and lieth where I or my auncestors after the limitatiō of assise, were not seysed of the customes or seruices of my tenant before, then I shall haue this writ to recouer those seruices. Also the tenaunt may haue this writ against his Lord, but after that the tenant hath declared, the
Lorde shall defende the wordes of the declaration and replying shall say, that hée distrayned not for the customes whereof the de∣claration is, and then he shall declare all the decla∣ration of the customes and seruices, and then the te∣nant who was plaintife shal become defendant, and shall defende by battaile or great assise. Consultation. COnsultatiō, Looke ther∣fore after in the title of Prohibition. Continual claime. COntinual claim is wher a man hah right to enter into certaine landes where of an other is seised in fée simple or fée tayle, and hee dare not enter for feare of death or beating, but approcheth as nigh as he dare, & maketh claime thereto within the yeare and day before the death of him that hath the landes, if after hee which hath the lande die seiseo, & his heire is in by discent, yet he that maketh such claime may enter vpon the hire not∣withstanding
such discent, for that that he hath made such cōtinuall claime: But it behoueth that such claim alwayes be made within the yéere & the day before the death of the tenant, for if such a tenant doe not die seysed within a yeere and a day after such claime made, and yet he that hath right dare not enter, then it be∣houeth him that hath such right to make an other claime within the yéere & day after the first claime, & after such second claime to make ye third claime with∣in the yeere and day, if hée will be sure to saue his en∣tre. But if the disseisor die seysed within the yeere and day after the disseisin, and no claime mae, then the entre of the disse: sée is takē away, for the yéere and day shall not be taken from the time of the title of the en∣tre to him growē, but only frō the time of y• last claime by him made as is afore∣said. See more hereof in Littleton ib. 3 cap. 7. Counterplee. COūterplee is where one bringeth an action, & the
tenāt in his answere & plée voucheth or calleth for any man to warrāt his title, or praieth in aid of an other, which hath better estate then he, as of him that is in the reuersion, or if one that is a stranger to the action, come and pray to be receiued, to saue his estate, if the demaundant replie thereto, & shew cause that he ought not such a one to vouch, or that he ought not of such a one to haue ayd, or that such a one ought not to be receiued, this plée is called a counterplee to the voucher, aid, or resceit, as the case is, but if the voucher be allowed, and when vouche commeth in, and demādeth what cause the tenant hath, and the te∣nant sheweth his cause & the vouche pleed to anie thing to auoid the warrā∣tie, that is called a counter∣plee to the warrantie. Contract. COntract, is a bargaine, or couenant betweene two parties, where one thing is giuen for another which is called, Quid pro
quo, as if I sell my house for money, or if I couenant to make you a lease of my mannor of Dale in consi∣deration of twentie pound that you shal giue me, these are good contractes, be∣cause there is one thing for an other, but if a man make promise to me, that I shall haue twentie shillinges, and that he will bée debtor to mée thereof, and after I aske the twentie shillings, and hée will not deliuer it, yet I shall neuer haue any action to recouer this twē∣tie shillinges, for that that this promise was no con∣tract but a bare promise. And ex nudo pacto non o∣ritur actio, but if any thing were giuen for the twentie shillinges though it were not but to the value of a pe∣ny, then it had béene a good contract. 123 Contra formam col∣lationis. COntra formam collatio∣nis, is a writte, and it lyeth where a man had giuen landes in perpetuall almesse to any of the late houses of Religion, as to
an Abbot, and to the co∣uent or other Soueraigne, or to the waren or Ma∣ster of any Hospitall, and his couent to find certaine poore men, and to doe o∣ther diuine seruice, if they alien the landes, then the donour or his heires, shall haue the saide writ for to recouer the lande, but this writte shall bée alwaie brought against the Ab∣bot or his successour, and not against the alien, al∣though that he be tenaunt, but in all other actions where a man demaundeth freeholde, the writ shall be brought against the tenant of the land. See the Sta∣tute w. 2. cap. 41. Contra formam feoffa∣menti. COntra formā feoffamē∣ti, is a writte, and it ly∣eth where a man before the Statute of, Quia emp∣tores terrarum, which was made Anno 18. Edw. in∣feoffeth an other by deede to do certaine seruice if the feoffour or his heires di∣straine him to doe other seruice then is comprised
in the déede, then the te∣naunt shall haue this writ, commaunding him that he distraine not him to doe o∣ther seruice, that is not comprised within the déed, but this writ lieth not for the plaintife which clay∣meth by purchase from the first feffée: but for such plaintife as cloymeth as heire to the first feffée. 125 Contributione fa∣cienda. COntributione facienda, is a writ, and it lyeth where there are diuerse Parceners, and hée which hath the part of the eldest doth make all the suite to the Lord, the other ought to make contribution to him, and if they will not, he shall haue against them the saide writ. 126 Conusance. COnusance of Plée, is a Priuiledge that a Ci∣tie or Towne hath of the Kings graunt t hold plee of all contractes, and of landes within the pre∣cincte of the Franches, and that when any man is
impleaded for anie such thing in the Court of the King at Westminster, the Maior and Baylifes of such frāchises or their At∣turney may aske Conu∣sance of the plée, that is to say, that the plée and the matter shall bee pleaded & determined before them. But if the Court at West∣minster be lawfully seysed of the plée, before Conu∣sance be demaunded, then they shall not haue Co∣nusance for that suite, because they haue negli∣gently surceased their time of demaunde thereof, but this shall bee no barre to them to haue Conusance in an other action, for they may demaund Conusance in one action, and omit it in an other action at their pleasure. And note that Conu∣saunce lyeth not in pre∣scription, but it behooueth to shew the Kings letters patents for it. Corodie. COrodie is an allowance of meate, bread, drinke, money, clothing, lodging, and such like thinges ne∣cessarie
for sustenance, It is somtimes certein where the certeinty of thinges is set downe, sometimes vn∣certeine where the certein∣tie of thinges is not sett downe which he shal haue, And some of them began by grant made by one man to another, and it may bée for life, yeres, in taile, or in fée, and some Corodies are of common right as euerie founder of Abbies, Prio∣ries, nunries & other hou∣ses of religion, had auctho∣ritie to assigne such in the same house, whē they were standing for father, brother Cosin or other man that he would appoint, should take it, if it were a house of Monkes, and he were founder of a house of nuns or women, then for his Mother, Sister, cosin or o∣ther womā that he would direct thether, and al∣waies this was prouided for, that he that had Coro∣die in a house of Monkes might not sende a woman to take it. Nor where Co∣rodie was due in a Nun∣rie, there it was not law∣ful to appoint a man to re∣ceive
the same, for in both cases such presentation was to bee reiected, And this corodie was due as∣well to a common person that was foūder, as where the Kinge himselfe was founder, but where the house was holden in frank∣almoigne, there the tenure it selfe was a discharge of corodie against all men, ex∣cent it were afterwarde charged voluntarily, as when the king would send his writ to the abbot for a corodie, for such a one whō they admit, there the house should be thereby char̄ged for euer, whether the king were founder or not, See the writ of Corod. hab. in Fitz Natura br. fol. 230. Crowner. CRowner, is an anciēt of∣ficer of trust and of great aucthority ordained to be a principal cōseruator, or ke∣per of the peace to beare re∣cord of the Plces of y• Crown and of his owne sight and of diuers other thinges manie in number &c. and therefore in Kinge Ed∣ward the first daies this
Statute following was made forasmuch as meane men and vndiscréete nowe of late are commonly cho∣sen to the office of the Co∣roner, where it is requi∣site that wise men lawfull & able shoulde occupie such offices, It is prouided that through al shires sufficient men shoulde bee chosen to bee Coroners, out of the most wise and discréetest Knights which best knw coulde and woulde attend this Office, and which faithfully made and repre∣sented the Plées of the Crowne. And although the Let∣ter of this statute bee not precisely obserued, yet at the least the intent should bee followed as ghe as ought bee, that for the default of Knights, Gen∣tlemē furnished with such qualities as the Statute setteth downe (of which sort there be many) might be chosen with this additi∣on that they be vertuous & good knowen Christians. Sée hereof in the writ de Coronatore eligendo in Fits Natura breuiū fol. 13.
Corporation. COrporation, is a per∣manent thing that may haue succession. And it is an assembly and ioinyng together of manie into one felowship, brotherhoode and minde, whereof one is head and chiefe, the rest are the bode, and this heade and bodie knitte to∣gether make the Corpo∣ration. And of Corpo∣rations some are called spirituall and some Tem∣porall, and of those that are Spirituall, some are cor∣porations of dead persons in Lawe, and some other∣wise, and some ar by the authoritie of the King one∣lie, and some haue been of a mixte authoritie. And of those that are tēporall some are by the authority of the King also, And some by the Common Lawe of the Realme. Corporation Spiritual and of dead persons in the Lawe, is where the corpo∣ration consisteth of an Ab∣bot and couent, and these had beginning of the king, and the man of Rome whē he had to doe here.
Corporation spirituall, and of able persons in law is where the Corporation cōsisteth of a Dean, Chap∣ter, Master of a Colledge or Hospitall, and this cor∣poration had beginning of the king onely. Corporation tēporal by the king is where there is a Maior & Comminaltie. Corporation temporall by authoritie of the Com∣mon Law is the assemblie in Parliament, which con∣sisteth of the Quéene the head of the corporation, and of the Lords spirituall and temporal, & the commons of the realme, the badie of the corporation. 130 Bodies politike. BOdies politike, are Bi∣shops, Abbots, Priors, Deanes, Parsons of chur∣ches and such like which haue succession in one per∣son onely. 131 Corruption of blood. COrruption of blood, is when anie is attaynted of Felonie or Treason, then his blood is said to be
corrupt, by meanes wher∣of his children nor anie of his blood cānot be heirs to him or to any other aunce∣stor, for which they ought to claim by him. And if he were a noble or gentleman before, he & all his children therby are made vnnoble & vngētle, hauing regard to the nobility or gentrie they claim by their father, which cannot bee made whole a∣gaine without authoritie of Parliament. Cosinage. COsinage, is a writte, and it lyeth where my great Grandfather, my Grand∣fathers Graundfather, or other cosin dieth seised in fée simple, and a stranger a∣bateth, that is to say, en∣treth into the lands, then I shall haue against him this writte, or against his heire, or his alienee, or a∣gainste whomsoeuer that commeth after to the seide landes. But if my Grand∣father die seised and a strā∣ger abateth, then I shall haue a writte of Aiel, But if my father, mother, bro∣ther, sister, vncle or aūt, die
seised, & a stranger abateth; then I shal haue an Assise of Mortdancester. 133 Couenant. COuenant, is an agree∣ment made by déede in writing & sealed betweene two persons, where euery of them is bounden to the other to performe certaine couenants for his parte, The one of them holdeth not his couenāt but brea∣keth it, then hee which therof feeleth himself grie∣ued, shal haue thereupon a writ of Couenant. And note well that no writ of Couenant shalbee maintenable without es∣pecialtie, but in the Citie of London, or in some o∣ther such place priuileged by custome and vse. 134 Couerture. COuerture, is when a mā and a woman are mar∣ried together, now what∣soeuer is done concerning the wife in the time of the continuance of this mari∣age betweene them is said to be done during the co∣uerture, and the wife is
called a woman couert. COuin, is a secret assent determined in the harts of two or more, to the pre∣iudice of any other: As if a tenant for terme of life, or tenant in aile will se∣cretely conspire with ano∣ther, that the other shal re∣couer against the tenant for life the lande which hee holdeth &c. in preiudice of him in the reuersion. Cui in vita. CVi in vita, is a writ, and it lyeth where a man is seised of landes in fee sim∣ple, or fée taile, or for terre of life in the right of his wife, & alieneth the same land and dieth, then shee shal haue the saide writ for to recouer the land. And note well that in this writ her title must be shewed whether it be of y• purchase of the woman, or of the heritage of y• womā. But if the husband alien the right of his wife, & the husband and the wife dye, the wiues heire may haue a writ of sur Cui iu vita.
137 Cui ante diuortium. CVi ante diuortium is a writ, & it lyeth in like manner, when such alie∣nation is made by the hus∣band of the wiues lande & after deuorce is had be∣tweene them, then the wo∣man shal haue this writ, & the write shall saye, to whō shee before the deuorce might not gainsay. 138 Curtesie of Eng∣land. CVrtesie of Englande, is where a man taketh a wife seised in fée simple or fée taile generall, or seised as heire of the taile espe∣ciall, and hath issue by the wife male or female, bée the issue dead or in life, if the wife dye, the husbande shall hold the land during his life by the law of Eng∣land: And it is called tenāt by the Curtesie of Eng∣land, because that this is not vsed in no other realm but onely in England. D. 139 Damage fesant. DAmage fesant, is when a straungers beastes
are in another mans ground without lawfull aucthoritie or licence of the tenant of the ground, and there do feede, tread, and otherwise spoyle y• corne, grasse, woods, or such like: In which case the tenant whom they hurt may ther∣fore take, distraine, and impound them, aswell in the night as in the day. But in other cases, as for rent and seruices and such like, none may distraine in the night season. Danegelde. DAnegelde, that is to be quite of a certaine cu∣stom which hath runn som times, which the Danes did leuie in England. This began first in the time of King Etheldred, who being sore distressed by the continuall inuasion of the Danes, to purchase peace, was compelled to charge his countrey & peo∣ple with importable pay∣ments, for hee first gaue them at fiue seuerall pay∣ments 113000. li. and af∣terwards graunted them
48000 pounds yearely. 141 Darr presentment. DArrein presentm̄t, Look therefore after in the ti∣tle Quare impedit. 142 Dean & Chapter. DEane & Chapter, is a bodie corporate spiri∣tuall consisting of manye able persons in lawe, as namely the Deane (who is chiefe) and his Pre∣bendes, and they together make the corporation. And as this corporation may ioyntly purchase lāds and tenements to the vse of their church and succes∣sors. So likewise euery of them seuerally may pur∣chase to the vse of himselfe and his heires. 143 Decies tantum. DEcies tantum, is a writ, and lyeth where a iu∣rour in any inquest, ta∣keth money of the one parte or other to giue his verdict, then he shall pay tenne times as much as he hath receiued, & euery one that will sue may haue an action, and shall haue
the one halfe, and the king the other halfe. But if the king in such case release by his pardon to such a iu∣rour, yet that shall bee no barre against him that bringeth the action, but that he shall recouer the o∣ther halfe, if his action bée commenced before the par∣don of the King, but if the pardone bee before any ac∣tion, it is a barre against all men, And the same law is of all other actions po∣puler, where one partie is to the king, & the other to the partie that sueth. Also the embrcers which pro∣cure such inquestes shalbe punished in the same man∣ner. And they shal haue the imprisonment of a yéere, but no iustice shall inquire thereof of office, but one∣ly at the suite of the par∣tie. Declaration. DEclaration, is a shew∣ing in writing of the griefe and complaint of the demaundant or plein∣tife against the tenant or defendaunt, wherein he
supposeth to haue recei∣ued wrong, & this declara∣tion ought to be plaine and certaine, both because it impeacheth the defendant or tenant and also compel∣leth him to make answere therto. But note that such declaration made by the demaundaunt against the tenaunt in an action Re∣all, is properly called a Count. Note that y• Count or declaration ought to con∣teine demonstration, decla∣ration, & conclusion. And in demonstration are con∣tained ii. things, (that is to say) who him complai∣neth and against whome,  for what matter, & in the declaration what ought to be comprised, how and in what manner the action rose betwéene the parties, and when and what daye, yere and place, & to whome the action shalbe giuen. And in the conclusion he ought to auerre & profer to prooue his suit, and shewe the damage which he hath susteined by the wrong done vnto him.
Dedimus pote∣statem▪ DEdimus potestatem▪ is a writ, & it lieth where a man suth in the kinges Court, or is sue  may not well trauell then he shall haue thi writ dire∣cted to some Iustice o o∣ther discreete person in the countrie to g him po∣wer to admitte ome a for his Atturney, or to se∣iue a e, or to take his cō∣fession or his aunswere, or other examination as the matter requireth. Defendant. DEfendant, is he that is sued in action perso∣nall, and he is called te∣nant in an action Reall. Defene. DEfence, is that which the defendant ought to make immediatly after the count or declaration made, that is to say, that he defedeth al the wrong, force, and dammage, where and when he ought, and then to proceede far∣ther
to his plee, or to un∣parie. And note, that in so much that hee desendeth the force and wrong hee doeth excuse himselfe of the wrong against him surmised, and maketh him partie to the plee, and in so much that hee defendeth the dammage, he affirmeth the partie plaintif able to be answered vnto. And for the residue of the defence, hee accepteth the power of the Court to heare and determine their plées of this matter. For if hee will pleade to the Iurisdiction, hee ought to omitte in his defence these wordes (ou & quant il deuera.) And if hee will shewe any dishabilitie▪ in the plaintife, and de∣maund iudgement, if the partie▪ shal bee aunswered vnto, then hee ought to o∣mitte the defence of the dammage. Demaundant. DEmaundant▪ is hee that sueth or complayneth in an Action Real for
title of land, and he is cal∣led plaintife in an assise, & in n action personall as in an action of debt, tres∣passe, deceit, det and such like. Demaines, DEmaines, or demesnes generallye speakinge according to the lawe, be all the partes of anye mannor which bee not in the handes of holders of estate of enheritance, though they bee occupyed by copyholders, lesses for yéeres, or for life, as well as tenaunt at will: But especially to speake, de∣maines according to the common speeche bee one∣ly vnderstoode the Lords chiefe manor place, which he & his auncestours haue from time out of mynde, kept in their owne hands, and haue occupyed the same, together with all buildinges and houses whatsoeuer, also the mea∣dowes, pastures, woods, errable lande, and such lyke, therewith occu∣pyed.
150 Halfe Blood HAlfe Blood is when a man marieth a wyfe▪ and hath issue by her a sonne or daughter, and she dieth and then hée taketh an other woman and hath by her also a Sonne or daughter, Now these two Sonnes are after a sorte brothers, or as they are termed halfe brothers, or brother of the halfe blood, that is to say, brother by the fathers side, because they had both one father and are both of his blood, and not brothers at all by the mothers side, nor of blood ne kin that way, and therefore the one of them cannot bée heire to other, for he that will clayne as heire to one by s must bée of whole blood to him from whom he claymeth, In the same maner it is  a woman haue diuers is∣sues by diuers husbands▪ who are called brothers by one mother. 151 Demurrer. DEmurrer is when anie action is brought & the defendent pleadeth a plée,
to which the plaintife an∣swereth, that hée will not answere, for that it is not a sufficient plee in the law,  she defendant saith to the contrarie, that it is a suffi∣cient plee, and thereupon both parties do submit the se to the iudgement of the court; then that is cal∣led a Demurrer. Denizen. DEnizen, is where an a∣en borne becommeth the Kings subiect, and ob∣neth the Kings letters Patns for to enioy all priuiledges as an English man, but if one bée made Denizen he shall pay cu∣stomes and diuers other ing as aliens, as it ap∣p by diuers statutes thereof . Deodande. DEodande, is when anie man by misfortune is slayne by a Horse or by a cart, or by any other thing that mooueth, then this thing that is cause of his death, and which at the time of his misfortune did moue, shalbe forfait to the
king, & that is called Deo∣dande, and that pertmeth to the kings Almener for to dispos almes & déeds of charitie. 154 Departure from a plee or matter. DEparture from his plee or matter, is where a mā pleadeth a plée in barre, and the plaintife replieth thereto, and hée after in his reioynder, pleadeth or sheweth an other matter, contrarie, to his first plée that is called a eparture from his darre &c. 155 Departure in dispite of the Court. DEparture in dispite of the Court, is when the tenant or defendant appea∣teth to the action brought against him, and hath a day ouer in the same Terme▪ or is called after, though hée had no day giuen him▪ so that it ée in the same terme if he doe not appeare but makes default, it s a Departure in dispe of the Court, and therefore hee shalbe condempned.
Deputie. DEputie is he that occu∣pieth in an other mns right, whether it e office or anie other thing ls, and his forfaiture or misde∣meanor shall cause the of∣ficer or him whose deputie e is to loose hi office o thing. But a mn cannot make his deputie in all ca∣ses except the graunt so bée: as if it bée with these or such like wordes to ex∣ercise or vse by himselfe or his sufficient deputie, or i the wordes goe further to himselfe or his deputie, or the deputie of his deputie, then he may make a depu∣tie, and his deputie also may make a deputie, or ls not. Debte. DEbte is a writte, and it lieth where anie summe of money is due to a man by reason of accompt, bar∣gaine, contract, obligati∣on▪ or other especialtie, to bée payed at a certaine day, at which day bée yth not, then e shall haue this writ. But if any summe of money bée due to  Lord by his tenaunt for
any rent seruice, the Lord shall neuer haue action of debte, but it behoueth al∣waie to distraine. Also for rent charge or rent secke, which anie man hath for life, in taile, or in ée, he shal not haue any action of debt as long as the rent conti∣nueth, but his executors may haue an action of debt for the arrerages of any of the said rentes due in the life of their testator, by the statute 32. H. 8. cap. 37. But for the arrerages of rent reserued vpō a lease for terme of yéeres, the les∣sor is at his electiō to haue an action of debt, or for to distraine: But if the lease be determined, then he shal not distraine after for that rent. But ée must haue an action of debt for the arre∣rages. 158 Deuastauerunt bona testatoris. DEuastauerunt bona te∣statoris is when the ex∣ecutors will deliuer the le∣gacies that their testator hath giuen, or make resti∣tution for wrong done
by him, or pay his des due vpon contractes, or o∣ther debtes vpon special∣ties, whose dayes of pay∣ment are not yet come &c. And kéepe not sufficient in their handes to discharge those debts vpon recordes or specialties, that they are compeliable formerly by the law to satisfie, then they shalbe cōstrained to pay of their owne goods those du∣ties, which at the first by the lawe they▪ were com∣pelled to pay, according to the value of that which they deliuered or payed by compulsion, for such pay∣ments of debts, or deliuery of legacies, as is aforesaid, before debtes payed vpon specialties▪ or recordes, whose daies o paymēt ar alreadie come▪ are accomp∣ted in the lawe a wasting of the goodes of the testa∣tor, asmuch as if they had giuen them awa▪ with∣out cause, or sold them and conuerted them to their owne vse. Deuise. DEuise is where a man in his testament, giueth
or b theth his goods or his landes to another after his decease. And where such deuise is made of goods, i the executors will not deliuer the goods to th deuisée, the dsée hath no remedie by the cō∣mon-law▪ But i behoueth h to haue a Citation a∣gainst the executors o the testator to appeare before the ordinary, to shew wh he performeth not the will of the testator, for the deui∣see may not take the lega∣e and serue himselfe, but it must be deliuered to him by the executors. But by the common-law if a man bee sole seises of landes in his demesne as of ee, & demseth the lands by testament, this deuis was void, vnles the lands were in a Citie or borough where landes  deuisable by custom: But if any man were enoed to the vse of another and his heires, and he to whose vse hee was so seised did make  of his lands, this deuise was good, though it be not in a Towne where landes are deuisable.
Also if any man deuise lands in Citie Towne, or Borough deuisable, and the deuisor dyeth, if his heire or anie other abate in the landes, then the de∣us shall haue a writte of Ex graui querela: But this writte shall neuer hee pleded before the Kinges Iustice, but alwaies be∣fore the Maior or Bailifes in the same towne. And here to the ende to shew how much the lawes of this Realme, and the wise discrte Iudges of the same, who are the in∣terpreters of the lawe, doe auor wils & testaments, and so deuises in yeelding to there such a reasonable construction, as they think might best agree with the mindes of the dead, consi∣dering that willes and te∣staments are for the most parte, and by common in∣tendement made when the testator is nowe very sicke, weake, and pasts all hope of recouerie, fo it is a receiued opinion in the Countrey among moste, that if a man should chaunce to bee so wise
as to make his will in his good health, when hee is strong of good memory, and hath tune and leasure, and might aske counsell if any doubt were of the learned that then hee should not liue long after, and there∣fore they deferre it, to such time, whē as it were more conuenient to applie them∣selues to the dispositions of their soules, then of their landes or goods ex∣cept it were that by the fresh memorie, and reci∣tall of them at that time, it might bee a cause to putte them in minde of some of their goods or Landes falsely gotten, and so moue them to re∣stitution &c. And at that time the penning of such willes are commonly com∣mitted to the Minister of the Parish, or to some o∣ther more ignorant then hee who knoweth not what wordes are neces∣sarie to make an estate in fée simple, fée taile▪ for terme of life or such like besides manie other mis∣chiefes: I will therefore here sette downe some of
those cases, that are most common in ignorant mens mouthes, & do carrie by the wise interpretations of the Iudges, as is aforesaid a larger and more fauoura∣ble sence in willes then in déedes. First therefore if one de∣uise to I. S. by his will al his landes & tenements, here not only al those lāds that he hath in possessiō do passe, but also those that he hath the reuersion of by vertue of these wordes te∣nements. And if lands be deuised to a man to haue to him for euer, or to haue to him and his assignes, in these two cases the deuise shall haue a fée simple. But if it be giuen by feoffement in such maner▪ he hath but an estate for terme of life. Also if a man deuise his landes to other, to giue, sell or doe therewith at his plea∣sure or will, this is fée simple. A deuise made to one  to his heires malas doth make▪ an estate taile▪ but i such wordes be put in a déede of feoffemēt it shall b
taken a fée simple, because it doth not appeare of what bodie the heires males shal be begotten. If lands bee giuen by déed to I. S. and to the heires males of his body &c. who hath issue a daughter, who hath issue a sonne, and dieth, there the land shal returne to the do∣nour, and he sonne of the daughter shall not haue it, because hée cannot conuei himselfe by heires males, for his mother is a let thereto, but otherwise it is of such a deuise, for there the sonne of the daughter shal haue it rather then the will shalbe voide. If one deuise to an in∣fant in his mothers bellie, it is a good deuise, other∣wise it is by feoffement, graunt, or gifte, for in those cases there ought to be one of abilitie to take presently or otherwise it is voide. A deuise made in fée sim∣ple wtout expresse words of heirs, is good in fée simple. But if a deuise be made to I. N. hee shall haue the lande but for terme of life, for those wordes will carie no greater estate.
If one will that his son I. shal haue his land, after the death of his wife, here the wife of the deuisor shal haue the land first for term of life. So likewise if a man deuise his goods to his wife, & that after the decease of his wife, his son & heire shal haue the house, where the goods are, there the sonne shall not haue the house during the life of the wife, for it dooth appeare that his intent was, y• his wife should haue the house also for terme of her life, notwithstanding it were not deuised to her by ex∣presse words. If a deuise bée to I. N. and to the heires females of his bodie begotten, af∣ter the deuises hath issue a sonne & daughter, and di∣eth, here the daughter shall haue the land & not the son, and yet he is the most wor∣thy person, & heire to his father, but because the wil of the dead is, y• the daugh∣ter should haue it, lawe and conscience wil so also. And herein the verie heathens were precise as appeareth by those ver∣ses
of Octauius Augustus, which Donatus reporteth hee made after y• Virgil at his death, gaue cōmande∣ment, that his books should bee burnt, because they were imperfect, and yet some perswaded that they should be saued, as indéede they happily were, to whō hee answered thus: but faith of lawe must néedes be kept and what last will doth say, And what it doth commaund bee done, that néeds we must obey. 160 Diem clausit ex∣tremum. DIem clausit extremum, is a writ, & it lieth wher the Kinges tenaunt, that holdeth in chiefe, dieth, this writte shall bee directed to the eschetour to enquire of what estate hee was sei∣sed, and who is next heire, and his age and of the cer∣taintie of the land, and of what value the land is, and of whome it is holden, and that inquisition shalbe re∣turned into the Chancerie, which is cōmonly called: The office after the death of that person.
Discent. DIscent, is in 2. sortes, ei∣ther lineal or collateral. Lineal discent is when a discent is conueied in the same line of the whole blood, as grandfather, fa∣ther, sonne, sonnes sonne, and so downward. Collaterall discent, is out in another branch from aboue of the whole blood, as grandfathers brother, fathers brother, and so downeward. Note that if one die sei∣sed in fée, or in taile of lande in which another hath right to enter, and that dis∣cendeth to his heire, such discent shal take away the entrie of him which hath right to enter, for that that the heire hath them by dis∣cent from his father, & so came vnto those tenemēts by the doing of the lawe, and he that had right can not put him out by en∣tring vppon him, but is put to sue his writ to de∣maund the land according to; the nature of the title. See heereof in Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 6. and statute, 32. H. 8. cap. 33.
162 Disclaymer. DIsclaimer, is where the Lorde distraineth his tenant; and hee sueth a re∣pleuin, and the lord anow∣eth the taking by reason that hee holdeth of him, if the tenaunt say that he dis∣claimeth to hold of him, this is called a disclaimer, and if the lord thereupon bring a writ of right sur disclay∣mer, and it be foūd against the tenant hee shall lose his land. Also if one bringeth a precipe against two other for the land, and the tenant disclaimeth and saith, that hee is not thereof tenaunt, neither claymeth any thing therein, then the other shal haue y• whole land. But if the Precipe be brought a∣gainst one alone, and hee disclaimeth as is aforesaid, the writte shall abate, and yet the demaundant maie enter unto the lande and holde it in his rightfull e∣state; although his entrie was not lawfull. 163 Discontinuance. Discontinuance, is when a man alienateth to an other, Landes or tene∣ments,
and dieth, & another hath right to y• same lande, and may not enter into thē because of this alienation, as if an Abbot alien the landes of his house to an∣other in fee, or fée taile, or for terme of life, or if a man alien the landes that hee hath in the right of his wife, or if tenaunt in the taile alien the landes gi∣uen to him and to the heirs of his body, then such ali∣enations bee called Dis∣continuance, for such e∣states passe alwaie by li∣uerie and seisin, & in these cases the successour of the Abbot or the woman af∣ter the death of her husbād or the issue in the taile af∣ter the death of the tenant in taile may not enter, but euerie of them is put to his action. Sée more here∣of in Littletō lib. 3. cap. 11. and 32. H. 8. cap. 28. which taketh away discontinu∣aunces by the husbande seised in right of his wife. Tithes. TIthes, are the tenthe parts of any thing, but properly of those thinges
which doe increase, which for the most part do belong to ministers of the church for their maintenance, and they be in thrée sorts deui∣ded, to wit Predial tithes, Personall tithes, & Mixte tithes, Prediall tithes are tithes that bee paied of thinges that come of the ground only, as corne, hay, fruits of Trées and such like. Personall Tithes are Tithes to be paied of such profits as come by the la∣bour and industrie of mans person, as by buying, sel∣ling, gaines of Merchan∣dize, and of handicraftes men, labourers and such as worke for hire, as car∣penters, Masons and such like. Mixt tithes are tithes of calues, lambs, pigs, and such like, y• increase partly of the ground that they bee fed vpon and partly of the kéeping industrie and dili∣gence of the owner. 165 Disperagement. DIsperagemēt, is a shame disgrace or villany done by the gardeine in Chi∣ualrie
to his ward in Chi∣ualrie being within age by reason of his mariage. As when the gardeine doeth marrie his warde within age of xiiii. yeres, & within such time as hee cannot consent to mariage, to a bond woman, or to the daughter of one that dwelt in a borough (which is to be vnderstood, such whose fathers professe handi∣crafts, & those baser artes of buying & selling, to get their liuing by) or to one that hath but one foote, or one hand, or is laine or de∣formed; or hath some hor∣rible disease, as the lepro∣sie, french pockes, falling sicknes or such like, or ma∣ryeth him▪ to a woman that is past childebearing, & diuers such other, then vpon the complaint made by the frinds of such heire, the Lord or gardeine shall loose the wardship, and the profits during the nonage of the heire for the shame done vnto him. See Littlet lib. 2. cap. 4. Disseisin. DIsseisin, is when a man enters into any landes
or tenementes where his entry is not lawfull, and putteth him out, that hath the fréehold. 167 Disseisin vpō disseisin. DIsseisin vpon disseisin, is when the disseisour is disseised by another. 168 Disseisor and dis∣seisee. DIsseisor, is which put∣teth any man out of his land without order of the law, & disseisée is he that is so put out. 169 Disceit. DIsceit, is a writ, & it is sometime originall, and sometime iudiciall, but when it is originall, it ly∣eth wher any discet is dn to a man by another, so y• hee hath not sufficiently perfourmed his bargaine or not perfourmed his pro∣mise, then be that is in such manor disceiued shall haue this writ. Also when this writ is iudicial, it lyeth where a Scire fac. is sued out of any Record against a man, and the Shirife returneth,
that hee is warned where he was not warned, or where a Praecipe quod red∣dat of a plée of lands, or a Qimpedit of the presen∣ting to a church, is sued a∣gainst one, & the shirife re∣turneth that he is summo∣ned, where he was not sū∣moned, by which disceit & false returne the demaun∣dāt recouereth in y• plaint, then the party grieued shal haue this writ against him that recouered, & against the summoners, & against the shirife, then the writt shalbee directed to the Co∣roners of the same coun∣tie, if hee continue shirife that made the retorne. Distresse. DIstresse, is the thinge which is taken and di∣strained vpon any land for rent behind, or other duty, or for hurt done although that the propertie of the thing belongeth to a strā∣ger: But if they be beastes that belong to a stranger, it behooueth y• they were leuant or couchant vpon y• same ground, y• is to saye,
that the beastes haue béen vpon the ground certaine space, that they haue them selfe well rested there, or els they be not distraina∣ble for rent or seruice. And if one distraine for rent or other thing with∣out cause lawfull, then the partie grieued shall haue a repleuin and vpon suretye found to pursue his action shall haue the distresse to him deliuered again. But there bee diuers thinges which be not distrainable, viz. another mans gowne in the house of a tailor, or cloth in the house of a ful∣ler, shéereman or weauer, for that they bee common artificers, & that the com∣mon presumption is, that such things belong not to the artificer, but to other persons which put them there to be wrought, Also vitail is not distrei∣nable nor corne in sheues, but if they be in cart, for y• that a distresse ought to be alway of such things wher of the shirife may make re∣pleuin, & deliuer againe in as good case as it was at the time of the taking.
A man may distraine for homage & fealtie, & escu∣age, & other seruices & for ines and amerciamentes which bee assessed in a Leete, but not in a Court baron. And also for dam∣mage feasant, that is to say, when hee syndeth the beastes or goods of any o∣ther doing hurt or cum∣bring his ground. But a man may not distraine for any rent or thing due for any lande, but vpon the same land that is charged therewith: But in case where I come to distrain, and the other seeing my purpose chaseth y• beastes, and beareth the thing out, to the intent that I shall not take it for a distresse vpon the ground, then I may well pursue, and if I take it presently in y• high way, or in anothers ground, the taking is law∣full aswell there as vpon the land charged, to whom soeuer the propertie of the goods be. Also for fines & amerci∣aments which be assessed in a léete, one may alway take the goods of him that
is so amerced, in whose groūd soeuer they be with∣in the iurisdiction of the Court as it is said. And when one hath taken a di∣stresse, it behooueth him to bring it to the common pound, or else he may keepe it in an open place, so that hee giue notice to the par∣tie, that hee (if the distres be a quicke beast) may giue to it foode, and then if the beast die for default of food, hee that was distrayned shalbe at the losse, and then the other might distraine againe for the same rent or duitie. But if hee car∣rie the distres to a holde, or out of the Countie, that the Shirife may not make deliuerance vpon the re∣pleuin, then the pary vpon the returne of the Shirife, shall haue a writte of Wi∣thernam dyrected to the Shirife, that hee take as many of his beastes, or as much goodes of the other in his kéeping, till he hath made deliuerance of the first distres. And also if they bée in a forslet or Ca∣stel, the shirife may take with him the power of the
Countie, & beat downe the castell. As it appeareth by the statute West. 1. cap. 17. therefore looke the statute. Diuorce. DIuorce so called of Di∣uortium, cōming of the verbe Diuerto, which sig∣nifieth to retorne backe, it is vsed in law when a man is diuorced from his wife, hée retorneth her backe home to her Father or o∣ther Friendes, or to the place from whence he had her, and by such diuorce the marriage is defeated & vndone. Donor and Donee. DOnor is hée which gi∣ueth lands & tenemēts to an other in taile, and he to whom the same is giuē is called Donée. Double plee. DOuble plee is where the defendant or tenaunt in any action pledeth a plée, in the which two matters be comprehended, & euery one by himselfe is a sufficient barre or aunswere to the action, then such a dou∣ble plée shall not be admit∣ted for a plée, except one de∣pend vpon an other, and in
such case if he may not haue the last plée without y• first plée, then such a double plée shalbe well suffered. 174 Dower. DOwer is a writ and it lieth where a mā is sole seysed during the couer∣ture betweene him and his wife, of lands or tenemēts in fée simple or fée tayle, where by possibilitie the issue betwéene them may inherite, if such a man die his wife shall recouer the third part of all the landes whereof the husband was sole seysed any time during the couerture by a writ of Dovver vnde nihil habet, though hée died not seysed, and though that he made alienation thereof in his lyfe. But if a man before the statute of Vsis 27. H. 8. had landes, in the which an other man, or other men were seysed to his vse al∣waies during the couer∣ture, and hée to whose vse they were seised dieth be∣fore the said Statute, his wife shal not be indowed. And also if before the says statute two men bée seised of lands to the vse of
one of them, & he to whose vse &c. dieth before the said statute, his wife shall not bée endowed. Also if a woman bring a writte of dower, she shal recouer da∣mages, for the profit rū af∣ter the death of her husbād if he dieth thereof seysed, but if any alienation or e∣state were made during ye couerture, so that the hus∣band died not seysed, then though shee shall recouer the land, yet shée shall reco∣uer no dammages. Also there is an other writte of dower called a writte of Right of dower, and  ly∣eth where a womā hath re∣couered part of hir dower in one towne, and the other part she is to recouer. Al∣so in diuers cases a womā shall not haue dower, as if the husband cōmit treason for the which he is attain∣ted, then his wife shal haue no dower. Also if she go a∣way frō her husband with an other mā in aduowtry, and if she be not reconciled by her husband of his own will without cohersion of the Church, she shal not be indowed.
175 Right. RIght, is where one hath a thing that was taken from another wrongfully as by disseisin, discontinu∣ance, or putting out or such like, and the challenge or clayme that hee hath, who should haue the thing, is called Right. 176 Right of entrie. RIght of entrie, is when one seised of land in fée, is thereof disseised: Now the disseisée hath right to enter into the land, & may so doe when he will, or els hée may haue a writte of right against the disseisor. 177 Dum non fuit com∣pos mentis. DVm non fuit compos mentis, is a writ & it li∣eth where a mā that is out of his wits, that is to say, mad or lunatike alieneth the landes that he hath in fee simple, & dieth, then his heire after his decease shal haue this writ, but he him∣selfe shall not haue this writte for that, that a man shall not be receiued to dis∣able himselfe. Also this writ may be made in the per, cui, and post.
Dum fuit infra aetatem. DVm fuit infra aetatem, is a writ, and it lyeth where an infaunt within age alieneth his lande which he hath in fée simple or for terme of life, when he commeth to his full age hée shall haue this writ or he may enter if he will, but it behooueth that he be of full age the day of his writ brought. Also if an in∣fant alien his land, and die, his issue at his full age shal haue this writ or hée may enter, but the issue shall not haue this writ within his age. Dures. DVres, is where one is kept in prison or restrei∣ned from his libertie con∣trarie to the order of the law, and if such a person so beyng in dures, make anie especialtie or oblig▪ by rea∣son of such imprisonment such a deede is void in the law, & in an action brought vpon such an especialtie he may say that it was made by dures of imprisonment, but if a mā be arrested vp∣on an action at the suite of
another though the cause of the action bée not good nor true, if he make an ob∣ligation to a straunger be∣ing in prison by such ar∣rest, yet it shall not be said by dures, but if hée make an obligation to him at whose suite hee was arre∣sted to bée discharged of such imprisonment, then it shall be said dures, as it is said. E. 180 Eiectione firme. EIectione firme, looke for that in the title Gard. 181 Eiectment de garde. EIectment de garde, looke for that in the Title of Gardes. 182 Eire Iustices. EIre iustices, or Itinerāt, as wée call them, were Iust ces that vse to ryde frō place to place through out the Realme to admini∣ster Iustice. 183 Elegit. TO holde by Elegit, is where a man hath reco∣nered debt or damage by a writte against another by cōlessiō or in other maner, hee shall haue within the
yéere against him a writte iudiciall called Elegit to haue execution of the halfe of all his landes and chat∣tels (except exen & beastes of the plow) till the debt & dammages be wholy leui∣ed and paid to him, and du∣ring the terme he is tenant by Elegit, And note well that if he be put out with∣in the terme hée shall haue Assise of Nouel disseisin, & after a redisseisin if néede be, and this is giuen by the statute of westminster se∣cond Chap. 18. And also by the equitie of the same statute he that hath his estate if he be put out shall haue Assise & re∣disseisin if néed be. And al∣so if he make his executors and die, and his executors enter and after be put out, they shall haue by the equi∣tie of the same statute, such action as he himselfe before said. But if he be put out, and after make his execu∣tors and die, his executors may enter, and if they be stopped of their entrie, they shall haue a writ of tres∣passe vppon their matter and case.
And note well if he doe waste in al the land or par∣cell, the other shall haue a∣gainst him immediatly a writ iudicial out of the first record called Venire facias ad Computādum, by which it shall be inquired if hée haue leuied all the mo∣ney or parcell, and if hée haue not leuied the money, then it shall be inquired to how much the waste a∣mounteth, and if the wast amount but to parcel, then as much of the money as the waste amounteth vnto, shalbe abridged of the fore∣said money which was to be leuied. But if he haue done more waste then the foresaid summe of money which was to be leuied, amounteth, the other shal∣be discharged by and by of all the said money and shall recouer the lande. And for the superfluitie of the waste made about that, that amounteth to the said summe he shal recouer his dammages single, And the same lawe is of his execu∣tors, and also of him that hath his estate. And note y• if he alien in
fée, for terme of life or in taile al or parcell of the lād which hee holdeth by Ele∣git, if the alienation bée made, within the terme or after, he which hath right, shall haue against him an Assise of Nouel disseisin, And they both must be put in the Assise, the alienor and the alienee, and not∣withstanding that the a∣lienor die presently, yet he which hath right, shall haue Assise against the a∣lienee alone, as if the alie∣nee had bin a plaine tenant for terme of yéers, and that is by the equitie of the sta∣tute of westm. 2. Cap. 25. for that that hée hath not but a chattell in effect, And the same law is of his exe∣cutours and of him which hath his estate as is afore∣said. And note well that in Elegit if the shirif returne that hée had nothing the day of the Recognisance made but that he purcha∣sed lands after y• time then the partie playntife shall haue a newe writ to haue execution thereof, the same law is of a statut marchāt.
And note well that after a Fieri facias a mā may haue the Elegit, but not contra∣rie wise, for that the Elegit is of more higher nature then the Fieri facias, And note well that if a man re∣couer by a writ of debt and sueth a Fieri facias, and the shirife returne that the de∣fendāt hath nothing wher∣of he may satisfie the debt to the partie, thē the plain∣tife shall haue Elegit or Ca∣pias sicut alias and a Plu∣ries, And if the Shirife re∣turne at the Capias mitto vobis corpus, & he haue no∣thing wherof he may make satisfaction to the partie he shalbe sent to the prison of the fléete, and there shall a∣bide vntill he haue made a∣gréement with the partie, and if the Shirife returne Non est inuentus, thē there shall go forth an Exigent a∣gainst him. And note well y• in a writ of debt brought against a Parson of holy Church which hath no∣thing of lay ee, and the shi∣rife returneth that hee hath nought by which hée may bée summoned, then shall the playntife sue a writte
to the Bishop that he make his Clerke to come, and the Bishop shall make him to come by sequestration of the Church. And note wel that if a man bring a writ of debt and recouer, and make his executors & di∣eth, they shall not haue exe∣cution notwithstanding, y• it be within the yeere, by a Fieri facias. Embrasour ou Em∣braceour. EMbrasour or Embraceour is he that whē a matter is in triall betwéene partie and partie commeth to the barre with one of y• parties (hauing receiued some re∣ward so to doe) & speaketh in y• case or priuily laboreth the iurie, or standeth there to suruey or ouerlooke thē, therby to put them in feare & doubt of the matter. But men that are learned in the law, may speake in the case for their Clients. Encrochment. ENcrochmēt, is said whē the Lorde hath gotten seisin of more rent or ser∣uices of his tenant thē of right is due or ought to be paied or done vnto him,
as if he tenaunt holde his land of the Lord by fealtie, and ii. s. rent yeerely. And now of late time hee hath got seisin of iii. s. rent or of homage or escuage, or such like. Then this is called an incrochment of that rent or seruice. 186 Enheritance. ENheritance, is such e∣state in landes or tene∣ments, or other things, as may bee enherited by the heir, whether it be in estate of fée simple, or taile, by dis∣cent from any of his aun∣cestors or by his own pur∣chase. And inheritance is de∣uided into two sortes, that is to say, enheritance cor∣porate, and enheritance in∣corporate. Enheritance corporate are mesuages, lands, mea∣dowes, pastures, rents and such like, that haue sub∣stance in themselues and may continue alwayes. And these are called corpo∣rall things. Enheritance incorporat are aduowsons, villains, waies, comons, courts, fi∣shings, & such like that are,
or may bee appendaunt, or appurtenant to enheritan∣ces corporate. Entre. ENtre, is wher a man en∣treth into any landes or tenements in his proper person, or any other y is commandement. Also there bee diuers writs of Entre which be in diuers maners, One is a writte of Entre sur dis∣seisin, and this writie lieth where a men is disseised, hee or his heire shall haue this writ against the dis∣seisor or anie other after tenant or the Ian. And if the disseisor alien and die sise then the writ of En∣tre shal be against the heire with the alienee in the Per, that is to say▪ in which the tenaunt hath no Entre but by such a one naming the disseisor, which him hath disseised &c. And if the heire or alie∣née die seised, or alieneth to another▪ then the writte shall be in the Per and Cui, that is to say, into which the tenaunt hath no entrie but by such a one naming the heire or alienée of the
disseisor to whome such a one (naming the disseisor) did lette it, which by force disseised him &c. And if land bee coeid ouer to manie, or if the first disseisor bee disseised, then the writte of Entre shall be in the Post, that is to say that the tenaunt hath no entry but after the disseisin which the first disseisour made to the demandant or his auncestor. See after Entre en le per. A writ of Entre in the Per lyeth where a man is disseised of his freeholde, and the Disseisour alie∣neth or dyeth seised, and his Heire entreth, then the disseisee or his heire shall haue the saide writte against the Heire of the Disseisour, or against the alienée of the Disseisour, but liuing the disseisour hee mae haue an Assise if he will, and the writte of Entre shall say, in quod A. non habet ingressum nisi per B. qui illud ei dimisit, qui inde eum iniuste dissei∣siuit &c. But if the dissei∣sor alien & the alienée dieth seised, or alieneth ouer to
another, or if the disseisor die, and his heire enter, and that heire alieneth or dy∣eth, and his heire entreth, then the disseisée or his heire shall haue a writ of Entre sur disseisin in y• Per and Cui, And the writte shall say, in quod idem A non habet ingressū nisi per B. cui C. illud ei dimisit, qui inde iniuste &c. And note well, that no writte of Entre in the Per and Cui shall bee mainte∣nable against none, but where he that is tenaunt bee in by purchase or dis∣cent: But if the alienation or discent bee put out of the degrees, vpon which no writ may bee made in the Per, nor in the Per and Cui, then it shall bee made in the Post, and the writte shall say, in quod A. non habet ingressum nisi post disseisinam, quam B. inde iniuste & sine iuditio fecit praef. N. vel M. proauo N. cu∣ius haeres ipse est. Also there are v. things which put the writ of En∣tre out of the degrées, that is to say, Entrusion, Suc∣cessiō, disseisin vpon dissei∣sin,
Iudgemēt, & Escheat. 1 Entrusion is when the disseisor dyeth seised, & an estranger abateth. 2 Disseisin vpon dissei∣sin, is when the disseisor is disseised by another. 3 Succession, is where the disseisor is a man of re∣ligion, and dyeth, or is de∣posed, and his successor en∣treth. 4 Iudgement is when one recouereth against the disseisour. 5 Escheat, is when the disseisor dyeth without heire, or doth felony wher∣by hee is attamted, by which the lorde entreth as in his Escheat. In all those cases the disseisie or his heire shall not haue a writ of Entre within the degrees in the Per, but in the Post, for that that in those saide cases they are not in by discent nor by purchase. Also there is a writ of entre Ad communem legē, and lyeth where tenant for terme of life, tenaunt for term of anothers life, tenāt by y• curtesie, or tenant in dower alieneth and dyeth,
then he in the reuersiō shal haue the foresaide writ a∣gainst whomsoeuer is in after in y• said tenements. Also a writ of Entre in casu prouiso yeth, if tenant in dower alien in fee, or for terme of life, or for an∣others life, liuing the te∣nant in dower, hee in the reuersion shall haue the writ called a writ of En∣tre in casu prouiso. Also a writ of Entre In casu consimili lyeth, if te∣nant for terme of life, or te∣nant by curtesie alien in fee lyuing them, he in the re∣uersion shall haue a writte called a writte of Entre in casu consimili. Also a writ of Entre Ad terminum qui preteriit lyeth, if a man lease lande to another for terme of yeares, and the tenaunt hod ouer his terme, then the lessor shall haue a writ which is called a writ of Entre Ad terminum qui preteriit. And also if lands be lea∣sed to a man for terme of anothers life, and hee for whose life the landes are leased dyeth, and the lessee
holds ouer, then the lessor shal haue this writ. Also a writ of Entre si∣ne assensu capituli lyeth, where an Abbot, Prior, or such as hath Couent or comon seale, alieneth lāds or tenements of the right of his Church, without the assent of the Couent or Chapter and dyeth, then his successour shall haue this writ. Also a writ of Entre Causa matrimonii prelo∣cuti lyeth, wherelandes or tenements are giuen to a man vpon such condition, that he shal take her to his wife within a certaine time, and he do not espouse her within the said terme, or espouse another womā, or make himselfe Priest, or enter in Religion, or him disable, so that he can∣not take her according to the saide condition, thn the donour and his heires shall haue the said writte against him or against whomsoeuer is in the said lande. And also it behoo∣ueth that this condition be made by Indenture, or otherwise this writte
doth noth lye, and all these and other writs of entrie may be made in the Per, Cui, and post. Entrusion. ENtrusion, is a writ and it lyeth where a tenant for terme of lyfe dyeth sei∣sed of certaine lands or te∣nements, and a straunger entreth, hee in the reuer∣sion shall haue the saide writ against the abator, or against whosoeuer that is in after their entrusion. Also a write of Entrusion shalbee maintenable by the successour of an Abbot a∣gainst the abator which shall enter in any lands or tenements in the time of vacation that belongeth to the Church by the statute of Marlebridge, the last Chapter. Equitie. EQuitie, is in two sortes differing much the one from the other, and are of contrary effectes, for y• one doth abridge, diminish and take frō y• letter of the law, The other doeth inlarge, adde & amplifie therunto.
The first is thus defi∣ned, Equitie is the corre∣ction of a lawe generally made in that part, wherin it faileth, which correction of the generall wordes, is much vsed in our law. As if for example when an act of parliament is made that whosoeuer doeth such a thing, shalbe a felon, & shall suffer death, yet if a mad man, or an infant of yong yeeres that hath no discre∣sion do the same, they shall bee no felons nor suffer death therefore. Also if a Statute were made that al persons that shall receiue or giue meate or drink, or other succor to any y• shal do such a thing, shalbee accessary to his of∣fence, and shall suffer death if they did knowe of the fact, yet notwithstanding one doeth such an acte, and commeth to his wife, who knowing thereof doeth receiue him & giues him meate and drink, shee shall not bee accessary nor felon, for in the generalty of the saide wordes of the lawe, he that is mad, nor y• infāt nor y• wife, were not
included in meaning. And thus equitie doeth correct the generalite of ye law in those cases, and the generall wordes are by e∣quitie abridged. The other equitie is de∣fined after this sort, Equi∣tie is when the wordes of the law are effectually di∣rected, and one thing onely prouided by the wordes of the law to the ende that all things of ye like kinde may be prouided by the same, & so when the wordes enact one thing they enact all o∣ther things that are of like degree, as the statut which ordeines that in an action of debt against executors, hee that doeth appeare by distresse shall aunswere, doeth extend by equitie to administrators, for such of them as doeth appeare first by distresse, shall aun∣swere by equitie of the said acte, because they are of like kind. So likewise the statute of Gloucester giues the ac∣tion of wast, and the paine thereof against him that holdes for life or yeres, and by the equitie of the same,
a man shall haue an action of wast against him that holdeth but for one yeere or halfe yeere, and yet that is without the wordes of the sta▪ for he that holdeth but for halfe a yere, for one yeere, doeth not holde for yeres▪ but that is the mea∣ning and the wordes that enact the one, by equitie enact the other. 190 Error. ERror▪ i a writ and it lyeth where iudgement is giuen in the Common place or before the Iustice in Assise or Oyer and ter∣miner, or before the Maior and Shifes of Ld, or in other Court of Re∣rde, against the  or vpon vndue and wrong proceeding▪ then by this were the partie grieued a∣gainst whome the iudge∣ment is giuen shall haue his writ  and therepon cause the Record & Proces to be remoued before the Iustice of the kings bēch. And if the error be found, it shalbe reuersed: but if an erronious iudgement bee giuen in the kings bench,
then it cannot be  but by Parliament▪  the Statute  of Eliza∣beth. Also if a false iudgmēt be giuen in Court that is not of record, as in county, hundred or in to rt baron, then the party shall haue a writ of false iudgement for to make the record to come before Iustice of the com∣mon place. Also if errour be found in the Eschequer, it shal bee redressed by the Chancelor & Treasorer▪ is it appeareth by the statute of Ed. 3. An. 31. c. 12. Escape. Escape, is where  that is arrested ceth to  before y• e be  by word of any Iustice or by order of law. Escape is in two sorts▪ that is to say,  & negligent. oluntary escape▪ is when one doeth arrest an∣other for felony▪ or other crime, & after he in whose custodie he is▪ letteth him goe where he will▪ this let∣ting him goe is a volunta∣ry escape.
And if the arrest of him that escaped were for fe∣lony, then that shalbe felo∣ny in him that did suffer y• escape, & if for treason, then it shalbe treason in  & if for trespas, then trespas, and so in all other. Negligēt escape is whē one is arrested, and  escapes against the will of him that did so arrest him, & is not freshly pursued & taken before the pursuer looseth the sight of  this shall bee saide a negli∣gent escape, notwithstan∣ding that hee out of whose possession hee escaped doe take him after he lost sight of him▪ Also if one e ar∣rested, and after escape▪ & is at his libertie▪ and he in whose ward he was, take him  and bring him to the prison, yet it  an escape in him. Also if a felon be arre∣sted by the Constable and brought to the gale in the county▪ and the gailor will not receiue him & the Con∣stable letteth him goe▪ and the gailor also▪ and so he es∣capeth, this is an escape in the gailor, for that in such
case the gaylor is bound to receiue him by the bond of the Constable without a∣ny precept of the Iustice of peace. But otherwise it is if a comon person arrest another vpon suspition of felony, there the gaer is not bound to receiue him, without a precept of some Iustice of peace. There is an escape also without ar∣rest, as if murder be made in the day, & the murderer be not taken, then it is an escape, for the which the towne where the murder was don shalbe amerced. Eschete. ESchete, is where a tenāt in fée simple doeth felony for the which he is hanged or aiured the realm, or be outlawed of felony, mur∣der, or petie treason, or if the: tenant dyeth without heire generall or especiall, then the Lorde of whome the tenaunt held the lande, may enter by way of Es∣chete, or if any other enter▪ the Lord shal haue against him one writ called a writ of Eschete, which as I thinke is deriued of the french word Eschien.
193 Escuage. EScuage, is called in latin Scutagium, that is to say seruice of the shield, and he that holdeth by escuage, holdeth by knightes ser∣uice, and to that belongēth ward, mariage and reliefe, but that shalbee entended of escuage not certeine, when the Escuage run∣neth through Englande. when it is ordeined by al y• counsell of Englande that after the warre, euery lord shall haue a certain summe of his tenant which was not in the said warre. But if the tenāt which holdeth of any Lord by escuage, be wt the king in his warres in Scotland, this Lorde will distraine hm for Es∣cuage, it shalbe a good plee to say, that hee was with the king in Scotland in his warres & that shalbee tried by y• kings Marshal. And note wel that a mā may not holde by escuage, vnlesse he hold by homage, for that Escuage of com∣mon right draweth to him homage, as it was iudged in Term̄ H. 21. Edw. 3. cap. 42. folio 52. Auowrie 115.
and note well that Es∣cuage is a certeine summe of mony and it ought to be leuied y the Lord of his tenant after the quātity of his tenure when Escuage runneth through all Eng∣lād. And it is ordeyned by all the Counsel of Englād how much euerie tenant shall giue to his Lord, and that is properly to main∣taine the warres betweene. England & them of Scot∣land, or of wales, and not betwéene other landes for that y• those foresaid lands should be of right belōging to the realme of England. See Lit. lib. 2. chap. 3. Esplees. ESplees, is as it were the seisin or possession of a thing, profit, or commodi∣tie that is to be taken, As of a common the Esplees is the taking of the grasse or common by the mouthes of the beasts that common there. Of an aduowson the taking of grosse tithes by the parson presented ther∣unto. Of wood, the sel∣ling of wood, of an orchard the selling of appels and o∣ther fruit growing there,
of a mill, the taking of toll, is the Esplees and of such like. And note that in a writte of right of lande or aduowson or such like the demaundant ought to al∣leage in his count, that he or his auncestors tooke the Esplées of the thing in demaund, or otherwise the pleading is not good. 195 Essoine. ESsoine, is where an actiō is brought & the plain∣tife or defendant may not well appeare at the day in court for one of the v. cau∣ses vnder expressed, thē he shalbe essoined to saue his default, note well yt there be v. maner of essoins, that is to say, Essoine de ouster le mere, & that is the defē∣dant shall haue a day by xl. daies. The second Essoin is De terra sancta, and vpō this the defendant shall haue a day by a yeere and a day▪ & these twaine shall be laid in the beginning of the plee. The third Essoin is De male vener, & that shall be adiorned to a common day a the action requireth and this is called the com∣mon Essoin, and when and
how this Essoin shall be, looke the statutes and the Abridgment of statutes, where it is well declared, And the 4. Essoine is De malo lecti, and that is one∣ly in a writ of right, & ther∣upon there shall a writ goe out of the Chauncerie, di∣rect to the Shirife, that he shall send iiij. Knights to the tenant to sée the tenāt, and if he be sicke to giue a day after a yéere and a day. Also the ie Essoine is de seruice le Roy, and it li∣eth in all actions except in Assise of Nouel disseisin▪  writ of Dower, Darrein presentment, and in appeal of Murder, but in this essoyne it behoueth at the day to shewe his warrant or else it shall torne vnto a default, if it bee in a plée reall, or els he shall lose xx. shillinges for the iourney or more, by the discretion of the Iustice, if it be in a plée personall, as it appea∣reth by the statut o Glou∣cest. cap. 8. Estoppel. EStoppel is when one is concluded and forbiddē in lawe to speake against
his owne act or decrée, yea although it bee to say the trueth. And of Estoppels there are a great manie, one for example is, when I. S. is bound in au obligation by the name of T. S. or a∣ny other name, and is sued afterward according to the name in the obligation, that is to say T. S. now hée shall not bée receiued to say, that he is misnamed, but shalbe driuen to an∣swere according to the name put in the obligati∣on, that is to say, T. S. for peraduenture the obli∣gée did not knowe his name, but by the report of the obligor himselfe, and in asmuch as he is y• same man that was bound, hée shalbe estopped and forbid∣den in lawe to say contra∣rie to his owne déede, for otherwise hee might take aduauntage of his owne wronge, which the lawe will not suffer a man to doe. Also if the daughter y• is an heire to her ather will sue liuerie with her sister y• is a bastard she shall not
afterwarde be receiued t say that her sister is a ba∣stard, in somuch that if her bastard sister take halfe the land with her, there is no remedy▪ by the law. Also i a man seised of lāds in fée simplée wil take a lease for yeres of the same land of a stranger by deede indented, this is an estop∣pel during the terme of yéeres, & the lessée is there∣by barred to say the truth▪ for the trueth is, that hée that leased the lād had no∣thing in it at the time of y• leas made, and that the fée simple was in him that did take the lease: But this he shall not be receyued to say till after the yeeres are determined, because it ap∣peareth that hée hath an estate for yéers, and it was his follie to take a lease of his owne lands, and there∣fore shall thus be punished for his follie. Estraungers. EStraūgers are somtimes takē they y• are not par∣ties or priuies to y• ing of a sine▪ or making of  déed, sometimes then that be borne beyond the seas.
198 Estraie. EStraie, is wher any beast or cattel is in a Lord∣shippe▪ and none knoweth the owner thereof, then it shall bee seised to the vse of the Kinge, or of the Lord that hath such Estray by the Kinges graunt, or by prescription: And if the owner come & claime ther∣to within a yere and a day, then he shal haue it againe, or else after the yeere the propertie thereof shall bee to the Lorde, so that the Lorde make proclamation thereof according to the Lawe. 199 Estrepment. EStrepment, is a writ, and it lieth where one is im∣pleaded by a Precipe quod reddar, for certaine lande, if the demaundant suppose that the tenaunt will doe waste hanging the plée, he shall haue against him this writte which is a prohibi∣tion, commaunding him that he doe no waste hang∣ing the plée. And this lyeth proper∣lie where a man demaun∣deth landes by Formedon, or writte of Right, or such
writs where hee shall not recouer dammages, for in such writs where hee shall recouer damages, hee shall haue his damages, hauing regard to the wast done. Etate probanda. ETate probanda, is a writ of office, and it lieth for the Heire of the tenaunt that helde of the Kinge in chiefe, for to proue that he is of full age, directed to the Shirife to enquire of his age, and then hee shall become tenant to the king by the same seruices that his auncestors made to the King: But it is said that euery one that shal passe in this enquest shall be of the age of xlii. yeres at least, so that he was of ful age whē he that sueth the writ was borne. Excommenge∣ment. Excommengement, is to say in Latin Excommu∣nicatio, and it is where a man in Courte Christian is excommenged, then hee is disabled to sue anie ac∣tion in the Kings Court, and if he remaine excom∣municate xl. dayes, and
will not bee iustified by his Ordinarie, then the Bi∣shop shall sende his Letter patent to the Chauncelour to certifie this Excommu∣nication or contempt and thereupon it shall be com∣manded to the Shirie to take the bodie of him that is accursed by a writ called de excōmunicato capiendo, ill hee hath made agrée∣ment to holie Church, for the contempt and wrong, and whē he is iustified and hath made agreement, thē the Bishop shall sende his letters to the King certifi∣ing the same, and then it shall be commanded to the shirife to deliuer him by a writte called Excommuni∣to deliberando 202 Exchange. Exchaunge, is where a man is seised of certaine lande, and another man is seised of other land, if they by a déed indented, or with∣out deede, if the lands be in one county, exchange their lands so that euery of them shall haue others lands to him so exchaunged, in fee, fée taile, or for terme of life, that is called an exchange,
and is good without liuery or seisin. Aso in exchaunge it be∣houth that the estates  them limited by thexchāge be egal for if one haue an e∣state in fe in his land, and the other hath estate in the other lande but for terme of life, or in taile, then such exchaunge is voide, but if the estates be egall, and the landes be not of egall va∣lue, yet the exchaunge is good. Also an exchange of rent for land is good. Also an exchange betwéen rent and common is good, and that ought to bée by deede. Also t behooueth alway, that this worde exchange e in the deede, or els no∣thing passeth by the deede except that he haue liuerie and seisin. Execution. Execution, is wher iudg∣ment is giuen in any ac∣tion that the plaintife shall recouer the lande, debt or damages▪  the case is, & when any writte is awar∣ded to put him in possessi∣on, that is called a writ of execution, and when he hath the pssession of the
land, or is paied of the debt or dammages, or hath the bodie of the defendaunt a∣warded to prison▪ then he hath execution and if the plée bee in the Countie, or Court Baron, or hundred nd they deferre the execu∣tion of the iudgement in our of the party, or for her cause, then: the de∣mandāt shal haue a writ of Executione iudicii. Note that in a writte of debt, a man shall not haue recoue∣rie of anie lands, but of thē which the defendant hath y• day of y• iudgement yéelded. And of cattels a man shall hau execution onely of the cattels, which he hath day of the execution sued. Executor. Executor, is when a man  maketh his testment & t will, and therein na∣meth the person that shall execute his testament, thē h that is so named: is his executor, and is asmuch as in the ciuil law, (heres de∣signatus or testamē tarius) as to debts, goods & cattels of his testator, and such an executor, shal hau an ac∣tion against euery deb∣tor
of his testator, and if the executors haue assets, eueryone to whom y• testa∣tor was in debt, shall haue an action against the exe∣cutor, if he haue an obliga∣tion, or specialtie, but in e∣uery case wher the testator might wage his law, ∣tiō lieth against y• exe. Look more therof before  the tie Administrators▪ Exigent. Exigent, is a writ & it ly∣eth where a man sh an action personal, and the defendant cannot be sd, nor hath nothing win the countie wherby he may: be attached nor dirai, their this writte shall goe forth to the shirife to make proclamation at 5. counties euery one after another, y• he appeare, or else that hee shal be tlawed: and if  be outlawed, then all his gds and els e for to the King▪ Also in an i∣dictment of Fellony, the Exigent shall goe forth af∣ter the first Capias. And also in a Capias ad compu∣tandū, or ad satisfacien▪ And in euery Capias that goeth foorth after iudgmēt
the exigēt shal goe forth af∣ter the first Capias. And al∣so in appeale of death, but not in appeale of robberie or appeale of maime. 206 Ex parte talis. Ex parte talis, Look there∣fore before in the title, Accompt. 207 Ex graui querela. Ex graui querela, Looke therefore before in the ti∣tle Deuise. 208 Extinguishment. Extinguishment, is where any Lorde, or any other, hath anie rente or seruice going out of anie land and hee purchaseth the same lande, so that he hath such estate in the lande as hee hath in the rent, then the rente is extincte, for that one may not haue rent go∣ing out of his owne lande. Also when any rente shall be extinct, it behoueth that the land and the rent be in one han, and also that the estate y• he hath bee not de∣feasible: & also y• hee haue as good estate in the lande as in the rent, for if he haue estate in the lande but for terme of lfe or yeeres, and hath fée simple in the rent,
then the rent is no extinct, but the rent is in suspence for that time, and then af∣ter the terme, the rente is reuiued. And if there bee Lorde, mesne, and tenant, and the Lord purchase the enancy, then the menatie is extinct, but the mesne shall haue the surplusage of the rent, if there bee anie, as rente secke. Also if a man haue a hie wai ap∣pendant and after pur∣chase the land wherein the he way is, then the way is extinct: and so it is of a cō∣men appendant. Extortion. Extortiō, is a wrong done by an officer, Ordinary, Archdeacō, Official, Mai∣or, Bailife, Shirif, Esche∣tor, Coroner, vndershirife, gailer or other Officer, by colour of his Office, in ta∣king excessiue rewarde or fee, for execution of his said Office or otherwise, and is no other thing in deede then plaine robberie, or rather more odious then robberie, for robberie is apparaunt, and alwaies hath with it the counte∣nance of vice, but extor∣tion
being as great a see as robberie is, carrieth  it a countenance of ve: By means wherof it is the more hard to bee tried, or discerned, and therfore the more oious, and yet some there be that wil not sticke to stretch their office, credit and conscience, to purchase money as wel by extortion as otherwise according to the saying of the Poet Vir∣gil, what is that that hun∣ger sweete of gold doh not constraine men mortall to attempt? F. 210 Failin of Record. FAiling of Record, is whē an action is brought a∣gainst one and the defen∣dant pleadeth any matter y• is of record in another sort, and doth auerre to proue it by Record, And the plain∣tife saith there is no such Recorde, whereupon the defendant hath day giuen him to bring in the record, at which day he faileth, or brought in such a one, as is no barr to this action, then he is saide to faile of his Record, and thereupon
the plaintife shall haue iudgement to recouer &c. Deede. DEede, is a writing sea∣led and deliuered to prooue and testifie of the a∣greement of y• partie whose déede it is, to the thing contained in the déede, as a deede of feoffement is a proofe of the liuerie of sei∣sin, for the lande passeth by the liuerie of seisin, but when the deede and the deliuerie are ioyned to∣gether that is a proofe of the liuerie, and that the feoffour is contented, that the feoffee shall haue the lande. And note that all deedes are either inden∣ted, whereof there bee two, three, or more parts, as the case requireth, of which the feoffour, gran∣tour, or lessour hath on, the feoffee, grauntee, or lessee another. And peraduen∣ture some other bodie also another &c. or else they are poll Deedes or single, and but one, which the feoffee, grauntee, or es∣e hath &c. And urie Deede consisteth▪ of three
principall pointes, (and if these three be not ioyned to∣gether, it is no perfect déed to binde the parties) name∣ly, writing, sealing, and de∣liuerie. The first point ts wri∣tinge, whereby is shew∣ed the parties names to the Deede, their dwelling places, their degrees, the thing granted, vpon what considerations, the estate limited, the time when it was graunted, and whe∣ther simply, or vpon condi∣tion with other such like circumstances. But whe∣ther the paryes vnto the Deede, writte in the ende their owne names, or set to their markes (as it is commonly vsed) it maketh no matter at all (as I thinke) for that it is not meant where it is said, that euerie deede ought to haue writing. The second point is sea∣ling, which is a further testimony o their consents to that contayned in the deed, as it appeareth by these wordes. In wit∣nesse wherof &c. or to such effecte alwayes put in the
later ende of deedes, with∣out which wordes the deede  insufficient▪ And because wee are about sea∣ling and signing of deedes it shall not be much a∣misse heere to shewe you, for antiquities sake, the maner of signing and sub∣scribing of edes, in our auncestors the Saxons times, a fashion different from that wee vse in these our dees, in this that they to their deedes sub∣cribed their names (com∣monly adding the signe of the Crosse,) nd n the end did set down a great num∣ber of witnesses, not vsing at that time any kynde of Seale. And wee t this day for more suretie, both subscrib our names (al∣though that be not ve∣rie necessary, s I haue aforesaide) and put to our Seales, and vse the helpe of testimonie besdes: That former fashion con∣tinued throughout▪ vntill the time of the Conquest by the Normans▪ whose maners by little and little at the length pualed amongst vs, for the first
sealed chrter in Englād is thought to be shal of King Edwarde the Con∣fessour to the Abbey of West. who being brought vp in Normany, brought into this Realme that and some other of their uy∣ses with him▪ And ater the comming of William the conqueror, the Nor∣mans lking their owne countrey customes (as na∣turally all nation do) re∣iected the maner that they found here, & retained their own, as Ingulp. the Abbot of Croiland, who came in with the conquest witnes∣seth saying: The Nor∣mans doe change the ma∣king of writinges which were wont to be firmed in England with crosses of golde & other holy signes, into the printing war, and they reect also the manner of the English writing. Howdt this was not done all at once, but it in∣creased and came forward by certaine steps and de∣grées, so that first and for a season the king onely, or a fewe other of the Nobilitie besides him vsed to seale.
Then the Noble men for the most part, and none other, which thing a man may see in the Historie of Battell Abbey, where Richard Lucy chiefe Iu∣stice of Englande, in the time of King Henrye the second, is reported to haue blamed a meane subiect, for that hee vsed a priuae Seale, when as that per∣tayned (as hee saide) to the king and Nobilite onely. At which time also (as I. Rosse noteth it) they vsed to ingraue in their seales, their owne pic∣tures and counterfaites, couered with a long coate ouer their Armors. But ofer this the Gentlemen of the better sort tooke vp the fashion, and because they were not all warri∣ors, they made Seales in∣grauen with their seuerall coates or shields of armes, for difference sake, as the same aucthour reporteth. At the length about the time of king Edwarde the thirde, Seales be∣came verie common, so that not onely such as bore
armes vsed to seale▪ but o∣ther men also fashioned to themselues signets of their owne deuise, some taking the letters of their owne names, some flowers, some knots and florishes, some birdes or beastes, and some other things, as wee nowe yet daily behold in vse. Some other manner of sealing besides these haue bin heard of among vs, as namely that of king Ed∣ward the third, by which he gaue to Norman the hunter: The hop and the hop towne, with all the bounds vpside downe, and in witnesse that it was sooth, he bit the waxe with his fore tooth. The like to this was shewed to mée by one of my friendes in a loose paper, but not verye aun∣ciently written, and there∣fore hee willed mee to es∣téeme of it as I thought good: It was as fol∣loweth. I willyam Kinge▪ giue to thée Powlen Royden, my hop and my hoplandes, with all the
boundes vp and downe▪ from heauen to earth, from earth to hell, for thee and thine to dwell, from u and mine, to thée & thine, for a Bowe and a broad arrow, when I come to hunt vpon yarrow. In witnesse that this is sooth, I bite this waxe with my tooth, in the presence of Magg, Maude, & Mar∣gerie, and my third sonne Henry. Also that of Alberic de Veer, conteining the do∣nation of Hatfied, to the which hee affixed a short black hafted knife, like vn∣to an olde halfpeny whit∣tle, in steede of a seale, with diuers such like. But some peraduen∣ture will thinke that these were receiued in common vse and custome, and that they were not rather the deuyfes and pleasures of a fewe singu∣ler persons, such as are no lesse deceiued, then they that déeme eury charter and writing that hath no seale annxed, to bee as auncient as the Conquest, wheras in déed
sealing was not commonly vsed till the time of King Edw. the thirde, as hath m alreadie said. The third point is deli∣uerie, which although t be set lat, is not the least, for after that a deede is writ∣ten and sealed, i i bee not deliuered, all the rest is to no purpose. And this deliuery ought to bee done▪ by the partie himselfe, or his sufficient warrant, and so it shall bind him, whosoeuer wrote or sealed the same, and by this aste acte the déede is made perfect, according to the intent and effect there∣of, and therefore in deedes the deliuerie is to bée pro∣ued &c. So thus you sée that writing and sealing with∣out deiuerie is nothing to purpose. That sealing and deliuerie where there is no writing worketh no∣thing, Nor writing and deliuerie without sealing also make no déede. And therefore they all ought iointly to concurre to make  perect déede, as is be∣fore said.
Farme or Ferme. FArme or Ferme is spe∣cially the chiefe msuage in a Village or Towne whereto belongeth great demeanes of all sorts, and hath béene vsed to bée let for terme of life, yéeres or at will. Also the rent that is re∣serued vpon such a lease or the like, is called farme or ferme. And farmor or fermor, is hée that occupieth the farme or ferme, or is lessée thereof. Also generally euery les∣sée, for life, yéeres, or at wil, although it be of neuer so small a cottage or house, is called farmor or fermor. And note, that they are called farmes, or fermes, of the Saxon worde Feor∣mian, which signifieth to féede, or yéelde▪ victuall. For in the auncient time, their reseruatiōs were as∣well (or for the more part) in victuals, as money, vn∣till at the laste, and that chiefly in the time of King Henry the first (by agree∣ment) the resruation of victuals, was tourned
into readie money and so hitherto hath continued a∣mongst most men. 213 Faux imprisonment. FAux imprisonment, is a writ, and it lieth where a man is arrested & restri∣ned from his libertie by an other against the order of the lawe, then he shall haue agaynst him this writte wherby he shal recouer da∣mages. Looke more therof before in the title arrest. Faux iudgmēt looke ther∣fore before in y• title error. 214 Fee farme. FEe farme, is when a te∣nant holdeth of his lord in fée simple, paying to him the value of halfe, or of the thirde or of the iii. part, or of other part of the lande, by the yéere. And he that holdeth by fée ferme, ought not to pay reliefe or do any other thing then is contei∣ned in the feoffment but fe∣altie, for that belongeth to all kind of tenures. 215 Fee simple. FEe simple, is when anie person holdeth landes or rent or other thing inhe∣riable to him and to his heires for euermore & these
words his heirs make the estate of inheritance, for if land be giuen to a man for euer yet hée hath but an e∣state for terme of life Also if tenant in fée simple die, his first sonne shall be his heire, but if he haue no son, then al his daughters, that he hath shalbe his heires, & euery one shall haue her part, by partition, but if he haue no sonne nor daugh∣ter then his next cosin col∣laterall of the whole blood shalbe his heire. Feoffment. FEoffement is wher a mā giueth landes, houses, or other corporall thinges which be heredtable to an other in fée simple, & there∣of deliuereth liuery & seisin & possession of the lād, that is a feoffment. Also if one make a gt in the taile, or a leas for terme of life▪ or of an other mans lie, it beho∣ueth also to giue luery and seisin, or els nothing shall passe by the grant. Feor and Feffee. FEfor is he that effeth or maketh a feofment to another of landes, or tene∣ments in fée simple. And
feoffée is he, who is infef∣ed, or to whom the feoff∣ment i so made. 218 Fealty. FEalty, is a seruice called in latin fidelitas, & shall be done in such maner, that is to say, the tenant shall holde his right hand vpon a booke, and shall say to his lord. I shalbe to you faith∣full & true, I shall bare to you faith for the lands and tenemēts, which I claime to holde of you, and truely shall o to you the customs and seruices that I ought to doe to you at the termes assigned, so helpe me God. And shall kisse the booke, but he shal not kneele as in doing homage▪ And therof looke after in the title ho∣mage. Also felie is inci∣dent to al maner tenures. 219 Felony. FElony, is a generall terme, which compre∣hendeth diuerse heynous offences, for which the of∣fndour ought to suffer dath, & loose their landes: And it séemeth y• they are called flonies, of the La∣tine word Fel, which is in English gall, infrēch Fiel:
or of the auncient English worde fell or fierce, or be∣cause that they are inten∣ded to be done with a cru∣ell, bitter, fell, fierce or mis∣chieuous mind. And some of them are, when a man without any colour of law, stealeth the goods of an o∣ther amounting to the va∣lue of xij. pence or more, that is Larceny: But if anie approcheth the per∣son of another in the high way, and robbeth him of his goods, although it be to the value but of one penie, it is felonie, & that is called robbery, and therefore he shalbe hanged. Fireboote. FIreboote, is necessarie wood to burne, which by the common lawe, lessée for yéeres, or for life, may take in his grounde, al∣though it bee not expressed in his lease: and although it be a lease by word onely without writing: But if he take more then is néed∣full, he shall be punished in wast. Fledwite. FLedwite, that is, to bée quite from amercements
whē an outlawed fugitiue cōmeth to the kings peace of his owne will, or beyng licenced. 222 Flemeswite. FLemeswite, that is, that you may haue the cat∣tell, or amercemēts of your man or fugitiue. 223 Fletwit. FLetwit (or Flitwit) that is to be quite from con∣tention and conuicts, and that you may haue plée thereof in your Court and the amerciamēts, for (flit) in English is Tensone in French. 224 Forstall. FOrstall, that is to bée quite of amercementes and cattels arrested with∣in your lande, and the a∣mercements thereof com∣ming. 225 Forstallers. FOrstaller is he that buy∣eth Corne, Cattell, or other marchandize what∣soeuer is salable, by the waye as it commeth to markets, faires, or such like places to bée solde to the intent that hee may sell the same againe at a more high & déere price in preiu∣dice
& hurt of the common wealth and people &c. The payne for such as are conuicte is for the first time imprisonment for two Moneths, and losse of the value of the thing sold. The second time impri∣sonment by the space of halfe a yéere, & shall lose the double value of the goods &c. The iij. time imprison∣ment during the Kings pleasure, and iudgement of the pillorie, and shall forfait all his goods. Sée the sta∣tute 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14. Franches Roiall. FRanches roiall, is where the Quéene graunts to one and his heires, that they shall be quite of toll, or such like. Free almes. FRee almes, is where in auncient times landes were giuen to an Abbot and his Couent, or to a Deane and the Chapiter, and to their successours, in pure and perpetual almes, without expressing anie seruice certaine, this is frankealmoigne, and such are bounde before God
to make Orasons & pray∣ers for the donour and his heires, and for that they do no fealtie, and if such that haue landes in frankeal∣moigne doe make no pray∣er nor deuine seruice for the soules of the donors, they shall not be compel∣led by the donours to do it, but for that they may com∣plaine to the Ordinarie, praying him that such ne∣gligence be no more after, and the Ordinarie of right ought to do it. But if an Abbot &c. hol∣deth landes of his Lorde for certeine deuine seruice to bée done, as to sing eue∣ry Friday a Masse, or doe some other thing, if such diuine seruice be not done, the Lorde may distrayne, and in such case the Abbot ought to doe fealtie to the Lorde, and therefore it is not said tenure in frank al∣moigne, but tenure by di∣uine seruice, for none can hold by franke almoigne, if any certaine seruice be expressed. 228 Franke fee. TO holde in Franke fée, is to holde in fée sim∣ple
landes pleadable at the common lawe, not in aun∣cient demesne. Formedone. FOrmedone, is a writ and it lyeth where the tenant in the taile enfeffeth a strā∣ger or is disseised, & dieth, the heire shall haue a writ of Formdon to recouer the land: but there be thrée ma∣ner of Formedones, One is in the discender, & that is in the case before saide. Also if one giue landes in the tayle, and for default of issue the remainder to an other in the taile, and that for default of such issue the land shall reuert to the do∣nour, if the first tenant in taile die without issue hée in the remainder shal hau a formdone in the remain∣der, but if the tennt in the taile die without issue, and he in the remainder also die without issue, then the do∣nour or his heires shall haue a Formedone in the reuerter. Fieri facias. FIeri facias, is a writ iu∣dicial, and it lieth where a man recouereth debte or dammages in the Kinges
Court, then he shall haue this writ to the shirife, cō∣manding him that he leuy the debt and dammages of the goods of him that hath lost, & it lieth always with∣in a yéere & a day, and after the yéere he must sue a scire facias, and if he be warned, & doth not come at the day &c. or if he come, & can say nothing, then he which re∣couereth shall haue a writ of fieri facias directed to the Sherife, that he make him haue executiō of iudgmēt. But if a man recouer a∣gainst a woman & she take a husband within the yere & the day, then he that shall recouer must haue a scire facias against the husband. So it is if an Abbot or Prior recouer & dieth his successor within the yéere shall haue scire facias. Sée thereof more in the title sci∣re facias, & title Execution. 231 Fine. FIne somtimes is takē for a summe of money which one is to pay to the King for any contempt or offence done by him: which fine e∣uery one that cōmitteth a∣ny trespas, or that he is cō∣uicted,
that he falsly denieth his owne déede, or dd anie thing in contempt of lawe, shal pay to the king: which is called fine to the King. Somtime a Fine is takē for a final agréemēt which is had between any persons concerning any land or rēt, or other thing wherof anie suit or writ is betwéen thē hāging in any court which may be diuers waies. One is whē one party reknow∣ledgeth y• to be the right of the other, as that y• he hath of the guft of him y• made that recognisance, which alwaies supposeth a feoffe∣mēt going before, & is cal∣led a fine executed. Or if he acknowledgeth that to bee the right of another omit∣ting these words (cōe ceo que il eit de sō done) which being a fine vpon acknow∣ledging of right onely, if it bee leuied to him which hath the freehold of y• land, is a Fine vpon a release. And if he that acknowled∣ged it, is seised, and hee to whom it is leuied hath not the fréehold of the land, thē it is called a fine executory, which he to whom the land
is acknowledged may exe∣cute by Entre or Scire fac. And sometime such a fine sur conuss de droit only is to make a surrēder: Ther∣in is rehearsed that the re∣conusor hath an estate for life, & the other a reuersion. And somtime it is taken to passe a reuersion, where a particular estate is reci∣ted to be in another, & that the reconusor will that the other shal haue y• reuersion, or that y• land shal remaine to another, after the parti∣cular estate spent. And somtime he to whō y• right is acknowledged, as that that he hath of the gift of the reconusor, shall yeeld the land, or a rent out therof to y• reconusor. And somtime for the whole fee: Somtime for the particu∣lar estate with remainder or remainders ouer: and sometime with reseruatiō of rents with distresse and graunt thereof ouer by the said fine. And it is called a fine be∣cause thereby the suite is ended and if it be recorded with proclamation it bar∣reth strangers.
Free mariage. FRee mariage, is when a man seised of landes in fée simple, giueth it to an other man, and to his wife (who is the daughter, Sister or otherwise of kinne to the donour) in free mariage, by vertue of which words they haue an estate in speciall taile, and shall holde the lande of the donour quite of al ma∣ner of seruices vntill the fourthe degree be past ac∣compting themselues in the first degree, except fe∣altie, which they shall doe because it is incident to all tenures sauing frée almes. And such gifte may bee made as well after ma∣riage solempnized as be∣fore. And a man may giue landes to his Sonne in frée mariage, as well as to his Daughter by the opinō of Master Fitzher∣bert in his writ of Cham∣perty H. But it appeareth other∣wise in Master Littl. & in Mast. Brook titulo Frāk∣marriage Placito decimo. And so it is holden clere in Graies Inne in Lēt, An.
1576. 18. Eliz. by the wor∣shipfull Master Rhodes, then reader there. 233 Freehold. FReeholde, is an Estate that a man hath in lands or tenements, or profite to bee taken in fee sim∣ple, taile, for terme of his owne life, or for terme of anothers life in dower or by the curtesie of Englād. And vnder that, there is o freeholde, for hee that hath estate for yeeres or holdeth at wil hath no frée∣holde, but they are called chattels. And of Freeholds there are two sortes, that is to say, freeholde indeede, and fréehold in lawe. Freeholde in deede, is when a man hath entred into lands or tenementes, and is seised thereof real∣lie, actuallie, and in deede: As if the father seised of landes or tenements in fee simple dieth, and his sonne entreth into the same, as heire to his father, then he hath a fréeholde in déede by his entrie. Freehold in Lawe, is when lands or tenemetnes
are discended to a man, and hee may enter into them when he will, but hath not yet made his entrie indeed, as in the case aforesaid, if the father being seised of lands in fée simple die sei∣sed, and they discend to his sonne, but the sonne hath not yet entred into them indeede, nowe before his entrie he hath a fréehold in lawe. Freshsuit. FReshsuit, is when a man is robbed, and the partie so robbed, followeth the fe∣lon immediatly, and taketh him with the manner, or otherwise, and then brin∣geth an appeale against him, and doth conuince him of the felonie by verdict, which thing being inqui∣red of for the Quéene and founde, the partie robbed shall haue restitution of his goods againe. Also it may bee said, that the partie made freshsuite, although hee take not the theefe presentlie, but that it be halfe a yeere, or a yeere after the robberie done, before he bee taken, if so bee that the partie
robbed doe what lyeth in him, by diligent inquirie & search to take him, yea al∣though he be taken by som other bodie, yet this shalbe said fresh suit. And so fresh suit is whē the Lorde commeth to di∣straine for rent or seruice,  the owner of the beastes doth make rescous, & dri∣neth them into others ground that is not holden of the lord, and the Lorde followeth presently & ta∣keth them, this is called fresh suit. And so in other like cases. G. 235 Gager de deliue∣rance. GAger de deliuerance, is where one sueth a re∣pleuine of goods taken, but hee hath not the deli∣uerie of the goods, and the other auoweth, and the plaintife sheweth that the defendant is yet possessed of the goods &c. and pray∣eth that the defendant may gage the deliuerance, then he shall put in suertie or pledges for the deliue∣rance,
& a writ shal go forth to the Shirife for to rede∣liuer the goods &c. But if a man claime propertie, he shal not gage deliuerance. Also if hee saye that the beasts be dead in ye pound, he shall not gage &c. Also a man shall neuer gage the deliuerance be∣fore that they be at issue, or demurrer in the lawe, as it is said. Garrantie of Charters. GArrantie of charters, is a writ, & it lieth where any déed is made yt cōpre∣hēdeth a clause of warran∣ntie, yt is to say, dedi or cō∣cessi, or this word warran∣tizabo, & if ye tenant be im∣pleaded by a stranger, if it be in assise or such action where he may not vouch to warrantie, then hee shall haue this writ against his feffor or his heire, & if ye lād be recouered against him▪ hee shall recouer as much land in value against him that made the warrantie. But this writ ought to be sued hanging ye first writ against him, or else he hath lost his aduantage.
Also vpon a warrātie in the law, as vpon homage auncestrel, or vpon rent re∣serued vpō a lease for term of life, or a gift in the taile, a man shall haue a writ of warrantie of charters, but not vpon eschange. 237 Garrantie. GArrantie, is in two ma∣ners, that is to saye, garrantie lineall and gar∣rantie collaterall. Garrantie lineal is wher a man seised in fée, maketh a feffement by his deede to another, and byndeth him & his heires to warrantie, and hath issue a sonne and dyeth, and the warrantie discendeth to his sonne, that is lineall warrantie, for y• that if no déede with warrantie had bin made, then the right of the lands should haue discended to ye sonne, & he shall conuey the discent from the father to the sonne. But if the te∣nant in ye taile discontinue the taile, & hath issue & dy∣eth, & the vncle of the issue releaseth to the disconti∣nuee with warrantie &c. & dyeth without issue, that
is a collaterall warrantie to the issue in the taile, for that, that the warran∣tie discendeth vpon the issue, the which may not conuey him to the taile by meane of his vncle. And in euery case where a mā de∣mandeth lands in fee taile by writ of Formedon, if any of the issue in the taile which hath possession, or which hath not possession maketh a warrantie, and he that sueth the writte of Formedon may by possibi∣lity by matter that may be in that déede conuey to him title by force of the gift by him that made the warrantie &c. that is then a lineall warrantie, and by such a lineall warran∣tie, the issue in the taile shal not be barred, except that he haue assets to him discended: But if he may not by no possibilitie that may be conuey to him ti∣tle by force of ye gift by him that made the warrantie, then that is a collaterall warrantie, and by such a collateral warrantie, the issue in the tail shalbe bar∣red without any assets.
And the cause that such a collaterall warrantie is a barre to the issu in the tail, is for that, that al warran∣ties before the statute of Glocester, which discen∣ded to them which he heirs to them yt made the war∣ranties were barres to the same heires to demaund a∣ny lands, except the war∣ranties that began by dis∣seisin, & for that, that the said statute hath ordeined that the warrantie of the father shalbee no barre to his sonne for the landes which come of the heritage of the mother, nor the war∣rantie of the mother shalbe no barre to the sonne for the landes which come of the heritage of the father, & the statute hath not made nor ordayned remedie a∣gainst the warrantie that is collaterall, to the issue in the taile, & therefore the warrantie that is colla∣terall to the issue in the taile, is yet in his force, and shalbe a barre to the issue in the taile, as it was be∣fore the statute. Also it behoueth yt all warrāties whereby any heire shalbee
barred, that the warrantie discend by ye course of ye cō∣mon law, to him which is heire to him that made the warrantie, or else it shalbee no barre, for if the tenaunt in the taile, of lands in bo∣row English, where the yongest sonne shall inheri∣rite by the custome discon∣tinueth y• taile, & hath issue ii. sonnes, & y• vncle relea∣seth to y• discōtinuee with warrantie & dyeth, and the yonger sonne bringeth a Formdon, yet he shall not be barred by such warrāty causa qua supra. Also if a∣ny man make any deede with warrantie whereby his heire should be barred, and after he that made the warrantie bee attaint of felony, then his heire shall not bee barred by such warranty, for y• that such warrantie might not dis∣cend vpon him, for y• that the bloud is corrupt. Also if the sonne purchase lāds, & after let the lands to his father for terme of yeres, & y• father by his déed enfef∣feth a stranger, & byndeth him and his heires to war∣rantie, & the father dyeth,
whereby the warrāty des∣cendeth to ye sonne, yet this warranty shall not barre the sonne, but ye sonne may wel enter notwithstāding his warranty, for that that this warranty began by disseisin when the father made the feoffemēt which was a disseisin to the son, and as it is saide of the fa∣ther, so it may be saide of e∣uery other ancestour. And the same lawe is, if the auncestour be tenaunt by Elegit, or by statute mar∣chant, and make a feoffe∣ment with warrantie, such warranties shalbe no barres, because they begin by disseisin. 238 Garrantie. GArrantie, is when one is bounde to another which hath lande, to war∣rant ye land to him, which may begin two waies▪s▪ by deede of lawe, As if one and his auncestours hath held land of another and his auncestours time out of mynde by homage, which is called Homage Auncestrel: Or by déede of y• partie which graunteth
by déede or fine to the tenāt of the land to warrant it to him: vpon which warran∣tie if the tenant be implea∣ded by him which ought to warrant, or his heires, the tenant shall barre the demandant by pleading of the warrantie againste him, which is called Re∣butter: Or if he be implea∣ded by another in an actiō, wherein he may vouch▪ he shall ▪vouch him which warranted, or his heires, & if the plaintife recouer, the tenant shall recouer in value against ye vouchée. Garde. WArde▪ is when an in∣fant whose auncestor helde by knights seruice, is in the warde or kéeping of the Lorde, of whome those landes were holden: And if the tenaunt holde of diuers Lordes diuers landes, the Lord of whom the lande is holden by prioritie, that is to saye, by the more elder tenure, shall haue the wardship of the infant: but if one te∣nure be as olde as the o∣ther, then hee that first
happeth to haue the ward of the bodie shall keepe it: But in that case euery Lord shall haue the warde of the lande that is holden of him. But if the tenaunt hold any land of the Q. in chiefe, then she by her Pre∣rogatiue shal haue ye ward of the bodie, & of all ye lande that is holden of her, & of euery other Lord. Also there bee diuers writs of warde, one is a writ of right of warde, and that lyeth where the te∣nant dyeth, his heire with∣in age, & a stranger entreth into the land, and hapneth to haue the warde of the bodie of the infant. A writ of eiectment of warde lyeth where a man is put out of the warde of the land without the bodie of the infant. A writ of rauishment of ward lyeth where the bo∣dy is taken from him only and not the land. 140 Wardeine. WArdeine, or gardeine most properly is hee that hath the wardship or keeping of an heire, and of
his lād holden by knights seruice, or of one of them to his owne vse, during the nona of the heire, & within that time hath the bstowing of the body of the heire, in marriage at his pleasure, without dis∣paragement. And of wardens there be two sorts, namely gar∣deine in right, & gardeine in deede. Gardeine in right is he that by reason of his seig∣niory is seised of the ward∣ship or keeping of the land, and of the heire, during the nonage of the heire. Gardein in déed, is wher the lord after his seisin, as aforesaide, graunteth by deede or without deede, the wardship of the lande, or of the heire, or of both to an other, by force of which graunt the grauntée is in possession, then is the grauntee called gardeine in deede. And this gardein in déed may graunt the heire to an other also, but that other is not properly called gar∣deine in déede for that is the grantee of the Garden
in right only, but the gar∣den in socage hath the pro∣fit onely to the vse of the heire, vntill he accomplish the age of xiiii. yeeres, and must yéeld therefore an ac∣count to the heire. See more hereof Lit. lib. 2. cap. 4. & 5. and Stamf. vpon the statute of Prerogatiue, cap. 1. 2. & 6. 241 Garnishment. GArnishment is, if an ac∣tion of detinue of char∣ters bee brought against one, & the defendant sayth, that the charters were de∣liuered to him by the plain∣tife & by another vpon cer∣taine conditions & prayeth that the other may be war∣ned to plede with y• plain∣tife if the conditions be performed or no, & there∣upon a writ of Scire facias shal go foorth against him, & that is called Garnish∣ment, & the other when he commeth shall plede with the plaintife, and that is called enterpleder. 242 Gauelet. GAuelet, is a speciall and auncient kinde of Ces∣sauit
vsed in Kent where the custome of Gauelkind continueth: whereby the tenaunt shall forfaite his landes and tenements, to the Lord of whom they are holden if he withdraw frō s Lord his due rents & seruices, after this maner as followeth. If any tenaunt in Ga∣uelkind, withhold his rent and his seruices of the te∣nement which hée hol∣deth of his Lorde, let the Lorde seeke by the award of his Court from thrée wéekes to thrée weekes, to find some distres vpon the tenements vntill the iiij. Court, alwaies with wit∣nesses. And if within that tune, he can find no distres in that tenement▪ whereby he may haue Iustice of his tenant, Then at the iiij. Court let it bée awarded, that he shall take that te∣nement into his hande, in the name of a distresse, as if it were an oxe or a cowe, and let him kéepe it a yéere and a daye in his hande without manuringe it: within which terme if the tenaunt come and pay his
arrerages, and make rea∣sonable amenos for the withholding, then let him haue an enioy his tene∣ment as his auncestors, and hee before held it: and if hee doe not come before the yéere and the day past, then let the Lord goe to the next Countie Court with his witnesses of his owne Court, & pronounce there this processe to haue fur∣ther witnesses, and by the awade of his Court, (af∣ter the County Court hol∣den) he shall enter and ma∣nure in those landes and tenements as in his owne. And if the tenant come af∣terward, and will rehaue his tenements, and holde them as he did before, let him make agréement with the Lord, according as it is aunciently said. Hath hée not since any thing giuen, nor hath hee not since anie thing paied: Then lette him pay v. li. for his were r before hée become tenaunt or holder againe. Sée hereof 10. H. 3. Fitz Cessauit 0. and sta∣tute 10. E. 2. of Gauelet in London, In the Col∣lection
of statutes London 2. matter much tending to this purpose, that by this worde Gauelet the Lord shall haue the land for the ceasing of the tenant. And sée W. 2. cap. 21. which gi∣ueth Cessauit. There be some copies that haue the first Verse thus written. Nisith yelde, and nisith gelde. And others thus. Nighesith yeld, & nighe∣sith geld. But these differ not in signification, other copies haue it after this sort. Nigondsith seld, and ni∣gondsith geld. That is to say, let him ix. times pay, and ix. times repay. Gauelkinde. GAuelkinde is a custome annexed, and goyng with landes in Kent cal∣led Gauelkinde lands hol∣den by ancient Socage te∣nure. And is thought by the skilfull in Antiquities, to be called Gauelkinde of Gyue al kin, that is to say, to all the kindred in one lyne according as it is
vsed among the Germās, from whom wee English∣men, and chiefly of Kent come. Or els it is called Gauelkinde of Gyue all kind, that is to say, to all y• male children, for kind in Dutch signifieth a male childe. And diuers other like coniectures are made by thē of the name (Gauel∣kind) which I omit of pur∣pose for shortnesse sake. The most vsuall custo∣mes of them are, That the land is diuidable betwéene the heires males, and that the heire at the age of fif∣teene yéeres may giue and sell his lande, and shall in∣herite although his father bée attainted and hanged for felonie, and his wife shalbe indowed of halfe the land, whereof her husband died seysed, and the hus∣band shalbe tenant by the curtesie of y• halfe although he haue no issue by his wife, but the estate of the husband & wife ceaseth by their second mariage. And diuers other customes are vsed in Kent of landes in Gauelkind, for which sée y• Perambulation of Kent,
made by M. Lambert. For which cause the residue I will omit as vnnecessa∣rie for this booke, and in∣treated of largely in the said Perambulation. Gelde. GElde. y• is to be quite of seruile customes which were wont to be giuen, and are yet giuen, as hornegeld and such like, Graund Cape. GRaund Cape, look there∣fore after in y• title Pe∣tit Cape. Graund Seriantie. GRaunde Seriantie is, where a man holdeth of the king certaine lande by the seruice of carying his banner or launce, or to lead his hoste, or to be his car∣uer, or butler at his Co∣ronation, and that is most honorable seruice and most worthie that a tenant may doe, and for that it is cal∣led graund serianty. But petit seriantie is when one holdeth of the King, pay∣ing to him yéerely a bow, a sworde, a speare, and such like, and that is but Socage in effecte, but a man cannot hold in grand
Serieantie or by petit ser∣ieantie but of the King. Al∣so if a tenant by grand ser∣ieantie dieth his heire be∣ing of full age the heire shal pay to the King for reliefe the value of the lands ouer the charges that he paieth to the king by grand Ser∣ieantie: but hee that hol∣deth by Escuage shal paye for his reliefe but C. s. Also those that bee in the Marches of Scot∣lande, that holdeth of the king by Cornage, that is to blow an horne when the Scottes enter into Eng∣land, are tenants in grand Serieantie. Also where a man hol∣deth of the Kinge for to finde a man in his warres within the Realme, that is called graund Serie∣auntie, for that, that it is done by a Mans badic: And if the tenaunt cannot finde a man to doe it, then hee is bounde to doe it him selfe. And he that holdeth by graunde Serieauntie holdeth by Knightes ser∣uice, and the King shall haue, warde, marriage and reliefe, but not of them
that holdeth by petit serie∣antie, but the king shal not haue of them that holde by graund serieantie escuage, except that they holde by escuage. So they that hold by graund Serieantie or Escuage hold by Knights seruice. But one may hold by graund Serieantie and not by escuage, and by Es∣cuage and not by graund Serieantie: And the Knights seruice alwayes draweth to him warde, mariage and reliefe. Grithbrech. GRithbrech, that is the kings peace broken, be∣cause (Grith) in English is pax in Latin. H Habere facias seisinam. HAbere facias seisinam, is a writte iudicial, and it lyeth where one hath re∣couered certaine landes in the Kings court, then hee shall haue that writte di∣rected to the Shirife, com∣maunding him to giue him seisin of that lande, and it shal not be returnable.
249 Hangvvit. HAngvvit, that is to bee quite of a théefe or felon hanged without iudgment, or escaped out of your cu∣stodie. 250 Hariot. HAriot, is in two sortes, the one Hariot custome, the other Hariot seruice. Hariot seruice (some saye) is alwaies expressed in a mans graunt or déede that hee holdeth by such seruice to paye Hariot at the time of his death, and this hariot is payable af∣ter the death of the tenant in fee simple. Hariot custome, is wher Hariots haue béene paide time out of minde by cu∣stome. And this may bee after the death of tenaunt for life &c. but to speake thereof generally. Hariot is the best beast (whether it be Horse, Oxe or Cowe) that the tenaunt had at y• time of his death. And the Lorde may either seise, or take a distresse for it, whether it bee Hariot seruice, or Hariot cu∣stome, to the Lordes vse of whome the tenaunt helde
by his Bailife or other officer belōging to his ma∣nor. But of right, the Lord nor his officer shoulde not take Hariot before it bee presented at the next court holden after the tenaunt is dead, and that such a beast is due to the Lorde for his hariot. Haybote or hedge∣bote. HAybote or hedgbote, is necessary stuffe to make and amende hedges, which the lessee for yeeres, or for life of common right may take vpon the grounde, to him leased, although it bee not expressed in his lease, and although it bee a lease by wordes wtout writing. Haybote also may be ta∣ken for necessary stuffe to make rakes, forkes, and such like instrumentes wherewith men vse in summer to tedde and make hay. And so a Lessee for yeeres tooke it, and it was allowed him by his Les∣sour, the rather as I suppose for that such in∣strumentes are commonly made of slender vnder wood, which by the cōmon
lawe the lssée for yeres may cutte and take as is afore∣said. 252 Hidage. Hidage, that is to be quit, if the kinge shal taxe al the land by hides. Note that a hide of land is a whole ploughlande. And this kinde of taxng by hides was much vsed in olde time, as well for prouision of Armour, as paymentes of Money, and that chieflie in king Ethel∣dreds daies (a king in this Countrey before the Con∣quest) who in the yeere of Christ 1006. when as the Danes landed at Sand∣wich in Kent, taxed al his land by hides thus, That euerie three hundred and tenne hides of lande, should find one ship furnished, and euery eight hides shoulde find one Iack and one sal∣let, for the defence of the Realme. 253 Hotchpot. HOtchpot, is a medling, or mixing together, and a partition of Landes giuen in frankmarriage,
with other landes in fée simple discended, As for example, a man seised of 30. acres of lande in fee simple hath issue 2. daugh∣ters, and giueth with one of his daughters to a man that marrieth her ten a∣cres of the same lande in frankemariage, and dyeth seised of the other twentie acres: Nowe if shee that is thus married will haue anie part of the twentie a∣cres wherof her father di∣ed seised: She must put her landes giuen in frank∣marriage in Hotchpot, that is to say, shee must refuse to take the sole pro∣fits of the lande giuen in frankemarriage, and suf∣fer the land to bee commixt and mingled together with the other lande wherof her Father died seised, so that an equall diuision maye bee made of the whole betwéene her and her sister: and thus for her tenne acres shée shall haue fiftéene, else her Sis∣ter will haue the twentie acres of which their father died seised.
254 Homage. HOmage, is a seruice which shall bee made in such manner, that is to say, the tenaunt in fee sim∣ple or fee taile that holdeth by homage shall knele vp∣on both his knees vngir∣ded, and the Lorde shall sit and shal holde the handes of his tenant betweene his handes, and the tenaunt shall saye. I become your man from this daye for∣warde of life and member and of earthlie honour, and to you shall be faithfull and true, and shall beare to you faith for the landes that I claime to holde of you, sa∣uing that faith that I owe to our Lorde the king, and then the Lorde so sitting shall kisse him. But how fealtie shal bee done looke before in fealtie. And the stewarde of the Lord may take fealtie but not homage. 255 Homage auncestrel. HOmage auncestrell, is where a man and his ancestours of time out of mind, did hold their land of their lord by homage. And if such Lord hath receiued
homage, he is bound to ac∣quite the tenant against al other Lords aboue him of euery manner seruice. And if the tenant hath done ho∣mage to his Lorde, and be impleded and voucheth the Lorde to warrantie, the Lord is bound to war∣rant him, and if the tenant loose, hee shall recouer in value against the Lord so much of the landes as hee had at y• time of y• voucher or any time after. Also if a man that holdeth his lande by homage auncestrell ali∣en the lande in fee, then the alienée shall doe homage to his Lorde, but he shall not hold by homage auncestrel, for that the continuance of the tenauncie in the blood of the first tenaunt is dis∣continued. Homesoken. HOmesoken, (or hame∣soken) that is to bee quit of amerciaments for entring into houses vio∣lently and without licence, and contrarie to the peace of the King. And that you holde plea of such trespasse done in your Court and in your land.
257 Homicide or Man∣slaughter. HOmicide or manslaugh∣ter, is the killing of a man feloniously without malice forethought. It is also defined thus, Homi∣cide is the killing of a man by a man, and if such kil∣ling be done by a dog, oxe, or other thing, it is not pro∣perly called homicide: for it is called homicide of a mā, and to kill as the killing of a man. 258 Hornegelde. HOrnegelde, that is to be quit of a certaine cu∣stome exacted by tallage thorowe all the lande, as of whatsoeuer horne beast. 259 Housebote. HOusebote, is necessarie timber, that the lessee for yeres, or for life, of com∣mon right may take vpon the ground, to repare the houses vpon y• same groūd to him leased, although it be not expressed in the lease, & although it bee a lease by words without deed. But if he take more thē is need∣ful, hee may be punished by n action of waste.
Hundred. HVndredes, were deui∣sed by Alfred the king, after that hee had deuided the whole realme into cer∣taine partes or Sections, which of the Saxon word Scynan signifying to cuite, hee termed Shires, or (as wee yet speake) Shares, and Portions. These Shires hee also deuided into smaller parts, where∣of some were called Laths of the worde Ielapian, which is to assemble toge∣ther, others Tythings, so named, because there were in eache of them to the number of tenne persons, whereof eache one was Suertie and pledge for others good obaring: o∣thers hundreds, because they contained iurisdicti∣on ouer an hundred men or pledges dwelling per∣aduenture in two or thrée, or more Parishes, Bo∣roughs, or Townes, lying and adioyning neuertheles somewhat neere together, in which hee appointed administration of Iustice to bee exercised seuerally amonge them of the same
hundred, and not that one shoulde runne out disor∣derly into an others hun∣dred, lath, or tithing, wherein hée dwelleth not. These hundredes conti∣nue to this daie in force, although not altogether to the same purpose, where∣unto at the first they were appoynted, yet still verie needefull both in tyme of peace for good order of go∣uernement diuers waes and also in warre for cer∣teintie of leuying of men: as els for the more readie collections of paymentes granted in Parliament to the Kings and Quéenes of this Realme. 261 Hundredum. HVndredum, that is to bee quite of money or customes to bée done to the gouernours and hundre∣dors. I. Ideot. IDeot, is hée that is a foole naturally from his birthe, and knoweth not how to accompt or number twentie pence, nor cannot name his father or mother,
nor of what age himselfe is, or such like easie & com∣mon matters: so that it appeareth he hath no ma∣ner of vnderstanding of reason, nor gouernement of himselfe, what is for his profite or disprofit &c. But if he haue so much know∣ledge that hee can read or learne to read by instructi∣on and information of o∣thers, or can measure an Ell of cloth, or name the dayes in the weeke, or be∣get a child, sonne or daugh∣ter, or such like, whereby it may appeare that hee hath some light of reason: then such a one is no Ideot naturally. Idemptitate no∣minis. IDemptitate nominis, is a writ, and it lyeth where a writ of debt, couenant, or accompt, or such other writ is brought against a man, and another that hath the same name as the defendant hath is takē for him, then he shall haue this writ, by the which the Shirife shall make in∣quirie before the Iustice
assigned in the same coun∣tie, if he be the same person or not▪ & if he bee not found to be y• partie, then he shall go without day in peace. 264 Ieofaile. IEofaile, is when the par∣ties to any site in plea∣ding haue procéeded so far that they haue ioyned is∣sue, which shalbe tryed or is tryed by a Iury or en∣quest. And this pleading or issue is so badly pleaded or ioyned, that it wilbe er∣ror if they procéede: Then some of the saide parties may by their Counsel shew it to the Court as well after verdict giuen and before iudgement, as be∣fore the Iury be charged. The shewing of which defectes before the Iurie charged was often when the Iury came into the Court to trie the issu: then the Counsell which will shew it, shal say, This en∣quest ye ought not to take; And if it bee after verdict, then he may say, to iudge∣ment you ought not to go. And because such many de¦laies were in suits, diuers
statutes are made to re∣dresse them, aswell in the time of king H. 8. in the 32 yere ca. 30. as in the time of the Queene that nowe is: wherof a man may saye as the Ciuilians say, that although Constantine the Emperor commanded the formes of the law to be cut off, yet the daily vse of plea∣ding doth séeme againe to recall them, or rather, some of them increase as y• heds of Hidra. Vnlawfull assembly. VNlawfull assemblie, is where people assemble themselues together to do some vnlawfull thing a∣gainst the peace, although that they execute not their purpose in déede. Imparlance. IMparlance, is when an action of debt, trespas, or such like is brought a∣gainst a man, & after that the plainlife hath counted or declared, the defendant prayeth the Court, that hee may haue time to put in his aunswere to
another daye in the same terme, or in the next terme following, this stay of aunswere is called im∣parlance. 267 Imprisonment. IMprisonment, is no other thing, but the restraint of a mans libertie, whe∣ther it be in the open field or in the stockes, or cage in the streates, or in a mans owne house aswell as in the common gaole. And in all these places the partie so restrayned is said to be a prisoner, solong as hee hath not his libertie fréely to goe at all times whether he will, without Baile, Mainprise, or o∣ther aucthoritie. 268 Infangthefe. INfangthefe, that is, that theeues taken within your demesne or ee con∣uicted of theftes, shall bee iudged in your Court. 269 Information. INformation, for y• Quéen is that, which for a common person s called a
declaration, and is not al∣wayes done directly by the Queene, or her Atturney, but rather by some other man, who sueth or infor∣meth as well for himselfe vpon the breach of some penall lawe or Statute, wherein a penaltie is gi∣uen to the partie that will sue for the same, but no action of debt to reouer it, then it must be had by information. Ioyntenants. IOintenants be wher two men come to any lands & tenements by one ioynt ti∣tle: As if a man giue landes to two men and to their heires. But Tenants in com∣mon bee where two men haue landes by seuerall ti∣tles, or by feoffement to ii. to haue & to holde the one halfe to one & his heires, & the other half to another and his heires, in all these cases none of them know∣eth his seuerall, as it shall be said after. And note wel, if there be two or thrée ioyntenants, and one hath issue & dyeth,
then hee and those ioynte∣naunts that ouerline shall haue the whole by the sur∣uiuor. But if two iointenants make partitō betwéen thē by deed by agreement, then they be seuerall tenants. But if one ioyntenaunt graunt that that belongeth to him to a straunger, then the other ioyntenaunt and the stranger be tenants in common. And though two tenants in cōmon be seised throgh∣lie and of the whole, and none knoweth his seueral, yet if one die the other shall not haue the whole by the suruiuor, but his heir shall haue the halfe. And so if there bee thrée Iointenaunts, and one of them maketh feoffement of his part to another, and the feoffee dieth, then his heire shall haue the third parte, and the other two bee ioyn∣tenants as they were, be∣cause that they two be sey∣sed by one ioint title. Also if landes bee giuen to the Baron and to his wife, and the husband ali∣eneth and dyeth, the wife
shal recouer the whole: but if they were iointenants before the couerture, then in such case shée shall reco∣uer but the halfe. Also if land be giuen to the husband & to his wife, and a third person, if the thirde person graunt that that belongeth to him, the one halfe passeth by this grant, for that, that the ba∣ron & his wife be but one person in the lawe, and in this case they haue no∣thing in right but ye halfe. Also if two Iointenants bée of landes in a Towne which is borough Eng∣lish, where lande is deuis∣able, and one by his testa∣ment deuiseth that, that belongeth to him to a strā∣ger and dieth, this deuise is void, and the other shall haue the whole by surui∣nor, for that the deuise may not take effecte till after the death of the deuisor, and immediate after the death of the deuisor, the right commeth to the other ioyntenant suruiuor, the which claymeth nothing by the deuisor but in his own right by the suruinor:
But otherwise it is of Parceners seised of lands deuisable, causa qua supra. 271 Indicauit. INdicauit is a writ, and li∣eth where debate is be∣twéene ij. Clerkes in court Christian of one Church, or part of a Church, for dismes which amounteth at the least to the value of the iiij part of the Church, & for that that the patron of the Clerke of the defen∣dant shall léese his aduow∣son if the clerk of the plain∣tife shall recouer it, he shall haue a writ directed to the clerke of the plaintife, or to the officers of the Court christian, them commaun∣ding to cease their plée, vn∣till it is discust in the Kings court to whom the aduowson belongeth, And the writte shalbe betwéene fower persons, two shalbe patrons, and two shalbe clerkes. But this writ is not returnable: but if they cease not their suit, he shall haue an Attachment. 272 Iointure. IOinture is an estate and assurance made to a wo∣mā in consideration of ma∣riage
for terme of her life▪ or otherwise, as is men∣tioned in the statute 27. H. 8. cap. 10. whether it be be∣fore or after the mariage. And if it be after the mar∣riage, then shee may at her libertie after the death of her husband refuse to take or haue the landes so assu∣red for her iointure, & de∣maund her dower at the common law: But if it be made before mariage, then shée may not refuse such ioynture, nor haue dower according to the common law, vnlesse that when shée bringeth her writte of do∣wer, the defendant pledeth such a plée that will not barre her of her dower, thē she shalbe endowed: As if he say in barre, that her husband was not seysed of such estate whereof shée might be endowed, or anie such plée, & doth not shewe that shée hath a ioynture made &c. and therefore de∣mādeth iudgement of that action, or iudgement if shée shalbe also endowed, or anie such lyke plée &c. And this was the opinion of the right worshipfull Master
Brograue, at his Reading in Grayes Inne in sum∣mer An. 1567. 18. El. vpō a branch of the statute made An. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. concer∣ning iointures & dowers. And by him of those things whereof a woman may bée endowed, shée may haue iointure as of mines, vesturam terre, woodes, Townes, Iles, Mea∣dowes, and such like. Also of an aduow on, of a re∣uersion depending vppon an estate for life, of a windmill, a high Cham∣ber, a rectorie and such o∣ther, and they are called Tenementes. Also of a villen, for hée is an here∣ditament. And of all these profite may come to the woman. But of those thinges whereof no pro∣fite will come, but rather a charge, a iointure cannot be made. L. 283 Theft. THeft, is a wrongfull takyng awaie of an o∣ther mans goods, but not from his person, with a minte to steale them, a∣gaynst
his will whose goods they were. And thefie is in two sorts, the one so called sim∣ply, and the other pety or little theft. The first is where the thing stolē excéedeth ye va∣lue of xij. d. & that is felony. The other (which is called little or petite theft) is where the thing stollen doeth not exceede the va∣lue of xij. d. and that is no felony. Lastage. LAstage, that is to be quit of a certaine custome ex∣acted in faires & markets for carrying of thinges where a man will. Leases. LEases bée graunts or de∣mises by one which hath any estate in any heredita∣ments of those heredita∣ments to on other for a les∣ser time, and they be in di∣uers maners, that is to say for terme of life, for terme of yéeres, for terme of an o∣thers life, and at will. Also a lease of lande is as good without déede as with déede. But in a lease for terme
of life, it behoueth to giue liuerte and seisin vpon the lande, or else nothing shall passe by the grant, because that they bée called free∣holdes. Also a lease of a common or rent, may not bee good without déede. But of a Parsonage, it is good without déede, for that that the Church which is the principall, may passe well ynough without déede, and so the dismes & offeringes which bée as accessarie to the Church. But dismes & offringes by thē slfe may not be let without déed as it is said. 286 Lessor and Lessee. LEssor, is hée that lesseth landes or tenements to an other for terme of life, yéeres, or at will and he to whom the leafe is made, is called lessée. 287 Leuant & Couchant. LEuant and Couchant is saide, whch the beastes or Cattell of a Straunger are come into an other mans grounde, and there haue remained a certaine good space of time.
Ley. LEy, is when an action of debt is brought agaynst one vpō some secret iudge∣ment or contract had be∣tweene the parties with∣out especialty shewed, or other matter of Record: as in an action of Detinue for some goods or chattels lent or left with the defen∣dant, then the defendant may wage his lawe, that is to say, to sweare vpon a booke and certaine persons with him that he detey∣neth not ye goods or oweth nothing to the plaintife in manner and forme as hée hath declared. And it is allowed onely in cases of secrecie where the plaintife cannot proue the surmise of his suit by a∣ny déed or open acte: or the defendant might discharge it priuily betwéene them without any writing of ac∣quitāce or publike act, and therfore in an actiō of debt vpon a leas for terme of yéeres or vpon arrerages of accōpt before Auditors assigned a man shall not wage his Law. But whē one shal wage
his law he shal bring with him vj. viij. or xij. of his neighbours as the Court shall assigne him, to sweare with him, much like vnto the othe which they make which are vsed in the com∣mon lawe to purge others of any crime laide against them, which are called cō∣purgators. Note that the making of the othe is called wa∣ger of lawe, And when it is accomplished, then is it called, the doing of your law. And also if the Sherife in any action returne that hée hath summoned the defendaunt to appeare in Courte at anie daye, to aunswere the plaintife, at whiche daye hee maketh default, procese shall bee awarded agaynst him to come & saue or excuse his default: which is asmuch to say, as to excuse the de∣ley, or otherwise to loose the thing demanded, And then the def. commeth and will sweare that hee was not summoned, which is cal∣led waging of law, Thē he ought to doe it at the day
assigned with twelue o∣thers, And in dooing of his lawe hée ought vppon his the affirme directly the contrary of that which is imputed to him▪ but the others shall not say, but that they thinke that hée faith the trueth. Libertate probanda. LIbertate probanda, looke for that in the title de Natiuo habendo. Liuery of seisin. LIuerie of seisin, is a cere∣monie vsed in conuey∣ance of lands or tenements where an estate in fee sim∣ple, fée taile, or a fréeholde shall passe: and it is a te∣stimoniall of the willing departinge by him: who makes the liuery from the thing whereof liuerie is made: And the receiuing of the liuery, is a willing ac∣ceptance by the other par∣tie, of all that whereof the other hath dismissed him∣selfe: And was inuented as an open and notorious thing, by meanes where∣of the common people might haue knowledge of the passing or alteration of estates from man to
man, that thereby they might bée the better able to trie in whom the right and possession of landes and tenementes were, if they should bée impanel∣led in Iuries, or other∣wise haue to do concerning the same. The common maner of deliuerie of eysin is after this sorte e: If it bée in the open field where is no building or house, then one that can reade taketh the writing in his hande, if the estate shall passe by déede, and declareth to the standers by the cause of their méeting there to∣gether &c. and then open∣ly readeth the déede, or declare the effect thereof in English, and after that it is Sealed, the partie who is to depart from the grounde, taketh the deede in his handes together with a clodde of the earth▪ and a twigge or bowe if any bée there, and all this hée deliuereth to the other partie in the name of pos∣session or seysin; accor∣ding to the forme and effect of the déede which before
them was there reād or de∣clared, But if there bee  dwelling house or building vpon the land, then this is done there at the doore of the same; none being left at that time within the house, and the partie de∣liuereth all the aforesaide together with the ring of the doore in the name of seisin or possession, and he that receiueth the liuerie entreth in first alone and shutteth too the doore, and presently openeth it again, and letteth them in &c. If it be of a house whereto is no lande or grounde, the liuerie is made and posses∣sion taken by the deliuerie of the ring of the doore and déede onely. And where it is without déede either of landes or tenementes, there the partie declareth by worde of mouth before witnesse, the estate that he meaneth to departe with, and then deliuereth seisin or possession in maner as is beforesaid: and o the land or tenement doth passe as well where there is no déede as by déede, & that by force of the liuery of seisin:
It was agreed in Grayes Inne by the right wor∣shipfull Master Snagge, at his reading there in summer Anno 1574. that if a feoffor deliuer the deed in viewe of the lande, in name of seisin that it is good, because that he hath a possession in himself. But otherwise it is of an At∣turney, for hee must goe to the land, and take possessi∣on himselfe, before that hee can giue possession to ano∣ther, according to y• words of his warrant &c. And where liuerie of seisin is by viewe, if the feoffée doe not enter after &c. nothing posseth, for he ought to en∣ter indéede. 291 Lotherwite. LOtherwite, that is that you may take amendes of him which doth defile your bondwoman without your licence. M. 292 Mahim or Maime. MAhim, is where by the wrongfull cte of ano∣ther, any member is hurt or token away, whereby the partie so hurte is made
vnperfecte to fight: As if a bone bee taken out of the heade: or a bone be broken in anie other parte of the body: or a foote, or hande, or finger, or ioynte of a foote, or any member bee cutte: or by some wounde the sinewes bee made to shrinke, or other eber, or the fingers made cr∣ked, or if anie eye be putte out, or the foreteeth bro∣ken, or anie other▪ thing hurte in a mans bodie by meanes whereof hee is made the lese bte ide∣fend himselfe or offend his enemie. But the cutting off of an eare, or nose, or brea∣king of the hinder teeth, or such lik, is no ahim▪ because it is rather a de∣formitie of the bodie▪ then diminishing of strength; and that is commale tryed by beholding the partie by the Iustices. And if the Iustices stand in doubt whether the hurt be a mam or not, they vse, nd will of their great discretion take the helpe and opinion of sone skilful Surgeon▪ to consider
thereof, before they deter∣mine vpon the case. 293 Mainprise▪ MAinprise, is whē a men is arrested by Capias, then the Iudges may de∣liuer his bodie to certaine men for to keepe and to bring him before them, at a certaine daie, and these be called mainpnors, and if the partie appear not at y• day assigned, the main pernors shalbe amer. 254 Mannour▪ MAnnour, is a thinge compounde of diuers things, as of a house, land arrable, Pasture, Mea∣dowe, wood, rent▪ ∣son, court Baron▪ and such like make a Manr. And this ought to be by long continuance of  to the cōtrarso whereof  me∣more cannot discerne: for at this days a Mannour cannot bee made, because a Courte Baron cannot now be made, and a Man∣nour cannot b without a Court Baron, and suters or fréeholders, two at the leaste, for if all the free∣holdes except one echeat
to the Lorde, or if hee pur∣chase all except one, there his manor is gone, for that it cannot e a manor with∣out a court Baron (as is aforesaid.) And  Courte Baron cannot bee holden but before suters, and not before ne suter, & therfore where but one fréeholde or fréeholderis▪ there cannot bee a manor properly, al∣though in common spéech it may be called a manor. Manumission. MAnumission, is in two sortes, the one is a ma∣numission expressed, the o∣ther a manumission impli∣ed or secrete. Manumission expressed is when the Lord maketh a déede to his villeine to infranchise him by this word (manumittere) which is as much to say, as to le one go out of another mās handes or power. The manner of Manu∣mitting or infranchising in olde time moste vsually was thus: The Lord (in presence of his neigh∣bours) tooke the bondman by the head saying, I will
that this man be frée, and therwith shoued them for∣ward out of his handes, & by this hee was free with∣out more ado. Manumission plyed without this warde (Ma∣numittere) is when the Lorde maketh▪ an obliga∣tion to his villeine to paye him money at a certaine day, or sueth him where hee might enter without suit, or graunteth vnto his villeine an annuitie, or leaseth lande to him by déede for yeres, or for life, and in diuers such like cases, the villeine thereby is made free. 296 Maximes. MAximes be the founda∣tions of the lawe, and the conclusions of reason, and are causes efficient, and certaine uniuersall propositions so sure and perfect, that they may not be at any time impeached or impugned, but ought alwayes to bee obserued & holden as strong prin∣ciples and auctorities of them selues, although
they cannot bee proued by force, of argument or de∣monstrations logicall, but are knowen by induction by the way of sence and memoris: As for exam∣ple, it is a Maxime that i a mā haue is two sonnes by diuers women, and the one of them purchase landes in fee and dyeth without: issue, the other brother shall neuer bee his heire &. Also it is another max∣ime, that lands shall discēd from the father to y• sonne, but not from the sonne to the father, for that is an ascention &c. And diuers like there be. Maynour. MAynour, is when a theefe hath stollen, and is followed with hue and criē and taken, hauing that sound about him which he stole, that is called y• may∣nour▪ And s w common∣ly vs to ye▪ when wee finde  doing of an vn∣lawfull ac▪ that we tooke him with the mayour, or manner.
298 Maintenance. MAintenance, is where any man giueth or de∣liuereth to another that is plaintife or defendant in a∣ny action, any summe of money or other thing for to maintaine his plee, or els maketh extreme labour for him when he hath nothing therewith to doe, then the partie grieued shal haue a∣gainst him a writ called a writ of Maintenance. 299 Mesne. MEsne, is where the ow∣ner of landes or tene∣ments holdeth of one by certaine seruice, and hee holdeth them of an other by like or other seruices, then hee which holdeth the lands is called tenant per∣auaile, and he of whome it is held is called Mesne, & he of whome the Mesne holdeth, is called cheefe lord. And in this case if the lorde aboue distraineth the tenant for the seruice of the Mesne, which ought to ac∣quit him to the lord aboue, then the tenant shal haue a writ against the Mesne, which is called a writ of
Mesne, & if he come not to acquit the tenant, then the mesne shall lose the seruice of the tenant & shalbe fore∣iudged of his seigniory, & the tenant shalbee tenant immediate to the chiefe lord, & shal do the same ser∣uice & suits as the Mesne did to the Lord. Misprision. MIsprision, is when one knoweth that another hath committed treason or felony, and will not disco∣uer him to the Queene or to the Councell, or to any Magistrate, but doth con∣ceae the same. Diuers o∣ther offences be called mis∣prision, as when a Chap∣leine had fixed an old seale of a Patent to a new Pa∣tent of Non residence, and this was holden to bee Misprision of Treason onely, and no counterfay∣tinge of the Queenes scale. Also if a man know mo∣ney to bee counterfait, and bring the same out of Ire∣lande hyther into Eng∣land, and vtter it in pay∣ment, this is but Mispri∣sion
of Treason, and no Treason, and so it is in diuers such like cases. And in all cases of mis∣prision of Treason, y• par∣tie offendour shall forfaite his goods for euer, and the profits of his landes for terme of his life, & his bo∣dy to prison at the Quéens pleasure. And for Misprision of felony or trespasse, the of∣fender shalbee cōmitted to prison vntil he haue found sureties or pledges for his fine, which shalbee assessed by the discretion of the Iustices before whome he was conuict. And note that in euery Treason or felony is in∣cluded Misprisiō, & where any hath committed trea∣son or felony, the Queene may cause the same to bee indicted & arraigned but of Misprision only if she wil. See more hereof Stam∣ford his first booke. 301 Shewing of deedes or Recordes. SHewing of deedes or Re∣cordes, is, as if for ex∣ample, an action of debt
be broght against one vpō an obligation by one or by executors &c. there after that the plaintife hath de∣clared, hee ought to shewe his obligation, & the execu∣tor y• testamēt to y• Court, & so it is of Recorde. And the diuersitie be∣twéene shewing of déedes or Recordes, & hearing of déeds or Records, is thus: he that pleades the deedes or record, or declares vpon it, to him it doth appertain to shewe the same. And the other against whome such deede or record is pleaded or declared, & is thereby to be charged, may demaund hearing of the same deede or record, which his aduer∣satie bringeth or pleadeth against him. Mortdauncester. MOrtdauncester, Looke therefore in the title Cosinage. Monstrauerunt. MOnstrauerunt, is a writ and it lyeth for the te∣nāts in auncien demesne, and is directed vnto the
lorde, him commaunding that he distrain not his te∣nant for to do other seruice that he ought not to doe, and they may haue this writ directed to the shirife that he suffer not the lorde to distraine the saide te∣nants for to doe other ser∣uice. Also if the tenants cannot bee in quiet they may haue an attachment against the lorde to ap∣peare before the Iustice, & all the names of the tenāts shall bee put in that writ, though but one of them be greeued onely. Also if any landes in auncient demesne be in va∣riance betweene the te∣nants, then the tenant so greeued shall haue against the other a writ which is called of Right close after the custome of the manor, and that shall bee alway brought in the lords court and there he shall declare in the nature of what writ hee will, as his case lyeth, and this writ shall not be remoued but for a great cause or no power of the Court. Also if the Lorde in
another place out of aunci∣ent demesne distraine his tenant to do other seruice then he ought, he shal haue a writ of right, called Ne iniuste vexes, and it is a writ of right patent which shalbe tryed by battell or Grand assise. Mortgage or Mor∣gage. MOrtgage or Morgage is when a man maketh a feoffement to another on such condition, that if the feoffour paye to the feoffee at a certaine daye xl. li. of money, that then the feoffour may reenter &c. in this case the feoffee is called tenaunt in Mor∣gage. And as a man may make a feoffement in fee in Morgage, so hee may make a gyft in taile, or a lease for terme of life, or for terme of yeeres in morgage. And it seemeth that the cause why it is called Mortgage, is for that it standeth in doubt, whether the feoffour will pay the money at the daye appoynted or not, and if hee faile to paye, then the
lande which hee layde in gage vppon condition of payment of the money, is gone from him for euer & so dead to him vpon condi∣tion: but if he pay the mo∣ney, then is the gage dead as to the tenant, that is to say, the feoffee, and for this cause it is called in Latine Mortuum vadium, as Ma∣ster Littleton sayth, or ra∣ther mortuum vas, as I thinke. Also if a feoffement bee made in morgage vpon cō∣dition that if the feoffour pay such a summe at such a day &c. And the feoffour dye before the day, then if the heire of the feoffour pay the same summe at the same day to the feoffee and the feoffee refuseth it, then the heire of the feoffour may enter, but in such a case, if there bee no day of payment expressed, then such tender of the heire is voyde, for that that when the feoffour dyeth, the time of tender is past, or other∣wise the heires of the feof∣for shall haue time of the tender for euer, which shal be inconuenient, that one
shall haue a fee simple to him and to his heires which shalbee defesible al∣wayes at the pleasure and wil of others, but in the first case the time of tender was not expired by ye death of the feoffor. Moderata miseri∣cordia. MOderata misericordia, is a writ, and it lyeth where a man is amerced in court Baron or county more then he ought to be, then he shal haue this writ directed to the shirif if it be in the county or to the bai∣life: fit be in the court ba∣ron comanding them that he amerce him not, but ha∣uing regard to the quanti∣tie of the trespas, & if they do not vpon this writ, then shal go forth against them, a sicut alias, and Causam nobis significes & after that an attachement. Mortmaine. MOrtmaine, is where lāds be giuē to a house of religion, or to another company which be corpo∣rate by the kings graunt,
then the land is come into mortmaine, that is to saye in English, a dead hand, & then the king or the Lorde of whome the lande is hol¦den, may enter as it ap∣peareth by the Statute de Religiosis, Therefore sée the statute. Also if one make a feoffement vpon trust to certain persons to the vse of a house of Reli∣gion, or to the vse of any guyld or fraternitie corpo∣rate, then it shalbee saide mortmaine, and then hee shal run in the same paine, as it appeareth by the sta∣tute Anno. 15. R. 2. 307 Mulier. MVlier, is a word vsed in our law, but how aptly I cannot well learn: For according to the proper si∣gnification, Mulier is a de∣filed woman, like as it is vsed by Vlpianus in a cer∣taine place after this sort. If I thought that I had bought a Virgin when she was a defyled woman, the bargaine was not good. Hereby you may sée, that Mulier is a woman y• hath had the company of a man.
But to leaue the right sig∣nification, Mulier is ta∣ken in our law for one that is lawfully begotten and borne: and is alwaies vsed in comparison with a ba∣stard, onely to shew a diffe∣rence betwéene them, as thus for example. A man hath a sonne of a woman before marriage, that is called a bastarde, and vn∣lawfull. And after he mar∣rieth, the Mother of the bastard, and they haue an∣other sonne, this seconde sonne is called Mulier, that is to say lawfull, and shall bée heire to his father: but that other cannot bée heire to anie man, because it is not knowen nor certeine in the iudgemēt of the law, who was his father, and for that cause is said to bée no mās sonne, or the sonne of the people, and so with∣out father, according to these old verses. To whom the people fa∣ther is, to him is father none and all. To whom the people fa∣ther is, well fatherlesse we may him call. And alwayes you shall
finde this addition to them (Bastard eldest, & mulier yongest) when they be cō∣pared together. 308 Murder. MVrder, is a wilfull kil∣ling of a man vpon ma∣lice forethought, and sée∣meth to come of the Sax∣on worde Mordren which so signifieth: And Mordri∣dus, is the murdered euen vntill this day amōg them in Saxonie, from whence we haue most of our words as hath bin often said. Or it may be deriued of Mort and dire, as mors dira: Sée Stamford Plees of the Co∣ron lib. 1. N. 309 Natiuo habendo. NAtiuo habendo, is a writ, and it lieth where the villein or niefe of the Lorde is gone from him, then the Lorde shall haue this writte directed to the Shirife that he make his Lord to haue his villeine or niefewith al his goods. Also in this writ more vil∣leins or niefes may not be demaunded then twayne, but as many villeynes or
niefes as will, iointly may bring a writ De libertate probanda. Also if a villeyne or niefe bring his writ De libertate probanda, before that the Lorde bring his writ, then the villeine pl' shall be in peace till the comming of the Iustice, or else his writ shall not helpe him. Also if a villeine haue tarried in auncien demesne one yeere and a day with∣out claime of the Lord, thē he cannot seise him in the said fraunchise. Ne admittas. NE admittas is a writte directed to the Bishop at the suite of one which is patron of any Church, and hée doubteth that the Bishop will collate one his Clerke, or admit an o∣ther Clerke presented by an other man to the same benefice: then hée that doubteth it shall haue this writ to forbid the Shirife to collate or admit any to that Church. Non omittas propter libertatem. NOn omittas propter li∣bertatem is a writ, and
it lieth where the Shirife returneth vpon a writ to him directed, that hee hath sent to the Baylife of such a franchise which hath re∣turne of writs, and he hath not serued the writ, then the plaintife shal haue this writ directed to the Shi∣rife, that he himselfe enter into the franchise and exe∣cute the kings writ. Also the Shirife shall warne the Baylife that hée be before the Iustice at the day contayned in the writte, and if hée come not and excuse himselfe, then all the writtes iudi∣cials which shall passe out of the Kinges court du∣ring the same plee, shalbe writs De non admittas &c. and the Shirife shal make execution of them hanging that plée. 312 Negatiua preg∣nans. NEgatiua pregnans, is when an action or in∣formation, or such lyke is brought against one, & the defendant pleadeth in barre of the action, or o∣therwise, a negatiue plée, which is not so speciall
an aunswere to the action, but that it includeth also an affirmatiue: As for ex∣ample: If in a writte of Entre in casu prouiso, brought by him in the re∣uersion vpon alienation by the tenant for life, suppo∣sing that hée hath aliened in fée (which is a forfai∣ture of his estate) and the tenant to the writte say∣eth that hee hath not alie∣ned in fee, this is a nega∣tiue, wherein is inclu∣ded an affirmatiue: for al∣though it bée true, that he hath not aliened in fée, yet it may bée that hée hath made an estate in tayle (which is also a forfai∣ture) and then the entrie of him in the reuersion is lawfull &c. Also in a Quare impedit the Quéene makes title to present to a Prebend, for that the temporalties of the Bishopricke wee in her handes by the death of w. late Bishop▪ &c. The defendant saith that it was not voyde béeing the Temporalties in the Quéenes handes by the death of w. this is a
Negatiue preignans, for it may be in y• Quéens hāds otherwise then by the death of w. and it sufficeth the Quéen if it be in her hāds by any meanes &c. So it is where an In∣formation was brought in the Eschequer against I. S. for that he bought wooll betwene shering time and the Assumptiō such a yere of I. N. The defendant saith that he did not buy a∣nie of I. N. as it is allead∣ged &c. this is called a Ne∣gatiue preignans, for it hee bought it o anie other, yet he is culpable for the buy∣ing. 313 Ne iniuste vexes. NE iniuste vexes, Looke therefore before in the title Monstrauerunt. 314 Niefe. NIefe, is a woman that is bounde, or a villeine woman, but if she mar∣rie a free man, shee is thereby made frée, be∣cause that she and her hus∣bande are but one person in lawe, and shee ought to bee of the same nature and condition in lawe to all in∣tents that her husbande is.
But her husbande is frée to all intents without anie condition in law or other∣wise: and so by consequens the wife ought to be, and is free according to the na∣ture of her free husbande, & then if she were once frée & cleerely discharged of bon∣dage to al intents, shee can not be niefe after without especiall acte done by her, as diuorce, or confession in court of record, and that is in fauour of liberty, and therfore a frée woman shall not bee bound by taking of a villeine to her husbande: But their issue shalbe vil∣leins as their father was, which is contrary to the Ciuil lawe, for there it is said, the birth followeth the bellie. Bondage or Villenage had beginning among the Hebrues, and his originall proceeding of Chanaan the Sonne of Cham, who because that he had mocked his Father Noe to scorne, lying dissolutelie when hee was drunk, was punished in his Son Chanaan with penaltie of bondage.
315 Nihil dicit. NIhil dicit, is when an action is brought a∣gainst a man, and the defē∣dant appeares, the plain∣tif declares, and the defen∣daunt will not answere, or pledes to the action, & doth not maintaine his plee, but makes default, nowe vpon this default, he shalbe con∣demned, because hee saith nothing. 316 Nisi prius. NIsi prius, is a writ iudi∣ciall, and it lieth when an inquest is empanelled and returned before the Iustices in the bench, then the plaintife or defendante maie haue this writte di∣rected to the Shirife, him commanding that he cause the Countrey to come be∣fore the Iustices in the same countie, at their com∣ming to be determined, and that for the easing of the enquest. 317 Nomination, NOmination, is where one may in right of his Mannour or otherwise, nominate and appointe a worthy Clerke or men to a Parsonage, Vicarage,
or such like spirituall pro∣motion. And note that this nomination ought to bee to another then the ordinarie, which other shall present him to the Ordinarie. Nonabilitie. NOnabilitie, is where an actiō is brought against one, and the defendāt saith that the plaintife is not a∣ble to sue aie action, and demandeth iudgment if he shalbe answered. There are sixe causes of nonabili∣tie in the plaintife, as if hee bee an outlawe, or an alien borne, but that disability is in actions reals and mixt onely, and not in actions personals, except hee be an alien enemie, or condemp∣ned in premunire, or profes∣sed into an Abbey, Priorie or Fryarie, or excommu∣nicate, or a villeine, and sueth his Lorde, but this last is no plee for ano∣ther that is not Lord to the villaine. See more hereof in Littleton. lib. 2. cap. 11. Bare, or naked Contract. BAre Contract, or naked promise, is where a
man bargaineth or selleth his lands or goods, or pro∣miseth to giue to one mo∣ney, or a horse, or to build a house, or doe such a thing at such a day, and there is no recompence appointed to him for the doing there∣of. As if one say to another, I sell or giue to you all my landes or goods. And there is nothing appoin∣ted, assigned, or agreed vpon what the other shall giue or paie for it, so that there is not one thing for another, this is a naked Contract, and voide in lawe, and for not per∣formance thereof no acti∣on lyeth, for of a naked Contract commeth no ac∣tion. 320 Nusaunce. NVsaunce, is where any man leuieth any wal or stoppeth any water, or doth anie thing vpon his owne grounde to the vnlawfull hurt and annoyance of his neighbour, he that is grie∣ued may haue therof an as∣sise of Nusance. Also if he that make the Nusance a∣lien ye land to another, thē this writ shallbee brought
against them both as it ap∣peareth by ye statute west∣minster 2. chap 24. Nuper obiit. NVper obiit, is a writte and it lyeth where one hath manie heires, that is to say, manie Daughters or manie Sones, if it be in gauell kinde in Kent, and dyeth seised, and one heire entreth into all the lande, then the other that bee hol∣den out, shall haue this writte against the coheire that is in. But a writ de Rationabili parte lyeth in such case where the aunce∣stor was once seised, and died not seised of the pos∣session, but in reuersion. O. Oredelfe. ORedelfe, is where one claiymes to haue the ore that is founde in his soile or ground. Outfangthiefe. OVtfangthiefe, that is, that theeues or felons of your lande, or fee, out of your land or fée taken with felony or stealing, shall be brought back to your court and there iudged.
324 Oweltie. OWeltie, is when there is Lorde, Mesne, and tenaunt, and the tenaunt holdeth of the Mesne by the same seruices, that the mesne holdeth ouer of the Lord aboue him. As if the tenāt hold of the mesne by homage, fealty, and xx. s. of rent yerely, and the mes∣ne holdeth ouer of the Lord aboue by homage, fealtie, and xx. shillings rent also, this is called Oweltie of seruices. 325 Hearing of recordes and deedes &c. HEaring of recordes and deedes, is as for exam∣ple, an action of debte bee brought against a man vp∣on an obligation, and the defendant appeares to the action, and thē praieth that he may hear the obligation wherewith the plaintife chargeth him. So it is when as exe∣cutors bring an action of debt, and the defendant de∣maundeth to heare the te∣stament, vpon this de∣maunde it shall be read vn∣to the defendant. But if it be in another terme or after
that the defendant hath imparled, then he shall not heare it. And so asis said of deeds, is to be vnderstood of Records that are alleaged against him. Oier & Terminer. OIer & Terminer, is a writ called in latin de Audiendo & terminando, & it lyeth where anie great or sodaine insurrection is made or any other sodaine trespasse which requireth hastie reformation, thē the King shall directe a Com∣mission to certain men and Iustices to heare and to determine the same. Note that euerie Iusti∣ces of Assise haue also one Commission of Oier and determiner, directed to thē and diuers other inhabi∣tantes within the shires, whereunto their circuite extendeth, whereof ech one of the Iustices of Assise are of the Quorum, for the hearing and determining of diuers offences, which may hppen in their circu∣ite, which without yt com∣mission they could not.
P. Pape. PApe, is an ancient name falsly arrrogated, or proudly vsurped by the Bishop of the onely Citie of Rome in Italie, and is commonly Englished the Pope, a name truely much frequented in our auncient yeere Bookes, specially in the times of those kinges, who too much abandoning their Imperiall authori∣tie, and abasing them∣selues farre beneathe their estate, were not ashamed to suffer an alien and out∣landish Bishoppe, that dwelt aboue fiftéene hun∣dred miles from them, to bee Soueraign ouer them in their owne dominions, and to take from them not onely the disposition of certaine small trifles of none accompt, but al∣so the nomination of Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Deanes, Prouosts, appro∣priation of benefices, pre∣sentations to Parsonages, Vicarages, and general∣lie of all Spirituall per∣sons to their preferments
sometimes by lapse, and sometimes by prouision or otherwise, whereby the Kinges Princelie Prero∣gatiue was verie much a∣bridged within their own Realmes. For the repressi∣on wherof diuers statutes were made, but no sufficiēt remedy vntil King Henrie the 8. did cast off their yoke for him & his subiects. Per que seruitia. LOoke therefore after∣warde in the title, Quid iuris clamat. Parceners. PArceners, are according to the course of the com∣mon lawe, and according to the custome. Parceners according to the common lawe are where an inheri∣tor hath no issue but daugh¦ters, and dyeth, and the te∣nements discende to the daughters, thē they be cal∣led Parceners, and are but as one heir, The same law is, if he haue not any issue, and that his sisters should be his heirs. But if a man hath but one daughter, she is not called parcener, but shee is called the daughter and heir. And if there be no
daughters nor sisters, the lande shall discend to the aunts, and they bee called parceners. Also whē lands discend to diuers parce∣ners, they may make par∣tition between themselues by agréement, but if any of them will not make par∣tition, then the other or the others shal haue a writ de Participatione facienda di∣rect to the shirife, who shall make partition betweene them by the oth of xii. law∣full men of the bailiwike. Also partitiō by agréement may be made by the law, as∣wel by word without deed, as by déed. And if they bee of ful age the partition shal remaine for euer, and shall not at any time be defeated. But if the lands be to them in the tail, and though that they are concluded during their liues, yet the issue of him which hath the lesser part in value, may disagrée from the partition, and en∣ter and occupie in common with the other parte. And also if the husbandes of the parceners make partition, when the husbande dyeth, the wife may disagrée
from the partition. Also if the parcener which is within age make partitiō, when shee commeth to full age she may disagree. But shee must take good heede when she cometh to her sui age that she take not al the profits to her own vse of ye landes which were to her allotted, for then she agrée∣eth to the partition, & ye age shall alway extend to the age of xxi. yeares. Also if there bee diuers Parceners that haue made partition betwéene them, & one of their partes be recouered by lawfull title, then shee shal compell the other to make a newe partition. Also they are parceners accordinge to custome, where a man is scises of landes in Gauelkinde, as in Kent & in other places franchised, and hath issue diuers sonnes & die, then the sonnes are parceners by custome. Partition. PArtition, is a deuiding of lands discended by y• common Lawe, or by cu∣stome
among coheires or parceners where there be ii. at the least, whether they be sonnes, daughters, sisters, auntes, or other∣wise of kinne to the aunce∣stor from whome the lande discended to them. And this partition is made foure wayes for the most parte, whereof three are at pleasure and by agreemēt among them, the fourth is by compul∣sion. One partition by agrée∣ment is when they them¦selues deuide the lande e∣qually into so many parts, as there bee of them co∣parceners, and eache to choose one share or parte, the eldest first, and so the one after another, as they be of age, except that the eldest by consent made the partition, then the choyse belongeth to the next, and so to the eldest last, ac∣cording as it is saide: who so maketh the parti∣tion, the other must haue the choyse. Another partition by agréement is when they choose certaine of their
friends to make diuision for them. The thirde partition by agréement is by drawing of lottes thus: First, to de∣uide the land into so many partes as there be parce∣ners, then to writ euery part seuerally in a little scroll or peece of paper or parchment, and to put the same scrols vp close into a hat, cap, or other such like thing, and then each parce∣ner, one after another as they be of age, to draw out thereof one péece or scroll wherein is written a part of the land which by this drawing is now seuerally allotted vnto them in fee simple. The fourth partition which is by compulsion, is when one or some of the coparceners woulde haue partition, and other some wil not agrée thereto, then they that so woulde haue partition may bring a writ De partitione facienda a∣gainst the others that woulde not make partiti∣on, by vertue wherof they shall bee compelled to de∣part &c.
In Kent where the lands are of Gauelkinde nature, we call at this day our partition Shifting, euen the verie same worde that the Saxons vsed, namely Shiftan, which sig∣nifieth to make partition betweene coheires, and to assigne to each of them their portion, In Latine it is called Herciscere. Partition also may be made by Ioyntenants or tenants in comon by their assent, by deede betweene them, or by writ by the statutes of 31. H. 8. cap. 1. and 32. H. 8. cap. 32. 331 Parties. PArties to a fine or deede are those which are na∣med in deedes or fines as parties to it, as those that leuie the same fine, & also they to whome the fine is leuyed. And they that make a déede of feoffement and they to whome it is made are called parties to the déede, and so in any o∣ther like cases. Note that i an Inden∣ture be made betwéene ii.
as parties thereto in the beginning, & in the déede one of them graunteth or letteth a thing to another, and one that is not named in the beginning, he is not partie to the déede, nor shall get nothing thereby. Patron. PAtron is hee that hath the aduowson of a par∣sonage, vicarage, frée chap∣pel, or such like spirituall promotiō belonging to his mannor, or otherwise in grosse, and thereby may or ought to giue the same be∣nefice, or present thereto, when and as often as it falleth voide. And this being patron or patronage had beginning for the most part by one of these three wayes, namely ei∣ther by reason of the foun∣dation, for that the Pa∣tron or his auncestors, or those from whome hee claimes were founders or buylders of the Church, or by reason of dotation, for that they did endow or giue landes to the same for maintenance thereof,
or els by reason of y• groūd, because y• Church was set or builded vpō their soile or ground: And many times by reason of them all three. 333 Perquisites. PErquisites are aduanta∣ges and profites that come to a mannor by ca∣sualtie, and not yeerely, as Escheates, Hariots, Reliefes, waifes, straies, Forfaitures, Amercia∣ments in courtes, wards, Mariages, goodes and landes purchased by vil∣leynes of the same man∣nor, fines of copyholdes, & diuers such like thinges that are not certaine but happen by chance, some∣times more often then at other times. Sée Perkins fol. 20. and. 21. 334 Perambulatione facienda. PErambulatione facienda is a writte, and it lieth where two Lordships lie one nigh another, and some encrochment is made by long time, then by assent of both Lordes the Shi∣rife shall take with him the parties and the neigh∣bours, and shall make
perambulation & shal make the boundes as they were before, but if a lord incroch vpon another, & he will not make perambulation, then the Lord so grieued shall haue a writ against the o∣ther, which is called de ra∣tionabilibus diuisis. Petit Cape. PEtit Cape is a writ, and it lieth when any action reall, that is to say of plée of land is brought, and the tenant appeareth, and af∣terward maketh default, then this writ of Petite cape shall go foorth to seise the landes into the Kings handes, but if hée appeare not, but maketh default at the first summons, then a graund cape shal go forth and for such default the te∣nant shall lose the land, but if he wage his law of non summons, he shall saue his default, and then hée may plede with the demādant. And in greūd cape the te∣nant shalbe summoned to answere to the default, and farder to the demaundant, but in petit cape he shalbe summoned to answere to the default onely, & not to
the demaundant, and it is called Petit cape, for that that there is lesse in this writ. 336 Petit serieantie. TO hold by petite serie∣antie is as if a man hold of the king landes or tene∣mentes, yéelding to him a knife, a buckler, an arrow, a bowe without string, or other like seruice at the wil of the first feoffor, and there belongeth not warde, mar∣riage ne reliefe. And marke well that a mā may not holde by graunde nor petite serieantie, but of the King. 337 Plaintife. PLaintife is he that sueth or complaineth in an as∣sise or in an action perso∣nall, as in an action of debt, trespasse, disceit, detinue, and such other. 338 Pleading. PLeadings, bée called all the sayings of the par∣ties to suits after the coūt or declaration, namely that which is contayned in the barre, replication, and reioinder, and not that contayned in the count it selfe, & therefore defaultes
in the matter of the count are not comprised within mispleading, or insuffici∣ent pleading, nor are reme∣died by the statute of Ieo∣failes, 32. H. 8. But onely that mispleading, or insuf∣ficient pleading, commit∣ted in the barre, replicatiō, & reioinder, are there pro∣uided for. Post disseisin. POst disseisin, Looke for that before in the title Assise. Possession. POssession, is saide two wayes, eyther actuall possession, or possession in lawe. Actuall possession, is when a man entreth in déede into landes or tene∣mentes to him discended, or otherwise. Possession in lawe is when landes or tenementes are dis∣cended to a man, and hée hath not as yet really, ac∣tually, and in déede entred into them. And it is called possession in lawe, because that in the ee, and consi∣deration of the lawe, hée is déemed to be in possessi∣on, for asmuch as he is te∣nant
to euerie mans acti∣on that wil sue cencerning the same landes, or tene∣mentes. 341 Poundes. POundes are in ij. sortes, the one pounds open, the other pounds close. Pounde open, is euerie place wherein a distresse is put, whether it be common pounde such as are in eue∣rie Towne or Lordship, or whether it bee backeside, court, yard, pasture, or else whatsoeuer, whether the owner of the distresse may come to giue them meate & drinke without offence for their being there, or his comming thither. Pound close, is such a place, where the owner of the distresse may not come to giue them meate and drinke, without offence, as in a close house, or whatso∣euer els place. 342 Preamble. PReamble taketh his name of the preposition (Pre) before, and the verbe (Ambulo) to goe, so ioy∣ned together, they make a compound verbe of the first coniugation (Pream∣bulo)
to goe before, & here∣of the first parte or begin∣ning of an act, is called the preamble of the acte, which preamble is a key to open the mindes of the makers of the acte, and the mis∣chiefes that they intend to remedie by the same, as for example the statute made at westminster the first, the 37. chap. which giueth an attaint, the preamble of which is thus. Foras∣much as certaine people of the realme, doubt very lit∣tle to giue false verdicts or othes, which they ought not to doe, whereby many people are disherited and lose their right, it is proui∣ded &c. Premunire. PRemunire, is a writ and it lieth where any man sueth any other in the spi∣rituall court, for any thing that is determinable in the Kings court, and that is ordeined by certaine sta∣tutes, and great punish∣ment therefore ordeined, as it appeareth by the same statutes, viz. that he shalbe out of the Kings protecti∣on, & that he be put in pri∣son
without baile or main∣prise till that he haue made fine at the Kings will, and that his landes and goods shalbe forfait if he come not within ij. monethes. Also y• prouisors, procurators, atturneis, executors, no∣taries & mainteinors, shall be punished in the same maner, therefore looke the statutes. Also some men say, that if a clarke sue an other man in the court of Rome for a thing spiritu∣all where hee may haue re∣medie within the realme in the court of his Ordinarie that hee shalbe within the case of the statute. And vpon diuers other offences is imposed by Statutes lately made the penaltie that they incurre which are attainted in pre∣munire. As by 13. Elizab. cap. 8. they which are, ay∣ding to make a corrupte bargaine whereupon vsu∣y is reserued aboue the x. pounds in the hundred in the yéere &c. 344 Precipe in capite. PRecipe in capite is a writ & it lieth where the tenant holdeth of his Lord
in chiefe as of his crowne, and hée is deforsed, that is to say▪ put out of his lande, thē he shal haue this writ, and this writ shalbe close and shalbe pleded in the cō∣mon place. Also if any te∣nant which holdeth of any Lord be deforsed it beho∣ueth him to sue a writ of right patent which shalbe determined in the Lords court, but if the lād be hol∣den of the king, the writ of right patēt shalbe brought to the kings Coure and this writ may bée remo∣ued from the Lords court vnto the countie by a oit, and from the countie into the comon place by a pone, Looke therefore before in the title Droit. Prescription. PRescription. is when a man claimeth any thing for that hée, his ancestors, or predecessours, or they whose estate he hath, haue had or vsed any thing all the time whereof no minde is to the contrary. But one may not pre∣scribe against a statute ex∣cept he haue an other sta∣tute
that serueth for him. 346 Presentment. PResentment, is of two significatiōs: one is pre∣sentmēt to a church, which when any man which hath right to giue any benefice spirituall, and nameth the person to the Bishop to whom he will giue it, and maketh a writing to the Bishop for him, that is a presentatiō or presentmēt, But if diuers coheires may not accord in present∣ment, the presentment of the eldest shalbe admitted, but of iointenants and te∣nants in common, if they orde not within six mo∣neths the Bishop shal pre∣sent by laps. The other is a present∣ment or Information by anie Iurie in a Court, be∣fore  Officer which hath authoritie to punishe anie offence done contrarie to the law. 347 Pretensed tight or Title. PRetensed tight or Title, is where one is in posses∣sion of lands or tenemēts, and n other who is out of possession, claimeth t,
or sueth for it. Now the pretensed right or title is said in him, who so doth sue or clayme. And if he af∣terward come to the posses∣sion of the same landes, or tenements, his right or ti∣tle is annexed to the lande and possession, and no then called right. Priuie or Priuities. PRiuie or Priuities, is where a lease, is made to holde at will▪ for yeeres, for life, or a feoffement in fée, and in diuers other cases, now because of this that hath passed betwéene these parties, they are called priuies in respect of stran∣gers betwéene whom no such dealinges, or conuey∣ances hath bin. Also if there be Lorde and tenant, and the tenant holdeth of the Lorde by certeine seruice, there is a priuity betwéene them because of the tenure, and if the tenaunt bée disseised by a Straunger, there is no priuitie betwéene the disseysor and the Lorde, but the priuitie stil remay∣neth betweene the Lorde and the tenaunt that is
disseised, and the Lorde shall auowe vppon him, for that hee is his tenaunt in right & in the Iudgement of the lawe. Priuies are in diuers sortes, as namely priuie in estate, priuies in déede, priuies in lawe, pri∣uies in right, and priuies in blood. Priuies in estate is where a lease is made of the manor of Dale to A. for lyfe, the remainder to B. in fée, there both A. and B. are priuies in estate, for their estates were bothe made at one time. And so it is in the first case héere, where a lease is made at will, for lyfe or yeares, or a feoffement in fée, the lessées or fef∣fées are called priuies in estate, and so are their heires &c. Priuies in déee is where a lease is made for lyfe, and afterwarde by an other déede the reuersion is graunted to a Straun∣ger in fée, this grauntée of the reuersion is called priuie in déed, because that hée hath the reuersion by déede.
Priuie in lawe is where there is Lorde and tenant, the tenaunt lesseth the te∣nauncie for life and dyeth without heire, and the re∣uersiō esheats to the lord, hee is said priuie in lawe, because that he hath his e∣state onely by the lw, that is to say, by escheate. Priuie in right is where one possessed of a terme for yeeres, graunts his estate to another vpon con∣dition, and maketh his executors and dyeth, nowe these executors are pri∣uies in right, for if the condition be broken, and they enter into the lande, they shall haue it in the right of their testator, and to his vse. Priie of blood is the heire of the feoffour or do∣nour &c. Also if a fine bee leuied, the heires of him that le∣uyeth the fine are called priuies. Priuiledges. PRiuiledges, are liberties and franchises graun∣ted to an Office, place, towne, or Mannor, by the Quéens great charter, let∣ters
Patentes, or acte of Parliamente, as Tolle, Sake, Socke, Infang∣theefe▪  Outfangthiefe, Turne tolle, Oredelfe, and diuers such like, for which looke in their pro∣per titles and places. 350 Proces. PRoces, are the writs and precepts that goe vpon the original: and in actions reals and personels there bee sundrie sortes of pro∣ces, for in actions reals the proces is Graund Cape, be∣fore apperance: therefore see of that in the title Pe∣tite Cape. But in actions perso∣nals, as in debt, trespasse, or detinue, the proces is a distresse, and if the Shirife returne Nihil habet in bal∣lina &c. then the proces is alias Capias, and Piuries, and an Exigent, & they are called Capias ad respondē∣dum. Also the Exigent shalbe proclaimed 5. times, and if the partie doth not appear he shalbe outlawed: But in diuers actiōs there are diuers manner of pro∣ces, which at large is de∣clared in Natura brenium.
Also there are diuers o∣ther proces after appa∣rance when the parties be at issue to make the en∣quest appeare, as a writ o Venire facias. and if they do not appeare at the daye, then a writ of Habeas cor∣pora urat, & after a writ of Distringas Iurat. Also there are diuers o∣ther proces after iudge∣ment, as Capias ad satisfa∣ciendum, Capias vtlagatū, and Capias ad valentiam &c. But Capias ad satisfaci∣endum lieth where a man is condemned in any debt or dammage, then he shall be arrested by this writte and put in prison without baile or maineprise, till hee hath paed the debt and the damages. But Capias vtlagatum, lieth where one is outlaw∣ed, then he shall bee taken by this writie, and put in prison without baile or mainprise, for that he had the law in contempt. Capias ad valentiam ly∣eth where I am impleaded of certain lands, & I vouch to warrantie another, and
cannot barre the demaun∣dant, so that the demaun∣dant recouer against me, then I shall recouer so much in value against the vouchee, and then shall goe forth this writte. Also there beeother pro∣cesse and writs iudicials, as Fieri facias, Scire faci∣as, and manie other: and therefore looke for them in their titles. 351 Next friend. NExt friend, is commonly taken for Gardian in socage, and is where a man seised of landes holden in socage dieth, his issue with∣in age of xiiii. yeeres, then the next friend, or nexte of kinne to whom the landes cannot come or discend shal haue the keeping of the heire, and of the lande, to the onely vse of the heire, vntill hee come to the age of xiiii. yeeres: And then at that yeeres e may en∣ter and put been out, and bringe him to accompte: But in that accompte bee shalbe allowed for all reaso∣nable costes and expences bestowed either vpon the heire or his land.
And the next friende or nexte of kinne to whome the inheritance cannot dis∣cende, is thus to bee vn∣derstoode: If the Landes discende to the heire from his Father, or anie of the kinne of his Fathers side, then the Mother or other of the Mothers side are called the next of kinne to whome the enheritaunce cannot discende, for be∣fore that it shall so discend, it shall rather Escheate to the Lorde of whome it is holden. And so it is to bee vn∣derstoode where the landes come to the heire from his Mother, or anie of the kinne of his Mothers side, then the Father or other of the Fathers side are cal∣led the nexte of kinne to whom the inheritance can not discende, but shall ra∣ther escheate to the Lorde of whome it is holden. Otherwise, Procheine amy is he which appeareth in anie Courte for an en∣fante which suth ani ac∣tion, and aideth the enfant o pursue his suite▪ where▪ of, see the Statutes of
w. 1. cap. 47. and w. 2. cap. 15. that an enfant▪ may not make an Atturney, but the Court may admit the next friend for the plaintif, and a gardian for the en∣fant defendant as his At∣turney. 352 Procedendo. PRocedendo, is a writ, & it lyeth where any acti∣on is sued in one Court which is remooued to a Court more high, as to the Chauncerye, the kings bench, or Common place by a writ of Priuiledge or Cerciorare, and if the de∣fendant vpon the matter shewed, haue no cause of priuilege, or if the matter in the bill whereupon the cerciorare issued be not wel proued, then the plaintife shal haue this writ of pro∣cedendo, for o send again the matter vnto the first basse Court, and there to be determined. 353 Prohibition. PRohibition, is a writ & it lieth where a mā is im∣pleded in y• spirtual court of y• thing y• toucheth not
matrimonie nor testamēt, nor méerely tuhes, but that toucheth the kinges crowne, and this writ shal be directed as well to the partie as to the Iudge or his officiall, to prohibite them that they pursue no further. But if it appeare afterwarde to the Iudges temporall, that the matter is to bee determined in the spirituall Court, and not in the Court temporall, then the partie shall haue a writ of Consultation, commanding the Iudges of the Court spirituall to procéede in the first plee. Protection. PRotection is a writ and it lyeth where that a mā will passe ouer the Sea in the kings seruice, then hee shal haue this writ, and by this writ hee shall be quit of all manner of plees be∣twéen him & any other per∣son, except plées of dower, Quare impedit, assise of no∣uel disseisin, darreine pro∣sentment, and attaintes, and plees before Iustice in eire. But there be two
writs of protection, one Cum clausula volumus, & another Cum clausula no∣lumus, as appeareth▪ in the Register. Also a pro∣tection shall not bee allo∣wed in any plée begun be∣fore the date of the protec∣tion if it be not in vyages where the King himselfe shall passe, or other vyages royals, or in messages of the king for neede of the Realme. Also a protecti∣on shall not bee allowed for victuall bought for the vyage whereof the prote∣ction maketh mention, nor in plees of trespasse or of contractes made after the date of the protection. But note that any may attach or begin any action reall against him that hath such protection, and therein proéede vntill the defendant cometh & shew∣eth his protection in the Court, & hath it allowed, and then his plée or suite shall goe without day. But if after it appeareth that the party which hath the protection goeth not a∣od y• affaires for which he hath it, then the demaū∣dant
shall haue a repeale thereof. And if he go & re∣turne after the busines en∣ded, the demaundant shall haue a resummons to re∣continue the former suit. Protestation. PRotestation, is a forme of pleading when any will not directly affirme, nor di∣rectly deny any thing that is alledged by another, or which hee himselfe alled∣neth. And it is in two sortes: One is, when one pleadeth any thing which he dar̄e not directly affirm, or that hee cannot pleade it for doubt to make his plee double. As in con∣ueying to himselfe a title to any lande, hee ought to plead diuers discents by diuers persons, and hee dare not affirme that all they were seised at the time of their death, or al∣though hee could doe if it shall bee double to plead two discentes of both which, euery one by himselfe may be a good bare. Then the defendant ought to plead and alledge the matter interlasing
this worde Protestando: As to say, that such a one dyed (by protestation) sei∣sed &c. and that is to be al∣ledged by protestation, and not to bee trauersed by the other. An other protestati∣on is, when one is to aun∣swere to two matters, & yet by the lawe hee ought to pleade but toone, then in the first part of the plee hee shall saye to the one matter Protestando, & not cognoscendo, this matter to bee true, and make his plée further by these wordes, sed pro placito di∣cit &c. and this is for sa∣uing to the partie, (that so pleadeth by protestation) to bee concluded by any matter alleaged or obie∣ted against him, vpō which hee cannot ioyne issue: And is no other thing but an exclusion of the conclu∣sion, for hee; that taketh the protestation excludes the other partie to con∣clude him. And this pro∣testation ought to stande with the sequell of the plee, and not to bee repu∣gnant, or otherwise con∣trarie.
Purchase. PVrchase is the possession that a man hath in lands or tenements by his owne act, meanes or agreement, and not by title of discent, from any of his aunce∣stours. See Littleton, lib. 1. cap. 1. Q. Quale ius. QVale ius, is a writ and it lyeth where an Ab∣bot, prior, or such other should haue iudgement to recouer lnde; by the de∣fault of the tenant against whom the lnde is deman∣ded, then before iudgement giuen or execution awar∣ded, this writ shal go forth to the eschetor to enquire what right hée hath to re∣couer, and if it be ounde that he hath no right, then the Lorde which shoulde haue the land if the tenant had aliened in mortmaine may enter as into land ali∣ened into mortmaine, for this loosing by default is like alienation. See the statute w. 2. ca, 32.
But a writ of Ad quod dampnum lyeth where one wil giue lāds to an house of religion, then this writ shall goe foorth to the Es∣chetor, to enquire of what value the land is, & what preiudice it shall bée to the King. 358 Quare eiecit infra terminum. QVare eiecit infra termi∣num is a writ, and it lyeth where one maketh a lease to another for terme of yeres, and the lessor en∣feoffeth another, and the feffee putteth out the ter∣mour, then the termour shall haue this writ a∣gainst the feoffee, but if another stranger put out the termour, then he shall haue a writ de Eiectione firmae against him, and in those two writs he shal re∣couer the terme and his dammages. 359 Quare impedit. QVare impedit is a writ & it lieth where I haue aduowson & y• parson dieth and another presenteth his clerke, or disturbeth mee
to presēt, then I shal haue the said writ. But Assise of darrain presentment ly∣eth, where I or my aunce∣stors haue presēted before. And where a man may haue Assise of darrain pre∣sentment, he may haue a Quare impedit, but not contrariwise. Also if the plée be depē∣ding betweene two par∣ties, and be not discussed within vmoneths, then the Bishop may present by laps, & he y• hath right to present, shal recouer his damages, as it appeareth by the statute of west. 2. c. 5. therefore see the statute. Also if hee that hath right to present after the death of the person, & bringeth no Quare impedit nor Dar∣reine presentment, but suffereth a stranger to v∣surpe vpon him, yet he shal haue a writ of right of ad∣uowson, but this writ ly∣eth not, vnlesse he claun to haue the aduowson to him & his heires in fee simple. Quare incumbrauit. QVare incumbrauit, is a writ,  it lyeth where
two bee in plee for the ad∣uowson, and the Bishop adttth the clerke of one of them within the vi. mo∣nethes, then he shall haue this writ against the Bi∣shop, but this writ lyeth alway hanging the plee. 361 Quare intrusit matri∣monio non satisfacto. QVare intrusit matrimo∣nio non satisfacto, is a writ, & it lyeth where the Lord profereth couenable mariage to his ward, & he refueth and entreth into the land, & marryeth him∣selfe to another, then the Lorde shall haue this writ against him. 362 Quare non admisit. QVare non admisit, in a writ, and it lieth where a man hath recouered on aduowson, and he sendeth his conuenable clerke to y• Bishop to be admitted, & the Bishop will not re∣ceiue him, the he shall haue the saide writ against the Bishop. But a writ de Ne admittas lyeth, where ii e in plee, if the plintife suppose that the Bishop
will admitt the clerke of the defendant, then hee may haue this writ to the Bishop, comaunding him not to admit him hanging the plee. Quarentine. QVarentine, is where a man dyeth seised of a maner place & other lands, whereof the wie ought to be endowed, then the wo∣man may abide in the ma∣ner place, & there liue of the store & profits thereof, the space of x. dayes within which time her dower shal be assigned, as it appeareth in Magna Charta; cap. . Quid iuris clamat. QVid iuris clamat, is a writ, and lyeth where I graunt the reuersion of my tenant for terme of life by fine in the kings-co, & the tenāt wil not orn, then the granee shall h this writ for to compell him to atturne▪ But  writ of Que▪ rddit  reddit th wher I grant by fine a rent charge, or an¦other rent which is not t seruice which my tenaunt
holdeth of mee, and the te∣nant will not atturne, then the grauntee shall haue this writ. And a writ of Per que seruita lyeth in like case for rent seruice. Also if I graunt foure diuers rents to one man, & the tenant of the land at∣turneth to the grauntée by payment of a penye, or of an halfe penie in the name of attornement of all the rents, this attornmēt shall t him in seisin of all the rent. But these iii. writs ght to be broght against those which are tenants at the day of y• note leuied, & against none others. 365 Fifteene. FIfteene, is a payment graunted in Parlya∣ment to the Queene by the temporaltie, namely, the fifteenth part of their goods: And it was vsed in auncient time to bee leuyed vpon their cattell going in their groundes, which thing was verie troublesome▪ and there∣fore nowe for the most parte, that way is altered
and they vs to leuye the same by the yarde▪ or I∣ce or other measure of land. By meanes where∣of it is nowe lesse trouble∣some, & more certeine the before it was. And euerie Towne and Countrey doe knowe what summe is to bee paied among them, and how the same shalbe ray∣sd. wée read that Moises was the first that did nu∣ber the people, for  ∣bred the Israelites, and therefore the first Taxe, subsidie, tribute, or fiftéene was inuēted by him amōg the Hebrews, as Pldore Virgill doth thinke. Quod ei deforciat, QVod ei deforciat, is a writ, & it lieth where the tenaunt in the Ta, tenaunt in Dower, or te∣nant for terme of l lée∣eth b defaut in anie acti∣on, then  that lseth shall haue this writie agaynst him that recouereth, or a∣gainst his heire, if he think that hee hath better right then hee which recouered. Sée the Statute west. 2. cap. 4.
367 Quod permittat. QVod tat is a writ and it lyeth where a man is disseysed of is cō∣mon of pasure, and the disssor lienth or dieth sysd, and his he en∣treth, then if the disseisée m his heire shal haue this writ. 368 Quo iure. QVo iure is a writ, and it eth where a man hath had common of pas∣ture in an other seuerall of  within the time of me∣morie, then hée to whom belongeth the seuerall shall hae this writ, and he shal∣bee cged to shewe by what title hee claimeth the common. 369 Quo minus. QVo minus is a writ, and it eth where a man hath graunted to another housote & hey oe in his wood to take uerie yéere, & he that made the graunt maketh such wst ad di∣struction that the grauntée cānot haue his reasonable estouers, then the grauntée shal ue the foresaid writ, and it is in manner of a writ of wast.
And note that house∣bote is called certaine esto∣uers to mend the house. And heybote is certaine estouers to mend heis and hedges. Quo warranto. QVo warranto is a writ, and it lyeth where a man vsurpeth to haue a∣nie fraunchise vppon the King, then the King shall haue this writte, to make him to come before his Iu∣stices, for to shew by what title he claymeth such fran∣chise. R. Rationabilibus diuisis. RAtionabilibus diuisis is a writ, & it lieth where there are two Lordships in diuers Townes, and one nigh the other, and a∣nie parcel of one Lordship, or of wast hath béene in∣crocht by litle parcels, then the same Lord from whom the parcell of ground or of wast hath bene encroched, shall haue this writte a∣gainst the Lord that hath so encroched.
372 Redisseisin. REdisseisin, Looke of that before in the title As∣sise. 373 Regrator. REgrator is hée that hath corne, vittayles, or o∣ther thinges sufficient for his owne necessarie néede, occupation, or spending, and dothe neuerthelesse ingrosso and buy vp into his handes more Corne, vittayles, or other such thinges, to the intent to sell the same againe at a higher and déerer price, in Faires, Markets, or such like places. Whereof sée the statute 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14. for hée shalbe punished as a forstaller. 374 Reioinder. REioinder, is when the defendant maketh aun∣swere to the replication of the plaintife. And euerie Reioinder ought to haue these two properties specially, that is to say, it ought to be a sufficient aunswere to the replication, and also to fol∣low and enforce the matter of the barre.
Release. RElease is the giuing or discharging of the right or action which any hath or claimeth against an o∣ther or his land. And the release of right is commonly made when one maketh a déede to an o∣ther by these or like words, Remised, released and vt∣terly for me and my heires quite claimed to A. B. all my right that I haue, or by any meanes may haue hereafter in one mesuage &c, but these words (what∣soeuer I may haue hereaf∣ter) bée void: For if the fa∣ther be disseised, and the sonne release by his déede of release without war∣rantie all his right, by those wordes, whatsoeuer I may haue hereafter & and the father dyeth, the sonne may lawfully enter in the possession of the dis∣seisour. Also in a release of right it is néedefull that hee to whome the release shall be made; haue a freehold or a possession in the landes in déede or law, or a reuer∣sion a the time of that re∣lease
made, for if hee haue nothing in the lande at the time of the release made, y• release shal not be to him a∣uaileable. Sée more hereof in Litt. lib. 3. cap. 8. 376 Reliefe. REliefe, is sometimes a certaine summe of mo∣ney that the heire shal paye to the Lord of whom those Landes are holden, which after the decease of his an∣cestour are to him dis∣cended as next heire, some∣times it is the payment of another thing, and not mo∣ney: And therefore reliefe is not certayne, and alike for all tenures, but eue∣rie sundrie tenure hath (for the moste parte) his special Reliefe certaine in it selfe, Neither is it to bee paide alwayes at a cer∣tain age, but varieth there∣in also according to the te∣nure. As if the tenaunt had Landes holden by Knightes seruice (excepte graunde Serieantie) and die, his heire being at full age, & hld his lande by the seruice of a whole knights fee, the lord of whom these landes are so holden shall
haue of the heire C. s. in the name of the relief, and if he held by lesse then a knights fee, hee shall pay lesse, and if more, then more, hauing re∣specte alwaies to the rte for euerie knightes fée n hundred shillings. And if hee helde by Graund Ser∣ieantie (which is alwies of the Quéene, and is also Knights seruice) then the reliefe shall be the value of the land by the yeer▪ ∣sides all charges  out of the same. Also if a man holde  the King in chief, and of o∣ther Lords the King shall haue the warde of all the landes, and the heire shall pay reliefe to all the Lords at his ful age, but the lords shal sue to the King by pe∣tition and shal haue the rēt for the time that the inft was in ward. And note that alwayes when the reliefe is due, it must bee paid at one who payment and not by parts, althogh that the rent be to be paid at seueral feasts. Remainder. REmainder, of land is the lande that shall remain
after the particuler estate determined: As if one graunt lande for terme of yeres or for life, y• remain∣der to I. S. that is to say, that whē y• lease for yeres is determined, or lessee for life is deade, that then the land shall remaine, shall be, or abide with, to, or in I. S. See Reuersion. 378▪ Remitter. REmitter, is when a man  hath two titles to anie land, & he commeth to the lande by the last title, yet she shall bee iudged in by orte of his elder title, and that shall bee saide to him a remitter, as it the tenaunt in the taile discontinue the tayle, and after disseiseth his discontinue and dieth thereof seised, & the landes discendeth to his issue or cosin collateral by force of the taile, in that case hee is in his remitter, that is to say, seised by force of the taile, and the title of the discontinue is vt∣terly nulled and defea∣ted, and the reason and cause of such remitter is, for that that such an heire
is tenant of the land, & ther is no person tenant against whom he may sue his writ of Formedon for to reco∣uer the estate tayle, for hee may not haue an action a∣gainst himselfe. Also if te∣nant in the tail infeoffe his son or heire apparant in the taile which is within age & after dieth, that is a remit∣ter to the heire. But if he were of full age at the  of such feoffement; it is  remitter, for that that i was his foli, that hee be∣ing of  age, would  such a feffement. Also i the baron alien landes that hee hath in the right of his ; and after take an e∣state againe to him and to his wife for terme of the liues, that is a remitter to the  for that that this alienation is the te of the baron on  of the  for no follie  ad∣iudged in the woman du∣ring the  of her , but if such alienation bee by fine in court of Record, such a taking againe after∣ward to the  and wife for terme of their , shall not make the woman
to bee in her remitter; for that in such a fine the wo∣mā shalbe examined by the Iudge, and such examina∣tions in fines, shal exclude such women for euer. Also when the entre of any man is lawfull, and he taketh an estate to him when he is of full age, if it be not by éede indented, or matter of Re∣corde, which shall est oppe him, that shall bee to him a good remitter. 379 Rents. REnts, be in diuers man∣ners, that is, rent ser∣uice rente charge, and rent secke. Rent seruice is, where the tenaunt in fee simple holdeth his land of his lord by fealty and certaine rent, or by other seruice and rit, and then if the rente of the tenant be behinde; the lorde may distraine for the rent, but for that hee shall not haue an action of debt. Also if I giue lande in taile to a man paying to me certain rent, then such rent is, rente seruice. But in such case it behooueth that the reuersion bee in the do∣nour, for if a man make a
feoffement in fee, or a git in taile, the remainder ouer in fée without déede, reser∣uing to him a certain rent, such reseruation is voyde, and that is by the statute Quia emptores terrarum, and then hée shall holde o the Lord of whom his do∣nour held. But if a man by déed in∣dent at such a day make such gifte in taile, the re∣mainder ouer in fee, or lease for terme of life, the re∣mainder ouer, or a feoffe∣ment, and by the same in∣dēture reserue to him rent, and that if the rent bee be∣hinde that well it is law∣full to him to distrain, th such rent is rent charge. But in such case, if there bee not anie such clause of distresse in the déede, then such rente is called rente secke, and for such rente seck hee shal neuer distrain but if hee were once seised hee shall hue assise. And if hee were not seised, he is without remedie. Also if one grant a rent going out of his lande with clause of distres, that is rent charge, and if the
rent be behinde, the graun∣tée may choose to distraine or sue a writte of Annuitie, but hee cannot haue both, for if hee bring a writte of Annuity, then the lande is discharged. And if hee di∣straine and auowe the ta∣king in the court of recorde then the land is charged, & the person of the grauntor discharged. Also if one grant a rente charge, & the grauntée pur∣chaseth half of the land, thē all the rent is extinct. But in rent seruice if the Lorde purchase parcell of the land, then the rent shall be apporcioned. But if one hath a rente charge and his father pur∣chase parcel of the land and that parcell discende to the sonne which hath the rente charge, then the rente shall bee apporcioned according to the value of the lande as it is said of rent seruice, for that that the son commeth to that not by his owne act, but by discent. Also if I make a lease for terme of yeeres reser∣uing to mee certaine rent, that is called a rent seruice,
and for that it is at my li∣bertie to distraine for the rent, or to haue an action of debt, but if the lease be de∣termined, and the rent bee behinde, then I cannot di∣strain, but shalbe put to my action of debt. And note well, that if the Lorde bee seised of the ser∣uice and rent before sayde, and they bee behinde, and he distraine, and the tenant rescueth the distresse hee may haue Assise, or a writ of Rescous, but it is more necessarie for him to haue assise then a writte of re∣scous, for that by assise he shall recouer his rent and his damages, but by a writ of rescous hee shall not re∣couer but the thing and the damages. And note wel, that if the Lorde bee not seised of the rent and seruice, and they be behind, nd he distraine for them, and the tenaunt take again the distresse, he shall not haue assise, but a writ of rescous, & shall not néede to shew his right. And note well, that if the Lorde may not finde a distresse by two yeere, hee
shal haue against the tenāt a writ of Cessauit per bien∣nium, as it appeareth by the statute of west. 2. cap. 21. And if the tenaunt die in the meane time and his issue enter, the Lorde shall haue against y• issue a writ of Entre vpon Cessauit, or if the tenant alien the lord shal haue against y• alienée the foresaide writ. But if the lord haue issue and die, and the tenant bee in arre∣rages of the saide rent and seruice in the time of the father of the issue, and not in the time of the issue, hee may not distraine for the arrerages in ye time of his father, & he shall haue none other recouery against the tenāt or any other, for that that such aduantage is gi∣uen by the law to the tenāt. And note well that rente seruice is that to the which belongeth fealtie, but to rent charge and rent secke belongeth not sealtie, but it belongeth to rent seruice of common right. And note that if a man distraine for rent charge, & the distres be taeen against his will from him, and hee
was neuer seised before, he hath no recouery but by writ of Rescous, for the di∣stresse first takē giueth not to him seisin, only if he hap the rent before, for if hee were seised of the rent be∣fore, and after the rent bee behind, and hee distraine, & rescous to him be made, he shall haue Assise, or a writ of Rescous. And note well that in e∣uery Assise of rent charge & annuall rent, or in a writ of Annuitie, it behoueth to him that bringeth the writ to shew forth an especialtie, or eis he shall not maintain the Assise. But in an As∣sise of Mortdauncestor or Formedon in the discender, or other writs (in ye which title is giuen or comprised) brought of rente charge, or annuall rente, it nee∣deth not to shewe the espe∣cialtie. And note well that if a man grant a rent charge to another, and the grauntée release to the grauntor par∣cel of the rēt, yet al the rent is not extinct. And note well, that if rent charge be graunted to
two iointly, and the one release yet the other shall haue the halfe of the rente. And also if the one pur∣chase the halfe of the land whereof the rente is go∣ing out▪ the other shall haue the halfe of the rente of his companion: and if the disseisor charge the lād to a stranger, and the dis∣seisie bring an assise and re∣couer, the charge is defea∣ted. But it hee that hath right, charge the land, and a straunger faine a false ac∣tion against him, and reco∣uer by defaulte, the charge abideth. And note well, that in case that partition bee betweene two parce∣ners, and more lande be al∣lotted to one then to the o∣ther, & shee that hath more of the lande▪ chargeth her land to the other, and shee happeth the rent, shee shall maintaine Assise without especialtie. And it is a rent secke, where a man heldeth of me by homage, fealty & other seruice, yelding to me acer∣teine rent by the yeere, & I grant this rent to another, reseruing to me the seruice.
And note well that if rent secke be graunted to a man and to his beires and the rent bee behinde, and the grauntour dye, the heire may not distreine nor shall recouer the arre∣rages of the time of his fa∣ther, as it is before saide of rent seruice. And in the same manner it is to saye of rent charge or annuall rent: But in all these rents before saide the heire may haue for the arrerages in his owne time such aduantage as his father had in his life. See the Statute 32. H. 8. cap. 37. And note well, that in rent seche, if a man be not seised of the rent, and it be behinde, hee is without re∣couerie, for that that it was his owne folly at the beginning when the rent was graunted to him or reserued, that he tooke not seisin of the rent, as a penie or two pence. And note well that a man may not haue a Ces∣sauit per biennium, or an∣other writ of Entre sur Cessauit for no rent secke
behind by two yeeres, but onely for rent seruice, as it appeareth in the Statute W. 2. cap. 21. And note well that in rent secke it behoueth him that sueth for the rent seck for to shewe a deede to the tenaunt, or els the te∣nant shall not bee charged with the rent, but where the rent secke was rent seruice before, as in this case: Lord, mesne and te∣nant, and euery of them holdeth of other by ho∣mage and fealtie, and the tenant of the mesne by x. s. of rent, the Lorde para∣mont purchaseth ye landes or tenementes of the te∣nant, all the seigniorie of the mesne but the rent is extinct: And for this cause this rent is become rent secke, and the rent seruice changed, for hee may not distraine for this rent, and in this case hee that demaundeth the rent shall neuer be charged to shewe a deede. Also in a writ of Mor∣dauncestor, Aile, or Besail, of rent secke, it needeth not to shewe a specialtie,
for that these writtes of possession doe comprehend a title within themselues, that is to say, that the auncestour was seysed of the some rent, and con∣tinued his possession, be∣cause of which seysin the lawe supposeth that it is also auerable by the coun∣trey. Yet learne, for some suppose that it behooueth of necessitie to shewe foorth a déede, for that that rent seck is a thing against cō∣mon right, aswell as rent charge. But in Assise of Nouel disseisin, and in a writte of Entre sur disseisin brought of rent seck, it behoueth of necessitie to shewe foorth a déed, for that that rent seck is a thing against a com∣mō right, except in the case before said, where it was rent seruice before. And Assise of Nouel dis∣seisin, and a writ of Entre sur disseisin, containe with∣in them no title, but sup∣pose a disseysin to be done to the plaintife, and of the intendement of the lawe the disseysin gyueth no
cause of auerment against common right, but of ne∣cessitie it behoueth to shew foorth a déede. 380 Repleuin. REpleuin is a writ, and it lyeth when any man distrayneth another for rent or other thing, then he shall haue this writ to the Shirife to deliuer to him the distres, and shall finde suretie to pursue his action, and if he pursue it not, or if it bee founde or iudged against him, then he that tooke the distresse shall haue againe the di∣stresse, & that is called the returne of the beastes, & he shall haue in such case a writ that is called Retur∣no habendo. Also if it be in any fran∣chise or bailiwike, the par∣tie shall haue a Repleuin of the Shirife direct to the Baylife of the same franchise for to deliuer them again, & he shall finde suertie to pursue his actiō at the next countie. And this Repleuin may be re∣moued out of the coūty vn∣to the common place by a
writ of Recordare. Looke more of Repleuin in the title Distres. Also a writ of Homine replegiando lyeth where a man is in prison & not by speciall cōmandement of y• king, nor of his iustice, nor for the death of a man nor for the kings forest nor for such cause that is not re∣pleuisable, then hee shll haue this writ directed to the shirife y• hee cause him to be repleued: this writ is a Iusticies & not retur∣nable, & if the shirife do it not, then there shall goe foorth another writ, sicut alias, & afterward another writ sicut pluries vel cau∣sam nobis significes, which shalbe returnable, & if y• shi∣rife yet make no repleuin, then there shall go forth an attachement against y• shi∣rife directed to the Coro∣ners to attach the shirife & to bring him before y• Iu∣stice at a certain day▪ & fur∣ther more y• they make ex∣ecution of the first writ. Replication. REplication, is when the defendant in any action
maketh an aunswere, and the plaintife maketh an aunswere to that, that is called the Replication of the plaintife. 382 Reprises. REprises, ar deductions, payments, and duties that goe yeerely and are paide out o a manor. As rent charge, rent secke, pē∣tions, corodies, annuities, fées of stewards, baylife, & such like. 383 Receite. REceite, is when any ac∣tion is brought against the tenant for terme of life, or tenāt for terme of yeres, and hée in the reuersion commeth in and praieth to be receiued for to defende the lande and for to plead with the demaundant. Al∣so when he commeth it be∣hooueth that he be alway ready to plead with the de∣maundant. 384 Rescous. REscous, is a writ and it lyeth when anit man taketh a distresse and an∣other taketh it againe from him and will not suffer him to bring the distresse with him, then hee doth to
him rescous and vpō that he may haue this writ and shall recouer dāmages. Al∣so if one distraine beastes for dammage fesant in his ground, & driueth them in the hie way for to unpoūd them, and in going they en∣ter into the house of him whose they be, & he with∣holdeth them there & will not suffer the other to im∣pound thē then that with∣holding is a rescous. Reseruation. REseruation, is taken di∣uers waies, and hath diuerse natures, as some∣times by waie of excepti∣on to kéepe that which a man had before in him, as if a lease bée made for yeares of grounde reser∣uing the great trées grow∣ing vppon the same, now the lessée may not meddle with them, nor with a∣ny thing that commeth by reason of them so long, as it abydeth in, or vpon the trées, as mast of Oke, Chestnu, Appels, or such like, but if they fall from the trées to the ground then they are in righte the lessées, for the ground
is let to him, and all there vpon not reserued &c. Sometimes a reserua∣tion doth get and bringe foorth an other thinge which was not before. As if a man lease his landes reseruing yéerely for the same xx. li. &c. And diuers other suche reseruations there be. And note that in aun∣cient time, their reserua∣tions were as well (or for the more parte) in vi∣tualles, whether flesh, fish, Corne, Bread, Drinke, or what else, as in money▪ vn∣till at the last, & that chief∣ly in the Raigne of King Henrie the first by agrée∣ment, the reseruation of victuals was changed in∣to ready money▪ as it hath hitherto since continued. 386 Retraxit. REtraxit, is the preter∣perfectence of Retraho, compounded of Re and traho, which make Retra∣ho, to pull backe. And is when the partie plaintife or demaundant commeth in proper person into the Court where his plée is,
and saith that he will not procéede any farder in the same &c. nowe this shall be a barre to the action for euer. Reeue. REeue is an Officer, but more knowen in aun∣cient time then at this day. For almost euerie manor had then a Réeue, and yet still in many Copiholde manors (where the old cu∣stome any thing preuay∣leth) the name and office is not altogether forgottē▪ And is in effect that which nowe euery Baylife of a manor practiseth▪ although the name of Baylife was not then in vre among vs beyng since brought in by the Normans: But the name of Réeue, auncient∣ly called Gereue (which particle (Ge) in continu∣ance of time was altoge∣ther left out and lost) came from the Saxon worde Geresa. which signifieth a ruler: And so in déede his rule and aucthoritie was large within the compasse of his Lords mannor and among his menne and te∣nantes as well in matters
of gouernement in peace and warre, as in the skil∣full vse and trade of hus∣bandrie: For as hée did gather his Lordes rentes, paie Reprises, or duties issuyng out of the man∣nour, set the seruauntes to worke, fell and cutte downe Trées to repayre the buyldinges, and en∣closures, with diuerse such lyke for his Lordes com∣moditie: So also hée had aucthoritie, to gouerne and kéepe the tenauntes in peace, and if néede re∣quired, to lead them foorth in warre. 388 Reuersion. REuersion of lande, is a certaine estate remay∣ning in the lessor or do∣nor, after the particuler estate and possession con∣ueyed to an other by lease for lyfe or yéeres, or gift in tayle. And it is called a Re∣uersion in respecte of the possession seperated from it: so that hée that hath the one hath not the other at the same time, for be∣ing in one bodie together, there cannot bee said a re∣uersion,
because by the vni∣ting, y• one of thē is drow∣ned in the other: And so the reuersion of land, is the lād it selfe when it falleth. Riot. RIot is where thrée (at the least) or more doe some vnlawfull acte: as to beate a man, Enter vpon the possession of an other, or such like. Robberie. RObberie, is when a mā taketh anie thing from the person of an other fe∣loniouslie, although the thing so taken bée not to the value but of a penye, yet it is felonie, for which the offendour shall suffer death. Rout. ROut, is when people doe assemble themselues to∣gether & after do procéed or ride, or go forth, or do moue by the instigation of one or more, who is their leader: This is called Rout, be∣cause they doe moue, and procéed in Routes & num∣bers. Also where many as∣semble themselues toge∣ther vpon their owne qua∣rels
& brauls, as if the in∣habitants of a towne will gather thēselues together, to breake hedges, pales or such like to haue common there, or to beate another that hath done to them a commō displeasure or such like, that is a Rout and a∣gainst the lawe although they haue not done or put in execution their mischie∣uous entent. Sée the sta∣tute 1. Mar. ca. 12. S. 392 Sake. SAke, this is a plée and correction of trespasse of men in your court, because (Sak) in English is A∣cheson in french, and sak is put for Sik, as to say for sik, sak, also for what hurt, and Sak is put for forfait. 393 Scire facias. SCire facias, is a writ iu∣dicial going out of the re∣cord, and it lieth where one hath recouered debt or da∣mages in y• kings court, & he sueth not to haue execu∣tion within the yéere & the day, thē after the yéere and day he shal haue y• said writ
to warne the party, & if the partie come not, or if hee come & nothing say to dis∣charge or stay the executiō, then he shall haue a writ of Fieri facias directed to the shirife him commaunding that he leuie the debt or da∣mages of the goods of him that hath lost. Also the writ of Fieri fa∣cias lieth within the yéere without any scire fac' sued. Also if the summe of the same debte or damages may not bée leuied of the goods of him that hath loste them, he may haue a writte of Elegit directed to the Shirife, that he cause him to deliuer the one halfe of his lands and goods ex∣cept his oxen and imple∣ments of his cart. Also when one hath recouered debte or dama∣ges in an action parsonall (where y• proces is a Ca∣pias) he may haue an other writ of Execution called a Capias ad satisfaciendum for to take the body of him that is so condempned, which shalbe committed to pryson there to abide without baile or mainprise
til that he hath satisfied the partie. Also when one hath iudgement to recouer anie landes or tenementes, he shall haue a writte called Habere facias seisinam di∣rect to the shirife, him com∣manding to deliuer to him seisin of the same lande so recouered, Sée more of yt in the title Fieri facias, and in the title Execution. 394 Scot. SCot, that is to bée quite of a certaine custome, as of common tallage made to the vse of the Shirife or Bailife. 395 Knights seruice. TO hold by knights ser∣uice, is to holde by ho∣mage, fealtie, and escuage, and it draweth to it ward, mariage, and reliefe, And note that Knightes ser∣uice, is seruice of landes or tenementes to beare armes in warre in the de∣fence of the Realme, and it oweth warde and ma∣riage by reason that none is able nor of power, nor may haue knowledge to beare armes, before that he be of the age of 21. yéeres.
And to the ende that the Lorde shall not léese that that of right hée ought to haue, and that the power of the realme, be nothing weakened, The lawe will because of his tender age, that the lord shall haue him and his lands in his ward till the full age of him, that is to say xxi. yeeres. Looke of that more in the title Graund seriantie, and the title of Escuage. Shewing. SHewing, that is to bée quite with attachment in any court, and before whom soeuer in plaintes shewed and not auowed. Sok. SOk, this is suite of men in your Court, accor∣ding to the custome of the Realme. Sokmans. SOkmans, are the tenants in auncient demesne, that holde their landes by Socage, that is by ser∣uice with the plough, and therefore they are called Sokmans, which is as much to say as tenants or men that holde by seruice of the plough, or plow∣men:
For Sok signifieth a plough. And these Sokmans or tenants in auncient de∣mesne, haue many and di∣uers liberties gyuen and graunted to them by the lawe, aswell these tenants that holde of a common person in auncient de∣mesne, as those that holde of the Quéene in aunci∣ent demesne, as namely to be frée from paying tolle in euerie Market, Faire, Towne, & Citie through∣out the whole Realme, as∣well for their goods and cattels that they sell to o∣thers, as for those thinges that they buy for their pro∣uision, of other. And there∣upon euery of them may sue to haue letters patents vnder the Quéenes seale directed to her Officers, and to the Maiors, Bay∣lifes, and other Officers in the Realme to suffer thē to be tolle frée. Also to be quite of pon∣tage, murage, and passage, as also of taxes and Tal∣lages graunted by Par∣liament, except that the Quéene taxe auncient de∣mesne,
as shée may at her pleasure for some great cause. Also to be frée from pai∣mentes towardes the ex∣pences of the Knights of the Shire that come to the Parliament. And if the Shirife will distraine them, or any of them to bee contributorie for their landes in aunci∣ent demesne, then one of them or all as the case re∣quireth, may sue a writte directed to the shirife com∣maunding him that hée do not compell them to be con∣tributories to the expen∣ces of the Knightes. And the same writte doth com∣maund him also, that if hee haue alreadie distrayned them therefore, that he re∣deliuer the same distresse. Also that they ought not to bee impannelled, nor put in Iuries and en∣quests in the countrey out of their Mannour or lord∣ship of auncient demesne, for the landes that they holde there (except that they haue other landes at the common law, for which they ought to bee charged)
And if the Shirife doe re∣turne them in panels, then they may haue a writte di∣rected to him de non ponē∣dis in assisis & iuratis: And if he doe the contrarie, then lyeth an attachment vpon that against him. And so it is also if the Bailifes of Franchises that haue returne of writs will returne anie of the te∣naunts which holde in an∣cient demesne in Assises or iuries. And also to be exempt frō Leetes and the Shirifes turne, with diuers other such like liberties. 399 Socage. TO holde in Socage is to hold of anie Lord lands or tenementes, yeelding to him a certain rēt by ye yere for all manner of seruices. And note well, that to holde by Socage is not to holde by knightes seruice, nor to it belongeth warde, mariage, nor reliefe, but they shal double once their rent after the death of their auncestor, according to that that they bee wont to pay to their Lord.
And they shal not be ouer measure grieued, as it ap∣peareth in the Treatile of wardes and reliefe. And note well that So∣cage may be said in 3. man∣ners, that is to saye: So∣cage in frée tenure, Socage in ancient tenure, and So∣cage in base tenure. rent for all manner of ser∣uices, as is before saide, and of that the next kinnes bodie shall haue the warde to whom the heritage may not discende, till the age of xiiii. yéeres, that is to say: if the heritage come by the parte of the Father, they of the parte of the Mother shall haue the warde, And contrariwise. And note well that if the gardian in socage do make wast, he shal not be impea∣ched of wast, but hee shall yeelde accompt to the heire when hee shall come to his ful age of xxi. yeres. And looke the statute of Marleb. cap. 17. for this matter. Socage of auncient te∣nure is that where the people in auncient demes∣ne helde, which vse no o∣ther writte to haue then the
writte of Right close, which shall bee determined according to the custome of the manor, and the Mon∣strauerunt for to discharge them when their Lord di∣straineth them for to doe o∣ther Seruices that they ought not to doe. And this writ of Mon∣strauerunt ought to bee brought against the Lord▪ and these tenants holde al by one certaine seruice, and these be free tenants of an∣cient demesne. Socage in as tenure is wher a man holdeth in an∣cient demesne, that maye not haue the Monstraue∣runt, and for that it is cal∣led the base Tenure. 400 Summons ad war∣rantizandum &c. SVmmons ad warrantizā∣dum & sequatur sub suo periculo, See of them ater in the title voucher. 401 Spoliation. SPoliation, is a suite for the fruites of a Church, or for the church it self, and it is to bee sued in the spiri∣tuall
Court, and not in the temporall Courtes. And this suite lyeth for one incumbent agaynst ano∣ther incumbent, where they both claime by one pa∣tron, and where the right of the patronage doth not come in question or debate. As if a Parson bee crea∣ted a Bishop, and hath dis∣pensation to kéepe his be∣nefice still, and afterward the Patron presents an∣other incumbent which is instituted, and induc∣ted: Nowe the Bishoppe maie haue against that Incumbent a Spoliation in the Spirituall Courte, because they claime both by one Patron, and the right of the patronage doth not come in debate, and be∣cause that the other incum∣bent came to the possession of the benefice by the course of the Spirituall Lawe, that is to saie, by instituti∣on and induction, so that he hath colour to haue it and bee Parson by the spiri∣tuall Lawe. For other∣wise if he be not instituted and inducted &c. Spolia∣tion lyeth not against him,
but rather a writ of Tres∣passe, or an assise of Nouel disseisin &c. So it is also where a person which hath a plu∣ralitie doeth accept an o∣ther benefice, by reason whereof the Patron pre∣sents another clerke, who is instituted and inducted, now the one of them may haue Spoliation against the other, and then shall come in debate if hee haue a sufficient pluralitie or not. And so it is of depri∣uation &c. The same law, is where one sayeth to the Patron, that his Clerke is dead, where vpon hee presents another: There the first incumbent which was supposed to bee dead may haue a Spoliation against the other, and so it is in di∣uers other like cases, whereof See Fitzherbert Nat. breuium. 402 Stallage. STallage, that is to bee quite of a certaine cu∣stome exacted for the streat taken or assigned in faires and markets.
Suit couenant. SVit couenant, is when your auncestors haue couenanted with my aun∣cestors to sue to the court of my auncestors. Suit custome. SVit custome, is when I and my auncestors haue béene seised of your owne suit & your ancestors time out of mynde &c. Suit reall. SVit reall, is when men come to the shirifes turne or leete, to which court all men shal bee com∣pelled to come to knowe the lawes, so that they shal not be ignorant of things that shalbee declared there how they shalbe gouerned. And it is called reall siute because of their allegeāce▪ and this appeareth by cō∣mon experience when one is sworne, his othe is, that he shalbe a loyall and faithful man to ye Quéene. And this suite is not for the land which he holdeth within the Countie, but by reason of his person,
and his abode there, and ought to bee done twise a yere, for default whereof, he shall be amerced and not distrained. 406 Suit seruice. SVit seruice, is to sue to the Shirifes turne or Leete, or to the Lordes Court from three weekes to three weekes by the whole yeere, and for de∣fault thereof, a man shalbee distrained and not amer∣ced. And this suit seruice is by reason of the tenure of a mans lands. 407 Statute marchant. TO holde by Statut mar∣chant, is where a man knowledgeth to paye cer∣tain money to another at a certaine day before the Maior, Baylife or other warden of any town that hath power to make exe∣cution of the same statut, & if the obligor paye not the debt at the day, & nothing of his goods, landes or te∣nemēts may be found wtin the ward of the Maior or warden beforesaid, but in other places without, then
the recognisee shall sue the recognisance and obliga∣tion with a certification to the Chauncerie vnder the kings seale, and hee shall haue out of the Chaunce∣ry a Capias to the Shi∣rife of the countie where hee is to take him, and to put him in prison, if hee bee not a clerke, till hee haue made gréement of the debt. And one quarter of the yeere after that, that he shalbee taken, hee shall haue his land deliuered to himself to make gree to the partie of the debt, and hee may sell it while hee is in prison, and his sale shall be good and lawfull. And if hee do not gree within a quarter of a yeere, or if it be returned that hee be not found, then the reconisée may haue a writ of the Chauncery which is cal∣led Extendi facias, direct to all shirifes where hee hath lands, to extend his lands and goods, and to deliuer the goods to him, & to seise him in his lands, to holde them to him and to his heires & his assignes, till that the debtes bee leuyed
or payed, and for that time he is tenaunt by statute marchant. And note well, that in a statute marchant the recognisee shall haue execution of all the landes which the recognisour had the daye of the recog∣nisance made, and anye tune after by force of the same statute. And note wel, that when any wast and destruction is made by the recognisee, his executors, or by him that hath estate, the recog∣nisor or his executors shal haue the same lawe as is beforesaid of the tenant by Elegit. And note well, if the te∣nant by statute Marchāt holde ouer his terme, hee that hath right may sue a∣gainst him a Venirefacias ad computandum, or els enter by and by as vpon tenant by Elegit. See the statut 11. E. 1. and of Acton burnel, & 13. E. 1. de Mer∣catoribus. T. 408 Fee Taile. TO holde in the taile is where a man holdeth
certain lands or tenemēts to him and to his heires of his bodie begotten. And note well, that if the lande be giuen to a man and to his heires males, & he hath issue male, he hath fee sim∣ple, and that was aiudged in the Parliament of our Lord y• king. But where lands be giuen to a man & to his heires males of his body begotten, then hee hath fee taile, and the issue female shall not be inheri∣table, as it appeareth the 14. yere of Ed. 3. in Assise 18. E. 3. 45. Fee taile, is where land is giuen to a man and his heires of his body begot∣ten, and he is called Te∣nant in the taile generall, but if lands be giuen to the husband & the wife & the heires of their two bodies begotten, then the husband and the wife be Tenants in the taile especiall, and if one of them die, he that sur∣uiueth is tenant in tail af∣ter possibility of issu extinct and if he make wast he shal not bee impeached for that wast. See Littleton. But if the king giue lād
to a man and to his heires males, and the donee dieth without issue mal, then the cosin collaterall of the donee shal not enherite, but the king shall reenter and so it was adiudged in the Eschequer Chamber 18. H. 8. in an Information made against the heire of Sir T. Loul knight. 409 Taile after pos∣sibilitie. TO holde in the tayle af∣ter possibilitie of issue extinct, is where lande is giuen to a man and to his wife, & to the heirs of their two bodies engendred, and one of them ouerieth the other without issue be∣twéene them begotten, he shall hold the land for term of his own life, as tenaunt in the taile after possbility of issue extinct. And not∣withstanding that hee de wast, he shall neuer be im∣peached of that wast. And note y• if he alien, he in the reuersion shall not haue a writ of entrie in consimili casu. But he may enter, & his entre is lawull, per R. Thorp chiefe Iustice 28.
E. 3. 96. & 4. E. 3. 25▪ Taxe and tallage. TAxe and tallage, are pai∣ments, as tenthes, fif∣tenths, subsidies, or such like granted to the Quéen by Parliament. The tenaunts in aunci∣ent demesne are quite of these taxes and tallages graunted by Parliament except that the Quéen doe taxe auncient sne, as shée may  shée thinks good for some great cause. Sée auncient de mesne. Tenure in capite. TEnure in capite, is  any hold of the Quéen as of her person yng Quéene, & of her cro as of a Lordship by it self in grosse, and in chief above all other Lordships, And not where they hlde of her as of anie Mau, Honour, or Castll, except certeyn auncient honor which appeare in the Es∣chquer. Terme dan. TO holde for terme of yere is not but chattell
in effect, for no action is maintenable against y• ter∣mour, for the recouering of the free holde, for no free∣hold is in him. A leas for terme of yeres is a chattell reall, & the other chattell is personal, & all goods which are remouable are chattels parsonals. 413 Testament. TEstament, is thus desi∣ned in master Plow∣dens Cmentarus, a te∣stament is the witnesse of the mind, & is compound of these two wordes, Te∣statio & mentis, which so signifieth, trueth is, that a Testament is a witnes of the mind, but that it is a compound worde, Aulus Gellius  his vi. booke, cap. 12. doth deny the same to an excellent lawyer one Seruius Sulpitius, & sayeth that it is a simple word, as are these Calciamentū, Pa∣ludamentum, Pauiamentū, and dirs such like. And much lesse is agre∣amentum, a cōpound word of aggregatio and mentiū, as is saide before in the title  Agreement, for
there is no such latin word simple or compound, but it may neuerthelesse serue wel for a law latin worde. And therefore thus it may be better defined. A Testament is the true de∣claration of our last will, of that we would to bee done after our death &c. And of Testamentes there be two sorts, name∣ly a Testament in wri∣ting, and a Testament by wordes, which is called a Nuncupatiue Testa∣ment. The first is alwaies n writing as is s. The other is, when a man being sicke, and for feare least death or want of memorie, or of speech, shoulde come so suddenly and hastely vpon him, that he should bee preuen∣ted if hee styed the wri∣ting of his Testament, desireth his neighbours and friends to ere wit∣nesse of his last win▪ and then declareth the same presently by wordes be∣fore them, which after his dece is proued by wit∣nesses, and put in writing
by the Ordinary, and then standeth in▪ as good force (except for lands) as if it had at y• first in the life of the Testator béen put in writing. 414 Them. THem, that is, that you shall haue all the gene∣rations of your villames with their suites and cat∣tell wheresoeuer they shal be ound in England, ex∣cept that if any bondman shal remain quite one yere and a day in any priuiled∣ged towne, so that he shall be receiued into their com∣munaltie or guilde, as one of them, by that meanes he is deliuered from ville∣uage. 415 Theftbote. THeftbote, is when a mā taketh any goods of a theefe to fauour and main∣taine him: And not when a man taketh his owne goods that were stolien from him c. The punishment in aun∣cient time of theeftbote, was of life and member. But nwe at this day
Mast. Stamford seith, it is punished by raunsome and by imprisonment. But en∣quire further, for I thinke if be felonie. Title. TItle, is where a lawfull cause is come vppon a man to haue a thing which an other hath, and he hath no action for the same, as title of Mortmaine, or to enter for breach of condi∣tion. Title de Entre. TItle de Entre, is when one seised of land in ee maketh feffement thereof vpon condition, and the condition is broken: Now after the condition thus broken, the feoffor hath title to enter into the land, and may so doe at his plea∣sure, and by his entrie the frée hold shalbe said to e in him presentlie. And it is clsed Ti∣tle of entre▪ because that hée cannot haue writte of Right against his feoffée vppon condition, for his right was out of him by the feoffemēt, which cānot be reduced without entrie,
& the entrie must be for the breach of the condition. 418 Tolle, or Tolne. TOlle, or Tolne, is most properlie a payment v∣sed in Cities, Townes, Markets and Faires, for goods and cattell brought thither to be bought and solde. And is alwayes to e payed by the buyer and not by the seller, except there be some custome o∣therwise. There are diuers others Tolles, as Turne tolle, and that is where Tolle is paid for beastes that are driuen to be sold, although that they be not solde in déed. Also Tolle trers, that s where one claymeth to haue a halfepenie, or such lyke tolle of euirie beast that is dryuen ouer his ground. Through Tolle, is where a towne prescribes to haue Tolle for euerie rast that goeth through their towne a certaine, or for euery oore or 100. a certaine: which femeth not to be so vnreasonable a prescription or custome, as
some haue thought, al∣though it bee through the Quéenes high way (as they call it) where euerie man may lawfully goe, if that there be one thing for an other: As it there bee a bridge or such like com∣moditie prouided at the costes and charges of the Towne, for the case of trauaylers that driue that way, whereby their iour∣ney is eyther shortned or bettered, why thē may not tolle be lawfully and with good reason demaunded of them &c? But diuers Citizens & Townes men are frée frō paying tolle by graunt of the Quéene or her aunce∣stors, or doe clayme the same by prescription or cu∣stome. So also spirituall persons and religious men (as they call them) were quit of paying tolle for their goodes and marchan∣dises bought and sold, but now the Statute of king H. 8. An. 21. cap. 13. will that they shall not mar∣chandise. Also tenants in aunci∣ent demesne ought to bée
quit throughout the whole Realme of paying tolle, as appeareth before in ye title Sokemās. And in al these cases where toll is demaū∣ded where it ought not to be paid of them that should goe, bay and sell tolle frée, there the partie or parties grieued may haue a writ, De essendi quietum de to∣lonio, directed to him, or thē that so demaūded tolle contrarie to the Quéene or her progenitors graunt, or contrarie to custome or prescription. 419 Treason. TReason, is in two ma∣ners, that is to say, graund treason and petit treason, as it is ordeined by the statutes and there∣fore looke the statutes, and Stamf. lib 1. cap. 2. 420 Treasure troue. TReasure troue, is when any money, golde, sil∣uer, plate or bolyon, is found in any place, and no man knoweth to whome the propertie is, then the property thereof belongeth to the King, and that is called treasure trone, that is to say, treasure found.
But if anie mine of met∣tall be found in any groūd▪ that alway pertayneth to the Lord of the soyle, ex∣cept it be a mine of golde or siluer which shalbe alway to the king in whose groūd soeuer they be found. Shirifes tourne. SHerifes tourne, is a court of recorde in all thinges that pertain to the tourne. And it is the Queenes léete thorough all the Countie, and the Sherife is iudge. And whosoeuer hath a léete hath the same authoritie within the pre∣cinct, as the Sherife hath within the tourne. V. View. VIew, is when ante acti∣on reall is brought and the tenaunt knoweth not well what lande it is that the demaundant asketh then the tenant shall pray the view▪ that is to say, y• hée may fée the land which he claymeth. But if the tenant hath had the view in one writ, and after the
writte is abated in misna∣ming of the towne, or by ioyntenure, & after the de∣mandant bringeth another writte against the tenant, then y• tenant shal not haue the view in the secōd writ. 423 Vilaica remouenda. VIlaica remouenda, is a writ, and it lieth where debate is betweene two Parsons or prouisors for a Church, and one of them entreth into the Church with great power of laye n, and holdeth the other out with force and armes, then hee that is holden out shall haue this writ direc∣ted to the Shirife that hee remooue the power which is within the Church, and the Shirife shall bee com∣manded that if he find anie men there withstanding, that the Shirife shall take with him the power of his Countie if neede bee, and stall arrest the bodies of all them him resisting, and shal out them in prison, so that he haue their bodies before the King at a certaine daie to answere to the cōtempt.
And this writte is retur∣nable, and it shall not bee granted before that the bi∣shop of y• place wher such a church is, hath certified in the Chauncerie such resi∣sting and force. Villenage. TO holde in pure ville∣nage, is to doe all that, that the lord will him com∣mand. The diffinition of ville∣nage is villein of blood▪ and of tenure. And it is he of whome the Lorde taketh redemption to marrie his daughter, and to make him frée, and it is he whom the Lord maye put out of his lands or tenements at his wil, and also of al his goods and cattell. And note well, that a sokeman is no pure villein, nor a vileie oweth not ward, mariage, nor reliefe, nor to do any other serui∣ces real. And note well, that the tenure in villenage shall make no freeman villeine, if it bee not continued e∣uer sith time out of minde▪
nor villaine land shal make no frée man villeine, nor frée lande shall make no villeine frée, except that the tenaunt haue continu∣ed frée sith the time of no minde. But a villein shall make frée lande villeine by seisin or claime of the Lord. And note well, that if a villeine purchase certain land, and take a wife and alien, and dieth before the claime or seisin of the Lord, the wife shall be endowed. And note well, that in case that the Lorde bring a Praecipe {quam} reddat against the alience of his villeine which voucheth to war∣rant the issue of the villeine which is villein to the lord hee shall haue the voucher, and by protestation the Lorde may notwithstan∣ding that hee pleae with his villeine, saue that his villein shall not bee infran∣chised. And note wel that a Bastarde shall neuer bée iudged villeine, but by knowledge in courte of re∣corde. And note well that if debt  due by a Lord to a frée man, and hée maketh
two men his executours the which be villeins to the saide Lorde and dyeth, the villeins shal haue an action of debt against their Lord▪ And notwithstāding that he plede with them, and if hee make protestation they shal not be thereby enfran∣chised, for that that they be to recouer the dette afore∣saide to the vse of another person, that is to saye to the vse of their teitatour, and not to their owne vse. And if the tenaunt in dower haue a villein which purchaseth certaine lande in fée, and after the tenant in dower entreth, she shall haue the land to her and to her heirs for euermore, and the same lawe is of tenant for terme of yeeres of a vil∣leine. And note will that the Lord may robe, beate and chastice s villeine at his will, saue oy that he may not mane him, for then he shall haue appeal  maime against him. And note well▪ that  villeine may haue three ac∣tions against his lord, th
is to saie, an appeale of the death of his ancestour, an appeale of rape done to his wife, and an appeale of maime. And note well if ii. parceners bring a writ of niefe, and one of them bee nonsuit, the nonsuit of him shall be iudged the nonsuit of them both, so that if that nonsuite bee after appea∣rance, they shall bee saued from that action for euer, for the lawe is such in fa∣uour of libertie. And note well, if two haue a villeine in common, & one of them make to him  manumission, he shall not be made frée against both, And note well, that in a writ de Natiuo habendo, it behooueth that the Lorde shew how the def. commeth to be priuie of the blood of the villeine of whom he is lord &c. And if he nor none of his ancestors were not seised of none of his blood, he shal not win by his ac∣tion, if the villein haue not knowledged in Courte of Recorde himselfe to be his villein. And note well that in a writ of Niefe may not be
put more Niefs then two and this was first brought in the hatred of bondage. But in a writ de libertate probanda may bee put as manie niefes as the plain∣tife will. And note well that if the villeine of a Lorde be in auncient demesne of the king, or other towne priui∣ledged, within a yeere and a day, the Lorde may seise him, and if hee dwell in the same towne or other place franchised by a yéere and a daie without seisin of the Lord, he hath no power to seise him after, if hee go not out of the foresaid fran∣chise. And some bee villeines by title of Prescription, that is to say, yt they haue béen villeines regardants to the manor of the lorde of time of no memorie. And some be villeins by their confession in a courts of recorde. Also the lorde maie make a manumission to his villeine, and make him free for euer. Also if the villeine bring anie action agaynst his
lord, if it be not Appale of mahim, and the Lord make aunswere vnto it, then by this the villeine is made frée. Also if a villeine pur∣chase land, and hath goods and sel the lands and goods before any entre or seisin made by the Lorde. the sale is good. But the King which is Lord of a villein in such case may enter and seise the lande alter such sale made, for no time run∣neth against the king. 425 Viscount. VIscount, is either the name of one degrée or state of honour vnder an Earle or aboue a Baron, or else the name of a Ma∣gistrate and Officer of great aucthoritie whome wee commonly call (Shi∣rife) or to speake more truelis (Shire reue) and was at the first called (Shiregereue) that is to saye the kéeper of the shire, vr the reue or ruler of the Shire, for (Gereue) being deriued of the Saxon worde (Gerecean) to rule,
was first called (Gerec∣fa) and then (Gerefa) which betokeneth a ruler. And heereof commeth (Portreue or Portgreue) a name that in olde time was giuen to the head of∣ficer of a Towne, and sig∣nifieth the Ruler of the Towne for that (Porte) comming of the Latine worde Pors, signifieth a Port town, and (Gereue) being deriued as is afore∣saide signifieth a ruler, so that Portgereue, or as we now shorter speak it (Por∣treue) is the ruler of the towne. And thus was the head Officer or Gouernour of the Citie of London long since (before they had the name of Maior or bailifs) called, as it doth appeare in diuers olde Monu∣ments. But chieflie in the Saxon Charter of wil∣liam Bastard the Corque∣rour, which thus begin∣neth. William the King gre∣teth William the Bishop & Godfrey the Portreue, and also the▪ Citizens tha in London be, &c.
So also they of Ger∣manie (from whome wee and our language toge∣ther first came) call a∣monge them one gouer∣nour Burgreeue, another Margreeue, and another Landsgeee, with such like &c. Thus much is said one∣ly to shewe the right Eti∣mon and antiquitie of the woorde (Shirif) to which Officer our common Law ath alwaies accordingly giuen great trust and au∣thoritie, as to be a speciall preseruer of the peace. And therefore all obligations that he takes to the same end, are as Recognisances in lawe. Hee also is a Iudge of recorde when hee holdes the Léetes or Turnes, which are Courtes of re∣corde. Also he hath the executi∣on and returne of writtes, and impanelling of Iuries and such like &c. 426 Volunt. VOlunt is, when the te∣nant oldeth at the will
of the lessour, or of the Lorde, and that is in two manners. One is when I make a lease to a man of landes, to holde at my will, then I may put him out at my pleasure: But if he sowe the ground, and I put him out, then hee shall haue his corne, and going out and comming in till they bee ripe to cutte and carrie of the ground. And such tenant at will is not so bounde to sustaine and repaire the house as a tenant for terme of yees is bound: But if he make wilful wast▪ the lessor shal haue against him an action of Trespas. Also there is another tenant at will of the Lord by copie of Court Roll ac∣cording to the custome of the Mannor: And such a tenaunt may surrender the lands into the hands of the Lord by custome to the vse of another for terme of life, or in fée simple, or in ae, and then he shall take the lande of the Lorde or his stewarde by copie, and shal make fine to the Lord,
But if the Lorde put out such a tenant, bee hath no remedy but to sue by petiti∣on, and if such a tenant will impled another at the lāds &c. hee ought to enter a plaint in the Court, & shall declare in the nature of what writte hee will, as the case lyeth. 427 Voucher. VOucher, is when a Prae∣cipe quod reddat of land is brought aganst a man, and another ought to war∣rent the land to the tenant, then the tenant shall vouch him to warrantie, and thereupon hee shall haue a writte called Summoneas ad warrantizandum: And if the Shirif retourne that hee hath nothing by the which hée maie bee sum∣moned, then there shall goe foorth a writte called Se∣quatur sub suo periculo, and when hee▪ commeth he shal plead with the demaun∣dant, and if hee come not, or if hee come and cannot barre the demandant, then the demandāt shal recouer the land against the tenāt,
and the tenant shall reco∣uer as much land in value against the vouchee, and thereupon hee shall haue & writ called Capias ad va∣valentiā against y• vouchée. Looke more of Voucher before in y• title Garrātie. Vses. VSes of land had begin∣ning after that the cu∣stome of property began a∣mong men: As where one being seised of lands in fee simple, made a feoffement to another without any consideration, but onely meaning that the other should be seised to his vse, and that he himself would take the commodity & pro∣sits of the landes, and that the feoffee shoulde haue the possession and franktene∣ment thereof to the same vse &c. Nowe after this vpon good considerations, and to auoid diuers mischiefes and inconueniences, was the Statute of Anno 27. H. 8. cap. 10. prouyded, which vniteth the vse and possession together, so that who hath the vse
of the land, the sme hath the possession thereof, ac∣cording to the vse he hath therein by vertue of that estatute. 429 Vsurie. VSurie, is a gaine of any thing aboue the princi∣pall, or that which was lent, exacted onely in con∣sideration of ye loane, whe∣ther it be of corne, meate, apparell, wares, or such like as of money. And here much might bee saide, and many cases might be put concerning Vsurie, which of purpose I omit, onely I wish, that they who accompt themselues religious and good Christians woulde not deceiue them selues by colour of the statute of Vsurie, because it sayrth that it shall not bee lawfull for any to take aboue x. pound in the C. li. for a yerare &c. whereby they gather (although falsely) that they may therefore take x. pound for the loane of an C▪ pound with a good conscience  because the Statute doeth after a sort
dispence withall (for that it doeth no punish such taking) which thing it cannot do with y• lawes and ordinances of God, for God will haue his decrees to bee kept uio∣lable, who sayeth, lende o king for nothing there∣by &c. By which wordes is excluded, either the ta∣king o x. li.  . yea, or one peny aboue the principall. But rather let such , that that statute was made vpon like cause, that mooued Moyses to giue a ill of diuorce to the Is∣ralites, as namey to a∣uoyde a greater mhiefe, and for the hardnese of their hearts. Vtlarie. VTlarie, is when an exi∣gent goth foorth a∣gainst any man, & procla∣mation made in v . coun∣ties, then a the v. countie if the defendant ppeae not, then the coroner shall giue iudgement tha hee shalbe out of the proection of the king, and out of the yde of the law. And by such a vilary in
actions persones the par∣tie outlwed shall forfait al his goods and cattels to the king. And by an vtary in fe∣lony he shall forfait aswell a his ades & enements that hee hath insee simpe, or for terme of his life, as hs goods and cattels. Also though a man bee outlawed, yet i any rror or discontinuance be in the fuite of the proces the pr∣tie thereof shall haue ad∣uantage▪ and for such cause the tiary shalbe reuersed & aded: Also if the partie defen∣dant be ouer the sea at the time of the varye pro∣nounced, that is a good cause of the reuersall of the vtlarie. Also if an exigent bee a∣warded against a man in one Countie where hee dwelleth not▪ yet an exi∣gēt with proclaatiō shall goe foorth to the Countie where he dwelleth▪ or els i he be thereupon outlawed the vtlarie may bee reuer∣sed as it appeareth by the statute made the 6. & 4. yere of king H. 8. cap. 4.
Also if a man bee oua∣wed in an action parsonel at the suit of another, & af∣ter hee purchase his char∣ter of pardon of the king, such charter shall neuer be allowed, till he hath sued a writ of Scir̄ facias to warn the partie plaintife, and if hee appeare▪ then the d∣fendant shall aunswer him and barre him of his actiō, or else to mae agreement with him. Vtrum. VTrum▪ is a writ, and it lyeth when the right of any Church is aliened & holden in lay fee, or tran∣slated into the possession of another Church, and the alienour dyeth, then his successour shall haue the sad writ, whereby an inquest shalbee charged to try whether it bee the free almes of the Church o lay fee. And note well that none that hath Co∣uent, or common Seale may maintain this writ, but a writ of Entre sine aen capituli of the ali∣enation made by his pre∣decessour.
W. Waife. WAife, is when a théefe hath feloniouslie stol∣len goods, and being neere∣ly followed with hue and crie, or s ouercharged with the burden or trou∣ble of the goodes, for his ease sae and more speedie trauayling, without hue and crie, lieth away and leaueth the goods or anie parte of them behind him, then the Queenes officer, o the eeue or Baylife to the Lord of the manor (within whose ursocti∣on or circuit they were left) that by prescription. or graūt from the Quéene hath the Fraunchise of waife, may seise the goods so wayued to their Lordes vse, who may keepe them as his owne proper goods: except that the owner come with freshe sinte af∣ter the selon, and sue an appeale, or giue in eu∣dence against him at his arranement vpon the in∣dictment, and bee attain∣ted thereof &c. In which
cases the first owner shall haue restitution of his goods so stollen and way∣ued. But although as hath béene said waife is proper∣ly of goods stolē, yet waife may e also the goods that are not stolne. As if a man be pursued with hue and cie, as a felon, and he fly∣eth, and leaueth his owne goods &c. these shalbe ta∣ken as goods waiued, and forfait as if they had béee stne. Waiue. WAiue is a woman that is outlawed, and shée is called waiue, as lefte out or forsaken of the law, and not an vtlaw as a m is. For women are not sworne in leetes to the Queene, nor to the law, as men are, who therefore are within the law, wher∣as women are not, and for that cause they cannt  said outlawed in so much as they neuer were within it. But a man is called vt∣lawe, because that he was once sworne to the law and now for cōtempt he is
put out of the law, & is cal∣led vtlaw, as one should say without benefit  the law. 434 Warwit. WArwit (or wardwit as some copies haue it) that is to be quite of gi∣uing of money for kéeping of watches. 435 Wast. WAst is where tenant for terme of yéeres, te∣nant for terme of fe, or te∣nant for terme of anothers life, tenant in dower, or te∣nant by the curtesie or gar∣dein in chiualry doth make wast or destruction vpō the land, that  to say, pueth downe the house, or cut∣teth downe iber▪ or suf∣fereth the house willing∣y to fa▪ or diggeth the ground, ther hee in the re∣uersion shall haue▪ one writ for that wast▪ and shall re∣coue the place where the wast is done, & tble dam∣mages. And if a man cut downe mbr without li∣cece and therewith repai∣reth old houses, yet that is no wast. But if he with the timber builde a newe
house, then y• cutting down of such timber is wast. Al∣so the cutting downe of vnderwood or willowes, which is no timber shall not be said wast, but if they grow in y• sight or shadow of the house. Wrecke. WRecke or varech as y• Normās from whom it came call it, is where a ship is perished on the sea, and no man escapeth a liue out of the same, & the ship or parte of the ship so peri∣shed, or the goods of the ship come to the lande of a∣ny Lorde, the orde shall haue that as a wrece of the Sea, but if a man or a dogge, or cat, escape aliue, so that the partie to whom the goods belonge come within a yeere and a day and prooue the goods to be his, hée shall haue them a∣gaine, by prouision of the statute of westm. 1. cap. 4. made in king Ed. 1. dayes, who therein followed the decrée of Henrie the first, before whose dayes, if a ship had beene cast on shore,
torne with tempest, and were not repaired by such as escaped aliue within a certeine time, that thē this was taken for wrecke. 437 Withernam. WIthernam, Looke ther∣fore in the title Di∣stresse. 438 Warren. WArren is a place pri∣uiledged by prescrip∣tiō or grant of the Quéene for the preseruation of Hares, Comes, partriges, and Feasantes or anie of them.
Abatement de briefe ou plaint. ABatement de br̄e ou plaint est quāt vn action est port per briefe ou plaint en q̄ fault sufficient & bon matter, ou auterment le matter alleage, nest certeinment alleage, ou si le plaintife, ou defendant, ou lieu sont misnom̄, ou sil ap∣pere variance perenter le briefe & le specialtie, ou record, ou que le briefe ou declaration sont vn∣certeine, ou pur mort del plaintife, ou defen∣dant, & pur diuers auters semblable causes, don{que} sur ceux defaults, le def. poit prie que le briefe ou plaint abatera, cest adire, que le suit del pl. enuers luy cessera pur cest tēps, & q̄ l commencer a au∣ter temps son suit & port vn nouel brief ou plaint, sil soit issint dispose a faire. Mes si le def▪ in as∣cun action plead vn matt in barre pur adnuller le
action a touts io urs, il ne viendra apres a pled' in a∣batement de br̄, mes si a∣pres il appiert in le Re∣cord q̄ est ascun matt ap∣parant pur que le br̄ doit estre abat, dōq, le def. ou asc' aut {per}son, vt amic{us} cu∣riae poit bn̄ plede & mr̄e ceo in arrest de iudgem̄t. Veies les titles de brief, Misnosm̄, & variance en les Abridgemēts, & le li∣uer appel le Digests del briefes, in quel est fort bn̄ entreat especialment de ceux matters. Abatement de br̄e ou pleint. Fault de sufficient matter ou bone matter Le matter nest certeinment alledge plaintife est Misnosme defendant est Misnosme ou lieu est Misnosme variance enter Briefe Specialtie ou Record vncertaintie del Briefe Count ou declaration Mort Plaintife ou defendant 2 Abatement en terres ABatement en terres ou ten̄ts est quant vn hōe
morust seisi de terres ou ten̄ts, & vn que nad droit entra en mesmes les tres, ou ten̄ts, deuāt q̄ le heire fait son entrie, cest entrie de luy est appel vn abate∣mēt, & il vn abator. Mes si le heire enter primes a∣pres le mort de son aun∣cestor, & le aut ent sur le possession del heire, cest entre de luy est vn dissei∣sin al heire. Vide liuer dentres fo. 63. c. & 205 d. & 519. c. lou cest abate∣ment est appell en latin Intrusio, teo entende destre melius de appeller ceo in latin Interpositio ou Intratio per interposi∣tionem de faire differēce inter ceo & Intrusiō puis mort tenant pur vie. Abbot. ABbe suit le soueraigne teste ou principall de ceux measōs q̄ux quāt ils fuerent, fuerēt appell Ab∣bies, & cē abbe ensemble oue les Moygnes de m̄ le meason, q̄ux fuer̄ appel le couent fier̄ vn corpor, & tiel soueraigne de ascun tiel measō ne ser charge {per} act de son predecessor,
fil ne soit {per} cōmon seale, ou p̄ tiel chose que vient al vse de son meason. Auxi abbe ne serra charge pur le det en q̄ son comoigne fuit indet deuant son en∣tre en religion, mes{que} le creditor ad de ceo vn es∣pecialty, sinon q̄ il auoit deuenus al vse de sō mea∣son, mes les executors de comoigne serra charge oue ceo. Vide pur ceo in le A∣bridgm̄t m̄ title, desouth quel veies com̄t ascūs de ceux fueront electiue, asc' presentatiue, Et com̄t fu∣eront prefect, & lour auc∣thority, & en cel title sōt auxi comprehende touts autres corporations spi∣rituall, come prior & son couent, Frieres & Canōs, Deane & Chapter. 4 Abbettors. ABbettors sont in diūs cases diuersm̄t prise: vn kinde de abbettors sont ceux que maliciousm̄t sās droitur̄ cause oudesert {pro}∣eur̄ auts de suer faux ap∣peals de murder, ou felo∣nie enuers hōes al entent de troubl' & grieū eux &
pur fair eux en enfamy & slaunder. Abbettors in murder sont ceux que cō∣maund, procure, counsell ou confortauters de mur∣der. Et en ascun case el abbettors serront prises come principals & en as∣cū case forsque come Ac∣cessories: Issint en auter felonies, Et lour presence a le chose fait, & lour ab∣sēce de la, fait vn differēce  le case. Il y ad abbett auxi en tresō, mes ils sont en cas come princ', car en treas il ny ad ascun acces∣sories. Veies pluis de ceo en le lieur appel les Plees del Crowne cōpile per le tre∣reuerēd Iudg Sir W. Stāf. en les titles de Accessories & damages en appell. Abeiance. ABeiance est qn̄t vn leas est fait pur terme de vie le remainder al droit heires de I. S. le quel I. S. est en vie al temps del grant, Ore per cest grant le remainder passa hors del grantor maintenant, vncore il ne vesta main∣tenant,
ne prist effect en le grantee, cest adire le droit heire de I. S. mes est dit deste en abeiāce, ou come les Logiciens appelle ceo in potentia, ou in intel∣lectu, & come nous dio∣mus in nubibus, cestassa∣uoir, en le consideration de le ley, Que si I. S. mo∣rust eyant vn droit heire en vie, & viuant le lessee pur vie, donques ceo est vn bone remainder, & a ore veste & vient en le dit droit heire, en tiel sort que il poit graunt forfait ou auterment dispose ceo, & cessa deste ore en abey∣ance, pur ceo que il est vn a ore de abilitie pur pren∣der ceo, pur ceo que I. S. est mort & ad relinquishe vn droit heire en vie, le quel ne poit estre viuant I. S. car durāt son vie nul poit pro∣perment este dit son heire. Itē si vn home soit patron dun esglise, & present au∣ter a ceo, Ore est le fee des terres ou tenements per∣teignant al rectory en le person, mes si le {per}son mo∣rust & le esglise est de∣uenus void, donque est le
fee en abeyance, tanque il soit vn nouel Parson present, car le patron nad le fee, mes so lemēt le droit de presenter, & le fee est in le incumbent, que est present, & puis son mort, il nest en ascun mes en a∣beyance, tanque il soit vn nouel incumbent come est auant dit. Veyes Lit. lib. 3. Cap. 11. Fol. 145. Et Park. fol. 12. Abishersing. ABishersing (& in ascun copies Mishersing) hoc est quietum esse de amer∣ciamētis corā quibuscun{que} de trāsgressione probata. Abiuration. ABiuration est vn sere∣ment, q̄ home ou feme preygnont quant ils ont commisse felome, & fue al Eglise ou cemitorie, ou auter lieu priuiledge pur tuitiō de lour vyes, eslysāt pluistost {per}petual banish∣ment hors de Realme, que a estoier a le ley, & destre trie del felony. En cel case deuant le Coroner il ferra tiel confession que puit
faire sufficient endyte∣ment de felony, donques le Coroner al common ley luy ferra de abiure la Realme et assigne a luy quel port il alera et luy iura que il ne va hors del haut chymin & que il ne demurra en le port, (sil poit auer bone passage) fors{que} vn flood & vn ebb, & sil ne poit auer passage, que il alera chescun iour durant xl. iours in la meare a son genu, Mes si iel felon que abiure, a∣la hors de la chemine & fue a auter lieu, si il so it prise, il serra amesne de∣uaunt le Iudge, & la aue∣ra iudgement destre pen∣dus. Mes sil que issint pria la priuiledge ne voil abiure, donques il aue∣ra la priuiledge pur xl. iours & chescun poit luy doner vyande. Mes si ascun doner luy vyande apres xl. iours, mesque il soit sa femme, tiel do∣ner est felonie, Auxy ce∣stuy que abiure serra de∣liuer per vn Constable a lauter, & de vn fran∣chise a lauter, tanque
il vient a son port, & si le Constable ne voit receiue luy, il serra greuousment amercie. Vide iuramen∣tum in tractatu de Ab∣iuratione Latronum. Et cest ley fuit institute per S. Edward le Confes∣sor, vn Roy de cest realme deuant le Conquest, & fuit ground de le ley de mercie, & pur le amour & reuerence sans doubt, que il & auters ses suc∣cessors porteront al mea∣son de Dieu, ou lieu de praiers & administration de son parol & sacra∣mēts, le quel nous appel∣lomus, le Esglise. Nota cel ley est ore change per statutes 21. H. 8. ca. 2. 22, H. 8. ca. 14. & 32. H. 8. ca. 12. Per queux appiert que il a cel iour ne abiurera le realme, eins tout son libertie de cest realme, & de son liberal & frāk ha∣bitations, resorts & pas∣sages de touts lieus de cest realme, a vn certaine lieu en cel realme a ceo limit per 32. H. 8. cap. 13. & 33. H. 8. ca. 15. Vide plus inde Staf. li. 2. ca. 10.
8 Abridgement de plaint ou demaund. ABridgmēt de plaint ou demand est lou vn port vn Assisse, brief de dower, briefe de garde, ou tiel sē∣blables, ou le brief de As∣sise est, de libero ten̄to, come en briefe de dower, le brief est, Rationabilem dotem quae eā cōtingit de libero tenemento, w. son baron. En en vn briefe de gard le briefe est custod' terrarum & hered' &c. & le pl' ou demaundant, de∣maund diuers acres, ou parcells de terre, & le te∣naunt plede Nontenure, ou ioyntenancy, ou ascun auter tiel semblable plee a parcel del terre demaund, en abatement del briefe, dōques le plaintife ou de∣maundant poit abridger son plaint, ou demaund al cest parcel, cest adire, il poit omit hors cest part & prie q̄ le tenant respondra a rest a que il ne ad vncore pled' ascun chose. Le cause est pur ceo q̄ en tiels br̄es le certainty nest mise, mes demaund est generalment de libero ten̄to; & nient
obstant le demaundant ad abridge son plaint ou demand en part, vncore le briefe demurre bon de libero tenemento pur le residue. ¶ Accedas ad Curiam. ACcedas ad Curiam est vn brief direct al vi∣cont, luy commaundant daler a tiel court dascun seignior ou franchise lou vn plaint est sue pur prisel del auers come distresse, ou ascun faux iudgment est suppose destre fait en ascun suit que fuit en tiel court, quel nest court de record, & que le vicont la ferra record del dit suit en presence del sutors de mesme le Court, & de quatuor autres chiualers del Countie, & oeo re∣cord certifier̄ al court, & a cel iour quel est assigne en le briefe. ¶ Acceptance. ACceptance est vn pren∣drans en bon gree, & come vn agreement al as∣cun chose fait deuant, le quel poit este auoide & vnfait (si tiel acceptance
nad estre) per luy ou ceux que issint accepta, sicome pur example: si vn Euesque deuant primo Eliz. lesse terre part del possessions de son Euescherie pur ans reseruant rent & morust, & puis vn auter est fait E∣uesque, le quel accepta, cest adire, prist ou receiue le rent quant il est & doit estre pay, ore per cest ac∣ceptance le lease est fait perfect & bon, le quel au∣terment le nouel Euesque poit assets bien auoid & faire frustrate. Semblable ley est, si vn home & sa feme seisi de terres en droit del feme ioin & font leas ou eff∣ment per fait reseruant rent, & le baron monist, el accept ou receyu  rent, per cel le feoffement ou lease est fait perfect & boue, & serra barre a luy de porter sa brief appel Cui in vita. 11 Accessories. ACcessories sont en deux sortes, lun auaunt le fact, le auter puis le fact fait. Accessorie
deuant le fait est celuy que commāda ou procu∣ra auter de faire felony, & nest la present luy mes∣me quant lau ter le fait, mes sil soit present don∣ques il est auxi principal. Accessorie puis le fait est celuy que receiua, fauora, aida, assist, on comfort ascun home que ad fait ascun murder ou felonie, dont il ad conusance, tiel accessorie serra punish, & auera iudgement de vie & de member, auxybien come le principal que fist le felonie: Mes tiel ac∣cessorie ne serra iammais mis a responder a ceo tā∣que le principal soit con∣uict ou attaint, ou soit vtlage de ceo. Mes vn fe∣me en tiel case ne serra accessorie pur le aider de son baron: en grande ou hault Treason sibien les commanders, come les assisters & receiuors ap̄s sōt touts foits principals▪ Auxy vn poit estre ac∣cessorie al accessorie, sicōe vn feloniousemēt receiue vn auter q̄ est accessorie al felonie, la le receiuer
est vn accessorie. Veies pluis del accesso∣rie en le dit Lieur de les Plees del Crowne, le pri∣mer lieur, cap. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. & 50. 12 ¶ Action. ACtion est le forme de vn suit done per le ley de recouer chose, come action de dette & tiels semblables. Vide Lexicon Iuris pur action. 13 ¶ Actions personals. Actions personals sont tiels actions pur queux home claime det ou auter biens & chateux, ou da∣mage pur eux, ou damage pur tort fait a son person, & est properment cel que en le Ciuil ley est appel Actio in personam, quae aduersus cum intenditur, qui ex contractu vel deli∣cto obligatus est aliquid dare aut concedere. 14 ¶ Actions reals. ACtions reals sont tiels actions per queux le demandant claim title al
ascun terres ou tenemēts rents ou commons, in fee simple, fee taile, ou pur terme de vie. Action populer. ACtion populer est vn action q̄ est done sur le breach dascū penal sta∣tute, le q̄l actiō chesc▪ hōe q̄ voit poit suer pur luy m̄ & le Roigne, {per} informa∣tion ou auterm̄t, come le statut allow & le case re∣quire. Et de ceux actiōs il y ad infinite number, mes vn pur example est: Quāt ascun del Iurie que sont impanel & iurus de pas∣ser perenter partie & par∣tie indifferentment, prist ascun chose de lun part ou laut, ou de ambideux parties pur lour verdict dire al ceo part, donques ascun home q̄ voit deins lan procheine ensuant le offence fait, poit suer vn briefe appel Decies tantū enūs luy, ou ceux q̄ issint prist pur lour verdit dire, & pur ceo q̄ cest action nest don al vn hōe speci∣alm̄t, mes generalment al asc▪ de les peopl▪ del R. q̄
voit suer, il est appell vn Action populer, mes en cel case, quant vn auoit commence de pursuer cel action, nul auter poit ceo suer, & en ceo come semble cel varie del acti∣on populer per le Ciuil ley. 16 Action mixt. ACtion mixt est vn suit done per la ley de re∣couer le chose demaund, & auxy damages pur le tort fait, come en Assise de Nouel disseisin, quel briefe (si le disseisor fait feoffemēt al auter) le dis∣seisee auera vers le dissei∣sor & le feffee ou auter terre tenant, & en ceo re∣couera son seisin del terre & ses dammages pur le mean {pro}fits, & pur le tort a luy fait. Et issint est vn action de Wast & Quare impedit. Mes vn actiō de Detinu nest appel action mixt, com̄t {per} ceo le chose detenus est demaund, & serra recouer si poit este troue, & damages pur le detain̄, & si ne poit estre troue, dō{que} damages pur
la chose & la deteiner▪ Mes ceo est appell sole∣ment action personall que serra port solement pur biens ou chattels. Action del briefe. ACtion del briefe est vn phrase del parlance, vse quant vn plede ascun matter, per que il mon∣stre que le plaintife nad cause dauer le briefe que il port, & vncore poit este que il poit auer au∣ter briefe ou action pur mesme le matter: tiel plee est appell plee al action del briefe, lou si per la plee appiert que le plain∣tife naueroit ascun cause de auer ascun action pur le chose demaund, donq̄▪ ceo serra dit plee al ac∣tion. Action sur le case. ACtion sur le case est br̄ port enuers vn pur ascun offence fait sans force, come pur nient {per}∣formāce del promise fait
per le defendant al plain∣tife, ou pur parlance des parolles per queux le plaintife est defame, ou pur auter misdemeanor ou disceit, lou tout le case serra contenus en le briefe. 19 Action sur le statute. ACtion sur le statute est briefe foundue sur as∣cun estatute, lou per as∣cun estatute vn action est done a vn en ascun case lou nul tiel action fuit deuant: Come lou vn commit periurie al preiudice dun auter, ce∣stuy que est dampnifi auera briefe sur lesta∣tute & son case. Et le difference enter action sur le statute & action Populer est, que lou le statute done le suit ou action al partie grieue, ou auterment, a vn per∣son certaine, ceo est ap∣pell Action sur▪ le Sta∣tute: Mes lou per le sta∣tute aucthoritie est done a chescun que voyle de
suer, ceo est appell acti∣on populer. Accompt. ACcompt, est vn briefe, & gist lou Bailife ou receiuer dascun Seigniour ou dauter home, que doit render accompt, ne voit son accompt ren∣der, donques celuy a que laccompt doit este rende, auera cest briefe. Et per lestatute de West∣minster 2. Capitulo 10. si laccomptant soit troue in arrerages, les Audi∣tours que sount a luy assignes, ount power de agarder luy a prison la a demurrer tanque il ad fait gree al party, Mes si les Auditours ne voil∣lont allower reasonable expence & costage, ou sils chargeront luy oue plusours resceipts quant ne duissent, donques son procheyne amye, que voit suer pur luy, su∣era vn briefe de Ex par∣te talis hors del Chaun∣cery, direct al Vicount de
prender iiii. mainpernors de render son corps de∣uant les Barons del Ex∣chequer a certaine iour, & de garner le Seigni∣our dapperer la a mesme le iour. 21 Accord. ACcord est vn agreemēt {per}enter deux al meins pur satisfie vn offence que le vn ad fait al auter, Quant vn home ad fait vn trespas ou tiel sembla∣ble al auter, pur le quel il ad agree oue luy de sa∣tisfier & content luy oue recompence, quel si soit executed & perform̄, dō∣ques pur ceo que cest re∣compence, est vn pleine satisfaction pur le offēce, il serra vn bon barr̄ en le ley, si laut apres laccord perfourme, voit suer a∣rere vn action pur mesme le trespas. Nota que le primer est {pro}prement appelle vn Ac∣cord, le aut est vn cōtract. 22 Acquital. ACquital est quant, il y ad Seignior, mesne, &
tenaut, & le tenant tient de le mesne certeine ter∣res ou tenemēts en frak∣almoigne, frankmariage ou tiels semblables, & le mesne tient ouster auxy de le Seign̄ paramount ou deuant luy. Ore doit le mesne acquite ou dis∣charge le tenant, de tout & chescun maner de ser∣uice, q̄ ascū aut vot auer ou demaund de luy con∣cernant mesmes les tres ou tenemēts, pur ceo q̄ le tenant doit fair le seruice a le mesne tantsolement, & nemy al diuers Sn̄rs pur vn ten̄t, ou parcel del terre. Mesm̄ le ley est ou il est Sn̄r, mesne, & tenant come auātdit, & le mesne granta al tenāt (sur le te∣nure fait parenter eux) pur acquiter & dischar∣ger luy de touts rēts, ser∣uices & tiels semblables, Cest discharge est appel Acquitall. Mesme le ley est, si te∣nant tient de son mesne per autiels seruices, come le mesne tient ouster del Seigniour, & le tenant fait ou paye seruices al
mesne, mes le mesne ne fe∣soit ses seruices al seigni∣or paramount, per que il distreine les bestes del te∣nant, en cel case le mesne pur le ouelty del seruices doit acquitter le tenaunt del seruices due al Seig∣nior. 23 Acquitance. ACquitance, est vn dis∣charge en escript dun summe de mony, ou auter duty, quel doit este pay ou fait: Si come vn soit oblige de paier mony sur vn obligation, ou rent re∣serue sur vn leas, ou tiel semblable, & le party a q̄ le mony ou duety doit este pay, ou fait, sur le re∣sceit de ceo, ou sur auter agreement parenter eux ewe, fait escript, ou bil de son mayne en discharge de ceo, testmoinaunt que l est pay, ou auterment cōtent, & pur ceo acquite, & discharge luy de ceo, le quel acquitaunce est tiel discharge & barre in le ley, que il ne poit de∣mand & recouer mesme le summe ou duty auter
foits contra a ceo, sil poit monstre le acquitance. Cest paroll differt ab hoc, quod in iure ciuili acceptitatio dicitur, quia illud fieri potest verbo fi∣ne scripto, & nihil aliud est quam icta solutio & liberatio, licet solutio non sit: nec Apocha dici po∣test, quae cautio est so∣lutae dataeue pecuniae▪ quae non liberat nisi pecunia soluta sit. Actes. ACtes de parliament sont leys positiue que con∣sist de deux partes, cest adir de les parols del act, & del sense de ceo, & ils ambideux ioint ensemble font la ley. Additions. ADdition, est ceo que est done al home ouster son proper nosme & sir∣nosme, cest adire, pur monstrer, de quel es∣tate, ou degree, ou mi∣sterye il est, & de que Ville ou Hamlett ou Countie.
Additions de estate sont ceux, yeoman, gentleman Esquire, & tiels sēblables. Additiōs de degree sont ceux q̄ nous appellomus nosmes de dignitie, come Chiualer, Conte, Marques & Dux. Additions de misterie sont ceux, scriuener, pain∣ter, mason, carpenter, tai∣lor, smith, & issint toutes auters de semblable na∣ture, car mistery ē le craft ou occupation, per que home gaine son liuing. Additions de villes cōe Sale, Dale, & tiels auters, & issint de les auters. Et lou vn home ad hous∣hold en deux leuz, il serra dit demurr en ambideux, issint que son addition en vn de cux suffist. Fuit ordeine per lesta∣tute Anno 1. Henrici 5. Cap. 5. que en sutes ou actions, ou proces dut∣lagarie gist, tiels addi∣tions serra al nosme de∣fendant, a declarer son estate, misterie & lieu ou il enhabite, & que tiels briefs abateront sils ne ount tiels additions,
si le defendant prist ex∣ception a ceo, mes ils ne abateront per office del Court. Auxy Duke, Marquesse, Counte, ou Chiualer ne sont pas del ceux additiōs, mes nosmes de dignitie, queux, duissont auer estre done deuant le Statute. Et ceo fuit ordeigne per cest Statut fait en le pri∣mer an de Roy H. le 5. ca. 5. al intent q̄ vn home ne serroit greeue ne trouble pur le vtlagarie de vn au∣ter: mes que per reason de le certaine addition, ches∣cun home poit este cer∣tainment conus, & portera sa burden demesne. Adiournement. ADiournemēt est quant ascun Court est dis∣solue & determine, & as∣signe destr̄ gard arrere al auter lieu ou temps, & come semble, est cōpound de deux parols, (ad) ou (al) & iour. Admeasurement de Dower. ADmeasurem̄t de dower est vn briefe▪ & nest
lou vn feme est endowe per vn infant, ou per vn gardein de pluis que de∣uoit auer, le heire en tiel case auera cest briefe, per quel le feme serra admea∣sure, & le heire restore a le surplusage. Mes si vn a∣bate, cest adire, vn que nad droit entre apres le mort le barron, & endowe la feme de cestuy que est mort, de pluis que doit auer, le heire nauera cest briefe, mes assise de Mort∣dauncester vers la feme, & si el plede que el fuit endow de ceo terre come del franktenement sa ba∣ron, le heire monstra co∣ment el fuit endowe per labatour, & quel el ad pluis, que deuoit auer, & prier̄ que il soit restore al surplusage, & si soit troue, il serra restore. 28 Admeasurement de pasture. ADmeasurement de pa∣sture, est vn briefe, & gist lou plusors tenaunts ont common appendant en auter terre, & vn sur∣charge
le cōmon oue plu∣sors auers: Dōques lauters cōmoners poient auer cest brief vers luy, & auxy poit estre port per vn commo∣ner solemēt, mes donq̄es couient estre port vers touts lauters commoners, & vers cesty q̄ surcharge, pur ceo q̄ touts les cōmo∣ners serront admeasures. Et cest briefe ne gist vers luy, ne {pro}ur luy que ad common appurtenant, ou common ingros, mes ceux que ont commō ap∣pendant, ou common {per} cause de vicinage. Vide le diuersitie de touts ceux cōmons apres. Auxy cest brief ne gist pur le seignior, ne vers le seignior, mes seignior poit distrain les auers le tenaunt que sont surplu∣sage. Mes si le seignior surcharge le common, les commoners nont remedy per le commō ley, mes vn Assise de son common. ¶ Administrator. ADministrator est celuy a que le ordinarie cō∣mit administration des
biens la mort pur defaut de executors, & action gist vers luy, & pur luy come pur executor, & ser∣ra charge resques al value des biens le mort & niēt ouster, sil ne soit per son faux plea, ou pur ceo que il ad wast les biens le mort. Mes si le admini∣stratour deuie, ses execu∣tors ne sont administra∣tors, mes couient al Or∣dinarie de commit nouel administration: mes si vn estrange que nest ad∣ministratour ne executor prist les biens le mort, & administer de son tort de∣mesne, il serra charge & sue come executor, & ne∣my come administrator en ascū actiō que est port vers luy per ascun credi∣tor. Mes si lordinarie fait vn brief ad Colligendum bona defuncti, cestuy que ad tiel letter nest admini∣strator, mes laction gist vers le Ordinarie auxy∣bien come sil prist les biens en son maine de∣mesne, ou per le maine de ascun de ses seruants per ascun auter cōmandmēt.
¶ Admiral. ADmirall est vn officer south le Roigne, que ad aucthority sur le mere tantum, pur veier le nauie repaire & maintain pur suppresser & chaser dehors estimures de mere, & de faire droit de contractes perenter partie & partie, concernant chose fait sur & ouster le mere, & pur cest purpose il ad sō court appel le Admiraltie. Il poit causer son Citation destre serue sur le terr̄ & prēder le corps del party ou biens en execution sur le terre. Itē il ad cognisance del mort ou maihem de vn home fait en ascun grand mefe fleetant en graund ryuers en le Realme, de∣base les pontes de eux prochein al mere. Auxy pur arrest niefes en les graund streames pur les voiages del Roign & realm, & ad iurisdictiō en les dits streames durāt mesme viages. ¶ Ad quod dampnum. AD quod dampnum est vn briefe que doit este
sue deuant le Roy grant certaine liberties: Come faire, market, ou tiels semblables queux poient este p̄iudicial al autres. Et {per} ceo serra inquise si ser∣roit preiudice a granter eux, & a que serra preiu∣dicial, & que preiudice ent auiendra. 32 ¶ Aduowson. ADuowson est lou vn home & ses heirs ont droit de presenter lour clerk al Ordinarie al vn parsonage, ou auter es∣piritual benefice quant il deuient void. Et celuy que ad tiel droit de presenter est appel patron. 33 ¶ Age prier. AGe prier est quant ac∣tion est port vers enfāt de terre que il ad per dis∣cent, la il monstra le mat∣ter al court, & priera que le action demurra tanque a son plein age de xxj. ans, & issint per agard del Court le suit surcessera. Mes en brief de Dower & en Assise, & auxy en tiels actions lou le in∣fant
est suppose a vener¦al terre en demaund de son tort demesne, il naue∣ra sa age. Auxy nota que sont plusors diuersities de a∣ges, car le Seignior aue∣ra aide de son tenaunt en Socage pur marrier sa file, quant le file le seigni∣or est del age de sept ans. Et auxy aide pur faire son fites & heire chiua∣ler, quant il est del age de sept ans. Auxy feme que est es∣pouse al age de ix. ans▪ si sa baron morust seisie auera Dower, & nemy de∣uant ix. ans. Auxy xiiii. ans est le age de feme que ne ser∣ra en gard, si el fuit de tiel age al temps del mort son auncestor, mes si el fuit deins age de xiiii. ans, & en gard son seig∣nior, donques el serra en gard tan{que} al age de xvi. ans. Et auxy xxi. ans est lage de heire male destre en gard, & apres ceo hors de gard. Et auxy il est le age de male & female de suer & destre sue des
terres, q̄ ils ont ou claime per discēt & de faire touts manners contracts & bar∣gaines & nient deuant: mes si tiel infaunt deins age de xxj. ans done ses biēs▪ & le donee eux prist, lenfant poet auer vn acti∣on de trespas, mes auterm̄ il est sil deliuer eux. 24 ¶ Agreement. AGreement▪ est en cest manner define ou ex∣pounde en master Plou∣dens commentaries. Ag∣greamentum, est vn pa∣roll compounde de deux parolx; cest assauoir, de Aggregatio & Mentium, cest a dire agreement de ments, issint que aggrea∣mentum est aggregatio mentium in re aliqua facta vel facienda. Et per le contraction de les deux parolx, Aggregatio & mentium, & per le cor∣repte & briefe perlance deux, ils sont fait vn pa∣rol, cestass. Aggreamen∣tum, le quel nest auter chose, q̄ vn vniō, collecte copulation & coniuncti∣on de deu ou plusours
ments in ascun chose fait ou deste fait. (Veies apres en testament.) Et cest a∣greement est in 3. ma∣ners. Le primer est vn agre∣ment executed en fait al commencement. Le second, est vn agre∣ment puis vn act fait per auter, & est vn agreemēt executed auxy. Le tierce est vn agree∣ment executory ou deste fait ē tēpsvncore a vener. Le primer que est vn a∣greemēt executed en fait al cōmencement, est tiel de q̄ mennon est fait en le statute de 25. Ed. 3. cap▪ 3. de panms in le quart statute que dit, que les biens & choses achates per forestallers, q̄ de ceo serront attaintes soient forfaites al Roigne, si le achator ēt vst fait gree al vēdour. En quel case, cest parol (Gree) q̄ est auter∣ment appel agreement, serra entende agreement execute, viz. paiment pur les choses. Le second maner de a∣greement est lou vn fait
vn chose ou acte, & vn auter agree ou assent a ceo apres, come si vn fait disseisn a mon vse, & a∣pres eo agree a ceo, ore ieo serra disseisor ab ini∣tio▪ & tiel agreement est vn agreemēt puys vn acte fait. Le tierce agreement est quant ambideux parties a vn temps sont accords que tiel chose serra fait en tēps a vener, & ceo agre∣ment est executorie entāt que le chose serra fait a∣pres & vncore la lour ments accor a vn temps. Mes entāt que le perf¦māce serra apres, & issmt le chose sur que lagrem̄t fuit fait, remaine a faire, ceo agreement serra dit executorie. Et ceo le sta∣tute de 26. H. 8. cap. 3. proue, ou il dit, q̄ chescun vicar, parson & tiel &c. deuant lour actual pos∣sessiō ou medling oue les {pro}ofits de lour benefice satisfiera, cōtent &c. ou a∣greera a paier al vse le Roign les primer fruits &c.  si asc tiel Parsō, vic &c. enter ē actual posses∣sion,
&c. ceo agrement est deste entende executory, come le common vsage proue, car est vse, quel oue vn ou deux oue luy faer̄ deux vel trois obli∣gations pur ceo deste pay en certaine iours apres, & cest agrement executory est deuidem deux points. Vn est agreement execu∣tory, que est certaine al cōmencement, come est dit darraine deuant del primer fruits. Lauter est lou le cer∣tainty nappert al primes & les parties sōt accords q̄ le chose serra performe, ou pay sur le certainty conus▪ come si vn vend al auter tout son wheat en tiel tasse en son barne ni∣ent thresh & il est agree perenter eux, que il paye∣ra pur chescun bushell xii. d. quant il est thresh, cleane, & measure. ¶ Ayde. AYde, est quant tenant a terme de vie, tenant en dower, tenaunt per le curtesie, ou tenāt en taile, ap̄s possibility dissue ex∣tinct
est implede, dōques pur ceo que ils nont que estate pur terme de vie, ils praieront aide de ce∣stuy in le reuersiō, & pro∣ces serra fait {per} brief vers luy, de vener & pleder oue le tenant, en defence del terre si voyl, mes il couient, que ils accorde en plee: car sils varie, le plee le tenant, serra prise, & dōques leyde pryer est en vaine, mes si ne vient al second briefe, le tenant respondera sole. Auxy tenant pur terme de ans, tenāt a volunt, te∣nant per Elegit, & tenāt {per} statute marchant aue∣ront ayde de cestuy en la reuersion, & le seruant & bayly de lour maister, quant ils ount fait ascun chose loyalmēt, ē le droit lour master, auerōt ayde. 36 ¶ Ayde de Roy. AYde de Roy, est en sē∣ble case come est dit deuant de cōmon person, & auxy en plusours auts cases, lou le roy puytauer perde, coment que le te∣naunt soit tenaunt in fee
simple, il auera ayde, Come si vn rent soit de∣mande vers tenaunt le Roy, que tient en chiefe, il auera ayde, & issint na∣uera de auter person. Auxy lou vn Citie ou Borough ad vn fee farme del Roy, & ascun chose est demaund vers eux que apperteme al fee farme, ils aueront ayde pur le perde le Roy. Auxy home auera ayde de Roy en lieu de vou∣cher. Auxy le Baylife, Collectour & Purueiour del Roy aueront ayde del Roy, auxy bien come les officers de auters persons. ¶ Ayle. AYle, est vn briefe que gist lou terre descend de layell a son neuiew, viz. fits, ou file del fites de layell, le pier esteant mort, deuant entrie per luy, & vn abate, le heire auera vers le abator cel briefe.
38. Alien. ALien, est celuy q̄ pere & il mesme fuer̄ am∣bideux nee hors del le∣geance le Roigne, & si tiel alien, nesteant vn ene∣my del Roigne, mes vn a∣lien amy vient & demurr̄ cy en Engleterre & ad is∣sue, cest issue nē aliē mes Anglois. Issint si vn An∣glois ala ouster le mere oue le licēce del roign̄ & la ad issu, cē issu nē alien. 39 Alienation. ALienation, idem est, quod alienum facere de alter̄, ou mitter le pos∣session de terre ou auter chose de lun home al auter. 40 Ambidexter. AMbidexter, est celuy que quant vn matter est in suit parenter homs, prist money de lun part, & del auter, ou pur labor le suit, ou tiels sembla∣bles, ou sil soit del iury, pur dire son verdict. 41 Amendement. AMendement, est quant error est en le Proces,
les Iustices poient ceo a∣mender apres iudgemēt. Mes si error sort en iuge∣ment done, ils ne poyent amender ceo, mes le par∣tie est mise al briefe de errour. Et in plusours cases lou le default ap∣piert en le clerk q̄ escrie∣ra la Record il serra a∣mende: Mes tiels choses que vient per informatiō del partie come le ville, misterie, & huiusmodi ne serra amēd, car il doit in∣former veray a son perill. Amercement. AMercement, plus pro∣perment est vn penal∣tie assesse per les piers del partie amercie, pur vn offence fait, come pur default de suit de court, ou pur non amend' de ascun chose que il fuit appoint de redresser de∣uant, ou pur tiel sem∣blable cause, en quel case la partie que offend soit mist en le mercie del roy ou Seigniour, & sur ceo cel penaltie est appel Amercement.
43 Amercement royal. AMercement royal, est quant vn Vicont, Co∣ron̄ ou aut tiel officer del Roigne est amercie {per} les Iustices pur son misde∣meaning en le office, q̄re si neserra dit fine. 44 An, iour & wast. AN, iour & wast, est vn forfaiture, quāt vn hōc ad fait petit treason ou felony, & ad terres queux il tient de ascun commō person, q̄ux serra scisi pur le Roigne & remain en sa maines {per} la space de vn an & vn iour procheine apres le attainder, & dō∣ques les aibres serrōt de∣fosse, les measons serront rases, & les pastures, & prees aires & plowed, sinon que il, a que le ter∣re deuenera per leschete ou forfaiture, ne ceo re∣deem̄ de Roy, vn chose le plus de greeuer le offen∣dors & terrifie auters de cader en autiel, en de∣monstraunce, coment le ley detest lour offence, cye auaunt issint que il execute iudgement &
punishment sur lour mute & mort choses. Annuitie. ANnuitie, est vn certein sūme de money grant al vn auter, en fee simple, fee taile, pur terme de vie ou pur terme de ans, a re∣ceiuer del grantor ou ses heires, issint q̄ nul frank∣tenement est charge de ceo, de que home nauera vnques, assise ne aut acti∣on forsque briefe de an∣nuitie, & nest ascun assets al heire le grantee a que il discendera. Appeale. APpeale, est lou vn ad fait murder, robberie ou mayhem, donques la feme cestuy que est tue, auera vn action de ap∣peale vers le murderer, mes sil nad femme don∣ques son procheine heire male auera le appeale a ascun temps deins lan & iour apres le feast, Et auxi cestuy que est issint robbe ou mayhem aue∣ra son appeale, & si le de∣fendant soit acquit, il
recouera damages vers lappellour & labbettors, & ils auerōt le imprison∣ment dun an & ferra fi∣ne al Roy. Appeale de mayhem nest en manner forsque action de trespas, ear il ne recouera forsque damages. 47 ¶ Appellant. Appellant est le plaintif en le appeale. 48 ¶ Appellour. APpellourou Approuer, est cesty q̄ ad fait asc felonie le quel il confesse & a ore appeale, ou ap∣proue, cest adire, accuse autres que fueront coad∣iutors ou aiders oue luy en feasans de ceo, ou au∣tres felonies, le quel cho∣se il voit approuer & ceo est appelle ē latin Proba∣tor. 49 ¶ Appendant & ap∣purtenant. APpendant & appurte∣nant sont choses q̄ per temps de prescription ont belong, appertain, & sont ioyne al auter prin∣cipal chose, ouesque que
ils passont & va come ac∣cessarie al mesme princi∣pal chose, per vertue de ceux parolx Pertinentijs: come terre, aduowsons, cōmōs, piscaries, chimins courtes, & diuers tielx sēbl', al vn manor, measō, office, ou tiels auters. Apporcionment. APporcionment est vn deuiding en parts de vn rēt (le quel est diuida∣ble & ment intier ou whole) & entāt q̄ le chose hors de quel il fuit deste pay, ē seperate & deuide, le rēt auxy serra deuide, ayant respect a les partes. Sicome vn home ad vn rent seruice issuant hors de terre & il purchase parcel de le terre, le rent serra apportion, accordāt al value del terre. Issint si home tient son terre dun auter per ho∣mage, fealtie, escuage, & certain rent, si le seignior de que le terre est tenus purchase parcel del terre le rent serra apportion. Item si home lessa ter∣res pur ans reseruant rēt, & apres vn estrange re∣couer
part de le terre, donques le rent serra ap∣portiō, cest adire deuide, & le lessee payera ayant respect a ceo que est re∣couer, & a ceo que ore remaine en ses maines accordant al value. Mes vn rent charge ne poit estre apportion, ne choses q̄ sont entier: Si∣come vn tient terres per seruice de paier a son Seignior annuelm̄t a tiel feast, vn chiual, esperuer, vn rose, vn chery, ou tiels semblables, la si le Seig∣nior purchase parcel de la terre, cest seruice est tout ale, pur ceo q̄ vn chiual, esperuer, rose, ou vn che∣ry, & tielx auters ne poi∣ent estre deuide, seuered, ou apportiō sans damage al entiertie. 51 Appropriation. APpropriations fueront quāt ceux measons de le Romish Religion, & ceux Religious persons, come Abbots, Priors, & tiels semblables, ont le aduowson de ascū parso∣nage al eux & a lour suc∣cessors, & obtain licence
de lour S. Pere le Pape, & de le Ordinarie & Roy, q̄ ils mesmes & lour suc∣cessors de ceo en auant doyent este parsons la, & il serra en auāt vn vicar', & que le Vicar seruera le cure. Et issint al cōmen∣cem̄t Appropriations fu∣eront faites solement a ceux persons spirituals, que puissciēt minister les sacraments, & dire de∣uine seruice, come Ab∣bes, Priors, Deanes, & tiels semblables. Apres per petite & petite ils fu∣eront enlarge & fait as auters, come nosmement al Deane & Chapter, quel est corps corporat, consi∣stant de plusors, q̄l corps ensemble ne puissoit dire deuine seruice: & q̄ pluis fuit, al Nuns que fueront Prioresses de ascun Nūry quel fuit chose horrible, entant q̄ ils ne puissoient minister sacraments ne preacher, ne dire deuine seruice al parochians. Et tout ceo fuit sur pre∣tence de hospitalitie & maintenance de yeel. Et de supplier cel defectes
vn vicar fuit deuise, quel serroit deputie al Priores ou Deane & Chapter, & auxy al darrein al dits abbeis & auters a dire de∣uine seruice, & il aueroit pur son labor fors{que} pe∣tite portion, & ils a quel le appropriatiōs fueront fait reteigneront le grād reuenues, & ils fesoient riens pur ceo, per meanes de quel hospitality decay en le lieu ou il doit estre chiefement garde, nos∣mement en le parish ou le benefice fuit, & ou les profits cresscient, & is∣sint il continue tanque a cest iour, al graund hin∣drance de erudition, al impouerishment de le ministerie, & le infamie de le Gospell & le pro∣fessors de yeel. Le Vicar auera vn cer∣taine portion del bene∣fice, & que le Abbe & le Couent serront parsons & auerōt les auters pro∣fits: Cest appel vn ap∣propriation, & donques le Abbe & le Couēt ser∣rōt parsons imparsonees. Mes tiel appropriation
ne poit estre fait a com∣mencer en le vie le par∣son sans son assent. Mes si tiel aduowson del parsonage soit recouer {per} auncient title, donq̄s lap∣propriation est adnul. Et est appel appropriation, pur ceo que ils teigne les profits al lour pro{per} vse. Approuement. APprouement est lou vn home ad common en le wast terre del Seig∣nior & le seignior enclose part del wast terre pur luy mesme, relinquishant nient obstant sufficient common oue egresse & regresse pur les commo∣ners: Cest enclosure est appel approuement. Arbitrement. ARbitrement est vn a∣ward, determination, ou iudgement, quel plu∣sors font al request de deux parties al meins, pur, &, sur ascun det, tres∣pas, ou aut controuersie ew perenter les dits par∣ties. Et cest appel en La∣tin Arbitratus & Arbi∣trium,
& ils que font le awarde ou arbitrement sōt appel Arbitri, en An∣glois Arbitrators. 54 Arrest. ARrest est quant vn est prise & restrain a son libertie. Nul serra arrest pur det, trespas, detinue, ou auter cause de acti∣on, mes per virtue dun precept ou commande∣ment hors de ascū court. Mes pur Treason, Fe∣lonie, ou debruser del peace, chescun home ad aucthoritie de arrester sans garrantie ou pre∣cept. Et lou vn serra ar∣rest pur felonie, il coui∣ent que ascun felonie soit fait, & que il soit suspect de mesme le fe∣lonie, ou auterment il poit auer enuers luy que issint luy arrest vn briefe de faux imprisonment. Et quant ascun home est arrest pur felony il serra amesne a le gaile, la a demurrer tanque al pro∣cheine sessiō pur este in∣dite, ou pur este deliuer per proclamation.
Arrerages. ARrerages sont duties arrere nient pay apres le iours & temps, en quel ils fueront dues, & doy∣ent auer estre paies, soyēt il rent de mannor, ou ascun auter chose reserue Assets. ASsets est en deux sorts lun appel (assets per discent) lauter (Assets en∣ter maines.) Assets per discent est lou vn home est oblige en vn obliga∣tion & morust seisy de tres de fee simple, queux discēde a son heire, don∣ques cest terre serra appel assets, cest adire sufficient de payer cest det & per cest meanes le heire ser∣ra charge cy auant que le terre issint a luy dis∣cende voyle stretch. Mes sil ad alien deuaunt que le obligation soit mise en suite, il est discharge. Auxi quant vn home seisie de terre en tayle, ou en droit de son feme, ali∣en ceo oue garrantie, & ad en value tant terre en
fee simple que discende a son heire: q̄ est auxi heire en taile ou heire al feme, Ore si le heire apres le mort sō ancestor port vn briefe de Formedon ou sur cui in vita, pur le tre issint alien, donq̄s il serra barre per reason dun gar∣rāty & le terre issint dis∣cend, que est tant en value come ceo q̄ fuit vende, & issint per ceo il nad re∣ceiue ascun preiudice, & per ceo cest terre est ap∣pel Assets per discent. Assets enter maines est quant vn home endet, come deuant est dit, fait executors & relinquist a eux suffic' de paier, ou as∣cun cōmodity ou profit est venus al eux en droit lour testatour, cest appel Assets en lour maines. 57 Assignee. ASsignee est celuy a que vn chose est appoint, ou assign̄ deste occupy, pay ou fait, & est toutes foites tiel person, que oc∣cupy ou ad le chose issint assigne en son droit de∣mesne & pur luy mesme,
Et de assignees il y sont ij. sortes nosmēt assignee en fait & assignee en ley. Assignee en fait est quant vn leas est graūt al vn & a ses assignees ou sans ceux {per}ols, assignees, & le grā∣tee done, grant ou vende le dit leas al auter, il est son assignee en fait. As∣signee en le ley est ches∣cun executor nosme {per} le testatour en son testamēt: si come vn leas soit fait al vn home & a ses assignees (sicome est auāt dit) & il fait ses executors & mo∣rust sans assignm̄t del leas al ascun aut, Ore les exe∣cutors aūa m̄ le leas pur ceo q̄ ils sont ses assignees en ley. Et issint est en au∣ters semblables cases. Assise. ASsise est vn briefe & gist ou ascun home est mis hors de son terre ou tenementes ou de ascun profit aprēdre en certain lieu & issint disseisi de sō franktenement. Frank∣tenement a ascun hom est lou il est seisie de ter∣res ou tenements ou pro∣fit a prender in fee sim∣ple,
fee taile, pur terme de son vie demesne, ou pur terme dauter vie. Mes te∣naunt per Elegit, tenaunt per statute marchant & statute staple poient auer assise, comēt que ils nont frank tenement, & cest est ordayne per diuers sta∣tutes. Auxi en assise il coui∣ent touts foes que il soit vn disseisor & tenant ou auterment le brief a∣batera. Auxi ou vn home est disseisi & recouera per assise de nouel disseisin, & puis est auterfoits dis∣seisi per mesme le dissei∣sor, il auera vers luy vn briefe de redisseisin di∣recte al vicount de fayre inquisitiō, & si troue soit le redisseisin, il serra mis en prison. Auxi si home recoūa {per} Assise de Mort∣dauncester ou per auter Iurie, ou per default ou redditiō, & sil soit auter∣foits disseisie, il auera dō∣ques vn brief de Post dis∣seisin, & cestuy q̄ est pris & imprisō pur redisseisin, ne serra deliuer sās espe∣cial
commaundement le Roy. Vide les estatutes inde Merton ca 3. Marl∣bridge, Cap. 8. Et West∣minster 2. Cap. 26. Auxy il est vn auter Assise ap∣pell Assise de Fresh force & gist lou home est dis∣seisie de tenements que∣ux son deuisables, come en le Citie de London ou auter Boroughs ou villes que sont enfraunchises, donques le defendant vi∣endra en la Court de dit Ville & entra son plaint, & aūa vn briefe direct al Maire ou Bay∣lifes &c. & sur ceo pas∣sera vn Iurie en manner dassise de Nouell dissei∣sin, Mes il couient que il entra son plint deins xl. iours, vt dicit ou auterm̄t il serra misse a le commo ley, Et si le ministres de∣lay execution, donques le plaintife auera vn au∣ter briefe dauer execu∣tion▪ Et Sicut alias, & Pluries &c. Vide Lattlet Ca. Rents, Assise ē nosme equiuocum &c.
59 Assise de darraine presentment. ASsise de darrain presēt∣m̄t, vide de ceo ap̄s ti∣tulo Quare impedit. 60 Assise de Mort∣dancester. ASsise de Mortdācester, vide de ceo apres titu∣lo Cosinage. 61 Attainder. ATtainder, est vn con∣viction dascun person dun crime ou fault, dont il ne fuit conuicte deuāt, si come vn home fait fe∣lony, treason, ou tiels sē∣blables, & de ceo est en∣dicte, arraign̄, & troue guiltie & adiudge, don∣ques il est dit deste at∣taint, & ceo poiet este deux voies, lun sur appa∣rāce▪ le aut sur default: le attainder sur apparance, est per cōfession, battaile ou verdict, le attainder sur default est per {pro}cesse tanque il soit vtlage. 62 ¶ Attaint. ATtaint est vn briefe & gist lou faux verdicte est done per xij. homes &
iudgement done sur ceo, donque le partie vers que ils auoyent passe auera cest briefe vers les douze homes, & quant ils sont a issue, il serra trie per vynt quater Iurours, & si faux verdict soit troue, les douze Iurours sount at∣taint, & donques le iudg∣ment serra que lour prees serront aires, lour mea∣sons debruses, lour boyes subuertes, & touts lour terres & tenements for∣faites al Roy, mes sil pas∣sa enconter celuy que port lattaint, il serra im∣prison & grieuousment ransome al volūt le Roy, Vide le Statute 23. H. 8. cap. 3. Attaint auxy est quant iudgment est done en treason on felony. Attournement. ATtournement, est quāt vn est tenaunt pur tme de vie, & cestuy en la reuersion ou remainder granta son droit ou estate a vn auter, donques il co∣uient q̄ le tenāt pur tme de vie agree a ceo, & cē a∣greem̄t est appel atturn∣ment,
ear si cestuy en le reuersiō grant son estate, & son droit a vn auter, si le tenāt pur terme de vie ne attourna, riens passe per le grant. Mes sil soit graunt per fine en Court de record, il serra compel de attour∣ner, Et vide de ceo apres titulo Quid iuris clamat, vide pluis de ceo en Litt lib 3. cap. 10. 64 ¶ Audita quaerela. AVdita quaerela, est vn briefe & gist lou vn est oblige en vn estatute marchant, estatute Sta∣ple ou Recognisance, ou lou iudgement est done vers luy pur det, & son corps in executiō sur ceo, donques sil ad vn releas ou auter sufficient mat∣ter deste discharg del ex∣ecution, mes nad iour de ceo pleder, donques il a∣uera cest briefe vers ce∣stuy que ad recouer, ou vers ses executours. 65 ¶ Auerment. AVerm̄t est lou vn ho∣me plede vn plee en a∣batement
de briefe ou barre dactiō, quel il dist, il est prist de prouer co∣me le Court voit agard, cest offer de prouer son plee est appel vn Auerm̄t. ¶ Auerpeny. AVerpeny, hoc est quiet esse de diuersis dena∣rijs pro aueragiis domini Regis. Auncien demesne. AVncien demesne sont cert tenures tenus de ceux Manours queux fu∣erōt en maynes de S. Ed. le confessor, & les queux il fist escrier en vn liuer appelle Domes day, Sub titulo R. & toutes les ter∣res tenus del dit Manors sont auncien demesne, & les tenants ne serrōt im∣plede hors del dit Man̄s, & sils sontils poiēt mon∣stre le matter & abater le brief, mes sils respōder al brief & plede & iudgm̄t done, donq̄s les terres sōt deuenus frank fee a touts iours. Auxi touts tenants en auncien demesne sont franke de tolle, pur touts
choses concernant lour viand' & husbandry en auncien demesne, & pur tiels terres ils ne serront mis ne impanel sur ascun enquest. Mes touts les terres en ancient demesn̄ queux sont in maines le roy sont frank fee & ple∣dable al common ley. Veies plus apres en le ti∣tle Sokmans. 68 Auowrie. AVowrie est lou vn prist distresse pur rent ou auter chose, & lauter sua repleuin donques celuy q̄ auoit prise iustifiera en son plee, pur quel cause il prist ceo, & si il prist ceo en son droit demesne il ceo doit monstre, & issint auowa le prisel, & ceo est appel son auowry: Mes sil ceo prist en ou pur le dr̄t de vn auter, don{que} quant il auoit monstre le cause, il ferra conusāce del pri∣sel, come bailie ou seruāt a celuy en que droit il prist ceo.
B. Baile. BAile, est quant vn hōe est prise ou arrest pur felonie, suspition de fe∣lonie, indict de felonie, ou ascun tiel case, issint que il est restraine de son libertie. Et esteant per la ley bailable, offereth suertie al eux que ont au∣cthoritie de luy bailer, q̄ux suerties sont oblige pur luy al vse le Roigne en vn certain summe dar∣gent, ou corps pur corps, q̄ il appearera deuant les Iustices gaole deliuery al prochein sessions &c. Dō∣ques sur le bonds de ceux suerties, cōe est auantdit, il est baile, cest adire, mis al libertie tan{que} le iour appoint pur sō apparāce. Bailement. BAilement, est vn deli∣uerie de choses, soyent ils de escripts, biens ou stuffe al auter, ascun foits destre redeliuer ar∣rere al bailor, cest adire
al celuy que issint deliuer ceo, ascun foits al vse del bailee, cest adire de luy a que il est deliuer, & ascun foits auxy il est deliuer a vn tierce person, cest deli∣uerie est appell vn baile∣ment. 71 Bailife. BAilife est vn officer que appertient a vn manor, pur order le husbandrie, & ad aucthoritie de paier quite rents issuing hors del manor, succider ar∣bres, repaire les measons, faire pales, haies, distraine aūs dam̄ fesāt sur le terr, & diūs tiels semblables. Cest officer est celuy q̄ les auncient Saxons ont appel vn Reue, car le nos∣me Bailife ne fuit don{que} conus enter eux, mes viēt eins oue les Normans, & est appel en Latin Villi∣cus. 72 Backberinde theefe. BAckberind theefe ē vn laron q̄ est prise oue le maner, cest adire, aiāt ceo troue sur lui esteāt pursue
oue le hue & crie) le quel il ad emblee, soit il mo∣ney, lynnen, wollen, ou auter stuffe: mes il est pl properment dit, quant il est prise portāt tiels cho∣ses que il ad emblee en vn bundel ou fardel sur son dorse. Bargaine & sale. BArgain & sale est quāt vn recompence est don per ambideux les parties al bargaine: come si vn bargain & vend son terre al auter pur argent, icy le terre est vn recompence a luy pur le argent, & lar∣gent est vn recompence al auter pur le terre, & cē est vn bone contract & bargaine, & fee simple passa nient obstant il ne dit a auer & tener le tre a luy & a ses hs. Et {per} tiel bargaine & sale terres poient passe sans liuerie de seisin, si le bargaine & sale soit per fait endent, seale & enrolle, ou en le countie ou le terre gist, ou en vn des Courts del Roigne de recorde, al Westm̄ deins sixe mois
prochein apres le date de mesme le escript endent, accordant al statute en cē case fait en le 27. an de H. 8. cap. 16. 74 Barre. BArre, est quant le defē∣dant en ascun action plede vn plee que est vn sufficient respons, & ceo adnul le action del plain∣tife a touts iours. 75 Base fee. TEner en Fee base, est a tener a volunt le Seig∣nior. 76 Bastarde. BAstard, est celuy que est nee de ascun feme ni∣ent espouse, issint que son pere nest conus per le or∣der del ley, & pur ceo il est dit filius populi. Mes per la ley del Ro∣mish esglise, si vn engen∣der vn enfant sur ascun feme, quel enfant est nee hors del espousels, & puis il espouse m̄ la femme, donques tiel enfant serra dit Mulier, & nemy ba∣starde.
Mes per la ley Dengle∣terre il est bastarde, & pur cest cause quant tiel especiall bastardie est al∣leage, il serra trie pr le pais, & nemy per Leues∣que▪ Mes generalment bastardie alleage serra trie per le certificat del Euesque. Et si vn feme soit grosse de enfant per son baron que morust, & el prist auter baron, & apres le enfant est nee, cest enfant serra dit lenfant le pri∣mer baron. Mes si el fuit priuement enseint al temps del mort sa pri∣mer baron, donques il serra dit lenfant del se∣cond baron. Sed quaere & veies le opiniō de Thorp 21. E. 3. 39. Auxi si vn home prent feme que soit grossemēt enseint per ascū aut q̄ ne fuit son baron, & apres lenfant est nee deins les espousels, donques il serr dit lenfant le baron mes∣que il fuit nee fors vn iour apres les espousels solempnise.
77 Battaile. BAttaile est vn auncient trial en nostre ley, que le defendant en vn ap∣peal de murder, robbe∣ry, ou felonie poit eslier, cestascauoir, a combater oue lappellāt, pur proofe sil soit culpable del felo∣nie ou non: quel com∣bate sil succeede sibien del part le defendant que il vanquish lappellant, il alera quite, & luy barre∣ra de son appeal a touts iours. Mes si vn soit in∣dict de felonie, & vn ap∣peal est port sur mesme le indictmēt, la le defen∣dant ne gagera le battail: battaile auxi poit estre en vn briefe de droit. 78 Bigamy. BIgamy, fuit vn coun∣terple (deuise al coun∣cel de Lions sur missike de second mariage) deste obiect quant le benefite de clergie, cestassauoir, son liuer, come nosment a dire, que il que de∣maund le priuiledge del Clergie, fuit marrie a tiel femme en tiel lieu,
deins tiel dioces & que el est mort, & que il ad a∣pres marrie vn aut feme deins mesme le diocesse ou deins ascun auter dio∣cesse, & issint Bigamus. Ou sil nad este forsque vn temps marrie, donques adire que el que il es∣pouse est, ou fuit vn viefe, cest adire, le relicte dun tiel &c. Le quel chose serra trie per Leuesque de le Diocesse ou le es∣pousals sont alleage. Et esteant issint certifie per Leuesque le prisoner per∣dera le benefite del cler∣gie: Mes al cest iour per force de le acte fait en Anno 1. E. 6. cap. 12. cest nul plea, mes que il poet auer son clergie ceo niēt obstant. Issint est Brooke titu∣lo Clergie placito 20. al mesme purpose. Et sur ceo si vous estes desirous, de veyer q̄ux reasons ils ont que perswade enuers second espousals, lege ent diuers auters Frances Pe∣trarche de remedus vtri∣usque fortunae le primer liuer & lxxvi. Dialogue,
intituled de secūdis nup∣tiis, quel liuer ore tarde Master Thomas Twine ad bien & oue bon grace (come ils q̄ poyent iud∣ger diount) translate hors de Latin en Englois, & mult aptment appell ceo Phisicke encounter fortune. 79 Bloodwit. BLoodwit, hoc est quie∣tum esse de amercia∣mentis de sanguine fuso, & que teneantur placita in curia vestra, habebiti amerciamenta inde pro∣uenientia quia (wit) en Anglois est misericordia∣en Latin. 80 Boote. BOote, est vn viel parol, & il signifie helpe, suc∣cour, ayde, ou aduantage & est communmēt ioynt oue vn auter parol, que signification il augment come ceux bridgeboote, burghboote, fireboote, hedgeboote, plowboote, & diuers tiels sembla∣bles, pur queux significa∣tions, eyes en lour pro∣per titles.
Broodhalpeny. BRoodhalpeny, en ascū copies, broodhalbeny, hoc est, quietum esse de quadā consuetudine exa∣cta pro tabulis leuatis. Burgage. TEner en Burgage est a tener sicōe les burgeis teignēt de Roy, ou de aut seigniour terres ou ten̄ts rendant a luy vn certaine rēt {per} an, ou auterment la ou vn auter home q̄ Bur∣geis tient dascun Seigni∣our terres ou tenements en Burgage rendant a luy vn certaine rent per an. Brugbote. BRugbote (& en ascuns copies bridgbote (hoc est quietum esse de auxi∣lio dando ad reficiendum pontes. 84 Burghbote. BVrghbote, hoc est qui∣etum esse de auxilio dando ad faciendum Bur∣gum, castrum, ciuitatem vel muros prostrata.
85 Burghbrech. BVrghbrech, hoc est quietū esse de trāsgres∣sionibus factis in ciuitate vel Burgo contra pacem. 86 Burgh English. BVrgh English, ou Bo∣rough English, est vn custome en vn auncient borough, ou si vn hōe ad issue diuers fits & morust vncore le puisne fits sole∣ment inheritera, & auera touts les terrer & ten̄ts, q̄ fueront a son pe re de q̄ il morust seisie deins m̄ le burgh per discent, come heire a son pere, {per} force del custome de mesme le burgh. 87 Burglarie. BVrglarie, est quant vn debruse & enter en le meason dun auter en le nuit, oue felonious intēt, de robber ou occider ou de faire auter felony en queux cases nient obstāt il ne emport riens, vncore il est felony {per} que il serra pendue. Auterment est fil soit en le iour ou que il
debruse le meason en le nuit, & ne entre pas en ceo a cest temps. Mes si vn seruant voile conspire oue auters de robber son Master, & a cel entēt il ouer lesdores, & fenestres de son Master en le nuit pur eux, & ils vient en le meson per cest voy, cest Burglarie en les estrangers, & le seruant est vn laron, mes nemy Bur∣glar. Et ceo fuit lopinion de le right worshipful Sir R. Manwood Chiualer, plus digne Seignior chief Baron de le Exchequer a la quarter Sessions tenus en Canterbury in Ianuary 1579. 21. Eliz. Capias. CApias, vide de ceo ap̄s en la title Proces. Caruage. CAruage, hoc est, quietū esse si dn̄s Rex tallia∣uent totā terrā suam per Caruas. Nota q̄ vn carue de tre est vn plow land. Certificatio in assise. CErtificatio Assise no∣uae disseisine, est vn
briefe & gist lou le bay∣life le ten̄t in Assise plede nul tort &c. & parde per lassise, donques si le tenāt ad vn release ou auter e∣script a pleder, il auera cest briefe, & les primers iurors serrōt garnes dap∣perer deuant les Iustices & parties auxi, donques si puit este troue que le release ou lescripts son voyer & bones, cestuy qui recoueroit in lassise, rendra dāmages en dou∣ble & perdra la terre. 91 Cerciorari. CErciorari, est vn briefe & gist lou vn est im∣plede en vn base Court, que est de recorde, & il suppose que il ne poit aū equal Iustice la, donques sur vn bill en la Chance∣rie comprisant ascū mat∣ter en conscience, il aue∣ra cest briefe pur remo∣uer tout le Record en la Chauncery, & la deste determin per conscience, mes sil ne proua son bill, donques lauter party a∣uera vn br̄ de Procedēdo a remaūd' le record en la
base Court, & la deste detmine. Auxi il gist en plusors auts cases pur re∣moū Records pur le roy cōe inditem̄ts & auters. Cession. CEssion est quant vn ec∣clesiastical {per}son ē cree Eues{que}, ou quant vn per∣son dun parsonage prist vn aut benefice sans dis∣pensatiō ou auterm̄t mēt qualified &c. En ambi∣deux cases lour prim̄ be∣nefices sont deuenus void & sont appel destre voide per cession, & al ceux q̄ il ad que fuit cree eues{que}, Le Roigne presētera pro illa vice, quicunque soit patron de eux. Et en laut case le patron poit p̄sent. Cessauit. CEssauit, est vn brief & gist lou mō verie tenāt q̄ tient de moy certeine tre ou tenem̄ts rendaunt certeine rēt {per} an, & le rēt est arrere nient paye per deux ans, & nul sufficient distresse poit este troue sur le terre, donq̄s ieo a∣uera cest brief {per} q̄ ieo re∣couera le terre, mes si le
tenant vient in Court de∣uant iudgement, & rend▪ le arrerages, & les dama∣ges, & troue suerty que il ne cessera plus de paim̄t de dit rent, ieo serra cō∣pel de prēder les arrerag. & les damages, & don{que} le tenant ne perdera la terre. Auxy heire ne poyt maintaine cel briefe pur cesser fait en tēps son aū∣cestor, Auxi cest briefe ne gist, mes pur annuall ser∣uice come rent & huius∣modi & nient pas pur homage & fealtie. Auxi il y ad auter brief appel Cessauit de canta∣ria, & gist ou vn done terres a vn meason de re∣ligion a trouer pur lame de luy & de ses aunce∣stors, & de ses heires an∣nuelment vn chandel ou Lamp in Esglise, ou pur faire ascū diuine seruice, ou de paster les pouers, ou auter almes, ou auter chose faire, donques si les dits charges ne sont pas fait per ij. ans, don{que} le donor ou ses heires aue∣ra cest briefe vers que∣cunque est eins apres til
cesser. Vide lestatut W. 2. cap. 41. Challenge. CHallenge, est lou Iu∣rors appeōt pur trier vn issue, donques si ascun des parties supposont que ils ne sont pas indifferēt, la ils poient eux challēge & refuse. Ils ad ēe diuers challē∣ges: vn est challēge al ar∣ray: lauter est al polles. Challenge al array est quant la panel est fauo∣rablement fait per le vi∣count ou auter officer. Challēge {per} les polls sōt ascuns principal, & ascun {per} cause, cōe il appel ceo. Principall est quant vn des Iurors est le fits, frere ou cosin al plaintife ou defendant, ou tenant a luy, ou q̄ il auoit espouse la file le plaintife, & pur cux causes il serra re∣trait. Auxi in plee de le mort de hōe & en chesc▪ action real, & en actions perso∣nal, si le det ou damages amount a xl. marks il est bon challēge q̄ il ne poit
dispender xl. shillings per an de franketenement. Challenge per cause est ou le party alleage vn matter que nest princi∣pal challenge, come que fits dun des Iurors es∣pouse la file le plaintife, & donques conclude & pur ceo il est fauorable, quel serra trie per auters del enquest, si il soit fa∣uorable ou indifferent, & si ils▪ diont que il est fauorable, & nemy in∣different, donques il ser∣ra treit auterment il serra iure. Auxy vn felon que est arraigne poyt challenge xx. Iurours peremptory sans ascun cause, & ceo est in fauorē vitae, & tant que il voile oue cause, mes donques il serra trie si pur tiel cause il soit in∣different ou nemy. 95 Champertie. CHampertie est vn brief & gist lou deux hōes sont impleadants, & lun done la moitie ou parte del chose in plee a vn estraunge pur luy main∣teiner
encounter lauter, donques le partie greue auera cest briefe deuers lestrange: Vide lestatute Articuli super Chartas Cap. 11. Champertors. CHampertors sont ceux q̄ moua plees & fuits, ou cause deste moue, per lour ou auters procure∣ment, & sue a lour costa∣ges & charge demesne, pur auer parte del terre, ou gaines en variance. Charge. CHarge est lou vn hōe graunta vn rent issu∣ant hors de son terre, & que si le rent soit arrere, que serra list a luy, ses heires & assignes a dis∣trayner tāque le rent soit pay, cest appel vn rent charge. Mes si vn graunt vn rent charge hors del terre dun auter, & puis purchase la terre, le grant est void. Charters. CHarters de terres sont escripts, faits, euiden∣ces, & instruments, fait de vn home a lauter, sur
ascun estate conueied ou passed perenter eux de tres ou tenem̄ts, mōstrāt lēs nosmes, lieu, & quan∣titie del terre, le estate, tēps & maner del feasans de yeel, les parties a le e∣state deliuer & prise, les tesmoignes p̄sent al ceo, oue auters circumstāces. 99 Chattels. CHattels sont en deux sorts, cest adire, chat∣tels reals & chattels per∣sonels, chattels reals sont leases pur ans, gards, & a tener a volunt. Chattels personels sont touts moueable biēs, co∣me argēt, plate, biens del meason, chiuals, vacches, blees & tiels semblables. 100 Childwit. CHildwit hoc est, quod capiatis gersummā de natiua vestra corrupta & pregnata sine licētia ve∣stra. 101 Chimin. CHimin est le hault voy lou chescū home pas∣sa q̄ est appel via Regia, & vncore le Roy nad
auter chose la forsque le passage pur luy & son people, car le franktene∣ment est en le Seignior del soile, & touts les pro∣fits cressants la come ar∣bres & auters choses. Chose en action. CHose en actiō est quāt vn home ad cause, ou poit porter vn action pur asc' duitie due a luy, cōe vn action de det sur vn obligation, annuity, rent, couenāt, gard, biens, tres∣pas, ou tiels semblables, & pur ceo que ils sont choses de queux vn home nest possesse, mes pur re∣couerie de eux est mis a son action, ils sont appel choses en action. Et ceux choses en action que sont certaine le Roigne poit granter, & le grātee poit vser vn action pur eux en son nosme demesne so∣lement. Mes vn common person ne poit graunter son chose en action, ne le Roigne luy mesme ne poit grāter sa chose ē ac∣tiō quel est vncertain, cōe trespas & tiels sēblables.
103 Cinque ports. CInque portes, sont cer∣tain hauen villes, sink en n̄umber, as queux ad este graunt long temps passe mult liberties (que auts port villes nont) & ceo primerm̄t en le tēps del▪ Roy Edward appel le Confessor (q̄ fuit deuant le conquest) & fueront encrease apres, & ceo e∣specialment en les iours del trois Edwards, le pri∣mer, second & le tierce, (ap̄s le conq̄st) cōe apiert en le lieur de Domesday, & auts vieux Monum̄ts, queux en cest lieur ser∣ront trope long de citer. 104 Circuity de actiō. CIrcuity de action, est quāt vn actiō est droi∣turelm̄t port pur vn dui∣tie mes vncore circum le bush cōe semble, pur ceo q̄ ceo poit sibiē estre au∣termēt respondue & de∣termin & le suit saue, & pur ceo q̄ mesme le actiō fuit pluis q̄ besoigne, il est appel circuit de actiō. Come si vn home grant vn rent charge de x. li.
hors de son mannor de Dale, & apres le grantee disseisist le grauntor de mesme le manor de Dale, & il port vn Assise & re∣couer le terre & xx. li da∣mages lequel xx. li. este∣ant paie, le grauntee del rent sue son action pur x. li. de son rent due durant le temps de le disseisin, le quel si nul disseisin ad este il doit auer ew, Cest appel circuitie de action, pur ceo que il poit auer estr pluis briefment re∣spondue, car lou le graū∣tor doit receiue xx. li. da∣mages, & paie x. li. rent, il puit auer receiue fors∣que le x. li. solement pur les damages, & le graun∣tee puit auer recoupe & retain arrere le auter x. li. en ses mains per voy de detainer pur son rent, & issint per yeel poiet auer saue son action. Claime. CLaime est vn challēge per ascun home de le propertie ou ownership de vn chose que il nad en possession, mes ceo q̄ est
detaine a luy torciouse∣ment. 106 Clergie. CLergie est vn auncient libertie confirme en diuers parliaments, Et est quāt vn home est arraign de felonie ou tiels sem∣blables deuant vn tem∣poral Iudge &c. & le pri∣soner pria son clergie, cest adire, pur auer son Lieur, quel en auncient temps fuit autant sicome il vst prie deste dismisse del temporall Iudge, & deste liuer al Ordinarie de purger luy mesme de mesme offence. Et don∣ques le Iudge comman∣der lordinarie de trier sil puit lyer come vn Clerke en tiel liuer & lieu come le Iudge assignera, & si lordinary certifie le Iudg, que il puit, donques le prisoner nauera iudge∣ment de perder son vie. Vide Stamford. lib. 2. cap 41. & quere le statute 18. Eliz. cap. 7. 107 Clerke Attaint. CLerke Attaint, est ce∣stuy que pria son cler∣gie
apres iudgement sur luy done de felonie, & ad son Clergie allow, tiel clerke ne poit faire son purgation. Clerke conuict. CLerke conuict, est ce∣stuy que pria son cler∣gie deuant iudgement done sur luy de le felo∣nie, & ad le clergie a luy graunt, tiel clerke puit faire son purgation. No∣ta que cel purgation fit, quant il fuit dismisse al ordinary, la destre trie del enquest del clerkes, & pur ceo ore per statute 18 E∣liz. ca. 7. nul tiel est misso al ordinarie. 109 Colour. COlour, est vn fained matter, le quel le de∣fendant ou tenant ve en son bar, quant vn action de trespas ou vn assise est port enuers luv, en le ql il done demaundant, ou plaintife vn shew prima fie, que il ad bone cau∣se de action, lou en verite il nest iust cause, mes tāt∣solement vn colour ou
visour dun cause: Et il est vse al entēt que le de∣termination del action doet este per les iudges, & nemy par vn ignorant Iury, de xij. homes. Et pur ceo vn colour doet este vn matter en ley, ou difficult al lay gents: co∣me pur example A. port vn assise de terre enus B. & B. dit que il m̄ lessa m̄ le terre al vn C. pur tme de vie & apres graunt le reuersion al A. le de∣maundant, & puis C. le tenant pur terme de vie morust, apres que decease A. le defendant claimant le reuersion per force del graunt (ou C. le tenant pur vie ne vnques at∣turne) entra, sur que B. entra, enuers que A. pur mesme entre port cest assise &c. Cest vn bone colour, pur ceo que les ley gentes pensant que le terre voile passe per le graunt sans atturnment, lou en fait il ne voyle passe &c. Auxy en vn action de trespasse, colour doit este done, & de eux sont
vn infinite number, vn pur example: En vn ac∣tion de trespas pur pri∣sel de auers del plaintife, le defendaunt dit, que denaunt le plaintife riens auoit en eux, il mesme fuit possesse de eux come de ses proper biens, & eux deliuer al A B. pur eux rebailer a luy quado &c. & A. B. eux dona al Plaintife, & le plaintife suppose le propertie de∣stre en A. B. al temps del done prist eux, & le de∣fendant eux reprist del plaintif, sur que le plain∣tife port laction: cest vn bon colour, & vn bon plea. Vide de ceo pluis en les Drologues ent le Doctor & Student. li. 2. cap 13. Colour de office. COlore officii, est toutes dites prist in malam partem & signifie vn act malement fait per le countenance de vn of∣fice, & il port vn dissi∣mulant vyage del droit office, lou le office nest q̄ vaile del fauitie & le
chose est ground sur vice & offie st come vn sha∣dow al ceo. Mes ratio∣ne officii, & vertute offi∣cii sont pises toutes for∣es in bonm partem, & lou le office est le iust cause del chose, & le cho∣se est pursuant al of∣fice. 111 Collusion. COllusion▪ est lou vn a∣ction est port vers vn auter per son agreement demesne, si le plaintife recouer, tiel recouerie est dit per collusion, & en ascuns cases le collusion serra enqure come en vn Quare impedit. Assise & tiels semblables, queux ascun corporation ou corps politique port en∣uers auter al entent de a∣uer le terre ou aduowson, dont le bee est port en mortmine. Mes en a∣uowrie ne en ascun acti∣on personal le collusion ne serra enquire. Vide stitute W. 2. capit. 32. que done le quale ius & le enquirie in tiel case.
Common ley. COmmon ley, est pur le pluis pate prise 3. voyes. Primerm̄t, pur ls leyes de cest Realm sim∣ply, sans as▪  ly, come customarie ly, ciuil ley, spiritual ley u qu aut ley i a ceo, come quant il  despute ē no∣stre lyes anglere, quid doet de droit est deter∣mine pr le common ley & quid per spiritual ley, ou le Court del Admiral ou tiels semblables. Second t il est prise pur les Courtes le Roy, come l bke le roy ou common place,  pur mnstre vn diffce peēr c les base courtes, come customarie courts, courts Barons. Countie courts, Ppowdes & tils sem∣blables: cme qū vn ple de terre est remoue hors de anciēt demesn̄ pur co q̄ le re ē frāk se & ple∣dable al cōmon ley, cest adire ē la Court le R. & nemy ē anciēt demesn̄ ou en as▪ auter bae court. Tiercet & pluis vsu∣alment
per le comon ley est entendue tiels leys q̄ fueront generalmēt prise & tenus pur ley deuant q̄ ascun estatut fuit fait pur alter ceo, cōe pur exāple, Tenant pur vie, ne pur ans ne fueront deste punish pur fesance wast a com∣mon ley tan{que} le statut de Gloucester ca. 5. fuit fait, le quel done vn action de wast enuers eux. Mes tenant per le curtesie, & tenant in dower, fueront punishable pur wast al common ley, cest adire, per le vsuall & common receiued leys de Realme deuaunt le dit statute de Gloucester fuit fait. 113 Common. COmmon, est le droit que home ad de mit∣ter ses beasts a pasture, ou de vser & occupier le tre q̄ nest son proper soile. Et nota que sont di∣uers commons cest adire common en grosse, com∣mon appendant, com∣mon appurtenant, & cō∣mon per cause de visi∣nage,
Common en grosse est lou ieo per mon fait graunt a vn auter, que il auer cōmon in ma terre. Common appendāt est lou home est seisi de cer∣tein terre, a que il ad cō∣mon in auter soil, & touts ceux que serront seisi del dit terre aueront le dit common solement pur ceux beastes que compast sa terre a que il est appē∣dant, except oysons, chi∣uers, & porceaux. Et touts iours, cest cō∣mon est per prescripti∣on, & de common droit, & il est appendant al ter∣re erable solement, & nemy al auter terre ou meason. Common appurte∣naunt est en mesme le manner come common appendant. Mes est oues∣que toutes manners des auers cibien porceaux, chiues & tiel semblable come chiuals, vacches, boefes, berbits, & tiels que compastr de terre. Et tiel cōon poit este fait a cest iour, & poit este se∣uer del terre a que il est
appurtenant, mes issint e poit common appen∣dant. Common pur cause de visinage est lou les te∣nants de deux Seigniours que sont seisies de deux villes, dont lun gist pres lauter, & chescun de eux ont vse de temps dont memorie  court de a∣uer comon en auter ville, ouesque toutes beastes comminable. Mes lun ne poit mitter ses auers en le terre lau∣ter, car la ceux de lauter ville poient eux distreine Damage fesant, ou auer action de Trespas, mes ils eux mittera e lour camps demese, & sils estray en les campes del auter ville, ils la doynt eux sufferer. Et les inha∣bitants de lun ville ne do∣yent mitter eins tants come il voile, mes ay∣ant regard al franktene∣ment del inhabitants de lauter ville, car auter∣ment l e soit bon vici∣nitie, sur q̄ tout cest mat∣ter depend.
Condition. COndition, est vn res∣traint ou bridle annex & ioyne al chose, issint que per le non perfour∣mance & fesans de co le partie al condition reco∣era preiudice & perde, & per le performance & faire de ceo commoditie & aduantage. Et toutes conditions sont ou conditions actu∣all & expresse, queux sont appel conditions en fait, O ls sont conditi∣ons implicite ou tacite, & ment expresse, les q̄ux sont appelles conditions en ley. Auxi touts conditions sont o conditions pre∣cedent & vaiant deuaunt lestate, & sont executed, O subsequent, & veni∣ens apres lestate & exe∣cutorie. Le condition precedēt, sait gaine & obtaine le chose ou estate fait sur condition per le perfour∣mance de mesme. Le condition subse∣quent fait garde, & con∣tinue le chose ou estate
fait sur condition per le perfourmance de ycl. Actual & expresse con∣dition, que est appel vn condition en fait, est vn condition knit & annex per expresse parolx al fe∣offement, leas ou graunt, ou en escript ou sans es∣cript. Sicome ieo enfeffe vn home en terres reser∣uant rent, destre paied a tiel feast, sur condition, que si le feoffee faile de payment al iour, que donques il serra loial pur moy de reenter. Condition implicite ou tacite & nient expresse, q̄ est appel conditiō en ley, est quant home graunt al auter le office destr̄ gar∣dein dun park, seneschal, beadle, baylife, ou tiels sembl' pur term de vie & nient obstant q̄ la ne soit ascun condition expresse en le grant, vncore le ley parle couertment de vn condition, quel est, que si le grantee ne execute pas touts points apperteināt a son office, {per} luy mesme ou son ufficient deputy, donque serra loial pur le
grantor de enter & dis∣charge luy de son office. Condition precedent & vaant deuant est, quant vn lease est fait al vn pur vie sur condition, que si le lessee pur vie voile paie al lessour xx. li. a tiel iour, que donques il aue∣ra fee simple, icy le con∣dition preceede & va de∣uant le estate in fee sim∣ple, & sur le performance de le condition, gaine & get fee simple. Condition subsequent & veniens apres, est quant vn grant a I. S. son man∣nor de Dale en fee sim∣ple sur condition, que le grauntee paiera a luy a tiel iour xx. li. ou auter∣ment que son estate ces∣sera, icy le condition est subsequent & sequens le estate in fee simple, & sur le performance de ycel, gard & continue le e∣state. Vide pluis de ceo en Littleton lib. 3. cap. 5. Et Perkins titulo vltimo de Conditions.
115 Confirmation. COnfirmation est quant vn que aiet droit al ascun terre ou tenements fait vn fait a vn auter que ait ent le possession ou ascun estate ouesque ceux parolx, Ratificasse, ap∣probasse, confirmasse oue intent de enlarger son estate, ou faire son pos∣session perfect & nient defesible per luy que fait le confirmation, ne per ascun auter que poit a∣ueigne a son droit. Dont vide pluis en Lit∣tleton Libr. 3. cap. 9. de Confirmations. 116 Confiscate biens. COnfiscate biens sont biens al q̄ux le ley en∣title le Roigne quant ils ne sont pas claime {per} ascū auter. Come si vn home soit endict q̄ il felonious∣ment emblea les biens de I. S. lou en veritie ils sont ses biens demesne, & ils sōt mise en court vers luy come vn mayneur, & donques il est demaund q̄ il dit a ceux biens, & il denie eux, ore per cest de∣nicr
de eux, il {per}dra ceux biens, coment que apres il soit acquite del felony, & issint en auters sem∣blable cases. Conspiracie. COnspiracie est vn brief & gist lou deux ou plusors sentailerent {per} se∣rement, couenant, ou aut maner aliance, q̄ chescun aydera auter pur indicter ou appeller ascun home de selonie, donques celuy que est per tiel maner en∣dict ou appeal auera cest briefe, Mes cest brief ne gist vers lendictors. Vade pluis de ceo en Stamford lib. 3. cap. 12. Custome. COnsuetud' & seruitijs est vn brief, & gist lou eo ou mes aūcestois de∣puis le limitation de as∣sise, ne fueront seisie des customes ou seruices de mon tenant, mes deuant, dōques ieo aūa cest brief pur recouer ceux seruices. Auxy le tenant poyt a∣uer cest briefe vers son Seignior, mes apres que le tenant ad count, le
Seignior defendera les motes del count, & re∣pliant dirra, que il ne di∣strayna pas pur les co∣stomes dont le count est, & donq̄s il countera tout le count de les customes & seruices, & donques le tenant que fuit plaintife deuiendra defendant, & defendra per battaile ou graund assise. 119 Consultation. COnsultation, vide de ceo apres en le title de Prohibition. 120 Continual claime. COntinual claime est lou home ad droit de entre en certain terres dont vn auter est seisi en fee simple ou fee taile, & il ne osast enter pur pa∣uor de mort ou baterie, mes approcha cy pres cōe il osast, & fait claime a ceo deins le an & iour deuant le mort de cestuy que ad le terre, si apres cestuy que ad le terre de∣uie seisie, & son heire est eins per discent, vncore cestuy que fait tiel claim poit enter sur heir nient
contristeant tiel discent, pur ceo que il ad fait tiel continual claime: Mes il couient que cest claime touts foits soit fait deins lan & iour deuaunt le mort le tenant, car si tiel tenant ne morust seisie deins lan & iour ap̄s tiel claime fait, & vncore il q̄ ad droit nosast enter, dō∣ques couient al cestuy q̄ ad tiel droit de faire au∣ter claime deins lan & iour ap̄s le primer claim, & apres tiel secōd claime de faire le tierce claime deins lan & iour, si il voit este sur de sauer son en∣tre. Mes si le disseisor de∣uie seisi deins lan & iour apres le disseisin, & nul claime ft, donques len∣tre le disseisee est tolle, car lan & iour ne serra prise de le temps del title dentre a luy accrue, mes solemēt pur le temps del darrein claime per luy fait, come est auantdit. Vide pluis de ceo en Lit∣tleton lib. 3. cap. 7. Counterplee. COunterplee est lou vn port vn action, & le
tenant en son respons & plee vouch ou appel pur ascun home pur garrant son title, ou prayer ayde de auter, que ad meliour estate, come de cestuy en la reuersion ou si vn e∣straunge al action vient & prayera deste resceu de sauer son estate, si le demaund reply a ce, & monstre le cause que il ne doyt de tiel home eyde auer, ou que tiel home e doit este resceu, cest plee est appel vn coū∣terplee al voucher, ayde. ou resceit come le case est, mes si le voucher soit allow, & quant le vouche vient eins & demaund quel chose le tenant ad de luy voucher, & le te∣naunt monstre son cause, & le vouchee plede as∣cun matter de ayder le garrantie, ceo est appel counterplee del resceit. 121 Contract. COntract, est vn bar∣gaine, ou couenant penter ij. parties ou vn chose est done pur auter que est appel, Quid pro
quo, cōe si ieo vende mon chiual pur argent, ou si ieo couenāt de faire lease a vous de mon mannor de Dale, en consideration de xx. li. que vous dones a moy, ceux sont bone cō∣tracts, pur ceo que il ad vn chose pur auter, Mes si vn home fait promise a moy, que ieo auera xx. s. & que il voile este det∣tour a moy de ceo, & puys ieo demaund xx. s. & il ne voyle a moy deli∣uer, vncore ieo nauera iāmes action pur recouer cest xx. s. pur ceo que cest promise ne fuit contract, mes nudus pactus, Et ex nudo pacto nō oritur ac∣tio, mes si ascū chose fuit dne pur le xx. s. mesque il ne fuit fors{que} al value vn denier, donques il fuit bone contracte. Contra formam col∣lationis. COntra formam colla∣tionis, est vn briefe, & gist lou home done terres en perpetual al∣moigne a ascun meson de Religion, come a
vn Abbe & la couent ou a auter soueraigne, ou al garden ou master de as∣cū Hospital, & son couēt de trouer certeine pouer homes, & de faire aut di∣uine seruice, ils alien les terres dōques le donour ou se heires, aueront le dit briefe pur recouer le terre, mes cest briefe ser∣ra tou fots port vers l'∣Abbote ou son succes∣sor, & nemy vers alience, coment que il soit tenat: mes en touts auters acti∣ons lou home demaunde francktenement, le briefe serra port vers le tenaunt del terre. Vide le statute W. 2. cap. 41. 124 Contra formam feoffamenti. COntra formam feoffa∣menti, est vn briefe, & gist lou vn home deuant lestatute de Quia emp∣tores terrarum, quel fuit fait Anno 18. Edw. in∣feoffe auter per fait de faire certaine seruice si le feoffour ou ses heires di∣straine luy de faire auter seruice que est comprise
en le fait, donques le te∣naunt auera cest briefe, luy commaundant que il ne distrayne luy de faire auter seruice, que nest comprise deins le fayt, mes cest br̄ ne gist pur le plaintife que clayme per purchase del ∣fee, mes pur tiel pla que claime come heirel primer feffee. Contributione fa∣cienda. COntributione facien∣da, est vn briefe, & gist lou sont diuers Parceners & celuy que ad le part del eygn̄, fut tout le suit al Seigniour, les auters doient faire contribution a luy, & sils ne voillont il auer vers eux le die briefe. Conusance. COnusance de plee, est vn priuiledge que vn citie ou ville ad del grant le Roy de tener plee des touts contracts, & des terres dns le precinct del Franchises: & que quant ascun home est
impleded, pur ascun tiel chose en le court de Roy al Westminster, les Ma∣iors ou Baylifes de tiels Franchises, ou lour At∣turneys poient demaun∣der Conusance del plee, scilicet, que le plee & le matter serra pled & de∣termine deuaunt eux. Mes si le court al Westm. soit loyalment seisie del plee deuaunt que Conu∣sance soit demaunde, dō∣ques ils ne auerōt Conu∣sance pur cest suite, pur ceo q̄ ils ont negligntm̄t surcease lour tēps de de∣maunder ceo, mes cest ne serra barre al eux dauer Conusace en auter actiō, car ils poient demaund Conusance en vn action, & omitte ceo en auter action a lour pleasure. Et nota que Conusance ne gist en prescription, mes ils couient monstre letters patents le Roy pur ceo. 127 Corodie. COrodie est vn allow∣ance de meate, pane, boier, argent, vestments, lodg. & tiels choses ne∣cessarie
pur sustenance: ceo ascun foits est certein ou le certeinty des choses est limit, ascun foits vn∣certeine, lou nest limit le certeintie que il aū t as∣cun de eux commence {per} grant fait {per} ascun hōe al auter, & pot est pur vie, ans, en tail ou fee: & ascū Corodies snt de cōmon droit, sicome chescū foū∣der de Abbies, Priories, Nunries, & auters mea∣sons de religiō papisick, auoient aucthoritie das∣signer tiel in mesme les measons (quant ils fue∣ront) pur son pere, frere, cosin ou auter home q̄ il voit, prendroit ceo, sil uit vn meason de moignes, & sil soit foūd del mea∣son de Nuns ou muliers, donque ceo pur sa mere, soer, cosin ou aut mulier q̄ il voil direct al ceo, & touts iours cē {pro}uo fuit ew, que il q̄ ad Corody en vn meson de moignes ne doit mitter vn feme de prender ceo. Ne ou Co∣rodie fuit due n vn Nū∣rie, l il ne fuit loall de appointer vn hōe de re∣ceiuer
ceo, car en ambi∣deux ses tiel presentati∣on fuit deste reiect. Et cest Corody fuit due si∣bien  vn commō person que fuit founder, sicome ou le Roy m̄ fut foūder, mes ou e meason fuit e∣is en frankalmoigne, la le tenure m̄ fuit vn dis∣charge de corody ncot touts hōes sicōe q̄ il fuit ap̄s charge voluntarim̄t, come ou le Roy voit mit∣ter son brief al Abbe pur vn Corody pur vn tiel le que ils admit, la le mea∣son doit este charge per ceo a touts iours, si le roy soit foūd ou nemy: vide breue de Corod. hab. en Fitz. Natura br̄. fo. 230. Coroner COroner est vn aunc▪ of∣fic▪ de trust, & de grād aucthority, ordain dēe vn principal conseruator, ou gardein de la peas, a port record s Ples del crown & de son view demesne & de diuers auter choses mult en number &c. & pur ceo n temps le Roy Edward le primer cest
estatute sequens uit fait pur ceo que petit gents meins sages soient s ore de nouel commune∣ment al office del Coro∣ner, ou mistyer serroit q̄ probes homes loyalx & sages e enrent de cel office. Puru est▪ q̄ pr toutes les Counties oyeat ess sufficient homes Coroners, de pluis loials & plus sages c∣lrs, que mieux saat puissant & veilent a cel office entender, & q̄ loy∣alm̄t attachēt & represen∣tēt le plees del Corone. Et ment obstinte le lett de cst estatute ne soit p∣cisement obserue vncore al meins le entent doit e∣stre pursue, y pres come poit, que pur le default des chiualers, gntleōes furnished oue tiels quali∣ties si come le statut par∣le (de que ls y a diuers) p estre esieu ue cst addition que ils soyent ver &  co Christians: vide de ceo en bi de o eligendo in  Natura breuium fol. 13.
129 Corporation. COrporation, est vn cho∣se permanent que poit auer succession: Et est vn assēbly & ioyning en∣semble de diuers en vn fellowship, fraternitie & ment, de que vn est le teste & principall, let au∣ters sont le corps, & cē teste & corps ioint en∣semble font le corpora∣tion. Et de corporations ascuns sont appels spiri∣tuals ascuns temporals, & de ceux que sont spiri∣tuals ascuns fueront cor∣porations de mort per∣sons en ley, & ascuns au∣terment, & ascuns sont per aucthority del Roy solem̄t, & ascuns ont estr dū mixt auctority. Et de ceux queux sont tēporall ascuns sont {per} aucthority del roigne auxy, & ascuns {per} le cōon ley del Realm̄. Corporation spirituall & de mort persons en ley est lou le corporation consist dun Abbe & co∣uent, & ceux ont lour cō∣mencement del Roy, & le home de Rome, quant il y ad a faire cy.
Corporation spirituall & dable persons ē ley est lou le corporation con∣sist dun Deane & Chap∣ter, Master del Colledge ou Hospitall, & cest cor∣poration ad commence∣ment del Roy solement. Corporation tempo∣ral per le R. est lou est vn Maior & Comminalty. Corporation temporal per aucthority del com∣mon ley est le assembly en parliament, le quel cō∣sist del Roign le teste del corporation & Srs spi∣rituals & tēporals, & de les commons del Realm̄ le corps del corporation. Corps politike. COrps politike, sont E∣uesques, Abbeis, Pri∣ors, Deans, Parsons dun esglise, & tiels sēblables, queux ont succession en vn person solement. Corruption de sangue. COrruption de sangue, est qn̄t asc' est attaint de felony ou treason, dō∣q̄s son sague est dit deste
corrupt, per reason de q̄l ses enfants ne ascun de sō sāgue ne poēt estre heirs a luy ne ascun auter aun∣cestor, {per}ur que ils doient claime {per}er luy. Et sii fuit noble ou gentle home deuant, il & touts ses en∣fants per ceo sont saits ignoble & vngentle, ay∣ant regard al nobility ou gentrie ils claim per lour pere, que ne poit este fait fane arrere sans auctho∣ritie de Parliament. 132 Cosinage. COsinage, est vn briefe, & gist lou mon besaiel mon trēsaile, ou auter cosin deuie seisie in fee simple, & vn estrange a∣bata, cest adire, enter en les terres, donques eo auera vers luy cest briefe, ou deuers son heire ou son alienee, ou deuers q̄∣cunque que aueigne a∣pres a les dits terres. Mes si mon aiel deuie seisi, & vn estrange abate, donq̄s ieo aūa vn briefe de Aiel. Mes si mō pere, mere, fre∣re, soer, vncle ou aūt deuie
seisie, & vn estrāge abata, don{que} ieo auera vn Assise de Mortdauncester. Couenant. COuenant, est vn agree∣ment fait per fait en escript & enseale perter deux persons, lou chescun de cux est tenus al auter de performer certain co∣uenants pur son part, & lun de eux e ent p sō couenant mes enfreint ceo, don{que} celuy q̄ se sent greeue, auera vn briefe de Couenant. Et nota bien que nul br̄ de Couenant sorra main∣tenable sans espealtie, sinon en la Citie de Lon∣dres, ou n ascun aut tiel lieu priuiledge per cu∣stome & vse. Couerture. COuerture, est quant vn home & vn seme sont espouse ensemble, ore as∣cun chose que est fait cō∣cernant la feme en le tps de le continuance de cest marriage perenter eux est dit destre fait durant le couerture, & le fem̄ est
appel vn feme couert. 135 Couin. COuin, est vn secret as∣sent determine en les cures de deux ou plusors al p̄iudice dun aut: Come si tenāt pur tm de vie, ou tenant en le taile secret∣mēt conspire oue vn aut, q̄ laut recouera vers le t pur vie le terre q̄ il tient &c. en preiudice de celuy en le reuersion. 136 Cui in vita. CVi in vita est vn briefe & gist lou home est seisi de terres en fee sim∣ple, ou fee taile, ou pur terme de vie en droit sa feme, & alien̄ mesme le terre & deuie, donques el auera le dit briefe pur re∣couerer la terre. Et nota bien que en cē briefe son title doit este monstre si soit de pur∣chase la feme, ou del he∣ritage la feme. Mes si le baron alien le droit sa feme, & le baron & la feme deuiont, le heire la feme auera vn briefe de sur Cui in vita.
Cui ante diuortium. CVi ante diuortiū, est vn briefe, & gist en semble maner, quant tiel aliena∣tion est fait per le baron del terre la feme, & puis deuorce est ew enter eux, donques la femme auera cest briefe, & le briefe dirra, cui ipsa ante di∣uortium contradicere nō potuit. Curtesie Dngle∣terre. CVrtesie Dengleterre, est lou home prent feme seisie in fee simple ou fee taile general, ou seisie cōe heire de la taile especial, & ad issue per la feme male ou female, soit le issue mort ou en vie, si la feme deuie, le baron ty∣endra la terre deuant sa vie per la ley de Angle∣terre: Et est appel tenant per le Curtesie Dengle∣terre, pur ceo q̄ uest vse en nul aut Realm forsq, tāt∣solem̄t en Engleterre. D. Damage feasant. DAmage seaat est quāt les beasts de vn strag'
sont in auters terres sans auctoritie loial ou licēce del tenant de la terre, & la mangeront, tread, ou auterm̄t spoylēt les blees, grasse, boies, ou tiels sem∣blables: En quel case le t q̄ ils issint damage, poit pur ceo prender, distrain, & impound eux, sibien en le nuict come en le iour. Mes en auters cases, come put rent & seruices & ti∣els sembles nul poit dis∣trainer en le nuict tēps. 140 Danegelde. DAngelde, hoc est quie∣tum esse de quada cō∣suetudine q̄ cucurit ali∣quo tēpore, quā quidē Da∣nu leuauerūt in Anglia. Ceo commence primer n tēps le roy Etheldred, q̄l esteant en graund di∣stresse per le continual in∣uasion de les Danes, pur purchaser paix, fuit com∣pel de charger son pais & people oue importable paiments, car il primer∣mēt dona cux al sink se∣ueral paymēt 113000. li. & puis graunt al cux
48000. li. annualment. Darrein presentment. DArrein presentm̄t. Vi∣de de ceo apres titulo Quare impedit. Deane & Chapter. DEane & Chapter, est vn corps corporate spiri∣tual consistant de plusors able persons en ley, come nosmement de Deane (que est principal) & ses Prebends, & ils emsem∣ble font le corporation. Et sicome cest corpora∣tion poyent ioyntment purchase terres & tene∣ments al vse de lour es∣glis & successors. Issint auxy chescun de eux se∣ueralmēt poit purchase al vse de luy & ses heires. Decies tantum. DEcies tantum, est vn briefe, & gist lou vn iurour en ascun enquest, prist rgēt dun partie ou dauter pur done son ver∣dict, don{que} il payera x. foits a tāt q̄ il ad receiue. Et chescun que voyl suer auera action, & auera
lun moitie, & le roy lau∣ter moitie. Mes si le Roy en tiel case release per son perdon a tiel iurour, vn∣core ceo ne serra barre verscestuy que port lacti∣on, mes que il recouera lauter moitie, si son acti∣on soit commence de∣uant le pardon le Roy, mes si le pardon soit de∣uant ascun action, il est barre encounter toutes gents. Et mesme le ley est de touts actions popu∣lers lou vn part est al roy, & lauter al partie que su∣era. Auxi les embra∣cers que procurent tiels inquestes serront puny en mesme le manner & ils aueront prisonment de vn an, Mes nul iustice enquirera de ceo de of∣fice, mes solement al suite del partie. 144 Declaration. DEclaration, est vn mō∣strance en escript de le griefe & complaint de le commaundaunt ou plaintife enuers le tenant ou defendant, en que il
suppose de auer receiue tort, & cest declaration doit este plaine & certain, pur ceo que il impeache le defendant ou tenant & auxy chace celuy a res∣ponder. Mes nota que declaration fait per le demaundant vers le te∣naunt en action Real, est: appel properment vn Count. Nota que le Count ou declaration doit conteine demonstration, declara∣tion & conclusion. Et en demonstration sont con∣teines troys choses (cest adire) que se pleint, & deuers que & de quel chose, & en le declara∣tion doit estre comprise come & en quel manner le cause del action surdit enter les parties, & quant & quel iour, an, & lieu, & a que laction serra done. Et en perclose il doit auerre & profer de pro∣uer son suite & monstra les dammages queux il susteine per le tort a luy faite.
145 Dedimus pote∣statem. DEdimus potestatem, est vn briefe, & gist lou vn home  le court le Roy, ou est sue & ne pt bien traueler, don{que} il auera est briefe direct a ascun Iustice ou auter discreete person en le payes de oner a luy po∣wer pur admit ascun pur son Atturney, ou de leuie fine, ou de prender son confession ou son respōs, ou auter examination come le matter require. 146 Defendant. DEfendant, est celuy q̄ est sue en action per∣sonel, & il est appel tenāt en vn action Real. 147 Defence. DEfence, est ceo que le defendant doit. faire immediatement apres le count o declaration fait, cest adire que, il defenda tout le torre force & dammage, lou & quant il deuera  & doques de proceede ou∣ster
a son plee, ou de ∣parler. Et no▪ que entant que il defend tort & force il se excuse del tort ves luy surmisee, & fait r partie al plee, & per tant qe il defende lēs dam∣mages, il affirme le par∣tie plaintife able deste re∣spondue. Et pur le reidue dl defence, il accept le po∣wer del Court de over & determiner les ples de cel matter. Car sil voile pleder al Iurisdiction, il doit omitter in son de∣fence les parols (o & quant il deuera) & sil voyle monstre ascun dis∣abilitie en le plaintife, & demaund iudgement si le partie serra respon∣du, donques il doit omit∣ter le defence del dam∣mage. Demaundant. DEmaundant, est celuy que sue ou com∣plaine en action Real put
title de terre, & il est ap∣pel plaintife en vn assise, & en vn action personel, come en action de debt, trespas, disceite, detinue & ils semblables. 149 Demaines. DEmaines, ou demesnes generalment a parler solonque le ley sont touts les parts de ascun maner l ne sont en maines del freeholders destate den∣heritance, coment soyent occupies pe tenaunt per copy de Court Roll, les∣sees pur ans, ou pur vie, cy bien come tenaunt a volunte: me specialment a parler demnes solon∣que le common parlance sont solement entend le principall mannor place del seigmo, que il & ses auncestors ont ewe de temps hors de memory en lour maines demesue, & ount occupy ceo, en∣semble oue touts edifices & measons quecunque, Etauxi les prees, pastures, boyes, terres eable, & tiels semblables, oue ceo occupie.
Demy sanke ou sangue. DEmy sanke est quant vn hōe marie vn feme, & ad issue per luy vn fits ou file & el morust▪ & donques il prist vn auter feme, & ad per luy auxy vn fites ou file. Ore ceux deux fits sot solō∣que vn manner freres, on come ils sont appels de∣my freres, ou freres del demy sanke cē adire frere  le part de pier pur ceo que ils ont ambideux vn pier, & sont ambideux de son sāgue, & nemy freres per le part le mere, ne de ascun sanke on kinne cest voy, & pur ceo lun de cux ne poit este heire al au∣ter, car il q voile claime come heire al vn per dis∣cent, doyt este dentier sāke a luy de q̄ il claime. En mesme le maner est si feme yt diuers issues {per} diuers barons qui fratres vterini dicuntur. Demurrer. DEmurrer est quant as∣cun action est port & le defendant plede vn ple
a que le plaintife dit que il ne voile responder pur ceo que il nest sufficient plee en le ley & le defen∣dant dit al contrarie que il est sufficient plee, & sur ceo ambideux mist∣rot le cause al iudge∣ment del Court, don∣ques ceo est appelle vn demurrer. 152 Denizen. DEnizen, est lou alien nee deuient le subiect le Roy & obteine le let∣ters patēts le roy pur en∣ioy toutes priuiledges, cōe vn hoe Anglois, mes si vn o an Demzen il paiera customes & diuers auters choses come alien▪ come appiert per diuers Statutes de ceo faits. 153 Deodande. DEodande, est quant as∣cun home per misfor∣tune est occide {per} vn chi∣ual ou per charet ou per auter chose que mouet▪ donques cel chose que est le cause de son mort, que al tēps de la misfortune moua, serra forfait al
Roy, & ceo est appell De∣odande, & ceo pene al Almener le Roy pur dis∣poser in Almes & actes de charitie. Departure de son plee ou matter. DEparture de son plee ou matter, est lou vn home plede vn plee en barre & le plaintife re∣plie a ceo, & sil apres en son omder plede ou monstre auter matter cō∣trarie a son primer plea en barre, ceo est appell vn depart de son barr̄ &c. Departure in dispite del Court. DEparture in dispite del Court, est quant le te∣nāt ou defendāt appeare al action port enuers luy, & ad iour ouster en m̄ le terme ou est demaunde apres, coment nul iour sot a luy done issint que soit en mesme le terme  ne appeare me fat de∣faut, cē vn departure in dispite del Court, & pur ceo il serra conde.
156 Deputie. DEputie est celuy que occupya en aut droyt soit ceo office, ou ascun auter chose, & son forfai∣tur̄, ou dismeanor cause officer, ou celuy que de∣putie il est de pard' son office ou chose. Mes vn e poit faire son deputie en touts cases, nisi le grāt soit issint, si come il soit o ceux ou tiels sēbla∣bles parols, exercēdo per se, vel sufficientem depu∣tatum suum, ou si les pa∣rols va ouster {per} se vel de∣putat▪ suum▪ aut deputat▪ deputati, donques il poit faire vn deputie & sō de∣putie auxi poet faire vn deputie, auterm̄t nemie. 157 Det. DEt est vn briefe & gist lou ascun summe dar∣gent est due a vn {per} reason accompt, bargaine, cō∣tract, obligation▪ ou aut especialtie, a estre paie  ascū certaine iour, a quel iour il ne paia passe, dō∣ques il auera cest briefe. Mes si ascun summe de argent soit due a ascun seignior {per} son tenant, pur
alcun rēt seruice, le seig∣nior ne vnques aūa actiō de dett, mes il couient touts foits distrain. Auxi pur rent charge ou rent secke, quel home ad pur terme de son vie, en taile ou en fee, il nauera actiō de det, cy longe come le rent endure, mes ses exe∣cutors poient auer vn ac∣tiō de det pur les arrera∣ges de ascun des dits rēts due ē le vie lour testator, {per} lestatute 32. H. 8. c. 37. Mes pur les arrerages de rēt reserue sur vn lease pur terme de ans, le les∣sor est a son election de auer action de dette, ou pur distrainer: Mes si le lease soit determine, don∣ques il ne distreinera a∣pres pur cel rent. Mes couient luy dauer vn action de det pur les arrerages. Deuastauerunt bo∣na testatoris. DEuastauerūt bona te∣statoris est quāt les ex∣ecutors voile deliuer les legacies que lour testator ad done ou faire resti∣tution pur torts faits per
luy, ou paie ses dets due sur cōtractes, ou aut dets due sur specialties, que iours de paiment ne sont vncore venus &c. Et ne gard sufficient n lour maines pur discharger ceux dets sur records ou specialties, q̄ ils sont cō∣pellabl' primerm̄t {per} le ley de satisfier, dōques il ser∣ront cōstrain de payer de lour biens, demesne ceux duties, le quel al primer {per} le ley ils, firont com∣pelles de paier, accordant al value de ceo q̄ ils deli∣uerot ou pay sans com∣pulsion, car tiels paimēts de dets, ou deliuerie de legacies, come est auant∣dit, deuant dets paies sur specialties▪ ou recordes, quel iours de payment sont a ore venus▪ sont ac∣compt en le ley vn vastāt des biens del testator, cy tant come si ils ad done eux sans cause, ou vend eux & conuert eux a lour proper vse. 159 Deuise. DEuise est lou vn hōe en son testament, done
ou grant ses biens ou ses terres a vn auter apres son decease. Et lou tiel de∣uise est fait des biens, si les executors ne voilent deliuer les biens a le de∣uisee, le deuisee nad re∣medie per le cōmon ley▪ Mes il couient de auer vn Citation vers les execu∣tors le testator dappea∣rer deuant le Ordinarie▪ de monst pur quoy il ne {per}forma le volūt le testa∣tor, car le deuisee ne poit p̄nder le legacy & luy m̄ s erū, mes il deit estre de∣liū a luy {per} les executors. Mes per le cōmon-ley, si home fuit sle seisi de terres ē son demesne co∣me de fee▪ & deuisa les terres {per} son testam̄t▪ cest deuise fuit void▪  les terres seront en vn Citie ou borough lou terres sont deuisable {per} custom. Mes si ascun home soit▪ enfeoffe al vse dun auter & ses heirs, & cesty a que vse il fuit issint seisse fait deuise de ses terres, cest deuise fuit bone, coment que il ne fuit en ville lou terres sont deuisable.
Auxy si asc' home de∣uise tres en citie, ville ou borough deuisable, & le deuisor deuie, si son heire ou asc' auter abate en les terres, donques le deuisee aūa br̄ de Ex graui quae∣rela: Mes cest br̄ ne ser∣ra iammes plede deuāt le Iustice le Roy, mes touts foits deuant le Maior on Bailifes in le dit ville. Et ore al fine de mon∣stre quant les leyes de cest Realme, & les dis∣creete Iudges de ceo, q̄ux sont les interpreters de le ley, ont fauour volunts & testaments, & issint deuises en yelding al eux iel reasonable cōstructi∣on, come ils pensant poit bien agreer oue les men∣es de les morts, conside∣rantes q̄ volunts & testa∣m̄ts sont pur le plus part, & {per} common intendm̄t fait quant le testator est ore en graund langor, feeble & passa tout spe∣rans de recouerie, car il est vn opinion en le pais enter le greinder nū∣ber, que si vn home per chaunce soit ey sapient
come de faire son volunt en son bone sane, quant il est strong, de bone me∣morie, & ad temps & op∣portunitie, & poit demād counsell si ascun doubt soit de le learned, que dō∣ques il ne doit viuer long apres, & pur ceo ils ceo deferre tanque tiel temps quant ceo soit plus con∣uenient de applier eux mesmes a le disposition de lour almes, q̄ de lour terres & biens, sinon que il soit que per fresh me∣morie, & recitall de eux a cest temps, il poit estre vn cause de mittr̄ eux en ment▪ de asc' de lour biēs ou tres fauxim̄t purchase & issint moue eux al re∣stitutiō &c. Et a cest tēps le escripture de tiels vo∣lunts sont communem̄t cōmit al minister del pa∣roch ou al ascun aut plus ignorant que luy, que ne seauoit q̄ux parolx sont necessarie pur faire vn e∣state ē fee simple, fee tail pur terme de vie, ou tiels semblables, preter diuers aut mischiefes: Ieo voile pur ceo mise cy ascuns de
ceux cases queux sōt plus common en les bouches de les ignorant homes & portont per le sauient in∣terpretations de les iud∣ges, come est auantdit, vn large & plus fauourable fēce en volūts q̄ en faits. Et pur ceo primermēt si vn deuise al I. S. per sont volunt, touts les ter∣res & tenem̄ts, icy non so∣lement tout ceux tres, q̄ il ad en possession passōt, mes auxi ceux de que il ad le reuersion, per vertu de ceux parelx tenemēts. Et si terres sont deuise a vn home ae auer a luy in {per}petuum, ou a auer a luy & a ses assignes, in ceux deux cases le deuisee aūa fee simple, Mes si soit dōe per feoffem̄t n tiel ma∣ner, il nad fors{que} estate pur terme de vie. Auxy i vn home deuise ses terres al auter, pur doner, vender, ou fa de co a sō wil & pleasure, cest fee simple. Vn deuise sait al vn & a ses heires males fait vn estate taile, mes si ils parols sot mise en vn fa de foffement, il serra
prise fee simple, pu eo que il appiert de que corps les heirs males ser∣ra ingende. Si terres sont done per fait al I. S. & a les heires males de son corps &c. que ad issue file, que ad issue fites & morust, la le terrie re∣uertera al donour, & le fits de file nauera ceo, pur ceo que il ne poit a luy mesme conueier {per} heires males, car sa meere est vn obstacle a ceo, mes au∣termēt est de tiel deuise, car la le fites del file ceo auera plustost que le vo∣lunt serra voide. Si vn deuise al enfant in ventre matris suae, cest bone deuise, auterm̄t est {per} feoffement, grant, o do∣ne, ca ē ceux cases il doit estre vn del habilitie pur prender maintenāt, auter∣ment il est voide. Vn deuise fair ē fee sim∣ple sans expresse {per}ols del heirs est bōe ē fee simple. Mes si vn deuise soit al I. N. il auera les terres fors{que} pur terme de vie, car ceux parols ne voilēt porter greinder estate.
Si vn voile que son fits I. auera son terre puis le mort son feme, icy le fēe le deuisor aūr le tre pri∣mes pur terme de sa vie. Issint si home deuise ses biens a sa feme, & que apres le decease de son feme, son fits & heire a∣uera le meison ou les biens sont, la le fits na∣uera le meason durant le vie de le feme, car il appiert que son intent fuit, que sa feme doit a∣uer le meason auxi put terme de sa vie, nient ob∣stant il ne fuit deuise a luy per expresse parols. Si vn deuise soit al I. N. & a les heires females de son corps engendres, apres le deuisce ad issue fites & file, & morust, icy le file auera le terre, & nemy le fits, & vncore il est plus digne person, & heire al sō peire, mes pur ceo que volunt del mort est, que le file doit ceo a∣uer, ley & cōscience voet issint auxy. Et en cest point les heathen fueront precise, come appiert {per} ceux ver∣ses
de Octauins Augu∣stus que Donatus report il fesoit apres que Virgil a son morte donoit com∣maundem̄t, que ses liuers doiēt estre combure, pur ceo que ils fueront im∣perfect, & vncore ascuns persuadont que ils doient estre saue, cōe en fait ils happiment fueront a que il respond issint: Sed le∣gum seruāda fides, supre∣ma voluntas, Quod man∣dat, fierique iubet, parere necesse est. Diem clausit extre∣mum. DIem clausit extremū, est vn br̄, & gist lou le tenant le Roy, q̄ tient en chief morust, donq̄ cē br̄ serra direct al eschetour denquirer de quel estate il fuit seisi, & que est pro∣cheine heire, & de q̄ lage & de la certainty del ie & de quel value le  est. & de que ceo est te∣ns, & cel inquisitiō  returne en le chancerie & est communement appel, The office after y• death of that person.
161 Discent. DIscent, est en ij. sortes, o lineal, ou collatal. Lineal discent est quant le discent est conuey en mesme le lyne dentier sangue, come aile, peere, fits, fits del fits & issint debassa. Collateral discent est dehors en vn auter brāch dehaust dentier sangue come le frere del ayle, frere del peere, & issint debassa. Nota que si vn deuie seisie en fee, ou en taile de terre en quel auter ad droit denter, & ceo dis∣cend a son heire, tiel dis∣cent tollera lentre de ce∣stuy que droit auoit den∣ter, pur ceo q̄ le heire ad ceux per le discent de son pere, & issint vient a les tenemēts per acte del ley, & cesty que droit ad ne puit luy ouster per entre sur luy, mes est mise de suer son brief a demaund le terre solonque le natu∣re de son title. Vide de ceo Littleton, liuer. 3. ca. 6. & Stat. 32. Henr. 8. cap. 33.
Disclaymer. DIsclaymer, est lou le seignior distraine son tenaunt, & il sua reple∣uin, & le seignior auowa le prsel, per reason que il tnt de luy, si le te∣nant dit que il disclaime de tener de luy, cest appel vn disclaimer, & si le seig∣nior sur co porte briefe de droit sur disclaimer, & il soit troue encounter le tenāt, il perdera le ter∣re. Auxy  vn port vn pre∣cipe vers deux auters pur tere, & le tenaunt dis∣claime & dit, que il nest de ceo tenaunt, ne claim rien en ceo, donques lauter auera tout le ter∣re. Mes si le precipe soit envers vn sole, & il dis∣claim, come auant est dit le briefe abatera, & vnco∣re le demandant poit en∣ter en le terre, & ceo te∣ter en son droiturel estate comēt son entrie ne fuit loyal. Discontinuance. DIscontinuance, est quāt vn home alien a vn nter terres o tene∣ments
& morust, & vn aut ad droit a msme les terres & e puit enter n eux {per} cause de cel aliena∣tion, sicome vn Abbot a∣lien les tres de son mea∣son a vn auter en fee, ou en fee taile, ou pur terme de vie, ou si vn home aliē les terres q̄ il ad en droit sa fem̄, ou si tenant en taile alien les terres do∣ne a luy & a ses heires de son corps, donque tiels a∣lienations sont appels dis∣continuance, car tiels estates passont touts foits per liuerie & seisin, & en ceux cases le successour labbe, ne la feme apres le mort son baron, ne lissue en le taile apres le mort le tenaunt en le taile ne poient enter mes chescun de eux est mise a sonacti∣on. Vide pluis de ceo en Litt lib. 3. ca 11. & 32. . 8. ca. 28. que toll les dis∣continuances per baron seisi en droit son fee. 164 Dismes. DIsmes, sont les dismes parts de asc▪ chose▪ mes {pro}prem̄t de ceux choses
que encrease, q̄ux pur le pluis parte perteigne al Ministres desglie pur lour maintenāce & ils sōt deuides en iij. sorts, nos∣m̄t Predial dismes, Parso∣nel dismes & Mixt dis∣mes, Predial dismes sont dismes, q̄ sō paid de cho∣ses, q̄ux viēt de le terr̄ so∣lem̄t, cōe bles, sein, fuits del arbors & tiels semb. Parsonel dismes sont dismes que sont paies de tiels profits que veigne {per} le labor & industrie del person dun home, come per emption & venditiō, gain de marchandize & de manuel crafts homes laborers & tiels q̄ labor pur salary, come carpent, masons & tiels sēblables. Mixte dismes sont les dismes de vitels, agnes, porcels & tiels sēblabl▪ q̄ encrease partm̄t del tre, sur q̄ ils sont depastures, & partm̄t del garding, ē∣dustrie, & diligence del owner. Disparagement. DIsparagem̄t est vn hōt, disgrace ou villanye fait {per} le gardein en Chi∣ualrie
a son gard en chi∣ualry, esteant deins age {per} reason de son mariage. Come quant le gardein marrie son warde deins age de xiiii. ans, & deins tiel temps q̄ il ne poit cō∣sent al marriage, al vn nief, o al file dun q̄ d∣murt en vn borough (que est deste entend tiels que peres professe maincrafts & tiels baser arts de emp∣tion & venditiō pur gam̄ lour viuer pr ce) ou al vn que ad fors{que} vn pee, ou vn maine ou est de∣crepit ou deforme, ou ai∣ant horrible disease, come le leprosie, les pockes de frankes, falling sicknes, ou tiels semblables, ou marrie luy a vn feme que est passe lage denfanter & diuers tiels auters, don{que} sur le complaint fait per les amies de tiel heire, le s̄r ou gardein perdera le gardship & les profits du∣rant le nonage de le heire pur le hont fair a luy. Vi∣de Litt lib. 2. ca. 4. 166 Disseisin. DIsseisin, est quant vn hōe ent en ascū terres
ou tenements, lou son en∣tre nest pas congeable, & ousta celuy q̄ ad le frak∣tenement. Disseisin sur disseisin. DIsseisin sur disseisin, est quant le disseisour est diseisie per vn auter. Disseisour & dis∣seisee. DIsseisour, est celuy que st ascun home hors de son terre sans order de ley, & disseisee est celuy que est issint s. Disceit. DIsceit est vn bre, & est ascun fois original, & ascun foits iudiciall, mes quant il est original, gist lo ascū disceit est fait a asc̄ hōe {pro} vn aut, issint q̄ il nad sufficientm̄t {per}form sn bargain, ou nint per∣forme son promise, dō{que} cluy que est en tiel man̄ disceiue auera cest brief. Auxy quant cest briefe est iudiciall il gift ou sci∣re facias est s hors de ascun Recorde ves vn & le Vicount retourne
que il est garnye, ou il ne fuit garnye ou lou vn Praecipe quod reddat de plee de terre, ou Quare impedit del presentment al esglise est sue vers vn, & le vicour returne que il est summon, lou il ne fuit summon, per quel disceit & faux returne le demaundant recouer en le plaint, donques le par∣tie greeue auera cest briefe vers celuy que re∣couera, & vers les sum∣moners, & vers le vicont, donques le brief serra di∣rect al Coroners de mes∣me le countie, si il conti∣nue vicount que fist le retorne. 170 Distresse. DIstresse est le chose q̄ est prise & distraine sur ascun terre pur rent arrere, ou pur auter dui∣tie, ou pur tort fait, co∣ment q̄ le propertie del chose soit perteignant al estrange: Mes si sont a∣uers que perteignont al estrange, il couient q̄ ils sont leuaunt & couchant sur m̄ le terre, cest adire
que les auers auoyent este sur le terre per certaine space, que ils ont eux bien repose sur la terre, ou au∣termēt ils ne sont distrei∣nable pur rent ou serm▪. Et si vn distraine pur rēt ou auter chose sans cause loyal, donques le partie greeue auera vn repleuin, & sur suretie troue de pursuer son action, auera la distres a luy redeliuer. Mes sont diuers choses q̄ ne sont distrainable, viz. robe de auter home en le meason de vn Tailor, ou drape en le meason dun fuller, sheereman ou wei∣uer, pur ceo q̄ ils sont cō∣mon artificers, & que le common presumptiō est, que tiels choses ne sont perteignant al artificer, mes al auters persons que le mittont la a ouerer. Auxi viād' nē p̄ distrei∣nable, ne blees en sheues, sinon q̄ ils sont en vn cha∣reot, pur ceo q̄ distres co∣uient este toutes foits de tiel chose, dont le vicont poit faire repleuin & re∣deliūy en auxi bon case q̄ il fuit al temps del prisel.
Auxi hōe poit distreine pur homage de son t, pur fealtie & escuage, & auts seruic', & pur fines & a∣merc' que sont assesse en vn Leete, mes nemy en vn Court baron. Et auxy pur damage fesant, cest adire, quant il troue les beastes ou bn̄s des auters feasant tort ou incumbrant son terre: Mes home ne poit distraine pur ascun rēt ou chose due pur ascun terr̄, mes sur mesme le terre q̄ est charge ouesque ceo; Mes en case lou ieo veign̄ a distrainer, & lauter veyant mon purposechase les beastes, ou port le chose dehors, al intēt que ieo ne prendra ceo pur distres sur le terre, don∣ques ieo poy bien pursue, & si ieo prise ceo main∣tenant en le hault chimin ou en auter soyle, le prisel est loyal, auxy bien la cōe sur la terre charge a que∣cunque la propertie des biens sont. Auxi pur fines & amer∣ciam̄ts q sōt assesse en vn leete, vn port touts foites prēder les bn̄s celuy que
est issint amerce, en que∣cun{que} soile que ils sont deins le iurisdiction del court vt dicitur. Et quant vn ad prise vn distres, il coment a luy de amesner ceo al common pound, ou auterment il poit gar∣der en ouert lieu, issint q̄ il done notice al par∣tie, que il (si le distres soit viue auers) poit do∣ner a luy viand, & don∣ques si le auers morust pur default de viand, ce∣luy que t distrein serra a le pard, & donques lau∣ter poit distraine auter∣foits pur mesme le rent on dutie. Mes sil amesn le distres a vn forslet, ou hors del countie, q̄ le vi∣cont ne poit biē faire de∣liuerāce sur repleuin, dō∣q̄s le partie sur le retorne del vicont aūa vn briefe de Withernam direct al Vicont, q̄ il prendra tant de ses auers, ou tant des biēs lauter en son garde, tanque il ad fait deliue∣rāce de la primer distres. Auxi sisōt en vn forslet ou castel, le vicont poit prē∣der oue luy le power del
Countie, & abater le ca∣stel. Come appiert per lesta. W. 1. cap. 17. Ideo vide Statutum. 171 Diuorce. DIuorce issint appel de Diuortium, veniēs del verbe Diuerto, que signi∣fie deretorner arere, cest est vse en ley quant vn home est seperate de sa feme, il luy retorne ar∣rere a sa pere ou auter a∣mies, ou a luy ou il luy ad, & per tiel diuorce le marriage est defeate & distroy. 172 Donor & Donee. DOnor est celuy q̄ done terres ou tenements al auter en taile, & celuy a que il est done est ap∣pel Donee. 173 Double plee. DOuble plee est lou le defendant ou tenant en ascun action pled vn plee en que deux matters sont comprehendus, & chescū per luy mesme est vn sufficient barre ou re∣spons al action, donques tiel double plee ne serra admit pur plee, sinon q̄ vn depend sur lauter, & en
tiel case si il ne poyt auer le darrein plee sans le pri∣mer plee, donq̄s tiel dou∣ble plee serr̄ bien suffer. Dower. DOwer est vn briefe & gist lou home est sole seisie durant le couerture perenter luy & sa feme, de terres ou tenemēts en fee simple ou fee taile, lou {per} possibility le issue en∣ter eux poient enherite, si tiel hōe deuie sa feme re∣couera la tierce part de touts les tres dont le ba∣ron suit sole seisi ascun tēps durant le couerture {per} briefe de Dower vnde nihil habet mesque il ne morust seisie, & mes{que} il ad fait alienation de ceo en sa vie. Mes si hōe de∣uāt le statute de Vses 27. H. 8. ad terres, en queux aut hōe, ou auters homes fueront seisies a son oeps touts foits durant le co∣uerture, & cesty a q̄ oeps ils fueront seisies deuie deuaunt le dit statute, sa feme ne serra endow. Et aux si deuant le dit Statute deux homes sont seisies de terre al oeps de
vn de eux, & cestuy a que oeps &c. deuie deuant le di statute, sa feme ne serra indow Auxi si feme port br̄ de dower, el re∣couera dammage, pur le profite incurus apres la mort le baron fil morust de ceo seisie, Mes si ascun alienation o estate soit fait durant le couerture, issint que le baron ne morust seysie, donques mesqueel recouer la terre vncore el ne recouera dammages. Auxy il est vn auter briefe de dower, appel briefe de droit de dower, & gist lou feme ad recouer parte de sa dower en mesme la ville, & auter parte el est a re∣couer. Auxy en diuers cases fem̄ nauera dower, sicome le baron fait trea∣son, pur que il est attaint, donque sa feme nauera dower. Auxy si el elopa de son baron ouesque vn auter home in auowtry, & si il ne soit reconcile {per} son baron de son bone volunt sans cohersion dl Esglise, el ne serra en∣dowe.
Droit. DRoit, est lou vn ad chose que fuit toll de auter {per} torte, come {per} dis∣seisin, discontinuance, ou eiectment, ou tiels sem∣blables, & le chalenge ou claime q̄l ad, que auoit le chose, est terme droit. Droit dentre. DRoit dentre, est quant vn seysie de terre in fee, est de ceo disseisi: Ore le disseisee ad droit den∣tre en le terre, & poet quant il voile, ou il poet auer briefe de droit en∣uers le disseysor. Dum non fuit com∣pos mentis. DVm non fuit compos mētis, est vn briefe & gist lou hōe que est hors de sō bone memory, cest adire, insane ou lunati{que}, alien les terres que il ad in fee simple, & deuie, donques son heire apres son decease auera cest briefe, mes il mesme na∣uera cest briefe, pur ceo, que home ne serra resceu a disabler luy mesme. Auxy cest briefe puit este fait en le, per, cui, & post.
178 Dum fuit infra aetatem. DVm fuit infra aetatem, est vn brief & gist lou enfant deins age alien sa terre que il ad in fee sim∣ple, ou pur terme de vie, quant il vient a son pleine age il auera cest briefe, ou il puit entre sil voile: mes il couient que il soit de pleine age, iour de son briefe purchase. Auxy si enfant alien sa terre, & deuie, son issue a son pleine age aūa cest briefe ou puit enter, mes lissue nauera cest briefe deins son age. 197 Dures. DVres, est lou vn home est garde in prison ou restraine de son libertie contrary al order de ley, & si tiel person issint e∣steant in dures, fait ascun especialty on obligation per reason de tiel impri∣sonment, tiel fait est void en le ley, & in actiō porte sur tiel especialtie il puit dire que il fuit fait per dures de ō imprisonm̄t, mes si home soit arrest sur ascun action al suite
vn auter mesque le cause del action ne soit bon ne voir, sil fait ascū obliga∣tion a vn estraunge esteāt in prison per tiel arrest, vncore il ne serra dit per dures, mes sil fait obli∣gation a luy a que suit il fuit arrest deste discharge de tiel imprisonm̄t, don∣ques il serra dit dures vt dicitur. E. Eiectione firme. EIectione firme, vide de ceo en le title, Gard. Eiectment de garde. EIectment de garde, vi∣de de ceo en le title Gardes. Eire Iustices. EIre Iustices, ou Itine∣rāt, come nous appelle eux fueront Iustices que vse de equitare de lieu al lieu per tout le Realme pur administer Iustice. Elegit. TEner per Elegit, est lou home ad recouer det ou damage per briefe deuers vn auter per Co∣nusance ou en auter ma∣ner, al auera deins le
an deuers luy vn briefe iudiciall nosme Elegit dauer executiō del moi∣tie de toutes ses terres & chattels (exceptes beofes & affers a sa carues) tan∣que le dett ou les dama∣ges soient oustremēt le∣ues ou paies a luy, & du∣rant cest terme il est te∣nant {per} Elegit. Et nota sil soit ouste deins le terme il auera Ass. de nouel dis∣seisin, & apres vn redissei∣sin si besoigne soit, & cest done per le estatute de Westm̄. 2. cap. 18. Et auxi per lequitie de mesme lestatute celuy q̄ ad son estate, sil soit ouste auera assise & redisseisin si besoigne soit. Et auxi sil face ses executors & de∣uy, & ses executors entrōt & puis soient oustes, ils aueront per lequitie de mesme lestatute tiel acti∣on come luy mesme suis∣dit. Mes sil soit ouste, & puis fait ses executors & deuy, ses executors purrōt ent & sils soient estops de lour entre, ils aueront vn briefe de trespas sur lour matter & case.
Et nota sil face wast en tout la terre ou en par∣cel, lauter auera enuers luy maintenant vn briefe iudicial hors de la pri∣mer recorde appelle Ve∣nire facias ad computan∣dum, per force de quel serra inquise sil ad leuy touts les deniers ou par∣cel, & sil nad leuy les de∣niers, donques serra in∣quise a quant le wast a∣mount, & si le wast a∣mount sinon a parcel dō∣ques tāts des deniers que le wast amount serra a∣bridge de les suisdits de∣niers queux fueront estre leuies. Mes sil ad fait pluis wast que le auant∣dit summe dargent que fuit a estre leuy amount, lauter serra discharge maintenant de touts les deniers suisdits & reco∣uera sa terre. Et pur la su∣perfluity de wast fait ou∣stre ceo que amount a le dit summe, il recouera ses damages single: & mesme le ley est de ses execu∣tors, & auxi de cestuy que ad son estate. Et nota sil alien en
fee, ou a terme de vie, ou en taile tout le terre ou parcell de la terre, que il tient per Elegit, si le alie∣nation soit fait deins le terme ou apres, cestuy q̄ ad droit auera vers luy vn Ass. de nouel diss. Et couiēt que ils soient mise en lassise ambideux, auxi∣biē le alience come le a∣lienor, & non obstāt que lalienor deuie mainte∣nāt, vncore cestuy que ad droit aūa vers le alience sole Assise, come sil vst estre son simple tenant a terme de ans. Et ceo est {per} lequitie del Statute de Westm. 2. cap. 25. pur ceo que il nad sinon chatel en effect: & mesme le ley est de ses executours, & de cestuy que ad son estate, come est suisdit. Et nota que en Elegit si le vicont returne que il auoit riens iour de la re∣cognisance fait, mesque il purchase terre puis le temps, adonques le par∣tie plaintife auera nouel briefe de auer execution de ceo: mesme le ley est de vn estatute Marchant.
Et nota que apres le Fie∣ri facias vn home poyt auer le Elegit, mes non econtra, entaunt que le Elegit est de plus haut nature que le Fieri faci∣as, Et nota que si home recouer per briefe de det & sue vn Fieri facias, & le vicount returne que le defendaunt nad ryens dont il poit faire gree a la partie, dōques le plain∣tife auera vn Elegit, ou vn Capias sicut ali∣as, & Pluries. Et si vi∣count returne a le Ca∣pias mitto vobis corpus, & il nad riens dount il poit faire gree a la partie il ferra maunde al gayle del Fleete, & illonques demurra tanque il ad fait gree al partie, & si le vicount returne Non est muentus, adonques is∣sera Lexigent enuers luy. Et nota que en briefe de dett port deuers person de Saint Esglise, que nad rien de lay ee, & le vi∣count returne que il nad riens per que il poit e∣stre summons, adonques suera le plaintife briefe
al Euesque que il face ve∣ner son clerke, & Leues∣que luy ferra vener per sequestration del Esglise. Et nota que si home port brief de dett & recouer, & face ses executours & deuie, ils naueront exe∣cution non obstant que al soit deins lan per vn Fieri facias. 184 Embrasour ou Embraceour. EMbrasour ou Embra∣ceour, est celuy q̄ quāt vn matt est en triall {per}en∣ter partie & party, viēt al barre oue vn del parties (aiant receiue asc' reward pur issint fair) & parle en le case, ou priurt labor le iury ou stat la pur sur∣ueier ou suruiew eux {per} cest means de mitter eux en pauour & dout del matt. Mes homes q̄ sont erudite ē le ley, poiēt {per}le en le cas pur lour clients. 185 Encrochment. ENcrochm̄t, est dit quāt le seigniour ad happa seysin de pluis rent ou seruices de sou tenaunt que de droit est due, ou doet ē pay o fait a luy,
Come si le tenant tient sa terre de son Sn̄r per feal∣tie & ii. s. rent annuelm̄t, & ore de tradife temps le Seg'ad happa seisin de 3. s. rent, ou de homage ou escuage ou tiels sembl, Donques cē appel vn En∣crochm̄t de cē rēt ou ser'. Enheritance. ENheritance, est tiel e∣state en terres ou tene∣ments, ou auts choses, q̄ poient estre enherite per le heire soit ceo de estate en fee simple ou taile per discent, de ascun de ses ancestors ou per son pur∣chase demesne. Et enheritance est de∣uide ē deux sorts, cestas∣sauoir, enheritāce corpor' & enheritāce incorporat. Enheritance corporate sont mesuages, terres, prees, pastures, rents, & tiels semblables, que ont substance en eux mesm̄s & poient continuer tout temps. Et ceux sont ap∣pel choses corporal. Enheritance incorpo∣rate sont aduowsons, vil∣laines, waies, commons, courts, piscaries, que sont
ou poient este appendant ou appurtenant a enheri∣tances corporate. 167 Entre. ENtre, est lou vn home entra en ascun terr̄ ou tenements▪ en son proper person ou auter person commandement. Auxy sont diuers br̄es dentre queux sont en di∣uers maners, Vn est brief dentre sur disseisin, & cest briefe gist lou home est disseisi, il ou son heire la∣uantdit briefe auer vers mesme le disseisor, ou as∣cun auter apres tenaunt del tre, Et si le disseisour alyen ou dee eyi, don∣ques le br̄ de Entre serra vers le heire ouesque ali∣enee en le per▪ cest adire, en q̄ le tenant non habet ingressum nisi per tiel nosmant le disseisor, que luy auoit disseisie &c. Et si le heire ou alience deuie seisie, ou aliena al auter, donques le briefe serra en le Per & Cui, cest adire, en que le te∣nant non habet ingres∣sum nisi per tiel nosmant le heire ou le alienee del
disseisor, cui tiel (nos∣mant le disseisour) il de∣misit, que luy per tort disseise &c. Et si terre soit conuey ouster al plusors, ou si le primer disseisor sort dis∣seisi, donq̄s le br de Entr̄ serra en le Post, cest adire, q̄ le tenant non habet in∣gressum nisi post disseisi∣nā quel le primer dissei∣sor fait al demandant ou son auncestor. Vide ap̄s Entre en le Per. Briefe de Entre en le Per gist lou home est disseise de son frankte∣nement, & le disseisor alien ou deuie seisie, & son heire entra, donques le disseisee ou son heire auera le dit briefe vers le heire le disseisor, ou vers le alienee l'disseisor, mes viuant le disseisor il poit auer Assise si il voile, & le briefe de Entre dirra, in quod A. non habet ingressum nisi per B. que illud ei dimisit, qui inde eum iniuste disseisiuit &c. Mes si le disseisor a∣lien, & le alienee deuie seisi, ou alien ouster a vn
auter, ou si le disseisor de∣uie, & son heire entra, & cely heir aliena ou deuie, & son heire entra, donq̄s le disseisee ou son heire auera briefe de Entre sur disseisin en le Per & Cui, Et le brief dirra, in quod idem A. non habet in∣gressum nisi per B. cui C. illud ei dimisit, qui in∣iuste &c. Et nota bien, que nul briefe de Entre en le Per & Cui serra maintena∣ble vers nulluy, mes lou il que est tenant soit eins per purchase ou per dis∣cent: Mes si le alienation ou discent sont deuenus hors des degrees, sur quel nul briefe poit estre fait en le Per, ne en le Per & Cui, donques serra fait en le Post, & le brief dir∣ra, in quod A. non ha∣bet ingressum nisi post disseisinam, quam B. inde iniuste & sine iuditio fe∣cit praef. N. vel M. proa∣uo N. cuius haeres ipse ē. Auxy sont v. choses que mittont le brief de Entre hors des degrees cest a∣dire, Entrusion, Succes∣sion, Disseisin sur dissei∣sin,
Iudgem̄t, ou Escheat. 1 Entrusion est quant le disseisor deuie seisie, & vn estrange abata. 2 Disseisin sur disseisin est quant le disseisor est disseisie per vn auter. 3 Succession est ou le disseisor est vn home de Religion & deuie, ou est depose, & son successor entra. 4 Iudgem̄t est quant vn recouer vers le disseisour. 5 Escheat est quant le disseisor deuie sans heire, ou fait felonie, per que il est attaint, per que le seig∣niour entra come en son Escheat. En touts ceux cases le disseisee ou son heire na∣uera brief de Entre deins les degrees en le Per, mes en le Post, pur ceo que en ceux dits cases ils ne sont eins per discent ne per purchase. Auxy il y ad vn brief de Entre ad communem le∣gem, & gist lou tenant a terme de vie, tenant a tm dauter vie, tenant per la curtesie, ou tenant en dower alieu & deuie,
don{que} celuy en le reuersiō auer le auatdit br̄ deuers quecun{que} q̄ soit eins ap̄s en les dits tenements. Auxy briefe de Entre in casu prouiso gist, si tenant en dower alien en fee, ou pur terme de vie, ou pur auter vie, viuant le tenant en dower, celuy en le re∣uersion auera le brief ap∣pel briefe de Entre in ca∣su prouiso. Auxy br̄ de Entre in ca∣su consimili gist, si tenant pur terme, de vie, ou  per la curtesy alien en fee vi∣uāt eux, celuy en le re∣uersion auera vn brief ap∣pel briefe de Entre in cō∣simili casu, Auxy br̄e de Entre ad terminum qui praeterijt gist, si vn hom̄ lessa terres a vn aut put terme dans, & le tenant tient ouster son terme, dōques le les∣sor auera br̄ que est appel briefe de Entre ad termi∣num qui praeteriit. Et auxy si terres sont lesse a vn home pur term dauter vie, & cestuy pur que vie les terres sount lesses deuie, & le lessee
tient ouster, don{que} le les∣sor auera cest briefe. Auxy briefe de Entre sine assensu capituli gist, lou vn Abbe, Prior, ou tiel que ad Couent ou common seale, aliena terres ou terements del droit de son Esglise, sans le assent del Couent ou Chapter & deuie, don{que} son successour auera cest briefe. Auxy br̄ de Entre causa matrimonii prelocuti gist lou terres ou tenements sont done a vn home sur tiel condition, que il prendra la donour a sa feme deins certein tēps, & il ne luy espousa deins la dit temps, ou espouse auter femme, ou luy fait Preister, ou entra en reli∣gion, ou luy disable, is∣sint q̄ il ne puit luy pren∣der accordant a la dit cō∣dition, donques le seme donour & ses heires aue∣ra le dit briefe vers luy ou vers quecunque est eins en le dit teire. Auxy il couient q̄ cest conditiō soit fait per Indenture, ou auterment cest briefe
ne gist, & touts ceux & auters briefes dentre poi∣ent este fait en le Per, Cui & post. 188 Entrusion. ENtrusion, est vn briefe & gist lou tenant a terme de vie deuie seisie de certeine terres ou te∣nements, & vn estrange entra, celuy en la reuer∣sion auera le dit briefe vers labator, ou vers que∣cunque que soit eins ap̄s lour entrusion. Auxi vn briefe de entrusion serra maintenable per le suc∣cessor dun Abbe vers la∣batour que entre ascun terres ou tenements tem∣pore vacationis que ap∣pent a sa Esglise per sta∣tute Marlebridge capitu∣lo vltimo. 189 Equitie. EQuitie, est en deux ma∣ners, diuers moulte lun del auter, & sont de contrarie effectes, car lun abridge, diminish & tolle de le letter del ley, Le au∣ter enlarge amplifie & adde a ce o.
Le primer est issint de∣fine, Equitas est correctio legis generatim latae qua parte deficit, le quel cor∣rectio, del generall pa∣rols, est moult vse en no∣stre ley. Sicome pur ex∣ample, quant acte de par∣liament est fait, quecun{que} que fait tiel acte serra fe∣lon, & serra mise al mort, vncore si home de non sane memorie, ou enfant de tender age que nad discretiō le fait, ils ne ser∣ront felons, ne mise al morte. Auxi si estatute fuit fait q̄ touts persons q̄ recette∣ront, ou doneront maun∣ger ou boier, ou aut ayde a cestuy q̄ faira tiel acte, serrōt accessarie a son of∣fence, & serront mise al mort si ils conusterōt del facte, vncore lun fait tiel acte, & veigne a sa proper feme, que sciāt ceo luy re∣ceiue & done manger & boier a luy, el ne serra ac∣cessary ne felon, car en le generaltie de les dits pa∣rols del ley, cestuy de non saue memorie, ne le en∣fant, ne le seme, fuerent
include in intent. Et issint equitie correct le generaltie del ley en ceux cases, & les parols generals sont per equitie abridge. Lauter equitie est defi∣ned en tiel maner. Equi∣tas est verborum legis di∣rectio efficiens, cum vna res solummodo legis ca∣etur verbis, vt omnia a∣lia in equali genere, eisdē caueantur verbis: & issint quant le parolx enacte vn chose, ils enactes toutes choses que sont en sem∣blables degrees, sicome le statute que ordeigne que en action de debt vers executors, cestuy que vient per distresse re∣spondera, extenda per equity al administrators, car cestuy de eux que vi∣ent primes per distres re∣spondera per equitie del dist acte, Quia sunt in ae∣quali genere. Issint le statute de Glocester done le action de Waste, & le punish∣ment de ceo vers cestuy que tient pur vie ou ans, & per le equitie de ceo
home auera actiō de wast vers cestuy q̄ ien fors{que} pur vn an, ou demy an▪ & vncore ceo est ors dl parols del estatut▪ car ce∣stuy que tient forsque de∣my an ou vn an, ne en pur ans, mes ceo est le en∣tent, & le parols que en∣act lun, per equitie ena∣cteront lauter. Error. ERror, est vn briefe, & gist lou iudgement est done en le Common banke ou deuant▪ Iustice in Assise, ou deuaunt Iu∣stice de Oyer & terminel ou deuaunt le Maior o vicont de Londre ou en auter Court de Recorde▪ contre le ley▪ ou for vn∣due ou male processe▪ donques per cel briefe, le partie greene  que le iudgement est done ue∣ra cel briefe  & per o causera le Record & pro∣ces destre remoue de∣uaunt les Iustices de bank le Roy. Et la si er soit troue il serra reuerse: mes si erronious iudgement soit done en bank le Rov,
donques  ne poit estre reuerse forsque per Parli∣ament tanque le statute Auxy si faux iudge∣ment i done en court q̄ st de record▪ come en County hundred ou court ha on▪ don{que} le party aa b de  iudgemēt pur faire le record vener de∣uant Iustice de common bank. Auxi si error soit oue n Leschequer l serra redresse  le Chan∣celor & Tresorevt patet  E. 3. An. 31. cap. 12. 191 Escape. EScape, est lou vn que est  arrest▪ deuelgue a on libertie de aunt q̄ il soit deliuer {per} agard de ascun ustice▪ on {per} order del ley▪ Escape est en deux sorts,  voluntary & ne∣gligent▪ Voluntary escape est quant vn arrest aut pur felony, ou auter crime & puis celuy en q̄ custody il oi, luy lesser ale ou il veult▪ cel lesser de luy aler, est vn voluntarie escape.
Et si larrest de cestuy que escape fui pur felo∣ny, ceo serra dit felony en cestuy que luy lessa descaper, & si pur treason il serra treason en luy, & si pur vn trespas, don{que} tres∣pas, & sic de singulis. Negligēt escape est quāt vn est arrest, & puis escape enconter le volunt de ce∣stuy q̄ luy arrest▪ & ne soit reshment puisue, & re∣prise deuaunt que le pur∣suor perda le view de luy, ceo serra  negligent Escape, non obstant q̄ ce∣stuy hors de q̄ possession il escape luy reprist ar le vieu peru. Auxy  v foi arrest, & puis escape & est a son libertie▪ & ce∣stuy en que garde l fist luy reprise aprs, & luy a∣mesne a le prison, vncore i est escape en luy. Auxy si vn felon sot arrest per le Constable, & amesne a le garle en le county▪ & le gailer ne voit luy receiuer & le consta∣ble luy deit, & le gailer aux, & issint il escape, cest est vn escape en le gailer pur ceo▪ que en el
case le gailer est tenus de∣luy rescier per le main le Constable sans ascun precept de le Iustices de peace. Mes auterment est si vn common person ar∣rest auter pur suspition de felony, la le gayler nest tenus de luy resceū sans precept de ascun des lu∣stices de peace, Il y ad v escap̄ auxi sans arrest, cōe si murder soit fait en le iour, & l'murderer ne soit prise, dō{que} il est escap̄ pur q̄ le vil' ou le murder fuit fait serr̄ amercie. 192 Eschete. ESchete, est lou vn tenāt en fe simple face felo∣nie pur q̄ il est pendu, ou abiure le Realme, ou vt∣lage de felony, murder, ou petit treason, ou side tenant morust sans heire general ou special don{que} le Sn̄r de q̄ le terre est te∣nus {per} le tenant poit enter per voy de eschet, ou si aut home ent le Seign̄ a∣uera vers luy vn br̄ appell br̄ de Esch▪ que come semble est deriue del pa∣roll francoys Eschien.
Escuage. EScuage, est appel en la∣tin Scutagium, cest a∣dire, seruitium scuti, & cesty que tient per escu∣age, tiēt {per} seruice de chi∣ualer, & a ceo appēt gard mariage & relief, mes ceo serra entend de escuage non certeine quant lescu∣age courge {per} tout Engle∣terre, quant est ordeigne {per} tout le counsell Dengle∣terre que ap̄s les guerres chescun Seigniour auera certain summe de son te∣nant que ne fuit en le dit guer Mes si le tenant que tient dascun Seign̄ {per} Es∣cuage soit oue le roy en ses guerres in Escose, & le seign̄ voit distrain luy pur Escuage il serra bon ple adire que il fuit oue le roy in Escose en le guerr̄, & ceo serra trie {per} le Mar∣shal le Roy. Et nota bn̄ q̄ home ne poit tener {per} escuage sinō q̄ il teign̄ {per} homage pur ceo q̄ escuage de Com∣mon droit treit a luy ho∣mage come il fuit Iudge in Term̄ H. 21. E. 3. ca 42 folio. 52. Auowrie 115.
& nota que Escuage est vn certeine summe de ar∣gent, & doit estre leuy {per} le Seign̄ de ses tenāts so∣lonque le quantity de son tenure quant le Escuage courge {per} tout Englet, & ordein ē per tout le coū∣sel denglet quant ches∣cun tenant donera a son seignior, & ceo est {pro}per∣m̄t pur susteiner la guer parent Engl', & ceux de Escose, ou de Gales & nō p̄ perent auters tres, pur ceo que les auātdit terres serront de droit appen∣dant a la roilme Dengl'. Vide Lit. lib. 2. cap. 3. 194 Esplees. ESplees, est sicōe le sei∣sin, ou possession dun chose profit ou commo∣ditie que est a prender, come dun common les Esplees, est le prender del grasse ou common per les bouches de les beasts que common la: dun aduowson, de prender de grosse dismes per le person present, de boys, le vender de boys, dun or∣chard, le vēder de pomes ou auts fruits cressāts la,
dun molin le prisel de toll est le esplees & de ri∣els semblables. Et nota q̄ en briefe de droit de ter∣re, ou aduowson ou tiels semblables, le demandāt doit alleger en son coūt, que il ou ses auncestours prise les esplees de chose en demaund, ou antem̄t le count nest bon. Essoine. ESsoine, est lou vn actiō est port, & le plaintife ou defendaunt ne poit bien appearer al iour in court pur vn de v. causes desouth expresses, don∣que il serra Essoin de sa∣uer son default. Nota que sont v. maners de Es∣soins, cest adire Essoin de ouster le mee, & ceo est le def▪ auera iour per xl. iours, Le seconde essoin de terra sancta, & sur ceo le def. auera iour per vn an & vn iour, & ces deux serront gist al commen∣cement de plee, Le tierce Essoine est de male ve∣ner, & ceo serra adiorne a cōmen iour co lacti∣on require, & appel le cō∣mon Essoin: & quant, &
coment cest Essoin serra, vide les statutes & liuer de Abridgmēt de statuts lou il est biē declare▪ Auxi le iiij. Essoin De malo le∣cti, & ceo est solement en briefe de droit, & sur ceo issera br̄ hors de Chaun∣cerie direct al vicoūt que il maunde iiii. Chiualers al tenant de veier le ten̄t, & sil soit malade, de do∣ner a luy iour apres vn an & vn iour▪ Auxi le v. Es∣soin est de seruice le roy, & gist en touts actions forsque en Assise de No∣uel disseisin, br̄ de Dower, Darrein presentment▪ & in appel de Murder, mes en cest essoin il couient al iour de monstre son garrant▪ ou auterment il tornera a vn default, sil soit en plee real, ou aut∣ment il perdera xx. ▪ pur le iourney ou pluis, {per} le discretion del lustice, sil soit en plee personell, vt patet per le statute de Gloucest. cap. 8. 196 Estoppel. EStoppel est quant vn est conclude & denie en ley de parler encounter
son act ou fait demesne, nient obstant il soit pur dire le veritie. Et de estoppels il y ad vn graund nūber, vn pur example est, quant I. S. est oblige en vn obliga∣tion per le nosme de T. S. ou ascun auter nosme, & est sue apres accordant al mesme le nosme mis en lobligation, cest adire T. S. ore il ne serra re∣ceiue adire que il est mis∣nosme, mes serra chase a respōd' accordāt al nosme mis en lobligation, cest adire T. S. car {per}aduenture lobligee ne scauoit pas son nosme, mes de le re∣port tantsolem̄t del obli∣gor mesme, & entant que il est mesme le home que fuit oblige, il ferra estoppe & denie en ley pur adire le contrary en∣conter son fait demesne, car uterm̄t il poit prēder aduātage de son tort de∣mene, le q̄l le ley ne voit suffrer vn home de faire. Auxy si le file que est heire a son pere voit suer liuerie ou sa soer que est vn bastard, el ne serra
apres receiue pur dire q̄ sa soer est vn bastard, en∣tant que si la bastard soer prist le moitie del terre oue luy, il nad remedie per le ley. Auxy  vn home seisie de terre en fee simple voit prender vn lease pur ans de mesme le terre de vn estranger per fait endent cest vn estoppel durant le terme de ans, & le lessee est per ceo barre adire le veritie, car le veritie est, que il q̄ lessa la terre nad riens n ceo al temps del lease fait, & q̄ le fee sim∣ple fuit en luy que prist le lease: Mes ceo il ne ser∣ra receyue adire tanque apres les ans serra deter∣mine, pur ceo q̄ il appiert que il ad estate pur ans, & il fuit son folie de pren∣der vn lease de ses terres demesne, & pur ceo serra issint puni pur son folie. 197 Estraungers. EStraungers sont ascun foits prise ils, q̄ ne sont parties ne priuies al fine leuie, ou fesans de vn fait, ascū foits ls que sont nee ouster de mere.
Estray. EStray, est lou ascun beast ou cattell est en ascun seigniorie, & nul conust le owner de ceo, donques il serra seisie al oeps le Roy, ou de le seignior que ad tiel es∣tray per graunt le Roy ou per prescription, & si le owner vient & faite claime a ceo deins an & iour, donques il le reaue∣ra, ou autermēt ap̄s le an le propertie de ceo serra al Seigniour▪ issint que le Seigniour face procla∣mation de ceo accordant a le ley. Estrepment. EStrepment est vn brief, & gist lou vn est im∣plede per vn Praecipe {que} reddat pur certain terre, si le demandāt suppose que le tenant voile faire wast pendant le plea, il auera vers luy▪ cest briefe q̄ est vn prohibition, luy com∣mandant q̄ il ne face wast pendant le plee. Et cest briefe gist pro∣perment loun home de∣mand tre per Formedon, ou brief de droit, ou tiels
briefes lou il ne recouer damage, car ē tiels briefs lou il recouera dama∣ges, il auera ses dama∣ges, ayant regard al wast fait. 200 Etate probanda. ETate probanda, est vn br̄ doffice, & gist pur le heir le tenant q̄ tient del Roy in capite, pur prouer q̄ il ē de plein age, direct al Vicour pur enquirer de son age, & donques il de∣mendra tenant al Roy per mesme les seruices q̄ son ancestor fist al Roy: Mes il est dit, q̄ chescun q̄ passera en cest enquest serra del age de xlii. ans al meins issint que il fuit de pleine age al temps quant cestuy que suist le briefe fuit nee. 201 Excommenge∣ment. EXcommengement, est adire ē Latin Excōmu∣nicatio, & est lou vn hōe per la iudgm̄t en Court christian est excōmenge, donq̄s l est disable de suer ascun actiō en court le Roy, & sil remaine ex∣commenge xl. iours, &
ne voile este iustifie per son Ordinarie, donques le Euesque mandera son letter al Chauncelour de certificer le excommuni∣cation ou contempt, & sur ceo serra commaund al Vicount de prendre le corps lexcommenge per vn briefe appel Excom∣municato capiendo, ius{que} il ad fait grce al saint Es∣glise, pur le contempt & torte, & quant il est iu∣stifie, & ad fait gree don∣que leuesque maunde ra la letter al Roy, certifi∣ant ceo  & donques ser∣ra maunde al viscount de luy deliuer per vn briefe appel Excōmunicato de∣liberando. Exchange. EXchaunge, est lou vn hōe est sisi de certein terre, & vn auter home est seisi de auter tre, si ils {per} vn fait endent, ou sans fait si le terres, sont ē vn coū∣tie, exchange lour terres, issint que chescun de eux auera auters terres, a luy issint exchange en fee, en fee taile, ou a tm de v ceo est appel vn exceb∣tor
& est bone sans liuery & seisin. Auxy in exchange il couient que les estates a eux limitte per lexchāge sont egalles, car si vn ad e∣state en fee in sa terre, & lauter ad estate in aut tre fors{que} pur terme de vie, ou en taile, donques tiel exchange est voide, mes si les estates sont egalles, & ses terres ne sont de egal value, vncore lexchange est bone. Auxy vn ex∣change de rent pur terre est bone. Auxy exchange inter rent & commen est boue, & ceo couiēt este {per} fait. Auxy il coment touts fois q̄ cest parol exchāg soit in le fait ou auterm̄t rien passa per le fait sinon q̄ il aiet liuerie & seysin. 203 Execution. EXecutiō, est lou iudg∣ment est done en ascun action que le plaintif re∣couera la tere, le det ou dammages, come le case est, & qt ascun briefe est agarde de luy mitter en possession, ceo est appel ▪  execution▪ & quāt  le possession de le
terre, ou est pay de det ou damages, ou ad le corps le defendāt agard al pri∣son, donques il ad execu∣cion, & si le ple soit en County, o Court Baron, ou hundred, & ils alienōt le execution del iudge∣ment in fauour de party ou per au encheason, donque le demandant a∣uera brief de Executione iudicii. Nota q̄ en brief de det, hōe nauera reco∣uery de nul terre, mes de ceux que le defendant a∣uoit iour de iudgt ren∣du. Et de chateux home aūa execution solement des chateux, q̄u il auoit iour de execution sue. Executor. EXecutor, est qt home fuit son testament & darre in volunte, & in ceo nosma le person que exe∣cutera son testam̄t, donq̄ cesty que est issint nosm̄ est son executor, & est a tant come en le ciuil ley (heres designatus vel te∣stamētarius) cōe al debts, biens & chattels son te∣stator, & tiel executor a∣ūa actiō vers chescū deb∣tor
de son testator, & si lexecutors ad assets, ches∣cun a q̄ le testator fuit in debt, auera action vers lexecutors sil ad obliga∣tion ou especltie, mes in chescun case lou le te∣stator puissoit gager son ley nul action gist vers execution Vide pluis de ceo deuant titulo Admi∣nistrators. 205 Exigent. EXigent, est vn briefe, & gist lou home sue acti∣on {per}sonel, & le defendāt ne puit  troe ne ad riēs deins le countie, {per} que il pui  attach ne distrein donq̄s cest briefe issera al Viscount de faire procla∣matiō al vcounties ches∣cun apres auter qu il ap∣pearer ou auterment que l serra vtlag: & si soit vtlage, donques touts ses biens & chateu sont for∣faites al Roy. Auxy en vn enditement de felony le exigent ssea apres le primer capias. Et auxy en capias ad computan∣dum ou ad satisfaciendū, & en chescun capias que issist apres iudgement
lexigent issera apres le primer Capias. Et auxy en appeal de mort, mes nemy en appel de rob∣bery ou appel de maim. Ex parte talis. EX parte talis, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Ac∣compt. Ex graui querela. EX graui querela, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Deuise. Extinguishment. EXtinguishment, est lou ascun seign̄, ou asc▪ aut ad ascun rent ou seruice issant dascun terre, & il purchase mesme la terre, issint que il ad tiel estate en la terre, come il auoyt en le rent, donq̄s le rent est extincte▪ pur ceo que vn ne puit auer rent issant hors de son tre demesne. Auxy qn̄t ascun rent serra extient, il couient que le terre & le rent sont en vn maine, & auxi q̄ lestate q̄ il ad ne soit defesibl': & auxi q̄ il ad auxi bō estat ē le tre cōe en le rent, car sil ad estat n le tre fors{que} pur tme de vie ou dās, & ad vn fee simpl en le rēt
donq̄s le rēt nest extinct, mes le rent est en suspēce pur cel temps, & don{que} a∣pres le terme le rent est reuiue. Auxi si soit Seig∣niour, mesne & tenant, & le seignior purchase la tenancie, donque le me∣natie est extinct, mes le mesne aūa le surplusage del rēt, si asc▪ soit cōe rent secke. Auxi si hōe ad chy∣min appendant & puis purchase le terre en q̄ le chymin est, donques le chymin est extinct, & auxi est de vn comen append'. 209 Extortion. EXtortion, est vn tort fait {per} vn officer, Ordi∣narie, Archdeac▪, Official, Maior, Bailife, Vicount, Escheator, southuicount, Coroner, gailer ou auter officer, Colore officj sui en prendrās excessiue re∣ward ou fee, pur execu∣tion de son dit office, ou auterm̄t, & nest aut chose in fait, que plaine robbe∣rie, mes plus odible que robberie, car robberie est apparant, & tout temps ad oue luy le counte∣nance de vice, mes extor∣tion
esteant cy haut vice, come robberie est port oue luy vn countenāce de vertue, per reason de quel ilē le plus dure deste rie, ou discerne, & pur ceo le plus odibile, & vncore as∣cuns il y ad que ne valiēt demu, mes stretch lour office, credite, & consci∣ence pur purchaser mo∣ney, cibien per extortion, come auterment, accor∣dant al disans de le Poet Virgil, Quid non mor∣talia pectora cogit, au∣ri sacra fames? F. Failer de Record. FAiler de Recorde, est qt vn action est porte enuers vn, & le defendant plede ascun matter de Record en auter sort & aū de ceo {pro}ue {per} le Re∣cord. Et le pl▪ dit nul tiel Record, sur que le def. ad iour dōe a luy, pur ames∣ner eins le Recorde, a quel iour il faile, ou a∣mesne eyns vn tiel que nest barre al cest action, donques il est dit de fai∣ler de record, & sur ceo
le plaintife auera iudge∣ment de recouer &c. 211 Fait. FAit est vn escript enseal & deliuer a prouer & testifie de le agreement del partie quel fait il est, al chose containe en le fait, Come vn faite de feoffement est vn proue del liuerie de seysin, car le terre passa per le liue∣rie de seisin, mes quant le faite & le liuerie est ioynt ensemble cest vn proue del liuerie, & que le feoffour est content que le feoffee auera le terre. Et nota que touts faites sont ou indent, de quel y sont deux, troys, ou plusors parties, come le case require, de que le feoffour, grauntour, ou lessour ad vn, le feoffee, grauntee, on lessee, vn auter, Et peraduenture ascun auter person auxy, vn auter &c. Ou auter∣ment ils sont faites poll, ou single & forsque vn, le quel le feoffee, graun∣tee, ou lessee, ad &c. Et chese▪ fait consist de trois
principall choses (& sils trois ne sont ioyne en∣semble, il nest perfect fait de lier les parties) nosm̄t, escripture, sigillation, & deliuerie. Le primer point est e∣scripture, per que est de∣clare les nosmes del par∣ties al fait, lour habitati∣on, lour degrees, le chose graunt, sur queux consi∣derations, lestate limit, le temps quant il suit graunt, & si simplement, ou sur condition, oue auters tiels semblables circumstances. Mes si les parties al fait, escript en le fine lour nosmes de∣mesne, ou mise a ceo lour marks (come il est com∣munem̄t vse) il ne fait as∣cū matt (cōe eo suppose) car ceo nest entende, ou il est dit, que chescun faite couiēt de auer escripture. Le second point est sigillation, que est plus testimonie de lour con∣sents al ceo containe en le faite, come appiert per ceux parolx. In cu∣ius re testimonium &c. ou a tiel effect mise en le
fine de faits, sans qux pa∣rols, le fait est insufficiēt. Et pur ceo q̄ nous sumus en sigillation & signing de faits, il ne serra dehors icy a monstre a vous, pur Ie amour de antiquitie, le manner del signing & subscribing de faites en nostre auncestors le Sax∣ons temps, vn fashion different de ceo que nous vse en ceux nostre iouis, en ceo que ils a lour faits subscribe lour nosmes, (communement adding le signe del Crosse) & en le fine mise vn graunde number des testmoignes nient vsant a cel temps ascun maner de sigill. ▪Et nous a cest our pur plus suertie, auxbn̄ subscribe nostre nosme (ment ob∣stant ceo nest mult neces∣sarie come eo aye deuāt dit) & mis nostre sigilles, & vse le aide destesmoig∣nes auxy. Cest primer fa∣shion continue per tout, tanque al temps del Con∣quest per les Normans, que maners per petite & petite al darraine preuaile enter nous, car le primer
charter sigil en Engl▪ est pense destre ceo del Roy Edward le Confessor al Abbe de West▪ que este∣ant educate en Norman∣die, port en cest Realme ceo, & ascun aut de lour guises. Et apres le venians de Guilliam le Conque∣reur, les Normans, esti∣mans de le custom de lour pays, (come naturalment touts nations font) reiect le maner que ils troont cy, & reteignōt lour pro∣per, coe Ingulphus le Abbot de Croyland, que vient eins oue le Con∣quest tesmoigne, dicens: Norman cheriogra∣phorum confectionem, cum crucibus aures, & a∣liis signaculis sacris in Ang. firmari solita in cae∣ra impress. muāt, modū q̄ scrbendi Anglicum re∣ciunt. Mes ment obstant ceo ne fuit ft tout al vn temps, mes il encrease & vient eins {per} certein steps & degrees, issint que p∣mes & pur vn season e Roy solement, ou vn peu auters de le Nobilitie ouster luy vse de sigiller.
Don{que} le nobl▪ homes pur le plus part, & nul auters, quel chose vn home poit veyer en le Historie de Battel Abbey, ou Richard Lucy chiefe Iustice de Engleterre, en le temps del roy Henry le second, est report de auer blame vn meane subiect, pur ceo que il vse vn priuat sigil, quant ceo pertaine (come il dit) al roy & Nobilitie solement. A quel temps auxy (come I. Rosse note ceo) ils vse de ingraue en lour sigils, lour pictures de∣mesne, & counterfaits, couer oue longe tunicle super lour Armors. Mes apres ceo les Gentle∣homes del meliour sort prist le fashion, & pur ceo que ils ne fueront toutes gouernors, ils fesoyent si∣gilles engraue oue lour seuerall coates ou shields de armes, pur difference, come mesme le aucthour report. Al darraine, in temps del roy Edward le iii▪ sigils fueront mult common, issint que non solement tiels, que portāt
armes vse de sigiller, mes auters hōes auxy fesoyent al eux mesmes signets de lour deuise demesne as∣cuns prendrans les letters de lour nosmes demesne, ascūs flowers, ascūs knots & florishes, ascūs aus ou beasts, & ascuns auts cho∣ses, cōe no{us} ore vnc' iour∣nalmēt veiomus en vse. Ascuns auters maners de sigillation ouster ceux ad estre oye enter nous, come nosment ceo del roy Edw. le iii. per que il done al Norman le hun∣ter: Le hop & le hop∣ville, oue touts les boūds vpside downe, & en tes∣moigne que il soit veray, il morde le cere oue son fonge dent. Le sēblable de cest fuit monstre a moy per vn de mes amies en vn lose chart▪ mes non mult aun∣cientm̄t escript, & pur ceo il voil moy q̄ ieo esteema de ceo cōe ieo pense bn̄: Il fuit come ensuist. Ieo Guilliam King, done a vous Powlen Royden, ma hop & ma hop terres, oue touts les
bounds vp & downe, de coelo al terre, de terre ad infern̄, pur toy & vestres a demurrer, de moy & mes, al oy & vestres, pur vn arck & vn brode sagit, quāt ieo veign̄ pur hunter sur yarrow. In esmoign̄ q̄ ceo est veray, ieo morde cest cere oue mon dent, in presence de Magge, Maude, & Margerie, & mon tierce fits Henrie. Item ceo de Alberic de Veer, conteignant le do∣nation de Hatfield, al q̄l il fixe vn curt noier haft cuttel, semblable al vn vi∣eux demy denier whittle, en steede de vn seale, oue diuers tielx semblables. Mes ascun peraduen∣ture voylent pense que ux fuerount receyue n common vse & cus∣tome, & que ils ne fue∣ront les deuises & plea∣sures dun peu singuler persons, tiels quels ne sont meines deceiue, que ils que pensont chescun charter & escript que ne ad sigille annex, deste cy auncient come le Con∣quest, lou en veritie
sigillation ne fuit cōmu∣nemēt vse tan{que} al temps del roy Edward le tierce, come ad este dit. Le tierce pointest deli∣uerie, quel nient obstant il soit mis darrein, nest le meanest, car apres que vn fait soit escript & sigil fil ne soit deliuer, tout le re∣sidue est a nul purpose. Et cest deliuerie doit estre fait per le party luy mesme, ou son sufficient garrāt, & issint il luy liera quecunque escript ou si∣gille ceo, & per cest dar∣raine acte, le fait este fait perfect, accordant al en∣tent & effect de ceo, & pur ceo en faits le deliue∣rie est destre proue &c. Issint pores veyer que escripture & sigillation sans deliuerie est a nul purpose, Que sigillation & deliuerie lou nest as∣cun escripture, work nul chose, Ne escripture & deliuerie sans sigillation auxy fait nul fait. Et pur ceo ils touts doiēt oint∣ment concurre pur faire vn perfect fait, come est auantdit.
212 Farme ou Ferme. FArme ou Ferme est spe∣cialment le chiefe me∣suage en vn village ou towne a que appertient graūd demeanes de touts sortes, & ad este vse deste lesse pur terme de vie, ans, ou a volunt. Itē le rent q̄ est reserue sur tiel lease ou sembl', est appel farme ou ferme. Et farmor ou fermor, est celuy que occupia le farme ou ferme, ou est lessee de ceo. Auxy generally chescū lessee pur vie, ans, ou al volūt, nient obstant il soit dū petit cottage, ou mes. ē appel farmor ou fermor Et nota, que ils sont ap∣pels farmes, ou fermes, del Saxon paroll, Feor∣mian, que signifie pur feede, ou render victual▪ Car en auncient tempes, lour reseruations fuer cy bien (ou pur le plus {per}t) en victuall come argent, tanque al darraine, & ceo principalmēt en le temps del Roy H. le primer (per agreement) le reseruatiō de victuals, fuit conuert
en ready argent, & issint vncore ad continue enter plusors homes. Faux imprisonment. FAux imprisonment, est vn brief, & gist lou hōe est arrest & restraine de sō libertie {per} vn auter en∣counter order de ley, dō∣ques il aūa vers luy cest briefe per q̄ il recouera damages: Vide plus de ceo deuant titulo arrest. Faux iudgment vide de ceo deuant titulo error. Fee ferme. FEe ferme, est quant vn tenāt tient de son seig∣nior en fee simple rendāt a luy le value del moitie ou de tierce parte, ou quart part, ou de auter parte del terre, per an, & que tient en fee ferme ne doit paier reliefe ou faire auter chose, mes sicōe est contein en le feoffement fors{que} fealty, car ceo ap∣pēt a touts man̄s tenures. Fee simple. FEe simple, est quant as∣cun person tient terre ou rent ou auter chose inheritable a luy & a ses heirs a touts iours, ceux
parols ses heires font le∣stat denheritance, car si terre soyt done a home a touts iours, vnquore il nad forsque estate pour terme de vye. Auxy si te∣nant en fee simple deuie, son primer fites serra son heire, mes fil nad fits, dō∣ques touts les files que il ad serront son heire, & chescun auera son parte {per} partition, mes sil nad fits ne file, donques son pro∣cheyn cosin collater▪ de lētier sank serr̄ son heire. 216 Feoffment. FEosment, est lou vn don terre, ou tiel chose cor∣porall hereditable a vn auter in fee simple, & de ceo deliuer seisin & pos∣session del tre ceo est vn feoffment. Auxy si vn fait done in le taile ou leas pur terme de vie, ou pur terme dauter ve, il coui∣ent auxy de don̄ liuery & seisin, ou auterment riens passera per le graunt. 217 Feoffor & feffee. FEffor, est celuy que en∣feoffe, ou fait feoffem̄t al auter de terres ou tene∣ments en fee simple. Et
feffee est celuy, q̄ est en∣feoffe, ou a q̄ le feoffmēt est issint fait. Fealtie. FEaltie, est vn seruice ap∣pel en latin Fidelitas, & serra fait in tiel māners. le ten̄t tiendra sa mayne dexter sur vn liuer, & di∣ra a son seign̄. Ieo a vous serra foyal & loyal, & foy vous portera des tene∣ments que ieo claime de tener de vous, & loyall vous serra les costumes & seruices que faire vous doye al termes assignes, sicome moy eyd dieu. Et basera la liuer, mes il ne genulera, come en fesant Homage: Et de ceo ide apres en le title homage. Auxy fealty est incident a touts maners tenures. Felony. FElony, est vn generall terme, que compre∣hend diuers hainous of∣fences, pur que loffen∣dors doient suffer mort, & perder lour terres: Et semble que eux sont ap∣pels felonies del latin parol Fell, q̄ est Angloys gall, en Francoys Fiel:
Ou del▪ auncient paroll angloys Fell ou fierce, ou pur ceo que sont entend deste faits felleo īo, with bitter, fell, fierce, ou mis∣cheuous mind. Et ascun de ceux sont, quant home sans ascun colour de ley, emb ley les biens dun aut amountant al value de xii. d. ou plus, ceo est lar∣ceny, mes si vn approcha a le person vn auter en le chimin, & luy robba de ses biens, mesque ils ne sont forsque al value de vn denier, il est felonie, & ceo est appel robberie, & pur ceo il serra pendu. 220 Fireboote. FIreboote, est necessarie boys pur arder, quel per le comon ley, lessee pur ans, ou pur vie, poet prender en son terre, ni∣ent obstant il ne soit ex∣presse en son lea, & niēt obstant il soit vn leas per parol tantum sans fayte: Mes sil prist plus que be∣soigne, il serra punic en wast. 221 Fledwite. FLedwite, hoc est quietū esse de amerciamentis
cum quis vtlagatus fugi∣tiuus veniat ad pacē do∣mini Regis sponte, vel li∣centiatus. Flemeswite. FLemeswite, hoc est quod habeatis cattalla siue amerciamēta homi∣nis vestri fugitiui. Fletwit. FLetwit (ou Flitwit) hoc est quietū esse de con∣tentione & conuictis, & quod habeatis placitū in∣de in curia vestra, & a∣merciamēta, qa (flit) An∣glice est Tensone gallice. Forstall. FOrstall, hoc est quie∣tum esse de amercia∣mentis & cattallis arre∣statis infra terram vestrā, & amerciamenta inde prouementia. Forstaller. FOrstaller est celuy que achate blees, auers, ou aut marchādize quecū{que} est vēdible per le chimin quāt il vient al markets, faires, ou tiels sēbl' lieus deste vend' al entent que il poit vender ceo auter∣foites al vn plus haut & chare pryce, en praeiu∣dice
& damage de le cō∣mō weale & people &c. Le penaltie pur ceux queux sont cōuict de ceo, est le prim̄ temps impri∣sonm̄t per i. mois, & {per}de le value del chose vend. Le second temps, im∣prisonment per space de demy an, & {per}dra le dou∣ble value des biēs &c. Le tierce temps, imprisonm̄t durant le pleasure le roy, & iudgment del pillory, & forfeite touts ses biens & chattels. Vide lestatute 5. E. 6. cap. 14. 226 Franches Royal. FRanches Royal, est lou le Roigne graunt al vn & a ses heires que ils ser∣ront quite de tolnet, vel huiusmodi. 227 Frankalmoigne. FRankalmoigne, est lou en auncient temps ter∣res fuerōt dones a vn Ab∣bot & son couent, ou a vn Dean & le chapter, & a lour successors in pure & perpetual almoigue sauns expresse ascun ser∣uice certeine, ceo est frankealmoigne, & ils sont tenus deuaunt dieu
de faire orasons & prai∣ers pur le donour & ses heires, & pur ceo ils ne ferront fealtie, & si tiels q̄ ont terres in franke al∣moigne ne font ascun praiers ne deuine seruice pur les almes le donor, ils ne serront {per} les donors a ceo cōpelles, mes pur ceo ils poient complaine al Ordinarie, luy prayant q̄ tiel negligence ne soit pluis auant, & Lordinarie de droit ceo doit fair̄. Mes si vn Abbe &c. tient terres de son Seig∣nior pur certeine deuine seruice de estre fait, come de chaunter chescun ven∣derdie vn masse, ou de faire aut chose certeine, si tiel deuine seruice ne soit fait le Seign̄ poit distrei∣ner, & en tiel case labbe doit faire a le Seign̄, feal∣tie, & pur ceo il nest pas dit tenure in franke al∣moigne, mes tenure {per} de∣uine seru', car nul poit te∣ner in frāk alm', si soit ex∣p̄sse ascū certeine seruice. Franke fee. TEner en franke fee, est a tener en fee sim∣ple
terres pleadable a la common ley, & nient en auncient demesne. 229 Formedone. FOrmedone, est vn brief & gist lou tenant en le taile enfeoffa vn estrange ou est disseise & deuye, le heire auera briefe de Formedone pur recouer la terte, mes sont trois briefes de Formedone, vn est in le discēder, & ceo est in le case auant dit. Auxy si vn done tre in le tayle, & pour default dissue le remainder a vn auter in la taile, & que put default de tiel issue, la terre re∣uertera al donour, si le primer tenant in le tayle deuie sans issue cestuy en le remainder auera vn br̄ de Formedone en le re∣mainder, mes si le ten̄t en le taile deuie sans issue, & cesty ē le remainder auxi deuy sans issue, dōques le donor ou ses heires aūa vn formdon in le reūter. 230 Fieri facias. FIeri facias est vn briefe iudiciall, & gist lou home recouera debt ou dammages in Court le
Roy, dōques il auera cest briefe al vicount luy cō∣mandāt q̄ il leuie le debt & les damages des biens celuy q̄ ad perdus, & gist touts foites deins lan & iour, & ap̄s lan luy coui∣ent de suer vn scire facias, & sil soit garne, & ne viēt al iour &c. ou sil vient & ne scauoit riē dire, donqs celuy que recouera auera br̄ de fieri facias direct al vicont que il face luy auer execution de iudgement. Mes si home recouera vers vn feme & el prist baron deins lan & le iour donques il couient que cesty que recouera auera Scire facias vers le baron. Auxy est si Abbot on Prior recouer & deuie, sō successor deins lan auera Scire facias. Vide de ceo plus in la title Scire faci∣as, & title Execution. Fine. FIne ascun foits est prise pur vn summe dargent quel ascun est de payer al roy pur ascū cōtempt ou offence cōmit {per} luy▪ quel fine, chescun que commit ascū trespas ou que est cō∣uict,
que il fauxm̄t deny son fait, ou fesoit asc▪ cho∣se en contempt del Roy, paiera al roy, quel est ap∣pell Fine al Roy. Ascun foits Fine est prse pur vn speciall concord, quel est ewe enter ascuns persons touchant ascun terre, ou rent ou auter chose, dont ascun suit, ou brief est en∣ter eux pendant en ascun court, q̄l poit ee in diuers maners. Lun est quant lou party reconust ceo este le droit del auter come ceo q̄ il eit del done cestuy q̄ fesoit le reonusans, quel toutes foits suppose vn feoffem̄t p̄cedent & ē dit Fine execute: ou si il re∣conust ceo deste le droit del aut omittant les pa∣rols (come ceo q̄ il eit de son done) quel esteāt fine sur conusauns de droit tantum, si soit leuy a ce∣stuy q̄ eit le franktenem̄t del terre est Fine sur re∣lease. Et si cesty que ceo conust est scisi, & celuy a que est leuy neit le frāk∣tenement del terre, don∣ques est dit fine executo∣rie, quel estuy a q̄ le tre
est conus poit executer {per} Entre ou {per} Scire facias. Et ac▪ foits tiel sine sur conusans de droit tantū est pur sae vn surrēder, lou en ceo est repeat, que le reconusor eit estat pur vie▪ & lauter en reuersion. Et asc▪ foits ceo est ew de passer vn reuersiō, lou particular estate est recite deste en auter, & q̄ le re∣conusor voit que le auter auera le reuersiō, ou que le terre remain̄ al auter apres le particular estate finie. Et ascun soits celuy a q̄ le droit est conus, come ceo que il ad del done le reconusor, rēdra le terre, ou vn rent hors de ceo al conusor. Et acunots pur lentr fee. Ascn foites pur particular estate oue remaind▪ ou remainders ouster. Et ascun u reseruation del rnt ou distres & gr d ceo ouster per mesme ine. Et est appel fine quia {per} ceo le su est determine, & si ceo soit record one proclamation, ceo barr̄ estrangers.
232 Franke mariage. FRank mariage, est quāt vn home seisi de terres en fee simple done ceo al auter home & a sa feme que est file, soer ou aut∣m̄t de kin al donour) en frankmariage, {per} vertue de queux parolx ils ount vn estate en speciall taile, & tiendra le terre del do∣nour quit de touts man∣ners de seruices tanque le iiij. degree soit passe, ac∣countants eux mesmes in le primer degree, sinon fealtie, queux ils fieront, pur ceo que il est incidēt a toutes tenures forsque franke almoigne. Et tiel done poit estre fait cybi∣en apres mariage solem∣nise, come deuant. Et ho∣me poit doner terres a son fits in frankmariage come a sa file, per le opi∣nion de Master Fitzher∣bert en son brief de Chā∣pertie. H. Mes il appiert auter∣ment en Master Littletō, & en Master Brooke titu∣lo Frankmariage, Pla. 10. Et issint il fuit tenus clere  Graies Inne ē Lent, An.
1576. 18. Eliz. per le Wor. Master Rhodes donques lector la. Franktenement. FRanktenemēt, est vn e∣state que home ad en terres ou tenements, ou profit a prendre en fee simple, taile, pur terme de son vie demesne, ou pur terme dauter vie, en dower ou per le curtesie Dangleterre▪ Et south ceo il ne est franktenem̄t, car il que ad estate pur ans, ou tient a volunt nad asc▪ franktenement, mes ils sont appel chattels. Et de franktenem̄ts il y ad deux sorts, cē ascauoir franktenement en fait, & franktenement en ley. Franktenem̄t en fait est qūt vn hōe ad entred en tres ou tenem̄ts, & est sei∣sie de ceo realm̄, actualm̄t & en fait: Si come le pe∣re seisi de terres ou ten̄ts en fee simple deuie, & son fits enter en eux cōe heire a son pere, donques il ad vn franktenement en fait per son entrie. Franktenem̄t en ley, est quant terres ou tenem̄ts
sont discendus al vn hōe, & il poit enter en eux quant a luy plest, mes nad vncore fait son entrie en fait, come en le case a∣uant dit, si le pere esteant seisie de terre en fee sim∣ple deuie seisi, & ils dis∣cend▪ a son fites, mes le fites nad vncore enter en fait en eux, ore deuant sō entrie il ad vn franktene∣ment en ley. 234 Freshsuit. FReshsuit, est quant vn home est robbe, & le party issint robbe, pursua le felon immediatment, & luy prist oue le man∣ner, ou auterment & dō∣ques port vn appeale en∣uers luy, & luy conuince del felonie per verdicte, le quel chose esteant en∣quire pur le Roigne & troue, le partie robbe aūa restitut▪ de ses biēs arrer̄. Item il poit este dit, que le partie fait Freshsuit, nient obstant il ne prist le felon presentment, mes que il soit demy an ou vn an apres le robberie fait, deuant que il soit prise, si soit issint que le partie
robbe fait tant que en luy est, {per} diligent enquirie & serch de luy prēder, nient obstant q̄ il est prise {per} vn auter home, vncore ceo serra dit bone freshsuit. Et issint freshsuit est quant le Seignior vient pur distreiner pur rent ou seruice, & le owner des beastes fait rescous, & en∣chase eux en auters terre que nest tenus del seign̄, & le seignior ensue pre∣sentment, & reprist eux, cest appel freshsuit. Et issint en auter semblables cases. G. Gager de deliue∣rance. GAger de deliuerance est, lou vn sua Reple∣uin de biens prise, mes il nad deliuerie des biens, & lauter auowa, & le plain∣tife monstra▪ que le de∣fendant est vncore pos∣sesse des biens &c. & pria que le defendant gagera deliuerance, donques il mittera eins suertie ou pledge pur le redeliue∣rance,
& vn briefe issera al Vicont pur redeliuerer les bn̄s &c. Mes si home clayme propertie, il ne gagera deliuerance. Auxy sil dit q̄ les auers sont morts en le pound, il ne gagera &c. Auxy home ne gagera iammais le deliueraunce auant q̄ ils soyent a issue, ou demurrer en ley, vt di∣citur. 236 Garrantie des charters. GArrantie des charters, est vn brief, & gist lou ascun fait est fait q̄ com∣prehend clause de garr̄. s. dedi ou concessi, ou cest parol Warrantizabo, & si le t soit implede per vn e∣strange si soit en Ass. ou tiel action lou il ne poit vouch a garrant, don{que} il auera cē br̄ vers son feof∣for ou son heir, & si le tre soit recoū vers luy, il re∣couera tant del tre en va∣lue vers cestuy que suist le garr̄. Mes cest br̄e co∣uient este sue pendant le prim̄ br̄ vers luy, ou aut∣mētal ad {per}de sō auātage.
Auxy sur garrantie en ley, come sur homage auncestrel, ou sur rent re∣serue sur lease a terme de vie, ou done en le taile home auera brief de gar∣rantie de charters, mes nemy sur eschange. Garrantie. GArrantie, est en deux manners. s. garrantie lineal & garrantie colla∣teral. Garrantie lineal est lou home seisie en fee, fait feoffement per son fait a vn auter, & oblige luy & ses heires a garrant, & ad issue fits & mo∣rust, & le garrantie dis∣cend a son fites, ceo est lineal garrantie, pur ceo que si nul fait oue gar∣rantie vst este fait, don∣ques le droit des terres discenderoit al fits, & il conueyeroit le discent de le pere a le fits. Mes si tenaunt en le taile dis∣continua le taile, & ad issue & deuie, & luncle del issu relessa al discōti∣nuee oue garrantie &c. & morust sauns issue, ceo
est collateral garrantie al issue en le taile, pur ceo q̄ le garrantie discende sur le issue, le q̄l ne poit soy conueyer a le taile per le meane de son vncle. Et en chescun case lou hōe de∣maunda terres en fee tail {per} br̄ de Formedon▪ si ascū del issue en le taile que a∣uoit possession, ou que nauoit possession fait vn garrantie, & cesty que sua le briefe de Formedon poit per possibilitie per mater que puissoit este en cest fait conueier a luy title per force del done per celuy que fist le gar∣rantie &c. ceo est don∣ques vn lineal garrantie, & per tiel lineal garran∣tie, le issue en le taile ne serra barre, sinon que il ad assets a luy discendus en fee simple: Mes si il ne poit per nul possibility que poit este conueyer a luy title per force del dn per celuy que fit le gar∣rantie, donques ceo est vn collateral garrantie, & {per} tiel collaterall garrantie, le issue en le taile serra barre sans ascun assets.
Et le cause que tiel colla∣teral garrantie est vn barr̄ al issue en le taile, est pur co q̄ touts garranties de∣uant lestatut de Glouce∣ster, queux discendant a ceux queux sont heires a eux que fesoyent les gar∣ranties, fueront barres a mesme les heires a demā∣der ascun terres forsprise les garranties que com∣mence per disseisin, & pur ceo que le dit estatute ad ordeine que le garrantie del pere ne serra barre a son fites pur les terres que veigne del heritage le mere, ne garrantie le mere ne serra barre al fits pur les terres que veigne del heritage de pier, & le∣statute nad fait ne or∣deine remedie encounter le garrantie que est col∣lateral al issue en le taile, & pur ceo le garrantie que est collateral al is∣sue en le taile, vncore est in sa force & serra barre al issue en le tayle, come il fuit deuaunt lesta∣tute, Auxy il couyent que toutes garranties, per que ascun heire serra
barre, que le garrātie des∣cend per course del com∣mon ley a celuy que est heire a luy que fist le gar∣rantie, ou auterment il ne serra barre, car si le tenant in le tail des terres in bo∣row English, lou le puisn̄ fits inheriter̄ per la cu∣stome discontinua le taile & ad issue deux fits, & luncle releas al disconti∣nuee oue garrantie & de∣uye, & le puisne fits porte Formedone, vncore il ne serra barre par tyel gar∣rantie, causa qua supra. Auxy si ascun home fait ascun fait oue garrantie, per quel son heire serroit barre, & puis cestuy que fist le garrantie soyt at∣taint de felony, donques son heire ne serra barre {per} tiel garrantie, pur ceo que tiel garrant ne puit dis∣cender sur luy, pur ceo que le sanke est corrupt. Auxy si le sits purchase tre, & puis lessa le terre a son pier pur terme dans, & le pier {per} son fait de ceo enfeoffa vn estraunge, & oblige luy & ses heires a garrantie, & le pier deuie,
per q̄l le garrantie dis∣cend al fits, vncore cē gar∣ranty ne barrer̄ my le fits, mes le fits bien puit entre nient obstant cel garran∣ty, pur ceo q̄ cest garranty commensast per disseisin, quant le pier fist le feoffe∣ment que fuit vn disseisin al fits, & come est dit de le pier, issint puit este dit de chescun auter aunce∣stour. Et mesme le ley est si launcestor soit tenaunt per Elegit, ou per statute marchant, & fait ascun feoffement oue garrantie, tiels garranties ne serrōt barres, pur ceo q̄ ils cō∣menceont per disseisin. Garrantie. GArrantie, est quant vn est lye al auter que ad terre de garr̄ le terr̄ a luy, le quel poit commence per deux meanes▪s▪ per act del ley: come si vn & ses auncestors ont tenu terre del auter, & ses aun∣cest' per temps dont me∣mory ne curt, per ho∣mage▪ q̄ est appel homage auncestrell: Ou per lact del partie, q̄ graunta
per fait on fine al tenant del terre de garrant ceo a luy: sur quel garrantie si le tenaunt soit implead per luy que doit garrant, ou ses heires, le tenaunt barrera le demaundant per pleder del garrantie vers luy, que est appell Rebutter: Ou si soit im∣plead per auter en action, en que poit vouch, il vou∣chera cestuy que garrant, ou ses heires: Et si le plaintife recouer̄, le te∣nant recouera en value vers vouchee. 239 Garde. GArde, est quant vn enfant que auncestor tient per seruice de chi∣ualrie, est en le grde & custodie de le seigniour de que ils fueront tenus: Et si le tenaunt tient de diuers seigniours diuers terres, celuy seigniour de que il tient per prioritie, cestascauoir, per le plus auncient Tenure, auera la garde del enfant, mes si vn tenure soyt auxy auncient que le auter, donques celuy q̄ primes,
happa le garde del corps, gardera ceo, mes en ceo case, chescun seignior a∣uera le gard del terre que est tenus de luy, mes si le tenant tient ascū terre del Roigne en chiefe, don{que} le Roigne {per} sa preroga∣tiue aūa le gard del corps, & de tout le terre que est tenus de luy, & de chescū auter seigniour. Auxy sont diuers briefs de gard, vn est briefe de droit de garde, & gist lou le tenaunt deuye, son heire deins age & vn e∣strange entra in le terre, & hap̄ le garde de corps de lenfant. Briefe deiectment de garde gist lou home est ouste de la garde de terre sauns de corps de len∣fant. Briefe de rauishment de gard gist lou le corps est prise de luy solement & ment le terre. Gardeine. GArdeine, ou gardeine plus propermēt est ce∣luy que ad le garde ou custodie dun heire, & de
son terre tenus per ser∣uice de chuale, ou de vn de eux a son vse de∣mesne, durant le nonage del h▪ & deins cest temps ad le bestowing del corps del hr, en mariage al son volunt sans disparagem̄t. Et de gardeines il y ad ii. sorts▪ nosmement: gar∣deine en droit, & gardein en fait. Gardein en droit, est ce∣luy que per reason de son seigniorie est seisie del gardship on custodie del terre, & del heire, durant le nonage del heire. Gardeine en fait, est lou le seigniour apres son seisin, come auauntdit, graunta per fait, ou sans fait, le gardship del terre ou del heire, ou dambi∣deux a vn ant, per force de quel graunt, le graun∣tee est en possession, don∣ques est le grauntee ap∣pell gardein en fait. Et cest gardeine en fait poit grant le heire al aut auxy, mes cest auter nest properment appell gar∣deine en fait, car ceo est le grauntee del garden
en droit solement, mes le gardein en socage ad le profit solement al vse del heire res{que} il ad accom∣plish lage de xiiii. ans, & rendra pur ceo accompt al heire▪ Vide plus de ceo Lit. li. 2. ca. 4 & 5. Et Stāf. sur statute de Prerog. ca. 1. 2. & 6. Garnishment. GArnishment est, sicome vn action de detinue des charters est port vers vn, & le defendant dit, que les charters fuernt deliuer a luy per le plain∣tife & per vn auter sur certeine conditions, & prey que lauter soit gar∣ny de pleder oue le plain∣tife si les conditions sont pimples ou nemy, & sur ceo vn briefe de Scire fa∣cias ssera vers luy, & ceo est appel vn Garnishmēt, & lauter quant il vient eins pled▪ oue le plaintif, & ceo est appel enterple∣der. Gauelate. GAuelate, est vn speciall & anciēt kind de Ces∣sauit
vsed en Kent ou le Custome de Gauelkinde continue, per quel le te∣naunt forfeitera ses ter∣res & tenements al Seig∣niour de que ils sont te∣nus, sil detaine de son Seigniour ses due rents & seruices, solonque cest maner que ensuist. Si ascun tenaunt en Gauelkinde retaine sa ent, & ses seruices de le tenement que il tyent de son Seigniour, querge le Seigniour per agarde de sa Court, de trois se∣maines en trois semains, de trouer distresse sur cel tenemēt iesque a le quart court, a touts foits per tesmoignes. Et si deins cel tēps ne troue distresse en cel tenement, per queux il puisse son tenant iusticer, Don{que} a la quart Court soit agarde que il preigne cel tenement en sa main, en nosme de di∣stresse, auxy come fuit boefe ou vache, & le tiēt n an & vn iour, en sa maine, sans maine ouerer, deins quel terme, si le te∣nant vient, & rende ses
arrerages, & fait reaso∣nables amendes de la deteiner, adone eit, & ioyse son tenement, si∣come ses auncestours & luy auant tiendront. Et sil ne vient deuant le an & le iour passe, done auage le Seigniour al procheyne County court uyant oue tesmoygnes de sa Court, & face la pronuncier cel processe pur tesmoynage auer, & per agarde de sa Court (apres ceo Coun∣tie tenue) entra & mey∣noura en cels terres & tenementes, sicome en son demesne. Et si le tenaunt vyent apres, & voyler reauer ses te∣nementes, & tener si∣come il fist deuant, face gree al Seygniour, si∣come il est auncientment dist. Neghe sith selde, & neghe sith gelde, & v. li. for the were, r he become healder. Vide de ceo 10. Hen. 3. Fitz∣herb. Cessaut 0. & sta∣tute 10. Ed. 2. de Gaue∣let en London, en le Col∣lectiō
del statutes Lōdon 2. matter tendant mult a cel purpose, q̄ {per} cel parol Gauelet le seign̄ auera le terre, pur cesser le ten̄t. Et vide Westm̄ 2. cap. 21. que done Cessauit. Il y ad ascuns copies que ad le primer Verse issint escript. Nisith yeld, and nisith gelde. Et auters issint. Nighesith yelde, and nighesith geld. Mes ceux ne differ en signification, auter copies ont ceo solōque cē sort. Nigondsith selde, & nigondsith geld. Cestassauoir, paiera il nouies foits, & nouies foits repay. 243 Gauelkinde. GAuelkinde est vn cu∣stome annex & cur∣rant oue tres en Kent ap∣pel Gauelkinde terres te∣nus en auncient Socage tenure. Et est pense per les erudite en Antiquities, deste appel Gauelkinde de Gyue al kin, cest adire a toutes les kinne en vn line, accordant come est
vse enter les Germans, de que nous Anglois, & e∣specialment de Kent ve∣nomus. Ou il est appell Gauelkinde de Gyue al kinde, cest adire al touts les males, car kinde en Dutch signifie vn male. Et diuers auters semble cō∣iectures sont fait per eux de le nosme (Gauelkind) le quel ieo omit de pur∣pose pur breuitie. Les plus vsual customes de eux sont, que le terre est diuidable enter les heires males, & q̄ le heire al age de xv. ans poit dōe & vende sa terre, & serra inherit coment son pere soit attaint & pendue pur felonie, & sa feme serra endowe del demy del terre, dont son baron de∣uie seisie, & le baron ser∣ra tenant per le curtesie del demy, coment ne a∣uoit issue {per} sa feme: mes lestate del baron & feme cease per lour second ma∣riage. Et diuers auts Cu∣stomes sont vses en Kent de terres en Gauelkind, pur queux veies le Per∣ambulation de Kent,
fait per M. Lambert, Pur quel cause le residue ieo voile omit come imper∣tinent a cel lieur, & in∣treat amplemēt en le dit Perambulation. 244 Gelde. GEld, hoc est quietū esse de cōsuetud' seruilibus q̄ quon lā dari consueue∣rūt & adhuc dāt, cōe hor∣negeld & his similibus. 245 Graund Cape. GRaund Cape, vide de ceo ap̄s tit petit Cape. 246 Grand Serianty. GRaund Serianty est lou on hōe tiēt de roy cer∣tein terres {per} le seruice de porter sō bāner ou laūce, ou amesner son hoste, ou destre son caruer ou but∣teler a son coronment & tiels sembl', & ceo est la pluis honorable seruice & pluis digne, q̄ le tenant poit fair, & pur ceo ē ap∣pel graund serianty, Mes petit Seriāty est quant vn tient de roy luy rendant annuelm̄t vn arke, vn co∣teau, vn launce, & tiels sembl', & ceo nest fors{que} socage en effect, mes hōe ne poit tener in graund
serieanty ne per petit ser∣ieanty sinon de roy. Auxy si tenant per graund ser∣ieantie morust son heire esteant de pleine age, le heir paiera al roy pur re∣liefe le value des terres ouster les charges que il pay al Roy {per} grand serie∣antie: mes cestuy que ty∣ent {per} Escuage paiera pur son relief forsque C. s. Auxy ceux que sont en le Marches de Scotland, que tient del Roy per Cornage, cest est, pur ventiler vn cornu quant les Scots entront en An∣gleterre, sont tenants per graund serieantie. Auxy ou vn home tient de roy pur trouer vn ho∣me en sa guerre deins le Realme, cest est dit grand Serieantie, pur ceo, que il est fait per corps dun ho∣me. Et si le tenant ne poit trouer home de faire ceo, donques il est tenus de faire ceo luy mesme. Et il que tient per grand serie∣antie tient per seruice de chiualer, & le Roy auera garde, marriage & re∣liefe, mes nemy de ceux
que tient per petite ser∣ieantie, mes le Roy na∣uera de eux que tient per grand Serieanty escuage, sion que ils tient per es∣cuage. Issint ceux que ti∣ent per grand sericantie ou escuage tient per ser∣uice de chiualer. Mes vn poit tener per grand Ser∣ieantie & nemy per escu∣age, & per escuage & ne∣my per grand serieantie. Et le seruice de chiualer toutes foites treit. a luy gard, mariage, & relief. 247 Grithbrech. GRithbrech, hoc est pax domini Regis fracta, quia (Grith) Anglice pax Latin. H. 248 Habere facias seisinam. HAbere facias seisinam, est vn briefe iudicial, & gist lou vn ad recouer certain terres en court le Roy, donques il auera cest briefe direct al Vi∣cont, luy commaundant de doner a luy seisin del terre, & ne serra retur∣nable.
Hangwit. HAngwit, hoc est quie∣tum esse de latrone suspenso sine iudicio, vel extra custodiam vestram euaso. Hariot. HAriot, est ē deux sorts lun Hariot custom, le auter Hariot seruice. Hariot seruice (ascuns diont) est touts foits ex∣presse en le graunt dun home, ou en son fait que il tiēt per tiel seruice pur paier hariot al temps de son mort, Et cest Hariot est paiable apres le mort de le tenāt en fee simple. Hariot custome, est lou hariots ont este paies temps hors de memorie per custome. Et ceo poit este apres le mort del te∣nant pur vie &c. mes a parler de ceo generalm̄t. Hariot est le meliour beast (soit il Chiual, Boef, ou vache) que le tenāt ad al temps de son mort. Et le Sn̄r poit seise, ou p̄nder vn distresse pur ceo, soit il Hariot seruice, ou Hariot custome, al vse del Seig∣nior de que le tenant tiēt
per son baylie ou auter officer de son manor. Mes de droit le Seigniour ne son officer ne doit pren∣der Hariot deuant que il soit present al prochein court tenus apres le te∣nant est mort, & que tiel beast est due al seigniour pur son Harriot. 251 Haybote ou hedg∣bote. HAybote ou hedgbote, est necessary stuffe pur faire & amend haies, que lessee pur ans, ou pur vie de common droit poit p̄nder sur le tre a luy les∣se, nient obstant il ne soit expresse en son lease, & nient obstant q̄ il soit vn lease {per} parols sans escript. Haybote auxy poit e∣stre prise pur necessarie stuf pur faire rakes, forks & tiels semblables in∣strumēts oue q̄ux homes vsont en summer de ted∣der & faire feme Et issint vn lessee pur ans prist ceo & fuit a luy allow per sō lessor, plus tost come ieo suppose, pur ceo que tiels instrumēts sont commu∣nement fait de slender subboys, q̄ per le cōmon
ley lessee pur ans poit succider & prender come est auantdist. Hidage. HIdage, hoc est quietum esse si dominus Rex talliaueit totam terram per hidas. Nota q̄ vn hide de terr̄, est vn entire plowland. Et cest kinde de taxing per hides fuit mult vse en vi∣el temps cibien pur pro∣uision de armour, come paimēts de argent, & ceo principalm̄t, en les iours del Roy Etheldred (vn Roy en cest payes deuant le Conquest) que en le an de Christ 1006. quant les Danes pst land al Sandwich en Kent taxe tout son terre per hides ē cest maner, Que chescun 310. hides de terre doent trouer vne niefe furnish, & chescun 8. hides doi∣ent trouer vn lacke & vn sallet, pur le defence del Realme. Hotchpot. HOtchpot, est vn med∣ling, ou mixing ensē∣ble, & vn partitiō de tres done en frankmariage,
ouesque auter terres en fee simple discendus. Co∣me pur example: vn ho∣me seisi de 30. acres de terre en fee simple, ad is∣sue ij. files, & done ouesq̄ vn de ses files al vn home q̄ luy marrie 10. acres de ceo terre en frankmarri∣age, & morust seisie de les auters xx. acres: Ore si el que est issint marrie voiloit auer ascun parte de les xx. acres de que son pier morust seisie: El doit mise ses terres done en frankemariage en Hotchpot, ceo est adire, el doiet refuser de pren∣der le sole profite del terre done en franke∣mariage, & suffer le ter∣re de estre commixt, & mingle ensemble oues∣que le aut terre de q̄ son piere morust seisie, issint que vn equal diuisiō poit estre fait de lentyer pe∣renter luy & sa soer: Et issint pur sa 10. acres, el auera xv. auterment sa soe voyt auer les xx. a∣cres, de que lour pier mo∣rust seisie.
Homage. Homage, est vn seruice que serra fait en tiel maner, cest ascauoir, le te∣nant in fee simple, ou fee taile q̄ tient per homage genulera sur ambideux genus discet, & le seig∣niour serra & tiendra les mayns son tenaunt inter ses mains & le tenant di∣ra. Ieo deueigne vostre home de cestuy iour en a∣uant de vie & de member & de tertaine honor, & a vous serra foial & loyal, & foy vous portera des terres que ieo claime de tenuer de vous, salue le foy que ieo doy a nostre seigniour le Roy, & don∣ques le seigniour issint seant luy besera. Mes comēt fealty serra fait, vide deuant in fealty. Et le seneschal le seig∣niour puit prender fealty mes nemy homage. Homage ancestrel. HOmage auncestrel, est o vn hōe & ses aun∣cest' de tēps dōt memory ne courge, ont ten' la tre del Sn̄r per homage, & si tiel Seigniour ad resceu
homage il est tenus de acquiter le tenaunt er toutes auters seigniours paramont luy de chescun mannr seruice. Et si te∣nant ad fait homage a sō seigniour & soit implede & vouche le seigniour a garrantie, le seigniour est tenu de luy garranter, & si le tenant perde il reco∣uera in value vers son seigniour tant des terres que il auoit al temps de la voucher ou vnq, puis. Auxy si home que tient sa terre per homage aun∣cestrel alien le terre ē fee donques le alience ferra homage a son Sn̄r, mes il ne tiendra {per} homage an∣cestrel pur ceo que le con∣tinuance del tenācy in le sank le prim̄ tenaunt est discontinue. 256 Homesoken. HOmesoken, (ou hame∣soken) hoc est quietū esse de amerciamentis, de ingressu hosp▪ ciorum vi∣olenter & sine licentia, & contra pacē domini Re∣gis. Et {quam} teneatis placita de hm̄di transg' facta in curia vestra, & in tra ve∣stra.
Homicide ou Man∣slaughter. Homicid' ou Māslaugh∣ter, est le occider dun home felonieusment sans malice prepenced. Il est auxi define issint Homi∣cidium est hominis occi∣sio, ab homine facta, s autē a cane, boue, vel alia re, non dicitur proprie homicidium: dicitur ho∣micid' ab homine & cae∣do, quasi hominis caediū. Hornegelde. HOrnegeld, hoc est qui∣etum esse de quadam cōsuetudine exacta {per} tal∣lag. {per} totam tra, sicut de quacūq, bestia cornuta. Housebote. HOusebote, est necessa∣ry timber, q̄ le lessee pur ans, ou pur vie, de cō∣mon droit poit prender sur le terre, pur repayrer les measons sur mesme le terre a luy lesse, ment obstant il ne soit expresse en le lease, & ment ob∣stant il soit vn lease per parols sans fait. Mes sil prist pluis q̄ besoigne, il poit ste punish per vn a∣ction de wast.
260 Hundred. HVndreds, fueront de∣uise per Alfred le roy, apres que il ad deuide le entier Realme en certain parts ou sections, le quel de le Saxō parol Seynan, significant de seinder, il terme Shires ou (sicome nous vncoe pale) Shares & portiōs. Ceux Shires il auxy diuide en petites parts, de queux ascuns fu∣eront appelles Lthes, de le parol Ielapian, que est de assembler ensemble, auters Tythinges, issint nosme, pur ceo que la fu∣eront en chescū de eux al number de x. persons, de que chescun fuit suertie & pledge pur auts bone behauiour: auters hun∣dreds, pur ceo que ils cō∣teine iurisdiction sur vn 100 homes ou pledges demurrāt {per}aduenture en ij. ouiij. ou plus paroches, borowes, ou villes, este∣ant & adioynantes ment meines prochein ensem∣ble, en le quel il appoint administration de Iustice destre exercise seueral∣m̄t ēter eux de mesme le
hundred, & nemy que lun irra hors disorderment en lauter hundred, lath, ou tything, en que il ne demurt. Ceux hundredes continue a cst iour en force, ment obstant non en tout al mesme le pur∣pose, pur que al primer ils fueront ordein, vncore a ore mult necessarie, & en temps de peace pur bone order de gouernement diuers voyes, & auxy en guerr pur certaintie de leuying de homes come auterm̄t pur le plus spedi collections de paiments grant en Parliamēt a les Roes & Roign̄s de cest Realme. Hundredum. HVndredum. oc est q∣etū sse de dnr̄ vel consuetudinibus facien∣dis paepositis & hundre∣darijs. I. Ideot. IDeot, est celu que est vn ot naturall de sa eysture, & e scanoit de accompter ou num∣ber xx. d, ne poit nos∣mr son pere ou mere,
ne de quel age il m̄ est, ou tiel semblable plaine & cōmon choses, issint q̄ il appiert q̄ il nad ascū ma∣ner de intendement de reason ne gouernement de luy mesme, quel est pur son profit, ou dispro∣fit &c. Mes sil ad tant en∣telligēce que il poit lier, ou apprender de lyer per instruction & informa∣tiō de auts, on poit mea∣sure vn vlne de drap, ou nosme les iours en le se∣maine, ou engēder vn en∣fant, sits ou file ou tiel sē∣blable, {per} q̄ il poit appeare que il ad ascun lumen de reason; don{que} tiel nest Ideot naturalment. 263 Idemptitate no∣minis. IDemptitate nominis, est vn br̄e, & gist lou br̄ de det, Couenant, Accompt, ou tiel semblable briefe est port vers vn home, & vn auter que ad mes∣me le nosme come le de∣fendant ad, est pris pur luy, don{que} il auera cest br̄ per que le viscount fra inquiry deuaunt Iustice
assigne in m̄ le countie, si soit mese le person ou nemy, & sil ne soit troue le partie donques il ae sans iour in peace. Ieofayle. IEofaile, est quāt les par∣ties al ascun suit en ple∣dant ont a tant proceed q̄ il aient ioyne issue quel serra trie, ou est trie per vn Iury ou enquest. Et cel pleding ou issue est cy malement plede ou ioyn q̄ il serra errour si eux {pro}∣ceed: Don{que} ascun del di∣stes parties poit per lou Counsell monstre ceo al Court auxibien apres ver∣dist done & deuāt iudge∣ment, come deuant le Iu∣rie soit charge. Le mon∣strans des q̄ux effects de∣uant le Iurie charge fuit souent quāt le Iury veign̄ al Court de trye le issue, dō{que} le Counsell q̄l voit ceo monstrer dira, cē en∣quest ne does prender, Et si soit apres verdict, don{que} il voiloit dire, Al iudge∣mēt ne deues aler. Et pur ceo q̄ ceux mults delayes fueront en suites, diuers
statutes sont faits de re∣dresser ceo, auxibien en temps Roy H. le 8. Anno 32. cap 30. come en tēps le roigne que ore est de queux home poit dire come les Ciuilians diont. Quod tamesi uis for∣mulas amputari iusserit Constantinus Imperator, quotidianus tamen fo∣rensis vsus eas reuocasse vide, vel potiu, quod crescunt vt Hidrae capita. 265 Illoyal assemblie. ILloyall assemblie, est lou people eux assemble usimul pur faire illoyall chose encounter le peace, nyent obstant que ils ne execute lour purpose en fait. 266 Imparlance. IMparlance, est quant vn action de dett, trespasse, ou tiels semblables est port enuers vn home, & apres que le plaintife ad count ou declare, le de∣fendant pria le Court que il poit auer temps de mitter ins son respons al
auter iour en mesme le terme, ou en le procheine terme, cest stay de res∣pons est appel impar∣lance. Imprisonment. IMprisonment nest auter chose fors{que} le restraint del libertie dun home, soit ceo en le ouert chāps ou en le cippes, ou cage en les estreates, ou en le proper meason dun hōe, ibien come en le comon gaol. Et en toutes ceux lieux le partie issint re∣straine est dit deste vn pri∣soner cy longem̄t come il nad son libertie frankmēt de re a touts lou il voit, sans baile, mainprise, ou auter aucthoritie. Infangthefe. INfangthefe, hoc est qd' latrones capti in domi∣nico vel in feodo vestro de latrociniis conuicti, in curia vestra iudicent. Information. INformatiō, pur le roign̄ est ceo que pur vn com∣mon person est appel vn
declaration, & nest toutes foits fait directment {per} le Roigne, ou sa Atturney, mes {per} vn aut home. Qui tam pro domina Regina quam pro seipso sequitur, sur le breach de ascū pe∣nal ley ou statute, en que vn penaltie est done al partie que voit suer pur ceo, mes nul actiō de dett pur recouer ceo, don{que} il doit ēe ewe {per} informatiō. 270 Ioyntenants. IOintenāts sont lou deux homes vient a ascū ter∣res on tenements per vn ioynt title: Come si home done terre a deux homes & lour heires. Mes Tenants en com∣mon sont lou ii. homes out terres per seueral ti∣tles, ou per feffement al deux, a auer & tener lun moitie al vn & ses heires, & lauter moitie al lauter & ses heires, en touts ceux cases nul de eux scauoit son seueral, come il serra dit apres. Et nota si sont deux ou trois ioyntenaunts, & vn ad issue & deuie,
donques cestuy ou ceux iointenants que surues∣que auera lentiertie per le suruiuor. Mes si deux iointenāts font particion enter eux {per} fait {per} agreemēt donques ils sont seueral tenants. Mes si vn iointenaunt graunt ceo que a luy ap∣pent a vn estranger, don∣ques lauter iointenant & le stranger sont tenants en common. Et mesque ij. tenants en common sont seysie per my & per tout, & nul conust son seueral, vncore si vn deuie, lauter ne aue∣ra lentiertie per surui∣uor, mes son heire auera le moitie. Et issint si sont iii. ioin∣tenants, & vn de eux fait feffement de son part a vn auter, & le feffee de∣uie, donques son heire auera le tierce part, & les auters i. sont iointenants come ils fueront, pur ceo que eux deux sont seisies per vn ioint title. Auxy si tre soit done al baron & sa feme, & le ba∣rō alien & deuie, le feme
recouera lentiertie: mes si ils fueront iointenāts de∣uant le couerture, don∣ques en tiel case el reco∣uera forsque le moitie. Auxy si terre soit done al baron & sa seme, & al tierce person, si le tierce person graunt ceo que a luy appent, la moitie pas∣sa▪ per cel graunt, pur ceo que le baron & sa feme sont forsque vn person en le ley, & en cest case ils nont en droit forsque le moitie. Auxy si deux ioynte∣nāts sont des tres en ville que est borough English, lou terre est deuisable, & lun per son testament de∣uise ceo que a luy appent a vn estranger & deuie, cest deuise est voide, & le auter auera lentiertie per suruiuer, pur ceo que le deuise ne poit prēder ef∣fect tanque apres le mort le deuisor, & immediate apres le mort le deuisor, le droit deuient al auter iointenāt per le suruiuor, le quel ne claime riēs {per} le deuisour mes en sō droit demesne per le suruiuer:
Mes autermēt est de Par∣ceners seisies des tres de∣uisables, causa qua supra. Indicauit. INdicauit est vn briefe & gist lou debate est per∣enter deux Clerkes en court Christian dun Es∣glise, ou part de vn Es∣glise pur dismes q̄ amoūt al meines a le value de la quart part del Esglise, & pur ceo q̄ le patron del Clerk le defendaunt per∣dra son aduowson, si le clerke le plaintife la re∣couera, donques il auera brief direct al Clerke le plaintif ou al officers del cōurt Christian, eux cō∣maundant de cesser de lour plee, iesques il est discusse en court le Roy a q̄ laduowson appent, Et cest brief serra enter qua∣ter persons, deux serront patrons, & deux serront clerkes. Mes cest briefe nest returnable: mes sils ne cessont lour suit il aūa vn Attachment. Iointure. IOinture est vn estate & assurāce fait al vn feme en consideration de ma∣riage
pur terme de sa vie, ou auterment, come est mention en lestatute 27. H. 8. ca. 10. soit il deuant ou apres le mariage. Et si soit apres le mariage, dō∣ques el poit a sa libertie apres le mort de son ba∣ron refuser de pender, ou auer les terres issint assure pur sa iointure, & demaund sa dower al cō∣mon ley: Mes sil soit fait deuant mariage, don∣ques el ne poit refuser tiel iointure, ne auer do∣wer accordant al cōmon ley, sinon q̄ quant el port sa briefe de Dower, le de∣fendāt pled tiel plee que ne voile luy barrer de sa dower, donques el serra endow: Sicome il dit en barre, q̄ sa baron ne fuit seisi de tiel estate de quel el doit este endow, ou as∣cun tiel plee, & ne mon∣stre que el ad vn iointure fait &c. & pur ceo de∣maund iudgement de cel action, ou iudgement si el serra auxy endow, ou ascun tiel semblable plee &c. Et ceo fuit lopiniō de le droit worshipful M.
Brograue, al son lecture en Graies Inne en Sūmer An. 1567. 18. Eliz. sur vn brāch, del statute fait An. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. concernāt Iointures & dowers, Et per luy de ceux cho∣ses de que vn feme poit este endowe, el poit auer vn iointure, cōe de mines, vesturā terre, boes, villes, Iles, meadowes, & tyels semblables. Item dun aduowson, dun reuersion dependaunt sur vn estate pur vie, dun Windmill, vn haut chamber, vn re∣ctorie & tiels auters, & ils sont appels tenements. Item dun villen, car il est hereditament. Et de touts ceux profit poet ve∣ner al feme. Mes de ceux choses de que nul profite voet vener, mes plustost vn charge, vn iointure ne poet este fait. L. Larceny. LArceny est vn torcyous prisell des biens dun auter home, mes nemye de son person, oue vn ment de eux embleer en∣counter
son volunt que biens ils fueront. Et laeeny est en deux sorts, lun issint appelle simplement, & lauter pe∣tit larceny. Le primer est lou le chose emblee exceda le value de xij. d. & ceo est felony. Le auter (que est appell petite larceny) est lou le chose emblee, ne exceda le value de xii. d. & ceo nest felony. 284 Lastage. LAstage, hoc est quietū esse de quadā cōsuetu∣dine exact in nundmis & mercatis pro rebus ca∣riandis vbi homo vult. 285 Leases. LEases sont grāts ou de∣mises {per} vn q̄ ad ascun estate in heredit de ceux hereditam̄ts al auter pur meinder tēps, & ceo sont en diuers māners, cest as∣cauoir, pur terme de vie, pur terme dās, pur terme dauter vie & a volunt. Auxy vn lease de terre est auxy bone sans fayt come per fayt. Mes en leas pur terme
de vie, il couient de do∣ner liuery & seisin sur le terre, ou auterment riens passera {per} le grant, pur ceo que ils sont appels frank∣tenements. Auxy vn leas de vn co∣men ou rent, ne poiet este bone sans fait. Mes de vn parsonage, il est bon sans fait, pur ceo que lesglise que est principall, puit assets bien passer sans fait, & issint les dismes & offerings que sont come accessory al esglise. Mes dismes & offerings per soy, ne poyent este lesses sans fait vt dicitur. Lessor & Lessee. LEssor est celuy que les∣sa terres, ou tenements l auter pur terme de vie, ans, ou al volunt, & celuy a que le leas est fait, est appell lessee. Leuant & Couchant. LEuant & Couchant, est dit, quant les beastes, ou Cattell dun estraun∣ger sont venue en le terre dun auter home, & la ont remaine vn certaine bone space de temps.
288 Ley. LEy est quant action de det est port vers vn sur ascun secret iudgement ou contract ewe perenter les parties sans especialty monstre, ou auter matter de Record, come action de detinue pur ascun biēs ou chattels, dōque le de∣fendant poit gager son ley, sil voile, cestassauoir, de iurer sur vn lieur, & certeine persons oue luy, que il ne deteyna les byens, ou doit riens al plaintife in le manner & fourme come il ad de∣clare. Et cest allowe solement in cases de secrecie ou le plaintife ne poit prouer le surmise de son suit per ascun fait ou ouert act: ou le defendant poit ceo discharge secretmēt per∣enter eux sans ascū escript de acquitance ou publi∣que acte, & pur ceo en action de det sur vn leas pur terme dans ou sur ar∣rerages de accompt de∣uant Auditors assign̄, hōe ne gagera son ley. Mes quant vn gagra
son ley, il amesnera o∣uesque luy vi. viii. ou xii. de ses vicins, come le Court luy assignera, de iurer ouesque luy, mult semble al serement que eux fesoyent que sont v∣ses in cōmon ley, de pur∣ger auters de ascū crime al eux impute: q̄ sont ap∣pell conpurgators. Nota que le fesans del serment est appell le ga∣ger del ley, & quant il est accōplish, donque est appell se fesans del ley. Et auxy si le Vicount in ascun action returne que il eit summon le defendaunt de appearer in Court a ascun iour a responder le plaintife, a quel iour il fait default, proces serra agard vers luy de vener & saue, ou excuser son default: que est a tant a dire, come purgare moram, ou au∣termēt de perder le chose demaunde: Et donque le defendaunt vient & voit iurer que il ne fuit summon, que est appell gager de ley, donque il doit ceo faire al iout
assign̄ oue xii. auters, & en fesant del le il doyt son serement affirmer di∣rectment al contrary de ceo que est impute a luy, mes lauters ne dira, mes que eux intend que il dit le verity. 289 Libertate pro∣banda. LIbertate probanda, Vi∣de de ceo en le title de Natiuo habendo. 290 Liuerie de seisin. LIuetie de seisin, est vn ceremony vse en con∣ueyance de terres ou te∣nements lou vn estate en fee simple, fee tayle, ou vn franktenement passe∣ra: Et il est vn tesmoigne de le voluntary depar∣ting per luy que fait le liuerie del chose de que liuerie est fait: Et le res∣ceite del liuery est vn vo∣luntary acceptance per le auter party, de tout ceo de que lauter ad luy dis∣misse. Et fuit inuēt cōe vn ouert & notorious chose, {per} meanes de q̄ le cōmon people poiēt auer intelli∣gēce de passing ou alte∣ratiō de estates de hōe al
home, que per ceo ils poient estre le meliour able pur trier en que le droit & possessiō de ter∣res & tenementes fue∣ront, sils doient estre im∣pannel & iures, ou au∣terment ont a faire con∣cernant ceo. Le common manner de liuerie de seysin, est en cest sort fait: Sil soit en le ouert champe ou ne sont edifices, ou mea∣son, donques vn que poit lyer prist le sait en son maine, si lestate passera per fait, & declare al eux que la sont, le cause de lour vener la ensemble, & donques ouertment lya le fait, ou declare le effect de ceo n Engloys, & apres que il est seale le partie que est a depar∣ter oue le terre, prist le sai en ses maines ensem∣ble oues{que} vn clodde del terre, & vn twigge ou bowe, sil y ad ascun la, & tout ceo il deliuer al au∣ter partie, en le nosme de possession ou seysin accordant al fourme & effecte del fayt; que de∣uāt
eux fuit la lye ou de∣clare. Mes sil soit vn habi∣tation ou edifice sur le terre, donques ceo est fait la a le doore del ceo, nul esteant relinquishe a cest temps deins le meason, & le partie deliuer tout les auantdites ensemble ouesque le annell del doore en nosme de sey∣sin ou possession, & il que receiua le liuerie entra primes sole & shota le doore, & pre∣lentmēt ouert ceo, & les∣sa eux eins &c. Sil soit de vn meason a que est nul terre, le lyuerie est fait & possession prise per le deliuerie del an∣nuell del doore & fait solement. Et ou il est sauns fait de terres ou tenements la le partie de∣clare {per} parol deuant test∣moignes, lestate q̄ il en∣tende de departer oue, & donques deliuer seisin ou possession, en maner cōe est auantdist, & issint le t∣re ou tenement passera cybien lou il nad fait, come per fait, & ceo per force del liuery de seisin:
Il fuit agree en Graies Inne per le droit wor∣shipful M. Snagge, al son lecture la en sommer An. 1574. que si vn feof∣four deliuer le fait en view del terre, en nosme de seisin, que il est bone, pur ceo que il ad vn pos∣session en luy mesme. Mes auterment est dun Atturney, car il doit aler al terre, & prise possessiō luy mesme, deuant que il poit doner possession al auter accordant al parols de son garrant &c. Et lou liuerie de seisin est per le viewe, si le feoffee ne en∣tra pas puis &c. nul cho∣se passa, car il doit enter en fait. Lotherwite. LOtherwit, hoe est quod capiatis emēdas ab ip∣so qui corrumpit vestram natiua sine licētia vestra. M. Mahim ou Maime. MAhim, est lou per le orcious act daut as∣cun member est dampni∣fie ou tol, per que le par∣tie isint dāpnifie est fait
imperfect a cōbater: Co∣me si vn osse soit prise hors del test: ou vn osse soit debruse en asc' auter part del corps, ou vn pee; ou maine, ou digit, ou ioint dū pee, ou asc' mē∣ber soit sciet: ou per asc' plague les nerues sōt fait de shrinker, ou aut mē∣ber, ou les digits faits cu∣rue, ou si vn oyl soit mise hors, ou les anterior dē∣tes debruse, ou asc' auter chose ē le corps dū hōe, {per} reason de que il est fait le meins able pur defender luy m̄, ou offēd sō enemy. Mes le syer dun de vn oril, ou nse, ou lēfiéd' del▪ dēts▪ moliers, on tiels semblables, nest asc' ma∣hem, pur ceo q̄ il est pluis vn deformity de le corps; que vn defect del strēgth,  ceo est communement try per Inspection del partie per les Iustices. Et si les iustices sōt ē doubt  eam̄ soit vn mahm ou , ils. vse▪ & voy∣lent e our graund dis∣cretion prender le aide & opinion de ascun eru∣dite Surgion, pur consid▪
de ceo deuant que ils de∣termine sur le case. Mainprise. MAinprise, est quant vn home est arrest {per} Ca∣pias, done les Iudges poi∣ent deliū son corps a cer∣tain homes pur garder & de luy amner deuāt eux a certain iour, & ceux sōt appels mainpernors, & si le party ne appear al iour asgne, le mainpernous serront amercie. Mannour. MAnnour, est vn chose compound de diuers choses, come de vn mea∣son, terre arrable, pasture, pree, bois, rent, auowson, court baron; & tiel sem∣blable font vn manor. Et co doit este per ancient continuāce de temps, cu∣is contrarium memoria hominū non existie: car a ceo iour vn manor ne poit este fait pur ceo q̄ vn Court baron ne poit estre fait a ore, & vn mānor ne poit estre sans vn court barō & uters ou frākte∣nants, deux al meines, car i tontes les franketene∣ments forsque vn escheat
al Seign̄, ou sil purchase tout preter vn, la son ma∣nor est ale, pur ceo que il ne poit estre vn mannor sans vn Court Baron (cōe auantdit.) Et vn court ba∣rō ne poit este tenus mes deuāt suters, & nemy de∣uant vn suter, & ideo lou fors{que} vn frāktenem̄t o frākt est, la ne poit este manor properm̄t, coment en common parlāce ceo poit estr̄ appel vn manor. 295 Manumission. MAnumissiō, est ē deux sorts, le vn est vn ma∣numission explicita, laut vn manumissiō implicita. Manumission explicita est quant le Seignior fait vn fait al son villeine pur luy enfrāchiser {per} cest pa∣rol (Manumittere) quod idem est quod extra ma∣num, vel extra potestatē alterius ponere. Le manner de manu∣mitting ou enfranchising en tēps passe plus vsual∣ment fuit issint▪ Seigni∣or (en presence de ses vi∣cines) prist le villeine per le test disant, Ieo voile
que cest home soit frank, & oue ceo il luy mise a∣uant hors de ses maines, & per ceo il fuit franke sans ascun pluis faire. Manumission impliita sans cest parol (Manu∣mittere) est quant le seig∣nior fait vn obligation a son villeine a payer a luy money al vn certain iour, ou luy sue lou il poit en∣ter sans suit, ou granta al son villeine vn annuytie, ou lessa terre a luy {per} fait pur ans, ou pur vie, & en diuers tiels semblables cases, le villeine per ceo est fait franke. Maximes. MAximes sont les foun∣dations del ley, & les conclusions de reason, & sont causes efficient, & certain vniuersall propo∣sitions, cy sure & perfect que ils ne poyent este a ascun temps impeach ou impugne, mes doyent touts foits este obserue & tenus come fort princi∣pels & aucthorities de luy mesme, nient obstant
ils ne poyent este proue, per, force de argument ou demonstration logi∣cal, mes font conus per enduction per le yoy de sence & memorie: Come pur example, il est vn Maxime que sn home ad issue deux fits▪ per di∣uers venters, & le vn de eux purchas terres en fee & morust sans issue, lau∣ter fits ne vnques serr' son heire &c. Item il est vn aut max∣ime, que terres discen∣dra del pere al fits  mes nemy del fits al pere, car ceo est vn ascention &c. Et diuers tiels semblables il y ad. 297 Maynour. MAynour, est quant vn laron ad emblee, & est pursue oue hue & crie & prise, ayant ceo troue oues{que} luy q̄ il ad emblee ceo est appel le maynour▪ Et issint nous cōmunem̄t vse▪ pur dire quant nous trouomus vn fesant de vn illoal act, que nous luy prist ouesque le maynor, ou manner.
Maintenance. MAintenance est lou as∣cun home done ou deliuer a vn auter que est plaintife ou defendant en ascun action, ascun summ̄ dargent ou auter chose pur mainteiner son plee, ou fait extreame labour pur luy quāt il nad riens a ceo faire, don{que} lauter partie greeue auera vers uy vn briefe appel briefe de Maintenance. Mesne. MEsne, est lou le owner del tres ou ten̄ts ceux teigne de vn per certeine seruices, & il ceux tenoyt de vn aut {per} autiels ou aut seruices, la cestuy q̄ tient les terres est appel tenant perauaile, & cestuy de que il teigne est appel mesne, & cestuy de que le mesne tenoit est appel seigniour paramont. Et en cest case si le seigniour paramount distrem̄ le tenaunt pur les seruice le mesn̄ q̄ luy doit acquite al seignour para∣mont, donques le tenaunt auera vn br̄ vers le mesne, que est appell briefe de
mesne, & si il ne vient pur acquiter le tenant, don{que} le mesne perdra le seruice le tenant & serr' foriudge de seigniorie, & le tenant serra tenaunt immediate al chiefe seigniour, & fra mesmes les seruices & suites come le mesne fist al seigniour. 300 Misprision. MIsprision, est quant as∣cun scit que vn au∣ter ad fait treason ou fe∣lony, & il ne voile luy dis∣couer al Roigne, ou sa Counsell ou a ascun Ma∣gistrate, eins concela son offence: Diuers auts of∣fences sont appel mispri∣sion, sicome vn Chapleine ad fixe vn auncient seale dun patent, a vn nouel patent de Non residence, & ceo fuit ten{us} deste Mis∣prision de treason tantū, & nul counterfaiter del seale del Roigne. Item, si vn auter sceit money destre faux, & port ceo hors de Ire∣lande en Engleterre, & vtter ceo en payment, ceo est forsque Mispri∣sion
of Treason, & nemy Treason, & issint est en diuers tiels sēblabl' cases. Et en touts cases de Mis∣prision de treason le par∣tie offender forfaitera se biens a touts iours, & les profits de ses terres pur terme de son vie, & son corps al prison, al plea∣sure del Roigne. Et pur Misprision de fe∣lony ou trespas, le offen∣dour serra cōmit al pri∣son, tan{que} il ad troue suer∣ties ou pledges pur son fine, q̄ serra assesse per le discretion de les Iustices deuant q̄ il fuit conuict. Et nota que en chescun treason ou felony, est in∣clude Misprision, & lou ascun ad fait treason ou felony, le Roigne poit causer luy deste indicte & arraigne fors{que} de mis∣prision solement sil voile. Vide plus de ceo Stamf. lib. 1. Monstrance de faits ou Records. MOnstrance de faits ou Records, est sicōe pur exāple, vn action de debt,
soit port enuers vn sur vn obligation per vn ou per executors &c. la apres que le plaintife ad de∣clare, il doit monstre son obligation, & le execu∣tor le testament al court, & issint est de Records. Et le diuersitie peren∣ter Monstrance de faites ou Recordes, & oyer de faits & Records, est issint, il que plede le fait ou re∣corde, ou declare sur ceo, a luy il appertaine de monstre ceo. Et lauter vers que tiel fait ou re∣cord est plede ou declare, & est per ceo deste charge poyt demaund oyer de ceo fait ou record, que son aduersarie port, ou plead vers luy. 302 Mortdauncester. MOrtdauncester, vide de ceo deuaunt titulo Cosinage. 303 Monstrauerunt. MOnstrauerunt, est vn briefe, & gist pur le tenant en auncient de∣mesne & est direct al
seigniour, luy comman∣dant que il ne distraine son tenant pur faire auter seruice q̄ faire ne duissēt, & ils poyent auer cest briefe direct al viscont q̄ il ne suffer le seigniour a distreine les dits tenants pur faire auter seruice. Auxy si le tenants ne poy∣ent este en quiet ils poyēt auer vn attachment vers le seignior dapperer de∣uant les Iustices, & toutes les nosmes des tenāts ser∣ront mise en le br̄ comēt q̄ forsque vn de eux soit greue solement. Auxi si ascun terre en auncient demesne soit en variance enter les tenants donques le tenant issint greue auera vers auter br̄ quod vocatur Droit close secund' consuetudinem manerii, & ceo serra touts foits port en le court le Seign̄, & sur ceo il coun∣tera en le nature de quel briefe il voit come son case gist, & cest briefe ne serra remoue sinon pur graund cause ou non po∣wer de Court. Auxy si le Seignior en
auter lieu hors de aunci∣ent demesne distraine son tenant de faire auter ser∣uice quel ne doit, il aue∣ra briefe de droit appel ne Iniuste vexes, & cest vn briefe de droit patent que serra trie per battel ou grand assise. 304 Mortgage ou Morgage. MOrtgage ou Morgage est quant vn fait vn feoffement a vn auter sur tiel condition, que si le feoffour paya al feoffee a certain iour xl. li. dargēt, que adonques la feoffour puit reenter &c. en ceo case le feoffee est appell tenant en Morgage. Et si∣come vn home puit faire feoffemēt en fee en mor∣gage, issint il puit faire done en le taile, ou leas pur terme de vie, ou pur terme dans en morgage. Et il semble que la cause pur q̄ il est appel Mort∣gage, est pur ceo q̄ il es∣toit en aweroust si le feof∣for voile payer al iour li∣mit le argent ou non, & sil ne paya passe, don{que} la
terre que il mit en gage sur condic' de paiment de de le money, est ale de luy a routes iours, & issint mort a luy sur condic', & sil paya le money, don{que} est le gage mort quant a le tenant cest ascauoir, le feoffee, & pur cest cause il est appel en Latine, Mor∣tuum vadium, come Ma∣ster Littletō dit, ou mor∣tuum vas, cōe ieo pense. Auxy si feoffement soit fait en morgage sur con∣dition que si le feoffour paya tiel summe a tiel iour &c. Et le feoffour morust deuant le iour vn∣core si lheire le feoffour paia m̄ le summe a mesm̄ la iour al feoffee, & si le feoffee ceo refusa don{que} lheire le feoffour poit en∣ter, mes en tiel case si ne soit ascun iour de pay∣ment expresse, donques tiel tender del heire est voide pur ceo que quant feoffor morust le temps del tender est passe, ou auterment les heires le feoffor aueront temps del tender a touts iours que serra inconuenient q̄ vn
auera vn fee simple a luy & a ses heires q̄ serra de∣feisable toutes foites a le pleasure & volunt des au∣ters, mes en le prim̄ case le tēps del tender ne fuit expire {per} la mort le feffor. 305 Moderata miseri∣cordia. MOderata misericordia, est vn brief & gist lou home est amercy en court Baron ou countie plus que deuer este, donques il auer cest briefe directe al Vicont si soit en coun∣tie ou al Bailife si soit en Court baron, eux com∣mandant que il ne luy a∣merciont, mes eient re∣gard al quantitie de tres∣pas, & sils ne font sur cel briefe, donques isse∣ra vers eux vn sicut alias & causam nobis signifi∣ces & apres ceo vn at∣tachement. 306 Mortmaine. MOrtmain est lou terres sont dones a vn mea∣son de religiō ou a vn aut company que sont corpo∣rate per le graunt le roy,
don{que} cest terre est deue∣nus en mortmaine, cest a∣dire en Angloys a dead hand, & don{que} le roy ou le seign̄ de q̄ le terre est tenus poit entercome ap∣piert en lestatute de reli∣giosis, ideo vide lestatute, Auxi si vn fait feoffement sur confidence a certaine persōs al oeps de vn mea∣son de religion, ou oeps de ascun gyld ou frater∣nitie corporate, don{que} il serra dit mortmaine, & il encourge m̄ le paine, vt patet per statut, Anno 15. Richardi 2. Mulier. MVlier, est vn parol vse en r̄e ley, mes come aptment, ieo ne poy dire ne scay bien, Car accordāt al proper signification, Mulier est faemina cor∣rupta, sicome il est vse per Vlpianus, en vn certeine lieu en tiel maner. Quod si ego me virginem eme∣re putarem cū esset mu∣lier, emptio non valebit. Per ceo poyes voyer, que mulier est vn fēe q̄ ad ew le company dun home:
Mes a relinquisher le droit significatiō, Mulier est prise en nostre ley, pur vn q̄ est loyalmēt engen∣der & nee: & est toutes dits vse en cōparison o∣ues{que} vn bastard solemēt pur monstre vn difference parent eux, cōe pur exā∣ple. Vn hōe ad vn fites {per} vn fēe deuant mariage, cē issu est appel vn bastard & illoial. Et ap̄s il marry oue le mier del bastard, & ount vn auter fites, cest second fites est appel Mu∣lier, cest adire loyall, & serra heire al son pier, mes le auter ne poit este heire al ascun home, pur ceo que il nest conus ne certeyne, en le iudgemēt del ley, que fuit son pere, & pur cest cause est dit, deste nullius filius, ou fi∣lius populi, & issint sans pere accordant al cestuy viele verses. Cui pater est popu∣lus, pater est sibi nullus & omnis. Cui pater est popu∣lus, non habet ipse pa∣trem. Et toutes foites vous
troues cest additiō al eux (Bastarde eigne & mulier puisne,) quant ils sount compare ensemble. Murder. MVrder est vn volūtarie occider dun home sur malice prepense, & sem∣ble de vener de le Saxon paroll Mordren q̄ issint signifie. Et Mordridus est le murderer tāque al cest iour ent eux en Saxonie, de q̄ nous auomus mulis de nostre parolx come ad estre souent dit. Ou poit estre deriue de Mort & dire, quasi mors dira: Vi∣de St. Ples de le Cor. li. 1. N. Natiuo habendo. NAtiuo habendo, est vn briefe, & gist lou le villein ou niefe dun seign̄ est ale de luy, donques le seign̄ auera cē briefe di∣rect al vicount que il face le seignior auer son vil∣leine ou niefe ouesque touts ses chateux. Auxi en cest briefe plusours vil∣leins ou niefs ne parront este demands q̄ deux, mes auxy plusors villeins ou
niefs q̄ voilent ensembl' poient port br̄e De liber∣tate probanda. Auxi si vn nief port briefe De liber∣tate probanda auant que le seignior port cest brief donques le villeine pl' ou niefe serra en peace iesque al venue des Ius∣tice, ou auterment son briefe ne luy aidera. Auxy si vn villeine ad demurre en ancien de∣mesne {per} vn an & vn iour sans claime del Seignior, dōques il ne poit luy sci∣ser deins le dit franchise. 310 Ne admittas. NE admittas est vn brief direct al Euesque al suit de vn q̄ est patron de ascun Esglise, & il doubta que Leuesque voit col∣late vn son clerke, ou ad∣mit vn auter clerke pre∣sent {per} auter home al dit benefice: donques il que ceo doubta auera cest briefe de inhibiter le vi∣cōt de collater ou admit∣ter ascun a son Esglise. 311 Non omittas prop∣ter libertatem. NOn omittas {pro}pter li∣bertatē est vn brief, &
gist lou le Vicont re∣turne sur briefe a luy di∣rect, que il ad maund al Bailife de tiel fraun∣chise q̄ auer returne des briefes, & il nad seruie le briefe, donques le plain∣tife auera cest briefe di∣rect al Vicont, que il luy mesme enter en le fran∣chise & execute le briefe le Roy. Auxy le Vicont garne∣ra le Bailife que il soit deuāt les Iustices al iour contenus en le briefe, & sil ne viēt & luy acquite, donques touts les briefes iudicials que passeront hors del Court le Roy durāt mesme le plee, ser∣ront briefes de Non o∣mittas &c. & le Vicont ferra execution de eux pendant cel plee. Negatiua preg∣nans. NEgatiua pregnans, est quant vn action ou informatiō, ou tiel sem∣blable est port enuers vn, & le defendant plede en barre del action, ou auterment vn negatiue plee, que nest cy special
aunswere al action, mes que il enclude auxy vn affirmatiue. Come pur example: Si en brief de Entre in casu prouiso, port per cestuy en le re∣uersion sur alienatiō per le tenant pur vie, suppo∣sant que il ad alien en fee (que est vn forfaiture de son estate) & le tenant al briefe dit, que il nad alien in fee, cest vn nega∣tiue, en que est enclude vn affirmatiue: car nient obstant il soit veray que il nad alien en fee, vncore il poit estre que il ad fait vn estate en taile (le quel est auxy vn forfai∣ture) & donques le entrie de celuy en le reuersion est loyal &c. Item en vn Quare im∣pedit, le Roigne fist title de presenter a vn Prebēd, ratione que les tempo∣ralties de leuescherie sue∣ront en sa maines per le mort de W. nuper Epis∣copi &c. Le defendant dist q̄ ne voida pas este∣ants les temporalties en les maines des Roign {per} le mort de W. cest vn
negatiue preignans, car il poit estre en les mains del Roigne, auterment que per le mort de W. & i sufist al Roigne si soit en sa mains &c. Issint est lou vn Infor∣mation fuit port in Scac∣cario vers I. S. pur ceo q̄ il achate laines enter she∣ring temps & le Assump∣tion tali anno de I. N. Le defendant dit quod non emit de I. N. come il est alleage &c. ceo est appel vn Negatiue preignans, car il ceo achate de au∣ter, vncore il est culpable pur le achater. Ne iniuste vexes. NE iniuste vexes, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Monstrauerunt. Niefe. NIefe, est vn eme que est bonde, ou vn vil∣leine feme, mes si el ma∣rie vn franke home, el est per ceo fait franke, pur ceo que el & on baron sont forsque vn person en ley, & el coment estre de mesme le nature & condition en ley a touts intents come son baron.
Mes sa baron est frank a touts intents sans ascun condition en ley, ou au∣terment: & issint per con∣sequens, le feme couient estr̄, & est frank accordāt al nature de sō frank ba∣ron, & donques si el soit vn foits frank & clerem̄t discharge de villeinage a touts intents, el ne poit estre nief apres sans espe∣cial act fait per luy, come diuorce ou conusans en court de record, & ceo est en fauour de libertie, & pur ceo vn frank feme ne serra villein per prisel del villein al son baron: Mes lour issue serra villeines come lour pere fuit, que est contrarie a le ley Ci∣uil, car la est dit, partus se∣quitur ventrem. Bondage ou villenage ad son commencement enter les Hebrewes, & son originall proceeding de Chanaā le fites de Cham, que {per}ur ceo que il auoit derisee son pere Noe gy∣sant dissolutement quant il fuit ebriee, fuit puny en son fites Chanaan oues{que} penaltie de bondage.
Nihil dicit. NIhil dicit, est quant vn action est port en∣uers vn home, & le de∣fendant appeare, le plain∣tife declare, & le defen∣dant ne voile responder, ou plede al action, & no mainteine son plee, mes fait defaulte, ore sur cest default, il serra con∣dempne, quia nihil dicit. Nisi prius. NIsi prius, est vn briefe iudicial, & gist quant lnquest est empanell & returne deuant les Iusti∣ces en banke, donques le plaintife ou defendant puvt auer cest briefe di∣recte al vicont, luy com∣maundant que il face ve∣nir la pais deuant les Iu∣stices en mesme le coun∣ty a lour venir la destre detmine, & ceo pur ease∣ment denquest. Nomination. NOmination, est ou vne poit en droit de son mannour ou auterment nominate, & appoint vn able Clerke, ou home al vn Parsonage, Vicarage,
ou tiel spiritual promo∣tion. Et nota que cest nomination doit estre al auter que lordinarie, que auter luy presentera al Ordinarie. 318 Nonabilitie. NOnabilitie, est lou vn action est port vers vn, & le defendantdit que le plaintif est non able de suer ascun action, & de∣mand iudgment sil serra respond. il y ad vi cau∣ses de nonabilitie ē le pl', cōe sil sot vtlage, ou vne alien nee, mes cest disa∣bility est ē actions reals & mixt solement & non en actions personals, sinon q̄ il soit vn alien enemy, ou cōdempne en premunire, ou professe en vn Abbey, Priorie ou Friarie, ou ex∣commenge, ou vn vil∣laine, & sue son Seigni∣our, mes cest darreme nest plee pur auter que nest Seigniour al villain. Vide plus de ceo Littl. lib. 2. cap. 11. Nude Contract. NVde Contract, ou nu∣de promise, est lou vn
home bargaine ou vende ses tres, ou biens, ou pro∣mise pur doner al auter money, ou vn chiual, ou a edifier vn meason, ou faire tiel chose a tiel iour & nul recompence ap∣point a luy pur le faire de ceo. Come si vn dit al au∣ter, ieo vende ou done a vous touts mes terres ou biens. Et la est nul cho∣se appoint, assigne, ou a∣gree, que lauter donera, ou payera pur ceo, issint que il nad quid pro quo, cest vn nude contract & voide en ley, & pur non performance de ceo nul action gist, car ex nu∣do pacto non oritur ac∣tio. Nusauns. NVsans, est lou ascun home leuye ascun mure, ou estop ascun ewe ou fait ascun chose sur son terre demesne a noy∣ance son prochain, cestuy que est grief auera ent vn briefe appell Assise de Nusance. Auxy si il que fist le nusaunce alien sa terre a vn auter, don∣ques cest brief serra port
deuers ambideux come appiert per lestatut west∣minster, 2. cap. 24. 321 Nuper obijt. NVper obiit, est vn br̄, & gist lou vn ad plu∣sours heirs, cest ascauoir, plusours filesou plusours fits si soit en gauelkind ē Kent, & deuie seisie & vn heire entra en tout la tre, donque les auters q̄ sont tenus dehors, aueront cē br̄ vers le coheire que est deins. Mes brief de Rati∣onabili parte gist en tyel case ou launcestour fuit vn foits seysie, & ne mo∣ust seisie de possession, mes del reuersion. O. 322 Oredelfe. ORedelfe, est lou vne clayme de auer le ore que est troue en son soile ou terre. 323 Outfangthiefe. OVtfangthiefe, hoc est, quod latrones de tra vestra, vel feodo vestro, extra trā vestrā, vel feodū vestrū, capti cū latrocinio, ad curiā vestram reuertā∣rur, & ibidem iudicentur.
Oweltie. OWeltie, est quant il y ad seigniour, mesne & tenant, & le tenant ti∣ent del mesne {per} mesm̄ les seruices que le mesne ti∣ent ouster de le seigniour paramount. Come si le tenant tient del mesne per homage, fealtie, & xx. s. de rent annuelment, & le mesne tiēt ouster de le seigniour paramont {per} homage, fealtie, & xx. s. rēt auxy, cest appel owel∣tie de seruices. Oier de Records & faits &c. OIer de records & faits, ē sicōe pur example, vn action de det soit port enuers vn hōe sur vn ob∣ligation, & le defendant appere al action, & don∣ques pray que il poitoier obligation ouesque que le plaintife charge luy. Issint est quant exe∣cutors port vn action de dette, & le defendant demaunde oyer del te∣stament: sur cest de∣mand il serra lye al defē∣dant. Mes sil soit en vn auter terme, ou apres
que le defendant ad im∣parle, donques il nuera le oyer Et issint come est dit de faits est deste intēd de Records que sont al∣ledge enuers luy. 326 Oier & Terminer. OIer & Terminer, est br̄ appel in Latin de Audiendo & terminando, & gist qt ascun graund ou sodein insurrectiō est falt ou ascun auter sodein transgression que require hasty reformation, don{que} le roy directera vn com∣mission a certain gents & Iustices de audiendo & terminando. Nota que les Iustices de Assise ont vn commis∣sion doier & determiner direct al cux, & diuers auters inhabitants deins les Counties as queux lour circuite extend dont chescun de les Iustices de Assise sont del Quorum, pur le meulx oier & de∣terminer de diuers offen∣ces queux point a vener in lour circuites quels sanscel Commission eux ne poient faire.
P. Pape. PApe, est vn auncient nosme fauxement ar∣rogate, ou hautm̄t vsurpe per le Euesque de le sole Citie de Rome ē Italie, & est communem̄t appel en Anglois le Pope, vn nosm̄ veram̄t mult frequēnt en nr̄e aunc annels liūs, spe∣cialm̄t ē les tēps de ceux Royes, queux grandm̄t a∣bandonās lour imperial aucthority, & abasāts eux mesmes mult debase lour estate, ne fueront hont de suffer vn alien & outlan∣dish Eues{que} que enhabite ouster cynq̄ diz cēt miles de eux, destre soueraigne dehaut eux ē lour domi∣nions demesne, & de tol∣ler de eux non solem̄t le disposition de certain pe∣tire trifles de nul accōpt, mes auxi le nomination de Archieuesques, euesq̄s, Abbes, deanes, prouosts, appropriations de bene∣fices, presentatiōs al par∣sonages, vicarages, & ge∣n̄alm̄t de touts spirituall persons a lour preferm̄ts
ascun temps per laps, as∣cun temps per prouision ou auterment, per que le praerog. del royes fuit moult abridg deins lour realmes demesne, Pur le repression de quel diūs statutes ont estr̄ fait, mes nul sufficient remedy tā∣q̄ roy H. le 8. tout ouster∣ment reiect cel iuge de luy & ses subiects. 328 Per que seruitia. VIde de ceo apres, ti∣tulo Quid iuris cla∣mat. 329 Parceners. PArceners, sont solon∣que le cours de com∣mon ley, & solonque le custome. Parceners solō∣que le common ley sont lou vn enheritor ad issue forsque files & deuie, & les tenemēts descendont a les files, donques ils sont appel parceners, & sont forsques vn heire. Mesme le ley est, si neyt ascune issue, & que ses freres serroyent ses heirs, Mes si home ad forsque vn sile el nest dit parce∣ner, mes el est dit la file, & la heire. Et si ne sont
files ne soers les terres descenderont a les auters, & ils sont appels parce∣ners. Auxi quant terres descendont a diuers par∣ceners, els poyent faire partition enter eux per agreemente, mes si as∣cun deux ne voilent faire donque lauter ou les au∣ters aueront vn briefe de Participatione sacienda direct al vic' que ferra partition enter eux per le serement de xii. loyals hōes de sa bailiwik. Auxi partition per agreement poit este fait per le ley, auxibien per parol sans fait come per fait. Et  sont de plein age, le par∣tition touts iours demur∣rera, & ne seria vnq̄; de∣fete. Mes si les terres sont a eux in le taile, & comēt q̄ ils sont cōcludes durāt lour vies, vnc' lissue cesty que ad le meinder part in value poit disagreer a le {per}tition & enter & oc∣cupier in cōen ouesq̄ laut part. Et auxy si les barons des parceners font parti∣tion, quant le baron de∣uy, la feme poit disagreer
a la partic'. Auxi si le par∣cen̄ q̄ est deins age fait {per}∣tition, quant el vient a son pleine age, el poit disa∣greer. Mes il couiēt de bn̄ garder quāt el vient a son plein age, q̄ el ne preigne touts les profits a son vse demesne des terres q̄ fue∣ront a luy allots car don∣ques el soy agrea a le par∣tition, & le pleine age serra toutes foits de ceo intend al age de xxi. ans. Auxi si sont diuers Par∣ceners q̄ ont faite partitiō enter eux, & le part de vn soit recouer vers luy {per} title loyal, don{que} el com∣peller̄ les auters de faire nouel partition. Auxy ils sont Parcen̄s solonques le custome, lou home est seisie des terres en gauelkind cōe in Kent & auters lieus fraunchi∣ses, & ad issue diuers fits & deuie, donques les fites sont parceners per le cu∣stome. 330 Partition. PArtition est vn diuision de terres discendus {per} le common ley, ou per cu∣stome
perenter coheires ou parceners, ou ils sont deux al meins, soyent ils fits, files, soers, aunts, ou auterm̄t de kinne al aun∣cestour de que le terre discend al eux. Et cest partition est fait quatuor voves pur le plus part, de que trois sont al pleasure & per agreement perenter eux, le quart est per com∣pulsion. Vn partition per agree∣ment est quant ils mes∣mes deuide le tre equal∣ment en tants partes, come la sont de eux co∣parceners, & chescun de slier vn share ou part, le eigne primerment, & issint lun apres lauter, come ils sont de age, si∣non que le eigne per con∣sent fait le partition, don∣ques le election apperti∣ent al procheine, & issint al eigne darreinment, ac∣cordant come il est di Cuius est partitio, alteri∣us est electio. Vn auter partition per agreement est quant ils eslient certeine de lour
amies de faire diuision pur eux. Le tierce partic' {per} agre∣ment est {per} trahens de lots issint: Primerm̄t de deui∣der le terre en tants des partes come la sont par∣ceners: don{que} a scriber chescun part seueralment en vn petit scrol ou peece de paper ou parchment, & de mtter ceux scrols closeen vn hat, cap, ou aut tiel sēblable chose, & dō∣ques chescū parcener, vn ap̄s aut cōe ils sont de age a traher hors de ceo vn peece ou scrol en que est escript vn part del terre q̄ per cest trahens est ore seueralmēt allotte al cux en fee simple. Le quart partition que est {per} compulsion, est lou vn ou ascun de les copar∣ceners voilent auer parti∣tion, & auts ne voilent a∣greer a ceo, don{que} ceux q̄ issint voylent auer parti∣tion poyent porter vn br̄e de Partitione facienda en∣uers les auts q̄ux ne voy∣lent faire partition, {per} ver∣tue de q̄l ils serront com∣pel de departer &c.
En Kent lou les terres sont de Gauelkinde na∣ture, est appel a cest iour nostre partition Shifting, il mesme parol q̄ les Sax∣ons vse, nosmement Shif∣tan, que signifie pur faire partitiō perenter coheirs, & pur assigner a chescun de eux lour portiō, In La∣tine est appel Herciscere. Partition auxy poit estr̄ fait per ioyntenants ou tenants en common per lour assent, per fait enter eux, ou per briefe per les statutes de 31. H. 8. cap. 1. & 32. H. 8. cap. 32. Parties. PArties al fine ou fait, sont ceux queux sont nosmes en faits ou fines come parties a ceo, come ceux queux leuie le fine, & auxy ils a que le fine est leuie. Et ils que font vn fait de feoffement, & ils a que il est fait sont appelles parties al fait, & issint en auters sembla∣bles cases. Nota que si vn Inden∣ture soit fait enter deux
come parties a ceo en le commencement, & en le fait vn de eux graun∣ta ou lessa vn chose al vn auter & vn que nest nosme en le commence∣ment, il nest partie al fait, ne prendra riens per ceo 332 Patron. PAtron est celuy que ad le aduowson de parso∣nage, vicarage, frāk chap∣pel, ou tiels semblable spiritual promotions ap∣pertient a son mannor, ou auterment en grosse, & per ceo poit ou doit do∣ner mesme le benefice, ou present a ceo, quant & cy tost que il deuient voide. Et cest esteant patron ou patronage ad commen∣cement pur le pluis part per vn de eux trois voies, nosmement ou ratione fundationis, pur ceo que le patron ou ses ancestors ou ceux de que il claime fueront founders ou edi∣fiers de le Esglise, ou ra∣tione dotationis, pur ceo q̄ ils endow ou done terres al ceo pur maintenance:
ou autm̄t ratione fūdi, pur ceo q̄ le Esglise fuit mise ou edifie sur lour soile ou terre: Et diuers temps per reason de ils touts trois. Perquisites. PErquisites sont aduan∣tages & profits queux vient al vn mānor {per} casu∣altie, & non annualment, come escheates, hariots, reliefes, waiues, estraies, forfaitures, amerciamēts en courts, gardes, marria∣ges, biens & terres pur∣chase {per} villeins de mesme le manor, fines del copy∣holds, & diuers sembl' choses queux ne sont cer∣tain mes happē {per} chance, ascun temps pluis often que a auter temps. Vide Perkins fol. 20. & 21. Perambulatione facienda. PErambulatione facien∣da est vn br̄, & gist lou deux seigniories gisont vn pres lauter, & ascū en∣crochment est fait per long temps, donques per assent de ambideux seig∣niors le vicont prendera ouesque luy les parties & les vicines, & ferront
perambulation, & ferroit les mets come ils fuerōt adeuant, mes si vn seign̄ incroche sur lauter & il ne voile faire perābula∣tion, donq̄s le seign̄ issint greue auera briefe vers lauter, q̄ est appel de ra∣tionabilibus diuisis. Petit Cape. PEtit Cape est vn briefe, & gist quant ascun ac∣tion real. s. de plee de terre est port, & le tenant appeare, & puis fait de∣fault, donque issera cest briefe de petit cape de seiser les terres en mayne le Roy, mes sil ne appera, mes fait defaut al primer somons, don{que} issera vn graund cape, & pur tiel defaut le tenaunt perdra la terre, mes sil gage son ley de non summōs, il sa∣uera son defaut, & don∣ques il puit plede oues∣que le demaundant. Et en graunde Cape le tenaunt serra sommō pour respō∣der al default & ouster al demaundant, mes in petit Cape il serra sum∣mon pur respōder al de∣fault solement, & nemye
al demandant, & est ap∣pell petite cape pur ceo que il ad minus en cel briefe, que en lauter. Petit serieantie. TEner {per} petite serieantie est sicome vn hōe tient de roy terres ou tenem̄ts, rendant a luy vn cuttell, vn escue, vn sete, vn arck sauns corde, ou auter ser∣uice sembl', a la volunt le primer feoffor. Et la nap∣pent, gard, mariage ne re∣liefe. Et nota que home ne puit tener per graund serieantie, ne {per} petite ser∣ieantie, si non del Roy. Plaintife. PLaintife, est celuy q̄ sue ou cōplaine en vn assise, ou en vn actiō personall, come en vn actiō de det, trespas, disceit, & detinue, & tiels semblables. Pleading. PLeadings, sont appell toutes actes del par∣ties al sute apres le count ou declaration, nosement ceo que est conteyne en le barre, replication, & reioynder, & non ceo containe en le coūt mes∣me, & pur ceo defaultes
en le matter del count, ne sont cōprise deins mis∣pleading, ou insufficient pleading, ne sont remedy {per} le statute de Ieofailes, 32. H. 8. Mes solement ceo mispleading ou in∣sufficient pleading, com∣mit en le barre, replica∣tion, & reioynder, sont la prouide. 339 Post disseisin. POst disseisin, Vide de ceo deuant in le title Assise. 340 Possession. POssession, est dit deux voies, ou actual posses∣sion, ou possession en ley. Actuall possession, est quant vn home enter en fait en terres, ou tenem̄ts, a luy discende, ou auter∣ment. Possession en ley est quant terres, ou tene∣mentes sont discend al vn hōe, & il nad vncore real∣ment, actualment, & en fait enter en eux. Et il est appell possession en ley, pur ceo que en le oile, & consideration del ley, il est pense deste en posses∣sion, entant que il est te∣naunt
a chescun action que ascun voet suer con∣cernāt mesmes les terres ou tenements. Poundes. POundes, sont en deux sorts, lun poundes oūt, les auters poundes close. Pound ouert, est ches∣cun lyeu en que vn dis∣stresse est myse, soit ceo common pound, tiels que sont en chescun ville ou Seigniorie, ou soit ceo backside, court, yarde, pa∣sture, ou auterment que∣cunque, lou le owner del distresse poit vener a do∣ner eux viande sauns of∣fēce pur lour esteaunt la, ou son vener. la. Pound close, est tyel lieu, lou le owner del dis∣tresse ne poit vener a don̄ eux vyande sans offence, come en vn close, meson, ou quecun{que} auter lieu. Preamble. PReamble ad son nos∣me de le preposition (pre) deuaunt, & le verbe (Ambulo) pur va, issint ioint enseble, ils font vn cōpound verbe de le pri∣mer coiugation (Pream∣bulo)
pur vaer deuaunt, & de ceo le primer part ou commencement dun acte est appell le pream∣ble de act, le quel pream∣ble est vn cliffe de ouerer les ments del fesors del act, & les mischiefes que ils intend de remedy per ceo, come pur example lestatute fait al W. le pri∣mer le 37. cap. que done attaint, le preamble de que est issint. Pur ceo que ascuns gents de la terre doutent meins faux sere∣ment faire, que faire ne duissent, per que multes des gentes sont disherites & perdēt lour droit, pur∣uiewe est &c. 343 Premunire. PRemunire est vn brief, & gist lou ascun home sue ascun auter in court christian pur ascun chose que est determinable en le court le Roy, & ceo est ordeine per certein sta∣tutes, & graund punish∣mēt a ceo ordeine come appiert per mesme les statutes. s. que il serra hors de protection le Roy, & q̄ soit mis en pri∣son
sans Baile ou main∣prise tanque ils ad fayt fine al volunt le Roy, & que ses terres & chateux serront forfaites sil ne veigne deins deux moys. Auxi lour prouisors, pro∣curators, attourneys, exe∣cutors, notaries & main∣teners serront punish en mesme le maner, ideo vide Statutum. Auxy as∣cuns diont que si vn Clerke sue auter home in court de Rome pur chose spiritual lou il poit auer remedie deins cest realm in Court son Ordinarie que il serra in case del statute. Et sur diuers auters of∣fences est impose per sta∣tutes depuis fait le pe∣naltie que eux incurre queux fuer attaintes en premunire, Come {per} 13. El. ca. 8. ceux que aidont a faire corrupt bargaine sur que vsurie est reserue ouster x. li pur le hun∣dreth en lan &c. Precipe in capite. PRecipe in capite, est vn briefe & gist lou le tenant que tient de Roy
in chiefe, come de sa Co∣rone & il est deforce dō∣ques il auera cest briefe, & cest briefe serra close & serra plede in le com∣mon banke. Auxi si as∣cun tenant que tient das∣cun Seigniour sort de∣force, luy couient suer brief de droit patent que serra determyne in le Court le Seignior, mes si le terr̄ soit tenns de Roy, le briefe de droit patent serra port in Court de Roy, & cest briefe poit este remoue de la Court le Seigniour en la Coun∣tie per vn tolt, & de la countie in commen bāke per vn pone. Ideo vide deuant titulo Droit. 345 Prescription. PRescription est quant vn person claime ascun chose pur ceo que il, ses auncestors ou predeces∣sors, ou ceux que estate il ad ont ew ou vse ascun chose dont nul memory court al contrary. Mes ne poit prescribe encounter vn estatute si∣non que il ad auter sta∣tute
que serue pur luy. Presentment. PResentment est equi∣uocū: lun est present∣ment al Esglise quel quant ascun home que ad droit a don̄ ascun be∣nefice spiritual, & nosme le person al Euesque a que il voit le doner, & fait vn letter al euesque pur luy, ceo est vn presen∣tation ou p̄sentment, Mes si diuers coheires ne poi∣ent accorder en present∣ment lene serra admit, mes de iointenants & te∣nants in common, sils ne accordent, deins les size moys, le Euesque pre∣sentera per laps. Lauter est vn present∣ment ou informatiō per ascun Iurie en vn Court deuant ascun officer la q̄ ad aucthority de punishe ascun offence fait contra le ley. Pretensed Droit ou Title. PRetensed droit ou Ti∣tle, est lou vn ē en poss. de erres, ou tenements, & vn auter que est hors de possession, claime ceo,
ou sue pur ceo. Ore le p̄∣tensed droit, ou title, est dit en luy q̄ issint sue ou claime. Et sil puis vient a le possessiō de mesme les terres, ou tenements, son droit ou title est annex al terre & possession, & mēt donque appel droit. 348 Priuie ou Priuitie, & Priuities. PRiuie ou Priuitie, est lou vn lease est fait a tener a volūt. pur ans, pur vie, ou vn feoffement en fec, & en diuers auts ca∣ses, ore pur ceo de ceo q̄ ad passe {per}enter ceux par∣ties ils sount appell pri∣uies, en respect de estran∣gers perent queux nul tiel conueiances ad estre. Auxy si soit Seygui∣our & tenaunt, & le te∣nant tient del Seigniour per certeine seruice, il y ad vn priuitie perenter eux per cause de tenure, & si le tenaunt soit dis∣seisie per vn estraunger, il ad nul priuitie peren∣ter le disseysour & le Seignior, mes le priuitie vncore demurt perent le Seign̄ & le tenant que est
disseisie, & le Seigniour auowera sur luy pur ceo que il est son tenaunt en droit, & en le iudgement del ley. Priuies sont en diuers sortes come nos∣ment, priuies en estate, priuies en fait, priuies en ley, priuies en droit, & priuies en ange. Priuies en estate, est lon vn lease est fait del man∣nor de Dale al A. pur vie, le remainder al B. en fee, la & A. & B. sont priuies en estate, car lour estates fueront ambideux al vn temps. Et issint est en le pri∣mer case cy, ou vn lease est fait al volunt, pur vie, ou ans, ou vn feoffement en fee, les lessees ou sef∣fees sont appel priuies en estate, & issint sont lour heires &c. Priuies en fait est lou vn lease est fait pur vie, & apres per vn auter fait, le reuersion est graunt al vn estraunger en fee, cst grauntee del reuersion est appel priuie en fait, pur ceo que il ad le reuersion per fait.
Priuie en ley est lou il est Seigniour & tenant, le tenaunt lessa le tenancie pur vie & morust sauns heire & le reuersion es∣cheate al Seignior, il est dit priuie en ley, pur ceo que il ad son estate sole∣ment per le ley, cest adire per escheat. Priuie en droit est lou vn possesse dun termepur ans, graunta son estate al vn auter sur condition, & fait ses executors & mo∣rust, ore ceux executors sont priuies en droit, car si le condition soit en∣freint, & ils entront en le terre, ils aueront ceo en le droit de lour testatour, & a son vse. Priuie de sanke est le heire del feoffor ou do∣nor &c. Item si vn fine soit le∣uie, les heirs de celuy que leuie le fine sont appell priuies. 349 Priuiledges. PRiuiledges sont liber∣ties & franchises grant al vn office, lieu, ville, ou mannor, per la graund charter del Roigne, let∣ters
patents, ou acte de Parliament, come Tolle, Sake, Socke, Infang∣thiefe, Outfangthiefe, Turne tolle, Oredelfe, & diuers tiels semblables, pur queu veyes en lour proper titles & lieux. Proces. PRoces, sont les briefes & precepts q̄ issnt fur le original: Et in actions reals & personels sont di∣uers sortes de proces, car en actiōs reals proces est grand Cape deuant ap∣parance: ideo vide de co en le title petite Cape. Mes en actions perso∣nals, come en det trespas ou detinue, le proces est vn distres, & si le Vicont returne Nihil habet in balliua &c. donq̄s le pro∣ces ē alias Capias & Plu∣ries, & vn Exigent, & ils sont appels Capias ad re∣spondendum. Auxy lexi∣gent serra v. foites pro∣claimes, & si le {per}tie ap∣peare il serra vtlge Mes en diuers actions ont di∣uers manners de proces, q̄ pluis longe est declare in Natura breuium.
Auxy snt diuers auters proces apres apparance quant les parties sont al issue pur faire lenquest apperer, come vn brief de Venire facias, & sils ne apperont al iour, dōques vn brief de Habeas corp. Iurat, & apres vn br̄e de Distring iurat. Auxy sont diuers au∣ters proces apres iudgm̄t, come Capias ad satisfaci∣cndū, Capias vtlagatū, & Capias ad valentiam &c. Mes Capias ad satisfa∣ciendum gist lou vn ho∣me est condempne in as∣cun det ou damages, don∣ques il serra arrest per cē briefe & mis en prison sans baile ou mainprise, tan{que} il ad pay le det & les damages. Mes Capias vtlagatum gist lou vn est vtlage dō∣ques il serra prise per tiel br̄e, & mis en prison sans baile ou mainprise, pur ceo que il ad fait con∣tempt enconter le ley. Capias ad valentiā gist lou ieo sue implede de certain terre, & eo vouch a garrantie vn auter, &
il ne scauoit pas barre le demandant, issint que le demandant recouer vers moy, donques ieo reco∣uera tant in value vers le vouchee, & donques isse∣ra cest brief. Auxy sont auters pro∣ces & briefs iudicials, cōe Fieri facias, Scire facias, & plusors auters: & ideo vide ceux ē lour titles. Prochein amy. PRochein amy, est com∣munem̄t prise pur Gar∣dian en socage, & est lou vn home seisi de terres tenus en socage morust, son issue deins age de 14: ans, donques le prochein amy, ou prochein de sank a que les terres ne poient vener ou discender, auera le gard del heire, & del terre, al vse solement del heire, tanque il vient al age de xiiii. ans: Et don∣ques a tiel ans, le heire poit enter & luy ouste, & auer luy de accompter: Mes en cest accompt il a∣uera allowance put touts reasonable costs & expē∣ces bestowe, ou sur le heir ou son terre.
Et le prochein amy ou procheine de sanke a que le inheritāce ne poit dis∣cender est issint deste en∣tende: Si les terres dis∣cende al heir de son pere, ou ascun del sanke del parte son pere, donques le mere ou auter del part le mere, sont appelle pro∣cheine de sanke a que le enheritance ne poit dis∣cender, car deuant que il issint discendera, il pluis tost escheatera al seigni∣or de que il est tenus. Et issint est deste entē∣de lou les terres vient al heire de sa mere, ou as∣cun auter de sanke del part sa mere, donques le pere ou auter del parte son pere sont appell le procheine de sanke a que le enheritaunce ne poit discend, mes pluis tost eschetera al Seigniour de que il est tenus. Auterment procheine amy est celuy q̄ appiert en ascun Court pur vn enfant que sue ascun ac∣tion, & que de le en∣fant de pursuer son suit: dont vide les statutes de
W. 1. cap. 47. & W. 2. cap. 15. que vn enfant ne poit faire Atturney, mes le Court poit admitter le procheine amye pur le plaintife, & vn gardian pur le enfant def. come son Atturney. Procedendo. PRocedendo, est vn br̄e & gist lou ascun action est sue en vn Court, que est remoue a vn pluis hault, cōe al Chauncery, banke le roy, ou commō banke, per bre de Priui∣lege ou Cerciorare, & si le defendant sur le matt monstre nad cause de pri∣uilege, ou si le matter in le bill sur que le cercio∣rare issuit ne soyt bien proue, donques la plain∣tife auera cest briefe de Procedédo pur remaun∣der le matter al primer basse court, & la destre determine. Prohibition. PRohibition, est vn br̄e & gist lou home est implede in court Christi∣an de chose que ne touch
matrimony ne testament ne meeremēt dismes, mes q̄ touch le corone nostre seigniour le Roy, & cest briefe serra direct auxi∣bien al partie come al Iudge ou son officiall, de eux prohibite que il ne pursue ouster. Mes si il appeare apres a les Iudges temporal q̄ le matter est destre determine en le spiritual Court, & nemy en le Court temporall, don{que} le partie auera vn br̄ de Consultation, com∣mandant les Iudges de le Court spiritual de proce∣der en la primer plee. 354 Protection. PRotection, est vn briefe & gist lon home voit passer ouster le meare en le seruice le Roy, don{que} il auera cest briefe, & {per} cest brief il serra quite de tout maner des plees enter luy & ascun auter person, ex∣cept plees de dower, Qua∣re impedit, assise de no∣uel disseisin, vltie pre∣sentationis & attains, & plees deuaunt Iustice in eire. Mes sont deux
briefe de protection, vn Cum clausula volumus, & lauter Cum clausula nolumus, vt appert in la Register. Auxy protecti∣on ne serra allowe en as∣cun plee commence de∣uant le date de la prote∣ction si ne soit in vyages ou le Roy mesme passa, ou auters vyages royals, ou in message le Roy pur besoin de Realme. Auxy protection ne serra allow pur vitailes achates pur le vyage, dont le protecti∣on fait mention, ne in plees de trespasse ou de contracts fait puis le date de mesme le protection. Mes nota que ascun poit attacher ou commencer ascun action reall vers cestuy que ayt tiel prote∣ction, & en ceo proce∣der tanque le defendant eigne & monstre son {pro}∣tection en le Court, & ayt ceo allowe, & don∣ques son plee ou suit ser∣ra mise sans iour. Mes si apres il appiert q̄ le par∣tie que ad le protection ne va en le besoigne pur que il cir, don{que} le demā∣dant
auera vn repeale de ceo. Et sil va & returne a∣pres le besoigne sine, le demandant auera vn re∣summons de recontinue le former suit. 355 Protestation. PRotestation est vn form̄ de pleading quant ascū ne voyt directm̄t affirmer ne directment denier ascū chose quel est alledge per auter, on q̄ il m̄ alledge. Et est en deux manners, lun est quant vn plead as∣cun chose quel il ne osast directment affirmer, ou que il ne poit ceo pleder pur doubt de faire son plee double. Come si en conueying a ly title al ascun terre, il doit pleder diuers discents per diuers persons, & il nosast affir∣mer que eux toutes fue∣ront seisi al temps de lour mort, ou coment il ceo purroyt, ceo serra double a pleder deux discents, de queux ambideux chescun aperluy poyt estre bone barre, Donques le defen∣dant doit pleder & allea∣ger le matt enterlasant
cest paroll Protestando, come adire, que tiel obiit (protestando) seisie &c. Et ceo est deste alledge per protestation & nemy trauersable per lauter. Auter protestation est, quant vn est de responder al deux choses & tamen per le ley il doit pleader forsque a lun, donques en le primer part del plee, il dira al vn matter, Protestando, & non cog∣noscendo, cel matter es∣tre vere, & faire son plee ouster per ceux parols, Sed pro placito dicit &c. & ceo est pur saluation al partie (que issint plede per protestation.) deste conclude per ascun mat∣ter allege ou obiect en∣counter luy, sur que il ne poit ioyner issue. Et nest auter chose que ex∣clusion del conclusion, car il que prist le prote∣station exclude lauter partie de concluder luy. Et cest protestation doyt estoyer one le sequel del plee, & nemy deste repu∣gnant, ou auterment contrarie.
Purchase. PVrchase est le possessiō que vn home ad en tres ou tenements per son act demesne, meanes, ou a∣greement, & nemy {per} title e discn, de ascun de ses ancestors. Vide Littleton lib. 1. cap. 1. Q. 357 Quale ius. QVale ius, est vn briefe & gist lou ascun Ab∣bot, Prior, ou tiels auters aueront iudgement de re∣couer terre, per le default del tenant ves que le tre est demaund; donques de∣uaunt iudgement don ou execution agard, cest bre issera al eschetour pur in∣quirer quel droit il ad a recouer, & si soit troue q̄ il nad droit donques le seigniour q̄ duist auer le terre si le tenant vst alien en mortmaine poit enter come en terre alien en mortmaine, Cor cel perd per default est come alie∣nation, Vide le statute W. 2. cap. 32.
Mes briefe de Ad quod dampnum gist lou vn voile doner terre al mea∣son de religion, donques cest briefe issera al Esche∣tor, pur inquirer de que value le terre est, & quel preiudice il serra al Roy. Quare eiecit infra terminum. QVare eiecit infra ter∣minum est vn briefe, & gist lou vn fait lease a vn auter pur terme dans, & le lessour in∣feoffe vn auter, & le fe∣offee ousta le termour, donques le termor auera cest briefe vers le feoffee, mes si vn auter estrange ouste le termor donques il auera briefe de Eiecti∣one firme vers luy, & in ceux deux briefes il re∣couera le terme & ses dammages. Quare impedit. QVare impedit, est vn br̄, & gist lou ieo aie aduowsō, & le {per}son deuie & vn auter present son clerke, ou moy disturbe
de present, don{que} ieo a∣uera le dit briefe. Mes as∣sise de darraine present∣ment gist, lou ieo ou mō ancestors ont present de∣uant. Et lou home poit a∣uer Assise de darrain pre∣sentment, il poit auer vn Quare impedit, mes ne∣my contrary. Auxi si le plee soit de∣pendant inter deux par∣ties, & ne soit discusse de∣ins vioys, donques le∣uesque presentera {per} laps, & cestuy que ad droit de presenter, recouera dam̄ com̄ appiert {per} statute de West. 2. c. 5. Ideo vide sta∣tut̄. Auxy si cestuy q̄ ad droit de presenter apres le more le parson, & ne porta Quare impedit, ne darrem presentment, mes suffer vn estrange de v∣surper sur luy, vncore il a∣uera vn briefe de Droit daduowson, mes cest br̄e ne gist, sil ne claim dauer lauowson a luy & ses hr̄es in fee simple. 360 Quare incumbrauit. QVare incumbrauit, est vn briefe, & gist lou
deux sont in plee pur la∣uowson, & Leuesque ad∣mit le clerke dun de eux depuis les vi. mois, don∣ques il auera cest briefe vers leuesque, mes cest br̄ gist touts foites pendant le plee. Quare intrusit matrimo∣nio non satisfacto. QVare intrusit matri∣monio non satisfacto, est vn br̄ & gist lou le sn̄r profera conuenable ma∣riage a son gard & il re∣fusa & entra in la terre & soy marrie a vn aut, don∣ques le Seigniour auera cest briefe vers luy. Quare non admisit. QVare non admisit, est vn briefe, & gist lou home ad recouer vn ad∣uowson, & il maund son conuenable clerk al eues∣que pur este admitte, & le Euesque ne voile luy receiuer, donques il auera le dit briefe vers le Eues∣que, mes briefe de Ne admittas gist lou deux sont in plee si le plein∣tife suppose que leuesque
voit admit le clerk le de∣fendāt, don{que} il poit auer cest bral Eues{que}, luy cō∣maundant que il ne luy admit pendant le plee. 363 Quarentine. QVarentine est lou hōe deuie seisi dun maner place & dauters terres, dont sa feme doit este en∣dow, don{que} la feme tien∣dra se en le maner place, & la viue del store & issu de ceo por quarant iours, deins q̄l temps son dower serra a luy assigne come appiert in Magna Charta Capitulo 6. 364 Quid iuris clamat. QVid iuris clamat, est vn be & gist lou ieo grant le reuersion de mō tenant a terme de vie per fine in Court le roy, & le tenant e voyt atturner, donques le grantee auera cest briefe pur luy chaser pur atturner. Mes briefe de Quem redditum red∣dit gist lou eo grant per fine vn rent charge, ou auter rent que nest rent seruice quel mon tenant
tient de moy, & le tenant ne voit atturner, donques le grauntee auera cest br̄. Et briefe de Per que ser∣uitia gist en semblable case pur rent seruice. Auxy si ieo graunt iii. diuers rents a vn home, & le tenant del terre attor∣na al grauntee per pay∣ment de vn denier, ou vn maile en nome de at∣tornement de toutes ceux rents, cest attornement luy mittera en seisin de tout cest rent. Mes ceux ii. briefes couient estre port vers eux que sont te∣nants iour del note leuy, & vers nul auters. Quinzime. QVinzime est vn pay∣ment graunt en Par∣liament al Rogne per les layes gents, cestascauoir, le quinzime part de lour biens: Et fuit vse en aun∣cient temps deste leuie sur lour auers esteants en lour terres, que chose fuit mult troublous, & pur ceo a ore pur le plus parte, cest voy est alter,
& ils vse de leuie ceo per les Verges, ou Acre, ou auter measure de re. Per reason de que il est a ore meins troublous, & plus certeine  deuant il fuit. Et chescun ville & pays scient, quel sūme est deste pay parenter eux, & co∣ment ceo ser raise. Nous egimus que Moyses fuit le primer que number le le people, car il number les sraelites, & pur ceo le primer Taxe, Subsi∣die, tribute, ou quinzime fuit inuent per luy enter les Hebrewes, come Po∣lidore Virgile suppose. 366 Quod ei deforciat. QVod ei deforciat, est vn brief & gist lou tenant en le taile, tenant in dower, ou tenaunt a terme de vie perde per default in ascun action, donques cesty que perde auera cest briefe vers celuy que recouera, ou vers son heire, si il intend que il auoit melior droit que il que recouera. Vi∣de le Statute Westm. 2. cap. 4.
Quod permittat. QVod permittat est vn briefe, & gist lou hōe est disseisie de sō cō∣mon de pasture, & dissei∣sou alien ou deuie seisie, & son heire entra, dōques si le diseisee deuie son heire aera cest briefe. Quo iure. QVo iure est vn brief, & gist lou home ad ew common de pasture en auter seueral de dar∣rem temps puis le temps de memorie donques ce∣luy a que appertient la seueral auera cest briefe, & il serra charge demon∣strer {per} qul title il claime le common. Quo minus. QVo minus est vn brief, & gist lou vn home ad grauna a vn auter housebote & heyboe in son bos a prender ches∣cun an,  celuy  esoit le graunt fait tiel wast & dstuction que le graun∣tee ne poit auer son rea∣sonable estuers dōues le grauntee aura lauat∣dit brief, & est n naure de ife wast.
Et nota que housebote est appel certain estouers pur amender la meason. Et heybote est certaine estouers pur amender heis & hedges. 370 Quo warranto. QVo warranto est vn briefe, & gist lou home vsurpe dauer ascun frāchise sur le Roy, don∣ques le Roy auera cest briefe, de faire luy vener deuant ses Iustices, pur monstre per quel title il claime tiel fraunchise. R. 371 Rationabilibus diuisis. RAtionabilibus diuisis est vn briefe, & gist lou sount deux Seigniories en diuers villes, & vn pres le auter, & ascun parcel de vn Seigniorie ou de wast ad este en∣crocht per petits parcels, & donques celuy Seigni∣our de quel parcel de terre, ou le wast ad este encroche auera cest brief enuers le Seignior que ad issint encroche.
Redisseisin. REdisseisin, Vide de ceo deuaunt en le title As∣sise. Regrator. REgrator est celuy que ad blees, vittailes, ou auters choses sufficient pur son necessarie oeps, occupation, ou expences, & nient obstant ingrosse & achate en ses maines plus blees, vitailes, ou au∣ters tielx choses, al en∣tent de vender ceo arrere al vn plus hault & chare price, en Faires, Mar∣kets, ou tielx semblables lieus. De que vide le sta∣tute 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14. car il serra punie come for∣staller. Reioinder. REioinder, est quant le defendant fait respons al replication del plain∣tife. Et chescun Reioinder doit auer ceux deux pro∣perties specialment, cest∣ascauoir, il doit estre vn sufficient respons al re∣plication, & auxy de sub∣sequer & enforcer le matter del barre.
375 Release. RElease est le done ou discharge del droit ou action que ascun eit ou claime enuers auter ou son terre. Et le release de droit est cōmunement fait quāt vn fesoit vn fait a vn auter {per} ceux ou tielx parols, Re∣misisse, relaxasse, & om∣nino {pro} me & haered me∣is quietum clamasse A. B. totū ius meū quod habui, habeo, seu quouismodo in futurū habere potero in vno mesuagio &c. Mes ceux parolx (quouismo∣do habere potero) sount voides: Car si le pere soit disseisie, & le fites release {per} son fait de release sans garrantie de tout son droit, per s parols, quo∣uismodo in futurū &c. & le pere morust le fits puit loyalmēt enter sur le pos∣session le disseysor. Auxy in vn release de droit il couient que il a que release serra fait, ad vn franktenement, ou vn possession in les terres in faite ou in ley, ou vn re∣uersion al temps de le re∣lease
faite, car sil nad ri∣ens in le terre al tēps de release fait, le release ne serra al luy auailable. Vi∣de pl{us} de ceo Lit. li. 3. c. 8. Reliefe. RElief, est ascun foits vn certaine summe de money que le heir paiera al seigniour de que ceux terres sont ten, queux a∣p̄es le decease de son an∣cestor sont a luy discend cōeprochein heire, Ascun foits il est paiment dun auter chose, & nemy mo∣ney. Et pur ceo relief nest certain & sēble pur touts tenures, meschescun sun∣dry tenure ad (pur le plus {per}t) son special reliefe cer∣tain en luymesm̄. Neq̄ est ceo destre pay touts foits al vn certaine age, mes il varie ē ceo auxy accordāt al tenure. Come si le te∣nant ad terres tenus per seruice de chiualer (fore∣prise graund serieantie) & morust son heire este∣ant de plein age, & tient ses terres per le seruice dun ētier fee de chiualer, le seigniour de que ceux terres sont issint tenus,
auera del heire C. s. no∣mine releuij, & si il tient per meins que vn fee de chiualer, il paiera meins, & si plus don{que} plus ai∣ant respect touts foits al rate pur chescun fee de chiualer vn cent souz. Et si tient per graund serie∣anty (que est toutes foits del Roigne, & est auxy seruice de Chiualer) don∣ques le reliefe serra le va∣lue del terre per an, pre∣ter touts charges issuant hors de ceo. Auxy si home tient de le Roy en chiefe, & des auters Sn̄rs, le Roy auera le gard de touts les tres, & le heire paiera reliefe a touts les sn̄rs a sō plein age, mes le sn̄rs suera al roy per petition, & aue∣ront le rent pur le temps que lenfant fuit in garde. Et nota que touts foits quant le reliefe est due, il doit este pay al vn entier paim̄t, & nemy per parts, niēt obstant q̄ le rēt soit deste pay al seueral feasts. 377 Remainder. REmainder, de terre est le terre que remainera
apres le particuler estate determine: Come si vn grant terre pur terme de ans, ou pur vie, le re∣mainder al I. S. cest a∣dire, que quant le lessee pur vie est mort, que donques le terre remai∣nera, serra, ou abide, oue, al, on en I. S. Vide Re∣uersion. Remitter. REmitter, est quant vn home ad deux titles a ascun terre, & il vient al terre per le darrain title, vncore il serra adiudge eins {per} force de son pluis eisne title, & ceo serra dit a luy vn remitter, Come si tenant en le taile discon∣tinua le taile, & puis dis∣seisi son discontinuce & morust ent seisi, & les tres discendont a son issue ou cosin inheritable {per} force del taile, in ceo case il est in son remitter, cest asca∣uoir, seisi per force del taile, & le title del discō∣tinuee est ousterment a∣nyēt & defeate, Et le rea∣sō & cause de tiel remitt est pur ceo que tiel heire
est tenāt del terre, & nest ascun person tenant vers que il poit suer son briefe de Formedone pur re∣couer lestate taile, car il ne puit auer action vers luy mesme. Auxy si tenāt in le tail infeoffa son fites ou heire apparant in le taile que est deins age, & puis deuie, ceo est vn re∣mitter al heir. Mes sil fu∣it de plein age al temps de tiel feoffement, il nest remitter pur ceo que il fuit son foly, que il este∣ant de plein age, voile prender tiel feoffement. Auxy si le baron alien terreque il ad en le droit son feme, & puis reptist estate a luy & a son fe∣me pur tme de lour vies, ceo est vne remitter al feme, pur ceo que cest alienation est lact le ba∣ron & nemy le feme, car nul folly puit este adiudge en le feme du∣rant le vie le baron. Mes si tiel alienation soit per fine en court de record, tiel reprisll apres al ba∣ron & feme pur terme de lour vies ne ferta la feme
deste en son remitter, pur ceo que en tiel fine le fe∣me serra examine per le Iudge, & tiels examinati∣ons ē fines excluderōt ti∣els femes a toutes iours. Auxi qt entre dasc' hōe est congeable & il prist estate a luy quant il ē de plein age si ne soit {per} fait indente, ou matter de re∣cord, q̄ luy estoppera, ceo serra a luy bon remitt. Rents. REnts, sont en diuers maners, cest ascauoir, rent seruice, rent charge, & rent seck. Rent seruice est, lon le tenant in fee simple tient sa terre de son seigniour {per} fealty & certain rent, ou {per} aut seruice & rent, & dō{que} si le rent de le te∣nant soit arrere, le seig∣nior puit distraine pur la rent, mes pur ceo il iam∣mais naūra actiō de det. Auxy si ieo done terres en le taile a vn home ren∣dant a moy certain rent, ore tiel rent est rent ser∣uice, mes ē tiel case il co∣uient que le reuersiō soit ē le donor, car si hōe fait
feoffement en fee, ou dōe en taile, le remainder ou∣ster en fee, sans fait, reser∣uant a luy vn rēt, cest re∣seruation est void, & ceo est per force del stat. quia emptores terrarū & don∣ques il tiendra de le seig∣niour de que son donor tenoit. Mes si home {per} fait in∣dent a cel iour fait tiel done ē le tail, le remain∣der ouster en fée, ou lesse a terme de vie, le remain∣der ouster, ou vn feoffe∣ment, & per mesme len∣denture reserua a luy vn rent, & que si le rent soit arrere, que bion lirroit a luy a distreiner, ore tiel rent est rent charge. Mes en tiel case si ne soit ascun tiel clause de distr̄ en le fait donq̄s tiel rent est appel rent secke, & pur tiel rent seck, il ne iammais distreinera, mes fi fuit vn foits seisi, il aūa Assise, & si il iammais ne fuit seisi, est sans remedy. Auxy si vn graunt vn rent issant hors de sa ter∣re oue clause de distres, cē vn rent charge, & si le
rent soit arrere, le graun∣tee poit eslier de distraine ou suer vn brief dannui∣ty, mes il ne poit auer ambideux, car sil port br̄ dannuity, donques le ter∣re est discharge. Et sil di∣strein & auowa la prise en court de record, don∣ques le terre est charge, & le person del grantor discharge. Auxi si vn grant vn rēt charge, & le grantee pur∣chase le moity de la tre, ore tout le rēt est extinct. Mes ē rent seruice si le seigniour purchase par∣cel del terre donques le rent serra apporcion. Mes si vn ad vn rent charge & son pier pur∣chase parcel del terre, & cel parcel descende a le fits que ad le rent charge, ore cel rent serra appor∣tion solon{que} le value del terre come est dit de rent seruice, pur ceo que le fits ne vient a ceo {per} son act demesn̄, mes {per} discent. Auxi si ieo faice vn lease pur terme dans reseruant a moy vn certaine rent, cest appel vn rent seruice:
& pur ceo il est a mon li∣berty a distrainer pur le rent ou auer vn actiō de det, mes si le lease soit de∣tmine, & le rēt foit arrer̄, donques ieo ne puisse di∣streine, mes serra myse a mon action de det. Et nota que si le seigni∣our soit seisi des seruices & rent auantdists, & ils soient aderere, & il di∣strain, & le tenant rescue le distres il poit auer as∣sise, ou briefe de rescous. Mes il est plus necessary pur luy de auer assise, que brief de rescous pur tant que per assise il recouera son rent & ses damages, mer per cē briefe de Re∣scous il ne recouera mes les reprises & les damag▪. Et nota quesi le seigni∣our ne soit my seisie del rent & seruice, & ils sont aderere, & il distrain pur eux, & le tenant reprēt le distresse il ne poit my aū assise, mes br̄ de rescous, & ne couient my al Sn̄r de monstre son droit. Et nota que si le seig∣niour ne poit my trouer distresse per deux ans, il
auera vers le tenant brief de Cessauit {per} biennium, vt patet per lestatute de Westminster 2. cap. 21. Et si tenant deuie en le mean temps & son issue enter le seigniour auera vers lissue briefe dentre sur Cessauit, ou si le te∣naunt alien, le seigniour auera vers lalienee lauāt∣dit briefe. Mes si le seig∣niour ad issue & deuie, & le tenāt soit en arrerages de dit rent & seruices de le temps le pier del issue & nemy en temps del is∣sue, il ne poit my distrein pur arrerages en temps son pier, & il nauera as∣cun auter recouerie vers le tenant ou ascun auter, pur ceo que tiel aduan∣tage est done per le ley al¦tenant. Et nota q̄ rent ser∣uice est c▪, a quel appent fealty, mes a rent charge & rent secke ne appent passe fealtie, mes il appēt a rent seruice de commō droit. Et nota si home distr̄ pur rent charge, & le di∣stres soit resu de luy, & il
ne fuit mie seisie adeuāt, il nv ad my recoūy forsq̄ per br̄ de Rescous, car le distresse primermēt fait, ne done a luy seisin, fors{que} sil happe le rent adeuant, car sil fuit seisi del rent adeuāt & pais le rent soit aderere, & il distraine, & rescous a luy soit fait▪ il auera Assise, ou briefe de Rescous. Et nota, q̄ en chescun assise de rēt charge & an∣nual rēt, ou en vn br̄ de Annuity, couiēt a celuy q̄ port le br̄ de mōstre auāt vn especialty, ou auterm̄t il ne maintenera Assise. Mes en Assise de Mort∣dancestor ou Formedon en le discender, & auters br̄s (en les queux title est done ou comprise) port de rent charge, ou de an∣nual rēt, nest my besoign̄ de monstre especialty. Et nota que si home graunt rent charge a vn auter, & le grantee reles∣sa a grauntor parcel de le rent, vncore tout le rent nest extinct. Et nota, que si rent charge soyt graunt a
deux ioyntment, & lan relessa, vncore le auter auera le moity del rent. Et auxy si lun purchase le moity de le terre dont le rent est issuant, lauter auera le moity del rent de son compaignion. Et si le disseisour charge la terre a vn estrange, & le disseisee port lassise & recouer, le charge est de∣feat. Mes si celuy que ad droit, charge la terre, & vn estrange faine vn faux action ēuers luy que nad droit & recouer per de∣fault, le charge demurra. Et nota que en case vn purpartie sort perenter deux parceners, & pluis terre soit allot a lun que a lauter & celuy que ad pluis de terre, charge sa tre a lauter, & el happe le rent, el maintainera as∣sise sans especialty. Et est Rent secke lou home tient de moy {per} ho∣mage, fealty, & auts ser∣uices, rendant a moy vn certaine rent per an, & eo graunt cest rent a vn auter, reseruant a moy le seruice.
Et nota que si rent seck soit graunt a vn home & a ses heires, & le rent soit aderere, & le graun∣tour deuye, le heire ne purra mye distreyner, ne recouera les arrerages de temps son pere, sicome est auaundit de rent ser∣uice. Et en mesme le maner est adire de rent charge ou annual rent: Mes en touts les rents auandits le heire purroit auer pur arrerages en son temps demesne tiel aduauntage come auoit son pere en sa vie. Vide Statutum 32. H▪ 8 cap. 37. Et nota que en rent seck, si home ne soit seisie del rent, & il soit aderere, il est sans recouerie, pur ceo que il fuit son folly de∣mesne adeprimes quant le rent fuit grant a luy ou reserue, que il ne prist my seisin del rent sicome vn denier ou deux. Et nota que home ne poit my auer Cessauit per biennium, ou vn au∣ter briefe dentre sur Ces∣sauit pur nul rent secke
aderere {per} deux ans, mes ils purront tantsolement pur rent seruice, vt patet in lestat W. 2. cap. 21. Et nota q̄ en rent secke il couient pur luy que sue pur le rent seck pur mō∣stre fait al tenant, ou au∣terment le tenant ne err̄ my charge del rent, fors∣que lo le rent secke suit rent seruice adeuaunt, come en cest case: Seigni∣or, mesne, & tenaunt, & chescun de eux tient de auter per homage & feal∣tie, & le tenant del mesne per x. s. de rent, le Seigni∣or paramont purchase les terres ou ▪tenements del tenant, tout le seigniorie del mesne, forsprise le rent, est extinct: Et pur cest cause cest rent est deuenus rent seck, & la rent seruice change, car il ne poit distraine pur cest rent, & en cest case celuy que demaunda le rent ne serra iammes charge de monstre fait. Auxy en b de Mordā∣cester, Aile, ou Besaile, de rent seek, il ne beforgne de monstre especialtie▪
pur ceo que ceux briefes de possessiō comprehen∣dont vn title deins eux mesmes, cestascauoir, que launcestor fuit seisi de mesme le rent, & conti∣nua son possession, per cause de quel seisin le ley suppose q̄ est auxy auer∣rable per le pais. Tamen quaere, car as∣cuns supposant que il co∣uient a fine force a mon∣stre auant fait, pur ceo q̄ rent seck est vn chose en∣conter common droit, auxibiē come rent charg. Mes en Assise de Nouel disseisin, & in briefe de Entre sur disseisin port de rēt seck, il couient de fine force de monstre auant fait, pur ceo que rent seck est vn chose encoūter cō∣mon droit, sinō en le case suisdit, o il fuit rent ser∣uice adeuant. Et Assise de Nouel dis∣seisin, & briefe de Entre sur disseisin, ne conteigne deins eux nul title, mes supposont vn disseisine deste fait a le plaintife, & de entendement del ley, le disseisin ne done nul
cause de auerrement en∣conter comon droit, mes de fine force il monstra auant especialtie. Repleuin. REpleuin est vn briefe, & gist quant ascun home distraine vn auter pur rent ou auter chose, donques il auera cest br̄e al Vicont pur deliuer a luy le distres, & trouera suertie de pursuer son ac∣tion, & si il ne pursua, ou si soit troue & iudged enconter luy, donques cestuy que prist le distr̄ reauera le distres, & cest appel returne des auers, & il auera en tiel case br̄e que est appel Returno habendo. Auxy si soyt en ascun franchise ou bailiwike, le partie auera vn Repleuin del Vicont direct al bai∣life de mesme le frāchise pur eux redeliuer, & il trouera suertie de pur∣suer son action al pro∣cheine countie. Et cest Repleuin poit estre re∣moue hors del Countie en le common banke per
briefe de Recordare. Vide pluis de Repleuin deuant titulo Distres. Auxy brief de Homine replegiando gist lou vn hōe est en prison, & nemy {per} especiall commandem̄t le Roy ne de ses Iustices, ne pur mort de home, ne pur le forest le roy, ne pur tiel cause q̄ nest repleui∣sable, donques il auera cē br̄ direct al vicont que il luy faire esse repleuie: & cest br̄e est vn Iusticies & nient returnable, & si le vicont ne ceo face don{que} issera aut br̄ sicut alias & apres, auter briefe sicut pluries, vel causam nobis significes, q̄ serra returna∣ble, & si le vicont vncore ne face repleuine, don∣ques issera vn attachem̄t vers le vicont direct al coroners dattacher le vi∣cont & de luy amesn̄ de∣uant les Iustices a vn cer∣tain iour & ouster ceo q̄ ils facent execution del primer briefe. 381 Replication. REplication, est quant le defendāt en ascū actiō
fait respons, & le plain∣tife fait vn respons a ceo, ceo est appel le Replica∣tion del plaintife. Reprises. REprises, sont deducti∣ons, payments, & dui∣ties, que va annuelment & sont pay hors dun mā∣nor. Come rent charge, rent secke, pentions, co∣rodies, annuities, fees del senschal o baylife, & tiels semblables. Receite. REceite est quant ascun action est port vers te∣nant pur terme de vie, ou tenant a terme dans, & estuy en la reuersiō vient eins & pria deste resceiue pur defend la terre & pur pleder ouesque le demā∣dant. Auxy quant il vient il couient q̄ il oit touts foits prist a pleder oue le demaundant. Rescous. REscous est vn briefe & gist quant ascun home prent distres & vn auter reprist la distresse de luy & ne voyle suffer luy de amesmer le distresse oue luy, donques il fait a
luy rescous, & sur ceo il puit auer cest briefe & recouera dāmages. Auxy si vn distraine bestes pur dammage fesaunt en sa terre & les enchasa per le haute chymin pur eux enparker & en alant ils entrent en le meason ce∣luy a que ils sount, & il eux deient la & ne voyle suffer lauter de eux im∣parker, donques ceo de∣teyner est rescous. 385 Reseruation. REseruation, est pris di∣uers voyes, & ad diūs natures, come ascun foits {per} voy de exception de re∣serue ceo que vn home ad deuant en luy. Come si vn lease soit fait pur ans de tre reseruāt les graūd arbos cressants sur ceo. Ore le lessee ne poit med∣dle ouesque eux, ne oues∣que ascū chose que vient {per} reason de eux cy longe come il demurt en, ou sur les arbors, come mast de Oke, chestnut, pomes, ou tiels semblables. Mes sil chient del arbors al terre, donques ils sont en droit les lessees, car le tre
est lesse a luy, & tout sur ceo nient reserue &c. Ascun foits vn reserua∣tion obtaineth & port hors vn aut chose que ne fuit deuant. Come si vn hōme lesse ses tres reser∣uant annualmēt pur ceo xx. li. &c. Et diuers auter tels reseruations y sont. Et nota q̄ en auncient temps, lour reseruations fueront sibien (ou pur le plus part) en victuals, soit ceo, carne, pishe, blees, pane, boyer, ou auterm̄t, come en money, tāque al darraine, & especialment en le temps del roy Hen∣rie le primer per agree∣ment, le reseruation de victuals fuit change en prist money, come il ad tanque cy continue. Retraxit. REtraxit, est le preter∣perfectence de Retra∣ho, compound de Re & traho, q̄ signifie Retraho, pur euulser arrere. Et est quant le partie plaintife ou demaundant vient en proper person en le Court ou son suit est,
& dit que il ne voyt vlte∣rius prosequi in placito illo &c. Ore ceo serra vn barre al action a touts iours. 387 Reeue. REeue est vn officer, mes plus conus en aunciēt temps que a cest iour. Car chescun manour ad don∣ques vn Reeue, & vncore en diuers Copyhold mā∣nours (ou le veyle cu∣stome ascun chose pre∣uaile) le nosme & office nest en tout oblie. Et est en effect ceo que a ore chescun Bailife dun mā∣nor practise: nient obstāt le nosme de bailif ne fuit dōques en vre enter nous esteant puis porte eins per les Normans: Mes le nosme de Reeue aūcient∣ment appel Gereue (quel perticle (Ge) en continu∣ance de tēps fuit ouster∣ment omise & {per}de) vient del Saxon {per}ol geresa, que signify vn rul'. Et issint veram̄t son rule & aucto∣rity fuit larg deins le cō∣pas del manour son seign̄ & enter ses homes & te∣nauntes cybien en choses
de gouemement en peace & guerre, cōe en le skil∣full vse & trade de hus∣bādry. Car sicome il col∣lect les rentes del seig∣niour, paye reprises, ou duities issuants hors del mannor, appoynt les ser∣uauntes de worker, suc∣cide & decoupe arbres pur repayrer les edifices, & enclosures, oues{que} di∣uers tiels semblables pur le commoditie del Seig∣niour: Issint auxy il ad aucthoritie de gouerner, & garder les tenants en peax, & sil besoigne, de conducter eux en guerre. Reuersion. REuersion de terre, est vn certaine estate re∣mainant en le lessor ou donour, apres le perti∣culer estate & possession conuey al vn auter per lease pur vie ou ans ou done en taile. Et est appell vn Re∣uersion en respecte del possessiō seperate de ceo: issint que il que ad le vn, nad le auter a m̄ le tēps, car esteant en vn simul, la ne poit este dit vn re∣uersiō,
pur ceo que per le vniting, lun est merge en lauter, Et issint le reuersi∣on del terre, est le terre mesme quant il eschuest. 389 Riot. RIot est lou troys (al meins) ou plures font ascun illoyal act come de bater vn home, entre sur le possession dun auter, vel huiusmodi. 390 Robberie. RObberie, est quaunt vn home prent ascū chose del person dun auter fe∣loniousmēt, coment que la chose prise ne soit al value forsque dun de∣nier, vncore il est felony pur quel le offendor suf∣fera mort. 391 Rout. ROut est quant people assemble eux mesmes, & puis procedūt, ou chi∣uauchant, ou allant auāt, ou mouent per instiga∣tion dun ou plusors que est conduct de eux: Cest appelle vn rout, pur ceo q̄ ils mouent, & proceed en routs & numbers. Item ou plures assem∣ble eux sur lour qua∣rels
& braules demesne, come si les inhabitantes dun ville voile assēb eux pur debruser huis, mures, fosses, pales, ou tiels sem∣blabl, dauer commen la, ou de bater vn auter q̄ ad fait al eux vn cōmon dis∣pleasure, vel huiusmodi, cest vn rout & encounter le ley, coment q̄ ils nont fait, ou mise en executiō lour male entent, Vide lestatut 1. Mar. 12. S. Sake. SAke, hoc est placitū & emenda de transgr̄ ho∣minū in cur̄ vestra, quia (Sake) Anglice, est Ache∣son Gallice, & dicitur pur sicke sack, idē quod pur quel acheson, & sacke di∣citur {pro} forfait. Scire facias. SCire facias est vn briefe iudicial issant hors de record & gist lou vn ad recouer det ou dama∣ges en Court le Roy, & il ne sue pas dauer exe∣cutiō deins lan & le iour donques apres lan & iour il auera le dit briefe
a garner le partie, & si le partie ne vein ou sil vein, & ne scauoit riēs dire en∣counter execution donq̄s il auera vn briefe de Fieri facias directes al vicount luy commaundant que il leuie le det ou les dama∣ges des biens celuy que a perdue. Auxy le briefe de Fieri facias gist deins lan sans ascun Scire facias suer. Auxy si le summe de mesme le det ou damages ne poit este leuy des biēs celuy q̄ auoit perdue, dō∣ques il poit auer vn briefe de Elegit direct al vicoūt que il fac' luy deliuer la moitie de sa terre & biēs except ses boues & affries de sa carue. Auxy quant vn ad re∣couer det ou damages en action personall (lou le proces est vn capias) il poit auer vn auter briefe de execution appell capi∣as ad satisfaciendum, pur prender le corps celuy que est issint condempne que serra commit al pri∣son illonques a demurrer sans baile ou mainprise
tanque il ad satisfie le partie. Auxi quant vn ad iudg∣ment de recouer ascū ter∣res ou tenements il auera vn briefe appell Habere facias seisinā direct al vi∣count luy commaundant de deliuer a luy seisin de mesme le terre issint re∣couer, Vide plus de ceo en le title Fieri facias, & en le title Execution. Scot. SCot, hoc est quietū esse de quadam cōsuetudi∣ne, sicut de communi tal∣lagio facto ad opus vie' vel balliuorum eius. Seruice de chiualer. TEner per seruice de chiualer est a tener per homage fealtie, & es∣cuage, & treit a luy gard mariage & relife. Et nota que seruice de Chiualer est seruice de terre ou de tenemēts pur armes port en guerre en defence de Royalme Et doit gard & mariage per la reason q̄ nul est able ne de power & ne poit auer conusance darmes porter auant que il soit dage de xxi. ans.
Et pur tant que le Seigni∣or ne perdera ceo, que de droit il doit auer, & que la power de la royalme de rien ne soit enfeeble: la ley voet {per} cause de son tender age q̄ le Seignior luy auera en sa garde tā∣que al pleine age de luy, cestassauoir xxi. ans. Vide de ceo pluis en le title Graund seriantie, & en le title Escauge. 396 Shewing. SHewing hoc est quietū esse cum attachiament in aliqua curia, & coram quibuscun{que} in querelis ostensis & non aduocat. 397 Sok. SOk, hoc est secta de ho∣minibus in Curia ve∣stra, secundum consuetu∣dinem Regni. 398 Sokmans. SOkmans sont les tenāts en auncient demesne, queux tient lour terres per Socage, cest adire per seruice del carue, & pur ceo ils sont appel Sok∣mans. que est tant adire come tenants ou homes queux tiēt per seruice del carue, ou homes del
carue: Car Sok signifie vn carue. Et ceux Sokmans ou tenants en auncient de∣mesne, ont plusors & di∣uers liberties done & graunt a eux per le ley, sibien ceux tenāts queux tient dun common per∣son en auncient demesne, come ceux queux tient del Roigne en auncient demesne, come nosment deste quite de paier tolle en chescun Market, faire, ville, & Citie per tout le Realme, sibien pur lour biens & chattels que ils vend as auters, come pur ceux choses que ils achat pur lour prouisiō, de au∣ters. Et sur ceo chescun de eux poit suer dauer let∣ters patents desouth le seale le Roigne a ses offi∣cers, & al Maiors, Bailiss, & auters Officers en le Realme de suffer cux deste quite de tolle. Item deste quite de pontage, murage, & pas∣sage, & auxy de taxes & tallages graunt per Par∣liament, sinon que l Roign taxe auncient de∣mesne,
come el poit a sa pleasure pur graund cause. Auxy deste quite de payments a les expences del Chiualers del shire queux vient al Parlia∣ment. Et si le Vicont voile di∣strainer eux, ou ascun de eux destre contributorie pur lour terre en ancient demesne, donques lun de eux ou touts come le case require poit suer vn brief direct al vicont, luy com∣mandant, que il ne com∣pel eux destre contribu∣tories al expences de chi∣ualers. Et mesme le brief luy command auxy, que si il ad distraine eux pur ceo, q̄ il redeliuer mesme le distres. Item que ils ne deue∣ront estre impanel, ne mis en Iuries & En∣quests en le pais hors de lour manor ou seigniory de auncient demesne, pur les terres queux ils teigne la (sinon que ils ont auters terres al com∣mon ley, pur queux ils deueront estre charge.)
Et si le Vicont retourne eux en pannels, donques ils poient auer vn briefe direct a luy de Non po∣nēdis in assisis & iuratis: Et sil face al contrarie, donques gist vn Attach∣ment sur ceo enuers luy. Et issint est auxy si les Bailifes des franchises q̄ux ont retournes des briefs voile retourne ascun del tenants queux teigne en ancient demesne en assise ou iuries. Et auxy deste exempts del Leetes, & de turnes del Vicont, oues{que} diuers auts sēblables liberties. Socage. TEner en Socage est a tener dascun Sn̄r terres ou tenements rendant a luy vn certain rēt {per} an pur touts maner des seruices. Et nota que tener per Socage nest pas tener per seruice de chiualer, ne la appent gard, mariage, ne reliefe, mes ils doubleōt vn foites lour rent apres le mort lour auncestor, solonque ceo que soloy∣ent paier a lour Seignior,
Et ils ne serront ouster measure greeues, come il appiert en le treatise de gardes & Reliefes. Et nota q̄ Socage poit estre dit en trois maners, cestascauoir, Socage en frank tenure, Socage en ancient tenure, & Socage en base tenure. rent pur touts maner des seruices, come deuant est dit, & de ceo le prochein amy auera le gard a que le heritage ne purra my discender, tanque al age le heir de xiiii. ans, cestas∣cauoir, si le heritage veign per le part le pere, ceux del part le mere aueront le gard, Et econtra. Et nota que si gardian en Socage fait wast, il ne serra my empeache de wast: Mes il rendra ac∣compt al heir qn̄t il viē∣dra al plein age de xxi. ans. Et vide lestatute de Marlebridg capitulo 17. pur cest matter. Socage de auncient te∣nure est ceo lou les gents en ancient demesne te∣noyent, que ne soylent auter briefe auoir que le
briefe de Droit close, que serra deternune secun∣dum consuetudinem ma∣nerij, & le Monstraue∣runt pur eux discharger quant lour Seignior eux distraine pur faire auters seruices que faire ne du∣issent. Et cest briefe de Mon∣strauerūt doit estr̄ port ē∣uerslour seignior, & ceux tenaunts eignent touts {per} vn certain seruice. Et ils sont franktenants de an∣cient demesne. Socage en base tenure, est lou home tient en an∣cient demesne, q̄ ne puit∣auer le Monstrauerunt, & pur ceo il est appel le base Tenure. Summons ad warranti∣zandum &c. SVmmons ad warranti∣zandum & sequatur sub suo periculo, vide de ceux as en le title voucher. Spoliation. SPoliation, est vn suite pur le fruits dun esglis, ou pur lesglis mesme, & est deste sue en le spiri∣tuall
Court, & nemy en les temporall Courtes. Et cest suite gist pur vn en∣cumbent enuers vn au∣ter encumbēt, ou ils am∣bideux claime per vn pa∣tron, & lou le droit del patronage ne vient in question ou debate. Co∣me si vn person soit cree vn Euesque & ad dispen∣sation de tener son rec∣torie, & puis le patron present auter encumbent que est institute & in∣duct: Ore leuesque poet auer enuers cestuy en∣cumbent vne▪ Spoliation en le spiritual Court, pur ceo q̄ ils ambideux claim per vn patron, & le droit del patronage ne vient en debate, & pur ceo que lauter encumbent vyent al possession del benefice per le course del ley spirituall, cest asca∣uoir, per institution & induction, issint que il ad colour de auer ceo, & deste person per le espi∣rituall ley. Car auter∣ment sil ne soit institute & induct &c. Spoliati∣on ne gist enuers luy,
mes vn briefe de Trespas, ou vn assise de nouel dis∣seisin &c. Issint est auxy lon vn person que ad pluralitie, accept auter benefice, per reason de que le patron present vn auter clerke, q̄ est institute & induct, ore lun de eux poit auer Spoliation enuers le au∣ter, & donques viendra en debate si il ad vn suffici∣ent pluralitie ou non. Et issint est de depriuation &c. Mesme le ley est, lou vn dist al patron, que son clerke est mort sur que il present vn auter, La le primer incumbent que fuit surmise de estre mort poit auer vn Spoliation enuers lauter. Et issint en diuers auters semblables cases de que veyes Fitz∣herbert Natura breuium. Stallage. STallage, hoc est quietū esse de quadam consue∣tudine exact▪ pro pltea capta vel assignata in nū∣dinis & mercatis.
403 Suit couenant. SVit couenant, est quant vostre auncestors ont couenant oue mes aun∣cestors de suer a le court mes auncestors. 404 Suit custome. SVit custome, est quant ieo & mes ancestors ont estre seisies de vestre suite demesne & vostre aunce∣stors de temps &c. 405 Suit reall. SVit reall, est quaunt homes vient al turne de vicont ou leete, a q̄ courts touts homes serra com∣pell de vener a conuster les leyes, issint que ils ne serra ignorant de les cho∣ses queux serra monstres la coment ils serra gouer∣nes. Et est appel real suit per cause de lour allege∣ance, & ceo appiert {per} cō∣mon experience quant vn est iure, son othe est que il serra loyal & foyal home al Roigne. Et ceo suit nē pur le terre que il tient deins le countie, mes per reason de son person,
& pur son rest la, & doyt estre fait deux foits per an, pur default de que, il serra amercy & non di∣streigne. Suit seruice. SVit seruice, est de suer al turne del viscount ou Leete, ou al Court del sn̄r de trois semaines en trois semaines {per} lentier an: Et pur default de ceo, vn hōe serra distreigne & non a∣mercy. Et cest suit seruice est per reason del tenure del terres dun home. Statute marchant. TEner per Statute mar∣chant, est lou hom̄ co∣nust a paier certaine de∣nyers a vn auter a certain iour deuant le Maire, bai∣lie, ou aut gardeine dascū ville que ad poyar de fair̄ execution de mesme le∣statute, & si le obligor ne paya le dett a le iour asses & rien de ses biens, terres on tenements ne purront estr̄ troues deins la gard le Maior ou gar∣dein auantdit, mes en au∣ters lyeus dehors, don{que}
le recognisee suer̄ le re∣cognisance & obligation oue vn certification al Chauncery de south le seale le Roy, & il aūa hors de la Chauncery vn Ca∣pias al Vicount de quel countie il est de luy ap∣prender & metter en pri∣son sil ne soit clerke, tan∣que il ad fait gree de la debt. Et vn quarter de lan apres ceo que il serra pris, il auera sa terre liuer a luy mesme pur faire gree a le partie de debt. Et il puit vender tanque il est enprison, & sa ven∣dr̄ serra bon & loyal. Et sil ne face gree deyns le quarter dun an, ou il soit returne que il nest troue, & sil ne soyt Clerke, a∣donques le reconisee puit auer briefe de la Chaun∣cerie que est appell Ex∣tendi facias, direct al toutes vicounts lou il ad terres dextender ses ter∣res & biens, & ses byens a luy deliuer, & luy sei∣ser en ses terres, pur les tener a luy & a ses heires & a ses assignes tan∣que le debt soyt leuye
ou paye, & per cel temps il est tenaunt per statute marchant. Et nota que en lestatute marchant, le re∣cognisee auera execution de touts les terres que le recognisor auoit iour de la recognisance fait, & vn∣ques puis per force de mesme lestatute. Et nota que quant ascū wast ou destruction est fait per le recognisee, se executors, ou per celuy que ad son estate, le re∣cognisor & ses executors aueront mesme la ley cōe est suisdit de le tenant {per} Elegit. Et nota si tenaunt per lestatute Marchant tient ouster son terme cestuy que ad droit poit suer en∣uers luy Venire facias ad computandum, ou entrer tantost sicome sur le te∣stant per Elegit. Vide sta∣tute 11. E. 1. & de Acton burnel, & 13. E. 1. de Mercatoribus. T. Fee Taile. TEner en le tayle, est lou home tient
certein terres ou tenem̄ts a luy & a ses heires de son corps engendres. Et nota que si la terre soit done a vn home & a ses heires males, & il ad issue male, il ad fee simple, & ceo fuit adiudge en le Parli∣ament nostre Seigniour le roy. Mes lou terres ou te∣nements sont dones a vn home & a ses heirs males de son corps engendres, il ad fee tail, & lissu female ne serra my inherite, vt patet Anno 14. E. 3. en vn assise 1. E. 3. 45. Fee taile, est lou terre est done a vn home & a ses heirs de son corps en∣gendres, & il est dit tenāt en le taile generall, mes i terre soit done al baron & feme & al heires de lour deux corps engen∣dres, or le baron & la fēe sont tenants en le tail especial. Et si vn de eux deuy cest que suruiue est tenant en le taile apres possibilitie dissue extinct & il face wast il ne serra empeche de cel wast. Vi∣de Littleton. Mes si le roy don terres
a vn home & a ses heires males, & le donee deuie sans issue male, donques le cosin collaterall del donee inheritera, mes le roy reentra, & ssint fuit adiudge en leschequer chamber Anno 18. H. 8. en vn information fait vers heire de Sir T. Louel Chiuler. Taile apres possi∣bilitie. TEner en le taile apres possibilitie dissue ex∣tinct, est lou terre est do a vn home & sa feme & a les heires de lour deux corps engendres, lun de eux suruiue lauter sans issue enter eux issuant, il tiendra sa terre a terme de sa vie demesne, come tenant in le taile ap̄s pos∣sibilitie dissue extinct. Et non obstant q̄ il fait wast, il ne serra iammays em∣peche de cel wast. Et no∣ta sil alien, celuy en la re∣uersion ne auera briefe dentre in consimili casu. Mes il poit entrer, & son entre est congeable, per R. Th. chiefe Iustice 28.
E. 3. 96. & 45. E. 3. 25. 410 Taxe & Tallage. TAxe & Tallage, sont paiments, come dis∣mes, quizimes, subsidies ou tiels embables grant al roigne per Parliamēt. Les tenants en aunciēt demesne sont quits de ceux taxes, & tallages gauntes per Parliament, sinon que le Roigne taxe auncient demesne, come el poet quant a luy pleast pur graund cause. Veies auncient demesne. 411 Tenure en capite. TEnure en capite, est lou ascun tient del Roigne come de a parson esteāt roigne, & de sa Corone, come dun Seigniorie per luy mesme en grosse, & en chiefe desuis touts au∣ters Seigniories, Et nemy lou ils tient de luy come de ascun mannor, honor, ou Castell, sinon certeine auncient honors, vt patet in Scaccario. 412 Terme dans. TEner a terme das est forsque chaell
en effect, car nul actiō est maintenabl▪enuers le ter∣mor quant a recouerer le frankten̄t, car nul frank∣tenem̄t est a luy. Lease a terme dans est chattel re∣al. Et lauter chattel est {per}∣sonal, & touts bn̄s moua∣bles sont chatels {per}sonals. Testament. TEstament, est issint de∣fine ou expounde en Mounsier Plowdens Cō∣mentaries: Testamentum est testatio mentis, & est cōpoūd de ceux deux pa∣rolx, Testio & mentis, q̄ issint signifie, veray il est, q̄ vn testament est testatio mentis, mes q̄ il est vn cō∣pound parol, Aulus Gel∣lius en son vi. liuer ca. 12. deny ceo al vn excellent Lawier vn Seruius Sulpi∣tius, & dit q̄ il est vn sim∣ple parol, come sont ce Calciamentum, Paluda∣mentū, Pauiamentum, & diuers tielx semblables. Et mult meines est a∣greamentum, vn cōpound paoll de aggregatio & mentium, come est dit en le title de agreement, car
il ny ad nul tiel latin pa∣rol simple ou compound, mes il pe it niēt obst serue bn̄ pur vn ley latin parol. Et pur ceo il poit issint este meliour define. Te∣stamentum est vltimae vo∣luntatis iusta sententia de to quod quis post mortē suam fieri vult &c. Et de Testaments il y ad deux sorts, cestascauoir vn Testament en escript, & vn Testam̄t {per} parolx, q̄ est appel vn Nuncupatiue Testament. Le primer est touts forts en escript come est dit. Le auter est quant vn home esteant en maladie, & pur pauor ne mort ou fault de memorie, ou de parler, voit vener cy sud∣deinment & hastiuement sur luy, que il serra pre∣uent sil demurt le scrip∣ture de son Testament, request ses vicines & a∣mies de porter tesmoign̄ de son darreine volunt, & donques declare ceo presentment {per} parolx de∣uant eux, que apres son decease est proue per tes∣moignes, & mis en escript
per le Ordinarie, & don∣ques il est en cy bone force (sinon pur terres) si∣come il ad al primer en le vie del testator este mis en escript. Them. THem, hoc est quod ha∣beatis totam genera∣tionem villanorum ves∣trorum cum eorum sectis & cattallis vbicū{que} in An∣glia fuerint inuenta, ex∣cepto qd' si aliquis natiu quiet {per} vnū annū & diē in aliqua villa priuilegiaa manserit, ita qd' in eorum cōmuniam vel gildam, tanquā vnus illarū reper∣tus fuerit, eo ipso a ville∣nagio liberatus est. Theftbote. THeftbote, est quant home prist ascun biens dun laron de luy fauou∣rer & mainteiner: Et ne∣my quant home prist ses biens demesne, q̄ fueront emblees de luy &c. Le punishment en aun∣cient temps de Thefe∣bote, suit de vie & de member: Mes a ore
M. Stamford dit, que il est punish per raūsome & emprisonmēt. Sed quaere car ieo pense ceo este fe∣lonie. 416 Title. TItle, est lou loial cause est veigne a vn home de auer chose que auter ad, & il nad ascun action pur ceo, come title de Mortmaine, ou de entrie pur condition enfreint. 417 Title de Entre. TItle de Entre, est quant vn seisie de terre en fee fait feoffement de ceo sur condition, & le con∣dition est enfreint: Ore apres le condition issint enfreint, le feoffour ad title de entre en le tre, & issint poit quaunt a luy pleist, & per son entrie le frank tenemēt serra dit en luy maintenant. Et est appel Title de Entre, pur ceo que il ne poit auer briefe de Droit enuers son feoffee sur cō∣dition, car son droit fuit hors de luy per le feoffe∣ment, le quel ne poit este reduce sans ntrie,
& le entre doit este pur le enfreinder de le cōditiō. Tolle, ou Tolne. TOlle ou Tolne, est plus properment vn pay∣ment vse en Cities, villes, markets, & fayres, pur biens & cattel port la destre achate ou vende. Et est toutes dits destre pay per le achator, & ne∣my per le vendour, sinon que soit ascun Custome al contrarie. Il y ad diuers auters Tolles, come Turne toll, & ceo est lou toll est pay pur auers, queux for dri∣ues deste vendus, com̄t que ils ne sont vendus. Item tolle trauers, ceo est lou vn claime dauer vn ob. ou tiel Tembla∣ble tolle de chescun beast que est driue sur son terre. Through tolle, est lou vn ville prescribe de auer tolle pur chescun beast q̄ ale through lour ville, vn certaine, ou pur ches∣cun vin ou cent, vn cer∣tain: que ne appiert deste cy vnreasonable prescrip∣tion ou custome, come
ascuns ont suppose, nient obstāt il soit per le hault chimin del roigne (come ils ceo appel) lou ches∣cun poit loialment passe, sil y ad quid pro quo: Come si la soit vn pont ou tiel semblable com∣modity, puruey al costes & charges del ville, pur le ease de trauaylers que chase mesme voy, per que lour iourney est ou a∣bridge ou fait le meliour pur que donques ne poit tolle este demaund loial∣ment & oue bone rea∣son de eux &c▪ Mes diuers Citizens & Burgesses sont quite de pay tolle {per} le graunt del Roigne, ou sa auncestors, ou claime ceo {per} prescrip∣tion ou custome. Issint auxy espiritual persons & religious homes (cōe ils fueront appels) fueront quite de tolle pur lour biens & marchandises a∣chate & vendus &c. Mes a ore le Statute del Roy H. 8. anno 21. cap. 13. voit q̄ ils ne marchandiser̄. Item tenants en aunci∣ent demesne doyent este
quite per tout le Realme de paier tolle, cōe appiert deuaunt en le title Soke∣mans. Et en touts ceux cases ou tolle est deste demaunde, ou il ne doit este pay de eux q̄ doyent aler, achate, & vēde, quite de tolle, la le partie ou parties greeue poyent a∣uer vn briefe, De essendi quietū de tolonio, direct a luy, ou ceux que issint demaunde tolle contra al graūt le Roigne ou sa progenitors, ou contra al custome ou prescription. Treason. TReasō est en deux ma∣ners, cest ascauoir▪ haute treason, & petit treason, come est ordeine per lestatutes, & ideo vi∣de statuta & Stamford lib. 1. cap. 2. Treasure troue. TReasure troue, est quāt ascun money, or, ar∣gent, plate ou bolion, est troue en ascun lieu, & nul conust a que le propertie est, donques le propertie de ceo ap∣pertient al Roye, & ceo est dyt treasure troue.
Mes si ascun minerall de mettal soyt troue en as∣cū terre, ceo toutes foites pertient al Seigniour del soile, forsque q̄ il soit mi∣nerall de or ou de argēt, queux serront touts foits al Roy, en quecūque soile que ils sont troues. 421 Tourne del vicont. TOurne del vicont, est vn Court de record en touts choses que pertaine al tourne. Et est le leete le Roigne per tout le Countie, & le viscount est Iudge. Et quecunque ad vn leete ad mesme le au∣thoritie deins le precinct, sicome le vicont ad deins le tourne. V. 422 View. VIew, est quaunt ascun action reall est port & le tenant ne seauoit bien quel terre il est que le de∣maūdant demand, dōque le ten̄t priera la view, cest ascauoir, que il puit veyer le terre q̄ il claima. Mes si le tenant ad ew le view en vn briefe, & puis le
brief est abatus per mis∣nomer de ville, ou per iointenure, & puis le de∣mandant port vn tiel br̄e vers le tenant, donque le tenant nauera le view en le second briefe. Vilaica remouenda. VIlaica remouenda, est vn briefe, & gist lou debate est perenter deux persons ou prouisours dun Esglise, & lun enter en lesglise, oue graund power de les hōes & ti∣ent lauter dehors oue force & armes, donq̄ ce∣luy que est ten dehors, auera le dit brief directal vicount que il remoua cē power q̄ est deins leglise & serra command al vi∣cont que sil troue ascuns homes luy resistants, que le vicont prender̄ oues luy la poyar de son coun∣tie si besoigne soit & fer∣ra attach per lour corps touts ceux luy resistantes & les mittera en prison issint q̄ il eyt lour corps deuāt le R. a certain iour de respōder del cōtempt.
Et cest briefe est returna∣ble & ne serra grant de∣uāt q̄ leues{que} del lieu lou tiel esglise est, eyt certifie en le Chauncerie tiel re∣sistance & force. 424. Villenage. TEnure en pure ville∣nage, est a faire tout ceo que le seigniour luy voit commander. La diffinition de ville∣nage est villeine de sank, & de tenure. Et il est de que son seignior prent redemption de sa file marrier, ou soy mesme enfranchise, & le seigni∣our puit luy ouste de ses terres ou tenements a sa volunt, & auxy de toutes ses biens & chateux. Et note que Sokeman nest pas pure villeine, ne villein doit pas gard ma∣riage ne reliefe, ne faire auter seruices reals. Et nota que tenure en Villenage ne ferra nul franke home villeine, sil ne soit continue puis le temps de non memorie,
ne villeine terre ne ferra franke home villeine, ne franke terre ne ferra vil∣leine franke, son que le tenaunt soit continue frankment puis le temps de non memory. Mes villein ferra frank terre villein per seisin ou per claime de son seigni∣our. Et nota que si vil∣lein purchase certaine tre & prent feme & alien & deuie deuaunt le claime, ou seisin de son seignior, la feme serra endowe. Et nota que en cest case que le ōn̄r port Praecipe quod reddat enuers lalie∣nee son villein le q̄l vou∣che a garrantie le issue la villein que est villein a la seignior, il auera le vou∣cher. Et per protestation le Sn̄r poit sauer (que non obstant que il plede oue son villeine) vncore son villeine ne serra mie en∣franchise. Et nota que ba∣starde ne serra iammais adiudge villeine sinon per conusance en Courte de record. Et nota que si dett soit due per vn seig∣nior a vn home & il face
deux homes ses execu∣tors, les queux sont vil∣leines al dit Seignior & deuie les villeins aueront Action de dette enuers leur seigniour, Et nient obstant que il pled oues∣que eux, & il face prote∣station, ils ne serrontpur∣tant enfranchise, pur ceo que ils sont a recouer le dette auantdist al vse dun auter person, cestassa∣noir, al vse lour Testator & nient a lour vse de∣mesne. Et si le tenaunt en dower eyt vn villeine, le quel purchase certain ter∣re▪ en fee & puis le tenant en dower enter, el auera la terre a luy & a ses heirs a touts iours, & mesme le ley est de tenaunt a terme dans de vn villeine. Et nota que le seignior poit robber, naufrer & chastiser son villeine a sa¦volunt, salue que il ne puit luy maime, car don∣ques il auera appeal de maihim enuers luy. Et nota que villaine poit auer trois actions uers sa seigniour, cest
ascauoir, vn appeale de mort son auncestour, vn appeale de rape fait a sa feme, & vn appeale de maihim. Et nota si deux parceners port briefe de nieftie, & lun de eux soit nonsuite, le nonsuite de luy serra adiudge la non∣suite de ambideux issint q̄ si le nonsuit soit apres appearance, ils serront saue de cest actiō a touts tours, car la ley est tiel en fauorem libertatis. Et nota si deux ont vn villein in common, & lun de eux fait a luy vn ma∣numission, il ne serra my enfrāc enuers ambideux. Et nota que en br̄e de Natiuo habēdo il couiēt que le Sn̄r monstr̄ co∣ment aueigna priuie de sanke a celuy villeine de que il est Seigniour &c. Et sil ne nul de ses ance∣stors ne soit seisi de nul de son sanke, il ne gainer per son action si le vil∣leine nad pas conus en court de Record luy estr son villeine. Et nota que en briefe de niefe ne purront estr
mis plusours niefes que deux tant solemēt, & hoc introductum fuit prius in odium seruitutis. Mes en brief de libertate pro∣banda, purront estre mise tāts Niefs come le plain∣tif voudra. Et nota que si le niefe de seignior soit fue ē an∣cient demesne de roy ou auter vill priuilegie, deins lan & iour le seig∣niour poit luy seiser, & sil demurt en la dit ville ou lieu franchise per vn an & vn iour sans le seisin de sou seigniour il nad my power de luy seiser apres sil ne va dehors le suisdit franchise. Et ascuns sont villeins per title de Prescription, que tout lour sanke out este villeins regardants a le maner dun Seigniour de tēps de non memory, Et ascun sont fait vil∣leins {per} lour confession en vn court de record. Auxy le Sn̄r poit fair vn ma∣numission a son villein & luy infrācha touts iours. Auxy si le villeine port ascun actiō vers son
seigniour, si ne soit appel de maihim, & le seignior a ceo sans protestation fait respons, donqs {per} ceo l villein est franches. Auxy si vn villeine pur∣chase terre, & ad biens & vend les terres & biēs deuant ascun entre ou seisin fait per le Seignior, la vend est bon, mes le roy que est seignior de villein ē tiel case poit ent & seiser le terre apes tiel vendr fait, quia nullum tempus occurrit regi. Viscont. VIscont, est ou le nosm̄ de vn degre ou state de honor soubs vn Cont & paramont vn Baron ou le nosme de vn Magistrate & officer dl grand auc∣thority q̄ nous commu∣nem̄t appellomus (Shirif) ou de parler plus veray∣ment (Shire reue) & fuit al primes appel (Shire ge∣reue) cē a die custos cōi∣ttus, ou le reue ou ruler del countie, car (Gereue) esteant deriue de Saxon parol (Gerecian) pur rule,
fuit al primes appel (Ge∣recfa) & donques (Gere∣fa) que betoken vn ruler. Et de ceo vient (Portreue ou Portgreue) vn nosme q̄ en viel temps fuit done al chief officer dun ville, & signifie le gouernour del ville pur ceo q̄ (Port) vniens de le latin parol portes, signifie vn port ville, & & (Gereue) esteāt deriue come est auantdit signifie vn ruler, issint que Portgereue, ou come nous a  briefement parle ceo (Portreue) est le gouernet del ville. Et issint fuit le chiefe Officer ou Gouernor del Citie de Londres longe temps past (deuant que ils ad le nosm̄ del Maior ou Bailifes) appel, come il appiert en diuers viculx Monuments: Mes prin∣cipalm̄t en le Saxō Char∣ter de Guilliam Bastarde le Conquerour, que issint commence. William Cing greit Williā Bisceop, & God∣frey Ges port Gerefan, and dalle tha Burwarren the on Londō beon &c.
Issint ils de Garmanie (de que nous & nostre language ensemble pri∣merment vient) appel enter eux vn gouernour Burgreeue, vn auter Margreeue, & vn auter Landsgreue, oue tielx semblables &c. Cest tant est dit tant∣solement pur monstre le droit Etymon & antiqui∣tie del parol (Shirife) a quel officer nostr commō¦ley ad toutes foits accor∣dant done graund confi∣dence & aucthoritie, co∣me destre vn special p̄ser∣uer del peace. Et pur ceo touts obligatiōs q̄ il prist a mesme le purpose, sont cōe Recognisances ē ley. Il auxi est vn Iudge de record quant il tient les Lees on Turnes, les q̄ux sont Courts de record. Item il ad le execution & retourne des briefs, & empannelling des Iuries, & tiels semblables, &c. Volunt. VOlunt est quant le te∣nant tient a la volunt
del lessor ou del seignior & ceo est en deux man∣ners. Vn est quant ieo face lease a vn home de terres, a tener a ma volunt, don∣ques ieo ps luy ouster a mon pleasure: Mes si il emblee le terre, & ieo luy ousta, donques il auera son emblee▪ & egresse & regresse isq, ils sont mature pur cux scier & carrier hors del terre. Etiel tenaunt a volunt nest pas tenus de sustay∣ner & repairer le meason sicome tenant a terme de ans est tenus: Mes si il fait voluntarie wast, le lessour auera vers luy vn action de Trespas. Auxi est auter tenaunt a volunt del Seignior per copie de court Rolle so∣lonque le custome del manor: Et tiel tenāt poit surrēder le tre ē le mains le Seignior {per} le custome al vse vn auter pur terme de vie ou ē fee simple, ou fee tail, & donques il p̄n∣dra le terre del Sn̄r ou sō Seneschall per copie, & erra fine al Seigniour:
Mes sile Seigniour ousta tiel tenant, il nad remedy mes de suer per petition, & si tiel tenant voile em∣plede vn auter des terres &c. il couient enter vn plaint en le court, & coū∣tera en le nature de quel briefe il voit, sicoe le case gist. Voucher. VOucher, est quant vn Praecipe quod reddat de teire est port vers vn home, & vn auter doit garrant le terre al te∣naunt, donques le tenant luy vouchera a gair ti, & sur ceo il auera vn briefe appel Summoneas ad warrantizandum: lt si le vicon retourne que il nad rins per que il poit este summon, don∣ques issera briefe appel Sequatur sub suo peri∣culo, & quant il vient il pldr onesque le de∣maundaunt, & si il vient & ne poit barre le de∣maundaunt, donques le demaundant recouera, la terre vers le tenaunt,
& le tenant recouera tant de terre en value vers le vouchee, & sur ceo il a∣uera vn briefe appel Ca∣pias ad valentiam vers le vouchee. Vide pluis de Voucher deuant titulo Garrantie. 428 Vses. VSes de terre ad son cō∣mencement apres q̄ le custome de propertie cō∣mence ent homes: Come ou vn esteant seisi de ties en fee simple, fait vn feof∣fement al vn auter sans ascun consideration, mes solement meaning que le auter serroit seisie al son vse, & que il mesme voile prender le commoditie & profits de les terres, & que le feoffee doit auer le possession & franktene∣ment de ceo al mesme le vse &c. Ore apres ceo sur bone considerations, & pur a∣uoider diuers mischiefes & inconueniences, fuit le Statute de An. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. puruiew, q̄l vnit le vse & possession ensemble, issint que il que ad le vse
de terre, il mesme ad le possession de ceo, accor∣dant al vse que il auoyt en c̄eo per vertue de cest estatute. Vsurie. VSurie, est vn gaine de ascun chose ouster le principal, ou ceo que fuit lent, exact solem̄t en con∣sideration de le loan, soit il de corne, viande, appa∣rel, wares, ou tielx sēbla∣bles, come de money. Et icy mult poit estre dit, & diuers cales poyent estre mis concemants V∣surie, le ql de purpose ieo omit, solement ieo pua, q̄ ceux q̄ accompt eux mes∣mes religious & bone Christians, ne voylent de∣ceiue eux mesms {per} co∣lour de le statute de Vsu∣rie, pur ceo q̄ il dit, que il ne seria loyal pur ascun de prender ouster x. h. en le C. li. pur vn an &c. per que ils collect (mes faux∣ement) q̄ils poyent {per} ceo prender x. la. pur le loane dun C. li. oue vn bon cō∣science, pu ceo q le sta∣tute solonque vn manner
dispence oue ceo (p ceo que il ne punishe u∣lx prendors) qel chose il n pot faire oue les leyes & ordināces de du car Diu voile auer ses decrees obserue inuiola∣ble, que dit, lende expe∣ctans pur nul chose pur ceo &c. Per queux parolx est exclude, le psell de x. li. v. li. ou de vn denyer ouster le principall. Mes plus pensant els que cest statute fuit fait sur tel cause, q̄ moua Moy∣ses de doner vn bill de diuorce 2 les Israelites, come nosment, pur a∣uoyder vn greinder mis∣chiefe, & pur le duitie de lour ceurs. 430 Vtlary. VTlarie▪ est quant exi∣gent issist vers ascun home & proclamation fait in v. counties, don∣ques a le v. countie si le defendant nappeare, le coroner donra iudgem̄t que il erra hors de pro∣tection de Roy, & hors del eyde le ley. Et per tiel vtlarie in
action personels e par∣tie vtlage forfetera touts ses bns & chateux al Roy. Et per vtlarie in felony il forfeitera auxy byen touts ses terres & tenem̄ts que il ad in fee simple, ou pur terme de sa vie, come ses biens & chateux. Auxy mesque vn home soit vtlage, vncore si acū discontinuance ou errour sit in la suite del proces, le partie de ceo auera la aduātage & pur iel cause lutlagary erra reuerse & adnul. Auxy si le partie defen∣dant sot ouster la mere al temps de vtlagay pro∣nounce, ceo est bon cause de reueral del vtlarie. Auxy si vn exigent soit agard vers vn home in vn countie lou l ne demur∣ra pas, vncore vn exigent oue proclamation issera al county lou il demurre ou auterment sil soit sur ceo vtlge vtlagarie puit este reuerse come appiert per lestatute fait anno 6. & 4. Henric octaui, cap. 4▪
Auxy si vn soit vtlage in action personal al suite dun auter & puis il pur∣chase son charter de par∣don de Roy, tiel charter ne serra iammes allow, tanque il ad sue vn briefe de Scire facias de garn̄ le partie pleintife, & si il ap∣peare, donques le defen∣dant respondera a luy & luy barrer̄ de sa actiō, ou auterment de faire agre∣ment ouesque luy. 431 Vtrum. VTrum, est vn briefe & gist quant le droit das∣cun esglise est alien & te∣nus in laye fee, ou tran∣slate in possession dauter esglise, & le alienour de∣ue, donques son successor auera le dit briefe, per q̄ vn enquest serra charge de trier vtrum sit libera elmosina ecclesiae vel lacum feodum. Et nota que nul que ad couent ou common seale, puit mainteer cest briefe, mes briefe Dentre sin assensu capituli de alie∣nation fait per on prede∣cessur.
W. Waife. WAife, est quant vn la∣ron ad felomousmēt emblee biens, & esteant neremēt pursue oue hue & crie, ou auterment sur∣charge oue le burden ou trouble des biens, pur son ease & plus speedie tra∣aile sauns hue & cry fua, & waiua les byens o as∣cun part de eux aere luy &c. donques le officer del Rogne, ou le Reeue ou Baylife al Seigniour del mannour (deins que iurisdiction ou circuit ils fuerount waye) que per prescription, ou graunt del Roige ad le fra∣chie de waife, poyent sei∣ser les biens it wayfe al ve de lour Seigniour, q̄ poet retaine eux come ses proper byens sinon que le owner vient oues∣que fresh uite apres le fe∣lon▪ & sue vn appell, o done en euidence enuers luy al son arraignmēt sur lendictment, & il attaint de o &c. En queux
cases le primer owner auera restitution de ses biens issint emblee & wayfe. Mes nient obstāt come ad este dit, waife est pro∣permēt de biens emblees, vncore waife poit este auxy de biens nient em∣bles. Come si vn hōe sot pursue oues{que} hue & crie, come vn felon, & il fue & relinquish ses biens de∣mesne &c. ils serra prise cōe biens waife, & forfait com̄ sils ad este emblees. 433 Waiue. WAiue, est vn feme que est vtlage, & est appeal waiue, quasi re∣licta a lege, & non vt∣lage come home est, car femes ne sont iures en leetes al Roigne, ne al ley come homes sont, queux pur ceo sont dens le ley ou femes ne sont, & pur cest cause ils ne poyent este dit vtl' entnt que ils ne vnques fueront deins ceo. Ms vn home est dit vtlage, pur ceo que il fuit vn foits ure al ley, & a ore▪ pur contempt il est
mys hors del ley, & di∣ctus vtlagatus quasi extra legem positus. Warwit. WArwit (ou wardwit come ascuns copies ad ceo) hoe est quetum esse de dnaris dandis pro wardis faciendis. Wast. WAst est lou tenant a terme dans, tenant a terme de vie, ou re∣naunt pur terme dauter vie, tenant en dower, ou tenant per la curtesie, ou gardein en chiualry fait wast ou destruction sur la terre. s. sil debrusa meason, ou coupe meris∣me, ou suffer le meas vo∣luntarily pur escher, ou foder la terre, donq̄ cesty en le reuersion auera vn briefe & recouer̄ le lieu ou le wast fuit fait & tre∣ble dam̄, mes si home coup̄ merisme sans li∣cence, & ouesque ceo re∣paire les auncient mea∣sons, vnc' ceo nest pas wast. Mes sil ouesque le merisme dfia vn nouel
meason donques le cou∣per de tiel merisme est wast. Auxi le couper de subboys ou willowes q̄ nest pas merisme, ne sera dit wast, sinō que ils cres∣sount en le view del site del meason. 436 Wrecke. WRecke ou varech cōe les Normans de que il vient appellot ceo, est quant vn efe est perish sur la mere, & nul home escape viue hors de niefe & le niefe ou part del niefe issint perishe ou les biens en la niefe vient al terre dascun seigniour, le seigniour les auera cōe vn wrecke de mere, mes si vn home ou vn chyen ou chate escape viue, is∣sint q̄ la partie a que les biēs sont veign̄ dens lan & iour, & proue les biens destr̄ ses, il auera eux arr̄, {per} prouision del statute de West. le primer ca 4. fait en les iours del Roy Ed. 1. que en ceo followed le decree de H. 1. deuant que iours, si vn niefe ad estre mise sur le shore,
torne oue tempest, & e∣my repaier per eux que escapont en vie deins vn certeine temps, que don∣ques ceo fuit prise come wrecke. Withernam. WIthernā, Vide de ceo deuant, titulo Di∣stresse. Warren. WArren est vn lieu pri∣uiledge {per} prescrip∣tion ou grant del Roign̄ pur le preseruation del liuerets, comes, perdi∣ces & fesants, ou ascun de eux. FINIS.
