21094 99857165 22849
VERA EFFIGIES LODOVICI ROBERTS CIVIS & MERCATOR: LONDI: NATs BELLOMARISCO INSVLA MONA ANNO DNI 1596 This is th'effigies, yet his real worth in this his worke, a liuelier shape brings forth (Which shall out-liue his fate, and giue in truste his Name to fame, when hee is writt in dust his speaks him outward, But his inward parte is best expresst, within this Booke of Arte.
THE MERCHANTS MAPPE OF COMMERCE: WHEREIN, The Vniversall Manner and Matter of TRADE, is compendiously handled. The STANDERD and currant COINES of sun∣dry PRINCES, observed. The Reall and Imaginary COINES of ACCOMPTS and Exchanges, expressed. The Naturall and Artificiall Commodities of all Countries for transportation declared. The WEIGHTS and MEASVRES of all eminent CITIES and TOVVNES of Traffique, collected and reduced one into another; and all to the MERIDIAN of COMMERCE practised in the famous CITIE of LONDON. By LEWES ROBERTS, Merchant. Necessary for all such as shall be imployed in the publique Affaires of PRINCES in forreigne Parts; for all Gentlemen and others that travell abroad for delight or pleasure, and for all MERCHANTS or their FACTORS that exercise the Art of Merchandizing in any part of the habitable WORLD. AT LONDON, Printed by R. O. for RALPH MABB. MDCXXXVIII.
TO THE RIGHT VVOR∣SHIPFVLL AND VVOR∣THILY EMINENT MERCHANTS: St. MORRIS ABBOT, Knight, Alderman of the Citie of LONDON, and Governour of the Company of English MERCHANTS, trading into the East-INDIES▪ And HENRY GARRAWAY, Esquire, Alderman of the said Citie of LONDON, and Governour of the Company of English MERCHANTS trading the Levant Seas. YOur excellent skill, (much honour'd SIRS) in all the particular parts of Merchandizing, and your skil∣full excellencie in the Universall Commerce of the World, not only demonstrated by continuall experi∣ments, but also practised by sundry demonstrations, (especially under your Government, in those so worthy and honourable societies, of which you are at this present the happy Governours) promp∣ted me, that you were not only the fittest PATRONS of this Modell, but the best Iudges of the WORKE it selfe; and therefore if I were not induced by any other
motive, nor yet moved by any other inducement; yet this alone might both move and induce me, not onely to present you with this Dedication, but also crave from your Worths a friendly and favourable Protection. But the further consideration of my particular Ob∣ligement, and the dayly experience of both your loves, challenged this justly from me, as the acknowledge∣ment of my respect and service: for before I had the fa∣vour of your acquaintance, I was made acquainted with your favours; and in Constantinople before you knew mee, I had the honour of your imployments; and after my returne thence, I found the approbation of my former indeavours extended it selfe not only to my admittance (as a Member) into those Societies you governe; but since into places of trust and repute in both of them. Your experience and judgement then in the contents of this Tract considered, and my never-dying Gra∣titude for these your noble courtesies remembred: please to Patronise these my Labours, and in a faire constru∣ction accept of this my New-yeares acknowledgement: So shall both of you reap the Honour due to your owne Worths, and I the respect due to a gratefull FACTOR, which with all faithfull expressions I shall ever co∣vet to preserve; that I may as well futurely as formerly be honoured by your good opi∣nion, and intitle my selfe still your thankfull and affectionate friend, to serve you. Ianuary 6. 1688. LEWES ROBERTS.
TO THE THRICE VVORTHY AND VVORSHIPFVLL WILLIAM HARVEY, D. of Phys. DANIEL HARVEY, Merchant. MICHAEL HARVEY, Merchant. IOHN HARVEY, Esquire. ELIAB HARVEY, Merchant. MATHEW HARVEY, Merchant. BRETHREN: And IOHN HARVEY, Merchant, onely Sonne to Mr. THOMAS HARVEY, Merchant, deceased. THe Draught of this MAP of COM∣MERCE (Right worthy SIR and SIRS) was above twenty yeares past roughly traced out and delineated for the furtherance and helpe of mine own imployment beyond the Seas, at the charges and expence of that worthy Merchant, your loving Brother, and my deceased Ma∣ster THOMAS HARVEY; since whose death, you were pleased for some yeares to second what he had thus given a
a beginning unto, and by a continuation of that my then imployment, and an acceptation of my then indeavors and service in many parts of the World, inabled and gave mee meanes to proceed with that Modell I had to this end thus begun: But time and my Mercantile Af∣faires not permitting mee at that time to collect all those fit materials in those places, as were usefull and necessary to perfect this Fabrique, I have since my returne from my former imployment, beene so much assisted by your helpe, and so much helped by your assistance, that I have brought it after many yeares toyle (notwithstanding my many other publique and private affaires) to that per∣fection you now see it. Such then therfore as it is, in regard of the respect I owe to the memory and worth of that my deceased Patron, and of the gratefull acknowledge∣ment Iowe to your particular and joynt-courtesies: Be pleased to accept of this my thankfulnesse, and let the WORKE (as a Child first bred under your Roofe, and since nourished and educated abroad for many yeares at his and your charges) find from you all not only a fa∣vourable Patronage and courteous Protection, but also a friendly acceptation. So shall the Author have just cause to honour your love, and still perse∣ver to love your honor, which he pray∣eth may not only yearly, but hourly be multiplied and increa∣sed unto you, Resting yours most affectionate, to serve You, LOD: ROBERTS.
To his much respected friends, the MERCHANTS of ENGLAND in generall, and to the courteous READER, whom it may concerne. I Was not ignorant, (Right worthy friends) when first I undertooke this taske, and busied my selfe to compasse this Worke, how difficult it would prove to bee in it selfe; what slender furtherances I had to accomplish the same; and how weak my own abilities were to give it per∣fection: yet notwithstanding all these obstacles, when I had duely considered the generall want thereof, and the com∣mon benefit and commoditie that would redound thereby, especially to those of my owne profession (if it might bee ful∣ly, or in some measure truely perfected) I resolved (conside∣ring the silence of those of better indowments) to take the same in hand, and cheerfully and willingly layed both my hand to the Worke, and my shoulder to the burthen, col∣lecting and gathering with laborious industry, and industri∣ous labour all those principall points and heads, as might ei∣ther conduce to the accomplishment of the building, or any way further my intended fabrique: So that by my continu∣all toyle, and search after fit and apt materials, I hoped that at length a good issue would crowne my indeavors, and finish this my intended undertaken taske. But after long and tedious inquisition, I found that the fur∣ther I sailed in this Ocean, the vaster were my desires, and the fewer were my furtherances to my wished Port; so that
perceiving the Worke thus to increase upon me, beyond my expectation and first purpose, I was constrained (with the wind-scanted Seaman) to cast about againe, and limit my selfe to a narrower scantling; for that to doe it at large, and as the matter punctually required, was farre beyond the reach of my knowledge; yet because I could not doe as I would, I resolved to doe as I could, and thereupon begun againe to in∣volve these my first scattered Collections into a lesser mould, and reduce my first thoughts and observations into such a se∣cond limit and order, as might best befit my experience, and the compasse to which now I had confined it; conceiving that as my intentions (ioyned to my labour and paines herein) tended onely to the good of others, and principally of Mer∣chants and their actors, that reside or negociate in forreigne parts, so they will in requitall be induced to have a good opi∣nion thereof, as a reward to mee, for the benefit that shall re∣dound to them by the same, excusing those errors which per∣adventure the better experienced may by triall find in the peru∣sall of this Worke, and the defects which my ignorance hath inforced me to let passe, which by reason of the diversitie and rarity of the matter the same is most subject unto, and the ra∣ther because I have beene constrained oftentimes in this De∣sert to travell without a certaine guide, and not seldome to navigate by anothers Compasse, having not in any Language or Countrey met with any Author, that could either totally conduct me, or truely rectifie my steps when I went astray; yet I must confesse I met with some that shot at the marke I aymed at; but it was at randome, and came not home to my proposed blanke; and I found some that tooke up stuffe up∣on trust, and a second followed him, and a third that second, and heere (not able otherwise to contradict nor amend) I al∣so became a follower of theirs; some againe I observed to have borrowed from others, of which number I may ac∣compt the Collections of Claud Bojer Lionois, of Gio: Mari∣ana a Florentine, of Iacob Cartolano, a Venetian, of Gio Bap∣tiste Zuchetta a Genovois, of Mr. Malines and Mr. Hunt our owne Countreymen, and some others, who againe gave addition to what they had in this nature gathered; but all
these (though by their indeavours meriting due commenda∣tion) yet satisfied not throughly my curiositie, nor the earnest desire I had to bring this Worke to a more absolute perfecti∣on: therefore in this case I was furthered by some friends, whose Starre led mee when I was benighted, and whose Candle lightned me, when otherwise I should have stum∣bled; by which meanes, and my owne old twelve yeares collections, during my aboade and imployment in many parts of the World, I have at last by due sounding of the Channell, safely sailed over the Ocean afore-mentioned, and brought my Barke to an Anchor in her desired Harbour; and I hope so well observed the depths, shoulds, rocks and sands thereof, that he that navigates after me, and by this my Mapp, shall bee secured from all dangers, and thereby bring his accompts to that wished Port, that may prove both to his owne profit and Commoditie. Now Gentlemen, having thus then understood with what industry and care the materials of this Edifice hath beene collected, what paines hath beene used to bring it to this conclusion and perfection, and having truely weighed the benefit arising thereby; all these I conceive are effectu∣all inducements to challenge a faire acceptance from you: yet notwithstanding all these reall arguments I cannot denie, but the Worke it selfe may not onely suffer in the opinion of the censorious, but be also subject to the verdict of the judicious, both in the forme, manner, method and Title thereof, which I shall easily be brought to acknowledge, though as easily I might alleadge, that had not my younger yeares been drawne by adverse fortune or crosse fate, from the study of Arts to the studie of Marts, I might peradventure have delineated this Mapp with more curious colours, illustrated it with more diversity of pleasing objects, and adorned it with some more delightfull varietie; but proceeding thus from the Pen of a Merchant, from whom such excellencies cannot be expected, it may the rather find a favorable construction from the inge∣nuous of my profession, and from the learned of what Art soever, to whose judgement and candid censure, I shall wil∣lingly submit both my selfe and these my Labours; and for
those whose tender appetite cannot relish it in that nature as it is, and who are ignorant of my paines herein, it will not be judged to be a point of ill manners in mee to tell them, that this method, forme, and Title was prescribed me by the ne∣cessity and consequence of the Worke in hand, and by the En∣thusiasme of my owne fancie, which I conceived in some sort I was bound a little to please, partly to ease the burthen I endured in the building, and principally to adde some de∣light and pleasure to the toyle I underwent in rearing the same. Now as touching the Structure it selfe, many motives have induced mee to lay the foundation thereof upon the knowledge of Geographie, and upon the use of Mapps and Sea-Cards in generall, so delightfull, profitable and neces∣sary to the Merchant, that it cannot be by him that would be accompted such a one, neither neglected nor omitted. The principall parts thereof I have touched, so farre only as conduced to the enlightening of the matter in hand, and to the generall understanding of the insuing Tract: from hence (for method sake) I was inforced to a cursory survey of the foure principall parts and divisions of the World, according to moderne Authors; from this I descend to the Empires, Kingdomes, and particular Provinces of each of them; and thence to the eminent and most noted Cities, and Townes of Traffique therein, whose scituation I have superficially run over, and in some sort, observed the most remarkable passa∣ges as have presented themselves within the compasse of my reading; and for matter of Trade, I have in the first place ob∣served the naturall artificiall Commodities therein found; then the Coines there in use and currant, with the value and denomination thereof, and the species wherein Merchants do there frame and regulate their accompts by, also the Weights and Measures of those places, together with their Exchan∣ges, and how these are found to be calculated amongst the Italians, who are accounted the most expert Bankers and Exchangers, with all other fit instruments and materials, as at this day is found practised in the Art of Merchandizing, in all the parts of the habitable World.
And in conclusion, I have added a Table of the longi∣tude and latitude of all these eminent places of Traffique, not onely thereby to satisfie the curious, but the better to guid the inquirer to any such Citie or Towne sought for: In the rest, I have (following the example of many Merchants) shewed the worst first, and the best last; I meane declared the particulars of the Trade of America, as the least and worst knowne unto us; then of Africa and Asia, and last of all Europe, as the best, and best knowne to us, and according to my Title included and concluded all, within the famous Ci∣tie of London where we abide, which ever with all grate∣fulnes as the place of my Education in the Art of Merchandi∣zing, I am obliged to honour. And to conclude, in all this Worke my ambition still hath prompted me to an indeavour of pleasing all Merchants in generall, and (if I may not bee thought to judge too favoura∣bly of this Child of my owne braine) I may be induced to beleeve I shall hereby please not onely the most, but also the most ingenuous. I am confident, were my Labours truely scand, my indeavours might challenge that thankes I expect; and he that knowes both my publique and private imploy∣ments, may well answere for me, and excuse the defects or omissions, that may by further triall peradventure be found herein; and if in the future I find this acceptable, I may yet bee incouraged to publish some other Workes, which in this kind I have hewen out to your profit and commoditie: till when, and ever, I remaine, A welwisher of your prosperities; LEWES ROBERTS.
To his honoured friend and Kinsman, Mr. LEVVES ROBERTS, Merchant. HOw ere our ruder Countrey-men despise The Mysteries of Trade and Merchandise; With whom 'tis counted Learning but to know The price of Runts, how Sheepe and Cattell goe: Such as (for COINE) doe onely understand That which with them doth passe from hand to hand: And as for Weights and Measures, find no ground For any other thanthe Yard and Pound: So as thy BOOKE, to these that judgement lacke, Seemes of lesse use then an old Almanake: How ere (I say) their ignorance incline To make wast paper of this Worke of thine; Yet please t'admit one from thy native Clime, And of thy Blood too, to speake truth in Rime. A verse protects not falshood, and a Lye Is not excus'd by being good Poetrie; That's but to sinne more wittily, and be Guiltie of a more quaint impietie: Such praise You'd scorne; and (though the vice of Time Make Sin in prose, but Courtesie in rime) Your better thoughts would ne'r with patience brooke That any damne himselfe to praise your BOOKE. Ile then bring no fain'd Eulogies t'invite The thrifty Buyers colder Appetite; Or (like a begging Prologuist) forespeake A faire Applause, for feare the Author breake: No thy Composures farre transcend that fate, And scorne alike the Vulgars love and hate. They that (like Thee) refus'd no paine or toyle With forreigne Trade t'enrich their Native soile, And (like discreet Camelions) can comply With each Mans humor for Commoditie: That have read Kingdomes over, and can tell What Men, for Letters put together, spell; And understand too even the most perplext And hidden meaning of that darker Text: These and these onely are allow'd to bee The equall Iudges of thy BOOKE and THEE. And sure Thy merit cannot want it's meed; For doing well's rewarded in the deed. M. E.
To my honoured friend and Cousin, Mr. LODO∣VVICKE ROBERTS Merchant, upon his BOOKE. STeel'd was his Courage, and undaunted Minde Who first spread Sailes to catch the nimble winde; Culling the stately Pines from lofty Woods, To cut a passage through the raging Floods: The hazard of this Enterprize did make Thee this laborious Taske to undertake; To make that way familiar, which before Was full of doubt; that where feare kept the doore Security might enter, and men now Through Neptunes field safely might drive their Plough Our English Merchants justly may stile thee, Not onely Typhis, but their Mercurie: For, how each Countrey doth to others prize The value of its Native Merchandize; What profit such COMMERCE to us may bring, Their Rites, and how the Image of our KING In forreigne Climates is preferd before Exotick Princes, stampt in the same Oare, Thou in this little VOLVME dost contrive; That Merchants seeing them (through perspective) Discharge their Factors; for thy BOOKE alone Seemes a sole FACTOR for our NATION. CAMBRIA rejoyce; hereafter thou maist write, I bore the MAN, who lent the World this light. F. H. To my loving and much honoured Cousin, Mr. LEVVES ROBERTS Merchant, upon his MERCHANTS MAPPE of COMMERCE. MY praise is bootlesse, and to discommend Is fitter for a Slanderer then a Friend; For my small judgement in this Art of Gaine Makes both my verdict and my Censure vaine:
Yet I've perusd thy BOOKE, and there have seene A Worke of wonder; and though have not beene Farr from my Native home; yet now I find The Worlds worth clos'd within thy knowing Minde; I see the Riches of each Countries soyle By this thy Art brought home, without our toyle; I find the Rarities of each Place and Towne Brought to our view with ease, and thou hast drawne All forreigne COINES to Ours, and ours to theirs; Their Weights and Measures too, to us appeares All but One thing; thy most industrious hand By this thy skill, ha's crowned thus this Land With strange Outlandish wealth, which shall commend Thy worth to after Times; and I, thy friend And Kinsman, glory shall that this thy Fame Hath thus rais'd up a WORKE t'outlive thy Name. ROBERT ROBERTS of Llanvair in Anglesey. Ad Ingeniosum exactissimi hujus operis Authorem, Dm Lodovicum Roberts, Merca∣torem Londinensem. MVltatuo (fateor) debentur carmina Libro, Qui dedit ingenij tot monumenta tui. Siste pedem, nec vade for as Mercator ad Indos: Huc ades, his paucis discere multapotes. Spargitur his folijs nummus peregrinus, et Aurum, Argentum, Aes, varijs sculptamoneta modis. Aspicerem, legem, placidâ brevitate docentur, Artificis, patriae, gloria, fama, decus. Vade Liber, plausuque volent (Lodovice) labores: Primadabunt merit is praemia digna tuis. Ad LECTOREM. QVisquis eris (Lector) Librinè supprime laudem, Ingenuum dices, si legis artis opus. Qui flocci pendes, tentes componere tale. Da sibi quod tibivis: Lector, Amator eris. GVLIELMVS ROGERS.
To the eminently deserving Author, Mr. LEVVES ROBERTS. TWere needlesse sure to fixe a Poem heere To draw the taken READER in by th'Eare; 'Tis cheape to praise the Author; we commend No worth i'th Worke by that, but love toth' Friend; And (by an open way of Flattery) make The Worke approved for the Authors sake: So, (though we loath) the thick-lipt Nurse wee kisse For the Babes sake, that by her nourish't is. Thy Genius, that first stampt a worth on This, Above its Reader, or its Praiser is; And we may make a doubt, whether best takes, The Coine thou speak'st of, or the Coine thou makst; And live indebted, that thou hast brought hither To us, the Trade of all the World together: And (as i'th' Worlds MAP spacious Kingdomes lie Deciphered by small Atomes to our eye) So the great Worth in every Page by Thee Exprest; is richer then a MONARCHIE. Live, live to Fame; and may its truth to You Make mee a POET and a PROPHET too. THO: BEEDOME. Ad clarissimum virum D. Lodovicum Roberts Civem Londinensem, linguarum modernarum artisque Mercatoriae scientissimum; Chartam Mercatoriam edentem. QVid dignum Lodovice tibi, quid pectorepromam, Quo possim merito solvere digna tuo? Carmina quid canerem, dulces imitantia Musas? Carminasunt Libris inferiora tuis. Laudibus eveherem? tua pura modestia pellit: Notaloquor. Laudes respuis ipse tuas. Desistam meliùs. Reliquos tu pande labores. Laus Chartae Mercis nulla sat esse potest. HENRY GARTHWAITE.
To his worthy Friend, and loving Fellow∣servant, the AVTHOR. TIs an old custome that this Age hath got, To praise their friends in print, Ile praise thee, not Because I am thy friend; onely Ile tell The World, the WORKE which thou hast done so well Speakes both thy worth and praise; it cannot misse, Those that are not thy friends must needs praise this; This thy COMMERCE, Child of thine Industrie, Joyning both POLES in neere affinitie, Nurse of thy Countries honor, and by which Onely, all Kingdomes of the World grow rich; And (by the Currant of a mutuall Trade) Thou shewst how happie all the Earth is made. Let others praise Thee; yet in the degree Of Vertue, live belov'd by W. B. Ad charissimum Fratrem Dm Lodovicum Roberts Civem Londinensem. QUas Phoebus merces terris adspersit Eois, Et quas occiduis aspicit ipse locis: Quicquid produxit Zephyrus, tu quicquid et Eurus, Antiquus quicquid et novus orbis habet, Collig is in fascem: numismata millia centum; Mille tibi merces; cambia caecapatent. Perge beare tuos foeliciprole cerebri, Utraquevix tant as India jactat opes. TASSS.
To my ever loving friend Mr LEWES ROBERTS Merchant, upon his MAP of COMMERCE. CAll up the ancient Bards and let them praise This Brittaines skill not known in former dayes, For then Astraea fled and left the land, But now's return'd with Ballance in her hand, And teacheth out of Roberts new found treasure, To know the World throughout by Weight and Measure. First then lets weigh the man, weigh his good will, Then weigh our words, so shall we speake none ill. Charles Fetiplace. To his friend Mr. LEWES ROBERTS MERCHANT. SOme Merchants travaile without rest, From North to South, from East to West, To gaine their wealth; which home they bring To fill their chests; or with full wing Profusely spend it here in pleasure, With health, time, credit and their treasure. But thou, experience having taught, That what is buried comes to naught, Here largely shewes by course of Trade, The Merchants MAP, COMMERCE to ayd; And so by spending gathers more Than they that basely hide their store. Ralph Hanson.
To his much Honoured friend Mr. LEWES ROBERTS Merchant, upon his MAP of COMMERCE. 1. WHen that the portall of this goodly frame Was first presented to my greedy eyes, (Before I saw the Master-builders name) Me thought it was a promising Frontispiece: And then desires did kindle in my brest, To enter further and to view the rest. 2. But looking longer on that beauteous Porch, I spied insculp'd on the outside building, The Authours name, that like a burning torch Did set on flame my pristine ardent longing: By that the builder of the worke I knew; How could I then but thirst for further view? 3. I crav'd admittance, 'twas a needlesse suite, (The Arts (they say) are called liberall;) Assoone as entred I was strucken mute, And made my moane to th' Muses severall: They promis'd ayde; but yet when I had done, They said 'twas lighting tapers to the Sunne. 4. Loe here I met with many sacred Arts, Which keepe their Courts and usuall residence; At Ox and Camber those two famous Marts, Partaking most of their munificence. These franckly sent this Architect a piece, To beautifie his curious Edifice. 5. Me thought I saw them sadly to lament The adverse fortune of so brave a Wight, That was not to their learned mansions sent, Ne'r could his Starrs have wrought him worser spight: But yet to conquer their malignities, Th'enricht his Thesis with their dignities.
6. Here did I see with strange variety The great Colosse of the terrestriall Globe, Brought by the Art of rare Geographie, Within the compasse of a paper robe; So rich the forme and so compendious, As strucke amazement in my wondering Muse. 7. I further look'd and saw with admiration Th'exact composure of two matchlesse lights, They serve not onely for the contemplation Of men Merchantile, but of Gentile spirits; The one descries the paths of merchandize, The other shewes Exchanges mysteries. 8. I've read of Drake and Martin Forbesher, Whose manly faces all the Poles did see, With others famed for the Globes surrounder, Their worths have sweld the Worlds great History: I honour much those Heroes memory, Asmuch I loathe the staine of flattery. 9. But my opinion freely Ile expresse, And thinke that none will judge it Heresie; That of the World in this MAP of COMMERCE, This age shall finde more rare discovery: For here that Massy Ball and all its traffique At once is seene, as through a perfect optique. 10. Goe on (brave wit) and let the World possesse Some further fruit of thy wel-tempred braines: Though Critiques snarle, it matters not a rush; Honour and thankes attend thy matchlesse paines. The unborne Babe that shall a Merchant be, Shall honour in this worke thy memory. I. H.
To the no lesse ingenuous, then really industrious Gentleman, Mr. LEWES ROBERTS, Merchant; and one of the COMMITTEES for the East-India COMPANY: Vpon his Booke intituled, THE MERCHANTS MAPPE OF COMMERCE. With an Ani∣madversion to the Reader, and Allusion to the time of the first Impression, being the beginning of this present Yeare; MDCXXXVIII. HAd I (by frequent Traffique on the BVRSE) Beene verst i'th' notes of Mercantile Discourse, In proper Accents heere I might set forth Some faire Expression of Thy pregnant WORTH; Or rais'd a TROPHEE to Thy vertuous NAME, Of equall PARR, to Thy Deserving FAME: But, (having onely touch'd APOLLOS Lyre) Grant me yet roome amongst this numerous Quire: And, (as I am) accept of what I bring, A Posie meane for such an Orient RING, A RING for every MERCHANT meet to weare, Though vast in Compasse, as the Orbique Sphaere: Thy Booke I mean, the MAP OF faire COMMERCE, That takes Circumference ore the UNIVERSE. Where first, (as to the life) I finde displaid 1. Due Method, and materiall forme of TRADE; The STANDERDS value secondly, injoynes Of PRINCES to observe their currant COINES: 2. The third, COINES reall, and imaginarie, Accompts, Exchanges; and wherein they varie: 3. Fourthly, COMMODITIES for Transportation, 4. The various sorts of every severall NATION: Fifthly, of TOWNES and CITIES eminent, 5. Their Weights and Measures to the full extent: Lastly, reducing all to One, (by This) 6. LONDONS COMMERCE, our faire Metropolis. Rare MERCHANT of the MVSES! may I call Thee Merchant? or Great FACTOR Generall? This Proofe piece of Thy Service for the rest, May well oblige Them to Thy deare behest;
For, of Thy equall sure no AGE can boast, That bringst Us Traffique home from every Coast; Rat'st the Commodities, the Coines, the Measures; And sum'st (in fine) a very Masse of Treasures. Go on, and prosper in Thy faire Designes; May these elaborate and experient Lines Add to those honourd PAIRE of CITIE-SAGES, That shall receive them to their PATRONAGES. Meane while, (and to transmit my free Applause READER, to Thee (without collaterall cause) Of th' AVTHORS Worth; not hereby to prefer This MERCHANTS MAPP, (as do's the Stationer, For his owne private profit) but for Thine, To whom Our AVTHOR do's His Worke resigne) This I infer; It ha's no PRESIDENT For THEORIE; and to make equivalent Thy practique Part; the Author here bequeaths A VOLVME, not more continent of Leaves, Then various fruitfull Matter; which his toyle Ha's brought Thee home from every forreigne Soyle; And (as deepe speld in GEOGRAPHIQVE Arts) Ran smooth division o're the WORLD in Parts; Searching the bowels of each Kingdomes STATE: And not alone of TRAFFIQVE there relate; But Customes, Habits, Strength, and Government, Deckt in so new HISTORIQVE Ornament; That heere Thou mayst with ease and pleasure see The Rate and State of every MONARCHIE. Nor need'st Thou yet demand for whom is made This faire Commerciall MAPP, this Mapp of Trade: To All 'tis needfull; specially for Those That most for Travaile shall themselves dispose; Or those who would employ or them or theirs Ith' publique way of PRINCES great Affaires; Or any, who for private RECREATION, Make (by conceit) continuall Transmigration: In fine, (and chiefe) for All that exercise Ith' spacious WORLD the Art of MERCHANDISE. Since now, for generall Good (as't may appeare) This HARVEST comes i'th' entrance of the YEARE; (As to so MANY usefull;) Many bee The future BLESSINGS shall be shour'd on THEE: Yea, All (in part) Thy LABOVRS to requite) Blesse that New-YEARE brought this new WORKE to light. MATHEW RHODES.
In praise of my friend the Author, and his BOOKE. To the READER. IF thou would'st be a States-man, and survay Kingdomes for information; heres a way Made plaine, and easie: fitter far for thee Then great Ortelius his Geographie. If thou would'st be a Gentleman, in more Then title onely; this MAP yeelds thee store Of Observations, fit for Ornament, Or use, or to give curious eares content. If thou would'st be a Merchant, buy this Booke: For 'tis a prize worth gold; and doe not looke Daily for such disbursements; no, 'tis rare, And should be cast up with thy richest ware. READER, if thou be any, or all three; (For these may meet and make a harmonie) Then prayse this Author for his usefull paines, Whose aime is publike good, not private gaines. Iz. Wa. SAMUEL VVILLIAMOT, to his ever honour'd Brother in law the Authour. THis learned Issue of thy teeming Braine Cals me not UNCLE; yet let me obtaine The Nurses usuall freedome, to embrace it, And shew it my best love, though 'twill not grace it For though new borne, it speakes as if it were The Sonne of Mercurie, or Vlysses Heyre. Thy worth to praise, were fitter Homers Quill Then my rude Verse; yet here accept my will. S. WILLIAMOT.
To my ever loving friend Mr. LEWES ROBERTS Merchant, upon his MAP of COMMERCE. THough many know much; yet we seldome finde Spirits so free, and profitably kinde, T'impart what or the industry, or sweat Of a whole Life-time, could observe, or get; Like cunning STATISTS enviously prone To keepe all Secrets of their Art unknowne; Out of a feare that some (lesse-witted) may (Meeting their Rules) become as wise as they. But friend, thy Candor's such, I dare acquit Thee of that malice, by thy labour'd Writt: And must commend thy judgement too, in this, That fix'd thy Fame on such a Piramis, As, (but the WORLD) 't had mist a Basis, great And vast enough, whereon to plant its seat: And, (if my Word may passe) this glori's Thine, Men sayle by all MAPPES, but must thrive by Thine. W. Lewis. To his deare Brother in law, Mr. Lewes Roberts, Merchant, on his MAP OF COMMERCE. SHould I write in thy praise, it would bee thought Friends will commend, although the Worke be nought; No, I will leave it to each READERS mind, To judge the WORKE as hee the worth shall find: And if they say this MAPP is not done well, Bid him that blames it, bring its parallel. R. HILL. To my most deare Father Mr. LEWES ROBERTS Merchant. A Fathers love may well excuse The weaknesse of my Infant Muse, Yet ('mongst the rest that praise thy Pen) As last admit mee say,—Amen. GABRIEL ROBERTS.
New and accurate Mappe of the World, drawne according to the best and latest discoveries that have beene made THE MERCHANTS MAPPE OF COMMERCE
CHAP. 1. The description of Countries conducible to the description of Cities and Townes of Traffique. BEFORE I descend to the particular parts The descripti∣on of Coun∣tries, condu∣ceth to the de∣scription of Cities and Towaes of traffiqu. of this Treatise, and before I describe the Scituations of these Towns and Cities of Traf∣fique, which here I intend to handle, I must of necessity for Method-sake, first by a cour∣sory draught describe the Countries, King∣domes and Provinces; wherein the same are found to be scituated and placed, and to do the same orderly, and as the subject requireth, it is fit I should survey the meanes whereby the same is or may be performed, which according to the opinion of the Learned, is noted onely to be done by the knowledge of Geographie; which in it self is esteemed to be a knowledge so needfull and requisite for a Mer∣chant, Factor, or any other active person whose occasions may draw him to see or abide in forraigne parts, that it may not be neglected nor omitted. Neither is it held onely necessary to such as man∣nage private affaires by Merchandizing, as Merchants or Factors, who are led thereto by the Motive profit; but also to such persons as are more Eminent, and such as are of greater quality, whose motives are the publike affaires of Princes, as Ambassadors; or pleasure and delight, by Travelling, as Gentlemen, whose motive may be properly termed curiosity of mind and search of novelty; which last by observing the Fashions and Manners of divers Na∣tions,
and the government and Policies of those Kingdomes, do not onely very much benefit themselves, but better their understand∣ings thereby, making their knowledge more capable of either publike or private imployment, when they return to their native homes. The like I conceive the ingenious Merchant or Factor may (if he please) do, for being in his younger yeares imployed abroad in merchandizing, he may by well husbanding his mercantile im∣ployment and time, joyn a future benefit of mind, to a present profit of estate; and by a provident judgement, and a judicious pro vidence, so manage his idle houres, and vacant time, that he fit his capacity, not onely wisely to undertake and discreetly to un∣dergo, but also skilfully to performe the greatest imployments that are incident to the service of a State or Kingdome, neither is it a rare or extraordinary thing to find those that have had their education thus, to have proved not onely good common-wealths men, but also excellent Statesmen: our own Country hath afforded some examples in all ages, but in other Countries many more are daily found, for it must be acknowledged, that from this Schoole those ripe and mature judgements have sprung up; that in many Countries abroad, have given sufficient testimony to the World of their excellent abilities this way: and that the Art of merchan∣dizing, together with the frequenting of forraigne Countries, at the first to that end, hath afterward rather furthered, then any way backwarded their abilities to undertake, and judiciously to perform the same. The ancient policies and present flourishing continuance of the state of Venice, the politicke and rich estates of the Netherlands, Merchandizing the first Schoole of the present government of many Com∣monwealths. the opulent and eminent quality of the Duke of Toscanie; the wealthy wellgoverned Hans-townes in Germany, (and many more which I could nominate,) make good this assertion, for in all these, merchandizing is found to be the School from whence they gather their first principles, and indeed the chief foundation upon which their fabricke of politicall government is raised: the scale by which their counsels are framed, and the pillars by which the same is seen to be supported and maintained. How excellent is it then for a Merchant (that hath another proper and peculiar end of his travels,) so to imploy his time and spend his houres, as that he may at pleasure, without cost or char∣ges, reape that benefit to himselfe which others purposely come to learn and painfully labour for, with great expence of time and money; and yet for all this, are peradventure destitute of those helpes and furtherances, which Merchants and Factors by reason of their aboad or vocation doe continually injoy, and who return as ignorantly home (perchance) as they went out; or happily fur∣nished with some such cursory speculations, as reach not into the depth of such policies of government, as the reall intent of their
travell doth truly require; whereas the Merchant that comes thi∣ther, not purposely to that end, but to benefit himself as a Mer∣chant, may gather and lay up those his observations obtained as pastimes, and collected as recreations, which will further and furnish him afterward; either by discourse for pleasure, or by necessity for profit and commodity, when he shall please to pub∣lish his secret treasure and put the same in practise. Geographie (by what hath bin said,) being then granted to be Geographie de∣lightfull, pro∣fitable, and necessary to the Merchant. both a profit and a pleasure to all, and specially to the Merchant, it must necessarily be granted to be usefull also: for though we living in this Iland acknowledge none for Merchants but such as adventure their estates at Sea, and are by this meanes accoun∣ted for reall Merchants; yet those that are versed in this profession, and seen in this Art, know also that there be Merchants likewise that have their residencie in Continents, where neither Seas are known, nor yet navigable Rivers found, yet for all this, supply with land Carriages of Horses, Mules and Camels, by industry and la∣bour, what Nature and our habitation doth freely afford unto us; by the commodity of the incompassed Seas in shipping, and these are observed and found to travell by Land in Companies and Ca∣ravans with their Merchandize from one Countrey to another, (as we do by Sea in Ships and Fleets) paying their duties, customes, and toles upon the entrie, and confines of every severall Princes do∣minions. How then shall this land-travelling Merchant know whose King∣dome he is in? what Prince commands, or who is lord of that The commo∣dity of this knowledge to Merchants. ground he treads upon; but by a speculation herein? Whereby shall he know what way he hath rid and travelled, where neither Miles nor Leagues are accounted, or in use but by this? how shall he know which way his course lies, where neither pathes nor high-wayes are found to direct him, nor guide to informe him; or how farre he hath yet to go in that Princes dominion but by this? How shall he know what Rivers run in his way, what Straits or Mountaines he hath to passe over but by this? Nay hereby he is instructed whether those streames be great or small; and whether passable by Boat, Bridge or Foord; and by this also what Plaines, Woods and Hills, with their extent fertility, and confinement, the better to provide for his accommodation, and the necessaries of his Journey; as also what Cities & Townes of traffique stands in his Road; the limits & bounds of kingdoms, the disposition of the Inhabitants, the alteration of the Climates, the Laws of those severall Regions, the Commodities that those Countries do afford for merchandizing; the plenty & scarsity therof; and lastly, how they are supplied with forraign Wares & Merchandizes, either by Land, Seas or navigable Rivers; and all these (besides many other needfull lessons) may be hence learned and observed, which laid up in memory both in the course of his life & traffique, may in after times much profit and ad∣vantage
him. The benefit reaped thereby being thus briefly ex∣pressed, the thing it self challengeth in the next place to be hand∣led, which according to my skill and insight; I shall succinctly touch so farre as is needfull to my present purpose. Geographie in brief then, is an Art that doth demonstrate by rules in a flat, levell or Plano; the whole Sea and Earth, and the division Geographie demonstrated. thereof, setting downe by a certaine method, the limits and extents of Countries, Provinces and dominions of Princes; the scituation of Cities, Townes, Hills, Rivers, Woods, &c. The bounds of Seas, Capes, Ilands, &c. All which is performed and expressed by apt lines, num∣bers and parts of the Heavens: and lastly, it giveth rules to know the distances of the said places, either in leagues or miles from one Coun∣trey, City or place to another; all which being also necessarie to be known by the Merchant, I will in few words declare the same. First then to make the same more evident, the ground of this Art is ordinarily demonstrated and best expressed in Mappes and Maps and Cards. Cards, which doth comprize both the Earth and Waters, of which making one intire body, the Cosmographers do inviron with five Cir∣cles, the first is the equinoctiall, then the two tropicks, and lastly the two polar circles; thereby dividing the whole, which now we call the World into five Zones, two whereof are found to be cold, two temperate, and one extreme hot: all which in these our daies are found to be habitable, contrary to the opinion of some an∣cient Cosmographers, of which circles and their particular parts, divisions, demonstrations and descriptions, it will not be unpro∣per I should briefly handle, as an entrance into this worke, and for the better understanding of what is to follow hereafter. Every Mappe or Carde then for the most part is commonly The use of Maps and Cards in ge∣nerall. Meridian. traced with two sorts of lines or circles, that is Meridians and Parallels; the Meridians are either right or Circular lines, passing through both the poles of the World, and are imagined to be drawn right up and down from the head to the foot of the Map, and called Meridians, because that when the Sun cometh to touch any of those lines, it is midday to those that dwell under the same. And Parallels are either right or circular lines, imagined to be equally distant one from another, which doe crosse the aforesaid Parallel. meridians with right angles; and in the very midst of these Uni∣versall Maps and Cards, are most commonly drawn, from head to foot a right line, which signifieth not onely the first Meridian, but also the axletree of the World; the upper end of which line is call'd the Poleartick, or the North Pole, and the nether end is cal∣led the Poleantartick, or the South Pole, and this line is crossed in Poles Artick and Antartick. the very midst betwixt the two Poles, with another great circle, or rather right line called the Equinoctiall; because, that when quinoctiall. the Sun cometh to touch this line or circle, the day and night is equall throughout the whole World, the one halfe of which line towards the right hand, sheweth the East part, and the o∣ther
halfe towards the left hand, sheweth the West part of the World; so as these two lines, the first meridian and the equinoctiall, do point out the 4 quarters of the VVorld; East, West, North and South, from whence the 4. principall winds do blow, betweene which winds are set down in all generall Maps, and generally in all Sea-cards the other division of the winds, which as not much pertinent to my present purpose, I willingly omit. Further, it is to be noted that both the Equinoctiall and the Meridian circles or lines are divided each of them into 360. de∣grees; so as every quarter of them containeth 90. degrees: and in the Equinoctiall are set down the degrees of longitude, which is the length of the VVorld, round about from West to East, and from East by West home againe. The first degree whereof begin∣neth where the first aforesaid Meridian crosseth the Equinoctiall, in the very midst of all Universall Maps in generall, and so pro∣ceedeth Eastward unto the number of 180. degrees; which is as farre as you can goe Eastward: for from thence by reason of the roundnesse of the Earth, you must needs turn back againe VVest∣ward, untill you come to the 360. degrees, which is the last degree of longitude, and endeth where the first degree beginneth. Moreover, in the said first Meridian are set downe the degrees of latitude, that is, the breadth of the VVorld, both in Northern and Southern, for from the Equinoctiall to the North Pole, are contained in the aforesaid Meridian 90. degrees, and that is cal∣led the North Latitude; and from the Equinoctiall to the South Pole are contained in the said Meridian, other 90. degrees, which is called the South latitude; and in most Mappes the Equinoctiall Line is divided and crossed with 18. Meridians, on each side of the first Meridian, dividing the Equinoctiall into 36. severall di∣stances; every distance containing 10. degrees, and every degree containeth 60. Italian Miles of length. Againe; betwixt the Equinoctiall and each of the Poles are Circles Ar∣tick and Ant∣artick. drawn certaine Circles or lines, which as I said before, are called Parallèls, of which most commonly it is found that 4. are poin∣ted with red ink, signifying, the 4. lesser circles; the highest towards the North Pole, is called the Circlearticke, which is 23. ½ degrees distant from the Pole; and the lowest towards the South Pole is call'd the Circleantartick, which is also distant 23. ½ degrees from the Pole; and as touching the other two red Circles, the one lying betwixt the Circlearticke and the Equinoctiall, it is called the Tropique of Cancer; and the other lying betwixt 2 Tropiques. 1 Cancer, 2 Capricorn. the Equinoctiall and the Circleantarticke, that is called the tropique of Capricorne, and each of these two tropiques is di∣stant from the Equinoctiall 23. degrees, 2. 8. ½ which is the greatest declination of the Sunne; for betwixt these two tropiques the Sun continually maketh his course, and returneth, mounting never higher then the tropick of Cancer, nordescending never lower then
the tropique of Capricorne: for which cause some do set down in their Maps betwixt the said two tropiques an overthwart line, signifying the ecliptick line, under which the Sun continually wal∣keth. Furthermore, by helpe of the said 4. circles, the Earth, (as I said before) is divided into 5. Zones, one hot, two temperat, and two cold: The hot is contained betwixt the two tropiques in the midst of Five Zones and where placed. which the equinoctiall line is placed; and of the two temperate Zones, the one lieth betwixt the tropique of Cancer, and the Circleartick, and the other betwixt the tropique of Capricorn and the Circleant∣artick; and of the cold Zones; the one lieth betwixt the north Pole and the Circleartick, and the other betwixt the south Pole and the Circleantartick. Moreover, besides the 4. speciall Parallels, there be also divers other Parallels drawn on each side of the equinoctiall, both North∣ward, and Southward, which crossing in certaine points, the first me∣ridian marked with degrees, doe shew the true latitude of every place, and under what Clime or Parallel it is: and also how many houres the longest day of any place under every Parallel is, begin∣ning to account the same; either from the equinoctiall upward, to∣wards the north Pole, along the first meridian, marked with degrees of Northern Latitude, or else from the first Equinoctiall down∣wards towards the south Pole, marked with degrees of southern Latitude. Also this World in all common Maps and Cards is divided into 4. parts, Europe, Africk, Asia and America, the bounds whereof The division of the World into 4 parts. will not be amisse here to be observed, and how many miles each particular division containeth, as well in longitude as in latitude, according to the opinion of Mercator, whom I willingly follow for my director in this point. Europe then is bounded on the North with the North ocean Sea, and on the South with the Mediterranean Sea; on the East with the Europe. Flood Tanais, and on the West with the West ocean: and Europe in measuring with a right line from the farthest part of Ireland on the West unto the Flood Tanais, on the East, both places having 52. degrees of latitude, hath in longitude 2166. miles, and in measu∣ring Long 2166. Miles. Lat. 2220. Miles. with a right line, from the farthest part of Morea on the South, whose latitude is 35. degrees unto the North Sea side, hav∣ing 72. degrees of latitude, hath in longitude 2220. Miles, or there∣abouts. Africa is bounded on the North with the straight Sea Gibalter, and with the Mediterranean Sea; and on the South with a Sea which Africa. divideth Africa from the South Land, not yet to us fully knowne; and on the East with the red Sea, and on the West with the great Atlantick Ocean: and in the measuring of Africa with a right line, from Gambra on the West, unto the cape de Gardaso on the East, both places having 10. degrees of North latitude, hath in lon∣gitude
4425. miles, and in measuring with a right line from the Long. 4425. Miles. Lati. 4020. Miles. 50. degree of the equinoctiall unto the Mediterranean Sea; it hath in North latitude 32. degrees, which multiplied by 60. maketh 1920. Miles, and in South latitude measuring with a right line from the 50. degree of the Equinoctiall unto the cape of bona Esperansa, it hath 35. degrees, which also multiplied by 60. makes 2100. Miles, which maketh the whole latitude of Africa to be 4020. Miles, or thereabonts. Asia is bounded on the North, with the North ocean Sea, and on the South, partly with the red Sea, and partly with other Seas Asia. and gulphs adjoyning thereto; on the East, with the East Indian Ocean, and the straight Sea of Anian; and on the West with the Flood Tanais and Fennes of Moetis, with the Chimerian and Thra∣cian Bosphorus, the Euxine and Mediterranean Sea, and part of the Arabian gulf: and Asia then in measuring with a right line from the mouth of the Flood Tanais, to the Promontorie Tamos, both places having 50. degrees of latitude; hath in longitude 4284. Miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 150. degree of Long. 4284. Lat. 4500. the equinoctiall, unto the Promontory Tabin; it hath in North lati∣tude 75. degrees, which being multiplied by 60. maketh 4500. Miles. America is bounded on the North with the North Ocean Sea, America. and on the South with the Magellanick Sea; on the East with the Atlanticke Ocean, on the West with the West Indian Ocean, and the straights of Anian, and in measuring with a right line from the straights of Anian to the farthest part of Estotiland upon the 64. degree of latitude, hath in longitude 164. degrees which maketh Long. 4264. Lat. 3210. 4264. Miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 270. de∣gree of the Equinoctiall unto the North Sea: it hath in North lati∣tude 76. degrees, which makes 4560. Miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 305. degree of the Equinoctiall unto the Magel∣lanick Sea; it hath in South latitude 53. degrees, which makes at 60. Miles the degree, 3210. Miles. Thus farre shall suffice to have spoken ingenerall of the Lines, Circles and divisions of the universall Maps, and Cards found to be made by our modern Cosmographers. That which cometh in the next place to be handled, as the more materiall and usefull part, belonging to my present worke, is the knowledge and scituation of every Kingdome, Region, City, Mountaine, Flood and Lake found in this circumference: also the knowledge of the Seas, together with the Ilands, Ports, Capes, Points and Bayes which do belong to e∣very one of the aforesaid parts and divisions of the World, and that are found therein comprised, which principally is manifested and learnd by the longitude and latitude thereof in it selfe, which teacheth these particulars: first, the very scituation of the place; secondly, the very distance from one place or Citie to another; thirdly how one place lieth from another; and lastly, with what
wind you may saile from one Point, Cape or Citie maritime to a∣nother: in which foure things the chiefe vse of Maps are found principally to consist. First then, the degrees of latitude or the Latitude how accounted. elevation of the Pole (being both one thing) is accounted from the Equinoctiall to either Pole which is 90. degrees, and the degrees of longitude accounted vpon the said Equinoctiall from the Iles of Cape Verde towards the East, and so round about the Earth till you come to the number of 360. degrees: where it is to be noted that the Provinces and Townes scituated vnder one and the same degree of latitude, have at one selfe time like houres of the day; but those that are scituated vnder divers degrees of longitude doe differ in number of houres; and that is the cause that when it is in one towne noone-tide, it is in another towne distant thence 30. degrees towards the East two a clocke in the afternoone, and so conse∣quently for euery 15. degrees distance, it is then found to differ one houre in time. Also those that dwell vnder one and the selfe same degree of Dayes and nights differ according to the latitude. latitude haue equall quantitie of dayes and nights; but yet so as they which dwel on the South side of the Equinoctiall have the shor∣test day, whenwe have the longest, and have their Winter when we have Summer: and those that are vnder divers degrees of latitude, have inequalitie of dayes and nights; for the nigher that any Place is scituated towards any of the Poles, the more houres the longest day of the yeare in that place hath; and those that dwell vnder the equinoctiall have alwaies their dayes and nights of like quantity: but I vnderstand heere by the day the space betweene Sun rising and Sun-setting; so that to those that have 30. degrees of latitude the longest day is almost 14. houres, and the nigher the Pole, the longer, insomuch as those that dwell vnder the Pole, and whose Zenith is the Pole, their yeare is but a day and a night, that is to say, they have sixe moneths day, and sixe moneths night. It is also to be noted, that the Meridians are found to have ma∣ny necessary vses in the generall and common Maps, for thereby is learned that it is noon-tide or mid-day sooner in one place then in another, by observing that Meridian that is most towards the East, which the Sun toucheth alwaies sooner then that Meridian which is more towards the West. By the Meridians is also known how the Eclipse of the Moone Meridians and their vse. appeareth sooner to one place then to another, and sheweth what varietie of time; for they whose Meridian is toward the West, do see the Eclipse of the Moone sooner then they whose Meridian is more towards the East; whereas indeed the Eclipse of the Moone is seene to all places (where it can be seene) at one very instant of like greatnes, and yet seemeth to bee seene later or sooner by reason of the diversity of the time of the day, in places standing one East or West from another; and if the distance betwixt those Eclipse of the Moone when seene. two Meridians doe containe 15. degrees of the Equinoctiall, then
the Eclipse appeareth to bee sooner to the one then to the o∣ther by one whole houre, according to my former assertion, for every 15. degrees maketh an houre, and therefore observe how many 15. degrees you find betwixt the two meridians, so many houres are to be accounted, and if fewer degrees be found, then the time of the Eclipse is to bee shortned accordingly, attributing 4. minutes of an houre to one degree, &c. As for the Eclipse of the Sun, it is seene neither generally nor fully at one selfe same time, nor yet of the same greatnes in all Eclipse of the Sunne when seene. places: indeed it appeares sooner, to the Westerne Countries then to the Easterne; but the diversity of the time of appearance doth depend not onely of the number of Meridians betwixt the two places, but also of the swift or slow motion of the Moone, which comming betwixt vs and the Sun taketh the sight of the Sunne from vs. The latitude and longitude of Cities and places may bee found Latitude and longit. found out by the Me∣ridians. out by the meridians also; but heere it is observeable that the de∣grees of latitude are in all places of like bignes, as making ever 60. miles, but the degrees of longitude proceeding from the Equi∣noctiall towards any of the two poles, are unequall, and every one shorter then the other, and containing 4. miles; so that if two Ships were under the Equinoctiall 150. degrees distant each from other, and being to saile towards the North pole, upon the same course when they come to the 60. degree of latitude, their distance shall bee but 75. leagues, and the farther they goe towards the Pole, the lesse distance they shall be one from the other, insomuch as when they are right vnder the Pole it selfe, they shall both meet: but this point doth more particularly concerne Navigation, which so farre forth as it is requisite to the knowledge of a Merchant, I have handled in my Booke of the Factors Aviso, which together with a collection of the Sea-lawes I intend (God willing) hereafter to publish. Now forasmuch as the vse of these latitudes and longitudes is most necessary and needfull in this Art, it is proper I should set downe the waies whereby not onely these latitudes and lon∣gitudes, but also the distances of all Cities and places by all univer∣sall Maps and Sea-cards that are perfectly drawn and delineated, is learned and found out. First then, to find out the longitude of any place, doe thus: Ex∣tend To find out the longitude of a place. a thred so as it passe through the Pole and through the place whose longitude you seeke in any Map or Card, euen to the very Equinoctiall and somwhat beyond, holding the thred strait, and then the number of degrees written vpon the Equinoctiall or Pa∣rallel will shew the longitude; Againe, by the Meridians likewise are knowne what longitude any place in the Map hath: as thus; Set the one foot of a paire of compasses in the place it selfe, and the other in some Meridian, that
is next unto it, whither on the right hand or onthe left it matters not; from thence draw downe your compasse, following still that Meridian untill you come to the Equinoctiall line, and there marke upon what degree of the Equinoctiall that foot of the com∣passe which you did first put in the place doth rest; then count how many degrees that is distant from the first Meridian, and that is the true longitude of the place; and note that that longitude ser∣veth to all the places that be vnder that Meridian, though they be never so farre distant one from another North and South. Now for the latitude of that place or anyother, do thus: Set To find out the latitude of a place. the one foot of your compasses in the very pole, extending the other to the place or Citie whose latitude you seeke, and keeping your compasse at that widenes, bring the movable foot to the first Me∣ridian whereon the degrees of latitude are marked, and there stay∣ing it, the number of the degrees counting from the Equinoctiall vpwards towards the Pole, will shew the latitude of the place sought, and note that the like latitude have all they that dwell un∣der that parallel, how farre soever they dwell asunder east and west, and by knowing the latitude of any place, you may quickly also find in some Maps under what clime or parallel such a place is sci∣tuated, and of how many houres the longest day is there. Now to know how one place beareth from another and with what wind your Ship is to be directed from one Maritime port to another, is needles heere to bee handled, as not pertinent to my taske; but for what distance is betwixt two severall places, many Cosmographers have found, by severall waies taught the same, one only, the most common in use, I will pitch vpon, as the most facile and easie. To find out then the distance betwixt any two places, doe thus: To find out the distance of two places or Cities. Set the one foot of your compasse on the one place, and the other foot on the other place, and apply that widenesse to the equino∣ctiall, and looke how many degrees of the equinoctiall that wide∣nesse comprehendeth, and allowing 60. Italian miles to every de∣gree you shall have the distance by a right line of those two places demanded. But if the said two places have both either North or South lati∣tude, then substract the lesser latitude out of the greater, so shall you find the difference, which difference if you multiply by 60. the product will be the number of miles; and if to the whole de∣grees of difference there bee annexed any minutes, then you must adde to the product for every minute a mile. But if one of the two places haue North latitude, and the other South latitude, then you shall find their difference by addition on∣ly, The distances of two places having diffe∣rent longi∣tudes and east and west la∣titude. and not by substraction. Now if you would find the distance of two places, differing only in longitude, both places having either east or west latitude; then substract the lesser out of the greater, so shal you have the true diffe∣rence,
which difference you must multiply by the number of miles belonging to their latitude, which commonly is found on the North-west side of the Maps, or by the table of miles answerable, of one degree of every latitude, and the product thereof will bee the number of miles; whereby the one place is distant from the other; but if the one place have East longitude, and the other West longi∣tude, then you must find the difference as well by addition as by substraction. To conclude this point, I conceive it not much materiall to my purpose further to insist hereupon; for the diligent and ingenious will easily hereby comprehend the benefit that may redound to him by a generall inspection in this Art, referring what is here by me willingly omitted to his owne private search and studie, and to such Authors as have learnedly written of this subject more at large; and therefore from the universall knowledge of Maps that pointeth out the generall divisions of the World, I will come to the particulars comprised therein, and view the subdi∣visions thereof, as Potencie, Might and Soveraigntie have prescribed rules thereunto. This World then, consisting as I noted before of foure princi∣pall parts, and every part consisting of severall Empires, King∣domes and Provinces in which many commodities both naturall and artificiall are found fit for Commerce, and traffique, and also wherein are noted to bee divers eminent Cities and Townes of great concourse, of Shipping, Merchants and Trade; which Trade is maintained and driven by the said Commodities and Wares, and by the naturall inclination of Mankind to inrich themselves by, Invention, and Time; hath devised the Art of Merchandi∣zing, and by meanes of Weights, Measures, Coines, Exchanges and Accompt-keeping, have drawne the same to certaine heads and principalls, which in this MAPPE OF COMMERCE I shall indeavour to demon∣strate: But before I fall to particulars, it is requisite I should first say somewhat of the same in generall.
CHAP. II. Of the Art of Merchandizing and the generall parts thereof. MERCHANDIZING (truly considered in it self, and rightly practised) may well be said to be an art Merchandizing accounted an Art. or science invented by ingenious mankind, for the pub∣like good, commoditie and welfare of all Common∣wealths; for thereby some places and Kingdomes are supplyed and furnished with those necessary things, whereof Na∣ture her selfe hath proved deficient in, and which in some other places or Kingdomes hath abounded, tending either to the need, ornament, or commodity of humane life, and is performed by ex∣porting the superfluities, that are found in the one, to furnish the defects and wants that are found in the other: and the Arts-men that are seen thus to practise and exercise the same, and which doe thus transport these things from one place to another, are ge∣nerally known to us and commonly termed by the name of Mer∣chants, and the things themselves wherewith they negociate and traffique are termed merchandizes or commodities. Merchandizing then of it self in effect is nothing else but a Merchandizing what. Commutation, bargaining, contracting or exchanging of one man with another, and by giving by one, so much of one thing or commodity, to have of the other, so much and the like value, of some one other differing com∣modity else; and the things themselves subject to this commutation, or exchanging, are principally observed in all places to be two; first wares or goods, and secondly moneys or coyne; which two are usually The marials of Merchandi∣zing, are com∣modities and Moneys. observed to be contracted and bargained for, in three severall distinct manners. The first is goods for goods, and this is termed bartering. The second is goods for money, and this is termed bargaining, and the Commutati∣ons dstingui∣shed into 3. manners or kinds. third is money for money, and this is properly amongst Merchants, (in these dayes termed) exchanging, from whence it proceedeth; and may be concluded, that all merchantile affaires and commercelike negotiations may be distinguished into three kinds or sorts, that is, into Bartering, commonly called Trucking; Bargaining, com∣monly called buying and selling; and into returning of moneyes from one place to another by bills, commonly called Exchanging. The first of these was taught to mankind by necessity, who to provide himself of things that were needfull, gave in liew and in Trucke thereof and for the same, the things whereof he had store and plenty: The second kind was found out and invented to faci∣litate
the first; and the third and last to facilitate the second. In the times of old amongst us, and yet in these dayes in many Bartering. places of America, Asia and Africa; the first manner of Bartering was and is yet in use and practised, where though gold and silver and brasse was not known nor accounted as a stamped coine, yet it was then both here, and is still there held in greater estimation then was any other commodity or mettall; the which Homer in∣ferreth in his relation of the Trojan Warre, where he mentioneth that Achilles his golden Armour, was valued in barter at one hun∣dred Oxen, and that the brasse Armour of Diomedes was valued in barter but at nine: But Man in processe of time, finding it too too difficult a thing, and too too troublesome a busines, to carry about him, all things thus barter'd and trucked from one place to another, chose out one singular thing; which as a common standard or measure, should countervaile and be in Value as all other things, and which should be received and accounted of in payment, satisfaction, and equivalencie to all others, and the things thus cho∣sen and estimated, was gold, silver and brasse, the most excellent of Mettals, which being then and since, by the authority of Prin∣ces, divided into great and small peeces, and into severall and di∣stinct parts and denominations, was stamped and coyned with severall characters, to denote thereby the true weight and value of the same; the which was first done by Servius in Rome of brasse, whereon was imprinted the image of Sheep and Oxen, betoke∣ning the wealth and riches of those dayes, as moneys do now with us; and because that ten of those pieces was then called a denier, therefore it is, that universally all such moneys are still called by the Latines Denarij: this being then the originall of Moneys, afterward came to be coined both of silver, and gold; as I shall more at large have occasion to demonstrate in the Chapter of mo∣neys, in this following Treatise. This first sort of Merchandizing or Commerce then, as I said Bargaining. before, termed Bartering or Trucking, of one commodity for another, begat consequently by the meanes of moneys, the second manner of negotiation, which is buying and selling, or bargaining; for all Merchants that would transport commodities from one Countrey or place to another, to effect the same, needed either other commodities, wherewith to barter and so to procure them, or money and so to buy them; and therefore to facilitate Merchan∣dizing, and to take away the incommodity and danger of the car∣riage of moneys, about a man, or from place to place, A meane was invented to have the same in what Countrey a man pleased, without trouble or danger of the transport, carridges or rigor thereof; and this was found to be best performed by exchange, Exchanging. which is the third sort of commutaetion; the which is noted to be no other then the giving of so much moneys in one place to one, who should cause it to be againe repaid in another place by another
for him; as for example, Edward hath here in London one thou∣sand pounds, and desireth to remit the same, or have it in the hands of Ioseph, who resideth in Venice; and Lodowicke hath one thousand pounds in Venice, in the custody and hands of Thomas, which he would get, receive, and recover out and have them here: it happeneth that Edward meeteth with Lodowicke, to whom he delivereth and payeth the said one thousand pounds; and there∣upon Lodowicke writeth to Thomas, that he pay the said thousand pounds to Ioseph, and thus each party come to be both satisfied and accommodated; by which it may be discerned, that in all ex∣changes, there is concluded two payments, two places, and fouro distinct persons; as he who payeth in the one place, and he who receiveth in the other; and he who receiveth in the one place, and he who payeth in the other; and from hence it consequently followeth, that no man can remit, except there be another to draw; nor no man can in the second place receive, except there be another authorized to pay. In this manner then came in use the originall of exchanges, pur∣posely Exchanges drawn into a profitable Art, and the rea∣sons there of. invented to accommodate Trade and Commerce, the which at first was practised without either benefit or losse, or any other consideration; and to render againe the self same summe and par∣cell as was received: but in processe of time it came to be consi∣dered, that the giver or deliverer of the money came both to lose a certain space in time ere the same was repayd, and did also run a certain risgoe in the payment thereof, which the re∣ceiver or drawer injoyed, and profited by; and therefore it was held reasonable that the deliverer should have some fruit and benefit, in requitall and satisfaction thereof, which afterward occasioned that the second payment came to be somewhat grea∣ter then the former; and that in consideration thereof there should be restored, more then was received: The indeavour of this gaine then hath converted exchanges since into an art or my∣sterie; from whence it proceedeth, that many are found at this day to remit and deliver moneys, to the intent, to have the same retur∣ned with benefit, and not for a need or necessity to have it more in one place then in another; and many againe are found to be takers and drawers, not with intent to withdraw or recover their money, from another person, or place; but to serve themselves and their occasions with that of others, for a certaine time, pay∣ing and allowing for the same, that consideration and interest as is agreed upon, and covenanted between them; which really and in effect is nothing else but a certaine kind of permitted Usury, and therefore by some accounted as a thing unlawfull, though by many, and by the common and received practise of the World, it is upheld and maintained with many solid reasons and substan∣tiall arguments; besides which, it is considerable, and peradven∣ture it may well be granted, that if it were not, that there is by
this art and mysterie, againe and profit made therof, very few ex∣changes would present; because that draughts and remittances would in this nature but seldome happen, that would or might any way be available to Traffique and Commerce, and lesse be∣nefit would consequently redound to the publike and universall Commerce of Kingdomes; and therefore though the intention of particular exchanges, be not alwaies found good herein, yet the generall good effect which it produceth, and that proceedeth therefrom, is in it self and in the true use and custome thereof both approved and laudable. Now in the first sort of commutation, which I terme bartering, Things consi∣derable in Bar∣tering. many things do happen considerable and necessary in the art of Merchandizing; the first is the knowledge as well in the commodity, thus to be delivered, as in the commodity so to be received: next a knowledge in respect of the value and present request and esti∣mation of both; then in respect of the quality, whether it be lasting and durable, or impairing and perishable; and lastly in respect of the property, whether it be of it selfe naturall and growing, or Ar∣tificiall, and made by the hand and industrie of man; and lastly in respect of the quantity, whether plentifull and in aboundance, or scarce and in few hands. In the second sort of commutation, which I terme bargayning, or Things consi∣derable in Bar∣gaining. buying and selling, are likewise besides the above mentioned, these particulars to be well known and considered; first a know∣ledge how the commodity is either bought or sold, as either by weight, as are ponderous commodities, or as by Concave or long measures, as are commodities of length, or commodities solid or liquid; the knowledge of which weights and measures, is in like man∣ner perfectly to be known, and really to be understood; and then the finenesse, goodnes and currant valuation of the money of the place, is also to be known, and perfectly and rightly to be found out and distinguished, that the bargaine may appeare to be made the more justly, equally, and conscionablie between both parties; and for the needfull circumstances observed in bargaining, these foure things are considerable, as having necessary dependances upon. First, a Merchant must know what to bargaine for, and under Prncipally foure. this the knowledge of the commodity it selfe is comprehended. Secondly, how to bargaine, and under this the knowledge of the weights and measures in the generall is comprised. Thirdly, when to bargaine, and under this the fit and proper seasons of bargai∣ning are generally included. Fourthly, with whom to bargaine, and under this point is comprehended, the person and party in∣teressed, that requires the accomplishment or credit in the bargain. Now in the third sort of commutation, which is here termed Ex∣changing, the things necessary to be knowne and considerable by Things con∣siderable in Exchanging. the said Art of Merchandizing are these: First a knowledge of
the finenesse, goodnesse and currant value of the Princes Coine, both where the partie Remitter abideth, and whither the said moneys are remitted; then a knowledge of the currant rate of the Exchanging of the Par or Value for Value, both according to the Standard of the Countrey, and according to the valuation of the currant Coine there passable; then of the Vsance of the Place; and lastly and principally, to avoid all prejudice and losse, a know∣ledge is to bee had of the partie who is the Drawer and Receiver of the same; and in default made of currant satisfaction and pay∣ment accordingly, knowledge is to bee had of the due and true manner and forme of making of all legall intimations, protests, and other such needfull instruments, circumstances and observations as are requisite thereto, according to the strict and solemne rules required in a Bill of Exchange, which in its due place I shall more at large declare. Now forasmuch as many of these afore mentioned points may as well be included within the mystery of some subordinate trades∣men, as comprehended within the bounds of the Art of Merchan∣dizing; I shall not need to insist farther thereupon, onely heere insert some other principall parts and points more aptly com∣prised within the particular limits of this Science, which in briefe I will only nominate, as fitly serving for an Induction to this pre∣sent MAP OF COMMERCE, and as being the proper in∣struments, wherewith also this Art of Merchandizing is practised. I have noted before that Merchandizing principally consisteth of Adventures made abroad into severall Regions, and that for the most part Merchants are found to traffique and negociate into divers parts and Countries of the World by the helpe and benefit of the Seas and Navigation, and have to that end their Factors, ser∣vants and agents resident in forraigne parts to performe those their Mercantile Occasions, and that Ships and Vessels of all bur∣thens are dayly seene to be by them so imployed and set on worke through all the parts of the habitable World, therefore the next point needfull their knowledge, and comprised in the Art of Mer∣chandizing, I may intitle under the name of Shipping; which pro∣perly consisting of sundry portions may bee fitly distinguished within the duties of foure severall distinct persons. The first Person is represented in the building of a Shippe, where∣in First duty to build, belon∣ging to the Shipwright. the whole materials are to be considered; next the Art of the framing, forming and making thereof, is to bee observed, the due rules of length, bredth, depth, stowage, offence, defence and commodiousnes in generall is to bee noted with all other circum∣stances thereunto appertaining: and this I hold to be the proper dutie of the Ship-wright, and the knowledge consequently not un∣proper to the Merchant, and fitly comprehended within the Art of Merchandizing. The second is represented in the setting forth of this Ship, where∣in
her tackle, apparell, victuall and munition and all her needfull Second dutie to furnish and set out, belon∣ging to Ow∣ners. and dependent furniture is to bee considered, her provision and store is to be observed: and this I hold to be the proper dutie of the Owners and letters out of Ships to fraight, and the knowledge most proper for the Merchant, and comprehended also in the Art of Merchandizing. The third is represented in the sailing of this Shippe, wherein Third dutie to saile the Ship, belonging to the Pilot or Master. the Art of Navigation is generally to be considered, with all cir∣cumstances thereunto of right appertaining, which I hold to be the dutie of the Master and Pilot, and how farre this knowledge may be necessary to the Merchant, I have mentioned in a Booke intituled The Factors Avizo, which I may, if occasion serve, pub∣lish to the use and benefit of Merchants and Factors that frequent the Seas, and take pleasure therein. The last is represented in the imployment of this Ship, wherein is Fourth duety of imploying this Ship, be∣longing to the Merchant. considerable these sixe things. First the lading of the goods a∣board, by which this Ship comes to bee imployed, which must be done in faire and dry weather and at fit seasons: secondly the stowage thereof aboard, which must be done without prejudice or hurt of one commodity to another, by building of bulke heads and providing of desnege and the like whereon the said goods must beare or lie upon: thirdly in truely marking the said goods, that it may evidently appeare who is the right Owner and pro∣prieter thereof: fourthly in really paying and truely discharging of all customes, duties and charges thereupon, that neither the Ship nor goods may be subject to losse, confiscation or prejudice there∣by: fiftly in making assurance thereon, that the Imployer preven∣ting losses may not indanger his whole Adventure: and sixtly and lastly in a generall knowledge of all the Sea Lawes comprised either in the Role of Olcron or Consolato of Barcelona, that all contro∣versies betweene the Merchant and Mariner may bee avoided; that he may thereby the better right himselfe, and doe also that which is right to all others; and this I hold to bee the proper duety of the Merchant and his Factor. In order to this I may heere nominate such other things as are A Merchant is to know the forme of a bill of Ex∣change. needfull to his knowledge, and which have a necessary de∣pendance upon the Art of Merchandizing, as next to know all manner of specialties proper to his Place and Calling. And first the manner, forme, force, and vertue of a bill of Exchange, the termes, and proper method thereof, with all manner of obser∣vations required thereto by the solemne, and strict rules of the proceedings commonly used therein. Secondly, the making of all Intimations, and protests, in all ca∣ses Secondly, of all manner of protests and intimations. Thirdly, of charter parties. whatsoever incident to this Art. Thirdly, the manner and making of all charter-parties for the fraightment of Ships; wherein all conditions and their circum∣stances must be truely and at large set downe and declared as the
time when the covenanted Ship is to depart, the Ports, where She is to unlade, the daies agreed vpon for her unlading, the summe agreed upon for fraight, and all other the particular conditions accorded upon, the better to avoid all inconveniences and con∣tentions in law that may happen thereupon. Fourthly, the manner of making of bils of lading, wherein the goods laden and the condition thereof is to be truely set downe: Fourthly, of bills lading. also the Ship wherein the same is put, and the Master or Pilots name, and who taketh the charge thereof; the place of unlading the said goods, and lastly, the fraight to bee paid for the same, when delivered according to conditions specified. Fiftly, the manner of making of policies of assurances; wherein Fiftly, of Pol∣licies of assu∣rances. the goods assured is to bee nominated, the Ship upon which the same is laden, and the Master thereof declared, the dangers and Adventure assured to bee specified, the places whence and whi∣ther bound noted, the rate or premio agreed upon observed; and lastly, the persons or Parties assurers subscribed, &c. Sixtly, the manner of making of all manner of specialties and bils of debt, either as they are simply in use amongst us in Eng∣land, Sixtly, of bils of debt and obligatory. or obligatorie, as also to know the force and strength thereof in law, both heere and beyond the Seas, with transportations thereof, as is used in many forreigne Countries; wherein is to be set downe the name and profession of the partie debtor, the summe owing thereby, to whom the same is due, and the time when the same is payable, and the place where, and in bils obliga∣torie, the penaltie for non payment accordingly. Seventhly, when the same is discharged, the forme and manner of an Acquittance and generall release in full discharge for the Seventhly, of an acquittance. payment thereof. Eighthly, the manner of drawing a Letter of Attourney or procura∣tion, with the strength thereof both heere and beyond the Seas: Eighthly of a letter attour∣ney. wherein is to be mentioned the power and authority given, the partie that giveth the same, and the partie who receiveth it, and the scope, end and determination thereof; and lastly, to con∣clude these necessarie appurtenances and dependances vpon the Art of Merchandizing, there must be added a right and perfect skill Ninthly, In accompt-keep∣ing. in Accompt-keeping, that thereby all his dayly Affaires, his Adven∣tures, Shipping, Sales, Buyings, Payments and Receipts, &c. may or∣derly and truely bee manifested, which is so farre forth to bee learned and knowne, that his Estate, Gains and Losses, and all passa∣ges that are else needfull happening in the course of his Negotia∣tions, Merchandizing or Commerce may appeare, and which may thereby be either yearely, or oftner reduced into a ballance, to his owne contentment, and to the commodity of his Estate and dayly Traffique. And as a handmaid or Vsher to this Art of accompting, he must, to finish and make vp these helpes and furtherances, have the Tenthly, of A∣rithmetique.
assistance of the Art of Numbring or Arithmetique, in which who∣soever is ignorant may not challenge to himselfe the Title of a Merchant, nor be said to have any judgement in the Art of Mer∣chandizing, nor hardly deserve the attribute of a rationall man. These are now the principall parts of the Art of Merchandi∣zing, and the Basis whereupon the same is observed to have its foundation, as it is seene practised and exercised by all Merchants in generall in these our dayes throughout the habitable World, the most part whereof I have more particularly handled in the fol∣lowing succinct Chapters, and some others I have willingly omit∣ted, as being such as are so inherent to the Art it selfe, that eve∣ry knowing Merchant must not bee ignorant therein, having in all other respects indeavoured to make this MAPPE OF COMMERCE so perfect, absolute and compleat, that it may stand the Merchant (especially the Learner) in stead, both at home and abroad beyond the Seas, and serve him as a guid and Tutor to direct and instruct him in all the parts of the Art of Merchandizing. And having thus run over the ground of this Art it selfe in the generall, I will in the next place begin with the Cities and Townes, where at this day it is found, that for the most part this Art of Merchandizing is seene to be practised and used. CHAP. III. Of Cities and Townes of trade in generall, mentioned in this MAPPE of COMMERCE. MY purpose is not here to shew the antiquitie of Cities and Townes emi∣nent in trade, onely mentio∣ned in this Mappe. Cities and Townes, according to their first ori∣ginall, nor the manners and custome used in their first foundation; neither yet speake of the divers kinds thereof, as at this day they are in them∣selves observed to be: But my intention is, in this following Map of irade, (having briefly shewed the common di∣vision of the 4. parts of the World,) to nominate and quote out, the chiefe and principall therof as they are knowne to be to Mer∣chants, and as they are found the most eminent and absolute in the trade of Merchandizing; and therewith distinguish the diversities that are observed to be therein. An absolute and compleat City or Town, as some learned have Sixe parts re∣quired in a compleat City. set down and expressed, cannot subsist of it self without sixe prin∣cipall parts and helpes, for the supportation thereof; and without
which no City or Town can properly be said to be, or to have a being: First, it must have Victualls to feed and nourish it; and this is the proper taske and duety of the Husbandman and Shep∣heard. Secondly, it must have Armes and Armour to defend it, and offend its Enemies; and this is the proper taske and duety of the Souldier. Thirdly, it must have wealth and riches, as sinewes for its imployment, in private and publike affaires; and this is the pro∣per taske and duety of the rich and eminent inhabitants of this Ci∣ty. Fourthly, it must have Justice for criminall and civill causes, to punish the bad and reward the good; and this is the proper taske and duetie of Counsellors and Senators of State. Fiftly, it must have Religion and the worship of GOD duely and reverently perfor∣med in it, and this is the proper task and duety of the Priesthood: And Sixtly, to make it a compleate, able and absolute Citie, it must have Trade and Arts, practised therein, and this is the proper taske and duetie of the Merchant and artificer that inhabit it. Now though many Cities are seen sometimes defective, in some of these parts, and are not so well furnished as this rule and the ex∣actnes of a compleate Citie requireth; yet it is daily manifested to the judicious and learned in policies of State, and government of commonwealths, that Merchants, and such as exercise the trade of Merchandizing in Cities, do supply by their indeavours and abilities by traffique, most of those other parts and helpes here before specified; and which are or may be found deficient and wanting therein. For setting aside the worship and service of God, which is onely fit and proper to Divines and Church-men: The person and purse of the Merchant supplies in a faire measure, all the other parts beforementioned; for first the Merchants Navi∣gation and traffique, is seen to supply the City with corne, graine, The Merchants purse and per∣son supplies many defects in a City of trade. cloth, &c. and all manner of provision, both for back and belly, delight and ornament, tending either to pleasure or need; and this way he performes the part of the Husbandman and Shepheard; His traffique is seen to supply the City with armes, armour, and all manner of amunition, either offensive or defensive; and thus farre he perfomes the part of a Souldier: His traffique likewise is seen to bring Riches into the common purse by customes, imposts, and such duties; and thereby may be said to perform the part of the wealthy and most eminent thereof. He is seen by his wisedome, tra∣vell, and experience abroad, to be able oftentimes to sit at the stern of the Cities government, punishing the vicious, rewarding the vertuous; and herein be performes the part of a Senator and Counsellor: neither yet is he wanting in many other particulars, to perform the duety of a good patriote and citizen, (not compri∣zed within any of these aforesaid limits;) for his traffique is seen to improve the Countries commodities, to set the poore and needy on worke, to invent new fabriques, stuffes and the like; to plant forraigne colonies, to settle peace and amity amongst Prin∣ces,
to build warlike Ships, to traine up Seamen; and to make the City and place of his abode famous and eminent by sundry other meanes, which I could exemplifie if need were in this place, and which at present I willingly omit. Now then if the Merchant and the art of merchandizing be so excellent, and consequently necessary in a City, and bringeth with it so many benefits and commodities: how happy then is that City, where many notable and well govern'd Merchants are found to reside, and where their care of their own profit is so necessarily interwoven with the care of the commonwealths, and its good, that to themselves and to their Countrey; their labours and adventures do bring in thus mutually, not onely a commo∣dity, but also an honour: but to the matter, All Cities and Townes What Cities are found fit for trade and commerce. are not found in themselves proper for commerce and traffique, nor yet all of them fit residences for Merchants; therfore it is seen by experience, that trade hath setled it self principally in two sorts of Cities and Townes, and in such first the Inhabitants by inclina∣tion; and then Forraigners and Strangers by conversation, are ob∣served and noted to have planted themselves and established a trade therein. Traffique then residing and abiding principally in two severall Two sorts of Cities of traf∣fique. sorts of Cities and Townes, by daily observation are found to be such as these; the first is the Maritime, and these are they that have their scituation on the Sea shore or coast, or upon navigable Rivers and streames; and the second are they that have their scitua∣tion within some continent, and may be called land Townes and Cities, distant both from Sea and River. And though that in both these, trade and commerce is observable to be setled and dri∣ven; yet the manner and common form of this trade is found to differ much, as being both of them proper to two severall sorts of traffique and Negotiation. Sea Towns of trade what. The trade observed then to be driven in Sea Townes or Cities, seated on navigable Rivers, is noted to subsist principally by na∣vigation, and by the easie transportation of merchandize by that commodiousnes, from one place to another; which is indeed the most proper and customarie way, whereby traffique is in these dayes seen to be maintained and preserved; for in many places thus scituated, it is noted that eminent Merchants do reside, who by reason of this neighbourhood of the Sea, and consequently of navigation, do hold a respondencie and trade from one fit place to another, over all the known parts of the habitable World, impor∣ting the commodities of all other Countries, and exporting the native commodities of the place it self; and of this sort is Marsilia, Amsterdam, Genoa, Venetia, Sivil, Lisborne, London, and many o∣thers, &c. But the trade observed to be driven in inland Townes and Land Townes of trade what. Cities, subsists by carriage of commodities by land, which in some places is done by Carts, in some by Camels, Caravans,
Mules, Horse, &c. as is at this day seen practised in many great Cities of the World; as at Aleppo in Turkey, at Spahan in Persia, at Agra in the Moguls Countrey, and such other, who injoy neither the benefit of Rivers, not yet the commoditie of the Sea it self by many miles distance; yet therein are oftentimes found residing many Merchants of great eminencie and a nample trade is discer∣ned therein, as may be seen in this following tract. And some∣times to adde some furtherance to this their want: some of these have a Sea port or haven, as the neerest whereto ships from other parts do come in; and do there both land and relade as occasion requireth, in which nature is Alexandria to Aleppo, Combrone to Spahan, and Sindy to Agra. Besides which, I might here adde a third sort of Cities, where yet trade is noted to be setled, differing from both the former, and Townes of trade inmanu∣all arts and fa∣bricks. which cannot be comprised within either of the limits; and these are such as subsist by some excellent or curious manuall Arts or fabriques, as is Norimberg and others in Germanie, Roven in Nor∣mandie, Florence in Italy, and Norwich in England; and some others, whose trade subsists by the benefit of nature, producing of it self, speciall or needfull commodities for traffique, as doth Bordeux by Gascoine Wines, Zante by Corrants, Smirna by Cottens, Gilan in Persia by raw Silke, Ivisa by Salt, and the like: and where these are joyned by scituation proper for traffique to the former, they are found to be farre more absolute, eminent and compleat, as shall be discerned also in this following tract. These are then the Cities and Townes which generally in this The Cities of trade mentio∣ned in the Map of Commerce. Mappe I handle, relating as neere as my observation and reading will permit me, the commodities that the place doth naturally afford for Merchandize, and the commodities the same is noted properly to vent; together with the time when the same is ei∣ther sent out or brought in, the quantity, how much; with all other such circumstances as are thereunto belonging. Moreover it is to be noted, that in all Cities and Townes of Five places in a City depen∣ding upon trade. traffique, there are alwaies found five particular places, that onely have a being and dependencie upon the trade thereof. The first place is it where Merchants and tradesmen do assemble and meet at certain houres, and limited times of the day, to con∣ferre The Burse or Exchange. and treat together, concerning Merchandizing, shipping, buy∣ing or selling, and the like; as is seen to be the Royall Exchange of LONDON, the Burse in Antwerpe, the Piazze in Venetia, and the like in other places. The second place is it where the Princes, customes, and dueties The Custome house. upon all Wares, either imported or exported by way of Merchan∣dize is seen to be paid and collected, where officers are appointed to attend the same; and where all Writs, as Cockets, bills of entrie, Certificates; and the like are granted, both to loade and land goods, either going out or coming in, and these are called by se∣verall
names, as in most places Custome-houses, Dattio, Commercios, and the like. The third place is it where Merchants do keep their goods and Magazines for commodities. wares in, where weighers, porters, car-men and labourers do hourely attend to be set on worke; where Brokers and Contracters are daily imployed in making of bargaines, shewing of Wares, transporting of bils of dept, and such like, as is seen in the Besistons and Basars in Turkey, Alfondces in Barbary, pack-houses in the netherlands; and as was accustomed to be done in the stillard in London. The next place is it where the publique beame is set up, by the authority of the Magistrate, to weigh all ponderous commodities Kings Beame. bought or sold; to decide differences and controversies arising by weights and weighing, and where a sworn weigher, with labou∣rers at all houres attendeth upon Merchants occasions, and who by his place is to keep a Register of all commodities weighed, to serve if need shall so require; and in this nature is the weight-house called the Kings beame in London, the Domme at Amsterdam, the Viconte in Roven, the Romano in Marsilia, and such like in other places of trade. The next and last place is it where the publike measures, both Met-house. of length, of dry, and of liquid commodities, in every City are kept and set up by the authority of the Magistrate, to measure all measureable commodities bought or sold; to decide all differences and controversies arising thereabout; and where a sworn measurer is to give attendance with other necessary helpers at all houres to dispatch Merchants occasions, of which he is to keep a Regi∣ster to serve in time of need, as was seen of old to be the standard of Cheap in London, and as is found the like in other places. And thus much shall serve to have said of Cities and Townes in generall, of trade, and of the principall places found therein, which have a dependence thereupon; which few Cities in the World, of traffique do want or are found to be defective in. CHAP. IIII. Of Customes, Impositions, and other duties in generall payd by Merchants upon commodities in all Cities of trade. TRADE in its selfe, hath ever been found to be, not Customes pay∣able to Prin∣ces. onely beneficiall to the City and Countrey where the same is exercised and preserved; but also to the Prin∣ces and Soveraignes who command the same; and though the commodities and benefits that it brings with it, be many and great, yet the principall are such as accru∣ing
to the Princes coffers, comes to them by the payments of certain customes, imposts and dueties, that are by them imposed up∣on all commodities and wares, which by the way of Merchandize is either imported out, or exported into their dominions, and for the better raising and collecting of which, there is seated as is be∣fore remembred, by the said Princes and their authority in every such Citie and Towne (where any trade and concourse of Merchants is found to bee) certaine publique houses, as offices by the name Custome hou∣ses. of Custome-houses where these duties are collected, and where the Traders and Merchants doe accordingly pay and satisfie the same. The duety then of Custome, though in all Countries it bee gene∣rally Customes not alwaies alike in all places. paid, yet it is not alwaies found to be paid alike in all places, for it is sometimes found to bee more and sometimes lesse, and oft times in some Countries it is paid according to the will of the Prince who imposeth the same, as being partly a Prerogative in∣herent to their Scepters, and partly as they are absolute Com∣manders in those Cities, Ports and Havens where this Traffique is so exercis'd, and is found to bee payable as I said before, upon all Custome due upon all com∣modities. manner of commodities used by way of Merchandize, either exported or imported out or into their Dominions, Countries and Citties. This duetie then thus called Custome, is conceived by some to The originall of Customes. have its first originall from a safegard given by those Princes at Sea, to their Subjects and Merchants from all Rovers, Pirats and Enemies, and a protection for free trading from all such dangers from one Port or Citie of trade to another: but we see that in these dayes the payment of the duetie is still continued, and is day∣ly paid by all Merchants; but the first institution and ground thereof (if so it was) is by many Princes either totally omitted, or at least wise forgotten, and therefore it may now be more pro∣perly called a Custome then heretofore, and the places where the same is paid and collected called thence Custome-houses. The Merchant then who intendeth to negociate and traffique The Merchant must learne what the Cu∣stomes are, and duly pay them. into any Citie or Kingdome (seeing there is a necessity in the pay∣ment and discharge thereof) ought first diligently and carefully learne and observe the summe and quantity payable upon all com∣modities whatsoever; and then truely and honestly satisfie the same according to the ordinances and proceedings used respe∣ctively in those Countries, partly to avoid the danger of the losse of the commodity (the nonpayment being in many places the forfeiture) and partly the better thereby to make his calculation either to buy or sell to profit, and that before he make entry of any goods in the said Custome-houses or office (thus appointed for the collecting of this duty) and that he take notice what the true and right custome in it selfe is; to further which knowledge it is often seene that a setled rate by Booke or particular Teriffe either in print or writing may easily in every such Citie of trade be had Book of rates.
and obtained: But if (as it is sometimes seene) in some places that the same cannot be had, then the Trader must learne in this case from others what the duety and Custome of the place is; wherein much care and circumspection is to be used, for the fraud and poling deceit, that is practised in sundry Custome-houses by many officers where no such Bookes are publique, is excessive, when either they collect the same to the immediate use of the Prince, or when they collect the same to their owne use, being let out to farme by contract and yearely rent unto them by his authority; many Merchants being deceived by their devices and slights, ma∣ny under officers and new offices being dayly hatched up and maintained by the chiefe Customers and Farmers, not onely to the detriment of Merchants and of all Trade in particular, but also to the prejudice of the Soveraigne and all Traffique and Commerce in the generall. These Customes then, as I said before, are noted not to be paid Custome dif∣fers in many respects. in all Countries alike, for they are found to differ in divers re∣gards; the principall whereof I have observed to be these. First, they are found to differ in regard of places and kingdomes, In regard of place. as a far greater Custome is paid in Spaine, and generally through∣out the King of Spaines Dominions, then in France, Italie, Turkie, and in some other places. Secondly, some difference is also found in regard of times, as in In regard of time. priviledged Townes, inioying free Faires, Marts and Markets, as is seene observed by custome and long use in Roven, Beaucaire, Franckford, Mesina, and other places where the Customes are then and at that time little or else nothing, or far lesse then at all o∣ther times of the yeare besides. Thirdly, somewhat againe in respect of Cities, inioying a more In regard of Cities. peculiar priviledge and continued freedome in Trade in sundry Kingdomes, where little or no Custome is paid upon any commo∣dity whatsoever, either during a yeare after the importing of the goods, or for certaine limited time or moneths, as it is seene in Ligorne, Marsolia, and in many other free Cities and hanse Townes, &c. Fourthly, somewhat againe in regard of commodities, as is seene in In regard of commodities. England, and many other places elsewhere, where some commo∣dities are higher rated in the custome than other some; some paying after the rate of 5 per Cent. some 10, some 15, and some 20 per Cent. and some yet more, and some lesse. Fiftly, somewhat againe in respect of the weight, as is seene in In regard of weight. Roven by the Viconte, in Lions by the Kings beame, in Stockholme by the Merchants weight; and so in other places where there is used a large weight in favor of the Merchants to pay their Custome by, and another lesser to buy and sell withall. All these things and many others, as necessary to this Commerce, Strictnes for not paying of Customes. must be truely learned; for ignorance herein is not pardonable,
and is ever a prejudice to him that is found to exercise Trade; for the rigor and strictnesse practised in sundry Countries herein a∣gainst Merchants is extreame, whereas these Customes are not duely and truely to the utmost satisfied and paid. As first in Russia, Denmarke and Sweden, the law is, that if a In Russia Den∣marke, Sueden. Merchant doe not declare all his goods in the Customehouse which hee either importeth or exporteth, but concealeth some part thereof; all the rest of that commoditie being of the same kind, are forfeited to the Prince without favour or redemption. In Spaine, and generally throughout all the King of Spaines do∣minions, In Spaines Do∣minions. the commodities concealed are onely forfeited, vnlesse they bee prohibited, or as they terme it Contrabanda goods, and then all is lost. In England, Scotland and Ireland the like; for there the goods In England, Scotland and Ireland. concealed are onely forfeited; but yet they may bee had againe upon composition, for the Officer that maketh the seisure hath power by a License sued forth to compound for the one halfe, which is his part: and if no inttion to defraud the King ap∣peare in the fact, the Barons of the Exchequer will deale favoura∣bly with the Merchant for the other halfe, which is the Kings, and if a Merchant cannot for want of a factorie make a direct or perfect entry, hee may declare his goods in the Custome house, at sight; and taking up the same, it may be either weighed or mea∣sured, opened and perused by an officer, and then afterward the Custome may be satisfied accordingly without further danger. And if the Merchant would againe ship out those goods, so brought in by him, hee may doe it by certificate free of Custome for 13. moneths, and have the impost thereof returned to him againe, provided the propertie hath not beene during that time altered. There is also by way of tares granted to the Merchant in the Custome house 5. per cent. upon all commodities, either weighed or measured, and allowances upon Wines and Oyles for leakage, and upon Clothes, Kersies and such like one in ten for wrapers, with ma∣ny other limited observations, which are found published in his Majesties declaration, before the printed Booke of rates for Customes in England, &c. In France, Germany, and many places of Italy and in the low Coun∣tries, In Germany, France, Italy, Netherlands. the goods concealed are onely forfeited; but the same may be afterwards compounded for, wherein the circumstances will in some places bee considered, and the manner how the error grew, and whether it appeare to be done with a set purpose or not. In Constantinople, Smyrna, and many places of Turkie the goods In Constantino∣ple, Sma. concealed are not at all forfeited, but are to pay double the im∣posed custome if taken, and then to be againe restored. I have noted that the rates of the customes is found to alter in sundry countries, as in Spaine and Portugall is paid upon divers
goods, 10. per cent. upon some 20. and 25. per cent. In Turkie is paid by the English onely 3. per cent. but by all other Christian na∣tions 5. per cent. and the same is not there paid nor satisfied in mo∣neys, as in other Countries, but in species and in kind, except com∣pounded for before hand, and so by a value reduced into monies: so also it is in some Countries more and in some lesse, sometimes setled upon the hundred in value, and sometimes upon the peece; and in China and some places of India it is noted that in favour of this duety the vessell and Ship is measured in length, and bredth, and depth; and so by a certaine rule and summe the custome is le∣vied accordingly, upon all sorts of goods abord her without di∣stinction alike in bulke. Besides this duetie of Custome paid in most Cities by Merchants, Impositions upon goods. as I have shewed, there is another duety like to this, which is cal∣led by the name of impositions, because the same is imposed upon some certaine and particular commodities, and not in generall (as customes are) upon all; the which also is not alike rated upon all wares: for though they be found now to bee much of the same nature as customes are, yet originally they are conceived to bee no∣thing but custome strained beyond a faire proportion, and are im∣posed oftentimes more for the inriching of some private courtier then for the profit or benefit of the Soveraigne, and which in themselves are found to be, very heavy excessive and burthensome upon some particular commodities; and therefore, as there is a necessity in the payment thereof; so is there likewise a necessity that the same be truely learned and knowne, and also the com∣modity upon which the same is so imposed; lest otherwise the Tra∣der make a short reckoning in his accounts, and find this impost to deceive him of his expected and hoped for gaine. To conclude, neither are these duties thus to be onely learned Fees to offi∣cers to be paid and knowne. and duely satisfied according to the customes and usance of euery Citie and Countrey, but also all such appurtenances, as belong ther∣unto, in the passing of all goods in the said offices and Custome houses, as in bils of Entries, Cockets, Certificates, passing of Bonds, and all fees thereunto appertaining and thereupon depending, as to Waiters, Searchers, Clerkes, Visitors, and such like, be also knowne and satisfied, the better to avoid the dangers and inconveniences that may happen by the default thereof to the goods whereupon the same is liable. These Customes then and Impositions thus varying by time, pla∣ces and circumstances, and imposed, altered and changed often∣times at the will of the Prince, are not by the industry of any one hand, to be punctually knowne in all places; therefore it suffi∣ceth me to have given here these generall rules and observations conducing both to the knowledge and the necessity of the dis∣charge and payment thereof, for the better Reiglement of Commerce in this particular; therefore I may bee held excusable,
if I be found in this point to be defective in this MAPPE, and so concluding herewith, proceed to the next point, which is of the Monyes and Coines of sundry Kingdomes used in the traffique of Merchandizing. CHAP. V. Of the Monies and Coynes of sundry Countryes, used in generall in the traffique of Merchandize. AMongst all the diversitie of Mettals which GOD Silver & gold the most ex∣cellent of mettalls. the Creator hath shutup in the closet and concavitie of the earth, none is accounted more singular and excellent than silver and gold, of which the commu∣nication and Commerce of mankind, have framed and invented the use of money and coine, which mo∣ney and coine, may be properly termed to be the universall measure of all things in the world, and though that thus naturally and ori∣ginally they be but mettals, and so to be in themselves accounted, yet in value and estimation, the monyes and coines made thereof are to us (as all things) for they are to us, (converted once to this use) as meate, cloth, house, horse, and generally what other thing soever man hath els need of; and thereby it is evident and manifested that all things are obedient and in subjection to monyes; and that by this devise, a meane was found out and invented, whereby one thing should be to Merchants as all, and therefore men thrust forward by Coines made of Silver and Gold. naturall inclination and worldly judgement, chose to this end and use at first, the thing that was found most durable, proper, and ma∣niable, which they onely observed best to be mettall; and amongst all mettals gave silver & gold the preheminence in the invention of monyes, which of their owne nature was thus observed to be most durable, and incorruptible, and of which wee find as well in these our times as in times past, most Princes of the world to make their currant coines of, between man and man in trade of Merchandize. I denie not but in the innocency of those golden times of old, when Bartering and exchanging before the use of gold and silver. neither silver nor gold was put to this use, there was yet a traffique found, and a Commerce practis'd amongst mankinde, which may be imagined did not then extend it selfe to buying and selling in that same nature, as now it is in use since the invention of Monyes, but onely to a trucking, exchanging, and bartering, and that onely for things necessary to back and belly, to feed and cloth, and so to pre∣serve life; but these times worn out by a more acute age, and men laying to themselves a foundation of soveraigntie and greatnesse, the stronger still depriving the weaker, and riches thereby becoming
desirable, this mysterie crept up, and was admitted, and therefore from these two mineralls was found out a bodie, which once autho∣rized by power of the Magistrate, had a predominancie over all earthly things, and by which was squared out and leveld (as by an indifferent measure) all things appertaining to mankinde, the a∣bundance thereof brought with it the abundance of honour, atten∣dants, necessaries, and superfluities, so that he that had most in his possession, was accounted of, as being the most eminent and grea∣test personage in the eye, rule, and esteeme of the world. But to come to the present times, though in the general through∣out all Europe, it is now found that Coines and Monies, of silver and gold (as is afore observed) is onely in use, and that all Commerce and traffique is principally drawne and maintained thereby; yet is it noted in this Map, that all Nations have not yet submitted their judgement to the prerogative of these two mineralls, but retaine still in use some other things serving in their stead and place; for first in the Ilands of Porto Ricco, Saint Dominico, and in many pla∣ces Severall sorts of moneys in use in severall Countries. of America, they have in use small peeces of Lether, currant for Coines amongst them, not that they want silver and gold, for they injoy it in greatest abundance, but want the use and invention thereof; as of late dayes it is found to be established there by the Moneys of le∣ther in S. Do∣minico, &c. Spanyard, as with us in Europe. Neither was this onely the custome of these parts alone; for it is observable, that in Peru, and else∣where, where the greatest plentie of silver and gold was found out and digged, it was never put to this use by the Inhabitants them∣selves. Diverse yet in this kind to this day is the custome of Coines and Monies that are used and goeth currant throughout the world; for beside the aforesaid use whereto these mettals have beene put, as to be thus imployed, the common Standard to rule all trade and commerce, and the estates as well of the Prince as subject in Europe and many other parts of the world: those Nations that have beene de∣fective in this poynt, and that have not valued these mettals as the Europeans doe, have yet found out some particular thing or mat∣ter, whereto they have by a nationall and unanimous consent, (as it were) attributed this power to have a maine stroake in their ne∣gotiation and traffique, and wherein their wealth is found princi∣pally to consist. In sundry parts of Africa, they use for their small coines a kinde Moneys of shels in Tom∣buto. of shells as currant amongst them, though their greatest payments be made either in sand of gold, which they terme Tiburin, or in In∣got. The same is the use this day also in the kingdome of Tombuto, and other adjoyning Countryes. In other places of that Continent, they use Iron for their coine, Of Iron in Massa. their smallest peeces being an ounce waight; and this is seene pra∣ctised in Massa, and other kingdomes also thereabouts. In the kingdome of Congo is taken up along the Sea-shoare, great
store of shell-fishes, differing from the former used in Tombuto, cal∣led Of Lumaches in Congo. Lumaches, which they distinguish male and female, the shell whereof is there accounted a coine, and wherewith they use to buy both silver and gold, but with silver or gold either in masse or coine, can they not buy any other thing needfull whatsoever. In Melinda, they have little balles of glasse, in manner of our red beads, which come to them from Cambaia, and other places, Of Glasse beads in Me∣linda. and these are their coines and monies; and with them gold is neither found to be of account nor esteeme. In some places of Cathaie, their money is a kind of paper stamped, Of Salt and Paper in Ca∣thay. and in some other Salt baked into small cakes, for the excellent use and scarcitie thereof, passeth currant as coines amongst them. In Pegu their money is called Ganza, and is made of copper and leade, which every man may at his pleasure both coine and siampe Of Gansa in Pegu. that is able; for gold and silver is accounted as a Merchandize a∣mongst them. In Bengala their small money is a fruit resembling the Almond, Of Almonds in Bengala. which passeth currant from man to man in traffique. And in the Iland Sumatra, it hath been observed, that the sculls of their slaine Of sculls of dead men in Sumatra. enemies was accounted their greatest treasure, with which they buy and barter; and he is the richest man that hath the greatest number thereof in his house. And lastly, in many places of India they use pepper and Cocos nuts in liew of money; and the same pas∣seth Of pepper and Cocos in India. currant for coine in many places of India: and to conclude, it may be observed throughout this MAP of COMMERCE, that though silver and gold is not the mettall generally in use for the coining and stamping of money throughout all the world; yet these other things specified, cary with them in matter of commerce in these places the like efficacie and power. To proceed then, Budelius, Varro and sundry Authors writing Moneys called by 3. severall names. upon the originall of moneys, and upon the excellencie of this predominant pointe of traffique; affirme that all coines in the ge∣nerall have been nominated by their severall and distinct names. 1. Moneta, 2. Nummus, 3. Pecunia; the reasons given thereof are Moneta. these: First, Moneta is said to have taken that name, and is deri∣ved a Monendo, which is to admonish and warne the people of the name of the prince, vel Nummi nota, and of such a signe or marke impressed thereupon, thereby alluding to the saying of CHRIST, Matthew 22. Where the Pharises brought him a penny, he thereupon demanding whose image and superscription that was? and they answered Caesars; then said he unto them, give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto GOD the things that are GODS. Secondly, Nummus is said to take its name as some will have it à Numerando vel Nomine, of the name of the Prince stamped upon Nummus. it, as a Duccat is said from Ducatus, or as some say from Numa Pompilius the Romane King, who is said to be the first that 1900.
yeares past, commanded moneys to be made, whereof ever since after his name every piece of money is called Nummus; or againe, as some hold, it is derived from Nomos, which signifieth a Law, and implyeth as much as such a Prince, or such a common wealth hath ordained money, from whom it hath taken a certaine price and valew. Thirdly, Pecunia is derived à Pecude. of cattle, sheep, and Oxen; Pecunia. wherein was said to consist the wealth of the ancients, and where∣on the figure thereof was stamped; and is construed to be all manner of living Creatures, wanting the forme of Man: and some hold that the name of money signifieth, not onely money numbred or told, but also all things that are contained in the World; aswell moveable as immoveable, liquid as solid; and in generall all things whatsoever men have upon the earth. From these three names and kinds grew first amongst the Ro∣manes a particular distinction, and nomination of the quality of the species, as they were currant in worth and esteeme amongst them: for they had then in use certaine moneys of copper, aswell as the others of silver and gold: and because every piece of the silver was in valew ten pieces of the copper, it was called Denarius; Denarij. and because every piece of gold was worth 10. pieces of silver, the same was also called Denarius; and thus for distinction sake, other Nations in their coines in after ages followed their example; and our English moneys came to have the apellation of starling, and to be distinguished into pounds, shillings and pence, as some say from the esterlins that were in times past the masters of our minte, and the refiners of our coines, which yet holdeth this name, and by Esterlin mony of England. which the same is knowne throughout all Europe. But to con∣clude this Chapter, however coines and moneys came at first to have their originall and names, and however the same came to be distinguished, and of what mettall soever the same is in these dayes found to be made of and framed; yet when once the same is allowed by the publike authority of the Prince and So∣veraigne Magistrate, it is held a capitall crime in all Coines deba∣sed or altered is a capitall crime. Countries, either todeface, mend, alter, or any waies to debase the same; and therefore most justly (the circumstances considered) doe the coines of Princes currant in all their Countries challenge a principall part and interest in the Universall commerce of the World.
CHAP. VI. Of weights in generall used in Merchandizing, and mentio∣ned in this MAP of COMMERCE. THE next principall point handled in this MAP of COMMERCE, is the Weights in generall of all Of Weights in generall. Kingdomes, and knowne Cities of trade, by the inven∣tion whereof (as by measures) a true meane was found out, to give every man his own; for all worldly things are found to be governd by it and measure; but most especially the same hath a great prerogative in all contracts and bargaines, where either buying or selling is either used or practised, which indeed is the fundamentall part of the Worlds Commerce and traf∣fique; for thereby are all commutations regulated, all accounts framed; and all profit and losse in trade found out and distingui∣shed: It is also one of the standard of all Kingdomes, Cities and Provinces, and therefore aswell as measures carries with it the approbation and authority of the soveraigne Magistrate, and there∣fore either to falsifie, adde or detract therefrom, is accounted a capitall crime, and worthy severest punishment. Now for their sorts; These weights are observed to vary and dif∣fer Differences of Weights in all Countries. in all Countries, aswell as in sundry Mart and principall Ci∣ties; though otherwise oftentimes neighbours yet are herein dis∣crepant, and not seldome it is seen, (as in this Map shalbe made evident) that severall sorts of weights are found to weigh severall sorts of commodities, in one and the selfe same place, City and Countrey; as in England where it is observed, that raw silke is weighed by the pound of 24. ounces, and other commodities by the pound of 16. ounces: and in Aleppo some commodities is weigh∣ed by the Rotolo of 680. drams, some by a ℞ of 700. drams; and some by ℞. of 720. drams. And as these weights are found to vary in respect of their greatnes, so are they found to differ in respect of The greatest denomination. their denomination; for some Countries use to weigh their com∣modities by hundreds, some by quintalls, some by centiners, talents, thousands, weighes, shipponds, chargos, lisponds, roves, stones, bahars, mands, candils, peculls, and the like. A second denomination is againe produced out of this, as a Second deno∣mination. lesser weight, whereof the former is composed; and is also found in use for weighing in sundry places, as pounds, mans, batmans, ro∣tolos, minas, lodoros, oakes, cattees, barotes, seares, wesnoes and the like. A third sort againe are found to be in use, whereof these latter are composed and in use, in the custome of weighing; and which
are of another denomination, and lesser in quantity, as Ownces, Third deno∣mination. whereof sometimes 12 14 16 20 24 and 30. doe make according to the custome of the place the pound weight, and then againe have a subdivision into drams, scruples, obolos, carats and graines; so that the greater containes the lesser in parts, which also is obser∣ved Least deno∣mination. to differ according to the proportion of the first and greatest; for the Cantar, which commonly is observed to bee the greatest weight, is so termed, as being the hundred of hundreds, and consi∣steth Hundreds, &c. sometimes of 100 li. just, though sometimes of hundreds, of 112 l. of 120 l. of 125 l. 128 l. and 132 l. The Weigh and Cargo are in like manner found likewise to va∣rie Cargos, &c. in many places, and to consist sometimes of 163 l. of 181 l. of 200. and 300 l. to a weigh, and Cargo or charge. The Shipond also consists sometimes of 300 l. sometimes againe Shipond, &c. of 320. 340. and 400 l. the Shipond. The Lispond also is found to consist sometimes of 15 l. of 16 l. Lispond, &c. and 20 l. to the Lispond. Roves are noted likewise to bee in some places 10 l. 20 l, 25 l. Roves, &c. and 30 l. and sometimes 40 l. to the Rove. Stones are noted also to consist of 6 l. 8 l. 10 l. 14 l. 16 l. 20 l. Stone, &c. 21 l. 24 l. 32 l. and 40 l. to the Stone, still altering according to the custome of the place. Rotolos are also noted to vary and to consist sometimes of 400. Rotolos, &c. drams, sometime of 600 dr. 680 dr. 700 dr, and 720 drams, accor∣ding to the custome of the place, and according to the custome in use of the commoditie. In all which the Merchant must not be ignorant, that intends to The Merchant must be vers'd in all vveights. make either an use, or reape a benefit by this MAPPE OF COMMERCE: for all weights must bee to him (in regard of his skill and judgement) as one weight; knowing readily how to make his calculations in all contracts; how the one weight doth advance of the other, or what the one may want of the other, ma∣king his accompt of concordancie allowing or deducting, where hee finds the discrepancie arising by an overplus or by a want ei∣ther in the one or in the other. Now for the manner of weighing in generall (so farre forth as Two manners of vveighing in use. ever I have observed) hath beene noted to have beene done by two severall wayes; that is, either by a Beame, or by a Romano or stalier: the weight by Beame I hold the best and justest perfor∣med By Beame. with leaden, brasse or iron weights, provided the said Beame be good and even both emptie and laden with one equall weight; and this is seene to bee the common custome of weighing in England, Netherlands, and in many other places and Countries. The weight by stalier which is used in Turkey, Barbary and Italy and sundry other Countries, I hold not so sure; for thereupon is By Stalier. marked all the number of weights that may be weighed thereby, which by the helpe of a small counterpoise removed to severall
stations, supplies sometimes the place of a pound, and sometimes the place of 100 pound, wherein is oftentimes found great deceit, which by the buyer and seller is carefully and heedfully in those places to be both prevented and avoided. Now if with a Beame one would abbreviate a long labour with To abbrevi∣ate the labour of vveighing. small time and paines, and weigh much with few weights, his weights must be made by an augmentation doubled, as by peeces of 1 lib. 2 lib. 4 lib. 8 lib. 16 lib. 32 lib. and 64 lib. making in all 127 lib. with which all summes under that number may be com∣prehended and weighed, and some exercised in great affaires, by single weights tripled have gone further and procured 1 l. 3 l. 9 l. 27 l. 81 l. &c. and thereby with little labour have performed very weighty and great businesse: but I leave this to the ingeni∣ous, and to him that shall fancie this method and manner of weighing. In all Cities then and places of traffique there is found a weight Waights au∣thorised by the Magistrate. (as I said) authorised by the Magistrate, which to alter or dimi∣nish is ever held a capitall crime: this weight thus setled in every place and Citie of trade, is reputed the Standerd of the place, by which as well the inhabitants as strangers doe make their bar∣gaines and contracts, and without which many bargaines cannot be made and perfited, and therefore partly to avoid scruple and doubt, and partly to doe justice to all men, and partly to decide all controversies incident in weighing, there is in the most emi∣nent Cities a publique Weigh-house set up and appointed, where Weigh-house. every man may repaire unto either for necessity of weighing, or tryall of his weights, and which is authorised by the Prince as a rule for all men that shall have occasion to make use thereof in the said places, serving sometimes as the beame whereby his cu∣stomes and dueties are paid him; the Master, Overseer or Weigher being ever sworne and deputed to doe justice and right in his Weigher svvorn. weighing, not onely betweene man and man, but (if need be) be∣tweene the Prince and the Subject. This Weight accounted thus the common and received Standerd By which weights the weight of this booke is cal∣culated. of Cities and Countries, is it, upon which (as neere as I could possi∣ble) I have in all these following places made my observations, and from thence raised not onely the agreement thereof, with o∣ther neighbouring places and Cities, but also with that which we call our haberdebois weight of England, wherein with all industry I have laboured to finde out the truth and certainty thereof, which (as subject to error by reason of the diversity) I must re∣ferre to the future triall of the better experienc'd, concluding this point with a way and method invented by unequall weights to accord the weights of any two knowne places or Cities, which A way to ac∣cord the weight of any two places. briefly is thus performed. Prepare a ballance as exactly made as is possible, that a very little thing may cause them to incline one way or other; likewise pre∣pare
of the one place, the just pound, the halfe pound, the ¼ the ⅛ the 1/16 the 1/32 the 1/64 the 1/128 and the 1/125 part of that pound, if it be possible, untill you judge it to be sufficient; then take the just pound waight of the other place, and put it into one of the Scales of the Ballance, and in the other Scale, put such waights as may justly counterpoise the pound waight of that place; as for ex∣ample: Say that the halfe the ¼ the ⅛ and the 1/256 part of the pound of the first place doe justly counterpoise the pound waight of the o∣ther place; then by consequence it followeth, that 128 li. 64 li. 32 li. and 1 li. that is in all 255 li. of the first place, doe justly waigh 256 li. of the other place. Againe, say that the 1 li. the ⅛ 1/226 1/512 of the first place, doe justly counterpoise the pound waight of the o∣ther; then I inferre thereby that 512. 64. 2. and 1. that is in all 579 li. of the first place doe justly waigh 512 li. of the other place; by which the calculation may be made both to the hundred and to the pound, therefore the further search and consideration thereof, I willingly here omit, and referre the same to the curio∣fitie of the more ingenuous. CHAP. VII. Of Accounts and Account-keeping in generall, observed in this MAP of COMMERCE. ALL rationall negotiators, and traders in generall will Accounts ne∣cessary in the Mappe of Com∣merce. grant, that this Mappe of Commerce would appeare to be very imperfect, if it should want the due rules and observations whereby accounts are in all Cities of commerce ordered and kept, which though found in themselves to varie in severall Kingdomes, and places, as having of∣tentimes a dependency, and sometimes concurrency with the coines and moneys of each kingdome; yet in all places they are not found to have the like agreement together. Some Countries be∣ing observed to keep their accounts, and the denomination there∣of in imaginary coines, such as neither that Countrey nor place hath either proper coine or money, that hath any affinitie there∣with, Accounts kept diversly in di∣vers Cities & Countries. as by daily practise is seene used in Venice by the duccat of lire 6⅕; in Florence by the Crowne of gold of lire 7½; and as in Eng∣land it is used in those ancient accounts, kept in some offices for the revenews of the Crowne by the name of Markes, of which wee finde not at this day any proper coine or money in use. Againe, it is seene by experience, that one and the selfe same place, affoordeth severall denominations in their accounts, and divers wayes are used in one and the selfe same Citie and Countrey therein; as in some
Cities of Italie, some are observed to keepe their accounts in lire, soldi, and denari; and some againe in the same place in Crownes, or scudi, soldi and denari; as the like in England is noted, some as be∣fore observing their rules of accounts in markes, and pence, and some, and those the most usuall and common, in pounds, shillings, and pence, starling; the which is necessarily both duely to be lear∣ned, and truely to be knowne, and understood, by such as shall have occasion to make use of, and exercise the art of Merchan∣dizing, and this Mappe of Commerce. Now for the methode used in keeping these accounts, every The methode used in Ac∣counts is di∣vers. Countrey and Nation are observed to frame to themselves, waies meanes and rules, whereby the same is performed and perfitted, and have for the most part every Countrey a peculiar forme by themselves. The generall knowne methode and best forme is by the laudable and excellent way of Debitor and Creditor, first in∣vented in Italie, and now generally practised by most part of the The best is by way of Debitor and Creditor. eminent Merchants of Europe, received for the most absolute, best, and truest methode of accounts that hitherto hath been found out and invented, which here to set downe would challenge a Vo∣lume by it selfe; yet such is the necessitie of this knowledge, that every Merchant should by the rules of his profession, be well ver∣sed and seene therein; the grounds whereof being universally knowne and daily taught, I referre to my good friends, Master Raphe Handson, and Master Valentin Markham, who are both ex∣cellent, and excellently learned therein; concluding this place with 4. principall rules required, and not to be omitted by such Foure rules re∣quired in an Accountant. as have to doe, and practise accounts in Merchandizing. First, it is required that in his account-keeping, he write all and singular the passages thereof, and thereto belonging, with all cir∣cumstances 1 To write all, and all circum∣stances. of time, price, and other conditions, in every bargaine, contract, adventure, receipt of goods, sales, &c. in which though there should afterward appeare an errour, either by disorderly charging, or by over or under charging, yet it will easily at a second view be both corrected and amended. Secondly, It is required that he never come behind hand with 2 Not to suffer his accounts to out-run him. his accounts, by letting the same run over-long, for being daily fi∣nished the trouble will be nothing, but being a while neglected, a man is still found to be the loather and loather to goe in hand therewith, and thus growing more loath every day than other, when necessitie constraineth him, either he is inforced to mumble them up to his owne prejudice, or to cast them off, and to neglect them altogether to his owne shame and undoing. Thirdly, It is required, that he keepe them, just, true, and perfect, and not to falsifie any parcell, matter, or thing, nor yet interline 3 To keep them true and per∣fect or shuffle one matter with another, but to set every thing (either appertaining to himselfe, or to any other) plainly, directly, and orderly downe.
Lastly, It is required, that he be well skild in the art of Arith∣metique That he be a good Arith∣metician. and numbering, which indeed is the principall steppe to this art of accounting, and the first degree of this Mappe of Com∣merce, without which knowledge, let none dare to intitle him∣selfe a Merchant, nor expect a benefit from this Worke. For the skill whereof I referre the learner, to the judicious, and excellent A∣rithmeticians of this Citie, and so proceed to the next generall point of Commerce, which is Measure. CHAP. VIII. Of Measures in generall used in Merchandizing, and com∣prehended in this MAP of COMMERCE. THE next materiall point here handled, is the Mea∣sures Of Measures in generall. in generall, used in all Kingdomes and knowne Cities of trade, by meanes whereof a certaine way and method was found out and invented to distin∣guish and order by rule the length and bredth of all commodities measurable, especially accustomed in all manner of fabricks, either linen, wollen, silkes or other stuffes; and this is ob∣served also (as in weights,) to have a speciall prerogative in many bargaines and contracts, where either buying or selling of things measurable is subsistent and in use; being granted to be a funda∣mentall point of all the traffique and commerce of the Universe; for thereby as by weights many commutations are regulated, many accounts are framed, and profit and losse is also thereby found out and distinguished: It is also estimated to be one of the standards of Kingdomes and Cities; and therefore (aswell as weights) carieth with it the approbation and authority of the Soveraigne Magi∣strate; and therefore to adde or detract therefrom, is ever in all Countries held punishable, and accounted a capitall crime. The measures of length are found so diversly to vary, that every False measure is punishable by the Magi∣strate. City and Province is noted almost to have aswell a distinct mea∣sure as a distinct weight, which in themselves oftentimes are found much to differ; and some particular Cities are observed by cu∣stome to have divers measures, for divers sorts of commodities, as Divers Coun∣tries have di∣vers Measure it is seen practised by example in the City of London, where the yard is accounted the common measure for cloth of woollen, and silke &c. the elle accounted the common measure for linen, and the goad for frizes, cottens and the like, which in many other Countries is also observable. And as for measures in the generall, It is a recei∣ved opinion that the first measure that was to this end invented
was the cubit, agreeing as some imagine with the halfe elle, the which was divided into 4. parts or quarters, and every quarter Cain the first inventor of Weights and Measures, Io∣sephus. into 4. inches; peradventure this was in those times a generall rule to all Nations: but time and traffique have since given to eve∣ry Countrey a particular measure, and therewith a peculiar law of measuring, which containes a succinct length by it selfe; which at this day wee see practised through most parts of the knowne World in severall waies: and thus diversity of places gave also di∣versity of names to their measures, such as are the ell yard, goad, fathome, cane, alne, brace, pico, sticke, palme, vare, covado, and the like. But Invention by the helpe and asistance of time, growing Measures of solid bodies. more perfect and absolute, and finding that neither weight nor yet this measure could extend it selfe to all commodities used in and by the way of merchandize; the art of measuring of solid bodies became to be hence produced, as we see it in use in the measuring of timber, stones and such like commodities: neither yet was com∣merce satisfied herewith; for the ingenious Merchant found it still defective, and therefore to have it yet more perfect, invented the art of concave measures, that should serve aswell for dry as for liquid commodities, as it is seen practised at this day for graine, rice and such like commodities; and for oyles, wines, waters, liquors and such like commodities, setting by this way by art and invention, in Measures of dry and liquid commodities. most of these commodities, a concordance of measure with weight, as in other commodities was set a concordance of weight with measure: but forasmuch as this knowledge in the generall is of it selfe too capacious and large to be particularly handled, as the subject required, I have been therefore constrained to confine my selfe to measures of length; onely as being the most necessary part of this MAP of COMMERCE, yet so as I have not omitted the rest where they have fallen within the compasse of my obser∣vation; and if I have therein been found defective, the vastnesse of the subject may plead my excuse. He then that intendeth by way of traffique to make use of this tract, must aswell be skild in measures, (as I have observed) he All measures to the Mer∣chants must be as one Mea∣sure. ought to be in weights; for he must not onely readily know his owne measure as it stands, and is found to be in it selfe in use, but also the measure of that place whereto he bendeth his trade and ne∣gociation, allowing or deducting by addition or substraction where the overplus or want doth challenge a part, to make a due proportion of both, and be so well versed therin, as that all mea∣sures may be to him as one measure, by a true calculation of the length or the shortnes therof. Againe it is found by the observation of Merchants, that in all Countries and well governed Cities, there is for the reiglement All Cities of trade have sworne and publique Mea∣sures. of things measurable, instituted a publike measurer, authorized by the Soveraigne Magistrate, who is sworne to decide all con∣troversies
that happen in and about the Art of measuring; to whose honesty and faith is intrusted this publike measure, and to which all Merchants and traders may in time of need and diffe∣rence repaire and have recourse unto, and by which in many pla∣ces An Instru∣ment to find out the agree∣ment of Mea∣sures in any wo Cities. it is seen that Princes doe receive their duetie of customes up∣on commodities measurable; and by this common, known and re∣ceived publike measure, I have made my observation in all places, and as neere as I could, not onely rectified the same in the agree∣ment thereof with other neighbouring places and Countries, but also with our own use in England: and therefore to conclude this point, I have inserted the forme of an Instrument here fol∣lowing, easie to be made, and purposely invented to accord the measures of any two known places or Countries, whether they be ells, vares, yards, canes or any other measure whatsoever. First then learn the order and custome of measuring of all those sorts of commodities in both the places which you would inquire after, then prepare a smooth straight borde, plate or such like, and draw upon the same a straight line of the length of the measure in one of the places with his allowance of measuring, either an inch or shaftnet or such like; which for example I will demonstrate in the Figure following, A B. Frst then divide the line A B into 4. equall parts, which is CDE, and divide the quarter of A C in∣to 250. equall parts, and number them from 10. to 10. upwards, making the print C the 750. part; for the number of parts con∣tained in the other three empty quarters: Then marke upon the line A B the length of the measure of the other place, with his allowance, which is for example from B to F being just in the 900. parts; therefore 900. of those mea∣sures in the first place, make just 1000. of those measures in the o∣ther place: but if the measure of the other place be longer then the measure of the first place, as for example, if it were from B to G, then take the distance of A G with a compasse, and set the one foot in C, and extend the other towards A, which for ex∣ample doth come to rest in F, being 150. parts from C; there∣fore then 1150. measures of the one place makes just 1000. of the other, by which you may calculate to a lesser proportion; and this is as much as I conceive needfull to insert con∣cerning the knowledge of measures in generall, and proceed to the next, which is the know∣ledge in generall of commodities used by the way of Merchandizing.
CHAP. IX. Of Commodities in generall used by the way of Mer∣chandize, and of the knowledge thereof. HAving spoken of Cities of trade in generall as they Commodities in generall u∣sed in Merchan∣dizing, and the knowledge thereof. are distinguished in these dayes; and of the Customes more or lesse that are imposed (by Princes in all Cities where trade is practis'd) upon all commodities used as Merchandize, by such as negotiate and use traffique and of the moneys and current Coines where∣by this trade is driven, with the weights and Measures whereby the same is distinguished and regulated: the next thing to bee hand∣led in order is the Commodities and Wares themselves, wherewith this Commerce is maintained and practised in every Citie and Coun∣trey comprised in this MAPPE; which is the proper thing upon which the said duties are paid, and for which the said mo∣neys are seene to bee given in Exchange, by the way of buying and selling. All Commodities then that are used as Merchandizes by traders All commodi∣ties are either naturall or artificiall. and Merchants may properly bee distinguished into two kinds; and are either naturall or artificiall commodities; naturall commo∣dities I call such as the Earth or Creatures, either with or without the labour and industry of man doth naturally produce of them∣selves: Naturall com∣modities. of which kinds are wines, oyles, cottons, wools, fruit, graine, raw silke, spices, druggs, jems, gold, silver and the like. Artificiall commodities I call such as are either wrought or perfi∣ted Artificiall commodities. by Art or Mystery, of which kind are all fabriques of either wollen, linnen, silke, and also the commodities of all manuall crafts, this day seene practised through the world in sundry Countries, within the compasse of which two sorts may all wares and all things used as commodities be comprised. Againe, both the naturall and artificiall commodities may bee distinguished into two other sorts and kinds, which are either such as are staple and lasting commodities, or impairing and de∣caying commodities. The staple and lasting commodities I call such as indure at all Staple commo∣dities. times and continue for ever in their true estate and first condition of goodnesse, never decaying, nor never losing their vertue and qualitie: and of this kind are jems, gold, silver, copper, brasse, lead, iron, steele, and the like. The impairing and decaying commodities I call such as are either Deying . subject to corruption, or to leakage, and doe lose and decay ei∣ther
by long lying, or by keeping, as are the fruits of the Earth, corne, wines, oyles, currens, figgs, fish, and the like. The infinite variety of which passeth any one mans judgement perfectly to know and distinguish, because that Nature and Art in all Countries and places brings into the world such change and diversitie, in place, time, use and qualitie in all professions, that it were a worke endlesse to set downe the natures, conditions and properties thereof; therefore it hath contented me in all Coun∣tries and Cities heere collected, to nominate only the commodi∣ties that the places are observed to afford, either naturall or artifi∣ciall, either staple or perishable, wherewith Merchants are found to negociate, and upon which it is found that a custome is imposed by Princes, and by them satisfied accordingly. And yet forasmuch as many of these commodities herein named and found throughout the world, may seeme strange to some not well versed in the generall knowledge therof; and yet this know∣ledge so necessary to all that professe Merchandizing; I hold it not improper here, not onely to adde a word or two, conducing to this so needfull a skill; but also to the preservation and true keeping thereof in their prime goodnes and beauty. He that intendeth then by his pen to teach the theorique of this mysterious part of Commerce must needs come short of his ayme: I hope I may therfore be well excused if I appeare defective here∣in; for I know it is practice and dayly use that maketh a man skil'd in this Art; and many lets and impediments appeare dayly in many men, that hinder the true attainement thereof: for it must needs be granted that hee that is imperfect in any one natu∣rall sense, or wants those helps that nature affords to perfect minds, must neither be a Merchant, nor yet addict himselfe to this know∣ledge: for any one sense being either depraved or defective in part or in whole, will inforce him to commit (against his will and mind) many errors, and constraine him to take the bad for good, or (at least wise) the bad as soone as the good; and som∣times (as we say) chalke for cheese, or one thing for another: for experience tels us that all commodities are not learned by one sense All commodi∣ties are known by the senses. alone, though otherwise never so perfect; nor yet by two, but somtimes by three, somtimes by foure, and somtimes by all: and yet this Art is now a dayes come to that heigth, (I may say) to that heigth of cunning, that all these are little enough too. But in the generall it must be granted that the eye above all the rest of the senses, still claimeth an especiall interest and prero∣gative herein, and must ever bee admitted as one of the chiefest that must still accompany the rest in this distinction, and there∣fore many things are oftentimes found saleable that are pleasing thereto; and in some commodities the same is noted to have the whole stroake, and onely to give the judgement, as in all manner of colours, and such like things depending thereupon.
Some are noted againe to require the sence of feeling to be as∣sistfull to the eye, as where the hand is of necessity to be imployed, as is seen in cloth and such commodities. Some require the sence of hearing, as where the eare giveth a help to the eye, as is seen in some mettalls, mineralls and such like: and some againe require the sence of smelling, as where the nose helpeth the eye, as is seen in some drugges, perfumes and the like; and lastly, some requireth the sence of tasting, as where the palate giveth the helpe, as is seen in spices, wines, oyles, and many such commodities, where it is to be noted A principall part of Mer∣chandise con∣sists in the knowledge of commodities. that in this knowledge doth consist much of the Art of Merchan∣dizing, a principall part of which profession is properly to know and learn the same; and therefore a Merchants judgement must no be limited within the compasse of any one particular trade or Vocation: for herein must his mystery, skill and art exceede all o∣ther, as requiring by necessity a more generall knowledge then any other tradesman; from whom there can be expected no more, then a skill in those commodities they challenge a property or right by trade unto; or as appertaining particularly to their pe∣culiar profession and calling. This is manifested in many trades-men, as in the goldsmith, whose knowledge is confined in silver and gold, and in the goodnes, finenesse A Merchant must be seene in all commo∣dities, and quality thereof: In the Ieweler, whose knowledge is confined in Iems and precious stones; in the Clothiers to their clothing, in the Druggesters to their drugges, in the Grocer to his spices; and so ge∣nerally in all others: But the Merchant whose judgement must be larger, must have skill in all, and have a generall inspection in every part and member of each of them, as being onely branches of his unlimited knowledge; which is not confinable to commodi∣ties and wares of value and consequence onely, but also to the wares of the meanest artificer; so that in this point his art may be com∣pared to the Poets, whose excellency must consist in a coursory judgement in all sciences, and to be learned in all professions, the difference being that the Merchants skill, must be reall, solid and substantiall, and the Poets may be fained and poeticall. Therefore both the naturall and artificiall commodities must be comprehended within the circuit of his judgement, and into all And in all trades. trades he ought to have a generall insight, as with the fisherman, he must dive into the deep, and know all sorts of merchantable fish, as ling, codde, haberdine, herings, pilchards, salmon, eeles, how caugh and how preserved, and the proper season for the same. With the Husbandman and labourer, he must have insight in the Harvest of the Earth, and know all commodities that the same is found naturally to afford for Merchandize, as all manner of corne, graine or pulse; the vintages for all manner of wines, the recoltoes for all manner of oyles, cottens, currants, figges, reasons, and other fruit of the Earth, how and when the same is gathered, and how and by what meanes the same is kept and preserved: with
the shepheard to know all manner of wools, with the woodman to know all manner of timber, and all circumstances thereto be∣longing; and to conclude, his skill and inspection must be such, that it extend it selfe from the commodities belonging to the meanest artificer, to the commodities belonging to the most emi∣net shop-keeper, which I neither know, nor yet am able in all neces∣sary points to learn; but specially so much of this knowledge must not be omitted as cometh within the compasse of that place, wherein and whereunto the Merchant resideth or bendeth his trade and adventures. A Merchant must know the value of all commodities, and all other circumstances thereof. Neither yet must his knowledge rest it selfe here upon the consideration of the meere goodnesse of commodities, but must also extend it selfe to the consideration of the true worth and value thereof, both in the price and in the esteem; and also know how the same is both requested and spent, and how imported, and how exported, either for use or for ornament, from one Countrey and place to another; together with the due circumstances of times and seasons, when this vent or sale presenteth, and when the same is out of use and not demanded: also when signes of plenty doth offer it selfe, and when of scarsitie, when of rising and when of falling; what commodities in themselves naturally are friends, and sympathise in the Shipping and will indure packing, binding, and ftowidge together; and which againe have a secret antipathie, and will perish and consume each other; all which circumstances I have at large handled in a tract which I have called the Merchants Magazin, which I may hereafter publish, if I find this my labour prove acceptable to Merchants. Merchants should reduce this know∣ledge of com∣modities to profit. Moreover, all Merchants indeavouring to obtain this exquisit∣nes, should not be satisfied with a naked skill and knowledge in these commodities thus belonging to other mens professions, but their maine scope and aime should be to make this knowledge and skill profitable and beneficiall unto them, as by exporting the super∣fluous commodities of one Countrey at the plentifull season of either harvest, recolto or vintage to another place or Kingdome, where either nature, scarsitie, the curiosity, pride, sloth or necessity of the Inhabitants challengeth a supply or stand in need of, which must be done with many advised circumstances. First, in that con∣sideration must be had aswell to the place as to the time, aswell in the importation as in the exportation; and to the property and fitnes of both the place and time; for all commodities are not trans∣portable at all seasons, nor yet every season fit for every commo∣dity; some commodities requires winter and cold seasons for trans∣portations, and some againe requires summer and warmer wether, and in the fitnes of the place, a judicious eye is to be had, and the same to be done with a great deale of providence and circum∣spection, observing well the nature and property of the place, whither the same is to be imported, and whence exported, and
not as that Dutch Merchant is said unfitly to have done, that car∣ried fish to Rome at Easter, or shooe-hornes and hats to Constantinople, or as we commonly say coales to New-castle, where great quantities are daily digged up and vented thence to all parts of the World. And for as much as Merchants find not at all times, a present Merchants should know how to pre∣serve all com∣modities. vent and sale for their commodities, according to their minde, and to a contented profit, therefore their knowledge must yet extend it selfe so farre, as that they know how the same is both to be pre∣served and kept, from either spoyling or perishing; for experi∣ence shews, that almost every severall commoditie doth demand almost a severall and different way of preservation and keeping, that the same may continue and hold its prime vertue, worth, and goodnesse, both in colour, substance, and beautie; and also know what may be opposite therto, and incident either to spoyle, hurt, harme, or prejudice it: for first some commodities are observed to be best preserved drie, as is seene in some sorts of Spices, Drugges, Sugars, raw silke, and such like, and these require a dry, close, ware∣house or magazin for stowedge thereof; some are found to be best preserved by lying close without ayre or vent, as some wines, some fruits, and such like; and some are observed to be best pre∣served by moisture and no ayre, as Tobacco, Civet, Muske, Verdigrace, and such like; and so in some other commodities, which doe also differ in respect of the place; some commodities requiring low and close Celleredge, and some high and airy warehouses, &c. all which things are considerable in the housing and keeping of wares, and commodities, and necessarie to be knowne, least that by ignorance a damage be sustained in staying for a Market, or a fit or more proper season for the sale and vent thereof. Neither is it sufficient that a Merchant doe know how to pre∣serve Merchants should know how to better their commo∣dities. his wares and Commodities in their first splendor, goodnesse, and vertue, but their skill must extend, if possible, to give it new vigour, life, strength and beautie, being either by casualtie or time, dead or faded, dying or perishing, which though in some commo∣dities it may (in some sort) be performed, yet in all commodities it is a matter not onely unprobable, but utterly impossible to be in any manner of wayes effected; for this onely secret, if any where it were to be learned, would prove a most profitable knowledge, and worth the learning, and a mysterie that would too soone en∣rich tradesmen and Merchants. Yet some such there be their Arts∣masters, who before they will throw away their goods, when ei∣ther they are in part decaying, or totally perishing, will trie ma∣ny wayes and conclusions to rectifie the defaults and defects there∣of; sometimes by commixtures, compositions and helpes, adding excel∣lent good to the very worst, or sweet to sowre, or one colour to another; as is imagined is too oftentimes practised by the art of the Vintner, in his old perished or palled wines. Others againe by changing the Objects, turning one die into another, as it is
conceived is daily practised by Mercers, and others, by new dying of spotted stuffes and silkes: many such wayes being practised, which the ingenious head and hand of the Artsman hath found out, and invented, to save, preserve, maintaine, and sometimes to restore a commoditie that is wasting and perishing, which I referre to those that are more skilfull therein. Now the last point resting to conclude this Chapter, is to shew How a Mer∣chant may have knowledge in all commodi∣ties. briefly how this knowledge first spoken of in commodities may be gained and acquired, which doubtlesse is best done by experience, the true mother of knowledge; and this experience is best gotten by often viewing the same, and heedfully marking the qualitie and properties thereof, and especially the best and principall of each sort, that a man would be expert in; to which end, it is ever good to procure and keepe patterns, and samples, and thereby so to im∣print the very Idea thereof in a mans minde, that at sight of the like or equall, the same may instantly be knowne and discerned, and the sooner to obtaine this knowledge, a man that would learne must be very inquisitive of men of experience that are able to in∣struct in the commodities required, and learne from such what is the principall notes requisite thereunto, either in their colours, goodnesse, substance, vertue, taste, seeing, or feeling; and what he hath Merchants to write downe their observa∣tions upon commodities. thus learned and gained, to take order never to forget, by com∣mitting the same to writing, and therewith to note, the signes and markes of the goodnesse and badnesse of all those commodities that a man doth either deale in, or would learne to know, and to make this knowledge the more compleat, to note downe therewith all manner of charges incident thereto, and that grow in that place upon the same, with the ordinary price which there it doth com∣monly beare and hold; and though these notes should either by hast or mis-information be at the first rude, and undigested, or though many should prove frivolous, and to little purpose, it mat∣ters not much; the one sort may soone be better ordered, and the other may as easily be rejected; his better knowledge and a little consideration may amend both these defects, my reason for the same is, that the use and custome of noting in this manner, will make a man (especially young beginners) more skilfull and readie in this knowledge in a yeare, than he that taketh onely a bare, idle, and su∣perficiall view, shall be in his whole life time; for it must needs be granted, that it both perfecteth skill, and helpeth memory, which is the onely meanes hereto, and by graving deeper impressions in a mans minde, inforce him will he, nill he, to a more considerate and judicious observation, and marking thereof; when as he hath thus absolutely tyed himselfe to a necessitie of setting downe every commoditie, and each particular circumstance in this manner ther∣to belonging. And this being as much as I thinke needfull to in∣sert, concerning this point in generall; I will proceed to the next and last, which is of Exchanges practised amongst Merchants in the art of Merchandizing.
CHAP. X. Of Exchanges in generall, used by Merchants in this MAP of COMMERCE. THE next and last generall point handled in this Map Exchanges in generall pra∣ctised by Mer∣chants in the Mappe of Com∣merce. of Commerce, is Exchanges, which is observed to be the most mysterious part of the art of merchandizing and traffique, being not onely necessary for the know∣ledge of all Merchants, but also fit and usefull for such as negociate the publique affayres of Princes, and for such as sit at the sterne and government of the Common-wealth. The necessitie and commodiousnesse of these exchanges in all The necessity and commodi∣ousnes of Ex∣changes. traffique is doubtlesse very great, it having found in all Countries hitherto, such a generall allowance and approbation, and having for so many yeares stood uncontrouled, and is still preserved in its pristine splendor and integritie, shews evidently that at first the same was invented, and devised to a most excellent use and end, it being observed, that as money was devised, and first invented of the best, and purest mettals, to avoide the chargeable and trouble∣some carriage of commodities in trade, from one place to another; so was Exchanges of moneys, first also devised and found out to avoid the danger and adventure therof, and the chargeable and trouble∣some carriage of the same from one Citie or Country, to another. I conceive it will not be materiall for me in this place to rec∣kon The excellen∣cie, &c. of a bill of Ex∣change. up the divers manner of exchanges, that have beene of old in use, and as yet are practised amongst traders and Merchants, throughout the world, nor yet here insert the forme of a bill of ex∣change, which in it selfe is accounted so noble and excellent a speci∣altie, that it carries with it not onely a kind of commanding power to pay, but is accordingly observed, satisfied, and discharged; though directed from the servant to the Master. Such a high e∣steeme being ever had to the qualitie thereof, that the proceedings and ceremonies used therein, are both singular and extraordina∣rie, and are not subject to any prescription by Law or otherwise, but subsisting meerly of a reverend custome, used and solemnized in and about the same. Neither yet will I here mention, the for∣malities and peculiar rites and customes that is onely found to ap∣pertaine thereunto, either in the punctuall presentment, intimation, acceptation, protest and returne, that is requisite, and necessarie, and thereto belonging; for it is to be understood, that he that doth take upon him, the title of a Merchant, and intendeth to make use of this Mappe, ought not to be ignorant in all the particular cir∣cumstances
of place and time, either of presentment, of payment, of w protests in default, and therewith know the common rates go∣rning, the causes of rising, the signes of falling of the said prizes, hich I here willingly omit, reserving the same to a more fit oc∣sion in the end of this Tract. I have noted then the first use of this exchanging, and the excel∣ncie The mysterie of exchanges re∣duced to profi∣table princi∣palls. thereof, being preserved in times past in its true integritie d realitie; but those honest and innocent ends are vanished ith those innocent and honest dayes of our forefathers; for since rade by a more generall and universall Commerce and concurren∣ie of Nations, being growne to that height and perfection that ow it is, this faire and candid manner and use of exchanging, nd the most excellent commodities thereof, is in part given over; or the subtiltie of these times hath made an art and mysterie there∣f, which being reduced into heads and principals, hath proved  many places so profitable and beneficiall to the studious therein, at it is now a received opinion, that the excellency thereof ex∣eeds the art of Merchandizing it selfe, and what inventions and eights to inrich themselves, their policies have brought to the iew of the world, I leave to the censure of Malines and others, hat have at large discoursed thereof, and described the same. But where the ancient custome of Exchanges is still preserved nd maintained in its true and moderate use, and the crafts and buses thereof taken away and purged, it then appeares to be most xcellent, usefull, commodious, and beneficiall, as well to Kingdomes nd Cities in generall, as to private traders and Merchants in articular. I have observed before that all waights and measures should be All Coines brought into one by Ex∣changes. o the Merchant, as one and the selfe same waight and measure, bating or allowing, as the difference of the place requireth. o by this knowledge of exchanging should all Princes coines be rought into one and the selfe same qualitie, and paritie, and be o him, as one and the selfe same coine; for if the allay or Stan∣ard of one Princes moneys, be finer or better, than the coines and oneys used in that place where the Merchant resideth, and his onsequently courser or baser, the allowance given by exchange, ither in time, in price, or in both, makes up that disparitie, and etles thus a paritie between them, in drawing downe the one which is the finer, or raysing up the other, which is the baser, to an even scantling, time and price giving the allowance to rectifie both the one and the other, in equalitie and true value. But so farre forth is this to bee understood, that this is truely seene practised where a course of quiet traffique is setled be∣tweene two Kingdomes and Nations, continuing in amitie and firme peace together: But where Princes either by the necessity of warres, or accidentall great disbursements, have occasion, or doe use to inhance the current rates of their monies in their pay∣ments,
or decrying them in the receipts, and that moneys by that ei∣ther casuall or constant course, become either more plentifull or more scarce then ordinary, then these rules of paritie holds not so justly; yet ever so as having in it's selfe a predominant power o∣ver the sudden affaires of Princes in matters of moneys, and with The Exchanger rectifieth the disorders of Mints, and the necessity of Princes. all expedition possible rectifying by a common knowledge and con∣sent of Exchangers and Bankers, the error or necessitie of Princes and their mints (who indeed are the Soveraignes of all coines and monies) so that though the Exchanger be not called to the Princes Counsell, nor yet admitted to give his opinion and verdict, either in his mint, or in the allay of his current monies; nor yet to his Procla∣mations and Decrees in the settling or rectifying of the goodnesse or current value thereof; yet the over-ruling part or Ballance is in his hand, and hee orders (by an invisible mystery of a visible Ex∣change) the allay, value, debasement or inhancement thereof, with due allowances, circumstances, places and times being rightly conside∣red, such as the necessity of the Countrey, the plenty or scarcitie of moneys, or other such like accidents may admit; regulating by this meanes tacitely in his Closet, the disorders committed by mints, and the oversights which the great affaires of Princes ne∣cessities plunge them in: and thus erecting to himselfe and others of his profession a certaine Rule and publique Ballance, that shall serve as an equall Parr and Standerd of all Princes coines whatso∣ever; thereby (as with a Touch-stone) taking the true valuation thereof; distinguishing still the finenesse and coursnesse according to the true worth and reall goodnes, altering and changing the price and rate thereof, as time, place and occasion may admit and give consent thereunto. It now remaineth that I should shew this true Parr of Exchan∣ges, How to find out the Parr of Exchanges. and how it may be found out and discerned in all Exchanges, experience hath made it evident to all the learned in this Art, that the true Royall Exchange for moneys by bils of Exchanges, is fairely and substantially grounded upon the weight, fines, and valuation of the moneys of each severall Countrey, according to the Parr which by Bankers is vnderstood to be value for value, as the truth thereof is seene in our Exchanges in England, which hath its ground upon the weight and fines of our starlin English moneys, the weight and fines of each other Countrey according to their severall Stan∣derds, proportionable in the valuation, being truely and justly made, giving also thereby the price of the Exchange, in and for every place according to the denomination of the money, and by which all Exchanges are or should bee in themselves framed, cast up and calculated: but besides this reall Parr of Exchange, there is also a Merchants Parr, which in due place I shall declare. These Exchanges then in the generall propertie thereof, doe much differ both in the name and in the proportion betweene the gold and the silver observed in most Countries, and that to set
downe the Parr of Exchanges exactly, wee are to examine and compare, not onely our owne weight (as is aforesaid) with the weight of other Countries; but also the fines of our sterling Stan∣derds with the fines of the severall Standerds of the Coines of other Countries; and if wee bee found not to differ with them in the proportion betweene the gold and silver, then may our Exchan∣ges run at one and the same price and rate, both for gold and silver, taking the denomination according to the valuation of the moneys of each Countrey; and hereby shall wee find how much fine silver or gold our owne pound sterling containeth, and what quantity of other moneys either of France, Italy, Germany, Low Countreys, East∣land and elsewhere, wee are to have in exchange to countervaile the same, in the like weight and finenesse answerable to ours, bee it by the pound, doller, duccat, crowne, or any other imaginary or reall Coine, giving alwaies a value for value, and receiving the like, which is called by Exchangers (as I said before) the Parr; the which should in all Exchanges be so particularly knowne and con∣sidered, that as money is publica mensura, or the publique measure within the Realme betweene man and man, so should Exchanges thus made for these moneys, bee the publique measure betweene us and forreigne Countries, for all commodities either bought or sold, which therefore necessarily requireth a certainty in the cal∣culation of this Parr aforesaid, admitting neverthelesse (as I said before) an advantage upon the same upon good ground and just occasion on either side. But as the price of Exchanges is at this day seene to be at the on∣ly The price of the Exchanges at the dispo∣sall of the Ex∣changer. and sole disposall of the Exchanger and Merchant, and that the same carrieth with it a predominancie in the buying and selling of their commodities as is observed especially beyond the Seas, so ought they carefully and circumspectly to consider the true na∣ture thereof, and not only looke upon the present object, which is to know how the price of the Exchange goeth at the time when they have occasion to deale therewith, but also truely to consider the Reality of this Parr, as is aforesaid, and as it is in it selfe really found to be, for it is observed both here in England, and abroad elsewhere beyond Seas, that those who altogether doe practise this exchanging, and deale for monies by exchange, have this ob∣servation therein; for they being Exchangers indeed, know per∣fectly the weight and fines both of our English and of forreign coines, and comparing the same together, make thereby to themselves the true calculation of the Par aforesaid, wherein they are not di∣rected by the current valuation of coines, which is often seene to be inconstant and uncertaine; nor by the tolleration of moneys, either here or beyond the Seas, going sometimes and in some places current above the said valuation, and this indeed is one of the most mysterious parts that is included in this Art of Exchan∣ging, which the Merchant ought considerately to learne and di∣stinguish.
And concluding here all further observations and cir∣cumstances practised in the generall Exchanges amongst Mer∣chants, I referre the Reader, for what is here purposely omitted, to the end of this Tract, where I have inserted what I have con∣ceived to be further needfull hereunto. HAving then thus briefly run over the generall Heads vpon The particu∣lars observed in this Mappe of Commerce. which I have grounded this MAPP OF COMMERCE and Trade, and noted first the division of the world, according to the received opinion of moderne Authors, and shewed how the same is generally bounded, and how distinguished into Empires, King∣domes, Provinces and Islands, and how againe these Countreys con∣taine certaine eminent and principall Cities and Townes, both ma∣ritime and Inland, which for their scituation, opulence and con∣course of Merchants, doe merit the name of the great and famous places of Commerce and traffique in the world: And having there∣in observed the commodities either naturally there growing or ar∣tificially there produced, whereby trade is in the said places both maintained and preserved; and therewithall noted the generall duty of Customes and Imposts leavied upon the said Commodities by the authority of Princes, and settled in all the said traffiquing Cities, and collected in certaine publique places from thence ter∣med Custome-houses, and then shewed the coines current in those se∣verall Cities and Kingdomes with the originall and present kinds thereof in sundry Countries, and then the reall and imaginary de∣nomination of species, wherein Merchants are observed to keepe their accompts in all the said places, with the weights and mea∣sures there extant and in use: and lastly the manner how the Par and prices of all Exchanges in the said places are settled, ordered, continued and maintained: I will now proceed to the particulars thereof, making my en∣trance into AMERICA, as futhest from us, and as least knowne to us, and first survey the Trade thereof, according to my proposed Method in this universall MAPPE OF COMMERCE: And from thence coa∣sting through Africa, Asia and Europe, conclude my Pilgrimage, and finish my MAPPE in the desired Port of the CITIE of LONDON.
AMERICA AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF.
OF AMERICA AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF. CHAP. XI. THIS bodie then contained in this univer∣sall America and the Provinces thereof. Map, or (as now I may terme it) this World, is by Geographers divided (as I said before) into 4. parts, Europe, Africa, Asia and America; which last was alto∣gether unknowne to the ancients, and being of a large extent, the moderne have divided it, some into two, some into three parts, Mexicana, Peruana, Magellanica, and each of these parts are found to containe severall Provinces and Kingdomes, the which I will onely superficially look over, thereby the better to come to the Townes of traffique, scituated in those Provinces and King∣domes; upon which my method and present intentions will in∣force me the longer to insist upon: and because this last mentio∣ned, parts America as last discovered, is least known unto us, and the least frequented by our Nation; I thinke it not improper there to begin to delineate my MAP of COMMERCE, bor∣rowing herein the liberty of those navigators that publish their Cards, leaving unperfect to the view of all men those places, lands and harbours, which have not been fully discovered and found out; and thence sailing homewards by Africa and Asia into Eu∣rope, gathering in each Countrey as I passe more variety of colours to adorne and beautifie this Treatise, and so at last to close my whole labours, and finish my MAP within the circumference of London, as better known unto us, and as being better versed in their severall manner of negotiation.
This new World then called by us America, and now adayes pas∣sing by the name of the west Indies; being West in respect of its Scituation, and India in respect of its wealth, was at first discove∣red by Christopher Columbus à Genoes, at the charges of Ferdinando, and Isabella King and Queene of Castilia, after 63. dayes saile from Sivil. Then secondly by Americus Vespatius à Florentine, at the charges of Emanuel King of Portugall: and thirdly, by Iohn Cabbot a Venetian, at the charges of Henry the seventh King of England, the first and last had their adventures of discovering of some Ilands onely in this part; and Americus of the Maine con∣tinent, and thereby gained the honour of giving name to that vast circuit of Earth, which since by sundry others have been more exactly discovered, as by our Countrey-men Drake, Candish, Frobusher, Davies, Willowby, Burrows, and others as desiring to share with the first discoverers in the riches and wealth which thence spread it selfe over all the other parts of the World. This America then or more properly in honour of the first dis∣coverer Columba, bounded as I mentioned before, is found by the Spaniard, (who challengeth all this large territory) for their own by conquest, to be divided into 2. parts, Mexicana, and Peruana, of which briefly. CHAP. XII. Of MEXICANA, and the Provinces thereof. MExicana containeth the northerne tract of America, and comprehendeth these distinct Provinces. Mexicana and the Provinces thereof. 1 Mexico. 2 Quivira. 3 Nocaragua. 4 Iucutan. 5 Florida. 6 Virginia. 7 Nurembega. 8 Nova francia. 9 Corterialis. 10 Estotilandia. Mexico giveth name to halfe America, now knowne by the name of nova Hispania, whence the Kings of Spaine stile themselves Hispaniarum Reges; it was very populous before the arrivall of the Mexico. Spaniards, who in 17. yeares slew 6. millions of the Inhabitants, rosting some, cutting off the members, and putting out the eyes of others, and casting them living to be devoured of wild beasts; to which place now is found no trade nor commerce by any Nation, save onely to the subjects of this King, and to such onely as are
known for naturall borne Spaniards, though at first the same was granted by Isabella to the natives of Castile onely, and Andalusia; but now indifferently to all. The commodities that this Countrey is found to afford for Mer∣chandise Commodities of Mexico. is principally gold and silver mines, sugar, tobacco, ginger, tallow, hides, and some spices not known to our ancestors till the discovery thereof; and amongst others not to be forgotten that admirable tree called Metle, which by them is planted and dressed Metle an admi∣rable tree. as we doe our Vines, having 40. kinds of leaves serving to severall uses, for when they are tender they make of them conserves, paper, flax, mantles, matts, shooes, girdles and cordage: on these leaves grow certaine hard prickles so strong and sharpe, that they use them instead of sawes: from the root of this tree cometh a juyce, like unto sirrop, which being sodde becometh honey, if purified be∣cometh sugar; or otherwise thereof is made both wine and vine∣gar: the rinde rosted healeth hurts and sores, and from the top∣boughes issueth a gumme which is an excellent Antidote against poyson. This Countrey is divided into 4. divisions, the first is nova Gali∣cia, St. Michael. the chiefe Towne thereof is called Saint Michael a Colonie of the Spaniards. The second is Mechuacan, one of the best Coun∣tries of new Spaine abounding in mulberry trees, silke, honey, waxe, and store of fish of all kinds; the principall Towne is Sinsonso, and the chiefe Havens are at Saint Anthonies, and at Saint Iames; or Sinsons. as the Spaniards called it Saint Iago. The third Province is Gu∣stacan, the chiefe City is Ilascalan, yeelding for beauty and state Ilascalan. precedencie to Mexico, and none other in all these parts, the principall part is Uillarico, a wealthie Town, as the place through which all the traffique of old and new Spaine doth passe. The City of Mexico fourth is Mexico, wherein that famous City of Mexico is seated: now the seat of the Spanish Uiceroy and Archbishop of new Spaine, this City is said to be scituated in a Lake upon certaine Ilands, as Uenice doth, every where interlaced with the pleasant currents of fresh and Sea waters, and carrieth a face of more civill govern∣ment then any other in America, though nothing, if compared with any in Europe: the Lake is said to be 50. Miles in compasse; on whose banks are found many pleasant Townes and houses: also it is said that 50. thousand Wherryes are seen here continually plying, and affords such quantity of fish that the same is worth 20000. Crownes yearely. The City of Mexico it selfe is 6. Miles in compasse, containing 6000. houses of Spaniards, and 6000. of Indians: it hath also a Printing-house, a Mint and an Vniversity; and some Churches of note that beautifie the same: it was vanqui∣shed by Fernando Cortes in Anno 1521. with an Armie 100000. A∣mericans, onely 900. Spaniards, 80. horse, 17. pieces of small ordi∣nance; in 13. Brigantins and 6000. Wherries, most of the Ameri∣cans were of Ilascalan, who were ever adversaries to the Mexi∣cans;
for which cause that City doth injoy many immunities to this day; and to conclude, according to the opinion of an English tra∣veller, whose relation I herein follow; Foure things are here re∣markable for beauty, their apparell, their women, their horses and their sticats: and thus much shall serve of Mexico. The second Province is Quivira, seated on the most westerne Quivira 2. parts of America, in which are two Provinces, Cibola taking its name from the chiefe City subdued by Francisco Vasques, in Anno 1540. and Nova Albion discoverd by that famous Sea-man Sir Fran∣cis Drake An. 1585. and by him so called: the chiefe commodities and riches of this Countey is kine, some men being owners of 40. thousand, and these serve to the Inhabitants here, as we say of our ale to drunkards in England, meat, drinke and cloth and more too; for first the hides yeeld them houses, or to say more properly the covering of them, their bones, bodkins, their haire thred, their sinewes ropes, their hornes, maws and bladders, vessels, their dung fire, their calfe-skins budgets to draw and keep water, their blood for drinke; and lastly their flesh for meat, &c. The third is Nicaragua, being South-east from Mexico, with which it agreeth in nature both of soyle and Inhabitants, and ac∣counted Nicaragua 3. for its pleasantnesse, Mahomets paradise, having trees in An admirable tree. great abundance, of that strange nature, that a branch touched by the hand of any man, withereth presently. The chiefe Citie is Nova Grenada, and Lea a Bishops Sea. The commodities thereof are, hony, waxe, cotton, and balam in great abundance; it is ex∣treame Nova Grenada. hot, and therefore not to be traveld by day, but by night: their winter beginneth in May, and from thence raineth for six moneths; the other six very faire and dry; and the day and night being here of equall length. The fourth is Iucatan, and was discovered in Anno 1517. which in the language of the place, signifieth, What say you? which Iucatan 4. was the answer the Inhabitants gave the Spanyards that first de∣manded of them the name of their Countrey; and since by this meanes retaines that name by the Spanyards. The chiefest Citie is Campechio, whence comes that wood so well knowne in Europe; also here is the Iland called by the Spanyard, Santo Crux, wherein Campechio. is a Citie of that name well fortified by them. The fifth is Florida, discovered by the English, under the conduct of Sebastian Cabbot, Anno 1467. then possessed by the Spanyards Florida 5. in Anno 1527. and called Florida; afterward the French got foo∣ting here in Anno 1562; but the Spanyards unwilling the French should be eye-witnesses of their rich bootie, waged warre with them so long, that there was not a man left on either side to main∣taine the quarrell; and then was Florida againe in 1567 abando∣ned: the Spanyards now hold here three strong Forts, St. Iames, St. Philip, and St. Augustin; which last was taken and burnt by Sir Francis Drake 1586. which since is repaired, and that is all the
Spanyards hold here at this day; desiring (as it seemes) neither to plant further himselfe, nor suffer other to doe it. The sixth is Virginia, wherein is said to be rich Veines of Allom, Virginia 6. Pitch, Tarre, Rosen, Turpentine, Cedar, Grapes, Oyles, plentie of Sweet Gummes, Dies, Tymber trees, Mines of Iron and Copper, and a∣bundance of Frait, Fishes, Beasts, and Fowle; it was discovered at the charges of Sir Walter Rawleigh in Anno 1584; and in honour of our Virgin Queene, called Virginia. The chiefe Towne is called Iames Towne, and of late dayes the northerne part of this Uirginia, being btter discovered than the other, is called New England, full of good new Townes and Forts; whither many persons dis∣contented with the forme of our Ecclesiasticall Government, are (said to be) the principall Planters, and is likely in a short time to prove a happie and flourishing Plantation. The seaventh is Terra Corterialis; on the South whereof runs Corterialis 7. that famous river of Caneda, rising out of the hill Hombuedo, run∣ning nine hundred miles, and found navigable for eight hundred thereof; this Country was discovered by Gasper Corteralis a Portu∣gall in Anno 1500. and affords onely some rich skins and furres for commodities and Merchandise. The chiefe Towne thereof is Brest, Cabomarso, and others of little note. The eighth is Nurembega, and the chiefe Towne carrieth that Nurembega 8. name, in possession of the French; other things remarkeable I finde not observable therein. The ninth is Nova Francia, discovered by Iaques Cartier, a Nova Francia 9. French-man, in Anno 1534. inhabited besides the Natives, with some few French-men. The chiefe Townes are Canada, and next Sanguinai, seated both upon two rivers so called, affording onely some skins and furres, especially Bevers, which thence by the French are transported into Europe. The last and tenth is Estotiland, called by us New-found-land; by the English discovered in Anno 1527. who imposed the names Estotiland 10. upon the Capes and Rivers which now they hold, where some have gone to plant, but the cold hath beene found to be too ex∣treame for the English constitution; but in the Summer season the Seas here are found to abound with Fish in such abundance, that a man may take in an houres space a hundred great Fishes, which being opened, salted and dried upon the rocks and braches, Fishing in the New found land. are hence transported to all parts of Europe; and knowne in England by the name of New-land fish; in French by the name of Morleux; in Italie, Bacalio; and in Spaine, Abadeses: five hundred sayle great and small doe from England yearly sayle to this coast, and to a place called the Banke, a sand of 15 in 20 fadome deepe, thirtie leagues off of this Coast; and these depart from our Coast about the end of Februarie, and arriving there about the middle of Aprill, unrigge their shippes, set up boothes and cabanets on the shore in divers creekes and harbours, and there with fishing pro∣visions
and salt, being their fishing in Shallops and Boats, continue it till September, and in this time doe not onely catch as many fish as will lade their shippes, but also as many as will lade vessels of greater burthens, that in the Summer come hither from England and other parts, to buy up the same, and purposely to transport it for Spaine, Italie, and other Countries: and this fishing en∣ded and the cold beginning, they leave their stations and booths and repairing aboord their shippes, lade their fish, and rigging their vessels, returne to their native homes, where these fishermen winter, and then become husbandmen; so that their lives may be compared to the Otter, which is spent halfe on land, and halfe in Sea. This fishing is found to be wonderfull beneficiall to our we∣sterne parts of England, whose Inhabitants confiding upon the constancie of the yearly fishing upon this Coast, it is usuall with them to sell the said fish either by tale or by the hundred waight in England by contract, before they either depart their homes, or before the said fish be caught, at profitable rates; and when their Summer is once spent, and that the cold approacheth, and that the fish beginneth to leave the Coast, they returne contented to their Families; where oftentimes in Winter they merrily spend, what thus in Summer they have painfully fisht for. Other notes of trading, worthy observations, at my there-be∣ing in my younger dayes, I observed not. The Waights and Coines of England passing there currant amongst the English, and the price of fish once generally Cut at their fishing Stales, doth afterward in liew of Coine, by way of Commutation, all that yeare passe cur∣rant for all needfull Commodities, and is esteemed as a valuable consideration amongst them from one man to another: and thus much for the Provinces and Cities of Mexicana. CHAP. XIII. Of Peruana, and the Provinces thereof. PERUANA containes the Southerne part of Ameri∣ca, eruana and the Provinces thereof. and is tyed to Mexicana by the Straight of Da∣rien, being ten miles broad; some hold the Spany∣ards did once intend to cut this Straight through, and make it navigable, and thereby shorten the way to the South Sea, China, Molluccos, but hitherto wee heare not that the same is any way attempted; this Part doth comprehend by the computation of the Spanyards, whose relation in this vast Countrey I must follow, five distinct Provinces.
1 Castella Aurea. 2 Guiana. 3 Peru. 4 Brasilia. 5 Chile; of each briefly. Castella Aurea, is the first, and was so termed by the Spanyards Castella Aurea. at its discovery, for the abundance of gold found therein, besides which it is admirably stored with silver, spices, and some drugges; it is divided into foure Provinces, which are first Castella del Oro, scituated in the very Isthmus, and is not populous, by reason of the unhealthfulnesse of the ayre, proceeding from the many standing pooles found therein: the chiefe Cities are Nombre de Dios on the East, and Panama on the West side thereof, both built by Di∣dacus Nombre de Dios. Niqesa the discoverer; which since for their unhealthfull scituation, were removed by the King of Spaines command, by Petro Aria, then Viceroy; through which two Townes commeth all the rich traffique that is betwixt Spaine and Peru; for whatsoe∣ver commodities cometh out of Peru, is unladen at Panama, caried Panama. by land to Nombre de Dios, and thence shipped for Spaine, and what commoditie comes from Spaine is landed at Nombre de Dios, is caried by land to Panama, and so laden for Peru. If I should silently passe over the attempt of one Iohn Ocknam Ocknams brave attempt. a follower of Sir Francis Drake, in his Worlds incompassement in this place, I should much wrong the honour due to so much worth: this man as Mr. Hackluit hath it, with 70. companions, in a creeke a little above these Townes, drew on shore his Barke, covered the same with boughes and leaves, and so leaving it marched over with his company, guyded by some negroes, untill he came to a River which ran into the South Sea, which by the relation and Mercator his Maps, may be Tomobonda, or the Creek Uentura, where he cut down timber, built him a freggat, entred the South Seas, went to the Ile of pearles, lay there 10. dayes, and there intercepted in two Spanish Ships 60000. pound weight of gold, and 200000. pound weight of silver in ingots, with divers other rich commodities; and after that returned safely againe to the main land, where rowing up the same streame where his frigat was built, he was discovered by some feathers pluckt from certaine soule they had kild for their provision, which swam upon the River down the current; and though by this meanes he was ta∣ken, and return'd not into his Countrey, nor yet his hidden Vessell; yet it is an adventure that deserves a remembrance from all such as are lovers of their Countries honour, and it is held in admiration by the Spanish writers that have made mention thereof. Andalusia Nova is the second; the chiefe Cities are Santa Mar∣garita, and Santa Sperita. Analusia Nova.
Nova Grenada is the third, the chief City is Iungia, a pleasant Nova Grenada. and strong Towne directly seated under the Equator; then next is St. Foy an Archbishops Sea and a Court of Iustice. Cartaghena is the fourth, accounted a fruitfull soile; but therein is found a tree, that whosoever toucheth doth hardly escape poy∣soning: Cartaghena. the chiefe City is Cartagena; which our Countrey man Sr Francis Drake, in An. 1585. surprised; where besides inestima∣ble summes of moneys, he tooke with him from hence 240. pieces of Ordinance. Guiana is the second Province, directly scituated under the E∣quinoctiall Guiana, second Province. line, and is the fruitfullest part of Peruana: the Inhabi∣tants in winter time dwling in trees, for feare of inundations, on which they built ma pretty Uilages and artificiall mansions: it is watered with two goodly Rivers; theone hath the name of Orinoque or rather Raliana, borrowing the same from Sr Walter Raughlie, who first of all to any purpose, made a plenary survey of this Countrey, with the commodities and scituation thereof in An. 1595. and found this River navigable for great Ships of bur∣then 1000. miles, and for Boats and Pinaces 2000. miles. The other River is called Orellana, or the Amasons, discovered 1543. the which is found navigable 6000. miles, and 200. miles broad at the entrance into the Sea. The chiefe City of this Countrey (and if Spanish writers may Manoa the gol∣den City. herein be beleeved the chiefest City of the World) is here found and called Manoa, or as Diego Ordas the discoverer calleth it, el Dorado, or the golden, from the aboundance of gold, both in coyne, plate, armour, and other furniture, which he there saw. This dis∣coverer or traveller, (for by that name the truth of his wonde∣rous relation may be the better considered) is said to have entered into the City at noone, and to have travelled all that day, and the next also untill night through the streets hereof, before he came to the Kings Palace, which peradventure was the policie of those people; as I have seen it to be in Constantinople in An. 1621. when as the Duke of Avarascah coming with a great traine in Embassie from the King of Poland to Soltan Osman the then great Turke, after his unfortunate expedition to Poland, caused him and his whole traine to be lead a whole afternoone thorow the most e∣minent streets of that City, when he first entered the same, and so to his appointed lodging, whereas an houres easie walke to him that had known the direct way, would easily have served the turn; perchance imagining this a fit way to demonstrate to the Ambas∣sadour the beauty and vastnes of that City, together with his own greatnes in ostentation, and to recover that honour and repute which he had a little before lost by the insolencie and cowardise of his Souldiers in his said expedition thither. The third Province is Peru, which above all others in America Peru the third Province. abounds in gold and silver, the mine whereof in divers places is
better stored with mettals than with Earth: the chiefe City where∣of is St. Michael, the first colony the Spaniards placed here, and for∣tified by Piscaro a famous Spanish captaine, who subdued the Coun∣trey, took the King thereof prisoner, and had for a ransome for his liberty and life a house piled upon all sides with refined gold and silver, in estimation about ten millions, which when he had received, most perfidiuosly contrary to his oath and promise slew him: by which ap∣peares the wonderfull riches of this Countrey. Besides which the soile is luxurient in all manner of graine, fortunate in the civility of her Inhabitants, frequencie of Cities, and salabrity of ayre; and aboundant∣ly stored with that herbe Tobacco, from hence brought first into England by Sr. Francis Drakes mariners in An. 1585. In this Coun∣try also is now found that famous River called of Plate, being 150. Rio de la plata. miles broade at the Embosheur, and above 2000. miles long: and on this streame is found certaine figge trees; the part towards the River bearing fruit in winter, and the other part thereof towards the land bearing fruit in summer. Brasilia is the fourth, affording a soile fat by nature, and alwaies flourishing, yeelding great store of sugars, and wonderfull rich in Brasilia the 4. Province. mines; and hence our red wood which is hereused by dyers called brasile doth come: the trees whereof are found of that bignes, that whole families live in an arme of one of them, every tree being as populous as many of our Countrey Villages, which is the reason that few Cities are found in this Countrey, yet along the Sea coast some Cities are of late built by the Spaniards, and by them forti∣fied where the Dutch have lately got some footing, and taken To∣dos los santos, and thence marched to Fernand buck, whence that wood comes so well known to diers by that name, where report saith they are now setled and daily get ground in that continent. The fifth is Chilo, taking its name as some would have it, from the Chilo the 5. Province. exceeding cold there found, so that the Rivers are here observed to run in the day, but by night to stand still, or at leastwise to move very slowly: this Countrey boasteth of 5. or 6. Townes inhabited by Spaniards, the Towne called the Imperiall being a colony of the Spaniards is found to be the principall. This Countrey bordereth upon the straights of Magelan, through which Sr. Francis Drake passed in his Worlds incompasse∣ment; many of the ports and baies herein owing him that honour due to this adventure, for the names they now are knowne by: which voyage finished by him in 2. ½. yeares, as the relation of Die∣go Nunio his Pilot testifieth, made profit to himselfe and Mer∣chants of London his partners and fellow adventurers, according to an account made up at his return, all charges paid and discharged which I have seen subscribed under his owne hand 47 li. for one pound; so that he who adventur'd with him in this voyage 100. li. had 4700. li. for the same, by which may be gathered the benefit that redounded thereby; though accompanied with many rubbes,
delaies and dangers. Having thus runne over the maine continent of this Worlds division, let us see what Ilands of note belong thereunto. First in the South Seas are found the Ilands of Solomon 18. in number, and imagined by the discoverer in An. 1567. to be the Iles of Solomon. land of Ophir, to which Solomon sent for his gold; but in this he was deceived: the next are the Ilands of theeves of no account, there∣fore I passe over them, and in the next place peruse the Ilands in the Virginian Ocean; the first worthy of mention is Margarita, deficient both in corne, grasse, trees and water; yet the aboundance of precious stones here found makes some amends for these defects, from whence the name of Margarita is imposed on it. Margarita. The next is Trinidado discovered by Columbus in An. 1497. being famoused for the best Tobacco, which by some Nations carrieth Trinidado. the name of this Iland. The next are the Iles of Bacaloes lying against the influx of Ca∣neda, Bacaloes. and owe the first discovery to Sebastian Cabot 1447. by some termed Terra Nova, well knowne for the great quantity of fish taken on this coast, as I have noted in the passage of that part of America. The next is the Iland of Beriquen, the North part affording plen∣ty of gold, and the South part of vitall provisions; the Cities here Beriquen. are St Iohns, built and inhabited by the Spaniards 1527 and Porto Rico ruind by Henry Earle of Cumberland 1597. and whose walles was then first mounted by my deceased Uncle Captaine Tho. Roberts, to whose worth and valour I owe here this remembrance. The next is Iamaica once very populous, insomuch that the Iamaica. Spaniards here slew 60000. living soules, and the women beholding their cruelty, did kill their Children before they had given them life, that the issues of their bodies might not serve so cruell a Nation. The Townes of note are Crestana and Sivil, acknowledging Columbus for its first discoverer. The next is Cuba, made knowne by Columbus his second Navi∣gation, it aboundeth with ginger, cassia, masticke, aloes, cynamon, Cuba. sugar; the earth producing brasse, of excellent perfection, but the gold somewhat drossie: here is the famous Roade Havana, a staple of Indian and Spanish merchandize, and where the King of Spaines Navy rideth till the time of the yeare, and the convenience of the winde joyne together to waft them homeward. The next is the Lucay Ilands 400. in number, who glory in the matchlesse beauty of their Women, and mourn for the losse of a million Lucay. of the Inhabitants murdered by the bloodthirsty Spaniards at the first discovery thereof. Hispaniola is the next, now lamenting the losse of three millions of her Inhabitants, butchered by her new Spanish Masters, injoying a Hispaniola. temperate ayre, a fertile soyle, rich mines, amber and sugars; it excel∣leth all other the Ilands of these Seas, especially in three prero∣gatives;
first, in the finenesse of the gold, which is here digged more pure and unmixed; secondly, in the increase of the sugar cane, which here is found oftentimes in one cane to fill up twentie and sometimes thirtie measures of liquour; thirdly, in the goodnesse f the soile for tillage, the corne here yeelding an hundred fold, nd in sixteene dayes, herbes and roots are found to ripen and to e fit for meat; this fertilitie is ascribed to foure rivers running East, West, North, and South, and all foure springing from one mountaine standing in the very center of this Iland; the chiefe Townes here is Saint Dominico, ransackt by Sir Francis Drake 1585. Besides which Ilands inhabited by Spanyards, there are be∣longing to this division of the world, some that are inhabited by the English, as the Barbadas, Barmudas, and others, in which certaine Barbadas, Barmudas. Colonies of English have planted themselves, which is found agree∣ble with the English constitution, and being well fortified and peopled, may in time prove maine instruments of sharing with he Spanyard in his American Dominions. And thus briefly stands he present state of this new found climate, least acquainted to our Nation, and onely subject to the will and power of the Spanish Scepter, who challengeth the soveraigntie and rule of this vast Countrey, the trade whereof is onely permitted to his subjects, and debarred from all others; save what is obtained by force or strength, and purchased by Colonies planted where the Spanyard is neither knowne nor seated. To give here a small touch of the traffique of this new world, is The trade of America by the Spaniards. the principall scope of my intention, but being shut up from the eyes of all strangers, wee must be content till time produce it more apparantly to live in ignorance: true it is that the Coun∣rey abounding in Mines of silver and gold, and the soyle rich in ringing forth all fruits, that from Spaine have beene hither tran∣planted, addes every day an increase to their present traffique, he speciall matter here sought out for is gold and silver, the load∣one that attracts all Merchants to adventure hither: and in their Mines the Inhabitants are set continually to worke, living poore∣y, and undergoing thus the punishment of their ignorance and pu∣llanimitie, suffering themselves to be so easily overcome and so asely subjected; out of which Mines the King hath the ⅕ part of ll extracted, which in the Emperour Charles the fifths time amounted but to five hundred thousand Crownes of gold yearly, but since it hath beene found that the Kings of Spaine have had thence sometimes tenne, sometimes fifteene, and sometimes seaventeene millions of gold yearly. The Merchants carry thither Spanish wines, woolen and lin∣nen cloth, and other merchandizes of Europe, and (if report may gaine credit) doe make returnes thence above one hundred pro∣fit for another, in spices, sugars, some drugges, and in gold and silver ingotts in great abundance, as well for the accounts of private mer∣chants, as for the account of the King himselfe; so that it doth
appeare in the Records kept in the Custome-house of Sivill, that in these seventy-foure yeares last past, there hath come from this India into Spaine two hundred and sixty millions of gold, which hath beene the moover of all those broyles and warres that have beene set afoot in Europe by the Kings of Spaine, it being affirmed with∣out contradiction, that by meanes thereof, Philip the second during his raigne, did spend more than all his predecessours, being in number sixty-two that have raigned before him in this Kingdome since they shooke off the Roman yoake; for he alone spent more than an hundred millions that came out of this India. This Countrey also giveth imployment to many ships of great burthen, to carry their sugars, ginger, cottons, fernandbucke, and such other commodities that are here sound daily to increase by the industrie of the Spanyard, which by good government may come in time to a great height, and had not the sword of these bloud∣suckers ended so many millions of lives in so short a time, trade might have seene a larger harvest, and a more profitable crop by their industrie and labour. It will not be further usefull for me to insist upon other parti∣culars of traffique in this Continent in matter of coynes, of waights and measures; for in all these they follow the rules observed in Sivill, where the rendevous of those shippes are made, that goe and come into these parts; and so leaving this new discovered Division of the World, I will crosse the maine Ocean, and with a somewhat better Survay, I will ob∣serve the needfull occurrents of trade in AFRICA, my second part of this Modell, and of the World.
AFRICA, AND THE PROVINCES AND CITIES OF TRADE THEREOF.
AFRICAE DESCRIPTIO
OF AFRICA, AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF. CHAP. XIV. AFRICA I make to be my second division Africa and the Provinces thereof. of the world, which is found to be a Penin∣sula, almost incompassed round, having the red Sea on the East, the Atlantique Ocean on the West, the Southerne Oce∣an on the South, and the mediteranean on the North; and where the Sea is defe∣ctive to make it a compleat Iland, there is a little Isthmus of twenty leagues that ty∣eth it to Asia, which sundry Princes in for∣mer ages intended to trench through, to have the benefit of both those Seas united, but have desisted as finding the Sea in the red Sea gulfe to be higher than the land of Aegypt, by nature all flat, levell, and plaine, and so might thereby over-flow and drowne all Aegypt. Africa is at this day usually divided into eight parts, which Divided into eight parts. are; 1 Barbarie. 2 Numidia. 3 Libya. 4 Negrita. 5 Ethiopia Interior. 6 Ethiopia Exterior. 7 Aegypt, & 8 The Ilands thereof.
And first Barbarie is now divided into foure Kingdomes, which Barbary 1. are, first, Tunes; second, Argier; third, Fesse; and fourth, Morocco: the commodities these Countries send abroad, I shall speake of when I come to these particular places. CHAP. XV. Of TUNES and the Trade thereof. THE Kingdome of Tunes containes sundry Cities of Tunes and the trade thereof. trade, the principall being the citie of Tunes it selfe, then Bona, Biserta, Tripolis, and Africa, and here was seated that famous Citie of Carthage, who contended Bona. Biserta. Tripolis. Africa. with Rome for the mastery of all the world, and challenged the prioritie in Africa as queene and supreame Lady thereof, now onely seene in her ruines, and knowne by her vast extent, and from whose ashes sprung up Tunes the abovesaid, sea∣ted upon a Lake six myles distant from the Sea; the Port com∣manded by the Fort of Golletta, and at this day acknowledging the great Turke for their Protectour, who every three yeares doth Golletta. send hither a Bashaw to command; but the chiefe rule appertaines to the Die or Governour, chosen and elected by the natives of this Kingdome. This Kingdome is much bettered and inriched by the labour of those Moores which by thousands were banished from Moros francs or Granatines. Spaine, who have here built many Cities, and Temples, according to their superstitious use, planted Vines, Oranges, Lemons, Figges, Dates, Almonds and Olives, and thereby have both much peopled and profited this whole Countrey; and where in Anno 1619. and 1620. in two severall voyages, at my residents there I obser∣ved in trade these things. Their coines used in trade is here commonly most currant the Coins currant in Tunes. Spanish both silver and gold; the Riall of ½ Spanish is accounted 46 aspers, the ℞. of 4/4 23 aspers, the ¼ 11½, and the Pistolet of Spaine commonly by them termed the scudo, is 64 aspers, but these rise and fall according to the plentie and scarsitie thereof: silver coines of their owne I have not observed any stamped amongst them, save the asper spoken of before, eighty whereof makes a sultany, chicquin, or hangar duccat, which is the common peece of gold knowne pas∣sable through all Africa & Asia, and through all the Dominions of the Grand Signeor: and these coines passe thus currant in Tripolis, Barbaria, in Africa, Vna, Biserta, and other maritime parts alongst the coast. Their common waight is a cantar, or 100 li. being about two Waights of the Kingdome of Tunes. pound bigger than our 112 li. of England, so that their pound
waight hath been found to make neere 16 ounces Troy, and produ∣ceth in Lighorne the common scale of passage from Christendome 150 li. This cantar cont. 100 Rotolos or li. each Rotolo is divided into 16 ounces, and each ounce into eight tamins, and hereby is waighed all sorts of commodities, except silver, gold, pearle, &c. which are waighed by a carrot waight and mitigals, as I shall shew in another place more convenient. Their common measure of length is a pico cont. 27 inches Eng∣lish, Measures of Tunes. by which all silkes and woolen are measured, and called the pico turkisco, but the Morisco pico, is an inch lesse and qt 26 inches, by which all Linnens is onely sold, and no other commoditie. Their liquid measure is a Mettor, which in oyles makes about 32 li. English, and accounting 7½ li. to a gallon is foure gallons and 2 li. by which is sold honey, wines, and such like liquid commodi∣ties. Their accounts by Merchants are kept by dollers and aspers, and by some in sultanies and aspers, as being the proper coines and Accounts in Tunes. species of that kingdome. The commodities of this Kingdome, are excellent horses, waxe, Commodities of Tunes. honey, raw and salted hides, corrall taken up at Bona on the coast where the Genoes and Marselians have built them forts and scales for trade and commerce with the Inhabitants, to this purpose spun∣ges, dates, almonds, rice, oyle, hard soape, Christian captives of all kinds and Nations. The customes paid usually is ten per cent. upon all commodities Customes of Tunes. entring, fo so much onely as is landed and sold, accounted upon the reall value sold, and what is not sold may be at all times shipt without payment of any custome or dutie whatsoever: a Broaker being appointed by the Dye of the Citie to attend the Merchants actions, who keepeth a register of the sales made, according to which the said ten per centum is paid by the Merchant seller. The Citie of Tripoly distinguished of Barba∣rie Tripoly in Bar∣barie. is found upon this coast, and to agree with Tunes in waights, measures, and coines: and thus much shall serve to have said of Tunes in Numidia.
CHAP. XVI. Of ARGIER, and the trade thereof. ARGIER containes onely two Townes of note, Tremesin once the principall of a Kingdome, and Argier and the trade thereof. Tremesin. Argier the principall now of this Countrey, not found to be very spacious in its selfe, but strong and of late much fortified, inriched not onely by the labour of the Moores banished out of Spaine, but also by the spoyles of many Merchants of all nations, brought thither as the retreat and receptacle of all Turkish and Moorish Pi∣rates, which doe much infest the mediterranean Seas, and of late yeares have found the way out of the Straights of Giblatar into the Canary Ilands, and into sundry other Countries bordering up∣on the Ocean. In it are accounted eighty thousand soules, the most part of them living by Piracies. Merchandizing is not much in use in this Citie, yet some of the Inhabitants are found to detest this common ill gotten gaine, by piracie and theft, and these are ob∣served to maintaine some trade with other nations alongst the coast. What points necessary thereto according as I noted there in 1619. I shall here set downe: and first their commodities vented thence to forraine parts, are such as followeth. The commodities this Kingdome affords is, Barbary horses, Estridge feathers, honey, waxe, reisins, figges, dates, oyles, almonds, ca∣stile Commodities of Argier. sope, brasse, copper, and some drugges: and lastly, excellent piraticall Rascalls in great quantitie, and poore miserable Christi∣an captives of all Nations too too many, God give them comfort, pa∣tience, and release in due time, if it be his blessed will. Their coines passing currant here in trade is the Double, which is Coines of Argier. accounted to hold correspondencie in value with the English shil∣ling, or rather two Spanish Rialls single. Foure doubles is 1 ℞ , called there an Osian. Five doubles and 35 aspers is a pistolet of Spaine. Seaven doubles is accounted a sultany or Chequin, the common peece of gold found currant in all Barbarie. Fiftie aspers is accounted to make a double; and these are the u∣suall coines passable in all this coast belonging to this Kingdome. The 100 li. or Rotolos here is 120 li. English, so that their 84 li. Wights of Argier. makes 100 li. sutle, and 94 li. or Rotolos is 112 li. English, according to the custome of Valentia in Spaine, from whence it is conceived they have drawne this originall of Waights: they are observed to have two severall maights, the proportion being 10 li. of the small making, 6 li. of the grosse.
But heere sundry commodities are found to be weighed by sun∣dry Cantars, as iron, lead, yarne, and all wools are weighed by a Cantar of 150 Rotolos of the Rotolos above specified. Reisins, figgs, butter, honey, dates, oyle, soape by the Cantor of 166 Rotolos abovesaid. Almonds, cheese, cottons by the Cantar of 110 Rotolos. Brasse, copper, waxe and all druggs by the Cantar of 100 Rotolos. And Flaxe is weighed by the Cantar to containe 200 Rotolos. Gold, silver, pearles and jems are weighed by the mitigall, which is worth there 9. doubles, and is 72 gr. English: and the soltany, checquin or hungar weighes 52 gr. English, being accounted equall to Angel gold and worth in England in circa 3 l. 11 shill. per ounce, Troy weight, or thereabouts. They use in Algier two picos or measures, the Turkish and Mo∣risco, Measures of length. the Morisco pico being the measure of the Countrey, and s ¾ of the Turkish, by which is sold all linnen only. The Turkish pico is divided into 16 parts, and every  part is called a Robo, and is 131/192 part of an English yard, which with the al∣owance of an ynch according to our custome in England, hath beene found to make 1. ½ picos turkisco and by which all silke stuffes and woollens are sold in this place. Their dry measure is called a Tarrie, which heaped up, as they Dry measures. use it, is 5 gallons English, and so hath it beene found to produce n corne, salt and some such commodities. They keepe their accompt in doubles and osians, and some in sol∣anies Accounts in Argier. and aspers, the coines of Barbarie, 4 doubles making an ossian, nd 50 aspers making a double. Their customes are heere 10 per cent. as in Tunis, and paid upon Customes of Argier. he commodity according to the value sold, and permission given to and, and if not sold, to be shipt againe free of all dueties (as I said efore) in the Kingdome of Tunis. And it is to bee noted, a Ship ntring here and anchoring, must either land her sailes or her udder for prevention of running away without license, which ust bee obtained in Duano, which is the common assembly of he Bashaw, who is Commander for the grand Seignior and of the Clearing of a Sp in Argier. rincipall Moores of the Kingdome and City, and then paying hese duties with licence she is dismissed, viz to the Kaiffa 28 dou∣les, to the Alamine 31 do. to the captaine Anchoredge 15 do. to the Bashaw, 8 do. to his Chiouse 4 do. to his Almin, 8 do. to his Chouse, 4 do. to the Bashaw sorman, 2 do. to the Druggerman, 8 do. to the Sackagie 8 do. to the Consols duety, 42 do. which in all make 162 doubles: And so much shall serve for Argier; now I saile along the Coast, and observe some Mari∣time Townes of note there seated.
CHAP. XVII. Of ORAN, and the Trade thereof. ORAN is seated upon this Shore also, and of late in possession of the Spaniards, whose immunities to such Oran and the Trade thereof. as come hither to reside have made the place noted for some traffique, especially for the commodities of this Countrey, which hence are transported into Spaine and Portugall, such as are horses, waxe, and some yeares corne in a great measure, as I have noted before. The coines currant of Barbary, and which passe currently here, Coines of Oran. are those indifferently named before, and the coines of the oppo∣site shoares of Spaine. It is found they have here foure severall weights: First a quin∣tar of 5 roves of 20 l. to a rove which is 100 l. or Rotolos: Secondly, The Weights in use in Oran. a quintar of spices of 4 roves of 25 l. per rove which is 100 Rotolos: Thirdly, a quintar for corne, every quintar being only 6 Rotolos, and lastly a quintar for cottonwool, every quintar being 15 Rotolos, the 100 l. of London makes in the first 90 Rotolos; in the second 133. Rotolos; in the third for corne 48 Rotolos; and in the last 58⅛ Rotolos. The Measures of ORON are found to be principally two, the one being the pico Morisco, the proper measure of the Countrey Measures of Oran. agreeing with the measure of Argier, before mentioned, and the other the Vare of Spaine here used in cloth, silke, and such like, by the Spaniards. CHAP. XVIII. Of VNA, and the Trade thereof. VNA is also seated upon this coast, and dependeth for the most part in matter of trade, upon the inland In∣habitants; Una and the Trade thereof. affording for transportation the common commodities of Barbarie, and by reason of the sci∣tuation little knowne to our nation, therfore I shall the more briefly passe over the same. The coines before mentioned are here current, onely with little alteration, as also the same is found to be in Bona (anciently Hip∣pona Coines of Vna.
the seat of Saint Augustin that learned Father) in Cola, Tabara∣ha, Bugia, Constantine, and other townes of trade upon this coast, therefore I will omit the repetition thereof, having all a refe∣rence in trade one to the other. But in weights they much differ; for here is found in use three Waights of Unia. severall quintals composed of one l. or Rotolo, one for cotton wooll, another for spices, and the third for corne; thus agreeing with London. The 100 l. of London makes 63 Rotolos for weight of wooll. The 100 l. of London makes 72 Rotolos for weight of spices. The 100 l. of London makes 91 Rotolos in the weight of corne. All which is to be observed by him that trades into this port, in the sale of these and the like commodities. The measure of length is here the pico Morisco, which generally Measures of Vnia. s used in all commodities and containes 26 ynches English in circa. CHAP. XIX. The trade in generall of ARGIER and TVNIS. THough these two Kingdomes of TVNIS and AR∣GIER The generall trade of Argier and Tunes. doe afford many faire Townes according to the manner of this Countrey, yet it is not found that the same doth produce many Merchants of quality or of great consideration; This tract of land is found at present to belong to three severall inhabitants, the Moores as propriators, inioy the principall part; and these are found with∣in themselves to acknowledge severall Soveraignes, which not sel∣dome are at variance, sometimes amongst themselves, sometimes with their neighbours, and because of the liberty given here for entertainment and protection to all nations, not onely these Townes doe harbour Levents which wee call Pirates, and they call naturall Turkes, but also Christians of all Countries which hence with robberies infest these adjoyning Mediterranean Seas, and joyning themselves with the abovesaid Levents, make up a dissolute and resolute company of Sea-farers and Pirats; and be∣cause these are not sufficient to worke any matters of moment a∣lone to make their strength the greater, and their force the stronger, there is of their owne accord added thereto the Taga∣rins, a poore, desperate and naked rascality, and the Spanish Moores, or Moorish Spaniards of late yeares banished from the Kingdome of Spaine, who willingly some in purse and some in person vndertake these designes to be revenged of their banish∣ment from their native Countries, their case herein being most
miserable; for whilest they lived in Spaine they were accounted for Moores, and now being amongst the Moores are still doubted as Christians. These last and some others inhabitants of these Cities of Tunis and Argier, doe still professe more civility then the common sort, and have some reliques of that honesty left them which perad∣venture they brought with them hither out of Europe; and these are onely they that in these Cities professe Merchandizing, and are found to use some trade alongst this coast from one part to ano∣ther, and so to Marselia and Lighorne, Townes seated on the Chri∣stian opposite shore inioying many priviledges and immunities for Merchants of what nation soever. The Spaniards inhabiting in this coast in sundry good and well fortified Townes, are the second that heere beare sway; the Country for some certain miles in circuit over-awed by their gar∣risons pay them contribution; and it is supposed that the char∣ges in maintaining these exceeds the gaine yeelded thereby, and heere is but little trade found. The third sort I account the Genois and the French nations, who upon this coast by permission of the State, doe pay certaine yearely pensions, for admission of trade, and have built them∣selves Fortresses and Castles for the defence of their estates and persons; and shipping; and these are now found the onely Mer∣chants inhabiting this coast: heere they have their scales for the corrall fishing; for honey, waxe, corne, hides, horses, spunges and ma∣ny other commodities, which the Countrey men willingly for love of their Spanish plate do bring them in, and heere traffique is made upon good termes and sure guard, buying and selling as they list to inhance or debase the commodities they either buy or sell: by which a great gaine is yearely made unto them. And this is as much as I conceive necessary in this point of Mer∣cantile traffique in these two Kingdomes and Cities of Tunis and Argier: but there is heere a piraticall Trade also much practised by the people of these two places who set out Vessels in partner∣ships The piraticall trade of Tunes and Argier. and shares for to take Prizes or Gonimas as they terme them, which is ever performed by all manner of advantages without faith or promise either kept or regarded, which spoiles have beene so great, and their booties so beneficiall, that the despe∣rate spirits of many of sundry nations have come hither in hope to raise by rapine and theft what else by honest courses they could not elsewhere compasse: their manner of setting forth these Ships is upon a small cost and done with little charge, con∣sidering the frugality in dyet used in these Countries, and their division at their returne is commonly allotted, (as I observed in these parts when for some time I abode amongst them) ⅓ for the bodie of the Vessell ⅓ for the Victuallers and setters out, and ⅓ for the Captaine and his company; and this is truely and exactly
made in species and kind, for they hardly admit a commodity taken or slaves captivated to be sold at the Market, and the divident to be made in money: but they (as I have often seen) will divide it in kind, as if a bagge of pepper, then by dishfulls, or a peece of cloth or linen, then by proportionall shares, according to their grosse capa∣city, which custome I understand is since by their better judge∣ment rectified, and Merchants Ships warned by their losses of lat∣ter dayes, goe better arm'd, man'd and provided; and seeing their prizes come in thinner, they are more provident in their division, though more venturous in their thefts. Argeer in this kind hath been able to set out neere 300. saile little and great in those times, now not a quarter so many: and Tunes then had 20. in 31. good saile, now it hath not a dozen; so that I may conclude their trade decreaseth and daily diminisheth, which GOD of his goodnes grant it may still doe, to the Merchants comfort and the mariners joy: and thus leaving these two piraticall Kingdomes and Cities, with this Maritime coast, I come in the next place to the famous Kingdomes of FESSE and MOROCCO. CHAP. XX. Of the Kingdome of FESSE and the Provin∣ces thereof. FESSE is divided into 7. Provinces, which borroweth Fesse and the Provinces thereof. their names from the Townes seated therein; the first is Ham lisnon, seated in the mountainous part of this Kingdome; the second is Seuta, now in possession of the Spaniard, having a Towne of this name strongly by them fortified; the third is Tanger, a City also fortified and belonging likewise to them; the fourth is Mehenes; the fifth Ar∣guer; the sixth is Alcaser, (neere to which the three Kings, Sebastian of Portugall, Mahomet of Fesse, and Abdelmelech of Morocco, com∣petitors for this Kingdome were slaine in one day, together with many others of eminent quality; and Stukley that famous infamous english rebell in Anno 1578) and seventh FESSE the Metropolis, which for its greatnes merits a more serious consideration.
CHAP. XXI. Of the City FESSE and the Trade thereof. THis City beares this name of Fesse from the aboun∣dance of gold, (as writers record) that was found in Citie of Fesse and the Trade thereof. digging the foundation thereof; it is beautified with many goodly buildings both publike and private; it is divided by the River Sahu into three parts, con∣taining in all 82000. households, having 700. mosces or Temples, 50. of them being adorned with pillers of alablaster and Iasper; and one seated in the heart of the City called Carucen is the most sumptuous, containing a mile in compasse, in breadth containing 17. arches, in length 120. and borne up by two thousand five hundred white marble pillers, under the chiefest arch (where the Tribunall is kept) hangeth a most huge lampe of silver, incompassed with 110. lesser; under every the other arches hang also very great lamps in each of which burne 150. lights: it hath 31. gates great and high; the roofe is 150. yards long and 80. yards broad, and round about are divers porches containing 40. yards in length, and 30. in bredth, under which are the publike storehouses of the Towne: about the walles are pulpits of divers sorts, wherein the Masters of their Law reade to the people such things as they imagine ap∣pertaine to their salvation: the revenewes thereof in Anno 1526. was 200. duccats a day of old rent accounted 100. li. sterlin; untill the late civill warres it was a City of great traffique, and many Mer∣chants of divers Nations resorted hither, and were allowed a pub∣like meeting place for their Commerce, and lodging for their resi∣dence, being in forme of a Court or Exchange, inclosed with a strong wall, with 12. gates, and limited with 15. streets for severall Nations to meet for their businesse, and for the laying up of their commodities; and every night for security of their goods and per∣sons the same was kept guarded at the Cities charge, resembling the Besistens or Canes now in use in Turkey and other southerne Countries. There is here also divers Colledges where the sciences are taught, amongst which Madorac is the chiefe, and accounted for one of the excellentest peeces for workmanship in all Barbarie: it hath 3. cloisters of admirable beauty, supported with 8. square Pillars of divers colours; the roofe curiously carved, and the Arches of Mo∣saique of gold and asore; the gates are of brasse faire wrought, and the doores of the private chambers of inlaide worke: it is recor∣ded that this Colledge did cost the founder King Abuchenen 480.
thousand sultanies in gold, which is in English money 192. thousand pound; which would hardly in these daies were it now to be built performe the twentieth part thereof, and this was not above 150. yeares past, and about that time Henry the seventh King of England did build that sumptuous Chappell in Westminster; which as I have been informed, did in those dayes cost 7448. li. and let it be judged by artists how much more would build the fellow of it in these our dayes. They have also here for the commodity and pleasure of the Ci∣tizens 600. Conduits, from whence almost every house is served with water; besides what goeth to their religious use, at the en∣tries of their Temples and Mosces: but I have dwelt too long in surveying this City, I will now see what commodities and mer∣chandise this Kingdome affords. The commodities found in generall, aswell in the Kingdome of Commodities in the King∣dome of Fesse. Fess as of Morocco and found transportable for merchandise, is fruits of all kinds, such as is principally of dates, almonds, figges, refins, o∣lives; also honey, wax, gold, and sundry sorts of hides and skins, es∣pecially that excellent sort of cordovante from this Kingdome of Morocco called Maroquins, famoused throughout Spaine, France, & Italy; also corne, horses, woolls, whereof the Inhabitants are observed of late dayes to make some cloth: here is also found for Merchan∣dise fabricated here some sorts of stuffes of silkes, as sattins, taffetaes, and some sorts of linen much in use in this Countrey, made partly of Cotton and partly of Flaxe, and divers other commodities. The moneys of this Kingdome, and generally of all the Kingdome Moneys of Fesse and Mo∣rocco. of Moroco is the Sheriffe or Duccat in gold deriving the name thereof from the Sheriffs, who within these few yeares made con∣quest of these Kingdomes under pretext and colour of the sanctity of their Religion, and is accounted to be about ten sh. starling mo∣ney, divided into 8. parts, and esteemed ⅛ each part, which may be compared to be about 14. d. in 15. d. starling. They keep their accounts in these places by duccats, or old sheriffs Accounts in Fesse and Mo∣roco. now almost out of use divided into 8. parts, accounted in common value, but 12. d. every, though worth more, as above is declared. Their weight here is two, one used in all ordinary commodities which is the Rotolo, containing()ounces or drams, it having been Weights in Fesse. found by observation that the 100. li. haberdupois London hath made here 64. Rotolo, and 100. Rotolos is here a Cintar. The second weight is here the Mitigall, used in the weighing of silver, gold, pearle, muske and the like, agreeing with the mitigall used in Argier and Tunes spoken of before. The common measure for length is here the Covado, 12. whereof is accounted to a Cane: and it hath beene observed by Barbary Measures in Fesse. Merchants hither trading, that the 100. yards of London make here about 181. to 182. covadoes. Customes of Fesse and Mo∣rocco. The customs of Fesse and Morocco are paid at the entrance there∣into,
as is likewise due at the entrance of any other the Cities of this Kingdome, and is by the subjects natives upon all commodities paid two in the hundred, and by all strangers ten in the hundred collected for what is sold or landed without leave, for exportati∣on againe if once landed; which causeth divers of our Merchants bound for those parts to make their Ships their shops, and conse∣quently land so much of their commodities as they imagine the Market will vent, and no more. But because the Kingdome of Morocco obeyeth the same rules in matters of trade, I will speake a word of that place likewise, and then survey the trade of them both together as they are knowne now to us, to be as it were but one, though indeed different Kingdomes. CHAP. XXII. Of the Kingdome of MOROCCO and the Provinces thereof. THE Kingdome of Morocco once of great splendor is now divided into 6. Provinces, the first Tangovista, Morocco and the Provinces thereof. having a Towne also of that name: Fisidet is the se∣cond which giveth name likewise to a Province; the third is Massa the principall of a Province abound∣ing in Amber. Alarach is the 4th fortified and kept by the onely garison of this Countrey. The 5. is Taradant, in times past the se∣cond in this Kingdome, and the principall for traffique, ruind by the late warres, whereunto yet the resort is commonly made by many English and French for commerce. The 6. and last is Moroc∣co the Metropolis, of which a word according to my intended method. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Citie MOROCCO and the Trade thereof. MOROCCO is the chiefe City of this Kingdome, and in times past was accounted the Metropolis of all Citie of Mo∣rocco and the trade thereof. Barbary, as once containing one hundred thousand housholds, but now inferiour to Fesse in beauty, spa∣ciousnesse and populousnesse: it is strongly walled about, and within adorned with many private and publike edifices, the chiefe being the Castle or Arsenall, and the Churches, or Mosces; one whereof is bigger, though not so beautifull as that of Fesse, seated in the midst of the Citie and built by Hali their King, aug∣mented
by 50. fadome in spaciousnesse by Abdull mumen and Man∣or his sonne with many exquisite Pillers brought from Spaine, he lso covered the same with lead, and made a cesterne of the same greatnesse as this Temple was to receive the raine water that ame therefrom; besides which he made therein a Tower of Ma∣sonry in forme of the Romane Colossus, equall in height to the fa∣mous Towre in Bolonia, which being ascended the Hills of Asaffi, being 130. miles distant, may be easily discerned. The Castle is also very large and strong, of the bignesse of a reasonable Towne, in the midst whereof is a Temple, which hath a Towre, whereon is fixed a spindle of Iron passing through three great round Globes made of pure gold, and weighing 130. thousand Barbary duckets, which is 58500. li. starlin, which divers Kings have gone about to take downe and convert into money; but have all desisted, by rea∣son of some strange misfortune that have been inflicted on them, so that the common people imagine they are kept by a guard of spirits. They have here also a Burse for Merchants, which is now taken p by artisens, the late civill warres having eclipsed the glory of the famous trade that was seated in this Countrie, which in its former splendour was found to have severall streets for severall artsmen, and no one artsman permitted to make his abiding but amongst those of his owne profession. The commodities of this kingdome are the same as in the king∣dome Commodities of Morocco. of Fesse, spoken of before, save that the same abounds more in sugars, especially in Taradant, where divers Merchants are found to reside purposely for that commoditie, from whence it is exported into other Regions. The coines currant is also the Sherif common with Fesse, and all Coines of Morocco. these parts of Barbarie, and by some called the duccat of gold, ha∣ving eight divisions or parts, esteemed to be about nine shillings and foure pence sterling, each  worth fourteene pence sterling. They are found here to have two severall quintalls, one that doth Waights of Morocco. accord with the quintall of Fesse, specified formerly, and the other which doth agree with the quintall of Sivill, which may be seene there more at large in this ensuing Tract, and there it may be ob∣served, how the same doth agree with the waight of London, and other places; besides which it is observable, that sundry com∣modities are waighed by this quintall, yet comprehending more or lesse Rotolos, according to the custome in sale of that commo∣ditie which the Merchants must learne to know. The measure of length here is also covado, agreeing with that of Measure of Morocco. Fesse, as you shall finde in the Chapter before touched. The customes of Morocco is the same as specified in the king∣dome Customes of Morocco. of Fesse, at thentrado 2 per cent. by the subject and 10 per cent. by the Merchant stranger: But the civill warres hath given a period to that famous traffique here maintained by the Barbary Mer∣chants
of London, which from this kingdome had its originall, and which flourished in the dayes of Queene Elizabeth; the facti∣on, dissention, and banding for this kingdome and Fesse, overthrew that company, from whose ashes and dissolution, arose the socie∣tie Barbarie Mer∣chants. of merchants trading into the levant Seas, known by the name of the Turkie Company, which now wee finde to be growne to that height, that (without comparison) it is the most flourishing and most beneficiall Company to the Common-wealth of any in Eng∣land The originall of the Turkie and East India Companie. of all other whatsoever; into whose Patent was at first inser∣ted the Easterne Indies, as onely proper to their navigation, which within few yeares after being by the way of Turkie better disco∣vered, and gathering thereby new strength, it was in the begin∣ning of King Iames Raigne incorporated a societie by it selfe, and for incouragement to adventurers in consideration of the length of the voyage, and of the great charges and dangers incident thereto, it was permitted that all men of what qualitie and pro∣fession soever, might be adventurers therein, and be admitted thereunto, contrary to the custome and priviledge of the Turkie, and said Barbary Company, and of all other Societies of Merchants, who admit not any to be a member thereof, but such as are meere Merchants, and none others. The trade of these Countries by reason of their discontent is al∣most come now to nothing, every Towne and Province for the The trade ge∣nerall of Bar∣barie. most part acknowledging a severall soveraigne; and where peace and unitie is wanting, trade must decay. Some good ports these two Kingdomes are found to injoy for traffique, as Tituan within the Straights, Tanger and Seuta at the Straights mouth, Larache, Maxi∣nara, Sali the old and new, a second Argier, and sure receptacle for Pirats, lately reduced to better conformitie with the English subjects by the valour of some English, under the fortunate and happie conduct of Captaine William Rainsborough, to whose worth I owe this particular remembrance; Assaffe, Mogador, and Santa Crux, with some others; and lastly, Taradant the onely Mart of all these Countries, seated Taradant. upon the River of Sues, in a spacious plaine betweene the Moun∣taine Atlas and the Sea, abounding with sugar, and all other kind of provision, the good regard and continuall abode that Ma∣humet Xeriffe, one of their late Soveraignes made in this place, hath greatly augmented and ennobled this Towne; the observations upon the pre∣sent trade thereof, I am constrai∣ned by reason of my igno∣rance, to referre to another hand.
CHAP. XXIIII. Of Numidia, and Libya, and the Provinces thereof. NUmidia hath on the East Aegypt, on the West the At∣lantique Of Numidia and Libya. Ocean, on the North Atlas, on the South Li∣bya: It will not be materiall to relate the Provinces, for in them are found but few Townes, by reason of the yearly progresse of the Inhabitants from place to ce in families and tribes; the Country abounding in Dates,  food here of man and beast. Libya hath on the East Nilus, on the West the Atlantique Ocean, Libya.  the North Numidia, and on the South the land of Negroes; the untry altogether sandie, barren, and a desert, the inhabitants ogether heathenish, and therefore not worthy the conversa∣n of a civill Merchant, or the residence of any commerce. CHAP. XXV. Of NEGRITA, or the Land of Negroes, and the trade thereof. THIS land of Blackamores hath on the East Ethiopia superior, on the West the Atlanticke Ocean, on the Negrita & the trade thereof. North Libya, on the South Manicongo; in this tract of ground is accounted twenty-five Kingdomes or Provinces, through which runneth the famous Ri∣r of Niger or Sanega, in whose over-flowing consisteth the elfare of the Inhabitants; even as in Aegypt it doth by the in∣dation of Nylus, for this (as that) increaseth for fortie dayes, d decreaseth for fortie dayes more, during which time the In∣abitants sayle over the whole Land in Boats and Barges. This whole Tract principally now acknowledgeth 3. Sove∣aignes, which is the Kingdome of Tombutu, the Kingdome of Born∣o, and the Kingdome of Goago; each Kingdome giving name to a City the principall residence of the Kings. The City of Tombutu Tombut. yeth beyond the River of Sanega or Niger, wherein is found a rade driven by many French, Dutch and English Merchants; the manner thereof, and the matter wherewith I shall hereafter as well
as I can particularise. Foure hundred miles from Tombut is the Citie of Goaga, wherein are found eminent Merchants   Gaogo. Borne. and sumptuous merchandize of all sorts. Borneo is the third, the In∣habitants whereof are better versed in breeding of cattell, than in the art of Commerce, and better read in Mars than Mercurie. The commodities of these Countries, are corne, sugars, cattell, horse, rice, fruits, gold in sand which they terme Siga and we Tibur; Commodities thereof. and also in Ingotts without soveraigne stampe or character, and is distinguished by its finenesse and goodnesse, which the Inhabitants by way of exchange doe barter with their neighbours, and other forraine Nations, against cloths, linnen, callicoes, Basons  , iron-worke, sword blades, hand-guns, glasses, beads, &c. such  and principally against salt, which of all other commodities this coun∣try is most defective in, and in some places affords not, and there∣fore pays for it at an excessive deare price to strangers. The trade of all this tract such as it is now in these dayes knowne to our Nati∣on, is comprised alongst the Sea coast, which the Portugals by rea∣son The trade of Giney and Be∣nin, and the golden coast. of their former plantation here, and rich commerce, have inti∣tled the golden coast, and wee in common appellation, terme the trade of the coast of Genin and Benin, two of the principall Pro∣vinces maritime that are found included within the circuits of these three before-mentioned Kingdomes: which trade that it may be a little the better understood, I shall more particular∣ly survey, according to the observations made by some hands thereon. In the beginning and discovery of this Maritime coast, (for The Portugalls the first tra∣ders into Giney and Benin. thereto I intend to apply the trade of this Countrey) the Portu∣gals were the first that ranged this shore, and had some small knowledge of their commodities and of the manner of trading with them, who partly by faire meanes, and partly by constraint got footing in this Sea coast, building Forts in some, and ∣risons and Factories in others, which then was found   and beneficiall to that Countrey, that it is conceived th onely thing (as what will not gold attract) drew them to search  the Maritime coast of this tract all along to Cape bona esperansa, d so consequently thereby into the East Indies: faire quarter and cour∣teous usage being then perceived in these Forts and Townes thus subjected to the Portugalls, drew the Inhabitants and Countrey∣men to a faire and ordinary commutation and exchanging of commo∣dities with them, which according to the then custome of that Kingdome was maintained by Factors appointed for the Kings private account in every Port and Towne, as if he intended to make the profits of Merchandizing to defraie the charges of his Conquest and Garison, furnishing them with salt, iron, tinne, copper, basons, knives, cloth, linen, and other European commodities; recei∣ving in exchange partly the commodities proper for their nourish∣ment, such as was cattle, corne, rice, and the like; and principally
commodities beneficiall, as gold it selfe in great aboundance, both  sand and ingots melted, which gave a quickning and life to the rther discoveries of those Countries and continuance of the de, which is found there maintained to this day, though in farre ser manner. The English and other nations afterwards defi∣s Who shewd the way to the English and o∣thers. to share in this rich trade, sayled within a short time likewise ther; and because they had not such places and Forts for their arehouses, and the protection of their persons and goods, there∣re would not, or else might not with safety land their commodi∣es without danger of the falshood of the Portugalls or treache∣e of the Inhabitants: therefore at first sailing hither were com∣eld to anchor along the coast neerest to the best Townes, and of reatest concourse, and signifie to the Inhabitants the commodi∣es they had brought to utter, drew at length by their faire de∣eanour and courteous usage the Moores to come aboard their hips, and bring their gold with them; the manner of which trade as being different from any other Countrey) I shall briefly set wne. In the morning betimes, having for the most part then e wind of off the shoare, and calme weather, the Moores come a∣oord in The manner of the usuall trade of Giney and Benin. their Conoes and Scuts to traffique, some for themselves nd some which they call Tolkens or factors for others, who carry t their girdles a purse, wherein small clots or papers containing ometimes 10. severall mens gold are wrapped and laid up; which hough it should be of one and the same weight and goodnes, they otwithstanding readily distinguish, and having made their bar∣ers for cloth, linens or the like, at noone return with the Sea-turne, r as they call it the brise againe to the shore; and besides their argaines covenanted, these factors have some small thing for hemselves as the reward of their paines by way of brokidge or ctoridge, which they called by the name of Dachio. But in pro∣esse of time the Netherlanders frequenting this coast, and well ac∣uainted with the manner of this English traffique; and coming in∣o the same parts where the English traded and were known, were e first that spoyled this golden trade, partly by their sinister dea∣ng, The undermi∣ning trickes of the Dutch in the trade of Giney & Benin. and partly by their undermining and fraudulent trickes; for ey coming to an achor together with the English to sell their mmodities, and finding that the English vented more wares, and ad a larger traffique by the concourse of the native Merchants om ashoare, with these Tolkens above mentioned, then they had, ired these pilots, boatmen and Tolkens (that were thus imployed, o carry their passengers and Merchants aboard,) underhand to carry them aboard of their Dutch ships, and not aboard the En∣glish, and so to trade with them onely; which the English at last perceiving and smelling out their craft, were by the same craft compelled to prevent the same; so that by this meanes the one out vying the other, these fellowes for their good will and broke∣idge have by this meanes drawne the duetie, or rather courtefie of
Datchio to 6. in 7. per cent. to the prejudice of all traders upon this coast: but this rested not here, for this dealing drew on a greater inconvenience in their trade, for when the Flemmings had first bin the authors of this ill custome or courtesie of Dachio to these Boatmen and Tolkens, which necessarily were by all succeeding European Merchants to be imitated, or their voyage lost, and their commodities remaine unsold: It was found that many Merchants Moores inland men coming to the Sea side to buy wares of them, bringing great store of gold with them for traffique, and having divers slaves, some 20. some 30. and some more according to their meanes and trade, to carry back those wares that they thus bought on shipboard, and these Moorish Merchants taking their lodgings in the houses of these Tolkens and using to acquaint them with their full commissions and intents, and then receiving of them their gold repaired aboard the Ships to trade and barter; and if the Moorish Merchant were not skild in the Portugall tongue; these Tolkens would presently tell the Flemmings and desire them not to speake Morisco to them, because their Merchants were such as dwell farre within the land; thereby giving them to understand that they meant by this watchword to deceive him, and afterward to share those so ill gotten purchases amongst them: and it did nor doth not seldome fall out, but that the Merchant Moore, not accustomed to the Sea, lies Sea-sick aboard all the whilest the knavish Tolken makes his bargaine for him with the crafty Dutch, conniving at the Flemmings great inhansed prizes of his commo∣dities, to draw the greater gaine and more gold from the Moore; whom somtimes he cozens by stealing some of his gold, and putting it into his mouth, eares or otherwise; which the Moore finding by the scale and weight to want, addes some more knavery thereto by blowing into the Christians scale and ballance to make it weight; and when all these his intended bargaines are finished, and the Moore againe landed, the Tolkens and Boatsmen returne againe aboard to divide the cozened profit and ill gotten gaine betweene them, wherein it may be imagined that the Flemming for his part of the knavery and connivance must have a share of the gaines, which hath proved such a hinderance and detriment to the English and other Christians that trade upon this coast, that unlesse they also connive at the Tolkens villany and deceit as the Dutch doe, their voyage will be lost and their commodities to their prejudice re∣main unsold; this is in briefe the manner of their trade, the meanes now follow. As for their customes due to the Kings and Soveraignes upon Customes of the golden coast of Geney and Benin. this coast, it is found to vary in divers Ports and Havens, and one∣ly paid by inhabitant in case the Christian bring not his goods a∣shore to sell, every Haven having a peculiar Officer, and every Merchant that cometh with an intent to buy wares at a Port Towne, payeth a tole or small custome for his person, though he buy
nothing; and that no deceit may be used in the collector, there is er a sonne or some neere kinsman of that Prince, joyned in au∣ority with the said collector or customer; and if the Merchant y any commodities aboard a Ship for lesse then two ounces of ld at a time, then he must compound with the customer for the stome as he can at his pleasure, as that which is the customers own ofit, fee and wages: but if he buy above two ounces of gold which hey call a Benda, then the custome is an Angel of gold for every Bne∣a, as I am given to understand. I have shewd that coines acknowledging any Soveraignetie by The coines currant in Gi∣ney and Benin. ampis not here in use, but gold passeable either in Sands or Ingots ccording to the finesse and goodnesse is the currant coine passeable, hich our Merchants very well distinguish by 24. artificiall needles ade by allay of mettalls, from the lowest sort of gold to the finest f 24. Carrets fine, having exact rules for the valuation thereof, ccordingly as the same is found either in finesse or coursenesse: either use they any money, or any kind of minted coine wherewith o pay each other; but when any commodity is bought, the payment thereof is made with gold, and that likewise by weight; and it must be a very small parcell that hath not some kind of weight to di∣stinguish and weigh it withall, and they pay each other with foure square pieces of gold, weighing some a graine, and some halfe a graine; and about Mina a castle of the Portugalls, they pay each other with Kacorawns, which is gold drawn out into wier, and cut afterward into small pieces for all triviall commodities; and in Kacorawns. other places with little pieces of iron of a finger in length, with some Character stamped thereon; and in some places they have not the art of melting their gold, but sell it or rather pay it one to ano∣ther in sand by weight, according as they shall agree both in the value and in the quantity. The weights are made of copper of divers sorts, and have little The weights of Giney and Benin. round copper scales, like a hollow Orange pill for gold. A Benda is the greatest weight, which weighs 2. ounces. A Benda-offa is halfe a Benda, and is an ounce. Asseva is two pesos and a halfe. Egebba is two pesos, and accounted halfe an ounce or the fourth part of a Benda. Seron is accounted for one peso and a halfe. Eusanno is accounted a peso. Quienta is three quarters of a peso. Each Peso is held a loote. Media taba is a quarter of a peso. Agiraque is halfe a peso, so that by those that have made the tri∣all of their weights with ours, they have found them to be in every pound Troy a peso and halfe in every pound hevier then our Troy
pound used in England, and this weight is the rule for their gold in passing for commodities: where note that all Countries have not in this and other these large coast moneys currant of mettle as wee have in Christendome, for in some parts of Ethiopia their money is pepper, in Tombotu, and about the river Niger their money is cockles Coines of many parts of this cost. or shell-fish, in Azanah their money is porcellette, in Bengala porce∣letta and mettle together, as in China they use porcolette for money, and in some other places of India, paper stamped with the Kings seale passeth currant for money, and in some places the barkes of certaine trees called Gelsamora, and in Congo and many places of these Countries Lumach, and in Angela, beads of glasse, and such like in many other places. Their Measure for length in cloth or other commodities, is a Measures of the Geney and Benin. Iactam, which is accounted with us 12 foot or two fadome which they cut the one from the other, and in that sort sell their linnen the one to the other; and those two fathome by triall of the Dutch make a storke and three quarters, but in woollen they never mea∣sure above pieces of one handfull broad, which they so cut off and use for girdles which they weare about their middles, and sell it among themselves in this manner in these pieces abovesaid, and use no other kind of measure save one which they call a Paw, which is ¾ 1. d. English. The Inhabitants of this coast at the first trading heere of the Portugals, were very rude and ignorant, and were easily beguiled in all the commodities which they sold them; and not only tooke in good part the badnesse of the ware they received, but were also deceived in their measure; the Portugals by these meanes putting off their rotten linnens, rusty knives, broken and patched basons, pieced kettles, and such like, and these at what measure, value, weight and quantity they pleased for their gold: but the times are now altered, and they by their usuall sufferings in this kind by the Por∣tugals, made the more warie, provident and circumspect in their traffique with the English, French and Dutch: so that in those com∣modities which they buy or barter, either for their owne use, or for Merchandise, they are found to have as good judgement in them as the sellers themselves. Their ignorance in trade may be judged by their ignorance in ac∣compting Their mnner of accounting. and reckoning, for when they have past the number of Ten they rehearse so many words one after another for one number, that they are so puzzled and combred therwith, that they cannot tell how to get out, and so sit buzzing so long, till at last they have lost their tale, and forgot their number, and so are forced to begin to tell againe: but since they began to trade with the English, and were to reckon above the number of Ten, for they use no more amongst them, they reckon on till they come to Ten, and then take one of their fingers into their hands, and then tell to Ten a∣gaine; and then take another finger into their hand, and so pro∣ceed
till they have both their hands full, which in all maketh one undred; then they marke that up, and then begin againe to tell s at the first, and use the same order as before. To conclude this traffique, and to leave this coast, I heare not hatin these daies the English frequenting that coast, or that the rench or Dutch make any great benefit thereby: for the present ubtilty of the inhabitants, perceiving how their gold is sought eagerly after by them and all Nations, can now a dayes set such  rate thereon by this their manner of Exchange and barter, and hat by being so often beguiled by others, they are now growne more wary and circumspect in their bargainings, and are as ready o beguile the beguilers as to bee beguiled themselves; for they ooke now narrowly both to their measure and the goodnesse of heir commoditie; and though at first they knew no distinction of Christians, but tooke the Portugals and all white men to be of one Nation; yet since they know each Nation, and are acquainted with their particular manners and manner of dealing, having e∣er hitherto from the beginning found the fairest and squarest Trade with the English, therefore when they come, they are the best welcome to them, and speed best of any other Nations whatsoever with them. I willingly omit heere to speake of the Sugar-trade, and of the Sugar trade. plenty of Sugar-canes growing upon this Coast; the King of Por∣ugall heere in certaine places farming the sole Trade thereof to certaine his owne Subjects with a strict proviso, that the same bee sold to none other but to his owne subjects, and that provision to be sent onely for Lixborne to gaine a great Custome thereby mposed thereon, therefore the Portugall being heere the onely uyer and ingrosser, the inhabitants must and are inforced to ll onely to them, and at what reasonable rate they best can agree upon; and this restraint of this commoditie hath drawne the Dutch to build and fortifie in some pla∣ces upon this Coast, as now of late they have done at Mina opposite to the Spaniard, where they are at continuall vari∣ance, the river onely parting them.
CHAP. XXVI. Ethiopia superior and inferiour and the Pro∣vinces therof. EThiopia the superiour is knowne to us by the name of Abasine, and comprehendeth many large Provinces Ethiopia supe∣rior. and Kingdomes, and containes the Springs of three famous rivers, Abas, Totiasis and Nilus arising out of the lake Zembre, being for the most part Christians, and commanded by that so much renowned Emperour Prester Iohn, affording for commodities to the neighbour regions, rice, bar∣ley, Commodities of Ethiopia su∣perior. pease, sugars, minerals of all sorts, goates, sheepe, and oxen, but because these Townes of these Provinces are for the most part in land, they afford no great matter of trade, and as little knowne to our nation, I willingly omit them. CHAP. XXVII. Of Ethiopia inferior, and the Provinces thereof. EThiopia inferior, hath the red Sea on the East, the Ethi∣opian Ethiopia infe∣rior. Ocean on the West, the land of Negro's on the North, and the southerne Ocean on the South, com∣monly divided into these parts, Aian, Zanbar, Mono∣motapa, Caffaria, Monicongo. In Aian, are upon the Sea coasts these three Cities much fre∣quented Aian. by Merchanrs, Arar, Zeila, Borbera, the second of which was sacked by the Portugals in Anno 1516, and is found to abound with flesh, honey, waxe, corne, gold, Ivory and cattell; especially Commodities of Aian. sheepe in plenty. Zanibar containes 15 Townes that gives names to 15 severall . Quiloa. Mosambique. Soffolla. Kingdomes, the chiefe for trade is Quiloa where the Portugals have Forts built and fortified Anno 1509. Mosambique also forti∣  them, Soffola which for the aboundance of yvorie and gold is conceived to be the land of Ophir to which Solomon sent by his three yeares Voyage. Monomotapa containes also sundry Provinces invironed almost Monomotapa. round with waters, and abounding with mines of gold, accounted to containe above 2000, the principall being three, Monica, Mnica.
Boro and Quitiana; which yeelds not any commoditie else save Boro Quitiana. Elephants teeth. lephants teeth, to procure which, it is supposed 5000 are yearely aine in these Kingdomes. Caffaria hath nothing famous in it, save that famous and no∣d Caffaria. Cpe Bonae Spei. headland Cape bona speranza, discovered by the Portugals in nno 1497. Manicongo was discovered by the Portugals 1486, and by them Manicongo. hen converted to the popish Religion, which the Inhabitants soone orsooke, as peradventure seeing that that Religion was made the loake of their conquest, yeelding yearely 30000 slaves in sale to the ortugals, which they carry to Brasile to worke in their silver Mines; of the trade of the principall of these it is fit I should in his place more particularly handle. CHAP. XXVIII. Of Mosambique and the Trade thereof. THe Sea coast affording the prime places of traffique Mosambique and the trade thereof. known to our Countrymen in this large tract of land before mentioned, and especially from cape bona espe∣ranze, to the entrance of the red Sea, which now com∣meth to bee handled, it will not bee fitting I should wholly omit the Trade thereof, before I have better surveighed he same, together with those Townes of Traffique as are found to e there most eminent, and therewith relate the manner how and he matter whereof this trade is heere maintained and preserved;  will then include the trade of this whole Coast under the title of Mosambique, as being the principall towne of negotiation found longst this shoare, having Soffalla on the one side thereof, and uiloa on the other side: all which being fortified by the Portu∣als the first Christian discoverers thereof give yet that libertie nd freedome to the Countrey inhabitants and others to exercise he same that would, and considering their manner of traffique, t is seene plentifully stored both with the native commodities of the coast it selfe, and of the inland Countries; there are here found the Townes of Cuama, Sena, Macava, Brava, Melinda, and others along this shore, seated some on the coast of Abex, and some on the coast of Melinde, but Quiloa for the commodiousnesse of the River, and the passage into the maine Continent, having but a short cut into the Lake of Zaflan, in which there ariseth a great River, that runneth into Nilus, and so to Cairo, and there∣fore the same is accounted the principall Citie for eminency and concourse of people, though for traffique this and the rest give
place (if the Spanish Relations be true) to Mosambique, wherein is found the first Fortresse that was built by the Portugalls on this coast and Seas. Mosambique then is not onely the name of an Iland, but also of a Kingdome, seated betweene Monomotapa and Quiloa; the Iland is found to have a pretie Towne seated upon it, and toge∣ther with the Ilands of Saint George, and Saint Iacob, makes a large, faire, and secure haven for shippes of the greatest burthen, fit to receive and harbour all vessels, that come and goe, both to and from India to Christendome; and although this Iland nor Kingdome are not very great, yet they are very rich, and most abounding of all the Countries of this coast of Mosambique; the Iland whereon the Towne is scituated, is inhabited now by two manner of people, Christians and Mahometans; the Christians account themselves Portugalls, or of the Portugall race, who are the keepers of a strong Castle seated therein, from whence also all other their Castles and Forts seated in this Tract are supplyed with their necessaries; especially Soffala, where the richest mine of Soffa▪ gold of all this coast lieth, and there the Portugall ships doe use to harbour in winter time, when they are not able to saile either backward or forward otherwise to accomplish their desired voy∣age; and there likewise the Indian shippes are accustomed to take in victualls and fresh water, and by the onely discovery of this place, the Portugalls first found out the way to India; for here they met with Pilots that were able to instruct them in the man∣ner of the navigation of these Seas, and were expert in the ma∣ritime coasts thereof; they have no sweet water in the Towne, nor in the Castle, though it be imagined to be the strongest in In∣dia, but have many cesternes round about it, wherein a yeares provision of water is ever found, which they fetch from the con∣tinent from a place called Cabasar. The Captaine of this Castle is The Captine of Mosmbique the greatest Merchant. still found to be the greatest Merchant here, for he keepes a Factor in Soffala, and another in Quiloa, and yearly sendeth barkes for trade alongst the coast, who commonly for some good service performed, hah this place and command assignd him for three yeares, which is conceived to be worth to him 400 thousand duc∣cats, and afterward he is to goe into India, and upon his owne charge to serve there at the command of the Viceroy for the King of Portugall other three yeares, and then may depart for Spaine if he please, besides whom none may hence trade for India, but the Inhabitants Portugalls, and who are also injoyned to be mar∣ried men, for such as are unmarried may not stay here by a speci∣all privilede from the King, granted to those that inhabit here, to the end at the Iland should be peopled, and thereby kept safeguaed and maintained, and for this immunitie they are one∣ly bo in me of need to defend the Castle, and are accounted as th Garrison thereof, though it is found that the Governour and
his family onely lieth therein, and the Townesmen by turnes, having the warding and watching thereof committed to their charge and trust. Their navigation is hence into India but once a yeare, which Navigation of India. is in the moneth of Aprill, and continueth till the midst of Sep∣tember, because that throughout the whole Countrey of India, they must sayle with Monsons, which are certaine current con∣stant winds, which have a setled course of blowing throughout the yeare, whereby they make their account to goe and come from the one place to the other, and in thirtie dayes they may sayle from Mosambique to India, and they are then forced to stay in India till the moneth of August, when as then the wind or Monson commeth againe, to serve them for Mosambique and this coast, in every which yeare the Captaine abovesaid hath ever a Shippe for his owne account going and comming into India. As for the commodities which this Countrie and coast is found Commodities of the coast of Mosambique. principally to affoord to the Merchant for transportation, it is chiefly gold, for neere Soffalla is a very rich Mine, and within the land, the famous Mine of Angola, the richest in the world, is said to be seated, besides the rich mines of Monomotapa, where∣in a River running thereby is found sands of gold in great plen∣tie, which is accounted the finest and best, and called by the Por∣tugalls, Botongorn Oroempo. The King of Portugall having ever a speciall Factor resident in Mosambique, trading for his account, keeping correspondence with other his Factors, and sending mer∣chandise from one place to another; for by this meanes the Kings The Kings of Portugall great Merchants. of Portugall, the first Navigators into these parts, so farre honou∣red merchandizing, that they held it no disparagement to raise thus some estate the better to performe and accomplish these long and chargeable Navigations, and hence it grew that they bringing these Indian commodities into Europe, for their owne ac∣count did by commissioners contract with private Merchants for the same in Lixborne, and other places; which hence from this authoritie were termed Regall Contracts. The other commodi∣ties Regall Con∣tracts. of this Country, besides Gold in sand, and Ingotts, are, Amber∣grise, Ebonwood, Ivorie, Elephants teeth, and many slaves both men and women, which hence are carried principally to India, as be∣ing reputed the strongest Moores  all the East Countries, and are put throughout India to the hardest labour and loathsomest drudgerie. In order here according to my intended methode, for the ex∣planation Coines, mea∣sures, and vvaights in Mosambique and the coast. of the trade of this place and Countrie, I should lay downe the Coines currant here, and their valuation, their mea∣sures of length, and their waights used in merchandizing; but be∣cause that by the collection I have made, and the observation that I have noted, the Portugalls at their first conquest here, brought
with them their owne species and coines, as also their owne waights and measures, as a testimony of their Regalitie and Soveraigntie, and that the particulars thereof shall be more at large shewed in its due place, when I come to handle the trade of Lixborne, from whence the same had its originall, I shall to avoide needlesse repe∣tition, desire the Reader to be referred thereunto, and so leaving this large coast with this slender Survey, I shall proceed to what doth rest behinde of Africa, which is better knowne unto us, and wherewith our Nation is more familiarly acquainted. CHAP. XXIX. Of AEGYPT, and the Provinces thereof. EGYPT on the East is bounded with the red Sea, on the West with Cyrene, on the North with the Aegypt and the trade thereof. mediterranean Sea, and on the South with Habasia: this Country is watered by the fruitfull River Nilus, which for the more benefit of the spreading plaines Nilus. divides it selfe into seven channels, and begins about the fifteenth of Iune to rise and swell above his bankes, and for fortie dayes doth so continue, and within fortie dayes againe collecteth it selfe into its owne limits: all the Townes here are seated on the tops of hills, which during this floud appeares to the stran∣gers like Ilands; intercourse and commerce being all this time preserved by boats, skiffs, and lighters, insteed of camells and hor∣ses;. this river is in length 3000 miles, and when it is found not to swell, it portendeth some fatall accident either to Countrey or Soveraigne. In this Country are found these famous Townes for traffique, Alexandria, built by Alexander the Great, the most eminent Sea∣port Alexandria. of all Aegypt, and whither before the discoverie of the Indies was the Scale of all those commodities which since we find to come thence, and then most frequented by the Uenetians, who had al∣most the sole trade of the commodities of India and Aegypt in their owne hands, and from them dispersed and transported through Europe, and who to this day yet keepe a Consull there for the protection of their Merchants. The next is Damiata, seated at the entrance of one of the chan∣nels of Nilus, the command whereof cost much bloud in the Damiata. dayes of those warres in the Holy land by the Westerne Christians. The next is Sues, a haven of consequence standing at the north Suesa. end of the red Sea, wherein the great Turke keepes a Station for
his Gallies, commonly built in Cairo, and afterward carried thi∣her by Camells to command his Dominions in those parts. The next is Rossetta, seated on the principall channell of Nilus, Rossetta. nd in a triangle from the two above-named Cities of Alexandria nd Cairo, serving for a Scale for both. The last and most principall is Cairo, the chiefe of this Coun∣trey, Cairo. containing 18000 streets, and each street being every night locked up and barred, which makes the Citie impregnable, of which more hereafter. I finde some Authors to have left for a re∣membrance behind them, a touch of the trade of this Countrey in The trade of Egypt in times past settled in Alexandria. times past practised by the commodiousnesse of the red Seas, which entreth into the heart of this Country, and because that Galuano relateth the beginning, continuance, and period of this trade, I will briefly follow his words. Ptol: Philadelphus then 277 yeares before the Incarnation, was the first that gave begin∣ning, and set afoot this Navigation, bringing the spices, drugges, and commodities of Arabia and India through the red Sea into Ae∣gypt to the port of Alexandria, where the Venetians as then the onely famous Merchants of Christendome, brought up the same, and were the first that this way dispersed it through Europe, Afri∣ca and Asia. Casir being then the principall haven Towne in the red Sea, whence their voyage to India was set forth and begun, Casir in the red Sea. and where the same afterward was ended, and from thence by land these commodities were conveyed to Coptus, a towne now Coptus. altogether inhabited by Iacobite Christians, and so thence downe the River Nile to Alexandria in the mediterranean Sea, by which traffique this Citie became so rich and eminent, that the Custome∣house there yeelded to Ptol: Aalates 7½ millions of gold: and after∣ward when the Romans came to be Lords of Aegypt, they found it to yeeld them fifteene millions. These last augmented this trade, and sent into India every yeare by the testimony of Pliny an hun∣dred and twenty sayle of ships, whose lading was outward bound worth 120000 Crownes, and it produced in profit at the returne homeward, for every Crowne, a hundred. But when the Vandalls, Lombards, Gothes and Moores had rent asunder the Romane Em∣pire, all commerce in these parts betweene these Nations began to cease, but when the inconvenience and discommoditie thereof was sensibly discerned and perceived, it was begun againe and set afoot anew by other Princes that coveted this rich trade, con∣veying the Indian commodities afterward with great difficultie, partly by land, and partly by water to Capha in the blacke Sea, And removed first to Caffa in the Euxine Sea. as then belonging to the Genoes; but this by reason of the long way and dangerous passage, being found too tedious and preju∣diciall, Trade (which is ever found to have a secret Genious and hid∣den course of it selfe) was removed, for these and other causes to Trabesond, which was then conceived the fittest Mart Towne, Then to Tra∣besond, sarma∣cand &c. then Sarmachand in Zagethai had it, where the Indian, Persi∣an
and Turkish Merchants met to barter, their commodities; the Turkes thence conveying the same to Damasco, Baruti and Alep∣po, from which last place the Venetians againe transported these commodities to Venice, making that Citie thereby the common Emporium of Christendome; and lastly in Anno 1300, the Soltans of Aegypt restored the passage by the red Sea, and the Venetians resetled their Factors in Alexandria, which continued for two hundred yeares, untill the Portugalls, Spanyards, English, and lastly the Dutch, found a new way by the backe side of Africa, to convey the same to their owne homes, whereby the great trade which the Aegyptians, and principally the Venetians had to themselves for many yeares, came thus to nothing, and the traf∣fique of Alexandria and red Sea thereby is now decayed, and be∣come altogether unfrequented, as at this day wee find it, subsi∣sting onely by the native commodities thereof, in which nature it is fittest I should now survay the same. CHAP. XXX. Of ALEXANDRIA, and the Trade thereof. ALEXANDRIA is said to be built by Alexan∣der Alexandria and the trade ther∣of. the great, and was called by the Turks the lords thereof Scanderia, and which in the Nicene counsell was ordained to be one of the foure patriarchall Cities; it is yet the fairest and best maritime port of this whole Countrey, and hath yet some reliques of that trade it earst injoyed, as I have noted before; and because it is the principall of this region for Merchandizing, I hold it proper to comprehend under this Chapter the greater part of the trade Universally of Aegypt and the neighbouring Cities. The commodities of Aegypt, besides what comes hither out of A∣rabia, Persia and India, is rice, corne, flaxe, hempe, hony, wax, balsome, Commodities of Aegypt. dates, some drugges, and some few spices, and in especiall it yeel∣deth aboundance of Palmetrees, which is of very strange proper∣ties, for they are found to grow in couples, male and female, both The excellen∣cie of the Palme-tree. thrust forth cods full of seede, but the female is onely fruitfull, and that not except growing by the male, and having his seed mixed with hers; the pith of these trees are excellent meate: of the bran∣ches they make necessary uses in their houses; of the leaves baskets, mats and fannes, of the outward huske of the codde; cordage, of the inward brushes; the fruit is like a figge, serving the Inhabitants sometimes dried in the su nne as bread, and greene as meat: and finally it is said to yeeld whatsoever is necessary to the life of man.
The weights in use in Cairo, Alexandria, and generally through∣ut Weight of Alexandria. all Aegypt for trade are found to be of 4. sorts, the first is the eight called the quintar of Zera, the second the quintar Forfor; e third the quintar Zaidin, and the fourth the quintar Mina; hich because of their former great trade with Venice, I will first ompare with the weights of that Citie, and then applie the same to he weight of our owne Countrie. One quintar of Zera hath been found to make of Venetia grosse 1 Zera. 200. li. and sutle 312. li. and in London 212. li. haber. One quintar of Forfori hath been observed to make in Venice 2 Forfori. 140. li. suttle and grosse 87. li. and in London 93. li. haber. One quintar Zaidin, hath made by observation in Venetia 127. 3 Zaidin. i. grosse, and 200. li. suttle, and in London 134. li. haberdepois. One quintar Mina, proper onely to Alexandria, hath made in 4 Mina. Venetia 250. li. suttle, 155. li. grosse, and in London 167. li. haberde∣ois. Whereas note that the first three quintars are accounted by Rotolos, but the quintar of minas containes in Alexandria 20. ounces to the Mina, and in Cairo 16 ounces to the Mina: And also observe that amber, muske, and some other fine commodities are sold by a Metalico or dramme, and also by the Peso, whereof 1½ is a Metalico; 50. Metalicoes is here a marke in gold or silver weight, and 42. Meta∣lico our English marke weight of 8. ounces Troy. Againe note that One Rotolo Zerai makes Venetia suttle 3. li. 1.½ ounces. One Rotolo forfori makes Venetia suttle 1. li. 5. ounces. One Rotolo Zaidin makes Venetia suttle 2. li. grosse 1. li. 3¼ oun. One Mina makes in Venetia suttle 2¼ li. and grosse 1⅔ li. Now let us observe how these weights are found to accord one with another, and so with Venetia. One quintar Zera, which is the generall quintar of Aegypt makes . quintars and 16. Rotolos of forfori in Alexandria. Againe, one quintar Zerai makes one quintar and 56. Rotolos of Zaidni, and maketh 120. Minas of Alexandria. One Rotolo Zera makes 2. Rotolo 1 ounce and  forfori. Againe, one Rotolo Zeri makes 1 Rot. 6 9/25 ounces of Zaidin. One quintar forfori makes 46. Rot. 3½ ounces Zerai, And one quintar forfori makes 20. Rot. 11 23/27 ounces Zaidni. One quintar forfori makes 55.½ minas, And one Rotolo forfori makes 111. oun. Zerai, and 6½ oun. Zaidin. One quintar Zaidin makes 64. Rot. 2 ounces of Zerai. One quintar Zaidin makes one quintar 28. Rot. 5⅓ oun. forfori. One quintar Zaiden makes 76. minas 11 ounces. One Rotolo Zaidin makes 7 7/10 ounces Zera, And againe, one Rot. Zaidin makes one Rot. 4⅗ ounces Forfori, And one Rotolo Zaidin makes one and 3 quarters ounces minas. One quintar minas makes one quintar 2 Rotolos forfori, And one quintar minas makes one quintar 30. Rotolos Zaidin. And one Mina makes ten ounces Zera:
And againe, one Mina makes one Rot. 9¼ ounces forfori. And lastly, one Mina makes one Rot. three ounces Zaidin. The variety of these weights will excuse this tedious repetition, which I was inforced to performe for the better understanding of the same; and for the shortening of my present survey of the trade of Aegypt: I will here reduce not onely the weights above∣named, Weights of Aegypt and sundry Cities in Barbary, to the 100. l. haberdepoise. but also the weights of some of the principall Cities of traffique upon this coast to the 100. li. suttle haberdepois of London, which hath been observed to make by: Zera quintar—48 Rot. In Cairo and all Aegypt. Forfori quintar—108 Rot.   Zaidin quintar—75 Rot.   Minas quintar—54 Rot.   Iripoli suria—25½ Rot. whereof 100. makes a quintar. Achria—17 Rot. the 100. makes a quintar Tamperan. Aleppo common—21¾ Rot. the 100. whereof is a quintar. Tripoli Barbary—62 Rot. the 100. where of is a quintar. Oran common with—91 Rot. the quintar is 5. Roves of 20. Rot. Oran for spices—133 Rot. the quintar is 4. Roves. Oran for corne—48 Rot. each quintar 6. Rotolos. Oran for cotton—59 Rot. each quitar 15. Rot. Una in Barbary—63 Rot. for cotton wools. Una—72 Rot. for spices. Una—90 Rot. for corne. Fras—153 Rot. the quintar is 100. ℞. Baruti—20¼ Rot. the quintar is 100. Rot. Argier—   Thunes—   Cathaio—84 Rot. the quintar is 100. Rot. Cyprus—19½ Rot. Famagosto 4. per cent. more. Suus in Barbary—90 Rot. 100. Rot. to a quintar. When I come to handle those particular places, I shall doe the same more exact, for the better satisfaction of the reader. Measures in Aegypt. The measures of length in Cairo, Alexandria, and in generall through Aegypt is found to be of two sorts, the one the pico Barb resco, or proper measure of the Countrey, serving for cloth, linen and other commodities, being 25⅞ inches English: The other the pico Turchesco, serving for silkes, cloth of gold, and fine stuffes, which is 22. ¼ inches English, and with Venetia they are found to render, viz. 100. braces of silke in Venetia, makes here Barbaresco pico 116. 100. braces of cloth in Venetia, makes here Barbaresco 124. ½. But I have found some observations that have noted that the 100. yards of London have made here and in these others Cities in Barbary thus, in
100 yards  London ave made Alexandria—165. pic. Baruti—148. pic. Tripoli Barbariae—165. pic. Damasco—148. pic. Bugia—210. pic. Tripolia Suria—149. pic. Rama—151. pic. Tangir— Bursa in Natolia—150. pic. Amano—133. pic. Sidon—151. pic. Gira—165. pic. Salonica—145. pic. Achria—151. pic. Aleppo—133. pic. Argier— Thunes— Oran— Bona— Morocco—181. cov. Una— And forasmuch as Cairo is the Metropolis of Aegypt, it will be oper I should travell thither and survey a little the present trade d estate thereof, before I leave this COMMERCE. CHAP. XXXI. Of CAIRO and the Trade thereof. I Willingly omit the present trade of Rosetto, Damietta and some others of lesser note comprehended within Cairo and the trade thereof. the limits of Aegypt, and also (here passe over to a fit∣ter place) the present trade of Sues in the red Sea, till I come to survey that gulph and the neighbouring ownes of Zebit, Mecca, Aden and others, and now content my lfe to consider the present state of the place and condition of affique of Cairo, and it is found at this day under the scepter of the and signior. Cairo is then commonly reputed to be one of the greatest and st famous Cities of the world called by the Arabians el Cahair, ted in a beautifull plaine neere the Mountaine Mucatun, and out 2. miles distant from the famous River of Nilus, invironed Misraim. th stately walls, and fortified with Iron Gates, having therein ny faire, large and long streets, where are seene placed by emselves each trade and occupation, and some streets wholly autified with Colledges for the studious, palaces for the honourable, emples for the religious, and Caens or Burses for the Merchants d negociators; the principall of which is called Caen Haleli, for∣erly the residence onely of Persia Merchants, now admitting of ther nations, built in manner of a Kings Palace, having three ories one above another; the lower onely containing ware∣ouses for the keeping of heavie and bulkie commodities, the iddlemost for spices, perfumes, and richer Merchandize, and the
uppermost for lodgings for those Merchants that have their ware∣houses therein: neere which, and round about the same the rich∣est shop-keepers are found to have their dwelling; and where in times past the principall Merchants of Christendome had a place of residence appointed for their factors and agents. This City is surrounded with sundry large and spacious Sub∣urbs, which is peculiar to sundry Artizans and Artists, the prin∣cipall Suburbs is called Bullach, distant 2. miles from the walls of the Citie, and stretching it selfe along the bankes of the River of Nile, beautified with many faire buildings, and is now the com∣mon residence of the principall Merchants of this Citie: and here are all such commodities landed, as either cometh out of the medi∣terranean Sea by any the channells of Nilus up this River, or out of Arabia or other Countries downe this streame; here lies all the Vessells moored, either to lade or unlade; and here doe the Offi∣cers reside, which receive the customes of all goods coming by water from either Damieta, Roscett a, or Alexandria, which in it selfe is but small, the principall custome and duety being payd by these Merchants, and collected by the agents of the customers at these Maritime ports abovesaid: but those commodities that come out of the firme land doe here pay the said intire customes as shall be mentioned hereafter. This Citie is inhabited by sixe sorts of Merchants, each of them trading by so many distinct wayes; the native Aegyptian I reckon Merchants of 6. sorts in Cairo. the first ever accounted expert Merchants, but never adventuring out of his owne Countrey, who buy from other forraine Nations their commodities in grosse, and supply the necessities of their owne Countrey by retaile. The Arabian or Moore is the next, here e∣steemed 2. the greatest and most eminent Merchants; for these are they who are found to furnish all Aegypt with the spices and Iems of India, and the drugges of Arabia, importing the same by camells and dromedaries from Goa, Ormus, Aden, Zebit, Dangula, Mecca, and other places from and about the red sea: and in returne there∣of exporting hence the drugs of Aegypt, and such other commo∣dities as are brought hither by those Nations neighbouring, prin∣cipally upon and about the mediterranean sea. The principall commodities accounted and fittest for them is the excellent gold of this Countrey called the Solianies and sheraffie, which Aegypt in great plenty affordeth. The third sort of Merchants I account the  Christians of Europe, as principally the French and Venetians, who have here their consuls and viceconsuls for the preservation of their trade, and protection of their Nation, by certain capitulati∣ons agreed uponbetween their soveraignes and the grand signior in Constantinople, paying such dueties and customes to his Officers here as their said capitulation doe nominate; and these thus fur∣nish Aegypt with leventine commodities, and generally with all the af bricks and wares of the growth of Europe; and these cary hence in
returnes these commodities brought hither both out of Arabia d India, and the native commodities of this Countrey. The 4. urkes I account the next, whose Emperour swayeth the scepter  this rich Countrey, and who in respect of their easie customes ape a peculiar benefit by the trade of this place; but the most inent of them residing farre hence and in Constantinople, and eir adventure proving dangerous and hazardable by reason of e incursions of the Malta and Florentine Galleys, joyning there∣o the dull temper of that Nation generally in matter of Com∣erce, and the ill successe their grand Galons have of late yeeres ad, doth much divert their minds from any eager pursuit of that o rich a traffique. The Iewes here resident I account the fifth, who y reason of their generall knowledge in trade, and their generall 5. orrespondence in all these Countries beforementioned, partake of all the Commerce and traffique practised by these severall per∣sons; for from Venice, Constantinople, Ormus, Goa, and other emi∣nent places of traffique they are found to adventure and to have adventures; they travell and returne with the Arabian into India and Arabia, they traffique here both in grosse and retaile; and be∣sides their subtilty in driving of bargaines and making of con∣tracts betweene man and man as brokers, they are here found to be of all professions, and are the professors of all Arts. The last which I reckon in this roule is the Armenian, Graecian and Coptie, 6. all Christians, who in their wayes set the wheele of trade on worke, by being some shop-keepers, some artificers, and some Mer∣chants, principally trading by Caravans to and from Aleppo, Damas∣cus, Amman and Baruti, and in the commodities of those Countries of Armenia, Georgia and Persia, they carry the principall sway and stroake, all which considered, what doth the place want to make it absolute but onely what it hath lost? which is the vast trade of India, which of late yeeres the Portugalls, English and Flemming hath deprived them of; for which I leave them to sorrow for, as for a thing past remedie. The commodities that this Countrey and place principally afor∣deth to these Merchants, whereby their commerce is now preser∣ved Commodities of grand Cai∣ro and Aegypt. to them is flaxe, and all sorts of pulse, abounding in the Pro∣vince of Sahid, where the Pharoah's resided, fruits, rice, balsome, &c. abounding in Eriffia, where the Ptolomies resided; cottons, sugars, and some drugges, &c. abounding in Marrema, where the Ro∣mans and Grecians resided; and all these annually foretold by the inundation of the River Nilus, discerned by a piller seated in the Iland Michias opposite to the City of Cairo, beginning ever to in∣crease about the 15. Iune, so continuing 40. daies increasing, and 40. daies decreasing as I said before; the height of the increase giving assured testimonie of that yeeres aboundance and plenty, at the end whereof a solemne seaven daies feast is kept to Nilus,
in which it is oftentimes seene the Aegyptian to sp end asmuch in jolity as with great paine and industry he hath gathered the whole yeare before with penury; out of this plentie and abundance is yearly drawne for revenue of this Kingdome three millions of she∣raffies, Revenewes of Aegypt. in value 8. sbil. starling a piece, the one whereof is now a∣daies sent to the grandsignior (by land and Caravan for feare of sur∣prizall at Sea by the Florentine or Maltagallies;) the second milli∣on is spent in the pay of the Militiae and Soldery of this Country: and the third redounds to the benefit of the Bassa, here resident for the grand signior for the maintenance of his owne Court and dependants. Their principall parts for traffique in the mediterranean Sea is Alexandria, as before I noted, accounted a free port for friend or enemie; the harbour commanded by a Castle, and the entrance guy∣ded by an eminent watch-tower to give light to saylers: the cu∣stomes of which place is formed by Jewes at 20. thousand Medins, per diem 30. Medins accounted for a Royall of eight Spanish, which here may be valued 5. sh. starling, the which by the yeare may a∣mount to 55. thousand pound starling, all goods entring here payes the custome in species, or compounded for at 10. in the hundred, Customes of Alexandria. onely moneys entring pay but one and halfe per cent: but outward all commodities payes 11. per cent. but this is to be accounted the Soldanes custome, and called the great custome: the other customes raised here is as much, or very neere as much more, as he shall find to his cost that tradeth into these parts, whereto for better tryall I will referre him. Now for the trade in generall of Cairo, the Merchants thereof are found at this day in some sort to have the reliques of that for∣mer Merchants of Cairo. great trade which they lost out of the red Sea; for hence they send by Caravans sundry European commodities thither, especially at the time when the yearly caravan departeth hence for Mecca, and Medina Talnabi, the Sepulcher of their false Prophet Mahomet, which arriving at Sues in the red Sea, is there found to have a ge∣nerall dispersion, some going for the Citie of Assuan, which is commodiously seated upon their river Nile, and upon the bor∣ders of the Kingdome of Nubia, which hence fits it selfe with the commodities both of Asia and Europe, and is equally distant be∣tweene Cairo and the Citie of Suachen or Suasuem, once the prin∣cipall port of this Kingdome, scituated on the red Sea, but now in the subjection of the great Emperour of the Abassins: from which is commodious navigation to Brava, Melinda, Quiloa, and other places alongst the coast of Abex and Mosambique, as I have men∣tioned before. And because it is the principall Towne of trading on Africa side in the red Sea, I hold it here worthy a better and more serious survey.
CHAP. XXXII. SVACHEN, on the red Sea, and the trade thereof. SVACHEN is one of the richest Cities of the Orient, Suachen on the Red Sea, and the trade thereof. scituated within the Arabique Gulfe in the coast of Ethiopia sub Aegypto, and amongst all the famous Ci∣ties of trade in the Orient; this is accounted equall, if not superior to them in foure things; the first in Suachen famous for 4 excellen∣cies needfull in trade. he goodnesse and securitie of the Haven; the second in the faci∣tie and good service for lading and unlading of shippes; the third n the traffique with very strange and remote people and Coun∣ries, and of divers behaviours; the fourch in the strength and cituation of the Citie; as for the goodnesse and securitie of the Port, Nature hath so made it, that it is defended from all stormes whatsoever; the Haven is capacious and large, of smooth tydes, the ground good, and able in circuit to hold 300 great saile of burthen, with water at all times, from six to twelve fadome; the Shippes are laden round about the whole circumference of the Citie, casting onely a planke into the Merchants ware-houses where their wares are kept; and the Gallies fastning themselves to the stones and doores of their houses, set their prowes over the streets, and by them as by bridges they are commodiously laden or unladen; and secondly, as touching the traffique and na∣vigation thereof, few Cities can in these parts be compared with t, for this Citie is found to have traffique with all India intra and extra Gangem, that is, Cambaia, Tanacerim, Pegu, Mallacca, and with the Arabique, with Iudea Cairo and Alexandria, as I said a∣bove, and with all Ethiopia and the land of Abexi; from whence t gathereth great abundance of gold and Ivorie: thirdly, for the cituation of it, for it is such as if nature had framed it purposely for a Royall Mart, for it is an Iland round in forme, incompassed with many sholds and flats, for defence of the Port and the Citie, occupying and taking up the whole bodie of the Iland, so that it may as properly be termed an Iland of a Citie, as a Citie in an I∣land; for there is no one foote of wast ground upon the whole I∣land, but is imployed in housing and Magazins: the manner of trade here, as farre as I have gathered is thus: It is now the principall port Towne in these Seas belonging to Prester Iean, from whose Court called Dombia, it is twenty-five dayes journey by Caravan, and the concourse of Merchants are here so great, that twenty caravans are yearly found to set out hence towards severall parts of the neighbouring Regions.
The commodities they carry are all kinde of Indian clothing, and Commodities of Suachen. also of our English commodities, as Broad clothes, kersies, leade and tinne; likewise Velvets, Damaskes, Sattins, Taffettaes, and all other sorts of silke stuffes; their colours more desired are reds, greens, vio∣lets, murries, and other light colours. Their measure is called a (—) about halfe a yard, and cloth Measures of Suachen. that is worth in Suachen 4 Rialls of 8/8 is there worth 8 Rialls, and the price of kersies is halfe the price of Broad-cloth; Uelvets of China is here worth 10 ℞  the said measure, and Italian Velvets are much more worth, but not so profitable to the Merchants as being much dearer; Sattins of Florence are worth 10  Damaskes of the best sort worth from 8 to 10 ℞ 8/8 Taffetta's 3 ℞  and all colours well sold, excepting yellow and blacke, which are out of use in these Countries. Their waight is the Rotolo, which is about 16½ ounces haberdepois, Waights of Suachen. the Rotolo is foure Wakies, and 360 rotoloes makes here a waight cal∣led a Bahar. The commodities here abounding are these; Civet in great quan∣titie, and worth a R 8/8 a wakia, Elephants teeth also plentie, worth thirtie R 8/8 the Bahar, Waxe worth 1 R 8/8 the 100 rotolo's; Gold worth 60 R 8/8 the rotolo, Tynn worth 1 ℞ 8/8 the rotolo, and lead much more; but the Turkes will not suffer any to be brought hither through his Dominions, for they hold it a conterabanda commo∣ditie: from Grand Cairo there goeth alwayes in August a great Caravan for these parts, and likewise another in November, and the commodities they carry thence is broad clothes, kersies, velvets, sattins, damaskes, and silkes of all sorts, and from Cairo to Dombia this way is fiftie dayes travell by Caravan, and no more, which hence is easily performed. Now for as much as I finde not on the Arabian side of the red Sea any other Towne of eminence in trade besides this, and that from cape guarda fue alongst the coast, I finde none other worthy my detention, I will hence sayle downe to the bottome of this Gulfe, and willingly passe by in silence the famous Port Towne of () the place conceived where the Israelites passed on dry foot over, or rather through this Sea, when they were pursued by their envious enemies the Aegyptians, who therein found their death the reward of their hatred; and perusing the same survay the now famous Port of Sues, the present station of the Grand Signeors Fleete, that aweth this Sea, and the neighbouring Re∣gions thereof.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of SVES, and the trade thereof. SVES is now the reliques of that ancient Heros, to Sues in the Red Sea. which place Cleopatra carried her Gallies by land after the defeate of Marke Anthony her beloved, accounted fifteene leagues from the neerest branch of Nilus running to Cairo, it is strengthned by a strong late fortification raised by the Turkes, not onely for the defence of the Towne, but in defence of those his Gallies here kept to command these Seas, and his maritime coasts on both des the gulfe; and here it was that severall Aegyptian Soltans in∣tended to digge a channell, and thereby joyne the commoditie of this Sea to the Mediterranean, but all of them desisting ere the worke was brought to perfection, the reliques whereof in many places remaines yet to be seene, the divine providence ha∣ving given bounds to Seas which the wit and power of man, though Princes, cannot transpose or alter. This place would long since have given way to the envie of time by decay and ruine, had it not been for that relique of trade which is here pre∣served by a few inhabiting Merchants, and the station for the great Turkes Gallies, which he is inforced to build on the Medi∣erranean Sea, for want here of wood and fit materials, and thence convay the same hither by camells and dromedaries in severall eeces, where afterward they are set up and accordingly imploy∣d, sometimes mastering the Portugalls, and other Kings his eighbours, and sometimes againe being by them mastered, ac∣ording to the fortune of warre; other subject of trade I finde not ere materiall, therefore in silence passe it over. And having hus then briefly run through the principall places of trade, com∣prised within the limits of Aegypt, and noted the concordancie of the waights and measures used commonly throughout this whole Country, both with Venice the former great traders hither, and with ours in England, before I come to the Coines currant of this Countrey, it will not be unproper I should insert a concordan∣cie of the waights of this place with some other neighbouring Countries, according as I have gathered them out of the workes of Alexander de Pasi, a Venetian Merchant, which here for many yeares resided.
CHAP. XXXIIII. Aegypt waight compared with the waights of sundry other Countryes. I Have noted before how that in Aegypt is used foure severall waights proper to severall sorts of commo∣dities; Aegypt waight compared with the waights of sundry other Countries. the cantar forfori is used in severall sorts of spices comming from Cairo; the cantar zero is the greatest and most common in use for all such commo∣dities as are sold here by Christian Merchants; the cantar laidin is The severall commodities waighed by the severall waights in Aegypt. onely used in flax, hemp, &c. and the last is the cantar mina, most used in Damietta, for cloves, maces, cinamon, muske, and some sorts of spices; the observations made thereon, with some other eminent Cities, are these: A cantar of Tripoli in Siria is thus found to accord with Ae∣gypt. Aegypt waights compared with Tripoli in Sria. A cantar forfori is, in Tripoli 1 cantar 24 Rotolos. A cantar laidin is in Tripoli——33⅔ Rotolos. A cantar Zeroi is in Tripoli——52½ Rotolos. A cantar mena is in Tripoli——42 Rotolos. And note that from Aegypt is sent to Tripoli in Suria, some spi∣ces, sugars, rice, casia, salt, &c. and from Tripoli is sent to Aegypt white soape, dates, and some other commodities. The waight of Cyprus is thus observed with Aegypt. The cantar of Cyprus makes in Aegypt 5 cantar: 20 rotol. forfor. Aegypt waights compared with Cyprus. 2 cantar: 30 rotol. zoroi. and the cantar forfori is in Cyprus 19 Rotolo ¼. A cantar laidin is in Cyprus 26½ rotolos. A cantar zoroi is in Cyprus 42½ rotolos. A hundred Mino is in Cyprus 33⅓ rotolos. And note that from Aegypt is brought to Cyprus, some spices, ca∣sia, rice, flax, salt, fish, and some other goods, and from Cyprus is brought to Aegypt, hony, melasso, sugars, cottons, chamblets, grograms, and some other commodities. Rhodes is thus found to accord with Aegypt. Aegypt waights compared with Rhodes. The cantar forfori is in Rhodes 18 Rotolos. The cantar laidin is in Rhodes 25 Rotolos. The hundred mino is in Rhodes 32⅔ Rotolos. The cantar of Rhodes is in Aegypt 2 cantar 56 Rot. Zeroi.
And note that Rhodes sends to Aegypt, hony, wax, oyles, reisins, d some fruits, and from Aegypt is sent to Rhodes, some spices, cas∣, sugars, rice, Cowhides, flax and salted fish. Aegypt is thus found to agree in waight with Scio and Smyrna. Aegypt weights compared with Scio and Smyrna. The cantar of Scio is in Aegypt 1 cantar 11 Rotolos forfori. The cantar Zeroi is in Scio 1 cantar 95 Rotolos. The cantar forfori is in Scio 89½ Rotolos. The cantar laiden is in Scio 1 cant. 24 Rotolos. And note that from Scio is sent for Aegypt waxe, honey, figges, ma∣icke, white soape, cottons; and from Aegypt to Scio and Smyrna is sent ssia, rice, flaxe, sugar and sugar candid, xe and buffolo hides, salted h, &c. Aegypt with Candie is thus found to accord in weight. Aegypt weights compared with Candia. The 1000 li. grosse of Candia makes 3 Cantar 63 Rotol. Zero. The 1000 li. sotile of Candia makes 3 Cant. 57 Rot. Zero. The Cantar Zeroi makes Candia sotile 274 li. The Cantar forfori makes in Candia sotile 125 li. The Cantar laidin makes in Candia grosse 115 li. The hundred of Meno makes in Candia sotile 220 li. And note that from Candia is sent to Aegypt honey, waxe, cheese, andia wines and some other commodities: And from Aegypt is sent  Candia some spices, rice, cassia, sugar candid, flaxe, and some other ommodities. Aegypt is found thus to accord with Cania. Aegypt weights compared with Cania. The 1000 li. grosse of Cania is in Aegypt 6 cantar 33 in 35 ℞. Ze. The cantar Zero is in Cania sotile 278 li. The cantar forfori is in Cania is sotile 127 in 128 li. The cantar laidin is in Cania grosse 100 li. The hundred mina is in Cania sotile 221 li. in 223 li. And note that the commodities transported for merchandize are e same as is above rehearsed in Candia. Aegypt is found thus to accord in weights with Brussia in Natolia. Aegypt weights compared with Brussia, Natolia. The cantar Zera is in Brussia 1 Canar 77 Rotolos. The cantar forfori is in Brussia 82 Rot. The cantar laidin is in Brussia 1 Cantar 14 Rot. The hundred Meno is in Brussia 1 Cantar 42 Rotolos. And note that from Brussia is sent to Aegypt waxe, honey, carpet lke, sivet and other commodities: and from Aegypt those commodi∣ies mentioned heretofore. Aegypt is found thus to accord with Constantinople in weights. Aegypt weights compared with Constanti∣nople. The cantar Zera is in Constantinople 1 Cantar 77 Rotolos. The cantar forfori is in Constantinople 82 Rot. The cantar laidin is in Constantinople 1 cantar 14 Rot. The hundred of Meno is in Constantinople 1 cantar, 42 Rotolos. And note that the commodities accord with the precedent of Brussia. Aegypt weights compared with Corfu. Aegypt is found thus to accord with the Iland of Corfu.
The 1000 li. sotile corfu is in Aegypt 4 cant. 27. Rot. Zero. The cantar forfori is in corfu sotile 108 li. The cantar laiden is in corfu sotile 150 li. grosse 126 li. The hundred meno is in corfu sotile 187 li. The cantar zero is in corfu sotile 234. li. And note that from Aegypt to corfu and the parts adjoyning is sent Cassia, pepper, cloves, cynamon, and some other spices, sugars, rice, flaxe, oxe and buffello hides, and other commodities of Aegypt, and from Corfu is sent to Aegypt, waxe, honey, &c. Aegypt is found to accord with Rhagusa in Slavonia. Aegypt weight compared with Rhagusa in Slavonia. The cantar forfori is in Rhagusa 120 li. The cantar laiden is in Rhagusa 166½ li. The cantor Zero is in Rhagusa 163 li. The hundred of Mena is in Rhagusa 208⅓ li. The commodities are the same as above mentioned in Corfu. Aegypt weight compared with Catarro in Dalmatia. Aegypt is found in weight to agree thus with Catarro. The cantar forfori is in Catarro 108 li. The cantor Zero is in Catarro 234⅓ li. The cantar laiden is in Catarro 150 li. grosse 126 li. The cantar Meno is in Catarro 187 li. and note that the commodities are the same, as is mentiond in Corfu. Aegypt is found to agree with Spollato thus in weight. Aegypt weights compared with Spollato in Istria. The cantar forfori is in Spollato 144 li. sotile. The cantarlaidin is in spollato sotile 200 li. grosse, 126 li. The cantar Zero is in spollato sotile 312 li. in 316 li. The hundred Meno is sotile spollato 250 li. Note the commodities are the same mentioned in Corfu and gulfe Venetia. Aegypt is found in weight thus to agree with Ancona. Aegypt weight compared with Ancona. The cantar zera is in Ancona 268 li. The cantar forfori is in Ancona 124 li. The cantar laidin is in Ancona 172 li. The hundred meno is in Ancona 215 li. And note that the commodities of Aegypt are nominated before, and from Ancona is sent to Aegypt white soape, oyles, nuts and the common commodities of the Kingdome of Naples. Aegypt is found in weight to agree with Apulia thus, Aegypt weights compared with Apulia. The cantar of Zero is in Apulia 1 Cant. 7 Rot. The cantar forfori is in Apulia 48 Rot. or 155 li. The cantar laiden is in Apulia 68 Rot. or 188 li. The hundred Meno is in Apulia 85 Rot. or 235 li. These weights are found in this manner also to agree with Na∣ples, and hath the commodities transportable for merchandize, as is mentioned before in Ancona. Aegypt is found in weight thus to agree with Sicilia. Aegypt weights compared with Sicilia. The cantar forfori is in Sicilia 55 Rotolos or 138. li. The cantar forfori is in Sicilia 1 cantar 29 Rot. or 300 li.
The cantar laidin is in Sicilia 77 Rot. or 192 li. The hundred meno is in Sicilia 96 Rot. or 240 li. And note that from Sicilia is sent to Aegypt, Mellassus of sugars, uts, cheese and brimstone pumicestones: and from Aegypt is sent to Si∣ilia the commodities above-named of Aegypt. Aegypt is found to agree with Tunes and Tripoli in Barbary thus, The cantar of Tunes is 1 cantar 17 Rotolos forfori. Aegypt weight compared with Tunes and Tripoli in Bar∣barie. The cantar forfori is in Tunes and Tripoli 85 Rotolos. The cantar laiden is in Tunes and Tripoli 1 cantar 19 Rot. The cantar zero is in Tunes and Tripoli 1 cantar 84 Rot. The hundred Meno is in Tunes and Tripoli 1 Cantar 47 Rot. And from Aegypt is sent to Tunes and Tripolis, some sorts of spices, as pepper, cloves, cinamon, cassia, Benjamin, muske, ambergreece, civet, storax, camphora, flaxe, and such like. It resteth yet to make the knowledge of these severall weights in themselves perfect; that I should shew what commodities are weighed by each of them, and afterward shew in briefe how they are found to accord with other principall places of traffique not here above mentioned. The cantar forfori is the weight wherewith in Aegypt Merchants The agreement of the Cantar forfori with o∣ther Coun∣tries. do buy and sell pepper, ginger and greene ginger, lache, red and white sandall, incense, myrrhe, zedoaria, gumme arabicke, semensie, asafetida, mirabolans, indico, sugars of all sorts, sl armoniaque, Elephants teeth and the like: agreeing thus with other Countries of trade. Cantar for∣fori, that is 100 Rotolos is in Rodes—17½ Rotolos. Cyprus—18⅔ Rotolos. Petras—108 li. Salonica—109 li. Zara—116 li. Fiume—140 li. Ancona—120 li. Riconati—123 li. Pesaro—124 li. Arminio—116 li. Lanfano—123 li. Apulia—132 li. Acquilla—124 li. The Can∣tar forfori of Egypt, is in Sicilia—134 li. which are 54 Rotolos. Calabria—131 li. which are 47 Rot. Naples—121 li. which are 47½ Rot. Roma—117½ li. Florence—112½ li. now all one. Pisa—124. li. Genoa sotile—133 li. Lucca—123 li. Bollonia—116½ li.
Millan-——129 li. Cremona——132 li. Piedmont——129 li. Geneva—88 li. Lions——98 li. Avignon——102 li. Barselona——98 li. Majorca—100 li. Marselia—105 li. Valencia——120 li. Sivil——90 li. Lixborne——79½ li. Bona and Bugia—83⅓ Rotol. London-——81 li. Bridges——92 li. The weight called Meno is accounted by the hundred and not The agree∣ment of the Cantar me with other Countries. by the Cantar which is also peculiar to some commodities onely and thereby is weighed cloves, maces and fust of cloves, nutmegs, ci∣namon, cubube, long pepper, aloes epatica, boras, in past and in gaine, cardamon, spiknard, costus sweet and bitter, sarcacole, armoniac, oppo∣ponax, storax, calamit, turbit, spodium, ermodotili, mumia, bein, laccia, euforbio, lignum aloes, rubarbe, manna, and other such like are sold by this weight, the hundred whereof, make of the cantar forfori 180 Rotolos, and makes in The 100 Rot. meno doth make in Venetia soteli—250 li. Petrasse——184 li. Corfu—187 li. Rome—-—211 li. Ricante——220 li. Lanfano-—215. li. Acquila——223. li. Fermo——223. li. Rhagusa-—208 li. Piedmont—229 li. Savoy——157. li. Avignon—181 li. Marselia-—187 li. Majorca—-179 ℞ Granado—148 li. Sivill—-—158 li. Lixborne—142 li. Tunes——148 li. Salerno—235 li. Ancona—215 li. Pesaro—220 li. Bollonia—208 li. Florence—219 li. Millan—229 l i Cremona—232 li. Genoa—238 li. Verona—225 li. Geneva—157 li. Lions—175 li. Paris—169 li. Barcelona—178 li. Valencia—208 li. Cades—164 li. Tripol. barb.—148 li. London—166½ li. In Flanders-173 li.
The next is the Cantar Zero by which is sold Cassia nd not any The agree∣ment of can∣tar Zero with other Coun∣tries. other spice, also tinne, lead, brasse and some other commodities the which is found to make in The can∣tar Zero doth make in Venetia gro.—200 li. Venetia soteli—316 li. Salonica—177. Rot. Petrasse——140 li. Fiume—312 li. Pulia——108 li. Lansano-—268. li. Ricante——275 li. Pesaro——275 Barcelona—219 li. Majorca—223 ℞ Valencia—227. li. Sivill——198 li. Lixborne—250 li. Tunes———186 ℞ Bome—266 li. Ancona—268 li. Florence——273 li. Genoa——297 li. Lucca——276 li. Millan—287 li. Sicilia——120 li. Piedmont—287 li. Marselia-—231 li. Cades——200 li. London——223 li. Flanders—215 li. Tripol. barb.—116 ℞. Granado—178 ℞. And this is as much as I have collected concerning the severall weights of Egypt used constantly in Cairo, Alexandria, Damietta and other the principall places of that Countrey which by reason of the diversity as being fourefold have proved the more tedious and intricate; wherein if error be found by the triall of him that shall have cause to make an experiment, I shall (I hope) find the more favourable construction of this my paines taken, wishing that I could have thus inlarged my selfe in the measures of these Countries and the agreement thereof with the other places be∣forenamed, wherein (being defective) I must crave to referre the Reader to him that is herein better acquainted, and therfore next to the coines currant. The coines currant of this Countrey are in traffique of Merchan∣dise, Coines currant in Aegypt. partly forreigne, and partly domestique; the forreigne is the Spanish Riall of eight, which they call here the piastre and doller and worth in common 80 and sometimes 90 aspers, which is the dome∣stique coine of this Countrey, and the Maidin which is the com∣mon silver coine of all the grand Seigniors Dominions. Three a. or aspers make a Maidin, and 30 maidins makes a Doller, the gold coines here is the soltany, sheriffe and chequine all of one value little differing, accounted 8 shil. sterling; but rising and falling in aspers according to the plentie and scarcity of gold. Their accompts are here diversly kept, the inhabitants for the The accompt kept in Aegypt. most part accounting by aspers and maidins, three aspers being a maidin, and some Christians by dollers and aspers 80 aspers to a
doller, and some by duccats of Pargo accounting that 3 duccats of Venice make one duccat of Pargo; besides which, there is also in use an Italian duccat 10 per cent lesse. The customes of Alexandria, Damietta and Rosetta is 10 per cent. The customes of Alexandria Damietta and Egypt. as I noted before upon all Commodities inward and outward, and paid in kind or species, but upon monies brought in it is onely ½ per cent. and very strictly lookt into and exacted; but the Bashaw go∣verning heere for the grand Signieur, being ever a principall man, and farre remote from the imperiall Port of Constantinople, layes in many towns of this Kingdome what custome he please; and though it be held now to be but 10 per cent. which is the old and ancient custome of Egypt, yet the Merchant that tradeth heere shall find ere his goods be sold and the moneys in his purse accoun∣ting the consoledge and other duties to bee above 22 or 23 per cent. the place being much subject to anuenus and mangaries, and the Custome-house being farmed to Iewes, adde thereto the greatest deceit they can possible to raise the daily customes of the place, A∣lexandria it selfe paying in this manner 20 thousand medines a day by farme, which at the rate of 30 medins to a Riall of  Spanish, and the Riall of  accounted at 5 shillings sterling, amounteth to 54750. li. per annum. 54750 li. I should in the next place survey the generall trade of Egypt as it is observed and found to be at this day: but by reason I have in many places of the beforementioned Chapters particulary hand∣led the principall parts thereof, and noted the most eminent nati∣ons that at this present doe hither traffique, I shall the more wil∣lingly passe over the same in silence, and onely now observe that besides the French and Uenetians, not any other European Christi∣ans are found here to traffique, and the English have given over all Trade into this Countrey, by reason they are furnished with all the commodities that this place did formerly yeeld, at the first hand from India, and what else they want, being commodities either of Arabia or Egypt, they furnish themselves from Aleppo where many English are resident: But here are found Consuls for both the Ve∣netians and French Nations, which continue still some Trade hi∣ther, as indeed more proper for them wanting the Trade of India which the English enioy, of which I have made mention before, and therfore leaving Egypt, and with it the firme land. I shall take leave now to view the Ilands that belong to Afri∣ca, by moderne Cos∣mographers.
CHAP. XXXV. Of the Iland Madagascar. I Find belonging to Africa many Ilands, which are Madagascar. found to afford many notable commodities for Mer∣chandise, which for brevities sake I will onely touch, that the Factor may know whence those commodities doe come which are found amongst us. Madagascar, otherwise called the Iland St. Lawrence, giving name Otherwise St. Lawrence. o a Towne the principall of that Iland was discovered by the ortugals, Anno 1506: the Inhabitants willingly permit no man o land upon their Countrey for traffique sake; it yeeldeth cloves, inger, and some silver, to the Inhabitants owne use; but not or exportation, and their monies in use are the glasse beades of Cambaia, which in Merchandize and barter currantly passe a∣mongst them. CHAP. XXXVI. ZOCOTARA Iland. THe Iland of Zocotara lieth in the mouth of the red Zocotara. Sea, 10 degrees North from the Equator, wherein the Portugals have fortified two Townes for traf∣fique, it is replenished with drugges for Physicke, and especially, with that so excellent and well nowne in Christendome, by the name of Aloes Zocatrina which s sold there by a quintall which (by observation) makes in En∣land, 93. li. CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Iland of Saint Thomas. SAint Thomas Iland lieth just under the Equinoctiall St. Thomas. Line; the prime Citie is Povoasan, inhabited prin∣cipally by Portugals and Negro's, abounding onely in Sugar, which here groweth in Canes, and are made so that yearely 50 great Ships are heere laden with that Commoditie for Spaine and Portugall, whereto I am not able to adde any other materiall point of Trade, because of my igno∣rance therein.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Ilands of the Canaries, and Trade thereof. THese Ilands are seven in number, and under the com∣mand Canari. of the Spaniard formerly called the Fortunate Ilands. They abound in Sugars, whereof great quan∣titie of Marmalet and other conserves are made; in Birds, which hereof take their names, excellent in singing; in Wines which hence are knowne by these Ilands names, excellent in taste; and in Woad found excellent for Dying. To these Ilands is now found and practised some small trade by The Trade thereof. the English; to which place they import some seys, serges, bayes, linnens, and such like, and export thence Woad, and Sugars and Wines of the growth of these Ilands which last is vented thence in∣to England and Holland above two thousand Tunnes yearely, to the great inriching of the Inhabitants. Their weights, measures, and coines are altogether concurrent Weights, Mea∣sures, &c. con∣curre with Si∣vill. with the weights, measures, and coines currant in Sivill, to which place it was annexed by the Spaniards the first discoverers there∣fore I shall not need to say ought here further thereof. CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Assores, commonly Tercera Ilands. FHe Tercera Ilands were first discovered by the Flem∣mings Iland Assores called Terceras. and a while bare their names; upon which is placed the Meridian line, dividing the East from the West part of the world; it onely aboundeth in Oad or Woad used by Diers, and is now in the hands of the Spaniards, and in speciall use to them in their voyage to the East or West Indies, and affording them for refreshment good water, and store of goates flesh. Other matter of Trade it affordeth not, therefore this shall serve to have said of the Ilands, willingly omitting the Hesperides, the Gorgades, the Princes Ilands; and others of lesser moment, and pro∣ceed in my MAPPE to view the Trade of ASIA, somewhat better knowne to us then AFRICA.
ASIA, AND THE PROVINCES AND CITIES OF TRADE THEREOF.
OF ASIA, AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF. CHAP. XL. Of ASIA, and the Provinces thereof. ASIA, The third division of the World, ASIA. is separated from EVROPE by the E∣gean Propontis, and Euxine Sea, by Paulus Maeotis, Tanais, Duina, and from A∣FRICA by the red Sea, and the Egyp∣tian stmus, as I remembred in the begin∣ning of this Worke. Five notable things have made this Countrey famous, and Five notable things in Asia. have giuen it the garland of supremacie over all the other parts of the World. irst, the Creation of Mankind: Secondly, the Birth of our Savi∣ur; his Miracles wrought, and place of his sufferance: Thirdly, the Actions memorized by the holy Pen-men of the Old and New Testa∣ment: Fourthly, the famous Monarchies of the Babylonians, Assi∣rians, Persians, and Medes: And fifthly, being the common Mo∣ther of us all, from whence innumerable troupes of men issued to people the other parts of the unhabited World, of which see o∣ther Authors further at large.
The principall Regions of ASIA, are 1. Anatolia. 2. Syria. 3. Palestina. 4. Armenia. 5. Arabia. 6. Media. 7. Assiria. 8. Mesopotamia. 9. Chaldea. 10. Persia. 11. Parthia. 12. Tartaria. 13. China. 14. India. 15. The Ilands there∣of. And of these in briefe according to my first intention. CHAP. XLI. Of Anatolia, or Natolia in generall. ANatolia is limited on the East with the River Euphra∣tes, Anatolia. on the West with Thracius Bosphorus, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Egean; on the North with Pontus Euxinus, on the South with the Rhodian and Lician Seas. In this Countrey was anciently accounted 4000 Cities and Townes, those seaven famous amongst the rest to whom Saint Iohn dedicated his Revelation; but now the ruines of them are hardly to be seene, and the Provinces that are found in this Region are these. First, Cilicia: secondly, Pamphylia: thirdly, Lycia: fourthly, Caria: fifthly, Ionia: sixthly, Lydia: seventhly, Molis: eighthly, Phrygia minor: ninthly, Phrygia major: tenthly, Bithynia: eleventhly, Pontus: twelfthly, Paphlagonia: thirteenthly, Galatia: fourteenthly, Cappadocia: fifteenthly, Licaonia: sixteenthly, Pisidia, and Armenia minor. Of these in order. CHAP. XLII. Of Cilicia, and the Cities thereof. CIlicia is not found at this day to have any Towne of Cilcia and the Cities thereof. note or consequence in it, save Alexandria, built by Alexander the Great, and to distinguish it from Alex∣andria in Egypt, is named Alexandretta, now known to us by the name of Scanderone, a famous Haven towne, Scanderone, or Alexandretta serving for the scale to Aleppo, for ll such shipping as come thi∣ther, either out of the Ocean or Mediterranean, and where the
English, French and Venetians have their Vice-consuls to protect eir Merchants goods and Ships, and where all Merchandize are ther landed or laden that goe to or from Aleppo, of which it ill be more proper that I inlarge, when I come to speake of A∣ppo which is seated in Siria, as I shall shew hereafter. CHAP. XLIII. Of Pamphilia, Licia, and Caria. ALl these have not any thing now worthy note in them, Pamphilia, Lycia, and Caria. conducing to Trade and Merchandizing, save the a∣boundance of those goates upon whom grows that wooll whereof is made the Chamlets and Grograms of which I all have cause to speake more at large, when I come to treat of e Trade of Angora, and in the interim it is to bee noted that ese Provinces having lost their former names, are now knowne o us by the name of Caramania, and are at this present under the ommand of the grand Seignior. CHAP. XLIIII. Of Ionia, and the Cities thereof. IOnia is the next Province, wherein is that ancient Ionia and the Cities thereof. Ephesus. famous Citie of Ephesus much ruined from its an∣cient recorded beauty, famous for the direction of an Epistle by Saint Paul to the inhabitants here∣of: famous also for the Temple of Diana: and lastly, famous for the buriall of S. Iohn the Evan∣elist, who went heere alive into the grave. But this Citie is now be∣ome a poore village, and retaines no monument of her pride at I could find in Anno 1624 but a porch of a Grecian Church of lack Marble, wherein is excellently ingraven the life of our Sa∣iour Christ, much admired by all Artists. But now the only Citie of Trade in this Province is Smyrna, one Smyrna. of the places that strove for the birth of Homer, and wherein was found one of those Churches whereto S. Iohn dedicated his Re∣velation, seated in the bottome of a Bay or Gulph, knowne to our Seamen by the name of the gulph of Smyrna; and where there is a Consull resident for the English, as also for the French and Vene∣ians to protect their Merchants and Trade, where in Anno 1619 n matter of traffique, I noted these things.
CHAP. XLV. Of SMYRNA and the trade thereof. THE principall trade of this Citie was within these Smyrna, and the trade there∣of. few yeares transported hither from the Iland Scio, where the consulls abovesaid had their residents, and from thence are intitled Consulls of Scio and Smyrna, but by reason that scale both for sales and investments had then a dependencie upon this, it was found more proper and lesse chargeable to remove their aboad and ware∣houses hither, and by that meanes this became the principall Port, the goodnesse of the harbour much furthering the same, being both under the command of the Grand Signior, and within these later yeares much inriched by the trade of English, French, and Venetians. The commodities that are found here to abound, and that are Commodities of Smyrna. hence transported into other Countries of Christendome, are cotton woolls, which in great plenty grow in the adjoyning plaines of this Citie; also Galles for Diers, aniseeds, cordovants, wax, cotton and grogram yarne, cute, carpets, grograms, mohers, chamblets, and some fruits and drugges, raw Persia silke is likewise hither brought by land from Persia; and all other commodities found in Turkie or of that growth is here to be had, and the commodities here vented from England are Clothes of Suffolke and Gloster, kersies of Yorkshire and Hampshire, lead, tinne, callicoes, pepper, Indico, and other spices, which within these late yeares wee had formerly from this and other places of Turkie, and which now by the commoditie of the East India trade and navigation, we carry to them; and from Ve∣nice is brought some clothp aper, silkes, velvets, &c. and from France some few clothes and paper, &c. The coynes currant of Smyrna are those of Constantinople, and The coines of Smyrna and ac∣compts. generally those of all that Empire, which I shall shew when I treat of that Citie, and for that cause here omit it, and their accounts they also keepe here in the same nature with them, and therefore referre you to that place in both these particulars. The waights of Smyrna and Scio, for they agree both in one, Weights usuall of Smyrna is the quintar, which containes 100 Rotolo's, or 42 Oakes, and e∣very oake being 400 drams, and every Lodoro being 176 drams, and the pound haberdepois hath beene found to be 148 drams, and the quintall of 42 oakes abovesaid, which produceth 119 li. English,
but in many commodities it is found to answer but 117 li. so that irca 9 drams is 1 ounce English haberdepois. They have here in use two measures, one for linnen and ano∣r Measures of Smyrna and Scio. for woolen, but because they neerly agree with Constantino∣ I will referre the same to that place. The customes payd by the English here and throughout all Tur∣ Customes of Smyrna and Scio by the English. by vertue of their Capitulations with the great Turke, is onely ree per centum; and oftentimes the custome-house of Scio and of yrna is in one mans hands, and though by their Capitula∣ns it is so agreed, that those goods that have once payd custome one port, should not pay any more being thence exported to y other place of his Dominions, and that commands have been anted to that end by the grand Signior at severall times; yet the stice of that Countrey is so defective in this particular, that the mmodities landed in Smyrna, and paying there three per centum, d afterward transported to Constantinople, pay there againe ano∣er three per centum, or compound with the customer, which metimes is done at 1½ per centum, and sometimes at lesse: note By Venetians and French. at here as in all parts of Turkie the Venetians French and Dutch y five per cent. two per cent. more than the English, which is ounded upon their capitulations with the Emperour. The port charges of clearing a Ship in Smyrna is paid in com∣odities Port charges of a Shippe. of our Countrey, and was to that end thus at first regula∣d; but since converted into payment by money, as to the cadie o is to have five pico of Venice cloth, and a bundle of cony-skins r a vest, which in the infancy of our English trade was here und to be much requested. The cadies servant to have 3½ pico english cloth. The cadies caya to have 3 pico of ditto. The cadies scrivan to have a chicquine in gold. The cadies pages to have 2½ dollers. The Mosur Bashaw to have 1½ pico cloth. The cadies Ianisaries to have a chicquine. All which charges amount in circas to 68 dollers. To conclude, the trade of this port it is most noted for the a∣ndance of cottons which hence is transported to England, France, olland, and Italie, estimated yearly to be about 20000 quintall, and found here to grow in the adjoyning plaines, which they doe w as wee doe Corne, the stalke being no bigger than that of heat, but stronger and tougher, bearing a head, round and bear∣ed and hard as a stone, which when it is ripe it breaketh and is livered of a soft white bombast or cotton, mixed with seed, which ey separate with an instrument, selling the wooll, but reser∣ng the seed for the next harvest; see more of this trade in Cy∣us and Constantinople, to which I referre the inquirer.
CHAP. XLVI. Of Lydia, Eolis, Phrygia minor and major. ON the Northeast of Ionia is Lidya, famous onely for the Lydia, Eolis, Phrygia. two rivers, Castrus abounding with swannes, and Meander with windings, from hence termed mean∣ders; and if some Authors may be worthy of cre∣dit, the natives were anciently the first known men that gave beginning to Merchandize, and exercised buying and The first Merchants. selling, and proved the originall of the Tuscans, whose supreame Duke continues the same to this day, and is one of the greatest and most eminent Merchants in the world. In Eolis are seated the two Misia Provinces, which hold not a∣ny thing note worthie. In Phrygia minor, is not found any thing at present worthy i Minor. trade to stay the course of my penne; it affordeth the place where the ancient and famous Citie of Troy was seated, which cost the Troyes ruines, ruin'd. Grecians ten yeares siege to take it, with the losse of 860000 of the Trojans, and 666000 of the Grecians, but in Anno 1620, I hardly saw the reliques of this mightie fabrique, though I traced it for ma∣ny miles, and gave care to all the ridiculous fables of those poore Grecians that inhabite thereabouts in many villages which lie within the compasse of her ancient walls, from mount Id to the River Scamander, now onely a brooke not two foote deepe; so that, what Ovid said of old I found by experience verefied, I a seges est ubi Tria fuit, &c. Neither In Phrygia major, doth not remaine any thing note worthie, Major. Gordion. save a remembrance that Gordion the seat of Gordius was here found in Alexanders time, who cut that knot with his sword which he saw he could not otherwise undoe; also Midium the seat of Midas, whose covetous petition was granted by Bacchus, Midium. to convert all into gold that he handled, and so had like to have eaten gold for meate, had not his after wit mastered his covetous appetite, and made him to his repentance see his error, & acknow∣ledge it; and falling againe to a second over-sight in judgement, as the first was an error in desire, he preferred Pans pipe before Apolloes harpe, and was rewarded for his small skill in musicke with a comely paire of Asses eares: also in this Province stood Colosso, to whom Saint Paul writ one of his Epistles; and Pesinus, where the goddesse Sybile was worshipped, which being brought . into Rome, would not stirre further than the entrance of the ri∣ver Tyber, which the Romans much wondred, because the domi∣nion
of the world was prophesied to that Citie that had the custo∣die thereof; but the vestall Claudias girdle performed that which all the strength of Rome could not, and shee halled up both the Ship and goddesse, to the wonder of the Citizens at that time, and of all the world ever since, though Farre greater miracles are found to be reported of that Citie, and the holy inhabitants there∣of at this day, if the said reports might gaine that credit now as this miracle then did. CHAP. XLVII. Of BITHINIA and the Cities thereof. ON the North side of the Phrygias is seated Bithinia, Bithinia and the Cities thereof. which is famoused first for the victory of Alexander against the Persians, of whom he slew 20000; second∣ly, for mount Stella, where Pompey overthrew Mithri∣dates, and Tamberlain with 800000 Tartarians, en∣countred Baiaset with 500000, where 20000 lost their lives, and Baiaset in his pride of heart taken and end up in an iron cage, a∣gainst whose barres he beate out his braines: thirdly, for Nice, where the first generall Counsell was held Anno 31 to repell the Arian heresie; and fourthly, Calcedon, where the fourth generall Counsell was assembled to repell the Nestorian heresie, where yet in Anno 1620, the Inhabitants doe shew to strangers the place of this assembly by tradition in manner of an ovall circle built pur∣posely for this occasion; and lastly, here is Bursa by some Prusa, the seat of the Ottoman Kings in Asia till they gained Adrianople in Europe, which was done by Mahomet the first: of the trade thereof a word in my passage. CHAP. XLVIII. Of BURSIA in BITHINIA, and the Trade thereof. BURSIA seated in the bottome of a Bay knowne to the Turke by the name of the Gulph of Bursia, being Bursia and the trade thereof. a faire City and antiently the seate of the Mahume∣tane Kings, is now inhabited by Turkes, Jewes and Greekes; who by reason of their neighbourhood, and in the way from Smyrna to Constantinople for land travellers is found to have some Merchants of quality, and affordeth quantity
of Persia commodities, as brought hither from Eusdrom and other bordering Townes of Armenia and Persia, principally occasioned by the immunities that have beene granted by severall Princes that have here resided, to the inhabitants thereof: but because the Venetians are found at present to be the prime traders hither, it will not be amisse that for the weights and measures of the place we should be ruled by their observations which thence may easi∣ly be reduced to ours. Their commodities afforded to forraine Countries are the same Commodities of Bursia. as Constantinople, onely some fabriques I have seen to have beene in my time there made of silks by Moores that have been banished out of Spaine, and come hither to reside, as damaskes, taffetas and stript stuffes, and such like; also commodities which the earth hath pro∣duced, as aniseeds, galles and sugars. Their coynes are the same currant in Constantinople. 100 Rotolos makes Venice sotile 176 li. and Venice grosse 112 li. Coines and Weights of Bursia. The Ocha of Bursia is Venice sotile 4 li. The Rot. of Bursia is Venice sotile 9 ounc. and grosse 1 li. 1 o. 1½ li. The 100 drams makes sotile Venetia 1 li. which is 72 metalichi. The 100 Kilats of Turkey makes in Venetia 87¼ Kill. gold weight 7 metalich make oun. 1 gold weight in Venetia. And by the English the same is observed to be within 2 per cent. to agree with the weight of Constantinople, as shalbe shewed here∣after. There are found here severall picos which with the brace of Venetia is found thus to agree. Measures of Bursia. Braces 100 of cloth▪ scarlet and fine cloth makes 108 picoes cloth here. Braces 100 of course cloth common makes 114 picos in Bursia. Braces 100 of cloth of gold makes in Bursia 102 picos. Braces 1000 of linens is found to make in Bursia 772 picos. And this is noted to be a greater pico than the rest: but by the observation of some English they find onely 2 picoes, one for cloth and the other for grograms, and do agree with those of Constan∣tinople. There is no custome due upon goods in Bursia, it being accoun∣ted an Inland Towne; but if sent thence to Smyrna or to Constan∣tinople, Customes of Bursia. and exported out of the grand signior's dominions, it is lia∣able to a custome, according to the capitulations or priviledge granted to that Nation that transporteth the same: but if those commodities bought in Bursia being carryed to Smyrna or Constanti∣nople and there sold, it payeth no customes but a small duety for re∣gistering, and quitting at the custome-houses of both the said places, as hath beene practised by divers Merchants. In this Towne of late yeeres some English have resided, and doe find a faire and friendly quarter with the inhabitants; but they are accounted as subfactors to those resident in Constantinople and Smyrna, therefore I shall not need to say further of this place.
CHAP. XLIX. Of PONTUS, and the Cities thereof. ON the North side of Bithinia is Pontus, wherein is Pontus. found the ruines of Toms to which Ovid was bani∣shed, and Pithius where Chrysostome lived in exile: here also ruled Mithridates, who for 40. yeeres withstood the Romanes, not more excellent in Warre then lear∣ing and memory, who spake 22. languages, and invented that unterpoyson from him named Mithridate; and who at last by the bellion of his sonne and the valour of L. Sylla, Lucullus and ompey was vanquished; the last of which erected a pillar upon a Pompeys Pillar. mall Iland at the entrance of the black or Euxine Sea, which at is day is knowne by his name, and shewed by the inhabitants to rangers as a trophey of his Victories in these parts. CHAP. L. Of PAPHLAGONIA and GALATIA and the Cities thereof. IN Paphlagonia I finde not any City notable for trade▪ Paphlagonia and Galatia. nor other thing note worthy: and as for Galatia, it is observed that to the people of this Province did Saint Paul dedicate one of his Epistles; and here is also sea∣d the City of Ancira, now commonly Angora, famous for the finite store of grograms, moheires and chamblets▪ that are made Angora. ere and frabricated, and from hence transported to Constantino∣e, being 16 dayes journey distant; and to Aleppo having a like re∣otenes; and from thence againe exported into all the Countries f Europe. In this place the Venetians have a factorie to provide them the aid commodities, and the English in imitation thereof about 1624. did first send thither two factors from Constantinople, to furnish themselves with these commodities at the first hand: but some of the yarne called hence grograme yarne, (and not camels haire as some Grograms trade. ainely conceive) being lately brought into England, ingenious workemen were here found that invented therewith Tames, and many other stuffes, to the great decay and prejudice of the Gro∣grame
trade of this Countrey, and of such as lived thereupon in Angora; whereupon the inhabitants in Anno 1630. petitioned the Duana of Constantinople, that this yarne might not be exported out of the Kingdome untill it were put into worke, and made into stuffes, which was granted them; but the farmers of the grand signiors customes at Constantinople conniving thereat, and suf∣fering the same to be exported, paying double custome, which is 6. per cent. and so it continued till 1634. at what time a second stricter prohibition with confiscation was proclaimed and neere∣ly lookt into, so that what quantity is now found to come thence is by indirect meanes, and not otherwise, if possible thereby a gaine to give life to the grogram trade and the makers thereof in these parts. There was of late yeeres an offer made by the Venetian Am∣bassadour resident at Constantinople to export 500. of the goates that beare this wool to Venetia, thereby in time to bring this com∣modity in request in their signorie; but the Turks perceiving their drift denyed the same, least his subjects and Countrey might fu∣turely be deprived of the benefit of so excellent a commodity, had our ancestors foreseene the like discommodity that would have insued by the exportation of English sheepe into Spaine, it may be conceived it would never have beene in those dayes permitted. The weights and measures of this place are the same as are found in Constantinople, the grograme pico having from this Towne its o∣riginall, Weights and Measures of Angora. and is the proper pico of this Countrey and City; where∣by all grograms, moheires and chamblets are measured and sold throughout all Turkey, and is in grograms found in England to an∣swere proportionally as 24 pico, being a piece of ordnary grograms to make 16. yards London: for their moneys and accounts they are found to be the same as in Constantinople, vide there. CHAP. LI. Of CAPPADOCIA and the Cities thereof. ON the East side of Galatia is Cappadocia, the chiefe Ci∣ty is Erzyrum, scituate on the confines of Armenia, Cappadocia. being held the randevous for the Turkish Militia in their expeditions to Persia; and the place where when the warre is ended they are dismissed; here is the entrance into the dominions of the grand signior, and though warres happen betweene the Turkes and the Persians, yet these barbarous Nations are so carefull of Merchants and the preserva∣tion of commerce, that the Merchants of both Countries, though otherwise the Provinces be at variance, may here enter and trans∣port
their merchandize into one anothers Countrey, paying a all custome as acknowledgment to the Prince, carrying a Tesca∣ or certificate thereof with them to such other places whither ey goe, which in it selfe protects their goods and persons from nger or confiscation, or other dueties▪ so that it is an ordinary ing to see Persia Merchants with great estates in Aleppo and nstantinople in the hottest of the warres between their two So∣eraignes, to the shame, and contrary to the custome of many Chri∣an Princes, who first prey upon the Merchants that inhabit their ountries, making a warre upon their estates and persons, before ey meddle with or haply hardly publish their intentions to eir Soveraignes; the antient Tibarenean custome being now out use in Christendome, who are said never to wage war against any emie; but they faithfully certified them beforehand both of the me and place of their intent and fight; and as it may be conjectu∣d, gave first a faire dismission to the subjects of their enemies, and onsequently to their Merchants. Here is also Amasia, where the grand signiors eldest sonne is seen  abide after his circumcision, till the time of his Fathers death, Amasia, d the beginning of his raigne: And Trabesond, formerly an Im∣riall seate, now a small City seated upon the Euxine or black Sea, Trabesond. aving a reasonable good harbour, and where the grand signior aintaineth certaine Gallies to scoure these coasts: here is found great trade in summer for fish, which to me did much resemble e English herring, which they take upon this coast in good quan∣ty, and is by the inhabitants, who are for the most part Armeni∣s pickled and salted, and so preserved and sent into Caffa, Con∣antinople and other parts. Their manner of salting, and the mat∣er wherewith is likewise as strange; for the Countrey affording ot our common known bay salt, there is a Mountaine within Minerall Salt. me leagues of the City, out of which with ease they digge a one, to the eye appearing blacke and no way transparent; but eaten in marble morters with them in use, it becometh very hite, and is found to preserve all Meates aswell as salt de bay, and r merchandize is carryed thence to Constantinople and other ountries, and sold in the stone unbeaten by the Rotolo, Oache or intar. In this Countrey did inhabit the Amazonian Viragoes, Pen∣esilea one of their Queenes, came with her troupes to assist the rojans, and long after Thalestris another of their Queenes came o Hyrcania to be Alexanders bedfellow, having now no memory extant of this feminine government.
CHAP. LII. Of LICONIA, PISIDIA and ARME∣NIA minor. IN Liconia is found the City of Iconium, the regall seate of the Aladine Saltans, the ruine of Lystra where Ti∣mothy Liconia. Pisidia. Armenia. was borne, and where Paul and Barnabas healing a criple were adored for Mercury and Iupiter. In Pisidia was the famous battell fought betweene Cyrus and Artaxerxes, where Cyrus lost his life and the victory; and out of which Xenophon made that notable retreit with his Grecians, in despight of 20000. which followed him at the heeles. In Armenia minor is seated the Mountaine Ararate, on whose Ararate. toppe the Arke is said to rest after the deluge. And thus much shall serve to have said of Natolia which in generall for merchan∣dise doth yeeld these commodities, galles, carpets, oyles, wines, cottons, wools and cotton yarne, grograms, grograme yarne, sheep wools, hides r Commodities of Anatolia. and salted, and dry Cordivants, aniseeds, goats wooll, soape, silke, comi seed, muscadins, cute, resins &c. and thus much in generall of Natolia, which ere I leave, a Word of Trapesond. CHAP. LIII. Of TRAPESOND and the Trade thereof. TRapesond formerly the seat of an Empire, now a Trabesond. Province of the grand signior is inhabited by Jewes, and Greekes, but principally by Armenians; the coines are those common with all Turkey. There is found in Trapesond in use two weights, one for spices, Weights in Trabesond. drugges and fine commodities, which is the same with the weight of , which they here brought into use in their great trade into this City from Gallata Caffa and other places subject in those dayes to their government; the other for grosse commodities, is the Rotolo, 100 whereof is the Cantar, agreeing with that common Rotolo of Constantinople, vide there more. Their common measure is a Pico agreeing neere with Constanti∣nople, Measures in Trabesond. making about 26½ inches English.
CHAP. LIIII. Of SYRIA in generall and the parte thereof. SYria hath on the East Euphrates, on the West the medi∣terranean Sea; on the South Palestine, on the North Si∣lcia, Syria. watered with Euphrates, which antiently passed through the garden of Eden; and having its sourse in the Mountaines of Armenia, running at this day by Euphrates. abylon or Bagdate, disgorgeth it selfe into the Persian Sea, and O∣tis which arising on Mount Libanus saluteth the walls of Silu∣, and disibogeth in the mediterranean, and is divided into 3 Pro∣nces, viz. Phenicia, Celosyria and Sirophaenicia, of which in order. CHAP. LV. Of Phenicia and the Cities thereof. IN Phoenicia is seated the City of Ptolemais, or Acr, Phaenicia and the Cities thereof. or Acon, famous for so many Christian Armies that have in times past besieged it, and which like∣wise added fame to our Kings Richard ceur de lion, and Edward the first, in which place the Venetians and French have some trade for waxe, hides, corne, ke; and therefore following the observations made by them in atter of weights and measures, I find the same to be thus accorded. CHAP. LVI. Of Acria commonly S. ohn de Acria, and the Trade thereof. ACria being seated in the bottome of the mediterrane∣an, and now strugling with its owne ruines, hath yet Acria and the trade therof. by reason of its small but commodious harbour some trade maintained by the French, but principally by Venetians; who in small vessels coast these parts, and pick up some of the Asian commodities out of these Villages and Townes bordering upon the Sea coasts, as both in this place, Tripoly, Sidon, &c. the agreements of their weights and measures observed by Venetians, I will insert.
The cantar of Acria commonly called by them the cantar Tam∣baran Weights of Acria. makes sotile in Venice 900 li. which produceth in Eng∣land 603 li. Rotolo 1 makes sotle pounds in Venetia 9 li. Braces 100 of cloth of gold and silke is in Acria 108 pic. Braces 100 Measures of Acria. of cloth woollen of Venetia is in Acria 115 Picos. Their coines is generally the same with all the Dominions of Coines. the grand signior, which I shall declare coming to treate of Con∣stantinople the Metropolis of that Empire, and of Aleppo the princi∣pall City of trade in this Countrie, therefore shall not need here to insist further thereupon. CHAP. LVII. Of SIDON and the trade thereof. SIDON is now limited within a narrower compasse Sidon. than its antient bounds, commanded by the Emir or Prince of the Drusians, the offspring of Christians, but now hardly professing any religion at all; it i eated upon the same shore as Acria, and where the Fench and Venetians maintaine consulls, and is better knowne to us then Acria: and where by their means all westerne Christians finde  reasonable favourable protection in their trade. The Countrey doth principally abound in corne, which some Commodities▪ of Sidon. yeeres is hence distributed and dispersed to Marselia, Lighor and other parts of Christendome, with galles, woolls, waxe, &c. Their coynes are principally Rialls of  Spanish and Chicquins in Coines com∣mon in Sidon gold, the Riall accounted for 72 aspers, and the chickquine 108 as∣pers, but the valuation alters according to the occasions of the state and course of traffique, therefore no great confidence can be given thereunto. Their waights is the dram and Rotolo currant in these parts of Weights of Sidon. Asia, 650 drams, making the Rotol. 4 li. 5½ ounces English. Rotolo 100 is their cantar qt 433⅓ li. English. Rotolo 1 is accounted to make there also 12 ounces. Rotolos 110 makes Rotolos 100 common in Aleppo. Rotolos 115 makes Rotolos 100 common in Cyprus. Their measures  ———Measures of Sidon.
In this tract lies the place where Tyre was seated, now devou∣ by the incroaching Sea, of whose ancient traffique see the 66 pter; and also Sarepta, where Elias who had formerly lived in ount Carmell nigh adjoyning, was sustained in a famine by a dow whose sonne he raised from death: other matters of con∣ence have not falne out within my reading hapned in this uit, therefore hence I will travaile to the next Province. CHAP. LVIII. Of Syrophoenicia and the Cities thereof. SYrophoenicia hath beene better beautified with Cities than now it is, the warres of Princes and time hath Syrophoenicia. given a period to many, of which Antioch was famous both for being the Metropolis of all Syria, and the place where the Disciples of our Saviour were first cal∣ Christians, now nothing but the ruines to be seene upon those ge plaines, which doth lead from Alexandretra to Aleppo; it prehendeth the famous Citie of Baruti, which deserves a re∣d for the present trade thereof. CHAP. LIX. Of BARUTI, and the trade thereof. BARVTI formerly called Iulia Felix, is a famous Mart Towne, yet much inferiour in trade to what it Baruti and the trade thereof. hath formerly beene; neere this towne is that noted Valley where it is said Saint George by killing of a Dragon delivered the Kings daughter, in memoriall ereof there was a Castle and Oratory here built and conse∣ed to him, and whose name it bore, whose ruines doe yet ap∣re, if the Inhabitants may be beleeved; it is now the common age for all those Caravans that travell from Aleppo, Damasco  Ierusalem to Cairo and Mecca, and thereby made a place of t concourse of Merchants. It is subject to the grand Signior, Coines cur∣rant in Baruti.  therefore his coynes in silver and gold are the currant coynes reof, partaking of those that are currant in the neighbouring untries, as all bordering Townes are found to be. The English ve no scale or residence here, but the Venetians who prie with re industrie into these parts, finde here a profitable traffique, erefore in the waights and measures thereof wee must sayle by eir observations.
The cantar containing 100 Rotolos of Baruti makes stle Venetia Weights of Baruti. waight 750 li. and of grosse 475. li. and of English 502 li. The Roto∣lo makes Venetia sle 7½ li. grosse 4 li. 9 ounces, English 5 li. the cantar or 100 Rotolos of Baruti is in Aleppo 96 Rotolos, the common waight and 90½ Rotolos of silke waight. Measures of Baruti is the pico, 100 whereof makes in Venetia Measures of Baruti. 86 Braces, and the 100 Braces of Venetia of woolen cloth makes in Baruti 112 or 113 pico's, which is in England() yards. The Towne of Amano lieth also in this Syrophoenicia, and is Amano and the trade thereof. found to be a Towne of great trade and confluence of Merchants of Arabia, Persia, and Turkie; but because I finde the waights and measures thereof to accord with the same that are found in use in Aleppo, and their coynes the common currant coynes of Turkie, I shall referre the Reader to Aleppo, and the trade thereof. CHAP. LX. Of CELOSYRIA and the Cities thereof. CELOSYRIA doth not now affoord many Cities Celosyria. of note, Hieropolis was here famous for the Temple and worship of the Syrian goddesse; but now Damas∣cus is the principall scale and City of this Province, which requires for the trade thereof a longer dis∣course, than my information can guide me, how ever what I have gathered I shall here willingly insert. CHAP. LXI. Of DAMASCUS and the Trade thereof. DAMASCUS is so pleasantly seated, that the impo∣stor Damascus and trade thereof. Mahomet would never enter into it, least forget∣ting by the ravishing pleasures of the place, the bu∣sinesse (as he said) he was sent for, and make this his Paradise; it is seated in a very fruitfull soyle, bea∣ring grapes all the yeare long, and girt with curious and odorife∣rous Gardens; being also famous, first, for her founders, who were Abrahams servants; secondly, for the Temple of Zacharias; and thirdly, for the conversion of Paul, who here first preached, and escaping the traps of his enemies, was let downe the walles of the house by a basket. And in matter of trade it still continueth a place
where all commodities of Turkie, Arabia, and India are brought in∣ where Caravans of thse Nations doe passe through, going  Constantinople, Bagdat, and Aleppo, to Aegypt, Mecha or India,  so againe backe. The currant coynes of this Citie is those common with all Syria, Coines of Da∣msco. ppo being the principall, where you may see further for the eys of the place. The Damasco cantar is in Venetia sotile 600 li. grosse 380. li. which Weights of Damasco. aberdepois 402 li. yet observed to make in some commodities 6 li. English, so that by the said Venetian calculation which I e by (because of their residence there, and their great traf∣e thither) 100 li. grosse Venetia should render 26⅓ Rotolos, and  100 li. sotile 16⅔ Rotolos Damascino Rotolo. 1. makes Venice sotile  grosse 3 li. 9⅓ ounces; Peso 100 Damascino are  66  so∣ Venice 1 li. metallichi 100 damas: gives in Venetia silver waight ¼ ounces; Killats 100 Damasco gives silver waight in Venetia 90 : Killats 100 damasco gives by spice waight in Venetia 106 : tar 7½ of damasco gives in Rhodes cantar one, cantar one damasco es in Genoa 550 li. Measures of length is the pico, which is accounted about 27 , Measures of Damasco. agreeing thus with other places. Pico 100 damasco, makes Venetia measure of cloth 87 brac; makes in Genoa 24 Canes of 10 palmes every Cane. makes in Florce 4  Canes. Braces 100 of cloth in Venetia gives here 11 . 100 of silke Venetia gives here 106 pic. Pico one Damasco make scarsly ⅞ Brace of Venetia. The commodities comming hence are cottons of Syria, Saffron, Commodities of Damasco. le, excellent blades for swords and knives, wrought and raw silkes  the growth of this Countrie, oyle, oney, wax, , Almonds, es, some drugges, rice, which here are noted plentifull, besides  commodities here found and hither brought from other Re∣ns, which I need not here nominate. There is used in Damascus in the buying and selling of divers  upon all commodities in Da. modities a certaine Tare and allowance to be given, over and a∣e the weight, from the buyer to the seller, most especially actised in bargaines of spices and drugges, which as I find them served by others, I thinke good here to shew; as in Ginger 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Myrrhe 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Maces 5 per cent. 105 Sugar candid 5 per cent. 105 Ro. Cinamon 5 per cent. 105 Worseed 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Cloves 5 per cent. 105 Zedoaria 5 per cent. 105 Indico 5 per cent. 105 Spiknard 5 per cent. 105
Gallingall 5 per cent. 105 Mirabolans 5 per cent. 105 Nutmeggs 5 per cent. 105 Aloes epatica 5 per cent. 105 Lacke 5 per cent. 105 Cardamom 5 per cent. 105 Long pepper 5 per cent. 105 Turbit 5 per cent. 105 Cutchenele 5 per cent. 105 Silke 10 per cent. 110 Greeneginger 0 per cent. 000 Ambergreece 10 per cent. 110 Sugars 0 per cent. 000 And many others which the Merchant must learne.   All these commodities are found to have these certaine Tares, besides the bagges, canisters, boxes, churles, and the like, by the cu∣stome and practise of the place, and for as much as this Citie is an inland Towne, wherein a Bashaw is found to command for the grand Signior; there is here a custome imposed upon all goods en∣tring and issuing to forrainers and Merchant strangers 3⅓ per cent. which is payd in money and not in the same species, according to the customes of Alexandria before specified. And to conclude the trade of this place, I will insert an old ob∣servation Agreement of the weight of Damasco with other places of trade. falne into my hands, made upon the waights here and the agreement therof with other Countries, the certaintie where∣of I will referre to triall. The cantar of Damasco making as I said before 100 Rotolos, makes in The cantar of Damasco by obser∣vatiō hath made in Alexandria 428 Rot. forfori. Constantinople 341 Rot. Venice sotil: 600 li. Ditto gross: 380 li. Ancona - 517 li. Florence—525 li. Rhagusa—500 li. Naples—566 li. Sicilia—576 li. Idem—203⅔ Rot. Millan - 552 li. Genoa—570 li. Valentia - 400 li. The Rot. Damas: is in Valentia 4 li. 11½ ounces, and 1 li. Ual. is 120 drams. The agree∣ment of the Rotolo of Da∣masco with some other places. in Genoa 5 li. 8½ ounces, - 1 li. Genoa is 105 dra: here. in Millan 56¼ ounces, - 1 li. Millan is 208 drams. in Sicilia 59 ounces. in Naples 5 li. 6  ounces, - and 1 li. Naples is in Rhagusa 5 li. - and 1 li. Rhagusa. in Florence 5 li. 3 ounces, - and 1 li. Florence is 112 dr. The truth of these observations I must leave to the tryall of the more expert, and give you a touch, what I have gathered in the matter of agreement of measures of length.
100 Braces of cloth in Florence have made in Damasco 99 picos. The agree∣ment of the pico of Damas∣cus with some other places. 100 pico of Damasco have made in Naples 28½ canes. 100 pocos of Damasco have made in Sicilia 28¾ canes. 100 picos of Damasco hath made in Millan 87 braces. 10 Canes of silke in Genoa hath made in Damasco 37½ pico. 100 pico of Damascus have made in Venice of cloth 87 braces. 100 braces of Venice silke have made in Damasco 106½ picos. And for as much as the English, French, and Dutch are not found at present to have any trade hither, and that the Venetians are the onely westerne Christian Merchants that here reside, and have here a Consull for the protection of them and their trade & goods, it will fit me best to borrow some of their observations, and ob∣serve the trade they now drive to this Citie. The commodities which the Venetians then carie hither for mer∣chandize, The trade of the Uenetians to Damasco. are woolen clothes, honey, almonds, tynne, quick-silver, leade, lattin wier, iron wier, lattin plates, brimston, allom, wax, mastique, cor∣rall, saffron, Flemish beades and bracelets, crystall looking glasses, linnen of divers sorts, course canvas, some few furres, sugars of Cyprus, wri∣ting paper, velvets, taffeta's, damaskes and sattins, some Norimberge wares, corrall, beads, and many such European commodities. The commodities that they finde here to make returnes of, are these, Raw silke of this Countries growth, and of Persia Ardasse and lege, Belledine, Tripoli, Bodovin, Baias and others; also some spices and some drugges, as Ginger, Cloves, Maces, Sandoll, Incense, Myrrhe, Nutmegs, Indico, Gallingall, long Pepper, Mirabolans, Ar∣moniac, Aloes Epatica, Cardamon, Turbit, sanguis dragonis, Sugar can∣did, Wormseed, Zedoaria, Spignard, Cynamon, Tutia, Cottons, and some cotton yarne, Benjamin, Assafetida, Manna, Camphir, Cassia, and the like, of which some are found to be sold by the cantar of Da∣masco, and some by the Rotolo: also observe That Muske, Ambergreece and pearle is sold by the metalico, which is 1½ dram, and Sivet is sold by a weight called Ongia, being 10 drams, which makes 6⅔ metalicos, which makes sotile in Venice 1 ounce 1 sacc: and 5 caratts. The Rotolo is accounted here 600 drams, but lege and ardasse is here sold by a Rotolo of 680 drams, which is 7 li. sotile Venice, but Damasco silke and all silke of the growth of the Countrie is sold by the Rotolo of the place of 600 drams. These notes the Venetians have made upon their weights and measures. 1 Cantar Damasco is sotile Venice 600 li. and grosse 380 li. 1 Rot: Damasco is sotile 6 li. and grosse 3 li. 9½ ounces. 100 Drams Damasco is 66½ metigall sotile Venice 1 li. and of the silver weight in Venice 10 ounces ¼ and 5 Caratts. 100 Drams makes silver weight in Venice 12 Marc. 6 ounces & ½. 100 Mitigal Damasco is in Venice 15¼ ounces and 5 Caratts.
100 Carat damasco is silver weight in Venice 91 Carat. 1½ dram damascin is 24 carat damascin, the which 24 carat is one Miticall damascino. Againe è contra The 1000 li. grosse in Venice makes in Damasco 263⅓ Rotolos. The 1000 li. sotile in Venice is in damasco 166⅔ Rotolos. So that the 100 li. grosse is 26⅓ Rotol. damascine, and the 100 li. sotile is 16  Rotol. damascine. As for the measure of Damasco, there is but one here in use, and Measures of Damasco. is common to all commodities, both linnen, silke, and woolen, which is the pico, which by the calculation of the Venetians I finde thus, 100 pico in Damasco is in Venice cloth measure braces 87, thereby  estimating the said pico to be almost ⅞ of brace Venetian. 100 Braces of cloth in Venice make in Damasco 111 in 112 pico. 100 Braces of silke in Venice makes in Damasco 106 in 107 pico; and how they agree with the measures of England and other pla∣ces I have shewed before, therefore leaving Damasco trade to the judgement of the better experienced, and finding the Caravan of Aleppo ready to depart, I am called thither, where by the way ob∣serving some reliques not here worth mentioning, and where ar∣riving you shall finde in the next leafe what I have there observed in the matter and manner of the trade thereof. CHAP. LXII. Of Aleppo, and the Trade thereof. ALeppo, called in the 2. Sam. 8. 3. Aram sobab, is now Aleppo and the trade thereof. the most famous Citie in all the grand Signiors Domi∣nions, for the wonderfull confluence of Merchants of all Nations and Countries, that come hither to traffie: It is pleasantly seated upon a Plaine, in the midst whereof doth rise a small hill, whereupon is built a strong Castle that commands the whole Citie; it hath in it many Canes for lodgings and warehouses for Merchants, which resembling small Forts being shut with iron gates, defend the Merchants, and their goods from all wrong or theft; their streets are shut with dores every night at each end, in the manner of Cairo, and there∣by every street becomes a defensible place by it selfe. There are of all Easterne, Southerne, and Westerne Nations Mer∣chants found therein, many of which injoy severall immunities and priviledges, granted them by their particul lations from the grand Signior who is Lord hereof: the English, Venetians, and French, are found to be great Traders hither, each bringing hi∣ther their native commodities, & here exchange them for Arabian,
Persian and Indian drugges, jems, spices, and such like commodities, ongst which the English are most eminent, by reason that they t onely furnish this Citie with the native commodities of En∣and; but also with such as come to them from India and Persia  Sea, and which in former dayes were from hence brought in∣ England. This Citie is seated about 100 English miles from the Sea, A∣ndretta or Scanderone being the Sea Port and Road whereto Scanderone. ll shipping, either out of the Ocean or Mediteranean come to de and unlade their goods, and are hence transported by Ca∣els to Aleppo; which scale was formerly in Tripoli, which is a ore commodious Port, and neerer in distance; but the way be∣g found more craggy, rugged, and dangerous, by reason of the solencie of the Arabians, it was by all Christians disused, and y consent the same was heere setled. The commodities which are found in this Citie, are commonly Commodities of Aleppo. ll the commodities of Asia and Africa, as spices of all sorts, drugs f all sorts, silkes of Persia, jems of India, spices of Arabia, and the ommon commodities proper to the Countrey, as Grograms, gro∣gram yarne, galles, Cottons, and cotton yarne, silke of Tripoli, Bacai, Be∣dovine, and Damasco, and other sorts in great quantitie. The Weights used here in particular, is the dra and Rotolo, as in Weights of A∣leppo. most parts of Turkey; but the Rotolo is found in many commodi∣ties to differ in drams, according to the custome in weight of the place and commoditie. The Cantar is also found to disagree in Rotolo, according to the common and usuall weight of commodities, which I will declare thereby to shew first how they accord with England and other places of trrade, and then how they agree amongst themselve: And first silke of Persia is sold by the wesno, which is 30 neher, and  neher is 120 grains, and every graine is 30 drams, by which accompt the wesno amounts o 3600 drams, and  make a cole. But the common weight better knowne to us is the Rotolo, which of ardesse and lege is 680 drams, of  700 drams, and so changing in other sorts of commodities, which the Factor is to take notice of. The Rotolo is also divided into 12 ounces, and ounce 1 is drams 60, drams 3600 is accounted a wesno. Drams 2400 is a botman, which is the weight by which silke is sold in Constantinople, and makes there 6 oakes. Cantar  is Rotolos 100, making neere 481 li. haberdepois. Rotolo 1 is haberdepois 4, 13 ounces accounted and found some∣times 4 li. 14 ounces; so that 112 li. haberdepois, is found hereby to be Rotolos 22, ounces 8.
Rotolos 100 common weight, is 494 li. 8 ounces haberdepois which is above 4 li. 15 ounces, and so is sometimes found to produce in some commodities. A wesno of silver is 100 drams, which is 68 lire of Venetia, and it is found that 11 ,  full weight, makes a wesno of silver heere. Silver, gold, jems, &c, are sold by the mitigall, which is 1½ drams, which is carat 24 English, or grains 96. Wesno's of Aleppo are in buying of silke thus reduced into Ro∣tolos Wesnos redu∣ced into Roto∣los in Aleppo. and drams following. Wesno 1 is Rotolos 5 drams 200. 5 26 320 10 52 650 20 105 600 30 158 560 40 11 520 50 264 480 60 317 440 70 370 400 80 423 360 90 476 320 100 529 280 Which may bee inlarged to a greater number, having pur∣posely heere inserted the same for the benefit of the ignorant, and learner. Now for asmuch as the Venetians have beene accounted the first Christian Traders into this Citie, let us observe the agreements Aleppo with Venetia. in weights of this place and Venetia. Cantar 1 makes sotile Venetia 720 li. gross. 456 li. which this way reduced to English weight, is 482 li. haberdepois. Rotol. 1 Venetia sotile li. 7, ounces 2, sache 2 2/4 gross. li. 4, ounce. 6¾. Grosse Venetia 1000 li. i i Aleppo cantar 2, Rot. 19. Solite Venetia 1000 li.  in Aleppo, cantar 1, Rot. 40; so that 100 li. gross. is Rotol. 21 & 100 li. ile is 14 Rotolos. Cantar 1 hath produced in Florence 660 li. Now it will be necessary to note some observations vpon com∣modities weighed in Aleppo, with the res and allowances by Aleppo notes of weighing. custome of the place given to the buyer. All sorts of Indico is sold by the Cle, which is 27½ Rotolo of 720 drams, churles 2, makes a chest, allowing in accompt 327 li. to Indico. a churle of neat Indico, and there is allowed to the buyer 3 ounces per churle for dust, and 3 ounces for single shire, and 6 ounces for double.
Silke of all sorts hath allowance for heads of skeins if course, Silkes.  in 130 drams per wesno; if fine 60 drams notwithstanding. Muske being bought by the mitigall, out of the Cod gives no al∣wance, Muske. in the Cod 20 per cent. Druggs of the growth of this Countrey, are sold by the Rotolo Druggs.  720 drams, and payes no custome; but of the growth of forreign rts, by Rotolo of 600 drams, and payes great custome, as are mphire, aloes, Socotrina. Silke also of these Countries as Damascus, Tripoli, Bacas, gives Silke of Da∣masco. o allowance in tare being cleane silke. Oppion is sold drams 110 for 100 drams, the 10 drams being al∣wed for tare in that commoditie. Spices of all sorts are sold by the Rotolo of 720 drams, and if the Spices. me be ungarbled, the allowance is 132 for 100; but if garbled, 10 for 100 notwithstanding, as in cloves, maces, cynamon, &c. Galls have allowance for dust 2 per cent. and briefly observe Galles. ese commodities give these tares to the buyer, Aloes epaticum with e skin, and aloes socotrina, asaphetida with the skin, Bedillio gives 0 in. 120: Cinamon, Cubebus, Casa fistula, Oculus Inde, Galbanum, Spices. Maces, Oppion, Rubarb, Manna, &c. 10 per 100; Camphora, Lig∣um Aloes, Nutmegs, &c. 5 per 105. Note, that forasmuch as no English Merchants are permitted o trade into Turkey but the levant company, and that this company re incorporated by especiall priviledges in London by the favour of his Majestie of England, the orders of that companie by the tra∣ders hither to other the Ports of Turkey is to bee observed, accor∣ding to their established acts and ordinances, whereto I referre the inquirer for further information. The Coines currant of Aleppo is the same common with all the Coines of A∣leppo. dominions of the great Turke; the passable here is The Soltanie is medines 80, aspers 120, sh. 16. The Lion doller, med. 50, asp. 80, sh. 10. The Duccat, med. 40, asp. 60, sh. 7½. Rialls of 8/8 have passed 6½ per cent. better then lyon dollers, and 1½ ℞. 8/8 hath passed for a soltanie: but this rule holds not in these dayes, for the warres and troubles of that Country have altered these observations. Shes. 1 is medin. 5⅓, or aspers 8, and the med. 1  shes. But these rules following are more certaine and found true. ℞. 8/8 is found to weigh 424 grains the single Rot. 26½ gr. The Crowne or single pistolet found to weigh 53 grains. The Solianie, hungar, or chequine to weigh 54 graines. And the Mitigall is found to weigh 72 graines. Their accounts are kept as by a common consent throughout Accompts in A∣leppo. the principall places of traffique in Turkey in dollors and aspers; the dollor containing 80 as. at what rate otherwise soever the
same doe passe amongst all Christians that are Merchants, and here resident; yet it is found that the account of the Countrey (as pro∣per to the revenewes and treasure of the grand signior, and practi∣sed by the receivers of his estate) is kept in aspers, wherein they account to thousands, ten thousand and hundred thousand aspers, and so by a cargo or loade of aspers which they account to be 100 thousand aspers, and at 80 aspers per dol. amount to 1250 dollers, o 312 li. 10 shil. starling. There is found in Aleppo but one measure or pico which is 27 Measures in Aleppo. inches English or ¾ of a yard, and is the same for linen and woollen, and doth agree with the Venetian brace, used there in cloth of gold and silke; and the 100 braces of cloth in Venetia is found to render here 106 picos. There is also a pico found for grograms, chamblets and Moheres, but this is the proper pico of Angera the staple of that commodity, and is found to be but 2 inches English incirca lesse, as I have more at large noted in that place. As for the customes of this place they are as in Constantinople, for the English nation 3 per cent. with some innovations crept i Cstomes in Aleppo. by the corruption of customers and forraigners which here are found to be Jewes; and which in this point are loath to derogate from the common manner of almost all customers and forraigners in the World: but the last agreement between Mustafa, Aga the customer and the consul of the English was thus, Kerfies rated at medines 14  per piece, at 3 per cent. Broad clothes rated at medines 120 per cloth at 3 per cent. Coe skins the bundle 50 skins at 14 dol. Tynne rated at 55 Rot. per chest and 3 dol. is 157½ dol. Indico at medines 587 per chest. Galles at 12 dol. per Rot. Silke at medins 6 per Rot. Grograms the balle at 33 dol. Fillades per quintall at 33 dol. Cotton wool per cent—33 dol. Quilts at 50 dol. per ball. Botanos at ball 80 dol. Cordovants at ball 8 dol. Turmericke at medins 80 per Rot. Gumdragan at ball 60 dol. Note that all spice as nutegges, cloves, mace and Cynamon payes 21 per cent. but to be rated at 14 per cent. lesse then the same cost as being commodities of India properly, Nutegges valued at medines—60. Cloves per Rot. at—160. Maces per Rot. at—220.
Cynamon per Rotolo at—90 Pepper owes but halfe custome, and therefore rate it at ½ lesse hen it cost, and then pay 21 per cent. Before I leave this place, it will be needfull that I doe more The generall Trade of Alep∣po surveyed in its particular colours. articularly survey the body of the great trade which is deen ex∣rcised here at this day; and first for the trade of the English as the most eminent, it is found that this place doth yearely vent about 6000 English clothes of severall sorts, about 600 quintalls of tynne, some furres, kerfies and other English commodities, besides 100 The English the prime tra∣ders to Aleppo. thousand rialls of 8/8 brought yearely hither by them in ready mo∣eys to be invested in raw silke, drugges, and other commodities of this Countrey: they have here to this end a consull, who is intitu∣ed of Syria and Cyprus, who hath here the preheminence of all o∣ther Christian consulls resident; and in returnes of this estate carry ence great quantity of raw Persia silke termed and knowne to us by the name of Ardasse and Lege, and also Bedovin Castravan, Bele∣in, Baias, and other sort of the growth of this Countrey; also they carry hence great quantities of galls of Tocat, some drugges of Arabia, great quantity of grogram yarne and grograms, cottons and cotton yarne, and other commodities of this place, which investments were formerly in a large nature in drugges, spices and Iems, which ow the English furnish themselves at the first and from In∣dia, &c. and though otherwise thus their returnes are thereby shortned, yet having a greater part of their returnes in these sorts of silkes above said, it hath herein found a faire inlargement for the abatement made in spices. The scale of this City is Alexan∣dretta as I noted before, commonly Scanderone, whereto all ships Scanderone. come that have businesse hither; and here likewise the English have a factorie intituled a vice consull for the effecting and preser∣vation of their affaires here, and for the landing or lading of all goods coming in or going out from this City; and where also to the same end the Venetians and French have likewise their par∣ticular vice consulls to manage the publike trade of their severall Nations. The Venetians I account the next Merchants of consequence The Venetians the sond. here resident, who bring hither great quantity of cloths Venice making, and others of severall sorts, some Germaine commodities, as lattin plates, wier, shaven lattin, steele, iron, silkes wrought, as sattins, damasces, velvets, taffetas, paper, and some rills of eight and Ue∣netian chiequens in gold, with crystall looking glasses, quicksilver and o∣ther commodities. And hence in returnes thereof export silkes raw of all sorts, cotton wooll and cotton yarne, grograms, moheires, chamb∣lets, sundry sorts of drugges, spices, jems, and galls, indico and other such. The French are the next of note that trade hither, having to The French the third. that end also a consull in Aleppo, and a vice consull in Alexandretia, and who carry hither some few clothes of Languedocke, and of
rialls of plate a great quantity, which every small Barke is found to bring hither from Marselia the onely French port hither tra∣ding, in return whereof they used some yeeres past to carry hence abundance of raw silke of all sorts, to the imports sometimes of 600 in 800 bales upon a vessell: but this their trade by sundry losses occasioned is now decayed, and their shippes are onely laden with galles, cotton woolls, cotton yarne, grograms, some drugges, spices, calli∣coes, and such. These are then the onely 3 Christian nations that have any trade of moment here, the trade driven here by the Dutch not worthy consideration; besides which this Town is found to be the great magazin of all Persia, India and Arabia commodities; the Mer∣chants whereof come hither in great troopes and caravans, with their Camels laden with the rich wares of those severall Coun∣tries, and make their returnes in the commodities of Europe above∣named, which they buy and barter with the English, French and Venetians, which here have their residence as aforesaid. To con∣clude then the trade of this place, and to omit nothing that I have judged proper for the demonstration thereof, I will insert the observations made here by experience in the weights and measures of this place, with the weights and measures of some other places of trade in the elevante. It is before noted that in Aleppo there is but one quintar ac∣counted The agree∣ment of the cantar of Aleppo with other places. as the common cantar of the place, by which all commo∣dities are both bought and sold; yet it is to be noted withall, that from this quintar is many other cantars derived, varying accor∣ding to the custome practised in the weight of some speciall commo∣dities, as I have before likewise noted: now this cantar consisteth of 100 Rotolos; the common Rotolo here which is also accounted 600 drams, though as I have there observed, severall commodities are weighed by a severall Rotolo, some consisting of 600, some 680, some 700, and some 720 drams: therefore to explaine this point it hath been observed that the common cantar of Aleppo containing 100 Rotolos, and each Rotolo containing 600 drams have made in these Countries following: The 100 Rotolo of 680 drammes is In Naples—633 li.—6 li. 8 ounces. Uenetia sotile—720 li.—7 li. 2 ounces 2⅖ sach. Uenetia grosse-456 li.—4 li. 9¾ oun. Florence—626 li.—6 li. 3⅛ oun. Gotile sotile—624 li.—6 li. 10 oun. Sicilia—691 li.—6 li. 10  oun. Millan—662 li.—6 li. 7½ ounces. I have noted the measure here in generall for all commodities to The agree∣ment of the 100 picoes of Aleppo with o∣ther places. be the pico in Cloth, the 100 picoes hath beene found thus to con∣cord with other Countries.
100 pico have made in Uenice cloth—94 braces. In Uenice silke—100 braces. In lorence—107½ braces. In Genoa—28½ Canes. In Millan—81 braces. Sicilia—31 Canes 1 palme. And thus much is what I conceive needfull to have  ∣ning the trade of this famous City of Aleppo. CHAP. LXIII. Of TRIPOLIS and the Trade thereof. THE next and last of note in this Countrey is Tripolis, Tripolis in Syria and the Trade thereof. and to distinguish it from that in Barbary common∣ly called (in Syria) it hath in former times been a faire Towne, and injoyed a faire and commodious harbour; now ruin'd, and hath (as I said before) of late dayes been accounted for the Port and Scale of Aleppo, where our Shippes ever laed nd unladen, but since their remo∣vall to Scanderone it is of little commerce: some Venetians are here found to reside, and who picke out hence some small wade with the inhabitants of the Countrey, who afford them silke re growing, some cotton yarne and cotton wooll, some drugges, corne and other commodities. Their weight agrees with that of Damasco, which is Rotolo 100 & is a Cntar dscino, which is Venetia sotile li. 600, grosse 380 li. Weights of Tripoli. which this way should be English li. 402. but it hath been found to yeeld 416 li haberdepois, drams 52 is an ounce. Ounces 12 is a Rotolo which hath been found to be 4 li. 2 ounc. of haberdepois, and ounces 8 is an oake, which hath been observed to make out 42¾ li. haberdepois. Their measure being a Pico is somewhat lesse then 27 inches Measures of Tripoli. English. Their moneys is generally the same with all Turkey, but thus ac∣counted—Coines in Tripolis. Aspers 2 is a medin. Aspers 40 is ¼ Rot. . Aspers 160 is a Rot. . Aspers 140. is a dollor lion. Aspers 240 is a sultany. And thus much shall serve for Tripoly in Syria.
CHAP. LXIV. Of PALESTINE and the Cities thereof. THE next Countrey in order is Palestina, having on Palestine. the East Euphrates, on the West the Mediterranean Sea; on the North Phenicia, and on the South Ara∣bia; this Countrey hath so often changed its name that it hath bin called by 6 severall names, 1 Canaan, 2 the land of promise,  Israel, 4 Iudea, 5 Palestina, and lastly the holy land; and now divided into 4 parts, Galilea, Iudea, Idumea and Samaria. In Galilea is not found any City either of note nor trading, Galilea. though in times past it was famous for many, as Bethsaida the birth place of Peter, Andrew and Philip; and Nazareth second to none, where the Virgin Mary was saluted with those joyfull tydings by an Angell: in this Countrey ariseth the two spring heads of Iord, Ior and Dan, of which two that united River doth derive Iordan. its name. Neither doth Samaria now afford any City of commerce, though many notable places were there found in the flourishing dayes of Samaria. the Israelites. Idumea is also destitute of trading, though it have the commo∣dious Sea Por Ippa in it, where our Westerne Pilgrims are seen Idumea. to land and foot it to Ierusalem; where also in times past Ionah took shipping to fly to Tarsus, and where Peter lying in the house of one Simon a Tanner, was in a vision taught the conversion of the Gentiles: here also was Gasa where the Persians did hord up in the greatnes of their Empire the customes and tributes of their westerne dominions: take what I finde in trade here worthy ob∣servation. CHAP. LXV. Of Gasa and the Trade thereof. GASA hath beene more famous and beautifull then Gasa and the Trade thereof. now it is, and renowned through Europe both for a good Sea Port and a good defence to the westerne Christians in their warres here against the Saladin and Soldans of Aegypt, and for a good seate of trade; but all these good things were too good for those Nations that
have since beene Masters thereof: for the goodnesse of the Port is oyled by rubbish, the goodnes of the walles ruin'd by the wars, d the goodnes of the scale in trade decayed by the neighbou∣g Townes scituated upon this coast. It is seated in the bot∣me of all the mediterranean Sea, and sees yet a little trade by the nefit of a creeke capable to receive small vessels, wherein the enetians and French picke out some trade with their ready mo∣ey: it is a station common to those caravans that by land travell om Damasco, Aleppo or Constantinople to Cao, and so backe ; and these caravans keeping their setled times of progresse d regresse, are the cause of some traffique here maintained: the arrennesse of the neighbouring desers drive som hither to in∣bit, which makes the Towne to be better peopl then other∣ise it happily would be, thereby inlarging the commerce of the lace. What observations therein I have learned I must acknow∣dge due to the indeavours of a Venetian Merchant who much equented these parts, which is The commodities of this City are Commodities of Gasa. ose proper of the Countrey, and as the place partaketh as a con∣e Towne of Aegypt and Iudea, so it must be understood that it oth participate of the commodities for merch  proper to oth of them, as cottons, cotton yarne, silks, some drugges, some spices, nd the like. The coines here currant I need not nominate, neither yet the Coines of Gasa. manner of keeping of Merchants accounts here; for as seated in the dominions of the grand signior; the coines and accounts are the same common with Constantinople and other parts of Turkey. The weight of Gasa is found to be onely one, composed of the Weights of Gasa. Rotolo, and 100 Rotolos making their cantar; which cantar by the said observations make in Venetia 800 li. sotile, and the 1000 li. gro. n Venetia hath made here 191 Rot. and the 1000 li. sotile Venetia hath made here 125 Rotolos: but because I find a Country man of our owne to have made a differing observation from this in the point of weight, which is, that the cantar of Gasa will make in Lon∣don 536 li. haberdepois; I will leave the experiment to that hand that shall have cause to make a further tryall.
CHAP. LXVI. Of TYRUS, and the ancient Trade thereof. TYRUS lieth also in this Tract, or to say more pro∣perly and more truely did once lie in this Tract, Of Tyrus and the ancient Trade therof. which for its great splendor in traffique in time past deserveth here the commemoration thereof▪ which I will insert as I find it noted by the Pro∣phet Ezech in chap. 26 and 27; the greatnesse and amplitude o which trade now ruind and altogether desolate, serving for ex∣ample to all eminent Cities of traffique, that the Merchants Inha∣bitants of those places forget not GOD the giver of that plenty and aboundance; nor yet abuse the same to their own destruction▪ as is shewd there it was to the Tyrians. Tyrus then in the heig of its greatnesse is recorded to have a very great trade, and so large that it served for a generall mart to all the World, and that all Nations were furnished with their merchandize and commodities thence, which wonderfully inriched the City and increased the power of the citizens; so that she is there termed the strong and re∣nowned City of the Sea, and which was mightily inhabited by Se men and Merchants, whose power and greatnesse in Navigation and trade is described by many particulars in that Chapter; as first that her Ship timber was of the Firre trees of Hermon hill, and the Masts thereof was of cedar, and brought from Libanon, and the Oares thereof were of the oakes of Bashan; the Sailes thereof was fine imbroidered linen brought from Aegypt, and the covering (or as Sea-men terme it their awneings) were of blew silke and purple, brought from the Iles of Elishah: their mariners were the Inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad, and their Ship-masters and Pi∣lots were the wisest of the City, and their Carpenters, shipwrights and Calkers were the ancients of Gebal, and the wise men thereof; and all the Shippes of the Sea with their Mariners negotiated in her in the traffique of merchandize. Now those that traded hither and were the Merchants thereof, and the commodities for which they traded is also recorded there, for the Merchants of Tarshish brought hither to the Faires all rich commodities, as silver, iron, tynne, lead: The Merchants of Grecia, Italy and Cappadocia furni∣shed it with slaves for labour, and with all manner of vessells of brasse. The Merchants of Togarmah brought hither to her Marts Horses and Mules for carriage. The Merchants of Dedan brought Unicornes hornes and Elephants teeth. The Merchants of Aram brought to her Faires emerald, corall, pearles, fine linen, and pur∣ple
imbroidered workes. The Merchants of Israel brought honey, lme, oyle and wheate. The Merchants of Damasco brought wines, ols, and multitude of other rich wares. The Merchants of Dan d Iavan brought iron worke, cassia, calamus. The Merchants of rabia furnished it with cattell. Of Sheba and Ramah with spices d precious stones and gold: and to conclude, all the nations of ose regions were accounted the Merchants that did traffique ither with all the riches of their severall Countries, and furni∣ed the same with the best of their Sea-men, and the principall of eir Ships for navigation: but the Holy Prophet in liew of their en greatnesse, prophesied their future miserie; instead of their en riches prophesied their future poverty, which is there recor∣ed to have fallen deservedly upon this City and their inhabitants r glorying in their owne strength and opulence, and for deri∣ing of the holy City of Ierusalem, by rejoycing at the visitation nd fall which GOD had beene pleased to afflict her withall;  that many yeeres past the said prophesie hath bin in her fulfilled, s now we see it in these daies to be; for many nations hath sen up against it, and the waves of the Seas hath devoured it; the iches thereof are robbed, and the merchandize thereof are spoy∣ed: the nations that have knowne the splendor of it are risen up n astonishment at it, the waters hath covered it, and in fine the ame is brought to nothing, and shall never hereafter have a bee∣ng, which is fully accomplished in every particular: therefore et each flourishing City of trade, and every Merchant exercising raffique take warning by their ruine and desolation, and by their ust and faithfull dealing and upright conversation indeavour to divert the wrath of GOD from the Cities of their habitations; and having the sinne of the Tyrians ever in remembrance, they may thereby hope to avoyd their punishment. Now as for the Countrey of Iudea, I find not that it affords any eminent City of trade in these our dayes, though otherwise it be famous in Scripture in times past, both for the City of Bethleem, where our Saviour CHRIST was borne, and where it was found the innocents did suffer for him ere he suffered for them; and also for the City of Ierico, destroyed by the sounding of rammes hornes; Ierico. and lastly for Ierusalem the City of the Lord, built by Melchisedec Prince and Priest of Salem, in the Countrey of the Jebusites; but Ierusalem. since that time having been layen wast divers times, and having againe found new reedifiers, is now of little consequence: here was that most magnificent Temple built by Solomon, and the fa∣mous Temple of the Sepulchre built by Helena daughter to Coilus a Brittish King, and mother to Constantine the Great; the ruines thereof is yet much resorted unto both by Protestants and Papists, though for sundry ends; which place affordeth now not any trade to any nation save to the Jewes, who farme of the grand signior this abovesaid Temple at 80000 sultanies yearely, and every pil∣grime
or other Christian entring, must pay 9 sultanies to the said farmers for admittance; so that the posterity of those Jewes make an unrighteous gaine and traffique by his death, whom unrighte∣ously their fore-fathers occasioned to die. CHAP. LXVII. Of ARMENIA and the Provinces and Cities thereof. ARMENIA hath on the East Media, and the Cas∣pian Sea, on the West Euphrates and the Euxi Armenia. Sea, on the North Tartarie, on the South Meso∣potamia; the whole Countrey is divided into three Provinces; first, Colchis; secondly, Georgia; third∣ly, Turcomania. Colchis lieth on the Euxine Sea, the Inhabitants thereof being Christians; hence did Iason in the dayes of old steale the golde Colchis. fleece; and here is also seene the ruines of that famous Citie Dios∣curia, where by reason of the many forraine Merchants from all Dioscuria. Countries that here frequented, three hundred languages was commonly spoken and practised. Neither can I finde in Georgia, earst called Iberia, any Citie of note for trading. Turcomania being also as barren in this kinde. Georgia. It is observed by sundry Authours that out of this Province is de∣rived Turcomania. the Name and Originall of the Turkes, who here had their off-spring, and who within these three hundred yeares last past have made themselves potent by their Armies, and to the ruine of many Kingdomes, the present Grand Signior Sultan Amurath, who The kingdoms under the Turk. in Anno 1623, at my being in Constantinople was proclaimed Em∣perour of that Nation, hath under his Dominions and command in chiefe as Soveraigne all these Countries; first in Europe he hath Dacia, Grecia, all the Aegean Ilands, and Taurica Chersonesus; in Asia he hath the Provinces before already described; also Arabia, Syria, Media, Mesopotamia, Rhodes, Cyprus, and other Ilands; and lastly, in Africa he hath Aegypt and the Kingdome of Tunes and Argier, and many others of lesser consequence: and thus leaving Armenia, my next step is to Arabia, which commeth now to be handled.
CHAP. LXVIII. Of ARABIA and the Provinces thereof. ARABIA is bounded on the East with the Persian gulfe, Arabia. on the West with the red Sea, on the North with Meso∣potamia and Palestina, on the South with the Ocean; the Inhabitants are extreamly addicted to theft, this ade being found to be the best part of their maintenance, the ountry is divided into three parts, Arabia deserta, Petrosa, and Fe∣x. Deserta. Arabia deserta is the place where the people of Israel wandred or fortie yeares under the command of Moses; the most eminent Citie of this Province is Bolsora, whereto by reason that it serveth Bolsora. or through-fare from Arabia to Aleppo, and Damascus, is found a Citie of great concourse of many Merchants, and which doth rincipally consist more upon the commodities brought hither rom other Countries, as of India, and other parts of Arabia, then of any found here to be transported into other Countries; the urther trade thereof by reason of my ignorance I omit. This Country by reason of the theevish lives of the Inhabitants and the generall barrennesse and infertilitie thereof some Au∣thours have observed in the course of their trade and merchandi∣zing, that the sandy Deserts are the Seas of the Arabian Mer∣chants, the wild arabs their pirats, and their Camells their shippes, usually carrying 600 li. for an ordinary burthen, and so we finde them to doe in the carriage of our goods and wares from Scande∣rone to Aleppo, and so backe againe, a Camells load being accoun∣ted ten Cloths Suffolke, which by statute weigh 640 li. which with the packing may be 700 li. or els two barrels or Chests of Tynne found to be incirca 600 li. and so in other commodities. In Arabia Petrosa I finde not any Citie of trading: Esion Gebor Petrosa. on the coasts of the red Sea, where Salomons Navie kept station before the setting out and at their returne from Ophir, was once a famous place, and of great traffique, though now it lies buried in its owne ruines. In Arabia faelix, Merchants should be better welcome were Faelix. the Inhabitants so beneficiall to their traffique as their commodi∣ties might be made, for it is esteemed the richest and pleasantest part of all Arabia, and indeed of all Asia, abounding with Gold, pearles, Balsam, Myrrhe, Frankinsence, and many other precious drugges. Here is those two notably noted Townes of Medina and Me∣cha, Medina Talnabi and Mecha. the one the birth place, the other the burying place of Maho∣met
(who in his younger yeares was a Merchant, and in his elder a cunning impostor) where Christians are forbidden to enter, lea they should see (as some Authours alledge) the absurdities of the Mahumetane adoration of their great Prophets Sepulcher, whose bodie inclosed in an iron chest, is said by an Adamant to be drawne up to the roofe of the Temple where it hangeth; but herein ma∣ny of them are and have beene for a long time deceived, for  selfe and other Merchants that have for some terme of time resi∣ded in Turkie, and specially in Constantinople, know by experience that the grand Signior doth yearly send a Carpet or rather tombe∣cloth of greene Velvet to cover the said Sepulcher, the old being then taken away and accounted the fees and vailes of their Priests and cleargie men that attend thereon, who cut the same into se∣verall small pieces, and sell it to the superstitious at extreame rates for precious reliques; the Tombe it selfe being seated in a Temple built in Mecha, of no great magnificence or beautie, save the cost daily bestowed thereupon in Lampes of silver and gold, wherein is Balsam and other such rich odours, oyntments and oyles continually burned, and is seated on the firme ground and not in the ayre, is above is said, and inclosed within an i∣ron grate, wherein some by favour are permitted to enter, from some of whom I have had this relation, and is by divers Turkes that I have knowne and that have seene it and reported it to be so, and no otherwise: this large circuit of ground hath not af∣foorded me much matter of trade worthy observation that hi∣therto hath come to my hands; the most pertinent and eminent places are Mocha, the Sea-port of the said Mecha above-named, and Adam, both on the red Sea; of the trade whereof a word, so farre forth as I have gathered, and then I will conclude. CHAP. LXIX. Of MOCHA, and the trade thereof. MOcha, or Muchi as some name it, is seated in the red Sea, almost opposite to Zuachen that famous Citie of Mcha, and the trade there∣of. trade on the African shoare, and serveth as the Port and scale to Meccha, the birth place of Mahomet the famous Prophet of these Countreymen, much heere resorted unto by Turkes, Moores, Arabians, and other Nations professing this superstitious religion; it is frequented by divers Merchants, especially Arabians and Egyptians that take it in their way to Aden, Ormus, India, or the like; and also much frequen∣ted by Mahumetane Pilgrims, who in blind devotion come this way to Meccha to pay their vowes to their ungodly Patron.
It is subject to the grand Signior, and acknowledgeth his coines Coines in Mo∣cha. r the currant in this place in matter of trade, which is the asper mmon with all Turkey. Whereof 60 is here accompted for a Riall of  Spanish. An hundred is accompted for a Soltanie, chiquine or sheriffe. The common gold here currant 8 sh. sterling. Their weights heere used partake also somwhat of the common Weights in Mo∣cha. eight in appellation used throughout all Turkey, which is the am, 10 whereof is accounted here an ounce. 14 Ounces is a Rotolo. 24 Rotol. is a fracello, which is 25 li. 12 ounces English. 15 Fracellos makes a cantar, or as they terme it, 1 Bahar, making English incirca, 386 li. The Measures here is the pico, accounted incirca 26½ ynches Measures in Mocha. nglish, other notes have not falne into my hand of this place, erefore hence I will bend my course to Aden. CHAP. LXX. Of ADEN, and the Trade thereof. ADen is the strongest and fairest Towne of Arabia foe∣lix, Aden, and the Trade thereof. scituated in a valley and incompassed most part with hills of marble, upon which it is conceived it never raineth; it lieth on the North side of the en∣trance of the red Sea, reaching 60 miles further in∣wards then the opposite cape Guardefu; it is fortified with 5 strong Castles, kept by Garrisons, and within late yeares surprized by the Bashaw of Aegypt, for the grand Signior, in whose obedience it now quietly remaineth by the death and slaughter of the naturall Soveraigne therof: it is now by the industry of man from a firme land become an Iland, and yet commanded by a strong Castle, the residence of the Governour seated on an adjoyning hill. It is accounted to have 6000 houses in it, inhabited by sundry Nations; or more properly a miscelanie of Indians, Persians, Ethi∣opians, Arabians, and Turkes which heere doe reside for the bene∣fit of that great trade and commerce that is exercised in this Citie. The Portugals had once got the possession thereof, and were ma∣sters of it for some few yeares; but finding the charge of the Gar∣rison to exceed the benefit afforded by the trade and neighbou∣ring confines, they willingly surrendred the place to a Moore; who paying them for some yeares certaine tribute, they seated
as a Soveraigne to command the same, who ruled heere till the Turkes became to be masters thereof. This Citie is now the principall Magazine for the commodities of Persia, India, and Arabia, and affording naturally great store of Druggs, as Myrrhe, Balsame, Manna, and many sorts of spices: The heat of this place is so excessive in the day time, that all the bargaines and contracts made heere amongst Merchants, is done by night, as the coolst season to effect the same. Now for the coines heere currant, the weights and measures heere in use and other needfull further observations of the trade of this place, I am inforced to be silent in, and referre the same to the more experienced, to bee hereafter added, as occasion shall serve heereunto. CHAP. LXXI. Of Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Chaldea, and the Cities thereof. ASsyria hath on the East Media, on the West Meso∣potamia, Assyria, Mesopo∣tamia, and Chal∣dea. on the North Armenia minor, on the South a part of Persia; in which I find no Citie at present of any note: heere is seene to this day the ruines of that Niiveh whose walles were of three dayes iour∣ney in compasse about, one hundred foot high, and thirtie foot broad, and beautified with 1500 Towres of 200 foot high; through which ran the famous River of Euphrates, and to which place was Ionas sent to preach; heere being 120000 per∣sons found so ignorant in the things of God, that they are said in Scripture not to know the right hand from the left. In Mesopotamia is seated Caramit a famous Towne and Bashaw∣like Mesopotamia. of the grand Signior whose commerce is unknowne unto us by reason of its scituation; in Genesis 12 it is called Padan Haran, and is the place where Abraham dwelt after he had left Vr; and in this Countrey was Abraham borne, and to which place hee sent his servant to choose a wife for his sonne Isaac; and here in some Authors opinion, (which in this description I followed, did Paradise stand. Paradise. In Chaldea wee find many Cities to have beene of old; and a∣mongst Chaldea. others Babel, famous for the confusion of Languages that heere happened in building that stupendious Edifice which was raised 5164 paces high, and who had its basis and circumference
equall to that heighth; it is now much lessened of its ancient greatnes, and from Babel it became first Babylon, and now Bagdat, Babylon, now Bagdate. a Bashawlike of the grand Signior, through which runs the River Euphrates, which is in part the cause of her present traffique which dayly is found to be maintained by the helpe of Aleppo, where is kept (by the intercourse of Merchants, and the commoditie of Caravans, and intelligence of Pigeons carrying letters) a neigh∣bourlike commerce; Bagdate oftentimes venting into the land, what Aleppo doth receive by Seas. CHAP. LXXII. Of BABYLON, now BAGDATE, and the Trade thereof. BAbylon, now Bagdate, was at first founded by Nim∣rod, Babylon, and the trade ther∣of. but never finished till that warlike Semiramis tooke it in hand whose walls were 60 miles in cir∣cuit, 200 foot high, and 75 foot broad, seated upon the River Euphrates, in those daies a faire and beau∣tifull Citie, now having almost lost all that splen∣dor and glory it then justly boasted of: Many famous accidents have heere happened; heere died Alexander the great, after which his body lay eight dayes ere his ambitious Captaines could have leasure to give it a fitting buriall; heere it is also said that when this place was taken by Zopyrus the Macedonian with his Grecians, it was full three dayes ere one part thereof tooke no∣tice of the conquest, since which it hath beene subject to severall soveraignes, and it is at this day a Towne of very great traffique, betweene which and Aleppo are many Caravans found to travell with many 1000 Camels laden with sundry commodities, the rich commodities of India brought from Ormus by Sea to Balsara, sea∣ted as the maritime Port of the Citie in the Persian Gulfe, and so up the River Euphrates hither, and hence to Aleppo, Damasco, and other Countries, which againe returnes-them in exchange the commodities of Turkey, Aegypt, and Europe. In this Countrey, and generally through many parts of Turkey, igeons Letter, or newes Car∣riers. they have a custome to give advice of their affaires by pigeons, which serve Merchants here for Posts; and hereby the English are found in Aleppo to have advice from Alexandretta, which is ac∣compted 100 miles, in 24 houres, and hereby the Caravans heere travailing give from time to time advice of their journeys and successe, which is done in this manner: when the hen dove sitteth and hath young, they take the cocke pigeon and put him into a cage,
whom (when hee is by the Caravan carried a dayes iourney off) they set at liberty, and he straight flieth home to his mate; when by degrees they are thus perfectly taught: the Carriers and Mer∣chants on any accident fasten a letter about one of their necks, and they being freed without any stay hasten to the place from whence they were brought, and such as at home doe watch their returne, (clime their hole and take away their Letter) are certi∣fied of the mind of their friends, or any other tidings, after a very speedy manner. The commodities of this place, are the common commodities be∣fore Commdities of Babylon. nominated in Aleppo, and their coines currant, are the same that are found throughout Turkey, as subject to one and the same Soveraigne; but the coines of Persia are found heere likewise to passe currant for their value, and so doth also their gold without Coines of Ba∣bylon. exception; it being a received custome in Trade, that frontier Townes of Trade admit the coines of the bordering Inhabitants and Regions. The weights of Babylon knowne amongst us is the dram, mitigall, Rotolo, and Cantar. Weights of Ba∣bylon. Their Rotolo hath been observed to make 1 li. 10 ounces English, and our 112 li. English hath made here 68 Rotolos. Their measure in length common in this place is the pico found to bee by triall about 27 ynches English. Measures in Ba∣bylon. To conclude this Countries relation; from hence came the 3 Wise men called of the East, who worshipped Christ and presented him with guifts, and the inhabitants hereof are said to bee the first inventers of Astronomic and Astrologie; and therefore hence have all such the title of Chaldeans, and for other matter of trade, here is only found the famous Towne of Mosull, scituated on the River Euphrates, abounding with Forrests of Galls, so much required and requested by divers through∣out the world: and now to MEDIA.
CHAP. LXXIII. Of MEDIA, and the Provinces thereof. MEdia is limited on the East with Parthia; on the West Media and the Cities thereof. with Armenia, on the South with Persia, and on the North with the Caspian Sea; being absolutely the greatest Sea of all others that hath no commerce with the Ocean, by some called the Hircanian Sea, and by some the Sea Bacchu, of a Towne of that name thereon bordering. The chiefe Cities of this Countrey is Sultania, famous for the Sultania. faire Mosque in the East; Sumachia, the strongest of all the rest, taken by the Turkes in Anno 1578, and now the seat of a Turkish Bashaw; Eres, Ardovile, Shervan, Bacchu, and some others; and lastly, the most eminent Tauris, of the trade hereof see heere∣after. Likewise in this Tract is comprehended the Province of Al∣bania, Tauris. now Zairia, little beholding to the industry or labour of the Husbandman, yet of its owne accord yeelding for one sow∣ing, most times two, and sometimes three reapings: the chiefe Citie is Caucasiae Portae, built hard upon the hill Caucasus, one of the best fortified Townes of the East, now called Derbent, a strong Derbent. Citie invironed with two walls, and fortified with iron Gates; yet neverthelesse taken it was by the grand Signior in his last wars against the Persians, vnder whose command it now remaineth, being now accounted one of the keyes of this kingdome, and the common entrance into Persia; and lastly in this Countrey Phidon an Argive in Anno mundi 3146 is said to find out the use of weights and measures; which knowledge and concordance by this Tract I covet to obtaine. And to conclude, a word of the Trade of this Countrey in the The Weight of Derbent is the Mone, which is 3 li. 11 oun∣ces Venice so∣tile. generall; I find that the Moscovia company were the first that sought the knowledge thereof in these parts; for upon their dis∣covery of Moscovia, they traded downe the River Volga to Astra∣can, and thence in Barks sailed with their English commodities to Bacchu, Derbent, and other places on the Caspian Sea, and since some of the East India Company have more narrowly traced it, and have observed the same more particular: the principall commodi∣ties proceeding hence is the raw silke made at Gilan, Zahaspa, Ra∣stiguan, Chiulfall, and others, now knowne unto vs by the name of Persia, Ardasse, and Lege silkes, and from this last the dealers in silke here are throughout Asia commonly termed Chiulfallins.
CHAP. LXXIIII. Of TAURIS and the trade thereof. TAuris, is the Metropolis of Media, and the summer seates of the Persian Sophies containing 16 miles in Tauris and the trade thereof. compasse, and including 100 thousand Inhabitants; it hath within late yeares beene three times conque∣red by the Turkes, and hath as often againe returned to the Persians, under whom now it resteth: first, by Selimus, then, by Soliman the magnificent, and lastly, by Osman Generall to Amurath the third; it is now in the possession of the Persian, and strongly fortified, and seated in a cold, yet wholsome Countrey, the Inhabitants more addicted to the making of silke, than to the sword; distant six dayes journey from the Caspian Sea; and indeed incompassed by severall great Townes of note, whose manuall labours are famoused over the world, as first Eres, whence came the fine silke called the Mamodean, now out of use; then Gilan a∣bounding with lege silke; Sumachia, abounding in excellent car∣pets, Gilan & Bilan. Sumachia. Arasse. whereto the people wholly addict themselves; then Arasse, the most eminent and opulent Citie in the trade of merchandise throughout all Servania, partly by the abundant growth of silke there nourished, and hence called Arasse, vulgarly Ardasse (2000 summes yearly going hence to Aleppo in Syria) and partly by the growth thereof; Galles, cottons, wooll, allom, some spices, drugges, and sundry other commodities; so that to make this place the hap∣pie scale of merchandise, Nature having plaid her part, there wanteth onely peace betweene the Kings of Persia and Turkie, which at present is denied them: the fur∣ther manner of trade of that place, I am con∣strained for want of due information to omit, and referre what I have thereof collected to PERSIA.
CHAP. LXXV. Of PERSIA and the Provinces thereof. PERSIA is bounded on the East with the River In∣dus, Persia and the Provinces thereof. on the West with Tygris and the Persian gulfe, on the North with the Caspian Sea, and the River Oxus, and on the South with the maine Ocean, the people are much addicted to hospitalitie and poetry; in their complements lordly, in their apparell phanta∣sticall, in their expences magnificent, and in their lives lovers of learning, nobilitie, and peace. This Empire containeth these severall Provinces. 1 Persis. 2 Sussiana. 3 Caramania. 4 Gedrosia. 5 Drangiania. 6 Arica. 7 Arachosia. 8 Parapomisus. 9 Saccha. 10 Hircania. 11 Ormus. Of all which in briefe, and no further than may concerne my present purpose. In Persis now called Far, having the gulfe of Persia to the South Persis Far. limit, Caramania for the East, Susiana for the West, and Media for the North, was seated Persepolis the ancient seat of this Empire, which Alexander at the request of his Curtisan Laies commanded to be set on fire, but afterward repenting him of so great a folly and so unworthy an act, he reedified it, though yet now having lost much of its former beautie, and giving place to the famous Citie of Casbin, the residence of the present Sophies brought hither from Tauris by Sophie Tamas. The commodities that this Country is in generall found to af∣foord Commodities of Persi. for merchandize, is silkes of all sorts, raw growing plentiful∣ly in 1 Bilan, 2 Gilan, and 3 Aras, some precious stones, many sorts of drugges, wrought silkes, Chamblets, Carpets, shashes, callico's, and many excellent Armes used in warre both for horse and man, which is here so well tempered in the framing and making (with some vertuous simples) that it makes it both hard and excellent for use, and preserves the same cleane from any rust or perish∣ing.
CHAP. LXXVI. Of CASBIN and the trade thereof. CASBIN is now accounted the Metropolis of Persia, Casbin and the trade thereof. and sometimes the residence of the Sophies, hither removed from Tauris, as I said before, it is accoun∣ted a dayes journey about on horsebacke, well wal∣led and fortified with a strong Fort, and beautified with two faire Straglios; the walles whereof are made of red mar∣ble, and paved with Mosacque worke; the chiefe street hereof is called the attimidan, in figure four-square, each angle being ¼ mile in length, incompassed with scaffolds for the people to sit and be∣hold the King and his Nobles at their exercises of shooting, riding, running, and the like; this Citie is seated in a goodly fertile plaine of three or foure daies journeys in length, which is furnished with neere two thousand Villages to supply the necessary uses thereof, which did much in rich this place before the removall of the Per∣sians Court to Hispahan, which is fourteene dayes journey further into the East; three places herein doe much adorne and beautifie Three excel∣lencies in Cas∣bin. this place; first, the Attimidan aforesaid; secondly, the Kings pa∣lace, which is so brave a fabrique, and so richly furnished, that Eu∣rope can hardly match it; and lastly, the Bassars which are many in number, which are in the manner of our Pawnes in London, where are to be sold all manner of Persia, India, Turkie, Moscovian, and Arabia commodities, as all rich Iems, Iewells, drugges, spices, silke Commodities of Cosbin. wrought in Damaskes, Velvets, and raw, transported into other Countries; the attimidan serving the Merchants for an Exchange or place of meeting, where every day is seene a continuall faire, where all manner of commodities is sold both for backe and belly; also Gold-smiths, Exchangers of moneys, and all other professions, who come hither and display their commodities, as to some pub∣lique Mart. And the moneys and currant coynes here passable a∣mongst Merchants, I referre to the chiefe Citie of Persia, Hispa∣han, the present residence of the Persian Monarch; and I am informed that the weights and mea∣sures thereof doe also agree therewith, so shall not need to inlarge my selfe further in that particular.
CHAP. LXXVII. Of BALSARA and the Trade thereof. BALSARA lieth in the bottome of the Persian gulph, Balsara and the trade thereof. and is seated on the mouth of the River Euphrates, ser∣ving as a Magazin for all the commodities of Arabia, India, Turkie, and Persia, and as a through-fare for all Merchants travelling from one of those Countries to another, but especially for such as here take shipping to the Ile of Ormus, India, Arabia, &c. This towne was of late yeares subject to the Persian, but now in obedience to the great Turke, and is the last of his Dominions this way: and here it is observed that the water doth ebbe and flow, as with us in England, and in no place els ad∣joyning upon the Ocean Seas, the indraught may be imagined to be the cause, as it is observed the like in Venice. It hath beene noted in matter of trade here, that there is payd for every summe of goods carried from Bagdat hither by water, six sehids, and from Balsara to Bagdat two Medins per Wesnoe, and 100 Wesnoes from Balsara to Ormus, cost carriage twenty Lairins, and the like backe from Ormus to Balsara. Hither alwayes comes the Syria Caravans that are bound for India, and end their land travell, and imbarke themselves and goods for the great Marts of Ormus and Cambaia, and here retur∣ning they conclude their Sea navigation, and begin their land pe∣regrinations for Turkie, &c. The customes payable at Balsara as the last port of the grand Sig∣niors Customes paid at Balsara. Dominions, who conquerd the same from the Persian in An∣no 1550, is 1 in every 14 sehids for grosse commodities, but it is 1 per 20 or 5 per cent. upon Cloths, silkes, and fine goods, but here is a tare of 3 in 10 Wesnoes allowed both in spices, drugges, &c. for dust, and upon silkes for waste, heads, and the like. The prices of commodities ruled some yeares past thus here. Prices of com∣modities in Bilsara. The Wesnoe of Maces is worth in Balsara 13 duccats. The Wesnoe of Nutmeggs was worth 6 duccats. The Wesnoe of soape was worth 15 seheds. The Wesno of Almonds was 24 sehids. The Wesno of Galles was worth 10 larins, and for this weight of Wesno, it is found that 16 Wesnoes of Balsara make a Kintar of Alep∣po common weight, but the 100 Wesnoes in the weight of silke of Rotol: 680 dr: in Aleppo makes silke Rot. 529 dr: 28.
The weight common here in the sale of commodities besides this Weights used in Balsara. Wesno, is the Maund which is 100 Rotolos, which hath been obser∣ved to have made 500 li. English, which is 5 li. a Rotolo, but I have met with an observation upon this place made by some English that have traveld hither, that the 112 li. hath made 19 Maunds 2¾ Rotolos, which must be 5 li. 4¼ ounces English; the difference I referre to be rectified by the better experienced. Their measure is found to be about 26 inches English. Measures of Balsara. To proceed to the next Province in Persia, it is Cusestan, scitua∣ted Eastward from Persia, called in Scripture Havilah, having in it Cusestan. Susa, a Citie where sometimes the Persian Monarch abides in win∣ter, as being more Southerly than Ecbatana; and lastly Casan, of which a word. CHAP. LXXVIII. Of CASAN and the Trade thereof. CASAN is a principall faire and famous Citie in this Countrey, but much troubled with excessive heate Casan and the trade thereof. by reason of its scituation in a pleasant and large plaine; it consisteth altogether of merchandizing, and the greatest trade of all the inland Countrey is found herein, and most especially frequented by Indian Mer∣chants; the Inhabitants are in generall addicted to all curious manufactures, and fabrickes, as in weaving of shashes, turbants, and girdles, in making also of velvets, sattins, damaskes, curious and fine Ormusins, and Carpets; and indeed it is accounted the very Maga∣zin Commodities of Casan. of all the Persian Cities, for these commodities; here is also to be sold all manner of drugs, and spices, pearles, diamonds, Rubies, and turkeses, and all sorts of silkes, both raw and wrought, so that the Authour (who in this relation I follow) is verily perswaded that there is more silke yearely brought into Casan, than there is of broad cloth brought into London. The civill policie of this Citie is Policie of Ca∣san. also commendable, an idle person not being permitted to live a∣mongst them, and the children after six yeares old, are presently set to worke; here being a Law to the shame of Christendome, that every Inhabitant must yearly give up his name to the Magistrate, therewith declaring how and in what manner he liveth, what art he exerciseth, and if he be found in a falshood, he is beaten on the fete, or els imployed in some publique slavery, to the example of others: and for other notes of trading, see Hispahan in Parthia.
Caramania is the third Province, the chiefe Cities are Gadil, Co∣bin Caramania. and Caraman, famous for the excellent fabricks here made of Cloth of gold, and for the best Semiters in the world; and here it was that Alexander being returned out of India, kept his Bacchanalian feasts. In Gedrosia, Drangiana or Sigestan, Aria now Sablestan, Araco∣sia Gedrosia, &c. now Cabull, Parapomisus, Saca and Hircania, I find not any thing worthie the survey, therefore I willingly passe them over and close these Provinces with the Citie of Sciras, which is compre∣hended in this tract. CHAP. LXXIX. Of SCIRAS, and the Trade thereof. SCIRAS in times past Persepolis, built by Perseus, Sciras and the trade thereof. who gave the name of Persians to the Inhabitants, was for a long time the seate Royall of this Empire, for which cause Alexander (as is before mentioned) at the request of his Curtizan Lais, commanded it to be set on fire, but afterward repenting him of so great an over-sight, he reedified the same; it is scituated on the bankes of the famous River Bindamir, which courseth through the Kingdome of Per∣sia Bindamir. and Lar, and so emptieth it selfe into the Persian gulfe, and stan∣deth just in the roade way which leads from Hispahan to Ormus; it sheweth yet many eminent signes and monuments of its former glory, as two very great Gates twelve miles distant asunder, shew∣ing what the circuit was in the time of the Monarchie; also the ruins of a goodly Palace and Castle, built by Cyrus, having a three∣fold wall, beautified with many spires and turrets; the first twen∣ty-foure foot high, the second forty-eight foot high, the last nine∣tie foot high, all of free stone, and formed in a square with twelve gates of brasse on each angle, with pales of brasse set before them curiously wrought, testifying the magnificence of the founder. It is now accounted one of the most famous Cities of the East, both for traffique of Merchandize and for excellent armour and furni∣ture for warre, which the Inhabitants here with wonderfull cun∣ning and art doe make of iron and steele, and the juyce of certaine hearbs, of much more notable temper and beautie, than are those which are made with us in Europe. The coynes here in use being proper to the whole Kingdome and the weights and measures not found differing from the same u∣sed in Ormus, the prime port of this whole Kingdome, I shall not need here further to insist thereupon, and therefore from hence accompanying the Caravan, I in the next place survay the said fa∣mous port of Ormus.
CHAP. LXXX. Of ORMUS and the Trade thereof. THE last Province of this Country is accounted to be Ormus and the trade thereof. the Iland and Territories of Ormus, twelve miles from the Continent, small in compasse, and very barren, yet famous throughout the world for the great trade there exercised by the Indians, Persians, and Arabians, and other Nations, the King thereof some yeares past was a Mahumetan, and drew by the customes of this Citie 140000 sheriffs yearly, since which it became tributarie to the Portugalls, who fortified the same in Anno 1506, and for the ex∣cellencie thereof, the Arabians use to say proverbially: Si terrarum Orbis, quaqua patet, annulus esset, Illius Ormasium gemma decusque foret; If all the world should bee a Ring, the stone And gemme thereof were Ormus Ile alone. Since which time by the valour of our English East India Com∣panies armes, this Iland hath beene reduced to the subjection of Ormus restored to the Persian by the English valour. the King of Persia, to whom it is now obedient, and still injoyeth the former splendid trade to all the parts of the East; here are found the spices and precious Iems of India, the tapestries, carpets, and shashes of Persia, the grograms, mohers, and Chamblets of Tur∣kie, the drugges of Arabia; and lastly, the neys called the larins of Persia, which are here accounted as a great and speciall Mer∣chandise, all which be excellent helpes to make this place a famous Mart and Magazin of all Easterne commodities. Now the cause that in part mooveth this great trade hither, and the great con∣course of Merchants into this Iland, is that twice yearely there Orders of Ca∣ravans from Syria to Bal∣sara. commeth a great company of people over land out of Syria, A∣leppo, and other those parts, which are called Caffiles or Caravans, with all the commodities of the mediterranan Seas, which in their journeys observe this order; They have first a captaine, and cer∣taine hundreds of Ianisaries or Souldiers, which convey and con∣duct the said Caffilla or Caravan untill they come to Balsara, from whence they travell by water to Ormus; and this twice yearely hapneth, in Aprill and in September, which constant times of their departure thence thus knowne, their number is oftentimes aug∣mented to 6000, in 10000 persons, with their Mules, Camells and
Dromedaries, passing by Babylon now Bagdat, and so to Balsara as is abovesaid; and in this same nature they travell at certaine set times; in their returne hence for Aleppo, carrying with them all manner of Merchandise of this place, fitting either for Turkie, or the mediterranean Sea; and in which Caravans all nations are found freely to travell, excepting the King of Spaines subjects, which are very narrowly lookt into, though notwithstanding they are found oftentimes to passe in the names of Uenetians, French, and other Nations, so that when these Caravans doe come to Ormus, a∣gainst their comming there is generall preparation made by all other Merchants of that Countrie, for to have commodities in rea∣dinesse to barter and exchange with them. The Iland it selfe is but small and barren, and composed onely of a salt rocke, whereof their houses and walles are made; and in Sommer it is found so ex∣cessive hot, that the Inhabitants are forced to lie and sleepe in wooden Cesterns made for the purpose, full of water, and all naked both men and women lying cleane under water, their heads one∣ly excepted; yet have they no fresh water in the Iland, but what they fetch from other Ilands in the Sea neere there adjoyning, which they also keepe in cesterns for their use, as is accustomed in some part of Spaine in Iarres, or as they terme them in Tenajos. At the last reduction of this Towne to the Scepter of Persia by the ayde of the English, they had many immunities of trade granted them, and to be here free of all custome, and withall to draw the one halfe of all the customes thereof; but that good service was soone forgotten, and they have now onely the honour of the good service for their paines and reward, and nothing els. To this Citie and Iland, I must adde the two onely Sea-ports of consequence on this coast, appertaining to the Crowne of Per∣sia, which are Iasques and Gombrone, in which the English have Iasques. Gombrone. their Factories and residencie, and is the place where their shippes doe lade and unlade their burthens for this Kingdome, and where also the goods and commodities bound for Hispahan, Casbin, Sciras, Casan, and Tauris, and generally for the whole Empire are landed, and here laden upon camells, dromedaries, and horses into those places; and because that I finde that the coynes, measures and weights of this place doe somewhat differ from them passable and in use at Spahan and more within the land, I have thought it need∣full here to insert the same, according as I have gathered them from those that have frequented the places above mentioned, re∣ferring the Reader for what is here omitted to Spahan it selfe, the Metropolis of this Empire in the following Chapter. The Coines then here in use and valuation are these: 1 Besse of copper is 4 Cosbeggs. Coines currant in Gombrone and Iasques and Ormus. 1 Shahee of silver is 2½ Bessees, which is 4d starling or 10 cosbegs. 1 Mamothy silver is 2 shahees which is 8d star. or 29 cosbegs. 1 Abashae of silver is 2 mamothies, which is 16 d star. or 40 cosb.
1 Asar of gold is 20 shahees or 6 shil. 8d. starling. 1 Toman of gold is 10 asars, which is 66 shil. 8d. star. and this Toman is accounted 50 abashes or 2000 cosbeggs. These are the generall coines currant throughout Persia; to these I must adde those in use in these parts above mentioned: The Riall of  Spanish is here a commoditie, and bought and sold, and the common estimation thereof is here 130½ cosbegs or 13 sha∣hees, and somewhat more, which accounted at 4d. per shahee is lit∣tle more than 4 shil. 4d. starling. Againe, this Riall of eight pas∣seth here for 5¼ larees, which larrees are 10d. star. and by this ac∣count the Riall of  is 4 shil. 4½d. starling. 1 Larree is 5½ saddees, each saddee being not fully 2d. star. and each saddee accounted here for 40 flosses; so that the larree is here 220 flosses, and every ℞. of  is here at Gombrone and Iasques 1155 flosses. The common weight here and throughout Persia is the dramme, 96 drams making 16 ounces haberdepois; so that 6 drams makes the Weights of Ormus, Gom∣brone and Ias∣ques. said ounce, and 1200 drams being a maund shaw, or as we may call it the Kings Maund, which hath beene found to make in England 12½ li. haberdepois: In weighing of silke, they observe the maund Tauris which is ½ the maund shaw or 600 drams, and 5 Maund Tau∣ris is accounted here for 1 maund of Sarrat, which by this com∣putation should make 3000 drams, or 500 li. haber: 36 maund shaws or 72 maunds Tauris is a load of silke, which is by the said calculati∣on 43200 drams, which is 7200 Ounces English making silke pounds 300 li. haberdepois, which is about two coles of Aleppo of 46½ Roto∣los per peere. Their measure in use here as throughout all Persia is not found much to varie, they have in generall two, which they terme the Measures of Ormus, Iasques, and Gombrone. Coveda, the short and the long; the long coveda is somewhat lon∣ger than the English yard, accounted by some 37 inches; and at Sciras and in some other Cities it is found to be 38 inches, by which all cloths, kersies, and outlandish manufacturies are sold by. The short Coveda is proper onely for the manufacturies of Persia, accounted to hold out 27 inches, and found agreeable to the pic used in Constantinople and Aleppo. And thus leaving Ormus and the said port Townes of Iasques and Combrone, I will hence travaile to Parthia, wherein I find Hispahan the Metropolis of Persia sea∣ted. The next Country subject to the Crowne of Persia is Parthia, bounded on the East with Aria, on the West with Media, on the Pia. South with Caramania, and on the North with Hircania, and is now in the Persian tongue called Erache.
The chiefe Cities that are found in this tract are Guerde, Irsdie, and last Hispahan, formerly Hecatompyle, the residence of the pre∣sent Sophie, and accounted of that bignesse, that the Persians hy∣perbolly call it, Halfe the world; under which I will comprehend the generall trade of Persia, so farre forth as I have found it ob∣served. CHAP. LXXXI. Of HISPAHAN, and the Trade thereof. HISPAHAN in times past was called Hecatompolis, Hispahan and the trade thereof. or the Citie of 100 gates, which name it may well still retaine, seeing that the walles thereof con∣taines a reasonable dayes journey on horsebacke, it is now become the greatest Citie in all the Persi∣an Dominions, and so much the more populous and magnificent, as being the common residence of the Persian Sophies; it is strong by scituation, defended by a high wall, deepe ditches, and a good Castle; on the west side stand two stately Palaces or Seraglios, for the King and his Women, farre exceeding in state and magnificence all others the proud buildings of this Citie. The walles are of red marble, and pargetted with divers colours, and all the Palace is paved with checkerd and fretted worke, and on the same is spread curious Carpets both of silke and gold; the windows are of Alablaster, of white and other spotted marble; the posts and wickets of massie Ivorie checkerd with glistering blacke Ebony, so curiously wrought in winding knots, as may easilier stay than satisfie the eyes of the wondring beholder; to which is ad∣ded a pleasant Garden, wherein is seene a thousand fountaines, brookes and lesser rivolets; and also what may els be wanting, to make it fit for so great a Monarch. The Inhabitants of this Citie do all their affaires one horsbacke, both publique and private, going from place to place, they con∣ferre one with another on horsbacke; and so doe the Merchants buy and sell and negociate; the difference here betweene the Gentlemen and the slave being, that the slave never rideth, nor the gentleman never goeth on foote. It is not questionable but that this Citie, the splendor of all Persia, the continuall residence of the Kings, and inhabited by so many eminent persons, as alwayes attend this Monarch, but that it is of great trade and concourse of Merchants, and furnished not onely with all the native commodities of Persia, but also of those of Arabia, Turkie, India and China, hither brought in great abun∣dance
to be exchanged for the native commodities of this place: and though it want the commodiousnesse of the Sea, yet by Cara∣vans it is supplyed with all those things that are conducible ei∣ther to beautie, necessitie, or ornament. The Caspian Sea affoords it the commodities of Turky, Russia, and Moscovia and Iasques with Ormus; his two Sea-ports in India affoords it the commodities of India and Arabia; all other commodities from either the Turke or Mogur is supplyed by Caravans Dromedaries and Camells: which hath cost by late observations in portage and cariage of commo∣dities thus: The cariage of 100 maunds of wares from Sciras to Hispahan Carriage of Commodities by Caravans. costeth 70 sehids, and from Spahan to Casan 60 sehids, from Hispa∣han to Ormus by Scyras 120 sehids, and from Hispahan to Tauris 40 sehids. The common commodities of Hispahan I have already nomina∣ted, and though all commodities in generall are subject to rise and fall in price amongst Merchants, yet the maund of cotton is here Prices com∣mon of Com∣modities in Spahan. commonly at 12 sehids, the maund of Rice 7 Beste, the maund of Dragant 2 Beste, of Enapp 2 Beste, of Non 3 Beste, of Laghem 4 Beste, of Anil 40 mamhodies, and the Cattee of sugar is worth 400 Tomans, which is () pound English. Their coines currant in Hispahan, and generally throughout all the Kingdome of the Sophie are of severall sorts, partly of brasse, partly of silver and partly of gold. The principall whereof is the Coines cur∣rant in Persia. Toman, which formerly hath beene accounted to be worth 6 li. starling, since 4 li. and by reason of the late warres imbased, and worth now onely 3 li. 6 s8. 8 d. at Sea side starling, and by some ac∣counted 3 li. 12. sh. 6 d. This Toman is worth 200 Saheds or Shahees, 14½ or 15 ℞. 8/8 span. or 10 asures, which have beene accounted 4 li. star. a piece, a Ma∣mothy of silver, is 2½ Bestees of copper. The Riall of  span. is here accounted for 13 Shahees, and 1 cosbeg or 5¼ lorins. The lion dollor currant in these parts is 10 Shahees, every Shahee is 4 d. starling, or 50 deniers here in account. A Rupias, which is the coine of the Mogull is abashees, 4¼ which is 2 sh. 3 d. starling. A Mamothy is 9 cosbegges or 32 dores, or 100 deniers. A Bestee of copper is 4 cosbegges, or 20 deniers. An Abaisce silver is 2 Mamothies, or 20 shahees, or 200 deniers. A Chickeene of gold, sheriffe or solton is 18½ shahees, yet in some places of Persia they passe for 20 shahees, and in some for 24 sha. An asure of gold is 20 shahees, and 10 asures is a Tomano 3-6-8 d. st. A Larin is 5½ shahees, and in some places onely 5 about 10 d. or 10½d. starling, here 25 cosbeggs. A Fonan is 9 Cupans. A mitigall is 3½ or 34 shahees. A sadee is 40 flosses. A shahee is 10 cosbeggs.
A mitigall is 33½, and in some places 34 shahees. A Tanger is 12 pulls, which is shahees. They here keepe their accounts in sundry species and denomi∣nations, Accounts kept in Persia. some in Sheriffes, some in Spanish Rialls, and some in to∣mans, and some in Shahees: The common account is thus distin∣guished. The Abashee is 200 deniers, or 20 shahees. The Mamothy is 100 deniers, or 10 shahees. The Sadon 50 deniers, or 5 shahees: The Uiste is 20 deniers, or 2 shahees. The Cosbegge is 5 deniers. And those that keep their account in shahees, onely they reckon them to hundred thousands, and hundred thousands, as the proper knowne coine of the Countrey; and this manner hath seemed the best to our English there resident, which they account 60 shahees for 20 sh. starling. The weights of Persia are subsistent of 3 sorts, of the Dramme, the Weights cur∣rant in Persia. Mitigall, and the Mand or Mandshaw: The dramme is the least, 100 whereof makes 66⅔ mitigals. The mitigall is the next, 100 whereof makes 150⅓ drams. The mand or mandeshaw is the greatest, and makes 1200 mitigals, or else 1800 drams; which hath made by the observation of some Factors that have resided there 14 li. 9 ounc. haberdepois. The summe or cargo of silke is accounted here 36 Mandshaw, which accounted as above, makes English 524 li. haberdepois, and is great pounds of 24 ounc. incirca 350 li. But the east India company find it to be 300 great silke pounds and no more by often triall: But it is to be noted that these mandshaws is found to differ in ma∣ny Provinces and Cities in Persia, and the bordering Countries, and doth differ in many commodities; but the mandeshaw common of Persia is 1200 drams for silke. The mandeshaw of Tauris is but 600 drams. The mandeshaw of Syrrat is 5 maunds of tauris above-named. The maund of hispahan is accounted one and halfe mand of Sira, besides which they have these weights in some places; 1 Dubba is counted 5 maunds. 1 Sherway is counted 50 maunds. 1 Rellaij is counted 7 maunds. 1 Maund is counted by observation pounds English. In Tauris also before named, a City in times past of great trad, in this Countrey they have 2 Mands, the one of silke which hath made by a Florentines observation 5⅝ li. Florence, and another for all other commodities; the 100 whereof hath made there by the said observation 264. li. Florence.
The measures of length used in Persia is of 2 sorts, and both of Measures used in Persia. them called a Covedo; A long and A short: The long accounted to be 37½ inches English measure, agreeable to the pico of Turkey. The short accounted to be 27 Thus is what I find observable in the particular trade of Persia, I will now view it as it stands in the generall parts thereof. CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Trade in generall of PERSIA. THE trade of PERSIA as it is found subsistent in The Trade in generall of Persia. these daies, consisteth more by an Inland then a ma∣ritime traffique; for if the large extent of the So∣phies dominions be well considered, and the neigh∣bouring regions whereon it bordereth, it will be found that it wanteth many things to make it emi∣nent: It is plentifully supplyed of commodities, and those also of excellencie, as of silver in great quantity, raw silke in aboundance, and of some drugges naturally growne: but when the industry of the natives is surveyed, it will be soone discerned that the costly, rare and rich carpets here made, the curious and fine cotton clothes here wrought; for their tulbants, girdles, shashes, shireing and the like, interwoven with silke, and not seldome with silver and gold; and the daily use thereof not onely in PERSIA it selfe, but throughout India, Arabia and Turkey; witnesse to the World the ingeniousnesse of this Nation: the greatest want and impediment of trade that they have here is of Sea-ports and Havens, of which they are much scanted; they injoyed once a large tract of land lying along the Caspian Sea, from Derbent on the one side, borde∣ring on the Turkes, to Deristan on the other, bordering on the Tartars; but of late daies the same is much shortned, for the grand signior hath laid Tauris one of his metropolitan Cities for his limits, and the Tartar hath entered as farre as Minerdon, so that he hath onely left him upon this Sea the Ports of Gilan and Pismir, that are of any consequence, wherein much trading is not exercised, by reason of the ill neighbourhood of the Turkes, Muscovits and Tartarians, coasting the Caspian Sea. In the Persian gulph he did ijoy the commodious and famous Towne and Port of Balsara, taken from him by the Turkes about 60 yeares past, and Ormus in the entrance of that gulph is but lately reduced to his scepter by Iasques and Combrone Ports belonging to the Persian, and where the En∣glish resort to. the valour of the English, though anciently belonging to his crowne. The Ports of Iasques and Combrone being the onely two Sea ports he injoyes upon that continent of any quality, to which
and Ormus all the trade of PERSIA toward India is observed to be driven, and to which the Portugalls, Dutch and English resort unto for their silkes, and others the rich commodities of PERSIA; and where each of them have factories and residencie for the trade of this Countrey: now on each side of PERSIA by land-ward he s invironed by three mighty and powerfull Nations, with whom e is sometimes in warres and sometimes in peace, the Mogulls Countrey and Tartar on the one side, and the Turkes on the other. For the trade thereof; It is observed that PERSIA yeelding year∣ly incirca 12000 coles of silke, which is the prime commodity of this Kingdome growing principally and made at Gilan, Bilan, Mah∣mody and Araste, (which last affords that sort of silke which we call vulgarily Ardasse,) the one third part of which is conceived to be ented into Turkey, transported by Camels into Aleppo, Damasco, Constantinople, Brussia in Natolia, and of late daies to Smyrna, and rom thence conveyed for the most part into Europe, principally o England, France and Italy, where the same is spent and consu∣ed, in returne of which they have from Syria and those parts principally rialls of 8/8 Spanish, some gold and some sorts of cloth, oollen and silke stuffes brought thither out of Uenice, Marselia and London. Another third part of the said silke is carryed to and spent n Agria and the dominions of the Mogul, into Ormus, Iasques, &c. and thence by the Indians and Arabians into Sarmacand, and other the dominions of the great Tartar, and into Astracan and other the dominions of the Moscovite, in returne whereof they have the spices of India, the drugges of Arabia, the rich furres of Russia, and the pretious jems of Cathai, and other the commodities of Tartaria; and the other third part is imagined to be spent for their owne use and clothing at home in their owne Countrey, so that by ver∣tue of this sole commodity which this Countrey thus abundantly affordeth, and which is so sought after by all other Nations, (and the curiosity and luxurie of this Nation in generall) they have the commodities of all other Countries in returne thereof brought un∣to them. Divers propositions have beene made, and divers inven∣tions proposed, and sundry treaties have beene set on foot, onely to compasse the sole trade of these silkes of PERSIA, with the So∣phie himselfe, who challengeth a property therein throughout his whole dominions. The Dutch have more then once thrust at it, and to have it delivered at Astracan, and so to be convaied against the streame of Uolga into Moscovia, and so to Holland: but the summe and stocke required was so vast to compasse and mannage it, and the propositions and passage so difficult and dangerous, that they gave it over with this opinion of the World, that they inde∣voured to swim against too great a streame, and that they had some plot to set it afoote, and never intended to goe through with it, or otherwise were not able to compasse the same; since which the Duke of () hath put on for a branch onely
thereof: but when the account came to be made up, his meanes was too meane to goe through with that small proposed part he aymed at: and lastly the English East India company, (as Merchants measuring their actions with the weight of their purses) have more prosperously succeeded; and in Hispahan have contracted with the Sophie for a round quantity, who have Merchant-like per∣formed on their parts the conditions agreed upon, so farre to his good liking, that by his late Ambassadour in England, the whole yearly growth was tendred and offered to them; but his ill perfor∣mance in the lesser, made them question the like in the greater; and therefore to their honour refused it. Now as concerning the lesser parts of this Countries traffique, which consits in the manu∣factories of this Kingdome; I passe them over in silence as being of lesser consequence, and hasten to Tartarie the next Countrey, bor∣dering upon the Persians. CHAP. LXXXIII. Of Tartarie and the Provinces thereof. TARTARIE is bounded on the East with the eastern Tartaria. Ocean, on the West with the Moscovia and Moldavia; on the North with the frozen Ocean, on the South with the Caspian Sea, the hill Taurus, and the Wall of China: it is divided into these Provinces, Procopensis Asiatica, Antiqua Zagathai and Cathaia. In Tartaria procopensis is found the ancient City of Crim the seat of the Tartarianrulers, whence this Nation had their originall Procopensis. and name: also Oksacou the residence of the present Princes; and lastly Caffa the onely Sea-port of consequence in these parts, of the trade whereof it wilbe needfull I should speake a word. CHAP. LXXXIIII. Of CAFFA and the Trade thereof. CAFFA anciently Theodosia, seated commodiously Caffa and the Tade of it. for traffique in the botome of the black sea, was by Mahomet the great taken from the Genoes, and is the present scale for all commodities that passe by Sea from Constantinople, Trabesond, Podolia, and Walachia by Danubius, and such other places to Tartarie, Muscovia, &c. The Countrey affords great aboundance of cow hides, furres, waxe, honey,
and a kind of pickled fish much resembling the English herring here caught upon this coast: also it sends to Constantinople some butter sowed up in oxe hides of all colours and sluttishly made, which serves for provision there to the slaves, and the meanest sort of people inhabiting that large City; also thence the grand signior hath his principall timber for the building of his Gallies, Shippes, and such like other provisions. Caffa doth in matters of Merchandize and trade retaine still much of the customes of the Genoes, to whom for a long time it was subject; and so doth Thana, Sorgat and other principall Cities bordering upon the black sea, which I will in briefe touch so farre as I have gathered the same when I lived in Turkey. First then the coines of Caffa are the same as is currant through∣out Turkey, save that the neighbourhood of Tartaria and Moscovia Coines cur∣rant in Caffa. makes the coines of those places and Kingdomes likewise passe cur∣rant there, as it is found in all frontier Towns which borders up∣on two Nations, and that are either free of themselves, or subject to other; therefore for the same I will referre the Reader to the coines currant in those bordering Countries. Their weight is a Rotolo, 100 whereof makes a Cantar, which an∣swers The weight of Caffa. in haberdepois weight to 70 li. English; which said Cantar is divided into severall divisions, according to the commodity bought or sold thereby; as sometimes to Batmas, accounting 7½ Batmas to a Cantar, and 12 Rotolos to a Batma, and then the Cantar is but 90 Rotolos: and sometimes to Sommas and Saggies, as 124 saggies makes a Somma, and 10 Somma's makes a Cantar of 100 Rotolos above-said; and silke is sold by this Somma, 20 Somma's to a draught, which is 2 Cantars, and is English about 140 li. and in Venetia sotile weight 212 li. circa. Their measure so farre as I could learne is but one, which is the The Measures of Caffa. pico, the 100 whereof made in Venetia by triall of a friend silke braies 130, and this pico is divided into 8 Rupps, as at Constantinople. They have also a coine which is called a Somma, in which their Accounts in Caffa. accounts are kept, and to which other coines currant are reduced; and the same is divided to saggis, which they account by 45 saggis to a somma, and 4 sommes to a soltany or checquin; and thus much shall serve for the trade of Caffa.
CHAP. LXXXV. Of Astracan and the Trade thereof. ASTRACAN is in Tartaria Asiatica, as I shall shew hereafter, seated in the Emboshure of the River Astracan and the Trade thereof. Uolga, having 70 mouthes and receives the trade of all the Caspian Sea, into which the said River en∣treth; it hath a very great confluence of Merchants, who by the benefit of that Sea have here a very great trade, Uolga bringing it all the commodities of Moscovia, Russia and Tartaria and this Sea; the commodities of Persia, Arabia and other Provinces abutting thereupon; it is situate in an Iland of 12 leagues compasse, defended by a woodden Castle and earthen walls, taken by the Moscovites in Anno 1552 from the Tartari∣ans: it is all winter shut up by the immeasurable cold, and all traf∣fique over and upon this great streame is performed on dry foot. The coines here currant by reason of my ignorance I must referre to the better experienced. Their weights are here two, a grosse for grosse commodities, and a sotile for fine commodities; the grosse cantar hath been observed to The Weights of Astracan. have in England yeelded 268 li. the small cantar hath made English 103 li. now in both these cantars there is accounted 20 Rotolos to a libb, and 5 libbs to a cantar, and 12 tochats to a Rotolo; which by the ingenious may easily be reduced to the sotile English pound, therfore I passe it over and come in the next place to the measures. Their common measure is a pico, and the 100 thereof hath made by observation in Venetia 126 braces of cloth measure, which is in Measures of Astracan. England about (—) inches. Corne and all other graine is sold by a measure called the Chi∣stetto, which in Venetia comes to make 8  staios. Corne and Wine and liquid commodities is sold by the but, which is 46 mi∣staties, and which also renders in Venetia 3¼ Bigonso. Wine. In Tartaria Asiatica there are few Cities; for the inhabitants by hords or tribes travaile with their substance from one place to Tartaria Asiatica another; yet in this Tract is found Casan, and Astracan afore∣named, which is a very great Towne of commerce, considering these Regions, commodiously seated, (as I said before) on the mouth of the River Volga, by which there is passage found from the Caspian Sea in some seasons of the yeare up to Mosco, and by which way (as I noted in the trade of Persia) some Merchants of
Christendome more then once intended to transport the silkes, and other the riches of Persia to Moscovia, and so to Europe; but the designe proved dangerous and chargeable, by reason of such po∣tent Princes that border upon that River; and by reason that the same must passe against the currant streame, which in winter is not found passable by reason of the frost, by which and other dis∣couragements the designe was given over and fell to nothing. In Tartary antiqua, I find not any thing worthy of note, nor yet Tartaria anti∣qua. Citie of import, the inhabitants living like vagabonds; onely it affordeth Rubarbe, which is so excellent in Physicke by its proper Rubarbe. nature, that the whole world is beholding to these Barbarians for the same as a cure for many diseases. CHAP. LXXXVI. Of Zagathai and Cathai, and the Provinces thereof. ZAgathai containes sundry Provinces, and but few Ci∣ties; Zagathai. the most famous is Sarmachand, which gave both Sarmacand. cradle and grave to mighty Tamberlan, from whom the Great Moguls boast themselves to bee lineally de∣scended. But Cathai is esteemed the richest and civillest Kingdome of all Cathai. Tartary, the which is furnished with sundry great and populous Cities, especially Cambalu, the residence of the Great Cham, and Cambalu. where Merchants of all Nations are found to reside and traffique to; as I shall shew hereafter. This Countrey is found to abound with rice, graine, wool, hempe, Rubarbe, corrall, and aboundance of silkes, both growing and Commodities of Cathai. brought hither from China and other Countries amounting to two thousand Cartes yearely; the Citie is held to be 30 miles a∣bout in compasse, and is replenished with all Artsmen (Astrologers being heere in great reputation) which may (considering their number found here, being as some write 5000) be more properly termed fortune-tellers, or Gypsies; but these Countries resemble in customes the Moscovite and Chinois, none being permitted to search into their Cities and manners, except they come either as Embassadors or Merchants; yet what I have gathered of the trade of this Countrey, I will include under the title of Cambalu, the principall Citie of this Empire.
CHAP. LXXXVII. Of CAMBALV, and the Trade thereof. CAmbalu, the Metropolis of Catai, as Samercand is of Zagathai, is seated on the North-east border of this Cambalu, and the Trade thereof. Countrey, containing both the old and the new City, through which doth run the famous River of Poli∣sanga; it is accompted 28 miles in compasse, or ra∣ther in square, each angle containing 7 miles, and in every square is placed three principall Gates which incloseth the Towne with earthen walls or rampires of 10 paces in thicknes, and every Gate comprehending a sumptuous Palace, and every angle having al∣so an excellent Pallace, where the Armours of the Garrison Sol∣diers are kept, which is 1000 Soldiers at every Gate. The Buildings are squared out proportionably, and every street is drawne out to a line, so that every Gate yeelds a free prospect through the Citie to the opposite Gate, be beautified on each side with stately edifices and houses for the honourable of this Countrey. In the midst of the Citie is a sumptuous Palace, wherein the grand Cham resideth, with all his Queenes and Children, and where∣in is placed a Bell, which is tolled at certaine houres of the eve∣ning, after which may no man stirre out of dores, untill the be∣ginning of the day following; the largenes, rarities, curiositie, and richnes of this palace, the partitions allowed his Queenes, and lodgings appointed for his Children, and their dayly atten∣dants, and the order, beauty, and manner thereof, I willingly o∣mit, as not pertinent to my present purpose. Without this Citie walles are accounted 12 suburbs of 3 in 4 miles long adjoyning to each of the aforesaid 12 gates, and here all Merchants, strangers, and forreigners doe abide, each nation having a severall Cane or storehouse, where they both lodge, and exercise their Merchandise and traffique one with another, for the commodities of these severall Countries, the confluence of Merchants here cannot choose but bee wonderfull, seeing it is reported that the City is so populous, that the Cham maintaineth 5000 Astrologers heere daily, besides many thousands of Soldiers both of horse and foot that 12000 horse is accounted but as his or∣dinary and daily Guard; besides which, the neere neighbourhood of Exendu, the principall place of the grand Cham, seated not Exendu, and the largenes thereof. many dayes journey farre hence where Merchants are not per∣mitted to enter, is built in a foure square figure, every side ex∣tending
eight miles in length; within this Quadrant is another, whose sides are sixe miles long; and within that another of foure miles square, which is accounted the very Palace it selfe; and be∣tweene which severall walles are found walkes, gardens, orchards, fishponds, places for all manner of courtly and military exercises, and also parkes, forrests, and chases, for all manner of pleasures and game, and the infinite number of attendants and servitours that of ne∣cessitie is required to wait upon so great a Prince, with the offi∣cers thereto belonging, cannot but much increase the trade and commerce of this Citie and place. As for the Trade of this Citie of Cambalu, and generally of all Tartaria, it is observed, that the Countrey (though in a large tract) extending it selfe upon the North Ocean; yet by reason of the long continued colds and frosts, the Inhabitants have but little benefit thereof; however it may bee conceived, that the Moluccos, Iapans, and other Ilanders thereabouts in the season of the yeare, have here a great traffique, and that hence these Tar∣tarians are furnished with the spices of India, the jems of Pegu, and Bengala, and peradventure with other the druggs of Arabia: but upon the Caspian Sea, they are the masters of many good Sea-Ports, besides Astracan which of late they have lost to the Mosco∣vite, as Zahaspa Cosmi, Melmesuach, and others; by which is con∣veighed to them the silkes, tapestries, carpets, armes, and excellent manufactures of Persia, and in the black Sea, besides Capha, now in subjection to the Turkes, they enjoy the brave Ports of Curaropo, Asow, and others, serving to conveigh unto them the commodities of Turkey, Trabesond, Podolia, Walacia, and other Countries bor∣dering upon the famous riuers of Danubius. Now for the other parts of this large Empire, it bordereth on the one side with Moscovia, with whom it is now in peace, though not seldome at debate, from whence by the benefit of traffique, which I find observed not to bee of any great consequence, they have rich furres and other the commodities of this Countrey. But where it bordereth upon China, which is for a very large extent of ground, by some Authors accompted 400 leagues, the common report of the strict lawes and customes of that Nation (to debarre entrance to all strangers) should perswade me of lit∣tle traffique that way; yet I find it observed by some late travel∣lers whose relation herein is questionable, that the Citie of Cam∣balu receiveth yearely thence by way of traffique, 10000 carts la∣den with silkes and stuffes of the China fabrique; the truth thereof I referre to the censure of the Reader. As for the moneys currant in this large Territorie, I find it to Coines currant in Cambalu, and through Tar∣taria Of the barke of mulbery trees. be diversly made, yet neither of gold nor of silver coined, but of the middle barke of the Mulbery-tree, which being made firme, and cut into divers and round pieces great and little, they imprint
the Kings marke thereupon, and from this meane stuffe, the Em∣perour causeth a huge masse of moneys to bee yearely made at Cam∣balu, which sufficeth for his whole Empire, and no man under paine of death may coine or spend any other money, or refuse it in all his Kingdomes and Dominions; whereby it commeth to passe, that Merchants often comming hither from farre and remote Countries, bring with them gold, silver, pearle, and precious stones, and receive the Kings money for them; and because the same is not currant in their Countrey, they therewith buy in this Empire other the commodities heere found, which they carry hence away with them: the King also payeth his stipends, officers and armies with the said moneys, and buyeth whatsoever else hee needeth with the same, so that no Prince in the world can exceed him in treasure, which is at so easie a rate provided and procured. Besides which, I find it observed in some parts of this large Countrey subject to some subordinate Kings, in subjection to the Great Cham, that they use in some places pieces of polisht corrall in Of corrall po∣lished. stead of money; and in others they have certaine twiggs of gold, in lieu of money, which is distinguished by weight into severall par∣cels, without stamp or Character, and this is accompted in mat∣ters of consequence: but they have a lesser coine (if I may so terme it) made of salt which they boile in coldrons for a certaine Of salt in loaves hard∣ned. time, which congealed they make into lumps, like our penny loaves, which being made solid, is signed with the Princes stamp, and passeth thus currant amongst them, & wherewith they provide themselves of all necessaries: in some others I find also that they use pursane for money, and weighted pieces of gold; for in some Countries of this Empire silver mines are not found, and they give in proportion one ounce of gold for five ounces of silver; neither is it found that in many places of this Countrey that they have the use of letters; therefore the Merchants make their contracts and obligations in tallies of wood, the halfe whereof the one keepeth, and the other the other halfe, which being afterwards paid and satisfied, the said tallie is restored; not much unlike the custome of tallies in England. And thus much shall serve to have said of the trade in generall of this Countrey, the strange customes, manners, and formes of government hinder all further particular know∣ledge of Trade to our European Merchants: therfore leaving thus this Empire and Citie, (contented with this short survey) I proceed to India, of late years become somewhat better known to Europe and our Nation.
CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of INDIA, and the Provinces thereof. INdia is bounded on the East with China, on the West India, and the Provinces thereof. with the River Indus, on the North with Tartaria above mentioned, on the South with the Ocean, ta∣king his name of Indus, a famous River heere run∣ning 1000 miles ere it meet the Ocean; it lay after the conquest thereof by Alexander the Great for ma∣ny yeares undiscovered, the Merchants only thereof were found to bring their native commodities to Sarmacand, and Cambalu a∣forementioned, to exchange against such commodities as those countries afforded, as to the common Empories, and likewise to Ormus where they provided themselves of all Egyptian and Ara∣bian commodities: by which meanes knowledge was got of their countries; but the great worth and wealth thereof was not fully knowne and discovered to us till of late yeares, by the navigation first of the Portugalls, then of the Dutch and English, this Coun∣trey became better surveighed, finding that the same afforded and abounded in all manner of minerals, (lead and copper onely ex∣cepted) Commodities of India. with all manner of cattell (horse excepted;) with all manner of precious stones, with all manner of spices, some druggs, and other commodities, as in their particular Provinces shall bee more particularly remembred. The famous River Ganges runneth through this Countrey, to Ganges. which the Indians goe in pilgrimage, as if the water washed in or drunk could bring salvation to them: this divideth India into two parts, called India intra Gangem & India extra Gangem, both which include many large Provinces and Kingdomes; and first India intra Gangem hath 9 principall Kingdomes, which I will briefly follow∣ing some Authours opinion passe cursorily through. First Narsinga, the chiefe City Maleaper or St. Thomas, where Narsinga. 1. they hold the body of this Apostle was burnt, though the Spani∣ards hold his body was found under I know not how many fa∣thome of ground in Calamana, by devout Fryers, that after the re∣ligions receit of the Sacrament of their wafer god, digged for him and found it; vide Mafe Iesuit. The second is Malavar, and the Malavar 2. Ballasia. 3. Cononor. third Ballasia, in which are found 3 famous Mart Townes, Cochin and Calicute, and Conanor: the last having a large and safe Haven commodious for the trade of these Countries, distant from Cali∣cute 30 miles, and Calicute distant from Cochin 80 miles: Calicute by reason of its great concourse of Merchants is here a famous
Mart, and extendeth it selfe for 3 miles all along the shore, princi∣pally affording to Christendome that sort of pepper taking its name hence of Calicute pepper, also callicoes cloth, and the other sort of pepper of the name of this Countrey of Malavar. The fourth is Cambaia, a famous Kingdome, very rich and popu∣lous, the chief City is also of the same name, and one of the richest 4 Cambaia. of these Countries containing 800000 persons. The fifth is Mandao, wherein is the City Mandao, being 30 miles in compasse, which held out a siege of 12 yeares against the Mogul, 5 Mandao. who is King hereof, as likewise of those former Provinces named. The sixth and seventh is Bengala and Aristan, where is found the Cities of Cattigan and Satigan, and principally for trade that of Ben 6 Bengala. gala, on the bankes of a gulph knowne by that name; and Orissa in∣habited 7 Aristan. by Christians of St. Thomas so called, because he conver∣ted them. The eighth is Canora, under command of the Mogull; the most famous Cities are Ultabat, Lispor, Melinda, &c. 8 Canora. The ninth is Dellia, the chiefe City being Dellie, the sometimes residence of the great Mogull; the other famous Cities are Tre∣mel, 9 Dellia Fatabar, and Chesmer famous for the studie here of Magiqu: all these mighty Provinces have been conquered by the Great Moguls forces within these 90 yeeres, to the astonishment of all India. India extra Gangem containes 12 potent Kingdomes, and all un∣der command India extra Gan gem. of the potent Kings of Barma, which cursorily I will also run over. The first is Macin, famous for that sweet wood which this Coun∣trey doth produce, called Aloes or lignum vitae, valued at its weight I Macin Lignum Uitae. in pure silver, serviceable onely here for the pompous funeralls of great Princes; the chief City for trade is the said Macin. The second is Aracan, wherein is the City of Ava, which 2 Aracan. Ava. through the World is so famous for the aboundance of gems. The third is Camboia, famous for the City of Camboia, a place of great traffique, which affords plenty of gold, silver, aloes, and many 3 Camboia. other commodities of great worth. The fourth is Cauchin China, aboundeth with the like commodi∣ties 4 auchin China. brought to Cauchin China, the chiefe City of this Kingdome, and much frequented by Merchants of all Countries for Porcelane and China dishes here made, and much in esteeme and use in these Countries. The fifth is Barma, made famous onely within 60 yeares, for the Princes hereof have vanquished all the former Kingdomes, and 5 Barma. made them tributaries to this Kingdome and this Scepter. The sixth is Siam, once the Lady of all India, now subject to Bar∣ma; the principall Cities are Mollacia in compasse 20 miles, a Town Siam of great resort for Merchants, for the traffique of spices, and now in subjection to the Portugals: the next is Siam, scituate on the Ri∣ver
Mean, which every yeere overfloweth the Countrey for 120 miles: and lastly Odin, on the River Cuipomo, on which 200000 boates are found daily to be set on worke, and containes 400000 families: and is now knowne the residende of that famous and for∣tunate King of Barma before-mentioned. The seventh is Pegu, which gives name to a principall City, 7 Pegu. having a rich soile and harberous Sea shore, the principall known Haven is Marban; and here is also Lasmin a City of great com∣merce. This Countrey hath suffered much by sword, pestilence and famine, within these late yeares, and is now as the rest a Pro∣vince of this a foresaid powerfull King of Barma. Now having thus survaid India in the generall and in grosse, as it is divided into Kingdomes and Provinces, it will be requisite it should next be surveyed in the particular, so farre as it may con∣cerne our present purpose, which is the commerce and trade there∣of, so farre forth as it is at this day knowne to our Nation, where∣in I could wish my experience better to shew the particulars thereof, in consideration of the large extent of ground that is comprized under this name of India, stretching it selfe from Tau∣rus to the Ocean one way, and from China to Persia, which is neere 4000 miles another way, at which place it wil be fittest for me to begin my trade, and see what may be observed therein. Yet be∣fore I enter into this discovery, and give a particular relation of such materialls, wherewith trade is in it selfe practised through this large tract of Lands, Ilands and Seas; and before I shew the matter wherewith this trade is in all this Countrey driven, it will not be improper I should also see who they principally are that manage this trade, and to whom this great traffique appertaineth, either as they are natives and here borne, or as they are strangers and here are induced to reside, attracted thereto by the sole mo∣tive of the great commerce and rich commodities found either na∣turally here growing, or artificially here made and produced. This Countrey then as I said before aboundeth in the generall with all manner of mineralls, copper and lead excepted; with all Commodities of India in ge∣nerall. sorts of cattell, Horses excepted, with all manner of spices, with many sorts of drugges, cotton cloth, precious stones, &c. to which may be added the want of Wine and Wheate that here they have, that so this Countrey might be beholding in some sort to others, as o∣thers are for her commodities to this. These being then the prime commodities wherewith trade is here maintained, I will note the traders and native Merchants that are here resident, which pro∣perly I may account to be of 5 severall sorts, all acknowledging severall rites, religions and customes; and therefore partake of so many severall formes and manners in the mannaging of their affaires of merchandizing. The Gentile Merchants are the first, and are found of great eminencie in some parts of this Tract. The Merchants in generall tra∣ding in India. The natives Christians converted by the discipline of St. Thomas
are the second, who in many places are found to mannage a great and ample trade through this Countrey: the third are the Mahu∣metans, Persians and Tartarians, especially since the great victo∣ries of the Mogur found here also of grat quality and estates. The 4th are the Jewes, who live strag lingly dispersed over and through all the parts of this Countrey, and in every Princes dominions exercise the same. The 5th are Moores and Arabians, who some 200 yeares past, seased on some Haven Townes here alongst this coast, driving the natives unto the inland parts, and at this day are seene to be very great Merchants. The 6th are the Portugals, who possessing some few Sea-townes commodious for traffique, bragge of the conquest of the whole Countrie, which they are in no more possibility intirely to conquer and possesse, then the French were to subdue Spaine when they were possessed of the Fort of Perpig∣nan, or the English to be Masters of France when they were onely Soveraignes of Calis. And now to the Cities of this Tract, where at this day is found a trade to be practised, and first of Diu. CHAP. LXXXIX. Of DIU and the trade thereof. THE Towne and Iland of DIU lyeth about 20 Diu and the trade thereof. Leagues from the famous River Indus, and not farre distant from the firme land; it is now subject to the Portugals, who have conquered both the Iland and Town from the King of Cambaia, and so fortified it, as it is conceived to be now invincible. This Towne hath a very good and great Haven, and therein is found a great concourse of Merchants of all Nations, as Turks, Persians, Arabians, Armeni∣ans, and others of sundry Countries; and because of the continuall traffique thereof, it is accounted the best and most profitable re∣venue the King of Spaine hath in all India, for that the Banians, Guserats, Rumos and Persians, which traffique in Cambaie, and from thence to the red Sea and Mecca, doe both discharge their wares and take in their lading here at DIU, by reason of the commo∣dious situation thereof, as lying at the entrance of Cambaia, and from DIU it is shipt and sent to Cmabaia, and so brought backe againe to DIU. The commodities of this place and this coast are first, fine cotton Commodities of Diu, and that Coast. linen of sundry sorts, which they call Ioryms, Sluyers, and Lampa∣rads, and which we call by the generall name of callicoes, also Cocos oyle, India nuts, butter, pitch, tarre, sugar candie, iron good store, and most excellent and faire leather, which is artificially wrought with silkes of all colours, both flowers and personages; and which is in
India much esteemed to lay upon beds and tables, instead of car∣pets and coverlets: they make also here all sorts of curious desks, cupboords, chests, boxes, standishes, and a thousand such like devises in wood, guilded with variety of colours, wrought with imagery and mother of pearl, which are carried hence throughout all India; but especially to Goa and Cochin, against the time that the Portu∣gall Ships come thither to take in their lading to goe homewards. Other observations of the further trade of this place I referre to Goa, the Metropolis of India in possession of the Portugals, to which all the other forts possessed by the Portugals, in some sort have a reference in the matter and manner of their trade. CHAP. XC. Of CAMBAIA and the Trade thereof. CAMBAIA the principall Citie of the Kingdome so Of Cambaia and the trade thereof. called, is a faire and large Citie, and contained some yeares past 800000 persons; it is seated on the im∣bosure of the famous River Indus, and there the Ri∣ver inlargeth it selfe to a great breadth, till it come to the Iles of Vacas, having the Iland of Diu on the one side, and the Cities of Deman and Surrate on the other: it is absolutely the greatest Citie of trade in these parts, and therein is a Factorie sea∣ted for the traffique in these Countries of the English and Dutch East India Companies: here is also found great concurrencie of Merchants as well of Christians, as of Persians, Arabians, and Ar∣menians, but the natives which are called the Gusarates and Bani∣ans, are esteemed the greatest and most politique Merchants of all India, and held in subtiltie equall with any Nation under the Sunne. The commodities for traffique that this Country either naturally Commodities of Cambaia. affoordeth, or is artificially here fabricated, is corne, rice, and such graine, Butter and Oyle, wherewith for their abundance they fur∣nish all the Countries round about them; also great quantitie of cotton linens are here made, which we terme callicoes of all sorts, called by them Canequins, Boffettas, Iarins, Cautares, and others of sundry kinds of making, from the very coursest wherewith they make their sayles for shipping, to the finest, which are by us known by the name of Calico Lawnes; also here are made sundry fine car∣pets called Alcatiffes and Banquies; also many sorts of coverlets, cal∣led Codorins; also many manufactures of wood carved and imbellisht, some with mother of pearle, and some with silver and such like; also
here are found sundry sorts of pretious stones, as Spinalls, Rubies, Granads, Iacints, Amatists, Chrysolits, Amber, Agats, Iasper; also sundry drugges, as Opium, Camphora, Bangue and sandallwood, su∣gars, and lastly and principally Anil or Indico is here growing prepared and made readie, and from hence carried throughout the whole world: the principall places in this Country affoor∣ding the same is, Bianny, Fetterbarre, Sherkis, Lahore, and other places thereabouts. To this place I should adde the famous Port of Surrat and Ba∣roche, Surrat and Ba∣roche, and the trade thereof. being as is Cambaia under subjection of the great Mogull, and seated in this tract, which because in matters of traffique I doe not finde to varie from the former, I willingly omit, and there∣fore comprehend them under this Chapter and title, proceeding to the currant coines weights and measures found in use and practi∣sed in these Cities, as in subjection to one and the same Prince, who is soveraigne thereof. The ancient currant and generall coyne of this Countrey is the Coins of Cam∣baia and Mo∣guls Country. Mahmudy, stamped by that famous King Mahmood in the first con∣quest of these Countries, which was accounted for (—) Res of Portugall, and by the English there resident estimated 12 d. starling. But the Grand Mogull being the last Conquerour, prohibited the said coines of Mahumdis, and therefore at this day they are found very scarse, yet most frequent in Gussurat. The most currant coine now throughout his Territories being the Ruppie, of which there are divers sorts, which are, The Casanna Ruppia which is the common Ruppia worth in In∣dia ¼ mahomudy, and estimated incirca 2 s. 3d starling. The Iacquerree Ruppie, 5 of which make 6 Casanna Ruppies. The soway Ruppie—4 whereof makes 5 Casanna Ruppies. The Hondee Ruppie of equall value with the Casanna Ruppie a∣bovesaid; and in these last doe the Merchants of Gusurat keepe their accounts: Besides which they have for smaller coines cur∣rant Accounts kept in Surrat and Cambaia. these: The Pice, accounting 34 to the mamodie, which is 10 d. starling. The shahee accounted to be 10 Pices or 10 Cosbeggs. And some there are that keepe their accounts in Mahomodis, accounting 2½ mahomdy to be one Hondee or Cassanna Ruppie, being thus esteemed for 2 shil. 6 d. star. as 2 Ruppies are accounted for 1 ℞  Spanish, though indeed not found alwayes of that value, for the Ruppie is here observed with the right of a Princes coine, and the R.  for a merchandise or commoditie, rising and falling: the said Ruppia in Agra is found to passe for 84 pices; but this is thus most currant in Amadever, Lahore, and other the places where the Christians of Europe and others doe provide & buy their Indico, &c. and there two of the said Ruppias make in ordinary payment for Merchandise 1 ℞  of Spanish.
There is generally found throughout the Dominions of the Weights in Cam∣baa, Surrat, A∣gria, and the Moglis Do∣minions. great Mogull two severall weights; the one proper to silke, and the other for all merchandise besides, and both of these have their foun∣dation upon a weight of copper called as the coine aforesaid the Pice. A Pice in silke is accounted 5½ mitigalls. A mitigall is () a pice is about 13 d. 10 Troy. A pice of silke is also accounted for 2 Tolls, 1 Toll is 12 masses. A seare of which there is a small and great; the small seare is or∣dinarily used in silke and accounted 30 Tolls. Now for the common weight for all other commodities, I will begin with the seare which varies here in severall parts of this Country. A seare of Surrat is 18 pices weight of copper money, which is 13⅓ ounces haber. A seare of Agra called the seare Acoberg, is 30 pices, which is 22 ounces haber. A seare of Agra called the seare Ianquery is 36 Pices, being the common seare of all India, and double the Surrat seare, which is 26  ounces. A seare of Puttana and Ganges is 37 Pices, and those that have made a strict calculation, have found that 22 common pices makes 16 ounces haberdepois. They have also in use in these Countries two Maunds. A maund small of surrat is 40 seares of surrat, and the said maund is 33 li. haber. But they have for some commodities another maund in Surrat about 27 li. haberd. A candil of Surrat Cambaia &c. is 20 of the said maunds. Seares 40 make a small maund of 33 li. English. Seares 40 great make a great maund of 54  li. English, and some have observed it to be 55 li. English; and this is the maund of Agria. In Amadever this differenee is found in the said weight. Amadever. A maund is 40 seare, which is 18 pices and 33 li. English. And the 100 maunds of Amadever is 63 maunds of Agria. For gold, silver, muske, civet, Besor-stone they have another weight which they call the Toll, being 12 masses, and is 7d. 16 grain Troy weight in England, as hath been observed both by the English and Portugall Merchants. It is not to be questioned but that this so large tract of Coun∣trey must admit of more diversitie of weights, which I am inforced to passe over in silence by reason of my ignorance, and referre what is here omitted to the better experienced. There is used in these parts two common measures, and both cal∣led Mesures in Cambaa, Sur∣rat, Agria, and Ms C∣trey. a Covado, a short and long covado.
The short covado of Surrat, Cambaia, &c. used in the sales of many commodities, as linnen and silke, is 27 inches English. The long covado of Surrat used for woolen cloth is 35 inches. But in Agra, Lahore, Dilly, Brampore, &c. the ordinarie and common covado is found to hold 32 inches, and called in some places of this Country Elahy. At Puttana they have a covado of 38 inches, and by the observa∣tion of some, it hath beene found that 1⅓ covado of Puttana is 5 covados of Agra, which makes 4 yards English. And note that in all the Moguls Countrey they use no con∣cave measures for any graine or liquid commodities, but sell the same by weight, in the same nature as they doe all ponderous and massie commodities. They measure their ground and dayes journeys by a measure which they call a Corso, which is one thousand five hundred geo∣metricall paces, and is accounted in common estimation of our late travellers a mile and a halfe English. In this tract and belonging to this Prince are many famous Townes of trade, the chiefest is Lahore, famous for the Indico there growing, and prepared; and for that admirable high way Iabore. to Agria of twentie dayes journeys, beset on each side with mul∣berry-trees, and whence there departeth yearely above twelve thousand Camells laden with spices to Hispahan, which are brought hither from India. The next principall towne is Amadabar, famous in these parts for the great trade and excellent scituation thereof, and as being Amadabar. the most eminent Citie of the Guserats. Neither is Tutta here to Tutta. be forgotten, though an Inland Towne, yet seated on the fa∣mous River of Indus, and having dependancie and belonging thereunto; and that excellent Port of Lowribander, three Lowribander. dayes journey distant from it, on the shoare common∣ly intitled the Coast of Sindie, wherein it hath beene observed by our European Navigators, that Shippes may safely ride without harme receiving by the wormes, which doth much hurt in SURRAT, and all a∣longst the coast of India.
CHAP. XCI. Of GOA, and the Trade thereof. GOa, is the Metropolis of India, I meane of those that are Goa, and the trade thereof. under the command of the Portugall or Spaniard, where the Viceroy, Archbishop, and the King his Con∣sull, and Chancery doe reside; here is also the Staple of all India commodities, whereto Merchants of Ara∣ia, Armenia, Persia, Cambaia, Pengala, Pegu, Siam, Mallacca, Iava, Mollucco, China, and of sundry other Countries doe resort: It is eated in an Iland of three miles circuit, but is but little distant rom the firme land; the Port is capacious of good ships, but if they exceed 200 Tunnes they unlade short of the Towne at a place called Bardes, well built with faire houses both publique and pri∣ate, after the Portugall manner, and hath in it many Cloisters, Churches, and Frieries; but is not fortified with any walls, but the contrived and continued buildings of the houses, serves both for defence and inclosure: in the heart of the City is a Street called he Leilon, where a daily assembly is made from 7 to 9 in the mor∣ing, not onely of Merchants from all parts, but also of gentry; nd during the said houres the said Street is replenished with all commodities and merchandise from all the aforenamed Kingdomes, et forth in manner of our Faires in England; which daily is thus practised, and wherein the rich commodities of those Countries re vented and put to sale; besides which, there are particular Streets where the native Indians doe dwell together, being found to be here great Merchants, and for the most part inhabit neere together, especially such as are found to be of one and the same Art and Profession, being bound by the strict lawes of this Coun∣trey, every man to marry within his own and the same Trade, and to bring up likewise their children in their owne and the same Profession; which law (being strictly observed) giveth great perfection to all Arts heere practised: their Winter begins here the last of April, continuing till September, and is called Winter, not for the cold, but for the continuall raines that are found all this time; the rest of the time is accompted Summer, which s without raine, and the pleasantest of all other seasons upon this Coast. The commodities naturall of this place is not observeable, the Comes o Goa. land small, and the firme land plentifull in Palme-trees, cocus, and
the like: the Citie is the common Staple for all India commodi∣ties, brought hither by others, and here bartered and exchanged for other; but of it selfe not affording any of note or conse∣quence. They have heere two sorts of moneyes, a good, and a bad, and therefore in all contracts they are as well to bargaine for the mo∣ney Coines curtnt in Goa. that is to be received, as for the commoditie that is to bee sold: but because this place is neighboured with sundry great Nations that traffique hither; it will be fit I should inlarge my selfe a little further on this subject. The common moneys heere currant is called the Pardaus Xera∣phin, coined here, and worth 300 Res of Portugall, and is as much as three testons, which is English money about foure shillings sixe pence sterling. One Pardau is five tang as, which is an imaginary coine, and is in both sorts of the coines in use, as accounting five tang as bad money, being the same in worth as foure tang as of good money. One tang as is worth foure good ventins, and five bad ventins, a coine also imaginary, and not reall, and is worth seaventy five ba∣sarucos. A vintin is worth 15 bad basarucos, and 18 good basarucos, which is the lowest and smallest coine heere in use. Three basarucos is worth two Res of Portugall money, and by this accompt, the Pardu sheraphin is worth 375 basarucos: and these are all the proper coines of Goa: the other here currant are The Persia larins is a coine of very fine filver, and worth 110 basarucos. The Pagode of gold worth about 10 tang as, is eight shillings sterling. The venetiander of gold, worth two pardaus sheraphin. The St. Thomas of gold, worth 8 tang as. The Riall of  called Pardaus de reales, worth commonly 440 Res of Portugall; but these and the larins of Persia may heere bee accounted for commodities, rising and falling in price, as the occa∣sions of Merchants inforce them. But note that all moneys are here paid and received by the hands of Sheraffs, as is the manner in Turkey and other Easterne Coun∣tries, Sheraffs. who make good the losse and dammage either in tale or goodnes for a small consideration, and by the Portugals termed Cernidors. The weights common in Goa, and along the coast of India, that is subject to the Crowne of Spaine, are divers; the usuall knowne Weights of Goa. is as in Portugall the quintall and the rove; and this is most in use for all European commodities. But they have in use another proper, for honey, sugar, but∣ter,
which is called the maund, being 12 li. of the weight above mentioned. Another proper onely to pepper, and other such Indian spices, they have, which they call the Bahar, accounted 3 quintals and a halfe of Portugall weight, which by reason of the neere concor∣dancie that it hath with the hundred of London, I shall not need to say any thing further thereof. The measure of length is the same as is used in Lixborne. The measure of graine, rice, and such like commodities is called a Measures of Goa. Medida, being about a spanne high, and halfe a finger broad, 24 whereof is accounted a mand. Mands 20, is accounted one candil, which is about 14 bushels Eng. and by this measure they accompt their tunnage in shipping; yet it is found, that some sort of rice is heere sold by the fardo, being round bundles wrapt straw, and bound about with cords, and these should weigh by the custome of the place 3½ maunds. There is upon this coast a great trade in use for pearles, which The order how they fish, and trade for Pearles. because it is of great moment in this and other places of India; it will be fit I should shew the manner thereof. The fishing for pearles beginneth yearly in March and April, and continueth but 50 dayes; but yet they fish not alwayes in one place every yeare, but change their places by certaine appointed and setled orders amongst the principall that have the over∣sight thereof. Now when the time of this fishing draweth neere, then they send very good divers that goe purposely to discover where the greatest heapes of oysters are under water, and on the shoare op∣posite to that place, there they set up and plant a village with houses, and a Bazaro or market place, of stone and other mate∣rialls, which standeth as long as the fishing time lasteth, and is for that time furnished with all things necessary, which now and then happeneth to bee neere unto places inhabited, and now and then a far off, according to the place appointed for that yeares fishing. The fisher-men themselves are for the most part Christians, na∣tives of that Countrey; neither is any other debarred from this fishing that will, paying a certaine tribute or acknowledgement to the King of Spaine, and to the Iesuites who have sundry Chur∣ches upon that coast: now during the said fishing, there are al∣wayes maintained three or foure fasts or galliots armed to defend the fishers from injuries and Rovers. The order of which fishing is observed to be thus. There are commonly three or foure barkes, and their compa∣nies that make consortship together, much resembling our En∣glish pilot-boates, having eight or ten men in a boat, and in the
morning they goe out together from the shoare, and anchor in 15 or 18 fathome water, which is the ordinary depths of this whole coast; and being thus moored to their Anchor, they cast a rope into the Sea, and at the end of that rope usually make fast a great stone, and then they have in readines a Diver, who hath his nose and his eares well stopped and annointed with oyle, and a basket fastened about his necke, or under his left arme; then he sinketh downe by the said rope to the bottome of the Sea, and as fast as he can he filleth the said basket, and being full, he then shaketh the rope, and his fellowes that hold the other end, and are in their Barke, instantly hale him up with his filled basket, and in this wise they goe one by one vntill they have laden their said boat with Oysters; and in the evening returning a shore to the village, every company maketh their owne heape or mount of Oysters by themselves, one distant from another in such wise, that there is seene a great long row of mounts or heapes of Oysters, which remaine untouched untill such time as the fishing be ended; and at the end whereof every company sitteth downe about their mount or heape, and fall to opening of them, which they may ea∣sily doe, because that then they bee both dry, dead, and brittle; and if every Oyster should prove to have pearles in them, it would prove a very good purchase unto them: but many are found to have no pearles at all in them; therefore when their fishing is done, they then perceive whether their said fishing and gathering proveth good or bad. Now there are certaine men expert in the choice and distincti∣on of Pearles, which heere they call Chittini, which set and make the price of Pearles, according to their carracts, each carract being foure graines, and these with an instrument of copper having holes therein of severall greatnes serving to distingush the sorts, to which also they consider their beauty and goodnes, and then ther∣of make 4 severall sorts. The first sort be the round Pearles, which they call aia or unia of Portugall, because the Portugals buy them: the second sort which are not round, are called aia of Bengola: the third sort, which are not so good as the second, they call aia of Canora, that is to say, the Kingdome of Besnegar: the fourth and last, and indeed the worst sort, they call aia of Cambaia: and thus the price being by the men set thereon, according to their sorts, goodnes, and greatnes, there are Merchants of every Coun∣trey which are ready with their moneys in their hands to buy them; so that in few dayes, all the said parcels are bought up, ac∣cording to the said prizes set upon them altering according to the carract, beauty, and shape thereof. And this is the manner of the fishing, and dispersing of the Pearles throughout India, and thence through the World, so farre forth as I thought good to insert the same in this place.
CHAP. XCII. Of the Trade in generall practised alongst the Coast of INDIA. THe Coast of India knowne in these Regions, is on∣ly The generall Trade of the Coast of India. so accounted from the Ilands called las Vachas, or from the Towne of deman to the Cape of Como∣rin, not above 200 miles in length, wherein be∣sides the Metropolis Goa, is found sundry others in subjection to the Crowne of Portugall; as first Da∣man to the North of Goa; then Basain, then Chaul, Dabull, and then Goa: and to the South-ward, which some call the coast of Mal∣lubar, they hold Romes, Onor; Barselor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cali∣cut, Cranganor, Cochin, Coulon, and cape de Comeri, which is ac∣compted the last end of the Coast of Mallabar and India, for the better understanding of the trade of these Sea-ports, it will bee needfull I should somewhat more particularly survey the same. First then, it is to be understood that the Northerne part of this Coast is held the wholsomest and purest ayre for habitation, the principall places being Daman, Basasen, and Chaul, which are found Daman. Basas. Chaul. in themselves to have good havens, whereto great traffique is maintained throughout India; the Countrey hereabouts aboun∣ding in rice, pease, and other graines, butter and oyle of nuts, also cotton cloth great quantity, especially Baroches, taking the name from a Citie of this coast; and in Chaul is found very great con∣course of Merchants and traffique to Ormus, Cambaia, Sinde, Mas∣quate, Bengala, having therein many rich Merchants, and ships of great burthen; and heere is also made divers kinds of silke stuffes, as grograms, sattins, taffata's, and such like in such aboundance, that India, and all other places bordering, are served therewith, and beholding thereto, which brings a great trade to the said Citie of Chaul; for they bring in the raw silke of China, and being heere spunne, woven, and wrought, carry it out againe, and distribute it throughout India, and the neighbouring Countries; here also they make faire and excellent wrought bedsteds, boxes, desks, stooles, and other woodden arts, which brings them great profit, and makes this place famous throughout these parts. As for the coast of Mallabar, Onor is of good esteeme, where Coast of Mal∣labar, and the trade thereof. there is a great quantity of pepper yearely laden by the Portugals factors, accounted the best and fullest berry in all India, the Coun∣trey hereabouts belonging to a Queene rich in pepper, who selleth the said commoditie only to the Portugals; but receiveth her mo∣ney
6 moneths beforehand, and at the season delivereth the said contracted pepper, which by the Portugals is housed in their Fort, which (by her leave) they have heere built, till their shipping come to fetch it away, which is commonly but once a yeare. Cananor is held the best fort they have upon all this coast, and Cananor. doth, abound with rice and pepper, and neere the fort is a faire Towne which is plentifully stored with all the commodities of this coast and shoare, especially abounding in all manner of victuals and provision and masts for ships of all sizes and sorts. Calicut was once the most famous town of trade of all this shore, Calicut. and gave name not onely to the sorts of pepper that here grow, but also to that sort of cotton cloth that was first hence transported for Europe; but the Emperour the then Soveraigne, being enemie to the King of Couchin, with whom the Portugals at their first arivall heere sided, and prosperd, by that meanes, overthrew the great traffique of Calicut, and advanced the traffique of Cochin, whose Cochin Soveraigne by meanes of the trade is now become a mighty and rich Prince in this Countrey, the City of Cochin it selfe thereby so inlarged, inriched, and so well inhabited by Portugals, who are in part the new Masters, by native Mallabars and other Na∣tions, and seated upon a pleasant River, and injoying the commo∣dity of a good Channell and Haven; that it is accounted in these parts for trade and concourse of Merchants the onely second to Goa: here is laden yearely great quantity of pepper, and a course sort of cynamon, vulgarly called de Matte, nothing comparable to cynamon of Seylon accounted the best; and hither come all the Por∣tugall ships to lade homewards, after that they have unladen their European commodities in Goa, which addes much to the trade of this Citie. Two commodities hither imported do much inrich this place, 1 the great store of silke that cometh hither raw from China to be wrought, and next the great store of sugar that cometh from Bengala to be spent, for which the marryed citizens are found to pay no custome to the King of Cochin, though for all others they pay 4 per cent. but the stranger and unmarryed pay at Cochin no∣thing to the King; but to the Portugall 8 per cent. And because The manner of the frming of the pepper in India by the Portugals. this great traffique for pepper is onely peculiar to some private Merchants or Farmers authorized by the Kings of Spaine, it will not be unproper I should here relate the manner thereof: It is to be understood then that the Kings of Portugall, the first European traders into these parts, in all their navigations and discoveries, ever added the benefit of commerce towards the supportation of the expences of their conquests; and having here built for conve∣niencie of trade, and protection of their Merchants, and subjects many Fortresses and Castles; they ever so setled them, that the commodiousnesse of the Haven, Port or harbour, joyned to the native commodities of the place, might adde meanes and faire in∣ducements to make by traffique their conquests profitable. This
coast then being found to abound with pepper, a principall com∣modity then requested in Europe, designed it to be converted to his peculiar profit, by all the provident waies of a circumspect Merchant; but Princes that will imbrace all, sometimes graspe but a Chi croo abra∣zia oca strin. little; for the same could not be so profitably contrived, conside∣ring the distance of way, length of time, and trust to be committed to factors, Captaines of Forts, and others; but he found himselfe to come farre short of his expectation in this point, whereupon he was advised to let out the same to Farme, and contracted it at cer∣taine conditions to certaine great and eminent Merchants, who should stand in his place strongly and amply priviledged, and should injoy a part of the gaines for themselves, and yet bring the greatest croppe of their labours into his coffers; hereupon it was first let out for five yeeres, the farmers and contracters binding themselves to send such a stocke to India in ready money, as would extend for 30 thousand quintalls of pepper yearely, concei∣ved to be in those daies as much as all Europe could annually vent in that commodity; but then the King was bound to send his Ships to India to lade the same, in number five Ships of sufficient bur∣then yearely; the Farmers bearing the adventure both of their moneys outward, and of the said pepper homeward, lading it in India into the said Ships at their own costs and charges, all which brought into Portugall, they were to deliver to the King at the price of 12 duccats per quintall, and what was either cast away, lost, or taken, was to be borne by the Farmers; the King paying for no more then what was thus fairely laid on land into his store-house at Lixborne, neither yet payd he ready money for the same, but payd them with their owne money when the pepper was sold; so that the King without disbursement or hazzard, had and hath a certaine great gaine without the losse of a penny; in consideration whereof the farmers have many great and strong immunities and priviled∣ges; as first, that no man upon paine of death, of what estate or condition soever he be, may any waies deale or trade in pepper but themselves, which is still strictly observed; secondly, that they may not upon any occasion or necessity whatsoever, diminish or lessen the said ordinary stocke of money, nor the King his said stint of shipping; neither hinder nor let them in any sort concerning the lading thereof, which is also strictly looked into; for though the pepper were for the Kings owne person or proper account, yet must the Farmers pepper be first laden; thirdly that the Uiceroy, and all other the Officers and Captaines in India shall give them all assistance, helpe and favour, with safe keeping guarding and watch∣ing the same, with all other needfull offices as shalbe by them re∣quired, for the safety and benefit of the said pepper: fourthly, that The Ships of pepper depart from Con a∣bout the moneths of December and Ianury. for the lading and providing thereof, the said Farmers may send their Factors into India with their servants and assistants of what nation soever they be, (English, French, and Spaniards onely ex∣cepted)
and that unto every place to see the same laden and dis∣patched away: and in latter times it is observed that they have also farmed of the King the ships and their fraightment, with large conditions to build them, and make the provision of all ne∣cessaries for them, and all at their owne adventures; and if the Ship come safe home, they give the King in lieu of licence a certaine summe of money for every Ship, and annually do furnish these five Ships at their owne charges: but for such Souldiers as are appoin∣ted to goe in them, they are bound to saile for the King and at his charge, and have but onely their meate and drinke at the Farmers charges, the officers and saylers being placed therein by the Kings admiralty, which the Farmers may not once deny or refuse; so that the King adventureth nothing, neither in pepper nor in Shippes; but onely if the Ships be cast away, he loseth the money that he should have, and otherwise gain by the farm of every Ship, if it had returned safe; and the profit of the pepper that should have beene delivered him at a certaine price, which is the cause now that the King doth not send out his Fleets to meet and waft them from the Flemish Ilands, as for long time he was accustomed to doe; and the King is found so nearely to look to this Farme, that he will not abate the Farmers a penny, how great soever their losses happen otherwise to be: And thus much shall serve for Goa and the trade of the Portugalls in India; now in the next place I will come to the coast of Chormandel. CHAP. XCIII. Of MESULIPATAN and the Trade thereof, with the coast of CHORMANDEL. THE Coast of Chormandel beginneth from the cape Ne∣gapatan to the Towne of Musulipatan, between which Musulipaton and the trade of the coast of Chormandel said places is found a place called St. Thomas, where the Apostle Thomas is said to have preached salvation to these Nations and whose Tombe is had still in great reverence to this day amongst the native Christians of this Coun∣trey: besides which is found the Townes of Pettipoly and Arma∣gow, where the English of late have setled factories that have de∣pendencie on the factory of Mesulipatan; under which therefore I will include the trade of this coast. Musulipatan by reason of the commodious scituation, is the most eminent place of trade of this coast, where the English have to that purpose planted a factorie, both for providing and lading hence the commodities of this Countrey; this place is seated on the
same coast, or rather Istmus, as Goa is with the Cities beforemen∣ioned, which are seated to the eastward, as the coast of Mallabar s to the westward: the pleasantnesse of the adjoyning River unning downe from Bisnagar the Metropolis of this Countrey, nd the goodnesse of the Haven, with the wholesomenesse of the oile and the temperancie of the ayre, addes much to the excel∣encie of it in matter of trade and concurrencie of Merchants; to which if we adde the industry of the inhabitants, and the fruit∣ullnesse of the Countrey bearing many commodities naturally, it s not to be reckned as the least or the worst part of trading in India. From this place and coast then is found a great trade, to be dri∣ven into Bengala, Pegu, Siam, Mallaca and to India, and the prin∣cipall commodities that this City is noted to be famous for, is those Commoditi of the cost of Cormandel. excellent fine cotton linen, made here in great aboundance, and of all colours, and interwoven with divers sorts of loome workes and flowers, very fine and cunningly wrought, and therefore much worne in India, and better esteemed there then silke, as indeed be∣ing both found finer and richer, and used by the greatest women in those parts for their clothing, wherein is found interlaced of∣tentimes threds of silver and gold, and divers other rare fabriques of cotton, &c. The currant usuall coines in Mesulipatan, Armagon, Petipoli, Coines cur∣rant in Musui∣patan and coast of Cormandel. St. Thomas, and all alongst the coast is the Pagode of gold, and the Mahomody and fanan of silver, and are thus valued. A Pogode is worth 15 fanams, or in English 8 sh. starling. A fanan is 9 cashee, or as some call them cupans about 6¾ d. star. A Mamody is 32 pices, or as in some places they are called docres. A riall of 8/2 Spanish is here 5 mamodies or 9 fanans, or 5 sh. And 10 rialls 8/8 is here currant for 6 and sometimes for 6½ pagods. And 10 R 8/8 are called in these parts a Seare incirca 50 sh. star. But in Armagon it is observed they have this difference. Armagon. Rialls of 8/8 11 are accounted for 8 pagods. One pagode is accounted worth 20 fanams. And 5 pagodes here are accounted but 4 in Mesulipatan. The pagode by this account may be said to be in value about 8sh. starling equivalent with the chequin of Uenice, or the sheriffe of Aegypt, or sultany of Turkey, and the mamody accounted for 12 d. starling, and the fanans about 6 d. ¾ or 7 d. per piece. Their common weight used along this coast is the candil, which Weights cur∣rant in Mesula∣pa  co of Comandel. in grosse goods is most usuall, accounted for 20 Maunds. A Maund is 40 Seare or 22½ Masses, or 26 li. 14½ oun. English. A Seare is 17 Kashee, which thus answers with England. The seare is twofold, as the small seare is of 16 Mass, and found to be about 10 li. English, or as some observe it 10  li. and the great seare is accounted as above.
And the candil of 20 mands of 26 li. 14½ ounc. haberdepois, brings it to be English pound sotile 538 li. incirca. But this finds some disagreement with the weight of Petipoli, for their candil is 20 mands found to be but 26 li. English in all 520 li. A mand is here counted for 5 Uisko 5 li. 3 ounc. English. One Uisco (or as the Portugalls call it fisco) is accounted 8 seares, which is found to be 10 ounc. ¼ haberdepois incirca. Further observations I find not of the trade of Mesulapatan, save∣ing that the governour of this City, having setled a trade with the English, and that they should pay for custome 4 per cent. he after∣wards raised the same to 12 per cent. till Anno 1614. one Floris, and other English surprised the chiefe customer being the governours sonne, and brought him aboord their Ship then in port, who there∣upon came to a new composition restored the overplus taken, and setled it for the future at the first agreed rate of 4 per cent. as now it standeth. CHAP. XCIIII. Of SATAGAN the Metropolis of Bengala, and the trade of that coast and the River Ganges. AT the ending of the coast of Coromandel, beginneth this coast of Bengala, through the middle whereof Satagan and the trade of the coast of Ben∣gala. the famous River Ganges runs, making a large bay or Gulfe, which carrieth the name of the Gulfe of Bengala: This Country is under the command of the great Mogul; whose coynes are here currant; the holy and reverend opinion that the Gentiles through all India have of this River, and the concourse of Pilgrims thereto, for de∣votion sake, addes much to the traffique of Satagam, the chiefe Ci∣tie of this Countrey, which is pleasantly seated on another faire and large River, whose imbosure is not farre distant from the im∣bosure of Ganges, and upon which boats sayle by the violence of the current a hundred miles in fifteene houres without the helpe of sayles or oares, and when the tyde turneth it, is found to be so violent that the saylers are forced to make fast their boats to cer∣taine trees fixed on the shoare side, for they are not able to make way against the streame and current thereof. At the entrance of this River is a place called Butter, which the Inhabitants of the Countrey and Merchants there doe yearly build in forme of a vil∣lage, of straw, branches of trees, reeds, and the like, and is of great largenesse, to which they bring all manner of merchandize, to meet the shippes which at certaine set times with the Monsoons come
hither for trade, who are not able to goe higher for want of wa∣er; and when the shippes are gone with the change of the Moun∣oon, and that yeares trading past, they then burne their said towne nd houses, and carry up their goods and merchandise to the Citie f Satagan; whither also all small barkes and boats doe goe to ade and unlade. It is observable that thirtie or fortie sayle of great shippes of Commodities of the Coast of Bengala. undry Countries and Nations doe here yearely at this time finde ading; the principall commodities of this place and the coast, being Rice here growing in great abundance, cloth of cotton of infinite sorts, made here in great quantitie, Lacca good store, great plen∣tie of sugars, Mirabolans both dried and preserved, long pepper, Oyle of Zerseline, and many other commodities; the Citie in it selfe is a faire Citie, and abounding with rich Merchants that trade to Pegu, Musulipatan, Sumatra, and sometimes to Cambaia, and the red Sea; their time of traffique by reason of the heat is for the most part here by night, and when they have once burned their towne of Butter, as hath been noted, they then hire galliotts and boats, and there with transport their commodities up the River from one Towne to another, scituated upon the same, where every day is found in one or other a publique faire and market, so that their whole life is still in motion and agitation, providing in one place and putting off in another, here buying and there selling. The Portugalls are found to have some trade hither, but those that reside here are not subject to much government, but make their will their law; onely two Forts they hold upon this coast, the one they call porto grande, the other porto pequenom, whereto there is driven an orderly trade, and thereby that Nation is kept within some order and discipline. As for the coines currant here, the weights and measures here in Weights and measures of the coast of Bengala. use, I must omit them by reason of my ignorance therein, and therefore shall referre them to the better skilled. Before I leave this coast, I must not forget a strange custome, not onely here much used, but also alongst the coast of Mallabar, and in many other parts of India, which is thus, if a Debtor breake Custome in India for Deb∣tor. the day of payment with his Creditor, and oftentimes disappoynt him, then he goeth to the principall of the Bramenes, and receiveth of him a rod, with which he approacheth to the debtor, and making a circle about him, chargeth him in the name of the King and the said Bramen, not to depart till he hath satisfied the debt, which if he doe not, he must then starve in the place; for if he depart, the King will cause him to be executed; and this is in use in many parts of India, but especially where the Bramans are reverenced; it is daily seene practised amongst Merchants the natives of these places.
CHAP. XCV. Of PEGU, and the coast thereof with the trade. IN order having passed the coast and gulph of Bengala, the next in this tract, is the Sea-coast of Aracan, Peg Pegu and the trade of the coast thereof. and Sian, stretching it selfe to the Iland and Fort of Malacca, of which according to the observations in trade, as I have collected, I will in briefe touch. The first on this coast and shoare is Aracan, scituated upon the Aracan. River of Cosnim, which passeth through some part of Bengala, and entreth into that gulph at this Citie, by which commodious sci∣tuation it is found plentifully stored as well with the commodities of that Countrey, as the naturall commodities of the place it selfe. The next is Macoa, seated upon one of the mouths of that great Macca. and famous River Martaban, which by ten mouths issuing into the Sea, gives a great supply to this Countrey of all the commodi∣ties that are found in India, from whence this mightie River hath its sourse. The third is Pegu it selfe, giving name to the whole coast, sea∣ted in like manner upon one of the said mouthes, which as being Pegu. the principall seat of the Princes of this Countrey, I will a little more particularly survey. The marvellous great tydes, and violent current of this great River is not here to be omitted as appertaining to trade, for it is River of Mar∣taban. found to be in it selfe so swift, th neither winde nor oare can make head or way against it, and because it is found to keepe: constant course of ebbing and flowing, therefore in their sayling they still observe the tydes thereof, and when those tydes are at highest, there are certaine stations on the bankes whereto their boats galliots and barges are fastned, untill the tyde doe againe serve their turne to proceed on their voyage: this one thing more I finde wonderfull here, that these tydes come not in by a constant continued pace or measure, but come rushing in at the first with a great violence, with a hideous noise and roaring, such as in some lesser sort is seene in the River of Roven, and in our River of Severne in England. As for the Citie of Pegu it selfe it is divided into two parts, in the one the King and his Nobilitie resideth, lately built and richly beautified, and therefore called the new Towne; the other part inhabited onely by Merchants, Artificers, Sea-men, and such like, and called the old Towne; every house in the old Towne where Merchants doe reside, hath a place built strongly of bricke which
as a warehouse serveth his occasion, called by them Godon, espe∣ally to prevent firing, which this Towne is much subject to by ason of the combustible matter it is made of; the new Towne  walled about and is a perfect square, having twentie gates, five  each angle, ditched about and watered, wherein many Crocodills re kept for the watch of the place by night; the walles are beau∣fied with many Turrets for centinels guilded with gold; the streets re very faire, straight as a line, and so broad as fifteene horsemen ay ride abrest on both sides; at each mans doore are set palme rees, which groveing makes a faire shew, and thereby all passen∣ers may walke daily in the shaddow from one street to another, o prevent the extraordinary heat of the place and climate: the greatest trade that is found at this day exercised in Pegu, is from the coast of Cormandell with pintados, cotton cloth, and other bombasins much in request here; but it is to be noted, that these Shippes must depart that coast by the sixt of September, and take the monsone winde, otherwise they lose their voyage for that yeare: from Bengala also commeth hither sundry shippes with cotton cloth and other such wearing commodities, which taking also the season of the winde arriveth here when the Cormondel Shippes are ready to depart. The principall harbour or port where these Shippes doe ride is called Cosmin, and is the place where the greatest Shippes doe Anchor to lade and unlade their goods. From Mec∣ca comes also sundry Shippes laden with woolen cloth, Damaskes, Velvets, and Chickens. From Mallacca comes many small Vessells laden with pepper, sanders, Porcelan of China, Camphora, and other commodities. From Sumatra commeth also sundry Shippes with pepper and other wares; all which goods are very strictly looked into for the payment of the Kings customes at landing, which is here payd in kind, and amounteth unto twelve per cent. and the King doth hold it for a great affront to be wronged of a penny of it: Rubies, Saphirs and Spinalls paying here no custome in or out, as being the proper commodities of the Countrey. For the effecting of the trade and commerce of this place, there is ordained eight Broakers or Tareghes by the Kings authoritie, who are bound to sell and vent all the goods and merchandise comming to Pegu, for all mens account of what Nation soever they be, ha∣ving two per cent. for their brokeredge, and are liable to make good the debts they make, which no Merchant there resident can a∣voide; for they will have the said two per cent. by the Kings au∣thoritie granted them, whether their helpe be taken or not. In like manner, there are ordained certaine Broakers for the buying of all the commodities bought in Pegu, wherein is found a∣mongst them such candid dealing, that a stranger can hardly be wronged or abused, if he have but so much discretion to provide such goods as may be proper for the Countrey whither he sends them.
The commodities native of this place and Countrey are these, Gold, Silver, Rubies, Saphirs, Spinalls digged at Caplan six dayes jour∣ney from Ava in this Kingdome, great store of Benjamin, lo pepper, lead, lacca, Rice, Niperwine and sugar; and many other com∣modities. The manner of their bargaining as being contrary to the Strange man∣r of buying  selling in gu. custome and use in most parts of the world, is here worth obser∣ving; all their bargaines by their law must be made publiquely and in open assemblies of and before all standers by, who because they should yet not know, what is bidden or demanded for any commoditie, the Broakers either buyer or seller having seene the commoditie, and liking of it, putteth his hand under a cloth and toucheth the parties hand interessed, and by nipping, touching and pinching of certaine joynts of each others hands, they know what is bidden and demanded without words speaking, which these Broakers againe with the other hand coverd in the like man∣ner, give notice of to the party who sets him on worke, and either so orders him to proceed to bid more or lesse, or els to give over: and after this manner are all their contracts here made, and after∣ward by the said Broaker registred accordingly in leaves of trees which with them is used as paper with us. And when any strangers and forraine Merchants arrive here, these Broakers are bound by their place to provide them a house, Maids let out to serue both by day and night service to Merchants. Magazin, and lodging, whilest they here are resident, and when the house is taken, the Governour of the Towne sends to know how long time he intends to stay with them, and withall appointeth certaine maides of the Towne to goe to him, that out of them he may make choise of one whilst he remaines there, and then having chosen one to his minde, he contracts with her friends for her use for the said time at an easie rate, which done he bringeth her to his house or lodging, and shee serveth him willingly in all his affaires both by day and night, as both his slave and wife; but then he must take care that during that time he keepeth not company with a∣ny other woman; for so he might incurre a great danger and perill of his life by the law of the Countrey. Now when the time of his residence is expired, he payeth the parents of the maid the price agreed for, and departeth quietly away, and shee returneth with credit to her friends, being as well esteemed of as ever shee was before; and if afterward this maid chance to marry, though with the principallest of the Countrey, and that the aforesaid stranger should againe returne hither to trade, he may againe demand his woman, and he shall have her by the law of the Countrey, without the resistance of her husband, or any shame unto him, and shee re∣maineth by the stranger as long as he abideth there, and he tra∣velling from thence, shee goeth home to her husband againe, which amongst them is held for a most sure and inviolable law and custome.
The coine currant here and throughout all this coast is called Coines currant in Pegu. Gansa, which is made of copper and lead, and is not the proper mo∣ney of the King, but every man may stampe it that will, and that is able, because it hath its just value in stuffe and materialls; there is much counterfeiting of this coine, but it is soone discerned by the Broakers, tellers of money, who readily spy it out, and therefore not passable, nor will not be taken by any; with this money Gan∣sa you may buy Gold, silver, Rubies, drugges, spices, and all commo∣dities; and no other money is currant amongst them. This Gansa goeth by a weight called a Biso, and this name of Bise goeth for the account of the weight, and therefore a Bise of a Gansa is accounted by strangers there trading ½ R.  or 2 shil. 6. d. starling; and albeit that gold and silver as all other commodities doe rise and fall, yet this Bise never altereth in value or estimation. Every Bise maketh a hundred Gansaes of weight, and so it doth come to passe that the number of the money is Bisa. In this Countrey is also seated the Towne of Martaven, a place Martavan. of great traffique, and the last of this coast; the Inhabitants where∣of are wonderfull expert in making of hard waxe, which hence is dispersed throughout India, and into many places of Europe; here is also made those great earthen Iarrs or vessels which serve them to keepe water, oyle, or any other liquor, and are much u∣sed in India, and aboord their shippes in stead of caske, barrells, and such vessells, and throughout all these Countries are called of the name of the place Martavanas; and in some places by the Portugalls Tenajos. CHAP. XCVI. Of SIAM and the trade of the coast thereof. VNder the title of Siam I will comprehend the Citie of Of Siam and the trade of the coast thereof. Tenaserim, a famous towne of traffique, and the Me∣tropolis of a Kingdome; also Pottana, another Citie on this coast, not farre distant from Siam it selfe, being a place where the English Merchants have a residence and hold a Factorie; and lastly Siam as the principall, and as one upon whom the rest have a dependencie, both in mat∣ter of government and trade. This Citie then of Siam some yeares past (as appeares by the relation of that worthy Merchant Raphe Fitche, and others) was the prime of all these and the neighbouring Regions; but being for twenty-one moneths besieged by the King of Pegu, who after foure moneths march incompassed it with a million and foure hundred thousand Souldiers, and at length by
meanes of treason and not of strength gained it, drove the King thereof to that desperation that he poisoned himselfe with all his wives and children; since which time it hath obeyed severall Princes and beene subject to sundrie Masters, according to the The fortune of Sam and Pegu various chance of warre, and of this Countrey, which in one age is seene here so diversly to alter into sundry shapes; for a petty King which now commands one onely Towne or Province, in a few yeares comes to be a great Emperour over severall Kingdomes, and peradventure that that great Emperour who now commanded so many severall Nations, within few yeares after is glad to rule o∣ver a small Province, Citie, or Iland, which the Princes of Pegu and Siam have of late yeares to their great griefe found too true by experience. This Citie of Siam is yet notwithstanding the former suffered calamitie, a place of great traffique, not onely hence to Cauchin∣china, Macau, Cantor, Mallacca, Cambaia and the Ilands, Sumatra, Borneo, Banda and others by Sea, but also is much augmented by the inland trade thereof, partly to Martavan, Tenaserim and others, which are seated on the same Land, but as seated on the backeside thereof, and as injoying thereby the commoditie of another Sea, but the same is found proper for trade by its owne commodious scituation, being on the bankes of that great and famous River Menan, which runneth hither through or rather thwarteth In∣dia, River Menan. arising in the lake of Chiamay, as they terme it, at least 22 degrees from this Citie, where it issueth into the Sea, and is here found about the moneth of March so to overswell his bankes, and the neighbouring Countrey, that it covereth the earth for 120 miles in compasse, and therefore the Inhabitants are said to re∣tire themselves during this inundation to the upper part of their houses, so purposely made to avoide the inconveniencie of the waters, every house then having a boate or frigat belonging thereto, by which meanes they converse together and traffique, as on dry shoare, till the said River returne to her wonted chan∣nell againe. The Kings of this Countrey as indeed of all these Regions, are for the most part Merchants, who gave the English admittance to trade and residence here about 1612; upon whom he bestowed al∣so a faire house for their aboad, and ware-houses to lay up their merchandise; where since for some yeares they have continued, but of late yeares have left it off and discontinued, upon the little benefit this scale and Countrey affoorded them. The principall commodities of this Citie and coast, are cottonli∣nens of severall sorts, and that excellent wine or distilled liquour, cal∣led Commodities of Siam and Pattana. here by the name of Nipe, made of Cocos or India Nuts, and hence transported into all parts of India, and the adjoyning Re∣gions: here is also great quantitie of Benjamin, and of lacc: where∣with the hard wax is made that is brought hence into sundry parts
of the World, also that costly wood called by the Portugals palo dangula, and calamba, which being good, is weighed against silver and gold; for rich perfumes, and the wood sapon used by dyers; also heere is Camphora in great plenty, Bezar stones and gold in some measure good store; also heere is found Diamonds, Nutmegs, and some other Spices, which the Countrey of it selfe affordeth for the maintenance of the trade thereof. The coines here currant as I am informed are these following. Coines ant in Siam, and the Coast. The first is a Taile which is worth 4 Ticalls, or 17 shillings ten pence, or eighteene shillings sterling. A Ticall is accounted 4 masse, or 4 shil. 4 d. in circa sterling. A masse is accompted 4 copans, about 13 d. sterling. A copan is accompted 750 cashe, or 3¼ d. sterling. A taile is 16 masse, and accompted worth 14 Rials of eight Spanish. And 20 taile is a cattee worth 48 Rials of  Spanish. And 1 taile of Siam is worth 2 tailes of Iapan. And note that in Pottana and elsewhere on this coast coines find little alteration in currant prizes and rates, except upon some ex∣traordinary Coines at Po∣tana. occasions, when some of these species are sought out, and provided by Merchants to transport into other places where the same do turn them better to benefit; and note that at Pottana, A masse is as above worth 4 capans. A capan worth 4 conderies. A conderie is 100 cashe, which is 800 cashe, which is 50 more then at Siam as is above mentioned. The measures and weights are not come to my knowledge. So leaving Sciam and the trade of this coast, I shall repaire to Mallacca inhabited and fortified by the Portugals, and of great consequence in these parts. CHAP. XCVII. Of MALLACCA, and the Trade thereof. MAllacca is the next Countrey to the aforenamed Siam, Mallacca, and th trade the of. seated betweene the Coasts of Siam and Pegu, vpon the utmost bound of a long tract of land, on which is found the Citie of Mallacca in obedience to the Por∣tugall, and conquered by them in 1511 and accomp∣ted the most profitable command of all India next after Ormus, which of late they have lost, and of Mosambique: it is commo∣diously
seated on the River Gasa, which is heere 10 miles broad, (as some write) and is accounted the Staple for all India and China commodities, and hath a very great traffique to China, Moluccos, Banda, Iava, Sumatra, and all the Ilands bordering thereabouts as also to Siam, Pegu, Bengala, coast of cormandel, and other the parts of India, wherby many ships are found daily to be imployed, comming in and going out, there lading and unlading, selling, buy∣ing, and bartering the commodities of these Countries together; the Country affording of it selfe no commodities to preserve trade, but all other Countries afford to this (by reason of its proper sci∣tuation for trade) their native commodities; a ship or two com∣ming hither yearely from Lixborne to traffique, which thence de∣parteth 30 daies sooner then the rest, for India, and is at her re∣turne found commonly the richest that frequent these countries: and here it is observable in navigation that the monsons or trade Monsons at Mallacca. winds here continue West and North-west from the end of Au∣gust to the end of October, and in November begins the Northerly and North-easterly winds, which blow till the beginning of April, and from May till the end of August, the South and Southwest rule, according to which, the trader hither must direct his trade and course, and take the proper season both for his comming and going. When Albuquerke the vice-King of Portugal tooke this Citie, finding it inhabited and frequented by Merchants of sundry Na∣tions, hee established Magistrates for both the Ethnicks, Moores, and Christians, with appeale onely reserved to the highest Sove∣raigne the conquerour: one remarkable passage in this conquest, I cannot omit, which was, that an inhabitant of this place of emi∣nent note in this Citie, fighting naked in defence of himselfe and of his native Countrey, was found to bee wounded with many deepe and wide wounds; but on his arme he wore a chaine where∣to was fastened the bone of a Iavan beast, called a Cabal, by vertue whereof, notwithstanding all those wounds which were many and large, he lost not one drop of blood; but when that chaine was taken from him, his veines suddenly and at once emptied themselves both of blood and life together: the riches and great∣nesse of the place may by this particular then happening bee con∣sidered, whenas the Kings tenths in the sacke thereof, come to 200000 duccats of gold, the Soldiers and adventurers satisfied, be∣sides the concealed and pilfered bootie, there found and shared by them. The currant coines are not as yet come to my knowledge; ther∣fore Coines of the Citie Mal∣lacca. I referre the same to the better experienced. The weight heere common in use, (as farre forth as I have col∣lected) Weights used in Mallacca. is the Cattee Bahar, and Pecull, wherein I find the observa∣tions
made heereupon to disagree; some making but one Bahar to be here in use, and some two sorts of Bahars, as thus. One Bahar to be 100 cattees of Malacca, and each Cattee to bee 4½ cattees of cantar and Cauchinchina which is 21 li. English, which thus estimated, must be 590 li. English. A second Bahar they accompt to bee 200 cattees of Mallaija, which heere are 302 China cattees, and thus estimated, the same should be 400 li. English. Againe, they have a weight called the Pecull, which is 100 cattees of China, and makes 132 li. English; but if this observation bee found true by triall, the cattee must be more then 21 li. English, which I referre to the better experienced, this is the late obser∣vation of some of our Merchants trading into these parts; but by the observation of the Portugals I find the weight to be thus. In Mallacca they say are two sorts of weights used, a great and Weights of Mal∣lacca. small, which is composed of the Bahar. A Bahar great weight is 200 cattees, or three pices. One pice is 66⅔ cattees. A cattee is 26 tailes. A taile is 1½ ounce Lisborne weight. And by this great Bahar they weigh pepper, cloves, nutmegs, san∣ders, indico, allom, sanguis draconis, palo dangula, camphora, and ma∣ny other commodities. The small Bahar is also 200 cattees. A cattee is 22 tailes. A taile is almost an ounce, 5/8 Portugall all weight. And by this small Bahar they weigh quicksilver, copper, vermilion, ivory, silke, muske, amber, lignum aloes, tynne, lead, benjamin, verdet, and other commodities, &c. Againe, some observe that a taile of Mallacca is 16 masses. And 10¼ masses is an ounce haberdepois, and 1½ ounces is 16  masses, by which masses they sell Bezar stones, and some other commodities. I should here proceed to surveigh the trade of this remaining tract and Coast, especially that of Camboia, Cauchinchina, and o∣thers but little having falne into my hand of the trade exercised there, I willingly omit the same, and next proceed to looke on∣ly upon the traffique of China it selfe, and then to the Ilands belonging to Asia.
CHAP. XCVIII. Of CHINA and the Provinces thereof. CHina hath on the East, Mare del Zur, on the West, China, and the Provinces ther∣of. India, on the North, a Wall extending 1000 miles in length, betweene the Chinois and the Tartarians, and on the South, the Ocean. The Trade of this Countrey is accounted very great, the scituation of the place, the temperature of the ayre, the disposition of the inhabitants, the continuall peace that abides a∣mongst them concurre to inlarge the same; the many navigable Rivers, and the excellent fabriques heere wrought, adde to make it eminent, and the commodities that it yeelds to maintaine the same are these; barley, rice, wool, cottons, olives, vines, flaxe, silke Commodities of China. raw and wrought into infinite sorts of stuffes, all kinds of mettall, fruits, honey, waxe, sugars, Rubarbe, porslaine dishes, camphire, ginger, all kinds of spices, muske, civet, amber, and infinite aboundance of salt, which commoditie only in the towne of Cantor, yeelds custo to the Prince yearely 180000 duccats. This Kingdome containes 15 large Provinces, each Province ha∣ving a Metropolis besides many Cities of lesser note; so that in the The greatnes of China. whole tract of this Countrey is accounted to be 30 Kingdomes and therein writers have mentioned to bee 1597 Cities and great Townes walled, 1154 Castles 4200 Borroughs without walls, wherin Soldiers are quartered, besides an infinite number of villages and hamlets; the Metropolis of the whole Kingdome being vulgarly called Quinsay, and is said to containe in circuit 100 miles, ha∣ving in the midst thereof, a lake of 30 miles compasse, in which Quinsay. are two faire Ilands, and in them two magnificent Palaces, ador∣ned with all necessaries, either for majestie or conveniencie: the lake is nourished with divers rivers, on which is counted 12000 bridges, and in many Cities here seated on the bankes of great and famous navigable Rivers, are found oftentimes ten thousand saile of great and small vessels; the King himselfe having in the Citie of Nanquin (accounted the second in this Kingdome) sea∣ted Nanquin. upon a faire and large river (if writers relations may have credit) 10 thousand saile of ships of his owne, and the Citie being 9 leagues from the Sea, the whole distance is found to bee as it Ten thousand saile belong∣ing to the King of China in one River. were wholly imployed and taken up with Vessels and Boats; for therein the inhabitants make their abode, dwell, negociate, and remove at their pleasure, from one place and Citie to a∣nother:
It is confidently affirmed by all moderne travellers that have bene here, that the inhabitants are not permitted to issue out of this Kingdome, nor yet strangers permitted to enter into it; and though for the commodiousnes of traffique this strict law find some tolleration for a certaine limited time for the nativs to trade a∣broad, yet is it most neerely lookt into on the behalfes of stran∣gers, that would enter into their Countrey: therefore (this con∣sidered) though the motives of trade and commerce bee many; yet this inviolable custome so severely executed, hinders justly the particulars I should in this place set downe of the trade of this mighty Empire; howsoever, it is observed that the Iapaners and some neighbouring Ilanders, as also the Portugals, and some other Christians, have (by the favor of the great maritime comman∣ders in this Countrey, and their owne faire deportment) procu∣red a license of trade in Canton, Macca, Nanquin, and some o∣ther Sea-ports; but with such strict limitations, as that in some Cities it is death for them to lie or abide a night either in the Towne or in the Suburbs, but abord their owne Ships, and in Canton where they find the most courteous usage, they may not upon paine of death abide one night within the Citie walls; but as in the morning their names are regisred at their entring into the Citie; so they come at night and blt out the same with their owne hands: I can then but afford a taste of the whole Trade, by a little that I have observed out of the collections of others, which must serve for a modell to the frame and foundation of what is practised in other Cities throughout this Empire, which I will comprehend under the title of Maccau, most frequented by our Nations. CHAP. XCIX. Of MACCAV, and the Trade thereof. THe Iland and Towne of Maccau, (as the place best Maccau and the tra thereof. knowne upon this Coast to our Nation) is seated on the North side of a Baye, which is at the mouth of the great River of Canton, which runneth out of the Lake of Quinsay spoken of before, oppo∣site to which standeth the great Citie of Canton, which I mentioned, as the place where is found the present Staple of all the commodities of China; and thither doe Merchants of all parts frequent to buy and barter for other commodities, with the restrictions and limitations above specified: and as for Maccau, it is inhabited by Portugals intermixt with the naturall Chinees;
the principall of their commerce being with the inhabitants of Cantaon, from whence all the commodities of China are found to issue; and heere the Portugals at the arrivall of their Ships, doe choose out a Factor amongst themselves, who is permitted in all their behalfs, to goe to trade for them at Cantoan, but in the night hee is to abide in the Suburbs under severe punishment, as I have before remembred. Heere is found a Ship to come yearely out of India, by a parti∣cular license of the King of Spaine; the Captaines place is ever be∣stowed A particular Ship yearely touching here from Goa to Iapan. upon a person of qualitie, in reward of some former ser∣vice, as indeed all the Captains places of the Fortresses in India are; from Maccau the said ship then (having dispatcht her busines) doth saile to Iapan, and there fully dischargeth her lading, and thence returneth againe to Maccau, and from thence to Malacca, and so to Goa in India; and though this voyage of Iapan is ever gran∣ted by particular license to some one in particular; yet to Maccau and Mallacca any Merchant may goe that will; but none may yet lade or unlade in either place, before such time as these Ships termed of the Kings, are fully dispatched and laden, and are readie to depart for India: it is recorded by some Portugals that this Captaines place may be worth to him for his part 200 thousand duccats, and that the said Ship is commonly 1500 Tunnes in bur∣then, and that the voyage continueth for three years from India, and so backe; for in April they set saile from Goa to Mallacca, where they abide some season for the winds or monsons, which at certaine times blow certaine set moneths together; and then from Mallacca they saile hither to Maccau, where they stay at least nine moneths for the said monsons, and then saile to Iapan, where they must stay likewise certaine moneths for the dispatch of their businesse; and the monsons to returne againe to Macca, where againe they stay, as in their voyage outward: so that by these delayes the time of three yeares is fully expired before they have ended their voyage to and from Iapan; and all the time of this Captaines residencie either in Maccau or Iapan, hee is there accounted the chiefe ruler and governour of the place, having the like power as their viceroy in Goa, and as the severall Captaines in their forts; for that when the one departeth from Maccau to Iapan, there commeth another from Goa to Maccau, to make the same voyage after the other hath performed his; and when he returneth againe from Iapan to Maccau, the other saileth to Ia∣pan, and so the first continueth Governour againe at Maccau, vn∣till he departeth from thence to Mallacca, and so to India; and by this meanes, there is alwaies found a Portugall Governor at Maccau. The commodities in generall of China, I have mentioned before the particular and principall commodities of Cantoan and Maccau, Commoditis of Maccau and Canton. is silkes raw, and silke wrought; the raw is found to be of three seve∣rall
sorts, first lankin which is the best; the second is fuscan; the third and worst is lankam, and these are knowne to us in Europe, and beare price there commonly about 145 or 150 R  Spanish, the pico of lankin, the fuscan is worth 140 or 145 R.  and the lan∣kam is worth 70 or 75 R 8/8, and all these are counted unspun silke; but the spun lankin is worth from 150 to 170 R  the pico; the spun fuscan is worth 130 or 135 R , and the spun lankam of canton 80 R.  the pico: and these I thought good to mention as being the principall commodity vented out of these Countries to other places. The commodities then wherewith the Portugalls doe drive this Commodities fit for China. trade, and which they carry to Maccau from India is principally R 8/8 rialls of eight, which in China is cut into pieces, and so paid out, as I shall shew hereafter in payment of merchandize; also wines of Spaine and India, olive oyle, velvets, which of all other sorts of silke stuffes they cannot make, and fine woollen, scarlet cloth, whereof they have none, nor yet can they make any, although they have mate∣rialls, as sheep and wool plenty; also looking glasses, and all sorts of drinking glasses, and Crystall, ivorie, Elephants teeth, and sundry o∣ther commodities. The moneys or rather the manner of payments made here for Coines of Chi∣na and Maccau commodities, differ from all other Countries observed in this Tract, for silver here in some nature is accounted better than gold, not in value and worth, but in currant esteeme and repute, as holding still the same quality in goodnes, and more apt and proper for their use; for the manner here is that every man carrieth about him his weight and ballance, to weigh the silver he taketh or giveth in payment; and hath also a paire of sheeres to divide, cut and pro∣portion his payment according to his commodity; so that for the generall the commodity is fitted to the payment in silver or piece of silver, and not the silver (as in most places of the World) to the com∣modity or ware: and this silver thus cut and divided into small par∣cells, hath not any Soveraigne stampe or character thereon; nor is acknowledged as the peculiar coine of any Prince: but being all reduced to one and the same allay, is passable at a valuable rate and consideration amongst the Merchants of Maccau, Cantoan, and generally as I am informed throughout all China. Besides which they have a Ticall of gold, esteemed at 12½ R ; and note that the Ticall of silver of Siam is here 22½, and 23 Foras accounted a Tail of gold. The payment of custome in this place is also seene to be done in a rare and seldome seene manner, for I find it noted by some to be here the custome, that a Ship entring into Maccau, the Kings offi∣cers cometh aboard, and measureth her breadth, length and depth; and so by a rule and proportion that they use, they cast up the custome due by the bulke of the Ship, by which the same is paid;
and then the Merchants may unlade and lade at pleasure, with∣out concealement of any sort of merchandize whatsoever they have aboard: how true it is I know not, with me it carryeth not any great beliefe, for that by what I have read, the acutenesse of this Nation is such that they cannot in so especiall a point of trade possibly be so dull conceited, nor of such grosse understandings. How farre the weights of Mollacca differeth from the weight of China, I have shewed before in the Chapter of Mollacca, I will now Weights of China, Maccau. shew how the weights in China are distinguished: I find by the ob∣servations of some English, Portugals and Dutch that have had trade hither, the Bahar to be the common weight of China; but in the concordance thereof with their owne they differ much. The common Bahar of China is 300 Cattees, which is the same as 200 Cattees in Mollacca small weight, as I have afore remembred, for that three cattees of China makes two catees of Mollacca; and this by the calculation of some doth make English 386 li. and yet by some others should produce in England 400 li. A Cattee of China is 16 Taels, which are 14 Taels in Mollacca, which respond with 20¾ ounces Haberdepois, and this way reduced the said Bahar is about 389 li. in 390 li. A Hand is 12 cattees small weight. A Cattee is 22 Taels, and a Tael is 1½ ounces haberdepois, and this way reduced it produceth 412 li. haberdepois. Hands 16 and 8 cattees, makes 200 cattees, which is the Bahar in small weight; and because these observations doe much disagree, I referre the truth to triall and experience; for the calculations of English, Dutch and Portugals in this particular doe differ very much, as is before expressed. The measures of the place I am inforced to omit, therefore re∣ferre it to the better experienced. Having thus done with the maine continent of Asia, and corso∣rily surveyed the particular trade of some of the most eminent Cities of the Kingdomes therein contained; being constrained by reason of the remotenesse of these places, and want of better in∣formation, to let the same passe not so perfect as otherwise I could wish for and desire, I shall willingly in what is here by me omit∣ted, crave the advises of the better experienced; and that they would adde by their knowledge and triall what is either here de∣fective or altogether left out: and thus leaving the continent (ac∣cording to my methode) I will in briefe run through some of those Ilands which merit observation, and survey the trade thereof as amply as my advisos will give me leave.
CHAP. C. Of the Ilands of ASIA, and the Trade thereof. THe Ilands of Asia are either in the orientall Seas, as Iapan, Ilands of Asia and the Trade thereof. Seilon, Mollucques, Iavas, Sumatra, Borneo, the Philipines and others: or in the mediterranean Sea, as Rhodes, Ci∣prus, &c. of the trade whereof a word, before I conclude this commerce of ASIA. CHAP. CI. Of the Iland of Iapan, and the Trade thereof. JAPAN is scituated over against Canton in China, Iapan Iland and the Trade thereof. having in length 600 miles, but narrow in breadth, in some places 90, and in some but 30 miles: it obeys 66 severall Soveraignes, the King of Tense holding the principall authority, commanding 50 of the 66 above mentioned Kingdomes, every King, Lord and Master having full power and authority over the goods and lives of the subjects, ser∣vants and children subject unto him. It was discovered by the Portugall Anno 1542, and since is much frequented by Jesuites, who in great numbers have setled themselves here, and are found to exercise trade and commerce, as cunningly and subtilly as any Jew elsewhere in the World. Their chiefe Townes are Osacaia, Bunguin, Meaco, and are the principall Ports frequented by Merchants strangers: the cmo∣dities of this place and Ilands, is silver in some good measure g∣ged up here, and carryed hence by Merchants to China to exchge for silkes, and principally rice, which is found here growing in such aboundance, that the King or Emperour draweth 2 millions of duc∣cats yearely, out of that which is gathered from his owne possessi∣ons, which he hath received as his owne demesne; and at Firando Frando. one of the Ilands of Iapan, the English have setled a factory for trade, in 1613 by Capt. Saris labour and industrie. The civill warres that continually vexeth these Ilands, hinders Coines cur∣rant in Iapan. an exact survey of the materialls, whereby their trade is driven; yet so farre as I have collected I will here insert. Their moneys currant for the most part through these Ilands
are thus termed, and with some small difference have this value. Their silver coines currant is A Tayle, A Mas, and A Condery. A Tayle is a ℞ of  or 5 sh. starling, or ½ Tayle of Siam; and this A Taile is 10 Mas, or 100 Conderies. A Mas is 10 Conderies, or 6 d starling. And in some places the R 8/8 passeth for 74 Condereis onely and no more. Their gold is coyned into two small Barres of two severall sor, the one is called an Ichebo, worth about 15 in 16 mas of silver; the other is called A Coban, worth from 60 to 68 mas, which may be valued from 30 sh. to 34 sh. starling. The warres that continually vexeth this Countrey is the cause of this inconstant rate and price thereof. The weights in use in Iapan is the Pecull and the Cattee. A Pecull is 10 Cattees. Weights in Iapan. A Cattee is accounted by some 21 ounces, and by some 20¾ o haberdepois; so that a pecul is about 130 li. or 131 li, English. Their measure of length is an Inckhen or Tattamy, which is . Measure of lengthin Iapan. yards English; 25 yards being 12 Tattamies. Their measure for rice is thus accounted, A Gant is 3 Cocas, being as much as three English alepints. Measure for Rice and grain in Iapan. An Icke Gaga is 100 Gantas. One Ickmagog is 1000 Ickgogas. One Mangoga is 10000 Ickmagogs. CHAP. CII. Of SILON and the Trade thereof. SILON lyeth in the gulph of Bengala, in length 250, and in bredth 140 miles; found so fruitfull, that the Iland Silon and the Trade thereof. grasse groweth, and the trees beare fruit all the yeare long without intermission: it is commanded in chiefe by the great Mogul; the principall Townes are Zi∣lan, the Metropolis of the Iland, and Columbo, fortified by the Por∣tugals; and as it is conceived commanding over the best harbour in India. For commodities it hath many, and almost all things that are found in India, through all the severall Provinces and places Commodities of the Iland Silon. thereof; first it hath nutmegs, cloves and pepper trees good store, and the best cynamon in all India, which is here had and found grow∣ing in whole woods, and hence dispersed into all parts of the
World: also it affords all kinds of precious stones (except dyamonds) as Saphirs, Rubies, Topasses, Spinals, Granati; also a plentifull fishing for Pearl, yet not accounted so good as at Bareim by Ormus; it hath likewise mines of gold, silver, and other mettalls; also iron, flax, brimstone, ivorie bones, and sundry other commodities. Here is also a hil of that great height, that the Inhabitants hold it the highest in India, and call it Adams hill, upon which they say Paradise stood, and that Adam was there created; whose footsteps, if they may be Adams hill the Silon Paradise. beleeved, doe remaine yet ingraven there in the Rocke, and goes not out: but the Inhabitants being most active in their bodies, may be imagined to be so also with their tongues, for throughout India they practise nothing but jugling, and Hocus Pocus, and other feats of activity; being the most excellent mannagers of hobbyhorses, and tumbling, by which trade they get money throughout all the neighbour regions; and therefore not surveying this their traffique Siloners ex∣cellent tum∣blers. further, I will leave them to their come aloft jack, passe and repasse, and passe my selfe over to the next Ilands, being those famous of the Moluccoes, the onely Ilands of all India, affording in such store and plenty, that excellent and admirable spice, knowne to us by the name of cloves. CHAP. CIII. Of the Moluccoes and the Trade thereof. THE Moluccoes are five in number, Mallucco, Tarna∣te, Tider, Gelolo and Macian, to which may be added Ilands Moluc∣cos and the Trade thereof. for neerenesse in the scituation Banda, and 70 other lesser Ilands, which submit themselves; and their de∣licious commodities to the King of Terenate, at pre∣sent the most powerfull through all these Ilands. These Ilands are found to have for commodities some nutmegs, especially in Ban∣da, Commodities of the Moluccos also some maces; but the principall commodities of all these I∣lands is the delicate spice, knowne to us by the name of cloves, and Clovesaboun∣dance. found here growing in so great aboundance, that as it is apparent the whole World is furnished from hence; and all Merchants coming hither, and frequenting these Ilands, are found onely to come for this commodity and for nothing else. In this number I may also reckon the Amboina Ilands, as the Iland Amboina it selfe, Pollerone, Pollowaie, Lantore and Rosingon, abounding with Amboina Ilands the selfe same commodity, and of late yeares made infamous, by the bloody slaughter and but cherly tyrannicall torture and death of some En∣glish Factors, by the Machiavilian and matchlesse villany of the Dutch;
the actors of which have all of them, or the most part come to untimely The matchles vlany of the Duh in he Amboina Iles. and fatall ends (if reports be true,) thereby shewing the manifest judge∣ment of GOD in punishing their vilanies and wickednes, when as they thought themselves safe and free from the hands and justice of Man; and for those that as yet are living, I leave them to the terrour of their guilty consciences, and without repentance to their due punishment in the World to come; where an uncorrupted and unpartiall Governour and Fiscall shall examine their Amboina proceedings truely, and reward them accor∣ding to their merits. Some of these Ilands are now by them comman∣ded, having driven out the Inhabitants, and by death cut off the in∣terest of the English, who were joyntly partners with them, both in their conquest and trade; and now there is none left to the English but Polerone, originally theirs, yet now due to them by a second composition and agreement, who coming of late to take possession thereof, found that those barbarous and wicked Dutchmen resident in the neighbouring Ilands, had cut downe and killed all the clove trs, and other of worth there growing, thereby depriving the English of all their expected benefit, by that last but prejudiciall composition. The coines currant in Molluccos, Amboina, Banda, &c. and other Ilands, I find not any setled in use amongst them; the Spanish R  Coines cu∣rant in Molluc∣co, Banda, Am∣boina, &c. is the most usuall in their payment for commodities, and for the most part they use no other coines but it: but I find that according to the innocencie of the times past, they barter and sell one com∣modity for another, which is yet the most usuall custome amongst them. Their common weight in use is the Bahar and Cattee. Weights of Mollucco, Am∣boina, &c. The Bahar of Amboina of Cloves is 200 Cattees, and is English 625 li. which is the great Bahar. This great Bahar is 50 Barrotes, every Barrote being 12½ li. ha∣berdupois. They have also in some of these Ilands a greater Bahar, being ten times the former quantitie, making 6250 li. English. A cattee is 100 Rialls of  almost 6 li. English. Ten cattees of Mace is called a small Bahar of Maces, and of the value of 10 Rialls of eight. 100 Cattees of Nutmeggs, is a small bahar of nuts, and is of the aforesaid value of 10 Rialls of eight. 100 Cattees of Maces is called a great bahar of maces. And 1000 of Nutmeggs is accounted a great bahar of Nutmeggs. And note that 10 bahars of nuts is accounted for 1 bahar of maces usually throughout all the Ilands. A cattee of maces being commonly worth 1 ℞ . And 10 cattees of Nutmeggs commonly worth but also 1 ℞ . The Inhabitants finding now their native commodities reque∣sted by all other Nations, who come from farre Regions to traf∣fique with them for the same, have daily learned new experi∣ments of traffique and commerce; and whereas in former time
they exchanged their cloves, &c. for cotton cloth & such like to cloth them, which yet is in some use amongst them; yet now they be∣gin to know the worth of silver, and the value of the Riall of eight, nd how that hath power to bring and provide to them all other ecessaries whatsoever. Their measure of length is distinguished by fathoms and cubits, Measures of Molluccos, Ban∣da, Amboina, &c. Dry measures in Molluccos, &c. orrowed from their late Masters the Dutch and Portugalls. But their dry measures for corne, graine, rice, &c. is called a Can∣on, making about 5½ pints English. A Quoian is their greatest measure, and is 800 Cantons. It is to be noted here, that the Ilands of Molluccos were first dis∣covered by the Portugalls in their Navigations to these parts, and fterward finding them rich in Cloves, by little and little got foo∣ing therein, partly by faire meanes, but principally by building of Forts and Castles in divers of them for the better obtainement nd preservation of the brave trade of these Ilands: but of latter eares, the Hollanders envying this their ingrossing of this rich ommoditie, indevoured to supplant them, or in default of means nd power to effect that, so to plant themselves, that they might artake and share with them in the Cloves, Nutmeggs, and Maces, he onely commodities these Ilands are found to produce, which y their policie, valour, and craft, at length hath so well succee∣ded with them that now they are Masters and Commanders over many Forts and strong Castles in these Ilands; as at Mallayo, Tal∣ucco and Tacuma, in the principall Iland of Ternate, at Mariero in Dutch Forts and trade in Amboina. Tidoro, at Nassaw in Timor, Mauritus and Tabiliola in Machian, and which is intirely the Hollanders, 2 in Banda, 2 in Amboina, Barnefelt, in Bachian, and sundry others, seated here and there through the most convenientest and best ports for trade and ship∣ping in all these Ilands; so that now being become more strong, potent, and daring, they have coped with the Portugalls in divers incounters by Sea and land, sometimes winning and sometimes loosing, according to both their force and fortunes; in all their occasions, adding violence to trade, trading peaceably where they can∣not otherwise choose, and robbing and pilfering when and where they can∣not otherwise make up their mouths to profit; in which practise of trade and theevery or theevish trade, I leave them and these Ilands, and come next to Iava.
CHAP. CIIII. Of IAVAS, and the Trade thereof. IN this tract is found Iava major and Iava minor, the grea∣ter being in compasse 3000, and the lesser 2000 miles; Iavas and the trade thereof. the nearnesse of these two Ilands to the Aequator, ma∣keth these Counties so wonderfull fertile, that they are termed the Epitome of the world. The chiefe Cities here are Pala∣ban, Mega, Pegar, Agaim and Ballambua; and in the lesser Iava, Basnia, Samara, Limbri, and others, but their principall trade is driven at Sunda calapa, Bantam, Iacatra now baptised by the Dutch Batavia, and lastly, Iaparra; in which three last, the English have residencie and Factories. The commodities of these Ilands, is Rice in abundance, Oxen, Commodities of Iava Ilands. kine, hoggs, sheepe, Indian nuts, and all provisions for food; also all kinds of spices, as Cloves, Nutmegs and mace, which the natiue Mer∣chants transport to Mallacca and other neighbouring Ilands in great measure, also pepper in great quantitie, esteemed farre bet∣ter than that of India or Mallabar, principally growing about the straights of Sunda, of which there is yearly laden hence about ten thousand Quintalls English; it hath also much Frankinsence, Benja∣min, Camphora; also Diamonds, and many other precious stones, which are found therein. The fittest and most proper commodities for these Ilands trade, are divers and different sorts and colours of cotton linens, which Commodities of India fit for Iavas. are made at Cambaia, Cormandel, and Bengala, called Serasses, Sa∣rampuras, Cassus, Saeposas, blacke cannequins, red Turrias, and di∣vers other sorts found made in the places abovesaid. Here the Hollanders are found to be Masters of Iacatra, of late Batavia alias Iaccettra. yeares called by them Batavia, the best and greatest Port of their trade and rendevous in these parts, where by little and little they have so fortified themselves, that they prescribe lawes to the In∣habitants, and indevour to debarre, both English and all other from injoying any benefit of the trade thereof. In Sunda (which I account here as the principall mart Towne and in a manner the greatest in Iava major) they have no other Coines cur∣rant in Iava, Sunda, Bantam, Iacatara. kinde of money than certaine copper pieces minted, which they call Caixa, in the middle whereof is a hole to hang them on strings, for commonly they put 200 or 1000 upon one string, wherewith they make their payments, as by this following account. A Satta is 200 Caixas.
Five satas is 1000 Caixas, which is a crusado Portugall money, or about six shilling starling. The Merchants of Europe here resident keepe their accounts Accounts in Iava, Bantam, Iacettera. in R 8/8 and pence, accounting 60 pence to the R  Spanish. The weight at Bantam, Iacetra, Iapparra, and at Sunda, is the Pi∣cull, Weights in Ia∣va, Bantam, Ia∣cettra, Iaparra, Sunda. the Cattee, and Bahar. A Cattee being lesse than the Cattee of Macau, containes but 20 ounces English, and the other 20¾ ounces. A Picull is 100 Cattees, and consequently is 125 li. English. A Bahar is 330 Cattees of China, of 20 ounces as abovesaid, and may make in England 412 li. Their measure for length is (——) Measures in Iava, Bantam, Iacetra, Iapar∣ra, Sunda. Their dry measures for graine, rice, and pepper, is a Timbam, and containes ten sackes, principally used in Pepper and Rice, consi∣sting of 5 piculls; so that by this computation each sacke should containe in weight 62½ li. English, two sackes for a Pecull. The common prices of commodities as I finde them here obser∣ved, Prices of com∣modities in Iavas. are pepper of Sunda, is sold by the sacke weighing ½ a picull or 45 Cattees of China, each cattee being 20 ounces English, at 5000 Caixas, and when it is at highest at 6 or 7000 Caixas, maces, cloves, nutmegs, white and blacke Benjamin and Camphora, are sold by the Bahar, good mace commonly sold for 120 thousand Caixas; the Ba∣har and good cloves after the same rate, but bad and foule cloves, are sold at 70 or 80000 caixas the Bahar; Nutmeggs commonly sold for 20 or 25 thousand Caixas the Bahar, white and black Benjamin sold for 150 or 180 thousand Caixas, and if extraordinary good, 200 thousand the bahar; but how farre these agrees with the now common currant rates, I referre to the better experienced. CHAP. CV. Of SUMATRA, and the Trade thereof. SUMATRA, anciently Traprobana, and Salomons sup∣posed Sumatra and the trade thereof. Ophir, was esteemed the biggest Iland in the world, but moderne experience hath found the con∣trary, being onely 700 miles long, and 200 miles broad: The Aequator cutteth through it, so that the Sunnes vicinitie, makes it abound in severall precious commodities Commodities of the Iland Sumatra. for traffique, as first it hath Pepper in abundance, whereof above
twentie Shippes of burthen is hence yearly laden; also Ginger, Aloes, Cassia, raw silke, gold and silver, brasse, and some other drugges. This Iland is subject to many Princes, the principall whereof are the Kings of Pedor and Achin; it is here a custome that the na∣tives doe eate their slaine enemies, and did earst account their sculles for a great treasure, which they exchanged for other ne∣cessaries, he being accounted the richest man that hath most store of them in his house, this custome is almost extinguished, for the trade of Merchants from other Countries thither, of late yeares having brought silver and gold in request amongst them, hath made them since know better. In this Iland is found a hill of brimstone continually burning, and two very strange and admirable Fountaines, the one yeelding pure Rarities found in Sumatra. and excellent Balsamum, and the other most excellent Oyle. The chiefe Cities of this Iland, is Daren, Pasen, and Androgede, the habitation of so many Kings, but the principall places and parts for trade knowne to the Europeans, are Dachem or Achim, Achin, Tico, Iambe, and Priaman, Eng∣lish Factories in Iava. Ticko, Iambe and Priaman, all maritime and good harbours; where the English are found to have residence and Factories; also Pedir, Campar and Manancabo, to the which the Portugalls gene∣rally doe trade; but the Inhabitants for the most part transpor∣ting the native commodities of this their Iland to Mallucca, which is not distant above twentie miles of, are not much troubled with the Portugalls Commerce; though in lieu of them the Dutch have of late got footing and built Fortresses amongst them, to their as great trouble, vexation, and slavery. Within these few yeares these Ilanders were not knowne to have any coines currant in payment for Merchandise amongst them, Coines cur∣rant in Su∣matra, Achin, Priaman, &c. but the sculls of their slaine enemies, as I said before, which they accounted as their greatest treasures, and with which their bar∣ters and exchanges for things necessary were made; but now of late the King of Achin in imitation of other adjoyning Princes, and the so neere neighbourhood of Mallacca, now in possession of the Portugalls, have coined moneys, which in these dayes are ob∣served to be these: A Masse, which is here accounted for 4 Cappans, which is 12d starling. A Taile is 16 masses or 3⅕ R. 8/8 or starling money 16 shil. A Cattee is 8 tailes in ordinary account, and worth 25⅗   Spanish or 6li. 8 shil. starling, and sometimes in exchange from hence to other adjacent parts, they account 7¼ and 7½ Tailes to one Cattee. In other parts of this Iland, as Iambe, Tico, and Priamon, they Accounts kept in Iava. have no coines of their owne, but the most currant is the Spanish R, in which the Europeans keepe their accounts, and for distin∣ction divide t to  0 deniers or pence to a R. 8/8.
The common weight through all Sumatra is a Bahar, but yet Weights of Su∣matra, Achin, Priaman, Iam∣bee. ound to vary in many places, and consisteth of Cattees, which in greatnesse also varieth, and from thence commeth the difference, ut in Achin, Praman, Ticcou and Iambe, where the English reside, he Bahar is found to be in each of these places 200 Cattees; every attee is 29 ounces English, so that by this computation the Ba∣ar must make 360 li. English sotile. The measures here in use are (——) Measures in Sumatra. CHAP. CVI. Of BORNEO Iland, and the Trade thereof. THe next Iland in this Tract is Borneo, and is equally di∣vided Borneo Iland, and the trade thereof. by the equinoctiall into two parts, putting as it were a bond betweene the dominions of the King of Borneo on the Northside, and of Laus on the South, in compasse accounted above 2200 miles, and held the greatest of all this ocean. The Countrey doth yeeld in great abundance, the wood which we call Camphora; also that wood knowne by the Portugalls by the Commodities of Borneo Iland name of Polad' aguila; and also that costly sweet wood which is called Callamba, which being good is weighed against silver and gold: also here is found some gold, diamonds, nutmegs, maces, agarick, and other spices; and great abundance of that excellent antidote, which in Europe is called the Besar stone. It is plentifully stored with many faire Townes and harbours, as Cabura, Taioparra, Tamorutas and Borneo, the Metropolis and Townes of Borneo Iland. most magnificent above all the rest, containing 25 thousand In∣habitants, and seated in a Marish of the Sea, after the manner of Venice. Also Socodana, where many diamonds are found, and where the English some yeeres past had a factory and residence, as also the Socodana and Beniermasa En∣glish Factories in Borneo. same in Beniermasa, another good Port in this Iland. I have not met with the coins currant here in payment for mer∣handize, nor yet with the weights and measures in use in this Iland; therefore must referre the same to the better experienced, and to the traders thither.
CHAP. CVII. Of CELEBS Iland, and the Trade thereof. THe Iland Celebs is the next in this Tract, not farre di∣stant from Borneo Iland, through part of which run∣neth Iland Celebs and trade thereof. the Equator, yeelding by the vicinity of the Su the same commodities proper to Sumatra, Borneo, Gilolo and others, seated under the same line; it is sub∣ject to severall Princes, and injoyeth some eminent Townes frequented by European Merchants, for the sake of their rich commodities, as Durati, Mamaio, Tubon and Maccasar, the Maccas the English Facto∣ry in Seleb. chiefest Port for the trade and commerce of this Iland, and where the English have a residencie and factory, and following their observations made in this place, I find, Their coines currant here in use is found to be the Mass, Cup Coines cur∣rant in Celebs and Maccasar. and Taile thus valued. A taile is accounted for 16 masses in currant value, and is reck∣ned to be worth 15 rialls of eight. A mass is a gold coine, as is the taile, and wants somewhat of 5 sh. or a riall of  Spanish. And this mass is 4 cuppans, each cuppan esteemed to be about 14d starling money; and by this calculation the taile should make star∣ling 3 li. 14 sh. 8 d. and by the account of R  at 5 sh. starling, the taile is 3 li. 15 sh. starling. The common weights in use is the Ganton, Zicoyan and Masse, Weights in Ce∣lebs and Mac∣casar. thus agreeing with the English weight haberdepois. The Ganton is both a weight and measure, in weight it is found to be about 5 li. English, and in measure about two English gallons. A Mass in weight is 40 Gantons, which is 200 li. English, or 80 gallons English. A Zicoyan is 20 Masses in weight, which is 4000 li. English, or 800 Cantons of this place. To proceed to the rest of the Ilands in these Seas, is a worke past my skill, or I thinke most mens els, considering the multitude thereof, the Philipins being discovered by the Spaniard in Ann Ppins 1564, being in number 110 thousand, as some Authors report. Over against China are also found 7448 Ilands, and about India 127000 great and small more, which in many places stand so igh one to another, that they seeme not onely to such as are afarre off to touch and to be all as one firme land, but whosoever passeth be∣tweene
them, may with his hands touch the boughes of the es, both on the one and on the other side. Many commo∣es are found growing upon these Ilands, with which the In∣itants of many of them, maintaine a Traffique with their ghbours; the knowledge whereof I leave to the better ex∣ienced. Now forasmuch as Portugals, Dutch and English have of late The Portugals the first Ma∣sters of the trade of East India, 1498. ares discovered those Countries of India, and that some of them ve since setled themselves by Forts and Castles there: It will t be improper I should here survey their strengths and holds ilt for defence, and their factorie setled for traffique throughout is continent of Asia and the Ilands thereof. The Portugals en were the first that brake the ice, and in Anno 1498 departing om Lixborne, under command of Vasco di Gamma, doubled the e of bona Esperance, which hath proved so successefull to them ce that time that they have mastered, conquered and fortified emselves beyond that cape in Soffala, Quiloa, Mosambique, Mom∣a, and in Ormus in the Persian gulph, lately againe lost. In In∣ they have the Castles and Townes of Diu, Daman, Basain, aul, Goa, Honor, Barsola, Mongalor, Cananor, Cronganor, Cochin d Colan. In Silon they have Collumbo, bragging of one of the st Ports of the World, on the coast of Cormandell; they hold egapatam and S. Thomas: In Bengala they have Porto pequenio, and rto grande, and Serapure; also Serone, Mollucca; and some holds  the Mollucca Ilands, Macao, and Nungasarke in Iapan and divers hers; in all which they are found to be both strong, powerfull, nd great, and masters of all the rich traffique of these places, hich thus for 100 yeares very neere, they have both peaceably nd quietly injoyed at their owne termes and conditions, till the utch disturbed them, who seconded them in the trade of India, ho were the next who envying, that this rich streame should nely run his current to Lixborne, and that all the pretious commo∣ities of India should first salute Portugall, set out from Amsterdam The Hollan∣ders became sharers in 1595.  Anno 1595, and have since so well played their cards, and plea∣ed as some alledge so strongly with Cannon law and steele argu∣ents, that within 30 yeares they have found themselves to be Masters and commanders. In these Countries and Seas of 28 Forts nd Castles, and of 44 or 45 factories, for the preservation and pro∣ecution of their trade and government; the names and draughts of which, some of their owne Nation have published to their no lit∣le honour, and no small estimation; so that it may be imagined hat their flood and the Spaniards ebbe, will in few yeares bring the Indies to be more theirs then the Portugals, notwithstanding their so long possession. The English Nation are the last and least in this trade and disco∣ery, The English Nation the last traders in∣to India, in An. 1600. for they imitating onely the Portugals and Dutch in the due ules of the prosecution of a trade, but not in the prosecution of
the natives; begun their discoveries in Anno 1600, under the com∣mand of S r. Iames Lancaster, with 4 Shippes, the Dragon, Hector, Asenton and Susan, whose indeavours have since by the blessing of GOD, and the good government of that company so well suc∣ceeded, that they have sent forth above 30 Fleets or voyages; and have setled their residence and Factors in 20 or 24 severall place of note, as at Ormus and Iasques, in the entrance of the Persian gulp, under the Persian Monarch at Cambaia, Surrat and Agria, and o∣ther places in the great Moguls Countrey, at Musulapan, Armago Petipoly, Pottana, Siam and other places on the coast of Cormandel and the continent of Asia: at Achin, Ticko, Iambe and Prianian, o the Iland Sumatra, at Bantam, Iaccettra and Iaparra on the Iland  Iava, at Socodana, and Benier masa on the Iland Borneo; at Mogass in the Iland of Celebs, at Palleron on the Iland Banda, at Firando i Iapan; and lastly in Amboina, Hitto, and other of the Molucco which they quietly injoyed, untill the traiterous and bloody mind Dutch did butcherly betray their lives, purposely to deprive them of th trade, and to satisfie their unsatiable blood-thirstinesse; as is extant  the passages of that act in severall languages in the World. These are then the onely three European Nations that now con∣tend and get share amongst them; the traffique and commodities of these easterne Countries, the Portugals making Lixborne the scale of the East India commodities; the Hollander making their Am∣sterdam the staple for their parts, and the English London for their emporium; which within these late yeeres, notwithstanding the sundry crosses and losses, is increased to that height and eminency, that these Merchants doe not onely furnish Italy, but also Constan∣tinople, Aleppo, Smyrna, and other parts of Turkey, with all those Indian commodities, which within lesse then these twenty yeeres, they brought from thence into England, to the prejudice of Syria and Aegypt, and to the enriching of the English subjects in general: as hath been most judiciously and at large demonstrated (by that right honourable Knight Sr. D. D. in severall particulars; as first by the riall founders thereof; secondly by the equitie and justice of the trade; thirdly by the honour arising thereby to the English na∣tion, in the strength added to the Navie Royal of this land; fourthly by the former fortunate successe of it, and the profit that may be yet reaped thereby to the whole Kingdome, and to the fellowship of that societie; besides the increase of Mariners, and of arts and knowledge; fifthly, by farre discoveries and hopes of propagation of religion in those yet heathenish Countries. But leaving thus the Indian Ilands, and the further survey ther∣of to those late Masters of that trade, I will proceed in what is yet resting to passe through, as belonging to Asia, which are the Ilands of Ciprus and Rhodes, seated in the mediterranean Sea, to which I shall now hasten.
CHAP. CVIII. Of CIPRUS Iland, and the trade thereof. THe Iland of Ciprus is accounted also belonging to A∣sia, Iland Ciprus and the trade thereof. and scituated in the Syrian Sea; in length 200 miles, in bredth 65; and is 60 miles distant from the shoare of Cilicia, and 100 from the maine land of Syria. This Iland is said to afford materialls to build a Ship from the keele to the topsaile, and fitted for the Sea, either s a Merchants vessell for transportation of goods, or as a Princes or warfare. It affordeth also these commodities, as wine, oyle, corne, sugars, cot∣ns, Commodities of Ciprus. honey, wool, turpentine, allum, verdigrace, salt, grograms, and o∣her commodities. The chiefe Cities of this Iland are Paphos, Famagusta, Nicosia, Lescara, Salines, and some others; in which Iland the English have a factorie, for the onely trade of cottons here in use; and the English English consul at Ciprus. consull resident in Aleppo carryeth the title of consull of Syria and of Ciprus, in which place hee hath a vice consull to supply his occa∣sions for the preservation and maintenance of the English tra∣ding hither; which are onely the Company of Merchants cal∣led the levant or Turkey Company, as included within their pri∣viledges. The moneys of this Iland currant I need not mention, nor Coines of Ciprus. yet their accounts, as being the coines of the Grand Signiors, and their accounts kept after the same denomination as in Con∣stantinople. The weight in use through this Iland is the dram, 750 whereof is Weights of cirus. the Rotolo, and 100 whereof makes a cantar, which is accounted 4 per cent. greater than the common cantar of Aleppo; and is by cal∣culation of such as have resided there 80 ounces haberdepois, or 5 li. the Aleppo rotolo yeelding by this computation 4 li. 13 ounces, or 77 ounces: and the quintall or Cantar of Ciprus by this account should be 500 li. sotile; but I find some observations made, that upon some commodities that the 100 Rotolos of Ciprus have made in London 510 and 512 li. The Rotolo of Ciprus containes 750 drams: and the Rotolo of Aleppo is accounted 720 drams, and 62½ drams makes 1 ounce, & 6½ ounces make here an Oake: but note that the can∣tar
of Famagusta, is 4 per cent. greater then this generall cantar of the Iland, which is above 1½ ounces per Rotolo. Note Fama∣gusta. This common cantar of Cyprus, I find thus to respond with the Citie of Venice and other places. Rotolos 100 of Cyprus, makes sotile U 780 li. and of gross 480 li. which by this computation should bee about 522 li. English: but I imagine this is accompted the ctar of Famagusta, which is 8 per cent. greater then that of Aleppo, which deducted, being 42 li. there resteth 480 li. haberdepois, the weight rendred of Aleppo; so that Rotolo 21 in circa, makes 100 li. gross, and Rotolo 13½ doe make 100 li. sotile; and Rotolo 1 is 7½ sotile or 4 li. 8 ounces gross of Uenice weight. Againe, I find these observations made on the weights of Cyprus, Weights of Cy∣prus compared with other places. for cottons, viz. 100 Rotolos of Cyprus cottons, hath made in Venice 750 li. which is 30 li. lesse then the aforesaid notes which are meant of Famagusta, and hath made in Naples 671 li. Bollonia 627 li. Montpelier 678 li. Barcelona 564 li. Sivill 589 li. Paris 448 li. Marselia 567 li. Genoa 710 li. Florence 656 li. Milan 678 li. Avignon 570 li. Bridges 555 li. Rome 631 li. London 506 li. The truth whereof, I referre to the triall of the experienced. Measures of length are heere two sorts: first, the pico, by which is sold all woolen cloth, and silke accounted 26½ ynches, and the Measures of Cy∣prus. brace, by which is sold linnen, being  longer then the pico a∣bovesaid. The 100 picos rendring in Venice 125 woolen braces and 116 of silke braces. Wine is sold here by the Cusse, 7 cusses makes 6 fetches of Venetia, which is a candie barrell, so that a cusse and a halfe, and a Zant jarre, Of Wine. are of one and the same bignesse. Oyle is sold by the Rotolo, which weighs 2½ oakes which is ac∣compted for 1000 drams. Of Oyle. Graine is sold by a measure called the moose, which weigheth 40 oakes, and 2½ mooses, or 100 oakes makes one staio in Venetia. Of Graine. Salt is sold by the Moose; 1000 mooses heere of salt, makes 14 Mooses in the accompt of Uenetia. Of Salt. Also some graine is sold by the coffino, 100 whereof making 24 in 25 steras of Venetia, which is () bushels English.
In this part of Asia (following the opinion of Authors) is Iland Rhodes seated amongst the Iles Arche∣pelago. the Iland of RHODES seated, formerly the habitation of the Knights of S. IOHN, now a Beylque of the Turkes, and where for the commodiousnesse of the Port, there is maintained a squadron of his Galleys yearely imployed, to cleare and protect those Seas: matter of trade presenting heere, I have heere wil∣lingly omitted, and placed the same amongst the Ilands of the Archipelago; to which place I referre the Reader, and who de∣sires to see further thereof. CHAP. CIX. Of the Trade in generall of ASIA, as it is found at this day. TO conclude then the Trade and Traffique of ASIA Of the Trade in generall of ASIA. in generall; it is comprehended within a few prin∣cipall Cities thereof: as first, in the Grand Signiors Dominions in Aleppo, Smyrna, Constantinople, Alex∣andria, Balsara, and Baruti, and Damasco: in Persia Dominions, in Sciras, Ormus, Casbin, Gilan, and Hispahan: and in India and these Coasts, at Goa, Mallacca, Siam, Pegu, Cochin, Calicut, Mesulapatan, and the Ilands of Iava, Iapan, Sumatra, Mo∣luccos: in Tartaria, in Astracan, Capha, Sarmacand, and Cam∣balu, &c. The Turkish Nation affoords not many Merchants of note; yet some are found that from Constantinople doe drive a Trade by Sea to Venice, Cairo, Trapesond, Capha, and some few o∣ther places; and some againe that with Caravans by land drive a Trade from Aleppo, Damasco, and Aegypt, to the Red Sea, and to Mecha; but these I may more properly account Arabians then naturall Turkes, who in generall have beene esteemed in times past, and yet are more industrious and better vers'd in all manu∣all Arts, then in the mystery of Merchandizing; but now they have well neere lost that attribute, and wholly addict themselves by reason of their grand Signiors tyranny, to no further trade then what necessitie doth for the most part compell them, therefore not much worth here further consideration. But those severall Nations inhabiting the large Coast of India, Persia, and these abovementioned Ilands, are found to bee more addicted thereto and of greater eminencie, and are found by their traffique and commerce to have raised to themselves Estates in these Countries equall to many of our European Dukes & greatest Earls,
wherof the Gusurets and Canarins, the frugall and proper inhabi∣tants of India, are accounted the chiefest & principall, occasioned partly by their excellent subtilty in accounts and numbring, and partly by the late navigations and commerce of the Europeans, Ara∣bians, and other remoter Nations amongst them, who bring them (for the most part) no other commoditie but plate and silver in Rials of  which they there exchange for the rich commodities of India, as their Cloves, Maces, Nutmegs, Pepper, Diamonds, Emeralds, Rubies, Pearles, and such other, the precious Wares of these Countries. The Persian Nation challenge also a large share in this Trade of ASIA, occasioned by their excellent and industrious fabriques, and their naturall plentie of raw silkes, which from them is aboun∣dantly transported and spread over all the World, and their sumptuous adorning and curiositie of living, drawing to them by exchange, the riches and commodities of India and China and other places. The Arabians, (as possessing a great part of ASIA) may not heere bee omitted, amongst which are found many emi∣nent Merchants, not onely trading by Camels with Caravans from Turkey into Aegypt and other places, and into the Red Sea, but also from Aleppo to Babylon, Balsara, and so to the Persian gulph; and also by Sea, not onely on the Coast of Sindy, India, Cormandell, Siam, Pegu, and the Ilands aforesaid, where ma∣ny Mahumetane Princes are found to beare rule; but also at Suachem, Melinda, Brava, and Quiloa, and many other parts and Ports of Africa Neither amongst all these above-mentioned Nations, which are found in the generall to afford Merchants of eminencie and note, and to have a Countrey for a particular residence to them∣selves, and where their Princes doe beare Soveraignty, are the Nation of the Iewes to bee omitted or forgotten, who (though by the curse of the Almightie) are scattered and dispersed as it were over the face of the whole earth, and are permitted (with some limitations and restrictions) their abode in seve∣rall Countries, paying for their libertie, and freedome of resi∣dence and commerce, both great and large annuall contributi∣ons in sundry places; yet by their ingeniousnes in Trade, and their expertnes in Arts, and their subtilty in the valuation of Princes coines, and their skill in Accompts, they are found in all these afore-named Countries to bee both eminent and rich Mer∣chants, trading as well by Land as by Sea through all these afore-named Countries, and by their craft and Art, raising to themselves eminence and great Estates thereby. I should heere give a share of this ASIAN Trade to the Chinois, Tartarians, and other great Nations: but my ignorance herein doth silence me.
Therefore it shall content mee to have surveyed it in the ge∣nerall, and to have left behind mee what observations I have beene able to collect of the Traffique, and Traders of those vast and large Territories and Countries, knowing that their strange Customes, and the manner of their Lawes and Go∣vernment debarres all easie accesse into their Dominions, and what others must not dare to see, I must not dare to offer to recount. To conclude then, having thus run over and surveyed the generall Commerce and Traffique of ASIA, I will now turne my selfe towards EVROPE, the last division of the World, and of this Worke, and as the best knowne to us, and the best reputed of Us.
EUROPE, AND THE PROVINCES AND CITIES OF TRADE THEREOF.
CHAP. CX. Of Europe the last division of the World heere handled, and the Kingdomes thereof. EUROPE which I have willingly omitted as Europe 15. parts. last and principall, commeth now to be sur∣veied, that the Trade thereof may the better appeare in her particular Provinces and Cities, should be in prerogative of worth the chiefe and first, but following the custome of Mer∣chants, I shew the best last, and the worst first. Europe then is divided into these Provinces and Ilands. 1 Spaine. 2 France. 3 Italie. 4 Belgia. 5 Germanie. 6 Denmarke. 7 Norway. 8 Sweden. 9 Moscovia. 10 Poland. 11 Hungarie. 12 Dacia. 13 Slavonia. 14 Gracia. The Ilands of Europe are dispersed through these Seas. 1 Greeke Seas. 2 Egean Seas. 3 Cretan Seas. 4 Ionian Seas. 5 Adriatique seas. 6 Mediterranean seas. 7 British Seas. 8 Northerne Seas. Of all which in order, and of each of these Divisions in order.
CHAP. CXI. Of Spaine and the Cities thereof. SPAINE the most Westerne Continent of Eu∣rope is invironed on all sides with the Seas, excpt Spaine. towards France, from which it is separated by the Pirenean Mountaines, and the Fortresse of Pampelo∣na on the North-west, and Perpignan on the South-east. The Commodities that this Country yeelds for Merchandise, is Wines, Sugars, Oiles, Metalls, Licoris, Rice, Silkes, Wooll, Corke, Rosen, Commodities of Spaine. Steele, Orenges, Limmons, Rasens, Almonds, &c. Aniseeds, Anchoves, Soda Barrellia, Figges, Tuny fish, Iron, Shumacke, Saffron, Soape, Cori∣ander, Hony, Waxe, &c. Spaine is found at this day to bee divided into twelve Provinces, which formerly were petty Kingdomes; viz. 1. Leon & Oucedo, 2. Na∣varre, 3. Corduba, 4. Gallicia, 5. Biscay, 6. Toledo, 7. Murti, 8. Ca∣stile, 9. Portugall, 10. Valentia, 11. Cattelona, 12. Aragon. Of which in order, with their Cities of note and traffique. In Leon and Oucedo I finde no Citie of Trade memorable, the Citie of Leon being the principall, and is the Principality belon∣ging Leon 1. Oucedo 2. to the Princes of Spaine, under the name of Astrias. In Navarre is of note, the Citie of Pampelona famous for her for∣tification, and not for her negocation. Navarre 3. Corduba is accounted the most fertile soile of all Spaine, and hath Corduba for a principall Citie; from whence commeth that excel∣lent Corduba. 4. Cordovant leather, knowne to us. 2. Marchna. a principall breeder of the best Genets in Spaine: also 3. Medina Sidonia, whose Duke was principall Commander of that pretended Invincible Ar∣mado 1588. Also Lucardi Barameda a great Haven-towne, Xres which yeelds the Wines knowne, Sherry Sackes, because the Spani∣ards are found to pronounce x as sh in English: and also Sivill which requireth (according to my Methode) for her worth and eminency of Trade a Chapter by it selfe.
CHAP. CXII. Of Sivill, and the Trade thereof. SIVILL is accounted the fairest Citie of all Spaine, in compasse sixe miles, invironed with beautifull Walles, and adorned with many stately buil∣dings; as Pallaces, Churches, and Monasteries; one whereof is endowed with 25000. Crownes annuall rent. The river Baetis divides it into two parts, yet joyned by a stately Bridge: from hence the Spaniards set out towards the Westerne India, and hither re∣turne againe to unlade the riches of those Westerne parts of the world, which principally are found to bee Silver, Tobacco, Ginger, Cottons, Sugars, Brasill, and Ferinand Bucqu wood, and so Drugges. Here is 30000. Genets maintained continually for the King of Spaine his service; and the Trade of this place is of that greatnesse, that some are of opinion, the Customes of this Towne onely is woth unto the King halfe a million of gold yearely; and the Archbishop of Sivill is held so rich, that his rent amounts to 100000 Crownes yearely, and hath under his Jurisdiction 000. smll Villages, and consequently, in his whole Diocese 2000. Benefices, besides Frie∣ries, Nunneries and Hospitals, and esteemed the next in degree to him of Toledo: the rarities of this place I willingly omit as well knowne to our Nation. In Sivill, Madera, &c. the Merchants keepe their Accounts by Mar∣vides, Account kept in Sivill and Madera. of which 35. are esteemd to make a Duccat of Exxo of 11. Rialls, every Riall being 37. Mal. and so is but 374. Mal. But our English there resident keepe their Accounts in Rialls of 34. Mal. the Riall. Their currant monies are these, A Duccat of Gold of Sivill is worth 375. Marvides accounted Coines of Sivill. 5. s. 6. d. Ster. A Riall of Castile is worth in Sivill 34. Marvides. and is so worth throughout all Spaine, which is accounted 6. d. Sterling. money. A Dobra currant is worth of Carlin money  Marvides; every 1000. Dobras are 80. V. 888. Marvides, and is accounted in Mer∣chandise 71. Mar. and is worth in Valentia at even hand 4. Sold. 7. Den. 1/10 of Valentia money without charges of Exxch. A Dobra of Castile is worth 375. Marvides, or is as above a Duc∣cat of Gold. A Castiliane of Merchandise is worth 485. Mervides, about 7. . Sterl. Vide monies in Castile currant in all Spaine.
Their Exxo. are made upon the imaginary Duccat of 375. Mar. Exchanges in Sivill. payable in banco with five per centum, which is the Bancos sala∣ry, or without the banco to bee paied without the same; and this Duccat is commonly tearmed Ducat de Or or de Peso; and is worth, as above, 375. Mervides. In Sivill they ake their payments as fol∣lowing, if you say in Ducate di Or or ae Castilia upon banco, those are then paid in banco without losse at all, but if you say to bee paid in so many Duccats Dor in Pistolets forth of banco, they will pay in the said money; but if it be said to pay in Carlins, it will cost, and sometime ¼ per centum losse. But because I have at large in the Tract of Exchanges in the Chapters 294. and 426. treated of the Exchange of this place, therefore I will (to avoid repetition) referre the Rea∣der thereunto for further and ampler satisfaction. There is used in Sivill three Weights or Kintars: as first, the Weights of Sivill. smaller which comprehends 112. l. of foure Roves of 28. pounds a Rove. The next is of 120. l. of foure Roves of 30. l. to a Rove. The last is the great, of 144. l. of 4. Roves of 36. l. a Rove, which last is accounted the common Kintar of Sivill, upon which these observations have beene made, which for the certainety I referre to triall: 100. l. in Sivill have been found to make in London—102. l. Marselia—113 Venetia Sotile—152 Venetia Grosse—96 Sicilia—5½ Lisborne—90 Florence—129½ Antwerpe—98 Lions—97 Dansicke—117 Genoa Grosse—100 Woolles of Sivill is commonly heere bought about Michaelmas, Spanish wooll. and they pay ½ ready money, ⅙ at Christmas, and have from March to May for payment of the rest, of which heere is great quantity provided. Silke is bought at Almaria, commonly worth 28. Pesanti the l. Morisco, which is 18. s. Florence, for which place it is bought, and Raw Silke. this it will cost 1020. Mar. the said pound which is 30. Rials, which is performed betweene Iune and October, the best time being from Iuly to August by reason of the heate, for after that the weight of silke will encrease. And as for other Commodities heere found besides Wooll and Silke, it cannot properly bee said to bee the Commodities of the place, but for the most are comprehended under the naturall Commodities im∣ported from the West Indies, of which this is the principall Port
and Scale in Europe, and as a Countrey intirely challenged by the Spaniards. Their common measure in Sivill is the Vare, which hath beene Measures  Sivill. observed, The 100. Vares to make in London—elles—74 Anvers—123 Frankford—154 Dansicke—102 Vienna—107 Lions—a.—75 Paris—al.—70 Genoa—Pal.—336 Roven—al.—74 Lisborne—V.—74 Madera—Br.—76 Venetia—133 Lucca—148 Florence—151 Millan—170 Oile is bought here by the Rove, 64. Roves is in Venita one Miara, Of Oil. 40. or 41. Roves makes a Pipe, a Rove is 8. Somer, a Somer is 4. Quartiles, and a Quartile is ⅙ of a Stoope of Antwerpe, and 2. Pipes or 81. Roves is 25. or 26. Florence Barrels, or 252. Gall. Gallons of En∣glish measure, but Sivill gage is accounted but of these Pipes 236. Gal∣lons, at 118. Gallons the Pipe. Corne is measured and sold by the Caffise, which is 28. Staos of Of Corne. Florence, and makes Bushels English () Note that S. Lucar is the Sea Port of this Citie, whereto all S. Lucar. shippes of burthen doe first come and there lade and unlade, and where the Officers of the Custome-house doe come aboord to take notice of the goods both landed and laden for the Citie of Sivill, where the Custome-house is, The Customes of Sivill are great, and arise upon some goods to Customes of Sivill. 10. 15. 20. and upon most to 25. per cent which I must referre to the better experienced; onely it is noted by some that have treated of the Kings of Spaine's Revenues, that the Custome-house yearely of this Citie doth yeeld him, as I said before, halse a million of Gold. To proceede, in the precinct of Corduba lies Andalusia, wherein I Andalusia. finde Sivill to be seated. Secondly Granado, wherein the Citie of Granado, Mallaga, and Almaria principall Cities are situated: and Granado. Mallaga. lastly, Estremadura, wherein I finde onely Merida for a Citie of note, but not of Trade: therefore a word of the two former, Granado and Mallaga, better knowne to the English.
CHAP. CXIII. Of Granado, and the Trade thereof. GRANADO is the ordinary Parliament and Court of Justice for all the Southerne parts of Spaine, as Valia∣dolid is for the North; and therefore it may be ima∣gined Where Lawyers are found to abound, little Trade is commonly concurrent: it is of it selfe a stately Towne, and curiously built all of Free-stone▪ it is fenced with a strong Wall, having twelve Gates, and 130. Turrets; the Palace of the late Morish Kings is the prime and most magnificent building of this Citie, it is ated within the Land, and hath Motrll for the next Port, the neighbourhood of Almeria and Mallaga both maritime Prts binder much the Trade thereof, therefore I shall insist the lesser upon the Trade of this Citie, which principally depends upon the Raw Silke made here and upon the fabriques wrought thereof. The Weight heere used is the Cantar of 100. l. which hath beene Weights used in Granado. observed by some English to make 118. l. haberdepois, and by some Venetians to have made there 111. l. Grosse and 175. l. Sotile. The Measure is as at Mallaga. CHAP. CIV. Of Mallaga, and the Trade thereof. MALLAGA is seated on the Mediterranean shore, aboun∣ding in Reasins, and Wines that are knowne by that name, and thence vented to our colder Climate, which makes this Towne famous for its plenty therein; where touching Anno 1617. I noted this observation, their monies are generall with all Spaine, the principall being A Riall, which is 34. Mervides, and is 6. d. Sterling. A Pistolet of Gold is 23½ Rials and the Double being 47. Rials. Coines in Mallaga. Their Customes upon Merchandise here differ; for Sugar, Almonds, Wine and Oiles are found to pay Custome outwards—7½. per cent. Customes of Mallaga. Cochoncale and other such fine commodities—10. All Commodities which are found to issue ou ells—5. All Commodities transported from Port to Port—2. Their Weight is the 100. l. divided into foure parts of 25. l. which
they call the Rove, and every pound is 16. ounc. and 1. oun. makes 16. Weights of Mallaga. drammes, and each dramme 28. graines: and this 100. l. or Kintar hath beene found to make 112. l. 5. ounc. English; but yet I finde some that have made observations upon this place alleadge that the 100. l. of Mallaga will yeeld in London 105. l. Their measure of length is a Vare, which is 27⅞ inches by Rule. Measures of Mallaga. Their liquid Measure for Wine and Oiles is a Rove, and divided into 8. Sobres: 25. Roves makes a Pipe, and is 100, Gallons En∣glish. Their graine Measure is a Hanocke, and is divided into twelve Of Corne. Almodos; this Hanocke is ¼ of a Bushell and twelve Gallons English, which weigheth by heape 144. l. and by stroake 29. l. English. Note that Almeria agreeth in Weights and Measures with Mallaga Almeria. above named. In Galicia, I finde onely Saint Iames of Compostella famous for the Gallicia. spulchre of Saint Iames which is worshipped with incredible de∣votion; and Baiona, commonly called the Groine, whereto some Q. Baiona. Trade is driven by the Merchants of England, principally of Bristoll, which I briefly thus anatomise. The Coines are the same, as used throughout Spaine. Here is in use two Quintals, the one proper to Iron, which is in London 122. l. and the other called the Sutle Quintall, which is 108. l. and the Measure heere in use is as in Bilboaa following. In Biscay, I finde Bilboa and Saint Sebastians, two noted Townes Biscay, and the trade thereof. of Trading, much frequented by Merchants, whereupon I have gathered these observations of the Trade of these places. The Coines are here currant with all Spaine, which is the Spanish Riall, distinguished into white Quartiles, foure to a Riall, and 4½ blacke Quartile to a single Riall, and accounted by 34. Mervides to the said Riall. There is heere in use two Quintars, the one proper to the Iron Weights of Bilboa. here made, which produceth in London 158. l. and the other being the Sutle 100. l. produceth here about 111. to 112. l. Their Measure heere of length is the Vare; 100. yards is heere Measures of Bilboa. 109. Vares, and the 100. Flemish Elles, whereby Bayes are bought in England is here 80. Vares. Corne is heere sold by the Hanega, and five Hanegaes hath beene observed to make a Quarter English. The Customes here are 2½ per centum, and valued as they shall bee Customes of Bilboa. sold, and not paid till sold: but note that no Commodities payes here any Custome but what is either to be eaten, drunken, or burned: and if a Merchant hap to make a bad debt of above 500. l. the Cu∣stome thereof is not paid at all.
In Toledo is the Citie of Toledo famous for its Archbishopricke, Toledo. whose Rents looke as high as 300000. Crownes yearely; it is seated in the center of Spaine, but of no great consequence in matter of Trade, knowne to us, as improper for the same by its situation, be∣ing an Inland Citie, and overtraded by Churchmen. In Murcia, there are three Townes of note, Murcia the first as principall of the Province; Cartagena the second, as having a Murcia. Cartagena. most excellent Haven, and agreeing in Weights and Measures with Alicant, that is the third, that hath choice Wines and good tra∣ding by its commodious situation. Of the two former I cannot say much: in the later having lived some yeares, I observed these Rules in the course and Trade of the place. CHAP. CXV. Of Alicante, and the Trade thereof. ALICANTE seated on the Mediterranean shore, as Mallaga, Almeria, and Cartagena are, is of late Alicante, and the Trade thereof. yeares become (by reason of its commodious Roade) to bee the Scale of the Citie of Valentia, where the principall Merchants thereof reside, and have here their Factors and Respondents that negociate their affaires for them: it affords Wines, Resins, Licoris, Soda Barillia, basse ropes, Soapes hence called Alicant Soapes, Aniseeds, and such. The Monies are those of Valentia, see there farther. Merchants keepe their Accounts here in Livers Solds and Deniers; Coines Alicant. twelve Deniers make a Soldo, twenty shillings a Liver, which is ac∣counted Account kept. to be five s. Sterl. as the Soldo three pence, and the Denier a farthing. Their knowne great Weight is a Cargo, which is 10. Roves of 24 Weights of Alicante. l. and of 36. l. to the Rove: the Rove of 24. l. being 18. Ounces, and the Rove of 36. l. being twelve ounces, by which is sold Pepper, Rice, Almonds, Cloves, Spices, and other commodities of value. All grosse Commodities are weighed by 24. l. to the Rove, and foure to the Quintall, the Cargo making 280. l. Haberdepois, and the Quintall making 96. l. in England. All Sugars, Drugges, and Tinne is weighed by a small Quintall which is 120. l. of twelve ounces to the pound, which is about 18. or 20. per centum, lesse than the English 112. l. Soda Barillia carryed hence to Venetia to make Glasses, and to
Marselia to make hard Soape, hath beene found to make a Cantar 133. lib. of Province: but because this diversity of Weights may seeme troublesome to bee understood, observe this generall Rule, 96. li. of 18. ounces is 144. li. of 12. ounces, and is the great Quin∣all A generall rule in Alicante Weights. 80. li. of 18. ounces is 120. li. of twelve ounces and is the small Quintall; the difference found is 16. li. of 18. ounces per libram, and 24. li. of twelve ounces li. from the great to the small Quintar. Their common Measure is a Vare, which is ⅙ lesse than the En∣glish Measures of Alicante. yard. Their Wine Measure is a Cantaro, which is about 12. quartes English. Their Corne Measure is a Caffise, about 3. bushels English. Their Custome is 11. Deniers per centum Liver, which is 4½ per cent. Custome. and is payable 8. Deniers to the Duana, and 3. Deniers Sisa, which s paid as well by the buyer as the seller, and as often as any goods re either bought, sold, or bartered, so often is the said Custome paid by buyer and seller 9. per cent. see Valentia farther. The next is Castile, the most prevalent Province of all Spaine, Castile. and whence the Spaniards entitle themselves Castilians, and to which all the other are united, either by conquest or intermarriages; it is divided into the New and Old, in which is first the Citie of Sego∣via, whence comes our fine Segovia cloth, made by Wools that first Segovia. had their originall from our English Sheepe. Secondly, Valiadolid, Valiadolid. an University, which yeelds no commodity but English papisticall Fugitives. Next Burges, famous as contending with Toledo for the Burges. Primateship of Spaine. Next Salamanca, the most famous Academy Salamanca. of all Spaine; these are in Old Castile. In New Castile are found these Cities, first Madrid the seate of the Kings of Spaine, and from a late Madrid. Village become a populous and large Citie. Secondly, Alcala. Alcala. Thirdly, Alcantara. And lastly the Escuriall, built by Philip the Se∣cond Escuriall. and which cost foure millions the structure. In this Tract, I have not observed any eminent Citie of Trading, yet because the whole Country of Spaine in generall hath in many things a depen∣dency upon the rules and orders in matter of Trade belonging hereunto; I will therefore to shorten my Worke as well in the succeeding as in some preceding Townes give you a touch of the Trade hereof under the Title of Madrid or Castile.
CHAP. CXVI. Of Madrid in Castile, and the trade thereof. THe generall Coynes of Castile I account as the generall Coynes passing thoroughout Spaine, which is to be con∣sidered Castilia and the trade thereof. when I treate of the trade of any Citty under the subjection of the King of Spaine. In the then Court of Spaine being commonly in Ma∣drid in Castilia, the duccat is worth 375. marvides, and is called by Coines of Ca∣stilia. some a dobra of Castile. A Castiliano is worth 485. marvides. A florin of Castile is worth 265. marvides almost foure shillings starlin. A duccat count or quento of marvides is a million. Quento. A count or quento of marvides is duccats 2666⅔, and at Dobra it is worth 2739 57/73 dobras, which is starlin 733. li. 6. s. 8. d. A Riall single of Castile is worth 34. marvides, which is 6. d. starlin. A quento of marvides is worth 3258. Rials and three marvides. A Crowne of Castile is worth 323, marvides, but of them you may not make paiment but of 500. onely. The Duccat of Spaine hath 11. Rials of plate, and every Riall as I said before 34. marvides, and every Duccat 374. marvides, which is 5. s. 6. d. English, the Riall 6. d. and the marvides lesse then our far∣thing: the single Pistolet of gold is 11. Reals ¾. being 400. marvides, which is according to 6. d. a Riall 5. s. 10½. Esterling. In Castilia they that give mony upon Exchange, do agree to be paid Exchanges in Castilia. in Duccats of gold, or their worth in gold or silver, for if they should not doe so, they should bee paide in base money, which would proove to be more then five per cent. losse. The orders of the faires in Castile are thus. The first is the faire of May, and is made in Medina del Campo, Faires of Ca∣stilia. and begins the first of Iune, and lasteth 50. daies. The second is the faire of August, and is made in Medina de Ri∣secco, and begins the first of August, and lasteth 30. daies. The third is the faire of October, made in Medina del Campo, and begins the first of November, lasting 50. daies. The fourth is the faire of Villa lion, begins the first day of Lent, and lasteth twenty daies, but is no faire of Exchange, the time expi∣red, there may no goods be sould, nor paiments made upon paine of forfeiture of the goods and monies. and it is to bee noted that the letters be there fifteene daies before the time.
The paiments upon all the faires they make in Banco, not saying The paiments. rth, and they are to remit in duccats de Or, in Or larg, and forth  Banco, when they say forth of Banco and for ready money, there  gotten thereby one per cent. and when they say duccats of gold or e worth, it is understoode in marvedes, 375. for a duccat, and when ey say forth of the faire, it is understood for ready money, and is shall suffice to have said of Castilia in generall: and as for the stome and manner of their exchanges here practised, see the chap∣r 426. of the exchanges of Spaine at the end of this tract. In Portugall once a famous Kingdome, (and the rather for the Portugall. rtunate discoveries made in the Easterne Indies by the inhabitants) ere is many faire townes of trading, but all of them giving prece∣ency to Lixborne, the metropolis of this Kingdome, I shall willing∣ therefore omit the rest, and inlarge my selfe thereupon: The Commodities of Portugall. nerall commodities this Country abounds in are these, Hony, ine, Oyle, Allum, Fruits, Fish, white Marble, Salt, &c. and those any other commodities that it is now in great aboundance found to eld are the proper commodities of the East Indies, such as are epper, Cloves, Sugars, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cottons, Callicoes, the Iems of dia, the Spices and drugs of Arabia, and the Silkes and fabriques of rsia and China, which though here to bee had, yet I have here mitted the mentioning, as not being the native commodities of ortugall. CHAP. CXVII. Of Lixborne and the Trade thereof. LIXBORNE is accounted to bee seven miles in com∣passe, Lixborne and the Trade thereof. and to containe 20000. families, having 67. towres upon the walls, and 22. gates to the Sea∣ward, and 16. to the Continent: it is seated upon the River Tagus, accounted most famous and commodi∣ous for traffique and commerce, from hence the Portugals set out to the East Indies, and hether doe returne againe with all those Spices drugs and other the rich Merchandise which East India, Arabia, Per∣sia and China doe affoord: at the entrance of the River Duer stands Porto also, a towne of good trade, where the gallies used in times past to land the merchandise, and therefore is called Porta gallrum, by which meanes some authors doe inferre the whole countrey tooke its name of Portugall. But to proceede to Lixborne, I will note what I have observed thereupon in matter of traffique accor∣ding to my proposed theame. The coines in Portugall found currant are these: Coines of Por∣tugall.
A  of gold, is worth 400. Reas. A Duccat of Portugall is 10. Reals, which is 400. Reas, which is five shillings starlin. A Riall is 40. Res, or 6. d. starlin, a mill Reas is 22. Rials. A Teston is 2½. Rials, or 100. Res, or 15. d. starlin. A Vintin is 20. Res or 3. d. starlin. A Mirle of gold is 1000. Res, which is 2½. duccats. A single Riall Spanish, is 2. Vintins, or 4. Res. Their Waights are these, a small and a great, the great C Waights of Portugall. is divided into foure Roves, and each Root. is 32. Reals, which is 128. li. at 14. ounces per li. which hath been found to make in F∣rence 149. li. their small Quintar for Pepper and Ginger is neee 112. li. English: the Rove or quarterne is 28. li. the great Quintall hol∣deth 15. in 16. per cent. more then the English 112. li. The King hath a Quintar for his Contractation house to sell the Spices of India, by which is 150. li. of Florence, and is about 114. li. English; the great Cantar of Lixborne making in Florence 170. .  130. li. English, but all fine goods is by custome of the place to b sould by the said Kings beame. These observations upon the 100. li. small of Lixborne, have been made in and yeeld The 100. l. small of Lixborne doth to yeeld in London—113½. li. Marselia—126½. li. Venetia sotle—168½. Venetia grosse—106 . Sicilia—63¼. Florence—149¼. Antwerpe—107¾. Lions—119 . Civill—110¾. Dansick—130½. Genoa—162. Alleppo—23. Rials Alleppo silke—24. 6. Irip. soria—27. 6. Irip. Barbaria—98. li. Baruti—22. Allex. zera—52. 3. Allex. forsia—117. 6. Sei—102. 10. Constantinople—93. 6. Rhodes—20. 7. Acria—18. 3. Babylonia—15. 10. Ma. Balsera—4. 5½. Ma. Ormus—113. Which for triall I referre to the experienced.
Their Measures of length, dry and liquid heere used are these; Measures of length in Por∣tuga. irst, their Measure of Cloth is the Covada, which is neere ¾ of n English Yard; but the Measure of Linnen is the Vare, and is n Ell, lesse naile of the English Measure, by which may bee made he computation for other Countries, and by some found to bee 8. er centum lesse. The Measure of Corne is the Alquier, three Alquiers is a bushell, Of Corne in Portugall.  is 8. Gallons Winchester Measure, and five Alquiers is a Hannep of Spanish Measure. The Measure of Salt is called the Muy, and 60. Alquiers makes a Of Salt. ni Portugall Muy, and 2. Muyes and 15. Alquiers is a Tunne of Bristoll water-mea∣ure, which is 10. Gallons Winchester, and 40. of those Measures doe make a Tunne. Note that 4½ Alquiers of Lisborne makes a Fanega or Hannep in Andalusia, by some observations, which Fanega is 2. Staios and omewhat more of Florence, in such manner that a Staio of Florence ay be accounted halfe a Fanega, and an Alquier of Lxiboa may bee ccounted halfe a Staio of Florence, which makes () Gal. Eng. The Customes is inwards 23. per centum, that is, to the dechima 10. Customes of Lisbor. er cent. to the Sisa 10. per cent. and to the Consolado 3. per cent. and he Customes outwards is onely 3. per centum. These observations have beene also made upon Measures of this place; 22. Alquiers of Lisborne have made in Sicilia upon corne Observations upon the dry measures of Lisb. . generall Salmo, Alquiers 3⅙ have made in Marselia one Mina; and t is to bee understood, that the Muy of Corne and Salt are all alike, but that there is given one in 24. more upon Salt, because the Salt ooseth and not the Corne. The Tunne of Wine in Lisborne is 52. Almudin, and one Almudin is 13. Chaate, &c. which is in England () Gallons. The next Province is Valentia, giving name, or taking it from a . Citie of the same name, the principall of this Province which is seated some two miles from the sea, where there is found an open Roade called La Greo, and not capable of great shippes, nor indeed safe for shippes of any noted burthen, therefore is Alicante become the principall Scale for this Citie, in which place having resided for some time Anno 1617. I shall touch the Trade thereof as ob∣served by me in those dayes.
CHAP. CXVIII. Of Valentia, and the Trade thereof. VALENTIA the principall Citie of the Province of Valentia, giveth Rules to all the adjoyning places, as Valentia and the Trade thereof. well for matter of Trade as judicature, wherein is vented yearely great quantity of Pepper, Tinne, Lead, Baies, Linnens, Fish, as Pilchards, Herings, and New∣land fish, and such other like Commodities, having their  current, Weights and Measures as followeth. A Liver of Valentia is worth 20. Sold. of that money, and is ▪ Coines of Valentia. Sterling. A Duccat of Gold is 21. Sold. of the said money. A Castilian is 27. Sold. and 4. Deniers of the same money. A Liver of Valenta is worth 365. Mervides of Castilia, and chan∣ging them at Naples for Valentia 18 sold. 4. Deniers, which with the charges comes even, because a Duccat of Carlins is worth at Naples after the rate of sold. 18. Den. 3½ and this because your money  at 15. per centum. Their greatest money is a peece of 6. sold. which is three Rials Castile, then have they three sold. which 1½ Rials, and the halfe of three sold. which is 18 Deniers, which is 1½ sold. every soldo is 12. Deniers, and 24. Deniers is a Riall Costiliano, which is 6. d. Sterl. Their Accounts are kept by Livers sold. and Deniers, 12. Deniers accounted to a sold. and 20. sold. to a Liver, which is 10. Rials Ca∣stile, Accounts in Valentia. 50 souls French and 5. s. sterl. The Weights are these and thus distinguished. The greatest Weight is a Cargo or Load, which is 360. li. of Vi∣lentia, Weights of Valentia. and hath beene found to encrease 3. or 4 per centum after the Weight of Florence. This Cargo is accounted to bee 12. Roves as well of fine as grosse goods; a Rove sutle being 30. li. and by this Weight Cargo fine. Ditto grosse. is weighed corne, sugar, oile, spice, and other fine goods. A Rove Grosse is 36. lib. and by this is weighed Wooll, and such other grosse goods. A Quintar as well the small as great is foure Roves, which makes 120. li. of fine goods, and 144. li. of grosse goods, in which ob∣serve this true Rule for all the Weights of Valentia. 98. li. of 18. ounces to the li. is 144. li. of 12. ounces to a pound, and is accounted the great Kintar, and Note in weights. 80. li. of 18. ounces to the li. is 120. li. of 12. ounces per li. the
small Cantar: so that the difference is 16. li. of 18. ounces and 24. l. f twelve ounces from the great to the small, and these two Weights ave beene observed to yeeld in other Cities of Trade after this anner. 100. lib. Sutle doth produce the first Rowe. 100. li. Grosse doth pro∣duce in the second   Sutle li. Grosse li. London 96½ 115¼ Marselia 107 128 Venetia sotile 140 168 Sicilia 54 64 Lisborne 84 102 Florence 122 147 Antwerpe 92 110 Lions 101 122 Civill 94 113 Dansicke 110 133 Mallaga 26 Rials 31 Rials Barselona 104. l. 125. l. Majorque 102 124 Paris 102 124 S. Mllos 105 128 Allepp 19. 6. Rials 23. 4. Tripoli Siria 23. 4. Rials 24. 9. Bruci 18. 8. 22. 4. Alexand. zera 44. 5. 53. 2. Scio 87. 6. 105 Constantinople 79 95 Rhodes 17 21 Genoa 133 163 Their Measures are these following: Foure Palmes of Valentia makes a Vare, which is 1⅔ Braces, of Measures of Valentia. Florence, and is ⅚ parts of an English Yard; 100. Vares after this account may be in London 83. in 85. Yards. Corne is sold by the Caffiso in Valentia, which is twelve Barsellas, Of Corne. which weigh 10½ Roves of 36. lib. a Rove of twelve ounces per lib. which is in Florence 7½ Staios, and 37. Barsellas is there 24. Staios, which is a Mayo, Barseilas 17. making a generall Salmo in Sicilia; and is of the measure of corne in England () Gallons. Salt is also sold by the Caffiso, which weighes 18. l. of the Grosse Of Salt. waight of Valentia, eight Caffices making one Mdino in Iuie, and one Caffice making 3. bushells English. Wine is sold by the Cantaro, which is a pitcher, and containes Of Wines. twelve quarts of English measures: note hat 1480. Salms of wheate in Sicilia have made in Valentia 1840. Saffici. This Country affords, as I said before, hard Soape commonly worth 80. Rials a Kintar, rising and falling as oyles are in request. Commodities of Valentia.
Aniseeds are worth about 24. Rials the Rove, and daily is trans∣ported for France and England. Barillia is used in making glasses, and hard soapes; and worth 16. to 18. Rials per centum. Resins of Denia, a small Village, anciently a famous Towne of this Province; not so well esteemed as Mallaga fruit, is sold Genia. heere at 18. Rials per cent. and I have paid here for a whole shippes lading of 200. Tunnes, Anno 1618. 24. Rials per cent. proving com∣monly best when dearest. Almonds are heere also plenty, worth commonly twelve Duc∣cats a Cargo, which is 2. 2. 0. l. English, which 280. li. Customes here paid is 9. per cent. 4½ by the buyer, and 4½ by the seller, and as often as any Commodity is bought or sold, so often Customes in Valentia. is this Custome paid, being 8. Deniers Duana and 3. Deniers Sisa; and if any goods comes in to bee shipped out againe (comonly called a Transito) the generall Duty of foure Deniers per li. is onely paid and no more. Their payments in Customes and all other wayes are in Valentia monie, and worth 3. per cent. to be converted into Spanish Rials. There is also a Duty called a Mottahecos, which is a pound of Pepper on each Quintar, and so upon other fine goods: and this is as much as I remember needfull in this argument, and so I will pro∣ceed to the next Province which is Cattalognia; and as for the Ex∣changes here practised, see farther in the 291. and 426. Chapters. In Cattalonia is onely famous, the City of Barselona the princi∣pall of this Province, where having good cause of the remem∣brance Catalonia. of my being heere by reason of my imprisonment in the Inquisition, Anno 1618. I must according to my Methode afford the Cities Traffique, a note of observation, in acknowledgement of their love and paines in my Release; moved thereto, partly by the affection I had gained with many the chiefe Merchants, but especi∣ally least the ame might deterre other English from comming to traffique and inhabite amongst them, and furnish their  with English commodities which they seeme much to desire, and of∣tentimes much stand in need of.
CHAP. CXIX. Of Barselona, and the Trade thereof. BARSELONA is seated on the Mediterranean shore, and entering into that Golfe which is so terrible to Barselona. Navigators. In these parts called The Golfe of Lions, it hath a reasonable commodious and safe Harbour, and the Citizens doe winterly enlarge and lengthen the same by adding to their Moulde, that shippes of burthen may come within the same: what I observed here Anno 1618. I will briefly declare. Their monies current in Merchandise, besides the Riall of Castile, Coines in Barselona. is a Liver which passeth heere at 20. sold. and a Duccat of Gold of Castile is worth 24. sold. of the said money, and the soldo is twelve Deniers of that money, wherein they are found to keepe their Ac∣counts. Their Cantar is a 100. lib. which is English 92. lib. or thereabouts, Weights in Barselona. and hath made by observation in Florence—123. l. Genoa—130 Valentia—106 Marselia—104 Venetia Sotle—140 Their Measure is a Canne consisting of eight Palmes and hath beene found to make three Braces in Florence, and in England found Measures of length. to produce 1  Yards English, and in Naples hath been found to make 6⅓ Palmes. Corne is sould by a Measure called the Quarter, one Salmo is foure Of Corne. Quarters, sould alwayes free of all Customes, 2½ Quarters making a Carga or loade, which is accounted 360. li. as is that Carga mentio∣ned aforegoing in Valentia. Woolles are sould by the Rove, which is 30. li. making 26▪. li. of Venetia grosse, whither the same is commonly transported, and in Florence 36. lib. All grosse goods are sould by the Carga, accounted 3. Kintars, which is 440. li. sutle of Venetia, and 278. li. grosse there, which is 372. li. in Florence, and hath beene found to make English 300. lib. Haberdepois. In this Province lieth also Tortosa a fine small Citie, but the prin∣cipall Tortosa. of the Inhabitants being accounted as Moores were some yeares before my being here banished this Country, and therefore
most places lies waste, and many Villages are here along found without inhabitants, and the grounds to want laborers. The next Province is Arragon, wherein is Tarragon, a fine and hansome Citie, but by the banishment of many of the inhabitants, Aragon. as above is said, now made poore: in my being there in 1618. I found it most to consist in making of silke, here bought and car∣ried to Valentia to be wrought: The principall Citie hereof is Sa∣ragosa, which should challenge a more particular relation, as being Saragos. commodiously seated for traffique on the bankes of the River of Ebro, but being an Universitie, it were too great an honour for an inland towne to produce famous Schollers and em inent Merchants, yet in the currant coynes, it is observed to rule as in Valentia: and because there is found practised here a great Exchange, I have in∣serted the same by it selfe, Chapter 292. in the end of this tract, with all circumstances thereunto apertaining. And these are all the principall Cities of traffique found at this day comprised with∣in the Kingdome of Spaine. CHAP. CXX. Of the waights and measures of Spaine reduced to the English hundred. THe principall Cities of Spaine and Portugall thus surveyed; It will not be unworthy our observa∣tion Waights of Spaine reduced to the 100. li. of England. first to see how the waights and measures of some other lesser Cities here omitted concurre with the waights and measures of England, and then take a generall view of the Trade which is in ge∣nerall found in the compasse of those Kingdomes, now united and subiect to the Crowne of Castilia: First then to beginne with the waights of Spaine and Portugall, I will reduce them to the suttle 100. li. of London, which by observation hath been found to make in Sivill is 108. li. by great quintar of 144. li. of 4. roves of 36. li. smaller quintar of 112. li. of 4. roves of 28. li. lesser quintar of 120. li. of 4. roves of 30. li. Granado and Almera bona 104. li. is the pound of 16. Ounces. 89. li. is of silke and copper of 18. ounces. 52. li. great waight for flesh, 32. ounces. Castilia and Medina del campo 98. li. Burgos 89. Rot. Aragon and Barselona 102. li. 92. li. great weight for Woolen. 126. li. small waight for Saffron.
Valentia 102. li. by quintar of 4. roves of 30. li. for Spices. 129. li. by quintar of 4. roves of 36. li. the carga, is those The 100. li. of London. quintars of 360. li. and the greater of 432. li. Leon 105. li. Saragosa 108. li. and by the small quintar 126. li. Savaona and Salanico 126. li. Viliaco 77. li. Note here that the Ilands of the Canaries, and all the Ilands of Spaine use the waights of Siill as aforesaid, now for the Kingdome of Portugall 100. li. London makes in Portugall Rot. 104. li. the great quintar of 128. li. the small quintar of 112. li. containing each 4. Roes of 32. li. and 28. li. Note here, that there is allowance made foure upon the hundred upon Sugars, and two and three per cent. upon Cotton wools and such ike, the small quintar is the waight of the contractation house of the ndies: all spice is waighed thereby, but all are waighed by the great quintall, and reduced upon the lesser quintar, one quintar of Waxe, is one quintar and halfe of 112. li. is 168. li. Madera 104. Rotolos. or pounds by the quintar of 128. li. Cape Verde 104. Rot. Saint Thomas 104. Rot. uynea 104. Rot. Morrcco in Barbary 104. Rot. Feas and suus in Barbary. 92. li. Calicut 77. aracoles: note here they sell by the, Baccar or Baharr, be∣ing at Laxborne foure great quintars of 112. li. and observe that the Baharr is foure quintars for 120. aracoles. The Bahar or Bahor is 20. faracoles of 32. li. per Rove, which at Lixborne is 5. quintals, 480. aracoles. Whereby it may be discerned, that as Sivill hath given the waight to the West Indies discovered by the Spaniard, so hath not Lixborne but in part given the waight to the East Indies, who had amongst themselves there an eminent trade, and consequently their waight and measure peculiar to themselves, before the Portugall discovered the same. As for the measures of both these Kingdomes, as I have done Measures of Spaine reduced to 100. yards in London. with the waight in reducing it to the London 100. li. sotle, so will I reduce the measures thereof, to the 100. yards of London which rendereth in The 100. yards of Londō is in Castilia 111. Vares of 4. quartes, and eve∣ry quarto 2. palmes. Toledo 111. Vares Cades—108. Vares. Dito for sike—148. Ells. Andolusia—109. Vares. —57. Cones.
Saragosa—44. Canes. Morocco 181. Covad. Both these of 12. to one Cove. Cap dalgi 141. Covad. Sivilia—109. Vares. Granado—109. Vares. Barselona—57. Canes. Valentia—97. Canes. Lixborne—82. Vares. Ditto for—109. Vares. Ditto for silke—96. Covades. CHAP. CXXI. Of the Trade in generall of Portugall and the Kingdome of Spaine. THe Navigations and discoveries of the Spaniards and Protugals into the East and West Indies, though Of the trade in generall of Porgall and Spe. they carried to the world, at first the specious co∣lors of piety and Religion, by planting their su∣perstition in these heathen countries, yet ambition and profit was doubtlesse the secret designe of their intendments: Portugall whose Kings first sought those un∣knowne Regions of the East Indies, and seeking discovered, and dis∣covering in part conquered; presently made strict lawes and pro∣hibitions for any of his Subiects to trade for certaine the richest commodities thereof but himselfe, and thereupon stled his con∣tractation house in Lixborne, where those commodities should be sold, waighed and delivered, and these bargaines being made by Commis∣sioners appointed by him, were first from thence called Royall Con∣tracts; and thus for a long time it continued till his Subjects ha∣ving made further and ampler discoveries of those Regions for their better incouragement, and to induce his people to those Na∣vigations, he permitted them afterward an ampler and larger li∣bertie of that trade, reserving certaine particular commodities onely to his owne use and benefit; neither did it otherwise appeare in the carriage of those who were discoverers of the West Indies, which we finde to be the Spaniards; for though there wanted not faire and plausible demonstrations of winning the soules of those poore people, yet by millions they were slaughtered, butchered and slaine, making a devastation in that Country of those inno∣cent inhabitants, as if there had beene no way to the eternall life of the soule but by a present death of the body, aiming thereby as may bee conjectured particularly at the possession onely of their
estates, which by many deaths and torments, was drawne from them, and converted to their owne and to their Soveraignes trea∣sury, as appeares (to the scandall of their Religion and of their King) in sundry of their owne Authors published in many langua∣ges: these two countries then thus discovered, and thus by rapine gotten and setled, and since unitedtogether under one King, hath af∣forded the present matter of trade to all Spaine and Portugall, which before that time afforded not any commodities almost whereby rade might be as much as discerned, much lesse maintained; and ow Lixborne for the East, and Sivill for the West Indies is become the Staple for all the rich commodities those two Countries doe af∣ford, and so continued till England and Holland by their late Navi∣gation shared with them in the traffique and riches thereof, which yet are seene to be but as petty branches comming from the prin∣cipall channell; but the West Indies affording to them great quan∣tity of Silver by the mines thereof, which now is found so aboun∣dantly plentifull in the world, may be called indeede and in effect, heir best commoditie, which ever since its first coinedge, they have maintained in its prime waight and finenes, which many of their Politicians have gone about at severall times to inhanse, as if it would ave prooved a great benefit to their Commonwealth, but wiser udgements have discovered that the raising of these monies in Spaine would prove altogether prejudiciall to that state, for all these ommodities that are brought to them, which for the most part they stand in great neede of, being necessary either for backe or belly would soone vanish, did not these their monies all and attract them: and contrariwise it may bee hence imagined, and I thinke granted, that what other Prince soever doth inhanse his Silver or the monies of his Countrey, it must needs prove to his owne pro∣per prejudice, and the Spaniards gaine, because they raise and in∣anse a commodity which is not theirs really, but transported to them at second hand by Merchants and others, and of which though happily possessing some small Silver Mines, of their owne, yet the grosse is still his, so farre forth as his quantitie and abun∣dance exceedeth theirs. As for the other commodities which those Countries afford, ours and many other nations were with the same from Alexandria and Venice at first supplied, and then hence, but now having found the way to the spring head, we daigne not to buy of them at the second hand, except such, of which their Princes reserve to themselves a peculiar interest, either by farming the same to their Subjects or keeping the same in their owne hands, or by excluding all other na∣tions from the trade thereof, and these we and others are constrai∣ned to have from them, in which number may be accounted Su∣gars, Tobacco, Ginger, and some other drugges and the commodities of the West Indies in generall. Now for the inhabitants both of Spaine and Portugall, they are in
generall lovers of Merchansing and traffique, neither so mu spising it as the French, nor yet so much addicted thereto as the  ans, yet more willingly adventuring their estates at sea than th who heerein are found to distrust the providence of Almig God in a lawfull calling, and preferre their owne wisedome  providence on land before the protection of the Almighty at  And as they are well-wishers to Trade, so are they found in a larg measure to practise it in such Cities as occasion and commodities doe either present or permit; for both in Sivill and Lisborne are found Merchants of great eminency, but yet are such as for the most par bend their Traffique into both the Indies and no where else, except peradventure a little to Antwerpe in Flanders, and into Naples, and Sicilia in the Mediterranean seas, and which seldome are noted to adventure their estates, or have any Factors resident but where their King is chiefe and Soveraigne. The Raw Silkes, Wines, and Fruits of this Kingdome are the prime commodities of import it now yeelds, as also Olives, Resins, figges, almonds, &c. which the English fet from them in great abundance; so that it is of late yeares observed, that the Planters of these Fruits, and their Wine Merchants have by our over greedy purchasing of these commodities, raised to them∣selves faire estates. Two things I observed during my abode heere, that are great lets and impediments to the Trade of this Nation, the one is the banishment of the Moores that heere in great numbers inhabited, who painefully and industriously manured their land, and by their labour and thristy living raised to their Landlords and to them∣selves good and great estates, the which now for many thousand thousand acres lies waste and desolate, whole Towne and villages being depopulate and the Lords, Castles, and Manurs appearing ru∣ined and decaied, want the paines of these poore people that gave their Lords and Lordships meanes of subsistency. The second is the residence of many Genoa Merchants amongst them, who are found in good number to abide in every good Citie, especially on the Sea-coasts, whose skill and acutenesse in Trade farre surpassing the naturall Spaneards or Portugals, and who by meanes of their wealth and continuall practise of the Exchanges are found to devoure that bread which the inhabitants might otherwise be sufficiently fedde with, and by reason that the King of Spaine is ever engaged to their Common-wealth for great and vaste summes at interest, hee is their Debtour not onely for their monies, but also for their favour, which by many immunities throughout his Kingdome, hee is found continually to require them, and amongst the rest it is observed, that there is no Genoa Merchant resident in Spaine in any part, but hath a particular Licence to export the Rials and Plate of this King∣dome to a certaine round summe yearly, which they seldome use re∣ally to doe, but sell the same to other Nations, that are constrained to make their returnes in Plate for want of other more beneficiall
commodities, which for the certaine profit it is found ever to yeeld n other Countries is often preferred before all the other commo∣dities of this Kingdome. A third reason of hinderance I might dde hereto, which is the current Coine wherein all commodities are ould and bought; for in many parts of this Kingdome, being for he most part base and of Copper and Brasse, which to convert into ials and good money is found to cost the change in some places 5. n some 10. in some 15. in some 20. per cent. which is the first peny. The great Customes also paid in many parts of this Kingdome, is ikewise a great let and hinderer of Trading in generall; which wheresoever the same is by the Soveraigne levied, will in a short ime and insensibly devoure and consume a flourishing Traffique, nd enforce the suffering Merchant either totally to give over, r bend his Trade where hee shall finde the burthen thereof ligh∣er and more easily to bee borne and endured. Now as for Commo∣dities which other Nations are found to bring unto them, and of which they stand in need of, partly to supply their owne necessi∣ies, and partly to maintaine their West India Traffique, as this Eng∣and brings them, great store of Newlandish fish, Irish Salmon, Pil∣ards, Herrings, Lead, Tinne, Calves skinnes, Baies, Saies, Searges, and ther Englishmanufacturies; and in returne have only thence, wines, ruit, Oiles, some Indico and sugars, ginger, and the like India commo∣dities. East country furnisheth them with corne, cordage, masts, pitch, rre, rosin, firre-boords, and other timber, and only returne thence the commodities above named; onely it is ever lawfull to him that brings  to carry out Rials of Plate in returne thereof. France sends them corne, linnens, Paper, and some few petty manufacturies, and returnes thence Plate, wine, fruits, and some India Spices. Italie affords them some Manufactaries, of Silke, and hath in returne some Raw Silke, SegoviaWools, Barillia, and such like: and herein is comprehended the generall Traffique of Spaine at this time: so passing the Pirene∣ans, I will enter into France.
CHAP. CXXII. Of France, and the Provinces and Cities thereof. FRANCE is accounted one of the most Emin France and the Provinces thereof. Kingdomes of Europe, and it is the best that can sub∣sist without the helpe of others: it is bounded on the North with the British Ocean, on the W with the Aquitaine Sea, on the South with  Mediterranean Sea, on the South-east with th Alpes, on the East with the River Rhine, and an imaginary li drawne from Strasburge to Callais. This Country affordeth for Merchandise to her neighbours th naturall notable commodities, Corne, Wine, and Salt; the Farme  Commodities of France. Salt onely yearely bringing in to the Kings coffers 100000.  besides which it yeeldeth Oiles, Almonds, Soapes, Canvas, , Paper, Oade, Linnen fine and course, Nuts, Beefes, and of late so Stuffes and Cloth made of woollen, &c. There is reckoned in this Kingdome 25. Provinces; the notable Cities of Traffique found therein, I shall orderly handle. The first Province is Aquitane, wherein are found the noted Cities of Tholousa, Burdeaux and Rotchell, of which a word  Aquitaia. briefe. CHAP. CXXIII. Of Tholousa, and the Trade thereof. THOLOUSA is the Parliament seate of Aq∣taine and standeth on the bankes of the River Tholousa and the Trade thereof. Geronde, which hence runneth to the Wals of Burdeux and Blay, and so to the Sea: it is very plentifull in Pastill or Wod, which hence i dispersed into severall Countries, the Country not affoording any other notable Commodity worth mentioning. Their Monies is the same as throughout all France, which in Coines and accounts. Paris the principall Citie of this Kingdome, I shall handle, their Ac∣counts also here kept, are as through all France in generall, in Livers
or Francks, Souls, and Deniers, 12. Deniers to a Souls, 20. Souls to a Liver or Franke. The 100. li. or Kintar of Tholousa hath beene observed in Wde Weights of Tholousa. for Diers to make in England 124. lib. and the Cargo by which the same is commonly sold to be 372. lib. The Measure of this Country is called the Aulne, and ma∣keth Measures of Tholousa. in England 42. inches by the Rule. Note that in Tholousa there is a Cantar also of 112. li. which is in use in all other Commodities, Woade excepted, sould by the Cargo, Woade of Tholousa. as above is mentioned, and is hence sent to Narbone, and thence dispersed into sundry parts of the Mediterranean seas. CHAP. CXXIV. Of Burdeux, and the Trade thereof. BURDEUX is seated upon the bankes of the River Burdeaux and the trade thereof. Geronde before mentioned, plentifully abounding in those Wines which being White and Claret are knowne by the names of this citie, here is alo neere this city the little village of le Greve, which gives name to those Grave wines, which we esteem so excellent, and between this towne and Tholousa lies those rich grounds which yeelds those sweet Wines by us knowne by the name of High Country, which the inhabitants of Burdeux knowing their worth, would hinder the sale and exporta∣tion of theirs of that growth, do therfore prohibite the same to be landed, or sould in their Towne ill Chri day in the morning, and hen these High Country Merchants are more busie in landing their Wines, than they are in attending their Masse; that Gabor or lighter being ever accounted free of taxe and Custome that first set∣teth  head agound, when their Masse bell ringeth, and then it is lawfull for any man for that day to come aboard her and be drunke grasis. Here our English have had many priviledges and beene esteemed as fellow Citizens before all other Strangers, but our last Warres to the sle of  hath made them heere inferiour to all others, and now pay double their former Customes▪ upon Wines, which in cour∣tesie to the Dutch is abated them and laid on the English shoulders, which may be remedied if his Majesty please; it is otherwise then for Prunes and Wines a Towne of no great Trade, for little traffique is heere else driven, Monies onely are hither remitted to provide the same, but no commodities else vendible of import. In Anno 1611. I here learned the French Tongue after I had beene for a while in
Rotchell, so will note in briefe, what I observed thereupon in those my younger dayes. The Monies currant and Accounts kept are in Livers, Sold, Denlers, as throughout all the Dominions of the French King. Monies and account. Their Weights and Measures are as followeth. The Weight of Burdeaux is the Pound, 100 whereof is the Quin∣tar, Weights of Burdeaux. which hath beene found to he 110. li. English and the 100. l. in London is 90¼ lib. here. Their common Measure is an Alne which is about English. From Burdeaux I will passe by Blaie, where I will onely note a Measure of Burdeaux. subjection of our English shippes, which heere at their going up to English subje∣ction at Blaie upon the river Geron. Burdeaux, unlade all their Artillery and Armes, which by many treaties beweene the Kings of England and France hath beene cove∣nanted to bee disused, yet the insolency of the Captaine of Blaie, scorning the commandements of his Soveraigne and his treaties, holds still the same in use to the great prejudice of our Merchants trading to Burdeaux. And now to Rotchell, the place of my first e∣ducation beyond seas. CHAP. CXXV. Of Rotchell, and the Trade thereof. ROTCHELL hath beene of long time accounted the Rotchell and the trade thereof. strongest and best fortified Citie in France, and was  of late yeares in possession of the Protestants, and was ever found as a Sanctuary for them in their greatest dan∣gers, it is commodiously seated for Trade on the Aqui∣taine Ocean, thesea every tide flowing into the Citie, and carrying thereinto shippes of a reasonable burthen: within these late yeares the French King hath besieged it, and after a long Siege starved the Inhabitants, and by that meanes enforced the reduction, therefore what Trade it now hath I am ignorant of, but Anno 1611. there was a great concourse of Merchanti, as being the staple for all Spanish and English commodities for these parts of France. Their coines currant and forme of Accounts are the same as throughout all France, and their Weights are these. The 100. lib. of Rotchell hath made in London 96. lib. English, and by observation in Lions of poids de la ville 94. li. Weights of Rotchell. The Measure is the Alne, common in name with all France, but Measure of Rotchell. in many places is found to differ, making here 44. inches English.
From England is sent hither Butter, Calves skinnes, Herings, New∣found land fish, and some English manufactuaries of cloth, &c. and hence is returned a small Wine called Rotchell Wine, but more pro∣perly Cogniacke, also Salt from the Isle of Re, Oleron, &c. and some Prunes and other commodities. Poictou is the next Province, the principall Citie hereof is Poiters, Poitou. famous for the study of the Civill Law, and next to Paris for great∣nesse in all France, but of no note in matter of Trade. Anjou is the next, yeelding the best Wines in France, the princi∣pall Anjou. Towne is Angiers and Sanmar, the onely Protestant Vniversity in France. Maine is the next, the principall Towne is Mans. Maine. Touraine is the next, the principall Cities are Blois, Ambois, and Touraine. Tours famous for giving a beginning to the Protestants of France, and which is noted for many excellent fabriques and Manufactua∣ries of silkes here daily made, knowne to us by the names of Taffe∣ies, Plushes, and Tabins of Tours. Britanie is the next, wherein is found Nantes for the situation Britanie. pleasant, Rhemes a Parliament seate; and lastly, Saint Mallo seated commodiously for Trade upon the British Ocean. Giberoy a great Faire for these Countries, and Morlais affording that Linnen in great quantity knowne to us by the names of Locrams. Locrams. S. Mallos and Morlais. S. Mallos and Morlais comprehending these three knowne sorts of Dowlas, Tregar, and grasse-cloth, also Noialls for saile-cloth, and some of other sorts here daily bought up for ready monies, and hence dispersed into Spaine, England, Scotland, and Ireland. The next is Normandy, in which are found many principall Normandy. Townes of Trade, as being commodiously seated by the neigh∣bourhood of the British Ocean; the chiefe is Cane, Deepe, New∣haven, Constance, and lastly Roven, under the title whereof I shall comprehend the Trade of the rest.
CHAP. CXXVI. Of Roven, and the Trade thereof. ROVEN seated on the bankes of the River Sein, Roven and the trade of Nor∣mandy. and the seate of the Parliament of Normandy, is one of the principall Cities of Traffique and Commerce in France, having a great concourse of Merchants of all these Northerne Kingdomes, and is one of the three principall Townes in France where Exchanges are used. The Commodities that is hence, and out of Normandy exported are Linnens course and fine, buckroms, paper, cards, some Wines, and Commodities of Roven. other petty manufacturies. The Commodities sent thither from England, principally Clothes of sundry Countries, as Kerses of Devonshire and York shire, Baies of Coxall, Cottons of Wales and York shire, and of late pepper, galles, cotton yarne, and other Turky Commodities also, Lead, Tinne, Fish, and some India Commodities. The notes of trade observed there at my residence therein 1614 I shall briefly touch as I then noted the same. Monies and ac∣counts in Roven The Monies currant and Accounts kept are the same as in generall used throughout France, see farther in Paris. The Kings beame is heere called the Viconte, which is 14. per cent. Weights in Roven. greater than our English 112. lib. and some have found it to bee 10. or 12. li. by which is weighed all Commodities whatsoever, but I have often found that the 112. lib. English hath made by Viconte 98. li. and by common beame 101. li. The Measure is heere an Alne, by which all Commodities of Measures in Roven. Woollen and Linnen is measured, and is accounted 1¼ yards English, but those that have made triall thereof finde it to bee 46. inches, but it is here to bee noted that in buying of Linnen cloth of this Country there is allowed in the account of Measure 24. Alnes for 20. and is called the Merchants Alne or measure, and by the same is oftentimes here againe sould in England, and it is found that Deepe, Cane, and some other Cities of Normandy afford also this over-mea∣sure; in the sale of Normandy canvas here made, so that it may bee said this place hath a great and a small Alne, the one exceeding the other 20. per cent. or 120. for 100. and the smaller agreeing with our English Elles. Roven is found to have 3. Faires in a yeare, at two Faires in Roven. whereof there is liberty given for fifteene dayes to buy and trans∣port any commodities in this Citie free of all customes and taxes:
provided the said goods bee laden and departed downe the River to a certaine limitted distance below the citie, by fifteene daies after, otherwise to pay the custome as is accustomed. The first Faire beginneth the 3. of February, and lasteth fifteene dayes. The second beginneth the morrow after Whitsunday and lasteth fifteene dayes. The third is not accounted a free Faire for customes as the former, and beginneth the 23. day of October, and continueth onely eight dayes, where note that these dayes are accounted so many working dayes, sundayes and holydayes according to the Church of Rome excepted. Here is in this Citie a publique Hall granted to the English for The English hall in Roven for sale of woollen cloth. the sale of all English woollen cloth, whereto they are enjoyned to carry the same and have certaine set dayes to lay open and sell the same, and for the hire and custody they pay a Duty of halledge or warehousedome: they have had formerly here many immunities and priviledges and were accounted as halfe Citizens, but the civill warres of France, the insolency of the Inhabitants, and the great au∣thority of their Court of Parliament dayly give new fashions and new lawes to the English Merchants here resident. This Citie is the prime of Trade in this part of France, and is ac∣counted the principall Northerne Scale of Traffique in the French Domnions, for from hence are exported great quantity, as I said before, of buckroms, canvas, fine and course, playing cardes, boxe combes, paper, thred, teasles for Clothworkers, and some plushes, and other stuffes lately heere made, and in fine all the principall com∣modities of Normandy, Paris, and those parts adjoyning to the Ri∣ver Sein; as for the Exchanges here used, see Lions in the Tract of Exchanges of Roven. Exchanges following, which gives Rules thereto in Chapter 277. and Chapter 302. The next division of this Kingdome is the Isle of France, which is Isle of France. in the heart of the French Dominions the principall Citie Paris, be∣ing the Metropolis of the Kingdome heere situated, which though it consist not much in Trade, save what may serve happily to feed and clothe the Cour and inhabitants, yet all the other Cities taking hence the Rule of government for Traffique may challenge justly a Chapter by it selfe.
CHAP. CXXVII. Of Paris, and the Trade thereof. PAris being the principall Citie of France, and the ordi∣nary Paris and the trade thereof. residence of the Kings, is esteemed to be ten miles in compasse, through which the River of Sei doth gently runne, and so to Roven, thence to Newaven or Haure de grace, and thence to our Brittish Ocean. It is not of great consequence in matter of trade, as neither affoording commodities to be exported, nor yet venting store of commodities imported, though an ignorant French-man, which had not seene further then this City, call it the greatest in the world for the trade found therein, and for the multitude of Merchants, which I imagine he understood shopkeepers; some Cloth, Lead, Tin, Baies, and Stockings it venteth from England, Sattins, and other silke, and  from Italy, some small wares from Germany, and that is all the most important. It is one of the three Cities in France, where Exchan∣ges have beene placed, Roven and Lions being the other two, and though I have divers times bin here, yet I could never find any re∣markeable observations in Trade, which indeed is no where in France much practised, because of the base esteeme the French ∣tion doe hold of Merchants and Merchandising, every Cobler hono∣ring his old shoes with the title of sa marchandise, with as great con∣fidence as he that never handled any commodity but Silkes or Iewels, in which foolish humor I will leave them, and come to my pur∣pose. Paris giving rule in matter of Coine to all other Cities of France, I have purposely referred it heere to avoide the reiteration in any other City of this Kingdome. The least peece then of Coine currant in France is a Deneire, two Coines of France. whereof makes a Double, and twelve thereof is a Souls; and Souls, twenty makes a Liver, which some call a Franke, and thus in Livers, Souls and Deneires their accounts are kept. Their common Coines are peeces of 8. Sol. which is the ⅛ of a Accounts in France. French Crowne in Silver: a peece of 16. Sold. which is the quarter Crowne, 4. of which makes 64. Sold, accounted for a French Crowne, and 4. Solds which is of 3. Livers Turnois. They have also peeces of 21. Sold, 4. Deniers, being the  of the said Crowne, called by some Testons, and the ½ and ¼ thereof, and as the quarter Crownes were at first raised from 15. Sold to 16. Sold, and thereby the 60. Sold to 64. Sold, so were the said Testons also in proportion raised accor∣dingly. The Gold coines are only two, which is the common Crowne,
of 3. Livers or 60. Sold, and the Crowne of the , being 3. Livers 16. Sols, or 76. Sol. All which Coines in their first coinage, bare this true worth and value, and then were conceived to hold equality with England: thus 10. Sold to make 12. pence starling. 20. Sold to make 2. shillings starling, which is their Liver. 60. Sold to make 6. shillings, or 72. pence, which is the French Crowne. But these in hanced to such rates as the necessities of the  Note of mo∣nies inhansed lately  France. or commerce inforce them, finde not now any setled rae, but accor∣ding to the will of the paier and receiver, for hee that sels his Com∣modities in France now for ready monies, must contract if hee bee wise, at what rate he must have these Coines in paiment, least he ima∣gine he sell to good profit, and yet by experience find he sells the same to a great losse and disadvantage. And note that since the writing of the abovesaid, the peece of 16. Sol, is raised to 20. Sol. ⅕ in the whole, which I place heere as a Caveat for such as shall have occasion to traffique into these King∣domes, that he be inquisitive and circumspect to informe himselfe in the true worth and valew thereof er ee part with his Comm∣dities. The Quintall of Paris is 100. li. which hath beene ound to pro∣duce Weights of Paris. in London neere 100. li. sutle. 2. per cent. more or lesse, which in Lions renders of 16. ounces 116. li. In Venetia sotile 144. li. 100. li. sotile in Venetia making in Paris 62½ li. of 15. ounces per li. The Carge or great Quintall in Paris is 300. li. of 12. ounces per li. which makes in Florence 487. li. but the ordinary Quintall of 100. li. before named is of 15. ounces to a pound. Wine is sold by the Cesterne, 96. making a Te, and each Ce∣sterne containes 8. pints, so that it may be accounted two Con of Florence, which is () gallons English, see London. They have two measures in length, one for Silkes, and another for Measures of Paris. Linnens, the which are () But note that all Merchants selling Silke stuffes in grosse in Paris, the same is sold by the pound waight, which is better for the buyer, for thereby hee discerneth the waight of the silke hee hath for his mo∣ney. Paris doth Exchange with many places, which I heere omit, and Exchanges of Paris. place the same amongst the Exchanges in generall in the Tract fol∣lowing at the end of this Booke in the Chapters 277. and 302. It may bee imagined that this Kingdome, considering the riches thereof should abound in Trade and Navigation, but the better sort of men medling not with traffique, as conceiving the same to bee The French not addicted to trade. both ignoble and base, and consequently unfit for them; leave the same to such whose spirits are elevated to that ripenesse that they can but onely be sorry for their erroneous opinions: their Naviga∣tion
also is not farre, the Marselians greatest voyage being to Turkie, and the inhabitants of Rochell, Saint Mallo and Rochell, seldome sai∣ling into any regions further then Spaine, their ill successe in Ame∣ricaes plantations, peradventure disswading them, but he that shall wisely looke into the beautie of their inland Townes, the riches of the Country it selfe, and especially the plenty of Corne, Wines, Lin∣nens and Sal that France produceth; and how much these commodi∣ties are prised and sought after by other Nations, will be more wil∣ling to excuse the French for their so little desire to traffique into remote Regions. The next Province is la Beause, wherein is Orleans a pleasant Ci∣tie, La Beause. and where the nearest and most Elegant French tongue is concei∣ved to be spoken, seated on the Loyer, but affording little matter of Trade or commerce, save that it is found to bee a great through-faire for all such commodities as doth enter into the heart of the Country, Orleans. as to Lios and other Cities, upon the River of Loyer and by this way and hath a growth of good Wines about it. The next is Berry, wherein is Bourges seated as the prime and principall Towne, who are much addicted to Clothing, and where Berry. Bourges. great aboundance of Sheepe are found to pasture and feed. The next is Burbon, wherein is contained Burbon, Nevers and Burbon. Nevers. Mollins. Mollins, wherein I never saw any commodities worth relation, save those excellent instruments of Iron in small cases here made in great aboundance, called estus, and dispersed thence over all Christen∣dome. The next is Bevois, the chiefe towne is Villa franche. Beavois. The next is Avergne, the principall City is Cleremnt. Avergne. The next is Limosin, the principall City is Lmoges. Limosin. The next is Perigort, the chiefe towne is Perigeux. The next is Quercu, the chiefe towne is Molbon, one of the Perigort. Quercu. cautionary townes in the Protestants possession, and now lately by the French King reduced to his subjection. The next is Daulphine, honoured with the title of the Princes of France, wherein is found Vienna, excelling in the art of making Deulphine. Vienna. sword blades: Valencia, a fine City, watered with the Rhoane; and lastly Lions, once the principall towne of traffique in all these parts, Valencia. where having occasion of residence 1616. I noted these particulars following in Trade.
CHAP. CXXVIII. Of Lions, and the Trade thereof. LIONS hath ever been accounted, a famous Mart Lions and the trade thereof. Towne, and doubtlesse before Navigation had its perfection, a City of great Trade and Commerce, but for as much as all inland Townes must submit in this point to maritime Cities by reason of the commodiousnesse of the Sea, which is the grea∣test fartherer of all Traffique, so must this Towne now give place to many others that exceed her in the point of Traffique. Their Mart for Trade here setled was formerly holden in Gene∣va, The Mart of Lions formerly in Geneva. and by Lewis the Eleventh removed hither, for the enriching o his owne Kingdome, and when Pope Iulius the Second had excom∣municated Lewis the Twelfth, he commanded by his Apostolicall au∣thority that the same should bee againe removed to Geneva, but his Holinesse herein was not obeyed, for Trade must not be constrained but entreated, though by Popes which would command all things; and therefore stirred not from hence, where yet it continueth. This Towne is watered with the streames of Rhoane and Soane, whith furthers it much for carriage: it is most famous now for the many fabriques of silkes here wrought and hence dispersed through all France, and the Citizens to this end have their Factours in Mar∣selia, who trade for them to Aleppo in Syria, to furnish them with that commodity by land; also they trade for Florence, Lucca, Mil∣lan, Mesina, and other parts of Italy, but it is onely for raw silkes, and some such Commodities as these places doe afford. I resided here some yeares, and found the greatest of their Trade to consist in Exchanges, as the principall and most proper Towne of France, thereto the Bankers of Florence, Venetia, Lucca, and Naples having here their Factours purposely for this occasion. From England is here vented some baies, tinne, lead, Cony-skinnes, and but few commodities else; and to our Country it affordeth not any commodity worth mentioning; what I have observed I shall onely touch and no more. As for Coines currant, and Accounts keeping, it is the fame as throughout France. Coines and ac∣counts in Lions. An ancient Marke in Ex∣change in Lions. There hath beene of long time in use an imaginary coine here cur∣rant in Exchanges called the Marke, which briefly to explaine is A Marke of Gold is 65. Crownes of Marke or 63. cro. 11. s. 9. d. of
gold in gold, or 62. crownes of Camera Vecia of Rome, or 68. 14. 3. Duccats currant of Venetia. And they did use heere to keepe their Accounts by crownes of markes sold and deniers, advising one Cro. de marke to bee 20. solds of marke, but is 45. sold turnois, by which crowne of marke they did ex∣change by, as briefly for example. They gave in Lions one crowne in Marke to have in Florence 57. or 58. crownes, according to the Cambi. To have in Rome 56. duc. of Camera more or lesse, as the exchange went. To have in Naples 72. duc. of Carlins more or lesse, &c. To have in Palermo or Mesina 25. or 26. Carlins, &c. To have in Spaine 400. Mervides, according to the rate of Ex∣change. To have in Anvers so many grosse as the Exchange did permit. But this custome being now lost by the expulsion of the great Exchange now of Lions. bankers out of this Towne in the dayes of Lewis the Twelfth, it is since reduced to Crownes of the Sunne of three Livers, by which imaginary (for so I call it now as having none to bee found of that value and rate) coine there is now made, and the common and ordi∣nary prices thereof I willingly heere omit, as having mentioned the same at the end of this Worke in the Chapters 277. and 302. and other following, where all the due circumstances of Exchanges and payments of monies are observed, whereto I referre the Rea∣der. It is to be noted that heere is observed foure Faires, in which all payments either by Exchange, or for Merchandise are made, which runne still from three moneths to three moneths, wherein for so many dayes rescounters of payments are made without any mo∣ney seene stirring, from man to man which is done in a publique place or Burse appointed to this purpose, as I have touched in the Chapter of transferring of Billes of debts and specialties in my Fa∣ctours advis: the times and tearmes of which Faires are these, First, the Faire of Easter begins after the Octaves of Easter. The second is the Faire of August, being the first Munday after Faires of Lions. our Ladies day in August. The third is the Faire of All Saints the day after All Soules. The fourth is the Faire of le Roies, the day after Epiphany, and every Faire lasteth fifteene daies that are not holy-daies, all businesse is done in these Faires, and all billes of Exchange, are made and dated in one day, and two daies after they make the rate of the Exchange, which Faires are counted by their payments. The terme of their billes of Exchange hence are these, Termes of the bils o ex∣change in Lions. From Lions to Florence, Rome, and Venice, about 30. daies, litle more or lesse, according as the Merchant maketh the agreement every Faire, but all the aforesaid places, for one and the same day. From Lions to Naples, and Valentia, 5. daies later than Florence.
From Lions to Anvers as Florence. From Lions to Spaine, that is, to Medina in Villalion, the Faire of All Saints, and of the apparition of Lions, they exchange for the Faire of Villalion of Midlent, and the Faire of Easter of Lions for the Faire of May in Medina del campo, as you shall see more at large in the daies of payment of billes dated in Lions, in the said place of the Exchanges of this place. They have in Lions three beames, one used in the Custome-house, Weights in Lions. which is the Kings beame, which containes 100. lib. the Quintall and is greater than the second, which is the Towne-weight by 8. per cent. by which all goods payeth custome that is ponderous. The second is the Towne-weight and is 100. lib. the cent. the pound thereof containing sixteene ounces per lib. upon which all calcula∣tions are made. The third is onely the Weight used for silke, and is 100. lib. the cent. and the pound containing fifteene ounces per lib. and called The pound of marke. The 100. lib. of the Towne-weight is it whereby the observations have beene made with other Countries, and which by triall hath beene found to render thus in these places following. In London—96. lib. Marselia—104 Venetia sot.—143 Ditto grosse—89 Sicilia—53 Lisborne—83 Florence—125 Antwerpe—90 Sivill—92 Dansicke—109 Mallaga—28. R. Rome—122. l. Millan—131 Paris—80. Genoa—135 Almaria—120 Burges—114 Rotchell—104 Deepe—94 Roven—92
And in Asia have made these, In Aleppo—19. R. Silke R.—20. 9. Tripoli—22.¾. Dito Barbar.—81. l. Baruti—18.¼. Alex. zera.—43.¾ Dito forfor.—96 Scis—86. Lod. Constantinople—78 Rhodes—17. 2. R. Acria—15. ½. Babylonia—13. . Balsara—3. 9.¼. M. Ormus—93.¾. lib. CHAP. CXXIX. How forraigne Measures and Weights are compared with Lions. I Finde a French Merchant to have made these ob∣servations upon the Trade of Lions, which I re∣ferre to triall. 100. lib. in Millan to have made by triall in Li∣ons 69. lib. silke-weight, the silke brace in Millan to Milla with Lions. render in Lions  of an Alne. The Cloth-brace there to render in Lions  of an Alne. And 20. sols of Millan calculated for 10. sols turnois. 100. lib. in Turin to render in Lions—77. li. silke-weight. The Ras which is the measure to be  of an Alne. Turine with Lions. The Florin in money calculated for three sols turnois. The 100. li. of Genoa to render in Lions 2. li. silke-weight; 9. palmes of Genoa making a Cane, 1. palme  of an Alne. Genoa with Lions. The Spanish Pistolet worth in Genoa then 11. lib. 12. s. in Lions 7. li. 7. s. The Crowne of Gold in Gold of Italy worth in Genoa 115. . The 100. lib. of Florence to bee in Lions—76¼ silke waight, 4. braces being there a Cane, 100. braces being 49. Alnes Lions. Florence with Lions. The Crowne of Gold of Florence calculated at 3. li. turnois. 100. lib. of Lucca sutle weight hath rendred in Lions 72½ lib. silke∣weight.
100. lib. of Lucca of Custome-house weight made—81. li. Lucca with Lions. The pound of which place beig composed of 12. ounces. And 2. braces of the said place made in Lions 1. Alne. 100. li. of Bollonia have rendred in Lions 77 li. silke waight. The brace of Bollonia hath rendred  of an Alne of Lions. Bollonia with Lions. The Liver thereof 20. Sols may bee esteemed at 11. s. 3. d. turnois. 100. li. of Naples have made in Lions 68. li. of silke waight. 8. Palmes make a cane, and the palmes by 4. to make them quar∣ers, Naples with Lions. and divide by 17. for 17. quarters in an Alne in Lions, which re∣duced into London measure is. The Duccat may bee calculated for 48. s. turnois, which is 4. 10. sterling. The 100. lib. Sutle of Venetia made in Lions 63½ lib. silke weight. 80. Braces of that place silke makes in Lions 43. Alnes. Venetia with Lions. The Duccat may bee calculated at 50. Sol turnois, which is 5. . sterling. The 100. li. of Mesina render at Lions 70½. li. of silke weight. The 100 braces of Mesina gives in Lions Alnes Messina with Lions. The Ounce of Mesina gives by calculation in Lions The 100. li. of Bergamo is in Lions 68. li. silke-weight. the Brace of Bergamo is 5/9 of an Alne, mult. by 5. divid. by 9. Bergamo with Lions. the Liver of bergamo is 6. per 6. dr. tur. which is sterl. 7½. d. The 100. li. of Mantoa are in Lions 66. lib. silke waight. the brace is  of an Alne, multiply by 8. and divide by 15. Mantoua with Lions. the Liver of Mantoua is in Lions. The 100. lib. of Modena are in Lions 77½ li. silke waight. the braces are the same as in Mantoua. Modena with Lions. The 100. li. of Antwerpe are in Lions 102. li. silke waight. the Elles of Antwerpe is  of an Alne, which is done by taking the Antwerpe with Lions. ⅓ and ¼ of the summe and adde them, they make Alnes. the Liver of grosse may be calculated at 6. li. tur. 12. s. sterl. The 100. lib. of Sutle have made in Lions—96½ lib. silke waight. the 9. Yards in London make in Lions 7. Alnes, so that the Alne of London with Lions. Lions is 46. inches English. the Liver or pound of London sterl. is 10. Livers turnois. The Oake of Constantinople makes in Lions li. Silke-waights. Constantinople with Lions. the P of Constantinople is 5/9 of an Alne, mult. by 5. div. by 9. the Piastre of Doller may be calculated at 45. s. sterl. 4. s. 6. d.
The Rotolo of Aleppo hath rendred in Lions 4½ li. Silke waight. The Rotolo of Tripoli in Siria hath made 4. lib. Aleppo with Lions. The 100. lib. of Valentia in Syaine hath made in Lions—73½ Almeria—117 Tortosa—72 Saragosa—73½ Spaine with Lions. lib. Silke∣weight. And 130. Vares of Valentia hath made in Lions 100. Alnes. 100. lib. of Paris have made in Lions of towne-weight 116 Roven have made in Lions ditto—120. li. Tholousa have made in Lions ditto—96 The weihts of dive Ci∣ties of France with Lion. Marselia hath made in Lions ditto—94 Montpelier hath made in Lions ditto—96 Rotchell hath made in Lions ditto—94 Geneva hath made in Lions ditto—130 Besanson hath made in Lions ditto—116 Bourge in Bresse makes in Lions ditto—115 Avignon have made in Lions ditto—96 The Measure of Languedocke is a Cane, divided into 8. Palmes, which Cane is 1⅔, to reduce Canes into Alnes, you must adde ⅔ and they make Alnes. Now for as much as many other places, that traffique in Silke, are found to correspond with this Towne; it will not bee improper I should inserte them briefly heere, as shewing what the 100. lib. of these severall places make Silke waight, or as they terme it poids de mare in Lions. of 15. oun. Padova 100. li. gives in Lion 73. li. Regio 100. li. gives 78 Callabria 100. gives 69 Cosensa 100. gives 70 Raconis 100. gives 66½. Bavearre 100. gives 90 Aleppo Rotolo gives 4½ Tripoli Rotolo gives 4 Ancona 100. gives 73 Placio 100. gives 72 Marselia 100. gives 85 Avignon 100. gives 68 Note that the 100. lib. of Marc or Silke waight in the payment at Lions makes 108. lib. of the Towne waight of Lions, the former Measures of Lions with o∣ther places. being fifteene Ounces to a Pound, and the latter being of 16. Oun∣ces to a Pound. For the Measure of length of Lions, I finde this observation to have beene made, that
The 100. Alnes in Li∣ons make in London—98⅓. elles. Anvers—163⅝. Francford—204⅝. Dansicke—136 Vienna—142 Paris—93⅖. Roven—85¼. Lixborne—98⅓. Sivill—132 . Madera—101⅖. Venetia—177 Lucca—196 Florence—200¾. Millan—226⅕. Genoa—472⅞. palm. Spaine—135. Var. Rome—130. braces. Naples—50. Canes. Which I referre to triall of the experienced; and thus much shall serve to have said of Lions. The next Province is Languedocke; wherein is found Narbone, Languedoc. Nismes, and Montpelier, three good Cities, and which afford of late daies, by te industry of the Inhabitants some serges, saies, and some fine cloth, of this Country making; and heere also growes that ex∣cellent Wine which takes his name from the Towne of Frontiniacke: and heere also is that small Village Beaveaire, having in Iuly a Faire Beaveaire. or Marte famous in these parts, and resembled at my there being 1618. our Sturbridge, beside which they have yearely there other Faires but of no great consequence. The next Province is Provence, wherein is Arles, in times past the seate of some Romane Emperours. Brignolle, whence our Prunes of Provnce. Brignolle come, knowne to us by the name Prunels from Brignole, whereas in the language of this Country the g. is not pronounced. Aix the Parliament seate; and lastly Thollon, the best Haven in France, and most capacious, and Marselia famous in trade for these Countries, of which a word in passing, and first of Thollon.
CHAP. CXXX. Of Thollon, and the Trade thereof. THollon enjoying a faire and capacious Haven, and e∣steemed the best, largest and safest in the Mediter∣ranean Tholln, & the trae thereof. Sea, is seated ten leagues to the Eastward of Marselia, wherein the King doth keepe a Cu∣stomehouse for Province, as having not so much power to settle one in Marselia, by the priviledge or insolency of the inhabitants, who endevour still thus to main∣taine that little liberty they have. It aboundeth onely in Oyles, which hence is laden in great aboundance, and dispersed into o∣ther Countries, as England, Holland, and some Almonds, which wee call Province Almonds: Some Salt is heere laden and brought from the Iles of Eres, about three leagues hence, being the proper Merchandise of the King, who hath Factors for the sale thereof in e∣very City and Towne in France. In this place the monies are the same as through all France, and the waights and measures not much differing from those of Marselia, which I will there more succinctly handle, and onely will shew the manner of buying and providing heere of Oyles, as I have observed my selfe heere at divers times du∣ring my abode in this Towne and Countrey. Oyles of Province are heere and throughout all Province bought Province Oyes how boght and cast up. by the Millrowle or Millroe, fourteene of which are accounted to a Tun of Oyle of 252. gallons, yet if carefully looked unto at the buy∣ing, and the same truely measured, 13½. Milroes will make the said Tunne; the same is sould commonly heere by the Florin, an imagi∣nary coyne, and in valew 12. Sol turnois; the Milroe of Oyle is commonly worth 26. to 30. Florence, the Caske of this place cost ordinarily 18. Sold per Milroe, and the Custome outward is 10. Sol per Milroe, and the Custome of the place gives 3. per 100. provision, and 1. per cent. for brokeredge thereof. Now to reduce all charges to a constant rate, it hath been observed and found true by my selfe and others, that if 18. shillings 6. pence stariing be accounted for every Florin that a Milroe of Oyle shall cost the first penny; so much will the Tunne of Oyle stand in cleare aboard of all accustomed charges. But for as much as this rule holds onely in Thollon, I will insert Measures for Oyles. the particulars thereof how it is found to accord with our measure and waight in England, because it is a staple and most requested commodity, and the principall commodity that this Countrey doth affoord. The common measure then is a Scandall, and of which it is
found that 4. Scandals make 1. Milroe, every Scandall being 4¼. gal∣lons English. and 31½. li. haberdepois. 1. Mroe is 17. gallons English, and is 126. li. English. 2. Milroes is a charge which is 34. gallons, or 252. li. English. 4. Charges makes a But, which is ½. a Te, or 12. gallons English, and hath been found to make 1008. li. haberdepois. The Custome hereof is a Crowne of 3. li. Tur. upon every 100. Milroes, and every Crowne is accounted 5. Florins, or 60. Sols. Wine is here sold by the same Milroe, as above is said. For Wine. Almonds are sold by the Cargo of 300. li. Marselia waight. Corne is sold by the Muyd and Mynots, 24. Mynots make a Muyd, For Corne. and 1. Muyd is about 8½. quarters English. Province doth affoord many commodities for Merchandising, which Commodities of Province. hence is transported into severall Countries, as first Oyle as above made and gathered in November and December shipe for England, Spaine and Italie. Also great quantitie of Wools for Clothing, bought up in May, Iune and Iuly, by Milanois, Genoes, Piems and Montpelerians, which commonly beares 14. in 16. the 100. oule, and being wa∣shed and clensed, there is lost in the clensing and clearing some∣times the one halfe thereof. Also great quantity of Scarlet graine, and powder of graine, gathe∣red in the Heaths and Fields by poore people, and brought by them to the Lords of their Territories, from the Moneth of May, to the Moneth of August, and is worth greene about 5. in 6. li. tr. per li. but being dried diminisheth at least . thereof. Also Almonds are heere in great aboundance found growing, gathered in September and October, called (as before is noted) Pro∣vince Almonds for distinction sake, and are commonly worth from 12. to 15. Crownes the Cargo. Also heere is yellow Waxe in good quantity, bought in October and November, worth commonly from 40. to 50. li. per cent. Also heere is Hony bought in November and December, worth commonly about 22. in 23. Cro. the Cantar. Besides which, heere are many Bed coverlets, and Wastcoats made and quilted of Satin, Taf∣feta and Callico, and hence dispersed into severall Countries. To conclude, there may bee laden in Tholon, Marselia, and generally throughout all Province, from 1500. to 2000. Tunnes of Oyle yeere∣ly, about 400. Quintalls of Almonds, about 1800. to 2000. Quintalls of Wooll, about 200. Quintals of Hony, and but little Waxe, as being for the most part spent in their owne Countrey, principally in their Churches. The Customes upon all commodities of the growth of France, pai∣eth Customes paid in Province. in the Exportation but a all acknowledgement, but all other commodities pay five per cent. but for Spices and all other commodities
that are brought in from the Levant, there is lately placed thereon throughout all Province a Custome of ten per cent. and thus much for Thollon. CHAP. CXXXI. Of Marselia and the Trade thereof. THe principall seate of Trade in Provence is Marselia, Marselia, and the trade thereof. famous for the great concourse of Merchants, and for the commerce that it maintaineth with Turkie, Barbarie, Spaine, France, Italy, Flanders and Eng∣land, it is commodiously scituated on the Mediter∣ranean Sea, enioying an excellent Haven, and a reasonable roade for shipping of all sorts, it wanteth to make it per∣fect a course for Exchanges which heere is supplied by the corrent of Lions, and governed onely thereby, to which place each faire some partidos are made, not by the rules of other places, but by the rule of Interest from the date of the Bill, to the time of the next succee∣ding faire there. It vents from England some Baies, Clothes, Lead and Tinne, Pilchers, Hering white and red, and yeerely about 2000. in 3000. tunnes of Newland-fish which the English bring thither, and they also supply it with Moscovia commodities, as African hides, aboue ten thou∣sand paire yeerely, Tallow 2000. Quintalls, Waxe 1000. Quintalls, besides other commodities of England, as Calueskins, Hides, Salmon and some fish. It affoordeth not any commodity to bee sent abroad, save some Oyles, Wines, Wools, Almonds, and Verdigrace, and all others are hither imported from other Countries, as such as Alexandria, Aleppo, Acria, Constantinople, Naples, Leghorne, or the coasts of Spaine doth yeeld; the maine support of their trade is the plenty of Spanish Rialls, and the licence heere for exportation, which is the onely meanes whereby the trade of Turkie is preserved to them, for from hence I have seene 100. thousand Rialls of . shipt publiquely upon a small Vessell of 160. tunnes for Scanderone, which hath been thence returned in rich Silks, Drugges and Spices. But of late daies, their successe in trade hath prooved so bad, and their losses by Pirats so great and so many, that the towne and Merchants have lost much of their former splendor and fame, their great Vessels are now be∣come small Barkes, and the great Merchants of Lions, Paris, Lioges, Toures, and other parts of France, who had heere their factors for to continue this trade, have recalled them after the sustentation of great losses, the paiment of great sommes, for the maintenance of their Ambassadour in Constantinople; and especially the late in∣hansement
of their monies, which is the ruine and overthrow of all commerce whatsoever. In this place I resided for some yeeres, and therefore will note briefly what I observed needfull to my present subject. The monies currant, and the accounts kept accorde in all particu∣lars with Paris, sometimes alteration is found in Coines by meanes Coines in Marselia. of the great trade, and that because both Italian and Spanish coynes are heere current; these become sometimes a Merchandise, and are requested and inhansed according as occasion for transportation doth require, which is more in winter then in sommer, by reason of their generall voyages made into Turkie, from September to March, and commonly not after. The pound of Marselia is 16. ounces, and 100. li. is the Quintall, Weights in Marselia. 300. li. or three Quintalls, makes with them a Cargo. The 100. li. in Marselia hath beene found to produce in these Cities following: In London—88½. li. Venetia sotile—134. li. Venetia gro.—84¾ Sicilia—50. li. Lixborne—79. li. Florence—114. li. Anvers—86. li. Lions—95. li. Sivill—88. li. Mallaga—24. Roves Dansicke—104. li. Alleppo—18½. R. Ditto silke—19¾. Tripoli—21. 1 Ditto barbar.—76. 2 Baruti—17. 5 Alex. zera—41. 6 Scio—81. 10 Constantinople—74. 5 Acria—14. 6½ Babylonia—12. 5½. M. Balsara—3. 6. M. These observations I have found true by my owne experience. Weights a∣greed with other places. Rotolo of Aleppo, gave in Marselia 5. li. 6. ounces Rotolo of Damasco gave 4½. li. Rotolo of Tripoli in Soria 4½. li. Rotolo of Mantoa 5½. li. Cantaro of Genoa 118. li.
Cantaro of Cuietavechia in Allome 130. li. Cantaro of Alicant in Barsilia 133½. li. Rotolos 100. li. Malta in Oliues 200. li. Loderos 100. li. of Constantinople 135. li. Cantaro of Sardinia in cheese 100. li. Cantaro of Zante in corrence 116. li. Cargo of Valentia in pepper 320. li. Cantaro of Argier 150. li. Rotolo of Cyprus in cottons 5¾. li. Cantaro of Valentia in cocheneale 88. li. Hundred of London, 112. li. gave in Tinne 125. li. And the 120. li. English▪ stannery in Tinne made 134. li. These Townes are said to agree with Marselia in their Quintall, First, Lepanto 100. li. Arches 100. li. Candia Sotile 100. li. Petras 100. li. Rotchell 100. li. Tholosa 100. li. Montpelier 100. li. Avignon 100. li. which I referre to triall of him that shall have occasion, because I question the trueth of some of them. The Measures of length is the Cane, which is divided into eight Palmes, the Cane making 2½. yards English. Measures of Marselia. Corne is sold by the Mine, the Sacke of Pisa, and Leghorne is found to be 1⅘ Mines of Marselia. The customes here out and in are 1½ per cent. but the Citie by rea∣son of cleansing the Harbour, and some shippes set out against Pi∣rats Customes in Marselia. have made the 1½ inwards 3¼ per cent. and onely 1¼. out, this is meant of commodities of the growth of the Countrie; but in Spices brought in, as Pepper, Ginger, Indico, or such as come not out of the Levant, but as they call it, out of the Ponent, or out of the West Seas, it paies the Kings custome which is now about 15. per cent. be∣sides the Cities custome above named, and thus much for Marselia. The next Province is that of Avignon, the principall Citie there∣of called by that name, it is a faire Towne, and seated upon the Ri∣ver Avignon. of Rhone, but hath no Trade that I could observe, though I have often beene there, it is subject to the Pope, and hee permitting Iewes to inhabite heere, are found the principall Pedlers, for Merchants I cannot call them. The City is said to have 7. Palaces, 7. Parishes, 7. Monasteries, 7. Nunneries, 7. Innes, and 7. Gates, and other things of note I observed not, and as for commerce, the Weights and Mea∣sures diffr not much from Marselia, and the great custome here paid is some prejudice to passengers and merchandise that passeth from Provence to Lions, or from Lions to Marselia. The next Province is Orange, the capitall Citie here bearing that name, belonging to the Prince of Orange, a strong Towne, and Orange. sweetly seated neere upon the Rhone; heere all Protestants passen∣gers
are really welcomed, and Papists narrowly lookt unto, in re∣quitall of the contrary courtesie practised at Avignon not above fixe leagues off. The next is Picardy, wherein I finde Amiens and Abbevile for Picardy. Callais. faire Townes, but of little or no traffique: Callais also the inlet of France is strong, but hath sent away its Trading with the Staple, which by the English was planted and continued heere for 200. yeares; whilest it was in possession of the English, the French Kings were accustomed to have the same put daily into their remem∣brance untill it was regained; and were it not, that the Merchant adventurers make mention thereof in their Oath taken at the en∣trance into that Brotherhood, it is almost forgotten that ever it was English, which I the rather mention heere, that some noble En∣glish heart would daily put our Soveraigne in minde thereof till it returne againe to bee English; in the meane time a word of the Trade thereof. CHAP. CXXXII. Of Callais, and the Trade thereof. CALLAIS formerly was the great Staple for the Woolles of England, and setled here Anno 1347. by Callais and the trade thereof. Edward the Third, to make good his Conquest after eleventh moneths siege, but afterward it was hence removed, and this place lost by Queene Ma∣ry, Anno 1557. after 200. yeares possession of the English, and was by our then Kings of England ever called the Key that gave their Armies entrance into France; the place is not now of any great noted traffique, though it and Bollen adjoyning be ac∣counted the best maritime Ports in Picardy, opposite to Dover from whence this is seven leagues distant. The Coines here currant are those in generall of France. The Weights here in use are three. Weights of Ca. First, is the Weight proper of the Towne, the 100. lib. whereof is in London about 92. lib. The second is called the Merchants Weight, the 100. lib. whereof make in London 113. lib. and the 100. sutle of London is here 88. lib. The third is called the English Wooll-hundred, or Staple hundred, the 100. lib. whereof is in London about 89. lib. or 90. lib. about 3. per cent. different from the Towne-weight. The Measure used here is the Alne, and makes in London() inches. The next is Champaigne, wherein is Rhemes the principall Citie, Champaigne.
where the Kings of France are annointed, and where there is a Col∣lege for the entertainment of the English, English Fugitives, Iesuites I meane The next is Burgondy, famous for Digion, which is notable through France for good mustard, a note worthy our Tukesbury. Burgondy. The next is Bresse, Chastilion being the principall Citie, and the last that I shall handle appertaining to the King of France, or under Besse. his government. The next in order according to my Methode is the Franche Count, the principall Citie thereof is Besanson, which in times past strove . for precedency of Trade with Lions, but being an inland Towne she hath lost that honour, the Inhabitants of this Country bringing home greater and more honourable titles, as famoused abroad for good Souldiers, knowne by the name of Walloons, and now is un∣der the command of Spaine. The Exchanges of Placentia was once here seated from Cambery, but the Merchants being not well used returned to Placentia. 100. lib. of Besanson is 112. lib. English. The next is Loraine, the principall Citie is Nancy, yeelding plen∣ty of Corne, and Wine, store of fresh water fish, and salt, and famous Loraine. in that it was the Dukedome of Godfrey, sirnamed of Bulloigne, which wonne Ierusalem from the Saracens, and was the first Christian crow∣ned King of that Kingdome: and now to Savoy, as partaking with the French in the Trade as well as in their Garbe. CHAP. CXXXIII. Of Savoy, and the Provinces thereof. THe Dukedome of Savoy comprehends onely this Dutchy and the Principality of Piedmont, in the Savoy and the cities thereof. former is Chambery the residency of the Duke, when hee is in these parts: in the later is Nisa and Villa Franca two Sea-ports, but not capaci∣ous nor safe for shippes of burthen; next Aste, a great Mart for all Italian commodities: and lastly Turin, the princi∣pall Citie where the Duke of Savoy holds his Court and residence; and because in these later yeares of Warre betweene England and France, our English Factours from Marselia fled hither for succour, entertainment, and protection, which they bountifully had of the late Duke; I must not passe over the Trade thereof without re∣membrance, nor be unmindefull of that bounteous welcome they found at his Highnesse hands.
CHAP. CXXXIV. Of Turine, and the Trade thereof. TURINE being the capitall Citie of Piedmont, ha∣ving Turine and the Trade thereof. Nisa, and Villa Franca for Sea-ports, hath had many furtherances to make it a great Citie of traffique; for the Duke at severall times, but lastly at the comming of the English hether from Mar∣selia, made a Cavidall or stocke for Trade of 300000. cro. whereinto hee caused many of his Nobles to enter and become Partners, but when the stocke was made, and published in England and in other Countries, this Dukedome was not found to give vent to any commodities of consequence, some fish, and Calve∣skinnes excepted, wherewith to invest the said Stocke: notwith∣standing he gave commandement that the English should be kindly entertained both at Nisa and Villa Franca, and appointed certaine lodgings and Warehouses for them, and their wares; but Peace ensuing shortly after with France, the Factours againe returned to Marselia with due acknowledgement of their Royall entertainment: the maine obstacle in Trade heere being the too neere neighbour∣hood of Genoa the rich, and of Leghorne the free, which neither of the two Townes formerly mentioned can equallize. The Monies commonly currant in Savoy are the Monies of Italy Coines of Savoy. and France, as neighbouring, and the florin of the Country ac∣counted three sold turnois, which is 3½. d. English. Their Accounts are kept in Livers sold and deniers, as in France; Accounts in Savoy. but in Nisa they account by Florins and Grosses, a crowne of sol of France is 4. flo. 2. gro. Their 100. lib. makes in London about 82. lib. and 77. li. in Lions and in Venetia grosse 66. in 67. li. in Florence or Pisa 135. l. Their Measure is a Ras both of Cloth and Silke, which is halfe an Alne of Lions, and 23. inches English by the Rule. This Country affoordeth for Merchandise Rice and corne, in abun∣dance, and some Silke wrought heere, and some other commodities, but of no great consequence, nor worthy mentioning; therefore I will forbeare to treate further of this Dukedome, and end my French Commerce. Before I leave France, and therewith Savoy, who doe in all things Waights o Fance redced to Londo 100. l. partake with the Garbe and manner of the French, and ere I enter into Italy, having thus surveied some particular Townes of emi∣nency
therein. It will be worthy notice to collect the Weights and Measures of such as we have omitted, and soe view the generall trade of France; which I will beginne in the Weights, and reduce the same to the 100. li. sutle of London, which is observed, The 100. li. of Lon∣don hath made in Paris by Kings beame 89. li. Deepe 91 Burgogne 91 Roan by Vicount 88 by ordinary weight 92 weighed by the same and account 4. l. per cent. over.   Avignon 112. li. Callais 107 by Merchants weight 8 Engl. Wooll weight 110 Marselia 112 Aquimort 98 Mirabell 98 Abevile 91 Burdeaux 91 Lions by ordinary weight 107 by Silke weight 98 by Customers weight 90 112 Montplier 112 Rotchell 112 Ditto by small weight 115 Genoa 98 by great weight 82 S. Anthony 123 Calsada 98 For further instruction, here I referre the ingenuous to the large Worke of Monsieur Savona, who hath comprised all the Trading of France into a Volume of too great a bulke for me to peruse it more accurately. In like manner, to abbreviate my labour, you well see that the Mesures of Frace reduced to the 100. yards o Lon∣don. 100. yards of London maketh in these Townes following, In Roven 77½. alns. Avignon 80 Orleans 48. ca. Marselia Silke 48 Ditto for woollen 44½. Paris, Rotchell 78. aln Lions for Linnen 80
Dito for Silke 115. alnes. Provence 48. can. Geneva 80. stabs. Nantes, Abevile 110. alns. And so for the most part the same are found through all France, the abovesaid places onely excepted. CHAP. CXXXV. Of the Trade in generall of France. FRom the particular Trade of the Cities of France, The generall Trade of France. let us view the trade in generall of this Kingdome, and we shall not finde it of any great consequence, for heere it is found that the Gentlemen doe not meddle with Traffique, because they thinke such Traffique ignoble and base, and so unfit for them; which errour the French no lesse dearely buy than doe some Eng∣lish, to which Kingdome of late dayes they have in some sort blo∣wed over that opinion, though some of the better judgements of England are reformed in that point, and finde it a most worthy, ex∣cellent, and profitable Calling: but as the French are found to neglect Merchandising, so are they lesse studious in their Navigations than their neighbours, either Spaniards, Dutch, or English; which I ima∣gine proceeds not out of a desire to attempt, or courage to per∣forme, but because they abound with all things both for plentifull food, and rich attire; and if they want any thing, strangers gladly bring it to them, allured by foure principall commodities which doth much enrich the Inhabitants, which is Wines, Linnens, Salt, and corne, being the prime commodities of that Kingdome; yet it is found that the Marselians trade and navigate into Egypt, Aleppo, and Con∣stantinople, and the Normans and Britains, into England, Spaine, Ire∣land, and Netherland: in time of Warres they have also some small Vessels at Sea, more fit for piracy and theft than for any great Warre of moment, and their successe hath been so ill in their Colo∣nies in America, that it hath quite disheartened them from seconding their attempts. Three Cities here carry the greatest fame in Trade, Marselia for the Levant, Roven for the English Chanell, and Rotchell for the Ocean, this last subsisting by the growth of their White and Claret Wines of Burdeaux: Roan by their petty manufactories of Cardes, Pinne, Combes, Paper, and Canvas: and Marselia by the Trade of Turky, wherein are found Factours that doe imploy the estates of many Merchants resident within Lions, and other inland townes of France,
which gives life to most of their Traffique and Navigation in these parts. Now it is observed that England brings them Newland fish, herings, pilchers, lead, tinne, cloths, keses, cottons, or frises, and have in returnes Wines from Burdeaux, oyles and almonds from Marselia, and paper, canvas, bucroms from Roven, and Locrams from Morlais, the East country and Holland brings them cordage, tarre, pitch, rosen, masts, and firre timber, and returnes Wines from Burdeaux, and paper, canvas from Roven, and sal from Eres: Spaine brings them some spi∣ces, and they returne them corne, and linnens: Italy brings them some silke fabriques, &c. and they returne them oiles, cloth, linnen, and the like: Turkie affords them cotton woolles, raw silke, cotton yarne, hides, sheepe woolles▪ &c. and they send thither Rials of Plate, woollen cloth, and little else; and this is the grosse of the present Trade of France. CHAP. CXXXVI. Of Geneva, and the Trade thereof. GENEVA being a faire Citie and wholly in possession of Protestants, is a Nursery of Learning, and withall Geneva and the trade thereof. no stepdame to Trade: it is seated commodiously, to that end upon the River Rhone, which within 16. leagues after saluteth the Walles of Lions, and ser∣veth out of Switzerland o convey many sorts of Merchandise to it, and to transport the same thence to Lions, Valence, Avignon, Arles, to Provence, and Languedocke. Their Monies are as in France, and keepe their Account in Livers Sold and Deniers Turnois, and heere also is currant the Coines of the Coines in Ge∣nev and ac∣counts. Vnited Cantons of Switzers, and the coines of Savoy. The 100. li. here renders in London 107. li. and by some is found Waights of Geneva. to agree with the grosse of Venice, and making of Venice sotile 158 2/3 li. Incirca. The Stab renders in London () and 60. Elles here hath beene Measures of Geneva. found to make in Venetia 100. braces cloth measure, and 106. bra. silke measures. But it is time that I should forsake these petty Provinces and tra∣vell over the Alpes, and come into Italy, which is my next Taske.
CHAP. CXXXVII. Of Italie, and the Provinces thereof. ITALIE is girded round with the Ionian, Tyr∣rhenian, Italie, and the Provinces thereof. and Adriatique Seas, except it bee toward France and Germany, from which it is parted by the Alpes. The Country in generall for Merchandi∣sing yeelds Rice, silkes, velvets, sattins, taffetaes, grograms, rashes, fustians, armour, allome, glasses of all sorts, as I shall mention in the particu∣lar Kingdomes and Provinces thereof. Italy hath ever affoorded eminent and ingenious Merchants, yet such as merit not really in all things that Title, because that their Trade consisteth more in Exchanges, which is a branch of Merchan∣dising, than in Adventures, which is the principall point which gives the Title to all bargainers, it being a common speech though unmer∣chantlike, yea unchristianlike amongst them, That they are loath to trust God with their Estates at Sea when they may have the same safe on shoare, as if then it were out of his reach or protection. Italy is now divided into 10. Provinces, which affords many prin∣cipall Cities of Trade, which following my intended Methode I will handle in order. 1. The Kingdome of Naples. 2. The Papacy. 3. The Common-wealth of Venetia. 4. The Dukedome of Florence. 5. The Dukedome of Millan. 6. The Dukedome of Mantoa. 7. The Dukedome of Vrbin. 8. The Principality of Parma. 9. The Estate of Genoa. 10. The State of Lucca. In each of which are found many notable townes of traffique, which as belonging unto severall Princes, will require a more par∣ticular Survay, than if otherwise it were commanded by one sole Soveraigne; and first of the Kingdome of Naples.
CHAP. CXXXVIII. Of Naples, and the Cities thereof. THe Kingdome of Naples, is accounted the richest of Italy, abounding in severall commodities for Mer∣chandising, Naples and the  . as in Mines of divers metals, in choise and rich Wines, in Saffron, Silkes raw and wrought, in Oyles, Brimstone, Anyseeds, Argalls, &c. heere I have seene one field yeelding at one and the same time three severall crops, the ground bearing Corne, having Mulberry trees intermixed, and Vines planted at the foote of each Mulberry, which have made excellent Wines, and this I have observed for twenty miles riding together on each hand of the way, which must needs bee pleasant to the beholders, and profitable to the inioyers and owners. The Kingdome of Naples is divided into sundry Provinces, which I will onely nominate: as first, Terra di Lavoro, wherein is found Capua, whose pleasures did ef∣feminate Haniball, Cuma where one of the Sibills resided, neere Terra di La∣voro. which is Lacus Avernus, the stinke whereof killeth Birds as they flie over it, Baca, Nola and Puteoli; famous in times past for many Anti∣quities and Baths, which in Anno 1619. I curiously visited for divers daies, in search of shaddowes. The next principall Towne is Gai∣eta, well fortified by the Spaniards, and where Burbon that ransac∣ked Stai of Gaeta i 43 li. o that waight. Rome lieth interred; but the principall of this Kingdome is Naples: of which, CHAP. CXXXIX. Of Naples, and the Trade thereof. NAples the Metropolis of this Kingdome, is a very beau∣tifull Citie, and estimated seven miles in compasse, Naples and the trade thereof. once called Parthenope, and now Neapolis, fortified with foure strong Castles in possession of the Spaniard, Castle Capedna, Castle Ermo, Castle Ov, and Castle Novo. It venteth out of England, Baies, Saies, Serges, Fustians, Lead, Tinne, Pilchards, Newland-fish, red and white Herring, some Cloth and other commodities; it consisteth much in Gentry, few eminent Mer∣chants
natives are heere found; the taxes laid upon Merchandises be∣ing so great, that it ruines all commerce, yet what I observed heere in Anno 1619. I shall relate. The currant Coynes of Naples were then, Coines of Na∣ples. A Duccat of gold large is worth in Naples 11½. Carlins. A Duccat of Carlins is worth onely ten Carlins, so that 100. Dut∣cats of gold, are worth 115. Duccats of Carlins. One Ounce is worth sixe Duccats. A Duccat of Carlines is worth five Tarries. A Tarrie is worth 20. graines. A Carlin is worth 10. graines. Their accounts are kept in Naples by Duccats, Tarries and Graines, Account kee∣ping. five Taries making a Duccat, and twenty Graines a Tarie; but these are accounted Duccats currant, every 110. Duccats currant, make 100. Duccats of gold. The Waights of Naples are the Cantar and the 100. Their Cantar Waights of Naples. of Naples is 100. Rotolos, which is 2. li. 9⅓. ounces Naples, and by which they weigh all their grosse goods, which is in Florence 32. ounces, and 285. li. and is 196. li. haberdepois. But the 100. li. hath been observed to produce in Florence—90. li. in Rome—93. li. in London—71. li. in Lions—68. li. in Venetia—106. li. Ditto grosse—82. li. 1. li. sutle is in Venice sotle—15¾. ounces. 1. li. sutle is in Venice grosse.—9. ounces 58. Note that in Gaeta is used another Quintar for some commodities grosse goods, which hath been found to render in Leghorne 254. li. and in Naples all grosse goods are waighed by the great Cantar, and all fine goods by the hundred. Their measure is a Cone divided into 8. Palmes, which is in Flo∣rence Measures in Naples. after the opinion of some 3⅝. Braces just, and it hath been ob∣served in the measure of these two places, that 46. Braces of Sattin made at Naples 12½. Canes, so that in stuffes the Cane of Florence makes in Naples 8. 2/23. Palmes, and consequently Braces 48⅔. made in Naples 13. Canes 3. Palmes. Nine Palmes of Naples are in Lions just two Alnes, so that the Cane make English 81½. inches by rule, which is somewhat more then 2¼. yards English, without the inch, and some have found it to bee 2½. yards: 12. Canes in Naples have made in Lions 21. Alns, so that 1¾. Alns have made a Cane in Naples. Many commodities are sould by the Salmo, and 16. Tomolos is a Corne, &c. Salmo, which Tomolo is two Staios of Florence, and in England Gallons.
Oyle in Callabria is sould by the Migliot, which is 132. ounces, or 11. li. and it requires 2¾. Milliots to make a staio of Naples. Oyle. Note that foure Salmo in Oyle in Naples have made 40. staios, which are in Venice 40. mari, which are in England () gallons. But Naples is more famous amongst Bankers for Exchanges then amongst Merchants for any emminent trade, therefore it is needfull I annexe the Exchanges thereof, according to the custome practi∣sed in this place, which you shall finde in the 284. and 343. Chap∣ters at large, with all circumstances therennto belonging. The Customes of this Kingdome doth diffe upon severall commo∣dities, as some paies 2½. some 4½. per cent. and some more and some Customes of Naples. lesse, according to the will of the Vice-king heere, commanding for the King of Spaine, which by the Merchant is more precisely to bee learned. The next Province is Abruzzo, wherein is Salerne, famous for Phy∣sicke heere taught; next Rhegum, opposite to Mesina, and in that Vare, Abruzzo. the next Tarento, where grow great quantity of Olives, and whereof Oyle in abundance is made. Taranto. The next is the Province of Ottranto, wherein is found Brindifie, the most famous Havens in these Seas, and Ottranto and Galipoli af∣foording Ottranto. great abundance of Oyles and Cattell which last pay for tri∣bute to the Spaniard 100. thousand Duccats yeerely; and for the Oyles they are knowne to us by the name of Apulia Oyles, being the last Province comprised in this Country, and the former Cities standing in Calabria, it will not bee amisse to insert two or three words of the trade thereof. CHAP. CXL. Of Callabria, and the Trade thereof. IN Callabria is seated Tarento, Ottranto, Brindise, and Rhegium, which abounding in oiles and catle, espe∣cially Callabria, and the Trade thereof. oiles, which many English shippes doe lade in these parts yearely, I will note what I have ob∣served therein. Their Monies are the same as in Naples, and and currant throughout the Kingdome. Coines of Callabria. Their Weight is the Quintall of a 100. lib. which hath made in Venetia sot.—106. li. Weights of Callabria. Venetia gro.—82. London—73. 100. lib. in Callabria hath made in Venetia sotl. 12¾. ounces.
The Cantar of Naples is also sometimes used for grosse goods, and is found to bee in Venice grosse 186. lib. and observed to have made in London 196. li. Their Measure of length is a Cane divided into 8. palmes, and hath Measures of Calabria. made cloth measure in Venice 3. bra. and in London () inches. The  of oile heere is 132. ou. which is 11. li. abovesaid, Of oyle. and it wanteth 2¾. li. of making a Staio in Napes. The But of oile in Callabria is 500. Rot. which make in Naples 43. in 44. sta. which is about 25. caf. and thus much shall serve for Calla∣bria, a word for Apulia. CHAP. CXLI. Of Appulia, and the Trade thereof. APULIA comprehending some of the aforesaid ci∣tities, also Lehy, Barry, and Manfredonia the prin∣cipall, Apulia, and the trade thereof. abounding in corne, oile, almonds, olives, galles, wines, and other commodities are sold thus. Corne is sold by the Tomelo, which is two staios of Florence, a cargo of corne being 36. tomolos makes Measures of corne. in Flor. 72. sta. and English () gallons. Barley is also sold by the tomolo, but of a lesser sise as containing 1⅓. siaio, a cargo making also 36. tomolos, which reduced to Florence measure is 48 staios, and is English () gallons. Their Tomolo of Wheate is 36. Rotolos, which are 2. li. 9½. ou. per Rotolo of Naples, which tomolo comes to be in Flor. 100. li. 6. ou. But the Tomolo of Barley, is 48. Rotolos, which is ⅓. more than that of Wheate, the cargo making 3. Moyas of Florence. Almonds are sometimes sold by the cantaro, and commonly worth here 26. taries the cantar, and sometimes by the tomolo, and Of almonds. of the Abrogino almonds there goes twenty tomolos to a cantar, and of the common sort of almonds 22. tomolos. A Butte of oile or wine of Pulia hold heere twelve barrels, which Of oile. have beene found to make in Florence 10. barrels, and is in England () gallons. Oiles in Pulia are sold by the 1000. l. which commonly cost about 20. Tar. and yet sometimes found to be measured by the Salme, ac∣counted for 10 staios, each staio waighing 18. Rotolos, so that this way the Salmo of oyle comes to bee 180. Rotolos, which reckoned in Florence, at 2. li. 7. ou. per Rotolo, makes Florence weight 465. lib. and English () pounds, commonly worth from 18. to 22. tares
a measure, which comes to produce about 5¼. or 5½. barrels in Florence. This Staio of oile weighs 49. li. of the weight of Pulia. Galles are here sold by the Cantaro, and is 196. li. of haberdepois. Olives are sold by the Tomolo, worth about 5. car l. a tomolo, in the time of gathering, which is in Iune and Iuly, which are put in sackes Of olives. of sixe or 6½. tomolos, and each tomolo of olive, weighes about 16. Rotolos. A Salmo of wine is accounted to make 3½. barr. of Florence, and is commonly worth 10. carlins a salmo, and held to bee incirca 14. Of wine. ser. of Venice measure. A Car. or Cargo of corne of Pulia, hath beene observed to make 34½. fanegs in Callais, and in Lixborne 145. alquiers of tomolos 36. of Naples per car. and 57. Chils of Constantinople. But I have staid too long here, I will passe to the next Principa∣lity, which is the Papacy. CHAP. CXLII. Of the Papacy, and the Cities of Trade therein. THe Papacy containes foure Provinces: first, Roman∣diola. Papacy, and the Trade thereof. Secondly, Marca Anconitana. Thirdly, Ducato Spoletano. And fourthly, St Peters patrimo∣ny. And first then in Romandiolia, are many prin∣cipall Cities, and great townes, of which the first is Bollonia, the chiefe Vniversity of Italy, Ferara fa∣mous for the Iron mines about it, and within whose jurisdiction stands Modena and Rhegium, two faire Cities; and last, Ravenna, once beautified with a faire Haven, now choaked by age and rub∣bish; of the Trade of these a word and in order.
CHAP. CXLIII. Of Bollonia, and the Trade thereof. BOLLONIA under the command of the Pope, is an Vniversity much frequented by Students of the Civill Bollonia, and the Trade thereof. Law, it is seated within land, and is well knowne in matters of Exchanges, as I shall shew in due place, and hath those Monies currant that acknowledge the Popes stampe, as I shall declare in Rome. Their Accounts are kept in Livers sold and deniers, 12. deniers to a Accounts in Bollonia. sol and 20. sols to a Liver, the Liver may be accounted to bee incirca 13½. d. sterling money, and some are found to keepe their accounts in duccatons, sols, and deniers, cast up by 12. and by 20. as above is said. Their Weights common in use are these, Weights in Bollonia. Their Quintall is 100. li. which makes In London—80. li. Rome—100 Millan—106 Florence—104 Genoa—133 Lions—77 Venetia sot.—120 Venetia gr.—75 1000. li. in Bollonia have given in Venetia sutle 1320. li. gro. 750. li so that the 1. lib. hath rendred their grosse 9. ou. sutle 14. ounces 2½. sach. Their Measure is a Brace, and is found to bee about 25. inches Measures in Bollonia. English, 100. braces here have made in Venetia cloth measure 96. br. and of silke bra. 90. braces. Corne is here sold by the Corbe, 100. whereof makes 92. staios in Venetia, and 100 corbes in wine make Amfra Venetiana 12. and 2. Corne. quarters, and in dry measures 170. quartes, and in London () gallons. From hence are accustomed to come to other parts, corne, al∣monds, oiles, wines, raw silke, and sundry sorts of wrought sattins, taf∣fetaes, Commodities of Bollonia. and other, called hence Bollonia silke, and of Bollonia making, and to conclude this place, heere are found many eminent Exchan∣ges, the course of which Exchanging you shall finde in the generall Exchanges here practised, vide Chapter 296.
CHAP. CXLIV. Of Ferara, and the Trade thereof. FERARA is the next principall Citie of Trade in this circuit, famous for his Iron-mines Ferara and the trade thereof. about it, seated on the bankes of the River Poe and accounted one of the pleasantest Ci∣ties in Italy, for in the middest thereof is a faire Greene, into which open about twenty Streets, of halfe a mile in length, and so even and uniforme that thence the utmost nds thereof may bee discerned; it affoordeth wines, oiles, olives, iron, steele, and some manufactories of silke. The Monies are as at Rome to which this Citie appertaineth, ad∣mitting but of very little difference in the rates current thereof. The Quintall of Ferara is 100. li. which makes Venetia sot. 112½. li. and Venetia gr. 72. lib. in London incirca 75. li. haberdepois, and the 100. Weights of Ferara. li. sat. Venice makes here 87. li. and the 100. li. gro. 138. li. The Measure is a Brace, 100. braces makes in London 72. yards. Their Wine Measure is a Mastello, 11. whereof make an Amfra of Measures of Farara. Venetia, and is in England () vide London. Their Corne Measure is a stare, 100. stares makes in Venetia 37. sta. and so much shall serve for Ferara and the Trade thereof. CHAP. CXLV. Of Modena, and the Trade thereof. MODENA is the next City seated in this Tract, yeelding many fabriques of silkes, which it disper∣seth Modena. to its neighbouring townes. Their Accounts are kept in Livers, sold, deniers, 12. deniers to a sold, and 20. sol to a liver. Accounts in Modena. Their Quintall is 100. li. which renders Weights in Modena.
In Lions—77. li. London—72. li. Venetia sotile—109. li. Venetia grosse—72. li. Florence—98. li. The measure is the Brace, the same as in Mantua, and 1. per cent. Measures in Modena. longer then the Brace of Ferrara, and by observation it hath beene found that the 100. Braces of Modena have made 118. in Florence. Corne is heere sould by the Staro, 100. whereof makes 93. or 94. Stares in Venetia, and one Staio of Modena, hath made 2½. Staios in Florence, and hath made in Venice three quarts, and sixe quarteroli. CHAP. CXLVI. Of Rimano, and the Trade thereof. RImno, anciently Ariminum, seated on the mouth Rano, and the Trade of it. of the River Rubicon, affoords much silke, which it partly sends abroad, and partly converts heere into Stuffes, also some Wines, Oyles, Corne: The coines currant as in Rome, as being subject to the Papacie, and the accounts are kept in their same de∣nomination. The Quintall is the 100. li. which makes in London 81. li. and some have made experience, that it makes in Venice grosse 76. Their Measure is the Brace, and is in London 27. inches bare. Waights▪ Measures. Their Corne measure is  stare, 100. making 210. in Venetia, and their Wine measure is a somo, which makes in London ten gallons. CHAP. CXLVII. Of Ravenna, and the Trade thereof. RAvenna is seated on the Adriatique Sea, and once beauti∣fied Ravenna, and the trade thereof. with one of the fairest Havens in the World, where Augustus Caesar alwaies kept a Navy mand, to defend these parts of the Empire, now choaked up with mud and rubbish: the neighbourhood of Venetia, whose Senators have as well followed Mercury by Merchandising, as Mars by Armes, keepes this City from any notable commerce, yet I will
note what I have observed heere upon both in matter of waights and measures. The Quintall of Ravenna is 100. li. which gives Venetia sotile 8. li. Weights of Ravenna. in London, 78. li. and the grosse 00. li. of Venetia made heere 133. li. The measure is a brace, 100. braces of Cloth in Venice, is heere 112. Measures of Ravenna. 100. braces of silke in Venice, is heere 106. Corne is sould by the stare, 100. whereof makes in Venice 66⅔. staio, so that 3. staros Ravenna, have made the 2. staios of Venetia; and these are the chiefe Cities of Romandolia. The next Province is Marco Anconitana, wherein is famous, first Loretto, for the Pilgrimage to our Lady Church, brought thither if you Loretto. will beleeve it through the aire from Palestine, whereunto a great trade is driven by the superstitious Papists; next is Adria, which gave name to these Seas; next Recanti, and Ancona, two faire Cities and of great concourse of Merchants, of which first. CHAP. CXLVIII. Of Recanti, and the Trade thereof. REcanti, Olim Aelia Recina, as some authors alleage is a faire City, affoording Corne, Oyle and Wine, and some Recanti in Istria. Silke for Merchandise to be exported: The waights thereof being 100. l. gives in Lond. 75. l. Waights. and in Florence—96½. li. In Venetia sotile—112. li. In Venetia grosse—72. li. Their measure is a brace, 94. whereof make Venetia brace 100. li. Oyle is sould heere by the Miare, which is the same as that in Ve∣netia. Measures. CHAP. CXLIX. Of Ancona, and the Trade thereof. ANcona is a faire Citie, seated on the hill Cinerius, which shooteth into the Adriatique Sea like a Promontory, ha∣ving Ancona and the trade. a commodious Haven built by Trajanus the Em∣perour, it is fruitfull as the rest of this Country, affoor∣ding principally, Corne, Wines and Oyles. The Quintall of Anconia is 100. li. and makes in London—78. li. Waights.
In Venetia grosse—73. li. In Venetia sotile—116. li. In Florence—98. li. Their measure heere is a brace, 106. whereof have made in Venice 100. braces, 10. cones of cloth in Florence have made here 37½ braces. Measures. Ancona. Corne is heere sould by the star, 6½. have made a somme in Florence. The next Province is the Dutchy of Spoletta, the principall Citie bearing the name of Spallata, whereof is not any thing in Merchan∣dising Spallata. worthy the note that I finde; and their waights and measures doe in all points agree with Venetia. The last part of this Country is Saint Peters Patrimony, wherein are principall Cities of commerce, Civetavechia, which hath a pret∣ty harbour, and neere which the Allom is made, which wee call Ro∣mish Civetavechia. or Roche, and beere the Pope doth for trade sake allow a Gentle∣man the title of Consull for the English Nation, to see that the Mari∣ners who are apt enough to give offence bee not wronged or abu∣sed, at whose hands in Anno 1619. going thence as a Merchant to Rome, I found all curtesies and friendship, and passing through Pol∣lidor, a pretty towne, in the Christmas Holidaies, I came to Rome, where what I did observe in matter of Trade, besides the devotion of the season and time, I shall in the next Chapter declare. CHAP. CL. Of Rome, and the Trade thereof. THis Citie in her ancient splendor, was fifty miles Rome and the Trade thereof. in circuit, and had 750. Towres that beautified her walles, and inhabited by 463000. Families, but now the compasse exceedes not ten miles, and a third of that is also wast ground, and hath two third parts of the inhabitants Clergymen and Cor∣tesans which latter heere are accounted to bee 40000. and pay 30000. Duccats, yeerely tribute, which doth mainetaine in Civeta∣vechia two Gallies furnished, knowne by the names of the , as the place of their aboade in Rome, but leaving this private Trade to the Virgin Frirs, I come to the publique commerce of this Citie, which according to my observation is following. Rome and the territory thereof affoordeth for Merchandise, Corne, Wine, Oyle, Silke, Glves, Alme, Ltestrings, Kidskins, and some fa∣briques made of Silke: And from England, it receiveth Lead, Tinne, Baies, Saies, Stuffes, Pilchards, Herrings white and red, Newland-fish, Calveskins, lt Salmon, , Waxe, &c. which are landed at Civi∣tavechia,
and thence transported by boats and barkes to Rome, along the so much famoused River of Tiber, which passeth through the same. The Coines of all Italy passe heere currant, but the principall of Coines in Rome. this Countrey that are currant is the Duccat, or as they call it the Crowne of Gold, which is worth 11. Iulios or Paulos. The Crowne of Silver is worth 10. Iulios or Paulos, which is 100. Baioches, or 400. quatrins. The Iulio is worth 10. Baioches or 40. quatrins. The Baioche is worth 40. quatrins or 1 sol. 4. den. small money of Rome. Their accounts are kept in Crownes, Iulios, Baioches and quatrins Accounts in Rome. as above, and some in Duccats of Camera or destampe, of which 97. 11. 3. make 100. of Gold. Their Quintall in Rome is 100. and makes in London—80. li. and with other Countries is found to be in Venetia sotle—119. li. Waights in Rome. In Naples 106. li. Venetia grosse 75. li. Florence 102. li. Genoa 110. li. But note, that of these Quintars of 100. li. is framed two different waights, with allowances given thereupon, as in sale of Spices and such like. The Quintar thereof is accounted to be of the above said waight 160. li. And the second for the waight of grosse goods accounted to be 250. li. to the Quintar, which is to be observed in the sale of a commoditie, and therefore the commoditie and the waight whereby it is sould is to be observed. They use also two measures in length, the one for Linnen and Measures in Roe. Woollen, called the Cane, divided into 8. Palmes, and 30. Cans is 100. Braces Venetia; the other which they call the Brace which is 3 . Palmes of the said Cane, which Brace renders in Florence 1½. Brace, the first making in London () inches, and the latter () inches. Cone is sould by a measure, called the Rugio, which renders in Genoa 1⅞. Mins, and in Florence 8¾. Staios, and is 412. li. of Rome, and is in England () gallons. But by reason of the great occasion that Clergy-men from most parts of Europe have to use money in this City, the Exchanges there∣of are most worthy observation, therefore I have handled the same in the 278. and 326. Chapters, with all circumstances thereunto belonging, to which I refer you. From Rome I will take my way to Venetia, and to that Republique, and see what is there note worthy in matters of commerce.
CHAP. CLI. Of the Common-wealth of Venetia, and the Cities of Trade therein. THe Common-wealth of Venetia containeth these Venetia, and the Trade thereof. Provinces, La Marca Trevigiana, Friuli, Hi∣stria, part of Dalmatia, and the Islands of Can∣dy, Corfu, Cephalonia, Itheca, Xante, Lucaia, Cy∣thera, &c. In which I finde these principall Cities of Trade, first Treviso, next Padua a fa∣mous Vniversity for Physicke; next Vicentia, next Bressia which is accounted the second for greatnesse in Lombardy, next Verona, also a faire Citie Crema, a strong Fort, Aquilegia once of great circuit, now devoured by the neighbourhood of Venetia, Palma a moderne towne built by the Venetians within these late years, next is Cape de Istria, Pola, and some others of lesser note, and last of all the Metropolis of all this Common-wealth which is Venice it selfe; of these, or as many as I have gathered any observation, I shall declare. CHAP. CLII. Of Treviso, and the Trade thereof. TREVISO is the principall Citie of that Province, Treviso, and the trade thereof. which to the Venetians is knowne by Marca Trevi giana, and commodiously seated for an inland trade, the chiefe Citie Venetia depriving all the rest of any eminent honour in matter of Traffique, there∣fore herein I shall be the briefer, and first, For their coines currant, and their Account kept, I willingly omit the same, as to bee found more at large under the Title of Venetia. As for the Waights and Measures thereof, it will not bee impro∣per that I set heere the agreements thereof with Venetia, as being seated within that Common-wealth. Treviso is found then to have two severall Waights, a grosse and Weights of Treviso. sutle, in the same manner as Venetia, which thus agree together. 100. li. grosse in Treviso makes grosse in Venetia 92½. li.
100. li. sutle in Treviso makes sutle in Venetia 112. li. 100 li. sutle Venetia gives in Treviso sutle 89½. li. 100. li. sutle Venetia gives in Treviso grosse 58⅓. li 100. li. sutle Treviso makes grosse in Venetia 70. li. All which considered, the thousands are found thus to accord. 1000. li. sutle Treviso is 1125. li. sutle Venetia. 1000. li. grosse Treviso is 1080. li. grosse Venetia and backward. 1000. li. grosse Venetia is 926. li. grosse Treviso. 1000. li. sutle Venetia is 890. li. sutle Treviso. 1. li. sutle Treviso is sutle Venetia 13½. ounces. 1. li. grosse Treviso is grosse Venetia 13. ounces. 1. li. sutle Vnetia is sutle in Treviso 10⅔ ounces. 1. li. grosse Venetia is grosse in Treviso 11. ounces. The Measures of length in Treviso is onely the Brace. Measures of Treviso. the 100. cloth braces in Venetia is 100. braces in Treviso. the 100. silke braces in Venetia is 94. braces in Treviso. Oile is sold here by the Miare. Corne by the staio, the 100. staios here are 109. in Venetia. Wine is sold by the Cara, which consists of 10. consi, which ac∣cording to the measure of Venetia is 17½. quartes; the next is Padoua. CHAP. CLI. Of Padoua, and the Trade thereof. PADOUA is a famous Vniversity, especially for Phy∣sicke, which affords not much matter of Trade, yet Padoua, and the trade thereof. observing my intended Methode, I will place here the concordancy of their Waights and Measures with the capitall Citie Venetia. Padoua is found to have a grosse Quintall, and a sotle Quintall, as the Citie of Venetia hath, and found thus to agree Weight of Padoua. togethr. The 100. li. sutle of Padoua is 112  sutle in Venetia. the 1000. li. grosse of Padoua is 1020. li. grosse in Venetia. the 1000. li. sutle in Padoua is 1125. sutle Venetia. the 100. li. sutle in Venetia is 889. sutle in Padoua. The brace in Padoua is the same as at Treviso aforesaid. Corne is sold by the stare, three here makes one stare in Venetia. Measure of Padoua. Wine is sold by the Cara, one whereof heere is 18. quarts Venetia. Oile by the Miaro, which is heere 1185. lib. grosse in Padoua, for other occurrences it is to be referred to Venice.
CHAP. CLIV. Of Vicentia, and the Trade thereof. VICENTIA would bee in matter of Trade of greater Vicentia, and the Trade thereof. note were shee not so neere neighbour to and under the authority of Venetia, for which cause I shall bee the briefer, and thus is found to agree therewith. The Waights heereof doe precisely accord with Waights of Vicentia. Padoua above mentioned. The Measures of Vicentia are only one which is the brace, which Measures. thus is found to accord. 100. braces of silke in Venice is in Vitentia 92. braces: 100. braces of cloth hath made in Vicentia 98. braces. Corne is sold by the stais, 100. whereof doe make in Venetia 33½. staio. Wine is sold by the Caro, which in Venetia is 18½. quarts. Oile is sold by the Miaro, which are 40. Miri, which makes grosse weight in Venetia 1210. li. and grosse of Vicentia 1185. li. Heere is made a fine kinde of raw silke, and dispersed abroad, fit for silke stuffes, called by the name of Vicentia silke, 100. li. thereof is 93. li. in Florence. CHAP. CLV. Of Bressia, and the Trade thereof. THe next is Bressia, seated likewise in this Pro∣vince, more famous in her Archbishop, who Bressia, an the trade thereof. is an Earle, Marquesse, and a Duke, than in any matter of Trade, yet according to my inten∣ded Methode begunne, I will compare the Waights and Measures hereof with Venice. Bressia hath but one Quintall, which con∣taines Weights of Bressia. the 100. li. of the laid place. the 100. il. of Bresse is sutle Venetia 108. li. and grosse 66⅔ li. the 100. li. grosse Venetia is 147. li. and 100. li. sutle is 92. li. here. the 1. li. of Bressia is sotle Venetia 13. ounces. The Brace of Bressia agrees with the cloth brace of Venice. Measures of Bressia. Corne is here sold by the Soma, and makes two staio in Venetia.
CHAP. CLVI. Of Verona, and the Trade thereof. VErona is a faire Citie, and famous in times past for many notable things heere performed, which I Verona. willingly omit, but in matters of commerce I finde the waights and measures thus to accord with Ve∣netia. Verona is found to have two Quintars, a grosse and sutle. The 100. grosse in Verona, is 108. li. grosse in Venetia. Weights in Verona. The 100. sutle in Verona, is 110. li. sutle in Venetia. So that the 100. sutle in Venetia, makes sutle Verona 90½. li. And the 100. li. grosse in Venetia, makes sutle Verona 145½. li. The Brace of Verona agrees with the Silke Brace in Venetia. Measures in Verona. Corne is sould by the Minali, 100. whereof is in Venice 45½. staies. Wine is sould by the Brenta, which is in Venetia 6. Sechi, and a Cara of Wine, is in Venetia 17½. quartes. Oyle is sould by the Miaro, which is 1210. li. grosse, and 1738. li. sutle, in Venetia, making 139. Basces, which are 8. Brentas and 11. Basses: where it is to be noted, that 3½. Basses of Verona, is 1. Miri in Venetia. CHAP. CLVII. Of Crema, and the Trade thereof. CRema is a strong Fort, and bordering upon Millan, where the state of Venetia hold a Custome house for Crema, and its trade. the collection of their Customes upon such goods as goe from these parts either to Millan it selfe, or thence by transito to Lions or other places. The Quintall of Crema, is the 100. li. thus agree∣ing Weights in Crema. with Venice. 100. li. sutle Venice, is in Crema 92. li. and 100. li. grosse 147. li. in 150. li. 100. li. in Crema, is sutle Venetia 108. li. and grosse Venetia 66. in 67. li. The measure for length is the Brace, which is found to bee two per cent. lesse then the Cloth Brace in Venetia: whither now it is high Measures in Crema. time I should repaire unto and survay the traffique thereof, as at this day it is found and observed.
CHAP. CLVIII. Of Venice, and the Trade thereof. VENICE is the principall citie of this Republique, and Venetia, and the Trade thereof. is seated in the bottome of the Adriatique Sea, or Venetian gulfe upon 72. Islands, and distant from the maine land five miles, defended against the fury of the Sea, by a banke extending twenty Leagues in length, through which there is passage broken in seven places for Boates, but no waies for ships, but at Mallamocco, and the Castles of Lio, which are found to be strongly fortified: it is accounted to be eight miles in compasse, and hath for convenien∣cy of passage neere 4000 bridges, and 12000. boates, as some of our moderne travellers have observed. It is the onely place where Policie, Warfare and Merchandising have kist together, for the most part of those Clarissimos which heere boast of their quality, great∣nesse or wisdome, have either in themselves or in their auncestors, had their originall from traffique and Merchandising, many of whom injoying this title of Noble families; I have knowne in Constanti∣nople and other parts as Merchants and Factors, who in their youth exercising this Arte, doe afterward as their genius leades them, either become Captaines and Providitors in Castles, Forts, or Cities, or Ambassadors, and so imployed into forraine States; or lastly Se∣nators at home governing the Common-wealth, but their worth being in it selfe sufficiently knowne to the world, I shall descend to the subject in hand. This Citie then hath for many yeeres had the sole commerce and traffique of all the Mediterranean Seas, and not content therewith, have made that Citie the common Mart of all the commodities of Arabia, Persia, India, and those Easterne rich Countries by their great trade to Alexandria and Cairo, which continued for many yeres; and when the Grecian Empire was both in its height and in its de∣scent, they mannaged the sole Trade thereof, till the State of Genoa did looke thereinto, and by their power and might at Sea, shared with them therein: but the Portugall finding the way to India by the Cape of Bona Speransa, and the English and Dutch Merchants fol∣lowing those leaders, now bring those rich commodities that way straight to their own homes, which in former times they were con∣strained to have from this Citie at a farre dearer rate and at a se∣cond hand, since which times, their customes have decaied, their ships rotted and their Mariners, the pride of their Commonwealth all become Poltrones, and the worst accounted in all those Seas.
This Citie now serves in matter of Trade for an inlet into Au∣stria, and upper Germany, which this way it yet fits with some spice, drugges, and other Arabian commodities, which in part is brought hither from Alexandria, Aleppo, and Constantinople, where they still have Consuls and Factours, and partly by a second hand from Eng∣land, now thereby bringing to them those commodities which a few yeares past wee had and fetched from them, as from the onely Citie and prime Marchants of Europe. The Commodities here found and afforded are not many, nor of much worth, as some corne, wines, oiles, rice, woollen cloth, paper, ani∣seeds, Commodities of Venetia. argall, glasses for looking and for drinking, quick-silver, some silkes raw and wrought. The Commodities sent thither from England is lead, tinne, baies, furres, perpetuanaes, searges, saies, and some cloth, indico, pepper, ginger, maces, cloves, Nutmegs, &c. herings white and red, pilchards, Newland fish, salted salmon, and such, it serves in these dayes for a Mart for the Commodities of Istria, Dalmatia, Slavonia, Austria, upper Germania, and the Adriatique seas, and serves these parts againe with such commodities as are either brought hither by the English, Dutch, and French from these severall Kingdomes, or from Ale∣xandria, Aleppo, Smyrna, the Archepelago, and Constantinople by themselves, as the sole persons to whom hence the Trade of Turky is permitted. Their Monies currant are these, The Crowne of Gold is worth 24. grosses of Venetia. Monies of Venetia. A Liver of grosse is worth 10. Duccats of Gold large. A Duccat of Gold is worth 24. Deniers the Liver of Grosses. A Liver ordinary of Venetia is worth of Florence lib. 6. 4. sold, which makes a Duccat in the said place of Venetia, those monies which heere are called Piccoli, are the currant Coine of this Citie, and the monies which heere are called Grosses, is worth 1. lire 62. sol of piccoli or 10. Duccats, the Duccat is alwayes worth lire 6. sol, 4. of piccoli, or else accounted 24. Grosses, and the Grosse is worth sol 5. 2. of piccoli, and in the lire of grosses it is accounted and rec∣koned as in Deniers, so that by this may bee discerned to bee cur∣rant, two sorts of Duccats, the one currant in payment, which may bee valued sterl about 3. s. 4. d. and the other of banco, which may be valued about 4. s. or 4. s. 2. d. as the Exchange will admit, where∣in see farther, the one being 20. per cent. better than the other. There is found to bee in Venetia foure kindes of Weights, which thus are distinguished and found to accord. Weights of Venetia. The greatest is called The grosse pound, and 100. li. wherewith all Woolls, brasse, metalls, fish, flesh, and other grosse goods are weighed. The second is the Gold-waight used for Gold, Silver, and Iewels onely. The third is used in Gold and Silver thread, and in nothing else.
The fourth is the pound, and 100. lib. sutle, wherewith all silkes, spices, drugges, cottons, cotton-yarne, and such like fine goods are weighed by, which thus are amongst them found to accord and agree. 100. li. grosse is 158. li. sutle, 633. li. grosse is 1000. li. sutle. 100. li. sutle is 83½. grosse, 1000. li. grosse is 1580. li. sutle. 1. li. grosse is sutle 1. li. 6. ounc. 5. sazi 18. Kr. 1. li. sotle is grosse 7. ounc. 2. sazi 16. Kr. 100. li. of Silver or Gold thread is sutle 116. li. 8. ounc. 1. Marc of Gold is sutle 9. oun. sazi 2. Where note that a Marc of Gold is 8. oun. 1. oun. is 4. quarters, 1. quarter is 36. Kr. and 1. Kr. is 4 gra. so that 144. Kr. is 1. oun. and 1152. Kr. is 1. Marc. 1. li. sotle is 12. oun. the 1. ounc. is 6. sazi, and 1. sazi is 1½. dram, which is 3. sec. Also note that in Venetia there is bought and sould divers com∣modities, some by Ballance, and some by stalero, as well in the grosse as in the sutle Waight; and that the ballance waight is greater than the stalero waight 2. ib. per cent. by the hundred more than by the pound, and the sutle Waight of the Ballance is greater than of the staliero sutle two pound per cent. by the hundred than by the pound Weight. Now let us observe how these two Waights the sotle and grosse responds with the Weight of other Countries. The 100. li. sutle have beene observed to make the first Rowe Weights of Venetia agree∣ing with other Countries. to the left hand, and the 100. li. grosse the next Rowe. The 100. li. sutle makes in the first rowe, and the 10. li. gro. makes in the se∣cond rowe thus. Alexandria zera 31. Rot. 50. Rot. Alexandria forf. 71. R 112. R. Alleppo 14. R. 21. R. Archepelago 77. li. 121. li. Anversa 64. li. 102. li. Almaria 55. R. 90. R. Ancona 86. li. 136. li. Bergamo 90. li. 145. li. Bollonia 83. li. 132. li. Baruti 13. R. 20. R. Cyorus 13½. R. 21. R. Constantinople 56. R. 84. R. Candia li. li. Corfu. 75. li. 117. li. Cremona 96. li. 151. li. Damascus 16⅔. R. 26⅓. R. Ferrara 102. li. 139. li. Florence 87. li. 138. li. Lions 70. li. 110. li. London 64. li. 106. li. Lixborne 59. li. 9. li. Millan 92. li. 150. li.
Mantoua 93. li. 150. li. Marselia 70. li. 112. li. Mallca 57. li. 90. li. Napoles Rema 94. li. 149. li. Naples Romania 78. li. 121. li. Parma 90. li. 148. li. Piasentia 92. li. 150. li. Paris 70. li. 112. li. Roma 84. li. 132. li. Ravenna 4. l. 133. l. Ragusa 83. l. 13. l. Scio & Smyrna 62. R. 98. R. Sivilia 63. l. 98. l. Tripoli Barbaria 59½. R. 93½. R. Turin 92. l. 148. l. Verona 90. l. 145. l. Zante 63. l. 100. l. How farre these may come neere to trueth I must referre to triall, therefore I deliver them here as I received them upon trust. The Measures of Venetia are two, and both called the brace. Measures in Va of length. The first is the Silke brace, by which is measured all stuffes of silke, Damasces, Sattins, Cloth of gold, of silver, &c. The scond is the Cloth-brace, by which is measured all Clothes and stuffes made of wooll, which is greater than the former 6¼ per cen∣tum. Upon which last braces 100 hath beene made this concordance with the Measures of other Countries. 100. braces in Venice make in London 55½. elles. Antwerpe 92½. Frankfort 115¾. Dansicke 70⅘. Vienna 80½. Lions 56½. alns Paris 52¾. Roven 48¼. Lixborne 55½. var. Sivill 75. Madera 57. v. Lacques 111. br. Forence 113⅔. br. Millan 123¾. br. Genoa 267 . pal.
The liquid Measures are these: Wines are sold in Venetia two wayes, either in grosse, or by re∣taile, Of wines. the grosse by the Amphora and Bigonsa, and by retaile, by the Quart, the Sachio, and Lire, where note that the Amphora is foure Bigonsa, and the bigonsa is 4. quarts, and 1. quart is 4. sachi, and 1. sachi is 4. liras or pounds, but buying the same in grosse, that is by the Amphora and the Sachio, 1. Amphora is 14. quarts, and 1. bigonsa is . quarets and halfe. Oile is heere also sould two wayes, first by Measure, and next Of oile. by the Waight of the staliero, the Measure is called the Miro, and is 40. lib. and by the grosse Weight is 120. lib. and 1. Mira makes by measure 25. li. and by weight makes 30. li. 3. oun. Corne is sold by the staio, which is 132. li. grosse Venetia, and in Of corne. Florence 175. lib. which is divided to 4/4. and to 8/8. and to 16/16. parts, by which is made the Scandalios, the ¼. being 32. lib. the . 16. lib. the . 8. li. of grosse. Their Accounts are kept in Venetia divers wayes, as by summe in Accounts in Venetia. Duccats and Grosses, at Livers 6. and 4. sol per ducc. accounting 24. Grosse to a Duccat. Others againe by Livers, Sols, and Grosse, which are valued at 10. Duccats the Liver, accounting 20. sol to the Liver, and 12. De∣uters grosse to a sold. Others by Liver, Sol, and Denari of Picholi, which Picholi are the common currant Money of the Countrie, where note that the Grosses are worth 1. Liver per Sol 62. of Picholies or 10 duccats, the Ducc. is ever worth 6. Livers 4 sol in Pechol, or 24. grosse, the grosse is worth sol 5. 2. pecholi, and n the pound of grosses, it is the same in Deniers, as I shewed before in the Monies currant of the place. The Exchanges made in Venice, I have inserted in the 281. and 368. Chapters, together with all circumstances thereto belonging, Exchanges of . where by the way it is to bee noted, that in times past the good∣nesse of their Monies both in payment for Merchandise, and in pay∣ment for Bills of Exchange was alike and of equall goodnesse and value; but these wise Senatours fearing to loose what they cannot keepe, I meane, that little Trade they yet hold, in comparison of what they had, lost by their providence and circumspection, set a distinction betweene the Monies payble for commodities, which they terme their currant Monies and out of banco, and betweene Difference be∣tweene money in banco and out of onc. in Ve∣nc. 21. per centum. their Monies paid by Bills of Exchange, which they terme in banco, which hath had its originall upon such unfit grounds that the very naming thereof, and the particular circumstances of this difference is dishonourable to this Republique, which therefore I will omit, onely thus farre the necessity thereof is to bee remembred, and to bee well knowne and understood by all Merchants and Exchan∣gers
that trade and traffique to this Citie, that the difference now at this time holds in proportion betweene 20. and 21. per cent. so that it doth appeare to all men that reside here, or have any com∣merce into this Citie, that their payments made in banco, and by Bills of Exchange is accounted better by neere 21. per cent. than the payments made for commodities, bought and sold betweene Mer∣chant and Merchant. The Customes of Venice are severall, altering upon many com∣modities, and though the wisdome of this Republique doe mani∣festly Customes of Venetia. discerne a great diminution of their Customes in generall, yet it so fals out that they impose still greater, as it were endeavouring thus to make up the annuall rents thereof, as of late they have done upon Corrence, under pretence, that if the English will come and lade them in the Port of Venice, or otherwise come thither laden, they are then freed of a new Impest which is lately levied in Xate upon that commodity: but they being of the condition of many Princes, that finding their Country enriched with an eminent com∣merce and a plentifull Trade, never leave imposing new Customes and Imposts thereon, till the Trade, and Customes, and Imposts, and all other the benefits thereof are slipt out of their fingers, and fled for protection to some other more friendly neighbouring State, or place, where the same findes a greater ease, and a lesser charge; and that hath Venice, Anvers, Lions, and Genoa, lost that famous Trade, which for many yeares hath made those Cities renowned, and by their falland easie Customes hath Leghorne, Marselia, Amsterdam, and London risen to that height wherin they are now found to be, which if the Princes thereof doe wisely cherish, and content themselves with a reasonable Duty, such as Trade in it selfe may well beare, and the Trader live, and chearefully proceed in his negotiations, they may see their Countries daily to flourish, and grow both rich and renowned thereby; otherwise Trade will insensibly flie from them, the Merchants will give it over, or finde out new pathes, and divert it into some other place, shipping will in an age rot and perish, and Navigation will quickly be forgotten, and those King∣domes must have other Nations to supply them at the second hand, and by strangers shipping, with those necessary commodities which the Country stands in need of, and the same both at deare rates, and to the too late repentance of the State it selfe, as may now bee verified by this of Venetia, who would with many millions redeeme that lost Trade, and would with free liberty of Customes entertaine that Commerce, which they themselves peradventure by their too great Customes and Imposts levied thereon by little and little in times past have of their owne accord wilfully or willingly lost, and thrust from them, as I shall declare further in the Trade of Leghorne, and other places which have of themselves no commodity to main∣taine a Traffique, vet have all things and want nothing that all other Countries can afford, onely by the benefit and commodity of an
easie and light dutie of custome imposed upon Merchandise by the li∣bertie and freedome of the place and traders thereinto; and for as much as this state have by their wisedome made of late daies divers subtile decrees for the benefit of their owne traffique, and for the re∣gaining of their last trade which are in themselves prejudiciall to many other Nations, but principally to the English, I hould it not improper in this place to mention some of the principall thereof, that thereby if any the able furtherers of the English traffique shall happen to peruse this Tract, fit remedies may bee enacted to meete these decrees, which I may call particularly injurious to the English Injurious de∣crees of Venice against the trade of the English in the Levant seas. Subject and Merchant, and tending to draw the whole trade of the Levant Seas to the City of Venice onely, to the generall prejudice of the shipping of His Majesty of England traffiquing in those Seas, which I conclude under five points. 1. First, they have considered the late great Exportation of Cor∣rance out of Zant and Zeffalonia (two Islands of their Signory) into England, and that the principall Trade of the English into their Sig∣nory is onely for this Fruite, therefore they have of late leavied an imposition of ten Duccats upon every thousand of Corrance bought and shipped from the said Islands, and of later times have also infor∣ced the payment of the said Impost at Venice, which formerly and at first was free, and have discharged their owne Subjects thereof, to the speciall dammage and prejudice of the English. 2. Secondly, they have to burthen the Trade of the English thither, or rather seeing all the Trade of that fruit wholy sought out and co∣veted by the English, to which end they use to vent in those Islands some few English commodities, they have I say of late, burthened the native commodities of England brought into those Islands with new Im∣posts, as leavying upon an English cloth 7. duccats, upon 100. waight of tinne 2. duccats, and upon a hearsie 2. duccats, and so upon all other En∣glish commodities, thereby to inforce all commodities of England to be brought into the city of Venice, and though sometimes English Mer∣chants finds it necessary in those seas to transferre some English goods out of one English vessell into another, and yet not land the same, when as ships do happen to meet together and to be bound for seve∣rall Ports, yet the same is not permitted them unles they pay the said Impost abovementioned, as if the said goods were there really landed and sold, contrary to the common custome of the Mediterranean Seas. 3. Thirdly, they have prohibited, that any Turky commodities should be landed there out of English shipping, or any other commo∣dities that are afterward to be shipped for the Kingdome of England, which for the conveniency of English shipping, the English Mer∣chants trading into those Seas have often occasion of: but they doe compell the English first to send such goods and wares to the Citie of Venice, purposely there to pay the duty of custome and the duty of cottinio, before they will suffer them to ship the same for England. 4. They have made an act for the imployment of their owne
shipping and Mariners, and for the restraint of all forreiners, that no commodities of the parts of Turky may bee brought into any the Signory of the State of Venice, but onely in Venetian shipping, where∣in they have been found to have beene so strict and severe, that if a∣ny English ships happen to bee fraighted either by their owne Sub∣jects, or by the Merchants of any other Nation when any of their owne shipping are in Port, or happen to come into the Port, or within the space of twenty daies after, upon the firming of a bare Protest against the said ship so fraighted, they have no law nor reme∣die left them in law to recover any fraight money, due for the said goods so laden by them. 5. Fiftly, they will not permit nor suffer no English ship to relade at Venice except they come first fully laden thither, neither will they suffr freedome of Trade from Venice to any parts of the Levant for he English Nation, neither in their owne nor yet in the shipping be∣longing to the Venetians, but doe straightly prohibit and forbid it, as also they doe prohibit the bringing in of some particular commodities by any whatsoever, themselves and their Subjects onely excepted. 6. To these I might adde some others, but I will conclude it with this last poynt of slight and fallacious subtilty some yeeres past, when as the Signory of Venice had heere a permission from His Maje∣stie of Englana to contract with divers Merchants for their shippes to serve against the Spaniards in the Gulfe of Venice; when the said ser∣vice was performed, and that they came to receive their contractd payment, they raised their monies 12. percentum above the rate of the same at the time of their agreement, by which rate, His Maje∣sties Subjcts came to lose a great summe of money by the said ser∣vice, to their great prejudice, and to the great dishonor of that so Honourable Seigrory. Having by these few particulars given the ingenious Reader a taste of these present policies enacted by this state of late for the supportation of their decaying Trade, and also given a touch of the subtilties used by them to preserve that little that is yet remaining, and their indevours to augment the same, I will now in a word view the state of the present traffique of this Cirie. It is not to bee questioned, but that this Citie hath in all Ages The present Tade of Ve∣nice survaied. affoorded many eminent Merchants, and hath not beene asha∣med to make Merchandising a proppe and supportation to their Nobilitie, which amongst them is intituled Clarissimi so that this their Schoole of Commerce hath affoorded such apt Schollers, and which have so notably profited therein, that they have with as much honor worne the gowne, as valiantly handled the sword; and he that shall heedfully peruse their Histories shall finde that not a few of them, have with generall approbation both of their Subjects and neighbous strooke the principall stroake in the governement of that Dukedome. The fit situation of their Citie, the large extent of their maritime coasts, the common aptnes and addiction of the Citi∣sens
hath much furthered the great Traffique of the same, what it hath beene in times past, when their potency and Opulency was at the highest, and when they set out and gave imployment both in warre and peace to 300. saile of Gallies, besides all other sort of ves∣sels; I referre to their owne Histories. Their then rich trade to Ae∣gypt for the commodities of India, Arabia, and to Constantinople and Alleppo for the commodities of Grecia, Armenia and Persiae, to Ger∣manie, France, Flanders and England, for the commodities of those Countries, must needs make this Citie famous for the Traffique thereof; but their covetous appetite, that could not bee satisfi∣ed with this same, and the great wealth each in particular drew thereby, envied to themselves that honour, which all other Ci∣ties of the World was constrained to give them for their great customes imposed, joyned with the accidents of that age and time brought them to the present state of traffique wherein now they are found to bee, which is at present comprehended within a narrow scantling, for their trade to Aegypt is vanished, and seene onely in the reliques thereof, for though in Alexandria and Cairo they maintaine Consuls, serving in outward appearance for the protection of their Merchants, yet indeede they serve to little pur∣pose, as having lost the former famous trade of Alexanaria and Cai∣ro in Sidon, Acria, Smyrna and other places of Turkie; they have their Consuls, as also their Agent in Constantinople and Consull in Alleppo, which now are the principall who give life to their designes, as in∣deed the places where their trade is of greatest eminency, yet it is not so great but may be fathomed within a small line, and as ma∣ny things have notably concurred in the losse of their former traf∣fique abroad and in other kingdomes (as the discovery of India by the Portugall, the subversion of the Greeke Empire by the Turks, and the favourable countenance of some of the late Kings of England to their owne Subjects, for their incouragement in trade, and their ge∣nerall inclination thereto, so they in themselves have been chiefe∣ly wanting to themselves, and have suffered a losse to fall in sensi∣bly vpon them; that hath been the greatest ruine of their traffique, comprised within the mystery of these their new Imposts, and the de∣cay of the shipping and Navigators, which that Prince must ever carefully avoid that would have his Countrey and Subjects thrive thereby; and having now lost all their trade to all other places (the dominions of the great Turke onely excepted their Shippes and Gallies are decayed, and their Mariners fled from them, some sparkes are seene yet to remaine, but the great fire of their mighty traffique being extinguished, it will not be needfull for mee to rake the ashes, and observe further that little cole that is yet re∣sting unconsumed amongst them.
CHAP. CLXIX. Of Florence, and the Cities of that Dukedome. THe Dukedome of Florence, containeth the greater Florence and the Provinces thereof. part of Tuskany, and now may be said to be com∣prehended under the Signorie of the great Duke, with the Republique of Pisa and Sienna, the princi∣pal marine port wherof is Leghorne, which may be accounted the best and one of the greatest townes of traae in all the Mediterranean Seas, and not onely thus continued and preserved by the industry of the inhabitants alone, but of other Nations, which by reason of the great immunities and priviledges of the place, and the freedome given to strangers and Merchants, and principally because all sorts of Merchandise may bee heere landed free of all customes duties and imposts, this scale is growne to that height, that it is famous throughout all the Mediterranean and Ocean Seas. In this Republique I finde onely foure Cities of consequence that challenge in matter of commerce my observation which is, Flo∣rence it selfe the principall Citie of this Dukedome; next Siena, then Pisa, and lastly the abovementioned Towne of Leghorne. These Countries affoords for Merchandise, some Marble, Rice, Commodities of Tuscame. Wines, Oyles, quantitie of Silkes, both raw and wrought in stuffes, famous for their fabriques throughout Europe, as Sattins, Taffetaes, Velvets, Grograines, Plushes and the like, called commonly of Flo∣rence. From England is heere vented Pepper, Cloves, Maces, Indico, Callicoes, as being Eastindia commodities, and Lead, Tinne, Clothes, Bayes, Sayes, Serges, Perpetuanes as native; and the English also bring hither Herings white and red, Pickled Salmon, Newland-fish, Pilchards, Calveskins and many other commodities. The Duke of Florence hath ever been found to bee a great lover of The Duke of Florence a great Mer∣chant. Merchants and Merchandising, and is conceived to be at this day the greatest Merchant in Europe, forgetting not that his Ancestors did raise themselves by traffique to the greatnes and height hee now doth hold; and to this end is found in Leghorne a stocke properly running in trade for his account, which is imploied in traffique as oc∣casion of profit upon Merchandise doth present it selfe.
CHAP. CLX. Of Florence, and the Trade thereof. THe Citie of Florence is seated neere the confluence of two Rivers, Arne and Chiane, and is a very faire Florence, and the Trade thereof. Citie, and abounding with publique and private buildings of great beauty, and therefore by some supposed to be called Florencia, a situ Florenti; it is in compasse sixe miles, and is the residence of the Duke, who heere hath a sumptuous Pallace: the greatest part of the trade thereof doth consist in the fabriques of Silkes that heere are made, and are hence properly called, and in the Exchanges heere used and practised by Bankers, for all parts of Europe, the inhabitants having lost the honour of Merchandising, which anciently they had, when eminent Factors from hence were sent into Flanders and Eng∣land and to other countries to reside, who mannaged a very great trade, now totally decaied what I have found from others or obser∣ved my selfe: in Anno 1619. when I was heere I shall set downe for the present occurrences of the place. The Merchants doe heere keepe their accounts in Livers, Sold and Accounts in Florence. Deniers, 12. Deniers making a Sol, and 20. Sol a Liver; and others a∣gaine in Crownes, Sol and Deniers of Gold, of Livers 7½. per Crowne, accounting 12. Deniers to a Sol, and 20. Sol to a Crowne, but all their commodities are sould by Livers, Sold, and Denieres of their monies, and to reduce Livers into Crownes, multiply by 2. and divide by 15. because 15. halfe Livers make a Crowne, and to reduce the said Li∣vers into Duccats,  is to be taken. The Coynes currant are the Duccats of Florence and the Picols. The Duccat is worth 7. Livers or 70. Bolognini. Coines currant in Florence. The Crowne is worth 7½. Livers in Picholi, whereas the custome is different from other Countries, wherein the Crowne of gold is not found to have any constant rate with the currant money of the place, and is adjusted therewith according to the rate of the Exchange. The Liver is 20. Sold, and accounted to be nine pence starling. The Duccat being 7. Livers, is accounted their 5. s. 3. d. starlin. The Seudo or Crowne of 7½. Livers, is consequently 5. s. 7½. starlin. The Liver is also divided to 12. Chraches, whereof 8. is a Iulio, which is 6. d. starling; 5. Quatrins is a Crch, and 60. Craches makes a Liver.
Divers observations have beene made upon the Weights of Flo∣rence, Waights of Florence. which is the 100. li. or Quintall of 12. ounces to a pound, the most noted I will here insert, and referre the truth to him that hath a cause of triall, because I have received them upon trust. This 100. li. then hath beene found to produce in these places. The 100. li. of Flo∣rence hath rendred in Anvers 73. lib. Lions 76. Dansicke 88. Venetia sotle 114. Venetia grosse 71. Siena 103. Pulia 104. Lucca 102. Bollonia 95. Ferrara 101. Padoua 117. Millan 103. Cremona 113. Roma 98. Genoua 108. Marselia 91. Barselona 71. Valentia 96. Granado 66. Sivill 75. Lixborne 92. Paris sutle 90. Paris grosse 112. Brussia 78. London 78. Ancona 98. Mairke 92. Sicilia settle Rot. 44. and grosse R. 48. Tunes 100. Alleppo—R. 15¾. R. Ditto Silke 16¾. Tripoli Soria 19. Ditto Barbaria 67¾. Baruti 152. Alex. zera 36. 2. Alex. for fori 81. 6. Scio & Smyrna 71. Constantinople 64. Rhodes 14. 3. Acria 12. 8.
Babylonia 10. 10. Balsara 5. 00½. M. Ormus 75. 10. As of Weights formerly compared, so doe I finde the brace of this place whereby all commodities are measured, and upon the Measures of Florence. 100. braces of Florence hath beene made these observations, and to make The Cane is 4. braces and the 100. braces are in London 49. ells Anvers 81. Frankford 102. Dansicke 67. Vienna 71. Lions 49. Paris 46. alns Roven 42. Lisborne 49. vares Sivill 24. Madera 50. Venice 88. bra. Lucca 97. Millan 112. Genoa 235. pal. Note that all Wrought silkes are heere bought by the pound weight, and not by the Cane nor Brace above mentioned. Wine is sold by the Cogne, which are 10. bar. and 1. barrell is 40. Of wine. Metadels, or 20. botles, or flsht, each boile being 2. metadels, the bar∣rell is to weigh 120. li. Oile is sold by the Orcio, which is a barrell, and containes 32. me∣tadels, Of . which ought to weigh 85. li. Graine is sold by the Moggio, and is staio 24. and the staio is 50. li. Of corne. Salt is also sold by the staio, which waighes 72. li. Of salt. The agreement of the Staio of Corne I finde thus computed with other Cities. Agreement of dry measures of Ence. Staios 3¾. of corne in Florence is 1. sache of Venetia. staios 3. in Florence make 1. sache in Pisa. staios 2⅘. in Florence make in Plombine 1. staio. staios 8¾. in Florence make in Rome 1. Rotolo. staios 10½. in Florence makes in Palermo a generall salmo. staios 13. in Florence makes in Misnia a grosse salmo. staios 1½. in Florence is in Naples 1. tomolo, 16. tom. is a salm. there. staios 6½. in Florence is in Ancona 1. som of Corne. Mogia 1. in Florence is in Arles 10½. sesterces. staios 3. in Florence is in Marselia 2. mines. staios 60. in Florence is in Brittany a tunne of Corne. I have beene the lerarg in the Waights and Measures of Florence
because I shall have occasion to accord other Cities to this, and∣therefore to make this the more absolute, I have added the follo wing concordancy of the dry Measures of this place with other Countries following, which I referre to the better experienced for due triall. CHAP. CLXI. Of the dry Measures of severall Cities in Italie, with other Cities in the Mediterranean Seas. NOw for as much as I finde it very difficult to accord so many Cities in the Measures of Corne, Salt, Wine, &c. Agreement of dry measures of sunry cities of Italic, &c. I will here adde what I have collected therein, which properly may best follow the preceding agreement of the drie Measure of Florence. First then a Mine of Corne in Avignon is 1. staio of Pisa. An Anne of Lions is 8. staios of Florence, which Anne of Lions is there accounted 6. buccalls. A Quarter of England is 11. staios of Florence. A Mogio of Graine in Florence is 3. Annes in Lions, which Mogio is accounted 10. sesterces there and the same in Provence. Alquiers 104. of Portugall are 40. Buccets of Lions. 1. Muy of Orleans & 12. in 13. Mines makes 13. buccets of Lions. 1. Tunne of graine either in Picardy or Normandy, to bee laden aboard their shippes is 16. Mins, which are 2 . in Moggios, which are 24. Mines, and the 24. Mins there are 3 . Moggio of Florence, and 1. Mine of the said places is 3½. staios incirca of Florence. 1. Tunne of Corne laden in Britanny, is accounted to hold and make 60. staios of Florence. 1. Fanega in Callais is 2 . staios of Florence. 1. Salme generall of Cicilia is in Portugall Alquiers 22½. the said Salmo of Cicilia is 11¼. staios in Florence. the grosse Salmo of Sicilia is 17 per cent. greater than the generall. the Salmo of Callabria is 6. tumelles of Noples. the Tomolo of Naples is 2. staios of Florence. the Carro of Apulia is 3. Moggio of Florence. Alquiers 4½. of Lixborne are 1. fanega in Andalusia. 1. fanega is 2. staios of Florence and a little more, so that the staio of Florence may bee accounted the fanega and alquier of Lisborne 2⅙. staio. 1. Mogio of Florence makes in Arles 4 . sesterces. And in Marselia doth make 2. sesterces.
The Sato of Venice comes to make 1. sacke of Pisa or little lesse. the Mine of Corne of Genoa are 4½. staio of Florence. the Sestercies 5. of graine in Avignon, are 1 salmo of Cicilia. A Carre of Corne in Pulia is in Callais 34½ fanega, and makes in Lis∣borne 145. alquiers of 36. tomolos of Naples the Carre. The 500. Retibe of Corne in Alexandria is in Leghorne 1090. sacks. the staio 63 of Corne of Ferrara makes just a Carro, and this Carro makes in Constantinople 57. Caffise. The Retibe of Alexandria is in Leghorne 6⅕. staios. the Cillaa of Chavallo is 3. staios of Florence. 1. Tunne of graine in Britanny is 60. staios of Florence. the Caffise of Corne in Valentia in Spaine is ⅔. of a generall Salme of Cicilia. Sestiers 10½. of Arles is in Florence 1. Moggio. And as for the Tomolo of Naples, I finde this observation in the agreement thereof: 36 Tomo∣los of Na ples which is 1. Carr, hath made in Venice 22½. stai. Istria 22¾. Segnia 68¼. quart. In ll Dalmatia 22¼. stai. Ragusa 19¼. Cattarro 22½. Ferme Marca 9 1/10. somo. Cofu 14¾. moza. Candia 97. mesn. Canca 14¾. moza. Alexandria 7. rib. Tripoli Barbaria 5. Caffise and 3. Iubes   Zrbe 5¼. caf. Millan 3. mos. Parma 45½. sta. Modena 26. Rimene 10⅚. Cesena 13. Ravenna 34. Forli 21½. Ferrara 62½. Mantoua 56½. Bollonia 24½. corbe. Florence 80. stai. Genoa 16 . mine. Padoua 34⅛. stai. Treviso 20⅞. Vicentia 24⅛. Verona 50 min. Bressia 12½. som.
Bergamo 19. stai. Cremona 11⅜ som. Mirandola 26. stai. For other particulars of these Measures I have observed the same in such other place as my Collections permitted. As for the Exchanges of Florence, which heere are found daily practised for great summes, I referre the particulars thereof to the 282. and 400. Chapters of this Tract with all the circumstances thereto belonging, and therefore hence come to Pisa the second City of Trade in Toscanie. CHAP. CLXII. Of Pisa, and the Trade thereof. PISA is the second Citie in the Dukedome of Tuscanie, seated in the entrance of the River Arnus into the Pisa, and the Trade thereof. Sea which commeth downe from Florence and wate∣reth the Walles thereof. Heere is the Custome-house, placed by the Florentine for all goods that are landed at Leghorne, and enters into his Coun∣try, or laden in Florence, and going this way out of his Country, so that though Leghorne bee free of all Customes, yet the Duke lo∣sing little thereby save what the Towne it selfe can vent, which is but small, for it is but as a Scale and Port-towne to this Citie, and the rest of his Territories. Heere is also kept his principall Courts of Iustice, and the Knights of Saint Stephen have here their Alberge, thereby keeping his Sub∣jcts from going to Malta to bee there enrolled, the Duke by these meanes using his best art to make this Citie have some splendour, which by the strict subjection of the Inhabitants the Citie other∣wise is wholly deprived of. Those goodly Buildings which it vet sheweth testifies its anci∣ent magnificency, and many things Anno 1619. I observed therein of note, though improper to the subject, which beares in many pla∣ces the reliques of that greatnesse it once had, by its command o∣ver divers Provinces, and the Warres it maintained for a long time together against both the Venetians and Genoues; but to my busi∣ness. The Monies, Waights, and Measures and Accounts of Florence are here onely in use, and therefore shall not need to reiterate. Weights. Onely the Corne measure is a Sacco, which is 3. staios of Florence. The Wine measure is a barill Cornuto, which is 1½. bar. Florence, so Measures.
that 7. bar. Cornuto is 10½. bar. in Florence, which is in Candia 45. mi∣state, and makes in Naples cogno 1. which is 1½. but. For Custome of the place, this hath beene observed, that a bagge Customes in Pisa. of ppper from landing at Leghorne to the dispatch in the Custome-house here is about a crowne of gold per balle, and herrings English have charges from the arrivall at Leghorne untill dispatched in the Cu∣stome house of Pisa 15. sold of gold the bar. of 4000. herrings; and the like for other commodities in generall. The customes of the place is ordinary 4. cratches per liver. CHAP. CLXIII. Of Siena, and the Trade thereof. THis City hath beene of more note and greater con∣sequence in times past, but falling under the com∣mand Siena, and the Trade thereof. of the Florentine, they deprived them of all their trade and ancient glory; it is an inland towne, adorned with beautifull both publique and pri∣vare Buildings, their great Church hath the Mo∣numents reserved of all the Popes, and of our famous Country∣man Sir Iohn Haukwood, who did the Florentine such good and vali∣ant service, that they have heere honoured his memory with a stately Monument: here is observed to be spoken the best Tuscan Language in Italie; and further I could not note materiall Anno 1619. Accounts heere and the Monies current are the same as in Flo∣rence. In Siena they have two Quintals, the one of 100. li. wherewith Waights in Siena. all fine goods are waighed, being incirca 3. per cent. lesse than the 100. li. of Florence. The other is for Woolles and some grosse commodities, which containeth 150. li of the former 100. The Braces and Measures agree with Florence formerly mentioned, Measures in Siena. other notes of Trade in this Dukedome I have not met withall, there∣fore will passe hence to the Dukedome of Millan, and will omit the rest to Leghorne, the onely Sea Port of note belonging hereunto.
CHAP. CLXIV. Of the Dukedome of Millan. THe Dukedome of Millan being under command of the Spaniard, is rich in Natures gifts, as esteemed Dukedome of Millan. the Garden of Italie, affoording plenty of Corne, Rice, Wines, Oiles, Silkes raw and wrought, and sun∣dry other commodities, it hath therein also many faire Cities, the principall whereof are, First, Millan the principall of the whole Dutchy. Secondly, Pavia. Thirdly, Alexandria de la Pallia. Fourthly, Cremona. And fithly, Como; of as many of which as is needfull, I shall touch the particulars. CHAP. CLXV. Of Millan, and the Trade thereof. MILLAN is a faire Citie and the greatest of Lombardy, the Castle whereof is accounted impregnable, it is Millan, and the Trade thereof. very populous, and containes seven miles in circuit, it is furnished in matter of Trade with many great Merchants, or rather as I may more properly call them, Shopkeepers, abounding in many rich manufacturies of Silkes, and iron for sword blades, cannons for Muskets and Pistols, &c. as silke stoc∣kins, chamlet, fustians, gold thread, and sundry other commodities here dispersed into Savoy, France, and other adjoyning Countries. Their Accounts are kept in Millan by pounds, shillings, and d. Or as they call them Livers, Sol, and Deniers, 12. Deniers make a Accounts in Millan. Sol, and 20. Sol a Liver, which Liver may be sterl. 12. pence, as I shall shew in the Tract of Exchanges, in 280. and 410. Chapters. Their Coines currant in Millan are these: A Duccat of gold of Millan is incirca 100. Sol of that money. Coires in Millan. A Crowne of gold of the Sunne is worth about 96. or 98 Sol. A Crowne of gold Italian is 5. Livers and 6. Sol Imperiall. A Duccat of gold of Livers 5. and 18. Sol is Livers 6. Imperiall. A Duccat Imperiall is esteemed 4. Livers.
A Duccat of Millan, or Imperiall of Livers 4 per Ducc. and so they count it in Exchange, the which they pay in Crownes of Italie at 101. Sol per Ducc. Note that the Crowne in Millan runnes in Merchandise for Sol 110. and the Duccat for the same. Note also that the Imperiall Coines are the currant of this Coun∣try, but French, Italian, and Spanish, passe heere also in Merchandise, as being placed betweene the two former, and subject to the last. The Weigh, of Millan is the Pound, and the 100. li. which is the Weights in Millan. Quintall, which 100. li. is In Venetia sotile 108. li. Venetia grosse 66. Florentia 97. Genoa 106. Lions 69. London 70. In Millan they have two Braces, the Cloth, and the Silke, upon the 100. Braces silke hath beene made these observations, and to have Measures of Millan. made In London 43. elles. Antwerpe 72. Frankford 90. Dansicke 60. Vienna 63. Lions 44. alnes. Paris 41. Genoa 209. palm. Roven 37. aln. Lixborne 43. var. Sivill 58. Madera 44. Venetia 78. brac. Lucque 86. Florence 88. Which I referre to the experience of him that shall have occa∣sion to make triall heerein farther, and so I will proceed to Cremo∣na; as for the Exchanges here practised I referre you to the generall Exchanges of Millan. Chapter thereof in the end of this Tract, videlicet 280. and 410. Chapters.
CHAP. CLXVI. Of Cremona, and the Trade thereof. CREMONA is the second City of Trade in this Cremon and the Trade thereof. Durchie, which endeavoureth by the industry of the Inhabitants to imitate and second Millan in her manufacturies of silke, gold thread, &c. Their common Waight is the Pound and the 100. Waights. li. which hath by triall beene found to make in Venetia sotle 104. l. and by the grosse of Venetia 65. in 66. li. in Florence 86. li. Their Measure is the Brace, agreeing the same as that of Flo∣rence. Measures. Oile is sold by the Carigas, 18. thereof is 1000. li. Venetia in ile cariga, 15. is accounted for a 1000. li. of Cheese in Venetia. Carigas 11. is accounted of Hony 8  staies of Venetia. CHAP. CLXVII. Of Como, and the Trade thereof. COMO is made more famous by the Lake whereon it is seated, being 50. miles about, than by the trade Come, and the Trade thereof. thereof, though it may well be imagined the same doth adde a good furtherance thereto by the be∣nefit and commodity thereof, and by transporting of wares to neighbouring places seated therea∣bout. The Weight thereof is the Pound, and 100. lib. which hath beene observed to produce in Venice sutle 108. and grosse 67. li. which in Weights. London is 72. li. haber depois, or thereabout. Their Measure is a Brace accounted to be. Corne is sold by the Mosa, which are here 14. pesos, and every peso Measures. is 10. li. at 30. un. per li. which in Venetia is 378. lib. sutle, which is 205. li. grosse, so that the said 14. pesos is in Venetia 1 . staios; and thus have I done with the Dutchy of Millan, and proceed to Man∣toua and the Dukedome thereof.
CHAP. CLXVIII. Of Mantoua, and the Trade thereof. MANTOUA hath some other Cities of qua∣lity Mantoua, and the trade thereof. subject thereto, but being debarred from the Sea, and invironed with potent neigh∣bours that hinder the commerce thereof, I will therefore reduce what I have collected note worthy to the City of Mantoa it selfe, which is a very faire and strong Towne, in∣vironed on three parts with a Lake of good breadth, and with a strong Wall on the rest, through this Lake run∣neth a River that leadeth into Poe which is a famous streame in these part, and much enricheth this Country, and furthereth the Trade of this Dutchy. The chiefe Commodities of this Dukedome is certaine fabriques Commodities of Mantou. of silkes, such as are Taffataes, Sattins, Chamblets watered, and the like. Their Accounts are kept in Livers, Sold, and Deniers, 12. Deniers making a Sol, and 20. Sols a Liver, 5. of which Livers maketh a Duc∣cat Accounts in . of gold large 9. 12. Sol making a Duccaton of Mantoa, or 115. sol of Millan which is accounted () sterl. They waigh in Mantoa by a Peso, and by the 100. li. 25. li. being Waights in Manto. the Pso, and 100. lib. the Quintall, which hath made in Venice sutle 108. li. and Vnice grosse 66 . lib. in Florence 98. li. and in London by observation of some 71. li. haberdepois. Their Measure of length is the brace, which doth agree with the cloth brace of Venice within a small matter. Measures in Mantoa. Corne is sold by the staio, 100. whereof are in Venetia 40. staios and 1. staio weighes about 80. li. of Mantoa waight. In this Dukedome is also Aste, where is yearely kept a great and notable Faire for many sorts of Merchandise, where many immuni∣ties Aste a Faire. are granted to Merchants, during the time that the said Faire doth continue, and is held in the beginning of September, and thus much I have observed of this Dutchie.
CHAP. CLXIX. Of Uibin, and the Trade thereof. VRBIN is a faire Citie, seated on the bottome of the Vrbin, and the Trade thereo. Apenine, where it hath for Sea Ports Pisaur and Fa, the English heere doe enjoy many immuni∣ties, and sundry priviledges, the originall whereof did arise in the Raigne of Henry the sixth of England, who created the Duke of this place a Knight of the noble Order of the Garter; and he to requite the Honour to himselfe done, returned it thus to the said King his Subjects, it now affoor∣deth the common commodities of other parts of Italie which it also followeth in matter of trade. Their accounts are heere kept in Livers, Sold and Denieres, 12. De∣niers Accounts in Vrbino. making a Soldo, and 20. Sold a Liver. The currant coines of this place are the Romaine, and doe as in most parts of these Italian Principalities partake of one anothers coines, which passeth currant with some small distinction from one Citie to another. The waights is heere the pound, and the Quintall being 100. lib. Weights. which produceth in Venetia stle 112½. and grosse 72. li. and hath produced in London 77. li. haberdepois. Their measure of length is the Brace, the 100. Braces of Cloth in Venice rendring heere 94. Braces, and the 100. Braces of Silke, ren∣dring Measures in Vrbino. heere 102. in 103. Braces, which is in England () inches. CHAP. CLXX. Of Parma, and the Trade thereof. PARMA, the chiefe Citie of this Principality, af∣foording Parma, and the Trade thereof. the commodities common with the rest of Italie, doth over and above affoord that excel∣lent Cheese knowne through Europe by the name of Parmesane, it is not noted for any eminencie in trade, the greatest fame that of late it obtai∣ned was by being subject to that Alexander Farnese who was Duke thereof, and made such a noise in the Netherlands, during his
regencie there, to his Masters great expence, but to little purpose, for trade observe that their accounts are kept in Livers Sold and De∣niers, Accounts in Parma. 12. Deniers to the Sold, and 20. Sold to the Liver, which is () starling. The Coynes currant of Parma are. The Waight is the pound of 12. ounces, and 100. li. to a Quin∣tall, Waights in Parma. which is in England about 60. li. and in Venice sotile. Their Measure is the Brace, agreeing with the Brace of Florence, Measures in Parma. and now to Placentia, also subject to this Principalitie. CHAP. CLXXI. Of Placentia, and the Trade thereof. PLACENTIA is a commodious Citie for trade, and Placentia, and the Trade thereof. feated properly to that end upon the River Poe, af∣foording the ordinary commodities of Italie, but in no∣thing so famous as for the Faires in Exchanges heere quarterly kept, to which place all Italy, Germany and other Countries doe make their Exchanges, rather for the Fatres, then for any commodities wherein they intend to have the said mo∣nies invested, and for the monies of the Country there is no ac∣count had therein thereof, but onely of that wherein the Exchan∣ges is made, which is called the Crowne of Marcque, wherein onely Accounts in Placentia. Bankers and Exchangers doe keepe the account of this Citie, and of those Crownes, their accounts are framed in Crownes, Sold and Deniers of Marcque, as I have more at large treated of in severall Chapters of Exchanges, vide 276. and 382. and others following, which by reason of the great concurrencie I have there amply specified, and to which I refer you. The waight of Placentia is the pound, and 100. li. the Quintall, Waights in Placentia. which a 100. li. is in Vence grosse, 66. li. Venice sutle, 108. li. and by that computation in London sutle pound 72. li. incirca. Their measure is a Brace, which is 27. inches English, in this Prin∣cipalitie Measures in Placentia. is Mirandola accounted, of which a word passando.
CHAP. CLXXII. Of Mirandola, and the Trade thereof. MIRANDOLA being a Citie also belonging to Mirandola, and trade thereof. this Principalitie, I thought good to insert in my way what I have observed in the waights and the measures thereof. The waight of Mirandola is the li. 12. ounces, Measures. 100. li. whereof is a Quintall, and found to be ha∣berdepoise 75. li. The measure is the Brace, found to be 26½. inches English, and so much for Mirandola, and now to Leghorne, therewith to finish the Waights. trade and commerce of Tuscany, and of these petty Dukedomes. CHAP. CLXXIII. Of Leghorne and the Trade thereof. LEGHORNE is accounted the strongest moderne Leghorne and the trade thereof. Citie in the Mediterranean Seas purchased not many yeeres past for 120000. Duccats of the Genoes, by the Dukes of Tuscanie, who reedifying, or rather buil∣ding a new Citie to the old, new fortified and walled the same, giving safe conduct to all men of what quality and degree soever to live heere, so that at the first it was a sanctuary for all Theeves, Pirats, Murtherers and wicked Rascalls, and because heere was also granted a liberty in conscience; the Towne was also sto∣red with all Religions, but as the Citie became populous, and Mer∣chants being graunted a freedome in Customes, the place became in a short time to be filled with Inhabitants, and to adde to these im∣munities, there were dwellings for seven yeeres given to any that would come hither to reside, and all such should be free from all ar∣rests or punishments for acts committed in all other Countries, of what nature soever they were found to bee, and by these meanes at first, and since by the incouragement of the great Duke of Florence it is become one of the principall Townes of trade in all those Seas, and is properly accounted the Scale of the Florentine dominions; in matters of commerce it is ruled by Pisa and Florence, which are the principall Cities of this Dutchie, and which yeelds the commodities
that drives the traffique of this place, the principall notes that I ob∣served at my being in this place in severall Voyages, are as fol∣loweth. Their accounts are kept in Livers, Sold and Deniers, 12. Deniers to a Soldo, and 20. Soldo accounted to a Liver, which is nine pence Accounts in Leghorne. starling. Their monies are those of Florence, which currant is the Duccat of 10½. Iulies, or of seven Livers, which is five shillings three pence Coines as in Florence. starling, and a Scudo or Crowne of gold, is 7½. Livers, and one Crowne of gold, in gold, or as they say, de Oro. in Oro. is 8. Livers. Also note that 12. croches make a Liver which is 9. d. 8. Craches make a Iulio, which is 6. d. sterl. 5. Quadrius make a Crache, 60. Crache a Liver. 3. Quadrins make a Sol. To bring Duccats of Florence of seven Livers the Duccat into Crownes of Gold of Florence of 7½. Iul. per cro. divide by 15. and sub∣stract the quotient from the summe divided, and the remainder is your demand. Againe, to bring Crownes of gold of Florence of 7½. Iul. into Duc∣cat of 7. Livers, divide by 14. and the quotient added to the summe divided will answer your desire. There is ever found betweene the Monies of Florence and the money of Leghor, a Lgio, which being both subject to one Prince is conceived by some that the same may be removed by Merchants, if they would endeavour it, but they that are well versed in the Trade of this place hold the contrary opinion, therefore I will omit the reasons given on both sides, and advise him that hath monies in Florence and is resident in Leghorne to make the best use thereof, and take the benefit of the Laggio as the currant rate will permit him, till the businesse may bee better rectified and the controversie by an equality may be decided and determined. The Weight is the same as in Florence, the Pound 12. ounces, and the Quintall is 100. lib. which is English 75. lib. but some commodi∣ties Waights in Florence. are found to be sould by the Quintall of 150. li. which is 113. li. English, and some by a Quintall of 160. li. as fish, woolles, and which is 121. li. English, the English 112. lib. making about 147½. li. of this plac. Note that 150. li. is here a Kintar of Allome, and is 113⅞. li. English. 151. li. makes a Kintar of Sagar is 114⅔. li. English. 16. li. makes a Kintar of fish, is 121⅔. li. English. 100. lib. is a Kintar of all other commodities, and is 75 . li. En∣glish, and is 108. li. in Genoa. The Measure of this place is the brace, 4. braces making a Cane, Measures in Flore. 50. Canes is 200. braces, and found to bee 100. Elles of London, ob∣served by some, 5. Canes to make 11. Yards English.
Their Corne measure is a Stare, 3. stares is a sacke, and 3 . sackes is a salmo: or 41. stares is a salmo, and this salmo is accounted a London quarter. Also they have another Measure called a Maggio, and 8. sackes or 24. stares is a Maggio, and a stare of good corne hath beene noted to weigh 50. li. From England is vented heere baies, faies, serges, cloths, perpetua∣nies, lead, tinne, Calve-skinnes, hides, Otracan bides, salt, salmon, pil∣cherds, English com∣mo  ven ted. n Leghorne. caviar, herrings, tallow, also pepper, ginger, mace, cloves, nut∣megs, indico, and such India commodities. This place being the greatest Scale of Trade in Tuscanie is found hence to be sent into other parts, oiles, wines silkes raw and wrought, Commodities of Tuscanie. rice, aniseeds, argall, and all other Italian commodities. All goods entring heere to be sold are not liable to the payment of Custome for a yeare, but if kept a full yeare, doe then pay a Cu∣stome, Custome in the Port o Leg∣borne. and if sale present not in that time, the Merchant may ship the same out againe without any charges, but if for the advance of his commodity hee send the same into other parts of the Dutchy of Florence, then the Custome is to bee paid at Pisa, as is there mentio∣ned, to which I referre the inquirer, and leaving Tuscanie I will passe over to Genoa. CHAP. CLXXIV. Of Genoa, and the Trade thereof. THE State of Genoa comprehends Finali, Sarasena, and Noli, Cities of small import, the Metropolis Genoa, and the trade thereof Genoa being the Mistris of this Republique, being accounted eight miles in compasse, and inhabited by the greatest Mony-mongers or Uurers in the World, who if they would not distrust God with their wealth by Sea, would easily become and bee accounted fa∣mous Merchants; their Usury is excessive, and hath more than once brought the King of Spaine into their bookes for vaste summes of money, and hee having the tricke of failing in his payments, and performance, hath beene observed to have satisfied them in blanco in lieu of being paid in banco, but I referre this to them that are constrained to suffer, and draw to my observations being such as I have gathered upon this Citie. This Citie would proove the most famous in all these Seas for Trading, were not the Inhabitants such noted Politicians, and great biters by Exchange, that no strangers can live among them, for they
envie the great commerce practised in Leghorne their neighbour, and yet may exceed Leghorne, would their greedy covetousnesse permit them, and suffer Merchants to bring their goods thither upon small charges, but that Soveraigne must not expect a plentifull Trade that will have also a great Custome paid him upon all good, and hee that desires to lose the Traffique of his Country needs no other way to doe it but by imposing heavie Customes upon Merchants, and their com∣modities, but to their better considerations I referre this point, and publish to the world their owne common Proverbe which ad∣mirs hardly any Merchants to live or thrive amongst them, Genoa fatta per noi, their Citie is onely made for themselves. In Genoa they keepe their Accounts in Livers, Sold, and Deniers Accounts in Genoa. currant, the Denier being 12. to a Sol, and 20. Sol to a Liver, which is 120. Raies of Portugall, and 16. dsterling. Their currant Monies are divers, as bordering upon so many neighbours, the most currant is the Deniers, 12. to a Soldo. Monies in Genoa. Soldos 4. makes a Cavalet. Cavalets 5. or Sols 20. make a Liver, which is 16. d. ste. Livers 4. Sold 8. is a crowne. Sold 7. den. 6. is a Spanish Riall of 6. d. sterling. Sola 90. is a crowne of Gold. Duccat in Silver is 4. liver, 16. sol being 6. . 5. d. sterl. Duccat currant is 4, Livers, sterling 5. s. 4. d. circa. Duccat of Gold is 68. Sold of Gold. Lire 3. So's 1. makes a Riall of Eight. Lire 4. 13. 4. of Genoa hath made 1. ducc. in Leghorne. Their Weight is the Pound of 12. . and the Quintall is 100. li. ditto which is called the Sutle Quintar, and the Grosse Quintar is 150. Waights in Genoa. lib. thereof  . lib. sutle Venice, and this Grosse Quintar agrees with the Grosse Weight of Venice, betweene which two places these notes have beene observed, that 100. lib. Sutle Genoa makes Sutle in Venetia 105. li. 100. li. grosse Genoa is grosse Venetia 100. li. sutle 157 . li. The said 100. lib. hath made in London 71. lib. circa and 92½. Leghorne. And the 150. li. their Grosse Quintar is London 105. li. circa. And the 112. li. London hath made here 143. li. And by proofe 100. li. in Florence hath made here 109. li. The Grosse Quintar is 150. li. of 18. ces per li. by which is sold cottons, and cotton-yarne, comin, and aniseeds, bony, rice, brasse, lead, tinne, soape, and woolles, and some other commodities. Their Measure of length is the Cane containing 9. palmes, which 9. palmes have made 4. braces of Florence, and the measure is for silkes Measures in Genoa.
and stuffes, but 10. palmes in Linnen makes a Cane, and is in Fiorence 4. braces, and the said Cane by observation hath made in Venice 3½. braces of cloth, and 3 . of silke braces, and upon the 100. palmes have beene made these observations, and to have rendred In London 27. yards. Anvers 34. elles. Frankford 43. Dansicke 23¾ Vienna 30. Lions 21. alnes. Paris 19. Roven 18. Lixborne 20¾. vares. Sivill 28. Madera 21. Venice 37. bra. Lucca 41½. Florence 42. Millan 47. 1. Cane is in Barselona 1⅗. Canes. 9. Parmes in Genoa is in Florence 1 1/16. Canes. 1. Cane in Genoa is in London 2⅞. yards. Note that it hath beene observed that five Palmes hath made al∣most an Ell English, or 25. palmes 6. elles and ½. and 100. palmes thus is 26¼. elles and 50. yards have made here 17. canes. Corne is here sould by the Mine, whereof 64. make the 100. Sa∣ches at Pisa, and 100. Mins make 137½. staios in Venetia, and the Mine Of corne. payes 6½. sold for custome in Genoa, and weighes 270. lib. and halfe a Mine is called a Corno, the Quarter of Harwich measure hath made here 2½. Mines, but the London quarter not so much. Oile is sold by the barrell, 7½. barrels making a Neapolitan but, called here Botta dimena. Of oile. Wine is sold by the Meserole, and 5. Meseroles is a Botta dimena, and 2. barr. make 1. Mesole which is also 100. Pints, so that 500. Pints Of wine. of Wine make a Botta dimena. All goods entring into Genoa payes for Consolato of the River 6. deniers per liver, and is paid by the buyer, according to the price bought, if a contract bee not made with the seller for the dischar∣ging of it. And hee that lands Commodities heere in his owne name and cannot make sale thereof, hath had formerly leave to carry the same out againe without paying any charges, but this privilege is now disanulled. Many silke fabriques are heere made common with all Italie, the principall being Velvets, watred Chamlets, &c. sould by the pound weight, as is usuall through Italie.
This Citie is famous for the Exchanges heere practised, as doth Exchanges. more fully appeare in the Chapter of the Exchanges heere in use, vide Chapter 279. and so forward, where all circumstances are in∣serted and now to Lucca. CHAP. CLXXV. Of Lucca, and the Trade thereof. LUCCA is the principall Citie of this Republique, and is pleasantly seated on the River Serchio, in Lucca, and the trade thereof. compasse about 3. miles in a plaine, the walles be∣ing adorned with trees, makes the Citie appeare to the Traveller to be in a Wood, till approach∣ing neere the bulwarkes, give testimony of her strength, and that these trees are planted upon the walls where the Citisens in summer walke for shade: it doth wholy consist upon the Fabriques heere made of Silke, such as is Damasces, Sattins, Taffetaes, &c. which hence is vented into for∣raine countries, which are all sould by the pound waight, according as is accustomed in Italie, and as for other matters in trade what I observed in 1619. is thus. Their accounts are kept divers waies, some in Livers, Sold and Deniers of Picholi, as in Florence, 12. Deniers to a Sol, and 20. Sol to Accounts in Lucca. a Liver; some againe in Crownes, Sold and Deniers of gold, of Livers 7½. per Crowne, accounted by 12. and 20. as is abovesaid, but Silkes are sould by so many Duccats the pound, so that to reduce Duccats into Crownes, the number of Duccats is to be multiplied by foure, and divide the proceede by 71. adding what may rest with the Duccats, and they shall be Crownes of 7½. Livers. Note that to bring Duccats of Florence, or as they tearme them Piastres, of seven Livers the Duccat, into Crownes of gold of Florence, of 7½. per Crowne, divide by 15. and substract the quotient from the summe divided, and the remainder is the demaund. Againe, to bring Crownes of gold of Florence, of 7½. into Duccats, of 7. Livers divide by 14. and the quotient added to the summe divi∣ded will answere your desire. Againe, to bring Livers of Lucca into Crownes of Lucca or Duccats of Florence, take the summe of Livers, and adde as many more unto them, the product being divided by 15. then the same are Crownes of Lucca of 7½. Livers, I say, Livers for Crownes and Duccats of Flo∣rence, of 7. Livers per Duccat, for that the Crowne of Lucca and duccat of Florence, reall one in valew, but in the Liver of Lucca and in that of Florence, is some difference, because the Liver of Florence is 7½. per
cent. greater then that of Lucca. Note also that 75. Bolonius make a Florence duccat of 7. Livers, and 79. Bolonins make a Lucca duccat, by which they account in sale of Silke. The Crowne is commonly thus charactered C. The Piastre or Duccat is thus D. The Liver is thus L. The Sol is thus, and the Denier d. Their Monies common is that of Florence currant, called Bolonini, the Crowne of gold is 7. Livers, 10. Sol in Picoli as at Florence. Monies in Lucca. The Ducatone is worth 7. Livers, and is called the Crowne of sil∣ver, but the Exchanges is made by Ducatons, Solds and deniers as more fully doth appeare in the 283. Chapter of Exchanges practised in this Citie, to which in that particular I referre you. They have in Lucca two waights, one of the Ballance waight, whereby all goods are bought and sould, and the other whereby Weights in Lucca. Merchants doe pay the customes by, wherein is about 12. percē. diffe∣rence. The Ballance pound is 12. ounces, 100. li. whereof hath made in Lions 72½. li. the customers pound is also 12. ounces, 100. li. there∣of hath rendred in Lions by triall 81. li. The ballance 100. hath made in Florence 97. li. The measure of Lucca is a Brace, which is 23. inches of London, Measure in Lucca. and two Braces have made an Alne of Lions, and vpon this 100. Bra∣ces hath been made these observations, that it rendereth In London 50. Ells Antwerpe 83 . Frankferd 104⅙. Dansicke 69⅙. Vienna 72½. Lions 50⅙. alnes Paris 47½. Roven 43½. Lixborne 50. Vare Civil 67½. Vare Madera 51 . Vare Venetia 90. Braces Florence 102. Braces Millan 115. Braces Genoa 240⅓. Palmes Silkes have been thus sould in Lucca: Account of sale of silkes in Lucca. Damasces were sould at 4. Duccats and 18. Sold the pound. Satine were sould at 4. Duccats and 14. Sold the pound. Rich Taffeta sould at 4. Duccats 16. Sold the pound. It is heere to be noted that in Lucca there is paid ¼. more for the colours then for blacks, therefore the custome is to adde for the colours
that are in the parcell ¼. to the Weight reducing them all to one weight and price, as if they were all blackes; where also is to bee observed, that Crimsons and Carnalions pay 10½. Livers over and above the ¼. before mentioned, but being mixt with other colours, and that either the ground or the flowre (as in Damasces) bee of another colour, then they pay but the halfe of 10. Livers besides the above mentioned ¼. or fourth in Weight. Moreover for the most part of those silkes made here, they are generally reduced to 7. braces per li. either Saitins, double Taffetaes, or Damaskes, and if they passe 7. braces, they are held advantage∣able to the Buyer in the Measure, if under 7. braces they are held the richer, and lesse advantage to the Buyer, the principall obser∣vations may bee collected to lie in the richnesse of the colour, and the goodnesse of the silke. CHAP. CLXXVI. Of the Weights of Italie reduced to the Weight of London. HAving thus runne through many particular Cities of Waights of Italie reduced to London. Trade in Italie, and therewith noted the particular ob∣servations that hath come into my hands, appertaining to the Trade of those places, I judge it expedient ere I leave it, to collect heerein on the Weights and Mea∣sures of these and other Cities, as I finde them observed by indu∣strious hands, and because they are there calculated to the Standard of sundry places one of another, I hold it fitting to reduce them to the English, wherefore I will take the London 100. li. sutle for the denomination which I intend heere to make use of, which I have noted to make according to these observations: The 100. lib. of Lon∣don hath made in Rome 127. li. Florence 121. of 12. ounces. Bollonia 51. of 30. ounces. Millan 137. of 12. o. most used. Pavia 137. of 12. o. being 13. of the other. Cremona 58. of 28. o. for flesh. Recanti 132. Ditto gold thread 108. Verona 86. for gold thred 137. l. Bressia 177. for Veni. gold 131. Naples 115. for Veni. gold. 129. Romagnia 115. for Veni. gold. 129. Savoy 132. by small weight. 188
Carpi Mirandola 141. li. incirca. Parma Plaisencia Lucca Mantoua Forli Carmia Acquilla Crema Come Piedmont Raviano 127. li. Faensa Modena Riman Ravenna Rhagusa Candia 133. li. for gold thread. Or elles 85. Rot. the 100. is a Cantar. The Weights thus reduced, I will also in the same methode re∣duce the Measures of Italie to the English yard, the 100. whereof is Measures of Italie reduced to London. found to answer in these places thus. The 100. Yards of London are in Venetia woollen 135. brac. Istria 135. Piran silke 142. Florence silke 163. for woollen 155. elles. Rome 44. canes. Ditto for woollen 140. brac. Lucca. 160. Rhogusa 160. Ferrara 142. Mantua 142. Ancona 142. Bollognia 142. Modena 142. Parato 142. Cesena 142. Carpi 142. Mirandola 142. Verona 139. Ditto cloth gold 144. Ditto cloth 115. Trevira 135. Bergamo 135. Vrbino 135. Pesaro 137. Ditto for cloth 142. Calabria 44½. canes Candia 144. pich. Parma 145. br.
Ditto for cloth 121. Ravenna 155. Corfu 155. Genes 163. Ditto for silke 384. pal. woollen at 9. pal. 82½. can. linnen at 10. pal. 38⅓. Vicentia woollen 131. bra. Ditto for silke 107. Naples 145. cones Ditto for silke 44⅓. Padona cloth 135. bra. Ditto for silke 109. Millan for linnen 160. Ditto for silke 188. Ravenna 149. Bressia 135. Croma 135. Recanti 135. Cremona 135. Lacaia 135. Palermo 45½. canes. Puglia for cloth 41. Ditto for silkes 44. Zara 149. These are such as I have collected, the truth whereof I must re∣ferre to the better experienced, for I am not ignorant, that some of these agree not with the particular recited Chapters of the Trade of the said places, yet notwithstanding, finding a reasonable ground of the said observations by other judgements, I have wil∣lingly passed them heere in the same manner, which I referre to better triall.
CHAP. CLXXVII. Of the Trade in generall of Italie. NOw having runne through the principall pla∣ces of Traffique in Italie, in the particular, let The trade in generall of Italie observed. us note a word or two in the generall, con∣cerning not onely the Traders, but also Na∣vigation which is seene in many places to bee meanes whereby Trade it selfe is preserved and performed. In Italie then not onely the Gentlemen, but even the Princes entitled doe professe themselves to bee Merchants, without any indignity to their quality or place, which many of our Country Gentiles and Nobles (with leave may I speake it) foo∣lishly disdaine, and onely permit retailing of goods to men of the inferiour sort, and Shopkeepers, but retaine yet the grosse ever in their owne and servants hands, and by this course they are found not onely to keepe the Patrimonies descended to them by their an∣cestours, but also are daily found to encrease the same, while our Gentlemen prodigall in expence, and ashamed to make honest gaine, and exercise an honest calling, oftentimes not onely destroy their Families, but ruine themselves and not seldome their Posterities. Amongst the Merchants of Italie then, the Venetians are the chiefe who in times past enjoyned every ship thence departing in Trade to carry one of their Gentlemen or Clarissimo who was allowed him his diet and passage, but this wisedome of their ancestours is now laid aside, and the charges thereof which is still collected, is in every such Vessell begged by some poore Clarissimo or other, so that their Traffique and Navigation is thereby much decaied, and the Mariners and most expert of their Seamen imployed in their shipping are for the most part Grecians. The Florentine is the next, the Duke whereof is heere to bee re∣membred, who is the most eminent Merchant, and here not sel∣dome imploies his owne and others shippes for Corne, Salt, or other necessary provisions for his Dukedome and his owne store, thereby incouraging his Subjects to trade and adventure abroad: two prin∣cipall things are observed which doe much enrich the Merchants of Italie, the first is their frequent Exchanging, wherein they are the best versed in the World; the other is the Trade of their Silkes, wrought by the industry of the Silke-worme, which wrought into fabriques are thence dispersed throughout Europe, and some parts of Asia, but these are fetched from them by others, and not exported
by themselves, partly by the over great affection that they have to their native homes, and their little desire they have to travaile abroad, but principally for want of good shippes of burthen, for excepting some few Vessels in Venetia, Naples, and Leghorne, all the Merchants of Italie cannot shew a ship of 100. tunnes. Naples is a large and rich Country, and Genoa rich, though of little extent, yet the great number of Nobility in the former, and the great usury practised in the latter hath reduced them to a neg∣lect of all Trade, what the bosome of their Country doth natural∣ly vent that they traffique with, and these being in themselves rich induce other Nations to bring them those few things they want, for though Italie as it now stands acknowledgeth many Soveraignes, yet one Country supplying another, stands in need of little from Forainers, so that it may be said, while they have peace they have plenty; some provisions of fish, corne, and cloth, England doth fur∣nish them, and in returnes have only their silke fabriques, oiles, and some few other commodities, so that putting aside the Trade driven thither by the English, as being of greatest consequence, the Trade of the Spaniard, French, or Dutch, is but small, and but of little mo∣ment amongst them; which in particular may bee thus surveied; for Venice I have given you the anatomy of the Trade thereof, now in the waine, and almost at the last breath, save where it is preser∣ved by their new devised Edicts, and the naturall growing Corrence, and by their small Trade to Constantinople, Cairo, and Alleppo by sea, and to Austria, Dalmatia, Istria, Italie, and into the upper Germanie by land: the next part of this Trade of Italie is challenged by Na∣ples, which in it selfe affords rich silkes, corne, oile, and wines, with which they seeme to bee contented, for they covet not much to traffique among themselves, nor yet with others further than for their meate, and drinke, and clothing, which to the poorer sort is most wanting. The Papacy her share in the Trade of Italie is not worth the no∣mination, no more is Mantua, Vrbin, and those other petty Signio∣ries. The Tuscans rightly demand a part, and it shall be granted them, both in their Florentine fabriques, and in their privileged Towne of Leghorne, but I may feare it will not last long, for the Dukes growing both rich and covetous, and daily encroching upon those liber∣ties, at first liberally given to strangers Merchants in Leghorne, and who every day are seene to lay some new petty duties upon the goods there, as for Genoa, were they as truely wise for the good of their Common-wealth as they are found to bee to themselves, they are of ability to doe better, and to have that Trade their neighbours now deprive them of. Millan likewise struggles for interest here∣in, and shall have it by my consent, but it shall bee onely in their Iron-workes, which the Cantons serve themselves with, and in their fabriques of silke which Lions doth helpe them to vent. Lucca may bee offended in my silence, but this Cities peace may further that
Trade which otherwise her owne or her neighbours warres would utterly ruine, you may see then of how many parts and members this rich and pleasant Italie is composed, and how the Trade thereof stands at this instant; it enjoyeth a generall peaceable and quiet inland Traffique, consisting for the most part more of branches bred within her owne bowels than of forraine helpes, their naturall growing corne, silke, graine, and oile, induce them thereto, and the benefit practised by Exchangers induce the rich to use that Trade onely and no other, wherein I will for this time leave them, and in the next place turne my head and hand to the survaying of the Netherlands. CHAP. CLXXVIII. Of Flanders, and the Netherlands, or the seventeen Provinces, and their Cities. I Will heere for good Methode sake in the first place take a view of the 17. Provinces, which are The seventeen Provinces and the Cities thereof. found this day to containe 4. Dukedomes, 1. Lim∣burge, 2. Luxenburge, 3. Gelderland, 4. Brabant; then 1. Marquisate, which is of the Holy Empire; next 7. Earldomes, which are 1. Flanders, 2. Ar∣tois, 3. Heinalt, 4. Nemurs, 5. Zutphen, 6. Holand, 7. Zeland; and lastly 5. Baronies, 1. Westfresland, 2. Virecht, 3. Overysell, 4. Mach∣lin, and 5. Groineing, of all which briefly. In the Dutchy of Limburge, which I account the first Province, is Liege or Luycke as the principall Citie, whose Trade I must referre Limburge. Liege. to the better experienced in these Countries, and the like for the Citie Limburge seated on the River Weser. In the Dutchy of Luxenburge, the chiefe Citie being Luxenburge, seated on the River of Elze, in this Country is the famous waters Luxenburge. of Spa, where many sicke men are found to drive a great healthfull but costly Traffique: heere is also Sidan, the seate of the Duke of Bullion, but of small commerce. Sidan. In the Dutchy of Gelderland the chiefe Citie is Nimmegen, seated on the branch of the Rhine, called the Whael, and doth much abound Guederland. Nimmegen. in cattle, as affoording fit pasturage thereto. In the Dutchy of Brabant, I finde noted many principall Cities, as first Levaine, the second Bruxels, the third is Bergen ap Zome, the Brabant. Lovaine. Bruxels.
fourth Mastrech, the fifth Breda, in all which is found by the indu∣stry Mastrit. Breda. of the inhabitants a reasonable traffique, but being ignorant in many necessary particulars, I will also referre it to the more lear∣ned and better experienced. In the Marquisate is found Antwerpe, by which all the former Cities are governed in trade, which by reason of the greatnesse of Marquisate. Antwrpe. the traffique in times past, was therein accounted the first and prin∣cipall of the knowne World, wherein I shall observe according to my former method, these necessary particulars of traffique following. CHAP. CLXXIX. Of Antwerpe, and the Trade thereof. ANTVVERPE is accounted the principall Citie of Antwerpe, and the Trade thereof. trade that is subject to the Archduke in all these parts, and having had the prerogative above all others in times past; neither yet to this day be∣ing so decaied but that in many particulars it gi∣veth rule to all or the most of the Neighbouring Cities round about, which considered to abbreviate my taske, I thinke it will not bee improper that I comprehend the trade of all those Provinces that are under this governement in this circuite to this particular Citie. Antwerpe then being seated upon the River of Sheld, which by eight channels cut, runneth through this Citie, is conceived to be eight miles in compasse, some of these channels being able to hold 100. great ships which made the same more commodious for the transport and carriage of wares to any part thereof. The former and ancient trade of this Citie was great and eminent, and occa∣sioned as some have observed by three meanes, and had its de∣caies also by three occasions. First, by reason of two free Martes holden yeerely, continuing five and forty daies, during which time, no man either in his person or in his goods could be arrested or molested for either debt or otherwise. Secondly, by reason that the King of Portugall having discovered the East Indies in Anno 1500 and diverted the course of trade driven by the Venetions from Alex∣andria, and the Red Sea to his Port of Lixborne, kept heere his factors and sent hither those Indian commodities to seeke their vent, and this first drew the English Merchant Adventurers from Bridges hither to reside. The third was the Warres that fell betweene the French and Charles the fifth, which brought hither many Gentlemen from villages and petty townes for safety sake here to reside and build.
Now as the causes of her rising have beene noted to bee three, so the causes of the losse of that trade may be reduced also to three. First, the Warres heere, and in generall in these Provinces be∣tweene the Spaniard, and the Dutch Nation, wherein this Citie suf∣fered pilledging, and indured the commaund of new Lawes. Secondly, the abrogation of part of those Priviledges that were graunted heere to the English Merchant Adventurers and others, and the new and great customes imposed upon their goods and Merchandise. Thirdly, the Navigation of the English and Dutch to the East In∣dies, whereby the Portugall factors decreasing thereby, and the Cities of London, in England, and Amsterdam in Holland increasing thereby, were also sharers in the India trade and commodities, leaving by this meanes this Citie bare and to subsist upon the traffique of her owne inhabitants, in that nature as now the same is found to be. Their Accounts are heere kept by Livers, Sol and Deniers, which they terme Pounds, Shillings and Pence of grosses, 12. grosses making a Accounts in Antwerpe. Sold, and 20. Sold a Liver or pound Flemish, which may be accounted 12. shillings starlin, or by their computation 240. grosses, by which species they doe make their Exchanges with all other Cities. The currant monies heere and in generall through all the Arch Dukes countries are, besides the Spanish and Imperiall these currant Coines in Antwerpe. are Doights, foure makes a Stiver, and ten Stivers is a shilling starlin, two Blankes makes a Stiver and halfe. Stivers 6. makes a shilling Flemish. Stivers, 20. makes a Guilder, which is three shillings foure pence Flemish. Shillings, 20. makes a pound, which is 6. Guilderns. Pound, 100. Flemish makes 60. Pound English, so that 20. Stivers is or may be computed for two shillings starlin, and one pound Flemish for 12. shillings starlin, and then 20. shillings starlin is 33. shillings 4. pence Flemish. The Waight of this Country is the pound of 16. ounces, and the 100. lib. of that pound which is their Quintar, which rendreth in Waights in Antwerpe. London 104. li. and thereupon it comes as some imagine, that upon Spices the tret of 4. li. upon 104. li. was allowed heere to the buier, for the English being supplied hence in those daies with their spices, found the 100. lib. there to give heere in the Citie of London 104. li. made that allowance heere willingly, as desiring the 100. li. there, would yeeld them a neat 100. li. heere and take the same by the factory without further allowance or garble, which was not then The conceived originall our treat in London. in use. Many observations have beene made upon the waight and mea∣sure of this Citie, which being reduced into a generall table by Master Malines, and the same being there accorded with all the
principall Cities in the World, I will referre you thereunto for lar∣ger satisfaction, and content my selfe according to my method to insert the same as I finde it, with some other particular places, be∣cause I have found some errors in the said concordance. The Waight then in use in Antwerpe being the 100. li. neat, hath Weights of Antwerpe com∣pared with that of other places. been observed to have rendred thus, In London 104 li. Marselia 115¼. Venice sotle 155. Ditto grosse 97¾. Sicilia 68. Lixborne 84½. Florence 132½. Lions 110. Sivil 101 7/2. Dansicke 120. Omus 108. Rot. Alleppo common 22. 8. R. Ditto silke waight 24. 0. R. Tripoly Soria 27. 2. R. Tripoly Barbaria 97. R. Baruti 21. 9. R. Alexandria Zeroi 51. 9. R. Alexandria Forsia 116. 5. R. Constantinople 92. R. Rhodes 20. 1. R. 18. 1. R. Babylon 15. 6. R. And what other inlargements is here wanting, I willingly omit, and referre the same to Lex Mercatoria. Now in the same manner it will bee needfull I doe calculate the Measures of Antwerpe com∣pared with thoe  other Countries. Measures of Antwerpe, which is the Ell, which also by observation hath made in these places. Acria 115. pico. Alleppo 108. pico. Argtere 136 covad. Allexandria 124. pico. Amsterdam 101. ells. Barselona 43. canes. Bridges 98⅔. ells. Candia 108. pico. Castile 78. vares. Constantinople 113. pico. Corfu 116. braces. Damasco 111. pico.
Dansicke 122. ells. Florence Cloth 116. ells. Ditto for silke 102½. braces. Genoa 122. braces. Hamburgh 122. ells. Holland 103½. ells. Lixborne long 63. vares. London for linnen 60. ells. Ditto for Wollen 75. yards. Ditto for Frises 59. goads. Lucca 120. braces. Millan for Silke 141. braces. Naples for Silke 33½. can. Paris 59. alns. Roven 58. alns. Sivil 83½. vares. Venice for Wollen 101⅔. braces. Ditto for Silke 101⅔. braces. Valentia 73. canes. Vrbin 101. braces. Note that this is for the common measure of Antwerpe, besides which they use another Elle for silke, and these Ells make of that but 98½. Ells. The other measure of sundry commodities heere in use are these. Beere is sould in Antwerpe by the Barrell, which is accounted throughout Flanders and Brabant to be 54. stoopes, the 81. whereof Of beere. is in Dansicke a fatte, and containes there 180. stoopes; but 50. stoopes of Antwerpe make the barrell of Lubecke, and the English gallon of beere is 2. stoopes of Flanders and 1⅔. stoopes of Amsterdam. Corne is heere sould by a measure called th Vertule, and 37½. Ver∣tules is a Last of Corne in Amsterdam and 10¼. quarters in London, vide Of corne. there further. Wine is sould by the Ame, the stoope and the Butte, and is found thus to accord together; 1. Ame is 50. stoopes, and one stoope is sixe Of wine. pound, and a Butte is 152. stoopes; so that by this rule 6. Ames which is 300. stoopes, or 1800. li. is in London 252. gallons, so that the Ame is by this calculation found to be 42. gallons, and the stoope is about 3⅓. quarts of London Wine measure, or as some account it about 7. pints, vide London for more certaintie. The Exchanges practised in this place are great, and for very great summes of money, especially when as the King of Spaine hath any Exchange of Antwerpe. generall disbursements in this Country, by reason of his continuall Armies heere in action maintained against the Dutch, the particu∣lars whereof I have inserted in the end of this tract, in the Chapter 289. and in the Chapter 435. and some others following, where I have at large declared the practise and use among the Merchants
of that place, in the calculation thereof, whereto I referre the in∣quisitive. As for the generall present trade of this Countrie I shall com∣prise it with the trade of the Netherlands, in the 181. Chapter fol∣lowing. The first Earldome accounted one of the seventeene Provinces is Flanders, so called peradventure, à flando, as lying open to the Windes, divided into Imperialem Galicam, and Tetonicam. The chiefe Cities of Trade therein is first Gaunt, whose Wall is Gaunt. seven miles in compasse, the two Rivers of Sheld and Leye running through the same, and makes in it 26. Islands, which are joyned to∣gether by an hundred Bridges, and had not her often seditions rui∣nated her beauties, shee might have beene Queene of all the Cities of Europe, and heere Iohn Duke of Lancaster was borne, commonly in Histories called Iohn of Gaunt. The second Citie is Bridges, once the most famous Mart Towne of Europe, where sundry Nations for many yeares kept both their Bridges. Magasines and Factours, for the sale and providing of all the prin∣cipall commodities of the World, now much decaied of its for∣mer splendour by reason of the removall of the English Merchant venturers, and of other Nations to Antwerpe, about the yeare 1503. it is seated about three leagues from the Sea upon a faire and deepe artificiall chanell, filled with the waters of all the neigh∣bouring and adjoyning streames and fountaines, which chanells in this Country are very frequent by reason of the levell of the ground in generall, which doth both further the Traffique of the Cities and enricheth the Inhabitants. There is in this Country accounted foure principall Sea-ports, which giveth entrance by Sea into this part of Flanders. The first is Dunkirke, the Inhabitants whereof doe in times of Dunkirke. Warre infest the Seas by the name of Freebooters, and because most of their Warres is with the Dutch, whom they account Heretiques, the Iesuites and other the Romish religious rablement of this place, joyne with these Pirats, and bestow thus the charity of the igno∣rant Secular towards the ruine and rapine of their fellow Country∣men and Christians, an evident testimony of the goodnesse and zeale of their devout Orders. The second is Scluse, seated at the mouth of the chanell of Brid∣ges, Scluse. commanding a faire Haven capable of 500. Saile of good shippes, and is now subject to the States, and was taken from the Archduke Anno Dom. 1604. with whose welfare it cannot stand to suffer the King of Spaine to enjoy any safe and large Harbour in those Seas; or adjoyning Coasts.
The third Port is Newport, famoused in these our daies by the Newport. great Battell fought neere it Anno Dom. 1600. betweene the Arch∣duke Albertus and the States, the Victorie being acknowledged to bee gotten next under God, by the valour and courage of the En∣glish and their valiant Commanders. The fourth Sea-port of this Country is Ostend, which held out a siege against the Archduke of three yeares and three moneths, Ostend. which hath made it for ever famous to Posterity. In this Country of Flanders, properly belonging to the French, and whose language is therein still used, is found the Cities of Lisle, accounted the third Towne of Traffique in all the Nether∣lands, Lisle. and to the Inhabitants thereof, some inferre the first invention of laying of colours with oile, of making of Worsted Saies, and many other Stuffes, which to this day is seene to come thence. Next is Doway an University. Then Torney, which was surprised and taken by our Henry the 8. Anno Dom. 1513. to whom the Citizens paid 100000. crownes Torney. for their ransome, and it was restored afterward to the French for the same 600000. crownes, and from him finally taken by Charles the Fifth. Besides these there are accounted in Flanders 35. Townes, and 1178. Villages of lesser note, which I willingly passe over brief∣ly, as intending to comprehend the trade thereof in a Chapter by it selfe. The second Earldome is Artois, containing twelve Townes of consequence, and 750. Villages, the chiefe whereof is, Artois. The Towne of Arrasse, whence our Tapestry and cloths of Arras have had their invention and first originall. Then Saint Paul, the Earle thereof Lewis of Luxenburge plaied S. Paul. so often fast and loose with Lewis the Eleventh of France, with Ed∣ward the fourth of England, and with Charles of Burgundy, that hee kept them for many yeares at continuall strife, which Duke Charles at length requited with the losse of his head and Earldome. The next Earldome is Henalt, comprehending 950. Villages, and Henalte. 24. Townes of note. The most eminent being Camberay, taken by the Spaniards from Cambray. the French by the Earle of Fuentes Anno 1595. accounted a free Towne. Then Mons. The next is Bevais, at a Pillar whereof beginne all the wayes leading into France, made all of paved stone by Brunhault the French Bevais. Queene. The next Earldome is Namurce, containing 180. Villages, and but 4. Townes of note. Namurce.
Namurce is the principall, this Country hath for Merchandise great store of Graine of all sorts, and is enriched with Mines of Iasper, and all sorts of Marble, and so abundant in Iron that it is in∣credible, making the Inhabitants thereby both wealthy and labo∣rious, and it is found moreover to produce a coale wonderfull in Nature, as kindled by water, and quenched by oile. Zutphen is the next Earldome, being onely a Towne seated on the River Issell, of good strength, taken from the Spaniard Anno Dom. Zutphen. 1590. at the Siege whereof was slaine that Honourable Knight Sir Philip Sidney, of whom was said, Dignae legi scribis, facis, & dignissima scribi: Scripta probant doctum te tua, facta probum. Thou writ'st things worthy reading, and didst doe Things that are even most worthy writing too, Thy workes thy learning praise, Thy deeds thy goodnesse raise. The next Earldome is Holland, in circuite 180. miles, no part of Holand. which is distant from the Seas three houres journey, and compre∣hendeth 400. Villages, and 23. Townes. The chiefe whereof is Dort, where Anno 1618. was held a Nati∣onall Dort. Synod against the Arminians. Secondly Harlem, where Printing was invented. Harlem. Thirdly Leiden, an University consisting of 41. Islands, to which there is passage, partly by boates, but principally by 40. wooden Bridges, and by 110. of stone, the rarity whereof being the first Citie of consequence I noted in these parts Anno 1625. I could not chuse then but amire, and here in this Towne is a Castle said to bee built by Hengist the Saxon at his returne out of England, if their stories may be credited. The next Towne is Delph, a place of residence for the Merchant Adventerers of England, where I was Anno 1625. admitted into that Delph. Society whose wlfare I am bound to desire, and whose prosperity I wish may still encrease: and though these Citizens have since upon some discontent enforced them to remove to Roterdam, yet considering the Towne is composed altogether of Brewers, and that men so qualified are subject to forget themselves, it may be imagined they have since slept upon it, and would peradventure regaine their companies at a greater charge than can by any but by their wis∣domes be imagined. The next is Alkmer, famous for the defeat which the Duke of Alkmer. Alva received before it, to his great losse of reputation, and to this Cities honour. The next is Roterdam, famous in giving life to Erasmus, and no∣ted Roterdam.
for lovers of the English Traffique, in giving lately free and wor∣thy privileges to the Merchant Adventerers of England, who from Delph lately remooved hither to reside, to the future prejudice of those Brewers. Lastly Amsterdam, as the now honour of all these Countries for matter of Commerce and Traffique, who hath raised it selfe to Amsterdam. that height of Trade by the industry, policy, and wealth of the Inhabitants, that 1000. saile of shippes have beene seene at one Tide to goe in and out, and as one of their owne hath it. Quod Tagus atque Hamus vehit & Pactolus, in Vere, bunc, congestum, dixeru esse ocum. What Tagus, Hemus, and Pactolus beare, You would conjecture to be heap'd up here. Now for the manner and matter of their Traffique, I shall note the same such as I have observed it at my there residency in 1625. above mentioned. CHAP. CLXXX. Of Amsterdam, and the Trade thereof. AMSTERDAM is now by the late addition of the New to the Old a faire Citie, strong and beauti∣full, Amsterdam, and the Trade thereof. the River Tay flowing like a large and calme sea on the North side thereof, and the River Amster of which and the word Dam this Citie is named, running from the South through three Lakes entreth this Citie, and passing through it, falleth into the River Tay on the North side. This Towne doth consist of 5. principall Streets, through which the water doth runne, and are divided therewith, in which shippes, barges, and boates, of all kindes are found both to come and goe continually, either to lade or unlade, which is not onely benefici∣all to the Inhabitants, but also commodious and beautifull. The Trade of this Citie is much enlarged since the passage of Antwerpe was stopped, and the Trade of the Inhabitants to the East and West Indies, occasioned by their industrie, their love to Navigation, and not the least by a great plenty of Monies which they deliver out at easie rates at interest as wanting land, or other
meanes to put out the same to better benefit, nothing being left them but Commerce and Navigation to imploy the same, and of late daies England, and other neighbouring Countries are found to have their estate going at interest according to the custome of the place, which is 8. per cent. whereas in their owne Countries 4. and 5. per cent. is as much as the same will yeeld them. But for the Coines, Weights, and Measures, as I observed them, I shall here insert, and referre the rest to the better experienced. They keepe their Account as in Antwerpe, by which all these parts Accounts in Amsterdam. were regulated in former time for what concerned Traffique. Their Monies have also a correspondency with Antwerpe coines, Monies of Am∣sterdam and all the Nether∣lands. but inhansed or debased as they see occasion by reason of their great yearely disbursements, and ordinarily the same is found to bee as in the Account of Antwerpe, so as that their Liver or Pound, which is twenty shillings Flemish, may be accounted twelve shillings sterling. Florins 6. makes that Pound of 20. stivers per florin Stivers 120. mkes a Pound of Grosse. 6 stivers a Flemish shilling. Stivers 5. is accounted as much as 6. d. sterl. or 5. sold turnois. Stiver 1. s a sold turnois. A Gosse is 6. deniers turnois. Catolus gulden is 20. stivers, 2. shillings sterling, or 20. sols turnois. Besides these as the currant monies of the Country, All Coines of Europe doe passe heere currantly for their value, and are received and paid in payments for Merchandise accordingly. Their Weight is the Pound, 100. whereof makes their Quintall, Waights of Amsterdam. which 100. or Quintar is held in London to be incirca 111. English, yet some alleage that the same truely calculated will not produce above 108. li. sutle, and for the concordancy see further. Their Measures is the Ell, which reduced to Yards English is Measures in Amsterdam. found to bee 134. Elles for 100. Yards of London, and the 100. Elles of London are here 167½. Elles, so that the 100. Elles heere makes in London about 74. Yards, or 60½. Elles incirca, and 40. Flemish Elles make in England 24. Elles. In the Exchanges this place is governed by Antwerpe, rising and falling according to their pesent occasions and the value currant Exchanges in Amsterdam. of their Monies, which is often inhansed, and debased, it being very frequently observed in this Citie and the rest subject to the Netherlands or to the Vnited Provinces, that when they have occa∣sions of great Receits, they are decryed in value, and raised a∣gaine where they have occasions by their Warres, or otherwise
of great disbursement, according to which diversity of need full occasions, the Exchange of the place is observed to alter, there∣fore therein cannot bee prescribed any direct Rules, though for the most part it is found by common difference to bee about 3. per cent. worse than the Exchanges practised in Antwerpe. Now for the 100. lib. Weight heere in use, I finde the same thus by observation of some friends to answer and agree with these Weights of Amstdam with other Cities. places, as In Antwerpe 107. li. Conixburgh 132. Constantinople 93. Rot. Coppenhagen 102. lib: Dansicke 126. Flanders in generall 117. Florence 133. Hamburgh 102. London 110. Lions ordinary 118. Mantua 155. Marselia 119. Melvin 131. Millan of 12. ounc. 151. Stokholme 127. Venice sutle 167. Venice grosse 103. Vienna 90. Naples 128. Norinburge 99. Paris 98. Portugall 113. Prague 93. Ragusa 140. Revell 126. Roven by Viconte 97. Rotchell small 118. Rome 139. Satomer 117. Saragosa 119. Sivill small weight 113. Sicilia 12. ounc. 161. Stralsont 98. Tholouse 118. Verona 95. Vrbin 144.
And thus much shall serve for the concordancy of the Weights here practised. The Measure of length heere in use is n Ell, which thus is found Measures of Amsterdam with other Cities. to make with other places, I say the 100. Elles doth yeeld In Alleppo 106. pico Argiere 135. covad. Allexandria 122. pico. Antwerpe 99. elles. Conixburge 123. Constantinople 111½. pico. Florence for silke 101. brac. Genoa 120. brac. Grenado 82. vares. Hamburgh 121. elles. Lixborne short 82. vares. Rome 33. ces. Valentia 72. can. London 59. elles. Ditto woollen 73½ yards. Lions linnen 59. alnes. Marselia woollen 33. can. Middleburgh 99. elles. Millan linnen 118. bra. Norinburgh 118. elles. Paris 58. alns. Prague cloth 109. elles. Rhgusa 118. bra. Roven 57. alns. Sivill 82. vares. Stokholme 123. elles. Besides these Measures of length, the concave Measures are in use. Corne is heere sold by the Laste, which containes 24. small bar∣rels, each barrell 1½. Muydens or Muys, each Muyden containes 1 . sackes, each sacke being three archetelings, which is 3 . shepels, so that the laste of corne containes 108. shepels, and this laste is observed to make Antwerpe 37 . vertules. Burdeaux 38. boiseax. Bridges 17½ bootes. Cyprus 40. medinos. Embden 55. werps. Hamburgh 83. shepels. Lixborne 225. alquiers. London 10. quarters.
In Pulia 36. timans. Rhegi 42. loopes. Roven 40. mines. Rotchell 128. boiseax. Roterdam 87. archetelins. Sivill 54. henegas. Sicilia 38. medinos. Venice 32. stares. Sweden 23. measures. Copenbaven 23. barrels. For the Measures of Wine, Oile, Beere, and other liquid commo∣dities, I referre you to Malines and others better experienced therein, and proceed forward to the description of the remainder of the Vnited Provinces. Zealand is the next and last Earldome of the seventeene Provin∣ces, consisting of seven Islands, the remainder of 15. which the seas Zealand. are said to have devoured. The chiefest Cities of these seven are these. First Middleburgh, which from nothing grew great by the re∣sidence of the English Merchant Adventerers, and now by their re∣movall Middleburgh. hence is now almost come to nothing againe; by this Citie and Stoade, and many other places may easily bee discerned the benefit that a Trade brings to a Citie or country, therefore my praiers shall ever bee, that London may never loose that great reputation it hath gained by commerce throughout the World. The next Citie is Flushing, famous in that it was the first that the Low-country men got from the Spaniard, and being cautionary to Flushing. the English, Sir Philip Sidney was the first Governour thereof. Then Brill, Tergouse, Brever-haven, to all which my curiosity lead me in 1625. in that my Northerne Voyage. Westfrisland is the first Barony, and accounted one of the seven∣teene Provinces, wherein is found for principall Townes Lewardin. Well frisland. Next, Harlingham, then Zeutsen, and some other Sea-ports. Vtrecht is the next Barony, containing therein the Townes of Utreicht. Rhenen, Wicket, Amsford, Montfort, and Vtrecth the principall Citie, and a pleasant Bishopriche, it is accounted the most excellent seate in all these Countries, whereto are found many Ferries for passages, for it is said, that a man may easily goe hence in one day to any one of 59. walled Townes equally distant from this Citie, or to any of 26. Townes to dinner, and returne againe at night to bed, which is both strange and true. Overissell is the next, from whence comes our Linnens bearing Oversell.
this name, the chiefe Cities are Swall, Campen, and Daventer. Mailin is the next, famous in her famous Nunnery, where are Mailin. sometimes found 1600. Nunnes, who may at their pleasure leave the Cloister and marry, as indeed it is fittest for them. The last Province is Groineing, the chiefe Townes being that of Groneing. Old-haven and Keykirke, and these bee all the principall Cities of Traffique in the said seventeene Provinces. Now for the abbreviating of my Worke, I have comprised in short the Weight, Measures, and Trade of this populous and rich Country thus according to my intended Methode. The particular Weights and Measures of the chiefe Cities of these Waights in ge∣nerall of the Netherlands re∣duced to the 100. li. in Lon∣don. seventeene Provinces for brevity sake I have thought good here by themselves to reduce to the Waight and Measures of London. And first for the 100. li. haberdepois of England what it produceth in these Cities. In Bridges 98. lib. Gante 104. Audmarte 106. Amsterdam 90. Ypres 104. Dixmude 104. Lislle or Lile 106. Flanders in generall 106. Abevile 90. Alder 87. Lovaine 96. Malmes 95. Halste 104. Poppering 104. Doway 106. Holand 95. Torney 104. St. Maur 106. Guelderland 95. Zeland 95. Walsond 95. Arschot 96. Barow ap some 94. Brussels 96. Cortericke 106. Hartegen bosh 96.
The reduction of their Measures to the English 100. yards is thus Measures in generall of the Netherlands re∣duced to the 100. yards of London. found to accord therewith, as the 100. yards in London make In Bridges 126. elles. Dunkirke 135. Gante 130. Honsooten 135. Andemarte 130. Ysingham 130. Bolduc 135. Dae 130. Brussels 135. Ypres 130. Lovaine 135. Sluse 130. Liege 153. Mastricht 139. Covin 93. Lisle or Lile 125. Cambray 125. Amsterdam 134. Doway 125. Harlem 125. Het 126. Glderland 139. Oversels 139. Middleburgh 135. Flushing 138. Vere 125. Romerswald 132. Artois in generall 131. Tourney 144. Holand in generall 138.
CHAP. CLXXXI. Of the trade ingenerall of Flanders, and of the Netherlands. NOW let us consider the generall Trade and Na∣vigation of Flanders, I meane first that part Of the trade ingenerall of the Nether∣landers and Flanders. thereof as is subject to the States, and called the Netherlands, and then the trade of Flanders, as at this day it is observed and found in obe∣dience to the Archduke. First then, these Ne∣therlanders, or , are of late yeares be∣come notable Mariners, and have undertaken, and fortunately atchieved many dangerous and long Navigations; every particular Citie having both many and great shippes belong∣ing thereunto: and in some places, where houses are deare and scarce, I have seene whole families live in Lighters, and such Ves∣sels, wherein they eate, drinke, and sleepe, and have their conti∣nuall habitation, their children, like Water-rs, seene continually dabling in the water, of which element, for the most part, their countrey is subsistent. They are accounted better for Nor∣therne designes and voiages, by reason of their Countries cold si∣tuation, than for Southerne, yet their late  the East and West Indies, and their good successes there demonstrate they can also ac∣commodate themselves to the hotter clymates. Their trade is generally throughout the world in imitation of their neighbours the English Nation, whose steppes for many yeares they have followed, onely in Turkie they have but small traffique, by reason their countrey wants those commodities that are fit and pro∣per for that Empire, such as Clothes, Lead, Tin, the maine Staple of the English trade thither. As for their iudgement in traffique, it is singular, by reason their want of many necessities both for backe and belly, inforceth them to pay nearer into Co than other nations that live in a more fruitfull and fertile countrey; and the easie rates that Money is to be found at interest, addeth some helpe to their inventions: they were few yeares past accounted of a heavie and duer mper; but the Italians who in foreseeing wisedome and providence, would be throughout the world accounted for Pro, were by them made , as wise after the deed too late repenting. For when they came first to  their trade in Flanders, they tooke yong youths
of that nation to be their Cashiers, and to copie their letters, where∣by they came to learne the secrets of their trade, and afterwards to the Italians great prejudice, exercised it themselves, and not con∣tented therewith, as it were thus depriving them of the trade of Flanders, but they followed them into Italie, and there living as sparingly as they, and dispersing themselves into sundry Provinces, and principall townes, have given a great blow to their great traf∣fique in Italie; and that which addes much to their knowledge and gaine is, that they covet still to buy all commodities at the Well head (as Marchants say) and where that commoditie hath its first origi∣nall, and where the same is cheapest, and then transport them not so much to their owne homes, as elsewhere where the same is dea∣rest, and not shaming to retaile any commoditie by small parts & parcels, which both English Merchants and Italians disdaine to doe in any countrey whatsoever; by which meanes they are come now to that height, that though by nature they want all things, yet by industry and Marchandising, they not onely supply their owne de∣fects, but also many of their neighbours wants and necessities, as I could instance in sundry particulars. Neither must I omit one cu∣stome here used, and not found I thinke elsewhere in the world, that whilst the Husband sports idly at home, their Women are oft-times seen to be the Marchants, and in some Provinces here saile from Ci∣tie to Citie, to compasse their affaires abroad, as they for the most part are found to manage it at home: for in their shops they sell all; and take account of all, and it is no reproach to the men to be ne∣ver enquired after about these businesses of trade, who take monies of their wives for daily expense, and gladly so passe their time over in idlenesse. Now forasmuch as Bridges hath been the Citie where in times past this great traffique was cohabitant, it will not bee a∣misse a little to looke backe upon it and those times, and see the glory of it in its luster then, and the decay thereof in its ruine now. It is recorded by Iacobus Marchantius, that Ldovicus Crassus in The ancient staple of Brid∣ges. Anno 1323. granted a Staple to Bridges, which his sonne Malus confirmed: which Staple was a priviledge of staying all forraigne commodities in the place, except the seller and bringer chose rather to returne whence they came. This Citie hath an eminent market place, with a publicke house for the meeting of all Marchants at The original of Burses, of pla∣ces of meeting for Merchants, which in Eng∣land is now termed the Ex∣change. noone and evening: which house was called the Burse, of the hou∣ses of the extinct familie Bursa, hearing three purses for  armes, in∣graven upon their houses, from whence these meeting places to this day are called Burses in many countries, which in London wee know by the name of the Royall Exchange, and of Britaines Burse. Fifteene Nations in the height of this trade, had each their severall houses or colledges here, namely, the Marchants of England, Scotland,
France, Castilia, Portugall, Arragon, Navar, Catalonia, Biscaia, the Hans Cities of Germanie, as Lubecke, Hamburg, Rostock, Dantsicke, Ri∣ga, Revel, and divers others Cities. Then the Marchants of Venetia, Florence, Genoa, Lucca, Millan, and others. Now then, these Nations having by this meanes each here a re∣sidence, supplyed this Citie of Bridges with the particular commodi∣ties of their countries, as first, the Italians they brought Chamblets, Grograins, threed of Silke, Silver and Gold, and Clothes made thereof, also Iewels, Wines of Candia, Allome, Brimstone, Oyles, Spices and Drugs of all sorts, which they had by their trade of Egypt, India, Arabia and Grecia. 2. The French brought Salt, Wines, White and Red, Paper, Lin∣nens, and some Oyles. 3. The English Wooll, Lead, Tin, Beere, and some Wollen clothes, for vailes for women used in those dayes. 4. The Scots brought Skinnes of Sheepe, and Conies, and such like. 5. The Spaniards and Portugals brought Graine for Scarlet Die, Gold, Silver, Raw Silke, some Drugges and Spices. 6. The Germanes, Danes and Pollackes brought Honey, Waxe Corne, Salt-peter, Woolles, Glasse Furres, Quick silver Rhenish wines, Timber for building, and the like. And 7. Flanders yeelded to these, Horses, Cattle Butter, Cheese, Herrings, and other Sea-fish, Wollen and Linnen Clothes, Tapestry of great beautie and varietie, excellent Pictures, and other Manufactaries. And by this great concourse of Nations, Flanders gave the name to all the Nether∣lands. To increase yet this trade, Burdges in Anno 1414. got a privi∣ledge, that they who were free of that citie by gift, buying, birth, or marriage, should be free from all confiscation of their goods, which exceedeth the priviledges of any other Citie in the Netherland: for those of Ipre having the like, yet loose it upon any force offered to the Prince. This trade thus continued till the yeare 1485. when as it began to decay, partly by the narrownesse and unsaftie of the Port of Sluce, and the River leading from thence to Bridges; and partly by the fame of the large and commodious River Scaldis at Antwerpe, and partly by the Civil warres then afoot in this countrey: First then the Portugall having taken Callicut in the East Indies, car∣ried the Spices of India to the Faires of Antwerpe in anno 1503. and contracting with that Citie, drew the Fuggero and Welfarts, two po∣tent Germain families of Merchants thither. After which the Mer∣chants of Florence, Lucca, and the Spindas of Genoa seated them∣selves there, as also the Marchant Adventurers of England in anno 1516. and many of other Nations were invited thither by the priviledge of marriage dowries, which became shadowes to many frauds: for when husbands either brake in their life time, or be found Bankerout in death, the wives are preferred to all debters in the recoverie of their dowrie. And thus farre he sheweth the rising and falling of the trade of Burges, and how it came to bee removed and setled in Antwerpe; and how since also it hath been lost and departed thence,
I have shewed in another place: and this is as much as I have thought good to insert of the trade in generall of Netherland, con∣cluding, that though the countrey be of small extent, and bee bar∣ren of rich commodities either to preserve or maintaine a trade, yet the industrie of the inhabitants hath made them potent, wealthy, and great Merchants, and now at this day they traffique to all parts of the habitable world, with the commodities of other countries, which by their endevours and paines they make and purchase to be as if naturally and really the same were their owne. Now for the generall trade of Flanders, so farre forth as it is in o∣bedience to the Archduke, or more properly to the Kings of Spaine, it must be granted, that it holds not any equalitie at this day with that part in subjection to the States. Antwerpe as the principall Citie of which the Flemings did, and might justly boast, is now, as then, the chiefest; but the former splendor is now and long agoe lost: for it had the preheminence, and was one of the chiefe Cities of traf∣fique in the world; but is now onely the chiefe of this jurisdiction. What it could formerly herein challenge, it hath now lost: for if the trade thereof be well observed, it will be discerned, it lookes not so high by many millions as it then did, the Merchants the inhabi∣tants partake of one of the qualities of the Spaniard Merchant, which they have since their reduction to that Scepter, learned thence, and this is never or very seldome to traffique or adventure their estates into any other Princes dominions, but where their Lord is Soveraigne. Which rule found here, as in all Spaine for the most part true, and granted, it must be confessed their trade cannot possibly be of any great consequence: for such is the nature of a free and uncontrouled Commerce, that no Countrey or Nation how remote or distant so∣ever, can give limit or bound thereto. Whereupon it may be in∣ferred, and as by proofe at this day it is found observeable, their generall traffique is small, and consisteth more by a laborious indu∣stry of the inhabitants at home, than by their great adventures by sea abroad, their greatest navigations extending but to Spaine, and in some second adventures thence to India, and that for no great matter, and otherwise they trouble not, neither the East nor West, neither the North nor the South parts of the World, no nor hardly as farre as into France, England, or into Netherlands, the nearest neigh∣bours (when at amitie) for any great matter of moment. The principall meanes whereby their small traffique is now main∣tained to them, is by their severall sorts of cunning and artificiall Fabrickes and Manufactaries, which every towne of any note is nota∣ble for, such as are Hangings of Arasse, Tapestrie, some sorts of stuffes of Silke, and of Wollen and Linnen, and in exchanges to purchase which, the English, French, and other the neighbouring Nations bring them Wollen Cloathes, Wines, and some other needfull provisions
which they want, to supply their occasions, and the necessities of those Armies as are for the most part seene to bee fed, maintained and clothed in this Countrey. Dunkerke their onely and best Sea-port, affoords some shipping, but so poorely set on worke by way of Merchandising, that they find their best traffique to consist of thie∣verie and boothalling against both their friends, and their enemies the Netherlanders, which yet they are so far unable really to set out o anycompetencie of strength, that the Iesuites and other the devo∣ter Orders of Friers, are oftentimes induced to set their helping hand thereto, this way oftentimes spending in uncharitable actions and blood-shed, the charitable almes of the poore and deluded multi∣tude: and how well this trade hath thriven with these irreligious Ec∣clesiasticall Orders, their great late losses by their owne reports suffi∣ciently witnesse to the world. So leaving the Antwerpians to endevour the regaining of their lost traffique, and the Dunkerke Free-booters, and their holy partners to the recoverie of their late dammage by some more honest Com∣merce, I will here leave Flanders, and hence travell further into this continent, and survey the particular trade of the famous Empire of Germanie. CHAP. CLXXXII. Of Germanie and the provinces thereof. HAVING briefly run through Flanders, and Germanie and the Provincos. the Vnited Provinces, and reduced the trade thereof into two principall Cities, that is to Antwerpe for Flanders, and the other Provin∣ces subject to the Spaniards; and to Amsterdam for Holland, and the other Cities subject to the States. i must bee constrained in a manner to use the same methode in the survey of the trade of Germanie, reducing the traffique of the lesser to the greater Cities; the greatest being also not much knowne to our Nation for any eminencie this way, as being in-land, to which our English (whose traffique principally consists at sea, and consequently in maritime townes) have but little knowledge of, though otherwise eminent, as being farre distant from it. Germanie then is bounded on the West with France, and Belgium, on the North with Denmark Germanie bounded. and her seas, on the East with Sprusia, Poland, and Hungarie, and on the South with the Alpes. This Countrey doth affoord to the Merchant for transportation,
many notable Commodities, as Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron, and Lead, by Commodities of Germanie. their Mines; Corne, Wines, Allome, Quick-silver, Armes of all sorts, divers Manufoctaries, as Linnen, Wollen, Silkes, &c. and sundry other commodities. Three sorts of Cities are sayd to be contained in this Empire, the Hans-townes 72. first are those that are called Hans-townes, which are such as enjoy large priviledges and immunities, and are thought to be about 72. in number, and for the most part are found either to border upon the seas, or to be seated upon great and navigable Rivers, being for the most part rich, and of reasonable Commerce and trade, or fa∣mous and noted for some one particular Art, Fabricke, or Manu∣factorie. The second sort are called Imperiall Cities, and accounted free in Imperiall Ci∣ties 60. respect of their great prerogatives, as in coyning of Monies, and knowing no Lord, but ruled by the Imperiall lawes; for which they acknowledge and pay a contribution yearly to the Emperour, whom they account their Protector, and these are found to be about sixtie in number. The third are such as are held by inheritance by some Princes, as Principalities. is Heidelberg, Vienna, and others of which are accounted in this Em∣pire in circa (—) and may bee called Principalities. There is also found in this Empire conducing to traffique, (besides the lesser) foure great navigable Rivers, that inrich these Hans-townes, Imperials, and Principalities, communicating the commodities of one Citie to another, and at last to the Sea-ports, where the same is last of all vented into forraigne kingdomes. The prime whereof is Danubius, which in running 1500 miles, doth receive above 60 navigable rivers, and disgorgeth it selfe into Danubius. the Euxine or Blacke sea. The second is the Rheine, running 800 miles through Germanie Rheine. and Belgia, disgorgeth it selfe into the Germane Ocean, taking in Al∣bis, which is accounted navigable for 400 miles, (and some others) Albis. and is the third river of this countrey. The fourth is Odera, running 300 miles in length, issueth out in the Baltique sea; besides which there is many other of lesser note, as Odera. Weser, Ese, and others in themselves found to be great Rivers, inriching divers parts of this countrey, though farre inferior to the former. Lastly, this Empire is found to containe twentie large Provinces, which by reason of my little insight therein, I will cursorily post over, and referre the same where I am defective, to the better lear∣ned. East-Frisland is accounted the first Province, wherein is found the Cities of Oldenburg, Ammerdun, and lastly Emden, which for its East Frisland. former eminencie in trade, I cannot so slightly passe over without a word of the trade thereof.
CHAP. CLXXXIII. Of Emden and the trade thereof. EMDEN hath been in times past of farre greater Emden and the trade thereof. trade than now it is: It was for some yeares the seat of the English Marchants Adventurers, but the civill warres about Religion, raised between the Citizens and their Count, was in part the cause of the decay of the trade thereof. This Citie lies in the utmost border of the Empire, and only divided by the River Emse from the Netherland: and by an Inland sea from West Frisland, being one of those Provinces. In the Summer it is found a pleasant Citie, but in Winter as if drowned in the Seas, and all the fields covered with water, makes it to appeare as an Iland in the waters. As for the Monies currant, and forme of accounts kept here by Merchants, I omit that to the place of the coynes and accounts of Germanie in generall, noted hereafter. In the mean time it is to be observed, that the weights and measures in use are these. The common weight of Emden is the pound of () Weight of Em∣den. the quintall or 100. pound makes in London Their common measure of length is an Ell, wherewith they measure Measure of Emden. Linnen, Wollen, and Silkes in generall, the 100 whereof hath beene observed to make in London 48  elles, and the 100 yards of London to have made thereabout 162. or 163. elles. Corne is here measured by the Werpe, 55 werpes make 10 quarters of London, or a Last of Amsterdam; but 61 werpes is here a Last, consisting of 4 werpes great of 15  Barrels the werpe. Westphalia is the next, containing in it selfe a large tract, and Westphalia. producing those Acornes in abundance, which feed their Swine, and which affoords those Gammons which are accounted so excellent a dish. The Northerne part of this Countrey is Bremen, wherein is found the towne of Breme, as the principall: then Clappenburgh, Exenburgh belonging to the Duke of Saxonie. Then Collonia, where∣in is sayd to bee the bodies of the three wise men which came from the East to worship our Saviour. And this belongs to the Bishoprick of Collen. Here is also Warendorpe and some others belonging to the Bishop of Munster, and Boport, Egers, Coblents, and Triers, belonging to the Bishop of Triers: of the principall of which a word passando.
CHAP. CLXXXIIII. Of BREME and the trade thereof. BREME is one of the Hans-townes, so called for the Breme and the trade thereof. freedome of the trafficke here practised, strongly for∣tified, five miles distant from the sea, the River Vi∣surge serving to convey all commodities thither, as run∣ning through the Citie, neere which lies that small but well knowne towne of Ossenbridge, noted for the great quanti∣ties Ossenbridge of narrow linnen cloth that is thence conveied to England and o∣ther countries. It is reported that in this Citie the Custome was first raised in swearing and inhansing of new commers by Bread & Salt, and of infranchising them into their Citie, by paying a certaine mulct, or fine in good liquor to the rest of the company which is now a generall received custome in all the Hans-townes of Germanie, and become part of the traffique thereof. The commonweight of Breme is the pound of (—) Ounces the 100. Weight in Breme. pound thereof hath rendred in London () pound. The common measure for length is the Ell, which agreeth with Measures in Breme. the Ell above mentioned in Emden. But in Ossenbridge it is found that the 100 yards London makes 84 elles there in circa, and 100 elles of London is here in Ossenbridge about 105 elles. CHAP. CLXXXV. Of COLLEN, and the trade thereof. COLLEN commonly for distinction called in La∣tine Collen and the trade thereof. Colonia Agrippina, is a very faire Citie, whereto is found great concourse of Marchants, neare to this Citie did Caesar with incredible expedition make a Bridge over the River Rheine, neare which the towne is at present situated, which more terrified the barbarous enemie, than the report of his valour. The Arch∣bishop of this Citie, is the second Especiall Elector of the Empire, and Cancellour of Italie. Here is sayd to be the bodies of the three wise men which came from the East to worship our Saviour, vulgarly called the
three Kings of Collen, whose bodies were translated by Helena the mother of Constantine, unto Constantinople; and from thence by E∣storsius Bishop of Millain transported to Millain; and finally, brought hither by Rinoldus the Bishop of this place. The Commonweight of Collen is the pound of () the 100 where∣of Weight of Col∣len. hath been observed to have made in London 110 pound. The common measure of length is the Ell here in use: the 100 Elles whereof have been observed to make in London 60 Elles. Measures of Collen. Exchanges of Cullen. Here are great Exchanges practised in this Citie as proper and fit thereunto, by reason of the rich Bankers and Merchants that are found here to reside, the which I have largely declared in the chap∣ter 290 f Exchanges of this place in the end of this worke: where∣fore it will be here needlesse to insert the same. The third Province is Cleveland, containing the Earldome of Cleve, Cleveland. the Dutchies of Gulicke and Berge; wherein are found the faire Ci∣ties of Cleve, Calker, Wesel, Emericke, Aken, Gulicke, Dulkins, and others which I omit for brevitie. The fourth Province is Alsatia, wherein is found the townes of Psaltberge, Wesenberge, Colmar, and principally the famous Citie of Alsatia. Strasburge: of which a word. CHAP. CLXXXVI. Of Strasburge, and the trade thereof. STRASBVRGE is one of the Imperiall Cities be∣fore Strasburg and the trade ther∣of. mentioned, seated a Musket shot from the ri∣ver Rheine, whereto there is a channell cut for con∣veyance of all commodities. There is here also a wood∣den Bridge over the Rheine, but very weak, and of no great strength. The circuit of the citie may be about 8 miles, wel fortified, & is famous for manie rarieties, the principal being their Clocke, which cost so many years labour to perfect, and the Steeple of the Cathedrall Church is numbred amongst the seven mi∣racles of the world, for its excellent structure and beautie. The curte∣sie of the inhabitants to strangers, is not to bee forgoten: And here they are accustomed at the Cities cost, to give all Handicrafts entertainment, that they may either teach if expert, or learne if ig∣norant; by which meanes they are found to have confluence of Ar∣tisans, which doth both much further their Cities stocke, and in∣richeth the inhabitants. In Strasburg are found two weights, a grosse and sotile, and by ob∣servation it hath been found that the 100 pound sutle of London Weights of Strasburg. ath made here incirca 70 in 71 pound of the grosseweight for grosse
goods of 16 ounces the pound: and 107 pound sutle weight of 12 ounces the pound, by which they use to weigh all fine commo∣dities, as Drugges and Spices, as Sugers, Pepper, Cloves, Maces, Cyna∣mon, Almonds Dates, and the like. The treasure of length of Strasburge is the Ell, which is in Lon∣don Measures of Strasburge. () inches. Their coines currant is the Bohemico grosse or Blaphace, which is three crutfers, one cruster is two pence, and one pey is two hellers, and one heller is two orchins, by which coins they keep their account. Vi∣de further chap. 206. The fifth Province is Franconia, divided into eight parts, the lo∣wer Palatine is the first part, wherin is found Worms, Spiers, and Hei∣delberge, Franconia. the chief Citie belonging to those Princes. Bacarac famous Bacarac. for the excellent Rhenish wines here growing, Cob-Openham, Franken∣dale, and others. The second part is Wittenberge, the chiefe townes are Toubing, Wittenberge. 2. Stutgard the Dukes seate, 3. Marlach and others. Stutgard The third part is Auspach, 2. Haibram and others. Auspach. The fourth is Baden, wherein is the Citie Baden, Durlach and o∣thers. Baden. The fifth is Ments, wherein is Lantse, Beinge, and others. Ments. The sixth is Bainberge, a faire Citie, and some others. Bainsberge. The seventh is Westberge, a Citie, and Arustime, and others. Westberge. The eighth part belongs to the Emperour, wherein is found No∣remberge, Norimberge. the fairest and richest Citie of Germanie, and seated in the centre thereof: and also here is Frankeford, seated on the river Me∣nus, Francfort. famous for the two Book-marts here kept annually, in Mid-let and Mid-September. A word of the most eminent of these before I proceed to the next province. CHAP. CLXXXVII. Os Wormes, and the trade thereof. WORMES is a towne of great antiquity, and yet wanteth not magnificence in her buil∣dings: Wormes and the trade ther∣of On the west side thereof growes in great abundance those Wines knowne to us by the name of Rheni. It is more famous for the many Imperiall Parliaments held here of old, than it is for trade, therfore I shal not have cause to insist much hereupon. Neare to this Citie stands the Citie of Frankendale, a new, moderne, strong, faire and beautifull piece, which hath made it selfe famous in the late
warres of these parts: these coasts affoording the most excel∣lent wines above mentioned here in great plentie abounding: and are found to grow especially on the west side of the river, which is the prime commoditiè of the inhabitants both of the Citie and Province. The weights and measures here are found to accord with Spiers, to which I referre the enquirer. CHAP. CLXXXVIII. Of Spiers and the trade thereof. SPIERS is halfe a mile from the Rheine, seated in a Spiers and the trade thereof. plaine on the West side of the said River, having more antiquitie than beautie; and yet more beautie than trade. Here the Imperiall Chamber is held, in which Court the differences of the Empire are jud∣ged, and the Electors themselves may bee called hither to triall of law. The weights and measures are these: First for the weights of Weights of Spiers. this place, the common is the pound of 16 ounces, or 32 lootes, of which is made two several quintals, one of 100 pound, another of 120 pound; and the 100 pound here is in London 111 pound, & the 100 pound of London is about 88 pound here of 32 lootes per pound. Measures of Spiers. The measure of length used is the Ell, which is in London () inches. CHAP. CLXXXIX. Of Heidelberg and the trade thereof. THE Citie of Heidelberg is seated in a plaine invi∣roned Heidelberg & the trade thereof. on three parts with high mountaines, the fourth part open, and beholding the River; from which it is a mile distant, and to which it con∣veyeth all commodities by a small river that runnes by the walles thereof. This is an Vniversitie. and the chiefe seate of the Palsgraves, and hath not been much famou∣sed for the trade therof, the weights & measures here in use are these. The weight common in use here is the pound of 16 ounces, of which Weights of Heidelberg. is made three severall hundreds or quintars, the first of 100 pound for fine goods, the second of 120 pound for grosse goods, and the third of 132 pound for provision of food, as Butter, Flesh, &c. The 100 pound hath been found to make in London 108 pound, and the 100 sutle makes then here about 92 in 93 pound. The measure of length is an Ell, which makes in London () inches. Measures of Heidelberg.
CHAP. CXC. Of Norimberg and the trade thereof. NORIMBERG is seated in a barren soyle, Norimberge & the trade ther∣of. yet this defect is supplyed by the industry of the inhabitants. It is absolute and of it selfe, and accounted one of the Imperiall Cities of the Empire, and the richest of all the rest: the inhabitants by their subtill inventions in Ma∣nuall workes, and cunning Arts, with the in∣couragement they daily give to , draw thereby the riches of other countries to them. Every childe though but seven or eight yeares old, is here put to worke, and is inabled thereby to get his owne livelihood; and by this meanes is all Europe filled with the triviall commodities of this Towne, knowne by the name of Norimberg ware, which makes the Citie rich, strong and powerfull: their trade is not great otherwise, and the weights and measures in use are these. There is here but one pound in use, as in Spiers, of which is also Waight of No∣rimberge. composed two severall  agreeing with it, and as there I men∣tioned, with London. Their measure of length is the Ell, both for Linnen and Wollen, con∣trary Measure of Norimberge. to the custome of most cities of Germanie, the 100 elles where∣of hath been found to make in London 63 elles, and the 100 yards of London to have made here 138 elles. The place is famous also for the great Exchanges that are practi∣sed Exchanges of Norimberg. therein, which I have at large handled in Chapter 298, with all circumstances thereto belonging. CHAP. CXCI. Of Frankfort, and the trade thereof. FRANKFORT is a free Citie of the Em∣pire, famous for the common Assemblies here Frankfort and the trade ther∣of. of the Electors for the choyce of the Emperour, and for their two annuall Faires, as also for ma∣ny Parliaments of the Empire held here. It is sea∣ted upon the Mane, which runneth through the same, dividing the Citie into two parts, which is united by a goodly Bridge. It is strongly incompassed
with a double wall, and is seated in a large plaine, the streets nar∣row, and the houses built of Timber and Clay: here is in this towne Sanctuary for Bankerouts for the space of foureteene dayes, which is never without some guests and company, from some one adjoy∣ning Citie or other. And if in those foureteene dayes they cannot compound or escape, then by all wiles they will get out of the priviledges thereof, and entring in againe, begin their fourteene dayes over againe; and thus some are found to doe for sixe mo∣neths, or a yeare together. There is found in their Marts or Faires, a great trade and concourse of Merchants, but it is principally fa∣mous for Bookes, which from all parts of Europe are brought hither, printed and dispersed hence, the towne consisting much upon printing, and other manuall Arts. The weights and the measures in use are The weight of this place is the pound of 16 ounces, of which is Weights of Frankfort. made three severall hundred, or quintals, which agreeth with that of Heidelberg before mentioned; and as that also with London, Lip∣sicke, Friburgh, Vlme, Iffan, Isuff, Basle, Costute and Domstetter, holding also in each of the sayd towns, the sayd concordancie, therfore here need no further repetition. Frankefort is found to have two severall measures for length, the Wollen & the Linnen ell, differing about 2 per cent. so that the 100 ells Measures of Frankfort. for Linnen here, gives in London 48 ells, and the 100 ells in Wollen gives about 49 ells London: and the 100 yards of London readers here of linnen 169 ells, and of wollen 168¾ in circa. The Exchanges here practised are great, which I have handled in the Chapter 298 at large with all due circumstances. Exchanges of Frankfort. Helvetia. The sixt Province is Helvetia, wherein are contained the thir∣teen Cantons of the warlick Switsers, preserving their liberties by their valour, notwithstanding their potent neighbours. The chiefe of their Cities is Zurich, 2 Bl, an Vniversitie, 3 Constance, famous for the Councell here held in anno 1414. 4. Berne, 5. Vpbaden, the or∣dinary place for the common assembly of the said Cantons, 6 Lu∣cerne, and others, and of the trade of the principall of these, a word in passing. CHAP. CXCII. Of Zurich and the trade thereof. ZURICH is seated on the Lake Zeisca, which Zuricke and the trade ther∣of. divideth the same into two parts, which againe is united by three faire Bridges, the middlemost ser∣ving as a meeting place for Merchants: which lake runneth into the brooke Limachus, which passeth to aden, and so into the Rheine, carrying Boats, by which com∣modities
are transportable, the weights and measures in use are. The Moneyes currant in the Switsers Cantons, I shall note in the Weights of zurick. place of the coines of the Empire: the weight then here is, the pound of 16 ounces, of which is made the 100 pound, and the 120 pound, and it is found that the 100 pound sutle of London turnes here 93¼ pound. The measure of length is here an Ell, the 100 whereof renders in Measures of Zurick. London 52 elles, or thereabouts. CHAP. CXCIII. Of BASIL, and the trade thereof. BASIL lieth upon the river of Rheine, which divideth Basil and the trade thereof. it into the lesser and the greater Basil: it was once an Imperiall Citie, but now is joyned to the Cantons of Switserland. It is a famous Vniversitie, and much fre∣quented by Students, the benefite of the Rheine run∣ning hence through Germanie, communicates the commodities of this Citie to all other seated thereupon. Basil is found in weights to have but one pound, equall with Frank∣fort Weight of Ba∣sil. and Heidelberg, of which is composed three severall quintars, one of 100 pound, another of 120 pound, and the third of 132 pound, and agrees with London, as you shall finde in Heidelberg and Frankeford aforementioned. The Measure of length of Basil is the ell for Linnen and Wollen, the Measure of Basil. 100 elles whereof renders in London 48 elles, and the 100 yards of London hath been observed to give here 167¼ elles. The seventh Province is Valesia, seated wholly amongst the Alpes. Valesia. Sittin is the onely walled towne of this Province. Boetia is the eighth, in which is Chur the Metropolis of the Grisons, Boetia. and here is the Voltolin taken by the Spaniards 1622. Suevia is the ninth, wherein is found the Cities of Vlme, 2 Aus∣burg, Suevia. 3 Norlinghen, 4 Ravensperge, and others, of some of which, as most notable, a word. CHAP. CXCIIII. Of Ausburg and the trade thereof. AVSBVRG is a free Citie of the Empire, governed Ausburg and the trade ther∣of. by a Senate of Citizens: it is seated upon the Nor∣therne mouth of the Alpes, in a fruitfull plaine of Corne and Pastures, it is strong and well fortified, and beautified with many houses of free stone of sixe or seven stories high. In this Citie lived those famous Merchants of the
family of Fuggers, who have built here many publicke buildings, & many private, which at a reasonable  are let to the poorer in∣habitants. Here is also a magnificent building for the meeting of Merchants, in manner of our  , called commonly the . There are two  rivers which runne through the suburbs, which are commodions for trasportation of Corne and Wines which this Countrey of Schwaben or Suevia yeeldeth in great quantitie. This Citie is also famous for the consession here made of their faith by the Protestant ,   the Emperour in anno() The  of Ausburg is the pound of 16 ounces, the 100 pound be∣ing Weight of Ausburg. the , makes in London 109 pound, and this agrees with Munchen, Wesell, , and some others of Germany. The measure of length is here the ell, found two fold, one for Wol∣len, Measure of Ausburg. and the other for Linnen and Silke, which because it very neerly agreeth with Frankefort, of which I have made mention before, I passe the same over. Bavaria is the tenth Province, the chiefe townes are Munchen on Bavaria. the river ser, and the Dukes seat, 2. , an Vniversitie, 3 Ratis∣bona, 4 Pass, 5 Salsburg, and many other great Cities. Northgola or the Vpper Pal is the eleventh, and belongeth totally to the Palaes of the Rheine, the chiefe townes are Aberg, Northgola. whose Silver mines yeelds yearly  thousand Crownes rent to the Princes Coffers. 2 Newberg and others. Austria is the , wherin is found the famous Cities of Vienna,  Austria. on , one of the most beautifull townes of Germanie; and walled, as stories say, with the monyes that Leopold the Duke had for King Richard the first his Ransome, being by him taken in his returne through Palestine. 2 Gratse, from whence the present Em∣perours Gratse. have their name. 3.   the  of . 4. Newark the chiefe of Carniolo, and in Tirolis is found the Citie of Inspurg, Tiroll Bolsan, and Trent, famous for the Counsell here held, and here concluded after 40 yeares lingring, and politicke delayes. CHAP. CXCV. Of Vienna and the trade thereof. VIENNA is at present the seat of the Germane Empe∣rours, Vienna & the trade thereof. and is now the  of this Countrey a∣gainst the  of the , who have more than once is   it; on the North side runneth the river of Dano; which here divideth it selfe  three , incompassing a good space of ground, & then
meeting againe; and all this is again united by three stone bridges, one containing 29 arches, another 57 arches, and the third 15 ar∣ches, each arch being 60 foot asunder. Here are many Merchants of great quality, that have their factors in Venetia, Florence, and other parts of Italie, to supply them with the Fabricks of Silks made there, such as are Sattins, Damasces, Taffata, Velvets, cloth of Gold, and such like. The weight in use here is the pound, which is in some commodi∣ties Weights of Vienna. divided into 32 Lootes, in some into 128 quints, and in some unto an 512 pfenning, of which pound the quintar is made, which is 100 pound, which doth render in London about 123 pound incir∣ca, and therewith is also found Idra and Erford to agree, the 100 pound of London making here 81 pound. Their measure for length is two, one in Linnen, and the other in wol∣len: Measures of Vienna. the 100 yards in London makes here in linnen 103 ells, and in Cloth and Silke 113 elles. There is here, as being the Court of the Emperour, a great Exchange Exchanges of Vienna. in use, and they are found to account and Exchange by ix Dollers of 8. shil. Flemish, and by Ducats of gold of 12 shil. Flemish. The kingdome of Bohemia is the thirteenth, wherein is accounted about 780 Cities, walled Townes and Castles, the chiefe whereof Bohemia. is Prague, the Metropolis of this kingdome, 2. Eger, 3 Budeis, 4 Mel∣muke, Pilsen, and others, and in this tract is found Prestan the chiefe Citie of Silesia, also Gorlits the chiefe Citie of Lusatia, and Brin and Preslan. Gorlitse. Olmuts. Olmuts the chiefe of Moravia; but the trade of Bohemia I will com∣prise under the title of Prague here following, as being the Me∣tropolis thereof. CHAP. CXCVI. Of Prague, and the trade thereof. THe Citie of Prague includeth three townes, as new Prague, old Prague, and a Citie inhabited by Iewes, Prague & the trade thereof. incompassed with one wal neither strong nor beau∣tifull: the river Molda doth run throgh the same, but is not navigable, nor commodious for carriage or transportation of merchandise, to which the inha∣bitants are not much addicted, Corne and Wie being the prime commodities the Countrey affoordeth, and timber in abundance, of which the walles of their houses are for the most part made, and that in whole pieces as the same grow, and not so much as the barke thereof taken away. The weight of Prague is the pound of 16 ounces: the 100 li. sutle of Weight of Prague, and of Bohemia.
London hath made here about 83 pound, Pasau and Regenborge agree∣ing also therewith, as doth also the most part of this Countrey. Their measure is the Ell, of which they have two, one in Linnen, Measures of Prague and of Bohemia. and the other in Cloth and Silke; the 100 yards of London hath made in Linnen 148 elles, and in llen 160 elles. Vide coynes currant in Bohemia. Brandenburg is the fourteenth, wherein is reckoned 50 Cities, and 64 walled Townes, the chiefe of which is Brandenburg, then Brandenburge. Frankefort for distinction called upon Oder, next Berlin, the resi∣dence of the Marque, and Hvelburg seated upon Havel, and many others of consequence, whereof little is come to my observation, therefore I will in silence passe them over. Pomerian is the fifteenth Province, wherein is found Statin the Pomeriana. Wallen. residence of the Prince, and Metropolis of this Countrey, then Wal∣len, once the famous Mart-towne of all these Countries, the Russians, Danes, Saxons, & Vandals had here their particular streets of abode for Commerce and trade, but ruind by warre, the trade was removed to Lubecke, where yet in some measure it is found to continue still. Meklinburg is the 16 Province, wherin is found the Cities of Mal∣chan, then Sternberg, next Wismar, and some others. Meklinburg. Saxonie is the seventeenth Province, wherein is found to be many Cities of note; the principall is first Erford, one of the fairest in Saxony Germanie, 2 , an Vniversitie for Physicians, 3 Smalcold Famous for the Protestant league here made, 4 Dresden, seated on the Albis, and the Dukes Magasin for warre and Armes, for 0000 horse and foot ever in readinesse at a dayes warning. 5 Lipsicke, an Vniversitie, which yearly doth yeeld the Duke for custome of , Drunke, and transpor∣ted 20000 pound steerling. 6 Wittenberg an Vniversitie, and the chiefe seat of the Elector of , and 7 Maidenberg, where it is sayd Lu∣ther studied Divinitie. Of some of these a word. CHAP. CXCVII. Of Lipsicke, and the trade thereof. LIPSICKE is seated in a plaine of ost  Lipsick & the trade thereof. Come-ground, the streets faire, and the chiefe hou∣ses built of free stone of foure roofes high: it is ac∣counted also an Vniversitie, but found to bee of no great note, by reason of the neighbourhood of Wit∣temberg: they have for some trespasse lost those great priviledges that they formerly enioyed, and therfore their trade is not accoun∣ted great, they may now neither fortifie their towne, nor winde a horne in their night watches, as other Cities in Germanie doe, nor
yet use Red Wax in their publicke Seales or Contracts, which are all of them accounted in Germanie of signes of freedome. The weights and measures in use are these. The weight is the pound, of which is made three quintars, one of Waights of Lipsicke. 100 pound, another of 120 pound, and a third of 132 pound. Vide more hereof in Frankefort and Heidelberg, with which it is found to accord. Lipsicke hath two measures, one for wollen, and the other for linnen, 14 per Cent. difference: For the 100 yards of London doth make in Measures of Lipsicke. wollen commodities 160 elles, and in linnen 140 elles. The Merchants here account by Markes of 32 grosse, and the grosse Accounts and exchange of Lipsick. being 12 heller; but they exchange by Florins of Breslow, 30 to have posito in Norimburg 32 Florins, and in Vienna 34 Florins. CHAP. CXCVIII. Of Wittenberg and the trade thereof. WITTENBERG is seated on a plaine sandie ground, accounted an Vniversitie, wherein they Wittenberge & the trade of Saxony. proverbially say, a man shall meet nothing but Whres, Schollers, and Swine, which shewes that the inhabitants have little trade, as living for the most part by the Students, and peradven∣ture by the flesh of Swine and Women, but by what weight and measure the same is proportioned to them, I am to seeke, therefore referre the same to the next Merchant that shall have occasion to make his observation thereupon. CHAP. CXCIX. Of Dresden, and the trade thereof. DRESDEN is a faire town and strongly fortified, Dresden and the trade ther∣of, in which the Elector of Saxonie keepes his court: it is famous for the magnificent Stables and Armories which the Duke keepes here in a continuall readi∣nesse, the river of Elve divides the towne into two parts, the new and the old, which is very strong both by Art and Nature, and accounted the strongest moderne Citie in Germanie, the inhabitants are much addicted to trade, and the river doth much further their endevours; but Nature affoording them a
rich soyle, takes away much of their edge: for it is ever found that the barren soyle affoords to the inhabitants the greatest incou∣ragement. Their weights and measures are, Dresden, Misen, and all Saxonie is found to have three weights, and Weights of Saxony. the 100 pound of London made of Zigostatica, or the Princes weight, 96 pound of 16 ounces it made 92 pound of Merchants weights of 16 ounces, and 144 pound of the common weight of 12 ounces. Their measures of length is two, agreeing with Lipsick above men∣tioned, Measures of Saxony. in which I need not further to insist. Brunswicke is the eighteenth Province, wherein is Brunswicke the principall Citie; secondly, Wolfinbotle, where the Duke commonly Brunswicke. resideth; thirdly, Alberstade, then Luneburg, and some other of lesse note. CHAP. CC. Of Brunswicke, and the trade thereof. _ comprehends in one five seve∣ral Brunswicke and the trade thereof.   free Imperiall towne, strongly forti∣fied e es with two, and in some places with  walles, and incompassed with the river  Ancor: the inhabitants are found addicted to trade  the morning, but their intemperance at night takes aw   hereof: they are great Husband-men, the earth answ  r labours, whichyeelds them plenty of Corn, both for themselves, and their neighbours wants, the earth yeelding them rich reward to their labours, and their after noones houres spent in good fellowship, makes me imagine there may bee some trade a∣mo ; which in particular I permit the reader in silence to co CHAP. CCI. Of Luneburg, and the trade thereof. LVNEBVRG is a free Imperiall Citie, over which the Duke of Luneburg challengeth a superioritie: it is Luneburg and the trade ther∣of. found to be fairly built of Brick, and well and strong∣ly fortified for its safeguard and defence, with deepe Ditches, and thicke Mudd walles. It is most famous for the naturall fountaine of Salt here found, over which is built a
spacious house, that containes 52 Roomes, and every roome hath Salt fountain in Luneburg. eight severall Caldrons of Lead, wherein is boyled eight tunnes of Salt daily, the profit whereof is divided into three severall parts: one part to the Citie, one to the Duke of Luneburg, and another to a Monastery, and some other adjoyning Earks: their trade is not otherwise of very great consequence. The nineteenth Province is Hassia, wherein is found the Cities of Dormstade, then Marburg an Vniversitie, and some others. Hassia. Veteravia is the twentieth Province, wherein is the Cities of Fri∣burg, Veteravia. then Hanan, next Dullinburg, Nassan, Catzenbogen, and some o∣thers of lesser note. CHAP. CCII. Of Friburg and the trade thereof. FRIBVRG is of round forme, invironed al∣together with high mountaines, having within Friburg & the trade thereof. it many ults nd cave to goe und , through whic  of the Citie  Mines found i  at certaine houres are  cke by the nd of a Bell: their worke is for the  by night, and their rest is by day, and the residence   Silver Mines in Friburg. more under ground than above in their houses   of belongs in halfe to the Citizens, and halfe to the El  om the Countrey appertaineth. The weighs in use in Friburg is the pound, of which is made Weights of Friburg. three severall quintars, one of 100 pound, second of  nd, third of 132 pound, agreeing with Frankefort and H  d Lipsicke; as before. The long measure is the Ell, which is () inches . In this tract is also comprehended the three periall Cities of Measures of Friburg. Stoade, Hamburg, and Lubecke, which acknowledging no Sove∣raigne, being free and Hans-townes, I shall here touch, and first of Stoade.
CHAP. CCIII. Of Stoade, and the trade thereof. STOADE is an ancient Citie, and one of the free Stoade and the trade therof. Cities of the Empire, and one of those Sea Towns which from the priviledge of traffique with their neighbours are called Hans-townes: it is commodi∣ously seated for traffique upon the river Elve, in which streame they maintaine certaine Buyes to guide the entring shippes: the English Merchant Adventurers had for a while here their residence, forced thereto by the discourteous u∣sage of the Hamburgers; and before their arrivall this Towne was so poore, that they sold the priviledge of coining of monies, and some other such rights to Hamburg, by whose company they grew rich, not without the envie and impoverishment of the Hambur∣gers, who often attempted, th   N ces  ,  s   gri  ll by  prohi  gion: so then ng   y never left, till partly by f  ats, they laboured their returne, w  formed, and where to this day it is found   idence and Court. The present trade of  pending much upon the priviledg at they  tion and choyce of all the Rhenish wines passing by the their acco pounds, shillings and pence, but they Coins of Stoade. ha  als, and  as I ll shew hereafter. Their C  these. money here and in Hamburg is two pence. 3  s a Doller, which is 5 shillings 4 pence there. 4   8 pence, makes a Spanish Riall of 6 pence ster∣ling. 1    33 Stivers, and is 4 shillings 4 pence ster∣ling, 1  16 stivers, which is two shillings 8 pence Flemish. 7 markes is 20 shillings. I say 20 shillings Flemish of that money. Thei ight is the pound of 16 ounces, 100 pound is their quintar, Weights in Stoad. wh  made in London 107, and some have observed 109 pound T  re is the Ell, as in Hamburg following. Measures in Stoade.
CHAP. CCII. Of Hamburg and the trade thereof. HAMBVRG is a free Citie of the Empire, and Hamburg & the trade thereof. one of them which enioy the priviledge of a Hans-towne, and for the building and populous∣nesse much to bee praised: the ate house is a beautifull Fabricke, and the Exchange where Merchants doe meet together, is likewise a plea∣sant place. The haven is guarded and shut up with an Iron chaine, the Citie it selfe compassed with a deepe ditch, and on the East and North sides with a dou∣ble ditch and wall. Water is conveyed into the same from a hill di∣stant some miles off: it is seated on a large, plaine, and sandie soyle, and adorned with e Churches, and sixe gates; on the South side it is washed with the river , which also putteth a branch into  ▪    North east the river Alster runneth by to▪     all the tie of their   the other Sea-bordering Cities,   , have for the most t broad d  large hall, the lower part whereof on bo  ware-h, and in the per part, lying  their chiefe houshold stuff is placed, and espec  of English Pwter, which being kept bright, makes  to them that passe by, so that their  promise  outwardly than they have   present  tie is great, principally by reason of the residen  Merchants, and some quantitie of shipping of reaso  found belonging to the Citins. The weigh of  is the pound, of whi  120 Weights of Hamburg. pound, their quintar, divided into three  of  , of 10 pound to the stone, 0  the Skip pound, which is the second, and 20 Lispond of 15  the said 300 pound, which is the third; so that it may be  per∣ly sayd to be two , one of 120 pound, another of 300 pound. of length is an Ell, wherewith they mea both Mee of Hamburg. , W, and  the 100 of hath been fo  ke   about 48,  for ,  the 100 yards of   ound to yeeld here about, 162 or 163 yards,  ith  before mentioned.
The Merchants here are found to exchange for London by the Exchange in Hamburg. pound sterling, and for all other places upon the Rex Doller, of 54 sh. Lapisto, or 54 stivers. A Doller is here noted to be worth three whitpence, one whitpeny to Doller. be 18 shillings, one shilling to be 12 pence, and one peny two hellers. Corne is here measured by the Schepel, ninetie making a Last, Of Corne. and 83 Schepels making a last of Corne in Amsterdam, or 10 quarters English. CHAP. CCV. Of Lubeck, and the trade thereof. LVBECKE is an Imperiall and free Citie, and one of those that are accounted Ha-towns; Lubeck and the trade ther∣of. it is seated on the top of a faire and spacious Hill, upon the very crowne whereof is a beautifull Church, from whence leadeth      the mariti   distant fro th to   of Bric aving   alles. The government of th   heir neatn  garden eous , civilitie of manners, and strict execution of  is conveyed hither by pipes; and Brewers, that  most  constrained to live together in one  of  ater in his owne ho al∣  tants  conained o liv a st by  hey are set on worke, and provided for. This  ten Churches, one whereof being a decayed  to an Armorie of all Amunitions for , being the principall, and sea∣ted  very summer f this hill, whereon the this Citie at present is great, partly by the industrie of  tants, and partly by reason of the commodiou ti∣on Beere o Lu∣beck  , & the neighbourhood of th ique sea   ous for the , an  tran   by some
The common weight of Lubeck is a pound, of which is made a Centiner Waights of Lubeck. and a Skippound: for 112 pound is the centiner or quintar; the stone 10 pound, and 32 stone to the Skip pound, which is 320 pound, and the 20 Lispound of 16 pound marke is also accounted for a Skip pound, which is in London () pounds. The measure of length of Lubeck is the Ell, 120 elles whereof makes in London 60 elles, and the 100 yards London hath made here 160 Measures of Lubeck. elles in circa. In Lubeck corne is measured by the last, 96 Schepels making a Last, Of Corne. which is 10¼ quarters of London, and 85 schepels is found to make a Last in Amsterdam. Lasts 7 of 18 Barrels in Lubeck is found to make 100 sackes of Salt, being 122 smal Barels for the 100 sacks at Ariden in Zealand, which is found to be 7½ lasts of 18 Barrels of salt in London, but accounted by the weigh in London to make 11½ weyes, and it is accounted 40 Bushels to a Wey, water measure of ten gallons. the B which is 50 Stoopes of Antwerpe, CHAP. CCVI. the Coin  in genera CONSIDERING the pri  ning rrant anie. of monies d  of Germanie to   that  to sundry   that are  within this Empire, it will pro  bour to my confessed ignorance,  down all the coyns found currant th beside  accidents of warre, necessities, trad  taintie in all certaine rules and Ed  on for an uniforme val to bee coyn  for currant, through all this Empire; yet beca  omit what I have in this poynt gathered, I will  sam  leave the truth to try all and experience: A  I  this part  of C  will not bee  in   accou ept in th ntrey. kept by   coynes:  of  is
the second is by florins, batchers, and crutchers, the florin be∣ing accounted for 15 batches, and the batch for 4 crutchers, the third is by florins, sold. and deniers, 12 deniers being a soldo, and 20 soldoes a florin, the florin may be valewed at 3 shil. 4 pence starling, or 33 sh. 4 pence tarine, and the batch at 2 shil. starl. and in payments of merchandise, note that a florin is accounted for a common silver guil∣den, of which there is no such coine found, being meerely imagina∣ry, as is the same coine of markes of Collen and Lubecke, likewise imagi∣nary, or at least not now coined, nor in use. Now for the currant coines, observe that first in Stoad, Hamburg, Coines in Stoad. Ham∣burg, and Lu∣becke. and Lubecke before-named, the gold Rhenish guilde was worth, when these notes were taken, 28  silver misen grosse, or worth 36½ lubecke shil. and the Imperiall doller was worth 33 lubecke sh. A common silver giulden was worth 28 lubeck shillings. A french crowne of gold was worth 44 lubecke shil. An English angel was worth two dollers and a quarter and  lubecke shillings; or to say otherwise, it was worth 12 flemish shillings and 4 lubeque shillings. Lubecke shil. 7½, made an English shilling starl. Lubecke shill. 6, of  is  33 rkes confines of the Empire and the Low   Eden was woth , an    understan   stiver  was  ch crowne was worth 3 flemish guil. d 6 sti∣ve  as also ó lubecke shillings make one shilling ish,  it is to be ted, that Princes and Cities doe coine , which are found often in their value to differ  ildens. ine, , and in those parts, they haue current coines  small pieces stamped, called copstackes, and a Coines  in Breme, Of∣denburg, &c. doll  rth 4  ckes or 55 groats, a french crowne was wor  nd on pstacke 10 stivers or 12 groats, and this  a little more than an English penny, a sesling was wor   cke shilling, and they have here halfe seslings. cke, a doller was 36 maria grosse, which are of equall Coins currant in Bnswicke. weig th 24 silver misen grosse, also 9 maria grosse make 8 lubeck shil.  doller was worth 18 spitzgrossen, whereof  wo ia ge. rg, Lesicke,  and in all the Electorate    and   bouring territories to the c of  ler   silver grossen, which are the sam  or 3  .
A Rhemish gold guilden was worth 27 silver gros. and the Philip doller was of the same value. A common silver guilden was esteemed at 21 silver grosse. A french crowne at 33 silver gros. A Spanish pistolet at 32 silver gros. A halfe Millres at 36 sil. gros. the hungarian duccat at 30. A short and long crusado at 35 silv. gros. A Rose noble at 3  dollers, the English angel at 2¼ doller; the silver grosse was worth more then 2 pence, and about 2¼ pence starl. And for the small Coines, a Grosse was worth 4 driers, and 1 drier 2 dreyhellers, and 1 dreyheller was worth a pfeninge and halfe, and 12 pfeninge made a grosse, and two schwerd grossen made one schneberger. In generall through all the upper parts of Germany, a doller was esteemed at 18 batsen, a silver guilden at 15, a Philips doller at 20, a Coines cur∣rant through the upper parts of Ger∣many. french crowne at 24 , a gold crowne of Italie at 24, a silver Itolen crowne at 22½ batsen, a Rhenish gold guilden through higher Germany was worth 27 silver misen grosse, a silver guilden there as in Saxony at 21 gros. the bats. may be accounted 3 pence English, and 4 creizers make  ts, 4 pfeminge make a cretzer, and three cretzers make a zwelver,  silver . have   common payme hich p   occasions, and this being none of t  ners doe carry out the Coines of the E    mmodities  he Empire, and there   moneys    to receive  than th commonly do otherwise passe at. The Kingdome of Bohemia, as also that of Hung  Coines of the Empire in the same value  at first coin   of . consent of both those nations, but it is to bee unde   well in those free Cities, and by those free Princes  priviledge of coining, there is alwaies stamped cer  money that onely passeth currant in their iurisdict  ∣ther; and these passing in the Kingdome of Bo   to be these; First, 3 potchandels make one zer, ni  ne potchandel make foure weissgrosse, and 30 grosse of Mia o sse make a doller, also here Merchants reckon two hellers   and fixe pfenings for a grosse, and 60 grosse for a shocke, and osse for a marke. zerland it is found that divers of the Cantons  yne   hich passe currant among themselves the p of whic ts are found to be in Ba, rich, and Sc he   wreof I will onely note. oine is the Rappen munts, where ed a  ret∣zers:
and 20 plaparts, or 60 cretzers make a common guilden, and 3 pfeninge make a cretzer. At Zurich it is found that 6 pfenings make a shilling, and may bee worth a penny starling, & 3 pfenings make a sickerling; two great finfers of Basil, and one little finferlin makes a bats of Basil, and in like manner 5 finferlins make a bats, and 5 finfers 2 bats. But my worke were endlesse to runne through the particular coines currant, and stamped in every particular place of this Em∣pire, therefore this shall suffice for a tast of the variety; and who∣soever carrieth any merchandise into these countries, let him bee sure to know the true worth of the monies hee receiveth for the same, lest he prove in conclusion a loser by his trafficke. CHAP. CCVII. The Weights of Germany reduced to the 100 li. of London. THE Next thing in order to bee handled is the Waights in ge∣nerall of Ger∣many reduced to the 100 li.  London. Waights and Measures of the Cities of Trade in this Empire, which I have in part touched already  , the est or as many   me hin my collections I shall here    ingenious and better skill'd m adde the . And  for the weight, which here I have redu to th . sutle of London, the which is found to yield in   li. berg 88 89 ce 88 rge 91 piers 88 leberge 92 ke 92 ge 92 116 The  of Lo doth  in 92 ienna 81 Statin 92 Erford 81 Ipsburge 81 Salsburge grosse 79 itto small 108 bech 92 tsen 133 ostuts 92 Mison of 16 ou. li. 96 Of . the li. 142 Of Merchants waigh 92 Munchen 91 Wessell 91 Saxony in generall 96 Norlinghen 91 Francfort 92 Breslow 116 Canoli 83 Domstreder 92 Regenberge 83 Loosen 141 Offen 92 Basile 92 Paslow 83 Hamburge 92 Copenghen 9 Basill 92 Zuricke 94 Wallos countrey
CHAP. CCVIII. Of Measures of Germany reduced to the Measures of London. HAving done with their Weights in generall, I will doe the same for their long Measures in generall, which I will Measures of Germany. reduce to the 100 Yardes of London, and note that the same hath beene observed to have produced in these Cities of Germanie. Embden 163 ells. Lubecke 160 el. Munster 80 el. Collen 160 el. Erford 218 el. Francfort 169 cloth 80 . Norimberge 160 el. silke 138 el. Vienna for linnen 103 el. Ditto for silke 113 el. Prague 14 el. Ditto for 160 el. Vlme 160 el. Ditto for wollen 128 el. Lipsicke 160 el. cloth Ossenbrigs 84 els. Breme 163 el. Hamburge 163 el. Basill 167 el. Bantson 148 el. el. lle el. el. cloth Ditto 138 el. long . 1 el. Ditto short measures 13 el. Zearech el. Statin el. Ocermond 1 el. Wismar 157 el. Gripswald 163 el. The rest I willingly omit for brevity sake, and   to the triall of the better experienced. CHAP. CCIX. Of the trade in generall of Germany. THe particular Trading of severall Cities being  ob∣served, it will not bee amisse a little to looke  the Trade in generall of Germany, and therewith  Na∣vigation The generall trade of Ger∣many. of this nation, by which wee finde,  in all Cou almost the same is principally maintained. The Ci∣ties
then found on the Sea-cost on the North-side of Germany, have very great ships; yet more fit for great stowedge and bur∣then, than either for saile or defence; and therefore oftentimes to this end fraighted by the Netherlanders. Neither can I attribute much commendations to the Germaine Mariner, for those Seas in good part, and the Balticke sea altogether, are found free of pirates and piracies, which is the chiefe reason why their ships are found in the generall to be so ill armed, either defensive or offensive, and in one thing they concurre with the Dutch, to the shame of the Christians profession, that there is never found any prayers used a∣board their ships, neither morning or evening, contrary to the laudable custome and godly exercise of our English mariners, who constantly use prayer and Psalmes, at least foure times in foure and twenty houres, which is at the setting of the foure quarterly wat∣ches of the day and night. These Maritime Cities are for the most part either Hans-townes or free Cities, because they enioyed of old in all neighbour Kingdomes, great priviledges of buying any Commo∣dities, as well of strangers as Citizens, and of selling their owne to either at pleasure, and to bring in or carry out all commodities by their owne ships, with like immunities equall to Citizens in all the said donions, and no lesse preiudiciall to others, than advanta∣geous to themselves and in London they were wont to dwell to∣gether in the house lled the Sil-yard, and there enioyed these and many other priviledges, which now for many yeares have ly dead; partly by reason the English found not these, or the like pri∣viledges in these free Hans-townes; and partly, by reason they have found re commodious to make use of their owne shipping, as in these es it is found they do. Notwithstanding all this, yet it is observed that the Germanes in general apply themselves very industriously to all Trafficke by land, but the free Cities on the sea coasts doe but coldly exercise it by sea; Be  found to be spent and exported amongst themselves in  dible measure and quantity, with an extraordinary gaine,  therefore noted for one of the prime commodities of this empire, bringing profit not onely to private men, but also to Prin nd to free States, there being no Merchandize in the world that ore easily findes a buyer in Germany, than this: for other commodities, it is observable that Germany sends into Italy Linens, corne and waxe; it sends into England Bords, Iron, Diaper, Rhenish wines, and Norimberg wares, which can hardly be called commodities; into Spaine they send Linens, waxe, brasse, copper, cordage, mastes, gun∣powd and this is their principall Exportation. Now for their Impotions, Italy returnes them Silkes of all kindes; England Lead, Tin, a wollen cloths; and Spaine returnes them Spanish wines, fruits, eiles, salt some wools, and other commodities. I formerly noted, that the English had their Staple at Embden, the
Count whereof used them well and courteously, but warres grow∣ing betweene England, and Spaine, the place grew dangerous for them: for their goods were oftentimes taken, and themselves made prisoners, even in the mouth of the harbour; wherupon they removed to Hamburg, where being oppressed with new impositions, and being denied the exercise of their religion, they removed also thence, and setled their Staple at Stoade. Then also our English had their Staple at Dansick in Prusen, for the kingdome of Poland; but when the Dansickers under pretence of the Suevian warre, exacted of them a Doller for each wollen Cloth, and as much proportionally upon all other commodities; and after∣wards, though the warre being ended, yet would remit nothing of the same; and withall, forbad the English, by a law decreed, to live in Poland, the commodities whereof were onely sold there, lest they should learne the language, and finde out the mysterie of that trade and Countrey: And lastly, when as they exacted as much weekly of an Englishman dwelling in their Citie, as they did of a Iew dwelling there amongst them, the English thereupon made agreement with the Senate of Melvin for 11 yeares, to pay them six grosse for each Cloth brought in, and accordingly for all other goods, and to pay as much more in the Citie of Kettle to the Duke of Pri for his giving them free passage to Melvin; d so is meane they set∣led their Staple in Melvin: whereupon the Dkers being offended with the Citizens of Melvin, and the Hamburgers no lesse with those of Stoade, procured all the free Cities by a publique writing to out∣law not onely Melvin and Stoade for receiving the  to the common prejudice of the rest, but also Coningsberg, the  of the Duke of Prussen, and the free Citie of Lubeck for favoug the En∣glish in this their course, and for permitting them being strangers, to sell their goods to any other than the Citizens of each severall Citie. But how these differences came afterward to be reconciled, and their Staples removed thence, I have shewed in o . And being now entred to speake of the trade of Pr Ger∣mane Trade of Pru∣ca. Province, but of late yeares annexed to the Crowne of Poland, which of it selfe is of great importance, it will not bee amisse to in∣large my selfe upon some particulars thereof. The English  are found to bring thither great quantitie of Tin, Lead, and ollen-Cloathes, and other commodities, and to bring thence hard and li∣quid Pitch, Hempe, Flax, Cables, Masts for ships, Boords, & Timber for building, Linnen Cloth, Wax, Minerall salt, which in Poland they digge out of pits like great stones, and the same being put to the fire, is made pure, and being blacke his colour is more durable,  lesse subject to giving againe than our boyled Salt. Also th bring thence Pine Ashes for making of Sope, commonly known to us by the name of Sope-Ashes, and Corne in great quantitie; yet the English are found seldome to have need of their Corne for the use of England,
which many times of their owne they transport to other nations; but they buy it as the free Cities doe, to transport it to other Coun∣tries, which the Low-countrey men do also buy as well for themselves, as to serve Spaine, and other Countries therewith, so great a quan∣tity thereof is hence dispersed into all parts of Europe. Amber is also brought from thence, but not gathered neither at Amber. Melvin nor Dansicke, as some imagine, but on the sea side of Ko∣ningsperg, where, as I said, the Duke of Prusen holds his Court, and so all along the coast of Curland; where, howsoever it lies in great quantitie on the sands of the sea, it is as safe as if it were lockt up in ware-houses, since it is death for any to take up the least piece thereof, and being onely by the law accounted to bee the proper commodity of the Duke, to whom the same appertaineth. And this being as much as I have thought requisite to handle concerning the trade of Germanie in the generall, or of the Imperiall Cities and Hans∣townes in particular, I wil proceed to the next kingdome, which in order is Denmarke, and to the principall Cities, and particular trade thereof.
CHAP. CCX. Of Denmarke, and the Provinces and Cities thereof. DENMARKE hath on the East Mare Balticum, on the West the Germa Denmarke and the Provinces thereof. Ocean, on the North Sweden, on the South Germany. This Countrey doth afford for Mer∣chandise, Fish; Tallow, hides, and having abundance of Oxen, 50000 are said to be sent hence yearely to Germany, also Buck-skins, armours of all sorts, furniture for shipping, Bords, such as Wainscot, firre∣wood, &c. This Kingdome now containes Ci∣bricke, Chersonesse, the Ilands of the Balticke, and part of Scandia, and first this Chersonesse is divided into foure Provinces. Halsatia is the first, wherein are found the Cities of Niemunster and Bramsted, and is the title of the second Sonne of Denmarke. Holsatia. Dithmars is the second Province, wherein are found the Cities of Dithmars. Marne and Meldorpe, the Inhabitants of this last esteemed so weal∣thy, that they are said to cover their houses with copper. Slesia is the third, wherein are of note Sleswicke, 2. Goterpe, and 3. Londen a haven towne. Slesia. Iuitland is the fourth, the townes of note are Rincopen, 2. Nico∣pen, 3. Holne, 4. and Arhansen. Iuitland. The Balticke Ilands are 35 in number, but of them 4 are found to Baltick Ilands. be of principall note, 1. Seeland, 2. Fionia, 3. Borneholme, and 4. Fi∣mera, of which a word. In Seeland is found thirteene Cities, the chiefe whereof is Haf∣fen the Kings seat, and the onely Vniversity in Denmarke, knowne to Seeland. other nations by the name of Copenhagen, that is Mercatorum portus, or the Merchants haven: Secondly Elsinour, standing on the sea side, Copenhagen. in which towne the Merchants that have passed, or are to passe the Elsinour. Sound, do pay their customes to the King: And thirdly Rotchilt, the
Sepulcher of the Danish Kings, betweene this Iland and the firme land of Scandivonia is the passage called the Sound towards Mosco∣via, which did formerly yield unto this King a great yearely profit, but now much decayed since the English found out the Northerne passage into Russia. This Sound is in breadth 3 miles, and commanded on Scandia side by the castle of Helsenburg, and on this Iland by that of Cronburg, both castles of good defence. In Fionia is found eight Townes, the principall whereof Osell Fionia. Scomberge and others. In Bornholmia is a principall Citie Barnholme. Bornholme. In Fimeria. is found the City of Peterborne, and is the Iland in which that famous Mathematician Tic Bra built an artificiall tow∣er, Fimeria. wherein he studied the Mathematicks, and wherein are still reser∣ved many of his rare Mathematicall instruments. Scandia is the last part of this Kingdome, lying part of it on this Scandia. side, and part beyond the Articke circle, so that the longest day in the more Northerne part is about three moneths, and containes the Kingdomes of Norway, Swethland, and part of Denmarke; the part of it belonging to Denmarke is divided into three Provinces, 1. Ha∣landia, 2. Schonia, and 3. Blesida. In Halandia is Halanesoe. Halandia. Scania. In Scania is the City of Londis a faire haven, Falsgerbode and the castle of Elsimbourg, one of the keyes of the Sound before mentio∣ned, and the seas are here said sometimes so to abound with hering, that ships are scarse able with wind and Oare to breake through them, and the Countrey is the pleasantest of all Denmarke. In Blesida is found the City of Malmogia, and the strong castle of Blesida. Colmar against the Swedlander. The principall trade of this King∣dome is contained in Coppenhagen and Elsinour, therfore under the ti∣tle of these two I will comprehend the Trafficke of this Kingdome. CHAP. CCXI. Of Coppenhagen, and the trade thereof. COPPENHAGEN is the Seat of the Kings of Coppenhagen, and the trade thereof. Denmarke in winter, and may bee interpreted the Merchants haven, on the East side is the Kings palace or castle, which bordereth on the sea shore, where the haven is found to be, the sea being not farre di∣stant from the North side thereof: the City is of a round forme, affording little beauty, as being but meanly built of wood and clay, and the castle of stone. Here are found some
Merchants, yet for the most part of no great eminence: for the Countrey affoordeth norich commodities that may allure others thither, or serve to bee transported to other regions, whereby a gaine may be expected. The Monies of this kingdome commonly currant is the Doller, Coins of Cop∣penhagen. and shilling; two Danish shillings making one Lubecke shilling, and 66 Danish shillings accounted for a Rix Doller, which is five shillings Sterlin. Their accounts are kept by markes of 16 shillings Danish. Accounts in Denmarke. Their exchanges are here practised by the Rix doller above mentio∣ned, the common currant coine of these countries. Their measures and weights I will briefly observe by them∣selves, and therefore hasten to Elsinour. Measures and weights, &c. CHAP. CCXII. Of Elsinour and the trade thereof. ELSINOVR of it selfe is but a poore Village, but much frequented by Sea-men by reason of his Elsinour and the trade ther∣of. neighbourhood to that straight Sea called the Sound, where the King of Denmarke hath layd so great im∣positions upon all shippes and goods comming out or going into the Baltique sea, as this sole profit surpasseth farre all the revenewes of his kingdome: the strong Castle of Cronburge lies in this village upon the mouth of this straight, to which on the other side of this narrow sea in the kingdome of Norway, another Castle is opposite, called Elsburg, which two are the Keepers of this straight, that no ship can passe in, or come out of the Baltique sea without their leave, and consequently without due payment of this Imposition. On the south side of Cronburge Castle is the largest Road for shippes, toward the Baltique sea where the King is sayd to have his lodgings, which cannot choose but bee a delectable prospect to all men, but especially to him: for shippes goe in and out here by Fleets of hundred, and hee is certaine, that none doe passe either way but according to their burthen and loa∣ding, addes somewhat to his treasurie. The haven is capable to contain a great Fleet, for it hath Cronburge Castle on the North side, the Castle of Elsburge on the East side, and Seeland, the chiefe Iland of the kingdome on the West side, and the Iland
Fimeria, or Wherne on the south side, in which I noted before, that Tycho Brahe the famous Mathematician had his residence. The Danes conceive this Iland to be of such importance, as they have a Fable, that Henry the seventh of England offered for the pos∣session of it, as much Scarlet Cloth as would cover the same, with a Rose Noble at the corner of each Cloth. If any such offer were made, doubtlesse the wisedome and judgement of that Prince, knew how to make that Iland being fortified, peradventure to returne him his charges againe with good interest; but it is not credible, by reason that it cannot benefit a forraine Prince whose territories lyeth out of the Sound, by which hee must needs enter those beforementioned Castles commanding the entrance, though it might prove more beneficiall to some Prince bordering upon the Baltique seas, and to whom the sea is open for passage. CHAP. CCXIII. Weights in generall of Denmarke reduced to that of London. NOW for the Weights of this Kingdome, they are found to differ in many places: so ma∣ny as have come to my hand, I have reduced to the sutle hundred of London, which sutle hundred is found to produce in these Cities of traffique and some others adioyning.   i. Aldar 87 Coppingham 92 Cracon 119 Dansicke 116 Hamburg 92 Wilde 116 Elsinour 92   li. Lubecke 92 Melvin 120 Revel 116 Rhiga 116 Statar 108 Stralsont 88 Bergen Norway 92 Where it is to bee noted, that generally in Coppenhagen, and in most parts of Denmarke, they have a great and a small hundred, one of 112 pound to the hundred, and another of 120 pound to the hundred, accounted twelve stone of ten pound to the stone: Also they have a Skip-pound, 32 stone of ten pound the stone, or 20 Lis∣pound of 16 marke pound is a Skip-pound, and 20 times 16 pound is 320 pound.
CHAP. CCXIIII. Measures in generall of Denmarke reduced to London. AS I have done with their weights, so will I proceede with Measures in∣generall of Denmark. their measures, reducing them to the hundred yards English, and makes in Arsnis 166⅔el Breme 162½el Breslow for cloth 148 el Ditto for Silkes 160 el Conixborough 166 el Lubecke 160 el Munster 80 el Ockermond 141½el Revel 166 el Rhosticke 158⅕el Wisinar 157¾el Dansicke 162½el Doinin 163 el Embden 163 el Gripswould 163 el Hamburgh 163 el Melvin 162 el Narva 166 el Osenbrighs 84 el Rhiga. 166 el Statin. 141½el And thus much shall serve to have said for the measures of this Countrey, whereto I have added the measures of some other the adioyning eminent Cities of trade and Commerce. CHAP. CCV. Trade in generall of Denmarke. TO conclude, the trade of Denmarke driven by the inhabitants, is not great, their countrey partly not The generail trade of Den∣mark. affoording commodities for Merchandises; and their seas, I meane principally the Baltique, not being for many moneths in the yeare navigable for frost. The inhabitants are frugall in food and apparrell, and therefore not much addicted neither to Silkes nor Spices, and the great traffique and concourse of other nations, through the Sound, that furnisheth them with all necessaries, makes the inhabi∣tants lesse desirous to saile abroad to fetch the same at the first hand. Stockefish and other salted Fish they send into forraigne Coun∣tries,
and so also they doe their Oxen and cattell in great quan∣ty, besides the commodities which the countrey doth natu∣lly afford, mentioned in the former part of this countries de∣ription; neither have I heard any great fame of their Naviga∣ons or Mariners, which principally saile Northward, and little to e Southward, though otherwise it is conceived that next to the nglish their Vessels are the strongest built to indure the blasts of he colder climates, and the scorchings of the warmer regions; yet f late daies I have understood, they have undertaken some new iscoveries and trade into the East Indies, which they have since ful∣y performed, to the great incouragement of such as shall fol∣ow them. CHAP. CCXVI. Of Norway and the Cities thereof. NORWAY is bounded on the North with Lappia, Norway, and the cities thereof. on the East with the Dofrie mountaines, on the other parts with the seas. The chiefe commodities of this Countrey is Stock∣fish, Nidrosia. rich furres, traine Oile, pitch, and takling for ships, as masts, caples, deal-boards, firre, and the like. Townes are here thinne, and the houses therein poore and mi∣serable. Bergen, one of the 4 ancien Marts of Eu∣rope. The chiefe of those that are, is Nidrosia, the Arch-bishops seat of Norway, Iseland, and Groinland: The second is Bergen, one of the foure ancient Mart townes of Europe; the other three being London in England, Nomgrade in Moscovia, and Bridges in Flanders; and all of these but London are decayed, for this Bergen hath yeelded to Wardhouse; Nouegrade, by reason of the charge of navigation through the Balticke into the Northerne passage, hath given way to Saint Nicholas, and Bridges being deprived of her trafficke by Antwerpe, it is now also removed to Amsterdam, for the Hollanders by blocking up the haven, but especially by keeping of Bergen up Zome, have such a command over the river, that no vessel can passe or repasse without their licence. But to proceed: Finmarch also appertaineth Finmarke. to this kingdome, and both to the Dane: the chiefe Cities are Saman, secondly Hielso, both Sea-townes, but the principall is Wardhouse, Wardhouse. seated in the very Northerne end of all the countrey, being a town of little trade, but great concourse of shipping, that this way are bound for Moscovia, which must needs touch here, and it is so cal∣led, as seated in a little Iland called Ward. In Bergen in Norway the common waight is a pound, the 100 li. of Weight in Bergen.
London hathbeene found to make there 92 li. but weighing with a sling, as they doe, is found to be very uncertaine. The measure is The particulars of the trade of this Countrey, here necessarily to be handled, I am inforced to omit, by reason of my ignorance, therefore intreat the better experienced to supply my defect therein. CHAP. CCXVII. Of Swethland, and the Cities of trade thereof. SWETHLAND is bounded on the East with Moscovia, on the West with the Dosrine hills, on Swethland and the cities thereof. the North with the frozen Seas, and on the South with the Balticke seas. The Commodities that this Countrey affordeth for merchandise is Lead, copper, silver, drawne out of Commodities of Sweden. their mines, and it aboundeth also with hides of Buckes, Goats and Ox∣en, tallow, Tarre, Malt, Barley, rich furres, and the like. It containeth five Provinces, Lappia, Bodia, Finland, Gothland and Sweden; of all which a word. In Lappia I finde not any City of note, being cold and com∣fortlesse. Lappia. In Bodia is the towne of Virei and Helsinga. In Finland are many strong townes populous and rich, Albo and Bodia. Finland. Narve, both of great strength; also those two strong Cities of Ve∣burg and Ruiallia, which cost the Sweden 100000 crownes yearely the keeping, by nature defending his owne, and offending his Ene∣mies Teritories. In Gothland stands the chiefe City of this kingdome, Stockholme, Gothland. seated in the waters, after the manner of Venice, and the residence of the Sweden King, next Lodusi a towne of great trafficke, then Waldburge and Colmar, two impregnable Cities. In Sweden are the chiefe Cities of Vpsall a Bishopricke, second Sweden. Nicopea, a sea town of good strength; third Copperdole, most famous for its abundance of brasse, which is here in such plenty, that there are found 400 brasse pieces in the castle of Stockholme; under which I will comprehend the trade of Sweden.
CHAP. CCXVIII. Of Stockholme and the trade thereof. BEcause I intend upon the generall trade of Eastland to handle some particular Cities belonging to the Stockholme, and the trade thereof. crowne of Sweden therefore I shall be the briefer up∣on the trade of this City of Stockholme the Metropolis of this kingdome. Stockholme then being the resi∣dence of this King, whose armes of late were so pre∣valent in Germany is accounted famous in those Northerne regions for the great concourse of Merchants and traffique here daily practi∣sed, seated in watry marishes, after the manner of Venetia, and sup∣posed to be built upon piles, and therefore beares in their language some construction thereof, which not unproperly may beare in our ancient English the same sense: It is situated in part upon the lake of Meller, and in part on the East sea, out of which the great trade of shipping to this place doth come and enter by a deepe and nar∣row channell, spacious and commodious for ships of the greatest burthen; but the fort of Waxholme on the one side of the passage, and the fort of Digne so fitly seated opposite to the same in the nar∣rowest of the gut and straight, command the whole channell, and guard the lake and City, and no Vessell is suffered either to goe in or out, but here have their conge and admission: It is besides fortified with a strong castle, wherein is found for the defence thereof foure hundred pieces of brasse Artillery; and for the beauty therof, it is adorned with many goodly private and publike buldings, the Kings palace being more renowned for the anti∣quity, than stately structure thereof. The Commodities for transportation found in this City are Commodities of Stockholme. principally Iron, Steele, Copper, Wyer, all sorts of graines, Lead and other Mineralls, Honey, Waxe, Tallowe, Hides, and the like: which is hence dispersed into all parts of these Northerne Climats. The Moneyes in use generally currant throughout the Kingdome Monies cur∣rant in Sweth∣land. of Sweden, is the Doller, which is divided into markes, and eight markes makes a doller, and this marke is divided into clipping, so that two clippings make a marke, and a clipping is accounted for 9½ stivers Flemish, and by this doller they exchange with other neighbouring Countreyes, and it is valued in sterling mo∣ney at ()
The weight in use or this place is the pound, and the 100 pound Weights of Stockholme. of London hath produced here 116 li. they have here also two ship∣ponds, the one the proper shippond of this place, which is 320li. of the said weight, and the other shippond is 340 li. the proper shippond of Dansicke of 34 stones, as there in the chapter of Dansicke appeares, and this quintar or pound is found to agree with Narva Riga, Revell, Dansicke, and some townes of trade in the Balticke sea. The common measure of length here used is the Ell, and is the Measure of Stockholme. same in all Sweden, except some principall townes of this tract here∣after noted, and the 100 yards of London doth produce 166 ells & , but note that in Barrow in Sweden this ell is found to be very uncer∣taine, for the bignes of a mans head is measured about with a rope, and this they account for an ell, so that here a great head may bee some benefit to a Merchant, for by this rule the greatest loggerhead shall have consequently the largest measure. Corne is here sold by a measure, called a Loop, 23 loops doth make a Of Corne. Last in Amsterdam, or 10 quarters in London.
CHAP. CCXIX. Of Moscovia and the Provinces thereof. MOSCOVIA is bounded on the East with Moscovia and the Cities ther∣of. Tartaria, on the West with Livonia, Lituania, and part of Sweden; on the North with the fr Ocean, and on the South with the Caspian sea the Turkes, and Palus Meotis. This countrey affoordeth for Merchandise Commodities of Moscovia. Furres of many sorts, Flax, Hempe, Whales grease, Honey, Wax, Canvas, Ropes, Cables, Caviare, A∣stracan bides, Tallow, raw bides, and Bgars. The many rivers that are found to bee in this Countrey, doth Famous Rivers of Moscovia. much further trading in generall; First, Tanais, which disburdeneth it selfe into Palus Meotis; secondly, Duino, which entreth into the Scythian seas at the Abbey of S. , where our English since the discoverie of the Northerne passage, use to land and disperse themselves into all parts of this vaste Empire. Thirdly, Boristenes that entreth into Pontus Euxinus. Fourthly, Onega, which openeth it selfe into the Baltique sea. And lastly, Volga, which with no lesse than 70 mouthes disgorgeth it selfe into the Caspian. This Empire is divided into 9 principall Provinces, which toge∣ther with the chiefe townes thereof, I shall onely touch. Novogradia is the first, the chiefe Towne being Novegrade, seated on the Dunia, and once one of the foure ancient Mart-townes of Novograde. 1. Europe, now of late decaied since the discovery of the new passage unto the towne of S. Nicholas by the river of Obye. Plescovia is the second, wherein is the Citie Plescoue, the onely Plescovia. 2. walled Citie in Moscovia, and yet of no great eminence. Valadomira is the next, having also a towne of that name. Valadomira. 3. Rhesan is the fourth, wonderfull plentifull in Corne, that neither Rhesan. 4. can birds fly, nor horses run through it for thicknesse, the chiefe towne Rhesan was the Metropolis of Russia, it is the first part of Mos∣covia, abounding in Graine, Hy, Fish, and Fowle without number. Servia is the fifth, the chiefe townes are Staradub and Pativola. Permia is the sixth, the chiefe Citie is Sickiardley, abounding in Servia. 5. Permia. 6. Stagges. Candora is the seventh. Candora. Petrosa is the eighth: in both these countries the inhabitants doe Petrosa. live under ground, and have for halfe the yeare together perpetuall
day, and the other halfe yeare perpetuall night, as situated beyond the Artique. Moscovia is the ninth, and so named of the principall Citie of Moscovia. Mosco, being about five miles round, having therein 16 Churches, of which the one halfe are made of wood and durt, as most of the houses are: the Emperours palace standeth in the middest, and Mosco. fortified with three Bulwarkes and 17 turrets, and continually guar∣ded with 25000 Souldiers. This is the most populous province of all this great Empire: for it extendeth 2000 miles in length. Besides these, there are yet some petty provinces wherein are Smalensko. found the townes of Smalensko, then Toropiers, next Coloprigod, Landiskron, and some others of lesser note, which I willingly omit, till my information be better. The trade of the English was here begun in the time of Queene Elizabeth of England, and Basiliades King in this Countrey, about the yeare 1575, and within ten yeares after it was perfectly setled; and because the trade of Moscovia is confined to a small circuit in these vaste dominions, it will not bee improper that I comprehend the same under the title of the Metropolis of this kingdome Mosco. CHAP. CCXX. Of Mosco and the trade thereof. MOSCO is the Metropolis of all this Mosco and the trade thereof. large kingdome, to the which the Em∣perour some yeares past repaired, as most fit for the government of so large an Empire, accounted the midst of all his dominions. It is pleasantly seated on the river Mosca, running into Tanais, where it loseth its name, and passing Assow, disgorgeth it selfe into the Palus Meotis, & so to the Euxine. About fiftie yeares past, it was esteemed ten miles in circuit, and in its height of greatnesse then burned by the Tartars, wherein 80000 persons were consumed, and since reduced to five miles compasse, beauti∣fied with 16 Churches, some of stones, some of timber and earth, and with the Palace of the great Duke situated in the very heart thereof, enriched with the branches of two rivers for use and ornament, which water two strong forts that defend the place. At the Abby of S. Nicholas the Patron of this country upon the river of S. Nicholas.
Dunia, or Obby, the English Merchants use to land, and thence dis∣perse themselves to Smalensko, Novo groad, hither and into all the o∣ther parts of this vast Empire, amongst whom they finde kinde en∣tertainment, and by the favour of the Prince, have larger immu∣nities granted unto them than to anyother nation, their traffiquing attributed to the never dying fame of Queene Elizabeth in whose dayes the trade was here first setled; and to the plausible behaviour of the English Merchants ingenerall. The Merchants here are observed to keepe their accounts in seve∣rall Accounts in Moscovia. manner; some, as the English, by Rubbles and pence, or as the in∣habitants terme them, Muskofkins, 200 whereof making a Rubble, which is accounted 2 Rix Dollers. Some againe, as the Dutch, and other nations, by Rubbles, Grevens, and Moskofkins or pence, accoun∣ting 20 pence to a greven, and ten grevens to a Rubble, which is most in use here, this Rubble being found an imaginary coyne, & not reall. The currant monies here is a Capecke, in value a stiver Flemish, and Cones currant in Moscovia. somewhat more than an English peny: for ten Capeckes is a grevene, which the English call 12 pence sterlin, because that ten grevens is a Rubble, which is 10 shillings sterlin. Three Capeckes they call an Al∣tine, by which name all receipts and payments are made in bargai∣ning and contracts, 33 Altines and one Capecke making a Rubble. At Archangel is found practised amongst the Merchants an Ex∣change Exchange at Archangell. for Monies, rising and falling, according as the Russe Monies are observed to be plentifull or scarce: the English sometimes a∣mong themselves giving 11 shillings, and 11 shillings 6 pence sterlin in England for the Rubble here; and the monies commonly taken there in August, to be paid in London the last of December following. The weight of Moscovia common in use is the Pood for fine goods, Waight of Mescovia. and the Bercovet for grosse goods, the one being derived from the other. By the Pood is weighed Silke Bever-wooll, Yefts, &c. and is accoun∣ted for 40 pound Russe weight: and three pood hath been observed to make 112 pound English, which by this computation should make 37⅓, pound haberdupois, and all goods there bought by the pood is 10 per cent. losse in England. By the Bercovet is weighed Tallow, Hempe, Cable-yarne, Coile, or Lard-ropes, and all grosse commodities, and is a Russe Ship-pound: 10 poods makes a Bercovet, which makes 360 pounds sutle haberdu∣pois, so that all goods being bought there by the Bercovet or Ship-pound is held 10 per cent. profit: for commonly the English Mer∣chants reckon the over-weight to pay the fraight of the same goods so bought.
The measure in length here generally used, is called an Archine, Measures in Moscovia. being a Brabant ell and ½ a nayle, or something more than of an English yard, reckoned by the English Merchants there resident two per cent. more, and may be in circa 28 inches, so that the 100 Archines may produce in London 77 in 78 yards, and the 100 yards bee here 128 Archine, or thereabout. The native commodities of this countrey in generall I have alrea∣dy Commodities of Moscovia. nominated, it will not be amisse I should more particularly view them and the ordinarie rates they carry in price, together with the particular markes whereby their goodnesse and qualitie is discer∣ned. Their most precious commodities and merchandise hence expor∣ted by forraignenations, are their rich Furres, the principall is the Sables, bought commonly by the Tymber, which containes 40 skins, Sables. which must be large and well coloured, and are found of all prices, as in goodnesse, from 15 to 20 Robbles the Tymber. Black Fox skins is knowne amongst all Northerne Merchants for the richest Furre in the world, and is here found in great store, bea∣ring Black Fox. price as in largenesse and growth from 5 to 200 Robbles peece. Otter skins are here found plenty, by reason of the many rivers of Otters. this countrey, accounted the region of springs and streames, sold by the Tymber of 40 skins, from 5 Robbles to 40 Robbles the Tymber. Minikins are also sold by the Tymber of 40 skins, and commonly sold about 6 Robbles the Timber. Minikins. Martins are also sold by the tymber of 40 skins about 15 Robbles the Martins. tymber, rising as found in richnesse of haire. Ermins sold also by the Tymber of 40 skins, about 2 Robbles per Ermins. tymber. Grawerte or Squirrels sold by the thousand, as in goodnesse from 14 Robbles to 30 Robbles the thousand. Squirels. Red Foxes by the 10 skins, at 12 to 15 Nobbles the 10 skins. Foxes red and white and dun. White Foxes by the piece about 5 Altins the piece. Dun Foxes by the piece, about 40 Altins the piece, Sable rands sold by the paire, from 2 to 6 Robbles the paire. Bever wooll is a Staple commoditie also of this kingdome, and sold by the pound about 2 Robbles per pound. Bever. Bever Wombes also by the pound, being a thin skin & well grown, is commonly worth 1½ Robble per pound. These are the ordinary Furres which their Northerne clymate affoords for Merchandise, the next found here are these. Yellow Wax is here found made by the industry of the Bee and hands of man in great aboundance, sold by the pood, which is 40 Bee Wax. pound here, the hardest and best coloured beares price here com∣monly about 4 in 5 Robbles the pood.
Tallow is sold by the Berquet, which is 10 poode, being clean white Tallow. and hard about 7 in 8 Robles the berquet. Tarre is sold by the Hogshead, being thicke as the best is common∣ly Tarre. worth () per Hogshead of () gallons English. Trayne oyle is sold by the Barrel, which is halfe a hogshead, and discer∣ned Traine. by its clearnesse without grounds, and of a whitish colour a∣bout 4 robble per Barrel of gallons English. Hempe is sold by the berquet of 10 poods being cleane and greene Hempe. beares price commonly from 3 to 5 Robles the 10 pood. Flax is sold by the Bercovet the bright silver colour is held the best, Flax. commonly about 7 robbles the Bercovet. Cable yarne is sold by the Bercovet, and being well spun, round and Cable yarne. not too much twisted from 67½ robble the Bercovet. Coyles or Tard ropes by the Bercovet about 7 robbles the Bercovet: Coiles. where note, that the English and other nations hither trading, buy here great quantity of Hempe, and spin it out there into yarn, to save the charges of fraight: every 1000 pood doth cost about 100 or 110 robbles charges; and if the hempe prove good, there is found neere losse, if bad, so much more, and worth, being in Cable yarne, as I said above from 6 to 7 robbles the Bercovet. Dryed Cow-hides being large and weightie, are sold by the hun∣dred Cowe hides. hide, worth from 40 to 44 robbles the hundred. Red Evits by the paire at 2½ rubbles per paire, and sometimes sold Evyts. by the pood, at 40 robbles per pood: and note that the white are com∣monly worst esteemed b  in price. Losh hides are sold by the piece, the largest and not worm-eaten Losh hids. is the best, from 6 grevens to 5 rubbles the piece, as in goodnesse. Duckes feathers sold by the pood, as in goodnesse from 3 to 5 rubble, Feathers. the pood. Caviare is also a principall commoditie here sold by the pood, and Caviar. commonly worth 40 Altines the pood. Course Linnen is made here in great quantitie sold by the 1000 Ar∣chine Linnens. of ½ yard, and ¼ the broad from 15 to 20 robbles the 1000 Ar∣chine, as it is found in finenesse. Some other commodities this coun∣trey affoordeth which I omit, as of no great consequence. CHAP. CCXXI. Of the trade in generall of Moscovia. THE excellent commoditie of the great Rivers Of the trade in generall of Moscovia. that in all places of this large Empire are found to water and enrich this Countrey, should much in∣cite this nation to the trade of Merchandise; but it is often found, that where nature is most liberall in her furtherances, the inhabitants prove most backward in their endevours; the naturall coldnesse of the clymate
inclosing the people into their warme stoves, and the neighbour∣hood of the Tartars (who in some respects resembling dogges, nei∣ther suffering the Moscovians to traffique, nor yet traffique them∣selves) by their continuall harrying of the countrey, and the of∣ten incursions and warres of the Swedens, may in some sort serve them for a reasonable excuse; yet it is found that these warres prove main helps somtimes to their traffick, especially in Furres, for their bodies thereby inured to cold and hardnesse, make the pastime of hunting a profitable exercise in the worst season of the yeare, the rest of their Merchandise come to them very neere in the same kinde: for it wholly dependeth upon Manufactories and labour for their cordage, linnens and yarne they have from the earth, as their hides, tallow, and wax upon the same: their Caviare and Traine oyle, and some other such by Fishing, so that it may be supposed they are more addicted to husbandry and fishing, than to merchandising. The English about the yeare of 1575 first discovered the trade, and found here good entertainment, and great priviledges from the then raigning Prince, and the first discoverers were in London in∣corporated into a Societie of Merchants by the name of the Moscovia Companie, by grant of Queene Elizabeth; which companie hath since been subject to some alterations and contingencies in their trade, by reason of certaine crosse accidents happening therein; but be∣ing in England ordered by the advice of a Governour, Deputie; and certaine selected Committies, and in Moscovia by an Agent, who regu∣late Mr. Henry Ga∣raway Alder∣man being at present Go∣vernour. the same, by whose wisedome they have of late so prudently setled their trade in general, and reformed their passed errours, that it is now seene to flourish, and in likelihood to increase daily to the particular benefite of that company, and the good both of this and that Kingdome in generall. CHAP. CCXXII. Of Polonia, and the Provinces thereof. POland is limitted on the East with Boristhenes, Poland and the Cities thereof. which parteth it from Moscovia, on the West with Vistula, which parteth it from Germany, on the North with the Baltique sea and Sinus Fri∣nicus, on the South with Hungary. The chiefe merchandise which this country Commodities of Poland. affordeth for transportation, is Barley, Oates, Amber, Waxe, Hony, Hemp, Pitch Tarre, Rosin, and some cordage, and other commodities.
The chiefe rivers, is first Vistula, navigable 400. miles, and endeth Rivers of Po∣land. in the Baltique sea, Niger, Ruben, Bog, Mimel, and others. The Pro∣vinces are counted to be 11. and the principall Townes therein are as followeth. Luconia is the first, in length 500 miles, in bredth 160 miles, where are Riga an Archbishopricke, 2 Derpt, a towne of great commerce, Rui∣alia Luconia. and Narve, two strong townes. Lituania is the second, abounding in beasts, which yeeld the inha∣bitants Lituania. furs for commodities, the chiefe cities are Vilna, second Vil∣comire and Brestia. Volinia is the third, wherein is found Kiovia and Circassta. Volinia. Samogitia is the fourth, the chiefe towne is Camia. Samogitia. Podolia is the fifth, affording three harvests of one sowing, the Podolia. chiefe city is Camiensa, held invincible, seated on high rocks, Orka∣cow, Wincecsa, and others. Russia Nigra is the sixth wherein is found, Leinburge, Grodeck, &c. Russia. Prussia or Spruce, wherein is upon the Sea-coast Amber found, the Prussia. chiefe cities are Dansicke a famous Mart, especially for all sorts of graine, 1000 measures, whereof being here daily sold, 2 Regiomount, or Conisberge, a famous Vniversity. 3 Heilsperge, 4 Manberge, 5 An∣genberge, 6 Cule, and others. Podlasia is the 8 wherein is Ticocksin, the place where the Kings Podlasia. treasure is reserved, Biesco, Kisen, and others. Masovia is the 9, the prime city being Marckesowe. Masovia. Poland is the 10 wherein is the Metropolis of Polonia which is Cra∣covia, seated pleasantly on the river Vistula, here is also the cities of Poland. Lublin, Guisua, Siradia and others, and of the principall of these, or others seated in this Tract, as followeth. CHAP. CCXXII. Of Cracovia, and the trade thereof. CRacovia is the chiefe and Metropolis of all the King∣dome Cracovia, and the trade there∣of. of Poland where the King and his Councell have their continuall residence; it is seated in a plaine, having mountaines on all sides, but somewhat di∣stant, it is compassed with two strong walls of stone, and a dry ditch, the building is very faire, of free∣stone 4 stories high, but covered with tiles of wood or shingles, it is of round forme, in the midst whereof stands a large quadrangular marquet place, wherein is seated the Cathedrall Church, and the Se∣nate house for the city, about which are many shops for Merchants, up∣on the East side of the city, is the Kings castle, faire and well built on
a hill, lying open on the South side, without any building above the wall, on the East side are the King and Queens lodgings, on the North side lodgings for feasting, on the West a Chappel where the Kings are in∣terred: it hath not receiv'd any great fame for merchndising, many Scotch-men have attained to some estate here by trading, but it may more properly be called pedlerising than merchandising, for they have a moveable Magasin which they transport by horse, from towne to towne wherein their commodities are inclosed; and not a few such are found to have begun this traffique at first by their backes, and af∣terwards by horses, their coynes currant with their weights and mea∣sures I will here insert. It is not above 300 yeeres since the Polonians used silver coynes stamped; for before that time, they did traffique with little pieces Coynes cur∣rant in Polo∣nia. of uncoyned silver, and by the exchange of skins, and other such com∣modities, but at this day they make all contracts by silver guildens, but have no such reall coyne amongst them, the coynes currant are these: A Gold Ducket, knowne by the name of Polander is of the same valew which the Hungarian Ducket, and worth 70 polish grosse, a silver Guil∣den or Florin is worth 30 polish groshe, which is 2 shillings starling, a doller in specie is worth 40 polish groshe; but in all contracts for buying and selling, the doller is accounted 36 groshe: a Creitzer is worth 3 pot∣chanels, 18 deniers make 1 grosh:  grosh of Poland or Bohemia, is worth 7 potchanels: 16 whites make one Ort, 4 Orts make a doller, valewed in starling mony foure shillings foure pence. The common weight of Cracovia is the pound, 136l^' whereof i Weights of Cracovia. here accompted a Quintar, which makes in London, 114l^' circa, and the 100l^' of London, hath yeelded here about 120l^' but the com∣mon pound is reduced to a stone of 40l^' to a stone, and to a shippond, which is ten of the said stones. The common measure of length is—an ell which is  an English Measures of Cracovia. ell, but they sell their linnen by shockes which produceth 57½ ells Eng∣lish the shocke. CHAP. CCXXIV. Of Dantzke, and the trade thereof. DAntzke is a very faire City, standing at the foot of a great mountaine that hangs over it, the famous river Vistula Dantzke, and the trade thereof. passing by it on the East side, and running towards the North, falls into the Baltique sea, a little Brooke enters the City on the South side, and runs through it toward the North, affording many commodities to the City: as first a faire water Conduit,
where by a Mill the waters are drawne into a Cesterne, and thence by pipes serving every private citizens house, then a Corne mill for the Senate (besides their private mils) which affords them in every houre a golden guilden throughout the yeere to their publike treasu∣ry, and besides many other mills; it hath one for sawing of boords and timber, having an iron wheele, which not onely driveth the aw, but hooketh in, and turneth the boords to the saw without the helpe of hands; the corne Garners of this towne are also faire, re∣markeable and many in number, wherein the citizens do lay up the orne comming out of Poland, and according to the wants of Europe, arry it into many Kingdomes, and many times relieve fruitfull Provinces in time of casuall dearth, into which Garners under a great penalty no man may carry either fire or candle lighted, by a Law enacted amongst them. The city is compassed with one wall, yet containes three severall cities, governed by three distinct Senates, out of which one chiefe nate is chosen to governe the whole City, and according to the Romane superstition they have St. George for their Protector, whose ed crosse they carry, in their flags, as doth also England, Genoa in Ita∣, and the Island, Scio, in the arches; the City is seated about one glish mile from the Baltique shoare, the port being called Dermind, here the ships of burthen doe ride to lade and unlade their com∣odities; and the City being acknowledged, a free towne is found  coyne monies, which as I finde observed, I shall note here, toge∣her with the weights and measures here in use. Their accompts are kept here in sundry manners; the common eing by polish Guilders of 30 grosse and 12 pence to a groshe. Accounts kept in Dansicke. But Merchants buy commodities here by the great Marke of 60 grosse, nd by the lesser of 15 grosse, and also by the doller of 35 grosse, of  stivers the grosse. Their monies currant being thus accompted: One great marke Coines cur∣rant in Dan∣sicke.  two polish Guilders; one polish guilder, is worth two lesser arkes; one lesser marke worth 15 grosse, and the grosse 18 pence, esides which, they coine Hungarian duckets of gold, as they doe  Poland, and they have two coynes in gold called a milres, and halfe  milres; and each milres is three dollers and two sesint, 36 polish grosse aking here a doller. The weight of Dansicke in use is the pound for fine goods, the 100l^' Weihts of Dantzke.  London making here 116l^'. Besides which, they have a skippond and pond thus distinguished; 16 marke pound is one lispond, and 20 pond makes one skippond by the small stone of 24l^' for spices &c. But they have also a great stone to weigh grosse wares, as Flaxe, xe, and the like of 34l^' whereof 10l^' to the skippond of 340l^'.
The measure for length of this City, is the ell, the 100 ells where∣of Measures of Dansicke. makes in London about 49 ells, and the 100 yards of London doth here render 162 or 163 ells incirca. The measure of Beere in Dansicke is the fatt which containes 180 stoopes which is accompted 81 stoopes of Antwerp. The measure of corne here, is the Last which containes 61 shepells, 56 whereof makes a Last in Amsterdam, or 10¼ quarternes English Lon∣don, 4 sheppells make one mudd, which is the shippond before mentio∣ned of 34l^'. Merchants for the most part throughout all Eastland are found to Accompts in Eastland. keepe their accompts in Florins, or Guilderns and in groshes and deniers, accompting 12 deniers to the groshe, and 20 groshe to the Guilderne or Florine. CHAP. CCXXVI. Of Elbin, and the trade thereof. ELbin is but a small, yet a faire City, and of late daies i compassed with walls, growne great and large by the trade and residence of the English merchants, which Elbin, and the trade thereof. since, upon some grievance and discontentment are hence removed: in this City lies the grosse of the trade of Prussen, especially for all the gruffe goods of that Dukedome; it once appertained to the Tentonique knights, but now to the Kings of Poland, and who for the present, the citizens acknowledge for their Protector, and otherwise it yeelds him but little obedience, be∣ing of it selfe a free City: from this City towards the North-east, is a channell that runneth up to Coninxburghe, the seat of the Dukes of Prusland, by which all commodities are transported and conveyed from the one to the other. The coines currant, and the manner of their accompts here kept, I have touched before, and the weight in use in this place, is the Weights of Elbin. pound 40 whereof makes the stone, and 10 stone of 40l^' makes the ship∣pond, which is 400l^', which is 350l^' of their great weight, and the 100l^' of London hath beene found to make here 120l^'. The Last of Wheate is here accompted for 5200l^' The measure of length in this place in use, is the Ell, and the 10 yards of London is found to make here 163 ells. There are also in this Measures of Elbin. Tract found for eminent cities of trade, Coninxburghe, Stettin, Starlsont, Reuel, Rhiga, of wch a word or two, and first of Coninxburgh.
CHAP. CCXXVI. Of Coninxburgh, and the trade thereof. COninxburgh, vulgarly Queensburgh, and in Italian Coninxburgh and the trade thereof. Mont Royall, is the Metropolis of this Dutchie, sea∣ted upon an In-let of the Baltique sea, and washed with the pleasant river of Piegol, it is found to have an Academie for Sciences, and well stored with Merchants from all the Northerne parts of the world; and here the Merchants of Prusen keepe their Factors for the venting of their in-land commodities: upon this shore is also found in some quantitie that excellent Amber, which the inhabi∣tants call Bernstein, which in English may bee translated the Burning stone, of which some writers make three sorts, the first comming from certaine Gummie trees, the second made by art of gold and sil∣ver, and other ingredients, and the third this sort comming natu∣rally from the bottome of these seas, which for 6 months are frozen up, and deny the sea-man and merchant the use of navigation. The Monies and Accounts here in use are mentioned before: and the common weight used amongst Merchants is the stone, containing Weights of Coninxburg. 40 pound, and 10 stone makes a Ship pound, of 400 pound, and the 100 pound Haberdupois of London, doth yeeld here about 120 pound, or 121 pound: besides which, they have also the Ship-pound of Dansicke in use for some commodities of 350 pound, but this weight is to be avoyded by the stranger, as being ever accounted too favourable to the Citizens. The common measure of length is the Ell here for all Commodi∣ties Measures of Coninxburg. measurable: the 100 yards of London hath made here by obser∣vation 166  in circa. And thus much shall suffice to have sayd of this Citie; from whence proceeding, I come next to Rhiga and Re∣vel two eminent Cities also in this tract.
CHAP. CCXXVII. Of Rhiga and the trade thereof. RHIGA is the principall Citie of Livonia, or Liffland, Rhiga and the trade thereof. seated neere the Emboseure of the river Dunia, strengthened with an exceeding strong wall, many Ordnance to defend it against all enemies, and bor∣dering upon the Liffeland sea: it was formerly the chiefe residence of the Tentonick Knights, and then and now rein∣forced by the Garison of Dunmund, accounted one of the impregna∣ble fortes of this Northerne clymate, where all shippes entring are searched, and pay a certaine Toll, or Dutie: the inhabitants curious for the preservation of their libertie, acknowledge the King of Po∣land for their Protector, to whom they pay a yearly contribution, but else are governed by their owne ancient lawes and priviledges which they enjoyed from the Knights their old masters, at the resig∣nation of this countrey to that King. The commodities of this Countrey for merchandising and expor∣tation, Commodities of Rhiga. is Corne, and graine of all sorts, Hempe, Flaxe, Hony, Waxe, Rosen, Tarre, Horses, and all sorts of rich Furres, as Martins, Ermins, Sables, Bevers, and the like, not wanting any necessary for nourish∣ment save Wine and Oyle, which forraine nations doe bring them. The weight in use is the pound, 20 pound whereof makes a Lispound, Weights of Rhiga. and 20 Lispound makes a Ship-pound, and 12 Ship-pound being 4000 pound, is accounted a Last of Rie both here and at Nerva, and the 100 pound of London hath been observed to make here 116 pound. The measure is the Ell agreeing with the Ell in use in Revel, Co∣ninxburgh, Measures of Rhiga. and Nerva, 100 yards London making 166½ in circa. The coines and accounts differ not much here in value from the Coines in Rhiga. others before mentioned, yet found to differ in appellation: for the Rix Doller, and the Marke Lupes is here all one, which makes two Swedens or common Markes, and one Sweden is 8 Lups shillings: one Lups is 2 shillings, one shilling is 12 pence, and one peny is two hellers.
CHAP. CCXXVIII. Of Revel and the trade thereof. REVEL is nothing inferiour for trade to Rhiga, situated on the North part of the Baltique seas, famoused in these Revell and the trade thereof. Northerne countries for the safetie and commodious∣nesse of the haven: it is well stored of Merchants that frequent the place for the traffique of the commodities thereof, no∣minated in the aforegoing Chapter. The inhabitants stand much upon their ancient priviledges granted them by their old masters Tentonique Knights, and acknowledging the King of Swethland for Protector, to whom they yeeld obedience, the keeping of which cost him 100000 Crowns yearly, as naturally defending his own, and of∣fending his neighbours teritories. This Citie in one thing hath a larger freedome than Rhiga, and is the same as in Lubeck for coyning of monies, which they doe foure square, yet are bound to stampe the same of the same worth and value as the currant coynes of Po∣land, therefore I shall not need further to insist thereupon. Their common weight is a pound, their Ship-pound is 400 pound, Weights of Revell. and the 100 pound of London makes here 116 pound. There is found some Exchanges practised in these parts by the mark Exchanges of Revell. Swedens of 16 shil. and by the mark Lups of 32 shil. &c. Their common measure of length is the Ell, agreeing with that of Measures of Revell. Coninxburgh and Rhiga, the 100 yards London making by computati∣on in circa 166½ ells here. Narva also seated in this tract, agreeth in weights and measures with Revel, therefore I shall not need to insist further thereupon. CHAP. CCXXIX. Of Stralsont and the trade thereof. STralsont lies also in this tract, and is found seated on the Baltique sea, opposite to the Iland of Raugie, Stralsont and the trade there∣of. where the late K. of Sweden first landed in his invasi∣on of the Empire: it is now subject to the Duke of Pomeran, and in whose cause it hath endured a long and straight siege; but being well and strongly for∣tified, by suffering, it over-came, and is now accounted a famous
Mart in these Northerne parts for Graine, Pitch Tarre, Rosen, Hony, Wax, Hides, Tallow, and the like. Here passeth in Merchandise the monies of Norway, Denmarke, Sweden and Germany, of all which I have spoken, and the Duke hath also a peculiar coine, which is stam∣ped in equall value to the Imperial Doller, as above is sayd. The weight of Stralsont is the pound, 10 whereof is accounted for Weight of Stralsont. a stone, and 16 for a Lispound, and the 100 pound in London hath pro∣duced here about 88 in 89 pound. The measure of length is the Ell, and is found to agree with the Measures of Stralsont. Ell of Statin, as is shewed hereafter. I must not here omit a word in memorie of the ancient Citie of Iulin, seated in this Dutchie, and which once was the principall Ci∣tie Iulin. of trade in all this sea: for here the Vandals, Saxons, Muscovites, Poloniant, Swedes, English, Danes, and Germanes had their severall quarters of residencie for Commerce; and all the commodities of these Countries were brought hither by these nations. It is noted, that the inhabitants were the last of all these Northerne people, that embraced the Christian Religion, by reason that being in the height of their prosperitie, perceiving the Gospel of Christ to thrive and increase in all their neighbouring territories, strictly prohibi∣ted, that no stranger whatsoever here resident, should embrace the same, nor that any should as much as mention any new religion unto them; but in these latter dayes their great traffique is lost, and they are become religious according to the superstition of that re∣ligion they use, and since have suffered much by the vexations of the continuall warres of the Danes, and appeares now for the most part ruined, where I wil leave it, and passe thence to the next town of Pomeran. CHAP. CCXXX. Of Stettin and the trade thereof. THis Stettin is the Capitall Citie of Pomeran, situated Stettin and the trade thereof. upon the river of Oder, in pleasant & delightsome soyle, and carrieth in these Northerne Regions that renowne, that from hence the Dukes of Stet∣tin in Pomerland have their appellation. The Citie abounds in all commodities for merchandise that the neighbouring Countries affoord; and of it selfe it yeeldeth to merchants the commodities common to Prusson, Sweden, and Polonia.
For its defence, it is strengthned on all sides with ramparts, ditches, and good artillery; the river of Oder is beautified with many use∣full and necessary bridges, the one whereof is purposely made to lead to the Granaries and store-houses, where the corne and graine, either for store or exportation, is laid up, and where their Arsenalls are seated, in which their warlike provision is kept, and where ves∣sels of all sorts both for the sea and river is seene daily to be fabrica∣ted, beside the severall Churches & Colledges that adorne this city, the Dukes Palace must be accompted as the principall ornament, built of that art and sumptuousnesse, that it gives not place to the most excellent in Italy, in fine, Statin is not to be accompted the least of the hauns-townes, and though the Prince be daily there resident, yet it proveth no way prejudiciall to the priviledges thereof. The commodities of this City are for merchandising, such as all the Commodities of Stettin. East Countrey affordeth, viz. Tarre, Pitch, Rosen, Hony, Waxe, Hides, Graine, and all kind of Furres. The weight of this City is divided into two kinds, derived from the pound weight here in use, the quintar is accompted 112l^' of this Weights of Stettin. place, and that is the first, and the second is the stone, which is also of two sorts: as a stone of 10l^' being the small stone, and a stone of 21l^' accompted the great stone, and it hath beene observed that the 10l^' of London Haberdupois hath yeelded here incirca 92l^'. The common measure in use for length is called the Ell, as the usu∣all denomination thereof in all the East parts, and the 100 yards of Measures of Stettin. London hath beene observed to produce here about 141 ells. And thus much shall serve to have said of these cities, which I have intitled under the names of Poland and Eastland, though in themselves acknowledging severall distinct Princes, having taken that liberty to my selfe in my first method, rather narrowly to ob∣serve the maritime shoares and the principall cities seated thereup∣on, though acknowledging divers Soveraignes, than precisely to fol∣low the limits and bounds of Princes dominions according to the largenesse and extent of their command and power. CHAP. CCXXXI. Of the Weights and Measures of Eastland, to that of London. NOw, for as much as there be many other eminent cities of trade which in particular I have willingly omitted to handle, therefore according to my observed order I will contract them here, and shew how the weight and measures of Lon∣don doe agree, and are found to accord together.
And first, I finde it observed, that the 100l^' of haberdupois in London, doth make in these townes following, viz. in The agree∣ment of 100l^' London to divers of Po∣land.   l' Stralsont as I said, 88 Statin 92 Revell 116 Dansicke 116 Conixburghe 120 Rhig 116 Thore and Narv 116 Cracovia 120 Elbin 120 Wild 116 And thus much shall serve for the weights in generall of Eastland, and as for the measures, take here the same observations made upon Agreement of the 100 yards London to di∣vers of Po∣land. 100 yards of London which produceth in   Els. Embde 163 Hamburg 162½ Brem 163 Lubecke 160 Munster 86½ Ossenbridges 84 Wismar 156½ Coninxburge 166 Rhiga and Revel 166 Rhostique 158 Gripswald 163 Donim 163 Stattin 141 Dansicke 163 Ocermond 141 Melluine 161 Nerva 166 arsius. CHAP. CCXXXII. Of corne measures of Eastland reduced to that of other Countries. THis Country is above all other commodities abounding in corne, which hence is transported into all parts of Europe; it will not be amisse, to see what observations have been Corne mea∣sure in East∣land. made upon the measure thereof, here in use, and concur∣rent with other places. Schepels 60 in Datzke, make a Last, and 4 makes a Mudde, which is the skippod of 340l^', as you finde it there noted. Werpes 61 makes a Last in Embden, or 15 barrels of 4 werpes. Schepels 90 make a Last in Hamburge. Schepels 96 makes a Last in Lubecke. Schepels 96 makes at Fameren a Last. Schepels 96 makes a Last in Hileger haven in Denmarke. Barrels 42 makes a Last in Coppen-haven. Barrels 36 makes a Last in Ebeltorffe donie: Quarters 10 makes a Last in London; but in lading of shi, quar∣ters five are accompted for one tun lading.
Now let us see how these respond together, and how these agree With the a∣greement ther∣of with other countries. with the Last of Corne in Amsterdam, upon which I finde these notes, and that the same maketh in Dazke 56 chepels. Embden 55 Werpe. 85 Schepels. Lubecke 85 Schepels. Fameren 78 Schepels. Hylegher 80 Schepels. Coppenhaven 23 small Barrels. Ebolltorffe 23 Barrels. Sweden 23 Barrels. Coninxburgh 6/7 of a lst, for the 6 lasts are 7 at Amsterdam. Melvin of a Last. Statin of a Last. Rhiga 42 Loopes, Rostique and Mechburgh measure of Lubecke Antwerpe 372 Vertales Brussels 10½ Muden & Diffring in all places of Brabant Middleburgh 40 Sackes 41½ to the last in Zealand. Roterdam, Delft. 87 Achtellins. Gronninghen 33 Muddes. London 10¼ quarters and 5 quarters to a Tun. CHAP. CCXXXIV. Of the trade in generall of Poland and Eastland. HAving thus surveyed the trade of this Coun∣trey Of the trade in generall of Po∣land and East∣land. in some particulars, it will not bee amisse to looke upon it in the generall. The reve∣newes both of the King and Gentlemen is here esteemed but moderate, and scarce sufficient to maintaine a plentifull table, and to ex∣change with merchants for Wines and Spices, which they yet much covet, as also they doe forraigne stuffes of Silks and Cloth: I have noted that this kingdome aboundeth with Beasts as well wilde as tame, and yeeldeth excellent horses, not great, but quicke, nimble and stirring; it aboundeth al∣so in flesh, fowle, and water-fish, and in all kinde of pulse and graine; it is found also towards the Carpatian mountaines of Hungarie to have some mines of Gold and Silver, of Iron and Brimstone, it yeeldeth also in aboundance, plentie of honey found in hollow trees, besides the husband-mans Hives: it yeeldeth moreover Wax, Flax, and Linnen clothes made thereof, Hempe, Pitch of both kindes, Masts for ships, Boards and timber, rich Furres, Salt digged out of the earth, Amber,
Sope-ashes, and Rie in aboundance, which hath made Danzke famous throughout Europe. No marvell then if Merchants bring unto them Silkes from Italy, Cloth from England, Wines from France and Spaine, and the very Spices and Drugges from India, since they not onely sell them at good prices, but also bring thence such pretious and staple com∣modities. Poland it selfe is found within land and Prussia with their immunities subject to this kingdome, is found to have the princi∣pall traders therein inhabiting, yet have they but few shippes, using strangers to export their commodities. For the rest of the Polanders they are observed to live content with their owne, and not by way of Merchandising to stir much abroad; yet are they not rich, because they want the above sayd commodities, which the proud Gentle∣men and Nobilitie of these countries buy deere, and wil have, though brought from farre unto them, and they are noted to have so little Gold and Silver, as despising all in respect of it, they sell the rich commodities of their countrey at a low rate, especially those which are for daily food, and thereby made unfit to bee exported. The people themselves are not much addicted to trafficke into remote regions, nor to travell farre out of their owne Countries, yet in imitation of other their neighbours, they sometimes trade with their rich Furres into other countries, of whom I have observed some to come to Constantinople, rather making a rangeing voyage, than comming with intent to trade and reside. Wherein they can∣not be much blamed, in regard that they have in plenty all things that naturally is wanting to mankinde, if they can bee contented therewith: but the inhabitants of Pomerland, East countrey, &c. are observed to be more ingenious, and farre more addict to traffick and commerce, and have some vessels fitter for transport and carriage than for warfare, but yet most proper for their grosse commodi∣ties and large stowage, however their winter colds depriving them of almost halfe the yeares trafficke: the other halfe wherein their seas are navigable, cannot make them any competent amends and their Merchandise being altogether grosse, cannot give them therfore the attribute of Eminent Merchants. CHAP. CCXXXIIII. Of Hungarie and the principall Cities thereof. HVngarie is bounded on the East with Transilvania and Valachia, on the West with Austria, on the North Hungarie and the Cities thereof. with Poland, on the South with Sclavonia, &c. This kingdome now stands divided betweene the Grand Signiour and the Hungarians: the great Turke enjoyes Buda, seated on Danubius, once the Metropolis of this king∣dome Buda.
and Court of the Kings, also Guilia Pest, Alba Regalis, called by them Wisenberge, next quinque Ecclesiae, Rab, and some others of les∣ser note. In the Hungarians possessions are these principall Cities, Pres∣berge Presberg. the present Metropolis of this Countrey; second Strigonium, 3 Agraria, 4 Comara in an Iland of that name, 5 Tertax, 6 Canista, 7 Zegith, before which Soliman the great Turk ended his dayes, and some others of lesser consequence. This Countrey doth much abound in cattle sufficient to feed all Germany, the store is so great, that they yearly sell to their neigh∣bours Commodities of Hungarie. 80 or 100 thousand Oxen, they have also some Copper, and Tin, some quantitie of Corn, Hony, wax, and such like commodities, and from hence to Constantinople I have seene Hides, Butter & Cheese, that in great aboundance have come out of these parts through the Black sea. Further matter of trade hath not remarkeably fallen into my hands, therefore for the currant coines of this Countrey, with their weight and measures in use, I must referre to the better experi∣enced, and hence travell to Dacia and the rest of those provinces comprehended within that circuit. CHAP. CCXXXV. Of Dacia and the Provinces and Cities thereof. DAcia is bounded on the East with the Euxine, on the West with Hungary, on the North with the Carpa∣thian Dacia and the cities therof. mountaines, on the South with Heus dividing it from Greece. The rivers that inrich this Countrey are Danu∣bius, 2 Aluta, 3 Salvata, 4 Cockle, 5 Morus, and some others. The commodities that this countrey affoordeth for merchan∣dise, is Butter, Cheese, Hony, Wax, Hides, Oxen, Tallow, and warlicke Commodities of Dacia. horses of great worth. The provinces are these, and are all under the command of the Grand Signiour. Transilvania the chiefe townes thereof are, 1 Wisenberg, 2 Clan∣senberg, 3 Bristitia, 4 Fogares, and others, and now in possession of Transilvania. 1. Bethlem Gabor the Vaviode thereof. Moldavia is the next, the chiefe Cities are Saccania, the second is Falsing, 3 Kilim, 4 Chermon, &c. under a Vaviod who is tributary to Moldavia. 2. the great Turke. Valachia is the third province, the principall townes whereof are 1 Salnium, 2 Praclaba 3 Tergvista, the Vaviods seat, who is tributary Walachia. 3. to the Turke. This countrey abounds in mines of Gold, Silver, Iron,
Salt-pits, Wines Cattle, and Brimstone, and esteemed the richest of these provinces. Servia is the fourth, and hath these Cities. 1 Stoneburg the seate of Servia 4. the Despot, tributary to the Turke, 2 Somandria, 3 Belgrade a famous towne, which cost the great Turkes much blood and money the get∣ting, and was accounted before as the Bulwarke of Christendome on this side. Rasia is the fifth, the chiefe Citie is Bodin, a famous Mart. Rsia. Bulgaria is the next, wherein is found Sophia, the seat of the Beg∣lerbeg of Greece, who hath under him 21 Sansakes. Next is Nicopolis, Bulgaria. and some others of lesser note. Bosna is the last province, wherein is Casachium and siga, the resi∣dence Bosna. of their former Despots. All which affoord not further matter of trade: for where the great Turke once commandeth, traffique is accounted very rare, and is seldome found of import, and being ig∣norant in that little there is, I am constrained to omit it. CHAP. CCXXXVI. Of Sclavonia, and the Provinces and Cities thereof. SClavonia hath on the East, the River of Drinut, Sclavonia. and a line drawne from thence to the Sa, on the West a part of Italy: on the North, Hunga∣ry; and on the South, the Adriatique sea. The commodities that this country doth af∣ford Commodities. for merchandise, are Horses for service, Cat∣tell, Oxen, Hides, Tallow, Butter and Cheese, and hath some Mines of Silver and Gold now in the great Turkes possession. The Provinces and Cities of note in Sclavonia are these. Illyria, now by the Turkes called Windismarque hath in it Zatha seated upon Danubius, 2 Zackaocs, 3 Windisgreets and others. Illyria. Dalmatia is the second Province, the chiefe City is Ragusa scitu∣ated on the Adriatique Sea, formerly a towne of great traffique Dalmatia. and riches, and now tributary to the Turke; next is Scium 3 Zara, both seated on the Sea shoare, and subject to the Venetions: 4 Spal∣latta, a Sea-towne, from whence to Venice, that State keepeth many Gallies for transportation of Merchants goods, and by reason of an unreasonable fraight by them taken, they stand to the hazards and adventures thereof, which they did to their cost in Anno 1619, my selfe being in Naples when as the Duke d'ossuna then Vice-king, tooke two of these their gally grosses laden with a rich booty as was re∣ported
to the import of 300000 Cro. which the state of Venice were enforced to make good principally to Merchants Turks of Con∣stantinople, to whom the greatest part thereof did at that time ap∣pertaine, and who are found at this day to be the greatest traders this way. The next towne is Scodra, famous for the resistance it made against the Turkes, and last, Lissa, famous here for the sepul∣chre of Scanderbeg, whose bones were digged up, and worne by the Turkes at the taking of this City, as conceiving them to be of excel∣lent vertue to make them partake of his good fortunes: This Pro∣vince being now divided betweene the Venetians and the Turke. Croatia is the next, the chiefe townes are Gardisca, seated on the Croatia. river Savut, 2 Brumon, 3 Novegrade, 4 Sisgith, and lasty Petro∣via; this country is now subject in part to the Venetians, and in part to the Austrians, of the trade of the most principall of this in briefe, and first of Rhagusa and Spallatta. CHAP. CCXXXVII. Of Rhagusa and Spallatta, and the trade thereof. THe trade of Sclavonia is at this day but of small accompt, and little to our Nation: the two cities of Spallotta and Rhagusa seated therein, merit the principall consi∣deration. Rhagusa then, formerly called Epidaurus, being scituated on the Rhagusa, and the trade thereof. Adriatique sea a common-wealth of great traffique and riches, was in times past of farre greater fame and name, both in trade and naviga∣tion than now it is: for from hence was the originall of those great ships here built, and in old time famous, as then vulgarly called Ar∣goses, properly Rhaguses. Rhaguses, the last which they were noted to have, they lent Philip the second King of Spaine, in 1588 to invade Eng∣land and had her buriall in our Brittish seas, and may all others so thrive, that envie the prosperity of England, since which, I heare not of any they have of any consequence. They now pay 12000 Duckets yeerely to the Turke for a tribute of that trade and liberty they now injoy, which notwithstanding is of no great consequence. The countrey affords not any commoditie of moment for our Na∣tion, and wee onely send thither some blew Hampshire Kersies, some Lead, Tynne, and little else. The Monies thereof are such as passe current through the state of Monies cur∣rant in Rha∣gusa.
Venice, and Turkie their neighbours, and their owne being in cor∣respondence therewith, and ampted by grosses. Grosses 6 is a Liver Grosses 62 is a Venice Chicquin Grosses 59 is a Hungar Grosses 40 is a Naples Ducket Grosses 38 is a Riall▪ Grosses 59 is also a Sultanie, ac∣compted in England for 8 star. Grosses 1 is 2 Gassets   A Gasses is 2 Saldes   The Weight is a pound of () ℥ and 100l^' is the quintall. Weights of Rhagusa. The 100l^' is English 80l^' 1l^' Rhagusa is 9℥ gros. Ven. and is Venice sutle 120l^' 1l^' Rhagus. is 14℥ sac. 2  sutle. and is Venice grosse 76l^'   The Measure is the Brace, which agreeth with the Brace of Venice: thus the 100 cloth Braces is in Ragusa 124, and of silke 116 Brac. and Measure of Rhagusa. is in England () inches. Note that the weights and measures of Spallata doe wholly agree with those in Venetia, therefore I neede not to say further thereof in Spallata. this place; and by the way, note, that for the weights of Rhagusa, I find this observation made: the 100 Rot. of Alexandria Zero is in Rhagusa 260l^' the 100l^' forfori is in Rhagusa 116 l' the 100 ℞ laidin, is in Rha∣gusa 165 l' the 100 ℞ of Damietta, is in Rhagusa 120 l', the 100 ℞ of Roma, is in Rhagusa 666 l', the 100 ℞ of Baruti is in Rhagusa 625 l' the 100 ℞ Damasco, is in Rhagusa 600 l', the 100 ℞ of Tripost in So∣ria, is in Rhagusa 500 l', the 100 ℞ of Alleppo is in Rhagusa 600 l', the 100 ℞ of Rhodes and Gasa, is in Rhagusa 666⅓ l', the 100 ℞ of Cyprus, is in Rhagusa 625 l', the 100 ℞ of Bursia in Natolia, is in Rhagusa 146 l' the 100 ℞ of Constantinople, is in Rhagusa 146 l', and the 100 l' in Rhagusa doth make as followeth: In Puglia 39 ℞ Puglia 110 l' Rome 101 Florence 105 Perosa 95 Siena 108 Acquilla 107 Lansan 106 Vrbino 106 Crema 111 Piemont 101 Forli 111 Faensa 110 In Cesena 106 l' Ricanati 107 Camerino 108 Bollonia 110 Lucca 106 Millano 111 Verona 108 Bressia 111 Ferara 106 Modena 109 Genoa 114 Fanno 106 Further matter worthy mentioning that concernes either the weight, measure, or trade of this place I have not observed, therefore I passe it over; and hence take my journey to Grecia, the next place which challengeth my survey.
CHAP. CCXXXVIII. Of Greece, and the Provinces thereof. GREECE, accounted the mother of Arts and Greece and the Cities thereof. Sciences, is bounded on the East with the Egeansea, the Hellespont, Propontis, and Thracian Bosphorus, on the West with Italy and the Adri∣aticke sea, on the North with the mountaine Hemus, and on the South with the Ionian sea, and is now intirely subject to the Grand Signi∣our. The generall commodities found here, and transported hence, Commodities. are Wines, Oyles, Copper, Vitrioll, Brimstone, Silkes, raw and wrought, as into Velvets, Damaskes, Grograines of Goats haire, or wooll, Cute, Aniseeds, Cominseeds, Currants, Sopes, Carpets, Cottons, &c. The chiefe Rivers navigable are Cephisus, rising in Epirus, and Rivers in Greece. setting in the Egean sea, Erigon, and Aliemon, rising both in Macedo∣nia, and issuing in Thermaicus sinus, then Sirmon in Migdonia, Alicus and Nisus in Thracia, and some others. The principall provinces are seven, and the Cities therein are as Peloponnesus, or Morea. followeth, Peloponnesus is the first, dividing it selfe into sixe lesser parts, wherein is found the Cities of Elis, Olimpia, now ruined, though once famous; then the Cities of Corona and Modona, the now flourishing Townes of this Province: here was also in times past Thebes, Lacedemon, Sparta, Argos, Nemea, Corinth, now a villedge called Crato, all now gone and ruined, and here is now of note in matter of traffique in this circuit, found onely Modon, Corona, be∣fore named, and Pretrasse, and some others of lesser consequence, whereto Merchants doe frequent for traffique sake. Of the trade whereof a word.
CHAP. CCXXXIX. Of Modona, Corona, and Petras, and the trade thereof. THese three Cities as situated on the same shores, Modona, Co∣rona, and Pe∣tras, and the trade therof. and subject to the same customes, and found a∣bonnding in Corne, Wines, Oyles, and Currants, Galls, Aniseeds, Silke, and such like, which I have thought good to put into one member, to abbreviate my taske. In Petros there hath been of many yeares a trade maintained by the endevours of the English, who here by authority of the Grand-Signiour Petras. have a protecting Consull resident, who hath the title of the Consull of the Morea: and here is vented from England some Clothes of Suffolke, Sarges, Tin, Lead, &c. In exchange whereof they trans∣port Exchange. hence these commodities aforenamed, Corne and Oyle being by their lawes prohibited transportation, but by the connivence of Officers found permitted notwithstanding. The monies of these places is currant with those of Turkie, and those of Venetia, as possessors and borderers, which they account Monies of Morea. by the Turkish coines, as in Dollers and Aspers. Aspers 80 accounted to a Doller, or ℞  which is the best commo∣ditie: aspers 120 accounted to a Sultany Hungar or Checquine, which coynes are found to rise oftentimes 10, 20, or 30 per cent. in aspers, as the occasion of trade, or misgovernment too oftentimes doth permit. The weight of Petros is the pound of 12 ounces, ordinarily ma∣king 11 drams to an ounce, 3l^' making their oake, which is 4l^' 2 ℥ Weights of Morea. English, or 400 drams here. 132l^' makes their quintall, which is 117l^' London; but their Silke is sold by a pound of 15 ℥. which is 1¼ pound abovesayd: and it hath been found that 112l^' English have made in Petras 126l^' the sack of Currants commonly weighing of their weight 140l^', which in Zant hath produced in circa 118l^'. 100l^' of Petras hath been found to make in Venice sotile 130 l', and in the grosse weight of Venice 83½ l', which thus computed may be 88 in 90 l' haberdupois of London. The measures of these places are two for distinction of length, First the Silke Pico is found to be 25 inches English, and the Cloth Pi∣co Measures of Morea. 27 inches by the rule in England.
Oyles is sold by a measure called the Liver and weigheth 7½ l', Of Oyles. 20 whereof is found to make a Candye Barrell, which must hold 15 Gallons English. which should be 112½ l' haberdupois. Corne is here sold by the Bachel, whereof 9 and ⅖ hath been noted Of Corne. to make in England 8 Bushels Winchester measure. From Petras it will not bee improper that I trace the Dalmatian shore, and survey the Cities seated on the maritime coast, and found in the gulph of Venice, purposels omitted in the Chapter of Dal∣matia, as more proper to this place; and then proceed to the rest of the Greciam provinces. CHAP. CCLX. Of Catarro and the trade thereof. THough in this tract then Rhagusa and Spallato be the prin∣cipall Cattarro and the trade ther∣of. Cites of trade knowne to our Merchants of Lon∣don, yet now coasting this Dalmatian shore, it will not be improper that I take a generall view of such eminent Cities of note as are observable in this tract, the next of conse∣quence being Catarro, seated in a gulph bearing the name of the Citie, enjoying a commodious harbour and safe from all windes, but not enjoying any great trade, by reason of the too neere neigh∣bourhood of Rhagusa yet the place doth affoord for Merchandise which is exported to Venetia, and to other places in that gulph, Wax, Hony Tarre and Pitch or Rosen, some minerals or colours for Painters-tallow and candles Cordots and sheepe Skinnes, Figges, Al∣monds, Nutt, and some other commodities for victuall. The Monies here, and generally throughout all this coast, are Monies in Cattarro, those currant in the State of Venetia, and the dominion of the great Turke, of which more is sayd in its due place. The weight here used is the pound, and the 100 l' here is in Ve∣netia Weights in Cattarro. sutle 133 l', as hath been observed, and may be about 90 l' Eng∣lish and the sayd pound is 16 ℥. And the sayd 100 pound of Catarro hath made in Sicilia 127 pound, and the 100 pound of Sicilia hath made here 78 pound, and the grosse Salmo of Sicilia hath made here 4 stares, the 100 pound of Catarro hath been also observed to yeeld in Lansano, and other parts of Pulia 117 pound. The measures of Catarro are, Measures of Cattarro. From Catarro I will take my passage to the next Citie neigh∣bouring, the most important being Sebenico.
CHAP. CCXLI. Of Sebenico and the trade thereof. SEBENICO is also found on this shore, and seated up∣on Sebenico and the trade ther∣of. the river of Cherca, abutting on the gulph of Venetia, and having a commodious harbour lockt from all dan∣gers of windes by sundry small Ilands, Caprano and Standica being the principall, Tina a faire Citie lies upon this river more into the land, which addes to the trade of this place, and were it not for the continuall piracie of Rovers upon this coast, and especially amongst these Ilands, the trade therof would doubt∣lesse increase daily, and grow, by reason of its commodious situa∣tion, to a great height; yet notwithstanding this difficultie, it af∣foordeth for merchandise exportable, Wax, Hony in great plentie, tallow, hides and cheese, excellent Oyle of Olives, and strong Wines, Figs and some other fruit. This Citie of Sebenico is found to have two severall weights Weights of Sebenico. commonly in use; the one for the weighing of fine goods, and the other for grosse goods. The first being called the sutle hundred, consisting of 100 pound, is in England 80 pound haberdupois. The second called the grosse quintar of 100 pound, doth also pro∣duce in London 128 pound haberdupois. The measure of length in use is the Pico, which is accounted to Measures of Sebenico. bee about 23 inches English, and is about 10 per cent. lesse than the cloth brace of Venice. This note hath beene made between the weight of Venice and Sebenico. 100 pound sutle Sebenico is sutle in Venetia 120 pound. 100 pound grosse Sebenico is grosse in Venetia 120 pound. 100 pound sutle Venice is sutle in Sebenico 83 pound. 100 pound grosse Venice is grosse in Sebenico 83 pound. 1 pound sutle in Venice is in Sebenico 10 ounces. 1 pound sutle Sebenico is in Venetia sutle 14 ℥ 2⅖ sases. And so leaving Sebenico I come to Scutari.
CHAP. CCXLII. Of Scutarie, and the trade thereof. SCutarie is accompted the Metropolis of Albania, and situated upon a Lake, called the Lake of Scutarie, or Scutary, and the trade thereof. Scodra, through which the river of Bolon runneth, and so to the Sea, neere the gulph of Lodrin, and in∣cluded in the gulph of Venetia; but being now as the other cities of this Tract in subjection to the Grand Sigr; the trade thereof is much decayed, and the city ruin'd from its ancient splendour and beautie, yet the industry of the inhabitants, doth afford some silke made here; also waxe, hony, hides, cordovante, and some other skins for merchandise. In Scutary is used two sorts of weights, a grosse and a sotile; the grosse The weights of Scutary. hundred of 100l^' is in England 108l^' in circa haberdupois, by which all grosse commodities are weighed, and the sotile hundred, by which all fine commodities are weighed, is English 64l^', and it hath beene observed, the 1000l^' sotile of Venice, hath made here grosse 664 l', and the 1000 l' grosse here in Scutary, hath made in Venice 1600 l'. The measure of length here in use, is the pico observed to accord Measures of Scutary. with Venice thus: the 100 braces of cloth hath made here 112 picho, and the 100 braces of silke in Venice, hath made here 106 picho, which in England must be accompted for (27) inches. All sort of graine is sold by the stare not onely in Scutary, but also Of Graine. in Boiano, seated on the mouth of this river, and the 100 stares make in Venice 66⅔ stares which is in England () accompting by this computation every three stares of Scutary to make two stares in Venice. And thus leaving Scodra with this short survey, with the ap∣plause due to it, for its excellent situation and strength, I hence passe to Valona, or Avalona.
CHAP. CCXLIII. Of Valona, and the trade thereof. VAlona is also a faire commodious city, seated on the shoare, betweene the cape of Languetta, and Valona, and the trade thereof. the cape of Crion and is appos to the  of Ottranto, and occomped the entrance into the gulph of Venice; and though it be in subject  to the Turkes, who are not alwaies found friends to traffique, yet by the industry of the inhabi∣tants, it affords for merchandise to be exported, raw silke powder of berry or graine, for dying of rich colours, wxe, ho∣ny Rose, cottons, carpets, rdovants, some salt fish, which they call sarrache, and other such commodities in good quantity. The weight here, is the pound, of which the quintar is composed, Weights of Valona. being 100 l' which hath beene found to produce in England 88 in 90 l' haberdupois, and hath made in Venice, from whence I gather my notes for these townes 133 l' sotile, so that the pound of Valona makes sutle in Venice 16 onnces, and the pound sotile there, makes in Valona but 9 ounces. The measure of length here in use, is the picho, common in name Measures of Valona. throughout all the grand Sigours Dominions; the 100 braces silke measure of Venice making in Valona 105 to 105 picho, which is in London () yards English. And the 100 braces of cloth in Venice, makes here 112 pichos, and having done with Avalona, I proceede in the next place to survey the trade of Larta. CHAP. CCXLIV. Of Larta, and the trade thereof. LArta is a pretty commodious towne for traffique, sea∣ted on a gulph, which beares the name of the towne, Larta and the trade thereof. having two points of a land fortified, that commands the entrance into the said gulph out of the Mediter∣ranean sea, and is seated also on this shoare, betweene the Ilands of Corfn and Santa Manra; it is as the rest of the cities aforegoing, subject to the grand Sigr. and doth af∣ford for merchandise to be exported great store of Sheepe skins, and
Cordovanis, raw silke, by us knowne by the name of Morea silke, pow∣der of Berry for Dyers: Cottons, Wace, Hony, Pottargot in great aboundance; being the rowe of the Mullet in great quantity caught in this gulph of Larta. The weight here in use, is the pound, 100 l' whereof doth make Weights in Larta. the quintar, and is found to produce in London 88 l' in 89 pounds. The measure of length is the picho agreeing with the picho before Measure of Larta. mentioned used in Valona. And now I come to Lepanto the next towne of consequence. CHAP. CCXLV. Of Lepanto, and the trade thereof. LEpanto is seated in the entrance of the gulph Lepanto, and the trade thereof. of Lepanto made famous to posterity by the Sea Victory obtained by the Christians over the Turkes, and the overthrow of their fleet herein 1571, it is here opposite to the city of Petras which is seated on the right side of the entrance in this gulph, as Lepanto is on the left. It is subject to the grand Turke, whose coines are here currant, as I shall have occasion to speake of more at large, when I handle the trade of Constantinople the metropolis of all his dominions. This place affordeth for merchandise which is hence exported into other parts, silke raw, called by us Morea silke, powder of graine, or berry for Diers, hony, waxe cottons, correns, cheese, wines, graine, Oyles, Galls, Aniseedes, and some other commodities. In Lepanto. is used two severall weights, the one called the grosse Weights of Lepanto. weight, agreeing with the grosse weight of Venice, which in England is about 107l^', the other agrees with the weight of Petras, by which is sold silke, graine, waxe, and some other commodities; and by the grosse weight is sold, woolls, cottons, hony, cheese, and all manducable commodities; but the Correns here, are usually sold by the bagge or sacke, at so many aspers a sacke or bagge, the which bagge ought to weigh 140l^' Petrasin, the which 140l^', is of Venice sotile 182l^', which is haberdupis 120l^' or 121l^' incirea, where it is to be noted, that 200 l' petrasin, make 260 l' sotile Venice, which is 174 l' English, and is the staro of Correns in Venice; againe, note, that the 100 l' petrasin, or the 100 l' in Lepanto of Petras weight, is about 86 l' ha∣berdupois,
which is 130 l' sotile in Venice, and 83 l' grosse, and the pound petrasin, makes grosse Venice 10 ounces by observa∣tion. The 100 l' sutile of Venetia, yeelds here petrasin 77 l'. The 100 l' grosse of Venetia, yeelds here petrasin 121½. The measure is here found to be the picho, agreeing with the pich Weights of Lepanto. of Larta and Valona aforementioned. Before I passe out of this gulph, it will not be unproper, that I in∣site the bottome thereof, where Caranto a small Villedge, now sup∣plies the place of that ancient and famous Corinth, a City commodi∣ous for the command of a brave trade, as enjoying two famous Ports into two different Seas, seated formerly on the Istmos, enjoy∣ing a double harbour, one of each side thereof, the one whereof re∣garding Asia, and the other beholding Italy, and by the commodi∣ousnesse of which situation, the Citie in a short time, came to a great largenesse. Acrocorinth was but little distant thence, on the top of an adjoyning mountaine, upon which mountaine was seated the famous Temple of Venus, neere which was that notable fountaine discovered by the impression of the foot of Pegasus, as the Anci∣ents did feigne. This Corinth was destroyed and ruined by L. Mummins, because the inhabitants had irreverently, and unworthily handled the Em∣bassadours The ancient Corinth. of the Romanes 952 yeeres after the first building thereof, by Allettus the sonne of Hippottes. In this continent, if the memory thereof may not here be im∣proper, was the Citie of Misene the dwelling of Agameon, where Misene. the Temple of Iuno stood so much famoused, both for the antiquity and devotion thereof, neere which was the Lake of Lerno, where Hercules slew the Lernian seven headed Hidra: Here was also Argos Argos. built, by that all everseeing Argos, so much celebrated by ancient Poets: likewise Epidaurus, renowned for the Temple of Esculapius, Epidaurus. filled with the tables of those that had beene healed by him, the sicke who entred into the Temple to be cured, were to sleepe there a night, and imagined that Esculapius healed them, during that their repose and sleepe. Here is also Lacedemon, by some called Sparta, now Misithie for∣merly great and powerfull, girt not with walles, but with the ver∣tue Sparta. of the inhabitants: not renowned for the magnificencie of publique workes, but the discipline, instruction, and the manner of their living. Here was also those pleasant Arcadian plaines, and Arcadian plaines. the places where the Olympian games were solemnized; with divers Olimpians. other memorable antiquities, which the injurie of time hath eaten out and consumed; wherefore I here omit them, and returne again to my purpose and prosecute my methode.
CHAP. CCXLVI. Of Salonica and the trade thereof. OF Modon, Coron, and Petras, the three prime Ci∣ties of Morea, I have already handled, now Salonica and the trade thereof. there rests a word of the trade of this an∣cient and famous Citie of Solonica, anciently called Thessalonica; to the inhabitants where∣of Saint Paul writ one of his Epistles: it is yet a rich and large Citie, and the residence of the Sgiac of Macedonia under the Grand Sig∣niour. The present inhabitants are Greekes, Turkes, and principally Iewes; who are here found to be very rich and eminent Merchants, 80 Synagogues of them being accounted to bee in this towne em∣ploying themselves in severall Arts and Merchandising. It is sea∣ted in the bottome of a gulph called by the Cities name; and by the demurre that happened in the English trade to Turkie some yeares past, these Iewes and inhabitants, and some Moores banished out of Spaine, have here set up some Loomes, and made cloth, in imitation of our English Suffolke clothes, which hath proved a great detri∣ment to the sale of Hampshire kersies; once vented in great quanti∣ty generally throughout Turkie, and especially in these parts; be∣sides which sort of cloth now here made, and hence taking name, the place affoordeth the generall commodities of the Morea, as pou∣der of Berry Orgrame for Diers, Wools, Cottons, Wax, Hony, Cordovants, Aniseeds, and the like. The weights here in use are two, the one called the quintar turcesco, Weights of Salonica. and the other the quintar petrafin. The quintar turcesco of 100 pound makes in English pounds 119 pound to 120 pound in Venice grosse 112 pound, in Venice sotil 176 in 178 pound. The quintar or 100 pound Petrasin make English 88 l' as is before mentioned: by this all silke, powder of graine, and other fine goods are sold; and by the quintar turcesco is wooll, cotton, cavlare, wax, hony, and some other grosse commodities sold and weighed. The measures of length is the Picho, which is 27 inches English, Measures of Salonica. and the hundred braces of cloth in Venice holds here 112 picho, and the hundred braces of silke in Venice, holds here 106 picho.
Nere this Citie is the Towne of Siderocapse, so well knowne to Syderocapse rich in mines of gold. the Turkes for the rich mines of gold there adjoyning, from which the great Turke doth monthly draw for his own share above 20000 Dollers besides the charges. Neare the entrance of the gulph of Salonica is found the high and craggie hill of Athos, now the holy mountaine; whereon is found Mount Athos. foure and twenty monasteries of Colloires, or religious Grecian Friers, with such devotion and zeale, that the Turkes themselves not onely admire their quiet living, but oftentimes communicate to their necessities, giving them gifts and almes. Here it is repor∣ted the ancient learning of many Greeke Fathers es buried, or at least immured, till by some divine hand they may bee freed and dis∣persed through Christendome. And now to the rest of the Provinces of this fruitfull and fa∣mous Countrey. The next province is Achaia, wherein was that famous Athens, Achaia. Athens. Marathron. Megara. Thebes. Thermopila. now Salines, also Marathron, where Darins was overthrowne. Then Megara, famous in times of old. Thebes built upon the ri∣ver Cephisus: here is also the straights of Thermopilae 25 foot in bredth, defended by 300 Spartans against Xerxes to the losse of 30000 of his men. Here is also the mount Helicon and Parnassus, Parnassus. famoused amongst Poets, and the Pythian Citie accounted the midst of all the world, and many other remarkeable places, which were here in times past, all having yeelded to age, and therefore merit not a longer stay, or a more serious survey of the trade thereof. Epyrus is the next province, wherin was found famous, 1 Antigo∣nia, Epyrus. 2 Casiope, 3 Ambrasia and others now ruined and or no account. Albania is the next, wherein is 1 Albanopolis, 2 Sfetigrade, 3 Du∣razzo, Albania. a strong towne, 4 Croia, under whose walles Amurath the se∣cond died; now affoording little knowne trade unto us. Macedonia is the next, wherein is Scidra, Adessa, Eribea, all faire Macedonia. Cities, but little knowne to the English for matter of trade: onely it is not to be forgotten, that this countrey is famous for Philip and Alexander the great his sonne; who from hence had their originall. Thessalie is the next province, where the Cities of Tricca, Lomia, Thessalia. Demetria, Pharsalia and others stood, now also ruind and forgot. Migdonia is the next province, wherein was Stagira, next Apollo∣nia, Migdonia. Nepolis, Antigonia, who also are now all ruined; giving prehe∣minence to Thessalonica, now called Salonica, seated in a Bay of that name, as I have mentioned in the chapter beforegoing. Thracia is the last province comprised in Grecia, wherein is Thracia. found the Cities of Sestos opposite to Abidos upon the Helle∣spont, famous for the loves of Hero and Leander, and now the Castles or keyes of Constantinople, Abdera the birth place of Democritus, who spent his life in laughing, Calipolis situated on the northerne pro∣montorie of the Chersonesse, the first towne that ever the Turkes took Calipolis.
in Europe, Trajanopolis, founded by Traanus, and Adrianopolis built by Adrianople. Adrian the Emperour, and by Bajaset taken in 1362, and made the seat of his Empire, till the taking of Constantinople about 90 yeeres after, and Pera, a city of the Genowaies opposite to Constantinople: and lastly, Pera. here is found the famous City of Constantinople it selfe the Metropolis of Greece, and the present seat of the Emperors of the Turkes, where∣in having resided for some yeeres, and finding that it comprehen∣deth most part of the traffique of his European Dominions, it will not be amisse for mee to observe it in a particular Chapter, as well meriting the same. CHAP. CCXLVII. Of Constantinople, and the trade thereof. CONSTANTINOPLE, the seat and residence of the great Turke, is situ∣ated Constanti∣nople, and the trade thereof. upon the streame that passeth from the Euxine seas, to the Meditorra∣nean, and thereby reaping the benefit of all that the winds can convey thi∣ther, both from the black and white seas, as they terme them: It is not more commodious for Merchandise, than for to be the head of an Empire, affronting Asia, and behind it Europe, whereof it is accompted the uttermost limit, estee∣med to be 20 miles in circuit, and comprehending 700000 living soules, as some have conceived, which would grow innumerable, did not the grand Signiours armies yeerely, and the plague once in three or foure yeeres sweepe away abundance of them. It was first built by Pausanias, a Lacedemonian captaine, 660 yeeres before Christ, and by him called Bisantium, afterward ruined by everus, and in Anno 313 reedified by Constantine the Great, and made the seat of his Empire, and by him beautified and adorned with mag∣nificent buildings and curious ornaments, and called Constantinople, then it fell into the hands of the Latins, from them to the Grecians, and lastly, in 1453 to the Turkes, who now command it, upon which some have made this observation: That the first Emperour of the Latins who commanded it was a Baldwin, and so was he also, that lost it, also that it was built by a Constantine, the sonne of a Helena, a Gregory being Patri∣arch and lost by a Constantine, the sonne of a Helena, a Gregory being Patri∣arch, and as it was gained by a Mahomet, so have the Turkes a Prophesie, that a Mahomet shall lose it.
The City is formed in manner of a triangle, or more fitly, as we see the composition of a Harp, having its two largest angles borde∣ring on the seas upon a point that stretcheth it selfe into the sea, and the third, which is the least part incompassed with a strong tripled wall, incompassed with dry deepe ditches for defence, and stengthened with sundry towers now daily ruined, for the Turkes hold but few cities fortified, either by walls or bulwarkes, save some principall places, frontiers, or such like. It hath many goodly moderne buildings, and amongst the rest, many Canes for Merchants strangers to abide; and Besesternes for Canes. them to make sales of their commodities in, it hath also many good∣ly Besesternes. Mosces, or Turkish Churches, and that anciently of Santa Sophia con∣verted to their irrelegious devotion, is not the least, though onely the now standing Chancell of the first building, neere which is the grand Signiors Palace, in the very point of the angle incompas∣sed for 3 miles in circuite with a high wall, and fortified with ma∣ny 100 peeces of Ordnance: this city, the common mart of all com∣modities of this Empire receiving and distributing what either comes or goes; the Merchants of London about 1580 here began to have some trade, and brake the ice by their land travell hither through Hungary; afterward it was setled by the benefit of the sea; and the first English ship that came hither, was about 1585, with an Em∣bassadour to refide; who obtained here such favour by the recom∣mendation of Queene Elizabeth, that her subjects in their treaty and capitulations, had many immunities and privileges granted them, and amongst the rest, a toleration of their Religion, freedome to their persons and estates, and that their customes should onely be 3 in the hundred out, and 3 in, whereas all other Christians there resident, paid 5 per cent'. Since which time, the English have here driven a great trade, under protection of divers Embassadours, that have here resided, which have had their Election, Salary, and Mainte∣nance from a society of Merchants incorporated in England under the great Seale: first, by the said Queene Elizabeth, and confirmed af∣terward with new priviledges by our deceased Soveraigne King Iames: and lastly, by our present King Charles under the Title of Merchants of England, trading the levant seas, wherein was at first comprehen∣ded the Easterne Indies, the dominions of the great Turke, and also the Signorie of Venice; this company deriving their originall from the company of Barbary Merchants, which about this time, by reason of the civill warres of Moroco and Fesse, began to decay, and with∣in a short time come to nothing, and who afterward searching more advisedly into the trade of these Easterne countries, this Company setled a Consul in Alleppo, and a vice Consul in Tripolie the then princi∣pall seate of Syria with the titles of Syria and Cyprus: also they placed another Consull in Chios, intitled of Scio, Smirna, and the Arches: as another Consull since in Argier, and another in T, and
the last in Petras in Morea, strengthened with command from the Port and Durano of the grand Signior, not onely for their peaceable living, but also for the quiet enjoying of these priviledges granted unto them as above is said. The commodities that this place at first affoorded to our Nation, and which hence in those dayes were brought into England, were Commodities found in Con∣stantinople. Grograins, Chamblet, Moher, Persia silke, Gold in great quantity, Car∣pets, Aniseeds, Cottons, Galles, some Pepper, Indico, and other spices, which now by the benefit of our East India trade, we send thither in farre greater aboundance than ever wee had them thence; and those are yet the common Staple commodities of this countrey. The commodities which at first this company did send to Constan∣tinople, were Lead Tin, and principally a sort of blew Kersies, called Commodities sent from Eng∣land to Con∣stantinople. Hampshire, & Stoplists, and some few clothes of Suffolk, Furs of Mar∣tins, Cony, Fitchos, Sables, and such: and now those kersies  altoge∣ther out of use, and converted into clothes of Suffolk Glosters Coven∣tries, and the like, which they send in colours dyed & drest, to the number of eight or ten thousand clothes yearly; & now we also sup∣ply their markets with Indico, pepper, cloves, maces, antmegs, ginger, ca∣licoes, and other East India commodities. The Merchants here residing, keepe their accounts as almost is accustomed over all Turkie, in Dollers and aspers, whereof 80 aspers Accounts in Constantino∣ple. is accounted a doller and though in merchandise it doth passe at 90, 100, or 110, or 150 asp. as I have knowne it; yet the standard of the doller in accounts alter not of 80 asp. to a doller, nor of the 120 asp. to a Sultany. The coynes currant in Constantinople, are those proper to the whole Empire; which is principally the Sultany in gold, which agrees Coines currant in Turkie. with the Hungar, Venice, Chquine, and Sheriff of Barbary pas∣sing for 120 asp. and the doller of Germany▪ the Rial of  Spanish pas∣seth for 80 asp. so that the 1  Rial of  is a Sultany of gold; how beit of late dayes silver is found more plentifull, and gold more scarce, so that the sayd Sultany, Hungar or  is worth 1  doller, and 10, 20 or 30 asp. more or lesse, as the same is demanded and sought after: also here are found other dollers, both of Italy and Germany, to passe for a considerable value, as the L doller at 75 asp. and the Germane Sesine at 70 asp. &c. and in fine, most sort of currant coins in the world, if found good silver, finde here a reall price in pay∣ments of merchandise. The weights used amongst Merchants are these, A Graine is the least, 4 makes a quillat. Weights in Constantino∣ple. A dram is 16 graines, of which all the weights of these countries are composed. An Tusdrome is 100 drams, and is 1 l'sotile Venice, or 72 mitagales here.
A Lodero is 176 drams about 132 l'haberdupoit 19 ℥ An Oake is 400 drams, which is neere 2 l' 12℥. or 10℥. Loderot 100 is accounted to be 42 Oakes, and called a quintar; which quintar is accounted to be 118 in 120 l' sutle English. A Batman is 60 akes, which is 2400 drams, or 16⅓ l' Engl. By which weight silke is here bought, making 10 great l'  ℥ per Batman, Batman 7 and Oakes 2 makes a quintal, which is 120 l' English. Lode 13 and drams 112 makes a Batman: all silke is sold by the Batman, and yet weighed by the Lodero; so also is Grograine yarne and other To bring Lode∣ros into Oakes. commodities sold by the Oake, yet weighed by Lodero. To bring therefore Loderos into Okes, doe thus, posito, you have 14 Loders, and would know how many Okes it produceth; First multiply your 14 Loderos by 44, which produceth 616: then cut off the two last fi∣gures for the C. will remaine 6 which is Okes: then multiply the 16 you cut off by 4, and it makes 64, which is drams, and so your 14 Loders is 6 Okes 64 drams, and so do of any other summe given. Drammes 720 700 680 are accounted Rotolos of silke and other commodities in Aleppo, according to the custome in sale of that commoditie which is to bee noted: and this dram is 16 Killats. A Mitigall is 1  Drams, which is 24 Killats 20 Mitigals of gold is 3℥ English. A Chicquine Sultanie or Hungar is 18 Killats or Carats. Rotolos 3  and 20 Drammes in Aleppo is a Batman in Constantinople, foure hundred Drammes making an Oake consisting of foure Yus∣dromes or pounds, ten ounces to the yusdrome, and ten drammes to the ounce; and hereby I have estimated neere fourtie eight drams to sixteene ounces haberdupois. Where note, that here (as in Alep∣po) severall commodities are sold by a severall Oake, as there by se∣verall Rotolo, as the Oake of Saffron is here 120 drams, and no more; and so in others. Weights of Constantinople, with other Countries. Now having considered this weight in it selfe, let us consider it as it is found to agree with other Cities of trade, which may best be done upon the 100 Loderos as the knowne beame; here the Oake, and Batman and Rotolo being fained and compounded thereof.
London 120 l' & found by often triall but to be 117 & 118 l' Aleppo 24 2℥ Ditto silke ℞ 25 2℥ Tripoli Suria 29 4℥ Tripoli Barbaria 500 Loders in Constanti∣nople make in 104 l' Barti 23 6℥ Alex. Zera 56 Alex. Forfori In ergams 160 li. In Crom 163 li. 125 l' Rhodes 22 ℞ Acria 19 6 Babylonia 16 8¾ Balsora 4 8⅓ Milan, and Verona,   and Mantua 163 l' Lucca 157 l' Genoa 160 li. Florence 151 li. Venice sotle 176 li. Venice grosse 112 li. Cairo 123 Rot. Cyprus 25½ Rot. Corfu 112 li. Lorta and Cattarro 132 li. Rhigusa and Spallato 146 li. Mesina grosse 62 Rot. Sicilia sotle 69 Rot. Naples and Puglia 60 Rot. Anchona. 148 li. Rome and Bolonia 146½ li. The measures of lengtth in Constantinople used in trade, are Measures of Constantino∣ple. three, and all called Picos: the first is the Cloth Pico: foure where∣of hath been observed to make three yards English, and is about 26½ inches, and if heedfully noted, twenty seven inches very neare. The second is the Grograine or Chamblet Fico, containing 24 inches, and observed to make 24 pico 16 yards English. The third is the linnen pico, which is onely the former dou∣bled: and note that in the measuring here of all commodities of length, here is no allowance made nor given in curtesie, as the inch is over-plus in England; but the sayd picos are found to bee made flat of Iron, and no more allowance given than the thick∣nesse of the pico at the end, which commonly exceeds not the thick∣nesse of an English shilling. Corne is sold by a measure concave, called the Killow, and weigh∣eth about 20 Oahes; and it hath been observed, that 8⅔ of a Killow is Corne measure a London quarter, and doth make a Salmo in Lighorne; and five Killows in Zant make 6 Bushels English. Wine and Oyle, and almost all liquid commodities is sold by a me∣ter, Wine & Oyle. which makes 8 Oakes and is accounted ⅔ of a gallon English. Note that in Constantinople all fuell to burne, fruit, fish, flesh, and for the most part all commodities are sold by weight, and very few by the concave measures, which is a good benefite to the provident. Observe that Scio doth agree with these measures and weights; and so also should Smyrna by the observations of Mer∣chants, some yeares past; but some difference is now found per∣adventure
crept in by the abuse of the weighers, and the falshood of beames; and this difference is found more grosse upon cottons and galls, than upon any other commodity which may proceed both from the foulenesse of the first, and the greennesse of the later, which I referre to the reformation of the more judicious. The customes paid in Constantinople is divers: as the Italians, and Customes in Constanti∣nople. other frankes and Iewes pay upon all commodities, both outward and inward, 5 per cent. The Turkes themselves are free from all customes. The English and Dutch pay 3 per cent, inward, and as much out∣ward, upon all commodities, and this is paid in species, and not in mony, except that the Merchants doe compound, as oftentimes they doe, with the customer, that an indifferent rate be made upon the commodities, and upon that rate is 3 per cent. taken accordingly. Miseteria. Note, that over and above this custome paid by agreement and ca∣pitulation of forraine Princes for their subjects, there is paid upon all ponderous commodities a duty of 1½ per cent. and upon all measureable commodities is paid 1 per cent. and these customes are called Miseteries, and ever paid betweene the buyer and the seller, the Turke, if hap∣pening to be either, is ever exempted, which duty, both by the buyer and seller is paid to the Brokers, who repay it to the Farmer thereof, and both  for the collectour, and is a rent setled for the maintenance of an Hospitall founded by Sultan Achmet, as hoping by this new custome levied upon strangers, and thus disposed of to charitable uses to gaine heaven at the charges of Christians. Gallata. Opposite to the City of Constantinople, is the City Gallatta, for∣merly Cornubisantium, and in times past belonging to the Genoes, who in the declining state of the Grecian Empire were possessors of this City, and many other in this Empire both of great trade and consequence which are now in the possession of the grand Signiour, betweene which a river now runneth, wherein all shipping finde both a safe and convenient harbour, and in which all the Westerne Christians, either English, French, Dutch, or Vendian Merchants have their common residencie, intermixt with Grecians, Iewes, Armenians and some few Turkes, where also is placed a custome-house opposite to another on Constantinople side, both commonly farmed by one and Emin. theselfe same Emine or Farmer, who is the Receiver of the Grand Sig∣niours customes, which are found commonly payable, the one halfe in aspers, of 80 aspers to a doller, and the other halfe in sultaines of gold, or otherwise, as the Farmer and Merchant can agree for, and com∣pound the same. I have shewed before, how that the Company of English Mer∣chants The governe∣ment of the trade of the English in Cō∣stantinople. incorporated by the name of the society of the levant Compa∣ny in England, doe elect and nominate an able and skilfull, well qualified man in Merchants affaires, who with his Maiesties consent
and approbation resideth here, as Leger Ambassadour, to protect both the said Companies Factors, and their Estates here in matter of trade, whose charges and salary is paid and defraied wholly by the said Levant Company, and for the honour of the English Nation, and as necessary to his Port, and the said Companies traffique through the grand Signiours Dominions, they are found also to maintaine at pre∣sent, and to pay salarie to 6 Consuls in 6 severall places of this Empire, and to wait upon these and their Factors, they give pay to 40 Ieni∣saries 20 druggermen, or Interpreters: 6 Secretaries: 3 Ministers, be∣sides Mr. Alderman Garaway at present being governor, and Mr. William Cockaine De∣puty, to whom I owe this gratefull ac∣knowledge∣ment, as to those who have lent me their ready furthe∣rance in this worke. sundrie other needfull officers. And for the government of this trade in England, they have a Governour, who is alwaies yeerely chosen in London, and is ever one of the most eminent of the said Company, then a Deputy, and thirdly a Husband, in which last, the said Company have for some yeeres honoured my employment, and thought my paines worthy their acceptatic, and these in consideration of their care, have a yeerely courtesie or gratuity for their paines: also to these is added a Secretarie, accomptant, and some other offi∣cers receiving salarie, and for the better regulating of this trade, and as assistants to the above said, they have a Treasurer, and 18 Committies yeerely chosen, and are ever the greatest traders, and the most eminent of the said Societie, and commonly the deepest interessed in the generall trade; and in this nature hath it conti∣nued since the first erection and incorporation of this Society in  1585, by Queene Elizabeth, whose love to her Merchants pro∣tured them in Turkie many priviledges, and granted them in Eng∣land the immunities aforesaid. Now for the levying and supporta∣tion of this charge annually thus happening, and for the raising of the present that is given to the grand Signiour, at the change of every Ambassadour, there is levied a lanto upon the Merchandise, ei∣ther imported or exported, in or out of Turkie, upon the members The English nation the greatest tra∣ders into Turkie of Christians. of the said Company, which in England is called by the name of im∣positions, and in Turkie, by the name of consoledge, which the said Company doe impose upon themselves, and set the same either higher or lower, as their occasions and necessitie of their charge doth re∣quire, and these are the most eminent of all the Merchants Christians that traffique hither. The second eminent traders into this city, are the Venetians, and The Venetians being the se∣cond. the subjects of that Signiory, to protect whom, and for reasons of estate, because of their neere neighbourhood, that Common wealth maintaines here an Ambassadour, commonly intitled the Bailo, toge∣ther with 10 Consuls in sundrie parts of the grand Signiours domini∣ons, together with 60 Ienisaries, 30 druggermen, and sundry other of∣ficers, which are all paid and defraid out of the office of Cottinio, in Venice, from whence also issueth all avenies, and other losses and charges that happen for the preservation and maintenance of the
trade of Turkie, or the liberties and immunities granted thereto throughout all the Grand Signiors Dominions. The third eminent traders into this Citie, are the French, and The French being the third, the subjects of that crowne: to protect whom, and also for preser varion of amitie setled between them, that King maintaineth here an Embassadour, together with twelve Consuls, dispersed into sundry parts of this Empire; together with 80 Ianisaries, 34 Drug∣germen, and sundry other Officers, all payd and defrayed out of the Coffers of the French King, who willingly contributeth the charge for the ease of his Merchants, and hath but small leviations upon them for the same. The fourth and last is the Dutch Nation, who in some manner are The Dutch be∣ing the last and least. found to have some traffique hither; to which end that State main∣taineth in this City an Embassadour, whom they intitle their Orator, besides whom they have onely three Consulships, twelve Ianisaries, ten Druggermen, and some other Officers dispersed through the Grand Signiors dominions, whose charge is borne by the state of the Merchants of that nation, trading hither at a tanto per cent, and not by the purse of the sayd provinces. Besides these, some small trade is driven here by the subjects of the King of Poland, as also by the subjects of the King of Hun∣gary, and by the Emperours subjects; who each of them have here their Embassadours: but the trade thereof is of so little conse∣quence, and subject to such change and variation by reason of the warre and peace, which sometimes is truely observed, and some∣times againe as little regarded, that it merits no great considera∣tion in this place. As for the traffique driven here out of Armenia, Moscovia., Tar∣taria, Egypt, Georgia, Persia, and other Countries of Asia, and Affrica, I passe them over in silence, having handled them particularly in those severall kingdomes; to which I referre the reader. Now the trade of other Nations hither I have noted, it is not unproper I should give a touch of the trade of the inhabitants of The trade of the citizens of Constantino∣ple. this Citie into other places: foure sorts of people are found hence to use a traffique such as are the native Greekes, Turkes, the Arme∣niant, and the Iewes. The Iewes bend much of their trade into the land, as to Adrianople with English Clothes, Tinne and Spices, brought hither by other nations: To Angora for grograines, Mohers, and grograine yarne: to Salonica and other Cities in Peloponnesus for silkes and other manufactories. the Armenians drive most of their trade into Georgia, Armenia and Persia for raw silkes, galles, and some drugges; and carry thither Clothes, Tinne, and other Eu∣ropean commodities, and Rials of silver. The Turkes bend their traf∣fique to Venice with grograines and Chamblets, and other commodi∣ties
of Dalmatia and Slavonia; and thence returne Sattins, Velvets, and some Wollen clothes, and Venice gold: then to Mecca, Damasco, and Cairo, with European commodities; sometimes by sea, but oftner by land; and bring thence Iems, Spices, Drugges, and Callicos, and other Indian commodities. The Greekes for the most part found to bee either shop keepers, and so cannot be tearmed Merchants; or else Mariners, which saile to Capha, to Daius, to the Arches, Cyprus, and Alexandria; and these are noted to drive some small trade, that it merits not here any further observation. Having thus as briefly and succinctly as I could, handled the trade of the maine continent of Europe; and being come to this Citie of Constantinople, one of the most eminent and fairest Cities, not onely of Europe, but also of the whole world, whose trade I have also duely & yet briefly related: It is now high time for me to looke homewards; and so leaving this famous Citie, saile downe the Thracian Bosphorus to the Hellespont, leaving in view and sight on Europe side the once famous Galipolis, the late Station for the Galipolis. Grand Signiors Gallies; whose materials either for the matter or for the manner of traffique, differs not from this used in the Citie of Constantinople it selfe, though otherwise it yeeldes to the Merchants for transportation good quantitie of raw Hides, sheepes wooll, Ani∣seeds, and some other commodities; and taking aboord me one qua∣lified here who according to the custome of the place supplies the roome of generall Consull for all westerne nations, I saile with him to the Castles of Sestos and Abidot, the now keyes of this sea and sayd Citie, famoused by the ancients for the sad and disastrous love of Hero and Leander; where staying three dayes to cleare my Vessell, according to the manner of each that would depart hence, discharging 101 Dollers 6 aspers to the Custome-houses of Con∣stantinople and Galatta, and to the Captaine of these Castles, and here 124 Dollers 54 aspers more, I and my ship are cleered & dis∣charged hence: and being freed, and my sailes flowne, I begin to descry the Arches, and there survey what Ilands of note and conse∣quence I finde in those seas, leaving behinde me the maine conti∣nent of Europe; and having thus performed my land-travaile, and fully discovered and layd open the traffique and commerce thereof I am called upon in the next place, to survey the trade of the princi∣pall Ilands comprehended under this part of the world Europe.
CHAP.. CCXLVIII. Of the trade of the Isles seated in the Egean, Ioniam, Mediteranean and Adriatique Seas. THe first Island falling in view, comming out of the Helespont is the Isle of Tenedos opposite to Troy, Tenedos. which hath a prettie towne in it, and inriched with excellent wines. The next is Samothracia in the Egean sea, afford∣ing Samothracia. at Sia a good harbour for ships and nought else of consequence. Lemnos is the next in the said seas affording that soveragine Mine∣rall Lemnos. against infection called Terra Sigillata, the earth thereof is made into little pellets, and sealed with the Turkes Character, and so dis∣persed Terra Sigillata. over all Christendome for an excellent Antidote. Scio or Chios is the next of note, affording that excellent Gumme, Scio. called Mastique, which in Iuly and August the inhabitants doe force out of trees, by making of deepe incisions into the barke thereof, with sharpe instruments, out of which the juyce dropping is after∣ward hardned like unto a bright Gum, and in September following gathered, which Mastique is farmed of the Grand Signiour, as his Mastique. peculiar commoditie, and therefore ever maintained at a constant price, and hence dispersed throughout the world. CHAP. CCXLIX. Of SCIO, and the trade thereof. I Have already declared in the trade of Smyrna, Scio, and the trade thereof. how that of late daies the principall seate of traffique was in this Iland in the towne of Scio, where a Consul for the English and other nations did reside; but finding the Port of Smyrna sea∣ted on the continent more proper for lading of Cottons and Cotton-yarne, and other grosse goods, the principall commodities of this seate, they removed their habitation thither, and with them is that trade that was here also removed, yet in that it was found a place where
great concourse of Merchants was found, we owe it a touch of its weights and measures, &c. Accompts were and are kept in dollers of 80 aspers, and of Aspers as Accompts in Scio. in Constantinople. The monies are the same ingenerall mentioned in Constantinople, save that commerce, doth often-times make them be here 2 or 3 per cent. better esteemed. The weights here, are derived from the dra of Turk that I Weights of Scio. mentioned in Constantinople. 100 drammes make a Rotolo, which is 19  ℥ Vca sotile. 400 drams make an Oake. 100 Rotolos make a quintar, accompted in circa 118l^' English, and should hold as in Smirna 120l^', but daily expe∣rience findeth the contrary, both here and in Smirna, not making above 118l^' sotile haberdupois. Their measures are here two, the linnen picho qt. 26 ynches, and the Measures in Scio. cloth picho usuall in Constantinople of 27 ynches, for other passages, vide further Constantinople and Smirna. I will now proceed to the rest of those Islands in these seas, which are first Lesbos, in which, Mitylena is noted for the principall towne, Lebos. where was borne Sapph, the inventresse of the sapphique verse, Pittacus, one of the Sages of Greece, Arion the Dolphin harper, and which have famoused this Island to posterity. Negroponte is the next, where the Sea ebbeth and floweth 7 times Negroponte. a day, which because Aristotle cold not unriddle, he here drowned himselfe: the chiefe City is Colhis, Caristia and others. Here is also Seiros, Salamis, the 12 Sporades, also Delos, where Seir Salamis. Delos. Samos. Oracles were given to the Petitioners, and the 53 Islands of Ciclades, which afford nothing note worthy: also Samos the habitation of that fortunate infortunate Policrates, and Coos the birth-place of Coo. Apelles and Hippocrates, then Pathmos where St. Iohn wrote his Reve∣tions Pathmos. being confined hither by Domitian, which are now of small accompt, save onely in their number, and so I come in the next place to Rhodes.
CHAP. CCL. Of Rhodes, and the trade thereof. THE same of this Iland and Citie is suf∣ficiently knowne through Europe; and Rhodes and the trade ther∣of. the valour of the ancient Knights the masters thereof sufficiently restified, in the defence thereof; it now (in matter of traffique) by reason of the commodious harbour and situation dai∣ly increaseth, and many Merchants Christians are found to frequent the place by day; but must by night get lodging in the suburbs, so fearfull are the Turkes of the losse or sur∣prisall of this place, which cost them so much blood in the gai∣ning. This Citie is a Mart for most of the commodities of the Arches, as of Corne, Wines, Oyles, Rasins, Wax, Honey, Cordivants, some cotton Commodities of Rhodes. woolls, and yarne and stuffes made thereof, as Dimitties, Vermilion, and as also some Damaskes and other stuffes of silke, &c. Their accounts are kept in aspers, onely amounting by increase, after the manner of the great Turkes treasures, to hundred and Accounts in Rhodes. thousand, and so to Loads or cargo, which is 100000 aspers. Their Movies is the same as throughout Turkie, all other coines being rather esteemed here as a commoditie than a coyne: for they Coine currant in Rhodes. rise and fall according to contract, so that in all bargaines here, the price of the money by the buyer as well as the price of the commo∣dity by the seller, must be agreed upon. Their weight is a Rotolo: the quintar is 100 Rotolos, which Roto∣lot 100 doe make in England 536 l', and by consequence the Rotolo of Weights in Rhodes. Rhodes is haberdupois 5l' 6℥. in circa, and hath made in Venice 800 l' sotle, and 506 l' grosse by observation; and in Genoa hath made 762 pound sotle, in Florence 701 pound, in Rome 676 pound, in Rhagu∣sa 666 pound. Their measure is a Cone which is about 84 inches English. Other Measures in Rhodes. notes have not come to my hands, therefore from hence I will saile to Candia, anciently Creete.
CHAP. CCLI. Of Candia and the trade thereof. THis Iland is situated in the mouth of the Egean Candia and the trade therof. Seas, and is very fruitfull in these commodities which it affordeth for Merchants; first, Muskadels, whereof there is above 2000 tonnes yearely ex∣ported, then in Sugars refin'd, and hence called Commodities of Candia. Candid, in Gummes, Honey, Waxe, Sugars, Dates, Olives, Apples, Oranges, Lemons, Reysins, but deficient in corne. The chiefe Cities herein are Candia, the Metropolis, Canea, Rhetmio, Sittia, and Suda not to be forgotten, being the best har∣bour Suda a brave Harbour. in all these Seas, & capable to receive 1000 saile of ships. The coynes of Venice is here current with little difference, and Coines cur∣rant in Candia. their accounts kept as there, and twice a yeare the Gally grosses from Venice come hither to furnish the inhabitants with all those commodities which nature hath denied them of, and which other, Germany, Italy, France, or England can afford them. There is here used two weights, or two quintals, as in Venice, a Weights in Candia. sotile and a grosse quintar, which is found thus to agree with the said Citie of Venice. 100 li. grosse of Candia is 110 li. grosse Venice, & 118. li. Engl. 100 li. sutle of Candia, is 114 li. sutle Venice, & 76 li. English. 100 li. grosse of Venice, makes here about 90 li. grosse. 100 li. sutle of Venice, make here about 86 in 87 li. sutle. There is here also used two picos, a cloth pico, and a silke pico, Measures in Candia. 100 braces cloth in Venice, is here in cloth 106 picos, () 100 braces silk in Venice is here also 100 pico silk, which by ob∣servation hath made in London () inches. Muskadels are here sold by a measure called the Mestach, 100 Of Wines. Mestach of cleare Malvoise, makes 24 quarts of the Begonso mea∣sure in Venice, or 21 of the Sechio measure, which is in England, () gallons. To proceed then in the Ionian Iles, I finde next Cerigo, which Cerigo. is plentifull in Marble, and out of the Castle of the chiefe towns of this Ile, was Helena the wife of Menelaus stolne by Paris, where during my abode here, the Castelan did shew me, and lodged me in the chamber whence as he would have me beleeve, she was ravished; but if it were so, her lodging I am confident was better then mine, for a soft boord was my best bed, & God knowes with what sorry coverings and appurtenances. The Strophades or strivali, are the next, giving onely a poore Strivast. livelihood to some few Greeke Colonies or ryers. And then Cursalari, noted onely as silent spectators to the bat∣tell Cursalari. of Lepanto, fought in Anno 1571. neere them. Then Corfu the key of the Venetian State, being in the center Corfu. of their dominions by Sea, of which a word by the way.
CHAP. CCLII. Of Corfu and the trade thereof. THis Iland having the principall towne of that Corfu and the trade therof. name, is now reputed to be one of the bul∣warkes of Christendome, and the key of the Venetian State, and is a reasonable fruitfull Iland, specially in waxe, honey, wine, oyle, and some other commodities. Their monies and accounts as in Venetia. Their weight is two as in Venice, a sotile and a grosse pound, and quintar, which thus is found to agree together: Weights in Corfu. 100 li. sutle of Corfu, makes sutle Venice, 133 li. & 90. li. London. 100 li. grosse of Corfu makes grosse Venice. Their measure in Corfu is a brace, which is () En∣glish inches. Measures in Corfu of Corn. Their corne measure is a Moija, which is 4 degalatros, which is 1½. stai of Venetia, and in England is () gallons. Wine is sold by the Iarre, 4 whereof makes a quart in Cerfu, which makes of the Sechio measure in Venetia, 6 Sechis, an jars Wine and 2 and ⅚. makes one quart Venetian in wine, which is in Eng∣land () gallons. Salt is sold by the Myetta, 1000 whereof makes in Venice 23. Salt. in 24 Moya incirca, and in London () bushels. Then comes in view Saint Maur, where stood a Temple, fa∣mous for curing unfortunate Lovers, but the medicine was by Saint Maur. casting themselves headlong into the Sea, and so I imagine they may be cured in any Country else whatsoever: the chiefe town is S. Maur, inhabited by Iewes only. There resteth yet of note in these Seas, the Ilands of Itheca, now called Val de campare, being 50 miles in compasse, and . North-east from the Iland of Sephalonia, being 66 miles in com∣passe, and wherein are found the townes and havens of Argusto∣li, Guiscard and Nllo, and on the South East thereof, is the I∣land of Zante or Zacynthus, about 40 miles in compasse, fortifi∣ed Zefalia. with a strong Castle on the East side, which commands the town of Zante, and the harbour thereunto adjoyning, the trade Zant. whereof I here for brevity sake comprise together.
CHAP. CCLIII. Of the Iland of Zante, Zeffalonia, and Ithecea, and the trade thereof. HAving before treated of these Ilands, and their si∣tuation, I now come to the trade thereof, as Zante, Zeffalo∣nia, and trade therof. found at the times of my being there which was in Anno 1619. and Anno 1624. with the needfull observations remarkable thereupon. The commodities that these three Ilands do yeeld for merchan∣dise, Commodities of these I∣lands. are Honey, Waxe, Oyles, Wines, and Corance, of which last here is found growing such abundance, that some yeares the English have laden here 3000 tonnes and upwards, besides what the Dutch, French, and other Countries do export, and is com∣puted to yeeld to the inhabitants 300000 Chequins incirca year∣ly, &c. and to the Signorie of Venice for custome, which is hereon very great 40000 Chequins. Of these Corance, Sefalonia doth yeeld the greatest quantity, but is commonly the smallest, and least esteemed: Zante doth Corants in Zant, Seffalonia and Theca. next yeeld a lesser proportion, but a better and larger sort: Itha∣ca, vulgarly Theaca, doth commonly produce the best and fai∣rest, but withall, the fewest in quantity. The commodities that this place doth vent comming from Eng∣land, is little, some Cloaths, Perpetuans, Sarges, Lead and Tinne, and some Fish of New-found land, also some Herrings and Pil∣chards, but the principall commodity brought hither is Rials Spa∣nish, with which these Corance above said are usually provided and bought, and no other commoditie is so welcome amongst them. Their moneyes currant are those of the Signior of Venice, as be∣ing under their government, and especially the Rials Spanish, Coines currāt in Zant, &c. which is hither by the English brought in great quantity, and also by all such other nations as have occasion of this fruit. Their accounts are kept by the Ilanders, as in Venice, but by the Merchants Strangers here resident, in Dollers, which are those Accounts in Zant, &c. Rials of . and gassets 80 to a doller. Their weight is the pound of 12 ounces, and the quintart is Weights of Zant, &c. 100 li. and found thus to agree with Venice and other places. 100 li. sotile of Venice makes here 63½ li. in these Ilands. 100 l. grosse of Venice, agrees with the common 100 l. hereof. The pound sotile in Venice, makes here 7 ounces, 2 sac. 16 per c.
Corance are here bought by the 1000 li. which by the com∣putation of concordancie, specified in this tract, should be sutle English 1070 li. which is grosse of London 9. C. 2. 6 li. but either by the deceit of weights, the falshood of staying, or the fraud of factors, it commonly produceth not so much by 2 or 3 per cent. and this mischiefe is increased to that height of late yeares, that it is found often times to produce but 9 C. grosse, or about 1020 li. sutle English, but let them that are herein guilty, indeavour to amend it in the future for their credit sake: for the 100 li. grosse Venice, is never found to yeeld lesse then 107 or 106 li. in England, and what is found wanting thereof to their principals, commeth by all probability by their default. Their measure is the brace, and found to be twofold in use, the long brace being for Cloth, Linnens, &c. agreeing with the Measures in Zante, &c. cloth brace in Venice, and found to be 27 inches English, and the short brace for silkes to be 6 in 7 per cent. the lesser oile is sold by a measure called the liver, and should weigh 13 li. English, 10 Of Oiles. whereof makes a candie barrell. Wine is sold by a measure called a Iarre 3½ is a candie barrell. Of Wines. Corne is sold by the measure called a Bachelo, 3 whereof is a staro, and weigheth 44 li. and 5 killowes make 6 Bachellos, which Of Corn. Bachello hath been observed to be in England gallons, and a Moya of corne here makes 2 staro in Venetia, and 7 Iarres of wine here, makes 3 quarts in Venetia. Customes of Zant, &c. The customes of these Ilands some few yeers past upon Corance, were small, till the Venetians perceiving the trade of that City to decay, thought to augment the revenues by the customes of the fruit of these Ilands, which accordingly they have effected, for seeing the English to covet the same unmeasurably, which at first the vulgar judged they used in the dye of their cloathes, or which was worst, in the feeding of their Swine, and finding on a time, sundry ships of burthen laden therewith, and ready to depart, their departure was stayed till the Merchants were com∣pelled to pay 5 Duckets, which is 25 sh. star. the 1000 li. upon which the Merchants English made complaint in England therof to his Majestie deceased, and for the taking away of that custome, it was thought fit to put as much more here in England thereup∣on, by way of an imposition, which hath been found to be so far from gaining a remedy, that the same continues in England, contrary to the first intent, and the State of Venice hath added 10 D. more to the former, as imagining England cannot subsist without this commodity, at what charge or discommodity whatsoever, yet it is now levied with this proviso, that the Co∣rance be laden in a vessell that doth come hither purposely to lade them, but if she landeth her outward fraught in Venice, or the thereof, and then commeth hither, she is freed therof, as I have shewed in the trade of that City.
CHAP. CCLIIII. Of the Ilands of the Adriaticke seas, and the trade thereof. THe Ilands found in these Seas are many, as Absyr∣tides; Adriatique Ilands. secondly, Cherso, Vegea, Grissa, Lesina, Cur∣sola, Brassia, Lissa, and Zara, all the rest are small, and appertaining to the Signior of Venice. The commodities that are hence exported for Commodities merchandise, is wood for fuell, Wines, Graine, Cattell, and some iles. CHAP. CCLV. Zara and the trade thereof. ZAra being for the goodnesse of its harbour, con∣ceived one of the best of the abovesaid, though Zara and the trade therof. small in circumference, yet most commodious for trading, therefore I will note what is observe∣able therein, and make it the principall of the rest, to which the trade of all the others may be reduced. Their moneyes I account the same as used in Venice, and the Dalmatian and Slavonian coynes are here passable, by reason of Monyes of Zara. their situation, which is bordering all along that continent. Their weights are two, a grosse and sotile, as is used in Venetia, Weights of Zara. but found thus to agree together. 100 li. sotile of Zara is Venetia sotile 120 li. English, 80 li. 100 li. grosse of Zara, is Venetia grosse 120 li. English, 128 li. 100 li. sutle Venetia, is grosse 83 li. Zara. 100 li. grosse Venetia, is grosse 83 li. Zara. Their common measures of length, is a brace 29 inches London, Measures of Zara. the 100 braces cloth in Venice, makes here 112 braces, and the 100 braces silke in Venice is here 106 or 107 braces, most of the other Ilands concurre with this in weight and measure. Now ∣ling hence, and getting out of these Ilands into the Mediterrane∣an Seas, in which survaying the most eminent of the European Iles therein contained: I finde in the first ranke the Ilands of Sici∣lia, Malta, Corsica, Sardinia, Majorque, Minorque, and some o∣thers now comming to be handled, and first for Sicilia.
CHAP. CCLVI. Of Sicilia and the Cities of trade thereof. SIcilia, anciently for its fertility in corne, accoun∣ted Sicilia and the Cities therof. the granary of Rome, is held to be 700 miles in compasse, and is beautified with sundry Rivers and Cities, which I shall handle in order as my methode requireth. The commodities exported Commodities hence for merchandise, and here abounding, are Wines, Oyles, Hoy, Wa, , Sugs, Salt, All, Corall, Agats, and some other Ges, and wonderfull fruitfull in all sorts of graine, also it hath some mines of gold and silver, also good quan∣tity of silke is here made, which is exported, both raw and wrought, into divers fabriques: here is also famous the hill Hi∣bla for Bees and Honey, and Mount Aetna for its continuall burning Mount Hibla▪ Mount Aetna. Division into 3 Provinces. and evaporating of flames. The Country is divided into 3 Pro∣vinces, the first is Vallis de Notto, wherein the City of Syracusa stands, once containing 22 miles in circuit, and the Metropolis of this Iland, and some others. The second Province is Masara, wherein is the Cities of Mntreal, 2 Gergenti and Palermo, now the chiefe City of Sicilie, whereto I will reduce the trade of this part of the Iland. CHAP. CCLVII. Of Palermo and the trade thereof. PAlermo, anciently Panormus, and a colony of the Phicians, is now the chiefe City of Sicilia, and Palermo and the trade ther∣of. the seat of the Spanish Viceroy, don Ferdinando de Castro, being Viceroy at my being here in 1619. from whom I and my company received so much honour, that I cannot without ingratitude, forget in this place to commemorate his noblenesse: the City is situate on the west cape of the Iland, and is beautified with large streets, deli∣cate buildings, strong walles, and magnificent Palaces and Temples: here I found a Dutch Gentleman attendant upon the
said Viceroy, who was intituled the English Consull, from whom I gathered these my observations in the trade of this place and Iland. Their accounts are here kept by ounces, taries, and graines. Accounts in Palermo and al Sicilia. One ounce is 30 taries. One tarie is 20 graines. Their moneyes are also ounces, taries, and graines, accounted one Monys currant in Sicilia. ounce to be 30 taries, which is 5 Florins, of carlins 1 the Florine. One tarie to be 20 graines, and is 12 sol. 6 den. small money. One tarie to be two Carlins. One Carlin to be 10 grains, and is 12 lires. One graine is 6 Picholies, and is 7 den. money Siciliano: One poncto is 8 picholis. A duccat of gold is worth 13 taries. Note that for the money which they pay by bils of Exchange, they give allowance 1. per cent. for bad money. It is to be observed that throughout all the Kingdom of Sicilia, there is but one weight in use, onely in Mesina excepted, which Weights in Palermo. I shall shew in its due place: now this weight of Sicilia in gene∣rall is the Rotolo of (30) ounces, which is 2 li. Siciliano, 100 Rot. making the cantar, which 100 li. hath been observed to have made in London 173 li. circa, or properly in grosse to say, 1 C. 2 Some have found it to yield 184 lib. English. quarters 4 li. incirca, and in Venetia sotile, to have produced 260 li. or Venice grosse 163 li. circa, and hath been found to ren∣der in Florence 225 in 230 li. but yet by the calculation I made, it should be but 221 li. just, it is in Rhagusa 218 li. in cattarro 78 li. Alexandria Zera, 83 Rot. dito forfori 185 Rot. in Damasco 43½. Rot. &c. Their measure of length is the cane, which is in London about Measure of length. 80 or 81 inches by the rule, which is 2¼. yards English; this cane is divided into 8 palmes, which is about 10 inches, the cane ma∣king 3 cloth braces in Venetia. Corne which is the prime commodity of this place and king∣dome, Of Corn. is sold by the Salmo, of which there is the grosse salme, and the generall Sicilian salmo, which is the small salmo, upon which generall salme, these observations have been made, and that the same is found to agree thus with these countries. In Ragusa staro 3. Dalmatia staro 3. Ancona somma 1½. Rici somma 1. Rine staro 1. Bolonia corbe 3½. In Andalusia 5 .
In Portugall 22½ Alquiers. In Florence 11¼ staios. In Avignon 5 sesteros. In Venetia 3 staros and 1 quarter. In Pisa 11 18 staros. Bergamo staro 13. Milan mesni 4⅛. Genoa measure 2 . In Ferrara staro 9. In Tripoli cafesi 15. In Tunis cafice 51. Alexandria ribebe 1 li. 1. Candia measures 14. Corfu mosi 2⅓. Catarro staro 3¼. Verona minali 7 quartero. Vicensia staro 9¼. Padua staro 9¼. Treviso staro 3. Modena staro 3 . Parma staro 6½. Mirandola staro 3 1/7. The grosse salmo of Palermo and Sicilia hath been observed to make in Spalatt staro 4. Ragusa staro 3 . Segnia quart. 12. Arbe staro 4. Istria staro 4. Padua staro 12. Vincentia staro 12. Ferrara staro 11. Forli staro 3 quarteroli 14. Belonia corbe 4 . Mantua staro 10. Cremona sommas 2. Bergamo staro 16. Verona minali 8 & 11½ quartroli. Brassia sommas 2 . Millan Mesini 5 1/9. Florentia staro 14. Wherin I have been somwhat the larger by reason of the gene∣rall use of this measure in the Levant Seas. Note that both the grosse and generall Salmo are divided into 16 Tomelos, and that the grosse Salmo is greater then the generall
Salmo about 17 per cent. and observe that the ordinary charges of corne here bought is 3 taries, and 15 grains the salmo, but if corne be above 18 taries per salmo, it payes also a new impost, which is per salmo. Salt is also sold by the salmo, which in Trappano is made in Of Salt. great quantity, where at my being here I observed to be as great as 3 ordinary salmos, of Corne, divided also into 16 tomelos, which made Sicilia weight about 7 Cantaros. Oile is here sold by the cantaro, which is 2¾ barr. of Florence, Of Oiles. and hath made 180 li. English. The custome of the Iland is commonly 9 and 10 per cent. but Customes of Sicilia. fish and other commodities for food pays 12 per cent. Palermo is also a place of great Exchanges, which briefly at Exchanges. my being there did run thus with other places, alwaies noting that all bils comming from abroad, pay one Carlin per ounce to make good money: and they exchange by ponctos as I have noted elsewhere: and they give in Palermo 160 pomutos incirca, With Naples. to have in Naples a duccat Corrant, and their account is made as in the particular of Naples is expressed. They give in Palermo 26 or 27 Carlins, to have in Rome a ducc. de Camera. With Rome. They gave in Palermo which is 6 taries accounted, and 1 Car∣lin per With Valencia. ounce more, to have in Valentia 10 sold. 3. den. and a crown of 12 taries, is 20 solds, and a duccat of 13 taries, is there estima∣ted for 21 sold. With Messina and Siracusa, and other places of the king∣dome, With Mesina. they exchange with the crown and the same moneyes. This note of Equality or Par, I also learned here for currant. For Valentia sold 9 dc. 10¾. per Florin. For Barselona sol. 11 d. 3⅖. per Florin. For Majorca sold 14 d. 10½. per Florin.: and for the afore∣said places, they consider the interest, to him that takes by Ex∣change at the rate of one carlin per ounce, which they recover accordingly, for the other particular circumstances thereof, I referre the reader to the end of this tract, where the Exchan∣ges of this place and Mesina is largely handled, and as the same may more amply there appeare in the Chapters 419. 420. 421. 422. 423. 424. and 425. with all particular circumstances, wherto I desire to be referred for better satisfaction. And in the next place survay the trade of Messina the second eminent City of traffique in this Iland.
CHAP. CCLVIII. Of Messina, and the trade therof. THe last Province of this Kingdome and Island is Mona, wherin are Cities of Nicosia in the Messina and the trade ther∣of. Midland, Milaso on the North Promontory, and Messina in the face opposite to Reggio in Calabria, which fare hath in times past been accounted to be very dangerous by reason of those anciently accounted perils, Scilla and Charybdis, the one a Sand, and the other a Rock, opposing each other at the entrance thereof, now not so much feared by our Seamen by being more expert: this towne is the most eminent towne of trade in all this Island, and inhabited by many Mer∣chants, which the benefit of the Haven doth much further, and the commodiousnesse of the situation, and the privileges and the immunities of the yeerly Fairs much augmenteth. The Commodities proper hereto, as also to the whole Island, as also the manner of keeping their Accounts, I have noted, but Monies finding some variation, and diversity by reason of trade, I will here briefly touch the same, first then A crown of gold of Italie, is worth 14 taries. Coines cur∣rant in Messi∣na. A crown of the place they account, 12 taries. A Tarie as in Palermo, 20 graines, is 2 carlins. An Ounce is as in Palermo, 30 taries. A Groine is 5 pecholies. A Florence duccat did passe for 11 taries, 4 gr. A duc. of Camera of Rome, for 12 taries 6 gr. A duc. of Carlins of Naples, for 10 taries 16⅔ gr. A crowne of Marc{que} is 12 taries. A liver grosse of Venice is 3 ounces, 21 taries, and 1 gr. One pound of grosse of Anvers is 1 ance and 10 taries. Marvedes 29½ of Spaine, is one tarie. And a pound starlin is here () The weights of Messina is found to be two, the first being the Note: grosse Cantar, wherby is weighed all manner of food, as flesh, cavier, fish, Tonnies, cheefe, &c. which is noted to be 10 per cent. greater then the second Cantar, and hath produced by com∣putation pound English 196, in 198 pound, and the smaller Can∣tar contains as the former 100 Rotolos of 30 ounces, or 2½ pound
Sicilano, doth agree with the summe mentioned in Palermo, as being the common weight of all the Island, and accounted (as I said before) to be 173 lib. but found by experience of some Eng∣lish Merchants, 184 lib. which I referre to triall, and they ac∣count 20 pesos to make a sotele cantar, and 22 peso the grosse, which is the generall Cantar of Palia. Their Measures is the same as mentioned in Palermo, which is Measures in Messina. the cane divided into 8 palmes for length, and the salmo divided into 16 tomelos for corne and so forth, as I have more at large handled under the Chapter of Palermo, as serving for great use to the Merchants that traffique in the Mediterranean Seas. All Stuffs of Linnen or Woollen (measurable) of this King∣dome, Customes of Messina. selling or not selling pay at Messina 6½ per cent. All Commodities of waight from without the Kingdome, selling or not selling pay at Messina 3 per cent. Remmoving from ship to ship pays, 3 per cent. or 3¼, all Mer∣chandise that is conveyed out of the Kingdom, at the Port of Mes∣sina, pays 6⅓ per cent. unlesse at the Fairetime, when as some Faires of Messina. commodities pays lesse then some others, so that Silke then pays only 3 per cent. I have noted an old printed observation between London and Messina to be thus, which I referre to the triall, that the 100 lib. of Palermo is in London, 172 lib. the 100 lib. of Messina in Silke makes silke weight in London 43½, and the Rotolo of Palermo, hath made in London, 1 lib. 9 ounces, the 100 yards hath made 44  Canes, and that the Cane hath made in London 2 1/4 yards or Ells 1 1/2 goad of Freezes and Cottons, and thus I will leave this City and Iland, and sail to Malta. Malta is the next Island of note in these Seas, famoused more Malta. by the Knights the now possessors, then by any traffique that is found therin, it is the place where Saint Paul suffered shipwrack, and where hee shook the Viper from his hand into the flame, which yet the inhabitants would perswade travellers hath left some vertue and relickes therof behinde him, which I referre to the relation of others, it aboundeth in Cotton-wooll, Oranges, Le∣mons, Citrons, Hony, Waxe, and some other fruits, the townes of note are , Saint Hermes, and Malta and some others. Corsica is the next, and seated opposite to Genoa, to whom it Corsica. belongeth being 300 miles in compane, Bastia is the chief City, and the residence of the Genoese Governour, with a commodious Haven and a strong Garrison, the principall Ports for shipping, are Saint Florence in the Northern part, and Saint Boniface in the South; the commodities therof are, Oiles, Figs, Reisins, Wines, Hony, Wax, Allom, Box-wood, Iron, good Horses, and fierce Mastives, little other Commodities it affordeth not, their weights and measure agreeth with Genoa.
Sardinia is the next, and accounted 550 miles in circuit, & sub∣ject to the Spaniard, divided into two parts, first, Cape Luggudory Sardinia. towards Corsica, and secondly Cape Cagliares towards Afrique, it affordeth for Merchandise corne in good plenty, and Oiles in rea∣sonable manner, but abundant of all sorts of cattle, as appeareth Commodities of Sardinia. by the great abundance of Hides and cheese, which in an homely manner is made here, and hence dispersed through Italie, Spain, and other Countries: there is here many towns, such as is Bossa, Sainta Reparata, Alquilastro, and lastly, Callary the Metropolis, of which a word: together with the trade therof. CHAP. CCLIX. Of Callary and the trade therof. CAllary is the principall City of this Iland, opposite Callary and the trade therof. to Afrique, the seat of the Spanish Vice-kings, en∣joying a goodly Haven, and much frequented by Merchants, and is an Archbishops See, and well sto∣red with eminent Citizens. Their monyes are generally the monyes of Valentia in the King∣dome Monyes of Callary. of Spain, but they have proper to the Island, some Copper or black monyes, to which the duccats and livers of Valentia are reduced, and their Accounts are kept in the same manner, as in that City. The common weight is the pound, consisting of 12 ounces, Weights in Sardinia. 100 li. thereof being their quintar, is English 88 in 89 li. and in Marselia 101 li. in Florence, 125 li. circa. Their common measures is a Vare and a Brace, the Vare found to agree with Valentia, and the Brace with Florence, the first used Measures in Sardinia. in cloth and linnen, and the latter in silkes, &c. Further observations on the trade of this Iland, hath not come to my hand, therfore I will hence saile to the next Ilands, which are those of Majorca and Minorca.
CHAP. CCLX. Of Majorca and Minorca, and the trade thereof. MAjorca is seated also in these seas 300 miles in cir∣cuit, Majorca and Minorca, and the trade therof. and 30 miles distant from the continent of Spaine, the principall City is Majorca, an Vniversi∣ty, and the seate of the Spanish Viceroy. Minorca is 9 miles distant from Majorque, and 150 miles in compasse, wherein is Minorca and Iava, the princi∣pall townes, but Mahon therein is found to be an excellent Port, able to containe 500 sayle of very great ships in safety from all weathers, whatsoever. This Country affordeth for merchandise, Commodities of Majorca,  &c. Corne, Wines, Oiles, this last being the principall commodity of this country, which the English doe here lade above 500 tunnes yearely, and some times more, and hence exported by them, if the Spaniard have not otherwise occasion for it for his own use, for from hence provisions are made for all the Eastern and We∣sterne Navigators. Their moneyes have reference to those currant in Spaine, and principally in Barselona and Valentia, and they ac∣count Monyes in Majorca. 7 Rials Spanish, and two Marvedes to make a liver here, by which their accounts are kept, being in liures, sold, and denieres, Accounts. 12 deniers to the sold, and 20 sold to the liver, which liver is 3 s. 8 d. star. but all commodities are here sold by the sold, 20 making a liver, which may be accounted 3 s. 8 d. starling as afore∣said, and they account 17 doublers is a Riall Span. Their weight is Weights of Majorca. in Majorca and Minorca two, the one the Rotolo, which 100 Ro∣tolos makes a cantar, called the cantar Barbaresco, which is 117 li. of the other weight, which they call a cantar of Majorca or Ma∣jorina, and consists of 104 li. The cantar barbaresco hath made in Pisa and Florence 141 li. in Venetia, sutle—163 li. in Venetia grosse—103 li. in London—110 li. The cantar Majorca which is 104 li. hath made in Valentia 116 li. 104 li. cantar Major. in Forence—120 li. in Venetia sotile—140 li. in Venetia grosse—110 li. in Genoa—130 li. in London—117 li. Some commodities are also sold by the cargo of three cantares, Car. but each cantar contains 104 li. by which cargo is Pepper, Ginger, Sinamond, Rise, Spices, and other things, and the cargo hath made in Venice 420 li. sotile, by the cantar barbaresco is weighed, wooll, hides, skins, metals, lead, tinne, and such grosse goods, and fine goods by the other quintar, or the cargo aforesaid.
Their measure of length is a cane, which hath made in London, 67 in 68 inches, which is 1⅞. yards London measure. Measures in Majorca, &c. Their measure of Oiles is a quarter, or quartano, 12 whereof is contained in an Odor or skin of Oyle, and 212 quartans I have found here in 1617. to be a tunne of 236 gallons, and 214. a tunne of 252 gallons or thereabouts, and 41¼. quartans, hath made in Venice, one Miara, and in Alexandria hath weighed 5 cantars, and 20 Rotolos. Oiles are commonly laden at Porcupin, and were found in my time to have there these charges for custome, 8 doublers per Of Oiles, and how they are laden, and the account therof made up in Majorca. lieur, which is 7 Rialls, and 2 Marved. Spanish, and 17 doblers, as I said before, being a Riall, for part 3 doblers per oder for measu∣ring 3 den. per oder for pipes at 3 livers the pipe, for sea custome at 9 dob. per liver, brokered at 1 den. per liver for halledge of the pipes at 5 sh. the pipe, stoadge at 8 den: the pipe, barkedge to Parcapin 2 sol. 6 den. the pipe, provision according to the cu∣stome of the place, at 3 per cent. A briefe of all which charges may be comprehended in this rule, certainely observe that accounting 214 quartans to a tunne, and for every soldo that a quartane doth cost here first penny, if you reckon 47 sh. 6. d. star∣ling for every the said soldo, so much infallibly will your tunne of oyle stand you in cleare abord of all charges, and thus much out of my owne triall I have thought good to insert in lading of Oiles in this place. Neare unto these Ilands are the Ilands of Ivisa, 100 miles in Ivisa. circuit, the chiefe City is Ivisa, the chiefest commodity that it affordeth, is salt, of the trade of which a word. CHAP. CCLXI. Of Ivisa, and the trade thereof. THe Iland of Ivisa, the chiefe City whereof▪ being Ivisa and the trade therof. Ivisa, consisteth wholy in making of salt, which is here sold by a measure called the Modino, which weigheth in summer by the weight of Valentia, which is here in use, is 33 cantars, and in winter, 36 cantar grosse, of the said place of Valentia, and cor∣responds with other places thus, in Majorca it maketh cantars 38. Of Salt. in Florence staros 50 in 52. in Genoa me. 9 in 9½. in Valentia Caffico 8. in Flanders, 100 Lutos, which is in Ivisa 13 Modini. in London () bushels. Their measures and weights I must referre to the better skild. Here is also Fromentary, Pantcleria and Lipara Iles, with the Leser Islands of the Medi∣terranean seas. Iles of Naples, as Capra, Ischia, Progitu, Elba, Gades or Cales, and some others which I passe by, and so saile into the Ocean, and observe the Ilands thereof.
CHAP. CCLXVII. Of the Ocean Ilands, and the trade thereof. BEing entred into these seas, I will begin with the Northern Islands. most Northerne Ilands thereof, and so drawing towards England, the place of our abode, and there determinate my traffique and peregrinati∣on. In the north then the report is credible, that the end of nature and of the world is, wherein by late discove∣ry are found these Ilands: first, Sir Hugh Willougbbies Iland, who Willougbbies. by his death gave life and knowledge to us of this Iland, search∣ing here a new way to China, Cathai, and Molluccos: then there is Nova Zembla only discovered, else not famous for any thing. Nova Zemb. Next, Frisland, subject to the King of Denmarke, and much Frisland. frequented by Dutch, English, and French for fish here taken in great abundance in the summer season onely. Then have we Island or Iciland, plentifull in Ling; the chiefe townes are Hal∣len Island. and Schasholton, and subject to the King of Sweden. Then Gronland, seated under the Northerne cold Zone, where their Gronland. longest summers daies is 3 moneths and a halfe, abounding in fish, of which there is a society now incorporated in London, by the name of Greeneland Company: the trade whereof principally consisteth in the fishing of Whales, for Fies and Oiles, and onely lasteth the summer season, and no longer, and then they are inforced to returne, by reason of the extremity of the cold and frosts. Now to come out of these cold Seas to the Ocean, as into more temperate Regions, I meet in my way with the O∣cades, Orchades 32. or Iles of Orkney, being 32 in number, the principall of which is Pomonia, stored with Tinne and Leade, next , then Pomonia. Shetland, anciently imagined the last Iland of the world, and called Thule. Then the Hebrides, which are 44. the prime whereof is Ila, a∣bounding Hebrides 44. in red Deare. 2 Iona famous for the Sepulchers of the Scottish Kings. 3 Mula, whose inhabitants are called the red shankes, the rest as of little note I omit. Then the Sorlings, which are 145. the principall being Ar∣math, Sorlings 145. Agnes, Sampson, and Silly, the name-giver to the rest and others. Here I meet also with 5 Ilands, which cannot be comprised within the former account, first the Ile of Man: which is ten Man. miles in length, and 10 in bredth, abounding in flaxe, hempe, ates, barley, and wheat, and some cattell; the chiefe townes are Ballacri and Russin or Castletoe. Then appeares the Ile of Anglesey, which is accounted a shire Anglesey. of Wales, in length 24. in bredth 17 miles, and for its abundant fertility in all things, is called by the neighbouring shires, M
Cimbri, the mother of Wales, as having plenty of all food and o∣ther provision necessary to preserve the life of man, out of which is yearely sent 3000 head of cattell to supply the wants of other Countries adjoyning, together with a good quantity of corne, butter, cheese, &c. the same had in times past 360 Towns and Villages, now it hath but one of consequence remaining, called Beaumares, commodious for trade, as commanding a faire, Beaumares. safe, and capacious haven and roade, to which as being the place of my birth, I owe this gratefull remembrance. Iarsey is the Iarsey. next, in compasse 20 miles, the chiefe townes are S. Hillarie and Saint Mollo, abounding in sheep, &c. Then Garnsey, 20 miles di∣stant Garnsey. from Iarsey, rich in good harbours, the chiefe towne is S. Peters. The last is the Ile of Wight, being 20 miles long, and 12 Wight. broad; the principall townes being Yarmouth, Newport, and Bra∣dring, it is well fortified and strengthened against all forraine at∣tempts whatsoever. There be also some other petty Ilands round about this shore, but I will passe them to come to those of greater note and consequence, which are Ireland and great Britaine, the last Ile & place, both of this my travell & traffique. CHAP. CCLXIII. Of Ireland and the Provinces thereof. IReland standeth West of Britaine, containing in Ireland and the Provinces therof. length 400 miles, and in bredth 200 miles, in∣joying this prerogative by nature, that no veno∣mous Serpent will neither live here, if brought from other Regions, nor yet doth naturally breed here: it is divided into 5 Provinces, which according to my former methode, I will in order touch, and see what townes of note they containe. Munster is the first, wherein is found the Cities of Limerick, seated on the bankes of Shenin, 2 Corke, 3 Kinsall and 4 Water∣ford: Munster 1. the first ground that ever I trod on out of my native soyle, being about 13 or 14 yeares old, and then began to be imployed by my Parents in trade of merchandising. Connaght is the second Province, the chiefe Cities are Dunrat∣tie and Gallaie; the third City in Ireland, both for fairenesse, Coght 2. largenesse, and for pleasant dwellings and situation. Vlster is the third Province, the chiefe townes are Dundale, 2 Dungannon, 3 Armath, an Archbishopricke, 4 Dongall, & 5 Landes Uls 3. derry, lately built, & peopled by the Citie & Citizens of London. Meth is the fourth, the chiefe towns are Kelly, 2 Tri, and last∣ly, Tredagh, a fine town, where also I refided in these my yonger Math 4. yeares of travell and first imployment in traffique. Lemster, is the last Province, wherin is found the Cities of Mer∣rge, Philips town, Kildare and Dublin, of the trade whereof  Lemster 5. word.
CHAP. CCLXIIII. Of Dublin, and the trade therof. DVblin is seated on the liffe, being the Metropolis of Of Dublin and the trade ther∣of. Ireland, and the residents of the Lord Deputy for the King of England, who is Soveraigne here, it being also an Archbishopricke and an Vniversity. The commodities the country doth afford for mer∣chandise, Commodities of Ireland. are these, first, the country abounds in cattell, each af∣fords tallow and hides in great abundance, which is hence expor∣ted to Spaine, France, and Italy, also Salmon is here caught good store in Iuly, August, and September, which is salted and expor∣ted, and in summer, the quantity is so great in some parts of this Iland, that the servants doe covenant with their masters, they must not feed thereon but certaine daies in the weeke. Herrings are here also caught, and accounted the best, as also Pilchards in August, September, and October, and thence vented to Spaine, France, and into the straights of Gibralter; here is also some but∣ter, cheese, pipe slaves, Calve-skins, and other commodities of late daies prohibited to be exported by the lawes of the King∣dome. The coines of this Kingdome in the standard, carrieth a concur∣rence Coines of Ireland. with those of England, which also are here current for the value, as being subject to one and the same Scepter, yet in di∣stinction of the true and reall worth, are found thus intituled. The pound of Ireland consisteth of 20 shillings Irish, yet in sterling is accounted but 15 shillings. The shilling by this account is but 9 d. sterling, and the sixe pence Irish is 4½ d. sterling. Here is also an Exchange found and practised, but not for any Exchanges of Ireland. forraigne part, saving England, and principally for London and Bristoll, commonly running at 8 d. upon the pound, and when most, at 12 d. per li. which is 5 per cent. Dublin, and in generall, all Ireland, hath the measures and Weights and Measures as in England. weights of England in use in their trassique, and agreeing there∣with in all particulars, I need not insist further therein. Now a word of the trade in generall of Ireland, as it is found observeable in these daies.
The daily conversation of the English nation, and the late un∣partiall and found administration of justice in this country, hath Of the trade in generall of Ireland. redeemed this Iland from the jawes of barbarisme, wherein it was ready to fall and suffer a ruine, and since by little and little, peace being firmely established, hath brought the inhabitants to a desire of inriching themselves, and this desire hath so well been seconded by their industry, that I may say it hath brought store and plenty into their dwellings, which hath hitherto met with so good a successe, that wheras few yeares past, this Coun∣try was with all necessaries supplied out of Englands and Scot∣lands abundance, it now returneth that courtesie, and contribu∣teth some yeares not onely to the wants of both, but to the wants of Spaine, France, and some other adjoyning Countries, for now it is found that the Earth and Seas addes to the inhabi∣tants labour and paines, as first the Seas and Rivers in their sea∣son affords them great plenty of Cod-fish, Hake-fish, Pilchards, Herrings, and these of both the largest, best, and in abundance, which they take, kill, and salt, and so disperse as a merchandise into France, Spaine, England, Scotland, and other Countries. Then the earth yeelds them a good breed of cattell, especial∣ly sheepe and oxen, in such store, that they have thereof in great abundance, as also of Hides, Woolles, Tallow, Butter, Cheese, and Beefe, and the Wooll, they by manufacturies convert into Cloth, Mantles, Rugges, Frises, and Yarne, whereof it is reported that there commeth yearely to the town of Manchester in Lancashire, to be there woven into stuffes, at least two hundred thousand weight fine and coarse: besides which, the bowels of the earth yeelds them Lead, Iron, and Tinne, and by their owne industry they have many other manufacturies, as also pipe-staves, waxe, honey, furres, hempe, linnen cloth, salt, and some others: all this considered, what should want here to make them eminent Mer∣chants, but shipping and skill in the Art of Navigation, and a de∣sire to imploy their talents in forraine Countries, which yet is not seen to be perfected amongst them: nature having to this end fitted them with many goodly Ports and navigable Rivers, and will in time I hope fit them with an inclination to second by their endeavours, what is so plentifully bestowed by her upon them, which by little and little may be brought to passe by the conversation and direction of the civilised English, that daily are seene to come and reside amongst them: and thus leaving Ire∣land, and my good wishes to the increase of her traffique, I hence passe over to Scotland, (a part of Britan) and view the pre∣sent trade thereof.
CHAP. CCLXV. Of Scotland, and the Provinces and Cities thereof. SCotland is the Northern part of Brittain, and Scotland and the trade therof. separated from England, by the River Tweed and Salwaie, and the Chenio-hils, extending from thence to the other, which being a Kingdome, and varying in the manner of trade from England; I have thought good here to insert by it self. The Commodities that this Country affordeth for Merchan∣dise Commodities of Scotland. are coarse Clothes, Freezes, Fish salted, Hides, Tallow, Lead, Oare, some Graine, Feathers, and other Commodities, as Sea-coale, Allome, Iron, &c. This Country is divided into two parts, the high-land and the low-land, and the same into severall Sherifdomes, or Provinces, in which are found these Towns of consequence. CHAP. CCLXVI. Of Edenburgh, and the trade thereof. FIrst Edenburgh, wherein, is seated the Kings Palace, Edenburgh and the trade therof. and the Court of Iustice, consisting principally of one street of a mile in length, whereto doth lead many other pretty Lanes, making the whole neer three miles in circuit, the second Town is Glasco, an Archbishops See, and an Vniversity; the third is Saint Andrews in Fiffe, honourd with many Prerogatives; fourthly, Sterling: then is Perth, Aberdon, Dondes, Saint Iohn's Town, and some others of lesser note. Their currant Monyes in Merchandise is the proper Coynes of Monyes of Scotland.
that Kingdome both in Gold and Silver, which are usually found to be in Gold Pieces of 22 shill. sterl. Pieces of 11 shill. sterl. Pieces of 5 6 d. sterl. Pieces of 2 9 d. sterl. Pieces of 4 4 d. sterl. In Silver, first Pieces of 1 shill. 1½ d. sterl. Pieces of ½ the ¼ and ⅛ therof. Pieces of 9-9 d. being ⅔ of the 13 d. ½ ster. one Mark. Pieces of ½ which is 4½ d. being  of the a∣bove said. Againe, 13 d. sterl. is Scotch Marke, or 13 shill. 4 d. Scotch. 6⅔ is a Scotch Noble, 6 shill. 8. 20 d. sterl. is 1½ Mark Scotch. or 1 pound Scotch of 20 shill. 20 shill. sterl. is 18 Soctch Marks. Besides which are here found currant the Coynes of England, and hee that would see further into the intrinsecall value and weight of these Coynes either of Silver and Gold, must have re∣course to a Proclamation set out by our Soveraigne King Iames de∣ceased, dated in 1609, which will also shew their conformitie to the Coynes of England in waight and goodnesse, and the currant va∣lue and estimation therof through this Kingdome. Here is practised for England an Enchange for monyes as is Exchanges in Scotland. done upon the Scotch Mark for 12 pence sterling in London, &c. Their Accounts are now kept severall ways, some following the custome of England, by sterling pounds, shillings and pence, and Accounts in Scotland. some by their own ancient manner also in pounds, shillings & pence Scottish, 20 pence sterling being their pound, 13 d. ½ being their Mark, and pence Scottish, of which they had some black or cop∣per Monyes, as Babaes, esteemed by them for six pence, wherof two made a penny sterling, Placks which they esteemed for four pence, but three of them made a penny sterling, and lastly, pie∣ces called hard-heads, esteemed by them at 1½ pence, but eight of them made a penny sterling mony, and some of these are yet cur∣rant amongst them. They have in generall (as is also the custome of England) but Weights of Scotland. one weight for weighing of their Merchandise, and for buying and selling throughout the Kingdome, which is the pound of 16 ounces, 100 of which pound makes their Quintall, which is
found to make. In London and all throughout England 108 lib. haberdupis, and the 100 li. London sotile is found to render here 92 lib. incirca, or the 112 lib. to give 103 lib. or thereabouts. Their common Measure in length for Linnens, Cloth, Silke, or Measures of length. Stuffs, is an Ell common in use throughout Scotland, which is a∣bout 4 per cent. differing from our English yard, as being greater, 120 for 100. so that wheras we allow 36 inches to the yard by Rule, their Ell may make incirca 34½ inches, it having beene observed by Traders hither, that 75 yards in London or Ells, 60 Ells hath made here 72 Scotch Ells, but in their hundred by tale in mea∣sure they account six score or 120 for 100. In other Measures of Corn, Coal, Salt, or liquid measures of Beer, Ale, Wines, Oiles, and such like, imitate the better experien∣ced to supply my defects therin, for I hasten now towards Eng∣land, and so to London, the City of my aboad, and the end of my present labours, and by the way wil observe that the Inhabi∣tants of this Country, are much addicted both to Trade and Na∣vigation, and have many good helps and furtherances there both by the naturall and artificiall Commodities of the Country, and the good Ports of the same, so that in briefe I may conclude, this Kingdome, to be more addicted to Traffique and Navigation then the Irish, and yet not so much as the English, which yet by the gracious aspect of our Soveraigne is seen daily to increase, and may in time come to a greater perfection. CHAP. CCLXVII. Of Brittaine, and the Provinces and Cities thereof. HAving now set my foot upon the happy shoare, and Brittain and the Provinces therof. run through the trade of most of the greatest knowne Cities of Commerce and Traffique in the World, give me leave to survay the distinct ports of this Kingdome, that I may not do lesse to our own then in this Tract I have done to other Forrain Countries. Brittain then the Queen of Islands is found to be in circuit 1836 miles, extending it selfe (comprehending England, Wales, and Scotland as of one entire Island, which wee now know by the name of Great Brittain) 800 miles, being divided into 3 parts, as into England and Wales, whose trade wee have now in hand, and Scotland whose traffique we have already declared.
CHAP. CCLXVIIII. Of Wales, and the Cities thereof. WAles then being the second part of this divi∣sion, is bounded on all sides with the seas, except the East, where it is separated from Of Wales and the Cities therof. England by the River Dee, and a line drawn to the river Wie, but by some by Claud Offa, or Offas ditch, or more proper by interpre∣tation, Offas Hedge or Rampire, beginning at the influx of Wie, into Severne, reaching unto Chester for 84 miles, where the River of Dee entreth into the Sea. The Country is in many places mountainous and barren, yet able of its selfe to subsist without assistance of any neighbour∣hood, partly by the industry of the inhabitants, and partly by the plenty of some of the shires thereof, the most fruitfull affor∣ding supply to others that are found the most barren & deficiēt. The commodities which this Country doth yeeld and vent abroad for merchandise, are first cattell in abundance, bred in ge∣nerall through the whole Country, waxe, honey, herrings white Commodities of Wales. and red, butter and cheese in great plenty, woolles also in some measure; also this Country is well stored with Mines of Silver, Lead, Lead are, Cole, and some Tinne, Milstones and good quar∣ries of freestone for building, Hides, Calfeskins, Frises, Baies, some linnens, and great quantity of cottons, knowne by the name of welsh Cottons and plaines, which in Oswestry, seated in Shropshire, is every Munday (as the common rie of all Wales) vented in great abundance, and thence dispersed throughout England, and so thence is shipped and conveyed to supply the defects of Normandy, Britaine, and Picardy, and of late have found a cur∣rent vent in Spaine, Turkie, and other countries: therefore I would incourage my countrymen to goe on in their manufactures of woolls seeing that nature hath done her part to give them the materials, their industry must be added, and that will soon bring forward the art, and all these conjoyned, will bring a benefit for a reward of all, and to all of them. Wales is found at this day to containe 4 circuits for the admi∣nistration of Iustice, 1 Flt, ,  shires being the first, nor, Glamorg, and Breckcke shires being the Foure Circuits in Wales. second, Cardigan, Cthen, and  shires, being the third, Meri, Canarvan, and the Ile of Anglesey, the fourth,
also to containe 4 Diocesse for Ecclesiasticall discipline, and these comprehended in twelve shires, wherein is also found 1 Chase, Foure Dio∣ceses. Twelve Shires. 13 Forrests, 36 Parkes, 99 Bridges, 230 Rivers, 1016 Parishes, wherein are noted to be 56 market townes, being no Cities, and in them 41 Castles, and 4 Cities, being the seats of so many Bi∣shops, as 1 Saint Davids in Pembrokeshire, 2 Bangor in Carnar∣vanshire, 3 Assaph in Flintshire, 4 Landaffe in Glamorganshire: Lastly, the inhabitants are accounted men of faithfull carriage one to another, most especially in a strange Country, and to strangers in their owne, and use a peculiar language that hath remained without alteration or commixture with any other in the world, from the originall thereof to this day. And lastly, to their everlasting praise and commendation, have for many yeares valiantly withstood all their enemies by their owne proper valour, and being joyned to the Crowne of England, have beene found to be true and loyall to the same, and have so continued in all amity, love, and faithfulnesse. CHAP. CCLXIX. England and the Cities thereof. ENgland is the principall part of Britaine and now the last in my labours, bounded on the East with England and the Cities therof. the Germane, on the West with the Irish, on the South with the British Oceans, and on the North with Scotland, as is afore mentioned. The Orna∣ments of this Country hath in times past beene expressed unto us by this verse, Anglia, Mns, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Famina, Lana. England is stord' with Mountains, Bridges, Woll, With Churches, Rivers, Women beautifull. But these are not the commodities that Merchants looke after, therefore I will shew you in his proper place, those commodities which England doth naturally afford for merchandise, and in the meane season, it will not be improper that I runne over the Pro∣vinces of this kingdome, and the rein see what particulars may be gathered out of each, conducing other to traffique, or to the honour and commoditie of the Country, and thereto adde also the Provinces of Wales, purposely omitted for this place. The Provinces or more properly the shires of England and Wales, ac∣cording to Camen, whom I gladly follow in this description, are these.
The first is Cornewall, in it self a barren and mountanous coun∣try, but the bosome thereof incloseth rich mines of Tinne, which Cornwall. for the excellence thereof, is famous throughout the world, also therewith is digged gold and silver, and a certaine stone is found upon the earth of it selfe transparent, and naturally formed into angles and points, which if found in forraine countries, would be held admirable: here is also upon this coast taken Pilchards and Herrings in great abundance, which the inhabitants do salt and dry in the smoake, and so transport into France, Spaine, and Italie, to good advantage: the sea-coast is beautified with many Townes, and Havens, capable of many ships, Famouth being the chiefe, and here is found that famous Mount Michael, by the in∣habitants called Cana, which hath for many ages beene noted for its steepenesse and antiquity. The second is Devonshire, no lesse rich in veines of Tinne, and withall beautified with many Towns and good havens then the Devon. 2. former, Ex being the principall Town, and an inland Citie, but Dartmouth and Plimouth the best havens, this last being from a poore fishing village▪ become to be a fire towne, by reason of the Castle and commodiousnesse of the haven, and the rather it is to be mentioned, as giving birth to Sir Francis Drake, Knight, who in our fathers dayes accomplished at Sea so ma∣ny notable exploits, and was the chiefe glory of that age for Navigation. The third is Dorsetshire, Dorchester being the chiefe town, and Waiemouth the chiefe haven. Dorset. 3. Somersetshire is the fourth, happy in the fruitfull soile, rich pa∣stures, Somerset. 4. multitude of inhabitants, and commodity of havens: the chiefe townes are Bridewater, next Bath, famous for those me∣dicinall Bathes there found, and lastly Bristoll, incompassed with a double wall seated on the River Severne, beautified with ma∣ny faire private and publike buildings, and next to London and Yorke it is preferred to all other Cities of England, but in ampli∣tude of traffique, shipping, and eminence of Merchants, next to London it selfe, and else in my opinion second to none. Wiltshire is the fifth, altogether an inland Country, the chie∣fest Wiltshire 5. towns are Malmsbury, famous for the cloths of wooll made here, Salisbury for the Bishopricke, and Wilton of old, the chiefe of this County, now a little village. Hampshire is the sixth, wherein is found the little faire City of Hampshire 6. Southampton, Winchester the pleasant, and Portsmouth the onely now Garison towne of England. Barkshire is the seventh, wherein is found the towne of New∣bery, Barkshire 7. famous for clothing, and Windsore for the Kings Castle, and where the ceremony of the Knights of the Garter is solemnised. Surry is the eighth, wherin is seen Olands and Richmond, two beautifull & stately Pallaces, belonging to the Kings of England. Surrey 8. Sussex is the ninth, Chichester being the chiefe City, & Rie the Sussex 9. chiefe sea town.
Kent is the next, rich in Medows, Pastures, Groves, Apples, and Kent 10. Cherries, wherin is found seated the Cinque Ports, Deptford, the Kings yard for the building of his ships, Rochester the seat of a Bishop, ltham and Greenwitch, two Palaces of the Kings, Dover a famous Sea Port, and one of the Keys of this Iland, and lastly, Canterbury, the prime of this County, and the seat of the Arch∣bishop and Metropolitane of all England. Glocestershire is the 11, the principall Townes are Tewksbury, Glocester 11. famous for Cloth-making, and Glocester the chief of the Coun∣ty, here are also found the famous Hils of Cotswold, upon which great flocks of sheep are found to feed, yielding that excellent Wooll, so much esteemed amongst all nations. Oxfordshire is the 12. which is a fruitfull County, both in Oxford 12. corne and pasture, and wherein is found Woodstocke, a house of the Kings, and an inclosed Parke with a stone wall, imagined the first in this land, and Oxford, an Vniversay famous through the world, and chiefe of this Iland. Buckinghamshire is the 13. wherein is found the good towns Buckingham 13. of Ailsbury, Snistratford, and Buckingham, the principall of this County. Bedfordshire is the next, and shewes the towne of Bedford for Bedford 14. the first of this County. Hertfordshire is the 15. wherein is the stately house of Theo∣balds, Hertfordshire 15 a house of the Kings, Saint Albans, a faire through-fare, and Hertford the principall of the County. Middlesex is the 16. wherein is found the Kings Palace, Hamp∣ton Middlesex 16. Court, and London, the prime Citie of this kingdome, and the Chamber of the Kings of England, so famous abroad in forraine Countries, that it needs no mans commendation: it is beautified with sundry Colledges, for the study of the Municiple lawes, with the Churches of Westminster and London, besides divers o∣thers, with the Hall of Westminster, where the Parliaments ex∣traordinary, and Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench, and other Courts are ordinarily kept, with the two Pallaces of White Hall and Saint Iames, with an Exchange or Burse for Merchants to meet in, with a sumptuous and wonderfull Bridge of free-stone, besides many other excellent private and publique edifices. Essex is the next, abounding in pasturedge, corne, and saffron, Essex 17. and in which is found Chelmsford the chiefe towne, Colchester, , and others abounding with ayes, sayes, and other new dropery, and lastly, Harwich, a safe haven for ships. Suffolke is the next, which affords quantity of butter, cheese, Suffolke 18. and cloths, known by the names of Suffolke cloth, wherin is found S. Edds By, and Ipswich, which hath a commodious haven. Northfolke is the 19. a large champaine Country, abounding Norfolke 1 in Cies and Sheepe, affording the two good haven townes of Linne and Yarmouth, and Norwich, the first of the County,
which deserves to be numbred amongst the chiefest Cities of England. Cambridgeshire is the 20, which is found to abound in corne, Cambridge 20. and wherein is seene the Vniversity of Cambridge, and Ely fa∣mous for being the seate of a Bishop. Huntingtonshire is the 21. the chiefe towne being Hunting∣ton. Huntington 21. Northamptonshire is the 22. abounding in corne, Peterborough Northāpton 22. being here the seate of a Bishop, and Northampton the chiefe Citie. Leycestershire is the 23. abounding in corne, Leicester the chiefe towne is more famous for the antiquity, then for the beauty Leicester 23. thereof. Rutlandshire is the 24. and accounted the least County in this kingdome, Vppingham being the chiefe towne. Rutland 24. Lincolnshire is the 25. rich in corne and pasture, abounding with Lincoln 25. fish and fowle; Lincolne once a great City, is yet the greatest in this County. Nottinghamshire is the 26. wherein is Nottingham, the chiefe Nottingham 26. towne, and the Forrest of Sherwood, feeding many fallow and red Deare. Darbishire is the 27. the chiefe City is Darby, famous for the Ale thereof; in this County are also many Mines of leade, Darby 27. and other minerals. Warwickshire is the 28. wherein is found Warwicke, the prime City, and Coventry a faire walled City, and accounted the Warwick 28. fairest inland City of this Iland, wherein now great quantity of cloth is made. Worcestershire is the 29. wherein is found the City of Worster, Worcester 29. famous now for clothing, and the seate of a Bishop. Staffordshire is the 30. which affordeth Salt-pits, and Wels, Stafford 30. and Coals, taken out of the earth, stone, and Lichfield being the principall Towns of the County. Shropshire is the 31. wherin is found Ludlow, of more beautie then antiquity, honour'd with a Councell and Court of Iustice for Shropshire 31. Wales, and a Palace for the Princes therof, Shrewsbery the chief of this County, much inriched by their trade for Cottons and Fri∣ses, with their neighbours the Welsh, whom yet notwithstanding they greatly affect not. Cheshire is the 32. abounding in pastures, and in excellent Chee∣ses hence transported throughout England, it hath Chester for the Chester 32. chief City seated on the River Dee. Herefordshire is the 33, and boasteth to be for its fertility and abundance of all things the first Shire in England, Hereford is Hereford 33. the chiefe Citie, and Lester justly boasteth of the sheeps wooll, feeding in those grounds, with which no part of Europe can e∣quallize.
Yorkeshire is the thirty fourth, and the largest County of Yorkshire 34. all England, abounding in corne, pasture, and meadowes, yeelding clothing by the industry of the inhabitants in abundance; Yorke being the chiefe City, and the second in England, and the seate of an Archbishop, here is a Court of Iustice held for the neighbou∣ring Marches, according to that of Ludlow; in this County is also the towne of Hull, seated on the River of Humber, where are found Merchants of good quality, and here is also the Castle of Scarborough, where in the adjoyning sea is the great fishing found annually for herrings. Richmond is the 35. in which is found mountaines to yeeld Richmond 35. plentifull leade, pit-coales, and some brasse, and the chiefe City of this County is called Richmond. The Bishopricke of Durham is the 36. pleasant in Meadowes, Durham 36. Pastures and Groves, and aboundeth in sea coales, which is digged out of the earth, Durham is the chiefe City. Lancashire is the 37. wherein is Manchester, an old towne in∣riched Lancashire 37. by the industry of the inhabitants, by cloth of linnen and woollen, the City of Lancaster being the first of the Shire. Westmerland is the 38. the chiefe towne is Kendall, famous Westmerland 38 for making of cloth of wooll. Cumberland is the 39. affording Mines of brasse, and some Cumberland 39. veines of silver, and blacke leade in abundance, Carlile being the principall towne, here are found apparent ruins of that wall which the Romans built, to keep out the Picts from making in∣cursions upon the Britans, being as it seemes, then so poore, as they cared not to subdue them. Northumberland is the 40. wherein is found the sea towne of Northumber. 40 Newcastle, which affords such abundance of seacoale, that the same is thence transported into many kingdomes of the world: here is also Barwicke, one of the strongest fortified townes of Barwick. England, formerly strengthened against the incursions of the Scots, by a strong garrison of souldiers, and now dismissed by the happy union of England and Scotland. Having thus briefly run over the shires of England, it will be necessary I should here adde the like cursorie view of woolles, comprehended under the government of England, and included within the same limit, and omitted to this place, as being parts of the said kingdome, which I finde to be in number these. Anglesey I account the first, which I have touched amongst Shires of Wales. Anglesey 1. the Ilands, being esteemed a County of Wales, having Beawma∣ris for the principall town of the County. Flintshire is the second, plentifull in corne and pasture, famous Flint 2. for the Spring of Holy Well, called here S. Winifreds Well, and Flint towne being the chiefest of the County.
Denbishire is the next, affording some mines of leade, wherein Deigh 3. is found Wrexham that boasts of its holy tower, and musicall Or∣gans, and Denbigh, the chiefe of this County. Carnarvanshire is the next, anciently called Snoden Forrest, be∣fore Carvan 4. that Wales was reduced to Counties, wherein is found the high hils, the alpes of Britaine, also Aberconwaie, a strong and faire little towne; Bangor the seate of a Bishop, and Carnarvan the chiefe of this Province, famous for the birth place of Ed∣ward the second, and the first Prince of Wales of English bloud. Merionethshire is the next, a mountainous Country, affording Merioneth 5. notwithstanding good pasture for cattell. The chiefe towne is Balla, a poore towne yet principall of these Mountenars. Montgomeryshire is the next, having the chiefe towne of the Montgomery 6. same name. Cardiganshire is the seventh, and hath the towne of Cardigan Cardigan 7. for the chiefe towne of the County. Pembrokeshire is the eighth, Pembroke is the chiefe towne, and here a long necke of land makes a haven, called Milford Haven, Pembrock 8. then which Europe hath not a more Noble, more safe, or more large, with many creekes and safe roades, wherein 1000 saile may ride out of sight one of another, and made the more fa∣mous by the landing of Henry the seventh. Caermardenshire is the next, abounding in corne, sheepe, and in pit coale, Caermarden being the chiefe towne. Cmarden 9. Glamorganshire is the next, Cardiffe is the chiefe town, having a commodious haven for shipping. Glagan 10. Monmouthshire is the next, wherein is found Chepstow and Mon∣mouth, Monmouth 11. the last glorious in giving life to Henry the fifth, Conquer of France. Brecknockshire is the next, Brecknocke being the chiefe towne. Brecknock 12. Radnorshire is the next and last, wherein is found Radnor for the chiefe towne. These are in briefe the shires of Wales. Radnor 13. To observe now my former method, having particularly thus surveyed the continent, let me now search into those commodi∣ties which England in generall affords for merchandise, and is thence exported into forraine Regions, as being the principall motives of trade in all kingdomes which it produceth severall waies. First, by manufacturies it yeeldeth, woollen cloths of all Commodities in England. sorts, broad and narrow, known and called by the name of se∣verall shires, also Perpetuanes, Bayes, Sayes, Sarges, Cottons, Ker∣sies, Buffins, Mocados, Grogram, Sattins, Calimancaes, Velvets, Plushes, Worsteds, Fustians, Durances, Tukes, and infinite others; there is made in this Iland, yearely 250000 clothes by compu∣tation, and by this may be guessed the quantity of the rest of o∣ther sorts, also Furres and skins, as Cony skins, Squirrell skins, Fitches, Calfe skins, Hides, and sundry others. Also it produceth by mines, and out of the earth, 1 Tinne
1200000 li. yearely, lde, 800 fodres yearely, aliome 800 tunnes yearely, Copperes 500 tunnes yearely, Iron of all sorts, 800 furaces daily set on worke, besides Ordnance of Iron, and such like, sea coale yearely () chaldrons, salt, () tunnes, also all manner of graine, Oates, Pease, Barley, Rie, and Wheate in great plenty, also linnen cloth, all iron wares, Tallow, Leather, Glasse, and Glasses of all sorts, Venice gold and silver, traine oyle, Salmons, Pilchards, and Herrings, Hake, Conger, and Haberdine, Hops, Wood, Butter, Cheese, Beere, Salt-peter, Gun∣powder, Hony, Waxe, Alablaster, and some other stones, Woolles, Wolfills Yarne, Yernsey, &c. and to conclude, many other good and rich commodities is here found. The beauty and wealth of this kingdome is demonstrated in Beauty of England. 325 Rivers, 8 therof being great and Navigable for some miles, whereon is found 857 Bridges, 30 Chases, 55 Forrests, 745 Parkes, here are also reckoned 26 Deanries, 60 Archdeaconries, 544 dignities and Prebends, 5439 Parochiall benefices, besides Im∣proprtations Six Circuits. and Vicaredges, and the whole divided into 6 circuits for the administration of Iustice, into 22 Episcopall Dioces for Ec∣clesiasticall discipline, and into two Archbishoprickes, under whom the rest are subordinate: and lastly, into 40 shires, over each of which, is a yearely Sheriffe appointed, who is to assist the Itine∣rary Iudges in executing Iustice, and to gather in the Kings a∣mercements: and these shires are divided into hundreds, and these hundreds into tithings, and to conclude, in England is found 145 Castles, 9527 Parishes, besides Chappels whereof 585 are market Towns, and 22 Cities, the principall wherof are these, 1 Oxford, 2 Cambridge, both being Vniversities, 3 Excester in De∣vonshire, 4 Norwich in Norfolke, 5 Bristoll watered by Severne, ac∣counted the second for trade in this Country, 6 Yorke, on the River Vre, accounted the second City for beauty and greatnesse in England; and lastly, London, under which I will comprise the trade of this whole Iland.
CHAP. CCLXX. Of London, and the trade thereof. LOndon, the Metropolis of England, the prime City of trading this day in the world, is pleasantly sea∣ted London and the trade therof. on the River of Thames, which divideth it in∣to two parts, her circuit may be 8 miles, wherein is found 122 Parish Churches, with the Pallace of the King, the houses of the Nobility, Colledges for the study of the Lawes, and divers other stately publique edifices, and may contain 400000 people. Here have their residencie, the rich and most eminent Merchants of this Iland, whom divers Princes of Merchants of London. this Kingdome have incorporated into severall societies and companies, partly to incourage their indeavours, and partly in reward of the discoveries of those Countries and Regions, whereof they take their name, and by the power and immuni∣ties granted them, doe make acts and orders for the benefit of commerce in generall, and of their Companies in particular. The ancientest of which companies have had their originall and con∣tinuance since Edward the first his raigne, called the Company Merchant Ad∣venturers, and their originall and places of residencie. of Merchants adventurers, grounded at first upon the exportati∣ons of wooll onely as the prime and staple commodity of this kingdome, since which it is grounded upon clothing, into which this wooll is now converted, for he at the request and being in league with the Cities and Townes of Flanders, made Brudges, which was then the greatest Mart of Christendome, the staple for  woolls, where it continued for 15 yeares, when as by some discontent with the Flemmings, and by experience seeing what the benefit of these staples were, removed them from Brudges to England, and for the ease, as well of his subjects, in bringing their woolls into those parts, as of such forraine Merchants as came to buy the same, he placed his staples at Exon, Bristoll, Win∣chester, Westminster, Chichester, Canterbury, Norwich, Lincolne, Yorke, and Newcastle, for the kingdome of England; at Caermar∣den for Wales; at Dublin, Waterford, Corke, and Tredath for Ire∣land, and enacted that no English, Irish, or Welshman, should transport this stapled commodity, (nor not by licences, if any such should be granted) on paine of confiscation, during the Kings pleasure. Lastly, he allured over hither divers Flemmings, which taught our nation the making of cloth, who are now growne the best cloth workers in the world, and to incourage them in that Art, in the 27 of his raigne, it was by statute enacted to be fellony, to trans∣port
hence woolles unwrought. Now when England had thus for some time enjoyed the benefit of these staples, he removed the same to Callais, which he had then conquered, and which he desired to inrich: from hence they were at severall times and occasions removed, now to one, now to another towne in Bel∣gium, and still happy was that Towne in whaat Country soever where the said Company kept a house for their traffique and residence, the confluence of all people thither to buy, infinitely inriching it. Antwerpe for a long time enjoyed their company, till upon some discontents between Henry the seventh, and Maxi∣milian, Arch duke, they removed thence, but at their return again, they were received by the Antwerpians with solemn processions, Princely triumph, sumptuous feasts, rare banquettings, and ex∣pressions of much joy, and more love: here they continued till the surprisall and sacke of this towne by the Spaniards, in Anno () where by reason of the wrongs and hard measure there received, they removed into two places, the one to Mid∣dleborough, the other to Stoade, afterward from Middleborough to Delph, and from Delph, now to Rotterdam, where they have lately seated themselves, with many immunities granted them, and a Pallace appointed them for their residence; the other from Stoade by some vicissitude of change, is now placed at Hamburge, where also they have many priviledges, and the said Company being now inlarged, and all new Draperie comprised therein, they intend to implant more factories in other places, and this is the most ancient of all our Societies, which is observed to be governed beyond the Seas in the said places, by a deputy and certaine assistants, and in England by a Governour, Depu∣ty, and certaine assistants, Sir Thomas Mouls Knight, and Al∣derman, being the present Governour, to whose worth and go∣vernment, I owe here this acknowledgement, as being a mem∣ber of this so ancient and worthy a society. The next to these are the Barbary Merchants, which had their originall in Henry the sevenths time, being indeed the age where∣in Barbary Mer∣chants their originall and ruine. our nation did begin, by imitation of the Portugals and Spani∣ards, to discover new regions: and this flourished and continued till the end of Queene Elizabeths raigne, wherein it fell when as civill warres was not in Morocco and Fesse, amongst the preten∣ders to that Empire. Out of whose ashes about that time, did rise the Levant Com∣pany, Levant Mer∣chants & their originall. or Turky Merchants, and by their Discoveries and Trade first made the Traffique into the Signorie of Venice, and then to the Dominions of the Great Turk, including as then within their privileges the East Indies Navigation which was as then known to them only by Land, and to the Portugals by Sea. since which the said Indies are raised to a great and eminent Company, and by themselves incorporated, imploying in a joynt stocke, a great
Capitoll, by which trade and stock they have built many war∣like Ships, and brought all those Indian Commodities to our East India Merchants & their originall homes, which before were brought to us by other Nations, both which Companies now supplyeth our Land, and by their second transportation many other Countries, with those rich Commo∣dities, which Venetia, Turkie, Arabia, Egypt, Persia, China, and India yieldeth, and is found governed in England by Sir Maurice Ab∣bot Knight and Alderman, and by Master Henry Garraway Alder∣man, the former Governour of the East India Company, and the latter of the Turkie Company, to which are joyned certain Com∣mittees and Assistants, to whose worth and government I also here do owe this acknowledgment, as being now both a mem∣ber, and intrusted with a particular charge in both the said Companies. Other Countries and Companies in the latter end of Queen Moscovi, Eastland, Greenland, French and Spanish Mer∣chants & their originals. Elizabeths Raigne, and some in the beginning of Kings Iame's Raigne have beene discovered, setled, and continued, as to the Northward the Muscovy Company, the East-land Company, the Greenland Company, and of late dayes, there is erected a Compa∣ny for France, governed here by Sir Iames Cambell Knight and Alderman, to whom also I owe this acknowledgment as being a member therof; and now there is also in agitation a Patent for a Company for Spain, of which also when confirmed, I may also intitle my self a member. These Companies then and Societies, besides others not at all incorporated, incouraged by sundry Privileges, granted unto them, governe themselves by setled Acts and Orders, under certain chosen Governours, Deputies, and a selected number of Assistants, which have been found to be so profitable to these Kingdomes by exporting the native Commodities therof, by set∣ting the poor on work, by building of many brave Ships and by importing hither of sundry necessaries both for use and orna∣ment, that the benefit thereof cannot here be certainly expres∣sed. But one particular in the Levant Merchants may in part de∣monstrate the great benefit that the rest may produce, for it was found that in our last Voyage to Cales, and to the Isle of Rhee, they were the Owners of 20 great sayle of Ships that served in both those Voyages, and it is probable that they are Owners of 30 sayle more, which one with the other may containe 12 or 13000 tuns of burthen, & which may have for further defence 1200 pieces of Ordnance at the least, and imploy about 4000 or 5000 Sailers yeerly, besides Porters, Weighers, Bargmen, Lightermen, Carmen, which cannot be lesse then 2000 or 3000 persons more, and they are found, if report may gaine credit to pay his Majesty by way of customes and imposts above 50000 li. yeerly, partly outwards by their Exportations of Cloth, Tinne, & other commodities, and partly Inwards by the importation of
Silks, Cottons Galls, Grograms, Spices, Drugs, Corance, and other Levantine commodities, this being then briefly to shew the bene∣fit of a well governed trade, and the profits arising therby to the Common-wealth, I leave it to others to consider the generall good accruing to this Iland, by all the rest of the said Compa∣nies and Societies of this Kingdom, and come in the next place, according to my method, to handle the other principall parts of Traffique comprised in this City, and generally of all this King∣dome. The Coines of this City and Kingdome are partly of Gold, and Coines cur∣rant in Eng∣land of lver. partly of Silver, as in other Countries the principall in use are these. The Silver currant Coines are Pieces of 5 shil. sterl. Crown. Pieces of 26 d. Pieces of 12 d. called shillings Pieces of 6 d. Pieces of 4 d. 3 d. 2 d. 1 d. ster. Which are accounted 4 farthings to a penny sterling, 12 ob. to a shilling, 5 shillings to a Crown, 4 Crowns, or 20 shillings to a pound sterling. The Gold coines currant are Pieces of 22 shill. ster. Pieces of 11 shill. ster. Of Gold. Pieces of 5 shill. 6 d. Pieces of 2 shill. 9 d. the  of 22 shill. Also Pieces of 20 shill. Pieces of 10 shill. Pieces of 5 shill. Pieces of 2 s. 6 d. the  of 20 sh. Accounted also in the former accounts of pounds, shillings and pence sterling, the goodnesse and finenesse, and intrinsecall value may be more particularly knowne by a Proclamation in Anno 1609, published by our deceased Soveraigne King Iames, to which I refer the Reader, or otherwise to a Table inserted in the end of this Chapter of the equality and valuation therof with the Coines of sundry other Countries. Their accounts are kept throughout England, by pounds, shil∣lings, and pence sterling, accounting 12 pence to the shilling, and Accounts in England. 20 shillings to the pound, but the accounts of the revenues of the Kingdome have been, and yet are in some Offices kept in Marks, containing 13 shill. 4 pence, per Mark.
CHAP. CCLXXI. Of Weights used in England. THe weight commonly used in and through Eng∣land, is two, the Troy weight, and the Haberdupois Weights in England. weight. The Troy pound consists of 12 ounces, the ounce Troy weight. of 20 peny weights, the peny weight of 24 grains, and serveth only for Bread, Gold, Silver, and Electuaries, eight pound accounted to the Gallon, & by consequence 16 li. to the Peck, 32 pound to the halfe Bushell, and 64 to the Bushell, and hereby weight and measure is reduced one into another. Wet Measures are also derived from this pound Troy, both on Weight with measure. Land and within Shipboard, as also Corn and Grain, as above is specified, for first this pound of 12 ounces, made into a concave measure is named a Pint, eight of the said Pints, or eight pounds make a Gallon of either Wine, Ale, Beere, or Corn, according to the Standard of the Exchequer, and the Acts of Parliament of 11 and 12 of Henry the Seventh. From hence is also drawn the measure Assise of all vendi∣ble Assise. Caske, each Hogshead to contain 63 Gallons, every Terce 84, every Pipe 126, and every Tun 252 Gallons. From hence ariseth also the measure for Fish, the Salmon Butt is to be 84 gallons, the barrell 42 gallons, the Herring barrell to be 32 gallons, the Eele barrell to be 42 gallons, the Soape bar∣rell to be 32 gallons, and the halfe, and firkin of these to be ac∣cordingly. The second weight is the Haberdepois pound, which consisteth Haberdupois. of 16 ounces, which are lesser ounces then the former, for these 16 ounces make but 14 ounces and a halfe, and 2 penny weight of Troy, used in the mint, where 136 li. haberdepois subtile, is but 100 li. sutle Troy. By the haberdepois or averdupois weight, is all commodities weighed, which beareth the name of garble, and whereof issu∣eth a garble or waste, also butter, cheese, tallow, waxe, and other commodities, and 7 li. of this weight is accounted to the gal∣lon of wheate, as is 14 li. the pecke, 28 li. the halfe bushell, and 56 li. to the bushell. The 7 li. averdupois is 102 ounces Troy, according to which Troy and Ha∣berdupois com∣pared for the weight of bread. rate the quarter of wheate must weigh 448 li. averdupois, and so 14 li. averdupois, and 16 li. 11 ounces Troy, doe accord in one,
or 56 li. averdupois, and 67 li. 8 ounces Troy, and note that as one penny sterling is the 1/20. part of an ounce Troy, so thereby is found that 7 li. 12 sh. sterling, is 84 ounces, and halfe, and 2 pen∣ny weight of Troy, and 6. li. 18 sh. sterling, is 82¾. ounces and one penny Troy, from the which two assises, the white, whea∣ten, and houshold breads are calculated and drawne. From the averdupois weight is also drawne the true weight of cheese and butter, called the Waighe, which is 112 li. averdupoi, Cheese weight to the hundred, and the two hundred is 224 li. containing 32 cloves, and every clove is 7 li. the Waighe of Suffolke cheese being 256 li. and the waighe of Essex cheese 336 li. averdupois. The sacke of wooll formerly so famoused by the staplers, did Wooll weight. weigh 364 li. averdupois, two waighes of wooll, make a sacke, and 12 sacks make a laste. The last of herrings containeth 10 thousand, and every thou∣sand Herrings measure. containe ten hundred, and every hundred six score or 120. Leade, is sold by the foder, the loade being 175 li. and the Lead weight. fother maketh accordingly 19½. hundred of 112 li. per cent. It is also to be noted, that of this pound of 16 ounces averdu∣pois, Three Quin∣tars in England used. is made in England, three severall quintals, for weighing of sundry sorts of merchandise. The first is a hundred of five score, or 100 li. just, and this is called the hundred sutle, whereby is sold, spices, drugges, and o∣ther Num. 1 100 li. fine commodities, which are accounted by the pound, and to which is added by the seller, an allowance of 4 li. upon 104 li. taken from the overplus received from Antwerpe weights in times past in spices, as I have said elsewhere, and called by the name of Tret, yet by some alledged to be an allowance in gar∣bled commodities. The second is a hundred of fivescore and twelve, or 112 li. Num. 2. 11 l. the halfe hundred being 56 li. the quarter 28 li. &c. to which all the aforesaid weight is adjousted, and by which all commodi∣ties are weighed, and all fine commodities afterward reduced to the sotle hundred, and by this are sold all grosse goods, Grocery, Saltery, &c. The third is a hundred of sixscore of the said averdupois pound, Num. 3. 120 l by which Tinne is weighed to his Majesties Farmers, and some few other commodities, and is called the stannery hundred. This pound averdupois hath in it selfe a division of 16 ounces, and thereof is formed other weights, as sometimes a stone of 8 li. 7 li. 10 li. 14 li. 16 li. 20 li. sometimes a todde of 7 li. 8 li. 10 li. sometimes a clove of 20 li. 28 li. 32 li. and such like, which is still found to be made out of this pound of averdupois of 16 oun∣ces, and every ounce of 8 drams, and every dram 60 graines. Raw silke of Persia or Turky, is sold also by this pound, but then it is accounted a pound of 24 ounces, or a pound and a halfe of the abovesaid; all which is requisite his learning that is either
to buy or sell in England, that he may know not onely the true weight of his commodity, but also the denomination thereof, and how many pound or ounces is contained therein. Having now shewed the distinction of the troy and averdupois weight, and how they agree together, and having calculated most of the weights of this booke to the hundred sutle, I will al∣so shew here how the 112 li. is found to respond with some o∣ther Countries, as being the weight common in use amongst Merchants, and in notes of commodities observed abroad. The 112 l. Londō is in Europa. Marselia 125 li. Venetia sotile 164 li. Venetiagrosse 104 li. Sicilia 62 li. Lisbne 100 li. Florence 143 li. Anverse 106 li. Lions 118 li. Sivill 110 li. Dansick 129 li. Bridges 112 li. Asia, Africa. Alepp 22 Rot. Aleppo Silke 24 Rot. Tripoli suria 27½ Rot. Tripoli barbaria 97 Rot. Alexandria zera 51. 9 Rot. Alexandria forfar 116 Rot. Scio and Constantin 101 Rot. Rhodes 20. 4. Rot. Acria 18. 1. Rot. Babylonia 15. 6 M. Balsola — Ormus 108. 7 li. I need not further inlarge my self herein by reason of the ma∣ny Tables found in this Book, wherby the said weight of 112 li. may easily be reduced to any eminent place of the World, and for as much as our English Gold and Silver is weighed and valued by the pound Troy, I shall here following insert how the same concurres and agrees with most of the eminent Cities in the World, in their Coines both of Silver and Gold.
It is observed then in most Countries abroad as with us in England, that Gold and Silver is coined and minted by a peculi Troy weight for gold and silver compa∣red with other Countries. weight only proper therunto, which in many great Cities and Countries of trade I have purposely omitted, that I might both cilitate this my labour, and in one place reduce them together to the pound Troy used, especially to that purpose in England; therfore if I prove here somewhat the larger, it is but what the seriousnesse and due circumstances of the matter requireth. The weight then used in this case in England is the pound Troy, and that which in use in most other Countries is the Mark which as well as  can I will here abbreviate, now this pound Troy con∣sisting of 12 ounces, and the ounce of 20 peny weights, and the peny weight of 24 grains, the 100 li. of these abovesaid pound being vsed for the Standard of Gold and Silver in this  hath been observed to make in Antwerp 112 marks each mark being 8 Ounces. 1 Oce being 20 peny weight. 1 Peny weight 32 grains. Adler 86 li. Cairo 105 Besses. Ancona 116 marks. Aqula 79½ li. Ausburg 118 marks. Bavaria 116 marks. Bohemia 99 marks. Catalonia 112 marks. Colen 118 marks. Constantinople 99 marks. Crema 116 marks. Dansick 118 marks. Florence 158½ marks. 1 Mark 8 Ounces. 1 Ounce is 8 grosses. 1 grosse is 3 deniers. 1 deer is 24 gs. Frankford 118 marks. Frburg 116 marks. Genoa for Gold 130 Marks 1 mark is  ounces. 1 ounce 24 deiers. 1 denier is 24 grains. Genoa for Silver 86½ pounds 1 pound is 12 ounces. 1 ounce is 24 deniers. 1 denier is 24 grains. Hungary 99 marks. Lipsich 118 marks. Lions 16 marks Paris idem 126 marks 1 mark in France is 8 ounces 1 ounce is 8 grosses. 1 grosse is 3 deniers. 1 denier is 24 grains.
Millain 118 marks. Narsinga 97 marks. Naples 86½ pound 1 pound Naples is 12 ounces. 1 ounce is 8 Octavos. Persia 98 Minas. Peru 99½ Cillats. Piemont 111 marks. Meison 118 marks Saxony idem 118 marks A mark of Mesen is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 24 deniers. 1 denier, or peny is found to be 24 momenta or grains. Burgas 120 marks. Franconia 116 marks. Nrrimberg 116 marks 1 mark Norimberg is 16 loots. 1 loot is 4 quints. 1 quint is 4 pence primes or nu∣mulies. 1 peny is 4 sesterties. Turky 98 marks. Turin 111 marks. Vicentia 116 marks. Vienna 98 marks. New Spain, America, 98½ marks. Spain in generall 121 marks. 1 mark Spanish is 50 Castellianos. 1 Castelliano is 8 tomines. 1 tominos is 8 grains, and this mark is 29700 marks, or 873½ Rials, or 792 Duckets. Trevis 117 marks. Vlme 116 marks. Weselburg 115 Venice Verona 116½ mark. 1 mark Venice is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 4 quarts or silices. 1 quarta 36 Carrats or Sili∣quas. 1 Carrat is 4 grains. Rome 116½ mark 1 mark Roman is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 8 drams. 1 dram is 3 scruples. 1 scruple is 2 obolos. 1 obole is 3 siliquas. 1 siliqua is 4 grains or primi. Lisbone 121 mark. 1 mark Portugal is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 8 octavos. 1 octavo is 4½ grains.
These are all the stanards of the coines both of gold and sil∣ver that I have met withall, and the particulars whereto the said weights are distinguished, which may so farre be needfull to the traffique of Countries, that thereby every Merchant stranger may know of what goodnesse and reall value those coines are stamped and coined for, and what the same will yeeld and af∣ford him in his owne City or place of residence. Vpon this troy weight doth also depend in Physicke, all Weights used in Physick & their parts. drugs and simples, administred by way of potions, which accor∣ding to the custome practised amongst Physitians, is thus distin∣guished into parts. One Ses quilibra is 1½. pound. or 18 ounces. One pound is 2 selibra or 12 ounces. One selibra is 2 quadrans or 6 ounces. One quadran is a¼ of a li. or 3 ounces. One sescuntia is 1½. ounce or 12 drams. One ounce is 8 drams. One dram is 3 scruples or 60 graines. One scruple is 20 graines. One obolus is ½. a scruple or 10 graines. Now according to this agreement of the weights of silver The reduction of some for∣raigne currant Coines to the English sterlin. and gold, I will here reduce the value of some forraigne coines, to the English sterlin. The crowne of Camera of Rome is sterlin—00 li. 07 s. o d. The sols Of Genoa is sterlin—00 01 6. The duccat of Venice of 6 li. 4 sols is sterlin—04 6. The duccat of Naples is—sterlin—04 9. The crowne of gold of Florence is—sterlin—06 0 The 20 sols of Millan is—sterlin—01 0. The Carlin of Cicilia is—sterlin—00 3. The sol of grosse of Antwerpe is—sterlin—00 7¼. The lire of Valencia, Barselona and Saragosa is—05 6 The liver or franke of France is sterlin—02 0 The florin of Turin and Savoy is sterlin—00 3⅜. The 34 Marvedes or single, Royall of Spaine is sterlin 00 6. The 40 Res of Lisborne in Portugall is sterlin—00 6. The lire of Bollonia is—sterlin—01 3½. The crowne of Lucca is—sterlin—05 9. The florin of Noremburgh and Franckford, sterlin 3 4. The Chequin of Turky is—sterlin—7 10. Where note that in Europe, the exchange ever maketh the accoun∣ted value of their coines with us, which are seene sometimes to differ much from the abovesaid rules, yet according to the esti∣mation of our English minte, this carrieth a neere concordancy, & therfore I have the rather thought fit to insert it in this place.
I have in many places of this Book shewed how the 100 li. sutle doth agree with London, and in the leaf aforegoing, shewed how the 112 li. doth also respond with some of them: now I will shew by a new invented Table out of the Works of Master Hunt Pounds for∣rain to pounds English redu∣. the Arithmetician, a method reducing the pounds of forraigne Counties to the pound of London, which I finde thus.   M D Ancona— 13 10 Antwerp— 24 25 Archipelago— 497 448 Acquilla— 143 100 Avignon— 11 10 Ausburg— 19 20 Barselona— 91 10 Besenson— 91 100 Bridges— 1 1 Burgois— 23 25 Calice— 24 25 Castile— 51 50 Cicilia— 37 25 Colen— 19 20 Corfu— 497 448 Dansick— 29 24 Deep— 359 400 Ferrara— 133 100 Florence— 131 100 Frankford— 396 448 Genoa— 141 100   M D Geneva— 81 100 Lipsich— 99 100 London troy— 29 24 London averd— 127 120 Lubeck— 389½ 448 Lions— 21 20 Lisbone— 83 100 Marselia— 497 448 Naples— 71 50 Norrimberg— 396 448 Paris— 19 20 Padua— 33 25 Parma— 34 25 Presla— 538½ 448 Rochel— 81 100 Roan— 127 100 Sicilia— 250¼ 448 Sivil— 439 448 Tholousa— 491 448 Venice grosse,— 423 448 Venice sotle— 151 100 Vienna— 256 448 For the understanding of this Table, note that one pound of London is in Ancona  of a pound, and so in the rest  is 1 and  first then against the names of the places are two numbers, as a∣gainst Avignon, you have 11 for to multiply, and 10 for divis, or 11 for numerator, & 10 for denominator, multiply then pounds of Avignon by 11, and divide it by 10, and they are pounds of London, so do for other places as the Table directs.
CHAP. CCLXXII. Of measures used in England. HAving now done with the Weights of England, Measures in England. whereby all Merchandise of weight is weighed; I come now to those measures that are in use through the Kingdome of England, which are three: the first is the yard, the common measure 1 A Yard. of all woollen cloth, stuffes, silkes, and such like, which is compo∣sed of three foot, every foot being 12 inches, and every inch 3 barly cornes, so that the yard doth containe 36 inches, and there is in the measure of all commodities given in measure, an inch, which doth make the yard to be 37 inches, when compu∣ted with the measure of other Countries. The second is an elle, wherewith all linnens are measured, 2 An Ell. and it containeth 44⅔. inches, or 45 inches by the rule, and herewith is also allowed an inch, for measure by custome of the Country. The third is a goade, onely used in welsh Frizes, Frizadoes, and 3 A Goad. the like, being the ancient measure of Wales, and as some ima∣gine, of England, before the setling of the yard wand, and by the inch rule is found to be (55 inches) at this time. In London there is found a custome both in weighing and mea∣suring The courtesies of Londo. of some commodities not found or practised in any other place, and called beyond Seas, the courtesies of London; the which is first in commodities weighed by 4 in 104 li. allowed and cal∣led tret, which I have noted before; next by 2 li. allowed upon Tret. every draught and commodity, which exceedeth 336 li. or three hundred grosse, called cloffe, and lastly in the measure of Cloffe. broad cloth by retaile in Drapers shoppes, allowing to the buyer, a shaftnet upon each yard, in lieu of the inch before specified, which is as much as is in length at the yards end, from the bot∣tome Shaftnet. of the wrist, to the end of the thumbe, which commonly may be about 5 in 6 inches in length, according to the dimensi∣on of the hand. I have already shewed what agreement some of these measures, especially the yard hath with the measures of length of many other places: it is requisite I should also here shew how our English Elle is found to respond with other Coun∣tries, which I finde to be by the observations of some ingenious Merchants thus,
Antwerp 166⅔ Ells. Frankford 208⅔ Ells. Measures of London com∣pared. Dansicke 138⅓ Ells. Vienna 145 Ells. Lions 101⅔ aln. Paris 95 aln. Roan 103 aln. Lisbone 100 Vares. Sivil 135 Vares. Madera Iles 103 2/7 Braces. Venice linnen 180 Braces. Venice Silk 196 Braces. Lucques 200 Braces. Florence 204 Braces. Millain 230 Braces. Genoa 480⅚ Pal. Bridges 164 Ells. Arras 165 Ells. Callice 157 alns. Norrimberg 174 Ells. Rome 56 Cans. Colen 208 Ells. Lisle 166 Ells. Mastriche 157 Ells. How true these observations are I must referre to triall by ex∣perience, and forasmuch as I would not omit any materiall col∣lection that might adde to the perfection of this knowledge, which doth oftentimes so much concern Merchants in their nego∣tiations; I have here also inserted M. Hunts table of respondency Measures For∣rain to English measure redu∣ced. of other Countries, Measures of length to the above said English Ell and Yard.   M D Antwerp— 3 5 Arras— 23 35 Bridges short— 25 41 Castile— 20 27 Calice— 150 157 Colen— 25 52 Frankford— 25 52 Flemmish Ells.— 6 10 French alns— 6 5 Florence— 25 47 Gant long— 50 77 Gant short— 25 41 Genoa— 150 721 Lions—   1 London yard— 4 5 Lisbone and Lisle— 50 83   M D Lucca— 5 8 Malins— 3 5 Mastriche— 100 173 Madera— 25 26 Millain— 50 57 Norrimberg— 100 137 Paris— 19 20 Roan— 100 103 Rome— 14 25 Sivil— 20 27 Venice long— 5 9 Venice short— 25 49 Vienna— 20 29 Vincentia— 100 133
The use of the former table is three-fold, first, to know what proportion one of our London Elles will beare unto any of the Use of the for∣mer Table threefold. measures of the aforesaid places, which is thus performed, looke the place in the table posito Florence, against it you shall finde these two numbers, 25. under the title of M. which signifieth Multi∣plicate, and 47 under the title of D. which signifieth divisor, di∣vide then the greater by the lesser, viz. 47 by 25. the quotient is 1 and 22 is the remainder, which is numerator to 25. making the fraction 22/25. so that our Elle at London is at Florence 1 of their measures, and 22/25. parts thereof, and so in the rest. Secondly, it reduceth forrain measures to the London Elle thus, 2 Use. posito the question were; how many Ells are there in 387 of the measures of Dansicke, then look Dansicke, against which you shall finde two numbers, the first is 20 your multiplicate, the second 27 your divisor, the order of the question then is thus, Thirdly and lastly, it reduceth Ells of London, to any of the a∣foresaid 3 Use. forraigne measures, posito in 597 Ells of London, how ma∣ny Lucca braces doe they containe? to doe this, looke lucca in the table, and right against it you have the two numbers of 5 and 8. and note by the way, that in questions of this nature that you multiply by the second number under D. and divide by the first under M. multiply therefore 597 by 8. and divide by 5. and the quotient is 955⅓. of the braces or measures of Lucca. And this shall suffice concerning measures of length, the truth of which tables I referre to the inquisition of the curious. There is also in use in England, divers measures, for severall distinct commodities, which orderly I will here observe. First, a measure whereby land is measured, and this hath some Measure of land in use. correspondence with all things that are measured by a square proportion in bredth and length, and this done also by the a∣fore mentioned yard, which beginning from the least part and is thus reckoned.
Grains 3 is an inch. Inches 12 a foot. Foot 3 a yard. Feet 3 inches 9, an ell. Yards 5½ is a perch. Perch 1 in breadth a farthindole. and 40 in length Farthindole 2 is half an acre. Farthindole 4 is an acre. 40 Rod in length is a Furlong, 8 Furlongs is a Mile English, which is 320 perches, 1760 yards, 5280 foot, or 63360 inches, note that a Rod-land, Yard-land, and Farthendale is onething. So that hereby it may be discerned, that a foot being 12 in∣ches every way, as 12 in length and 12 in breadth, making 12 times 12 is 144 inches, and so in the yard which is 3 foot in breadth, & 3 foot in length, which is 9 foot, is 1286 inches, and Board, Glasse, Hangings, &c. thus is Board, Glasse, Pavement, Hangings, Wainscot, and the like Commodities measured in England. Next let us observe dry Measures in themselves, for so farre Dry measures of grain. forth as they concurre with weight, I have noted before, dry measure principally is for grain.   Gallons Potles Quarts Pints. The Gallon is found to be by the Statute of England, 1 or 2 or 4 or 8 A Peck is 2 or 4 or 8 or 16 Half a Bushell is 4 or 8 or 16 or 32 A Bushell is 8 or 16 or 32 or 64 A Strike is 16 or 32 or 64 or 128 A Cornock is 32 or 64 or 128 or 256 A Quarter is 64 128 or 256 or 512 A Way is 384 768 1536 3072 A Last is 640 1280 2560 5128 It is here to be noted, that severall commodities are measured by a severall different measure: as for example, Corne is mea∣sured by the quarter, which contains 8 bushels as above is men∣tioned, five quarters making a tunne lading, and 10 quarters to a laste, but yet 10¼. or 10½. goes for a last of Holland, so also in salt, which is sold by the weight, which is 40 bushels water mea∣sure of tenne gallons; yet note that in Plimouth, and in some o∣ther Sea-ports of England, they measure by a bushell alien mea∣sure, whereof 24 makes a tonne, and 8 doth make a quarter, so three quarters make one tunne, and every bushell is 18 gallons, so that a tunne of salt at Plimouth, is greater than a weigh of London,
by 32 gallons. And note that as in salt, so also in corne, they have 2 measures, the water measure, large for shipboord, and the land for shop-measure, the difference in some places, as from 6 to 7. also from 3 to 4. which is to be observed. The next measure observable is liquid measures, which in Eng∣land Liquid mea∣sures in Eng∣land. are found to vary much, and to be of divers kindes, both in the quantity it selfe, and in the commodity or liquor, which I will here for method sake collect together thus.   Gallon Potles. Quart. Pints. Of Ale. Ale the Firkin ought to be Kilderkin of Ale ought to be Barrell of Ale ought to be 8 or 16 or 32 or 64 16 32 64 128 32 64 128 256 Of Be Beer the Firkin ought to be Kilderkin of Beer Barrell of Beer 9 or 18 or 36 or 72 18 36 72 144 36 72 144 288 Of Wine. Kilderkin of Wine ought to be Barrell of Wine to be Hogshead of Wine to be A Tertian of Wine Butt or Pipe of Wine Turn of Wine 18 or 36 or 72 or 144 31 62 124 248 63 126 252 504 84 168 336 672 126 252 504 1008 252 504 1008 2016 Of Sope. A Firkin of Soap ought to be A Kilderkin to be A Barrell to be 8 or 16 or 32 or 64 16 32 64 128 32 64 128 256 Of Ecles and Sal on. A Firkin of Salmon and Eels to be A Barrell ought to be A Butt ought to be 10½ 21 42 84 42 84 168 236 84 164 236 572 Of Ole. A Tun of Oile and Hony ought to be A Pipe of Oiles to be A Hogshead to be A Rundlet to be 252 504 1008 2016 126 252 504 1008 63 126 252 504 18½ 37 74 148 But note that the custome of London sometimes is found to dis∣agree with the statute in the measures of some commodities, as in oyles it is observed, that 236 gallons which by Merchants is called the civill Gadge, is sold ordinarily for a tunne, and not 252 gallons, as above is mentioned. Now for as much as cloth, tynne, lead, and some other commo∣dities, A declaration of the Stan∣dard for cloth making made in the fourth yeer of King Iames. are the staple of the trade of England, and that divers good lawes have been enacted for preservation of the said commodi∣ties in their true nature: It will not be unproper that I mention here some heads of such orders as have been made, and princi∣pally for the true making of cloth, being the prime of the native
commodities of England. The sacke of wooll then of which our En∣glish cloth is made, doth containe as I said before 364 li. the tod of wooll is 28 li. 13 toddes making a sacke, every tod being 4 nails, and every naile being 7 li. This sacke of wooll is accounted to Sack of wooll. make 4 standard clothes of cleane wooll, called sorting clothes, weighing 60 li. the cloth, and being 24 yards long of 6½. quar∣ters broad. Now in the weight is to be observed that the clothes be well scoured, thicked, milled, and fully dryed: and in the mea∣sure that the same be measured by the yard and inch, within the list, concerning the bredth, all which I will for the benefit of cloth-traders insert in this following collection.   Bredth. Weight. Measures. Kent, Yorke, and Reading clothes of 6½. qu. 86 li. 30 & 34 yds. Suffolke, Norfolke, and Essex clothes of Breadth, weights and Measures of English clothes. 7 quar. 80 li. 29 & 3 yds. Worster, Coventry, and Hereford cloths of 6½. qu. 78 li. 30 & 33 yds. Wiltshire, Gloster, Oxen. Somerset of 7 quar. 76 li. 29 & 32 yds. Suffolke sorting clothes 6½. qu. 64 li. 23 & 26 yds. All sorting clothes of divers shires of 6½ qu. 60 li. 24 & 26 yds. Broad cloth, Taunt. Bridgwaters & Dunst. 7 quar. 30 li. 12 & 13 yds. Broad and narrow of York shireof 4 quar. 30 li. 24 & 25 Devonshire, Kersies and dossens of 4 quar. 13 li. 12 & 13 Check. Kersies, strait and plaine grayes 4 quar. 24 li. 17 & 18 Ordinary penistons or forests, 5½. qu. 28 li. 12 & 13 Sorting penistons of 6½ qu. 35 li. 13 & 14 Washers of Lancashire, and others.   17 li. 17 & 18. See further the said statute for the manner of making of all the said woollen clothes, and orders for workmen, with the view∣ing, searching, and all other needfull circumstances there and therunto belonging, for further direction whereto I referre you. As for Tinne, which is also one of the staple commodities of this Tinne in England. kingdome: many good orders are enacted for the true casting and assay thereof, and is accounted as the Princes peculiar commo∣dities, farmed to certaine Merchants, who have the sole prehem∣tion thereof, and thereto belongeth a peculiar weight called the stannery weight, the hundred thereof making 120 li. sutle haber∣dupois, as I said before. Lead is also one of the staples of this I∣land, Lead in England. knowne throughout all the parts of the world, and is in England sold likewise by a particular weight called the foder, which is 19½. hundred of 112 li. to the hundred, and making sutle pounds 2184 li. for other the staple commodities of England, I need not further insist, referring the same to the search of the inquisitour at his owne leisure. I have already noted that sundry commodities are in England weighed and measured by sundry & distinct weights and measures, the principall thereof being of silver and gold. I have already shewed as the standard of our English coines, and shewed how the
same agreeth with other places, then of salt, wine, and corne, which in the next place I meane here to shew, and withall de∣monstrate how the same holdeth correspondency with other Countries, which in most Cities I have omitted as purposely in∣tended here to be inserted by it selfe, as reducing all others to the City of London. Corne then as the most necessary commodity, is sold, as I have Corn measure with other Countries. shewed before in England, by the quarter, accounting five quar∣ters for one tunne lading ordinarily, though otherwise 10¼. quar∣ters, is a last of corne, and this last then of corne doth make: In Embden 55 Werpes, whereof 61 made a last, there, or 15½. barrels of 4 Werpes. In Hamburgh 83 schepels, whereof 90 make a last there. In Lubecke 85 schepels, whereof 96 make a last. In Dansicke 56 schepels, whereof 60 there make a last, the 4 schepels make one muid, which is the skippound of 340 li. In Fameran 78 schepels, whereof 96 to the last. In Haleger haven in Denmarke, 80 schepels, 96 to the last. In Coppen haven 23 small barrels, whereof 16 to the last. In Ebbetorff Danic 23 barrels, whereof 36 to the last. In Nelbogge 23 barrels, whereof 42 to the last. In Sweden 23 barrels. Conixburgh 6/7. of a last, the 6 last are 7 at Amsterdam. In Milain . of a last. In Statin in Pomerland, 6/7. of a last. In Riga 42 loopes. In Antwerpe 37½. Vertules. In Bruxels 10½. mudden, and differing in all places in Brabant. In Gant 4 mudds, 7 halsters of 12 to one mudd is 55 halsters. In Bridges 7½ hoot. In Dunkirke 18 Rasiers water measure. In Middleburg 40 sackes is 41½. to the last in all Holland. In Dort 28 sackes. In Rotterdam and Delph, 87 atchtelings. In Schoon haven 88 achtelings. In Enchusen, Horne, Medenblicke, 42 sackes. In Groennighen 33 mudds. In Tenell 58 loopes. In Callais 18 Rasiers. In Roven 20 untill 30 mines, every mine is 4 bushels. In Rotchell 128 bushels, 4 to every sestier. In Bourdeux 38 Boiseaux, whereof 33 to the last. In Sivil 54 Haneges, a last is 4 Cais of 12 Haneg. In Lixborne 225 alquiers, whereof 240 to the last, or 4 Moyos of 60 alquiers to the Moyo, and so in all the Ilands of Portugall. In Venice 32 stares.
In Genoa 23½. Minas. In Sicilia 38 Medinos of 6 Moyos. In Puglia 32 Cara 36 timans. In Ciprus 40 Medinos of 2 cipros. In Amsterdam a last, and it is observeable here, that corne is found so farre to differ in goodnesse, that the measure of this place will weigh of East-land wheate 156 li. of French wheate 180 li. of Sicilia wheate 224 li. and of Africa 236 li. and this last o Amsterdam is 27 Moyos or Muddens, each mudden is 4 schepels, or every last is 29 sackes, and each sacke 3 achtelings, so that a last may be said to be 108 schepels or 87 atchtelings. Now for as much as salt is not a native commodity of our Country, we must borrow the originall of the measure thereof Measure of Salt compared with other places. from these places which produceth the greatest quantity or from those Cities which hold the principall staple thereof. It will be necessary then we bring it to the great hundred of Ze∣land, which is accounted for 4 small hundred, and because it is the best knowne in all places, they measure their salt with bar∣rels, 18 barrels to a last, and 7 last to the hundred, which is 126 barrels. In Armuyden in Zeland, they reckon 8  weighs for one hun∣dred: every weigh is 11½. sackes, every sacke 4 measures, and 15 waighs of Browadge salt, makes the great hundred. The sacke of salt of Arminden, being 122 small barrels, for the 100 sacke shall be my computation, and it maketh in In Browage 4/7. parts of one hundred of 28 moyos, and 12 sackes to the moyo, also by charges or loads, ten load to the hundred, and 48 moyos or moys to the last of 21 barrels. In Lixborne 25 moyos. In Saint Mary Port 28 moyos. In Saintubal 20 Cays. In Calis 22 Cays. In Saintlucar 21 Cays. In Gaunt 108 sackes or barrels. In Antwerpe 144 vertels of 24 to the last, and 6 last to the hun∣dred, and the white salt is measured with a lesser measure of 12 upon 100. In Dunkerke 92 water measures, or 104 land measures. In Ostend 98 measures. In Damme and Axels 102 measures. In Bridges 104 measures. In Ypres 144 measures. In Rotterdam 100 whereof 6 make one mud of 18 to the 100. In Amsterdam, Vtricht, Druenter 102 schepels. In Calis in France 130 barrels, 19 to the last, but 20 by fraigh∣ting.
In Roven and almost all France 6½. Muyes. In Hamburgh 7 last, whereof 80 barrels makes 100. In Denmarke, 6⅔. last. In Sweden 111 tunnes or barrels, 16 to the last. In Emden 100 barrels, 14 to the last. In Lubecke, 7 lasts of 18 barrels. In London, 7½. lasts of 18 herring barrels, but by weighs 11½. In Venice and Prian, 70 Mose. Pit-coale is a commodity peculiar and native, and is sold by Measure of Sea coal com∣pared with o∣ther places. the Chalder, which must be taken from the measure of Newca∣stle, where the greatest quantity of coales is found, and they measure there by the Chalder, filled up whereof 7½. Chalder is a last, and is measured in giving 21 for 20. the correspondence thereof is, The last of Newcastle of 7½. chal∣der is London and Yarmouth 10 chalders. Roven 100 barrels giving 104 for 100. Bridges and Oastend 100 measures for Oats. Dort 12 hort, also by weighs of 144 li. of 24 stone, of 6 li. Gaunt 144 sackes, or 24 muds. Alst 200 muds. Antwerpe 175 Vertils. Condet 44 Muys the 80 makes a cherke. Zeland 68 herring barrels. Middleburgh by weigh of 180 li. Amsterdam 13⅓. Lot of 38 measures. Wines are sold in England by the tunne of 252 gallons, and by Measures of Wine. reason of the diversity of wines of the growth of sundry coun∣tries comming to England, it is fit I should set downe how the tunne of 252 gallons doth correspond with other places. It then makes in Antwerp 6 ames, containing 300 stoopes, every stoope weighing 6 li. called a stone, every me being 50 stoopes, or 42 gallons, and every stoope being 9½. pintes English. In Paris and Orleance, 4 hogsheads lacking 10 stoopes, every hogshead 312 stoopes, and at Paris 36 sextiers, each sextier being 4 quarts, every quart two pints, is 288 pints and each pinte is 2 chapins. In Burdeaux 4½. hogsheads. In Lixborne 5½ hogsheads. In Auxere in Burgundy 3 punchons. In Poito 2¼. pipes. In Coniaque 2 pipes or 4 hogsheads.
In Ay and Artois, 4⅔. hogsheads. In Seres or Canary, 2 pipes of 150 stoops or 1 But and . every But is in Antwerpe, 158 stoopes, they measure by the Rove of 30 li. is 5 stoopes of Antwerpe, which is about 5  gallons, and every But containeth 30 Roves, and the pipes containe 30 Roves of 28 li. weight. In Condado is 2 Buts. In Madrid 2 pipes lacking 16 stoopes, or about 19 gallons. In Sivil 56¼. Rove of Romani, a Rove is 8 somers, every so∣mer is 4 quartils, every quartil is . of a stoope, of Antwerpe, which is about 1½. pintes English, and they doe deliver 27 and 28 Roves in a pipe, but of oile measure by 40 and 41 Roves in a pipe. In Ansoy or Bastard 2 pipes 16 stoopes for the said 6 ames. In Lixborne 37½. almudes of 1½. Rove of Sivil, every almu∣das is 12 covados or somer at Sivill, cavado is 4 quarts oile measure by alqueri or cantar, every alqueri is 6 covados, every cantar is 4 stoopes of Antwerpe, or 4½. gallons English. In Algorne 34 starre. In Florence 16⅔. barrels of 20 fiaschi or 18 stoopes of Antwerpe, the 3 barrels is one starre, and each starre is 54 stoopes of Antwerpe, or 64 gallons English. In Rome 7½. brontons, every Bront is 96 Bocals or 13½. Rubes or stones of 10 li. of 30 ounces in one Brent, or 42 stoopes of Ant∣werpe for honey the pound being 44 ounces. In Candia 80 mostaches in a But of 34 and 35 mostaches of 3¼. stoopes of Antwerpe or circa 4¼. gallos English. In Bollonia 13 corbes incirca 19½. gallons English each corbe. In Padua 1 and 1/25. Cara, the oile is by the Millier of 1185 li. is in Antwerpe 1100 li. makes 152 stoopes in a But. In Venice 80 Mostati, the 38 make one But, and 76 make an amphora, 16⅘. quarti Besonts measure the 4 one Bigonts, Bigonte is a French hogshead, one quart 18 stoopes of Antwerpe, 15 . quar measure, Secchio or small measure of 4 Tischaufer. Amphora 4 Bigonts or Bigontins. 16 quarti bigots measure. 18 . quarti secchio. Lagol is a punchon, amphora is 2 ames, which is 84 gal∣lons, and for oile, they measure by amphora also, and for honey, but most by millier of 1210 li. In Verona 1½. cara. 14 Brents, every brent is 16 bases. Oile by the millier of 1738 li. is 8 brenten & 11 bases In Ferrara 12 mastilli of 8 sechio, each mastilli is 21 gallons. In Vicentia 1 1/26. cara, and the oile by the millier of Venice. In Treviso 11 consi, the 10 consi makes one carra.
In Corfu and Zante 37 Zare or Sare, and each Sare is neere 6½. gallons In Istria 15 Venas, neere 17 gallons. In Prian 12 Vrnas, each Vrna is 21 gallons. In Tunes 60 matali of 32 Rotolos, every matali making about 4¼. gallons English. In Tripoli in Barbary 45 metares of 42 Rotolos, and each metara being somewhat more then 5½. gallons English. In Constantinople 180 almes, each alme being about 20 pintes, and 96½ almes of oile here, is at Venice a Millier. In Callabria 8 Salmes. In Puglia 8 salmes, are French barrels, oile also 8 salmes, every salme is 10 star, each star is 32 pignatoli. Hereto it will not be unfit I should adde Malines his observati∣on upon these wet measures in generall. The Romans in times past, called the wet measure by ounces, as we doe now the weight; accounting ten ounces ponderales, for 12 ounces mensurales, so Sestarius Bonianorum was 18 ounces weight measure, and 21 . ounces mensurales or wet measure. Now this custome of measuring and correspondencie of wet measure and weight is yet in use in sundry places: As at Meyson in Saxony, 20 ounces ponderales, make 24 ounces mensurales. Also at Lipsich, 32 ounces wet measures, goes to 26½. ounces weight measure, the difference of correspondence being of 5 to 6. This is further demonstrated in many commodities. As a hogshead of wine weigheth 500 li. the caske 50 li. so that in net wine there is 450 li. Also a hogshead of corne weigheth 400 li. the caske 50 li. the net corne is 350 li. so that by this computation, the tunne of wine weigheth 1800 li. and with the caske 2000 li. and the tunne lading of corne, weigheth 1600 li. and with the caske 1800 li. So that for the laing of a ship, by weight and measure, these observations are to be noted. Two tunnes are accounted for one last, so two tunnes of wine Observations for the lading of a ship by weight and measure. is 4000 li. and somewhat more, and in hogsheads there should be but ⅔. parts of a last. At Dort in Holland they call a great vessell, a rod of wine, which weighed 4500 li. as a last of corn, comparin these 4500 li. men∣surales by reduction of 6 to 5. as above is noted, are 3750 li. pon∣derales, is 12½. ames, now if you account the gallon of wine of Ant∣werpe to weigh 6 li. the capacity of this vessell is 15 ames, being 750 gallons. The rod is a rod quadrant, of 10 foot long, and 10 foot broad, and one foot deep, every foot containing 7½. gallons Antwerpe
measure, or 4⅔. foot Cubice. And this is as much as I thinke fit to insert in this place concerning the wine measures of England, with other Countries, for other liquid commodities, the table aforegoing will more largely demonstrate. The Exchanges practised in England, and principally in Lon∣don, The Exchan∣ges of London. are confined within a narrow scantling, being but as a Riv∣let issuing out of the great streame of those Exchanges that are used beyond the Seas, and therefore limited but to some few places, as to Antwerpe for Flanders, to Roven and Paris for France, to Amsterdam and Rotterdam for the Netherlands, to Dansicke for the East Country, to Venice for Italie, to Edenburgh for Scotland, to Dublin for Ireland, all the other parts of the Exchanges pra∣ctised in England, have their derivation hence, and he that would exchange for any other forraigne Country (these afore∣named excepted) must first have recourse hither, and by a se∣condary exchange, have his desire fulfilled, all which exchanges, and the manner how the same are calculated, and the places with which London hath in former time been seen to exchange. I have at large demonstrated in the 443, 444, 445, 446, and 447 chapters of this ensuing treatise: whereto for better sa∣tisfaction I will referre the reader.
CHAP. CCLXXIII. Of the trading in generall of England. WHen I consider the true dimensions of our Of the trade in generall of England. English traffique, as at this day to me it ap∣peareth to be, together with the inbred commodities that this Iland affordeth to preserve and maintaine the same, with the present industry of the natives, and the a∣bility of our Navigators: I justly admire both the height and eminencie thereof: but when againe I survey every kingdome and great City of the world, and every petty Port and Creeke of the same, and finde in each of these some English prying after the trade and commerce thereof, then againe I am easily brought to imagine that either this great traffique of England is at its full perfection, or that it aymes higher then can hitherto by my weake sight be either seene or discerned: I must confesse, England breeds in its owne wombe, the principall supporters of its present splendor, and nourisheth with its owne milke the commodities that gives both lustre and life to the continuance of this trade, (which I pray may neither never decay, nor yet have the least dimination. But Eng∣land being naturally seated in a northerne corner of the world, and herein bending under the weight of too too ponderous a burthen, cannot possibly alwaies, and for ever finde a vent for all those commodities that are seene to be daily imported and brought within the mpasse of so narrow a circuit, unlesse there can be (by the policy and government of the state) a meane found out to make this Iland either the common Emporium and staple of all Europe, or at least wise of all these our neighbouring northerne Regions. The staple commodities of England, such as are Clothes, Lead, Tynne, some new late draperies, and other English Reall and Royall commodities, shipped hence in former times, yeelded by their returnes from forraigne parts, all those necessaries and wants we desired, or stood in need of: but the late great traffique of this Iland hath been such, that it hath not onely proved a boun∣tifull Mother to the inhabitants, but also a courteous Nurse to
the adjoyning neighbours: for what in matter of traffique they have lost, we have been found to have gained, and what they have wanted, or have been noted to have supplied them with. Hath the proud and magnificent City of Venice lost her great The reall worth of the English trade. traffique and commerce with India, Arabia, and Persia? England hath got it, and now furnisheth her plenteously with the rich commodities thereof. Hath all Italie lost Venice, that fed it with those dainties? London now supplieth her place, and is found both to cloth and nourish it. Hath France almost lost the excellent commodities of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Aleppo, and ge∣nerally of Turky? London can and doth furnish it. Nay, is Turky it selfe deprived of the precious spices of India? England can and doth plentifully afford them. Will you view Moscovia, survey Sweden, looke upon Denmarke, peruse the East Country, and those other colder regions, there shall you finde the English to have been, the inhabitants from the Prince to the peasant, weares Englands woollen livery, feeds in English pewter, sauced with En∣glish Indian spices, and send to their enemies sad English leaden messengers of death. Will you behold the Netherlands, whose eyes and hearts envy Englands traffique, yet they must perforce confesse, that for all their great boasts, they are indebted to London for most of their Siria commodities, besides what other wares else they have of English growth? Will you see France, and travell it from Marselia to Callais, though they stand least in need of us, yet they cannot last long without our commodities. And for Spaine, if you pry therein from the Princes Palace to the poore mans Cottage, he will Voto, a dios, there is no clothing comparable to the English Baye, nor Pheasant excelling a seasonable English red Herring. The East India Company of London, are yearely seen to visite The East In∣dia Company. Persia, frequent India, and traffique in Arabia, and the coasts thereof, and for our English commodities, and some other expor∣ted hence, they are found to import Pepper, Cloves, Maces, Nut∣megs, Cottons, Rice, Callicoes of sundry sorts, Bezar stones, Aloes, Borax, Calamus, Cassia, Mirabolans, Mirrhe, Opium, Rhubarbe, Cinamond, Sanders, Spicknard, Muske, Civet, Tamerinds, pretious stones of all sorts, as Diamonds, Pearles, Carbuncles, Emeralds, Iacincts, Saphirs, Spinals, Turques, Topases, Indico, and Silkes, raw and wrought into sundry fabriques: Benjamin, Camphir, Sandal∣wood, and infinite other commodities, and though in India and these parts, their trade equaliseth not, neither the Portugals nor the Dutch, yet in candid, faire, and Merchant-like dealing, these Pagans, Mahumetans and Gentiles, hold them in esteeme farre
before them, and deservingly have here the Epithete of far more currant and square dealers. And although for the present this trade and Company doe suffer under some adverse clouds, and grone under some unkinde losses by the falshood of the Nether∣landers, and sad accidents at sea, yet their adventures and acts are praise worthy, and their faire indeavours for Englands honour in point of trade, meriteth due commendations, and just applause. The Turky Company of London, for its height and eminency, is The Turkie Company. now second to none other of this land, for not yearely, but mo∣nethly, nay almost weekly their ships are observed to goe to and fro, exporting hence the clothes of Suffolke, Gloster, Woster, and Coventry, dyed and drest, Kersies of Hampshire and Yorke, Lead, Tynne, and a great quantity of the above said India spices, Indico and Callicos, and in returns thereof import from Turkie, the raw silkes of Persia, Damasco, Tripoly, &c. Galles of Mosolo and Toccat Chamblets, Grograms, and Mohayrs of Angora, Cottons, and Cot∣ton yarne of Cyprus and Smirna, and sometimes the Iemmes of In∣dia, and drugges of Egypt, and Arabia, the Muscadins of Candia, the Corance and Oiles of Zante, Zeffalonia, and Morea, with sun∣dry others, and in all these parts are accounted also second to none, nor give place to any nation, neither in the greatnesse of their traffique, nor yet in their faire and Merchant-like performance. The ancient company of the Merchant Adventurers of Lon∣don, The Merchant Adventurers. hold the same proportion in the integrity of their dealings, and in the squarenesse of their performance with both the a∣fore named: their excellent government, and their ancient or∣ders preserved and maintained, is every where both applauded and commended. The Cities of Hamburgh, Rotterdam, and o∣thers in the Netherlands by their submissive seeking for their resi∣dence, and their privileges and immunities granted them during that time, is a sure testimony that speaks their welcome every where, and an assured token of that Cities decay. that they leave from England, they furnish them with clothes of sundry shires, & some other commodities monethly, as by the shortnesse of their navigation they finde it needfull and proper to their traffique, and from thence furnish England with Tapestries, Diaper, Cam∣briques, Hollands, Lawnes, Hoppes, Mather, Steele, Rhenish wines, and many other manufacturies, as Blades, Stuffes, Sope, Lattin, Wier, and plates, &c. and here also this nation is accounted the most current and onely Merchant-like nation that traffique or have com∣merce amongst them. The East country Merchants, and the Moscovia Company, doe The Eastland and Moscovia Company.
also challenge a part in this great trade of England, and adde some perfection to the traffique of the City of London: neither doth their faire dealing there, come behinde any of their fel∣low citizens, nor are they there lesse esteemed then any other forraigne nation there resident. They export hence principally, cloth, as the best commodity, as also tinne, leade, with some o∣ther spices of India, and other Southerne commodities, and re∣turne thence, ashes, clapbord, copper, deales, fish, rich furres, masts, pipe staves, rye, timber, wainscot, wheate, fustians, iron, latine lin∣nen, mathers, quicksilver, flaxe, hempe, steele, caviare, cordage, hides, honey, tarre, ropes, tallow, pitch, waxe, rosin, and sundry others. What shall I say to the French Company, the Groenland Com∣pany, the Merchants trading into Spaine, Barbary, Geanny, Benin, Italie, Scotland, and Ireland, but that they also challenge a great interest in the traffique of this City and Kingdome, for the French Merchants carry hence, English clothes, Kersies, and Bayes, The French Merchants. Galles, Silke, and Cottons of Turky, and for the same returne, Buckrams, Canvas, Cards, Glasse, Graine, Linnens, Salt, Claret and white Wines, Woade, Oiles, Almonds, Pepper, some silke stuffes, and some other petty manufacturies. The Merchants trading into Spaine, carry hence bayes, sayes, The Spanish Merchants. serges, perpetuanos, leade, tynne, herrings, pilchards, salmon, new∣land fish, calfe skins, and many other commodities, and in returns furnish England thence with wines of Xeres, Mallaga, Bastard, Candado nd Aligant, Rosins, Olives, Oiles, Sugars, Sopes, Ani∣seeds, Liquoris, Soda barillia, Pate, and sundry west India commodi∣ties: neither have the Spanish and Portugall any ill opinion in the dealing and traffique of the English nation, for though of all o∣ther nations, they have the best conceit and opinion of their owne greatnesse, and punctuall worth, and have of late exchan∣ged the name of Mercader into Cargador, (how unproper I refer to their own language) yet account they the English (after them∣selves) the principall and fairest dealing Merchants in the world. The Merchants of England trading into Naples, Sicilia, Genoa, Leghorne and Venice, &c. which here I tearme Italie, are not ob∣served The Italian Merchants. to have any joynt society or company, yet to the honour and benefit of this Kingdome and City therof, transport hence, bayes, sayes, serges, perpetuanos, kersies, lead, tyn, cloth, and many other native commodities, besides pepper, indico, cloves, and other Indian commodities in great abundance, and for returnes thence, have clothes of gold and silver, satins, velvets, taffataes, plushes, tabins, damaskes, alme, yles, glasse, aniseeds, rice, Venice gold and
silver, great quantity of raw silkes, of sundry sorts, and divers o∣ther commodities; and here likewise all other forraigne nations give willingly place to the English, as the prime and principall Mer∣chants that either abide amongst them, or negotiate with them. I need not to insist here upon the reliques of that famous Barbary trade, nor yet mention the petty adventures of the English to Guyny and Benny, though that otherwise they are concurrent to the traffick of this nation, neither need I nominate the homeland commerce of this kingdome to Scotland and Ireland, neither goe a∣bout to particularise the large traffique of this Iland to their late Plantations of New found land, Sommer Ilands, Virginia, Barba∣dos, and new England, and to other places which rightly challenge an interest in the present trade and traffique of this kingdome. Therfore omitting what may be further said in this point, and having thus survayed the trade of this Iland in the particular, and shewed the commodities exported and imported by every no∣ted Company and Societie, I shall now speake a word concer∣ning the Navigation of this Nation, which is one of the maine and principall meanes by which this traffique is observed to be preserved unto them at this day. I shall not need to looke backe into former ages, nor trouble The navigati∣on of the Eng∣lish famous, my selfe to search after old records that expresse the worth of the English nation at sea in the times of old; it sufficeth me to un∣derstand, and know that these present times wherein we live, is not any waies inferiour (in this point) to the former, nor the reall value nor valour of the English any wayes decayed or alte∣red from its former ancient greatnesse, to its present splendor: what they have done, let Histories remember, and what they now doe, let the world witnesse and testifie throughout Europe. What Creeke or Port in Europe have they not sought out and throughout Europe. found? nay how many of them have fought against hunger, cold, and all extremities, to finde new northerne passages to the southerne Regions, and though the South Seas, and a great part of America be at this day debarred to them and to their Navigati∣on, In America. yet their wils herein are more boūded to their Princes plea∣sure in a faithfull obedience to his treaties and peace with that Don that challengeth those vast Countries, then any way in feare of his greatnesse, or his navall power at Sea, as may well witnesse their Attempts, Navigations, and Plantations in many parts of that Country not limited or forbidden by that treaty. As for their Navigations to Africa, begin at Alexandria in Egypt, In Africa. and so saile to Tunes, Argire and Seuta, and thence alongst the coast of Guiny and Benyn, to cape Bona, Esperansa, then to Mom∣basa, Melinda, Brava, Cape, Guarde fuy, and into the red sea gulfe,
and tell me where is it that they have not beene, or what place or Port is not acqainted to them. And if you survey the Mari∣time shore of Asia, and beg in at Sues in the aforesaid Gulfe, an In Asia. so to Aclon, Dieu, Cambaia, Ormus, Surrat, Goa, Cochin, Mesulapa∣tam, Pegu, Camboi, Cauch, China, Maccau, and to the utmost bounds of China, and the Iles of Iapan, and Cathay, and all the adjacent Ilands they have all borne for many yeares, both well acquainted to our sea men, and not unfrequented by our Mer∣chants and traders, and for the Casplan Sea, the Euxine and the other parts of Asia comprised from thence by Constantinople to Scanderone, and so to Alexandria, every weeke brings us tidings of the currant advises of those places. To conclude then by what hath been said, may be clearely discerned, the present height and amplitude of our English commerce, and the greatnesse of Englands Navigations, the continuation whereof my devoti∣ons shall ever second, and my prayer shall be, that neither our fained friends, nor yet our sroward foes, may ever have just cause to rejoyce at the decrease, nor least diminution thereof. Having thus happily ended my peregrination, and drawn out the utmost bounds and limits of this my Mappe of Commerce, and concluded there the manner and matter of the generall and par∣ticular traffique of most of all the eminent Cities and Countries of the world, I will now here cast anchor, and finish in this place my voyage, till the next faire gale doth offer and present it selfe, to imbarke both my time and pen in the survey and calculation of the Exchanges of Europe, as at this day they are seen practised amongst the Merchants of Christen∣dome. FINIS.
EXCHAN∣GES.
EXCHANGES, CHAP. 274. Of Exchanges in generall, and of the Method and manner thereof, and how calculated in any place in Christendome. I Have in the tenth Chapter of this Map Exchange in Generall. of Commerce, shewed, that to make this Treatise absolute and compleate, the Method and manner how all Exchanges are framed and calculated is perfectly to be knowne and learned, and there also declared the necessity of this knowlege with all circumstances depending there∣upon. Now by reason that I have in all the afore mentioned Cities of this Map, (wherein, either custome, time, or commodity of Trade, Exchanges of moneys have beene setled, and where the said Exchan∣ges are daily used and practised) omitted the forme, manner and calculation thereof, together with all the particular circumstan∣ces rebuisite and necessary to the explanation of this mystery of Exchanging, I have in this place thought good to allot it (as wor∣thily meriting) a peculiar discourse at large by it self, which here I conceive it most proper to bee inserted: and because that my experience in the exactnesse required may not be peradventure sufficient, to lead me through in every particular point and need∣full circumstance; I have therefore judged it no blemish to my knowledge to be instructed by those excellent and judici∣ous Bankers, Geo. Baptista Zuccetta, a merchant of Genoa, and Cladio Boiero, a merchant of Lions, whose endevours herein are wor∣thy commendations, and whose laborious presidents and pre∣ceding labours, where I find my selfe defective in this taske and Labyrinth, I willingly follow.
Places in use, and those as are apt for exchanges, are such, where Merchants in some fit and competent number, doe meet and are What are places of Exchanges. assembled for the benefit and behoofe of trade and negotiation, which at this present day are observed to be many, yet withall are noted not to be so firmely setled, but that the same admits some∣times an alteration and change, varying according as the dew occasions of Commerce, and traffique in that place requires, either by the decay of the trade there, or by the encrease of the trade of another place more fit and proper thereunto. Some places againe are observed to be (if I may so tearme it) the Staples of Exchanges, and yet notwithstanding hath its de∣pendency Som cities are the Staples of Exchanges. upon the Exchanges of other places, and which else are not found to comprehend any other manner of traffique, having onely certaine times or faires, setled and confirmed by the custome of Exchangers, in which, and to which Bils of Exchange, are either dated, expire, or are renewed, in which Nature, and of which sort Pla∣centia is accounted the most notable for all Italy and other places, where indeed Exchanges are found to have a certain kind of being, yetacknowledgeth its real existence from other places and Cities, Besanson in Burgondie, Spossa in the River of Genoa, Camberay in Pied∣d, and some others were in former times observed to be of this kind, whose Exchanges did totally depend upon the partidos of Ex∣changes, made in other countries, and these sometimes of such, as had the same concordancy in the currant coins of the Exchange, and sometimes a discrepancie. And for as much as it is observed, that some other Cities where no set Exchanges are found, sometimes challengeth by the neces∣sity The Exchan∣ges of some ci∣ties depends upon the Ex∣changes of som others. of traffique and Commerce, a course of Exchanging with these or the like places, and yet hath none setled therein, then and in such cases is it seene, that the Metropolis, or principall Cities of these countries, prescribes both the Rule, rate, and condition thereto, as if Vicentia, Verona, or Padoua, would frame an Ex∣change with Placentia, it is observable, that the rate of Venice, in which estate these said places are found to be, and who have their moneyes of one and the selfe-same goodnesse and value, give the rule, rate, and condition thereto. So in Pavia, Como, and other townes in the Dutchy of Millan, as in Millan it selfe, so in Bristoll, Yorke, Chester or Hll, or other townes in England, as in the City of London, the principall of that Iland, so have the Cities of France, their rule from Lions, all places of Flanders from Ant∣werpe, and so have the like in other places and Countries. Now for as much as Exchanges then are not found current in all places, Exchangers, Bankers, and Merchants have setled a common The chiefe ci∣ties of Exchan∣ges. course of Exchanging, in some certaine particular and princi∣pall places, the which are observed in these daies chiefly to bee these, as namely in Italy thirteene.
For Italie 13. Rome. Genoa. Millan Naples. Barri. Mesina. Bollonia. Venice. Florence. Lucca. Lechie. Palermo. Bergamo. &c. For France 3 Paris. Lions. Roan &c. For Spaine 6 Valentia. Barselona. Alcala. Saragosa. Sivill. Medina delcampo. For Portugall Lisborne onely. For Flanders Antwerpe onely. For England London onely. For Germany 5 Vienna. Noremberg. Colonia. Augusta. Francford. &c. Besides which, some others of lesser note, are observed to have an Exchange currant, but by reason, that in some sort, they have in most of the principall points, a dependancie upon some of these, and a concordance with them; they are by most Authors neglected, and therefore shall be by me heere wholly omitted. In the next place it is considerable that many of these before Many Cities practice Ex∣changes by one and the same monyes &c. mentioned Cities, are found to practice their Exchanges, in one and the selfe same moneyes, Coines, and denominations, as doth Lechie, and Barry, which are included in Naples, as Naples it selfe, Palermo and Mesina comprehended in Sicilia, Valentia, Saragosa, and Barselo∣na, in Catalonia, Sivil, Alcala, & Medina del Campo in Castilia, Francford, Noremberge, Colonia, and Augusta in Germany, and so in some others. What thing this Exchange is properly in it selfe found to bee, What Ex∣change is, &c. as also what a Bill of Exchange is, and the due ceremonies and strict rules thereof, together with the commodiousnesse, neces∣sity, and first reall intent of the same, I have shewed in the tenth Chapter, which briefly here, may not unproperly bee defined by the word it selfe, as it is aptly expressed in our English tongue, which extendeth it selfe into two parts; as first, an Exchanging of one sort of Moneyes to another, and secondly an Exchanging from one Citie or countrey to another, in which is also considerable, both
a rate and tearme wherein, and whereby this is brought to con∣clusion and perfection, which are principally observed to be per∣formed Rates, termes, Faires, and V∣sances of Ex∣change. by certaine faires or usances, accustomed in the Art of Ex∣changing, and which are set downe, by Merchants, Bankers and Ex∣changers, at their assemblies and meetings, in a faire and regular Order, by a certaine course of Iustice, and by peculiar lawes and ordinances amongst themselves, both which faires and the rates and tearmes thereof, have a constant expiration and determina∣tion, within certaine monthes, as the Vsances have, that are like∣wise included within the rules of the said Faires, which are found also to end and determine within certaine prefix't daies, accor∣ding to the received custome of those two Cities, wherein the said Exchanges are found mutually and respectively to be both setled and placed. Moreover, in the practice of Exchanging, Bankers and Exchan∣gers, are found to observe this custome amongst themselves in What is obser∣ved in Exchan∣ing in the usual manner ther∣of. the usuall manner of Exchanging from one place to another, that is, the One propounds his Money in a whole number or denomination, and the Other consequently and necessarily in a fraction, broken Number, or lesser denomination, in which contract or Bargaine, it is imagined, that those two, either persons or places, would ne∣gotiate one and the self-same thing, so that the one would be the Seller, and the other the Buyer thereof, to performe which, it is questionlesse needfull, that he that hath the thing, makes the rate and price, the which shall happen without any contract, or diffe∣rence of much or little, and as it chanceth in the sale of any com∣modity, so falleth it out in the Exchanges of Moneyes, for of the two places that would Exchange, the one propounds a grosse summe, and the other the condition and price in a lesser summe, which may either admit an encrease, or decrease in estimation or value, according as they fall to agreement, upon the lesser or greater esteeme of the said some propounded, the use of which is exem∣plified thus. If Placentia would Exchange with any other place, the said Pla∣centia, Example. or as Exchangers tearme it, the said Faire, or fiera propounds and gives alwayes the intire summe, or greater denomination, and by consequence, the other that would exchange therewith, gives the other which is the lesser denomination. This Summe which I thus tearme an intire or whole denomina∣tion, falles in some places to be, sometimes one Crowne, and in other places sometimes 100 Crownes, Florins or Duccats, the same is likewise found to be practised betweene any two places; Ex∣changing, for each place giveth either a Denomination intire of one to one other, or of one hundred to another Hundred, or else of a les∣ser divident then one, or then one hundred, which I here tearme the fraction, broken number, or smallest denomination, as shalbe more plainely expressed in the calculated Tables following.
Now as touching the monyes which are thus given as intire or What an in∣tire summe Exchanges is, and what a broken num∣ber or fraction. whole summes, Videlicet, One or One hundred, these are either found to be Crownes, Ducats, Pounds, Florins, &c. according to the received quality of the grosse and whole monyes, which that place is found to have current, that would give, so in like manner it falleth out in the smaller or lesser denomination, in the places that would take, which in themselves is also various, and conse∣quently of divers sorts, as pence, sols, deniers, &c. as shall also ap∣peare by the said Table. And though it fall out to be the custome, that one place giveth Liberty of Ex∣changing to the judicious. an Exchange in grosse monyes, and another place in small, (as is before related,) and that this grosse and small monyes be of such or such a quality and kind, This observation and Rule prescribed notwith∣standing, is not alwayes necessary, but that Exchangers may, (though I confesse it is seldome seene) at their pleasure propound, the one or the other differing or contrary hereunto, and that the wise and judicious Exchanger may for his profit, ease or commo∣dity, propound his owne intentions, and thereby (if he can) ob∣taine a beneficiall bargaine or issue, according to his desired de∣signe and plot. As for example. If it should be said, that Exchanges may be made in a method Ignorant ex∣changers cen∣sure the judi∣cious of vary∣ing from the custome of Ex∣changing. differing from this or the common rule, or contrary to that way that hath beene received and taken, some would soone censure him of folly that should be of that opinion, and conceive such a one to be little versed in exchanging affaires, that should either propound or seeke to performe such a thing, but yet no great heed is to be taken, to the raw conceits and childish opinions of such selfe-willd Merchants, which may for the most part, be said to be either drench'd in ignorance, or drowned in Envy; because that a skilfull Merchant, may (as I have alledged) frame his Exchanges as he fees good, and to his owne commodity, the which very often∣times is observed tobe done by others, and practised daily by those of this Cittie of excellent judgements. In example whereof, posito, I would Exchange Genoa with Naples, Example. betweene which two places, the use and custome is, that Genoa gi∣veth the intire summe, or greater denomination, which is the Crowne of gold, for the which Naples gives the Graine 135. a little more or lesse, I demande, why may not Genoa give that whole summe, which is the Crowne of 4. livers, as it is accustomed to give with other places, and estimating the same by 120 graines Na∣ples, and thereby the Exchange will prove to be equall with the first manner before mentioned. And further, why may not the contrary be practised, Naples giving the whole denomination, which may be Ducats, one, for sold 66. 8. d. and so vary in as ma∣ny formes as they please, wherein I confesse I never yet found any Exchanges made, neither doe I know any true reason that the common customes should be altered, though I have thought
good to note the same here, that each knowing Merchant, may boldly use which he please, for to him that truely understands the value and course of both the places Exchanging, there will appeare no difficultie therein, and I wish that those, which knowe no other wayes but their owne, content themselves within the limits of their owne manner and understanding, and suffer others of bet∣ter judgements, without their censure, to follow their owne, when it is to their benefit or commodity. CHAP. 275. The declaration of the Table of Exchanges following. THE Table of Exchanges of the Cities here follow∣ing, are formed and disposed in this nature, first, Declaration of the Table of Exchanges. in the front thereof there is placed the name of the Towne or Citie Exchanging, and in what Region or Countrie seated; secondly, the manner and me∣thod wherein the accounts in that Citie is kept by Exchangers: thirdly, the quality of the monies in use is observed, and in what coine imaginarie or reall that Citie is accustomed to make its Exchange, with the others there mentioned; fourthly, under∣neath that, is orderly set down the names of all the other places, the which by a line, are found to be joyned and knit together; and lastly, in the midst of the line is written the name of the place and Citie it selfe, for which the said Table in the said leafe is made: as for example, in the first leafe, which is for Placentia in Italy, where besides the name of the place it selfe is found these words (Placentia Exchangeth with) the which words, by reason of the including line drawne from the highest to the lowest, hath reference to every one of the names of the other places which are so included together, so that it is to be understood, as that Placentia Exchangeth with Lions, Placentia Exchangeth with Rome, with Genoa, &c. and so in the rest from one to another. Next to every one of the said names of places, followeth the species or monyes Exchanged either by an entire and whole summe, or by a broken and lesser denomina∣tion, which the place in the Table giveth in Exchange by pro∣portion with the other, to whose name the said monyes are placed and put unto, as to say, Placentia Exchangeth with Lions 100 Crowns, that is understood, that in Exchanging betweene Pla∣centia and Lions, 100 Crowns of Placentia are supposed and put by an Equivalencie or in Value to that quantity or summe of mo∣ney, which is found to be noted in Lions following, as in the said Example, Placentia Exchangeth with Lions Crowns 100. for Cro. 97. ¾. so likewise is it to be understood, that in the said Exchanges that for every 100. Crowns of Placentia, or of Fiera, or of Marke,
it is as much to say, as Lions counterpayeth or giveth 97. . of his Crownes, that is, of the Sunne. Also Placentia Exchangeth with Ge∣noa Crown 1. for sol. 67. 10. d. that is to say, that Placentia Ex∣changing with Genoa it giveth (or as I said before, it selleth) Crown 1. of Marke to have in Genoa, Sol. 67. 10d. of Gold, and in the same manner the rest of the said places are to be understood, and wher∣as the rates or prizes of these Exchanges, may here be found to disagree from the currant rates of the same in sundry places, at this very day and time, yet that cannot take away the benefit that Though the Tables of Ex∣changes differ from the pre∣sent rates, yet the use there∣of is not any way lessened. may redound to Merchants, by the use thereof, nor prejudice the labour or judgement of him that calculated the said Table, be∣cause we see by experience, that the rates of Exchanges doe hour∣ly differ, and the moneys also are found to rise, and fal daily in sun∣dry places, upon which, these Exchanges have their groundworke and foundation, and though a Table were calculated precisely to this present day, and time, yet ere the same could be published it would find a disagreement in divers places. CHAP. 276. The Use of the Table of Exchanges. THe Method being thus understood, the use thereof The use of the Table of Ex∣changes, by three Exam∣ples. is easily comprehended, which by three examples, I shall illustrate and make plain, where by the way, it is to be noted, that in the exchanging of any sum of moneyes whatsoever, the rates me ntioned in this Table, are not observable, save onely for the example sake, and for instruction in the contract, that may be made thereupon, but the rate agreed upon, and by which the exchange is conditi∣oned by both the giver and taker, is the true and firme rule, wher∣by the question is to bee wrought, notwithstanding for the first Example, wee will propound a question by a contracted price, ac∣cording First Exam∣ple. to the currant rates mentioned in this said Table, and that from Naples, a Merchant would exchange Ducat. 738. 4. 10. with Placentia, and the price of the exchange, shall be that which is mentioned, in the Table of Naples, with the towne of Placentia, where it is found, that Naples exchangeth with Placentia at Graines 133 for a Crowne. By these three numbers in the Tables mentioned, I work thus then by the Rule of Three, saying, if 133 graines, give 1 Crowne, how ma∣ny doe 738 Duc. 4. 10. give, and working Arithmetically accor∣ding to the said Rule, it makes 555 Crownes 11, 3. of Marke in Credit to be given in Fiera of the said Placentia.
For a second Example, I will propound, that Naples would exchange 500 Duc. with Placencia at Sold. 18. 2. d. &c. This exam∣ple Second Ex∣ample. considered, will not bee found to differ from the former, save that in the former Naples gave the lesser or broken number, and in this, Naples gives the whole and intire number, nowithstanding which the rule is not found to differ, as in other the like questi∣ons in simple exchanges, wherein is to be observed that Sol. 18. and Den. 2. of Valentia, are paid for 1 Duccat of Naples, and by that price and rate, I would know, how many Livers of that Money of Valentia the proposed summe of 500 Duc. in Naples come unto, and by that which we find in the Table by the same Rule of Three, I say, If one Ducat is worth 18 sol. 2 Den. How many shall 500 be worth, and by working the question, it makes 454 livers, 3 s. 4 d. And so much Credit will 500 Duc. of Naples give at the price a∣fore mentioned, thus. All other Exchanges have their resolutions as these two for∣mer, but yet sometimes it is true, some accident may interpose, Third Exam∣ple. which may cause the questiō to have a double working, as if I shold say, that Genoa would Exchange with Venetia Crownes 1000 of Li∣vers 4. to Livers 7 lib. 10 Sol. of that money, and the Credit is required in Duccats. Now then because the simple Exchange gives the money in Livers, you must make another reckoning to reduce the same into Ducats; but yet for all this, neither in this, nor in any other case, would I have but one account made, the which may bee done by the rule multiplied: I say then, if 1 Crowne bee worth 7. 10. Den. and that 6 s. 4 Den. is worth one Ducat, how many Ducats will a 1000 Crowns make? and by working the que∣stion, it will bee found to make 1209 Duc. 13. 6 d. for credit,
which from Genoa will be produced by a thousand Crownes in Ve∣nice, the question being well observed, it will bee found to bee wrought in this manner. It is to be noted, that in what place soever the Moneyes are ac∣counted by Livers, Sol. and Den. or as we say, in England by Pounds, shillings, and pence, it is accounted by 20. and by 12. be∣cause that Sol. or shil. 20. make a Liver, or Pound, and 12 deniers or pence makes a Soldo or Shilling, the same rule also holds in those places, whose greatest moneyes are imaginary and faigned, or who keepe not this orderly succession, as are the Ducats of Ca∣talonia, of Castilia, of Rome, and of Portugall, also those Crowns, who have no proper parts, also the Ducatons in what countrey soever, and the Forins in Germany, all these I say, which ought to succeed in 20, and 12. That is, in Solds, and Deniers, or Shillings and pence, and each of the other sorts of moneyes shall be accounted accor∣ding to the property of that countrey, and as shall bee signified, in the front of the following table of that place, amongst which there are some which are commonly resolved, by the more principall of their owne moneyes, as the Exchange of Sicilie with Catalonia, Castilia, Portugall, Brabant and England, and howsoever they make their Exchange, either by the Sicilian Florin, or by the Duccat, notwithstanding the parcell is resolved in Ounces, Tarins, Graines and Picholes, which is throughly declared in the follow∣ing Tables. And lastly, for as much as the termes and daies of Bils of Ex∣change, are found in many countries, to differ in length of time, and are limited of divers daies, and that the rates, rising and falling of Exchanges have a course set by a continuall meeting of Exchan∣gers, and their opinions in equality of value, I have thought good to insert the same with some other needfull circumstances of this Art of Exchanging, at the end of the Tables, to which I refer the learner, where also he shall find at large, how most of these Exchanges, are cast up, and reckoned from one place to another, and now I will proceed to the Tables themselves, as I find them calculated by the said Geo. Bapt. Zucetta, and others following him.
CHAP. 277. Of the Exchanges of Placentia, a place of Faires or Fiera of Exchanges in Italie. THis Towne is considered, as a Faire or Staple of Exchanges, and not as a Citie of Traffique; and therefore there is no esteeme made of the current The Exchanges of Placentia. Money of the place, but onely of that which is made by Exchanging, which are Crownes of Marke; in which Moneys, Bankers and Exchangers doe onely treat and account in; and the same is held by Crownes, Sold. and Deniers of Marke. And in the custome of Exchanges here in use, it giveth the entire and whole summe to all other places, being either Crownes One, or Crownes one hundred. Placentia doth ex∣change with Lions Crowne 100 for 96¾ Crowne Rome Cro. 100 for 99  Ducc. Genoa Cro.—1 for 67. 10 Sol. of Gold Millan Cro.—1 for 134. 9 Sol. Venice Cro. 100 for 130 Ducc. Florence Cro. 100 for 109  Cro. Luccha Cro. 100 for 116¾ Duccatons Naples Cro.—1 for 134 Grains Lechie Cro.—1 for 135½ Grains Bari Cro.—1 for 135 Grains Palermo Cro.—1 for 029 Carlins Mesina Cro.—1 for 029¼ Carlins Anu. & Coll. Cro.—1 for 128 Grosses London Cro.—1 for 81  d. sterl. Valentia Cro.—1 for 24 Sold. Saragosa Cro.—1 for 24 Sol. 6 Den. Barselona Cro.—1 for 24 Sol. 4 Den. Siv. al. Med. Cro.—1 for 432 Marvedes Lixborne Cro.—1 for 482 Rais Bolonia Cro.—1 for 119 Duccatons Bergamo Cro.—1 for 118¾ Duccatons Francfort Cro.—1 for 103  Quarentins. In the 382 Chapter, the Reader may finde how these Exchanges are cast up and calculated.
CHAP. 278. Of the Exchanges of Lions, Paris, and Rouen, in France. IN Lions, Paris, Rouen, and through all France, they keepe their accounts in Livers, Sols, and Deniers, The Exchanges of Lions. &c. Turnois, and they here doe Exchange in Crownes of the Sun, and Deniers of the Sun, this Liver is also called in some places of France, a Franke, and three Livers or Frankes is accounted for the said Crowne of the Sun, and the Crowne of Italy by a decree and standard of the countrey pas∣seth at 58 Sol. of the said Crowne. And in the custome of Exchanging, it giveth the entire and whole summe or number, either one Crowne, or one hundred Crowns of the Sol. Lions doth ex∣change with Placentia Crowne 100 for 103½ Crownes Rome Cro. 100 for 99  Ducc. Genoa Cro.—1 for 66. ½ Sol. of Gold Millan Cro.—1 for 115. Sol. Venice Cro. 100 for 116¾ Duc. Banko. Florence Cro. 100 for 106  Cro. Luccha Cro. 100 for 117½ Duccatons Naples Cro.—1 for 124 Grains Lechie Cro.—1 for 122½ Grains Bari Cro.—1 for 123 Grains Palermo Cro.—1 for 29½ Carlins Mesina Cro.—1 for 29¼ Carlins Antw. & Col. Cro.—1 for 096 Grosse London Cro.—1 for 62 Pence sterling Valentia Cro.—1 for 23 Sol. 10 Den. Saragosa Cro.—1 for 23 Sol. 8 Den. Barselona Cro—1 for 24 Sol. Siv. al Med. Cro.—1 for 436 Marvedes Lixborne Cro.—1 for 485 Raies Bollonia Cro. 100 for 119½ Ducatons Bergamo Cro—100 for 118  Ducatons Francford Cro—1 for 104 Quarentins Vide chap. 302 and so following of the calculation of the Ex∣changes of this place.
CHAP. 279. Of the Exchanges of Rome in Italy. IN Rome, the Bankers and Exchangers keepe their ac∣counts in Crownes, Iulios, Baiochs and Quatrins, and The Exchanges of Rome. they Exchange in Ducats, Sols, and deniers of Camera. The Crowne of the abovesaid money is worth 10 Iu∣lios, or 100 Baiochs, or else 400 Quatrins; the Iulio is 10 Baioch, or else 40 Quatrins, and the Baioch is 4 Quatrins. The Duccat of Camera according to the old value, is worth 2  per cent. more than the Cro. of Gold, so that 100 duc. are 102  Crownes. In the custome of Exchange amongst Merchants, the place gi∣veth the Broken number to all Italy, excepting to the Kingdome of Naples, to Sicilia, Bollonia, and Bergamo, and to all others it giveth the whole number, which is either by one Ducat or by a 100 Ducats. Rome doth ex∣change with Placentia Duc. 97¾ for 100 Crownes. Lions Duc. 97½ for 100 Crownes. Genoa Duc. 97 for 100 Cro. of Gold. Millan Duc. 97¼ for 100 Cro. of Gold. Venice Duc. 85⅕ for 100 Ducats. Florence Duc. 91¼ for 100 Crownes. Lucca Duc. 84 for 100 Duccatons Naples Duc. 100 for 135 Ducca. Lecchie Duc. 100 for 134  Duccats. Barri Duc. 100 for 134  Duc. Palermo Ducat. 1 for 14 15 Tarins. Mesina Ducat. 1 for 14 17. Tarins. Antw. & Col. Ducat. 1 for 125 Grosses. London Ducat. 1 for 87½ d. sterl. Valentia Ducat. 1 for 242. Sol. Saragosa Ducat. 1 for 23 Sol. 8 Den. Barselona Ducat. 1 for 23 Sol. 10. Den. Siv. al. Med. Ducat. 1 for 440 Marvedes. Lixborne Ducat. 1 for 482 Raies. Bolonia Duc. 100 for 119 Duccatons. Bergamo Duc. 100 for 119½ Duccatons. Francfort Duc. 1 for 103 Quarentins. Vide how these are calculated, Chap. 326. and so following.
CHAP. 280. Of the Exchanges of Genoa, the Metropolis of Liguria. IN Genoa, Exchangers keepe their accounts in Livers, The Exchanges of Genoa. Sol. and Deniers current, and they exchange in Livers, Sols, and Deniers of Gold. The Monyes current, is it that is the common in use; of which, the Crowne of Gold is worth Sol. 90. and in times past was worth lee: The Monyes of Gold are imaginarie, and valued according as the Faires of Exchanges permit; of which, the Crowne of Gold is alwayes worth 68 Sol. In the custome of Exchanging, this place giveth the whole summe to all, excepting Placentia and Lions, the which are either one Crowne, or 100 Crownes; the which Crownes are accounted of Gold for all the laces, excepting Milan, Venice, and Germanit, to which they are accustomed to give the Crowne of 4 Livers current. Genoa doth ex∣change with Placentia Sold. 66 of Gold for 1 Crowne. Lions Sol. 66. 4 of Gold for 1 Crowne. Rome Crow. 100 of Gold for 98½ Duc. Millan Cro. 1 of 4 Liv. cor. for 119 Sold. Venice Cro. 1 of 4 Liv. cor. for 7 Liv. 10 Sol. Piccho. Florence Cro. 100 of Gold for 106¼ Crowne. Luccha Cro. 100 of Gold for 118 Duccat. Naples Crow. 1 of Gold for 134 Graines. Lechie Crow. 1 of Gold for 135 Graines. Barri Crow. 1 of Gold for 134½ Graines. Palermo Crow. 1 of Gold for 29  Carlins. Mesina Crow. 1 of Gold for 29½ Carlins. Antw. & Col. Crow. 1 of Gold for 124 Grosses. London Crow. 1 of Gold for 83 d. sterl. Valentia Crow. 1 of Gold for Sol. 23 9. Saragosa Crow. 1 of Gold for Sol. 23. 10. Barselona Crow. 1 of Gold for Sol. 23. 8. Siv. al. Med. Crow. 1 of Gold for Marved. 436. Lixborne Crow. 1 of Gold for Raies 470. Bollonia Cro. 100 of Gold for Ducat. 118½. Bergamo Cro. 100 of Gold for Ducat. 118⅓. Francfort Cro. 1 of 4 Liv. cor. for Quarentin. 92. Vide Chap. 360. how the Exchanges of this place are calculated.
CHAP. 281. Of the Exchanges of Milan, in Lombardie. IN Milan, Exchangers keepe their Accounts in Livers, Solds, and Deniers Imperiall, and some in Crownes, Sols, The Exchanges of Milan. and Deniers of Gold. The Monyes current, is accounted the Imperiall Monyes: there is also the Crowne of Gold, of no setled price, but now worth Sol. 135. The Cre of 6 Livers, is it which some doe use in Exchange with Genoa. The Crowne of 117 Sol, is in use for the Exchange of Venetia. In the custome of Exchanging, this place giveth the broken num∣ber to Placentia, Lions, and sometimes to Genoa, and to all the other the whole number, which is either One or 100 Crownes of Gold, excep∣ting onely to Venetia, which is of Sol. 117. as aforesaid. Milan doth ex∣change with Placentia Sold. 134 for 1 Crowne. Lions Sold. 135 for 1 Crowne. Rome Gold Crow. 100 for 98¼ Duc. Genoa Gold Crow. 1 for Liv. 4. 10 current. Venice Cro. 1 of 117 Sol. 1 for Liv. 7. 6. Florence Gold Cro. 100 for Crow. 105. Luccha Gold Cro. 100 for 117 Duccat. Naples Gold Cro. 100 for 133 Ducc. Lecchie Gold Cro. 100 for 134 Ducc. Barri Gold Cro. 100 for 133  Ducc. Palermo Gold Crow. 1 for 29¼ Carlins. Mesina Gold Crow. 1 for 29⅓ Carlins. Antu. & Col. Gold Crow. 1 for 124 Grosses. London Gold Crow. 1 for 84  d. sterl. Valentia Gold Crow. 1 for 24 Sol. Barselona Gold Crow. 1 for 23. 9. Sol. Siv. al. Med. Gold Crow. 1 for 434 Marved. Lixborne Gold Crow. 1 for 465 Raies. Bollonia Gold Cro. 100 for 118 Ducatons. Saragosa Gold Crow. 1 for 23. 10. Sol. Bergamo Gold Cro. 100 for 118 Ducatons. Francfort Gold Crow. 1 for 103 Quarentins. Vide Chap. 440. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 282. Of the Exchanges of Venice, in the Adriatique Seas. IN Venetia they keepe their accounts in Livers, Sols, The anges of Ven. and Deniers of Picchol, and some in Livers, Sols, and Deniers Grosse, and others in Ducc. and Grosses. The Monyes which here is called Piccholi, is the current Monyes of the place. The Monyes which we here call Grosse, is worth 1 Liver, Sol. 62 of Picchols, or 10 Ducats. The Ducat is alwayes worth Livers 6. Sol. 4 of Picchol, or else accounted 24 Grosses. The Gross is worth Sol. 5. 2 d. of Picchol, and in the Liver of Grosses, it is accounted and reckned as in Deniers. In the custome of Exchanging, it giveth the broken number onely to Placentia, Lions, Genoa, Millan, and Bolognia, and to all the rest, the whole number, either by one Ducat, or by 100 Ducat. Venetia doth ex∣change with Placentia Duc. 129 for 100 Crownes. Lions Duc. 129½ for 100 Crownes. Roma Duc. 100 for 77½ Ducat. Genoa Liv. Pic Duc. 7. 10 for 1 Cr. of 4 Liv. current, Millan Liv. Pic. 7. 6. 5. for 1 Cro. of 117 Sol. Florence Duc. 100 for 82 Crownes. Naples Duc. 100 for 101 Ducats. Lucche Duc. 100 for 100¼ Duccats. Barri Duc. 100 for 09 9¼ Duc. Palermo Duc. 1 for Tarins 11 2. Mesina Duc. 1 for Tarins 10. 18. Antw. & Col. Duc. 1 for 91 Grosse. London Duc. 1 for 60 d. sterl. Valentia Duc. 1 for Sol. 17 6. Saragosa Duc. 1 for Sol. 17 8 Barselona Duc. 1 for Sol. 17 10. Siv. al. Med. Duc. 1 for Marvedes 320. Lixborne Duc. 1 for Raies. 350. Bolonia Duc. 115 for Duccatons. 100. Bergamo Duc. 100 for Duccatons 117. Francfort Duc. 100 for Florins 127. Lucca Duc. 100 for Duccatons 91. Vide Chap. 368. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 283. Of the Exchanges of Florence, the ducall City of Toscany. IN Florence the Exchangers keepe their accounts in Livers, Solds, and Deniers, Picholi, and Exchange in The Exchanges of Florence. Crownes Sols, and Deniers. The Moneyes which is here called Pichol, is the money currant of the place, the Crowne is alwayes worth Livers 7, Sol. 10 of Piccol. wherein the custome of other places is divers, in which the Crowne of gold, with the currant Moneyes, and here the variety is accorded by the Exchange. They use also a Duccat which is worth Livers 7. or else Boloni∣ni 70. In the use of Exchanging it giveth the broken number to Lyons, Placentia, Genoa, Millan, and Venice, and to all others the intire or whole number found to be either one Crowne or 100 Crownes. Florence doth ex∣change with Placentia Crownes 105 for 100 Crownes. Lions Cro. 105½ for 100 Crownes. Roma Cro. 100 for 96 Ducats. Genoa Cro. 106 for 100 Cro. of Gold. Millano Cro. 106¼ for 100 Cro. of Gold. Venetia Cro. 82 for 100 Ducats Luccha Cro. 100 for 112 Ducatons. Naples Cro. 100 for 130 Ducats. Lecchia Cro. 100 for 129 Duccats. Barre Cro. 100 for 129  Duccats. Palermo Cro.—1 for 28  Carlins. Mesina Cro.—1 for 28  Carlins. Antu. & Colon. Cro.—1 for 118 Grosse. London Cro.—1 for 80 Pence starl. Valentia Cro.—1 for 23 4 Sold. Saragosa Cro.—1 for 23 6 Sol. Barselona Cro.—1 for 23 2 Sol. Siv. al. Med. Cro.—1 for 432 Marvedes. Lixborne Cro.—1 for 460 Rais Bolonia Cro. 100 for 115  Duccatons Bergamo Cro. 100 for 115 Duccatons. Francfort Cro.—1 for 98 Quarentins. Vide Chap. 400 how these are calculated.
CHAP. 284. Of the Exchanges of Lucca, a Republique in Toscanie. IN Lucca, Exchangers doe keepe their accounts, in The  o . Livers, Sol. and Deniers of Piccols, and doe Exchange in Ducatons, Sol. and Deniers the Monyes here called Piccols, is the current Coine of the place. The Crowne of Gold is alwayes worth Liv. 7. Sol. 10. of Piccols: as in Florence, the Ducaton is worth 7. Liv. of Piccol, and is com∣monly called the Crowne of Silver. In the custome of Exchanging, it giveth the broken number to Placentia, Lions, Genoa, Millan, and Venetia, and to all other the entire or whole, which is one Ducaton or 100 Ducatons. Lucca doth exchange with Placentia Ducatons 117¼ for 100 Crow. Lions Ducatons—118¼ for 100 Crow. Roma Duc. 119 for 100 Duc. Genoa Duc. 118 for 100 Crow. of Gold. Millan Duc. 118½ for 100 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Duc.-92 for 100 Ducats. lorence Duc. 113 for 100 Crow. Naples Duc. 100 for 114 Ducats. Lucca Duc. 100 for 114  Ducats. Barri Duc. 100 for 115 Ducats. Palermo Duc.—1 for 24½ Carlins. Mesina Du.—1 for 24½ Carlins. Antu. & Col. Du.—1 for 102 Grosses. London Du.—1 for 67 d. sterl. Valentia Du.—1 for 20 Sol. Saragosa Du.—1 for 19. 10 Sol. Barselona Du.—1 for 19. 11 Sol. Siv. al. Med. Du.—1 for 365 Marvedes. Lixborne Du.—1 for 395 Raies Bollonia Duc. 100 for Ducatons 100 Bergamo Duc. 100 for Ducatons 99½ Francfort Duc.—1 for 85 Quarentins.
CHAP. 285. Of the Exchanges of Naples, the Metropolis of that Kingdome. IN Naples, the Exchangers keepe their Accounts in Ducats, Tarins, Graines, and Cavalls, which are accoun∣ted The Exchanges of Naples. in 5, 10, and 12 foll. The Ducat is 5 Tarins, or 100 Graines, or else 1200 Cavalles; the Tarine is ac∣counted 20 Graines, or 240 Cavalles, and the Graine is 12 Cavalles. Besides which, there is in use another sort of Monyes current, which are Carlins, Cinquins, and Torneses. The Carline is 10 Graines, or halfe a Tarine; from whence, 10 Carlins maketh the Du∣cat. The Cinquine is 2  Graine, of which, 4 maketh the Carline, and 40 the Ducat. The Tornese is 6 Cavalles, of which, 5 makes a Cin∣quine, 20 makes a Carline, 40 the Tarine, and 200 the Ducat. In the custome of Exchanging, it gives the broken number to all Italy and Lions, Palermo onely excepted, and to all others it giveth the whole number, which is either one Ducat, or 100 Ducats. Naples doth ex∣change with Placentia Grain. 133 for 1 Crowne. Roma Ducat. 136 for 100 Duc. Lions Grain. 135½ for 1 Crowne. Genoa Grain. 135 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Millan Ducc. 134½ for 100 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Duc. 100 for 100 Duc. Florence Duc. 131 for 100 Crownes. Lucca Duc. 113½ for 100 Ducatons. Lecchie Duc. 100 for 100¼ Ducats. Barri Duc. 100 for 99¼ Ducats. Palermo Duccat. 1 for 174 Gra. of 8 Pic. Mesina Duc. 96 of 6 Tar. for 100 Ducats. Antu. & Col. Duccat. 1 for 88 Grosses. London Duccat. 1 for 66½ Pence sterl. Valentia Duccat. 1 for 18. 2 Sols. Saragosa Duccat. 1 for 18 Sols. Barselona Duccat. 1 for 17. 10 Sol. Siv. al. Med. Duccat. 1 for 330 Marved. Lixborne Duccat. 1 for 346 Raies. Bollonia Ducc. 114 for 100 Ducatons. Bergamo Ducc. 100 for 88 Ducatons. Francfort Duccat. 1 for 76 Quarentines. Vide Chap. 342. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 286. Of the Exchanges of Lecchie in Calabria. IN Lecchie the Exchangers keepe their accounts and The Exchanges o ie. have their Moneyes as in Naples, the Metropolis of that Kingdome, which is in Duccats, Tarins, grains, and Cavallies accounted in 5, 20 and 12, and in Exchan∣ging it differs not much from the customeof Naples, specified in the former leafe. Lecchie doth ex∣change with Placentia gra. 134 for 1 Crowne. Lions gra. 136 for 1 Crowne. Roma gra. 137 for 1 Duc. Genoa gra. 135 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Millan gra. 134 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Duc. 101 for 100 Duc. Florence Duc. 131 for 100 Crownes. Lucca Duc. 116 for 100 Ducaton. Naples Duc. 102 for 100 Ducat. Barri Duc. 100 for 100½ Ducats. Palermo Duc.—1 for 22¾ Carlins. Mesina Duc.—1 for 23 Carlins. Antu. & Col. Duc.—1 for 87 Grosses. London Duc.—1 for 61 Pence sterl. Valentia Duc.—1 for 17. 10. Sols. Saragosa Duc.—1 for 18 Sol. Barselona Duc.—1 for 18. 1. Sol. Siv. al. Med. Duc.—1 for 328 Marved. Lixborn Duc.—1 for 348 Raies. Bollonia Grain. 115 for 1 Ducaton. Bergamo Grain. 114 for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Duc.—1 for 75  Quarentines.
CHAP. 287. Of the Exchanges of Barri in Puglia. IN Barri their Accounts and Monyes are the same as are in use in Naples, mentioned in the former Leafe, The Exchanges of Barri. and the custome in Exchanging also, is neere con∣formable thereto. Barri doth ex∣change with Placentia Gra. 133 for 1 Crowne. Lions Gra. 135 for 1 Crowne. Rome Gra. 137 for 1 Ducat. Genoa Gra. 134 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Millan Gra. 134 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Venice Duc. 101 for 100 Ducats. Florence Duc. 130 for 100 Crownes. Lucca Duc. 115½ for 100 Duccatons. Naples Duc. 101 for 100 Ducc. Lecchie Duc. 100 for 99½ Ducc. Palermo Ducat. 1 for 22⅘ Carlins. Mesina Ducat. 1 for 23 Carlins. Antw. & Col. Ducat. 1 for 88 Grosses. London Ducat. 1 for 62 d. sterl. Valentia Ducat. 1 for Sol. 18. Saragosa Ducat. 1 for Sol. 17. 10. Barselona Ducat. 1 for Sol. 18. 2. Siv. al. Med. Ducat. 1 for 330 Marvedes. Lixborne Ducat. 1 for 345 Raies. Bolonia Grain. 114 for 1 Ducaton. Bergamo Grain. 112 for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Ducat. 1 for 75 Quarentins.
CHAP. 288. Of the Exchanges of Palermo, in Sicilia. IN Palermo Exchangers keepe their accounts in Oun∣ces, Tarins, Grains and Picchols, the which is succes∣sively The Exchanges of Palermo. accounted in 30, 20, and 6. and others there be that keepe their accounts in Crowne of moneyes in Tarins, Graines, and Pichols, and these account it by 12, 20, and 6. The Ounceis 30. Tarins, or 600 Graines, or 3600 Pichols, the Tarineis 20 Graines, or 120 Pichols, and the Graine is 6 Pichols. Besides which there is a Crowne in Moneyes which is 12 Tarins or 240 Grains, or 1440 Pichols, the Ducat is 13 Tarins or else 260 Graines or 1560 Piccoles, The Florin is 6 Tarins, or 120 Grains, or 720 Pichols, the Carlin is ½ a Tarine, or 10 Grains, or 60 Pichol. In the custome of Exchanging it giveth the broken num∣ber to all Italy, and to Lions, and to all other places giveth the whole number, which is sometimes one duccat, or one Florin, or 1 Ounce, or one hundred Ounces. Palermo doth ex∣change with Placentia Carlin. 29⅓ for 1 Crowne. Lions Carl. 29½ for 1 Crowne. Roma Carl. 29¾ for 1 Duc. Genoa Carl. 29½ for 1 Crow. of Gold. Millan Carl. 29⅗ for 1 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Carl. 24¼ for 1 Duc. Florence Carl. 28 for 1 Crowne. Lucca Carl. 25 for 1 Ducaton. Naplesgra. dipicc. 172 for 1 Ducat. Lecchie Carl. 23 for 1 Ducats. Barri Tarin. 11. 8 for 1 Ducat. Mesina Ounc. 100 for 101½ Ounces. Antu. & Col. Duc. 1 for 106 Grosses. London Duc. 1 for 73 Pencesterl. Valentia Flor. 1 for 9. 8. Sols. Saragosa Flor. 1 for 9, 10 Sol. Barselona Flo. 1 for Sol. 9. 7. Siv. al. Med. Flor. 1 for 185 Marved. Lixborn Flor. 1 for 196 Raies. Bollonia Carl. 25 for 1 Ducaton. Bergamo Carl. 25¼ for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Duc. 1 for 89 Quarentines. Vide Chap. 419. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 289. Of the Exchanges of Mesina, in the Faire of Sicilia. IN Mesina, the accounts are kept, and the Moneyes The Exchanges of Mesina. that are current, are the same as in Palermo aforemen∣tioned, only excepting in the Exchange thereof with Naples, it giveth a whole Number, which are found to be of 100 Duccats. This place and Palermo, are accounted to Exchange with Pla∣centia or Lions, to give more one Carlin per Ounce, by the name of making good the moneyes, so that, he that here is to pay Moneyes by Exchange for the said places, must pay 61 Carlins per Ounce. Mesina doth ex∣change with Placentia Carl. 29 for 1 Crowne. Lions Carl. 29 for 1 Crowne. Roma Carl. 29 1 for 1 Duc. Genoa Carl. 29½ for 1 Crow. of Gold. Millan Carl. 29 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Carl. 22 for 1 Duc. Florence Carl. 28¼ for 1 Crowne. Lucca Carl. 25 for 1 Ducaton. Naples Ducc. 100 for 96½ Duc. of 6 Tarins. Lecchie Tarin. 11. 14 for 1 Ducat. Barri Carl. 23½ for 1 Ducat. Palermo Ounce 100 for 102 Ounces. Antu. & Col. Duccat. 1 for 107 Grosses. London Duccat. 1 for 72 Pence sterl. Valentia Florin. 1 for Sol. 9. 9. D. Saragosa Florin. 1 for Sol. 9. 10. D. Barselona Florin. 1 for Sol. 9. 8. D. Siv. al. Med. Florin. 1 for 190 Marved. Lixborne Florin. 1 for 200 Raies. Bollonia Carl. 25¼ for 1 Ducaton. Bergamo Carlin 25 for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Duccat. I for 90 Quarentines. Vide Chap. 419. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 290. Of the Exchanges of Antwerpe, in Brabant, and Collen in Germany the lower. IN both these places the Exchangers keepe their ac∣counts The Exchan∣ges of Antwerp and Colonia. in Livers, Sols, and Deniers of Grosses, so that their Grosses are there accounted, as their Deniers or Pfening. And in the custome of the Exchanges of these two places, they give the broken number to all other places, London on∣ly excepted, which they give not by the Grosse, but by the Sol. or shilling. Antwerp & Colonia doth ex∣change with Placentia Grosse 125 for 1 Crowne. Lions Gro. 128 for 1 Crowne. Roma Gro. 130 for 1 Ducat. Genoa Gro. 129 for 1 Cro. of Gold. Millan Gro. 127 for 1 Cro. of Gold. Venetia Gro. 94½ for 1 Ducat. Florence Gro. 112 for 1 Crowne. Luccha Gro. 104 for 1 Ducaton. Naples Gro. 91 for 1 Ducat. Lecchia Gro. 90½ for 1 Duccat. Barri Gro. 90 for 1 Duccat. Palermo Gro. 107½ for 1 Duc. Mesina Gro. 107 for 1 Duc. London Sold. 34 1/ for 1 Pound sterl. Valentia Gro. 107 for 1 Duc. Saragosa Gro. 109 for 1 Duc. Barselona Gro. 112 for 1 Duc. Siv. al. Med. Gro. 106¾ for 1 Duc. Lixborne Gro. 102 for 1 Duc. Bolonia Gro. 104 for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Gro. 105 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Gro. 78 for 1 Floren. of 65 quar. Vide Chap. 435. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 291. Of the Exchanges of London, the Metropolis of England. IN London, and throughout all England, Exchangers The Exchanges of London. keepe their Accounts in Pounds, Shillings, and Pence Sterling, and cast it up, as in other places, by Livers, Sols, and Deniers, by 12 and 20. And in the custome of Exchanging, it giveth the Exchange to all places by the broken number of Pence Sterl. Antuerpe and Colonia onely ex∣cepted, with which two places it exchangeth by the Pound of Ster∣ling Money, above specified. London doth ex∣change with Placentia Starl. Pence 64 for 1 Crowne. Lions Pence 64 for 1 Crowne. Roma Pence 66 for 1 Duc. Genoa Pence 65 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Millan Pence 64 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Pence 50 for 1 Duc. in Banco. Florence Pence 61 for 1 Crowne. Lucca Pence 53½ for 1 Ducaton. Naples Pence 50 for 1 Ducat. Lecchie Pence 50½ for 1 Ducat. Barri Pence 51 for 1 Ducat. Palermo Pence 57½ for 1 Ducat. Mesina Pence 56½ for 1 Ducat. Antu. & Col. Pounds sterl. 1 for 34½ Shill. Flem. Valentia Pence 57½ for 1 Ducat. Saragosa Pence 59 for 1 Ducat. Barselona Pence 64 for 1 Ducat. Siv. al. Med. Pence 58½ for 1 Ducat. Lixborne Pence 53½ for 1 Ducat. Bollonia Pence 53⅓ for 1 Ducaton. Bergamo Pence 52 for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Fence 59½ for 1 Florin. Vide Chap. 443. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 292. Of the Exchanges of Valentia, the Metropolis of Valentia. IN Valentia and in all the Kingdomes of Valentia, in Spaine Merchants doe keepe their accounts in Li∣vers The Ex o Valentia Sols and Deniers, the current moneyes of the place, are Rials and Deniers, and Ryals ten are accounted for a Liver, so that halfe a Riall is a Soldo,  Duccat is here imaginary, and accounted for 10  Rials, and accounted 21 Sols. In the custome of Exchanges of this place, it giveth the broken number, to all Italie, Spaine and Germany, and to all other places the intire number, either of one Duo. or 100 Duc. The Castiliano is also here found in use for an imaginarie Coine, in the ancient custome of Exchanging with Sivill, and accounted worth 27 Sol. 4 Deniers. Valentia doth ex∣change with Placentia Sol. 23. 6 for 1 Crowne. Lions Sol. 23. 8 for 1 Crowne. Rome Sol. 24. 2 for 1 Ducat. Genoa Sol. 23. 10 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Millan Sol. 23. 9 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Venice Sol. 17. 10 for 1 Ducat. Florence Sol. 23. 0 for 1 Crowne. Lucca Sol. 20. 2 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Sol. 18. 0 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Sol. 18. 2 for 1 Duccat. Barri Sol. 18. 1 for 1 Duccat. Palermo Sol. 9. 6 for 1 Florin. Mesina Sol. 9. 7 for 1 Florin. Antw. & Col Ducc. 1 for 106 Grosses. London Ducc. 1 for 72  d. sterl. Saragosa Duc. 100 for 102 Duccat. Barselona Duc. 100 for 101  Duccat. Siv. al. & Med. Sol. 20. 3 for 1 Duccat. Lixborne Ducc. 100 for 100⅓ Duccat. Bolonia Sol. 20. 3 for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Sol. 20. 4 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Sol. 14 for 1 Florin. Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 293. Of the Exchanges of Saragosa, in Catalonia. IN Saragosa, Merchants keepe their accounts as in Va∣lentia afore mentioned, and have the same Monyes, saving that the Duccat passeth here in account for 22 The Exchanges of Saragosa. Sols, or 11 Rials. In the custome of Exchanging, it giveth the broken number to all Italy, and to all the whole number, which is found to be either one Duccat or 100 Duccats. Saragosa doth ex∣change with Placentia Sol. 23. 8 for 1 Crowne. Lions Sol. 23. 11 for 1 Crowne. Rome Sol. 24. 3 for 1 Ducat. Genoa Sol. 23. 9 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Millan Sol. 23. 8 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Venice Sol. 17. 9 for 1 Ducat. Florence Sol. 22. 10 for 1 Crowne. Lucca Sol. 20. 1 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Sol. 17. 10 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Sol. 18. 1 for 1 Duccat. Barri Sol. 18. 0 for 1 Duccat. Paler Sol. 9. 8 for 1 Florin. Mesina Sol. 9. 9 for 1 Florin. Antw. & Col. Ducc. 1 for 105 Grosses. London Ducc. 1 for 73 d. sterl. Valentia Duc. 100 for 103 Duccat. Barselona Duc. 100 for 102 Duccat. Siv. al. & Med. Duc. 100 for 105 Duccat. Lixborne Ducc. 100 for 108 Duccat. Bolonia Sol. 20. 2 for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Sol. 20. 1 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Duccat. 1 for 95 Quarentins. Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 293. Of the Exchanges of Barselona the Metropolis of Catalonia. IN Barselona, the use of account keeping, and the mo∣noyes are the same as is specified in Valentia, ex∣cepting, The Exchanges of Barselona. that the Duccat is here accounted Sol. 24, which is twelve single Rials. In the custome of Exchanging, this place giveth the broken number to all other places, excepting to Antuerpe, Colo∣nia, London, Lixborne, and Germany, to which it giveth the whole number, which is found to be either one Duc. or 100 Duc. Barselona doth ex∣change with Placentia Sol. 23. 10 for 1 Crowne. Lions Sol. 24 for 1 Crowne. Rome Sol. 24. 4 for 1 Duccat. Genoa Sol. 24. 2 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Millan Sol. 24. 1 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Venice Sol. 18. 2 for 1 Ducat. Florence Sol. 23. 0 for 1 Crowne. Lucca Sol. 20. 2 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Sol. 18. 3 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Sol. 18. 2 for 1 Duccat. Barri Sol. 18. 1 for 1 Duccat. Palermo Sol. 9. 10 for 1 Florin. Mesina Sol. 9. 9 for 1 Florin. Antw. & Col. Ducc. 1 for 103 Grosses. London Ducc. 1 for 72 d. sterl. Valentia Duc. 103 for 100 Duc. Saragosa Duc. 104 for 100 Duccats. Siv. al. & Med. Duc. 106 for 100 Duccats. Lixborne Ducc. 100 for 104 Duccats. Bolonia Sol. 20. for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Sol. 20 2 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Duc. 1 for 96 Quarentines. Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 295. Of the Exchanges of Sivil, Alcala, Medina del Campo, and other places in Castilia. IN these parts, and generally throughout Spaine, Mer∣chants doe keepe their accounts in Marvedes; yet The Exchanges of Sivil, Alcala, Medina del Campo. &c. notwithstanding, for the benefit of Exchanging, they have an imaginarie Duccat, which Duccat is accounted 375 Marvedes. The Crowne of Gold is ever worth 400 Marvedes, and the single Riall ever worth 34 Marvedes. In the custome of Exchanging, this place giveth the broken number to all Italy and Lions, but to all other places the whole number, found to be either simply the single Duccat, or 100 Duccats. There is also of old in use an imaginarie Coine, called the Castili∣ano, where with these places doe exchange with Valentia, and is 485 Marvedes. Sivil, Alca∣la, and Me∣dina doth exchange with Placentia Marved. 440 for 1 Crowne. Lions Marv. 445 for 1 Crowne. Rome Marv. 450 for 1 Duccat. Genoa Marv. 442 for 1 Cro. of Gold. Millan Marv. 438 for 1 Cro. of Gold. Venice Marv. 330 for 1 Duccat. Florence Marv. 430 for 1 Crowne. Lucca Marv. 370 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Marv. 337 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Marv. 334 for 1 Duccat. Barri Marv. 333 for 1 Duccat. Palermo Marv. 180 for 1 Florin. Mesina Marv. 175 for 1 Florin. Antu. & Col. Duccat. 1 for 105 Grosses. London Duccat. 1 for 72 Fence sterl. Valentia Duccat. 1 for Sol. 19. 8. Saragosa Ducc. 100 for 104½ Duccat. Barselona Ducc. 100 for 108 Duccat. Lixborne Ducc. 100 for 109 Duccat. Bollonia Marv. 372 for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Marv. 368 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Duccat. 1 for 88 Quarentines. Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.
CHAP. 296. Of the Exchanges of Lixborne in Portugall. IN Lixborne and throughout Portugall, Merchants ac∣counts are kept in Rais, beside which, they have an imaginary Duccat, which is accounted for foure hun∣dred The Exchanges of Liborne. Rais. In the custome of Exchanging, this place giveth a whole number to Anuers, Colonia, London, and Germanie, which is onely upon the said one Duccat, and to all other places it giveth on Exchange by a broken number. Lixborne doth ex∣change with Placentia Res 472 for 1 Crowne. Lions Res 480 for 1 Crowne. Rome Res 483 for 1 Duccat. Genoa Res 476 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Millan Res 475 for 1 Crowne of Gold. Venice Res 354 for 1 Ducat. Florence Res 465 for 1 Crowne. Lucca Res 397 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Res 350 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Res 352 for 1 Duccat. Barri Res 348 for 1 Duccat. Palermo Res 190 for 1 Florin. Mesina Res 193 for 1 Florin. Antw. & Col. Duc. 1 for 104 Grosses. London Duc. 1 for 69 d. sterl. Valentia Duc. 105 for 100 Duc. Saragosa Duc. 104¾ for 100 Duccats. Barselona Ducc. 103 for 100 Duccats. Siv. al. Med. Duc. 106 for 100 Duccats. Bolonia Res 400 for—1 Duccaton. Bergamo Res 388 for—1 Duccaton. Francfort Ducc. 1 for 89 Quarentines.
CHAP. 297. Of the Exchanges of Bollonia in Italy. IN Bollonia some are found to keepe their accounts in Livers, Sols, and Deniers, and others in Duccatons, Sols, The Exchanges of Bollonia. and Deniers. And in the custome of Exchanging, this place giveth the broken number to Placentia, Lions, Rome, Genoa, Millan, Florence, and Luccha, and to all others the whole number, which is the Duccaton, either one or one hundred. Bollonia doth ex∣change with Placentia Duccatons 117 for 100 Crownes. Lions Duccat. 119¾ for 100 Crownes. Rome Duccat. 120 for 100 Duccat. Genoa Duccat. 118 for 100 Cro. of Gold. Mill Duccat. 117 for 100 Cro. of Gold. Venice Duccat. 100 for 114½ Duccats. Florence Duccat. 116 for 100 Crownes. Lucca Duccat. 101 for 100 Ducatons. Naples Duccat. 100 for 113  Duccats. Lecchie Duccaton 1 for 112 Graines. Barri Duccat. 100 for 112  Duccats. Palermo Duccat. 1 for 24½ Carlins. Mesina Duccat. 1 for 24  Carlins. Antu. & Col. Duccat. 1 for 103 Grosses. London Duccat. 1 for 67 Pence sterl. Valentia Duccat. 1 for Sol. 20. 2 d. Saragosa Duccat. 1 for Sol. 20. 0. Barselona Duccat. 1 for Sol. 20. 1 d. Siv. al. Med. Duccat. 1 for 370 Marved. Lixborne Duccat. 1 for 395 Raies. Bergamo Duccat. 100 for 101 Duccatons. Francfort Duccat. 1 for 87 Quarentines.
CHAP. 298. Of the Exchanges of Bergamo, in Lombardie. IN Bergamo, Merchants accounts are kept in Livers, The Exs of B. Sols, and Deniers of Piccholis, and the Exchangers in Duccatons, Sols, and Deniers. The Money of Piccholi, is the current Coine of the place, and the same as is in use in Venetia. The Duccaton is worth 7 Livers of Piccolis, so that 1 Sol. of Duccaton is worth 7 Sol of Piccols, so likewise the Denier of Duccaton is worth 7 Deniers of Piccoli. In the custome of Exchanging, this place giveth the broken number to Placentia, Lions, Rome, Genoa, Millan, Venetia, Florence, Luccha, Naples, and Bollonia, and to all other places the whole number, which is found to be the Duccaton. Bergamo doth ex∣change with Placentia Duccaton 117 for 100 Crownes. Lions Duccaton 117 for 100 Crownes. Rome Duccaton 118 for 100 Duc. Genoa Duccaton 117 for 100 Crow. of Gold. Millan Duccaton 117 for 100 Cro. of Gold. Venice Duccaton 87 for 100 Duccats. Florence Duccaton 111 for 100 Crownes. Luccha Duccaton 100 for 100 Duccat. Naples Duccaton 88½ for 100 Ducc. Lecchie Duccaton 1 for 112 Graines. Barri Duccaton 1 for 110 Graines. Palermo Duccaton 1 for 25 Carlins. Mesina Duccaton 1 for 24  Carlins. Antu. & Col. Duccaton 1 for 104 Grosses. London Duccaton 1 for 67 d. sterl. Valentia Duccaton 1 for Sol. 20. Saragosa Duccaton 1 for Sol. 20. 1 d. Barselona Duccaton 1 for Sol. 20. 2 d. Siv. al. Med. Duccaton 1 for 370 Marved. Lixborne Duccaton 1 for 390 Raies. Bollonia Duccaton 100⅓ for 100 Duccatons. Francfort Duccaton 1 for 86¼ Quarentins.
CHAP. 299. Of the Exchanges of Francfort, Norimberg, Augusta, and Vienna in Germanie. IN these places, Merchants are found to keepe their accounts in Florins, Sols, and Deniers, as by 20 and 12. The Exchanges of Francfort, Norimberg, Au∣gusta, and Vi∣enna. the Florin being 20 Sols, or 60 Quarentines. The Qua∣rentine is in some places called the Craizer, which is 4 Pfenings, so that 12 Pfening makes one Sol. In the custome of Exchanging, these places gives the whole number, which is the Florin, to London, Antuerpe, Colonia, and Valentia, and to all others gives the broken number, which is the Quarentine. Francfort, Norimberg, Augusta, and Vienna doth ex∣change with Placentia Quarentine 102 for 1 Crowne. Lions Quarent. 103 for 1 Crowne. Rome Quarent. 104 for 1 Duccat. Genoa Quarent. 191 for 1 Cro. of 4 li. curr. Millan Quarent. 102 for 1 Cro. of Gold. Venice Flor.—126 for 100 Duccat. Florence Quarent. 96 for 1 Crowne. Luccha Quarent. 86 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Quarent. 77 for 1 Ducc. Lecchie Quarent. 77 for 1 Ducc. Barri Quarent. 78 for 1 Ducc. Palermo Quarent. 90 for 1 Ducc. Mesina Quarent. 89 for 1 Ducc. Antu. & Col. Flor. of 65 quar. 1 for 80 Grosse. London Florin.—1 for 50 d. sterl. Valentia Florin.—1 for Sol. 13. 8 d. Saragosa Quarent. 96 for 1 Duccat. Barselona Quarent. 97 for 1 Duccat. Siv. al. Med. Quarent. 87 for 1 Duccat. Lixborne Quarent. 86 for 1 Duccat. Bollonia Quarent. 88 for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Quarent. 87 for 1 Duccaton.
CHAP. 300. Of the Termes of payments in generall of Bills of Exchange. TO make these Tables compleat, and the Rules of The termes of payment of Bills of x∣change, e. these Exchanges to be truly and rightly understood, it is observable, that as all Exchanges have a setled rate and price, by which the taker taketh, and the giver by covenant giveth it; so is there likewise a certaine positive terme, and time limitted, wherein, and at which day expired, the factor of the taker, or his assigne, repayeth the co∣venanted summe to the factor, or assigne of the giver thereof, which rme or time is of differing space of dayes prefixed: the com∣mon terme or times by which all Bills in Exchanges are made, are found usually to be five; which is, first, at sight of the Bill; second∣ly, at Vsance; thirdly, at double Vsance; fourthly, at halfe Vsance; and fifthly, at Marts, Faires, &c. which five Termes in Exchanges are thus understood. First then, at sight, or so many dayes after sight, is understood to be so long a terme or time, as the Bill of Exchange will be after the 1. At Sight. deliverie going to that place, where it is covenanted that the same should be payd; and upon the shew and sight thereof, or at so many dayes after, as is specified therein, it must be payd and answer'd accordingly. Secondly, at Vsance, is understood to be of a different terme and space of time; sometimes consisting of 8 dayes, as from Rome . At . to Naples; sometimes of 10 dayes, as from Genoa to Rome; some∣times of 30 dayes, as from London to Roven, to Antuerpe, to Middle∣burgh, to Amsterdam, and so to other places; sometimes of 60 dayes, or two moneths, as from London to Hamburgh, from Antuerpe to Rome, and to Venice, and to Florence, to Naples, to Palermo, and so to other places: sometimes againe, Vsance is understood to be 90 dayes, or three moneths, as from London to Venice, Florence, Na∣ples, &c. according to the severall customes of the said distant severall places, where the Bills of Exchanges are made, and ever ac∣counted from the date of the said Bill. Thirdly, at double Vsance; which, considering the said places, is understood to be double the former space of single Vsance, being . At  Ve. ther of 8, 10, 30, 60, or 90 dayes doubled, according to the cu∣stome of the place where the Bill is made and accounted also from the date of the said Bill.
Fourthly, at halfe Vsance, this is understood to bee halfe the a∣bovesaid, 4. At halfe V∣sance. first limited terme or time, according (as I said before) to the common custome of that place where the Bill is made, and accounted also from the date of the Bill. Fiftly, at Martes or Faires, which by Italians and Spaniards is 5. At Faires and Martes. called La Fiera, and this space of time for paiment of Bils is un∣derstood to be at some certaine daies, accounted for Faires in the said places, where the Bils are made to be paiable, as is found in Placentia quarterly foure times of the yeere; the like observed ge∣nerally in Lions, and in Castile, at three times of the yeere, ac∣counted as in three Banks 1o i' las Fieras de Vilaleon. 2o de Medina del Campo, 3o de Medina del Rio Sieco, which places are as publike Martes, whereto Merchants doe use to give and take, sometimes to benefit themselves by Exchanges, as in the abovesaid places, and sometimes to buy commodities, and supply their occasions, as is used twice a yeere for some Martes in Germany, as I have touched more largely in the description of the trade of the said Cities. CHAP. 301. How the rates and Prices in Exchanges are setled. THe next thing considerable yet to bee handled How the Rates and prizes of Exchanges are setled. for the explanation of these Tables of Exchanges, is the rate and price it selfe, for seeing that so many Merchants of great eminencie, whose e∣states are continually traversed from one coun∣trey to another, and from one Coyne to ano∣ther, doe daily and constantly give and take as their occasion, and the rates of the Exchanges, conduce to their profit, it may be conceived, that their great purses, should prescript the rule and rate thereto, which is seene so variously to alter, and daily to rise and fall by the continuall current of those and others that use this Mystery, yet notwithstanding, it is not found that they have any determinate power or stroake, in giving the price therto, though itmust be confessed, that such have a conducing hand, so far forth as it may be found, that their opinion concurre with the universal opinions of the rest, interessed in this mysticall body of Exchanges, and therefore to explaine my selfe, it may fitly here bee de∣manded, how these rates and prizes of Exchanges come to be set, and then continued, or how it coms to passe that the same are seen so frequently to vary and alter, in forraine parts: whereto I an∣swer, that the Bankers in Italy, Spaine and France, being now a∣dayes
found to be the onely great takers and deliverers of monyes, have at the times of the payments of Exchanges, in the principall places aforesaid, (as namely, at Lions in France, Madrid, and in other places of Spaine, Florence, Genoa, Venetia, and such other pla∣ces in Italy) a constant meeting, and there by certaine tickets in writing, deliver every man his opinion, what the price of the Ex∣change ought to be for all places: Then exchanging for the next Faire or time of payment in every the said places, and according to the same, the calculation is cast up, by the Medium; that is to say, if there be seven or more Voices or Tickets, the said seven are added together, and the seventh part is the Medium; and if there be ten, then the ten being cast up, the tenth part is the Medium; and so for greater or lesser numbers accordingly: wherein it is to be noted, that these Bankers doe observe, how the plentie of Monyes lyeth by Exchange, how the occasions of Princes may helpe or hinder, either by great Receits, or great disbursements; how the Trade and commerce of Negotiators and Merchants is concurrent and effective; and therein they are found to concurre, in setting the said Rates and Prices for their owne commoditie and advan∣tage: and from this Spring, is observed to arise the Maine Ocean of all the Exchanges of Christendome; in which, this of our Coun∣trey of England hath but a small share, as being onely a Branch derived from the principall Channell. CHAP. 302. Of the Par in Exchanges. THe next thing observable here, is the losse and gaine Of the Par in Exchanges, which is two. accruing by these Exchanges practised amongst Mer∣chants: to distinguish which, and for the finding out the realitie thereof, every giver and taker applyeth his studie to finde out the true and reall Par of Ex∣changes; whereby it is manifested, both what the gaine and losse is, and who is the gainer and who is the loser. Now this Par in Ex∣changes may be here properly (in the generall) said to be of two distinct kindes; the one as appertaining to the State and Prince, and belonging to the profit and losse of the Kingdome; and the other to the Merchant or Exchanger, and appertaining to the profit and losse of his private estate and interest: the first, I hold proper and fit the knowledge of Counsellors and States-men; and the other, is proper and fit the knowledge of the Trading-Merchant: the find∣ing out of both which Par's in Exchanges, is thus.
The first Par in Exchanges, which I tearme here the Princes Par, 1 Princes Par. or the Soveraignes Value for Value, is grounded upon the weight, finenesse, and valuation of the Monyes of each severall Kingdome, Citie, or Place; the severall Standards thereof so equally propor∣tioned, so truly and justly by the art of the Mint rectified, that each Prince his Coine, in Exchanges, may have its due allowance, accor∣ding to the goodnesse and finenesse, coursenesse and badnesse there∣of: and therefore herein to make and to settle this above-named Par exactly betwixt one Kingdome and another, we are to examine and compare, not onely the weight and finenesse of our owne Coines as they are in themselves, but also the weight and finenesse of those of other Princes and Countries, with the reall proportion that happe∣neth therein, not onely betweene our owne Gold and Silver, but also betweene the Gold and Silver of other Countries: This examination, comparison, and proportion, duly, rightly, and really examined, compared, and proportioned, and no difference, inequalitie, or dis∣proportion found or admitted therein, then may our Exchanges run at one and the same price and rate, both for Gold and Silver, taking the denomination according to the valuation of the Monyes of each Countrey and Kingdome; hereby finding how much ne Silver or Gold our owne Pound Sterling containeth, and what quantitie of other Monyes, either of France, Italy, Germanie, Netherlands, East∣land, &c. this Kingdome is to have in Exchange, to countervaile the same, in the like weight and finenesse, answerable to our owne, be it by the Pnd, Doller, Duccat, Crowne, or any other reall or imaginarie Coine, giving alwayes a Value for Value, and receiving the like; which, by reason of the great consequence depending thereon, I here call the Prince his Par, in the exchan∣ges of his Monyes by Bills of Exchange with other Countries and Kingdomes. The second Par, I call the Merchants or Exchangers Par in Bills 2 Merchants Par. of Exchange, and is grounded partly upon the Soveraigne or Princes Par above mentioned, but principally upon the current value of the said Coines, the plentie and scarcitie thereof, the rising and fal∣ling, inhansement and debasement of the same: and therefore such Merchants as are Exchangers, doe endevour by certaine rules of Exchanges, to equalize the valuation of the Monyes of one Prince or Countrey with another: And therefore every man that delive∣reth his Money in one Countrey, or Place, to have it in another, is and ought to be ever curious, to understand either the losse or gaine that commeth thereof; which is onely and properly distinguished by the knowledge and finding out of this Par, afore mentioned. For finding out of which, it is requisite for him that remitteth, to know either by his owne advice, judgement, or otherwise, how much the Crowne, Doller, Duccat, or Pound whence he remitteth, is worth in the place whither he would make his remittance unto.
As for example, having Money in Lions in France, which I would remit for Antuerpe, I ought to know how much the Crowne of France is really worth in Antuerpe: as presuppose, that the Crowne of France, of 67 Souls, or 3 li. 7 Souls Tournois, is worth by exchange, according to the course thereof, 100 Grosse there; I would then know that the reall Crowne of 60 Souls or 3 li. Turnois (the Crowne wherein Exchanges are made) is worth, multiplying and dividing as the rule requireth, it will appeare to be Souls 89 37/67 Grosse, which is indeed the true value of the Crowne: if then the Bill of Exchange be made for lesse then 89 37/67 Grosse per Crowne of 3 li. Turnois, there is a losse thereby; and if for more, there is a gaine thereby: so that it is hereby evident, that 89 37/67 Grosse is the Par in Exchanges be∣tweene these two Countries, in the Crowne of France, and in the Grosse of Antuerpe; the which rule may serve as example in remit∣tances for all other places: for it is not otherwise to be imagined, that any positive rule can be set downe herein, considering the di∣versitie of species, which, as I said before, dayly riseth and falleth, and the price of the Exchanges, which every day, according to pre∣senting occasions, likewise altereth, found to be sometimes at one rate, and sometimes at another. And this Par is the matter where∣upon all Merchants Exchanges for profit and losse is grounded, and is the Par, or Value for Value, which in this following Tract I principally and fundamentally ayme at. Now the last thing considerable in this place, and now to be observed, is the method, forme, and manner, how the Accounts of these divers Exchanges, from one Countrey to another, is betweene one Merchant and another cast up and calculated; which indeed principally is the worke of the Fen, and the hand of the Arithmeti∣cian; which as a necessarie adjunct, and needfull furtherance to the Mysterie of Exchanging, I have hereto inserted, and have herein pit∣ched upon the principall places here mentioned, willingly omitted the least and rest of them, having fitted (to such as I have concei∣ved the most worthy) apt questions and their solutions, from one Towne or Citie to another, with the denomination of their severall accounts and species, the manner of the briefe calculations there∣of, and the short proofe of each prescribed rule and position, ad∣ding for conclusion to each generall Citie of Exchanges, some examples of orders and Commissions, given and received, in draughts and remittances, made according to the common custome & use of the place, omitting some other principall points, wherein I might have enlarged both this matter and subject, that the ingenious head and hand of the learner may have roome and scope to worke upon according either to his desire, capacity, or inclination.
CHAP. 303. Of Examples upon the Exchanges practised at Lions, and how the same are calculated. I Have formerly noted, that the payments of Bills of Examples upon Exchanges in Lions. Exchanges at Lions is onely in use foure times a yeare, which are, first, 1 The payments of Roys, beginning the 6 of March after their stile, and continueth the rest of that moneth. 2 The payments of Pasques, or Easter, the 6 of Iune. 3 The payments of August, the 6 of September. 4 The payments of All-Saints, the 6 of December. The acceptance of all Bills of Exchange here, is alwayes made the The custome of acceptation of Bills of Exchange in Lions. first day of the moneth of each payment: which acceptances hold in themselves both a promise and assurance of the payment of the summe included in the said Bills so accepted: And because there is no other time accustomed wherein Bills of Exchanges are accep∣ted, the Merchants here resident have invented, by meanes of a little Booke, away of registring their severall Bills, which they common∣ly call in French a Bilan; in which Booke, or Bilan, they accustomarily A Bilan. use to make a little Crosse or marke upon each Bill there registred, and thus orderly accepted. But if the partie to whom the same is presented, make a question whether he shall accept it or not, and demandeth time to thinke upon it, then they placeupon that Bill so there registred the letter V, signifying in French, Voir la lettre, or the Bill seene; and if in conclusion he refuse the same, either be∣cause he holdeth not the partie that charged the same sufficient, or solvent, or for any other just occasion, they commonly note the same in their Billan with S and P, signifying that the same is Soubs Protest, that is, under Protest: The which Bilan of Acceptations, Draughts, and Remittances, thus quoted and thus registred, I obser∣ved at my residence in that Citie, to carry so much credit amongst the Merchants of the place, as if the same had beene done with wit∣nesses by a publique Notarie. The third day of the moneth of the said payments, the price of The price setled for the succeeding Faires. the Exchange is cut and setled, as well for the succeeding course of Eions it selfe, as for all the principall exchanging places of Chri∣stendome; in all which it is found, that Lions gives the Law and rule, ordering in some sort the price of all other places, excepting for Placentia.
The sixth day al the Merchants residing upon the place, appear Descounters or transferring of bils of Ex∣change, and debts in Lns in certain publike rooms neer the Burse, or place of daily mee∣ting with their Booke or Bilan, containing both their Debit and Credit, of both depts and Bils of Exchanges, and there addresse themselves to one another, and to whom they are indepted, in∣timating unto them, to transferre parcels, or as they terme it Vi∣rer partie, and give for Debtor one or more, who doth owe and stands indepted unto them, the like summe or parcell, the which being accepted by the Creditors, the sum is respectively re∣gistred, and noted in the Bilan abovesaid, and after that time; that parcell is understood to be transfer'd, and remaineth entire∣ly upon the Risgoe, perill and fortune of the party that did accept the same, and in this manner here I have observed a Million of Crownes hath in a morning beene paid and satisfied without the disbursement of a Denier in money, and therefore to this purpose all Merchants resident here, or their servants for them are compel∣led in this manner, to appeare with their Bilon, thus to satisfie ac∣counts with their Creditors, and make good their paiments, or in default of this appearance, are by the custome of the place de∣clared as Bankrupts, and this in briefe is the remarkeable custome of Lions in matters of Exchanges upon every paiment. It now remaineth I should shew the rules how the Exchanges Rules of cast∣ing up the Ex∣changes in Lions. are made in this place, for at every paiment, the current moneyes of the place are found encreasing, or decreasing being sometimes worth, from one paiment to another 2 per cent. or 2  more or lesse, to understand then these rules, I will first lay downe some Exam∣ples for the helpe of those that are not well acquainted with the custome of this Citie. Presuppose that a Merchant hath taken in Banco 455 Livers, at 2½ per cent. from the paiments of Roys, as they call it, or Kings, untill the paiment of Pasques or Easter, and to know what the Exchange may amount unto, at the rate abovesaid, doe this brie∣fly the  of the said 455 Lib. is first to be taken, and then the ¼ of the said tenth, shall be the Exchange, forasmuch as the tenth of an hundred is ten, and the ¼ of ten is 2½ which is the Exchange afore. mentioned, At 2½ per Cent. and therefore ¼ of the tenth is to be taken, as for ex∣ample. Againe a Debtor oweth unto his Creditor Lib. 3141. 16. 6 d. to pay at the rate of 2⅔ per cent. for Exchange, the which most fa∣cilie At 2 . and briefly is thus performed, take the  of the said sum, & of the proceed  and of the  the ⅓, adding the said fifth to the ⅓.
And thus the value of the said Exchange is found out, as here fol∣loweth. The reason of this brevity is, that if from 100, one taketh as is before said ⅕ of 1/10 and  of the said ⅕ the product of the said  with the , gives just 2  as is above specified. Againe at 2  per Cent. how much amounteth the Exchange of Lib. 842. 17. 6. you must here take  of a 1/10 and a 1/10 of the said adding the two last products the Exchange will appeare, as Againe a Debtor oweth to his Creditor lib. 1435. 17. 8d. to be paid at the rate of 2  per cent. for the Exchange, to doe this, take At 2⅓. the  part of the said sum, and of his Product  and of the  the  adding the said  to the said  and the Exchange will appeare. Againe at 2¼ per cent. what will the Exchange of 7661 lib. 17. Sols amount unto, to doe which, the ⅕ of  and the  of the said  is At 2 . to be taken, adding the ⅕ and the  and it giveth the Exchange.
Againe, at 3 per Cent. I would know the Exchange of 7000 lib. At 3. per Cent. herein take ¼ of 1/10 and ⅕ of the said ¼, adding the two last products, it giveth the Exchange: as example, Also presuppose, that a Merchant hath sold some goods for the At 2 . value of 5312. 10. li. at a yeares time, conditionally to have the allowance of 2½ per Cent. for every payment, what ought the Buyer to give the Seller at the said terme? in this case consider, that 2½ per Cent. for a payment, is 10 per Cent. for the yeare; and therefore the 1/10 is to be taken, and to be added to the totall, and it giveth li. 5843. 15. But I have stayed upon this point too long, and therefore will omit further Examples, and will onely insert a briefe Method of these forme of Exchanges, in this place, because the ingenious may make it serve his occasions in any Countrey, where Monyes are either given or taken at interest, serving as compendious Tables, for casting up of any Exchange here, or of interest elsewhere, for any space and terme of time whatsoever, and fitly serveth as a ne∣cessarie introduction to what I shall here further insert, as concer∣ning the Exchanges made by Lions for other Countries. CHAP. 304. Briefe Rates of Exchanges in Lions, which may serve for the Rates of Interests in many other places. FIrst, at ½ per Cent. take 1/10 of a 1/10, and the ½ of the last  shall Rates of Ex∣change in Lions and may serve for rates of in∣terest in many other Cities. be the rate and summe of the Exchange propounded and demanded. At ⅓ per Cent. take a 1/10 of a 1/10, and a  of the last 1/10, is the Exchange.
At ⅔ per Cent. take a 1/10 of a 1/10, and ⅔ of the last 1/10 is the Ex∣change. At ¼ per Cent. 1/10 of a 1/10, and ¼ of the last 1/10 is the Ex∣change. At ¾ per Cent. ¾ of a 1/10, and the 1/10 shall be the Ex∣change. At  per Cent. of the 1/10 of a 1/10 shall be the Ex∣change. At ⅖ per Cent. ⅖ of the 1/10 of a 1/10 shall be the Ex∣change. At 1 per Cent. of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 1  per Cent. 1/10 of a 1/10 and  of the last 1/10, adding the two last. At 1⅓ per Cent. 1/10 of a 1/10 and  of the last 1/10, adding the ⅓ and 1/10. At 1⅔ per Cent. of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 1¼ per Cent. ⅛ of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 1  per Cent. ½ and ¼ of the 1/10 of a 1/10 shall be the Ex∣change. At 1  per Cent. 1/10 of a 1/10 and ⅜ of the last 1/10. At 2 per Cent. of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 2  per Cent. of a 1/10 and  of the said , adding the  and ⅕. At 2  per Cent. ⅕ of a 1/10 and  of the said . At 2  per Cent. ¼ of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 2¼ per Cent. ⅕ of a 1/10 and  of the said ½, adding the ⅕ and . At 2¾ per Cent. ¼ of a 1/10 and the 1/10 of the said ¼. At 3 per Cent. ¼ of a 1/10 and ⅕ of the said ¼, adding the ¼ and . At 3  per Cent. of a 1/10. At 3  per Cent. ¼ of a 1/10 and  of the said , adding the ¼ and . At 3¾ per Cent. ¼ of a  and ½ of the said ¼, adding the ¼ and . At 4 per Cent. ⅕ of a . At 4  per Cent. ¼ and ⅕ of At 5 per Cent. of a 1/10. At 5½ per Cent. of a 1/10 and 1/10 of the said , adding the  and . At 6 per Cent. of a 1/10, and ⅕ of the said  shall be the Exchange. At 6¼ per Cent. 1/10 of a ¼ of a ¼ shall be the Exchange. At 6⅔ per Cent. or a  of one . At 7⅕ per Cent. of 1/10 and ½ of the said ½. At 8⅓ per Cent. . At 10 per Cent. .
At 12½ per Cent. . At 15 per Cent. 1/10 and ½ of the said 1/10, adding the whole. At 16⅔ per Cent. . At 17½ per Cent. 1/10 and twice the  the one of the other of the said 1/10. At 20 per Cent. ⅕. At 22½ per Cent. ⅕ and of  of the said ⅕ adding giveth the Exchange. At 25 per Cent. take the ¼. The reason why I have beene induced to set downe the briefe The reason and benefi of these rules, as well in Lions as else where. method of calculating the Exchanges here is, that as it is to be un∣derstood that the rate of the Exchange at the payment is regula∣lated for the next ensuing payment from that day, so must it al∣so be understood that the neerer the time is, to the day of the next paiment ensuing, the lesser consequently is the rate of the Exchange, for that paiment to be accounted, and because in many contracts that are made there in private bargaines, between mer∣chant and merchant, it is oftentimes found that the time of pay∣ment prefixed by agreement is sometimes 2, 3, or 4, or more Fairs or payments to come and succeed, and thereto is oftentimes to be considered the remaining time running to the first payment ensuing, therefore in this case, I have for the easier and better reckoning of him that sels a commodity, and of him that doth buy the same, set downe the easiest and briefest way how to make his account of the time to runne, which here I have set downe to the common terme of 10 payments, which at 2  per cent. makes 25 per cent. CHAP. 305. Examples of the Exchanges of Lions, with the profit of the profits thereof. THe declaration of these rules is best demonstra∣ted by examples, which here following my in∣tended Example of Exchange, with the profit of the profit ther∣of, in the na∣ture of intererest upon interest. method, for the better understanding thereof, I here purpose to insert, the question being: That if a Creditor receiveth not each pay∣ment, the Exchange that is due to him, the Debi∣tor  o ke him good the same, as if it were the principall, for Example. I would know what shall Lib. 1560, 15 Sol. give for pro∣fit at the rate of two ½ per cent. for three paiments, valuing the said Exchange, with the principall at the price abovenamed.
First it is to bee noted, that if by the rules above mentioned, the profits of the said summe at 2½ per cent. for one paiment coms to Lib. 39. 0. 4. d. that some is to be added to the prin∣cipall, and then it doth amount unto Lib. 1599. 15. s. 4. d. out of which must be drawne the Exchange of the second paiment, and adde that likewise to the principall, and out of that, the Exchange, of the third, and adding that in the same manner, and it giveth 1680-15. as by example following doth appeare. And in this manner the account of the profits of the Exchange, of Lions may be made for any time whatsoever, and forasmuch as the rate of the Exchange, for a paiment in a continued summe, may alter, therefore I will lay downe one Example more, which Posito may be 7450 put out by the Exchange of Lions for a yeere, or 4 payments: The first payment falling to be at 2¼, the se∣cond at 2⅓, the third at 2  and the fourth paiment at 2 , which accordingly cast up, and continued with the profit of the profit added to the principall, it will amount to 8203 lib. 6. 6 d. as following, shall appeare by the example.
Now forasmuch as these Rules have affinity with the interest u∣sed Interest paid. upon rebate in many countreyes, continued by the yeere from one to ano∣ther, called by us, interest upon interest, it will be needlesse further to insist thereupon, and therefore before I proceed to the Ex∣change of Lions, I must not omit to shew one particular circum∣stance much in use upon this place, which is the account of dis∣counting, which falles out in many occasions, but principally when a Merchant doth here sell his commodities at 4, 6, or 10 payments time, and that he would pay the same at any payment, before the prefixed time, at a covenanted rate, an example or two in this kind I will also shew, serving for other countries also, where the like manner of discounting is used, with a briefe man∣ner, how the same is easily cast up, contrary to the method of ma∣ny of our common arithmeticians. CHAP. 306. Of the Account of Discounts or rebates, and the manner thereof, used as well in Lions, as in many other places of trade. AMerchant selleth a commodity for Lib. 3709, 1259 paiable at a yeere, to discount at pleasure at 2 per Accounts of discounts or rebates in Li∣ons, and else∣where. Cent. for a paiment, or Faire, now if the buyer pay the same content, or in ready money, how much ought the seller to rebate him for discounte for the 4 paiments or faires at the said price? To doe this succinctly and briefly, I first draw the discounte of the said Lib. 3709, 12, 9 at 108 per cent. and then multiplie the said summe by 2, and of the product take ⅓ of a 1/9 or more facilie, 3 thirds, the one of the other, the last whereof, shall bee the dis∣count of the said parcell, and so much must the seller rebate to the buyer, the which discount deducted from 3709. 12, d. 6. there resteth 3434 Lib. 17, 0 d. which the buyer ought to pay in ready money, the which for better declaration, I will lay downe by ex∣ample, with the proofe of the rule, for the triall of the certainty thereof.
Now the reason why out of 108 per Cent. there must three thirds Example pro∣ved. be taken one out of the other, is, because that 8 (which is the discounte or Rebate) is contained 13½ times in 108, the which 13½ doubled, are 27, and therefore must be divided by 27, or for the briefer and readier way, take ⅓ of a  or three thirds one out of the other, and therefore to make the proofe, take 1/10 of the said 3434. 17 0. and in drawing ⅕ of the said , the rest giveth 274. 15, 9, Lib. which declareth that the rule is well and rightly made. Because that in this manner of discounting, or as we terme it, of Rebating, the time and price is found diversly to alter, I will set downe a briefe table for the casting up of any summe, for any Faire or payment, and an example or two for the understanding thereof, thereby the better to come to the maine and principall point of our account of Exchanges. CHAP. 307. The Table of casting the Accounts of discounts, or Rebatements. IMprimis, At 101 per cent, divide by 101. At 101¼ per cent. divide by 81, or take  f a 1/9 A table for ca∣sting up all ac∣counts of dis∣counts or re∣batements. At 102 per cent. divide by 51. At 102  per cent. divide by 41. At 102  per cent. for 38  divide by 77, or take 1/7 of one 1/10 At 104 per cent. divide by 26, or take ½ of a 1/13. At 105 per cent. divide by 21, or take ½ of a 1/7. At 106 per cent. for 17  divide by 53. At 106¼ per cent. divide by 17. At 107½ per cent. for 14⅓ divide by 43. At 108 per cent. for 13  divide by 27 or take  of a . At 108  per cent. divide by 13. At 100 per cent. divide by 11, or take . At 112 per cent. for 9  divide by 28, or take ¼ of one 1/7. At 112  per cent. divide by 9 or take At 113  per cent. for 8  divide by 17. At 114 per cent. for 8  divide by 57. At 115 per cent. for 7  divide by 23. At 116 per cent. for 7¼ divide by 29.
At 116⅔ per cent. divide by 7, or take 1/7. At 117½ per cent. for 6 5/7 divide by 47. At 118 per cent. for 6 5/9 divide by 59. At 120 per cent. divide by 6 or take ⅙. At 122½ per cent. for 5 4/9 divide by 49. or take a 1/7 of a 1/7. At 125 per cent. divide by 5 or take ⅕. For the better understanding of the precedent Table, note that for Example, to take the discount at 122½, I divide the 22 , in 2, Example of discounting or Rebate. which make 45, and the like of the 100, making 200, which di∣vided by 45, the product giveth 4 4/9, and so many times 22½ are contained in 100, and because that the discount or Rebate is al∣wayes upon the 100, one more is to be added thereto, which makes 5 4/9, so that the said 22½ are contained 5 4/9 in 122½, and ther∣fore it must be divided by 4 4/9, the which to do, it is needfull, that all the same be put into ninthes, multiplying by 9, as well the summe out of which the discount is to be made, as the said 5 4/9, a∣mounting to 49 for Divisor, and for to divide by 49, as the brie∣fest and shortest way, take the 1/7 of a , because that 7 times 7, makes 49. Againe to draw the discount at 105 per cent. I divide 100 by 5, taking ⅕ which is 20, to the which number, I alwayes adde one Another Ex∣ample of dis∣counting at 105. for the reason beforementioned, making thereby 21 for divisor, and for to divide by 21, you must take ⅓ of the summe, which the discount is to be made of, and the 1/7 of the said ⅓ shall be the dis∣count. Againe, for to make the discount at 107  I double 7½ in two parts, which making 15, and so of the 100, making 200, which Another Ex∣ample at 107½. I divide by 15, taking ⅕ of ⅕, his product giving 13⅓, to which I adde 1, making thereby 14 , and so many times 7½ are contained in 107½, and therefore you must divide the summe, of the which the dis∣count must be made, by 14⅓, and thus doe in al other summes and parcels. CHAP. CCCVIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Rome. I Have declared before in the generall chapter of the Exchanges Exchanges of Lions wth Rome. of Lions, how many Cities Lions is found to Exchange with, and there also shewed the common rates how the same doth governe, which notwithstanding is found at every Faire, and pai∣ment, to alter, yet it standeth the Merchant so farre in stead, that
thereby he is able to make the account, both of his draughts and remittances, though otherwise altering from their noted prices, which is the thing now resteth to be handled, that it may be discer∣ned, how the Exchange at Lions is cast up with any other place whatsoever, and there likewise it is observed, how the Merchants Exchangers doe keepe their accounts, which for the most part is in Livers, Tournois, Sols and Deniers, 12 Deniers making a Sol, and Accounts kept in Lions. 20 Sols a Liver, and yet some there be, that keep their accounts in Crownes of Exchange, called Crownes of the Sun, and is as the L ver distinguished into Sols and Deniers of Gold, accounted by 12 and 20 as the former, this Crowne being accounted worth 3 Livers, upon which the Exchange of the place is made and marked with Crownes, Livers, Sols and Deniers; the question then upon the Ex∣change of Lions with Rome is thus, 100 Crownes of Gold of 3 lib. is given in Lions, to have in Rome 85 Crowne. of Gold, Estampe or de Camera, more or lesse, as the Exchange passeth, I demand for Cro. 4520 1 6d. of Gold of the Sunne, how many Crownes of Estampe shall Lions have at Rome, to know which, you must multiplie the said Crownes of the Sun, by 85, and from the Product cut the two last figures, the which you must multiplie by 20, to make them Sols, and then by 12 to make them Deniers, which will come to be 3842. 10. 7 of Gold of Estampe which Lions ought to have in Rome for the said summe of Crownes of Gold, which this calcu∣lation following maketh more apparent. Example. The proofe of the said account will appeare in the same que∣stion Proofe. propounded, where Rome Exchangeth at the same termes with Lions.
CHAP. CCCIX. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Florence. LIons Exchangeth with Florence, and giveth 100 Crowns to have in the said place 95¾ Crownes of Gold more or Exchanges of Lions with Flo∣rence. lesse, I demand for Crownes 1324. 15-0. of Gold of the Sunne, how many Crownes of Gold I shall have in Florence, to know which, I multiply the said Crownes of Gold by 95¾ in cutting the two last figures of the Pro∣duct, as I did in the precedent account, the which are to be mul∣tiplied by 20 and 12, to make the fame Sols and Deniers, and I find I must have in Florence, Crowns 1268 8-11 of Gold, for the said Crownes of the Sun Example. Facit Crownes 1268-8-11 which shall appeare, when Florence Exchan∣geth with Lions. Proofe. CHAP. CCCX. Of the Exchange of Lions with Lucca. LIons Exchangeth with Lucca, and taketh Crowns 100 to pay in Exchanges of Lions with Luc∣ca. Lucca, posito 103⅙ of Livers 7½ the Crowne: I demand for Cro. 1234-5-6. of Gold of Sun, how much must I pay in the said City of Lucca, to know which, I multiply the said sum of Crownes of the Sun by Cro. 103⅙ and from its Product cut off the two last fi∣gures, the which I multiplie by 20 to come to Sols, and then by 12 to come to Deniers, and it wil make Crownes 1273-7-2, which I must pay in the said place of Lucca: Example.
Note that if in Lions it be paid in money, there is one per cent. given more, so that receiving in the said place of Lucca, the said Pat made in Money. Crownes 1273-7-2 in money of the said place, the Debtor shall be bound to pay more Crownes 12. 14. 8, which is in all Crownes 1286-1-10, as for Example thus cast up: The proofe of the said Exchange, you shall find in the account when Lucca doth Exchange with Lions, made by the rule of three, saying, if Crownes 103  give 100, how many shall the abovesaid 1273-7-2 d. give, which will be Crownes 1234-5-6. of Gold of the Sunne. CHAP. CCCXI. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Naples. LIons exchangeth with Naples, and giveth crownes 100 of the Sun to have in that place Duc. 127½ more or lesse of Taries, 5 per changes of Lions with Naples. Duccat, I would know for crow. 2584. 9. 6. of Gold of the Sun, how much Lions shall have credit for in Naples: the which to doe, you must multiply the said summe of crownes by the said 127  Duc. cutting the two last figures of the Product, the which must be multiplied by 5, to make them Taries, and then by 20, to make them Graines, because that the Duccat is worth 5 Taries, and the Tarie 20 Graines, so that it will give in Naples, Duc. 3295, Tarie 1.
The proofe of the said rule shall appeare in the Exchange of Proofe. Naples backe with Lions. CHAP. CCCXII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Palermo or Mesina. LIons exchangeth for Palermo or Mesina, and giveth 1 Crowne of Exchanges of Lions with Pa∣lermo and Me∣sina. Gold of the Sunne, to have in the said place posito 38 Carlins. I would know, for Crownes 4692. 11. 3. of the Sun, how ma∣ny Ounces shall Lions have credit in Palermo or Mesina, first mul∣tiplie the said Cro. of the Sun by the said 28 Carlins, the value of the Crowne, and taking the rest of the multiplication for parts of 10, because the Carlin is worth 10 Grains, and the proceed shall be Carlins and Grains, to make the which Ounces, you must take▪ in cutting the last figure, because that 60 Carlins makes an Ounce, and of that which resteth cut of, adde with the last figure, you must take ½ to make Taries, one whereof being 2 Carlins, and 30 worth one Ounce, and if you find a rest of the said Taries, you must take ½ which is 10 Graines, because that one Tarie is worth 10 Grains, and ½ of 20 which is 10, to the which must bee added the resting Grains, if any bee, so that the said summe of Carlins will make Ounces 2189 Tar. 25, Gra. 17, and so many Ounces will Pa∣lermo or Mesina give, and over and above the said summe of Oun∣ces, one Carlin per Ounce is given for to make it good money, and to adde the said Carlin per Ounce in the shortest way, it is to bee considered that for the said Ounces 2189 is given the same summe of Carlines for the Laggio of the moneyes as they terme it, which
reduced into Ounces, cutting the last figure, and taking ⅙ of the rest, as hath been said before, will give Ounces 36, resting two tens of Carlins, which is twenty, to which must be added the last figure cut off, and it will be 29 Carlins, which is 14 Taries, and there will rest 1 Carlin, which is 10 Grains, to which must bee added 8 Grains, for 25 Taries which are with the Ounces, seeing that for 3 Taries commeth one Graine, for Lagio of the said money, and they will be Ounces 2226-10. 15, and so much will the Credit of Lions be in Palermo, and because that the said Carlin per Ounce comes to 1⅔ per cent. the account may be made in taking  per cent. of the said sume of Ounces, and it will make the same sumr; as Exam∣ple. The proofe of the said account shall appeare in the Exchange of Peofe. Palermo and Mesina backe to Lions. CHAP. CCCXIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Genoa. LIons exchangeth with Genoa and giveth one Crowne of the Sun, to have in that place, posito of mony in Gold 59 s. 9 d. I de∣mand Exchanges of Lions with Genoa. for Cro. 9432. 9 of the Sun, how much credit shall Lions have in Genoa in current money, to doe which, first multiply the said Crowne of the Sun by Sol. 59. 9 d. and it maketh Sol. 563588. 10 d. which reduced into Livers, makes Lib. 28179. 8. 10 Money of Gold, which divided by 68 Sol, which is the price of a Crowne of Gold in money of Gold, and that which resteth of the division, you must multiplie by 20, to make them Sols of Gold, and then by 12 to make them Deniers, and they will be Crownes 8288. 1. 5 of Gold, the which multiply by 4½ which is the price at present of the Crowne of Gold in current money, and of its product will come Lib. 37296. 6. 4 of money current, and so much Credit shall Lions have in Genoa, for the said Crowne 9432. 9 of the Sunne,
and you must note, that the Livers of the money of Gold cannot be reduced into current money, unlesse first it be reduced to Crownes of Exchange. The proofe of this Rule is seene, when that Genoa doth exchange Proofe. for Lions. CHAP. CCCXIIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Millan. LIons exchangeth with Millan, and giveth a Crowne of the Sunne Exchanges of Lions with Mil∣lan: to have in Millan posito 118⅓s, I would know how many Li∣vers makes Crownes 1564. 15. 6. of Gold of the Sunne in Milan: To doe which, you must multiply the said summe of Crownes by 5 Li. 18. 4. which are the Sols 118⅓, beginning to multiply the Li. 5 by the 6 Den. and then by the 15 which are with the Crowne of the Sunne, the proceed of the multiplication shal be Li. 9258. 5. which shall be had in Millan for the said Cro. of the Sunne: as for example,
The proofe of the said account shall be manifest in the Example Proofe. of Millan with Lions. CHAP. CCCXV. Of the Exchange of Lions with Venetia. LIons exchangeth with Venice, and giveth 100 Crownes of Gold, Exchange of Lions with Venetia. to have there Duccats posito 119⅔ of Livers 6  per Duccat; I demand, for Crownes 3549. 10. of the Sunne, how much credit shall Lions have in Venice: to know which, multiply the said summe of Crownes by the said 119⅔ Duccats, and the remainder produced by the said multiplication, shall be divided by 24, because that the Duccat is worth 24 Grosse, and out of that product cut the two last figures, the which being multiplyed by 24, to make them Grosses, they will make Duccats 4238 1/12, which Lions shall have Credit in Venice for the said Crownes of the Sunne: as Example. Facit 4238 Duccat. 2 Grosse. And the proofe of this account shall be manifested by Example, in the Exchanges of Venetia back Proofe. for Lions.
CHAP. CCCXVI. Of the Exchange of Lions with Bolonia. LIons exchangeth with Bolonia, and giveth 100 Crownes of the Sun Exchanges of Lions with Bo∣lonia. to have in Bolonia Crow. 113 of Livers 4¾ per Crowne; I demand then, for Crow. 3879. 13. 4. of the Sun, how much credit shall Lions have in Bolonia: to doe which, multiply the said Crownes of the Sun by 113, and from the product cut the two last figures, then mul∣tiply them by 20. and 12. to make them Sols and Deniers, and it will come to Crow. 4282. 6. 5. in Bolonia, the which you must bring into Livers, by multiplying them by Li. 4. 15. which is the value of the Crowne in Bolonia, and they make Li. 20341. 0. 5. which Lions shall have credit for in Bolonia. The proofe hereof serveth to know how to make the account, when Bolonia exchangeth for Lions, and is done by the rule of 3. say∣ing, if Cro. 113 give 100 Crowns, how many shall 4282 Cro. 6. 5 d. give? CHAP. CCCXVII. Of the Exchange of Lions with Placentia. LIons exchangeth with Placentia, and giveth 119⅔ posito Crownes Exchanges of Lions with Pla∣centia. of the Sunne, to have in Placentia Crownes 100 of Marc. I de∣mand, for Crownes 3489. 15. of Gold of the Sunne, how many Crownes shall be due to me in Placentia: to find which, I say by the rule of Three, if Crow. 119  give 100 Crow. of Marc. how many will Crow. 3489. 15. give? the product of which rule, giveth Crow. 2916. 4. 6 d. of Marc. and so much shall be due to me in the said place of Placentia, for the said summe of Crownes of the Sunne: for example,
The proofe of this rule is seene, when that Placentia shall ex∣change with Lions. CHAP. CCCXVIII. Of the Exchange of Lions with Antuerpe. LIons exchangeth with Antuerpe, and giveth one Crowne of the nges of  with rpe. Sunne to have in Antuerpe posito 121  Grosse; I demand then, how many Livers of Grosses I shall have there, for Cro. 6895. 11. 3. To doe which, I multiply the said summe by the said 121  Grosse, and it giveth Grosses 836661, out of which take , to make them Sols, and they make Sols 69721. 9. which to make into Livers, you must cut the two last figures, & take the ½ of the others, and it will come to li. 3486. 1. 9. of Grosses, which I should have in the said place of Antuerpe, for the above-mentioned summe of Crownes of the Sunne: as by Example,
The proofe of the said account will appeare, when that Antuerpe exchangeth with Lions: and therein it is to be noted, that in the meaner of the Exchange that Lions maketh with Antuerpe, the cal∣culation will serve in the same manner with Colonia; because the same Monyes are used in Exchanges in the said Citie of Colonia as in Antuerpe, and the same also is in use in Amsterdam, and through∣out the Netherlands. CHAP. CCCXIX. Of the Exchange of Lions with London. LIons exchangeth with London, and giveth a Crowne of the Sunne Echanges  Lions with London. to have in London posito Pence sterling 58; I then demand, for Crownes 7693. 10. 0 Crownes of the Sunne, how many Li∣vers of Pounds sterling shall I have in London, working the same as the precedent rule, and account from Lions to Antuerpe, and it will make sterling Pounds 1859. 5. 3 d. And so much credit shall the same give me in London, as shall appeare by Example fol∣lowing. The proofe of this account shall appeare, when I come to the Proofe.  Exchanges of London with this place of Lions. Here also it is to be noted, that the account is calculated in the same manner, when either Paris, Roven, or any other part of Paris, Roven. France doth exchange for the Citie of London, or for any other Citie in England.
CHAP. CCCXX. Of the Exchange of Lions with Francfort. LIons exchangeth for Francfort, and giveth a Crowne of the Sunne to have in the said place Quarentines posito 95¾; I demand, Exchanges of Lions with Francfort. for 1500 Crownes of the Sunne, how many Florins shall Lions have in Francfort: to doe which, multiply the said Crownes of the Sunne by 95¾, and it maketh Quarentines 143625; to reduce which into Florins, you must cut off the two last figures, and then take  of the others, or else divide them by 60, because that 60 Quarentines make a Florin, and it giveth Florins 2393, and 4 over-plus, which is to be understood for 40, and with the figure cut off, makes 45, of which,  is to be taken to make Sols, because that 3 Quarentines is a Sol, and then it makes Flor. 2393. Sol. 15. which Lions ought to have credit for in Francfort. Example. Desiring for proofe of the said account, to exchange from Franc∣fort to Eions, the said Flor. 2393. 15. at Quarent. 95¾ per Crowne, Proofe. I first put the said Florins into Quarentines, multiplying them by 60, and they will be Quarentines 143625, which divided by 95¼, makes just Crow. 1500 of the Sunne, as abovesaid. Note also, that in Francfort is onely accounted two Faires; the first, in Mid-Lent; and the other, in Mid-September; and if the remittance be out of the Faire, you may stay for the said Faire, and the Money must stay halfe a yeare, which is here two Faires, in satis∣faction whereof, is sometimes made good 6, sometimes 7 per Cent. as Merchants can agree, more or lesse. Note also, that when Lions is found to exchange with No∣rimberg, the account thereof is made as above is said, with Francfort.
CHAP. CCCXXI. Of the Exchange of Lions with Sivil. LIons exchangeth with Sivil, and giveth crownes 1 of the Sun, to have in the said place posito 396 Marvedes: I demand Exchanges of Lions with Sivil. then, what credit I shall have in Sivill, for Crownes 6792-16-6 d. delivered in Lions, at the said price: to doe which mul∣tiplie the said Crownes by 396, and they will make Marvedes 2689958, to which must be added  per Cent. for the Lagio of the money, which is 5 per 1000, and then they will make, Mar∣ved. 2703407, and so much shall Lions have credit in Sivill, as Example. Note that when Lions doth Exchange with Alcala, the account is made as the precedent with Sivil, and that the proof of the said Alcala. calculation is found true by the Exchange of Sivill, or Alcala with Lions. CHAP. CCCXXII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Lixborne. LIons exchangeth with Lixborne and giveth 1 Cro. of the Sun, to have there posito 528 Rais, I demand then for Cr. 7893. 4. 6. Exchanges of Lions with Lix∣borne. of the Sun, how many Res Lions shall have credit in the said place of Lixborne, and to know which Imultiplie the said Cro. by
528, and find that it giveth in Raes 4167622, which Lions shall have credit in Lixborne, as for Example. The proofe of this rule is manifested, when that Lixborne shal exchange with Lions. CHAP. CCCXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Barselona. LIons exchangeth with Barselona and giveth one Crowne of the Exchanges of Lions with Barselona. Sun, to have in the said place posito 22-8-Sols: I demand for 7822. 12. 6. Cro. of the Sun, which Lions doth remit to Barselona, how many Livers shall I have, to doe which, you must multiply the above said summe of Crownes, by lib. 1. 2. 8. which is 22-8 d. beginning to multiplie by the Deniers, and then by the Sols, which are annexed to the Crownes, and the summe will come to 8865-12-10, which you shall have in Barselona for the said summe of crownes of the Sun. Example. The proofe of the said account will appeare, when Barselona ex∣changeth backe with Lions. It will not be needfull I should propound here any Examples, when Lions Exchangeth with Valentia and Saragosa, seeing that the tia and gosa. account is the same as with Barselona above said, and this is as
much as I conceive requisite concerning the Exchanges of Lions with other places, to which I could adde sundry Remittances and Draughts in Exchange hence made to other places, with other such circumstances, but here being already matter enough set down, to exercise the pen and head of the ingenious, and of him that will study the Art and the Mystery of the Exchanges of this place, I will onely adde a word of the Orders and Commissions, given and received here in Exchanges, and an Example for explanation thereof, and leave the rest to the consideration of the stu∣dious. CHAP. CCCXXIIII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances by Exchanges in Lions. BEfore I enter this vast subject of Orders and Com∣missions, Of Orders and Commissions gi∣ven and recei∣ved for Draughts and Remittances in Lions. I will briefly shew, how the accounts of these Orders and Commissions are made, being onely iven, by the expert and subtle heads of Bankers and Exchangers, conversant in the course of Exchanging, which sorts of Commission or Orders, are wrought partly by the Rule of Three Direct, and partly by the same rule backward, and the bet∣ter to distinguish, those that are made Direct, and those that are made backward, it is requisite, that the course and manner of Exchanging from one place to another bee precisely knowne and learned, and how that place to which the Commission is sent and given, draw or remit either by a certaine or uncertaine rate, and such Commissions ought to be made, by the Rule of Three back∣ward, taking one of the prices, which are found for Divisor, and the other two, which are the order'd prices, take for the summe to divide by, and it is to be noted, that the first price, which is taken for Divisor, be of the same place as the last, and to know herein what is meant by this word certaine and uncertaine, I shall now declare it. A Certain Exchange is no other, then to give a setled price, which varieth not in Exchanging, and hath no change or alteration, as it Certain price in Exchanges. is seene in Lions, or in Placentia, which giveth alwayes Cro, 100, or Cro. 1, to have in Nles Duccats 130 more or lesse, and this 100 Cro. or 1 Cro. is  found to alter, and therefore termed by Ex∣changers to be the certaine price.
Incertaine Exchange is a price that is observed unconstant, and Incertaine price in Ex∣changes. which admits of variation, which shall be when the place which Exchangeth, giveth a number of Crownes, Ducats, or Sols, or of any other money which commeth not to the iust sum of 100, or else exceedeth the same, and therefore the same not being firme and stable, are named incertaine Exchanges, as subject to alteration, sometimes more, and sometimes lesse, which is rightly and well to be considered and understood in Orders and Commissions of Ex∣changes given. When the place then wherein the Commission is to bee effected, giveth to the places whereto it ought to remit, and draw, to both of them the Incertaine, the account must be made by the rule of Three Forward or direct, taking for first & second number, the pri∣ces that have beene ordered, and for the last number of the said rule, take one of the prices that are found, in such a manner, that the first Exchange of the said rule be of the same place as the latter. Likewise, when the said place where the Commission is effected, giveth to the places that it ought to remit, and to draw to both of them the certaine, the account thereof is made by the said Rule of Three forward, as by Example. Order and Commission is given for a Merchant to his friend at Li∣ons, Example of a Certaine and incerte Ex∣change. to remit to Naples at Duccats 126½, and to prevaile for Rome at 85 Crownes, or at an other price differing therefrom, provided that it may be done without losse, it is found to remit to Naples at 125  Duccats, I would now know at how much might the same be drawn for Rome, to the end that this Commission be fully and iust∣ly effected. It is here first to be considered, that Lions giveth the price cer∣taine to the said two places of Naples and Rome, and therefore by that account, it must be made, by the Rule of Three forwards, say∣ing, if Ducats 126  give Cro. 85, the inordered price, how many will Duccats 125½ give, the price found for Naples, and it will come to Cro. 84. 4. 4, and at that price you must draw for Rome. By this Commission then it is to be understood, that those of Naples will have Ducc. 126  in remittance, in that place, and be Debitors in Rome Crownes 85; who finding to remit at Ducc. 125 , it giveth losse, receiving lesse then that which was inordred; and making the account in this abovesaid manner, it is found, that the Draught ought to be made at Crownes 84. 4. 4. which is to profit, becomming this way a lesse Debitor, then that which was inordred, which commeth to recompence the losse which is made in the remittance; As for Example shall ap∣peare.
To proove this account, by which may bee clearely knowne, how this Commission remaineth perfectly effected, doe in this man∣ner. P. Presuppose, that those of Naples have given the Commission for Crownes 2000 of Gold of Estampe, or de Camera, which they would draw for Rome, and remit the value for Naples: You must first see how much the said Crownes of Estampe are worth, in Crownes of the Sunne, at Crownes 85 per cent. the inordered price, and it will come to Crownes 2352. 18, 9. of Gold of the Sunne, out of which you must take  per cent. for provision, and there will remaine Crownes 2343. 10. 7. the which must be remit∣ted to Naples at the price inordered of Ducats 126½ per cent. and it will come to Duccats 2964½, or thereabout. So that as it doth appeare, the said Crownes 2000 of debt in Rome, are made by remittance to Naples, Duccats 2964½. Now then it is to be observed in the prices (different from the order given) which are found, that is to say, at Crownes 84. 4. 4. for Rome, and at Duccats 125⅓ for Naples, if for the said Crownes 2000 by Draught to Rome, a remittance may be made of the above∣said Duccats 2964½; and the better to know it, it must be seene, how much the said summe of Crownes of Estampe are worth in Crownes of Gold of the Sunne, at Crow. 84. 4. 4. per Cent. which will come to Crow. 2374. 16. 6 Crownes of the Sunne; out of which, ta∣king the provision at ⅖ per Cent. there will remaine Crown. 2365. 6. 7. which must be remitted to Naples at the said price, which is found of 125  per Cent. and it will make in Duccats 2964½, or thereabouts, by remittance to Naples; the which sheweth the said Commission is perfectly accomplished, in conformitie of the Order given. For example.
I could here adde many of these Examples for the illustration of this point of Commissions, but I forbeare to doe it, because the examples might prove tedious and intricate, and the rather be∣cause I may publish in this kind some things that I have already roughly drawne, if I find that my labours this way prove grate∣full, and therefore touching other circumstances and questions that may arise in the Exchanges practised in Lions, I will referre the same to the ingenious lover of this Art and Mystery, having set downe sufficient, to exercise both the head and hand of the studious, and which may afford matter for greater varietie in in its season, therefore I will in the next place survey the Ex∣changes practised in Rome, after the same manner.
CHAP. CCCXXV. Of the Faires of Lions, wherein all Bills of Exchange are thence drawne, and there satisfied. LIons is noted to have foure Faires: the manner of ac∣cepting The foure Faires of ions. of Bills of Exchange therein, I have observed in the 275 Chapter; the times of the said Bills now resteth to be shewed. The first Faire beginneth in Lions the first Monday after the Epiphanie; and if the same fall upon a Mon∣day, 1 Foire des Rois. the Faire doth then begin the Monday following; the which lasteth fifteene working dayes, excluding and excepting Sundayes and holy-dayes, the which is designed for Merchants to doe their af∣faires: at the end whereof (which oftentimes happens at Candle∣mas) all parties are made by Exchanges, and all former remittances are payd and discharged. The second, is the Faire of Easter, which beginneth the Monday 2 Foire des Pasque. following the Octaves after Easter day, and lasteth 15 working dayes, Sundayes and holy-dayes excepted: at the end whereof, all former Draughts, payable in this Faire, are satisfied, and all new Remittances and Draughts for other places, are made and framed from one man to another. The third, is the Faire of August, and beginneth the fourth of 3 Foire d'Aust. the said Moneth, and continueth as the rest, 15 working dayes, which oftentimes happeneth not till the beginning of Septem∣ber; wherein, as above is noted, the Draughts made hither, and Remittances are discharged, and new parties by exchange for other places framed and perfited from one to another. The fourth, is the Faire of All-Saints, beginning the third of 4 Foire des touts Saints. November, continuing as the former, 15 working dayes, which sometimes happeneth on the beginning of December; and therein the Merchants use to discharge all former Bills that come hither from other places, and frame new Remittances and Draughts hence to other Cities, betweene man and man. For it is here to be noted, that all Bills of Exchanges, and for the most part all Bills of Debt have in this Citie no other time of payment, receit, or discharge, but during these foure principall afore-mentioned Times or Faires.
CHAP. CCCXXVI. Of Examples of the Exchanges practised in Rome, and how the same are calculated. I Have shewed in the generall Exchanges of Rome, with how many places the same is found to exchange Exchanges practised in Rome, and first with Lions. with; and there also shewed the common Rates how the same doth governe, which every day is so observed to alter, that no set Rule can be peremp∣torily layd downe for the same; yet it is in it selfe so beneficiall, that thereby the ignorant may make his calculation, either in his Draughts, or Remittances: The way of making which ac∣count, now remaineth to be handled, observing the same with so many other places, as may be fit to understand the ground thereof. It is also there noted, for the understanding of what is to fol∣low, that Bankers and Exchangers in Rome doe keepe their accounts in Crownes of Stampe or Camera, Sols, and Deniers of Gold, named of the Eight Stampe, which are numbred by 20 and 12, because that 20 Sols of Gold makes a Crowne, and 12 Deniers a Sol. The Crowne of Stampe being worth 12 Iulies. The Crowne in Money worth 10 And the Iulio worth 10 Baiocs. CHAP. CCCXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Lions. FIrst then, Rome exchangeth with Lions, and giveth Crownes 85 of Gold of the Eight Stampe, to have in the said Citie Exchange of Rome with Lions. of Lions Crownes 100 of the Sunne; I demand, for Crownes 3842. 10. 7. of Estampe, how many Crownes of the Sunne shall Rome have in Lions: To know which, you must say by the rule of Three, If Cro. 85 give 100 Crownes of the Sunne, how much will 3842. 10. 7 Cr. give? and it will come to Cro. 4520. and the remain∣der
of the Divident multiply by 20 and by 12, to make Sols and Deniers of Gold, and it will be Crownes 4520. 12. 5 Crownes of the Sunne that Rome ought to have in Lions for the said summe: as for example; The proofe of this account is seene, when Lions doth exchange Proofe. with Rome. CHAP. CCCXXVIII. Of the Exchange of Rome with Placentia. ROme exchangeth with Placentia, and giveth posito 99¼ Crownes Exchanges of Rome with Pla∣centia: of Gold of Estampe, to have here Crownes 100 of Marc. I demand, for Crownes 1382. 5. 8. of Estampe, how many Crownes of Marc. Placentia shall have? You must reduce the price and the summe of Crownes into Deniers, multiplying the same by 20 and by 12, and adding 15 for the ¾ of a Crowne, then say by the rule of Three, If the Deniers come at of the said price, give Crownes 100 of Marc. how many will the Deniers come of the said summe of Crownes give? and multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, in doing which, they will amount to Crownes 1385. 14. 11. of Marc. which must be had in the said place of Placentia for the said summe of Crownes of Estampe, as may be seene by the fol∣lowing Example.
The proofe of this account is seene, when Placentia doth ex∣change Proofe. with Rome. CHAP. CCCXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Florence. ROme exchangeth with Florence, and giveth posito Crownes 92¼ of Gold Estampe, to have in this place 100 Crownes of Gold; Exchange of Rome with Florence. I demand, for Crownes 1476. 2. 3. of Estampe, what credit shall Rome have in the said Florence? To know which, you must reduce (as afore is said) the price and the summe of Crownes into Deniers of Gold, multiplying by 20 and by 12, and adding 5 Sol for the ¼ Crowne; then say by the rule of Three, If the Deniers come of the said price, give Crownes 100 of Gold, how many will the Deniers of the abovesaid summe of Crownes give? and multiply∣ing the remainder of the division by 20 and by 12, to have Sols and Deniers of Gold, it will appeare to come to Crownes 1600. 5. 2. of Gold: and so much credit must Rome have in Florence. As for example:
The proofe of this account is seene, when as Florence doth ex∣change Proofe. againe with Rome. CHAP. CCCXXX. Of the Exchange of Rome with Venetia. ROme exchangeth with Venice, and giveth Crownes 73  posito of Exchanges of Rome with Ve∣nice. Estampe, to have in that place Ducc. 100 de Banco of Livers 6⅕ per Ducc. I demand, for Cro. 850. 15. 8. of Estampe, what credit in Banco shall I have at Venice: to doe which, I must reduce, as in the precedent accounts, the price and the summe of Crownes into Deniers of Gold, multiplying the same by 20 and by 12, and adde 10 Sols for the ½ Crow. and then say by the rule of Three, If the Deniers come of the price, give Ducc. 100, how many will the De∣niers give me, that come of the abovesaid summe of Crownes? and multiplying the remainder of the division by 24, to bring them in∣to Grosse, because that 24 Grosses are worth in the said City of Venice 1 Ducc. of Li. 6⅕, then it will make Ducc. 1157½, which Rome hath credit at Venice: as for example. The proofe of this account may be discerned, when as Venetia Proofe. doth exchange with Rome backe.
CHAP. CCCXXXI. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Millan. ROme exchangeth with Millan, and giveth posito Crown. 87  of Estampe, to have in that place Crow. 100 of Livers 5. Sol. 17. Exchange of Rome with Millan. per Crowne; I demand, for Crow. 2140. 16 of Estampe, how many Livers of Millan shall I have? First, reduce the price and the Crownes into Sols of Gold, multi∣plying them by 20, and to the multiplication adde 16 Sol. for  of a Crowne, and then say by the rule of Three, If the Sols comming of the price, give Crow. 100, how many will the Sols comming of the abovesaid summe of Crownes give? and multiplying the remain∣der of the division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and De∣niers of Gold, they will make Crown. 2438. 5. 4d. the which you must reduce into Livers, by multiplying them by Li. 5. 17. and they will make Li. 14263. 17. 2d. which I must have at Millan for the said summe of Crownes of Estampe; as appeareth plainely by this Example. The proofe of this rule is apparent, when Millan shall exchange with Rome. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCXXXII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Naples. ROme Exchangeth with Naples, and giveth cro. 100. of gold of Exchages of Rome with ∣ples. estampe, to have in that place, posito Ducc. 135⅔, I demand for cro. 2346. 15. 4 of estampe, how many Duc. shall I have, to doe which you must multiply the said summe of crow. by grai. 135⅔ per crowne, seeing it is the same graines 135⅔ per crow. as in Ducc. 135⅔ per cent. because the Duccat is worth in Naples graines 100, and of the product will come graines 318377, of the which you must cut the two last figures, to make them Duc. and it then maketh duc. 3183 Taries 3 grain. 17, and these Taries and graines make grai. 77 because that the Tarie is worth ga. 20 and so much you are to have in Naples for the said crow. of estampe, as appeares by this Example following. The proofe of the said account is seene when as Naples doth exchange this summe backe with Rome. Proofe. CHAP. CCCXXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Genoa: ROme exchangeth with Genoa, and giveth posito Crownes 101 Exchanges of Roe with Ge∣noa. of gold of estampe to have in the said place Crownes 100 of gold of Italie, I demand for Crownes 4000 10. of gold of estampe, what credit shall Rome have at Genoa,
you must first reduce the said Crownes of estampe into Crownes of gold of Italie, at the rate of Crownes 100 of estampe, for Crownes 102½ of gold, and therefore you must multiply by 102½ in cutting the two last figures, the which you must multiply by 20, and by 12, and they will make Crownes 4100. 10. 3 of gold of Italy, then say by the Rule of three; if 101 Cro. give 100 cro. what shall 4100 cro. 10. 3 give, and it will come to crow. 4059. 18. 3 of gold in gold of Italy, and for to reduce them into livers, you must multiply them by livers 4  (the valew of a Crowne of gold) and in so doing, it will come to lib. 18269. 12. 1 current mony, that Rome shall have credit in Genoa for the said Crownes of estampe, as for Example. The proofe of the said Rule is more apparently demonstrated, when Genoa doth Exchange this parcell backe with Rome. Proofe. CHAP. CCCXXXIIII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Palermo or Mesina. ROme Exchangeth with Palermo or Mesina, and giveth 1 crow. of gold of estampe to have in one of the two said places, posito Exchanges of Rome with Pa∣lermo and Me∣sina. carl. 29⅕, I would know then for cro. 4000. 10. 6, what cre∣dit in Ounces shall Rome have in Palermo or Mesina, to doe which you must multiply the said crow. by 29⅓, and the product will be carlins 117348. 7. 2. the which must be reduced into Ounces, by
cutting the last figure, and by taking the ⅙ of the rest, and the 48 remaining are Carlins, of which taking the ½, and they shall be Taries, and in thus working, it will make ounces 1955, Taries 24, grains 7 and picolies 2, which Rome must have credit for in one of the aforesaid places, for the above mentioned crownes of estampe, as is aparent by the following Example, The proofe of this account is seene when Palermo or Mesina Proofe. shall exchange backe with Rome. CHAP. CCCXXXV. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Antwerpe. ROme Exchangeth with Antwerpe, and giveth one crowne to Exchanges of Rome with Antwerpe. have in the said Citie of Antwerpe posito 114 grosse, I demand then, for crow. 2000. 17. 8, how many pounds in grosse, or grosses, shall Rome have credit in Antwerpe, to doe this, you must multiply the said summe of crownes by 14, and of the product will come grosses 228100, the which reduced into pounds Elemish will make lib. 950. 8. 4. and for so much shall Rome have credit in the said Citie of Antwerpe, as for Example. The proofe of this account is demonstrated when this parcell Proofe. is Exchanged backe from Antwerpe to Rome, and note that when Rome shall exchange with Francfort, Amsterdam, or any other part of the Netherlands, the account is made as in the abovesaid man∣ner of Rome with Antwerpe.
CHAP. CCCXXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Rome with London. ROme Exchangeth with London, and giveth 1 Crowne there to have in the said City posito 65 pence sterl. I demand then for Exchanges of Rome with Londn. Crownes 4000 14. 8 of estampe, how many pounds sterling shall Rome have credit in London, which must be wrought as in the precedent account of Rome with Antwerpe, and it will be found, that it will amount unto 1083. 10. 8 den. which I ought to have in the said City of London, for the said summe of Crownes of estampe, as may appeare by the Example following, The proofe of this Rule will more evidently appeare when the summe of 1083 lib. 10 shil. 8¼ den. sterl. is remitted from London to Proofe. Rome, which I hope is not in these dayes used in England. CHAP. CCCXXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with the Cities of Valentia, Saragosa, or Barselona. ROme doth Exchange with Valentia, Saragosa and Barselona, Exchnges of Rome with Valentia, Sara∣gosa an Bar∣selona. and giveth 1 Crowne of estampe to have in one of the said places Solsposito 25 den. 6, I demand then for crownes 6000 14. 4. of estampe, what credit shall Rome have in one of the said pla∣ces, to know which, you must multiply the said summe of crownes of estamp by li. 1. 5. 6, and they will make li. 7650. 18. 3. d. which Rome shall have in credit in one of the said places, for the said summe of crownes of estampe, as shall appeare by this Example,
The proofe of this rule is best seene when this summe shall be remitted backe from these Cities to Rome, and because that the calculation to all these three places, is made in one and the same manner, I have put them thus together, the price onely giving, the alteration in exchange more or lesse in each Citie. CHAP. CCCXXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Sivile. ROme Exchangeth with Sivile, and giveth 1 Crowne of estampe Exchanges of Rome with Si∣vil. to have in Sivil, poito 456 Marvides, I demande then for 400 Crownes of estampe, how many Marvides shall Rome have in Sivil, to doe which you must multiply the said summe of Crownes of estampe, by 456 Marvides, and they make 182400, which Rome must have credit in the said place, and it is here to be noted that throughout all Castilia, the Exchanges are made in the same manner as at Sivil, and they likewise keepe their ac∣counts in the denomination of Marvides, and when as the ya∣mount to a million, they terme it in Spanish a Quintos. Example. At Alcala and other places in Spaine, the account is as above Proofe. made, and the further proofe thereof is seene, when that Sivil shall exchange with Rome.
CHAP. CCCXXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Lixborne. ROme doth Exchange with Lixborne, and delivereth one Crown xchanges of Rome with Lis∣borne. of Estmpe, to have in the said place posito 513 Res, I demand what credit in Res shall Rome have in Lixborne for 325 Crownes 9. 6. d. this question is to be wrought, as in the precedent account is shewed, and it will appeare that Rome shall have Cre∣dit in Lixborne for Raes 166968 as shall be seene by the working thereof following. The proofe of this account is apparent, when that Lixborne shall Exchange backe Raes 166968 with Rome at 513 Raes per Duccat. Proofe. CHAP. CCCXL. Of the termes of payments of Bills of Exchange in Rome. From Rome the termes are To Naples at 8 dayes sight, and from thence backe at 10 dayes. Termes of payment of bills of Ex∣change in Rome. To Brudges and Antwerpe, at 8 dayes sight. To Palermo at 15 dayes sight, & from thence backe at 10 dayes. To Florence at 10 dayes sight, and so backe. To Venice at 10 dayes sight and so backe. To Avignon at 45 dayes sight, and thence at 10 dayes backe. To Valentia at 2 months from the date, and 10 dayes sight backe. To Barselona at 2 moneths from the date, & 10 dayes sight backe. To Lions on the Faire, and thence 10 dayes sight backe. To Genoa at 10 dayes sight, and so backe. To Pisa at 10 dayes sight, and the same backe thence.
CHAP. CCCXLI. Of the Aggio of moneyes practized in the Exchanges and payments of Rome. THis terme Aggio common in divers parts of Italie, is as much as the Valewable consideration, in the spe∣cies The Aggio of mony paid in Rome by Ex∣changes. of sundry monyes▪ that are made in payments, either for Merchandize or in Exchanges by bills, and is accounted the difference, betweene the best mo∣ny, used in the termes of Exchanges, and the worst used in pay∣ments of goods, and therefore for the declaration and manife∣station thereof, I have made this question and Chapter, by way of Proposition and Demand. A certaine Merchant in Rome, fin∣ding himselfe to have received for merchandize sold by him to another, Crownes 3441 and Baiocs 97, of Iulies 10 per Crowne, which he desires to reduce into Crownes of the estampe, or as some terme them de Camera, thereby to make them fit to be remitted into any other place, the Aggio of the monies being considered as commonly is seene at 45 Iulios, I demand then how many Crowns of estampe, the same will produce. To know which, you must first see how much the 100 destampe are worth in Iulies at Iu∣lies 12 the Crowne, which will be Iulies 1200, to which must be ad∣ded 4▪ 5 Iulies for  Laggio therof, because that the Crown of stamp, is worth 12 Iulies, and then the Laggio, which comes to be 12 Iulies and Baiocs 4½ per Crowne, or else 45 Iulies for Crownes 100, and they will be 1245 Iulies, and so much shall 100 Crownes destampe be worth the Aggio of the mony comprised; likewise in the same manner you must reduce the said summe of Crownes of mony, into Iulies, and they make Iulies 34419 and Baiocs 7, comprehending 9 Iulies and 7 Baios, for the 97 Baiocs, and this being done, then worke by the Rule of three, and say, If Iulies 1245 give Crownes of gold of stap 100 Cro. how much shall the said Iulies 34419. 7 give, then to multiplie the said Iulios by 100, there is only a cipher to be added after the 7 Baiocs, and prosecuting thus the working of the question it will amount unto Crownes 2764. 12. 8 of estampe. Now to proove the said account, you must multiplie the said Crownes of estampe by Iulies 1245 per cent: in cutting the two last fi∣gures, Proofe of the Aggios account. and of the product, there will remaine Crownes 3441 and Baiocs 96⅘ and so the account will appeare to be well made, sa∣ving a small broken number lost, and in this manner must be wrought all like accounts, though the Aggio of the mony, be ei∣ther augmented or lessened, still by adding the Aggio, such as it shall be found to be, with or to the Iulios 1200, which is the price
of 100 Crownes of gold destampe. The whole question I shall for explanation demonstrate by the working thereof in this example, and first, CHAP. CCCXLII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for draughts and remittances by Exchanges in Rome. I Will herein, following my first intended method, give you also a proposition or two of a draught and Orders and Commissions  and re∣ceived for dught and remittances in Rome. remittance by commission and Order, the manner whereof largely explained by example, will be full and sufficient for reglement for the like draught or remittance from this City to any other place. From Rome then is mitted to Venice, at Crownes 97¼ posio, and from thence is remitted to Pacentia at Duccat. 136 , I would now know at h much commeth the remittance from Rome for Placen∣tia, to doe which worke thus. You must first multiplie the said Ducc. 136⅔ being the price of 100 Crow. of Mark by Crow. 72¼ per cent. cutting the two last figures, the which being multiplyed by 20 and by 12, to reduce them into Sols and Den. of gold, and in thus working it will come to Crownes 98. 14. 9. to the which must be added  per cent. for the provision, paid at Venice which is 6 Sols 7 Deniers, and they make Crownes 99  and so many Crownes destampe is disbursed in Rome
for 100 Crownes of marc of credit at Placentia, as doth appeare by Example following. To prove this account, you must see how much the summe of Proofe. Crownes destampe that you would remit, are worth in Duccats in Venice, at the said price of Crownes 72¼ for Ducc. 100, out of which to make the remittance to Placentia, the provision is to be taken out at ⅖ per cent. then see, how many will the Crownes of marke give at Ducc. 136  for 100 Crownes of marke, and the Crownes of marke, which come thereof, must be multiplyed by the said price of 99  per cent. and in thus working, will come the selfe-same sum of crownes of estampe, which are disbursed in   e remit∣tance made to Venice, and by the Rule may  be made of all other accounts of the selfe-same subject▪ But it is to be noted, that the said account cannot serve in any other occasion, but where the remittance is made from Rome to Placentia, and that the Exchange is at 100⅓ crowne of estampe, for 100 crownes of marke, thereby to discerne, if it be the more profitable, to remit, as they terme it, a dritura or straight, or else to make remittance to Venice, and from Venice to Placenti, as is beforesaid at the above said prices, the remittance comming to be at 99  crownes of ampe, so that as i is apparent it is more beneficiall to remit to Placentia by the way of Venice, for as much as t is seene by this Example, that for 100 crownes of marke in that ace, there is no more paid and disbursed, but crownes 99 1/11 in Ro, and ma∣king the remittance straight and a dritura 100  crownes is to be disbursed. And moreover it is to be noted, that their Exchange is made some times, at a greater or lesser price, according to the aboundance or scarsity of the monyes current, and therefore these accounts serve onely but for instruction sake, and to shew how the Rules thereof are to be reckoned and cast up. Another example of a commission given to enlighten this point, I will adde hereunto.
There is order and Commission given at Rome to remit to Venice at 73  crownes, and to prevaile for the same from Placentia at crow. 93 , but there is found bills of Exchange for Venice at crownes 74⅓ and mony for Florence at crownes 94⅖, the question is then, if at these prices, the said Commission and Order may be effected. The which to accomplish and know, I must say by the Rule of three, seeing, that Rome giveth the uncertaine to both those said two places, If crownes 73⅔ give 93  crownes, what will crownes 74⅓ give, and it will give by the said Rule, crownes 94. 3. 6 d. so that this order and commission may be accomplished and performed with be∣nefit, because that remitting to Venice at crownes 74⅓, it ought to be drawne to Florence at crownes 94. 3. 6, and there it is found at more videlicet at crownes 94⅖, as for Example. And thus much shall serve for instruction and method to the Exchanges and commissions practised at Rome, and now I will pro∣ceed to the next eminent place of Exchanges, according to my intended method, which is Naples.
CHAP. CCCXLIII. Examples of the Exchanges practised in Naples, and how the same are calculated. I Have shewed in the generall Exchanges of Naples, I amples of Exchanges pra ctised in Na∣ples. with how many other places this Citie is found to exchange, and there also shewed the common rates, how the same doth governe, which every day is so found to alter, that no set rule can perem∣ptorily be set downe for the same, yet it is in it self so beneficiall, that therby the learner may know how to make his account, either in his draughts or remittances, the way of ma∣king which account now remaineth to be handled, observing the same with so many other places, as may be fittest to under∣stand the ground thereof. It is also there observed, that the Bankers and Exchangers of the Accounts in Naples. place doe keepe their account in Duccats, Taries and graines, the which are cast up by 5, and by 20, because that 5 Taries doe make a Duccat, and 20 graines a Tarie, also that the Crowne of gold, in gold of this Kingdome, is 13 Carlins, or 6½ Taries, and the Crowne of mony or silver is 11 Carlins or 5½ Taries, the Ducat of gold being worth 6 Taries, and the Duccat current is worth 5 Taries. CHAP. CCCXLIIII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lions. NAples then Exchangeth with Lions, and giveth posito Duccats Exchanges of Naples with Lions. 127½ to have in this place 100 Crownes of gold of the Sunne, I demand then, for Duccats 3295 and 1 Tarie, how many Crownes of gold shall I have in Lions, to know which you must say, by the Rule of three, if Duccats 127½ give 100 Crownes, how many will Duccats 3295  give, multiplying the remainder of the divi∣sion by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers, and it will make Crownes 2584. 9. 4 of gold of the Sunne, which I should have at Lions.
The proofe of this account is seene, when Lions exchangeth backe either for Naples, Bery, Lechi or any other City of that King∣dome. CHAP. CCCXLV. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Placentia. NAples exchangeth with Placentia, and giveth posito Duccats 132¾ to have in this place cro. 100 of marke: I demand Exchanges of Naples with Placentia. then for Ducc. 3416 Taries 2 and gr. 8. how many crownes of marke shall I have at Placentia, to doe which, I must first reduce the said summe of Ducc. into graines, and if there were neither Taries nor graines, it were done by the onely addition  two ci∣phers, because that the Ducc. is worth 100 graines, and because that there is in this question 2 taries and 8 graines 48 graines is to be added, and take graines 132¾ for devisor of the said summe, seeing it is as much at grain. 132¾ per crow. as at Ducc. 132¾ per cro. 100, multiplying as well the one part as the other by 4 to bring them into quarters of graines, and after division by multiply∣ing the rest of the divisor by 20 and 12 to bring them into sols and deniers of gold, and all this done, it will come to crow. 2573. 12. 4 of marke which I must have in the said place of Placentia for the said summe of Ducc. above mentioned, as for Example,
The proofe of this account is more apparently demonstrated, Proofe. when this summe or parcell is Exchanged backe from Placentia to Naples, Bary, Lecchie, or other Cities of this Kingdome. CHAP. CCCXLVI. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Rome. NAples doth Exchange with Rome, and giveth posito Duccats 135⅔ in this place, to have in Rome 100 Crownes of gold of Exchanges of Naples with Rome. estampe: I demand then for Ducc. 3183. 3. 17, what cre∣dit in Crow. shall Naples have in the said City of Rome, to know which, the question is wrought as is before mentioned in the pre∣cedent Exchange of Naples for Placentia, and it commeth to Crow. 2346. 15. 2 of gold of estampe or de Camera, and for so much shall Naples have credit in Rome, as for Example.
The proofe of this Rule is manifested, when this parcell is Proo. Exchanged back from Rome to Naples, Bary, Lecchie, or to any other City of this Kingdome. CHAP. CCCXLVII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Florence: NAples Exchangeth with Florence, and giveth Ducc. posito 119: to have in Florence 100 Crownes of gold: I demand then for Exchanges of Naples with Florence. Ducc. 934. 1. 10, how much shall Naples have credit in the said City of Florence: this must be wrought as the precedent que∣stion of the Exchange of Naples for the City of Rome, and it will come to Crownes 780. 15. 0 of gold, and so much shall Naples have credit in the said place of Florence, as appeareth by this Example. The proofe of this account is declared when this parcell is Ex∣changed backe from Floren to Naples. Proofe. CHAP. CCCXLVIII. Of the Exchanges of Naples for Venice: NAples Exchangeth for Venice and giveth posito Duccats Exchanges of Naples for Ve∣nice. 97¼ to have in Venice Ducc. 100 of Livers 6⅕ of this mony (which now is termed in Banco) I demand then for Ducc.
1799. 1. 13 of Naples, how many Ducc. shall I have in the place of Venetia, this is to be wrought as the precedent, multiplying the remainder of the division by 24, to bring the same into gross. because that the Ducc. of livers 6. 4 shil. maketh 24 grosse, and it will come to Duccats 1850 , and so many Duccats shall Naples have in the said place of Venice, as by the Example following, The proofe of the said account appearing when this parcell of 1850 5/24 is Exchanged backe from Venice, to the aforesaid place of Proofe. Naples. CHAP. CCCXLIX. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Milan. NAples exchangeth with Milan and giveth posito Ducc. 98½ to Exchanges of Naples with Milan. have in Milan Crow. 100 of Livers 5 per Crow. of the mony of this place, I demand then for Ducc. 850, how many Crow. shall I have in Milan: To know which, I must doe as in the precedent exchanges, multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 and 12, to bring the same into Sols and deniers, and by this working it will make Crow. 862. 18. 10, and to know how many Livers they are, they must be multiplyed by 5 Livers, beginning to multiply the den. then the sols, and afterwards the Crow. calcu∣lating for 12 den. one sols and for 20 sols in mony one liver, and it will make lib. 4314. 14. 2 which one shall have in the said place of Milan for the said Duccats 850, as for Example.
The proofe of this account is manifested with this parcell is Exchanged backe from Millan to Naples as aforesaid. . CHAP. CCCL. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lecchie and Bary: NAples Exchangeth with Lechie and Bari, Citties within that Kingdome, and giveth posito 98  Ducc. to have in the  of Nes with Le and . said places Ducc. 100. I demand then for Ducc. 3850. 1. 15 of Naples, how many Ducc. shall I have in these two places, This Rule must be cast up as in the precedent Exchange for Millan, and multiplying the remainder of the division by 100, to bring it into graines, and thereof will come 98 which are 4 Taries, and graines 18, and in all Ducc. 3908 Tar. 4 gra. 18, which Naples shall have credit in the said places, and note that when Naples Exchangeth with Montelion, with Cosense, or any other part of this Kingdome, the account is made as above, as for Example,
The proofe of this Rule and account is thus made up. . CHAP. CCCLI. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Mesina. NAples exchangeth with Mesina, and giveth posito ducc. Ducc. Exchanges of Naples with Mesina. 115  to have in Mesina Crow. 100 of Tar. 13 of that mo∣ny, I demand how many Crownes of Taries 13 shall I have there for Ducc. 2348. 3. 8, to doe which working, as by the pre∣cedent Rules, I say: If graines 115  make one Crowne of 13 Ta∣ries, what will graines 234868 make, and multiplying the re∣mainder of the division by 52, to bring them into halfe carlins, be∣cause that 13 Taries are worth 26 Carlins, and by this working it maketh Crownes 2035  which abridged are , or otherwise multi∣plying the remainder of the division by 13 and then by 20 to bring them into Taries and graines, which will be the easier to compre∣hend, but the reason why I have otherwise demonstrated it, is be∣cause herein I would follow the method and manner of the Mer∣chants of Naples, who in their accounts are accustomed to doe as above is shewed, and to reduce the said Crowns 2035 9/13 into ounces, you must multiply by 13 to bring them into Taries, adding to the multiplication 9 for the 9/13 and they will be Taries 26464, from which cutting the last figure and take  of the rest to make them ounces, because that 30 Taries is an ounce, and the remain∣der of these thirds are tens of Taries, to the which adding the fi∣gure cut off, which are so many Taries, as must be placed after the ounces, and it will make Ounces 882. 4, and for so much shall Naples have credit in the said place of Mesina for Duc. 2348. 3. 8.
The proofe of this Rule is manifested what that Mesina shall Proofe. be found to Exchange for Naples. CHAP. CCCLII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Palermo. NAples Exchangeth with Palermo and giveth one Duccat to have in the said place posito 166  pontos, I demand for duc. Exchanges of Naples with P. 2846. 2. 10, what credit shall I have in Ounces in Palermo, to doe which, multiply the said summe of duc. by 166  pontos per duccats and it makes pontos 473942 to which adde  to make them graines, because that 1 Pontos is 1 graine and , and for as much as one graine is worth 6 piccolis, and 1 pontos is 8 piccolis, and it maketh graines 631922, to reduce which into ounces, you must cut off the two last figures, and take  of the rest, because that 600 gra. make an ounce, which in all makes ounces 1035, and there remaineth 1 which is worth with the two figures cut off 122 gra. which are 6 Taries and 2 gra. because that 20 gra. is 1 Tarie, and they will be ounces 1053, Taries 6 and gra. 2, and so many ounces by the said exchange shall you have in Palermo, and note that over and above, they give credit 1 Carl. per ounce for good Ago allow'd  Palermo. mony, to adde which said carl. per ounce, doe thus, considering that for the said ounces 1053, will come the same summe of carlins, for the Aggio of the mony, and to make the said carlin into ounces, you must cut the last figure, and take  of the rest, will make oun∣ces 17 and there will remaine 3 tens of carlins, which are 30 in value, to which adding the figure cut, and it is 33 carlins, from which, taking  to make them aries, (a carlin being ½ a tarie) which are 16 taries, and the remainder is 1 carl. in worth 10 gra. and ad∣ding 2 gra. for the 6. tar. which is with the ounc. because that for 3 tar. which are 60 gra. the Aggio will be 1 gra. and it will be in all ounc. 17 tar. 16 and gra. 12 which added, to be abovesaid ounces,
it makes 1070 Tar. 22, and gra. 14, and so much credit you shall have in Palermo for Ducc. 2846. 2. 10. in Naples at pont. 166½ per Ducc. Example. The proofe of this account is shewed when Palermo doth Ex∣change Proofe. backe with Naples this same parcell. CHAP. CCCLIII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Genoa. NAples Exchangeth with Genoa and giveth one Ducc. to have Naples Exchan∣geth with Ge∣noa. posito in Genoa 66⅔ Sols, I demand for Ducc. 1345. 4. 5 how many livers current mony shall I have in Genoa, the which is done by multiplication in taking of grains 85 which are the 4 Ta∣ries, and grains 5. the ⅔: seeing that it may be calculated for one graine of Naples ⅔ of a Sols, and it will come to Sol. 89723 and de∣niers 4, which to reduce into livers you must cut the last figure, and take the ½ of the rest, and if any rest, it will be a tenth, to which must be added the figure cut off, and it will be Sols, and thus it will appeare to be livers 4486. 3. 4 and so much will your credit be in the said place of Genoa, as by this Example,
The proofe of the said Rule is more evident when this summe Proofe. cometh to be rechanged from Genoa to Naples, as is aforesaid. CHAP. CCCLIIII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Antwerpe. NAples Exchangeth with Antwerpe, and giveth one Duccat, to have in Antwerpe posito 90 grosse. I demand then by this Exchanges of Naples with Antpe. Exchange, what credit shall Naples have in Antwerpe for 3200 Ducc. to doe which, you must multiply the said summe of Ducc. by 90, and it maketh 288000 gra. which reduced to pounds Elemish, will make 1200 lib. 00. 0. d. and so much credit shall Naples have in Antwerpe for the said summe of Ducc. 3200. as for Example. The proofe of this Rule is more apparent when this summe of 200 lib. Flem. is rechanged for Naples from Antwerpe. . CHAP. CCCLV. Of the Exchanges of Naples with London. NAples doth exchange with London, and giveth one Duccat to have in London posito 52 pence starling, I demand then for Exchange of Naples with London. 1528 Ducc. how many pounds starling shall Naples have cre∣dit in London: this must be done as in the precedent account, of Naples and Antwerpe, and it will be found that the same will give in London 331 lib. 1 sh. 4 d. which is the summe that Naples shall have credit there for 1528 ducc. delivered, as for Example.
The proofe of this Rule will appeare when as 331 lib. 1 sh. 4 d. Proofe. shall be rechanged from London to Naples. CHAP. CCCLVI. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Valentia. NAples doth Exchange with Valentia, and giveth one Ducc. Exchages of Naples with Valentia. for posito 21 Sols in Valentia, I demand then for Ducc. 2306 of Naples, how much shall I have credit in Valentia, to know which you must doe as in the exchange preceding, multi∣plying the said summe by 21 Sols, and they will make 2421. lib. 6 shil. which Naples shall have answered in Valentia at the price above shewed, the like is to be observed in the Exchanges of Sara∣gosa and Barselona, which I here omit for brevity, to which this Example shall suffice. The Proofe of this Rule is seene when this summe shall be re∣changed from Valentia to Naples. Proofe. CHAP. CCCLVII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Sivill. NAples doth Exchange with Sivill, and giveth one Duccat, to have in Sivill posito 402 Marvedes, I demand then for Exchange of Naples with Sivill. 2634 Duccats in Naples, how many Marvedes shall I have in Sivill, to doe which you must multiply the said summe of Du∣cats by 402 Marvides, and they make Marvides 1058 868 which Naples must have credit in the said place, and moreover it is here to be noted, that throughout all Castilia the Exchanges are
made in the same manner as at Sivill, and they likewise keep their account in the same denomination of Marvides, which when amounting to one million, they terme it in Spanish a Quinto, marked thus V. Example. And accounted 1058 V. or Quintos 868 mar. The proofe where∣of Proofe. is seene when Sivill rechangeth with Naples. CHAP. CCCLVIII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lixborne. NAples doth Exchange with Lixborne, and giveth one Ducc. to have in Lixborne, posito 498 Res, I demand for 1200 Exchanges of Naples with Lixborne. Duccats in Naples delivered, how many Res I shall have credit in Lixborne, this question is wrought as in the precedent with Sivill, and it will appeare, that Naples shall have in Lixborne the summe of 597 V. 600, as by the following working there∣of. The proofe of this Rule is manifested, when that Lixborne shall have occasion to rechange for Naples. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCLIX. Of the termes of payments of bills of Exchange in Naples. From Na∣ples the termes are TO Rome at 10 dayes sight and at 8 dayes backe. Termes of bills of Ex∣change in Na∣ples. To all other places of that Kingdome at 8 dayes sight, and so backe. To Florence at 20 dayes after date, and thence at 10 dayes backe. To Venice at 15 dayes sight and the like thence. To Avignon at 60 dayes from the date, and thence at 20 dayes sight. To Valentia at 40 dayes sight. To Genoa at 10 dayes sight, and thence at 15 dayes sight. To Pisa at 10 dayes sight, and so thence. To Palermo at 10 dayes sight, and the same backe. CHAP. CCCLX. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in Naples. ACcording to my intended method, I will here adde an example or two of Draughts and Remittances, by Orders and Commissions gi∣ven and re∣ceived for Drauhts and Remittances in Naples. Commission and Order, performed in this place of Naples, posito, To Naples commeth Order from Venice, that the Remittance is made to the said place at Ducc. 98⅓, in drawing from Placentia at Ducc. 135 , but there doe bills present for Ve∣nice at ducc. 99 : I demand then, (considering the losse that fal∣leth out in the Remittance) at how much ought I to draw for Pla∣centia, to know which, you must say by the Rule of three, If ducc. 98  give ducc. 135 , what will 99  ducc. give, and it will come to 1 Example. 137⅓ ducc. and at that rate the draught must be made for Placentia, in the Remittance for Venice at ducc. 99⅔, and then the Commission will remaine effected according to the Order given, as for Exam∣ple.
Againe, presuppose that at Naples commeth Order from Flo∣rence, 2 Example. to Remit to Rome, at 134⅔ and to prevaile for Naples at 121 , there is found bills for Rome at 136  and mony for Florence, at 122 , I demand then, if at these presenting prices, the Com∣mission may be accomplished, to know which worke by the Rule of three, and say, if Ducc. 134  give ducc. 121 , what will duccats 136  give, and it will come to duccats 122 and graines 58, so that, as it is apparent, the Commission may be effected, because that Remitting to Rome at 136 , the draught for Florence must be at ducc. 122 graines 58, and it is found at 122  which is 60 graines more, as by the following Example.
Againe, at Naples commeth Order from Palermo, to draw to 3 Example. the said Palermo, at Pont. 168¼, and to remit to Placentia, at 134½. Now there is found Money for Palermo, at 166½, and Bills for Placentia, at 136. I demand then, if the said Commis∣sions may be effected, at the Rates presented? To doe which, you must worke by the Rule of Three, taking one of the prices which are found for Divisor, as hath beene shewed by the in∣struction given upon Commissions, and say; If Pontos 166½ give 134½, what will 168¼ give? And it will make Duccats 135 , or thereabouts. So that it appears this Order and Com∣mission may not be performed, seeing that drawing to Palermo at 168¼, the remittance cannot be made for Placentia at more then 135 , and there is found Bills but at 136; as by this Example. Againe, at Naples commeth Order from Genoa, to remit for 4 Example. Placentia at 133; and to prevaile from Mesina at 114, cleare of charge, there are found Bills for Placentia, at 131 . I de∣mand (considering the benefit which is given in the remit∣tance) at what price may the parcell be made? To know which, say by the Rule of Three; If 133 give 114, what shall 131⅓ give? and it will come to Ducc. 112, and 57 Gr. To the which must be added 44 Graines, for the provision which is there taken at  per Cent. and it will be Duccats 113. And at a lesser price, may not be taken for Mesina. The Example will make it evident.
And this is as much as I conceive fitting to have said of the Exchanges, Orders and Commissions practised in the City of Naples, and next to Genoa. CHAP. CCCLXI. Of Examples of the Exchanges practised at Genoa, and how the same are calculated. I Have shewed elsewhere, the generall Exchanges of Genoa, and with how many other places this city is Exchanges practised at Genoa. found to Exchange with, and there also declared the common rates and prices, how the same is found to governe, which notwithstanding is sound so subiect to alteration, that it cannot admit of any great certainty, yet so farre it is conducible, to this knowledge, that it may serve as a certaine rule for the calculation thereof, either in the Draughts, Remittances, or Orders, that may happen to fall within the limit of this City, the forming of which accounts now remaineth to bee handled, observing the same with some other principall places, which being well understood, will enlighten the way to what is here by me, for brevity sake willingly omitted. To give then introduction thereto, it is to be noted, that Ex∣changers Accounts in Genoa. doe here keepe their accounts severall wayes, as some in Livers, Sols, and Deniers of current money, and others by Livers, Sols and Deniers money of Gold, and both these accounted and summed up, by 20 and 12, because 20 Sols make a Liver, and 12 Deniers doe make a Sol.
Moreover, it is to be noted, that the Crowne of Italy of Gold, in Gold is worth here in current Money 90 Sols of Genoa, though it is found sometimes to be worth more, and sometimes lesse, as Mo∣nyes are requested: Notwithstanding, the said Crowne is alwayes given for 68 Sol, Money of Gold. Againe it is to be observed, that in Genoa all or the most part of Exchanges that are practised, are effectively for Placentia, Lions, Millan, Venice, Naples, and Rome; and therefore, in the handling thereof, I shall, to avoid tediousnesse, be the briefer. CHAP. CCCLXII. Of the Exchange of Genoa with Placentia. GEnoa doth exchange with Placentia, and giveth posito Sol. 87¼ current Money, to have there 1 Crow. of Marc. I would Exchang of Genoa with Palermo. know then, for Livers 10269. 19. 3 d. current Money, how many Crow. of Marc. I shall have in Placentia? First then multiply the said Sol 87¾ by 4, to bring them into 4/4, 1. Example. adding the▪ and they make 351 quarters, and then multiply the said summe of Livers by 20, to make them Sols, and then by 4, to make them quarters of Sols, adding to the multiplication  for the 3 Deniers, and it will be in all 821597 which divide by 351 the price of the Crowne of Marc. and the division will bee 2340, mul∣tiplying the rest by 20 and by 1 to make them Sols and Deniers, and they will be in all Crow. 2340. 14. 7. of Gold of Marc. which you must have in Placentia, as by Example will be more evident.
To prove this account, you must multiply the said crownes of Marc. by Lib. 4. 7. 9. beginning to multiply by the Deniers, and then by Sols, calculating it by 12 Deniers for one Sol, and by 20 for one Liver, and of the product will come li. 10269- 18- 11. so that it is evident, that the account is just, the difference being in some small parts of the division which is lost, as by Example. At Genoa it is oftentimes seene that the Exchange is made for Placentia in Sols of money of Gold, and the difference of this money is, that the Crowne of Gold, by decree of the estate is worth 68 Sol. money of Gold, and in current money 90 Sol, and though that the said price of the current money rise and fall, the money of Gold never varieth from the said price of 68 Sol. If then I would know for li∣vers 2816. 13. 4. money of gold, which one exchangeth at 66. 5d. money Another Ex∣ample of the said Exchanges. of gold per Crrwne, how many Crownes of marc. shall one have, doe thus: reduce the abovesaid liv. into Deners, multiplying them by 20, and the Sols resting by 12, likewise reduce the said Sol 66. 5 De∣niers into Deniers multiplying them by 12, and that which will come thereof shall be the Divisor of the summe of Deniers, come of the said liv. the which divided, will be 848 Cro. 3. 7 of Marc. To prove this rule, multiply this by 5 d. and the product will be 2186. 13. 3, which shewes the account to be just cast. Proofe.
In Genoa I would deliver for Placentia lib. 3248. 15. of current Third Exam∣ple. money which is Exchanged at 67 Sol. 10 d. of money of Gold, I de∣mand how many Crownes of Mark they will be, first reduce the said summe of Livers of current money, into Livers of money of Gold, dividing the same by 90 Sols, the price of the crowne of Gold in current money, and they will be crownes 721. 18. 10 which must be multiplied by 3 lib. 8 shill. the price of the crowne in money of Gold, and it will come to lib. 2454. 12. money of Gold, which di∣vided by 67. 10, to see what the crownes of Mark are worth, and they will make crow. 723. 14. 3. of Mark, and so much shall Ge∣noa have credit in Placentia for the said lib. 3248. 15 of current mo∣ney, as the Example shall more evidently demonstrate. If in Genoa you would reduce any summe of current mony, in∣to To reduce Li∣vers of cur∣rent money into Livers of Gold in Genoa. Livers of money of Gold by a short rule, because that the crow. of Gold in current money is 90 shil, and in money of Gold 68 s. you must take of the current money twice ⅔ placing them, the one under the other, and out of one of the said ⅓ take ⅓, and of that which commeth of the said  you must take , and adding these 4 parcels together, will come mony of Gold, as will appeare by this Example.
For proofe of the said account, if by the same method you Proofe. would reduce Livers of Money of Gold into Livers of current Mo∣ney, you must adde to the said Livers of Money of Gold the •, and of that which will come thereof, take , adding the said two par∣cels together, and they will make Livers of current Money: Ex∣ample. And thus much shall serve for the Exchange of Genoa with Pla∣centia; wherein I have thought fit thus farre to enlarge my selfe, by reason of the great Exchanges continually practised betweene the said two places. CHAP. CCCLXIII. Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Lions. GEnoa exchangeth with Lions, and giveth posito Sols 59. 9. ge of Ge with Li. Money of Gold, to have in Lions a Crowne of the Sunne; I would know then, for Livers 37296. 6. 0 of current Mo∣ney in Genoa, how many Crownes of the Sunne I shall have in Lions? First reduce the said summe of Livers of current Money into Li∣vers of Money of Gold, by the former rules, dividing by Sol. 90. the price of the Crowne of Gold in current Money, and they will make Crown. 8288. 1. 4. which must be multiplyed by Li. 3. 8. 5. the price of the Crowne in Money of Gold, and it will co to Li. 28179. 8. 6. the which divided by Sol. 59. 9. the price of the Crown. of the Sunne, it will be Crown. 9432. 8. 10. And so many Crow. of the Sunne will Lions give for those Livers of current Money, as above is propounded. Example.
The proofe of this rule will appeare, when this parcell shall be Proofe. rechanged backe from Lions to Genoa. CHAP. CCCLXIIII. Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Millan. GEnoa doth exchange with Millan, and giveth 1 Cro. of Livers Exchange of Genoa with Millan. 4 of current Money, to have in this place pos Sol. 118 ; I would know then, for Livers 3850. 14. 8. of current Money, what credit shall Genoa have in Millan? First, take the quarter of the said summe of Livers, to make the same into Crow. of Livers 4, and they will make Cro. 962. 13. 8. the which must be multiplyed by Livers 5. 18. 6d. per Crow. which are the said Sol. 118 , and they will make Li. 5703. 17. 11d. And so much shall the said credit be in Millan, as doth appeare by the Example in the work following. The proofe of this account will more evidently appeare, when Proofe. this parcell is rechanged for Genoa from Millan.
CHAP. CCCLXV. Of the Exchange of Genoa with Venice. GEnoa doth Exchange with Venice, and giveth one crowne of Livers 4 current money, to have in Venice posito 146½ Sol. de Exchange of Genoa with Venice. Banco and of that money. I demand for lib. 8340. 12. 0. current Money of Genoa, how many Ducats de Banco of lib. 6  per du. shall one have credit in Venice: to doe this then first take the ¼ of the said summe of Livers to reduce them into Crownes of 4 Lib. and they will make crow. 2085. 3. 0, the which multiply by Lib. 7. 6. 6. per cro. which are the said Sol. 146 , and of the Product thereof will come Lib. 15273. 14. 6. which must be reduced to Duccats, dividing them by 124, the price of the Ducat of 6 Lib. 4 Sol. and multiplying the rest of the Division by 24, to bring them into Grosses, because that 24 Grosses maketh one Duccat, and by thus working, the same will bee Ducats 2463. , and so many Duccat of Lib. 6⅙ shall you have credit in Banco for at Venice, as for Example. The proofe of this rule is seene, when Venice doth Exchange backe for Genoa this said summe. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCLXVI. Of the Exchange of Genoa with Naples. GEnoa doth Exchange with Naples and giveth posito 66⅔ Sols Exchange of Genoa with Naples. of current money, to have in this place one Du. of 5 Ta∣ries, I demand then for liv. 4486. 3. 4 current Money, how many Duc. in credit shall I have in Naples? First reduce all the said summe of Livers with the said lib. 66  of current Money into Deniers, multiplying the Livers by 20, and the Sols that come thereof by 12, doing the same by the Sols, of the price of the Exchange, multiplying the same by 12, and by the Division thereof, it will make Duccats 1345, and multiplying the remainder of the Division by 100, by reason that 100 Grains doth make one Duccat, and there will come Gra. 85, which are worth 4 Taries, and Gra. 5, seeing, as hath beene before remem∣bred, that 1 Tarie is in Naples 20 Grains, and by thus working, it will make Duccats 1345. 4. 5, and so much shall the credit bee in Naples, as by the Example. The proofe of this account is seene, when Naples shall Exchange backe with Genoa. I could much more inlarge the Exchanges pra∣ctised Proofe. at Genoa with other places, but for brevity I willingly o∣mit the same, and therefore now come to the Commissions and Or∣ders given in matters of Exchanges at Genoa.
CHAP. CCCLXVII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in Genoa. ACcording to my proposed method, I will here adde one or two Examples of the Orders and Commissions, Orders & Com∣missions iven and received for Draughts & Remittances  Genoa. 1. Example. given and received in Draughts and Remittances at Ge∣noa. First then posito from Venice, there is order given to Genoa, to remit to Venice, and to prevaile for Milan, at such a price that the Draught from Milan to Venice, comes but to 148 s. cleare of all charges, now then there doe present Bils for Venetia, at 149, and money for Milan at 148, I demand if at these prices, the said Commission may be performed, to doe which, say by the Rule of Three, If Sols 148 of Venice give at Milan, Sols 117, being the price of the Crowne of the said Milan, what will Sols 149 give, the price of the crowne of Livers 4 Lib. at Genoa, and it will come to 117¾ Sol. the which without deduction of provi∣sion, is apparent that the Commission cannot be performed, because that the remitting to Venice at 149, the Draught cannot bee made for Millan at more then 117¾ besides the provision, and the parti∣do is found at 118 Sols, as the Example sheweth. Againe to Genoa commeth order from Antwerpe to buy some Velvets, and to prevaile for the same by Placentia, at such a price, See Example. that the Palme of Velvets in Genoa, amount not (being bought) to more than Sol. 8½ money of Grosse, and the Draught for Placentia
at Gross. 123. Now there is found Velvets at 72¼ Sols the Palme, and Money for Placentia at Sol. 88. in current Money: I demand then, if at these prices the said Commissions may be effected: to know which, say by the Rule of Three, If Gross. 123. the price of the Cro. of Marc. give at Genoa, Sol. 88. what will Gross. 102. which are the said Sol of 8½ of Grosses give? and it will come to Sol. 72. 11. so that as it will appeare, the said Commission may be performed to benefit, because that in drawing for Placentia at Sol. 88. the Velvets may be bought at 72 Sol. 11. Den. the Palme, and it is found at 72¼ Sol. CHAP. CCCLXVIII. Of the termes of payment of Bills of Exchange in Genoa. From Genoa the termes of Bills are TO Venetia at 15 dayes sight, and at 10 dayes backe. Of the termes of payment of Bills of Ex∣change in Genoa. To Avignon at 15 dayes sight, and so backe. To Barselona at 20 dayes sight, and so backe. To Valentia at 20 dayes sight, and so backe. To London at 3 moneths from the date, and so backe. To Millan at 5 dayes sight, and so backe. To Rome at 10 dayes sight, and so backe. To Pisa at 5 dayes sight, and so backe. To Gaietta at 10 dayes sight, and so backe. To Bridges and Antuerpe at 10 dayes fight, and thence at 2 moneths from the date. To Paris the same as to Bridges and Antuerpe. To Naples and Palermo at 15 dayes sight, and backe at 20 dayes sight. And thus much shall serve for the Exchanges practised at Genoa, together with the Commissions given and received there, and so pro∣ceed to the next eminent place of Exchanges, Venetia.
CHAP. CCCLXIX. Examples of the Exchanges practised at Venice, and how the same are to be calculated. I Have shewed the generall Exchanges used in Venice, and with how many other places, this city is found ges pra∣d at . to Exchange withall, and there also shewed at large the common rates & prices the same is found there to governe, which notwithstanding is so subiect to alteration, that the prices there mentioned, cannot bee admitted for a setled rule, and certaine rate, yet so farre it is conducible in it selfe to the understanding hereof, that the same may serve as an undoubted method in the calculation thereof, either in the Draughts or Remittances, Orders or Commissions, that may fall with∣in the limit of the Exchanges of this city, the working of which rules now remaineth to be handled, observing the same onely with such principall places, as are most notable, which being well un∣derstood will serve as guides to find out what else is here by mee for brevity willingly omitted. To give first then introduction thereunto, it is to bee noted, Accounts kept in Venice. that Merchants and Bankers here doe keepe their account by seve∣rall methods, and denomination, some in Duccats and Grosses of Livers 6⅕ the Duccat, the which they summe by 24, because that 24 Grosses are worth one Duccat: and others keepe the same by Livers, Sols, and Grosse, which are worth ten Duccats the Liver, which is summed up by 20 and by 12, making 20 Sols of Grosse to be one Liver, and 12 Deniers one Sol. Again it is to be noted, that some few yeers past, the Moneycur∣rent paid in paiment of Merchandise, & the Money current paid up∣on Bls of Exchange was of one and the selfe-same goodnesse in value, or little in difference, but now the moneyes paid upon Bils of Exchange, is found to exceed the former 20 in 21 per cent. and is commonly now called in Banco, as the other is called the current Money, and therefore when moneyes by Exchange is men∣tioned, it is understood to bee in Banco, as the best and prin∣cipall.
CHAP. CCCLXX. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Lions. VEnice doth Exchange with Lions, and giveth posito duccats 119  of Livers 6  to have in Lions Crow. 100 of gold of the Exchanges of Venice with Lions. sunne: I demand for ducc. 4238 1/11, how many Crownes of the sunne shall I have in Lions? to doe this, say by the Rule of three: If ducc. 119⅖ give 100 crow. of the sunne of gold, what will ducc. 4328 1/11 give me, which being done, accordingly as I have heretofore often mentioned, it will come to crow. 3459, and multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 to make them sols of gold, and then by 12 to make them deniers, it will come in all to crow. 3549. 9. 8. of gold of the sunne, and so much shall you have credit in Lions for the said summe of duccats 4238 1/12 of livers 6. 4. sols per duccat, as may be seene by the following Example. The proofe of this Rule is seene when that Lions doth Ex∣change Proofe. backe with Venice.
CHAP. CCCLXXI. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Placentia. VEnice doth Exchange with Placentia, and giveth posito ducc. Exchanges of Venice with Placentia. 134½ of livers 6  to have in Placentia 100 Crow of marke: I demand for duccats 1450 17/24, how many Crownes of marke? first reduce the said ducc. 134½ into grosses, multiplying them by 24, and adding 12 grosses, for the halfe duccat, and it will make gross. 3228, in like manner you must reduce the said duccats into grosses, in multiplying them by 24, and adding of 17 gross. for the 17/24 (it being the same to say one grosse, as 1/24) and it will be grosses 34817, saying then by the Rule of three, If grosses 3228 give Crow. 100, what will grosses 34817 grosses give, and it will come to Crow. 1078, and multiplying the rest of the division by 20 to make them sols of gold, and by 12 to make them deniers, it will be found to make in all Crownes 1078. 11. 10. of gold of marke, and so much you shall have in Placentia for the said Duccats 1450 17/24 of lib. 6. 4. sh. as by the Example following. The proofe of this Rule is more apparent when Placentia doth exchange backe with Venice. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCLXXII. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Rome. VEnice doth Exchange with Rome, and giveth Duccats 100 of 6 lib. 4 sh. to have in that place posito Cro. 73  of gold de Ca∣mera Exchanges of Venice with Rome. for ducc. 1157½, I would know how many Crow. shall Venice have in Rome: you must multiply the said summe of ducc. at the said price of Crow. 73½ per cent. and out of its product, cut off the two last figures, the which multiplied by 20 and by 12, to make them sols and deniers of gold, and it will make Crowns 850. 15. 3. of gold of estampe, and so much credit shall Venice have in Rome, as is apparent by this Example. The proofe of the said account is more apparent, when this parcell is Exchanged from Rome backe to Venice. Proofe. CHAP. CCCLXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Naples. VEnice doth Exchange with Naples, and giveth   Enger Ve Naples. of lib. 6.⅕ to have in the said place posito ducc. 97  ries 5 per duccat. I demand then for duccats 1850  of ∣nice, how many duccats credit shall I have in Naples? multi∣ply the said summe of duccats by graines 97¼ per ducc. and of the product will come graines, out of which cut off the two last figures, to make them Ducc. because (as hath beene said before) one
duccat is worth 100 graines, and it will make ducc. 1799, and gra. 32, which are one Tarie and graire 12, and so much credit shall you have in Naples, for the said summe of ducc. of Venice, as by Example shall appeare. The proofe of this account will appeare when this is rechanged from Naples to Venice: and note, that when Venice doth Exchange Proofe. with Bary, Lecchie, Lausano, or other parts of the Kingdome of Na∣ples, the account is made as above with Naples it selfe. CHAP. CCCLXXIIII. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Florence: VEnice doth Exchange with Florence, and giveth ducc. 100 of lib. 6⅕ to have in Florence posito 81½ Cw. of gold, I demand Exchanges of Venice with Florence. then for duccats 2500 what credit sll Venice have in Flo∣rence: to doe this, multiply the said summe of ducc. at the above∣said price of Crow. 81½ per cent. and from the product cut the 2 last figures, multiplying the same by 20 and by 12, to make the same sols and deniers of gold, and they will make Crow. 2037. 10 sols of gold of Florence, as by Example will more manifestly appeare. The proofe of this account is seene, when this summe is rech n∣ged from Florence to Venice. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCLXXV. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Millan. VEnice doth exchange with Millan, and giveth posito Sols 148½, Exchanges of Venice with Millan. to have in Millan one Crowne of Livers 5, and 17 Sols of that Money: I demand, for Ducc. 1486¼ of Li. 6⅕, what credit in Livers shall Venice have in Millan? First multiply the said summe of Ducc. by 124 Sol. the value of the Ducc. of Li. 6 , and it will make Sol. 184295. the which divide by Sol. 148½, to see how much the Crownes of Millan are worth, and multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will make Crow. 1241, and 10 Deniers, the which multiplyed by Li. 5. 17. the price of the Crow. to make them Livers, beginning to multiply the Livers 5 by the 10 Deniers, which are worth the Crowne, and then with the Sols, if any be, calculating for 12 Deniers 1 Sol, and for 20 Sols 1 Liver, and of the product thereof will come Li. 7260. 1. 10. And so much credit shall Venice have in Millan, for the said Duccats 1486¼ of Livers 6  of Venice; as by the Example following. The proofe of this rule is seene, when Millan doth exchange Proofe. with Venice.
CHAP. CCCLXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Vence with Antwerpe. VEnice doth exchange with Antwerpe and giveth one Duccat Exchanges of Venice with Antuerpe. of Livers 6⅕ to have in that place posito Grosse 92 •, I de∣mand then for Duc. 3810¾, how many Livers Grosse shall Venice have credit in Antwerpe, you must multiply the said sum of Duccats by the said Gross. 92½, and it will make Gross. 352494, out of which, take 1/12 to make the same Sols of Gross. and they will be Sols 29374, and Gross. 6, the which must bee reduced into Li∣vers, by cutting the last figure, and by taking the of the rest, and it will come to be Livers 1468, and the tenth that is remai∣ning is ten Sols, and adding 4, the figure cut off, shall bee 14 Sol. so in all 1468. 14. 6, which Antwerpe will give, as for Example. The proofe of this rule is seene when Antwerpe rechangeth this summe with Venice, and here it is to be noted, that Venice doth Proofe. exchange with Colonia, and Amsterdam and the Netherlands, after the same manner as with Antwerpe, and the account is made up as the precedent, whereto needeth no further example for illustrati∣on. CHAP. CCCLXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Vence with London. VEnice doth Exchange with London, and giveth one Duccat of Exchanges of Venice with London. Liv. 6  to have there posito 56  pence sterling: I demand then
for Duccats 740, how many Livers or Sterling shall Venice have credit in London: this must be done as in the precedent account is shewed of Venice with Antwerpe, and it will come to pounds 173, s. 8. and pence 9, which Venice shall have credit in London, as by the Example more at large appeareth. The proofe of this account is manifested, when London doth re∣change Proofe. this sum of 173. 8. 9 d. for Venice, and here note, that Vsance from Venice to London is 3 moneths, or 90 daies, and double Vsance the said time doubled, and the like accounted backe from London to Venice. CHAP. CCCLXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Genoa. VEnice doth Exchange with Genoa, and giveth posito Sols Exchanges of Venice wth Genoa. 146½ to have in Genoa one Crowne of 4 Livers mony of Ge∣noa, I demand then for Ducc. 2463½ of Livers 6⅕ how ma∣ny Livers of current mony shall I have credit in Genoa? first reduce the said summe of Ducc. into Sols, multiplying them by 124, the value of the Duccat, and devide the Sols that shall rest of the said multiplication by 146½ to make them Crow. of 4 Livers, and mul∣tiply the remainder of the Division by 20 and by 12, to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they shall be Crow. 2085. 2. 11, which must be multipyed by lib. 4 per Crow. beginning the multi∣plication by deniers, and then by the sols, calculating for 12 de∣niers 1 sol, and for 20 sols 1 liver, and of the product will come livers 8340. 11. 8 current mony, and so much will the credit be in Genoa, as for Example.
The proofe of this account is seene, when Genoa doth rechang . this parcell for Venice. CHAP. CCCLXXIX. Of the Exchange of Venice with Norimberg. VEnice doth exchange with Norimberg, and giveth Ducc. 100 of Li. 6 , to have in the said place posito Florins 130¼ of 60  of ce w . Quarent. per Florin. I demand then, for Ducc. 2645 , what credit in Florins must I have in the said place? Multiply the said summe of Duccats by Florins 130¼ per Cent. and the broken numbers of the multiplication divide by 20, to have an account of the Sols, and of the remainder cut off the two last figures, the which being multiplyed by 20, to bring the same into Sols, and then by 12, to bring them into Deniers; and in doing thus, there will be found Florin. 3210. 18. 8. which must be had in credit at Norimberg for the said D. in Venice remitted: as by this Example following appeares.
The proofe of this account is manifested, when Noremberg shall exchange this summe backe with Venice: and note, that for Augusta Proofe. and Francfort, the Exchange from Venice is made as with Noremberg, whereto needs no other Examples. CHAP. CCCLXXX. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Bergamo. VEnice doth Exchange with Bergamo, and giveth one Crowne of 7 lib. to have in Bergamo Sols 145½ posito, I demand then Exchanges of Venice with Bergamo. for ducc. 4220 , how many Livers will it amount unto? multiply the said summe of duccats by 6 lib. , and it will amount to lib. 26168. 2. 8, of which take the  to make them Crownes, and the remainders divide by 20 and 12, and they will be Crownes 3738. 6. 1. the which must be multipiled by lib. 7. 5. 6. which are the said lib. 145½ sols, and of the multiplication will come lib. 27196. 3. 2, which must be had in credit in the said place of Ber∣gamo, as by this Example following.
The proofe of the said Rule is discerned when this parcell is Re∣mitted Proofe. backe from Bergamo to Venice, and thus much shall serve to have said of the Exchanges of Venice, a word of the Orders and Com∣missions here practised in matters of Exchanges. CHAP. CCCLXXXI. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in Venice. ACcording to my proposed method, I will here adde an Example or two of Draughts and Remittances, or∣dered Orders and Commissions gi∣ven and re∣ceived for Draughts and Remittances in Venice. by Commission in the City of Venice, posito: Into Venice commeth Order from Francfort, that they may draw thither at Florins 130, and remit thence to London at 56 pence, not of charges or provision, the partido being for duccats 3500, now there is bills found for London at 57¼ pence, 1 Example. and mony for Francfort at Florins 132 , I demand then at these rates, whether this Commission without breach of Order may be performed? to doe which, say by the Rule of three, (seeing that Ve∣nice giveth the certaine price to both those said two places) If 56 pence starl. give 130 Florins the limitted price, what shall 57¼ pence give, (the price found) and it will make Flor. 132 , from which deduct 10 shil. 7. den. for the provision that is taken at ⅖ per cent. there will remaine Flor. 132. 7. 5, so that thereby the said Com∣mission may be performed with benefit, because that remitting to London at 57¼ pence starl. the draught may be made for Francfort, at Florins 132. 7. 5, and the mony that is found is at Flor. 132. , as appeareth by this Example.
Againe, a Merchant of Florence is creditor in Venice posito 2000 2 Example. Duccats of banco, who ordereth that the same be remitted unto him at Crow. 81½ thence or by the way of Antwerpe at grosse 91¼ and to take the most beneficiall way of the two, and finding, a remit∣tance by both to profit, according to the limitted prices, the order is to take the most profitable of the two, and finding the remit∣tances produce losse, to accept of the least, now then, there are bills found for Florence as I said, at 82½ Cro. and for Antwerpe at 92  gro. I would know by which the remittance ought to be made, seeing that by both the remittance may be made to profit, and desirous to find out the most profitable, you must say by the Rule of three, if Crow. 81½ give gross. 91¼ the price limited, what shall 82½ Cro. give which is the price found, and it will make grosses 92  or thereabouts, so that the remittance must be made by Florence straight, because that remitting by that way at 82½ Crow. to make the price, you should remit to Antwerpe at 92  gross. and there are no bills found but at grosse 92 , as it is seene wrought by this Example. Againe, posito from Lions the Exchange goeth for Venice at ducc. 117  and for Naples at ducc. 125, I demand giving order to Lions, 3 Example. that at these prices they make draught to Venice, and remit to Na∣ples, at what price then will the remittance come out to be from Venice to Naples, to know which, say by the Rule of three, if duccats 117  of Venice, the price of 100 Crow. of sol of gold of Lions, give at Naples ducc. 125, how many will ducc. 100 give of the said place of Venice, and it will make ducc. 106½ or thereabouts, and so much credit must be had in Naples for ducc. 100 of lib. 6⅕ which are dis∣bursed in Venice, out of which must be deducted  per cent. for the provision that is paid in Lions.
Againe, in the said place of Venice, commeth order from Flo∣rence, to remit to Placentia at ducc. 136, and to prevaile on them at 4 Example. crow. 80 not of charges, the partido being made for 5000 crow. of marke: now the said 5000 crow. of marke, is found for Placentia at ducc. 135, and for Florence may be drawne ducc. 2000 at crownes 80¼: I would know at what price must the rest be drawne, to know which, I must first see for the remittance of the said crow. 5000 of marke, at the price inordered, how many crow. of gold it is at Flo∣rence, and to doe this, multiply the said summe of crownes by ducc: 136 per cent. and they make ducc. 6800, without calculation of provision, seeing that the order is not of charges, you must mul∣tiply them by crowns 80 per cent. and they will be crow. 5440 of gold, and so much the draught will appeare to be for the said crow. 5000 of marke by remittance, and afterwards multiplying the said crowns 5000 by ducc. 135 per cent. the price that is found, it maketh ducc. 6750 to which adding ducc. 27 for the provision at ⅖ per cent. see∣ing that the draught must be made for Florence, and they will be ducc. 6777 out of which, deduct ducc. 2000 which were found to be drawne at crownes 80¼ there will rest ducc. 4777, and for the said ducc. 2000, their disbursement is at Florence crownes 1605 which must be deducted out of crow. 5440, which must be drawne, there will remaine crownes 3835 of gold, which must be drawne, for the which I must be imbursed at Venice, duccats 4777, and to know at what price, say by the Rule of three, if ducc. 4777 give by disbursement at Florence crownes 3835 of gold, which will ducc. 100 give, and it will make crow. 80. 5. 7. of gold, and at this price the said parido of ducc. 4777 may be drawne, and the other ducc. 2000 at 80¼ Crow. and so for both these parcels must be drawne Crow. 5440, as is inordred, and there is imbursed ducc. 6777, there being per contra disbursed ducc. 6750 for the remittance of the said Crow. 5000 of marke, at Ducc. 135 per cent. and Ducc. 27 which is imbrsed over and above, proceeding from the provi∣sion, and in this manner this said Commission will remaine perfor∣med as it was by the Committies inordered as by example, the same will appeare evident, following.
And note, when the said Citie of Venice exchangeth for Naples, Rome, Antuerpe, and London, and that you would know at how much Note. commeth the Money of any one of the said places for Lions or Placentia, the account is made as in the precedent rule of Florence and Placentia, alwayes multiplying the price, by which the Ex∣change goeth for Lions, with the price of the other place from whence it is remitted or drawne: and therefore, for brevitie sake, it is needlesse to propound here any further Example. CHAP. CCCLXXXII. Of the termes of payment of Bills of Exchange in Venice. The termes from Venice TO Naples and Gaietta at 15 dayes sight, and so backe. Termes of payments of Bills of Ex∣change in Venice. To Palermo & Mesina at 30 dayes sight, and so backe. To Rome at 10 dayes sight, and so backe. To Florence and Lucca at 20 after date, and 5 dayes sight backe. To Avignon at 45 dayes after date, and thence 2 moneths after date. To Barselona at 2 moneths after date, and so backe. To Valentia at 75 dayes after date, and so backe. To Sivil at 90 dayes after date, and so backe. To Lions for the Faire, and from Faire to Faire. To Bridges and Antuerpe at 2 moneths after date, and so backe. To London at 3 moneths after date, and so backe. To Paris at 2 moneths after date, and so backe. To Genoa at 10 dayes sight, and 15 dayes backe. To Millan at 12 dayes sight, & 20 dayes thence after date. To Constantinople 5 moneths after date, and so backe.
CHAP. CCCLXXXIII. Of Examples upon the Exchanges that are practised in Placentia, and how the same are to be calculated. I Have shewed in the generall Exchanges of Placentia  Exchanges practised at . with how many other places Placentia is found to exchange with, and there also set downe the common rates how the same is for the most part found to go∣verne which every day is so subject to alteration, that no positive rules can be set downe for the same; yet it is in it selfe so beneficiall, that thereby the unexperienced may know how to make up the account thereof, at what rate soever the same be found to be, either in Remittances or Draughts, the which onely now remaineth to be handled, observing the same with so many other Townes, as may be fittest to understand the ground thereof. It is then first to be noted, that all Bankers and Exchan∣gers Ats kept in . here doe keepe their Accounts in Crownes, Solds, and De∣niers of Gold of Marque, which are cast up by 20 and 12, because that 20 Sols of Gold makes a Crowne, and 12 Deniers make a Sol. CHAP. CCCLXXXIIII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Lions. ANd first then, Placentia is found to exchange with Lions, and giveth posito Crownes 85 , to have at Lions 100 Crownes ges of  with . of the Sunne of Gold; I demand then, for Crownes 1516. 12. of Marc. what will be due to me in Lions? To doe which, say by the Rule of Three, If Crownes 85½ of Marc. give 100 Crownes of the Sunne, what will the said Crownes 1516. 12. give? and it will come to Crownes 1773. 16. 0. of Gold of the Sunne: And so much will be due to me in Lions, for the said summe of Crownes of Marc; as by Example following.
The proofe of this Rule is seene, when that Lions doth exchange Proofe. with Placentia. CHAP. CCCLXXXV. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Genoa. PLacentia exchangeth for Genoa, and giveth one Crowne of Marc. Exchanges of Placentia with Genoa. to have posito Sols 67. 10 Money of Gold in Genoa; I demand then, for Crow. 723. 14. 3 of Marc. how many Livers of current Money shall I have in Genoa? First multiply the said Cro. of Marc. by Li. 3. 7. 10 per Crow. which are the said 67 Sols, 10 Den. beginning to multiply the said Li. 3. by 3 Den. and afterwards by Sols 14, which are with the Crow. calculating for 12 Den. one Sol, and for 20 Sols one Liver, and of the product will come Li. 2454. 11. 9. Money of Gold, which must be divided by 68 Sols, the price of the Crowne of Gold, in Money of Gold, to bring them into Crownes, multiplying the rest of the division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers, and they will make Crow. 721. 18. 9 of Gold, which must be multi∣plyed by Li. 4½ per Crow. the present price of the Crow. of Gold in current Money, and it will make Li. 3248. 14. 4. And so much in cur∣rent Money I shall have in Genoa for the said Crow. 723. 14. 3 of Marc. As by Example.
The proofe of the said account is seene, when Genoa exchangeth Proofe. for Placentia. CHAP. CCCLXXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Rome. PLacentia exchangeth with Rome, and giveth 100 Crownes of Gold Exchanges of Placentia with Rome. of Marc. to have in that place posito Crownes 99  of Gold of Estampe; I demand then, for Crownes 1385. 15 of Marc. how many Crownes of Estampe shall Placentia have credit for in Rome? To doe which, multiply the said summe of Crow. of Marque by 99¾ per Cent. and taking the remainder of the multiplication, to be divided by 20 Sols, cutting off the two last figures of the production, the which multiplyed by 20, to make them Sols of Gold, and then by 12, to make them Deniers, and they will make Crownes 1382. 5. 9 of Gold. And so much will the credit be in Rome: as by the Example following.
The proofe of the said account is seen, when that Rome doth exchange backe for Placentia. CHAP. CCCLXXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Florence. PLacentia doth exchange for Florence, and giveth 100 Crownes . of Marc. to have in that place posito Crownes 110½ of Gold: I demand, for Crownes 4500. 10 of Marc. how many Crownes of Gold shall I have in Florence? To know which, working accor∣ding to the preceding Example, and Rule of Placentia with Rome, and I finde it giveth Crownes 4973. 1. 0. of Gold, which Placentia must have credit for in Florence: as for example. The proofe of this account is discerned, when Florence doth re∣change . for Placentia.
CHAP. CCCLXXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Palermo. PLacentia doth exchange with Palermo, and giveth Crow. 100 of Exchanges o Placentia w Palermo. Marc. to have in Palermo posito Ducc. 132¾ of Taries 5 per Ducc. I demand then, for Cro. 2573. 12. 4 of Marc. what credit shall Placentia have in Palermo? To doe which, you must multiply the said summe of Crownes by Graines 132¾ per Cro. seeing as hath been said, it is alike so many Graines per Crow. as so many Duccats per 100 Crownes, and of the product will come Graines; the which to turne to Duccats, you must cut off the two last figures, and there will re∣maine Ducc. 3416. and the Graines 47, which are the two last cut figures, which are 2 Taries and 7 Graines: so that for the said Crow. 2573. 12. 4 of Marc. Placentia shall have credit in Palermo Ducc. 3416. 2. 7 d. As for Example. The proofe of the said account is discerned, when that Palermo Proofe. is seene to rechange for Placentia. And note, that when the said Exchanges with Mesina, the same as with Palermo. place doth exchange with Mesina in this Kingdome, the account is made as above with Palermo, the price and rate is onely found to differ, and to be either higher or lower. CHAP. CCCLXXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Venice. PLacentia doth exchange for Venice, and giveth Crownes 100 of Exchanges of Placentia with Venic Marc. to have in the said place Ducc. 134½ more or lesse, of Livers 6⅕ per Ducc. I say in Banco, I demand, for Crow. 1078. 12 of Marc. how many Duccats shall it make in Venetia? Multiply
the said summe of Crownes by Ducc. 134½ per Cent. and the remain∣ders of the multiplication are to be divided by 24, to bring them into Grosses, and from the product cut off the two last figures, which are to be multiplied by 24, to make them Grosses, and it will make Ducc. 1450 17/24 of Livers 6⅕ per Ducc. And so much will Placentia have in Venetia, for the said summe of Crownes of Marc. As by this Example. The proofe of the said account is discerned, when that Venetia is Proofe. found to rechange for Placentia. CHAP. CCCXC. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Milan. PLacentia doth exchange with Milan, and is found to give one Exchanges of Placentia with Milan. Crow. of Marc. to have in the said place posito Sols 133⅔; I de∣mand then for Crow. 1450. 15. 6 of Marc. how many Livers ought I to have in Milan? Multiply the said Crownes by Livers 6. 13. 4. per Crow. which are the said Sols 133⅔, beginning to multiply the 6 Livers by the 6 Deniers, and then by the 15 Sols which are with the Crow. of Marc. calculating for 12 Deniers one Sol, and for 20 Sols one Liver, and they will make li. 9671. 16. 8. which Placentia must have in Milan: As by Example. The proofe of the said account is seene, when Milan doth exchange Proofe. backe with Placentia.
CHAP. CCCXCI. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Naples. PLacia doth exchange with Naples, and giveth one Crowne of  to have in Nales Carlins posito 29½; I demand, for  2400. 10. 0. of Marc. what credit in Ounces shall I have in Naples? Multiply the said Crownes by 29½ Carlins per , and take the rest of the multiplication to be divided by  o the end to make them Graines, and they will make Carlins  15, Graines 9. the which to reduce to Ounces, you must cut off the last figure, and take ⅙ of the rest, and it will be Ounces 1180. and the tenth of the remaining Carlins is to be added to the 5 Car∣lins, which is the figure cut off, and they are Carlins 15, which are Taries 7, and there will remaine 1 Carlin, with the 9 Graines, which are Graines 19, and in all are Ounces 1180. 7. 19. to which adde one Carlin per Ounce for the good Money, which is done as hath beene before shewed, when Naples doth exchange with Palermo, and it will make Ounces 1199. 28. 1. And that is the credit that shall be due in the said Naples, good Money being therein com∣prised, as by this Example. The proofe of this account is seene, when Naples doth exchange . with Placentia. And note, the account is the same, when Placentia Note arri and ecchie. doth exchange with Barri and Lecchie in this Kingdome, the rates onely altering.
CHAP. CCCXCII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Sivil. PLacentia is found to exchange with Sivil, and giveth one Ex of  with . Crowne of Marc. to have in that place posito 428 Marvedes; I demand then, for Crow. 815. 5. 6 of Marc. what credit in Marvedes shall Placentia have in Sivil? Multiply the said summe of Crownes by 428 Marved. the Crowne, and it will make Marvedes 348937, and adding ½ per Cent. for the Aggio of the Monyes, at 5 Marvedes per Mill. and they make Marvedes 350681. And so much credit shall Placentia have in Sivil: as for example. The proofe of this account is seene, when that Sivil doth rechange for Placentia. CHAP. CCCXCIII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Valentia. PLacentia doth exchange with Valentia, and is found to give Exchanges of Placentia with Valentia. one Crowne of Marc. to have in Valentia 23⅓ Sols posito: I demand, for Crownes 926. 19. 2 of Marc. how many Livers shall I have in Valentia? To doe this, multiply the said summe of Crownes by Livers 1, 3, 4 d. per Crow. which are the said 23  Sols, beginning the multiplication by the Deniers, and then by the Sols which are with the Crownes, and they will make Livers 848. 2. 4 d. And so much shall Placentia have credit in Valentia. Ex∣ample.
Note, that when Placentia doth exchange with Barselona and Note Saragosa and Barselona the same as Valentia. Saragosa, the account thereof is made up, as the above-mentioned exchange from Placentia to Valentia. And the proofe of the said Rule is apparent, when that Valentia shall exchange backe for Pla∣centia. Proofe. CHAP. CCCXCIIII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Antuerpe. PLacentia doth exchange with Antuerpe, and giveth one Crowne of Marc. to have in Antuerpe posito 124  Grosses; I demand, Exchanges of Placentia with Antuerpe. for Cro. 700. 15. 0 of Marc. how many Livers of Grosses shall I have in Antuerpe? You must multiply the said summe of Crownes by 124  Grosses per Crow. and it maketh Grosses 87243, from which you must take , to make them Sols, and then it is 7270, and Gross. 3. which reduced to Livers, cutting off the last figure, and by taking ½ of the rest, and it will make Livers 363, and the tenth that remaineth is worth 10 Sols, and then 3 Grosse. And so much will the credit appeare to be in Antuerpe: as by example. The proofe of this Rule is seene, when Antuerpe doth rechange Proofe. for Placentia.
CHAP. CCCXCV. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Bergamo. PLacentia doth exchange with Bergamo, and giveth 100 Crownes of Marc. to have Crownes 123¼ posito, more or lesse, of Li∣vers Exchanges of Placentia with Bergamo. 7 per Crowne. I demand, for Crownes 740. 4. 8. how many Livers credit shall I have in Bergamo? To doe which, first multiply the said summe of Crownes of Marc. by the said Crownes 123¼, and the remainders divide by 20, to keepe account of the Sols, and from the product cut off the two last figures, which must be multiplyed by 20 and by 12, to make them Deniers and Sols of Gold, and they shall be Crownes 912. 6. 8. which to reduce into Livers, multiply by seven Livers, the value of the Crowne, begin∣ning to multiply the said 7 Livers by the Deniers 8, and then by the Sols 6, which are with the Crownes, calculating for 12 De∣niers one Sol, and for 20 Sols one Liver, and it maketh li. 6386. 6. 8. which must be had in credit at Bergamo. Example. The proofe of this account is seene, when Bergamo doth rechange Proofe. this parcell for Placentia.
CHAP. CCCXCVI. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Lucca. PLacentia doth exchange with Lucca, and giveth 100 Crownes of Marc. to have in Lucca posito 117½ Crownes of Livers Exchanges of Placentia with Lucca. 7½ per Crowne; I demand then, at this rate, for Crownes 406. 10. 10 of Marc. how many Crownes of Li. 7½ shall I have credit in Lucca? First multiply the said summe of Crownes of Marc. by Crownes 117½ per Cent. and of the product cut off the two last figures, which multiplyed by 20, and by 12, to bring them into Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will make Crownes 477. 13. 8. And so many Crownes of Livers 7  per Crowne shall I have at Lucca. Example. The proofe of this Exchange serveth to know how to make the Proofe. account, when Lucca exchangeth with Placentia, being done by the Rule of Three, saying, If Crow. 117  give 100 Crow. of Marc. how much will 477. 13. 8 Crow. give? and it will be 406. 10. 10 Crow. of Marc. And this is to be observed in the proofe of the rest, according to former mentioned rules.
CHAP. CCCXCVII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Francfort. PLacentia doth Exchange with Francfort, and giveth Crownes Exchanges of Placentia with Francfort. 100 of Marc. to have here Crow. 110  of 93 Quarentines per Crowne: I demand for 800 Crownes of Marc. how many Florins of 60 Quarentins per Flor. shall I have in Francfort. Multi∣ply the said Crow. 800 by Cro. 110½ per cent. cutting off the two last figures, the which multiply by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and it comes to 884 Crownes of Quarentines 93, the which to make Florins, must be multiplied by 93 Quaren∣tines, and they are 82212 Quarentines, from which cut off the last figure, and take ⅙ of the rest, and they then doe make Florins 1370, and the tenth remaining, with the 2 Quarentines, which is the fi∣gure cut off, and it maketh 12, from which taking  to make them Sols, by reason that 3 Quarentines make one Sol, and they are Florins 1370, and Sols 4, which is the credit that must be ren∣dred in Francfort, as shall appeare by example. The proofe hereof appeareth when Francfort Exchangeth for Proofe. Placentia, and thus much shall serve for the Exchanges practised a Drotura from Placentia.
CHAP. CCCXCVIII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in Placentia. ACcording to my method proposed, I will here adde some examples of Draughts and Remittances made Orders and Commissins gi∣ven and re∣ceived for Drauhts and ces in Placentia. by Order and Commission, in this place of Placentia, wherein I will somewhat inlarge my selfe by reason that it is the most noted and eminent place of Ex∣changes at this day practised in the world. To Placentia then is order given, to remit to Venice at Duc. 134 or to Florence at Crowns 110½ where the benefit shall appeare to be  Example most, that is to say, that finding to remit to one of the said two places, with benefit of the limited prices, the remittance be made thither where most will be given, and if the Remittance be found to be made with losse, to that which will give the least: for Florence then there is found at Cro. 111⅖, and for Venice at Duc. 135: I de∣mand whither ought the Remittance be made, for to both the Re∣mittance is found to be with profit, and to know where the grea∣test gaine will be, I say by the rule of three, If Duc. 134 give 110½ the inordered price, what will 135 Duc. give, the price found, it will make Cro. 111  or circa, so that there is more profit to make the Remittance to Florence, because that remitting at Duc. 135, to make the Par, the Remittance should be for Florence at Cro. 111 , and the partido found is 111  Cro. as for Example.
Again, at Placentia there is order received to remit to Antwerpe at Grosses 123, or to Barselona at Sol 24½, where the most advantage See Example. shall be found, there is found a parcell for Antwerpe at Grosse 120⅔, and for Barselona at Sol 24, I would know to which must the Remit∣tance be made, seeing that in both places there is losse given upon the prices that are inordered, and to know where is the least, I say by the Rule of Three, if Sols 24½ give Grosses 123, the price inorde∣red, what will 24 Sols give, the price that is found, and it maketh Grosses 120½, so that the Remittance must be made for Antwerpe, by reason that remitting to Barselona at Sols 24, to make the Par, the Remittance should bee made to Antwerpe at Grosse 120 , and it is found at 120 . CHAP. CCCXCIX. Questions upon the Exchanges practised at Placentia. AT Florence there is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedi∣tion of the Faire, posito at Cro. 109 , and for Venice at Cro. Questions upon the Ex∣changes practi∣sed at Placentia. 81½, I would know by the said Exchanges, at what price Placentia doth hereby exchange for Venice, to doe which, say by the Rule of Three, If 81½ Cro. of Gold of Florence give at Venice 100 Duc. of Livers 6 , how many will 109  Cro. give, the price of 100 Cro. of Marc. and it will make Duc. 134⅓ of Lib. 6 , and at that price should Placentia exchange for Venice, where by the way it is to be noted, that it is a thing evident, that exchanges are here made at greater or lesser prices, according to the plenty or scarcity of money to be found, and the rates incertaine, these rules only ser∣ving for instruction to make up the accounts thereof.
Againe at Naples is Exchange made for Placentia in expedition Question fo . of a Faire there at Duc. 136½, and for Venice at Duc. 1012, I would know by the said Exchanges at what prices should Placentia Ex∣change with Venice: I say by the Rule of three, if Duc. 101½ of Na∣ples give at Venice ducc. 100 at lib. 6  howmany will 136½ ducc. give the price of 100 Cro. of Marc. and it will appeare to make Ducc. 134 , and at that price should Placentia Exchange for Venice, as by Example. Againe, at Venice there is Exchange made for Placentia, in expe∣dition of a Faire at Duc. 133⅔, and for Naples at Duc. 102⅔, I de∣mand ion for . by the said parties, at what price should Placentia Exchange for Naples, you must multiplie the said Duc. 133⅔ which is the va∣lue of 100 crow. of marc. by Duc. 102⅔ per cent. by reason that the said Duc. 102  are the value of 100 Duc. of Venice, and thus wrought, it will make Duc. 137  or thereabout, and at that price should Placentia exchange with Naples. Againe at Naples is exchange made for Placentia, in expedition Question for me. of a Faire, at Duc. 136½, and for Rome at Duc 137, I demand by the said exchanges, at what price should Placentia exchange with Rome, I say then by the Rule of three, If Duc. 137 of Naples give at Rome Cr. 100 of Gold of Estamp, how many wil Duc. 136½ give the price of 100 Crow. of marke, and thus it will come to Cro. 99  in circa of Gold of Estampe, and at that price should Placentia exchange with Rome.
Againe at Rome is exchange made for Placentia, in expedition Question for Florence. of a Faire, there at Cro. 99 and for Florence at Cro. 90 I demand by the said exchanges, at what price should Placentia exchange with Florence, I say then by the Rule of three, If Cro. 90 of Gold of Estamp, give in Florence Cro. 100 of Gold, what will Crow. 99 of Estampe the value of Cro. 100 of marke give, it will bee Cro. 110, and at that price should Placentia exchange for Florence. Againe at Rome is Exchange made for Placentia in expedition of a Faire there at Cro. 99, and for Milan at cro. 86, I demand by Question for Milan. the said Exchanges at what prices should Placentia Exchange with Milan, I say by the Rule of three, if cro. 86 of Gold of Estampe give at Milan cro. 100 of lib. 5. 17. 0, what will crownes 99 the price of 100 Cro. of Marc. give, it will bee crownes 115. 2. 3. which being multiplied by Sol 117, the price of the crowne in cutting the two last figures of his product to reduce the exchange to the value of the crowne of Marc. there will remaine Sol 134⅔, and at that price should Placentia Exchange with or for Milan.
Againe, at Milan is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition Question for Genoa. of a Faire there, at Sol 133½, and for Genoa at Sol 118 , I de∣mand by the said Exchanges, at what price should Placentia Ex∣change for Genoa? I say by the Rule of Three, if Sols 118⅔ of Milan (the price of the Crowne of 4 lib. of Genoa) give Sols 80, what will Sols 133½ give (the price of the Crowne of Marc. in money of Milan) and it will be 90 Sols of current money, the which without making the reduction into money of Gold, seeing it hath been already said, that 90 Sols of current money is worth 68 Sols of Gold, and at this price should Placentia exchange with and for Genoa. Againe at Venice is exchange made for Placentia in expedition of a Faire there, at Duc. 141, and for Lions at 116½, I demand by the Question for Lions. said Exchanges, at what price should Placentia exchange for Lions? I say by the Rule of Three, if Duc. 141 of lib. 6  of Venice give in Placentia Cro. 100, how many will Duc. 116½ give (the value of the Cro. 100 of Gold of the Sun of Lions) and it will bee Cro. 82  in circa, and at that price should Placentia Exchange with Lions. At Placentia there is exchange made for Lions at Cro. 83½, and for Florence at Cro. 113, and from that place we have advice, that Another. they exchange for Lions at Cro. 95⅓, I would know by the said ex∣changes, if it bee beneficiall to remit from Placentia to Lions, and to draw from Florence, by inordering my Factors at Florence to pre∣vaile upon Lions at the said price of Cro. 95⅓, to know which, you must multiply the said Cro. 83½ of Marc. being the price of cro. 100 of the Sun of Gold, by Cro. 113 of Gold per cent. seeing that the said Crow. of Gold are the value of 100 Crownes of Marc. and from the product, cut off the two last figures, and there will re∣maine Cro. 94. 7. 1. to the which adding  per cent. for the provi∣sions
which are paid, the one at Florence, the other at Lions, and they will be Cro. 94. 19. 8. so that it will be profitable, to draw and to remit according to the abovesaid order and manner, be∣cause that at Florence may bee taken by exchange for Lions at Cro. 95 in circa, and finding cro. 95⅓, upon which consideration is to be had, what the moneyes of Florence may doe by exchange for Lions, which thus I work by example. Now for the termes of paiments of Bils of Exchanges in Placen∣tia, it is expressed in the trade of that city in Chapter 383. And this shall suffice to have said of the Exchanges practised at Placentia, where by reason of the great and continued practises here daily made for vast summes, I have somewhat more then or∣dinarily inlarged my selfe, and so I proceed to the next place of exchanges, which is Florence. CHAP. CCCC. Of Examples of Exchanges practised at Florence, and how the same are to be calculated. I Have shewed in the generall Exchanges of Florence, Exchanges pra∣ctised in Flo∣rence. with how many other places the said City is found to exchange with, and there also shewed the common rates, how the same is observed to rule, which every day is so subiect to alter, that no set price can be peremptorily set downe fot the same, yet in it selfe it is so beneficiall, that thereby the ignorant may bee furthered to make his accounts either in Draughts or Remittances: the way of making which accounts, upon this place, now remaineth here to be handled, observing the same with so many other places, as may make a man capable to understand the same, with any of the rest here omitted.
And by the way it is observable here, that all Exchangers here Accounts kept in Florence. doe keepe their accounts in Crownes, Sols, and Deniers of Gold, of Lire or Livers 7½ of that money per Crowne, the which are cast up by 20 and by 12, because that 20 Sols of gold doe make one Crow. and 12 Den. one Sol. CHAP. CCCCI. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Lions. FLorence then is found to exchange with Lions and giveth posito Cro. 95¾ of Gold to have in Lions 100 Crownes of the Sun of Exchanges of Florence with Lions. Gold, I demand for Cro. 1268. 9. of Gold, how many Crownes of the Sun shall I have in Lions? I say by the Rule of three, if Crow. 95¾ give Cro. 100, what will Crownes 1268. 9. give, and it comes to Crownes 1324, and the remainder of the division being multi∣plied by 20 and by 12 to bring them into Sols and deniers of gold, they will make in all Cro. 1324. 15. of Gold of the Sun, which I should have credit in Lions for the said summe of cro. of Florence, the calculation thereof here followeth. The proofe of this rule is seene, when Lions doth exchange with Florence. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCCII. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Placentia. FLorence doth Exchange with Placentia, and giveth posito 110     Pl. ½ Crownes of Gold to have there 100 Crownes of Marc. I demand then for Crownes 4973. 1. 10 of Gold, how many Crownes of Marc. is due to me: first reduce the said Crownes 110½ into Sols of Gold, multiplying them by 20, adding to the multiplication 10 Sols for the halfe Crowne, and they make Sol 2210, likewise reduce the said summe of Crownes of Gold into Sols, and it will be 99461, then say by the Rule of Three, if Sols 2210 give Cro. 100 of Marc. what will Sol 99461 Sols give, to which adding two cyphers for the 100, and then dividing it, will come to Crownes of Marc. and multiplying the rest of the division by 20 and then by 12, to make the same Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will make Crownes 4500. 9. 11. of marc. and so much must I have credit in Placentia for the said cro. 4973. 1. 0. of Gold of Florence, as by Example calculated. The proofe of this account is seene, when the exchange is made from Placentia to Florence &c. Prooe.
CHAP. CCCCIII. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Venetia. FLorence doth exchange with Venice, and giveth posito Crow. 81  of Gold, to have Ducc. in Banco 100 of Livers 6⅓; I demand Exchanges of Florence with . then, for Cro. 2037. 10 of Gold, how many Ducc. shall Florence have credit in Venice? To doe which, bring the Crow. 81  into halfe Crownes, multiplying them by 2, and so in the same manner of the said summe of Crow. of Gold, adding halfe a Crowne for the 10 Sols: then say by the Rule of Three, If the halfe Crownes produced of the price of the Exchange, give at Venice Ducc. 100, what will the halfe Crownes give, proceeded from the said summe of Crow. of Gold? and so by adding 2 cyphers for the 100, and dividing the same, it will make Ducc. 2500, which Florence is to have in Venice; and if there were any remaining of the division, they must be multiplyed by 24, to make them Grosses, because that 24 Gross. make a Ducc. of Lib. 6. 4 Sols. Example. The proofe of the said account is more evident, wh Venice Proofe. doth rechange for Florence. CHAP. CCCCIIII. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Rome. FLorence is said to exchange with Rome, and giveth 100 Crownes Exchanges of Florence with Rome. of Gold to have in the said place posito Crownes 92¼ of Gold of Estampe; I demand then, for Cro. 1600, 2 Sol. 5 Den. of Gold of Florence, how many Crownes of Gold of Estampe shall Florence have in Rome credit for? First multiply the said summe of Crownes of Gold at 92  per Cent. and multiply the remainder by 20 and by 12, to bring them into Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they make Crownes 1476, 2 Sols, 2 Den. of Gold, which should be had in Rome: as for example.
The proofe of the said Rule is evident, when this partie is re∣changed from Rome to Florence. Proofe. CHAP. CCCCV. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Naples. FLorence exchangeth with Naples, and giveth Cro. 100 of Gold, to Exchanges of Florence with Naples. have in Naples posito Ducc. 119⅔ of Taries 5 per Ducc. I de∣mand then, for Cro. 780. 15 of Gold, what credit in Ducc. shall Florence have in Naples? To do which, first multiply the said summe of Cro. of Gold by Graines 119⅔ per Cro. because it is so many Graines per Cro. as it comes to be Ducc. for Cro. 100. and they make Graines 93429. of which, cut off the 2 last figures, to make them Duccats, saying that the Ducc. is worth 100 Graines, & they make Ducc. 934. and for the Graines 29, Taries 1, and Graines 9. And so much credit shall Florence have in Naples, as by this Example is shewed. The proofe of this Rule is manifested, when Naples is seene to Proofe. exchange with Florence.
CHAP. CCCCVI. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Antuerpe. FLorence doth exchange with Antuerpe, and giveth one Crowne of Gold, to have in the said place Gross. 112½ posito. I de∣mand Exchanges of Florence with Antuerpe. then, for Crownes 1400. 12. 8. of Gold, how many pounds of Gross. am I to have in Antuerpe? To doe this, multiply the said summe of Crownes by the said price of Gross. 112½, and it maketh Grosses 157571. of which, take the , to make them Sols, and they make Sols 13130, and Grosse 11. which to reduce to pounds, cut off the last figure of the said Sols or Shillings, and take ½ of the rest, and it maketh pounds 656. and for the tenth that is remaining, it is to be accounted 10 Sols; and if the figure cut off had beene any number, it should have beene added to the 10 Sols: and it thus makes pounds 659. 10. 11. Money of Antuerpe. The proofe of the said Account is seene, when that Antuerpe Proofe. doth exchange with Florence. Note, that when Florence doth exchange for London, which is sel∣dome Note Florence with . in use, the rule of casting up the same in Sterling Money, is this as above with Antuerpe, in Flemish Pounds.
CHAP. CCCCVII. To reduce Crownes of 7 l. in Florence into Crownes of gold of Lire, 7½. IF in Florence you would reduce, any summe of Crowns of money of Lire 7 l. per. Cro. into Crowns of gold of Lire 7 l.  you must take the  of the Cro: of money, and the remainder will be Crownes of gold. And if againe you would reduce Crownes of gold into Cro: of money, you must adde contrarily to the Cro. of gold 1/41 and they will be so many Crownes of money, as for example Cro: 3647 12 6 of money of Lire 7 l. pr. Cro: 1/15 243 3 6. Cro. 3404 9 of gold of Lire 7½ pr. Cro. CHAP. CCCCVIII. Of the termes of payment of Bills of exchange in Florence. THe terme of payment of Bills of Exchange is found to be from Florence: To Naples at 10 dayes sight and from thence at 15 dayes sight. To Rome at 10 dayes sight and so back. To Venice at 5 dayes sight and thence at 20 dayes after date. To Bollonia at 3 dayes sight and so back, and so for Pisa. To Ferrara at 5 dayes sight and so back. To Perugia and Sciena at 2 dayes sight and so back. To Genoa at 8 dayes sight and so back. To Avignon at 30 dayes after date, and thence 45 dayes after date. To Gaietta at 10 dayes sight and so back. To Paris 2 months after sight and so back. To Padova at 5 dayes sight and so back. To Palermo and Mesina at 15 dayes sight and so back.
To Ancona at 10 dayes sight and so back. To Barselona at 2 moneths after date and so back. To Valentia at 40 dayes sight and so back. To Brudges and Antwerpe at 2 moneths after date and so back. To London at 3 moneths after date and so back. To Ceneva at the faires and thence 15 dayes sight back. To Lions to the faire and from faire to faire. To Milan at 10 dayes sight and so backe. To Aquilla and Sermona at 11 dayes sight. To Comerino at 8 dayes sight and so back. CHAP. CCCCIX. Of Orders and comissons, given and received for draughts and remittances by exchanges in the City of Florence in Tuscany. ACcording to my proposed methode, I will here set downe, an example or two of draughts and remit∣tances, Orders and comisons gi∣ven and re∣ceived for draughts & remittances by exchange in Florence. made by Order and comisson in Florence. To Florence then commeth advise from Venice, that the Exchange for the said place of Florence commeth at Cro. 80½ and for Placentia at duc. 135. they inorder in the said place of Venice, that at this rate, they make a remittance to Flo∣rence and draw from Placentia, at how much then will the draught of Florence for Placentia come unto, to do this. 1. Example. Multiply duc. 135½ which is the value of 100 Cro. of marc by Cro. 80½ of gold pr. cent, because the said Cro. of gold is the rate of the duc. 100 of Venice, and it will be Cro. 109 19 from which take ⅖ pr. cent, for the provision paied at Venice, and there will rest Cro. 108 12 10 and so many Cro. of gold, is imboursed at Florence for 100 Cro. of marc for a debt at Placentia, as thus for example:
Again, one of Venice is creditor in Florence Cro. 3000 of gold, who Example 2. inordereth that the same be remitted unto him at cro. 81½ or by Placentia at cro. 110, where the most advance & profit shall appeare to be, that is to say, that finding a remittance in both places, to be∣nefit of the price limited, the remittance should be where the pro∣fit and benefit is greatest, and finding the remittance to losse, the remittance be made where the damage is least, there is then Bills found for Venice at Cro. 82¼ and for Placentia at Cro. 110⅚ I de∣mand by which of the two should the remittance be made. By both the said places there is found a delivery to losse, and to know which of the two is the least, say by the rule of three, If Cro. 81½ give Cro. 110 the price limited, what will Cro. 82¼ the price found give, and it will come to Cro. 111 0 2, so that the remit∣tance should be made by Placentia, because that remitting to Venice, at Cro. 82¼, to runne at the parr: the delivery should be for Pla∣centia at Cro. 111, and the bills is at Cro. 110⅚ Example: Againe one of Rome is debitor in Florence in Cro: 2500 who in∣ordereth that the draught be made at Cro: 91 or by Placentia at Cro: Example 3. 110½ where the most profit shall appeare to be, now there is found mony for Rome at Cro: 92⅕ l. for Placentia, at 109⅙ Cro: I de∣mand, whither should this draught be made, seeing that to both the places, the draughts happen to be to losse in both the limited prices, and to know which is the least of both, say by the rule of 3. if Cro: 92  the price found for Rome (seeing that Placentia recei∣veth the uncertaine rate from Florence) give Cro: 110½ what will Cro: 91 the price inorderd give, it will make Cro: 109-1-2, so that the draught should bee made for Placentia, seeing that drawing for Rome at Crownes 92⅕, to runne upon a Parr: should be taken for Placentia at the said price at Cro: 109  or there about, and there is found at more, that is at Cro: 109⅙: as by example.
And so much shall suffice to have sayd of the Orders and Commis∣sons in draughts and remittances by exchange of Florence. CHAP. CCCCX. Of the exchanges practised at Milan, and how the same are to be calculated. I Have shewed in the generall exchanges of Millan, with Exchanges practised at Milan. how many other places, this citty is found to exchange with, and there also set downe the common currant rates thereof, which every day is found so to alter, that no positive rule can bee observed in the same, yet is in it selfe so beneficiall, that therby the unexperienced may know how to make his accounts, either in his draughts or re∣mittances, the way of framing these accounts, now remaineth, ob∣serving the same with some few other, the principall needfull hereunto. It is also to be noted, that Exchangers do there keepe their ac∣counts, in lire sols and deniers, and cast up by 20 and by 12 because Accounts pt in Mi∣lan. that 20 sols do make a lire and 12 den: a sols.
CHAP. CCCCXI. Exchange of Milan with Lions. MILAN then exchanges with Lions, and giveth posit: sols 118⅓ to have in sayd place, one crowne of the Exchange of Milan vvith Lions. sunne of gold, I demand then for l. 9258: sol: 5 of Milan, how many crownes shall I have cre∣dit in Lions, first reduce into sols, the sayd summe of Liuers, of Milan, and they make sols 185165, the which must be multiplied by 3 to make them thirds of sols, likewise bring the sols 118⅓ unto thirds, multiplying them by 3 and they make 355, for division of the said summe, and by division it will come to be crownes, and multiplying the remaynder of the division by 20 and by 12, to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they will be crownes 1564. 15. 5 of gold of the sunne, and so much will be had in Lions for the sayd summe of l. 9258: 5 of Milan mony, as by this example. The proofe of the sayd account is seene when that Lion ex∣changeth with Millan as before. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCCXII. Of the exchanges of Milan with Placentia. MILAN doth exchange with Placentia, and giveth po∣sito sols 133⅓, to have in Placentia one Crowne of Marc: Exchange of Milan with Placentia. I demand then for liuers 9671. 16. 8. of Milan, how many crownes of Marc: must I have in Placentia. First reduce into deniers the sayd 133⅓ sols, multi∣plying them by 12 and adding 4 deniers for the ⅓ of a sol, and they make deniers 1600, and then to reduce into deniers the said summe of Lire, multiply them by 20 and by 12, adding to the multiplica∣tion sol: 16. and deniers 8, which acc. with the liuers, and they make deniers 2321240, the which must be divided by deniers 1600, the price of the crowne of Marc:, and by division they will come to bee crownes, multiplying the rest of the division by 20 and then by 12, to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they make cro: 1450: 15. 6. of Marc: and so much will the sayd summe be in Pla∣centia, example. The proofe of the said rule is manifested when that Placentia ex∣changeth for Millan. Proofe.
CAHP. CCCCXIII. Of the exchange of Milan with Venice. MILAN exchangeth with Venice, and giveth a Crowne of Liuers of 5: 178. to have in that place, posito 148 l.  Exchang of Milan vvith Venice. sols: mony of Piccoli, I demand for l. 7260: 10: 0 of Milan, how many Duccats of l. 6  shall I have in Venice. You must divide the said summe of liuers, by liuers 5: 17, re∣ducing them, and the other price into deniers, and it will be Cro: 1241. 0. 9. the which must be multiplyed by l. 7. 8. 6. the Crown, which are the above said 148 6, beginning to multiply the l. 7 by the den: 9: 4 then by the sols, if there were any with the sayd Crownes calculating for deniers 12, one sols, and for sols 20, one Lyre and they will be l. 9214: 14 mony of Piccoli of Venice, which to be reduced into Duccats, must be divided by l. 6⅕ the valew of the duccate, and it will make ducc: 1486 5/24 of l. 6⅕ and so much shall I have in Venice for the summe above mentioned in liuers of Milan, as by example is more apparent. The proofe of the sayd account is seene when Venice doth ex∣change for Milan. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCCXIIII. Of the exchanges of Milan with Rome. MILAN exchangeth with Rome, and giveth posito Exchanges of Milan vvith Rome. Cro: 115½ of l. 5. 17. per Cro: to have in the sayd place Cro: 100 of gold of Estampe, I demand then for l. 7820. 18. of Milan, how many Crownes of gold of Stampe shall I have in Rome. You must first see for the said summe of Milan Liuers, how many Crownes they will be dividing them by l. 5-17 per Crown, and they make Crowne 1336 18 1, then say by the rule of three, if Cro: 115½ of Milan give in Rome Crowns 100 of Stampe, how many Crownes will the said Cro: 1336. 18  give, and it will amount to Crownes 1157. 9-9 of gold of Stampe, which will be given in Rome, for the sayd summe of Milan Liuers as abovesaid, example. The proofe of this rule is seene when that Rome doth exchange with Milan, Proofe.
CHAP. CCCCXV. Of the exchanges of Milan with Naples. MILAN doth exchange with Naples, and giveth Cro: 100 of l. 5 p. Cro: to have in Naples posito 98½ Duc∣cats, Exchange of Milan with Na∣ples. I demand for l. 4314-14-2 of Milan how ma∣ny Duccats shall I have in Naples: first take  of the sayd summe of Liuers to reduce them into Cro: of 5 l. and they make Cro: 862 18 10 which must be multiplyed by grains 98  pr. Cro: seeing it is the same as at Duccats 98  per 100 Cro: and it makes grains 84999, and cutting off the two last figures, there will remaine duccats 849, and for the two figures cut off which are grains 99, will bee Liuers 40 grains 19 in all duccats 849-4-19 which is to be had in Naples for the said summe of Liuers of Milan, as for example. The proofe of the said account is seene when Naples shall ex∣change with Milan. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCCXVI. Of the exchanges of Milan for Genoa. MILAN exchangeth with Genoa, and giveth posito Exchange of Milan with Genoa. sols 118½ to have in Genoa one cro: for 4 l. of that mony, I demand for l. 5703-18-0 of Milan, how many Liuers of currant mony shall I have in Genoa, first reduce the said summe into sols, multiplying them by 20 and adding to the multiplycation the 18 sols which ac∣count with the Liuers, and then of the sols produced, and of the said sols 118½ taken for devisior, bring into ½ sols and deviding the same will become crownes, and the remainder of the devision multiply by 20 and by 12 to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they will make crowns 962-13-8. of l. 4 mony of Genoa, the which to bring into Liuers, must be multiplyed by l. 4 per cro: beginning to multiply, the sayd l. 4. by deniers 8, and by the sols 13 which are with the crownes, calculating for 12 deniers, 1 sol, and for 20 sols one Liuer, it will come to l. 3850-14 8, and so many Li∣vers of mony currant, shall you have in Genoa for the sayd Liuers 5703-18 of Milan. The proofe of the said rule is seene when that Genoa doth ex∣change Proofe. for Milan.
CHAP. CCCCXVII. Of termes of payment of Bils of Exchange in Milan. THE termes of payment found to be in Milan, are obser∣ved to be from thence to Termes of payment of bills Ex∣change in Milan. To Genoa at 5 dayes sight, and so back. To Pisa at 10 dayes sight, and so back. To Florence at 10 dayes sight, and so back. To Venice at 10 dayes sight, and so back. To Paris at 2 mon. after date, and so back. To Bridges & Antwerp at 2 mo. after date, & so back. To Barselona at 20 dayes sight, and so back. To Montpilaer at 20 dayes sight, and so back. To Lions for a Faire, and so from Faire to Faire. And thus much shall serve to have spoken of the Exchanges of Millan: and now to Orders and Comissons in use in the said place. CHAP. CCCCXVIII. Of Orders and Commissons given and received for draughts and remittances in Milan. ACcording to my proposed method, I will here briefly Orders and Comisons given and received for draughts and remit∣tances in Milan. Example 1. insert some examples of draughts and remittances made here by Order & Commisson from other places. From Naples then coōeth Order to Milan, to remit for Plancentia at 133 sol. and to prevaile for Genoa at Sol 118½, the parcell being for 3000 Cro. of marc: Now there are Bills found for Placentia at Sols 131. cōsidering then the benefit, which is found in the remittance, at how much may the draught be for Genoa. Say by the rule of three, If Sol 133 give Sols 118½ the price inorderd, what will 131 give, the price found for Placentia, and it will be Sol 116⅔, and at this price the draught must be made for Genoa, in re∣mitting to Placentia at Sol. 131, and the Comisson will remaine ef∣fected according to the Order given,
Againe, from Lions is order given to Milan, that they may draw for Lions at Sol, 118, and remit to Venice at Sol. 145, the parcell be∣ing for ducc: 5500 of l. 6⅕ per ducc. there is mony for Lions at Sol. 119, and bills for Venice at Sol. 144⅓ I demand if at these prices, the or∣der may be performed, say by the rule of 3, taking one of the pri∣ces which is found for devisor, by reason that Milan giveth (accor∣ding to my former method) the certaine rule to Venice, and the in∣certaine to Lions, and say, If 144⅓ the price found for Venice, gave Sol. 118, what will 145 the price inordred give, and it will make 118½, so that the said Commisson at the prices found, may be effected to benefit, because that remitting to Venice, at the said price of 144 , the draught may be made for Lions at 118 , and there is mony found at Sol. 119: as by example Againe, from Rome commeth Order to Milan, to draw on them at Cro. 115, and remit to Placentia at 132 Sol, the party being for Cro. 4000, there is bills found for Placentia at Sol 133½, and mo. for Rome at Cro. 11 6 , I demand if at these rates the Commisson may be performed without losse, say by the rule of three, If Sols 132 give,
Cro. 115 the price limited, what will 133½ give, the price found for Placentia, and it will come to cro. 116 6 1, so that the comison may be performed to benefit, because that remitting to Placentia at the said price of sol. 133½ the draught may be made for Rome at cro. 116 3/10, and there is found at more that is to say at cro. 116⅔ as per example. And thus much shall serve for the Exchanges of Milan, next is Palermo and Mesina. CHAP. CCCCXIX. Of Exchanges practised in Palermo and Mesina and how the same are to be calculated. I Have shewed in the generall Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina, with how many other places these Cities in Sici∣lia Exchanges practisd in Palermo and Mesina. are observed to Exchange with, and there also set downe the common currant Rates, thereof, which eve∣ry day is found so subject to alteration, that no positive rule can be observed in the same, yet it is in it selfe so beneficiall, that thereby the unexperienced may know, how to make his calculation both in his draughts or in his remittances, they way of casting the sum up, is now to be handled, observing the sum heare with some few principall places, which is sufficient for instruction to those others omitted. First it is to be noted, that in Palermo and Mesina and generally Accounts kept in Sici∣lia. thorow out the Iland of Sicilia the Exchangers keepe their accounts in Ounces, Taries, and Grains, which are cast up by 30, and 20, be∣cause
that 30 taries do make an Ounce, and 20 grains make a tarie, and also it is to bee observed, That the duccat is worth taries 13 which is Carlins 26. The Crowne of money is worth taries 12 which is Carl: 24. The florin is worth taries 6 which is Carl: 12. so that the Tarie is 2 Carlins the Carlin is 10 Grains the Graine is 6 Picolis CHAP. CCCCXX. Of the Exchange of Palermo and Mesina with Lions. PAlermo and Mesina doth exchange with Lyons, and gi∣veth Exchange of Palermo and Mesina with Lions. posito 28 carlins to have in Lions a crowne of the sunne, I demand then for ounces 2189 25 17, how many crownes must I have in Lions, first multiply the ounces by 30, to make them taries, adding ther∣to the 25 taries, and multiply the taries that will come thereof by 20 to bring them into graines, and adde thereto 17 which are with the ounces, and then they will be graines 1313917, do the same like∣wise with the 28 carlins multiplying them by 10, because the car∣lin is worth 10 graines, and they will bee 280 gr. the which must be taken for divisor against the said graine come from the ounces 2189 25 17, and from the divison will come crownes of the sunne, and multiplying the remainder by 20 and then by 12 to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they will be crow. 4692 11 2, as for example.
The proofe of this account is seene when that Lions shall Ex∣change Proofe. back with Palermo and Mesina. CHAP. CCCCXXI. Of the Exchange of Palermo and Mesina with Placentia. PAlermo and Mesina exchange for Placentia, and give Exchange of Palermo & Mesina with Placentia. posito carlins 29  to have in the said place one cro. of marc. I demand then for ounces 1180, taries 7, and gr. 19, how many crownes of marc. shall I have in Placentia, herein do as in the precedent ac∣count, multiplying the said ounces by 30, to make them taries, and adde the 7, which are with the ounces, and then multiply, the said taries by 20, to make them graines, and adde the 19 and they will be grains 7081 59 do the same with the said 29½ carlins, multiplying them by 10, to bring them into gra. adding 5 for the ½ carlin, and they make 295 grains, the which taken for di∣visor, against the said summe of grains come of the ounces 1180 7 19, and of the divisor will come cro. of marc. multiplying the re∣mainder by 20, and then by 12, to make them sols, and deniers of gold, and they make cro. 2400 10 9 and so many cro. of marc. shall I have in Placentia for the said summe of Ounces. The proofe of the said rule is seene when that Placentia doth Prrofe. exchange either for Palermo or Mesina.
CHAP. CCCCXXII. Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Naples. PAlermo and Mesina doe Exchange with Naples, and Exchange of Palermo, &c. with Naples. gives posito pomitos 166½ of 8 picolis to have one duccat of 5 taries, I demand then, for Ounces 1053 taries 6 and 2 gr. how many duccats must I have, first multiply the said summe of Ounces by 30, to make them taries, and then by 20 to make them gr. adding to the multiplication 6 taries, and 2 gr. which accompany the Ounces, and then they make gr. 631922, out of which to make them pomitos, take out the ¼ because that the gr. is worth 6 picolis, and the pomito is worth 8 picolis, of which the 2 picols overplus is the ¼ of 8, and that they make pomitos 473942 which must be di∣vided by the said 166½ the price of the Exchange, reducing them into ½ picolis both on the one and on the other side, and by divi∣sion they will make duccats of Naples, multiplying the remainder by 100, and adding of two ciphers, to bring them into gr. because that the duccat is 100 graines, and the same will be duccats 2846, and for the gr. 49 taries 2 and grains 9 of taries 5 per. duccat which is to be rendred at Naples for the said sum of Ounces of money of Pa∣lermo: Example. The proofe of this account is seene when that Naples do Ex∣change Proofe. for either Palermo or Mesina.
CHAP. CCCCXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Palermo, and Mesina, with Venice. PAlermo and Mesina doe exchange with Venice, and giveth Exchanges of Palermo, &c. with Venice. one Crowne, of 12 taries to have in Venice l. 6. 18 posito, I demand for ounces 1486. 26. 10, what credit in duc∣cats shall I have in Venice of l. 6⅕ per duc. first reduce the said oun. into crowns of 12 taries, multiplying them by 30, to make them taries, adding to the multiplication the 26 taries, which are with the ounces, and they make taries 44606, out of which take 1/12, and they then make cro. 3717 taries 2 and gr. 10, which must be multiplied by 138 Sol per cro. which are the said l. 6. 18, and they make Sols 512974¾, which must be divided by 124 the price of the ducc. and it will make ducc. 4136  and so much shall I have in Venice for the said summe of ounces in Palermo or Mesina. Example, The proofe of this rule is to see if 4136 21/24 duccat of l. 6⅕ of Ve∣nice make the said summe of ounces 1486. 26. 10. of l. 6. 18 mony of Proofe. Venice for one crowne of 12 taries in Palermo or Mesina as above said.
CHAP. CCCCXXIIII. Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina, with Barselona. PAlermo, and Mesina, Exchanges with Barselona, and Exchanges of Palermo, &c. with Barselona. giveth one Florin of 6 taries, mony of Palermo, to have in Barselona posito 10½ Sols mony currant of Barselona, I demand then for 300 ounces what credit in liuers is due for the same. First, multiply the said ounces by 5 to make them Florins, the ounce being accounted 5 Florins, and it makes 1500 Florins, the which multiplied by 10½ Sols, per Florin makes Sols 15750, which to reduce to liuers, you must cut off the last figure, and take ½ of the rest, and it will be l. 787. 10, which is due at Barselona, For the proofe of the said Rule, as above divide the said livers Proofe. l. 787 10 by 10½ Sol, to make them Florin, and it is 1500 Flor. and if there were any remainders, they should be multiplied by 6 and then by 20, to bring them into taries and grains, and for to reduce the said 1500 Flor. into ounces, you must take ⅕ for that 5 Flor. make one ounce, and it will come to 300 ounces, the rule thus appearing right and just. And for the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina, with Valentia and Saragoza, it is cast up as above, therefore need not insist further as Palermo and Mesina, with Sara∣gosa and Valentia. being easily comprehended.
CHAP CCCCXXV. Of Orders and commissons given and received for draughts and remittances in Palermo and Mesina. ACcording to my proposed methode, I will heare Orders and comissons gi∣ven and re∣ceived for draughts & remittances in Palermo and Mesina. briefly insert some examples of draughts and remit∣tances made by order and commison in Palermo and Mesina from other places: At Mesina, the ex∣change for Lions is found to goe at Carlin 28, and for Placentia at Carlins 33, and from hence there is an exchange for Lions at Cro: 81½, I demand if at these prices, there will be a benefit to remit from Mesina to Placentia, and draw for Lions, to remit from Placentia to said Lions at sayd price of Cro: 81½ say by the rule of 3, if Carlins 33 the valew of a Cro: of Marc: (to re∣duce the exchange to the valew of 100 Cro:) give 100 Cro: of Marc: what will 28 Carlins give, the valew of the Cro of the sunne, and it will be cro: 84 17/20 out of which must be abated ⅔ per cent, for provisions payable ⅓ at Lions, and another ⅓ at Placentia, and there will remaine cro: 84 3/10, and at this price, the remittance may be made from Placentia to Lions, to satisfie that debt, and finding to remite at lesse, that is at cro: 81½, it appeareth playnly to be to profit to draw and to remitt according to the aforesaid Order, in which also lies this consideration, that the mony of Placentia for Lions may also varie from the sayd price, example. Againe from Venice there is Order given to Mesina, to draw upon them at l. 6. 14, and to remit to Placentia at Carlins 29, the par∣tido being for crownes 2000 of Marc. now there are bills for Pla∣centia
found at Carlins 29½, and mony for Venice at l. 6. 12. 6, I demand if at these prices the said comison may be effected, say by the rule of 3, taking one of the prices, that is found for divisor, be∣cause that from Mesina to Venice, it giveth the price certaine, and to Placentia the incertaine, saying thus, if Carlins 29½ the price found for Placentia give sol 134, which are the said l. 6 14. what will Carlins 29 give the price inorderd, and it will make sols 131¾ or thereabout, so that the said comison may not be effected but to losse, seeing that remitting to Placentia at the said price of 29½ Carl. the draught cannot be made to Venice at more then sol: 131¾ and money is not sound but at sols 132½ which are the said l. 6. 12 6 d. Example. Againe, from Naples there is an exchange made for Mesina at duc. 118  and for Placentia at duc. 132⅓. Now there is order gi∣ven in Naples, that at these rates, they draw for Mesina, and that they remit to Placentia, I demand then at how much will the re∣mittance be from Mesina to Placentia, say by the rule of 3. If graines 118  make disbursed in Mesina Carl: 26, the price of the Cro. of taries 13, how many will 132⅓ graines disbursed be the value of the cro. of marc. It will make Carlins 29 and  of a graine, and so many Carlins (and then ⅖ per cent for the provison that is paid at Naples) comes to be disbursed in Mesina for one cro. of marc. of cre∣dit in Placentia.
And thus much shall serve to have said of the Exchanges that are practised in Palermo and Mesina, to which the whole Iland of Sicilia hath reference. CHAP. CCCCXXVI. Of Examples upon the Exchanges that are practised in Barselona, and how the same are calculated. I Have shewed in the generall Exchanges of Barselona, Exchanges practised in Barselona. with how many other places Barselona is found to Ex∣change with, and there also set downe the common rates, how the same for the most part is found to go∣verne, which every day is so subject to alter that no positive rules can be set down for the same, howbeit the same is in it self so availe∣able, that thereby the unexperienced may know, how to make the account thereof, at what rate soever the Exchange is found to bee, either in remittances or draughts, the which onely now re∣maineth to bee handled, observing the same with so many other townes, as may be fittest to understand the ground thereof. It is then to be noted that Bankers and Exchangers here do keep Accounts kept in Bar∣selona. their accounts in lire, sold, and deniers, which are cast up in 20 and 12, because that 20 sols make a liver, and 12 deniers make a soldo, and it is to be noted that, The duccat is worth—sold 24 The Crowne is worth—sold 22 Note con∣cerning the exchange practisd' in Valentia & Saragosa, Sivil and Lisborne. The Riall is worth—sols 02 Note also here that the same order which is observed in the Ex∣changes which are made in this City of Barselona, with the other places of Spaine, should bee observed in the Exchanges which are made in Saragosa, Valentia, Sivil and Lisborne, seeing that when
the said places of Spaine Exchange the one with the other, alwayes that place which Exchangeth, giveth ducc. 100, to have the more or the lesse, and therefore the money of the place where the Ex∣change is made, must first be reduced into duccats, and multiplying the dcats which come thereof, (which are of the place to which it Exchangeth) by the price it is worth, for to reduce the same into the money wherein their accounts are there kept, and this conside∣red to abreviate my labour the rules being easie, I shall forbeare to trouble my selfe with any further particulars concerning the said places of Valentia, Saragosa, Sivil and Lisborne. CHAP. CCCCXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Lions. BArselona doth exchange with Lions, and giveth posito Exchanges of Barselona with Lions. sols 22 8 to have in Lions one Crowne of the sunne of 3 l. I demand then for l. 8865 12 10 how many Cro. am I to have in Lions, first reduce the said sum of liuers into deniers, multiplying the same by 20, and adding of 12, sols and then by 12 and adding 10 deniers then reduce into deniers the said sol 22 8 d, and they make 272, for devisor, against the some of deniers come of the said livers and multiplying the rest of the devisor, by 20 and by 12 to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they make Crownes 7822 12 6 of gold of the sunne, which is due to have in Lions, Example. The proofe of this account is manifested when that Lions doth Proofe. exchange for Barselona.
CHAP. CCCCXXVIII. Of the exchanges of Barselona with Placentia. BArselona doth exchange with Placentia, and giveth Exchange of Barselona with Pla∣centia. posito sols 23  to have there a crowne of marc. I demand for liuers 1850. 12. 0 how many cro. of marc. shall I have. First reduce the said summe of liuers into de∣niers, multiplying them by 20, to make them sold, and adde the 12, and then by 12 to make them deniers, and doe the same with the sols 23  multiplying them by 12, and adding thereto 7 deniers, the deniers come thereof, are to be taken for divisor against the deniers come of the said liuers, and by division they will come to cro. of Marc. multiplying the rest by 20 and by 12 to make them sols and deniers of gold and then they make cro. 1569. 8. 3 of Marc. which is due to be had in Placentia for the said summe of Barselona. The proofe of this rule is apparent when that Placentia doth ex∣change for Barselona. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCCXXIX. Of the Exchange of Barselona with Saragosa. BArselona exchangeth with Saragosa, and giveth 10 Exchange of Barselona with Sara∣gosa. duccats of 24 Sol per duccat, to have in this place posito 104 duccats of Sols. 22 per duccat of that mo∣ney, I demand for liuers 6000 of Barselona, how many liuers shall I have in Saragosa, first reduce in∣to Sols the said summe of liuers, multiplying them by 20, and divide the sols comming thereof by sol. 24 the price of the duccat, and it will be duccat 5000, the which duccat 5000 of Barselona, must be multiplied at the said price of ducc. 104 per cent: and from the summe cut off the 2 last figures, the which multiplied by 20 & by 12, to make them sols and den. of gold, will be duc. 500 of Saragosa, which must be multiplied by l. 1. 2 sol. the price of the duccat, and they make liuers 5720, which should be rendred in Sa∣ragosa for the said 6000 l. mony of Barselona. The proofe of this rule is manifest when that Saragosa doth againe rechange back for Barselona. Proofe. CHAP. CCCCXXX. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Valentia. BArselona doth exchange with Valentia, and giveth duc. 100 of 24 sols to have in Valentia, posito ducc. 108 of sols Exchanges of Barselona with Valen∣tia. 21 per. duc. of that money, I demand for l. 7000 money of Barselona, how many l. shall I have in Valentia. In this you must doe as in the preceding account of Barselona for Saragosa, multiplying the duccats of Valentia, which shall
come thereof by liuers 1 1 the price of the duccat, and it will be liuers 6615, and so much will be due in Valentia for 7000 l. delive∣red in Barselona. The proofe of this rule is apparent when that Valentia doth re∣change for Barselona. Proofe. CHAP. CCCCXXXI. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Sivil. NArselona doth exchange with Sivil, and giveth duc. 100 of 24 sol, per. ducc. to have in this place Exchange of Barselona with Sivil. duc. 108 posito more or lesse, of marvedes 375 per. duccat, I demand for l. 7500 how many mar∣vedes must I have in Sivil. You must do as in the precedent rule of Bar∣selona for Valentia, multiplying the duccats of Sivil which come thereof, by marvedes 375 the price of the duc. and it will make marvedes 2531250 which is due to have in Sivil for the said sum of 7500 l. in Barselona. Example. The proofe of this rule is manifested when that Sivil doth re∣change for Barselona. Proofe.
CHAP. CCCCXXXII. Of the exchanges of Barselona with Lisborne. BArselona doth exchange for Lisborne, and giveth duc. Exchange of Barselona with Sivil. 100 of 24 sols per duc. to have in Lisborne duccats posito 113, of 400 Rais per duc. I demand for 4000 l. of Barselona, how many Rais shall I have in Lis∣borne, heare you must do as in the account precedent of Barselona for Sivil, multiplying the duccats of Lisborne, which shall come thereof by 400 Rais per ducc. and they make Rais 1506666, which is due to bee had in Lisborne for l. 4000 in Barse∣lona. Example. The proofe of this rule is apparent when that Lisborne doth re∣change Proofe. back for Barselona. CHAP. CCCCXXXIII. Of Orders and Comisons given and received for draughts and remittances in Barselona. ACcording to my proposed methode, I will here briefly Orders and commisons given and received for draughts & remittances in Barselona Example 1. insert some examples of draughts and remittances made in this City by order and comison from other places. To Sivil then cometh order from Barselona to
draw upon them at duc. 93½ and remit to Placentia at marvedes 413, which of all charges, the partido being for Cro. 3000 of marc. Now there is found money for Barselona at duc. 93, and bills for Pla∣centia at marvedes 413, I demand if at these rates the Comison may be accomplished and performed, you must say by the rule of 3 taking one of the prices, which are found for divisor, because that Sivil giveth to Barselona the certaine, and to Placentia the incertaine price, saying, If duc. 93 the price found for Barselona give marvedes 413, what will duc. 93½ give the price inorderd, and it maketh marvedes 415⅕ out of which deduct ⅖ per cent for provison which is taken, there will remaine marvedes 413  incirca, so that the said comison may be effected to profit, seeing that drawing to Bar∣selona at the said price of duc. 93, it may be deliverd for Placentia at mr. 413  and their present bills at lesse that is at 413 marvedes; as by Example. Againe, In Barselona commeth order from Valentia, that remit∣tance may bee made to them at duc: 108¼, and to prevaile from Example 2. Placentia at sol 23, the partido made for 3000 Cro. marc. Now there is bills found for Valentia, at duc. 107, I demand then for the losse then that is given by the remittance, at what price may the draught be made for Placentia, say by rule of 3. taking one if the prices found for divisor, because then Barselona giveth the cer∣taine to Valentia, and the incertaine price to Placentia, saying of duc. 107 the price found for Valentia, give sol 23, what will duc. 108  give, being the price inorderd, and it will come to sols 23¼ and at lesse price cannot be drawne for Placentia, remitting to Valentia at duc. 107 Example.
CHAP. CCCCXXXIV. Of the termes of paymens of Bills of Exchange in Barselona. THe termes of payment found accustomed in Bar∣selona is noted to be thence To Venice at 2 mo. after date and so back. Termes of payment of bills of Ex∣change in Barselona, &c. To Florence at 2 mo. after date and so back. To Avignon at 18 dayes sight and so back. To Bridges and Antwerpe at 50 dayes after date and so back. To Genoa at 20 dayes after sight and so back. To Lisborne at. To Sivill at. To Saragosa at. To Valentia at. To Lions for the faire and so from faire to faire. To Placentia for the faire and from faire to faire. And thus much shall serve to have said of the exchanges in ge∣nerall practised in Barselona, Valentia, Saragosa, Sivil, and Lisborne in Portugall.
CHAP. CCCCXXXV. Examples of Exchanges practised in Antwerpe, and how the same are to be calculated. I Have shewed before in the generall exchanges of Ant∣werpe, Exchange practisd in Antwerpe. with how many other places this Citie is found to exchange with, and there also observed the com∣mon currant rates thereof, which in it selfe is found every day so subject to alteration, that no positive rule can be set downe therein, how ever yet the same is so beneficiall to the unexperienced, that he may easily make his calculation there∣by either in his draughts or his remittances; there resteth now to be handled the way, and method how the same is cast up, which I will only observe with such other principall places, as may be sufficient for instruction, and as a guide to rule that which is here omitted. And the better to understand what shall ensue, it is to be noted Accounts kept in Ant∣werpe. that in Antwerpe, Bankers and Exchangers doe keepe their accounts in pounds, shillings and pence Flemish or grosse, which are cast up by 20, and by 12, because that 20 sols or shillings makes a pound, and 12 pence or grosse makes a shilling. CHAP. CCCCXXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Antwerpe with Lions. ANtwerpe doth exchange with Lions, and giveth posito Exchange of Antwerpe with Lions. 121⅓ grosse to have in Lions one cro. of the sun of gold of 3 l. I demand then for l. 3486. 1. 9 mony of Ant∣werpe, how many crownes must I have in Lions. First reduce the said sum of liuers into grosses, multiplying the same by 20 and then by 12, adding to the multiplications 1 sol. and 9 pence, which are with the pounds, and divide by 121  gros. the summe of grosses which shall come of the said liuers, reducing both them and other into thirds of grosses, and of the divison will come Crownes, and multiplying the remainder of the divison by 20 and by 12, to make them sols and deniers of gold, they will make cro. 6895. 11. 1 of gold of the sunne, which you shall have in Lions for the said summe delivered in Antwerpe. Example:
The proofe of the said rule is seene when that Lions doth ex∣change for Antwerpe. Proofe. CHAP. CCCCXXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Antwerpe with Placentia. ANtwerpe doth exchange with Placentia, and giveth posito gros. 124  to have in Placentia one Cro. of Exchange of Antwerpe with Pla∣centia. marc. I demand for l. 363 10 3 mo. of Antwerpe, how many Crownes of marc. shall I have in Placentia, first reduce the said summe of liuers into gros. multiply∣ing the summe by 20 and by 12, adding to the multiplycation 10 shil. and 3 pen. which are with the pound, and divide the groses that come thereof by said gro. 124  the price of the crowne of marc. bringing both the one and the other into halfe grosses, and by di∣vision it will come to Cro. multiplying the remainder by 20 and by 12, to bring the same into pence, and then they will be Cro. 700 14 11 of marc. which will be due at Placentia, for the said summe of liuers or pounds in grosses.
The proofe of the said account is seene when that Placentia Proofe. shall exchange with Antwerpe. CHAP. CCCCXXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Antwerpe with Florence. ANtwerpe doth exchange with Florence, and giveth po∣sito Exchanges of Antwerpe with Flo∣rence. 112  gro. to have in that place one Crow. of gold, I demand for l. 656 10 11, money of Antwerpe how many Cro. of gold do they make, and doing as in the precedent rule, it will appeare to be Cro. 1400 12 7 of gold, which I shall have in Florence for the said pounds Flemish.
The proofe of this said account is seene when that Florence shall be found to exchange with Antwerp. CHAP. CCCCXXXIX. Of the exchange of Antwerp with Venice. ANTWERPE doth exchang with Venice, and giveth posito 92.  grosse to have in that place one duccat of Exchange of Antwerp with Ve∣nice. l. 6⅕ mony of Venice, I demand for l. 1648 14 6, mony of Antwerp, how many duccats shall I have in Venice, and doing as in the precedent accounts, it will come to ducc: 3810  and so many duccats of l. 6  will bee due in Venice, Example. The Proofe of this account is seene when that Venice shall ex∣change for Antwerp. Proofe. CHAP. CCCCXL. Of the exchanges of Antwerpe with London. ANTWERPE doth exchange for London, and giveth Exchange of Antwerpe with Lon∣don. posito Shill: 33  to have in that place one pound starlin, I demand for l. 748-18. 6 mo: of Antwerpe, how many pound starlin should I have in London, first reduce as well the said summe of pound starlin as the said summe of pound flemish
into grosse and pence, multiplying the pounds by 20, and then by 12, adding the shillings 18. 6d. which are with the pounds flemish, and the shill: flem: 33⅓, multiplyed by 12, adding 4 grosse for  of a shill flem:, and the grosse which shall come thereof, must be taken for divisor, against the summe of grosses, come of the said pounds, and dividing the summe will come pounds starlin, multiplying the remainder of the divison by 20, and then 12 to make them shillings and pence starlin, they will make pound starlin 449. 7. 1, due in London, for the said summe of pound flemish 748. 18. 6. and for proofe of the said exchange, multiply the said pound starlin 449. 7. Proofe. 1 by 1 l. 13 shillings 4d. which are the said 33⅓ shillings and it will make the above sayd l. 748. 18. 5 pounds flemish so that the account will appeare to be just cast up. And thus much shall serve to have sayd here of exchanges, now to the terms of payments of bills in Antwerpe. CHAP. CCCCXLI. Of the terms of payment of bills of exchange in Antwerpe. THE terms of payments of bills of exchange observed in Antwerpe, and to go from thence to other Cities is: Termes of payment of bills of ex∣change in Antwerpe. To Venice at 2 mo: after date and so back. To Florence at 2 mo: after date and back the same. To Genoa at 2 mo: after date and thence the same. To Avignon at 2 moneths after date and so back. To Barselona at 50 dayes after date and so back. To Valentia one moneth after sight and back 30 dayes after date. To London one moneth after date and so back. To Pisae 2 mo: after date and so back.
To Milan 2 mo: after date and so back. To Paris one mo: after date and so back. To Montpelier 20 dayes after sight and so back. To Lions for the succeeding faire. To Placentia for the next succeeding faire. To Roven one moneth after date and so back. Now for the Orders and Comisons given in Antwerp, I will here inserte a word also according to my Methode. CHAP. CCCCXLII. Of Orders and Comisons given and received, for draughts and remittances in Antwerpe. ACCORDING to my proposed methode, for the better understanding of what is said, I will insert Orders and commissions given and received for draughts and remit∣tances in Antwerpe. some examples of draughts and remittances made by Order and Comison in the Citty of Antwerpe. At Venice then is found an exchange for Antwerpe posito at gro: 90, and for Placentia at ducc: 135, Order being given to Venice that at these prices, they draw to Antwerpe, and remit to Placentia, I demand at how much will come the remittance from Antwerpe to Placentia, first you must multiply the said duccats 135 1. Example. the value of 100 Cro: of marc, at the said price of 90 grosse per duc∣cat, and of the grosses which shall come thereof, you must cut off the 2 last figures, and there will remaine grosse 121 , and so ma∣ny sse and  re percent for provison, which is payable in Venice, is disbuable in Antwerpe for one crowne of marc in credit in Placentia. Againe at Venice is exchange found for Antwerpe at gro. 90 , and for London at 56 pence starlin, there is hereupon Order given 2. Example. to Venice, that at these prices, they draw for Antwerpe, and remitt to London, the question is at what price will the remittance bee from Antwerp to London, to do this say by the rule of three, if 56 pence starlin give grosse 90  (seeing that the one and in the other is the valew of a duccat of Venice, what will 240 pence starlin give being
the price of the pound sterlin of London, it will be gros. 387, which reducing to shillings in taking the , and it will be 32¼ shill. and so many shillings Flem. and ⅖ more per cent for the provison paya∣ble in Venice, comes to bee disbursed in Antwerpe, for one pound sterlin money credit in London. Againe a Merchant of London is Creditor in Antwerpe, 2000 l. Flemish, who inordreth that it be remitted him at shill. 33¼ or to 3. Example. Placentia at 121 gro. where the most profit shall be found, that is, to that place which shall bee most beneficiall, or to least losse of the prices limited, now there are found bills for London at shillings 33  and for Placentia at gro. 121¾ I demand to which of the said places should the remittance be made, seeing that by both there is found remittance to losse, and to know where is the least, say by the rule of 3, if shill. 33¼ give gros. 121 the price inordred, what will shill. 33½ give being the price found for London, it will come to grosse 121  so that the remittance should be made to Placen∣tia, because that remitting to London at shill. 33½ to goe the Par, should be delivered for Placentia at gro. 121 , and there is found bills for losse that is at 121  gros. And thus much for the Exchanges practised in Antwerpe.
CHAP. CCCCXLIII. Of the Exchanges practised in London and how the same are to be calculated. I Have shewed in the genell Exchanges of London, with how many other pces this City is found to Exchanges practisd in London. Exchange with, and th o set downe the com∣mon currant prices and es thereof, which eve∣ry day is found to be so subject to alteration, that no positive rule can bee observed rightly, to set downe the same, yet it is in its selfe so beneficiall, that thereby the unexperienced, may know how to make his calculation thereof and that as well in his draughts as in his remittances, Now onely there resteth to conclude this Tract of Exchanges and this Map of Commerce to handle the way how the same is cast up, and ho by Arithmetick it is performed, which I will observe heare with some other principall places, which may serve for a sufficient ground and instruction to those here omitted. It is here to be noted for the better understanding of what en∣sueth, Accounts kept in Lon∣don. that all Bkers or Exchangers doe keep the accounts in London in pounds, shillings and pence commonly called sterlin and cast up by 20 and by 12, for 20 shillings makes a pound, and 12 pce makes a shilling. And moreover that London exchangeth in the denominator of pence sterlin with all other countries, Antwerpe, and those countries neighbouring of Flanders and Holland excepted, with which it ex∣changeth by the intire pound of 20 shillings sterlin. CHAP. CCCCXLIV. Of the Exchanges of London with Lions. LOndon Exchangeth with Lions, and giveth posito 61 pence more or lesse to have in Lions a crowne of gold Exchange of London with Lions. of the sun of 3 l. piece, I demand then for 348 l. 15 shilling sterling how many crownes of the sunne shall I have credit for in Lions, first reduce the said summe of pounds sterling into shillings, multiply∣ing the same by 20, and adding thereto the 15 shillings, and then by
12 pence, adding thereto the pence if any were, and then divide the same by 61 pence, and the divident will make Crownes, multi∣plying the remainder of the divison by 20 to make them sols and by 12 to make them deniers of gold, and then they will make in all Crow. 1372008 pence of the sunne of gold, that I shall have in cre∣dit at Lions for the said summe of 348 l. 15 starlin delivered in London. The proofe of this rule is manifested when that Lions shall Ex∣change Proofe. the said summe of 1372  Cro. for London and here also it is to be noted that the rule is the same when London shall exchange Exchange of London, with Paris, Roven, &c. in France. with either Paris or Roven or any other City of the Kingdome of France. CHAP. CCCCXLV. Of the Exchanges of London with Florence. LOndon doth exchange with Florence, and giveth posito Exchange of London with Flo∣rence. 70 pence starl. more or lesse to have in Florence a cro. of gold, I demand then for pound 656 10 6 d starl. how many Crownes shall I have credit in Florence, this is to bee cast up as in the precedent rule of Lon∣don with Lions, and it will appeare, that for the said 656 10 6 starlin I am to have credit in Florence the sum of Cro. 2250 —∣as per Example,
Note that this Exchange is seldome practised from London, and Proofe. therefore not in use in these dayes, but when many Florentine Mer∣chants resided in London it was much in use, yet the rule is right and the proofe thereof is evident, when Florence rechangeth againe for London. CHAP. CCCCXLVI. Of the Exchanges of London with Venice. LOndon is found to Exchange for great summes with Ve∣nice, Exchange of London with Venice. and giveth posito 50 d sterlin, to have in the said place one duccat in banco of l. 6⅕ money of Venice, I demand then for 555 l. 17 6 d sterlin how many ducc. shall I have credit for in Venice, this is done as in the precedent rule, reducing the pounds sterlin into shillings, by the multiplyca∣tion of 20, and adding 17 and then multiplying that againe by 12, to bring it into pence and adding thereto 6 d and it will make duc. (2668 ) which should be rendred in Venice for 555 l. 17 6 d sterl. in London as per Example.
Note that for distinction of the currant money in Venice, which is 21 per cent. at present worse then the money payable by Exchange, Proofe. it is termed in Banco in which all bills of Exchange are payable, Difference betweene mony in Banco and currant mo∣ny in Venice. and the proofe of this rule is apparent when that the said summe of 2668⅕ ducc. is rechanged for London. CHAP. CCCCXLVII. Of the Exchanges of London with Antwerpe. LOndon doth exchange with Antwerpe, and giveth one Exchange of London with Venice. pound sterlin, to have in Antwerpe posito shillings 35. 6 pence or grosse, money of Antwerpe, I demand then for 445 l. 15 and six pence sterlin, how many pound Flemish shall I have in Antwerpe, first multi∣ply the pounds sterlin by 20. and bring them into shillings, and then by 12 to bring them into pence sterlin, doe also the same with the pounds Flemish, bringing them first into shillings Flemish, by a mul∣tiplication of 20, and then to pence or grosse by multiplication of 12 d, accounting the 35 shil. 6 d for l. Flem. 1. 15. 6 d. and say then by the rule of 3, if one pound sterlin give 35. 6 d Flemish, the price proposed, what will 445 l. 15. 6 sterlin give, which will make l. 791. 5. 0. d Flemish for which you must have credit in Antwerpe pounds.
The proofe of the rule is more manifest when that Antwerpe doth Exchange for London, and note that the account is the same Proofe. London ex∣change with Am∣sterdam, Collonia. &c. when that London doth exchange for Colonia, Amsterdam, and other places in the Low Countries. CHAP. CCCCXLVIII. Of Orders and Comisons given and received for draughts and remittances in London. ACcording to my proposed method, I will here for conclusion of the Exchanges practised in London, briefly insert some Examples of draughts and re∣mittances made by comison and Order in the Citie of London. To London, then commeth Order from Venice Example. 1. to remit to them at 60 pence, and to draw for Pla∣centia at 82 pence sterlin, the partido being for Cro. 4000 of marc. I finde then bills for Venice at 61 pence, I would know considering the losse that presenteth in the remittance, at how much should I draw my draught for Placentia, you must say by the rule of three, If pence 60 give pence 82 the price inordered, how many will pence 61 give the price found for Venice, and it will be pence 83⅓ sterlin or thereabouts, and at lesse must not the draught be for Placentia.
Againe posito, Florence is found to exchange for London at pence 83 starlin, and say for Placentia at Cro: 108, and that there is Or∣der Example 2. given to Florence, that at these rates they draw for London and remit to Placentia, at how much then will the remittance come from London to Placentia? to doe this, I multiply the said Crownes of Florence, which properly are the value of Crownes 100 of Marc. by pence sterlin 83, as is above mentioned, and out of the pence that are thence produced, I cut off the two last figures, and there will remaine pence sterlin 89  incirca, and so many pence together with  per cent. for the provison that is commonly paid in Florence, comes to be disbursed in London, for one crowne of marc. credit in Placentia. Againe to Antwerpe commeth Order from London, to draw thi∣ther, and to remit to Venice, at such a price, that the remittance Example 3. from London for Venice, come but to 55 pence starlin cleare of charges, the partido being 1000 pound starlin, now there is found mony for London at shill. 33⅓, and bills for Venice at gro. 90 , I demand if at this price the said comison may be effected, first reduce the said shill. 33⅓ into grosse, and they make 400, then say by the rule of three, if pence 240, (the valew of the pound starlin) give 400 gro. what will 55 pence starlin give being the price of the ducc: of Venice, it will make grosse 91⅓ from whence must be deducted  per cent. for provison taken and there will remaine gro. 91 3/10, so that the sayd comison may be effected to profit, because that draw∣ing for London at sh. 33⅓, may be delivered for Venice at gro. 91 3/10, and there persent bills at lesse, that is at gro. 90⅔ example.
And this is as much as I conceive needfull at this time to insert concerning the exchanges practised in London, now there only re∣steth the termes of payment of bills of exchange in London. CHAP. CCCCXLIX. Of the Terms of payments of Bills of exchange in London. THe termes for the payment of Bills of exchange in Lon∣don Terms of payments of Bills ex∣change in London. are observed to bee with other citties thus: To Venice at 3 moneth after date and so back. To Antwerpe at one moneths after date and so back. To Genoa at 3 moneths after date and so back. To Florence at 3 moneths after date and so back. To Pisa at 3 moneths after date and so back. To Lions for the faire and so from faire to fayre. To Placentia the same as Lions. To Roven and Paris at one moneth after date and so back.
CAHP. CCCCL. Of the abreviation of Division and Multiplication af∣ter the Italian and forraine manner and methode. FOr as much as I have in many parts of this particular Tract of Exchanges followed the arithmeticall me∣thod Of Division and Multi∣plication abreviated after the I∣talian man∣ner. & manner of those rules practised in the calcula∣tion of these exchanges by the Bankers and Exchan∣gers of Italy, it will be here needfull for the better in∣lightning of the same, & the easier casting up & calculation thereof, that I shew how the Italian Brokers and Exchangers do abreviate their labour, and shorten their taske therein, and the rather I have presumed to adde the same here, and in this place, partly in regard that I have not found it published by any of our English Arethme∣ticians, but principally to shew the learner the wayes how the same are there wrought and arethmetically calculated. It is generally confest by all Arethmetictans that the whole art of Arethmetick depends upon five principall rules, now common∣ly in all countries received and taught, that is, by Numeration, Ad∣dition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division, and that no one proposed question in Arethmetick can be perfected without the help of some of these, for the three former I find not any disagree∣ment in the common received manner by them and us, and there∣fore I will omitt to speak any thing thereof; but of the two later, whereby is observed that most rules and questions of all exchanges are perfected and performed, I will here insist upon, induced princi∣pally as I sayd before to inlighten thereby the preceding examples that I have handled in the calculatians of the exchanges before mentioned. I will then in the first place contrary to the custome of our Eng∣lish Masters in this Science, begin with that part of Arethmetick which wee call Division, and by an example or two of the working thereof explaine the same to such as either shall bee desirous to
learne it, or such as shall desire to make use of these before menti∣oned tables. A certaine marchant then bought 46 clothes, which cost him 673 l. and desireth by a briefe way to know what one cloth doth Division a∣breviated in calculations of accounts. stand him in, to do which I dispose of the question after the man∣ner of the rule of three, and say, If 46 Clothes cost 673 l. how much doth the Cloth cost. Now for as much as it would prove to be too difficult, at first sight after the cōmon manner, to find how often 46 the divisor is found in 673, it will be more facile and commodious, to take it after their method thus, take then the first figure which is 4 and see how often the same is included in the figure 6 which is once, the which 1 I write then under the  drawing a line between them, & then multiply it by the whole divisor , beginning at 6, saying once 6 is 6, & next comming to the sum that is to be divided 673 I chuse the second figure 7 from whence I take 6 and there remaines one, which I place under the said 7, and returning againe to the divisor, I multiply 1 by 4 which giveth 4, which I deduct from the other figure 6, of the summe to be divided, and there remaines 2, the which I write under the 6, so that 46 taken by this meanes out of 67 there  1, from whence I proceed and put this before the figure 3 remayning, which thereby makes 213, for the summe that now remaynes to be divided by 46, saying in 21 how many times 4, which cannot be but 4 times, for in taking 5 there will remaine but  which with the following figure doth make 13, (the which number cannot pay 5 times 6, and for this cause I can take but 4,) multiplying the divisor as at first, saying (beginning alwayes by the last figure of the divisor) 4 times 6 is 22, and taking the last figure 3 from the summe to be divided 213, the which for payment of 24 I borrow 3 tenns, which I beare in mind, and say 24 from 33 there sts 9 the which I place under the 3 and then come to multiply the other figure 4 of the divisor by 4 and it makes 16, which with the 3 tenns borne in minde, makes 19 which must be deducted from the sume to be divided 21 so there will rest 2 the which I place un∣der 1 as by the example appeareth more at large. So that 673 l. divided by 46 Clothes, the quotient giveth 14 l. and the rest is 29 l. which now is to be devided by 46, which cannot be done, and therefore the same to be reduced to shillings which mul∣tiplied by 20 comes to 50 sh: which must now be divided by 46 in the manner before shewed, saying how many times 4, in 5 which is once, the which I write in the quotient at the side of 14 l. pro∣ceeding from the first divison, multiplying it by 6 and it giveth 6, which taken from 8 the rest is 2, which I put under the 8, and mul∣tiply the other figure of the divisor 4 by 1 which giveth 4 taken from 5 there rests 1, then 46 substracted from 58 there rests 12, right with which I put the other figure 0 resting of the summe to
be divided and returne to say, how many times 4 in 12, the which I can take but 2 and I place it in the quotient and multiply  by the last figure of the devisor, saying 2 times 6 is 12 which I deduct from 120, the which to do I say (borrowing 2 tenns which I bare in mind) 12 from 20 rests 8 which I place under the 0 and multiply the other figure of the divisor 4 by  making 8 with the 2 borne in mind, comes to be 10, taken from 12 there rests 2, so that 0 sh. divided by 46 the product is 12 shill. and there remayneth yet 28 shill. which must be brought into , multiplyed by 12 and it makes 336 the which must be divided by 46, saying in 33 how ma∣ny times 4, which is 7 times, the which I place in the quotient by the shillings, multiplying 7 by , which makes 42 from 46 there rests 4, the which I place under the 6, and keepe 4 in mind borrowed ad∣ding them with 4 times 7 they make 32, which deducted from 33, there rests 1, the which I place under the 3, so that 336 divided by 46 the perduct giveth 7 and there rests 14 d. to divide which is a thing of a small valew. So that if 46 peeces of cloth cost 673 l. the one will cost 14. l. 12. shill. 7. d. as may be seene by the example here under wrought. To shew the brevity of this manner of dividing, I will shew Another ex∣ample. here another example, which cannot without much difficulty be performed by the common manner of divison in cancelling the figures, and yet is very easily and compendiously performed is way, by observing the order which is before prescribed, and there∣fore to avoyd prolixity I shall not need here to put downe any particular explication, the example shall be thus then to, divide 19999100007 by 99999, which by the product doth give 199993 without any remaynder as shall appeare by the working here un∣derneath.
Division which is wrought by the rule of practise, is done in this manner by the help of the parts found therein, as for example, if 72 Another method of dividing by rule of pra∣ctise. peeces of sarges cost 169. l. 12 shil. how much will the peece stand in, then dividing by 72 I find first the parts thereof, and observe that 8 times 9 makes 72, I take then the  of the summe to be divided, saying the eighth part of 16 is 2, which I place under a line drawne, and the  of 9 is 1, there remains one pound which is 20 shil. which with the 12 makes 32, the  whereof is 4, so that the eighth of the said 169 l. 12 shil. is 21 l. 4 shil. of which number I take the 1/9 (which shall be the price of the peece) in this manner, saying, the 1/9 of 21 is 2, the rest is 3 l. which is 60 shil. and with the 4 maketh 64 shil. of which the 1/9 is 7, then there rests 1, which is 12 pence, and the 1/9 of 12 is 1, so that the ninth part of 21 l. 4 shil. is 2 l. 7 shil. 1 d. the price of the peece as by this example is shewed, But when it happens that any broken numbers fall in the divisor, the divisor and the summe to be divided, must then be reduced to Note ano∣ther ex∣ample. one and the selfe same denominator, as for example, If 13  peeces should cast 264 l. 17 shil. 6 d. what would the peece stand in? to doe which I reduce into halfes the peeces 13  multiplying the same by 2 making 27 halfes, doing the same with the summe to be divided, multiplying it by 2 which comes to be l. 529. 15, which to be divi∣ded by 27, must be considered that 3 times 9 is 27, therefore must be taken  and 1/9 of the said third in this manner saying  of 5 is 1, of 22 is 7 and of 19 is 6, and there remaines 1 pound which is 20 shil. which with the 15 makes 35, the  of which is 11 and there rests 2 shil. which are 24 pence, the  whereof is 8, and afterward taking the of  the said  saying, the  of 17 is 1, and of 86 is 9, and there s 5 l. which with the 11 shil. is 111 shil. the 1/9 whereof is 12, then rests 3 shil. which with the 8 d remaining is 44 d, the  whereof is 4, so that the product of the said 1/9 giveth 19 l. 12 shil. 4 d, the value of the said peece, as by example, Againe, at 34 l. 16 shil. the 21  yards, how much will the yard amount unto, doe this as the preceding rule, putting the yard into Another. thirds, in multiplying them by 3 they make 64 for divisor to 34 l. 16
also multiplied by 3 which make 104 l. 8 shil. which to divide by 64, is to be considered that 8 times 8 is 64, and therefore the ⅛ of an eight is the price of a yard, as example, Many other divisions are resolved in the same manner as the pre∣ceding, which I willingly here omit, and referre them to the oc∣currences of traffique that shall happen herein, and now I will pro∣ceed to Multiplication abreviated, by which two rules both the golden Rule of three, and many other in Arithmetique are wrought and performed, commodious and necessary to this Tract of Exchan∣ges and this Map of Commerce, as being indeed the proper rules, by which the Exchanges in this book are cast up and calculated. The method that hath beene shewed in the former Division, may in some sort serve also in multiplication in this manner, suppose you Multiplica∣tion abrevi∣ated. were to multiply 56 yards by 4 l. 18 shil. 9 d. you must consider that 56 is composed of 7 times 8, and therefore you must multiply the said 4. 18. 9. by 7, and its product by 8, beginning with the pence, and saying 7 times 9 is 63, I write 3 pence, and retaine 5 shill. which I ad with 7 times 8 which make 61, write then 1 and retain 6 which added to 1 times 7 makes 13 which is 6 l. 10 shil. and following the common method of addition, I put downe one ten, and retaine 6 l. which I add with 4 times 7, and they make 34 l. the which product I multiply againe by 8, beginning to multiply by the pence which are with the pounds, and then by the shil. calculating for 12 d, one shill. and for 20 shill. 1 pound they then make 276 l. 10 shil. for the value of 56 yards as shall be more plainly demonstrated by this Example following.
Many other questions may be answered as the above sayd, but yet note, that to multiply by an uneven number, such as is 31, 43, Another Example. and the like, then do in this manner, posito I demand at 5l. 9. sh. 3. d. the yard, what will 43 yards come unto, now for as much as 43, hath no dividable parts I take 42, multiplying it by 6 and by 7, as hath beene shewed, and for the yard that doth remaine I adde to the last multiplication 5. l. 9. 3. d. which is the cost of 1 yard and it makes 234 l. 17. 9. d. the cost of 43 yards as may be observed by the following example. But when there is any broken number in the yards or peeces, doc Another Ex-ample. thus by example, at l. 7. 14. 6 the peece, what will 81½ cost, then for 81 I multiply by 9 the cost of the peece, and its product againe by 9 because that 9 times 9 is 81 and I find l. 625. 14. 6 for the va∣lew of the said 81 peeces, and for the ½ peece I take the  of 7. l. 14. 6. d. and adding it thereto the same comes to be l. 629. 11. sh. 9. d. and so much the 81½ cost, example. But for as much as this may seeme difficult, I will here note an∣other Another way of Mul∣tiplication abreviated. way of Multiplication abreviated, serving as well in exchan∣ges or in marchandising posito; I would know what comes 154 yards unto, at 56 shillings the yard, to do this multiply the sayd yards, by the halfe of the sayd mony which is 28 sh. and in adding its pro∣duct, double the last figure taking that for so many shill. and the rest for pounds as doth appeare by this example following, which I adde in this manner, saying 2. 4. and 9 make 15, and after the ordinary manner, you must set downe 5, and beare 1 ten, but in this me∣thode,
you must double it, setting downe 10 for 5. the which doub∣led you must hold as so many shillings and so proceeding in the ad∣dition of the rest, and adding the tenth borne of 15, it will come to l. 431. 4. sh. the valew of 154 yards, and this note is to be obser∣ved in all other questions of this nature, as by example doth ap∣peare. There is yet another briefe way of Multiplication, used in France Another way of abre∣viated Mul∣tiplication. and many parts beyond the seas, which is done by taking the parts of 10 or of 100 in this manner, I would multiply 113 yards by 1¼ I note what part 1¼ is in 10 and find it to be ⅛ therefore is 113 yards to be multiplyed by 10, or else more briefe by adding an 0 and in taking the  which shall be the valew of the said 113 yards, and for to multiply by 1  you must take the  of the summe to be mul∣tiplyed, after you have added thereunto an o because that 1  is the  of 10, and for to multiply by 3  you must adde an o and take  because that 3⅓ is the  of 10 and so in many others, in taking alwayes the parts of 10, and note that the same may bee done in taking the parts of 100, as to multiply 137 yards by 8  you must adde two oo to the summe, then take , because that 8  is the , part of 100 and for to multiply by 12 , you must adde two oo and take the ⅛ because that the  of 100 is 12  as may be seene by these following examples. Againe at 3 shill: the pound, what will the 100 l. come unto? to Another ex∣ample. doe this in briefe a cipher is to be added to the cost of the pound
which is 3 sh. and it makes 30 of which summe take the ½ and it makes 15 l. which makes the cost of the hundred, and so for others by these examples following. Againe at 3 d. the pound, I would know how much 100 l. comes Another. unto, multiply the pence (which the pound is worth) by 5, and out of its product take 1/12 which shall be the cost of the quintall and to find the cost of the pound, you must multiply the valew of the hun∣dred by 12, and the ⅕ of the product is the cost of the pound as fol∣loweth by these examples. But I have wandred too farre, and proceeded farther in this subject than I intended, therefore here will conclude both the cal∣culations of Exchanges and these methods of abroviating the rules of Division and Multiplication, referring what is here by me omitted in both the sayd subjects to the ingenuous hand and head of the mysterious Exchanger. FINIS.
The Printers to the friendly Readers. GEntlemen, it is found true by daily experience, that one hand doth oftimes ease many mens labour, & as often (it must be granted) that many hands give ease to one mans paines, and makes, as the Proverb sayes, light worke; the first Assertion the Author hath made good in this Tract by his paines in your behalfes, the last, wee desire you to make good in his right, for being not well acquainted with the subject, and his publique and private affaires not per∣mitting his daily and continuall attendance at the Presse, may occasion the let slipping of some Errors, which unwillingly have past the Correctors hand, our will, and his knowledge, therefore wee entreat you lovingly to amend them where they are found, and courteously to accept both of ours and his good will and endcavours therein, so shall you encourage us to doe better hereafter, and endeavour so farre to please you in the future, that wee may make some satis∣faction to him for the Errors now committed, and rest ingaged to you for your love and courteous acceptance of our paines and care taken therein.
An Alphabeticall Table, comprehending the most notable things contained in this MERCHANTS MAPPE OF COMMERCE. A AFRICA bounded with longitude and latitude, Chap. 1 Asia bounded with its longitude and latitude, ib. America bounded, its longitude and latitude, ibid. Art of Merchandizing and the generall parts thereof, 2 A Merchant should know the forme of Acquittances, Let∣ters of Atturney, of account∣keeping and arithmetique, ib. To abbreviate the labour of weighing, 6 How to accord the weights of any two places, ibid. Of Accounts and account∣keepings, 7 Accounts kept diversly in di∣vers Cities and Countries, ib. The methode used in accounts is divers, ibid. Foure rules required in an Ac∣count, ibid. Artificiall commodities what, 9 America, and the Provinces thereof, 11 Andalusia nova, 13 Africa and the Provinces, 14 Argier and the trade thereof, containing the commodities, coines, weights, measures, accounts and customes there∣of, 16 Ain, and the commodities thereof, 27 Alexandria 28, and the trade of the commodities, weights, measures, 30 Asia and the Provinces there∣of, 40 Anatolia or Natolia, 41 Alexandretta or Scande∣rone, 42 Angora, with weights and measures, 50 Amasia, 51 Armenia and the Cities, Chap. 67, & 52 Mount Ararate, ibid. Acria and the trade thereof, 56 Containing weights, measures, and coines, ibid. Amano, and the trade there∣of, 58 Aleppo, and the trade there∣of, containing commodities, weights, coines, measures, accounts, customes thereof, &c. 63 Arabia, and the Provinces thereof, 68 Assyria, and the Cities there∣of, 69 Aden, and the trade there∣of, 71 Astracan and the trade there∣of, containing the weights measures thereof, &c. 85 Aracan and Ava, Chap. 95 and Chap 88 Agria, 90 Amadavar, ibid. Adams hills the paradise of Siloners, 102 Amboina Ilands. 103 Achin, and the trade there∣of, 105 Andalusia, 112 Alicant, and the trade there∣of, containing coines, ac∣counts, weights, measures, &c. 115 Alcala, ibid. Aragon, 119 Aquitania, 122 Aniou, 125 Avergne, 127 Avignon, 131 Abruzzo, 139 Apulia, and the trade there∣of, 141 Ancona, and the trade there∣of, 149 Aste a great Mart, 168 Antwerpe and the trade ther∣of, 179 Artois, ibid. Arras ibid. Amsterdam, and the trade thereof, 180 Albis River in Germany, 82 Alsatia. 185 Anpache, 186 Ausburg, and the trade ther∣of, 194 Austria, ibid. Amber, 209 Archangl in Moscovia, 220 Avalona or Valona, and the trade thereof, 243 Argos in Morea, 245 Arcadian plaines, ibid. Achaia, 246 Athens, ibid.
Albania, and the Cities there∣of, 246 M Ahos the holy moun∣taine, ibid. Adrianopolis. ibid. Adriatique Ilands, 254 Anglesey Iland, 269 and 262 Merchant Adventurers their originall and places of resi∣dencie of London, 267 Antwerpe Exchanges, 289 Alcala Exchanges, 294 Augusta Exchanges, 298 Custome of Acceptations of Bills of Exchanges in Lions, 302 Account of discounts and the manner thereof, used as well in Lions as in many other places of trade, 305 Account - keeping in Lions how, 307 Aggio of moneys practised in the payment of Bills of Ex∣changes in Rome, 340 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Antwerp, and how calculated, 435 Exchanges of Antwerpe with Lions, 436 Of Antwerpe with Placentia, 437 Of Antwerpe with Florence, 438 Of Antwerpe with Venice, 439 Of Antwerpe with London, 440 Of Termes of payment of Bills of Exchanges in Antwerpe, 441 Orders and Commission given and received in Exchanges at Antwerpe, 442 B Bartering in use of old, Chap. 2 Bargaining, ibid. Things considerable in Barte∣ring, ibid. Things considerable in Bar∣gaining, ibid. A Merchant ought to know the forme of a Bill of exchange, ibid. Of Bills lading, ibid. Of Bills of dept, ibid. The Burse or Exchange, 3 The Booke of rates of cu∣stomes, 4 Bartering and Exchanging before the use of gold and silver, 5 Brasilia, 13 Barbada Iland, ibid. Barmuda, or Summer Ilands, ibid. Barbarie, 14 Barbarie Merchants, 23 Borneo, 25 Boro, 27 Bithinia, and the Cities there∣of, 47 Brusia in Bithinia, the trade, commodities, coines, weights, measures and customes there∣of, 48 Baruti, with the trade of the coines, measures, weights thereof, 59 Babylon and the trade, contai∣ning the weights and mea∣sures, &c. thereof, 72 Balsara, and the trade thereof, containing the customes, commodities, weight and measures, 77 Bindamir, 79 Balasia, 88 Bengala, ibid. Barma, ibid. Boroche, and the trade there∣of, 90 Bassain, 92 Bengala, and the trade of that coast, 94 Banda, and Ilands of Moluc∣cos, 103 Batavia olim Jacetra, 104 Bantam and the trade there∣of, ibid. Borneo Iland, and the trade thereof, 106 Beniermasa, an English facto∣ry, ibid. Baiona and Biscay, 114 Barselona, and the trade ther∣of, 119 Burdeaux and the trade ther∣of. 124 Brittanie, 125 Burbon, 127 Brry and la Beuse, ibid. Burges and Beavois, ibid. Beaucarre, 129 Burgundie, 132 Bresse, ibid. Bisanson, ibid. Bollonia and the trade thereof, 143 Bressia and the trade thereof, 155 Brussels, 178 Breda, ibid. Bridges, 179 Breme & the trade therof, 184 Baccrai, 186 Baden, ibid. Bainsberge, ibid. Basil and the trade thereof, 193 Bavaria, 194 Bohemia, 195 Brandenburge, 196 Brunswicke and the trade thereof, 200 Beere of Lubeck famous, 205 Baltique Ilands, 210 Bornholme, ibid. Blesida, ibid. Bergen, one of the 4. ancient mart Towns of Europe, 216 Bodia in Sweden, 217 Buda in Hungarie, 234 Bulgaria, 235 Bosna, ibid. Beaumares in Anglesey, 262 Britaine and the Provinces, 268 Barkshire, 269 Buckingham shire, ibid. Bedford-shire, ibid. Barwicke, ibid. Brecknock-shire, ibid. Beauty of England. ibid. Barbary Merchants of Lon∣don,
their originall and de∣cay, 270 Barrie Exchanges, 286 Barselona Exchanges, 293 Bollonia Exchanges, 296 Bergamo Exchanges, 297 Bilan what, 302 Examples upon Exchanges practised in Barselona, and how calculated, 426 Exchanges of Barselona with Lions, 427 Exchanges of Barselona with Placencia. 428 Exchanges of Barselona with Saragosa, 429 Of Barselona with Valentia, 430 Of Barselona with Sivil, 431 Of Barselona with Lixborne, 432 Of Orders and Commissions gi∣ven & received in draughts and remittances, in Exchan∣ges made in Barselona 433 Termes of payment of bills of Exchanges in Barselona, 434 C The commodity of the know∣ledge of Geographie to Mer∣chants, Chap. 1 Cancer and Capricorne Tro∣piques, ibid. Commutations distinguished into three manners, 2 A Merchant should know the forme of all charter parties, ibid. Cities and Townes eminent in trade, onely mentioned in this Map, 3 Sixe parts required in a com∣pleat City and Town, ibid. What Cities are found fit for traffique and Commerce, ib. Two sorts of Cities of traf∣fique, ibid. Sea Cities of trade what, ibid. Land Cities of trade what, ib. Cities of trade in manuall arts, ibid. The Cities of trade mentioned in this Map of Commerce, ibid. Five places in a City depen∣ding upon trade, ibid. The Custome-house, ibid. The customes, impositions, and other duties paid by Mer∣chants upon goods, 4 Customes not alwaies alike in all places, ibid. Customes due upon all Com∣modities, ibid Customes differing, in regard of times, of places, of Cities, of Commodities, and of weight. ibid. Coines of sundry Countries u∣sed in traffique of Merchan∣dizing, 5 Coines made of silver and gold, ibid. A Capitall crime to debase or to alter any Princes Coine, ibid. Cargos in weights what, 6 Cain the inventer of Weights and Measures, 8 All Cities of trade have sworn and publique measures, ib. Of commodities used in mer∣chandizing, and the know∣ledge thereof, 9 All commodities are either naturall or artificiall ibid. All commodities knowne by the sences, ibid All Coines brought into one by exchanging, 10 Castella Aurea, 13 Chilo, ibid. Cuba, ibid. Caffaria, 27 Cape bona speransa, ibid. Carro 29. and the trade ther∣of, 31 Casir in the red Sea, 29 Captus, ibid. Caffa in the Euxine Sea, ibid. Cilicia and the Cities thereof, 42 Colloso, 46 Capadocia and the Cities thereof. 51 Celosyria and the Cities ther∣of. 61 Colcos. 67 Caldea and the Cities there∣of. 69 Cabin and the trade thereof. 76 Cusestam. 77 Cusan and the trade thereof. 78 Caramania. ibid. Carriage of commodities by Caravans. 81 Capha and the trade thereof; containing the coins, weights, measures and accounts there∣of, 85 Cathay and the Provinces. 86 Cambalu and the trade there∣of. 87 Conanor 88. and the trade. 92 Cambaia. 88 Canora. ibid. Camboia. ibid. Cauchinchina. ibid. Cambaia and the trade ther∣of. 90 Chaul and the trade thereof. 92 Cochin and the trade thereof. ibid. Calicut and the trade thereof. ibid. Coast of Cormandel and the trade thereof. 93 Custome in India for deptors. 94 China and the Provinces ther of. 98 Commodities of China. ibid. Cloves in aboundance in Mol∣luccos 102 Celebs Iland and the trade thereof, containing coines, weights, &c. thereof. 107 Ciprus and the trade thereof, containing commodities, coines, weights, measures. 108
Cartagena. 114 Castilia and the trade thereof, containing exchanges, coins, weights, measures. 116 Catalonia. 118 Callais and the trade thereof. 132 Champagne. ibid. Callabria and the trade there∣of. 140 Crema and the trade thereof. 157 Cremona and the trade ther∣of. 166 Como and the trade thereof. 167 Cambray. 179 Charlemond. ibid. Collen and the trade thereof. 185 Cleveland. ibid. Coines in generall of Germa∣ny. 206 Coines of Stoade, Hamburge, and Lubeque. ibid. Coines of Embden, Breme, E∣denburg, Brunswick, Mayen∣burg, Lipsicke, upper Germa∣ny, Bohemia, Switzerland, ib. Coppenhagen 210. and the trade thereof. 211 Candora in Moscovia. 219 Cracovia and the trade there∣of. 223 Coninburg and the trade ther∣of. 226 Corne measures of Eastland, reduced to that of sundry o∣ther Countries. 231 Croatia. 236 Corono and the trade thereof. 239 Cattarro and the trade there∣of. 240 Caranto anciently Corinth, a famous Mart in Morea. 245 Constantinople and the trade thereof. 247 Coos Iland. 249 Candia Iland, and the trade thereof. 51 Cerigo Iland. ibid. Cursolari Ilands. ibid. Corsu Iland and the trade thereof. 252 Corsica Iland. 258 Callarie and the trade thereof. 259 Capre Iland. 261 Cadis or Gades. ibid. Conaght in Ireland. 263 Foure circuits in Wales. 268 Cornwall. 269 Cambridge-shire. ibid. Cheshire. ibid. Cumberland. ibid. Carnarvan-shire. ibid. Cardigan-shire. ibid. Caermarden-shire. ibid. Sixe Circuits in England. ib. Cities of Exchanges in Eu∣rope. 273 Collen Exchanges. 290 The Captaine of Mosambi∣que, the greatest Merchant of that coast. 28 D Description of Countries con∣duceth to the description of Cities, Chap. 1 Division of the world into 4 parts, ibid. Distance of places how found out, ibid. Dutie of building of a Shippe, belonging to the Shipwright, 2 Dutie of Shippes provision be∣longing to Owners and Out∣readers, ibid. Dutie of Sayling a Shippe be∣longing to Navigators. ibid. Dutie of Imploying of Shippes belonging to Merchants. ibid. Denarius how called. 5 The best way of accounts is by Debitor and Creditor. 7 Divers Countries have a di∣versitie in their measures. 8 Decaying commodities what. 9 Damietta. 29 Damascus and the trade, con∣taining the coines, waights, measures, commodities there∣of, &c. 62 Derbent. 73 Dellia. 88 Dieu and the trade thereof, and of that coast and the commodities. 89 Damain in India. 92 Customes in India for Deb∣tors. 94 The Dutch Forts and trade in Amboina Ilands. 103 Denia and the trade thereof. 118 Dolphine. 127 Duke of Florence a great Merchant. 159 Drie measures of severall Ci∣ties in the Levant Seas com∣pared. 161 Dukedome of Millan. 164 Dunkerke. 179 Doway. ibid. Delphe. ibid. Doree. ibid. Danubius River. 182 Dresden and the trade there∣of. 199 Denmarke and the Provin∣ces. 210 Dithmar i Denmarke. ibid. Dansicke and the trade there∣of. 224 Dacia and the Cities there∣of 235 Dalmatia. 236 Delos or Delphos. 249 Dublin the Metropolis of Ire∣land, and the trade thereof. 264 Foure Dioceses in Wales. 268 Devonshire. 269 Dorsetshire. ibid. Darbyshire. ibid. Durham. ibid. Denbighshire. ibid. Declaration of the Table of Exchanges. 274 Double usance what. 299 Account of Discounts used
in Lions and elsewhere. 305 Dayes and nights differ ac∣cording to the Latitude. 1 E Aequinoctiall what. Chap. 1 Europe and its bounds, lati∣tude and longitude. ibid. Eclipse of the Sunne and Moone when seene. ibid. Exchanging the third manner of Commutation. 2 Exchanging drawne into a profitable art, and the rea∣sons thereof. ibid. Things considerable in Ex∣changing. ibid. Esterlin Moneys in England. 5 Of Exchanges in generall u∣sed by Merchants. 10 The excellency of a Bill of Exchange. ibid. The Exchanger rectifieth the disorders of mints, and the necessitie of prices. ib. Estotiland. 12 Aethiopia and the Provinces. 26 Elephants teeth. 27 Aegypt and the Provinces. 29 The trade of Egypt in times past. ibid. Aegypt weights compared with others. 34 Euphesus. 44 Eolis, the first Merchants. 46 Euphrates. 54 Three excellencies in Cas∣bin. 76 Exendu, and the largenesse thereof. 87 The English the last traders into India. 107 English Consull at Ciprus. 108 Europe and the Kingdomes thereof. 110 Escuriall. 115 English subjection at Blois upon the River of Gerond. 124 English hall in Roven for wool. 126 East Frisland. 182 Embden and the trade there∣of. 183 Elsinor and the trade there∣of. 212 Elbin and the trade there∣of, 225 Epidaurus. 245 Epirus. 246 The English the greatest tra∣ders of any Christians into Constantinople. 247 Mount Etna in Sicilia. 256 Elba Iland. 261 Edenburgh and the trade thereof. 266 Essex. 269 East India Merchants of Lon∣don their originall. 270 Eastland Merchants their o∣riginall. ibid. Of Exchanges in generall, with the method and man∣ner thereof, as practised in Christendome. 273 Exchanging places. ibid What Exchanges are, &c. ib. Declaration of the Table of Exchanges. 274 Of the Exchanges of Placen∣tia. 276 The Exchanges of Lions, Pa∣ris. 277 The Exchanges of Rome. 278 The Exchanges of Genoa. 279 Exchanges of Millain. 280 Exchanges of Venice. 281 Exchanges of Florence. 282 Exchanges of Lucca. 283 Exchanges of Naples. 284 Exchanges of Leccie. 285 Exchanges of Barrie. 286 Exchanges of Palermo. 287 Exchanges of Mesina. 288 Exchanges of Antwerpe and Collen. 289 Exchanges of London. 290 Exchanges of Valentia. 291 Exchanges of Saragosa. 292 Exchanges of Barselona. 293 Exchanges of Sivil, Alcala, Medina del campo in Casti∣lia. 294 Exchanges of Lixborne. 295 Exchanges of Bollonia. 296 Exchanges of Bergamo. 297 Exchanges of Francfort, No∣rimberge, Augusta, Vien∣na. 198 How the rates and prices in Exchanges are setled a∣mongst Merchants. 300 Of Examples upon Exchan∣ges practised at Lions, and how the same are calcula∣ted. 302 Examples of the Exchanges of Lions with the profit of the profits thereof, as interest up∣on interest. 304 Certaine and incertaine prices in Exchanges what. 323 Examples of Exchanges in Rome, and how the same are calculated. 325 Examples of Exchanges in Naples, and how the same are calculated. 342 Examples of Exchanges in Genoa, and how the same are calculated. 360 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Venice, and how to be calculated. 368 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Placentia, and how calculated. 382 Questions of Exchanges in Placentia, 399 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Florence, and how calculated. 400 Exchanges practised at Mil∣lain, and how the same are to be calculated. 410 Exchange practised at Paler∣mo and Mesina, and how to be calculated. 419 Exchanges of Balona, Si∣vill, Lisborne, Valentia and Satagosa, and how the same
is calculated. 426 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Antwerp, and how calculated. 435 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Lonon, and how calculated. 443 The excellency of the Palme∣tree. 30 F Florida. Chap. 12 Fishing in New-found-land. ibid. Fesse and the Provinces ther∣of. 20 The Citie of Fesse, with the cōmodities, moneys, weights, measures, and customes ther∣of. 21 The manner of farming the Pepper in India by the Por∣tugalls. 92 The fortune of Siam and Pe∣gu. 96 Firando and the trade there∣of. 101 France and the Provinces thereof. 122 French not addicted to trade. 127 Forraine weights compared with the weights of Lions. 129 Farara and the trade there∣of. 144 Florence and the Cities of that Dukedome. 159 Florence and the trade of that Citie. 160 Flushing. 180 Franconia. 186 Francford and the trade ther∣of. 191 Fountaine of Salt in Lim∣burg. 201 Friburg and the trade there∣of. 202 Fionia. 210 Fincria. ibid. Finmarke. 216 Finland in Sden. 217 The French Nation the third eminent traders into Tur∣kie. 247 Fromentarie. 261 Frisland. 262 Flint. 269 French Merchants of Lon∣don their Originall. 270 Florence Exchanges. 282 Francford Exchanges. 298 Faires and Marts what 299 Faires in Lions when. 324 Examples of Exchanges used in Florence, and how calcu∣lated. 400 Exchanges of Florence with Lions. 401 Of Florence with Placentia. 402 Of Florence with Venice. 403 Of Florence with Rome. 404 Of Florence with Naples 405 Of Florence with Antwerpe. 406 To reduce Crowne of 7 livers in Florence to Crown of gold of 7½ li. 407 Termes of payments of Bills of Exchange in Florence. 408 Orders and Commissions in Exchanges practised in Flo∣rence. 409 G Geographie delightfull, pro∣fitable and necessary to Merchants. Chap. 1 Geographie demonstrated in Maps and Sea cards. ibid. Gold and silver the most ex∣cellent of mettals. 5 Nova Granada. 13 Guiana. ibid. Goaga. 25 Genin and Benin, and their trade, with their customes, coines, weights, measures, and manner of accounting ibid. Gordion. 46 Gallacia and the Cities there∣of. 50 Grograme trade. ibid. Galelia. 66 Gasa and the trade thereof. 66 Georgia. 67 Gedrosia. 78 Gombrone and the trade thereof. 80 Ganges the famous River. 88 Goa and the trade thereof, con∣taining the commodities, coines, weights and mea∣sures. 91 The greatnes of China. 98 Granado and the trade there∣of. 113 Geneva and the trade thereof. 136 Genoa and the trade thereof. 174 Guelderland. 178 Gante. 179 Graveling. ibid. Groeing. 180 Germany and the Provinces thereof. 182 Grats. 194 Gorlits. 195 Germany accounts and coines. 206 Gothland in Sweden. 217 Grecia and the Provinces ther of. 238 Galipolis or Calipolis. 246 Gallata. 247 The government of the trade of the English into Constan∣tinople. ibid. Groanland. 262 Garnsey Iland. ibid. Glocester-shire. 269 Glamargan-shire. ibid. Green-land Merchants of London their originall. 270 Genoa Exchanges. 279 Genoa Exchanges and how calculated. 360 Exchanges of Genoa with Placentia. 361 To reduce livers of curant money into livers of gold in
Genoa. ibid. Exchanges of Genoa with Lions. 362 Of Genoa with Millan. 363 Of Genoa with Venice. 364 Of Genoa with Naples. 365 Orders and commissions in Ge∣noa. 366 Termes of payment of bills of Exohanges in Genoa. 367 Galetta in Tunes. 15 Granatins or Moro francos. ibid. H Hundred weights what. Chap. 6 Hispaniola. 13 Hispahan and the trade there∣of, containing the commodi∣ties, coines, accounts, weights, measures thereof, and Persia. 81 The Hollanders the second tra∣ders into India. 107 Holland. 179 Henalt. ibid. Harlem. ibid. Hanstowns in Germany. 182 Hidleberg and the trade ther∣of. 189 Helvetia. 191 Hasia. 201 Hamburg and the trade ther∣of. 204 Holsatia. 210 Hungaria and the Cities ther∣of. 234 The Hollanders the least tra∣ders into Turkey, of the we∣sterne Christians. 246 Mount Hibla in Sicilia. 256 Hebrides Iles. 262 Hamshire. 269 Hartfordshire. ibid. Huntington-shire. ibid. Hereford-shire. ibid. Halfe Usance what. ibid. I A Merchant should know the forme of Intimations and protests. Chap. 2 Impositions upon goods. 4 An Instrument to find out the agreement of measures in any two Cities or places. 8 Jucatan. 12 Iles of Salomon. 13 Iles of Baccalos. ibid. Iland of Beriquen. ibid. Jamaica. ibid. Iland St. Thomas. 37 Ilands Canaries, and the trade thereof. 38 Ilands Tarceras or Asores. 39 Ionia and the Cities thereof. 44 Iordan the River. 65 Idumea. ibid. Iudea. ibid. Ierico. 66 Ierusalem. ibid. Iasques in Persia. 80 India and the Provinces ther∣of. 88 Ilands of Afia and their trade. 100 Ilands of Iapan and their trade containing their coines, weights, measures. &c. 101 Iland of Silon and the trade. 102 Inhabitants of Sylon excellent and rare Tumblors and Mo∣risdancers. ibid. Ilands of Molluccos and the trade. 103 Ilands of Iava and the trade. 104 Iacettra, baptised Batavia. ib. Iaparra and the trade thereof ibid. Iambe and the trade thereof. 105 Ile of France. 126 Italy and the Provinces there∣of. 137 Imperiall Townes in Germa∣ny. 182 Iutland in Denmarke. 210 Iulin an ancient Mart. 229 Illvria. 236 The trade of the Ilands sea∣ted in the Ionian, Egron, mediterranean and adria∣tique Seas. 248 Ithecca, and the trade there∣of. 252 Iuisa Iland and the trade ther∣of. 261 Iscia Ilands. ibid. Island. 262 Iarsey Iland. ibid. Ireland and the trade there∣of. 263 Ingland and the Cities there∣of. 269 Levant Merchants of London their Originall and splendor. 270 Ignorant Exchangers cen∣sure the judicious if varying from the custome of Exchan∣ging. 273 Dates of Exchanges in Lions which may serve for the rate of interest in any other place. 303 Interest payd upon rebate. 304 K The Kings beame or waigh∣house Chap. 3 How a Merchant may have a knowledge in all commo∣dities. 9 The Kingdomes now in sub∣jection to the Grand Signior 67 Kent. 26. Kings of Portugall great Merchants into India. 28 L Latitude how accounted. Chap. 1 The longitude of a place how to be found out. ibid. The latitude of a place how to be found. ibid. Latitude and longitude found out by the Meridians, ibid. Lucay Ilands. 13 Lybia and the Provinces. 24 Lidia. 46
Liconia and the Cities. 52 Lahoare. 90 Lawiander. ibid. Lxborne and the trade there∣of, containing coines weights, measures and customes of Portugall. 117 Locram. 125 Limosin. 127 Lions and the trade thereof. 128 Languedoc. 129 Loraine. 132 Loretta. 147 Leghorne and the trade ther∣of. 173 Lucca and the trade thereof. 175 Limburge. 178 Liedge. ibid. Luxenburge. ibid. Lovaine. ibid. Lisle. 179 Laiden. ibid. Lipsicke and the trade there∣of. 197 Luneburge and the trade ther∣of. 201 Lubecke and the trade therof. 205 Lappia in Swethland. 218 Livonia. 222 Lituania. ibid. Larta and the trade thereof. 244 Lepanto and the trade therof. 245 Lemnos. 248 Lesbos. 249 Lipara Iland. 261 Lemster in Ireland. 263 Lecester-shire. 269 Lincolne-shire. ibid. Lankeshire. ibid. London and the trade thereof. 270 Liberty of Exchanging. 273 The Exchanges of Lions. 277 Lucca Exchanges. 283 Leccie Exchanges. 285 London Exchanges. 290 Lisborne Exchanges. 295 Examples upon Exchanges in Lions, and how calculated. 302 Custome of acceptions of bills of Exchanges in Lions. ibid. The price of Exchanges setled in Lions for succeeding faires ibid. Recounters in Lions what. ib. Rules of casting up the Exchan ges made in Lions. ibid. Rates of Exchanges in Lions, which may serve for the rates of interest in many o∣ther places. 303 The reason and benefit of the rules of Exchanges in Lions. ibid. Examples of the Exchanges of Lions, with the profit of the profits thereof. 304 Account of disaccounts in Li∣ons and in many other places. 305 Exchanges of Lions with Rome. 307 Exchanges of Lions with Flo∣rence. 308 Exchanges of Lions with Luc∣ca. 309 Exchanges of Lions with Na∣ples. 310 Exchanges of Lions with Pa∣lermo. 311 Exchanges of Lions with Ge∣noa. 312 Exchanges of Lions with Mil∣lan. 313 Exchanges of Lions with Ve∣nice. 314 Exchanges of Lions with Bo∣lonia. 315 Exchanges of Lions with Pla∣cencia. 316 Exchanges of Lions with Ant∣werp. 317 Exchanges of Lions with Lon∣don. 318 Exchanges of Lions with Francfort. 319 Exchanges of Lions with Si∣vil. 320 Exchanges of Lions with Lix∣borne. 321 Exchanges of Lions with Bar∣selona. 322 Orders and commissions for Ex change in Lions. 323 The faires of Lions. 324 Exchanges of Lixborne. 42 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in London, and how cal∣culated 443 Exchanges of London with Lions. 444 Exchanges of London with Florence. 445 Exchanges of London with Venice. 446 Of London with Antwerpe. 447 Orders, and commissions, in draughts and remittances in Exchanges in London. 448 Termes of payments of bils of Exchanges in London. 449 M MERCHANDIZING the first Schoole of the present government of many Coun∣tries. Chap. 1 The use of Mappes and Sea-Cards in generall. ibid. Meridian what. ibid. Meridians and their use. ibid. Merchandizing accounted an Art. 2 The materialls of Merchandi∣zing are commodities and moneys. ibid. The dutie of Merchants. ibid. A Merchant ought to know I the forme of a bill of Ex∣change, 2 of all intimations & protests, 3 of Charter par∣ties, 4 bills tading, 5 Policies of assurance, 6 of bills of debt, 7 of a release, 8 of Leters of Atturney, 9 of account keep∣ing, and 10 arithmetique ib. The Merchants purse and per∣son supplyes many defects in
a Citie. 3 Magazins for commodities. ib. Met-house. ibid. Merchants must learne what customes are and duly pay them. 4 Moneys of Leather in Saint Dominco. 5 Moneys of shells in Tombu∣to. ibid. Moneys of iron in Massa. ibid. Moneys of lumaches in Con∣go. ibid. Moneys of glasse in Melinda. ibid. Moneys of Salt and Paper in Cathay. ibid. Moneys of Gansa in Pegu. ib. Moneys of almonds in Benga∣la. ibid. Moneys of dead mens skulls in Sumatra. ibid. Moneys of Pepper and Cocos in India. ibid. Moneys called by three seve∣rall names. ibid. Moneta what and how called. ibid. The Merchant must be versed in all weights. 6 Of measures in generall. 8 False measures are punishable by the Magistrate. ibid. Measures of solid bodies, of dry and liquid commodities, ibid. All measures to the Mer∣chant must be as one mea∣sure. ibid. A Merchant must be seene in all commodities, and in all trades. 9 A Merchant must know the value of all commodities. ib. A Merchant must reduce the knowledge of commodities to a profitable end. ibid. Merchants should know how to preserve all commodities. ib. Merchants should know how to better their commodities. ibid. The mysterie of Exchanges reduced to profitable princi∣palls. 10 Mexicana and the Provinces. 12 Mexico and the commodities. ibid Manoa the golden Citie. 13 Margarita. ibid. Kingdome of Morocco. 22 Citie of Morocco with the trade, containing the com∣modities, coins, weights, mea∣sures, and customes thereof. 23 Mosambique, and the trade thereof, containing coines, weights, measures and com∣modities thereof. 28 Monomotapa. 27 Manica. ibid Manicongo. ibid Merchants of six sorts in Cai∣ro. 31 Madagascar, otherwise Saint Laurence. 35 Midium. 46 Medina Talnabi and Meccha. 68 Mesopotamia and the Cities. 69 Mocha and the trade, contai∣ning the coines, weights, mea∣sures thereof. 70 Media and the Cities thereof. 73 Mallavar Chap. 88. and the trade of that coast. 92 Mandoa. 88 Macin. ibid. The Merchants that in gene∣rall are found to traffique in India. ibid. Musulapatam and the trade of the coast of Cormandil, with the coines, weights, measures of that place and coast. 93 Maccau in China. 95 Mallacca, and the trade there∣of, as the weights, measures, coines, &c. thereof. 97 Moonsons at Mallacca. ibid. Maccau and the trade there∣of, containing the commodi∣ties, coines, weights, &c. thereof. 99 Maccassar and the trade ther∣of, containing weights, mea∣sures, coines, &c. 107 Malaga and the trade thereof, containing coines, customes, weights, measures. 114 Murcia. ibid. Madrid. 115 Measures of Spaine reduced to the English yard of London. 120 Maine. 125 St. Mallos and Morlais in Brit∣tany. ibid. Moneys lately inhansed in France. 127 Molins. ibid. Mart of Lions formerly in Ge∣neva. 128 Marselia and the trade there∣of. 131 Modena and the trade there∣of. 145 Millan and the trade thereof. 165 Mantoua and the trade there∣of. 168 Mirandola and the trade ther∣of. 172 Mastricht. 178 Marquisate. ibid. Middleburge. 180 Maclin. ibid. Measures of Netherlands re∣duced to the measures of London. ibid. Ments. 186 Meclinburge. 196 Measures of Germany redu∣ced to London. 208 Measures of Denmarke to London. 214 Moscovia and the Provinces. 219 Mosco and the trade thereof. 220 Massovia. 222 Moldavia. 235
Modona and the trade there∣of. 239 Morea and the trade thereof. ibid. Misene in Morea. 245 Marathron. 246 Megara. ibid. Macedonia. ibid. Migdonia. ibid. Mastique. 248 Messina and the trade there∣of. 257 Malta Iland. ibid. Majorca and Minorque, and the trade thereof. 260 Man Iland. 262 Munster in Ireland. 263 Meth in Ireland. ibid. Middlesex. 269 Merioneth-shire. ibid. Mountgomery-shire. ibid. Monmouth-shire. ibid. Merchants Adventurers of London their Originall and places of residence. 270 Moscovia Merchants of Lon∣don their Originall. ibid. Measures used in England. 272 Manner of Exchanging. 273 Millan Exchanges. 280 Mesina Exchanges. 288 Medina del campo Exchan∣ges. 294 Exchanges practised at Milan, and how the same are calcu∣lated 410 Exchanges of Milan with Li∣ons. 411 Of Millan with Placentia. 412 Of Milan with Venice. 413 Of Milan with Rome. 414 Of Milan with Naples. 415 Of Milan with Genoa. 416 Termes of payment of bills of Exchanges in Milan. 417 Orders and commissions given and received in Exchanges in Millan. 418 Exchanges of Mesina and Pa∣lermo. 419 N The duety of Navigators. Chap. 2 Nummus what. 5 Naturall commodities what. 9 The necessity and commodi∣ousnesse of Exchanges. 10 Nicaragua. 12 Norumbega. ibid. Nova francia. ibid. Nombre de dios. 13 Numidia and the Provinces. 24 Negrita and the trade therof. 25 Navigation to India. 28 Nilus River. 9 Narsinga. 88 Nanquin. 98 Normandie. 125 Nevers. 127 Naples and the Cities therein. 138 Naples and the trade thereof. 139 Nimingen. 178 Newporte. 179 Namurce. ibid. Norimberge, 186 And the trade thereof. 190 Northgoia. 195 Norwaie and the Provinces. 216 Nodrosia in Norway. ibid. Novegrade in Moscovia. 219 St. Nicholas in Moscovia. 220 Negroponte. 249 Northerne Ilands. 262 Norfolke. ibid. Northampton-shire. ibid. Nottingham-shire. ibid. Northumberland. ibid. Naples Exchanges. 284 Norimberge Exchanges. 298 Exchanges of Naples with Li∣ons. 343 Exchanges of Naples how cal∣culated. 342 Exchanges of Naples with Placentia. 344 Exchanges of Naples with Rome. 345 Exchanges of Naples with Florence. 346 Exchanges of Naples with Venice. 347 Exchanges of Naples with Millan. 348 Exchanges of Naples with Leccie and Bary. 349 Exchanges of Naples with Mesina. 350 Exchanges of Naples with Palermo. 351 Exchanges of Naples with Genoa. 352 Exchanges of Naples with Antwerp. 353 Exchanges of Naples with London. 354 Exchanges of Naples with Valencia. 355 Exchanges of Naples with Sivil. 356 Exchanges of Naples with Lisborne. 357 Termes of payment of bills of Exchanges in Naples. 358 Orders and commissions in Na∣ples. 359 O The duety of owners of Ships. Chap. 2 The originall of customes. 4 Officers fees of custome-houses to be known and discharged. ibid. Merchants should write downe their observations upon com∣modities. 9 Ocknams brave attempt. 13 Oran, with the coines, weights and measures thereof. 17 Originall of the company of Merchants of Turkey and East India. 23 Ormus and the trade thereof. 80 Restored to the Persian scepter by the valour of the English. ibid. Orders of Caravans from Sy∣ria to Balsara. ibid.
Orleans. 127 Oyles of Provence how bought 130 Oyles how measured in Thol∣lon. ibid. Orange. 131 Ottranto. 139 Oversells. 180 Odera River. 182 Ossenbregs. 184 Olmuts. 195 Olympian games. 245 Ocean Ilands. 262 Orchades. ibid. Oxford-shire. 269 Orders and commissions given and received for draughts and remittances of Exchan∣ges in Lions. 323 Orders and commissions given and received for draughts and remittances of Exchan∣ges in Rome. 341 Orders and commissions given and received for draughts and remittances in Exchan∣ges in Naples. 359 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Genoa. 366 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Venice. 380 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Placencia. 398 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Florence. 409 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Millan. 418 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Palermo and Mesina. 425 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Barselona. 434 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Antwerpe. 442 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in London. 448 Originall of Burses, of places for meeting of Merchants. 181 P Parallels what. Chap. 1 Poles articke and antarticke. ibid. A Merchant should know the form of policies of assurance. 2 Pecunia what and how called. 5 A principall part of merchan∣dising consists in the knowledge of commodities. 9 How to find out the Par of Ex∣changes. 10 The price of the Exchange, at the disposall of the Exchan∣ger. ibid. The particulars observed in the MAP of COMMERCE. ib. Peruana and the Provinces. 13 Panama. ibid. Peru. ibid. Pamphilia. 43 Phrigia. 46 Pontus and the Cities thereof. 49 Pompey's Piller. ibid. Paphlagonia and the Cities. 50 Pisidia and the Cities. 52 Phoenicia and the Cities. 55 Palestine and the Cities. 65 Place of Paradise. 71 Pigeons letter carryers. 72 Persia and the Provinces ther∣of. 75 Persis. ibid. Policies of Casan. 78 Parthia. 80 Pegu. 88 The manner of farming the pepper in India by the Por∣tugals. 92 Pegu and the trade of that coast. 95 Pottana and the trade thereof. 96 Priaman and the trade there∣of. 105 Philipine Ilands. 107 The Portugall the first Ma∣sters of the trade of India. 107 Portugall. 116 Poitou. 125 Paris & the trade therof. 127 Perigort. ibid. Provence. 129 Picardie. 131 Papacie and the Cities there∣of. 142 Padoua and the trade thereof. 153 Pisa and the trade thereof. 162 Parma and the trade thereof. 170 Placencia and the trade there∣of. 171 Principalities in Germany. 182 Preslave. 195 Prague and the trade thereof. 196 Pomerania. 197 plescovia. 219 Permia. ibid. Petrosa. ibid. Pollonia and the Provinces thereof. 222 Podolia. ibid. Podlasia. ibid. Prussia. ibid. Trade in generall of Poland and East-land. 233 Presberge. 234 Pretras and the trade thereof. 239 Pernassus Mount. 24 Pera. ibid. Pathmos Iland. 249 Palermo and the trade there∣of. 257 Panteleria Iland. 261 Progita. ibid. Pomonia Iles. 262 Penbroke-shire. 269 The Exchanges of Placencia. 277
The Exchanges of Paris. 277 Palermo Exchanges. 288 The Par in Exchanges what. 301 Princes Par in Exchanges. 301 Merchants Par in Exchanges. ibid. Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Placencia, and how calculated. 382 Exchanges of Placencia with Lions. 383 Of Placencia with Genoa. 384 Of Placencia with Rome. 385 Of Placencia with Florence. 386 Of Placencia with Palermo. 387 Of Placencia with Venice. 388 Of Placencia with Millan. 389 Of Placencia with Naples. 390 Of Placencia with Sivil. 391 Of Placencia with Valencia. 392 Of Placencia with Antwerp. 393 Of Placencia with Bergamo. 394 Of Placencia with Lucca. 395 Of Placencia with Frankfort. 396 Of Placencia with London. 397 Of orders and commissions gi∣ven and received in exchan∣ges in Placencia. 398 Questions upon Exchanges in Placencia. 399 Exchanges practised in Paler∣mo and Mesina, and how the same is calculated. 419 Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Lions. 420 Of Palermo, &c. with Placen∣cia. 421 Of Palermo, &c. with Naples. 422 Of Palermo, &c. with Venice. 423 Of Palermo, &c. with Barse∣lona. 424 Of Palermo and with Sarago∣a and Valencia. ibid. Orders and commissions in Pa∣lermo and Mesina, given and received in Exchanges there. 425 Piraticall trade of Tunes and Argier. 19 Q Quivira. Chap. 12 Quiloa. 27 Quitiana. ibid. Quinsay. 98 Quento of money what. 116 Quercu. 127 The Qualitie of money ex∣changed. 273 Questions upon exchanges that are practised in Placen∣tia. 399 R Roves in weighing what. Chap. 6 Rotolos in weighing what. ib. Rio de la platta. 13 Regall Contracts. 28 Rosetta on Nilus. 29 Rovenas of Aegypt. 31 Rhubarbe. 85 River of Martaban. 95 River of Menan. 96 Rarities found in Sumatra. 105 Rotchell and the trade there∣of. 125 Roven and the trade there∣of. 126 Runano and the trade there∣of. 146 Ravenna and the trade there∣of. 147 Ricanti and the trade there∣of. 148 Rome and the trade there∣of. 150 Rotterdam a seate of the Merchant-Adventurers of London. 179 River of Rhine. 182 Rivers of Moscovia. 219 Rhesian. ibid. Russia Niger. 222 Rhiga and the trade there∣of. 227 Revell and the trade there∣of. 228 Rasia. 235 Rhagusa and the trade there∣of. 237 Rhodes and the trade there∣of. 250 Rutland-shire. 269 Richmond-shire. ibid. Radnor-shire. ibid. The Exchanges of Roven. 277 The Exchanges of Rome. 278 Rescounters in Lions what. 302 Rules of casting up the Ex∣changes made in Lions. ibid. Rates of Exchanges in Lions, which may serve for rates of interest in many other pla∣ces. 303 A Table for casting up the account of Rebatments. 305 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Rome, and how the same are to be calculated. 326 Exchanges of Rome with Pla∣cencia. 327 Exchanges of Rome with Florence. 328 Exchanges of Rome with Venice. 329 Exchanges of Rome with Millan. 330 Exchanges of Rome with Naples. 331 Exchanges of Rome with Ge∣noa. 332 Exchanges of Rome with Palermo. 333 Exchanges of Rome with Antwerpe. 334 Exchanges of Rome with London. 35 Exchanges of Rome with
Valentia, Saragosa and Bar∣selona. 336 Exchanges of Rome with Si∣vil. 337 Exchanges of Rome with Lis∣borne. 338 Termes of payments of bills of Exchange in Rome. 339 Aggio of moneys in Rome. 340 Orders and commissions by Ex∣change in Rome. 341 S Shipping distinguished into foure parts, as the dutie of foure distinct persons. Chap. 2 The  dutie. ibid. Strictnsse for not paying cu∣stomes in Russia, Denmarke, Swedn, Spaine, in Eng∣land, Scotland, Germany, France. Ialie, Netherlands and Turkie. 4 Severall sorts of moneys in use in severall Countries. 5 Shippons in weights what. 6 Stones in weights what. ibid. Staple commodities what. 9 Sugar-trade. 25 Soffala. 27 Sues in the red Sea, 29 and the trade thereof. 33 Suachen and the trade, con∣taining the commodities, mea∣sures and weights thereof. 32 Sma, with the commodi∣ties, coines, accounts, weights, measures, customes, and the trade thereof. 45 Minerall Salt. 51 Syria in generall. 54 Sidon and the trade, contai∣ning coines, weights and mea∣sures thereof. 58 Syrophoenicia and the Cities thereof. ibid Samaria. 65 Sciras and the trade thereof. 79 Sarmacand. 86 Siam. 88 Surrat and the trade, contai∣ning the coines, accounts, weights, &c. thereof. 90 Shippes of pepper depart from Cochin in December and January. 92 Satagan and the trade of the coast of Bengala waights, &c. 94 Strange manner of buying and selling in Pegu and that coast. 95 Spinalls digged at Coplan. ib. Siam and the trade of the coast thereof, their weights, mea∣sures, &c. 96 Ten thousand saile of Shippes belonging to the King of China in one River. 98 A Shippe yearly at Maccau from Goa going to Iapan. 99 Sumatra and the trade there∣of. 105 Socodana an English Factorie 106 Spaine and the Cities there∣of. 111 Sivil and the trade thereof, containing accounts, coines, Exchanges, weights, commo∣dities, measures, &c. there∣of. 112 Segovia. 115 Salamanca. ibid. Saragosa. 119 Savoy and the trade there∣of. 133 Sienna and the trade thereof. 163 Seventeen united Provinces. 178 Sidan. 178 Sluis. 179 The ancient Staple of Brid∣ges. 181 Strasburge and the trade thereof. 186 Stutgarde. ibid. Spiers and the trade there∣of. 188 Saxonie. 196 Silver Mines in Friburge. 202 Stoade and the trade there∣of. 203 Scaland in Denmarke. 210 Scania. ibid. Scandia. ibid. Sweden and the Cities there∣of. 217 Stockholme and the trade thereof. 218 Seruca. 219 Smalensco. ibid. Samogitia. 222 Stralsond and the trade ther∣of. 229 Stettin and the trade there∣of. 230 Servia. 235 Sclavonia. 236 Spallata and the trade there∣of. 237 Sebenico and the trade there∣of. 241 Scuttari and the trade there∣of. 242 Sparta. 245 Salonica and the trade there∣of. 246 Sidrocapse rich in Mines of gold. ibid. Samothracia. 248 Scio or Chios and the trade thereof. 249 Sciros Iland. ibid. Salamis Iland. ibid. Samos Iland. ibid. Suda a brave harbour in Can∣dia. 251 Strucalli Ilands. ibid. Santo Mauro. 252 Sicilia and the Province thereof. 256 Sardina Iland. 258 Sorlings Ilands. 262 Scotland and the Provinces thereof. 264 Twelve Shires in Wales. 268 Somerset-shire. 269 Surrie. ibid. Suffolke. ibid. Sussex. ibid. Stafford-shire. ibid. Shrop-shire, ibid.
Saragosa Exchanges. 291 Sivil Exchanges. 294 Sight what. 299 Exchanges of Sivil. 426 Exchanges of Saragosa. ibid. T Tropickes of Cancer and Ca∣pricorne. Chap. 1 Things considerable in barte∣ring, bargaining, and Ex∣changing. 2 Terra Corterialis. 12 Trinidado. 13 The trade of America by Spa∣niards. ibid. Tunes and the trade thereof, with the coines, weights, mea∣sures, commodities, and cu∣stomes thereof. 25 The trade in generall of Argier and Tunes. 19 Of trade in generall of Barba∣rie. 23 Tarradant. ibid. Tombotu. 25 Troyes ruines ruind. 46 Trapesond, Chap. 51, with the weights and measures thereof. 53 Tire and the ancient trade thereof. 60 Tripoly in Syria, with the trade, containing weights, measures, &c. thereof. 64 Turcomania. 67 Tauris and the trade there∣of. 74 The generall trade of Persia. 82 Tartarie and the Provinces thereof. 83 Tartaria Precopensis. ib. Tartaria asiatica and antiquo. 85 Tutta. 90 The trade in generall of the Sea-coast of India. 92 Ticco and the trade thereof. 105 Trade in generall of Asia. 109 Tolledo. 114 Tortosa. 119 The trade in generall of Spaine and Portugall survayed. 121 Thoullousa and the trade thereof. 123 Torraine. 125 Thollon and the trade there∣of. 130 Turino and the trade there∣of. 134 The trade in generall of France. 135 Tarranto. 139 Treviso and the trade there∣of. 15 The trade in generall of Ita∣lie. 177 Torney. 179 The trade of Antwerpe aug∣mented by three occasions, and decayed by three occasions. 179 The trade in generall of Ne∣therland. 181 The trade in generall of Ger∣many. 209 The trade of Prussia. ibid. The trade of Denmarke. 215 The trade of Moscovia. 221 Transilvania. 236 Thebes. 246 Thermophilae Straights fa∣mous. ibid. Thessalia. ibid. Thracia. ibid. The trade of the Citizens of Constantinople. 247 Tenedos. 248 Terra Sigillata. ibid. Temple for the cure of Lo∣vers. 252 Turkie or Levant Merchants their originall in London. 270 Though the Tables of Ex∣changes differ from the pre∣sent rates, yet the use there∣of is no way lessened. 274 Trmes of payments of bills of Exchange. 299 A Table for casting up the account of discount or rebate∣ments. 306 Tripoly in Barbarie. 15 V Virginia. Chap. 12 Vna and the trade thereof, con∣taining the coines, weights, measures thereof. 18 The undermining trickes of the Dutch in the trade of Giny. 25 The matchlesse villany of the Dutch in the Amboina I∣lands. 103 Valiadolide. 115 Valentia and the trade there∣of. 118 Vienne in France. 127 Valencia in France. ibid. Reipublike of Venice and the Cities. 151 Vicentia and the trade there∣of. 154 Verona and the trade thereof. 156 Venice and the trade thereof. 158 Vrbin and the trade thereof. 169 Valencourt. 179 Vtrecht. 180 Vienna and the trade thereof. 195 Veteravia. 201 Valadomia. 219 Volmia. 222 Valona or Avalona and the trade. 243 Venetians the second traders of eminencie into Turkey. 247 Vlster in Ireland. 263 The use of the Table of Ex∣changes. 275 Venice Exchanges. 281 Valencia Exchanges. 291 Vienna Exchanges. 298 Vsance what. 299 Examples of Exchanges pra∣ctised in Venice; and how cal∣culated.
368 Exchanges of Venice with Lions. 369 Of Venice with Placencia. 370 Of Venice with Rome. 371 Of Venice with Naples. 372 Of Venice with Florence. 373 Of Venice with Millan. 374 Of Venice with Antwerpe. 375 Of Venice wh London. 376 Of Venice with Genoa. 377 Of Venice with Norimberge. 378 Of Venice with Bergamo. 379 Of orders and commissions gi∣ven and received in Exchan∣ges at Venice. 380 Termes of payments of bills of Exchange in Venice. 381 Exchangesof Valencia. 426 Injurious decrees of Venice a∣gainst the trade of the En∣glish in Levant Seas. 158 The present trade of Venice survayed. ibid. W The World divided into 4. parts. Chap. 1 The Weigh-house or Kings beame. 3. 6 Weights in generall used in Merchandizing. 6 The difference of Weights in all Countries. ibid. Two manners of weighing in use. ibid. Weighing by Beame. ibid. Weighing by Stadiero Weights are authorised by Magistrates. ibid. Weighers to be sworne. ibid. By what weighs the weights of this Booke is authorised. ibid. How to accord the weights of any two severall places. ibid. The weights of Spaine redu∣ced to the English hundred. 120 Woade or Pastell of Tholou∣sa. 123 Weights and measures of France reduceth to the En∣glish. 134 Weights of Italy, reduced to the weights and measures of London. 176 West Frisland. 180 Weights of Netherlands, re∣duced to the weights of Lon∣don. ibid. Westfalia. 183 Worms and the trade thereof. 187 Wittenburge. 186 Westberge. ibid. Wallen a famous Mart. 196 Wittenberge and the trade thereof. 198 Weights of Germany with London. 207 Weights of Denmarke with London. 213 Ware-house in Norway. 216 Weights and measures of of Eastland, reduced to that of England. 231 Wallacia. 235 Willowbeys Iland. 262 Wight Iland. ibid. Wales and its bounds. 268 Wiltshire. 269 Warwick-shire. ibid. Worcester-shire. ibid. Westmerland. ibid. Weights used in England. 271 Y Ypres. Chap. 179 Yorke-shire. 269 Z Zones five. Chap. 1 Zanibar. 27 Zagatora. 36 Zagatai and the Provinces. 86 Zutphen. 179 Zealand. 180 Zuriche and the trade there∣of. 192 Zante and the trade thereof. 253 Zeffolonia and the trade ther∣of. ibid. Zara Iland and the trade ther∣of. 255 Nova Zembla. 262 The end of the TABLE.
A Table of the Longitude and Latitude of all the principall CITIES mentioned in this MAPPE OF COMMERCE. A Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. ADrianople 42. 45 22. 45 Alba regalis 46. 48 42. 0 Album castrum 48. 35 50. 45 Amsterdam 52. 40 27. 34 Alexandria in Aegypt 31. 00 60. 30 Alexandria in Italie 43. 10 30. 0 Alsfild in Hassia 51. 00 72. 00 Abevile in Picardy 49. 50 22. 30 Amberge in Bohemia 49. 26 32. 40 Ancona 43. 22 39. 40 Antioch 37. 20 70. 15 Antwerpe 51. 58 26. 36 Acquilla 43. 30 38. 20 Argentina 48. 45 28. 14 Augusta 47. 42 33. 00 Angiers 47. 25 18. 10 Avignon 44. 40 22. 40 Aleppo 38. 00 72. 30 Armig 41. 00 76. 00 Ava 27. 50 142. 30 Agades 30. 0 66. 33 Agasimba 7. 0 24. 0 Algiers 25. 20 30. 0 Almara S. L. 30. 00 63. 30 Angola S. L. 07. 00 45. 10 Asna 25. 00 66. 30 Asncia S. L 19. 00 363 20 Santa Anna S. L. 27. 30 318. 30 B Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Boriquen S. L 19. 40 273. 20 Bangamodrum 06. 00 62. 36 Bernagasum 13. 00 70. 00 Benomoapa 26. 00 55. 00 Bona 35. 40 37. 10 Brava —30 74. 30 Bugia 35. 10 34. 30 Babylon 33. 00 82. 20 Bethlem 31. 50 65. 45 Baccu 42. 00 88. 50 Bulgar 54. 30 88. 30 Bengala 21. 20 125. 10 Bensanson 46. 30 20. 30 Burges 46. 20 22. 10 Buda 47. 0 42. 0 Burdeaux 44. 30 17. 50 Bollonia 43. 33 35. 50 Basil 47. 40 31. 00 C Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Constantinople 43. 05 56. 00 Cales 37 05. 10 Conimbre 40. 00 11. 25 Collen 51. 00 30. 30 Copenhagen 56. 50 34. 30 Corinth 36. 55 51. 15 Cracovia 50. 12 42. 40 Cane 49. 42 19. 20 Compostella 20 06. Caminetsa 50. 40 50. 20 Calicut 10. 30 112. 40 Casan 35. 10 96. 10 Cappha 48. 00 68. 50 Cambalu 51. 10 161. 10 Cambaia 11. 40 142. 20 Cantan 25. 149. 00 Chile S. L. 36. 299. 30 Coanum 31. 259. 40 Canada 50. 20 305. 10 Cartagena nova 20. 10 300. Casco S. L. 13. 30 297. 20 Caxamalca S. L. 11. 30 298. 30 Cuba 31. 40 296. Capua 41. 39. 10. Careuge 31. 50 31. 48 Cairo 9. 50 63.—
Cesena 43. 40 34. 40 Cephalonia 37. 10 47. 10 Colmar 48. 12 26. 0 Constance 47. 30 28. 30 Cordoua 37. 50 8. 0 Corfu 38. 45 45. 10 Corsico Iland 40. 50 31. 0 Crema 44. 20 31. 15 Cremona 44. 40 32. 25 Ciprus 35. 30 65. 30 Cuma 41. 40 41. 0 Cap. bona speransa S. L. 35. 00 50. 30 Cape varde. 40. 10 9 50 D Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Dabull 31. 00 112. 20 Damascus 35. 69.— Doway 50. 30 25— Dole 46. 10 27. 00 Dublin     Dort 44. 00 30. 40 Dansicke 54. 44 44. 15 Dresden 51. 00 23. 45 Diraccium 40. 50 45. 00 Decan 14. 00 113. 20 Delle 5—00 114. 19 Damieta 32. 40 69. 00 Dara 12. 00 66. 50 Dancali 17. 10 66. 50 E Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Edenburgh 58. 00 19. 20 Ephesus 37. 40 57. 40 Erford 51. 10 34— Epidauro 36. 25 51. 45 F Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Francford upon Oder 50 30 —24 Francford upon Mense 50-30 —30 Florence 34— 43— Ferara 36— 44— Friburge 48. 13 28— Famagusta 30-30 69. 20 Fassum 45. 40 57. 50 Favencia 43. 30 35-20 Fesse 34. 40 5. 30 Flanders 52. 30 22. 45 G Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Guatimala 24. 20 303— Guaiachil S. L. 2 30 294. 30 Goa 14. 40 112. 20 Gaza 33 70. 50 Guinea S. L. 9. 10 18— Guangala 25. 50 37. 30 Goaga 22.— 55— Geneva 45. 45 28— Granado 37. 30 17. 15 Genoa 15. 20 45. 20 Gaieta 40. 50 38. 20 Gallipoli 41. 30 45. 10 Gelderland 52. 20 27. 40 Gotland 60. 00 48— Golmon 54. 6 33. 54 Gorlits 51.— 34. 45 Gulich 52. 0 27. 30 H Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Hidleberge 49. 25 33— Havana 20. 00 292. 10 Hochlaga 44. 10 300. 50 Hamburge 54. 20 30. 15 Hamia in Norway 60.— 31. 45 Halbestad 52. 11 35. 20 I Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Ierusalem 31. 40 66— Ireland the midst 57— 12— Ingolstad 48. 42 31. 20 Iamacca 17. 00 298. 30 St. Iaco 32. 10 298. 10 Isabella. 10. 10. 32 India the midst 38— 105. 40 Ierico 33— 73— L Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. London 51. 30 20— Leiden 52. 10 27. 20 Lions 44. 30 25. 40 Lovaine 51— — Lisborne 38. 50 . 50 Leighe 50. 30 2— Liampo 34. 40 1. 20 Lima S. L. 23. 30 29. 40 Lucaio 30. 00 299. 27 Lansano 47. 40 35. 30 Leoburge 54. 10 28. 2 Leghorne 42. 12 33. 10 Lovaine 51. 00 26. 45
Lubecke 54. 48 34. 00 Lucca 42. 40 32. 40 Luneburge 54. 40 34. 20 Lucerne 46. 34 26. 0 Lipsicke 51. 25 34. 45 M Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Maragna 19. 30 281. 30 Margerita 10. 50 314. 10 Martha 10. 40 301. 20 St. Michel S. L. 6. 10 291. 40 S. Micheal 27. 20 327. 10 Mexico 38. 30 283.— Madagascar S. L. 19.— 77.— Madera 31. 30 8. 10 Manicongo S. L. 7.— 47. 10 Morrocco 30. 30. 30 Melinda S. L. 3. 20 71. 20 Meroe 16. 10 68. 20 Mombasa S. L. 4. 50 72.— Mandao   125. 25 Mallacca 5.— 136. 30 Mecha 25.— 75. 30 Medina 27. 20 73.— Meac 23. 15 160. 30 Ments 50. 30 27. 30 Marburg 51. 30   Millaine 43.— 40. 20 Modena 45. 40 43. 50 Majorca 39. 35 18. 50 Mosco 61.— — Machlin 51. 15 26. 50 Maguntia 50. 8 30.— Madgburg 52. 20 34. 30 Mantua 44. 30 32. 20 Marselia 43. 6 24. 30 Manfredonia 40. 45 42. 50 Mesina 38. 50 42. 46 Minorque 40. 10 19. 30 Montpelier 43. 25 20. 30 N Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Naples 39. 30 46.— Nsia 60. 50 89. 45 Niss 42. 30 25.— Nica 40. 00 57.— Ninive 36. 40 82.— Narsinga 18,— 119.— Nicodia 44. 20 63. 30 Nipolis 45,— 56. 30 Nova Albion 50.— 235.— Nova Galisia 2. 40 298. 15 Norumbega 43. 40 315. 40 Nombre de dios 9. 20 294. 30 Navaca 17. 10 300. 20 Narbone 43.— 19. 20 Nantes 48. 12 16. 20 Nola 40, 45 40. 15 Novaria 44. 30 30. 30 Negroponte 38. 15 53. 40 Norimburgh 49. 24 31. 10 Nursia Italia 42. 44 308.— O Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Ormus 19.— 92. 0 Odia 12.— 138. 30 Oxiana 20.— 107. 40 Oxford 51. 30 19.— Orleans 47. 10 22.— Orchades Iles 61. 40 21.— Ortinge in Sweden 48. 58 28. 3 P Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Paris 48.— 23. 20 Poitiers 50. 10. 20.— Padona 36. 10 44. 45 Pavia 33. 5 44.— Prague 46. 10 29. 10 Persepolis 30. 40 90. 40 Ptolemais 29. 40 66. 40 Palama 28.— 6. 20 Panama 8. 10 294. 10 Papaia 1. 50 297. 30 Palermo 37.— 37.— Perpignan 42. 40 18. 30 Pampelon 42. 50 15.— Parma 43. 30 32. 30 Perusca 42. 56 36. 50 Pisa 43. 45 36. 30. Pistia 43.— 33. 20 Pescaro 42. 38 32. 40 Placencia 44.— 31. 30 Portugall 40. 45 5. 48 Q Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Quitto S. L. 10.— 293. 10 Quivira 40.— 233. 41 Quinsay 40.— 153.—
