21398 99846237 11191
Looke to it: FOR, Ile Stabbe ye. Imprinted at London by E. Allde for W. Ferbrand, and George Loftes, and are to be solde in Popes-head Allie. 1604.
THere is a Humour vs'd of late, By eue'ry Rascall swagg'ring mate, To giue the Stabbe: Ile Stabbe (sayes hee) Him that dares take the wall of me. If you to pledge a health denie, Out comes his Poniard; there you lie. If his Tabacco you dispraise, He sweares, a Stabbe shal end your daies. If you demaund the Debt he owes, Into your guts his Dagger goes. Death seeing this, doth take his Dart, and he performes the Stabbing part. he spareth none, be who it will: his lisence is the World to kill. S. R.
Deaths great and generall Challenge. I Do defie the World and all therein, My challenge at the Scepter doth begin: Downe to the Plough Swaine, come who dare in place, Set foote to mine, and looke me in the face. My flesh and fat, doth make no burlie show, A raw-bne fellow, all the World doth know. To deale at sundry Weapons, J refuse, As Fencers (when they play their prizes) vse: Of Sword and Dagger I haue little skill: Rapier I neuer wore, nor neuer will. My sight is very bad to haue about, For Ile assure you both mine Eyes be out▪ But at the Irish Dart J onely deale: Whose Hart I hit, I nere knew Surgeon heale. My Horse is pale, well pac'd; I neuer shoo-him, Sainct Georges Gelding was a ade vnto-him, I would ride often, when I goe on foot, But there's no Shoo-maker can fit me' a Boote.
Deaths Prologue to his Tragicall Stabbe. TO no degree or facultie, I do intende offence; Al those I threaten heere to stab, & send the wretches hence Are such, as tremble when they heare, what fatall Stab I giue, For though I kill both good and bad, all creatures that do liue, The good are neuer terrified with any power I haue: I open the them Doore of life, the chiefest thing they craue. But to the wicked gracelesse sort, most fearefull appeare, Because I sende them to a place, doth passe all torments heere. To thē the name of Death seems Death, Oh tis a fearful sound For of the hope of life to come, they want assured ground, From this bad World vnto a worse, I send them forth to dwell I am the Iaylor, leading them vnto the vault of Hell. Good newes vnto the good J bring: but to the wicked, euill: Because I send the one to God, the other to the Deuill. Such as feare God, they feare not me, but bid me do my worst If any finde himselfe agreeu'd, ile stabbe that fellow first.
Tyrant Kinges. YOu high Imperious crowne-contending Kings, Who for Earth's glory (not Religions good) Turne humane bodies into bloudy springs, And die the ground with slaught'red christians blood That for the gayning of an earthly Crowne, Will tosse a spatious Kingdome vpside downe. You that deuorce the husbands from their wiues, By fatall warre, the endlesse foe to peace: you that denye poore new-borne Babes their liues, and will not graunt sweet life an howers lease: That care not how, or by what meanes you raigne, So you the golden Crowne and Scepter gaine. Ile Stabbe yee.
VVicked Magistrates. NObles and Iudges, mightie men on Earth, That carelesse cast the sword of Iustice by▪ And let your pleasures surfeit in their myrth, Not lending poore mens Plaints, eare, hand, nor eye: Suff'ring the Iust vniustly be opprest, When the oppressor liues at ease and rest. Forgetting God, whom you should represent, In all the actions of your publique place: Yeelding the world your hartes, with full consent, To gather Mammon, hoording wealth apace. You that nere thinke your selues must once appeere To giue account how you haue Iudged heere: Ile Stabbe yee.
Curious Diuines. DIuines, that are together by the eares, Puft vp, high-minded, seedes men of dissention, Striuing vntill Christes seame-lesse garments teares, Making the Scriptures follow your inuention, Neglecting that, whereon the soule should feede: Imployde in that, whereof soules haue no neede. Curious in thinges you neede not stir about, Such as concerne not matter of saluation: Giuing offence to them that are without: Vpon whose weaknes you should haue compassion, Causing the good to grieue, the bad reioyce; Yet you with Martha, make the worser choyce. Ile Stabbe yee.
Couetous Lawyers. LAwyers that wrest the Law to your affection, To fauour, or disfauour, as you please: And keepe your Clyants purses in subiection, Till some doe get Peirce pennylesse disease: Nor caring how their cause do stand or fall, So you your selues get golde to rise withall. That whyle you deale with Angels, serue the Deuill, Because you banish Conscience out of towne, Couetousnesse, you knowe's a damned euill; And yet you wrap it with you in your Gowne. You that with if's with and's, demurrs, delayes, Bring Causes in consumptions and decayes. Ile Stabbe yee.
Vp-start Courtier. COurtier, whose hart with pride, so mighty growes, thou wilt not to thy Father mooue thy Hat, because he weares a paire of ruslet Hose, Thy Veluet Breeches looke awry at that: Nay, ere he shall disgrace thee, thou wilt rather Sweare by the Lord, that he is not thy Father. You that deny the stocke from whence you came, thrusting your selfe into some Gentle kin, you that will giue your selfe an other name, Which must not from an old Thatcht-house begin. you that will haue an Armes shall grace you too, Though your poore Father cobled many a Shoo. Ile Stabbe yee.
VVealthye Cittizens. YOu Cittizens that are of Diues wealth, His costly cloathing, and his dainty fare, Regarding nothing but selfe-ease and health: How euer Lazarus lyes poore and bare: your Dogges are not so kinde to licke their sores, But rather serue to bite them from your dores. You that do make your Tables Poulters stalles, Great prouocation to the sinfull flesh: And though the famish'd, hunger-starued calles For Iesus sake, with Crummes our wantes refresh: Your Dishes haue the food for which they cry: You play with that, for which they pine and die. Ile Stabbe yee.
Greedy Vsurer. THou Fur-gown'd slaue, exceeding rich and olde Ready to be deuowred of the Graue: Thou that wilt sell a soule, to purchase Gold, And gold, still gold, nothing but golde dost craue: Thou most extreame hard-harted cruell wretch, Whome Hell gapes for; the Deuill comes to fetch. Thou that wilt not forbeare an howers time, But wilt a forfayture seueerely take: Thou that by crueltie to wealth dost clyme, And threatnest Dice of poore mens bones to make, Hauing that rustie gold vpon thy hand, For which, there's thousandes perish in the land. Ile stabbe yee.
Cursed Swearers. THou that dost take Gods holy name in vaine, Which is of wondrous feare and reuerence, Thou that reprou'd, wilt vtter Oathes againe, To grieue him, that admonish'd thy offence. Thou that wilt say, He that's agreeu'd with swearing, May stop his eares or get him out of hearing. Thou that wilt sweare a truth, not to be so, And sweare that which is false, to be most trew, Thou that wilt vow most absolute to know, That which thy conscience knowes thou neuer knew. Thou that wilt sweare, thou car'est not what thou swearest because the deuil and thy tongue are nearest. Ile stabbe yee.
Phisitions of the Quacksaluers crew. DOctor, or rather Dunce, that purge with Pill, Vntill that siluer haue a cleane Purgation: You Artlesse Bussard, that abuse the skill, Of Learned men, deseruing reputation. You that had neuer Doctorship in Schooles, But got your grace from women or from Fooles. You base. Quacksaluer in a Common wealth. That practize Phisicke out of olde wiues tales, you that can make them sicke which haue their health And learne by Almanackes, to pare your Nayles. You that can tell what signe is best affected To picke ones Teeth, or haue his Beard corrected. Ile Stabbe yee.
Gentlemen of hase broode. GAllant that takes the Altitudes on hie, and like a Fawk'ners Hawke do hood your wife, Giuing those golden Angels leaue to flye, your Father kept close prisoners all his life: you that are Sonne to him that held the Plow, Transform'd by Gold, into a Gentle now. You that are Fashions spie, and Humors Ape, A silken Asse, a very Veluet Clowne: A perfect Gull, that lets no Fashions scape, To swagger it in London, vp and downe. you that within a suite of Cyuit dwell, And Garlike was your Fathers onely smell. Ile Stabbe yee.
Counterfayte Captaine. YOu Captine mouse-trap, growne a desperat stabber You that will put your Poniard in mens guts: You that last Voyage, were no more but swabber, Yet you cracke Blades as men cracke Hasel-nuts, You that try all your manhood with a Puncke, And fight most brauely when you are most drunke: You that protest the Feather in your Hat, came from a Countesse Fanne by way of fauour: Your Rapier, why the great Turke gaue you that For mightie monst'rous Marshal-like behauiour▪ You that weare Scarfs and Gart'rings for your hose, Made all of Ancients, taken from your foes. Ile Stab yee.
Dissembling Souldier YOu Sirha, that vsurpe a Souldiers name, Vaunting your selfe a Thunder-bolt of Warres, Vowing that euery ioynt you haue is lame, By piercing Bullets, bloudy woundes, and scarres: You that some hundred men at once withstood, And fought most brauely to the knees in blood. You that haue slaine more men by breake of day, Then could haue graues digg'd for them in a weeke, You that haue made your foes to run away, Starke naked, when their breeches were to seeke: You that haue compass'd all the earth's globe round, Yet neuer trod a step from English ground, Ile Stab yee.
Vnkinde Parents. PArentes, which so vnnaturall are growne, That for your Children you will not prouide Becomming so obdurate to your owne, With hardned heartes you can them not abide, But to a stranger will extend more good, then to the ofspring of your blood. You that in rage and fury, most vnkinde, Will vtter Curses where you ought to blesse: For which God often yeeldeth to your minde, and sayes Amen, to wished ill successe. You that from all humanitie haue ceast, Man-like in shape, in manners but a beast. Ile Stabbe yee.
Disobedient Children. CHildren that most vndutifull doe liue, Forgetting what the Law of God commaundes: You that no reuerence to your parents giue, But follow that which with your fancie stands, That onely like the Prodigall, will spend, But come not home (as he did) to amend. You that propound your selues vnthriftie wayes, And will not vnto sound aduise consent: you that doe runne like Follies witles strayes, Vntill some prison teach you to repent you that liue as you please, do what you list, and admonition vtterly resist. Ile Stabbe yee.
Drunkard. YOu filthy slaues, whom I do often see, sleeping in Tauerns on the benches drunke: That will haue full carowses come to thee, Till with the liquors lading thou art sunke. Then fill vs Boy one quart of Charnico, To drinke a health to Dicke before we goe, You that will drinke Reynaldo vnto death: The Dane, that would carowse out of his Boote, and quaffe an hundred Flemings out of breath, Laying as many French-men vnder foote: you that no other course obserue and keepe, But either drinking, drunke, or els a sleepe. Ile Stabbe you.
Periurers. VIllaine, that runn'st the ready way to Hell, and neuer art at home, till thou com'st there, Base slaue that for base Bribes thy soule wilt sell, And any thing wilt vndertake to sweare. Thou carest not for God, nor mans law feares, Vntill the Pillorie bite off both thine eares. Thou that dost make thy tongue a Serpents sting, To wound and hurt the Innocent withall: Thou that confusion to thy selfe dost bring, And wilfull wilt into perdition fall: Thou that art knowne amongst the best and most, and Officer of Hell, Knight of the Post. Ile Stabbe you
God-lesse Athists. THou damned Athist, thou incarnate Deuill, That doest deny his power which did create thee: a Villaine apt for euery kinde of euill, And all the eyes in heauen and earth do hate thee. That mak'st account when thou shalt breathlesse lie, Thy soule and bodie like a beast do die. That Pharoa like dar'st aske what fellow's God? Esteeming sacred Scriptures, to be vaine▪ And that the dead in earth shall make abode, and neuer rise from out their graues againe: That say'st; eate, drinke, be merrie, take delight: Swagger out day, and Reuell all the night. Ile Stabbe thee.
Miserable Marchant MArchant, that doest endeour all thy daies, To get commodities for priuate gaine: Caring no whit by what synister wayes, Nor by what hazard, trauell, toyle, or paine: Neuer respecting other mens hard crosses, So thou mayst sell decrepen-worths by their losses. Thou that doest couet all in thine owne hand, and for another let him sincke or swim: Thou that hast blessinges both by Sea and Land, Giuen by God, yet neuer thankest him: thou that with carefull nights doest breake thy sleepe; to gather wealth, which long thou canst not keepe. Ile Stabbe thee.
Deceitfull Artificers. ARtificers, and Crafts-men of all trades, That deale by craft in selling and in bying: You that with falshood often times perswades Men to giue credite to vntrueth and lying: That care not, so your ware content the eye, Though your owne Father be deceiu'd thereby. You that protest to vse a man most kind, And serue him that, shall well be worth his mony, When he that tryes you, shall be sure to finde The deedes proue Gall, & words containe the Hony. You that are out-side goodly protestations, But all the in-side false dissimulations. Ile Stabbe yee.
VVretched Husband-man. YOu Husband-men that heape & hord vp Corne, And neuer laugh, but when it waxeth deere: You whom the poore do wish had nere bin borne, Because you famish and vndo them heere. You that an Almanacke still beare about, To search and finde the rainy weather out. You that at plentie euermore repine, And hang your selues for griefe, to see the same. You that will weepe when as the Sunne doth shine, And sigh to heare but of faire-weathers name. You that for nothing but deare yeeres do pray, To Gentleman your Sonnes, another day. Ile Stabbe yee.
Svvaggring Ruffian. YOu Swagg'rer, with your Hat without a band, Your head beshagg'd with nittie lowsie lockes▪ You that vpon Tabacco vertue stand, Your only soueraigne Medcine for the Pockes You that weare Bootes, and Ginglers at your heeles, Yet whē you ride, your coatch hath but two wheeles. You that will meete one by the high-way side, And sweare Gods woundes, Deliuer me thy purse. You that for Bawdy houses do prouide, Though many honest true men speed the worse. You that will cousen, cheat, tobbe, kill, and steale, Till for your cloathes, Hangman and Broker deale. Ile Stabbe yee.
Proud Gentlewomen YOu Gentle-puppets of the proudest size, That are like Horses, troubled with the Fashions, Not caring how you do your selues disguise, In sinfull shameles, Hels abhominations. You whom the Deuill (Prides father) doth perswade To paint your face, & mende the worke God made. You with the Hood, the Falling-band, and Ruffe, The Moncky-wast, the breeching like a Beare: The Perriwig▪ the Maske, the Fanne, the Muffe, The Bodkin, and the Bussard in your heare: You Veluet-cambricke-silken-feather'd toy, That with your pride, do all the world annoy. Ile Stabbe yee.
Odious Quarreler. YOu Sir, that are so quarrelous by nature, That you scorne all men, be they what they will: Tearming each one a cowardly base creature, That will not sweare and curse, stab, fight, and kill. You that will challenge any to the feelde, Vowing while you can stand, neuer to yeelde. You that without any offence at all, Will shoulder him you meete vpon the way. You that (by wounds and blood) will haue the wall, Eu'en in despight of him that dare say nay. You that inhumane, brutish, most vncyuill, Professe your selfe a Champion for the Deuill. Ile Stabbe you.
Disloyall Traytor. FAlse harted Traytor, bred of Iudas kinde, Sent from the Furies, about Helles affayres: That vnto mischiefe wholy art inclin'd, And neither for thy soule nor body cares: Thou that with Sinon wishest Troy might burne, To serue and fit the Deuill, thy Maisters turne. Thou that doest plot and practise gainst the state, And Gods Annoynted dar'st with treason touch. Thou that can'st to thy Soueraigne be ingrate, Whom thou art dearely bound to honour much: Ile fyle no handes vpon thee; I abhorre thee, But Ile giue order to the Hangman for-thee.
Filthy Pander. YOu scuruie fellow, in the Brokers suite, A Sattin Doublet, fac'd with Greace and Ale, That of the art of Bawdry can'st dispute, To picke a lyuing from a damn'd Whores tayle. Thou that within thy Table hast set downe, The names of all the Squirils in the towne. Thou that can'st holde a Fanne, and keepe a Dore, And offer any Constable the stabbe: Thou that about the streetes can'st walke a Whore, And bring her vnto him that wantes a Drabbe. Thou that art out-side horned like an Oxe, Thy in-side all Tabacco, and the Poxe. Ile Stabbe thee.
Lease-mongers. REnt-raysing rascals, you that care not how You do exact vpon the needy wretch, That liue euen on the poore mans sweating brow, And from his painefull toyle, your ryches fetch: Early and late, his labours all are spent, To pay a churlish dogged Naball rent. You whom the Prophet curseth with a woe, House-mongers, that on earth would euer dwell: Grinding the poore, as their distresses shoe: And at the price of old Shooes do them sell. You that of Earth enough will neuer haue, Till soule in Hell, and body in the graue. Ile Stabbe yee.
Adulterer. THou filthy fellow of a beastly life, Poluted both in body, and in minde: That breakest wedlocke with thy lawfull wife, And think'st all's well, if thou the world canst blinde. Tut, Death ha's worke enough with other men, Heele come when th'art an old man; God knowes when. Tell thee of Iudgement, or of Gods displeasure, Why, thou wilt answere, He hath grace in store: And for Repentance, thou wilt finde some leasure, When Age will let thee follow Whores no more. Thou that wilt serue the Deuill with the best, And turne God to his leauings, and the rest. Ile Stabbe thee.
Idle-huswife. FIne, neate, and curious mistris Butter flie, The Idle-toy to please an Idiots eye You that wish all Good-huswiues hang'd for why, Your dayes work's done each morning whē you rise Put on your Gowne, your Ruffe, your Masske, your Chaine Then dine & sup, & go to bed againe. You that will call your Husband Gull & Clowne, If he refuse to let you haue your will: You that will poute and lowere, and fret and frowne Vnlesse his purse be lauish open still. You that will haue it, get it how he can, Or he shall weare a Vulcans brow, poore man. Ile Stabbe thee.
Prodigall Gallant. YOu Sir that haue your purse cram'd full of crownes The liuely picture of the Prodigall: That haue your mouth furnish'd with blood and woundes And come in Whores, Wine, Fidlers: you'le pay all. You that are like the Dwarfe in Athens, right, Who in fiue dayes, spent's Patrimony quite. You that are churched once in seuen yeere, But in a Tauerne you could liue and die: You that haue your Ioy in Belly-cheere, In Dice, in Dauncing, and in Venerie. You that for pennance of your passed sinne, In Woodstreete, or the Poultry, meane to Inne. Ile Stabbe thee.
Gluttone. YOu goodman Glutton, bellyed like a Butt, Fac'd like the North-windes picture in a Map: Thou with the neuer satisfied gutt, VVhose life is eate, and drinke, and take a nap. Thou that if Wolner were aliue againe, VVould'st eate more at a meale, then he in twaine. Thou most vnhealthy lothsome rauenous beast, That tak'st delight in nothing but excesse: And hast a nose to smell out any Feast: A brazen face to ceaze on euery messe, That vndertakest nothing with good-will, Vnlesse it be thy Pudding-house to fill. Ile Stabbe thee.
Sooth-sayer, or Figure-flinger. YOu Cunning man, or rather co'sning Knaue, That will tell good-man Ninney of his Marc: Cysley, how many Husbandes she shall haue, Tom Carter, when the weather will be faire: My neighbour Powling, who hath found his Purse, And Ione his w who did her Chickens curse. Whether a man shall haue a happy life, Whether a Louer shall his Loue enioy: Who shall die first, the husband or the wife? Whether the childe vnborne, be girle or boy? You that can fetch home Seruantes runne away, And finde out any Cattle gone astray. Ile Stabbe yee.
My fine Dauncer. HEigh, w'on turne more, let's see this Galliard out, I promise you the fellow doth it well: How nimbly at his trade he turnes about, At hopping vp and downe he doth excell: Well, let him daunce it out, and when tis done, A daunce twixt him and Death must be begun. You nimble skipiacke, turning on the toe, As though you had Gun-pouder in your tayle: You that do leape about and caper soe, Esteeming our old Country Daunces stale. You that do liue by shaking of the heele, By hopping, and by turning like a wheele. Ile Stabbe yee.
Ieffery Make-shift. SHifter, that liues without a lawfull calling, And onely basenesse with your humor fittes, That cares not in what myschefe you are falling, But make an occupation of your wittes: You that haue alwayes cheating Dice in store, With, Come sweete Fiue, I holde yee sixe to foure. You that can cunningly in Cookes shops brawle, And shew your selfe in Chollers mighty heate: while your Consort steales Victuals from the stall, To finde your poore and needy stomacke meate. You that for all your diet with your Hoast, Do set your hand in Chalke vnto his Poast. Ile Stabbe you.
Spend-thriftes, and ill Husbandes. YOu carelesse wretches of the wastfull vaine, That for your Families will not prouide: But liue in Idlenesse, and take no paine, Spending your owne, and other mens beside: That wife and children vtterly neglect, And to your seruantes neuer haue respect. You that do wish them hang'd, will purchase landes, Tearming him that spares Mony, worse then madde: You that commit your Stocke to Vitlers handes, With Tush, a merry Hart outliues a sadde. You that are a good fellow to your friende, Druncke from the weekes beginning to the ende. Ile Stabbe yee.
Haue at you all to stabbe and kill, There flies my Dart, light where it will. HEe that will take no warning, let him chuse, Few wordes my maisters, I intende to vse: My deede and word, togither alwayes goe, I loue plaine dealing, you shall finde it so. The Stabbe I promise, and the Stabbe Ile pay, Your Hartes shall haue it, on their dying day. But thinke that day is very long to come, And you shall liue more yeeres then other some: Thinke though your friendes and kindred dayly die, You shall escape, your turne is nothing nie: Put my remembrance farre out of your minde, For wicked men no hope in Death can finde: They thinke vpon me with a cruell feare, They quake, and tremble, when my name they heare. I bring but heauie newes, their soules to greeue, Yet till I come, they will it not beleeue.
Hee that hath health and ease, with gould stor'd still, And nere in's life did good, nor neuer will, Tell him of Death, of Iudgement, and the Graue, And what reward in Hell, the wicked haue; That very shortly he shall not be heere, That with his flesh the Wormes shall make good-cheere, That other men his hoarded goodes shall share, That hence he must depart, poore, naked, bare: That earth's delightes shall be of no esteeme, That all the world cannot a Soule redeeme: That Diues begg's for drops, where torments dwell, That there's no comfort to be had in Hel. That they which haue done good, to Heau'n shall go That they which haue done ill, to endles wo. His blockish Sences, worldes conceites so smother, It enters one eare, and goes out at tother. Therefore let him that will hold on his course, Goe on in euill, and be worse and worse▪ Tis nothing vnto mee, if heele not mende, Ile Stabbe him for the Deuill, there's an ende▪ Drinke and be merry as good fellowes do,
And if you please you may be drunken to. Carouse your drunkardes health's from day to day, Till I, and Sicknesse, take your health away. Sweare and blaspheme Gods sacred holy name, And take delight in doing of the same. Thunder out Oathes, such as in Hell are bred, Vntill I teare thy tongue out of thy head. Beare thy selfe proude, as loftie as thou can, Dispise the poore, disdaine an humble man, Boast of thy store of wealth, thy worldly wit, Ile turne thy flesh and bones to rot for it. Mallice thy neighbour, cause thou see'st him thriue, And for to get away his lyuing, striue. Vndoe him if thou can'st, and for that sinne, Ile leaue thee but a Clout to wrap thee in. Rayse Rentes apace, builde Houses, purchase Landes, Be alwayes raking with Oppressins handes. Thinke all is lawfull purchase, thou can'st catch from thy distressed friendles needy wretch. Buye thy poore neighbours House ouer his head, Turne him and's children out to begge their bread.
Deale cruelly with those are in thy debt, And let them at thy handes no fauour get. Send them to Prison; there in all distresse, To taste the mercie of the mercilesse. Ile shackle thee, for stirring handes or feete Within a Coffin and a Winding-sheete. Say to thy selfe, as once the Churle did say, (Whose soule the Deuill fetch'd that night away) For many yeeres, much goodes thou hast in store, Eate, drinke, be merry; take delight therefore: Exclude all Pittie, Conscience, and Remorce. Get Goodes it skils not how, by fraude or force. Ile come vpon thee, when thou thinkest least, And thou shalt die, as thou did'st liue, a Beast. Dissemble cunning, do it with a grace: Giue all kind wordes before thy neighbours face. Protest thy kindnesse he shall neuer lacke: Yet hang him (if thou can'st) behind his backe. Flatter, and fawne: with falshood pray vpon him: Bestow the courtecie of Iudas on-him: Of all thy villany I keepe a score,
Ere long thou shalt deceiue the world no more. Be a Time-seruer; liue as others doo: With some prophane, with some religious too: Yet howsoeuer thou hast done, or spoke, Let thy Religion serue but as a cloke. Thinke th'art a man from whom much wisedome flowes, If thou can'st blinde the eyes of men with showes. To get thy selfe Gods curse, with worldlings prayse, Why, t'is a sinne most common now adayes. Looke to it wretch, as sure as Death; so sure, An euerlasting Hell, thou shalt endure. Striue and contende, reuenge the least offence: Threaten by Law: vrge to extreame expence. Spende many a pound, in quarrell of a penny, And be it right or wrong, yeeld not to any. Let no man haue the ending of thy cause, But onely Lawyers; try it by the Lawes. Ile Stabbe thee foole; there's no Atturnyes fee Can finde out Law to be reueng'd on mee. Builde sumtuous Houses, tytle them thine owne: Make wrong pay-maister for the wood and stone.
Let thy Wiues pride, be all thy Tennants woe, Because the Deuill and shee, will haue it so. Hood-her, and Mask-her; Fanne her with a Feather: Let Vanitie and Lightnesse, go together. Vpon the pleasure of thy Hawkes and Houndes Waste it away most prodigall, by poundes. Be bountifull in spending on a Whore, And myserable to relieue the poore. Feaste euery day, as once the Glutton did, And none but Gluttons to thy Banquets bid. Receiue thy foode, as Beastes do feede on Grasse. Sit downe like th'Oxe, and rise as doth the Asse, Steale Gods good guiftes, and neuer vse his name, Vnlesse in swearing, to abuse the same. Liue as thou list: but for thy time so spent, By me to Iudgement, hence thou shalt be sent. And this resolue, howeuer Sinne doth dlind-thee, Eu'en as Death leaues thee, so shal Iudgement find-thee FINIS.
Deathes Epitaph, vpon euery mans Graue. BEhold the state of all the Sonne of Men, That liue to die, and die they know not when: How Flowerlike they wither and decay; How soone Deaths Sith doth mow them downe like Hay. How vaine a thing of all thinges els, is Man, How short his life is measur'd out a span: How he is borne with teares, brought vp in paine, And how with sighes, he leaues the world againe. FINIS. S. R.
