21749 99843563 8306
D. SARAVIA. 1. Of the diuerse degrees of the Ministers of the Gospell. 2. Of the honor vvhich is due vnto the Priestes and Prelates of the Church. 3. Of Sacrilege, and the punishment thereof. The particular Contents of the aforesaide Treatises to be seene in the next Pages. Iob. 8. 8. Inquire I pray thee of the former age, and pre∣pare thy selfe to learne of the Fathers, 9. (For we are but of yesterday, and are ignorant.) 10. Shall not they teach thee? LONDON. Printed by Iohn VVolfe, and are to be sold by Iohn Perin at the signe of the Angell in Paules Church-yard. 1591.
The Contents. The first Booke. 1 WHat the Ministery of the Gospell is, and what be the parts thereof. 2 Of ordinary and extraordinary calling to the Ministery. 3 Of the twelue Apostles. 4 Of the seuenty Disciples. 5 Of Prophetes. 6 That the names and titles of Apostles, Euangelists, & Prophets, were giuen also vnto other Pastors and Do∣ctors of the Church. 7 Of Deacons. 8 That the Churches in their beginnings had no other Bishops and Elders, besides the Apostles them selues & their fellow-laborers. 9 Of Priests (or Pastors) and Bishops. 10 Of two degrees of Pastors. 11 That the doctrine of the Apostles acknowledgeth no annuary Elders, to rule onely, and not to teach in the Church. 12 The place of Ambrose expounded. 13 The place of Paul expounded, in his first to Timothy the fift Chapter, what it is to labour in the word and doctrine. 14 That, that order is of God, which appointeth superior Elders Bishops, and that but of man, where all Pastors & Elders are alike. 15 That our Sauiour by no statute, repealed the superemi∣nent authority of Pastors among them selues. 16 That the forme of the Apostles gouernement did not end, with the death of the Apostles. 17 That the commaundement; To preach the Gospell to all nations (the Apostles being now receyued vp into Heauen) doth in like manner bind the Church: to the which the authority Apostolique is also requisite. 18 That the Apostolique authority is as necessary for the
conseruing and confirming, as for the founding & first planting of Churches. 19 By testimony of Eusebius his Ecclesiasticall history the former Chapter is confirmed. 20 That the authority of Bishops ouer Priestes or Elders, is approued by the consort of all Churches throughout the whole world. 21 That Bishops are ordained by a diuine institution, and Apostolique tradition. 22 That it was the opinion of Aerius, That there is no dif∣ference betweene a Bishop and a Priest: which opinion was condemned for an Heresie by the Fathers. 23 Hierome his opinion confuted. 24 Of one Bishop in one Diocesse. 25 Of the names of Patriarches, Archbishops, and Metro∣politanes. 26 Of Doctors. The second Booke. 1 THat by a certaine Law of nature a∣mong all nations, the Presidentes of Religion were esteemed wor∣thy great honor. 2 How great the reuerence of Priestes hath beene in all nations. 3 What the honour of the Priesthood was among the people of God. 4 Of that double honor which is due vnto those Elders which rule well, and the argumentes of those which thinke the contrary. 5 An answere to the arguments of the former Chapter. 6 That the honour which is giuen to the Pastors of the Church, is ioyned with a certaine Religion towardes God. 7 Certayne other reasons confuted, and the truth con∣firmed, by many testimonies of Scripture.
8 That the good examples of our fore-Fathers, prescribe a Law to theyr successors. 9 That the oblations of Christians are part of Gods worship. 10 An aunswere to certaine obiections: with the which it is confirmed, that the Ministers of the Gospel are wor∣thy no lesse honor, then were the Priests of old among the people of God. 11 The iudgement of the Fathers concerning the oblati∣ons of the faithfull. 12 That the Church had no small reuenewes, and certayn places in the which they did celebrate theyr assemblies, before the time of Constantine. 13 A distinction of Church goods. 14 That the Prelates of Churches are not maintayned of almes, but of the due reward of theyr labours. 15 Of those landes which are held in fee, and haue annex∣ed with them any ciuill authority or iurisdiction. 16 That Bishops and other Pastors are not forbidden to be Lordes of Fees, and sometimes to vndertake secular and ciuill charges. 17 What a Fee is, and what are the lawes and conditions thereof. 18 A distinction of Fees. 19 An aunswere to the obiection, that ciuill iurisdiction, outward pompe, and honors which are annexed with these Fees, doe not agree with the simplicity of the E∣uangelique Ministery. 20 That it is lawfull for Bishops to heare ciuill causes, and to determine vppon them. 21 An exposition of that place of Luke, the two and twen∣ty Chapter. 22 That the Pastors of the Church, for the necessity of the common wealth, may attend some times vppon world∣ly affaires. 23 That diuerse functions are not confounded, albeit vn∣dertaken of one man,
24 That Dauid and Solomon vsed the aide of Priests and Le∣uites in ciuill affaires. 25 Theyr error confuted, that think no ciuill affaires of the common wealth ought to be committed to the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. 26 That wher the Church is the common wealth: the same man, as Bishop, may take charge of the Church for the Lord Iesus, and render fealty and obeisance to the king, as one that holdeth by faith and homage. 27 An other argument, against the endowment of Fees, confuted. 28 Of the honorable titles which are giuen vnto Bishops. 29 Of the Bishops family and retinue. 30 Whether it be better for Ministers to liue of the sti∣pends of the Magistrate, or rather of the oblations of the faithfull. 31 The Stipendaries cald to account, and confuted. 32 Certain reasons why Stipendaries are disproued. The third Booke. 1 OF Sacrilege, & the punishment therof. 2 What Sacrilege is. 3 The reasons with the which they com∣monly excuse theyr Sacrilege. 4 An aunswere to the reasons of the for∣mer Chapter. 5 A distinction of those Church goods, which the Church of Rome possesseth at this day. 6 That the goods of Monasteries are not al of one kind. 7 That it is another thing to come from Paganisme to Christianity, then to come from Popery, or some other Heresie. 8 How greeuous and incurable the sin of Sacrilege is. 9 Certaine examples of Gods vengeance against Sacrile∣gious persons. FINIS.
To the Reader. YOu will say; what neede all this wast? this labour might haue beene well spared. For seing the same argument hath ben hand∣led long since, and of late; learnedly, and at large by men of our ownes: what neede this foraine ayde? In such aboundance of wits and writings, to transport Sarauia out of Latine into English, is to bring owles to Athens, and to carry stickes to the wood; as it is in the Prouerbe. True it is: the cause hath ben vndertaken long since; but it was late first: and of late; but it was long first: And the same hath ben maintayned learnedly enough; if not with learning too much: and it hath ben handled at large also; yet all little enough: Such is the female misconceit, of the lasciuious male∣content, and the male miscontent of the learned ignoraunt of this age, euer learning and neuer able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Notwithstanding, seeing in the iudgement of the most wise and best learned, this Germane Booke seemed for sound iudgement inferiour to none, and for graue discourse equall to any, it was therfore thought by them an action no lesse commodious to the people, then commen∣dable to the Author; that he, who in the causes of present con∣trouersie, hath propounded his iudgement vnto all, shoulde haue his iudgement expounded vnto vs. The which although it hath beene curstly censured by a certaine suspicious and sus∣pected Criticke, emulous of his betters credite, who in his professed lectures hath vsed the remembraunce of his name in disdaine, with Sarauia nescio quis: Yet his best auditors there, and others his betters elsewhere, haue found this diffe∣rence betweene Sarauia and him: that, besides his great learning, and no lesse experience (of the which this great Cen∣sor neuer had the one, neuer will haue the other) Sarauia hath made knowen to him and the whole world, by this his
resolute definitiue, who he is: whereas the other in one whole tearme hath so behaued himselfe in the same cause, that albeit wee all know who he is, yet we could neuer tell where to finde him. So hoppeth he betweene the stone and the Altar, that as a man distract betweene feare and flattery, he maketh vp his doubtfull resolution with this harmelesse confession, Sentio quod sentio; quod? nescio. I know what I know, what? I doe not know. I, but now we see the aduerse part (partly by theyr lawlesse outrage, and partly by theyr lawfull restraint) to be nowe as impotent in their faction, as they are odious in their opini∣on, to be at this time as vnable, as they were at all times vn∣worthy to preuaile: and then, what neede we any longer striue when the ennemy can no longer stand? I aunswer; that their increase was seene long since, to be at the full, and their cre∣dite appeareth euen now to be in the Waine. For the which as we are to giue God thankes, (who in taking Iustice vpon some of them, hath taken pitty vpon the whole Church,) so likewise are we to pray for the rest, that in good time we may see, ey∣ther theyr speedy amendement, or their present preferment: (For it is time (O Lord) that thou haue mercy vppon Sion, yea the time is come.) Notwithstanding, in the meane time wee haue entertained this profered aide, not so much to inuade the seditious brethren, or to bring home the resolued recre∣ant, as to strengthen the godly Subiect, and to bring for∣ward the well affected Protestant. With the which if any man finde himselfe agreeued let him shew for it; but so, that Sara∣uia may vnderstand what he saith. For my part; if I haue conceiued him right, the fruite is yours: if I haue deliuered him not right, the fault is mine. Sure I am, the Author meant you well; and my Authors: And so doe I. The Translator.
TO THE MOST RE∣uerend father in Christ, John by the pro∣uidence of God Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of al England, and Metrapolitane. To the renovvmed and most honored Heroicke, Sir Christopher Hat∣ton, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and high Chauncellour of England. As also to the noble and right ho∣norable, Sir William Cecill, Baron of Burghley, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and high Treasurer of England, of her Maiesties most Honorable priuy Counsell, my very good Lordes, true felicity. THe auncient receiued custome of de∣dicating books to men of name and authority, is growne and grounded vppon many reasons great & waigh∣ty, all which it shalbe needelesse for me to reuise in this place: But for my part, there are chiefly three cau∣ses mouing me to consecrat this my small trauell to you the most Honorable, and honored of me (my good Lordes.) First, that thereby I might testifye vnto you the duety and deuotion of a loyall and gratefull minde towards you, that find my selfe seuerally and singu∣larly bound vnto you all and euery one of you. For first, one of you (vppon my repaire into England) disdained not to entertaine me a stranger with no straunge countenance, and straunge courtesie: The other also dained to accept me (vnworthy) into his owne family: And the other of his es∣peciall fauour brought to passe, that by her Maiesties pri∣uiledge and preferment, I might be made of a forreiner a freeman, of an alien a Cittizen. And seeing I haue recei∣ued
all these fauours without any deede or desert of mine, (God thou knowest mine vnworthines) I were but too in∣grate and vnkinde, if I should bury in darke and deepe si∣lence your so rare and religious demerites. But whereas I haue no other thing to render or repay vnto your Honors, but a mine of thanks, and a thankfull minde, that mind wil I alwaies beare, and that duety in minde, so that I will not cease to worship the sacred memory of your religious loue towardes me. Another cause is, the very nature of the argumente I vndertake, the which I could not well prosecute, without some particular mention of the Church of England. In the which, seeing I haue now my part and portion of a pastoral prouince (and praised be the Lord, my lotte is fallen vnto me in a faire ground) might I not seeme vnmindfull of my good & neglecting my duty, if when I vndertake the cause of those Churches which are alien and outlandish, I should ouerslip the state of mine own Church now gremiall to me and mere English? But when mine hearts desire and praier to God is, that I may some waies benefite my countrey∣men, if I forget thee O Ierusalem? And yet if I should for∣get my duety herein, the meere alliance and relation of the matters them selues, is such and so great, as that by ordi∣nary course of necessary consequence I must be inforced, to inferre and praefer the mention thereof in my bookes. But because I am but new made of Flemish, sterling, that is, of Outlandish, English, it may be happely, that they which are home-bred, will thinke I deale not wel with them, to deale with them, and that I meddle too farre, when I come so neare. For which cause I thought it necessarye for mee, to commend and commit my selfe vnto your Honorable patrocinie, that this stranger book might freely passe vnder your safe conduct. Neither shall it grieue me much, though it be vniustly cast by most voices, if it may iustly passe your accoumpt: neither shall it hurt me much, though the in∣raged multitude in disordered throngs cast stones at mee, only if your Honors vouchsafe to giue me the white stone.
But the last cause is, for that I am in some doubt, how this discourse will be taken of them, for whose sakes especi∣ally it was vndertaken. For it is to be feared, that they are so far from turning stones vnto bread, that they will make stones of bread, and that which I haue done to relieue their weakenes, they will account as deuised to vndermine their estate, and so take that with the left hand, which I proffer with the right. And in deede what other thing shoulde I looke for at their hands, who (in lieu of my well deseruing towards them) haue sought heretofore, rather to cast me off with disgrace, then to giue me vp with reward? How de∣sirous I haue alwaies beene of publique peace, and howe zealous ouer them that layd snares for my life, I dare ap∣peale vnto God and men: and yet for my good will what great reward haue I receiued at their handes, but sharp re∣uenge, or what better meede for my paines, then bitter ma∣lice? But no reason I should take this kinde of cruelty vnkind∣ly, seeing it is so common a case, and commonly incident to me, with many my betters. And therefore far be it from me, that the iniuries of a few (though no fewe iniuries) should so far preuaile with me, that I should therefore lesse regard the better health of the whole Church. Should I be for priuate wronges so far inraged beyond all sence, and besides my selfe, as to study to bee reuenged vppon many good men, being offended but of a few bad fellowes. After I was last called frō hence by the Belgike Churches, I conuersed among them in diuers places ten whole yeares together: in what time I found by aduised experience, that there were two thinges of great moment greatly missed in those Churches, the which I could not then without grief, and cannot now without sin conceale, namely, That the mi∣nistery of the Gospell receiued of them by publike authority, is not adorned by them with due honor: And againe, That wealth and worshippe in the order of the ministery, is thought a needlesse thing to aduaunce the estimation thereof in a ciuill society. (Men that we are) misconceauing is the cause of all this. For now a
daies (for sooth) no Church is thought reformed, vnlesse First all Church dignities, be either thrust out at the Church porch, or thrust downe to the belfry, and then all the Church goods, be ei∣ther put in the great bagge, or giuen to the greedy baggage. The which errour if it doe proceed (as it will if it be not nipt in the head) it will one day reuele, not only vpon the church, but also vppon the whole state a greater misery, then can easely be driuen into euery common mans head. To the which this also may be added, that there are many of opi∣nion (and they are of many opinions) That the abolishing of Bishops is not the least part of reformation, and That their autho∣rity in the Church is crept in, not of any diuine institution of Gods word, but (that which not any Church before this time did euer auouch) of the onely errour and ambition of mans wit. Our elders & all auncient diuines (for the preuenting of Scisme, and conuenting the head-strong and giddy headed rashnes of many) helde the prudent moderation of one (in one Cit∣ty or prouince) to be ordained from aboue. And they knew very well, that albeit the quirke of speaking (for so they speak) be found in many, yet the art of gouerning, and the rule of well ruling, is knowen but of a few. How great a stay a godly and prudent Bishop may bee, to any troubled or distressed State, auncient histories doe plainly teach, & present experience might make vs learne. Doe you not knowe (I know you are not ignorant) howe that many times, many things betide in a christian com∣mon wealth, which require the aduise of Ecclesiastical Pre∣lates? As also where the Gospell is publiquely authorised, that there are many thinges requisite for the Church, which cannot be effected with out the ciuill Magistrate? And how then, are not they in a peeuish and a peruerse errour, which either exclude the Magistrate from causes Ecclesia∣sticke, or sequester the Minister from affaires politike? (sil∣ly men that they are) as if either the Christian Magistrate were no part of the Church, or the sacred Minister not Cit∣tizen of the same common wealth? And yet neither the Magistrate (if he be Christian) is to neglect the safety of the
Church, nor the Minister (if he be godly) not to regard the safegard of the state. But these two (the Magistrate and the Minister) so long as they shalbe distracted into partes, and as it were diuorsed in state the one from the other, and shall not take sweete counsell together like friends, or not communicate in consent for their common benefite, they cannot but conceiue diuers and doubtfull surmises, fonde yea, and some times false opinions of each others gouerne∣ment. The Magistrate that keepeth fresh in memory the new broken yoke of the Popes tiranny, feareth least by any meanes he should fall againe into the like, though vnlike. And therfore is iealous ouer the counsels and conuenticles of the Cleargy, & suspecteth alwaies some snare to be laid in them to entangle his liberty. Of the other side, the Pa∣stors (so many as are, or will bee accoumpted faithfull in their Ministery) cānot but be careful for the welfare of their flocke, and therefore seeke by all meanes to benefite the Church, and to shun those things which may preiudice the same: who when they see diuers kindes of people to pre∣uaile in the Common-wealth, and they some of them open professed enemies to the Church, some but suspicious and suspected fauorites, few faithfull and vnfeined friendes; no woonder though they dare hardly commit their cause and their credites, them selues and their safeties, to such Gouer∣nours. Besides, they being ignorant of the common coun∣sels, how should they bee good interpreters of such thinges as are done in the Common-wealth? neither can such coun∣sels be well communicated to the common people, and yet reason would they should, seeing they are common. If the States in the Low-countries (brought to lowe e∣state) had their learned and reuerend Bishoppes, in that e∣stimation they ought to be, in euerie well ordered state, no doubt with their vigilancye and moderation, they might more easily haue remedied their present miseries. I did com∣plaine (not without cause,) to see the Church goods pilde and pilferd, and learned Pastors set to their stipēds: Of the which, some in deed do liue & releeue their families (though
porely God knowes) and some againe for the moity of their stipēds, & the multitude of their familiars, are by no means able to keepe open shop windowes. I speake not, (or neede not) of them which are denied their wages, or serue (like our soldiers) for cheese flemish, if that they can get it. But by this meanes, when as (to the griefe of al good men) I did see the most sacred studie of Diuinity to languishe, that young wits were affraid of it, and old heads a weary of it, Churches without Pastors, Schooles wanting professors: I lamented with my selfe, and sorrowed for these mischiefes, and those wee might easily coniect, would issue out of these as out of Pandoraes box. Neither did I sorrowe for these thinges to my selfe alone: I acquainted my griefs, where I was acquain∣ted. But because in those intempestuous times, I could not safelie either speake, or write my minde, without suspect of contention, couetousnes, or ambition, I conteined my selfe discontēt, expecting a fitter opportunity. In the mean while, I could haue wished that this argument might haue bin vn∣dertaken of some other, and of some other profession: And that doubtlesse might haue bene performed of such an one with so much the more ease and lesse enuie, by howe muche the matter did lesse concerne himselfe. But seeing no man offered himselfe to this seruice, (and the seruice honorable) after manye delaies, I ouercame my selfe at last, and in the zeale of my dutie, haue vndergon that burthen, which Atlas himselfe can not sustaine alone: and therefore in the consci∣ence of mine owne weaknes, I come loaden to your Honors with mine ouer-burden, and laye downe the same in three little bookes vnder your names (thrise reuerend and renow∣ned.) And this also haue I done with the greater confidence, and the lesse conflict, for that both the trueth of the cause it selfe, wil bear me vp, that I slip not, and also your honorable fauours (as I hope) wil beare me out, if I slip not. And now, if it shall please God to put them in some bet∣ter mind, whome these things do chiefly concerne, so that these may be commended of them, and they amended by these, I verely shall reioyce in them, but they shall be behol∣ding
vnto you. But if these thinges displease them, and they finde themselues offended with my liberty, I shal find others (I doubt not) as amorous of the present truth, as they are of their priuate humor, and as far in loue with reuerend an∣tiquitie, as they are in liking with insolent noueltie; vnto whom I perswade my selfe (though they should fore-speake the contrarie,) this my labour shall not bee altogeather vn∣welcome. Wherefore for your Honors I will pray, and im∣portune the most great and Almighty, that he would vouch∣safe to giue you life, euen a long life, for the benefite of the Church, and the aduancement of the kingdome of Christ. London 4. Kal. Aprill. Anno Dom. 1590. Your Honors most bounden Hadrian Sarauia
TO THE GODLIE AND Faithfull Ministers of the Church of Christ, throughout the Low-countries, my brethren beloued in the Lord. AT what time I liued at Leiden (worshipfull and beloued) I many times, with many of you, bewailed the state of the Church there: In the which, the deuill, (the deuill it is) spreadeth his net, as many other waies, so e∣speciallie nowe with a certaine newe slight after another fashion: In the which he hath his gins and engins, nothing like vnto those of olde, when hee went a hirding with gainefull hipocrisie, and en∣tangled the soules of Christian people with a kind of costlie supersti∣tion: then did the Cleargie, and the Layitie ambitiouslie contend, (as yet they continue vnder the Papacie) whether should exceed the o∣ther: they in their pompous sanctimonie, or these in their superstiti∣ous munificencie: So they, sold (and sell) at a deare reckoning: these, bought (and buy) at the hucsters handes: The one deceiuing, the o∣ther deceiued; both in an error, neuer a better. And is it not strange to see (a thing that is not strange,) how superstition and hypocrisie is of more force and preuaileth more, to conquere and lead captiue the minds of men, then true and sincere religion, which is pure and plaine, without wealt or gard? But such is either the negligence of men, or the nature of man, it will be deceiued, and will deceiue. Who is able to recompt (and keepe reckoning,) the quircks and the tricks, the gybing and the iugling of the Romaine Alcaron, by the whiche they hold play with the simple, and play noddie with the peoples sim∣plicitie? The paines of Purgatorie, the Popes pardons, Images, false miracles, pilgrimage to statues, shrines and crosses, reliques of saints, bones, teeth, and ashes, vestments, belts, and sandals, and a thousand such like trumperies? These are the martes and the marchandise which they make ouer to the peple for hid treasure, while they sel the people for olde shooes, What should I more say? They say themselues, (and the more shame) they are not ashamed to say: That these and such like, are the Religious illusions of the Religious. VVhat
a commodious craft auricular confession is, the Iesuits (besides other the Romish Prelates minions) doe feele, and find. But now adaies, because the true Ministers of Christ, and the faithfull stewards of his house are not trained vppe in these trades, nor guiltie of these traines, they are set at naught of naughtie men. And yet of olde, when the people doted ouer their false Gods, and spared for no cost, so they might satisfie their soules with neuer-satisfied superstition, they were notwithstanding nothing so ranke in seking to satisfie the rauine of that vnkind lust towards their false God and his worship, as they were slowe and slacke to inquire after the true God his seruice, and his true seruants: and why then should it seeme a thing rare or insolent among vs, if the like kinde of vn∣kindnes be reuolued vpon vs in this age? For man to man, and age to age is as like, as is the water to the water, day to day, to day and heareafter. In what honour and estimation the Ministers of the Church are among the Romanists, is well knowen to such as either now liue, or at anie time haue liued amongst them. But now, amongst vs the professors of the Gospell, they which sincerely teach the true religion, and truly teach what way leadeth to heauen, and by what means we are reconciled to God, ar ether nothing at al acounted, or as nothing. Is any thing (for honour sake?) for pittie sake yeelded vnto them? it is by and by thought much of, and thought too much, bee it neuer so little. For which sinne, not onely the vnkindnes of the people is to bee condemned, as principallie guiltie, but our owne foolishnes also may be conuicted, as accessorie faultie. And howe? Forsooth a toy hath taken vs in the head, and we haue taken a toy in hand, by sur∣prising the Popes tyrannie, to suppresse our owne liberty: As if indeede, the excessiue riot, and not expleable auarice of the Popish Cleargie could by no possible meanes be rebated, vnlesse wee thrust downe the reformed Ministerie beneath the Bell-ferie, and hand o∣uer head lay wast all the possessions of the Cleargie. A passing de∣uice indeede, to bring this to passe (as it hath alreadie brought it within come to passe) that the Church wanteth wherewith to nou∣rish the sacred Muses, and is faine to honour the painefull Minister with monethly menstruous fees. From hence is foisted into the Church, a kinde of temporall
biter, after a new fashion & an euil example: who chiefly attending, vpon their own drudgerie, by the way ioyne hand with the Pastor in his prouince, and that for a yeare or two at the most (that they may be good in their office.) And by this meanes, (that which I account worse then all the rest) the beautie of the Church is vanished, and that vnited force of the brethren which in placed in one Bishop, who dare with confidence, and may with authoritie controule the wicked in their enterprises, is vtterlie lost and languished. For whilest eue∣rie one is dispised, all are contemned and likewise, whilest euerie one taketh care of his owne Curch onelie, they altogeather neglect the good of the whole Church generallie. I spare to exemplifie this: your selues suppose, what, and where vpon I speake it. But doe you not see, or can you not conceiue, how that many things may daily chance in the Church, which concerne all Churches in common, and for the which, a present remedie must be had? In this case no priuate man dare vndertake the cause: and why? he seeth and considereth that the matter pertaineth not to him, or to anie one, or to a few, but vn∣to all the rest of that whole Prouince in common. But whilest hee which could find in his heart to put himselfe vpon the action for the common good, yet findeth many doubts in his hart, and is stil affeard least either himselfe should not be allowed, or that he should perform not confirmed, by the rest; of necessitie the time is deferred in this necessitie, and needs must a further time be expected, vntil the bre∣thren may bee assembled. That a Synode should bee called for euerie such matter, it is both costly and inconuenient: and many times also before either they could be called, or come togeather, either the mis∣chief that was feared would be receiued, or the occasion that was pro∣fered would be ouer-passed, whereby the euil might ether altogether, or more easily haue bene remoued. Amongst you, the Church-goods are rifled and ruined with∣out anie reuerend regard of sacred or prophane: as if (forsooth) it were religion for the Church of Christ to bee woorth one dodkin in a christian Common-wealth: or as if indeed it were the onely errour of the Church of Rome, that they are rich. Doth anie thing re∣maine yet vnransackt in any of your Churches? the better for those Burgreeues and Burgomaisters in whose handes it is. As for your selues, there is not so much as one mite left to bee at your disposing:
you that stand so much in your ownlight, and haue put out two lights with your too much lightnes, can you put out mine with an half pe∣nie? alas good souls: if you were euerie one pore, yet might you be all rich. But now it is the cōmon opinion, that Pastors ought of congru∣tie to be poore and needie: and that is so deeplie infixed in the harts of the simple peple, that they can hardly be perswaded to the contra∣ry. Is it possible, but by such meanes it shuld one day come to passe (if they thus proceed) that the whole Ministery of the Church shuld fal ether into vtter decay, or wretched contēpt? I was purposed (if I had staied with you) to haue conferred about this matter with the States themselues. And verely I would haue exhorted and intreated thē, that they would take some better course in this cause: I would haue taught them, that they had no right at all vnto the church-goods: I would haue prooued and protested vnto them, that whatsoeuer ca∣lamities haue befallen the Low-countries, they are al but the iust vengeance of God for their sacrilege: that the goods of Cathedrall and Collegiat churches, and also of many Monasteries, were desti∣nate and consecrated to the vse of sacred studies: And last of all, I would haue informed them, and confirmed to them, that whatsoe∣uer hath varied from the first institution therof, ought not to be de∣stroyed, but restored by the christian Magistrate. But this my good purpose was hindered, first by the vntimely death of the Prince of Orange, and then also for the Earle of Leycester his sake: Least I might seeme to haue attempted the same, either at a bad time, (in the greatest tumult of the countrey) or els by bad means (presuming vpon the fauour and furtherance of my L. the Earle. In the meane while, I might greatly wonder at the error of many, and they not meanely conceited towards the Gospel: neither should I cease to wonder, were it not that I knowe the Ministers themselues, whome the matter doth more neerly concerne, to bee the authours of that error. But when I consider with my selfe the iniquitie of these euill daies, and the bad meaning of euil men, I cannot wel tell whe∣ther I might rather lament or reioyce in that their foule ouersight. For albeit to haue the churches spoyled & left desolat of such helps with the which it ought to be releued, may bring vpon both Church and State a greater misery then many can suspect, or any can auoyd: notwithstanding, that in the beginnings of reformation, there was
nor mention nor motion made for the Church-goods, it greeueth me the lesse; for that by this meanes the aduersarie cannot well say, that we rather sought the treasure of the Church, then the glorie of God. For had they made anie question of the Church-goods, these cauils and quarrels might haue taken some aduantage of them. But now, when as they esteemed of whatsoeuer the Papists possessed, as of things nothing pertaining vnto them, and referred all the whole matter to the moderation of the Magistrate; by this meanes, Suspicion it selfe could not but cleare them of suspicion. So God sometimes doth vse the verie ignorance of his seruants, to some good end: namelie, when as a truth taught out of time, would doe more hurt then good. Notwithstanding, that which sometimes hath beene obiected, can neither be denied nor defended; that there were some which tooke our part in hope of the pray onely. And al∣beit these things were not altogether vnknowen vnto the godlie at that time, (as their writings doe witnesse) yet in wisdome they chose rather to suffer and say little to that iniurie, then that in hast they should goe about to offend any. And in this they did imitate Saint Paule, who in the rich Cittie of Corinth, had rather labour with his hands, and so get his maintenaunce, then otherwise to giue anie occasion of suspect to a nouice people, not seene into the dignitie of his right Apostolique. And shall I tell you? that onely conside∣ration was not the least cause, why my selfe dared not bewray vnto euery one the silence of my thoughts: And yet (such was my natiue weakenes, or my foole-hardie forwardnes) I could not hide my selfe from my brethren and companions, and some also of the Magistrats of Gaunt. But I spake not then so freely, as I meane to doe in this discourse: For I alwaies feared, as I ought to do, least such as were but newly wonne to the faith of Christ, might be haplie lost by my indiscreet libertie, and my selfe brought into a needlesse gealosie of auarice and ambition. But now, seeing I am in that place and condition, in the which no man can iustly accuse me, as if I sought any especiall commoditie for my selfe, or desired any other thing, then that which is commo∣dious and necessary for the Church: I thought it my duty to speake plainely, what I thinke of the goods and possessions of the Church. Neither is it enough for mee, that I am heere well prouided for my
selfe: I wish the like vnto my brethren. And although I may iustlie complain my self, to be iniuriouslie forsaken of you, whom I ought to haue found the chief Patrons of mine innocency: yet notwithstāding, my loue and my Zeale, both towards the Church, and also vnto you-wards, is not therefore either altered, or alienated. And how then shuld I be lesse carefull for yours & your Churches good, then when my selfe was in the same ship with you? VVherefore, seeing we haue now sufficientlie wincked at this errour, as well of the people, as the Magistrate, which (if it be suffered) will bring to the Church, ei∣ther a deadly ruine, or a desperate mischiefe: we may no longer dis∣semble the matter; the Church it selfe must be taught hir duetie towards hir Ministerie. It is a perilous & pernitious thing, to be∣queath an euill president vnto our posteritie: who shall take all for reformation, whatsoeuer they receaued in the name of Reformati∣on (for what cause so euer it was done.) Men (as you know) for the most part, vse rather to regard the deed, then to respect the cause: what is doone euerie man can tell, but for what cause it was doone, there are few which can conceiue, or well consider. I must needes confesse, I haue proceeded some-what farther in∣to this matter, then my purpose was, when I came first hither: For that I see heere in England, by the euill presidents of other Coun∣tries, most men are carried away with the same errors. Some streine their consciences so farre, and open their mouthes so wide, that like dronken men they stretch and yawne after the Church-liuings, and doe euen gourmandize them already in their hopes mercilesse, and bottomeles conceits. And some againe while they grutch the Pastors their fields, and enuie the Euangelique Bishops the riches of Romish Prelates, (as if it were not lawefull for vs to succeed them, and not exceed them) would seme to eat their hearts in garlike (as they say) while they eat and spit their owne gall in malice. A strange opinion they hold, that the place, power, and authoritie, it hath pleased her Maiestie and the rest of the states, the Bishops should reteine in this kingdome, is a grant vtterly auerse vnto the reformation of religi∣on. VVherefore now, what honour is due in a Christian Common-wealth to the Ministers of the Church, and how forforth the same may extend, is to be examined more at large. But it is to be feared, least some will be scarcely well pleased,
especially such as be ignorant of the auncient Church gouernment) with this my treatise of the diuers degrees of the Ministers of the Gospell: and the rather, for that I haue noted in their newe∣come reformation two things not to be liked of: namely, that the au∣tentique order of Bishops is abrogated, and a nouell kinde of Pres∣byters intruded. The which I haue the rather noted, for that the common sort of people are of opinion, that not the least part of refor∣mation consisteth in the dilapidation of Church-goods, in the extir∣pation of Prouinciall Bishops, and in the creation of Demi-laicall, and mongrell Presbyters. The which opinion of the people, I doe therefore reprehend, not that I dissallow, that certaine graue seni∣ours and godlie men should consort with the Pastors, (that is, the true Presbyters of the Church:) but that they may know, (as they shall be taught) not to mistake them for those Elders, of the which, in the Actes of the Apostles, and in Paules Epistles there is often mention, and is it not needful also, to point at an error betimes, least it beeing by time confirmed, should not afterwardes be easilie correc∣ted? If any man shall thinke my selfe in the error, or that I haue gone further then he liketh well of: let him teach me that which is bet∣ter. I will presently alter my iudgement, and giue ouer the bucklers vnto him that can do best. The which I speake not as if I doubted, or were not thorowlie resolued, that those things of the which I affirme in this book, were not assumed out of gods book. (For I do verely be∣leeue that I haue not swarued frō that rule which God hath giuen me to follow.) But yet, if any man presume he can teach the contrary out of the word, (and make not the word contrarie) I am more rea∣dy to attend and be taught, then to teach, and had rather bee ouer∣come, then ouercome: condition, that that onely truth may preuaile, which in truth ought to preuaile. In the meane while, as I haue al∣waies borne, and beare with such as dissent in opinion from me, (so long as they holde intire the Lorde Iesus:) so likewise in the same charity may they beare with me, if I dissent from them, I hartelie wish, and intreat earnestly. If it shall please God, by the counsel of christian Princes, that there may be a generall and a free councell ce∣lebrated, that (as it becommeth me) I refuse not to bee iudge of my iudgement: but if otherwise, neither I can bee perswaded by others,
nor perswade others: let vs expect with one accord the iudgement of Almightie God, when euery one shal render according to the moi∣tie of his talent, a reason of his Ministerie. For me to contend with my brethren after a bitter manner? it is no part of my meaning. If in any place my stile shall seeme more sharpe: beleeue me, (I will not fable with you) the greatnes of the mischiefe, not any priuat griefe, hath set an edge on it. And to speake reason, what reason haue I to be violent, or virulent in this question? Seeing whatsoeuer is helde amisse, I impute it to the error and ignorance of art, not to the ma∣lice or euill meaning of men. The horrible sacrilege of men is not so manifest to the world, as the execrable authors thereof are vnknown vnto me: (and it gre∣ueth me not that they are vnknowen.) Of whome then should I ex∣claime? Against whome should I declaime? But whereas certaine vngodly men are craftely crept in amongst vs, who make a shewe of religion, and would seem to fauor the Gospell, and that not so much of any deuotion towards God, as in detestation of all godlines: I am constrained many times, more earnestly to inueigh against the sub∣tiltie and impietie of such: (let them be of what estate they may be, if they be of that condition) For neither are our owne colours cleare of such staines: against whome can there bee anie worme-wood too bit∣ter? This I note, that if at any time I name the Hollonders, I note not the whole nation: (God forbid) but onely those that degenerate from the naturall integrity of their owne nation. But are not they so much the more worthy greater ignominy, by how much the more fondly they abuse their owne authority, and the peoples simplicitie? such therefore I must necessarilie, and may worthelie accuse of A∣theisme and irreligion, the rest, I cannot excuse of errour and igno∣rance onely. Indeed error and ignorance doe sometime mitigate the guilt of the offender, but neuer can it obliterate the staine of the offence. It will seeme a hard matter I know vnto some, that sacrilege should be openly reprehended, and vnto some an absurd thing, that in the policy of the Church, Bishoppes should be required. For there are here in England a certaine number of wicked men, (and I am very sorie for them) who are so farre out of order with that
order, as if no Ecclesiasticall Discipline were to be had vnder them. Amongst whome, the quarrell is growen so farre, that nowe they de∣uorce themselues from the communion of the English church, as Pa∣pisticall and Antichristian, and so betake themselues to their pri∣uate and not permitted conuenticles. VVhome I could doe no lesse then lightly note in this place, because they seem to patronage their odious scisme, and mutinous huggor-muggar by the precedent pre∣sidents of our foraine Churches. O God thou knowest, and themselues cannot bee ignoraunt, that the first peregrine churches which were heere in England, had their Lord Bishop Alasco, and these which at this day are vnder the protection of the most gracious Elizabeth, doe acknowledge the Bishops of those Diocesses in the which they are, and to them they supply. But (thankes be vnto God) there are others, who being somewhat more milde and moderate in their pro∣ceedings, doe not altogeather estraunge themselues from the assem∣blies of their churches: but yet, they haue the Bishops in emulation also, and promise vnto themselues a golden worlde, could they but once bring to passe, that by a preposterous Alchymy of earthly pollicy they could turne gold into drosse, that is, Bishops into Presbiters, & their reuenues into annuities. But to them I dare say, and can fore∣shew, that they shal bring, themselues? The whole state Ecclesiastik into deepe disdaine, disdaine worse then themselues deserue. And whereas (the Lord be praised for it) we haue now some good Disci∣pline, it will come to passe that then they shall haue none at all, but voluntary, which as soone as it is begone, will be gone. I omit the tumults and contentions with the which they shall first trouble and turmoyle both heauen and earth. But this is plaine, and I dare pro∣mise them, that they which were the first authors thereof, will proue their first enemies, so sone as vnder these colours they shal haue ob∣tained their desires. The calamities of your present churches your selues see, and suffer: but from whence they arise, or what is the true remedy (pardon me, I beseech you, if I speake as I thinke) you seeme not to see or conceiue at all. Doe you not heare of the turbulent state of other Churches? and you know what they were from the beginning. Where, if they had in∣tertained for a popish Prelat, a true BB. & for Romish masmongers
Euangelique Ministers, contented and contenting themselues, with the rites and reuenues of their owne Churches: no doubt all thinges amongst them, had continued more peaceable and prosperous, aswell in Church as, Common-wealth. The like I affirme of other prouinces, from whence is exiled the tyrant of Churches. But what can be done, where the mindes of men are foreseasoned with preiudice, and alreadie resolued, That to bee ruled by bishops, and to be releeued by Tythes (and other oblations of the people,) is a point of Poperie. But may I not be so bolde to tell them, (and I will tell them but the truth) that these, and such like medicines as they go about to ad∣minister vnto the Church maladies, are like to prooue but prouocati∣ons vnto further mischiefes? Admit the drugs they concoct be not simplie offensiue, yet is it to be considered, (and wise men wil consider) whether the faintnes and infirmitie of the whole body of the common-wealth, may abide the same. Here there is need of great wisedome, & no lesse moderation: the which as it may be in many, so must it be in one, which may execute the same: and this is he, which is not to looke ouer one part, but to watch ouer all, not of the whole worlde, (which neuer any mortall thing, or could, or can,) but of one Cittie or pro∣uince, so farre forth as the power of man may extend it self. And may wee not also more saflie walke in the steppes of the auncient fathers, then rashlie to step aside into tracts of our owne treading? Now, how you will accept of this my libertie, I cannot well tell, but I hope well of you, and commit the whole cause vnto God him∣selfe. This I am perswaded, and this haue I learned, that in an vn∣stayed estate, it is not the part of a good Cittizen, to suspend his censure of the Common-wealth, nor of a faithfull Christian, to sup∣presse his opinion of the Church of Christ. For mine owne part, if in this daungerous enterprise, I shall obtaine that onelie, which I haue propounded vnto my selfe, I shall haue iust occasion to giue thankes vnto my GOD: but if it fall out otherwise, yet shall I haue discharged my duetie vnto my Brethren, and performed my vowe to the Church of GOD. Vnto the whiche, I haue hitherto thought my selfe indebted as muche as this comes vnto, That a knowen errour ought not to bee ouer-slipped in the silence of mee.
But put case, I doe smale good vpon those, for whose sakes especially I haue traueiled in this duetie; yet shall their remaine a perpetuall note of that notorious errour vnto all posteritie, that they yet at the length may amend that, in the which they haue found their Fathers to haue bene faultie. London the fourth of the Kal. of Aprill. Desirous of your welfare. Hadrian Sarauia.
To the curteous Reader. WHosoeuer thou bee (gentle Reader,) into whose hands this booke shall come, in any case I would not haue thy minde troubled with this discourse, as if we did reuerse som graund Article of thy faith, when wee doe but restore, (for so we holde it behofefull) the graue Senat of Bishops into the refor∣med Churches (so called.) Doe we crosse herein the iudge∣ment of some late writers of great name? Why then iudge you, (and iudge me worthie of double blame) if I should be either so frontlesse, or so forgetfull at least, as to aduenture vpon this contradiction, of mine own head: suppose ye me at the least, backt with the piller of truth, (the sacred scrip∣ture) and borne out with the consent of the auncient Fa∣thers, and countenaunced with the continued custome of the whole Church. What then? (Will you saye) did they, whome you cal men of name, see nothing? I answere, they did see indeede, that which I see: But as they which take vp∣pon them to repaire an old house, albeit within dores there bee many pretie romes, and necessarye corners, which they would willinglie, and might well bee reserued; yet notwith∣standing, when they beholde on euery side, the most partes rotted and ruinated, and those good partes to hang togea∣ther by putrified and imperfect ioyntes, they are in dispaire, that the house can not bee well turguised, except the whole frame should be ouerturned: Euen so the reformers of gods house, albeit they did see to their greife, manye excellent things which might well, and well worthie, bee reserued, yet perceiuing them to be either vtterly disteined with supersti∣tion, or doubtfullie entangled therewith, and consequentlie dispairing, that they could not roote out the grounded su∣perstition and tyrrany of the pope, vnlesse they plucked vp by the roots many singular ornaments of the church; in the anguishe of their zeale they cried at once, downe with it, downe with it, euen to the ground. And so is it come to pas that togeather with impietie and Idolatrie (if not before
them both) such and so many instruments are taken away, as might haue beene verie great helpes to the Church, both for the preseruing of Discipline, and also for the retaining of that dignitie to the Ministerie, which is decent and requi∣site in a ciuill societie. But to the purpose: although in materiall thinges, that which we haue exemplified before, many times must be so of necessitie: yet in morall causes there is no such necessity. The state therefore of this question (friend reader) is not of thy faith in Christ, or of thy souls health, but by what guides especiallye, and gouernours, thou maist bee best lead in the way of truth, and kept in the path of eternall life. And vpon this point is all this variaunce. For there are some of opini∣on, that all discipline of maners, is to be referred to the Ma∣gistrate, and that the Minister is to be restrained to the bare Preaching of the worde, and ministring of the Sacraments. The which fancie of men, seeing it hath neither the word of God to confirme it, nor any president of our Elders to giue countenance to it, I can but wonder, howe so friuelous an opinion, could once either creepe in, or peepe out of the heads of Diuines. But there are other which yeild (as they ought to doe) the power of Ecclesiasticall censures to those Bishoppes and Elders, which are such, both in name and in∣deede: vnto whome, they deny not that authoritie which God gaue vnto his Apostles, and their successours the Bi∣shops. And last of all, there is a third kinde of them, which reiecting the order of Bishops, ioyne with the Pastor certain annuall Elders, vnto whome they commit the regiment or the Church, and the ordering of Ecclesiasticall Discipline. Thus did the Philosophers of old, when it came in question, what kinde of Gouernment was best: Of whome, some pre∣ferred the Monarchie of one, and that (as it is indeed) they iudged the best: yet others maintained, that an Oligarchy or ioynt gouernment of a few, was as good as the best: again there were others, who for a Democratie, or state popular, would yeeld to none of the rest. And last of all, there were some, who to the former three added a fourth, which they
indifferently, (not equally) mixed of all three; and that they would make good, to be as good as they al, and better then any of the rest. But in the meane while they considered not this, that any kind of gouernment as it is in it selfe, is not so much to bee considered in gouernance, as is the nature and condition of them, who are to be gouerned, and for whose good that kind of gouernment is ordained. So that nowe, that forme of pollicie is to bee accounted best, not which is such in his owne nature, but that which is most necessary for the people, the time, and the place. For which cause, (as I conceaue) GOD himselfe in the secrecie of his wisedome, hath not set downe vnto any nation, any perpetual forme of gouernment, the which it was not lawful to alter according to the incidencie of time, place, and persons. But in the gouernment, of the which we dispute, the case is far otherwise: for in that it proceedeth immediatly from God, men maye not alter the same according to their fan∣cies, neither is it necessary: For the wisedome of God hath so tempered the same, that it repugneth no form of ciuil go∣uernment. In deede, where any one whole state is become Christian, the gouernment happelie may receiue some kind of alteration, but not such as shal alter the nature of it. Were they before in gouernment diuerse, and in no one thing a∣like? nowe they consort in one, and lend each other their mutuall aide. Wherefore, whatsoeuer other men thinke in this matter: doubtlesse the Christian Magistrate, in a well ordered state, ought not to bee held as a priuate person, ei∣ther in Church or common-wealth. The which distinction beeing not sufficientlie looked into, hath distracted vs into diuerse errors in Church Discipline. For my part, (and the best wil take my part,) I hold, that the state of Bishops is ne∣cessary in the Church, & that Discipline is best and from a∣boue, in the which, godly Bishoppes, with the not nick-na∣med Elders do sit at the helme. And yet when I consider with my selfe, the badnes of these times, and the badde condition of some places, in the which it hath pleased God, by the hands of learned and reli∣gious
men to gather togeather his dispersed flocke out of the captiuity of Babilon. I doe not see indeed, how the true Bishops could haue bene restored. In the Churches of Flan∣ders and Holland, my selfe haue susteined the office of a Pa∣stor: but shall I tell you? I cannot easily tell, how many im∣pediments I there found in this busines. But shal that which was done extraordinarily, and partly of necessity, and that but in a certaine fewe places, and that but in our age onely, prescribe a law to the world besides? This diuorce of minds and opinions had neuer bene, were it not for the tyrrany of some misrulie Bishops, a nouell opinion is crept vp, oppo∣sing it selfe against all antiquitie, which holdeth all Bishops generally in iealousie: and yet, the like and no lesse suspicion is raised of our newe consistories also, wheather rightlye or wrongfully, I will not say. Wherefore, he that will vndoubtedly attaine to the cer∣taine knowledge of these thinges indeed, must bee sure, that he examine and try the cause him selfe, deuoyd of all passion or preoccupation of affection. Many times within these sixe and twentie yeares, haue I deliuered my minde vnto my friends in familiar conference, (though not at all times, nor to all) concerning the gouernment of Bishops. What they would conceiue of mee for so doing, I might easily coniect by others, who had in like maner reueiled themselues vnto their brethren. For as it happened, a certaine disputation fel out between certaine Ministers, concerning the same po∣sition: in the which M. Doctor Villerius, (whose name I cannot remember without due reuerence) assumed, that the authority of Bishops was not so rashly to haue bin reiected. But Lord, how they were netled and nestled with this? as if with that one word, he had vtterly ouerthowen that equa∣lity, which they expected in the French churches, and which they thought requisite in all Ministers. O griefe: to me they made knowen their griefe, and (pittifull complaining) they complained to me thereof. But what should I heere do? de∣fend him I dared not, (and yet I liked well the cause of his opinion,) least I should incur the like suspicion of aspiring
thoughts. But from that time forwarde, that conference gaue mee occasion to search and sift out more narrowlye, those matters by my selfe. And that which then happened to me, I doubt not but is incident to many others with me, who in wisedome see, also and consider, that the authority of Bishops is greatly wanting in ours, and al Churches. There are some which can indure, nor equall, nor su∣periour: I giue God thanks, I can see my superiour without enuy, and sustaine my inferior without contempt. But now, seeing I am heere in England, no man can chalenge my af∣fection as guiltie of a Bishoppricke, or as if I seeke dominion ouer my brethren: (the calling I affect, but not to be called.) And therefore now I dare more boldly, and will more freely speake what I thinke, then before I thought it requisite; nei∣ther was it conuenient, when I conuersed among brethren neuer-a better. Yea, but I may seeme in this action, to sooth vp the By∣shops, and seeke their countenance: countenance? nay then must I seeke further, and neuer look the Bishops in the face, whose condition in this thankles age, is more subiect to the enuie and obliquie of men, then my selfe am. And indeed, if that were all, and all but so little, it were the part of a warie child, and him that would husband his credite to make the most of it, rather with safetie and silence to say nothing, and with patience and pollicy, to expect the issue of these things. The which I dare saye, I also could haue doone as well as o∣thers, without displeasure to my selfe, or disfauour to anie. But what moued me, God knoweth: men may construe my fact as themselues affect: but it is the Lord that iudgeth my soule. Notwithstanding, let the curteous Reader conceiue my meaning in few words: I desire to benefite the churches alreadie, and to be reformed, to extirpate Scisme where it is rooted, and to preuent it where it is rising. He that thinketh this cannot be done by these meanes, shall haue his own say∣ing for me: but yet the euent of things (mother of fooles,) will one day make it plaine, howe good and profitable my meaning was; and in the meane while, the Church (if it be∣ware
not) maye receiue that detriment, which it cannot re∣paire. The ground of our saluation, is to know God, & whom hee hath sent, Iesus Christ our Lorde and Sauiour, the Bi∣shop of of our soules. But as in euerie thing which men goe about: whether weauing, caruing, or any other craft, of the which, either the Citie, or the ciuill Magistrate hath any care, that it should bee well done, there must bee a decent order kept, and a diligent ouer-sight had of the works, the which by how much the more curious it is, by so much the things themselues doe flowrish the better, and continue the long∣er: So likewise in Religion, the same order and ouer-sight ought to be had, if we wil haue the same to flowrish amongst vs, or to continue pure and intemerate for euer. But that al men doe not agree about the maner of ordering and gouer∣ning the Church, why should that trouble the quiet of anie peace-able man? Doe yee not know, that the more profita∣ble and necessarie a thing is to bee vsed, the more lets and delaies are made by the enemy, either to infect, or els to in∣terrupt the vse thereof? Was there euer at any time, anie thing so cleare and manifest among men, that was out of all controuersie? How then knowest thou this, that thou know∣est nothing? Or how commeth it in question among men, whether a man seeth, or doth that, which in very deede, hee both seeth and doth? Without controuersie there is no part of Philosphie, or precept of Diuinitie, no point of Religion, which hath not bene called into controuersie; This sore tra∣ueile hath God giuen to the sonnes of men, that they might be exerci∣sed therein. But the vanitie of mans will, detracteth nothing from the veritie of anie thing. And therefore, goe to gentle Reader, be doing with the sequell, and doe well by it.
THE PRAEAMBLE. THe surprising of the Bishop of Rome his ty∣rannie, to whose scepter (a croisier) all chur∣ches, and kingdomes, and empires were en∣thralled, is, now of late growen so hotte, that now a daies, all Primacie, and the name of Primacie is found guiltie, (not guiltie,) and thought worthie to bee exiled the Church of Christ: (wisely.) For by that meanes, all the tyrranie of Prelates may be subdu∣ed. But they are farre wide in my iudgement. The Tarquines once exiled Rome, the very name of King becam odious amōg them: as if (for-sooth) with the name of those tyrants, tyran∣nie had ceased. But were they not afterwardes (and then iust∣lie) thralled and threshed, as men thresh corne, with more, & more kinds of tyranny, then if they had retained still the soue∣raine name of Kings and their princely authoritie? Neither indeed, is there any tyrāny at all in the name of a King, but in the nature of a Tarquine. And the like wee may iustlie say in this action: that the pride and tyranny, with the which the Church of Christ was wearied and wasted, was not in the Pri∣macie of Bishops and Archbishoppes, but in the persons which did abuse their authoritie, and going beyond their commissi∣on, extended the bounds of their Prouince, further then might lawfully stand with the modestie and moderation of christian Religion: by which meanes indeede, the power of Rome is be∣come excessiue and insupportable. But shall I now, vppon this bare presumption, indite of tyranny, the more auncient forme
of Church pollicie, and so many godly men, (or rather Gods a∣mongst men) of rare learning, sincere liues, and sound Religi∣on? Or shall I condemne of error, those sacred and religious Sy∣nodes, in the which, holy men of God did ratifie that auncient pollicie of the Church, which with reuerence (as they ought,) they receiued of their godlie predecessors? Farre bee that sinne from my thoughts, as far as is this impure age from their per∣fections. For albeit I am not ignorant, that both Fathers and Councels may erre, (if they enact against the will and word of God,) notwithstanding, it followeth not, that therefore they erred in this. But if so be we were thus equally affected towards others and our selues, that as we know a natural infirmitie to be vniuersallie infused in the natures of all men, so with all we wold acknowledge the same, to be particularlie imprised in our selues also: we would then more diligently search and prie into the reprehension of our selues, rather then of others: But now it is far otherwise with vs. Is there anye thing in the Fathers (for some especiall cause moouing vs) misliked of vs? By and by we haue this theoreme at our fingers end: We must remem∣ber, they were but men; and because men may easilie erre, we muster whatsoeuer we mis-conceiue of them, among the er∣rors of that age. In the meane while, wee neuer remember our selues, that we also are but men, and therfore may erre with them: yea, we are such men, (neither are we exempt from the common infirmitie of men) who may then er, when we thinke amisse of them, and in that verie thing may wee erre, for the which we condemne them. This is once: that against the constant and consonant con∣clusions of the ancient church, we ought not to attempt, or ad∣mit anie innouation, without a plaine commission from Gods holie writ: and this also I dare boldly say, that whosoeuer ta∣keth away al authoritie from the Fathers, he leaueth none for
himselfe. Indeed it must bee confessed, that the Fathers were men, and that they had their wrinckles: yet can it not be de∣nied, that to haue our Fathers to bee our Patrons in the prin∣cipal points of faith, and externe pollicy of our church, (things controuerted betweene the Popelings and vs) is a matter of no small moment, and of especiall account. And albeit, the vni∣forme consent of Gods children from the Apostles times vnto this day, may not be compared with the eternall word of God: Notwithstanding, of right it may come in, and stand for the second place. The custome of gods people, receiued of all Churches tho∣row out the whole world, is in maner of a lawe, sacred and in∣uiolable: Neither is there any likelihood, that there could e∣uer haue beene an vniuersall consort of all Churches and ages, without either the authoritie of gods word, or the tradition of the Apostles. Notwithstanding, for as much as no consent, no custome, no auncient prescription, can, or ought to preuaile in the Church of Christ, against the word of God; Therefore, those reasons are to be weighed, and those Scriptures to bee ex∣amined, which mooued the Fathers to intertaine, and conti∣nue that Church gouernment, which our newe reformers will in no case agree vpon; that we may certainelie know, whose is the error; theirs, or ours. The time hath bene, when no good men disallowed of Bi∣shops and Archbishops: but now, in despite of the Popes ty∣ranny, & his complices, it is come to this passe, that their very names are called into question: and that of diuerse men, for diuerse causes. Some, because they are (as they suppose) the de∣uises of Antichrist, or his fore-runners, thinke them vnwor∣thie thee Church, and worthie to be cast ouer-boorde. Others, yet more modest, in some reuerence of antiquitie, thinke they may be borne with all for a time, (although in the mean
time they allow not of them) vntill such time, as commodious∣lie the names may bee antiquate with the thinges themselues. In the meane while, for that they know, (neither can they be ignorant) to what singular effect the Church of God hath bin gouerned by graue and godlye Bishops, they haue not the face to condemne them openly: yet because they see certaine refor∣med Churches of this age, to be gouerned without Bishops: It is enugh: they haue not the power any longer to tollerat the more auncient gouernment. O the regiment of Pastors and Elders passing all antiquitie, our soules haue longed for thee, and we haue a desire vnto thee: for that thou alone art grounded vp∣pon the Lord Iesus his institution, and thou, (if any) art wholy purified of all tyranny and ambition. O, but by your leaue (good brethren) the shadowe you im∣brace, is no substance: neither is the plot you conceaue, a priue∣ledged place. Are you so far in loue with your liuelesse Pig∣malion, the worke of your owne hands? I know who is not: & hee hath reason for his, why not; For neither is your newe draught of straunge gouernement, sufficientlye prooued by the word of God: neither is it yet, (or can at any time) bee confir∣med by the example of our Elders. And how should it? (if we should iudge aright of it) seeing it was partly vnknowen vn∣to them, as a thing insolent and not heard of: and partlie con∣demned of them, as a thing Heriticall, and not approoued of. Wherefore, to speake the plaine truth, without flatterie or par∣tialitie: I thinke of this new forme of Church gouernment, as some thinke of our Bishops regiment: Namely, that it is but a deuise of mans conceit, and there to be tollerated, where a bet∣ter cannot bee obtained. And contrariwise; that which is disallowed of some, as deuised by man, seemeth vnto me to bee the verie ordinance of God, and the onely true gouernment of the Church; as that which hath his institution from God; not
only in the old, but in the new Testament. But because it is de∣filed with the manifolde abuses of men: that which were to be layd vppon the person, is imputed to the function; as if (for∣sooth) no such miscariage might befall this their nouell kinde of gouernement. The Romish Antichrist, with his Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarches, and Metropolitanes, hath so troubled and intan∣gled the Church of Christ, that tyranny it selfe, is thought to bee masked vnder those honest and honorable titles. It is most true: He that is once stong of a Serpent, suspecteth euery stone: and once bitten of a dog, is affraid of euery cur. Some there∣fore, that they might apply some remedy to this maladie, haue reuersed those names, and yet retained the same things; and for Bishops, haue anoynted Superintendents, and for Archbishops, generall or prouinciall Superintendents: as if the controuersie were not for the thing it selfe, but for names sake. But (wise as we are) seeing the signification of wordes, is variable and vo∣luntarie: when we agree in truth, what neede these garboyles about termes? If the formes of gouernment, which are signifi∣ed by those termes, are contained in gods worde; Is there anie reason or sense, that in disgrace of those names, these formes should not be retained of vs? If any man obiect, that in the go∣uernment of Bishops there are many corruptions: I make no question of that; So wee might cauill with the gouernment of the ciuill Magistrate: hath it not his corruptions? Haue they not their infirmities? Yet was there neuer anye that had his fiue wits, who thought that a sufficient reason to remooue those from their place, that are president in the state. Where∣fore, our question is not, how the Bishops haue abused their au∣thoritye, but whether the Lorde hath so forbidden this their Primacy, that there may bee, nor Pastor ouer Pastor, nor Bi∣shop ouer Bishop, in the outward pollicie of the Church. As for
the rest, if any will accuse the Bishops or their Consistories, ei∣ther of neglect dutie, or corrupt dealing: no man will be their hinderance, why they may not prosecute that, (and persecute them) before the chiefe Magistrate. I take not vppon mee the apologie of anie Bishop: I am not so worthie; they are not so weake, as that they need my Patrocinie; they are able to say for themselues, and to gaine-say their accusers; onely I lament, that the antique order of church gouernement, (of great and long esteeme with our fore-fathers) should be negligentlie lost, or violently taken from vs: and I feare me greatly, least in the infelicitie of this age, it be vtterly taken from vs. For who see∣eth not, and greeueth not to see, how men are set together vpon mischiefe? euen to reduce the whole Ministerie of the church, to the bare Ministerie of the word. But this our present controuersie, can by no meanes better bee decided, then by conferring the orders of the Ministery in that order as they were ordained of God, and deliuered of the Apostles: according to their singular degrees, and seuerall seasons, as they were then in vse: So shall we easily learne, what order is consonant to the word of God, and what dissonant: the which, that I may the better performe; there are two thinges which affoord me fit ingresse thereunto. The first is, the first in∣stitution of those seuerall orders: The second is, that one place of S. Paule to the Ephesians, the fourth chapter, where he set∣teth downe the diuerse Ministeries of the church, distributed into their seuerall degrees. Wherein the first place are inue∣sted (as the chiefe Patrons, and first Patriarches of the gospel) Apostles; in the second, Prophets; in the third, Euangelistes; in the fourth, Pastors and Doctors. Of all the which, we are now to discourse in their due order. And albeit Paul seeme to write of the functions giuen to the church after the Assention of Christ: Notwithstanding wee will looke backe a little further
for this matter, neither will we cease our diligent persute, vntil wee come to that time and place, in the which Christ selected his twelue Apostles; and so returne by the seuentie and two Di∣sciples, whom hee ordained also, and added to the Apostles, for the preaching of the gospell throughout Iewrie. And albeit, this discourse doe chieflie intend the distin∣ction of Ministers; yet by the way, we haue somewhat to say of Deacons also. For whereas the doctrine of life, doth not nusle vs vppe in anie idle contemplation of good things, but rather traineth vs vp in the practise of all goodnes, especially of chri∣stian charitie: Therefore of the Ministerie of the gospel, there ariseth an other Ministery, which exerciseth it selfe about bo∣dely necessaries of this life, and consequently hath imposed vp∣pon it the dispensation of the church stocke: whereby it com∣meth to passe, that there is a twofold Ministery of the church: One, which only respecteth the glory of God, & ou souls helth: An other, which regardeth the procuration of earthly thinges, and the preseruation of this present life. After these thinges handled, and set out of hand as I may: in the sequel of this my trauell, I wil intreat of that honor and reuerence, which by the lawe of God, instinct of nature, and right of nations, is proper and peculier to the sacred Minister. And last of all, against the gourmandiers of church goods, I will set downe and lay before their eies, the odious sin of Sacrilege, with the dires and punish∣ments accompaning the same. And these three things, accor∣ding to the variety of their natures, I haue distinguished into three bookes: but because they are of some af∣finitie, and rise togeather insequence, I haue also laied them togeather in this one volume.
Doctor Sarauia, of the diuers degrees of Ministers. What the Ministery of the Gospell is, and what bee the partes thereof. Chap. I. ALthough this present Treatise doth chiefly aime at the inequality of Mi∣nisters, yet notwithstanding I take it a good way, or not much out of the way, if we set on first with the defini∣tion of the Ministery: that thereby it may the better appear, what is com∣mon to the Ministers among them all, and what is proper to euery one in his particular order. Vppon diuerse groundes of the Scripture, diuerse defini∣tions may be diuersely framed; but I comprise them all in one word or two, of the Apostle Paul: and vppon his bare word I affirme:1. Cor. 4.1. 1. Tim. 3.16. That the Ministery of the Gospell is a cer∣taine dispensation of the mysteries of God, which were re∣uealed vnto the world by the comming of Christ. Where I cal a mystery, not only that doctrine of the wonderful coū∣saile of God in the redemption of mankinde, but also all o∣ther things which God hath annexed vnto that doctrine. And those I resolue into three sortes: Whereof the first is, The preaching and publication of the Gospell: the second is, The vse and administration of the Sacraments: the third is, The exercise and execution of Ecclesiastical gouernment.
The preaching of the Gospell is a sacred Embassee in the name of Christ, in the which sinners are intreated to recon∣cile themselues to God; or thus; It is the publishing of that doctrine of free pardon of sinnes, which Christ himselfe su∣ed forth from his Father, and purchased with his precious death; or otherwise also thus; It is the doctrine of the free iustification & sanctification of the holy Ghost, which is ob∣tained by faith in Christ Iesus. Many other definitiōs might be added, were it not that I delight to be briefe: Of these, if you couceiue what the Gospel is, and the preaching therof, it sufficeth, & I am satisfied. To the second part of this mini∣stery, do appertaine the commands of the Lord, to baptise the faithfull and to administer the Lords Supper.Mat. 16.19. and 18.18. But to the third part (which is of gouernmēt) is reserued the power of the keies of heauē, & the preheminence of binding & losing vpon earth. And this authority hath two branches, whereof the one cōpriseth the Ordaining of Ministers, the other cō∣prehendeth the Censure of maners.Act. 14.13. By this power the Apo∣stles ordained Bishops and Elders in the church, vnto whom they demised their authority; that all things might be done duely and decently, and that good order might be mantay∣ned in the Church of Christ. In the assurance of this power, the Apostle deliuereth vnto Sathan, the stiffe necked and selfe willed enemies of the truth; & of this power, in his Epistles he many times inter serteth imperious menaces with gentle admonitions. But of this matter there is some controuersie in these daies: haue you not heard of it? neither did our fa∣thers. For there be some of strange opinion (but strongly o∣pinionat) that the whole Cēsure of maners is to be set ouer to the Magistrate; and how so? because it appertayneth to his duty to take care for good order and publicke honesty, and to take punishment of disordered persons & pernicious of∣fēces. But to the Pastor (vnder a christian Magistrat) no such matter. Let him only teach vertue and taxe vice, and admini∣ster the Sacraments hand ouer head. In deed he may admo∣nish al men to proue thēselues before they eat of that bread and drinke of that cup: to the which if they do obay, it is so
much the better; but if not, yet that must be left between God and their conscience. Forbid any man the Communion? God forbid. Is it not to be wondered, that they which confesse that the Minister hath power of binding, should not consider that the same Minister hath the like power of loosing also? Doe they not know, that there is the like reason of them both? or can they not conceyue, that the effects being con∣trary, they are performed of the Pastor with contrary acti∣ons? It is without all controuersie, that sinners are loosed by the Ministers, when remission of sinnes in the name of Christ is pronounced to the faithfull; But when as by the same power, the wrath of God and vengeance eternall is de∣nounced against the vnfaithful, and that they are denied the sweete comfort of the holy Sacraments, who doubteth, but that they are bound in like sort? Is it not abhorring from the duety of a faithfull Pastor, to let in Wolues into his ma∣sters sheep-fold? so is it also, if he thrust not out those, which are closely crept in. If so be it so fall out, that any man fall from the faith after baptisme, or when he confesseth Christ with his lips, that he deny him in his life, and within himself crucify agayn the God of life; What? is there here no part of the Pastors office to be perfourmed? He shall restrayn (they will say) the disobedient, & release the penitent. Very good. But seeing these things cannot be done, but with contrarie facultyes; as to the penitent he shall pronounce the sweete promises of Gods mercy and receiue him into the Church; So to the disobedient hee shall denounce all the dires and execrations of Gods wrath, (that he is a recreant from the kingdome of God, that he is exiled the Citty and forbid∣den the house of God) and he shall deny the dogge returned to his vomit, the bread of the children of God. Wherfore as a faithfull dispenser of the mysteries of God baptiseth none that was once an infidel, without some publique confession of his faith: so neyther doth he receiue to the Communion a notorious sinner, without apparant conuersion of life. This is olde Diuinity.
But to spend many words in the confutation of this con∣ceit, is no part of my meaning, neither would it quite for cost; this only cause would require a whole quire of conclu∣siōs, & that too painful a course, for so needles a discourse. This onely seemeth to me a sufficient confutation thereof, that it is a new and an vnexpert error, crossing the aduised iudgement of all auncient Diuines: that I vrge them not with the Heathen, more holy then themselues, with whom there was alwayes great difference, betweene things sacred and prophane. But if Popish Prelates haue heretofore a∣bused, and abuse at this day the lawful power of the church, by their lawlesse tiranny, shall their vnlawfulnesse make a lawfull thing of none effect? Together with religion a lawe was made, which excluded the irreligious from religion, since the worlde began. And is not then the condition of the Church present to be pittied, being now come to this stay, that when as it ought to be the schoole of vertue, it wil not endure the censure of conformity? And that which to the Heathen (men rude and vntaught in the true worship of God) seemed most beautifull in it selfe, and no lesse be∣neficiall to the common wealth, should altogether of vs Christians be neglected as needelesse, or contemned as er∣ronious? But to returne to the principall issue in this controuer∣sie: albeit the ministery of the Gospell committed to the pa∣stors of the Church, be one and the same in them all: yet in this third part, concerning the diuerse degrees of authority, which first the Lord himselfe constituted, and afterwardes the Apostles continued, there is great ods betweene them, and no small inequality to be found among them. Amongst the which, there is no controuersie, but that the Apostles haue the first degree of dignity, Euangelists the second, Pro∣phets the third, Pastors and Elders the fourth, Doctors the last. For as the authority of an Apostle was greater then of an Euangelist or a Prophet, & of a Prophet greater then of a Bishop or an Elder: so was the authority of Titus and Timothie, who were both Elders and Bishops, greater then
was the authority of those Elders, whom by theyr Aposto∣lique commission themselues had created in euery Towne. And albeit the Baptisme of Christ be one and the same, by whome so euer it be administred, whether of an Apostle of the highest, or of an Elder of the lowest order, and the do∣ctrine of the Gospell is neither better nor worse which is deliuered of these, or of those: Notwithstanding good or∣der of gouernement doth not permitte, that the authority of al should be all alike, or that the like cōmission should be granted to these, and them; the constant and continued cu∣stome of the Church ministery, deriued from the Apostles time, and vnrepealed vnto this day, doth euince the same. The first creation of the twelue Apostles, and the seuen∣ty Disciples, doth containe a manifest demonstration of this whole matter. For that the beginnings of the old, and new Church might accord: First the twelue Apostles were ele∣cted to be the first Patriarches and progenitors of a newe people: but afterwards, when the haruest was greater then the labourers, and the kingdome of Heauen already began to suffer violence, as the Lord ioyned with Moyses in the old Testament seuenty Elders, to assist him in the gouernance of his people: so in like manner vppon the like occasion, our Sauiour added vnto the twelue Apostles, seuenty other Dis∣ciples. And so in the first infancy of the Church, we may see how the Lord ordained two diuerse degrees of Mini∣sters: whom when he distinguished in number, and disseuered into distinct companies, did he not declare, that in honour and authority they were not equall, not all of a company? The which thing verily he would neuer haue done, had hee once knowen (and he should know) that it had beene a sin, for Ministers to be diuerse in degree, and not equal in dig∣nity. And these were the first preachers of the Gospell vnder the Lords direction, whiles himselfe was yet resident among them. But after hee ascended into Heauen, he raysed vp Prophets also in the Church, when as at Whitsontide hee poured forth of his spirite, whereby he might make his Disciples as miracles, not onely for theyr manifold langua∣ges,
but also for theyr diuine wisedom and fore-knowledge. But in processe of time, when the number of Churches in∣creased and multiplyed exceedingly, so that themselues were now no more able to ground and gouerne them; they took vnto them of theyr followers, and made them theyr fellow labourers. Who although they were of rare faith and rype giftes, yet were they the schollers and followers of the Apo∣stles and Euangelists, much inferiour to theyr maisters. But when as not onely the number of the Churches, but the multitude of beleeuers increased still aboue number, then were there ordayned for seuerall Churches, seuerall Pastors, who in that age without distinction were called Bishops and Elders. And of all these we purpose to speake particularly, so soone as I shall haue shewed you my minde concerning the diuerse kindes of Calling to the Ministery. Of ordinary and extraordinary calling to the Ministery. Chap. II. NO man not lawfully called, may intrude himselfe into the holy Ministery of the Church. For it is be∣longing vnto God alone to choose his owne Mi∣nisters, and to prescribe lawes vnto men, by the which he would haue them chosen. Wherefore, there are now two kinds of lawful callings to the Ministery: one, when a man is called of God himselfe: an other, when he is ordai∣ned of men, according to the lawes prescribed of God. This we call ordinary, the other extraordinary. That which is ex∣traordinary commeth to passe two sundry wayes, and at two seuerall times: namely, eyther immediatly from God with∣out any inter-meane: or else from God, but yet by means of his Prophet. And that also is of two sorts, eyther when ther was no certaine order set downe in the same matter, or else when there was a certaine order appoynted for the same. Of the first, we haue an instance in Moyses and Aaron, both called extraordinarily; Moyses immediatly from God with∣out any inter-mean: and Aaron by his brother Moyses: Who,
being so commanded of God, preferred to the Priesthood, Aaron with his sons, and the whole Tribe of Leuy. But then there was no lawe written, so that from them the order and function of Leuy had theyr foundation. Of the latter wee haue an example in Samuel, whō God called after the order of Priesthood was receyued and confirmed amongst the people of God: So was Elias the Thesbite raysed besides the common order, when an order was set downe; and so were for the most part al the Prophets of the olde Testament. But Elizeus and others were so called of God extraordinarily, that he vsed in this busines his Prophet Elias, as a meane thereof. So likewise in the new Testament, Christ called his twelue Apostles, vnto whome also he added seuenty other Disciples, when as yet there was no certayn order set down for the Ministery of the Gospell: But Paul and Mathias he added to the twelue, after the institution of the Ministery. The Priuiledge of an extraordinary calling is this, that as it hath God the only autor, so it hath the same God the on∣ly director of the same. For alwayes extraordinary gifts do accompany an extraordinary calling: in so much that they which are so called of God, haue no neede to be informed of man, in those things which concerne the execution of theyr charge: as it appeareth in Moyses and the Prophets, as also in the Apostles and Euangelists. The ordinary calling is that, which is made of men, ac∣cording to such lawes as God hath set downe for the same. As was the Priesthood of the family of Aaron, and the Mini∣stery of the Leuites in the olde Testament: and as is at this day the calling of Bishops and Elders, who both of the Apo∣stles themselues, and also of their successors, were chosen as∣sistants for the founding of Churches, and appoynted pre∣sidents ouer them being founded, and so for euer (so long as there is a Church) are to endure. As for men, they haue no power (not cōmanded of God) to cal any mā to the Ministery extraordinarily. Wherfore they are deceiued that thinke Titus or Timothy, or Iohn Mark & o∣ther the Apo. followers & fellow-laborers extraordinarily
called, seing they were called no otherwise, then were the o∣ther Elders and Bishops whom the Apostles ordayned ouer diuerse Churches. Was there any thing in them singular or extraordinary? impute not that to theyr extraordinary calling, but to theyr ordinary conuersing, with tutors and instructors, excellent and extraordinary, (the Apostles and Euangelists.) I admit theyr giftes were rare, and theyr per∣fections extraordinary, yet notwithstanding (no dispraise to any) they wanted much of that manhood of strength, which was in theyr instructors, neither were they wiser then their teachers. Neuer did Apostle giue Apostle instructions, as Paul did to Timothy and Titus; who as they supplied the A∣postles places, so they followed not theyr own, but the Apo∣stles precepts. So were they at once & together both schol∣lers and maisters: for as they did conforme the Churches, & informe theyr pastors with wholesome doctrine, so them∣selues also were informed of the Apostles, the Apostles im∣mediatly from God, and our Lord Iesus Christ. So that Paul might boldly say (as he sayd truely) What things I haue receyued of the Lord, I haue deliuered vnto you: but Timo∣thy might say with vs (and we with him) what things wee haue receyued of the Apostles, we haue deliuered vnto you. And albeit both he and we, haue receyued of the Lord, that which we haue deliuered to the Churches, yet notwithstan∣ding our receipt is after another sort. They liued with the Lord, and those things which they heard and saw, and han∣dled with theyr handes of the word of life, they deliuered to the Church: but Titus and Timothy, and all they which succeeded, taught and teach with vs, such things as were de∣liuered by theyr hands vnto vs. Besides Titus and Timothy, Paul had his fellowes and ioint laborers, Sylas and Barnabas; I say his fellowes, not his follo∣wers; his schoole-fellowes, not his schollers. For why? they had theyr calling as he had, extraordinary from God, and therefore vnto them he set downe no precepts of wholesom doctrine, he gaue no instructions of Church gouernement, as he did vnto Titus and Timothy. Where I leaue it to euery
indifferent mans iudgement, what difference there was be∣tweene the calling of those, and of these. As for the calling of those, whom it hath pleased God to rayse vp for the refor∣mation of his Church, there be many which moue manye questions, and make more to doe, then they neede: out of the which when they can no wayes winde themselues, at al aduenture they cast anker in this vnknowen coast of extra∣ordinary calling. But vnlesse I be wonderously deceyued, they doe but ride in a shallow, and they neede not. For to oppose himselfe against a false and corrupt opinion concer∣ning the Sonne of God, or of the chiefe grounds of religi∣on, euery good Christian (well seene in sacred writte) both can and ought. Wherefore amongst so many, as God hath stirred vp to so singular a purpose (as he hath stirred vp ma∣ny) how few I pray you haue they beene, whose calling was extraordinary, except a few? And what then can the aduer∣sary obiect in this case against the Church of England? Or wherein can it iustly be challenged? May it not defend her calling ordinary, as may also many other Churches in Ger∣many? Say that irreligion hath vniuersally possest some cer∣tain Church; I say, ther need no calling extraordinary to re∣cal the same. The Church, may be extraordinarily reformed (if so it be required) by them, which haue ordinary autority to performe it. We haue heard of many reformations in the kingdome of Iuda, to the which neyther ciuill Magistrate was ordayned more then ordinary, nor nouell Priesthood. Did not the Priests themselues, which before were defiled with foule Idolatry, purify the Temple, the people, and thē∣selues together from foule Idolatry? And at this day, if the Bishops of the French Churches, would redeeme them∣selues from the Popes tiranny, and sweepe theyr Churches cleane of all error and Idolatry; what need should they haue of any other calling, then that which they haue? The like I af∣firme of all other Churches, (in what part of the world soe∣uer) which through the iniquity of these dayes, and the sub∣tilty of the ennemy, are inuolued and ouercast with the most daungerous mists of error and ignorance. If they please to
send for our Countreymen, and vse theyr counsel, they may but if otherwise they will not, they are to vsurpe no autho∣rity ouer theyr Churches, but rather to reioyce and congra∣tulate with them for theyr conuersion, making profer vnto them of theyr company and theyr countenance. Of the twelue Apostles. Chap. III. THe twelue, which were the first preachers of the Gospell, were chosen of the Lorde himselfe. With them he deyned familiarly to conuerse, and friendly to acquaint with all his counsels (which according to the time, they were capiable of) that after∣wards they might the better testify of those thinges, which they both saw, & heard. Theyr first prouince extended not it selfe beyond the confines of Iewry; for they were then for∣bidden to goe into the way of the Samaritanes, or to enter into the streetes of the Gentiles. And in this theyr first cir∣cuit, the Lord vnto the office of preaching, ioyned the po∣wer of Baptisme, and the working of miracles,. But so long as no end was imposed vnto the ceremonies of the olde Church, neyther yet the order of Aarons priesthood was abrogated, they founded no particular Churches, but re∣tained company and communion with the rest of the Iewes, in such things as concerned the seruice of God. But what the peculiar office of the Apostles was, is ease∣ly vnderstood by the commaunds which our Sauiour gaue them after his resurrection, and also by those promises which he made in Iohn, concerning the comforter which he would send them after his ascention. In the last of Mathew these are the words of our Sauiour to his Disciples: Al pow∣er (saith he) is giuen to me in Heauen and in earth; Goe therefore
and teach al nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy Ghost: Teaching them to obserue al things what so euer I haue commaunded you. And behold I am with you vntill the end of the world. In which words the chiefe parts of theyr Apostolique function, are thus to be discerned: The first, is that Legacy which is immediatly giuen them of God, vnto all nations, and not restrayned within any limitte; an other, is the publi∣cation of that doctrine which they receiued of the Lord; the third, is the administration of those Sacraments which were instituted of God; the last, is the protestation of that especi∣all aide, which albeit generally it concern the whole church, yet particularly it respecteth the Apostles them selues. Like∣wise in the fourteenth, and sixteenth of Iohn, the gift of the holy Ghost is promised vnto them, for the better perfor∣mance of their Apostolike function. And that was it, which did so moderate theyr tongue and theyr talk, as that they should vtter no doctrine of theyr owne, but of theyr maister Christ. And albeit the commis∣sion of teaching, with the power of working miracles, were graunted out vnto others also, yet this alwaies remayned proper to the Apostles, and intire to theyr calling, that theyr onely doctrine was a paragon and a patterne, by the which al others doctrine was to be tried, And also: that they alone in the beginnings of the Church, conferred the holy Ghost vnder a visible signe, by the laying on of handes, (as it is in the eight of the Actes and the seuenteenth verse.) Wherefore as Moyses had God the first author of the law, so was it requisit the Apostles should haue the same ground of theyr cōsecration, that the foundation of the Church might be layd sure and indefeyseble. As for the authority of the Apostles among themselues, it was one and the same, and theyr honour alike: there was no ods between them, but that which eyther gifts, or graui∣ty did make. And albeit Peter be euery where called the first, yet was that primacy in the order only of his vocation, not in the preheminence of his commission. For if so bee
that (out of those words of the Lord,) Thou art Peter, and vp∣pon this rocke will I builde my Church, and such other like, the Apostles had conceyued any especiall authority committed to Peter, they would neuer haue moued the question twise after that, which of them should seeme the greatest. And al∣beit the Lord vouchsafed Peter, Iames and Iohn, the partici∣pation of some greater secrets; yet notwithstanding he bare himselfe so indifferently towardes them all, in the donation of any especiall place, as that themselues could not tell, a∣mong themselues, whome to prefer before his fellow. But from this degree of Apostolique dignity, Iudas through his treasonable and sacriligious auarice fell, and into his place was Mathias inuested after the ascention of Christ: and last of al other, was Paul also ascribed into this holy society, after a right wonderfull and miraculous manner. Of the seuenty Disciples. Chap. IIII. ALbeit Paul for honour sake, haue placed Pro∣phets in the second place, yet notwithstan∣ding vppon iust occasion, I haue domised them to the third: For that I am here to obserue, not the honour, but the order of theyr calling; and to take them as they fall, not in regard of the preheminence of theyr titles, but in res∣pect of the priority of those times, in the which they were called in the new Testament. Wherefore, when as the Lorde perceiued, that for the smalnes of the time the Haruest was great, and for the greatnes of the Haruest, the laborers were but few; he elected seuenty other Disciples to preache the Gospell, and to publish the glad tidings of peace. Vnto whome albeit he gaue the power of miracles also, & no lesse priuiledge then had before the twelue Apostles, (to bee ho∣nored of them, vnto whom they preached;) yet notwithstā∣ding, he vnited them not together with the Apostles, to
make of them al, one order or society: For yee shall alwayes read, that the twelue were euer seperate from the seuenty: Who in this regard seemed inferiour to the Apostles: For why? they were not in ordinary with the Lord, as were the Apostles; so that they could not be witnesses of such things, as he dyd and sayd. If there were any, any more familiar then the rest, they were but few, namely two; Iosephe (surna∣med the iust) and Mathias: of the which one (God being gouernor of the lottery) was inuested into the place of Iudas. Barnabas also, was appoynted Apostle-like to discourse through diuerse countryes, and to plant certaine Churches, who notwithstanding (most certayne) was none of the A∣postles. Phillip likewise may be taken for one of this order, (and many other) who laboured with the Apostles in the work of the Gospel. And seeing it is so plain a case, that these all were called immediatly from God, and that (as we read) God gaue vnto his Church Euangelists: who shall wee say were those Euangelists, if not these? Resolue then, that those seuenty Disciples were Euangelists, and those Euangelistes inferior to the Apostles. For why, they were giuen as Legats or Lieutenants, vnder those graund Capitains, to vndertake (with like authority) theyr taske and theyr turnes. And yet besides these, the Apostles tooke vnto them di∣uerse others, as fellow laborers with them: But in them ther was not that valour, as was in those, whom the Lord him∣selfe did choose, and infuse with an Apostolike spirite. We haue read of Barnabas, Iude and Sylas, theyr great trauel, and no smal autority in the Church: In which respect they came neare, and were next (in deede) vnto the Apostles them∣selues. But how might this haue beene, if so be the spirit of God had not wholly possessed them, as it did the Apostles? But we knowe, how that they all met, (that were at the ele∣ction of Mathias) the same day in the same place, with the Apostles themselues, when the Lord poured forth of his spirite a visible shape. And albeit Barnabas was no Apostle, none of the twelue; yet can we make no lesse of him, then an Euangelist, one of the seuenty.
As for Marke and Luke, albeit theyr authority in the Church were great, and theyr desertes great, for their per∣fect and well penned Histories of the Gospell: yet are they not to be reputed with the seuenty Euangelistes, by reason theyr calling was by men vnto the Ministery. Tertullian in in his fourth booke against Marcion, writeth thus: Luke (saith hee) not an Apostle, yet Apostolique, not a maister, but a scholler, as he was lesse then his Maister, so likewise was he so much the more lesse then an other, for that he was follower of a lesse Apo∣stle. As for Marke, Papias in his Commentaries (as Eusebi∣us reporteth in his thirde booke) hath left vs this testimony. Marke the interpreter of Peter, wrote in deede very diligently, what so euer hee remembred; yet not altogether in that order, as they were spoken and performed by the Lorde. Neyther in deede did hee heare the Lorde himselfe, neither was hee any follower of his, but afterwards (as I haue sayd) became the companion of Peter, &c. VVherefore Marke did not amisse in this, that he diuulged in wri∣ting such things, as before hee committed to memory: seeing aboue all thinges he chiefely regarded this one thing, that neyther hee would omitte any thing he heard to be true, neyther committe any thing hee knew to bee false. Thus saith hee of him: And it is well knowen, that hee was inferiour vnto Barnabas also, in authority: for hee was his follower, and in a manner his scholler; as he was al∣so Pauls and Peters, and that in no other order, then were Titus and Timothy. And yet notwithstanding, the name and credite both of Marke and Luke (for their faithfull regi∣ster of the Apostles preceptes) is such, and so reuerend, as that their Gospels are recorded among the canonical scrip∣tures, and are equaled in authority, with the more exqui∣site labours of Mathew and Iohn. And reason too: For in their Euangelike recordes, whome had they for theyr patternes or their patrones, but the Apostles and Euangelistes? So that, whereas the Gos∣pell of Ma hew, may seeme to bee onely Mathewes, and that of Iohn to bee Iohns onely, these theyr Gospels may be repu∣ted the Gospels, not of Mark and Luke, but of all the Apo∣stles
and Euangelists. In the which thing verily they are worthy great commendations, that they sauoured no whit at all of men; (as commonly they doe which pen Histories,) but they so nearely and narrowly followed the very spirit of the Apostles and Euangelistes, as if the Apostles themselues had beene rather the penners, then perusers of so greate a worke. Wherefore Luke is for good cause commended of Paul (in the second to the Corinth: the eight chapter, and eighteenth verse) when as he saith, VVe haue also sent that brother whose praise is in the Gospell throughout all Churches. But by these you may easely conceiue, who were properly Euan∣gelistes, and who not. Of Prophets. Chap. V. AS wee reckon none in order with the twelue, (Paul onely excepted) so with the seuenty, find we not any that may be compared. And albeit we doubt not, that God could haue added to the 70. others also, no way their infe∣riors, yet seeing we haue no record of sacred writte to auouch the same, it were hard for man to affirme, that there were any such: But now when as besides the twelue Apostles, and those seuen∣ty Euangelists, we read of other also, who in like manner haue been honoured with the first fruits of the holy Spirite; by what name or title shall they be called? or by what additi∣on shal we distinguish thē from the rest? Of the number of an hundred and twenty men, there remayn fix and thirty stil: whom seeing we neither account with the twelue Apostles, nor yet with the seuenty Euangelistes, it remayneth, that wee adorne them with the name of Prophets. For this
it is which Peter doth insinuat vnto the people, out of the Prophet Ioel (in his Apology for himselfe and his fellowes) namely, That the spirite of Prophesie, promised of olde to be giuen out in the later dayes, was then poured forth vp∣pon that assembly, whom then they heard preaching and prophesying in diuerse tongues, to theyr great astonishe∣ment. Wherefore those thirty sixe men, which neyther are as∣cribed into the company of the twelue Apostles, nor yet are recounted in the society of the seuenty Euangelists, were those first Prophets, whom God gaue into his Church, after our Sauiour was receyued vp into Heauen. In which order (as it might very wel be) was Ananias of Damasco reputed, and Agabus, both of them renowmed Prophets. Iudas and Sylas are also called Prophets, and for that cause are they sent by the Apostles to Antioch, to exhort & confirme the brethren. And I am of opinion, that these and such like were properly called Prophets, not Metaphorical∣ly; seeing they did foresee thinges to come by the spirite of God, and by the same spirite reuealed things secret and re∣condite. And albeit the interpreting of the Scripture bee a kinde of prophecying, yet is that kinde more proper to the Doctor, then the Prophet, and more truely may a man ac∣count Doctors interpreters of the Scripture, then Pro∣phets. But doubtlesse God restored to his Church, in those latter dayes, that true kinde of Prophecy, which in Israell was familiar from the beginning, and in singular wisedom did erect three kindes of Doctors in his Church, and gaue them to his new people; Apostles, Euangelists, and Pro∣phets. And these were the first Elders and Bishops of the Church of Ierusalem.
That the names and titles of Apostles, Euangelists, and Pro∣phets, were giuen also vnto other Pastors and Doctors of the Church. CHAP. VI. ALbeit, by that which I haue already writ∣ten, it maye sufficiently bee vnderstoode, whome I call by the name of Apostles, E∣uangelistes, and Prophetes: yet notwith∣standing, because those names are for good causes giuen vnto others also, some what must be said of them in like maner. In the Epistle to the Romains the sixteenth Chapter, An∣dronicus and Iunius, are called notable among the Apo∣stles: and out of the eight Chapter of the last to the Corin∣thians, Titus and the brethren which were with him, are cal∣led Apostles: and in the Epistle to the Philippians, Epaphro∣ditus is called their Apostle. The deriuation of the greeke word is well knowen, that Apostles are called, of sending, for that they are Postes or speedie messengers, sent of especiall purpose as Legates or Embassadours into diuers parts of the worlde; & according to this signification, whosoeuer is sent as a messenger in a∣nie busines, may be called an Apostle. In this sense, our Sa∣uiour himselfe, (who is Prince and Lord ouer the Apostles) in the epistle to the Hebrues, is called an Apostle. But (to be short,) this name is no where giuen in the newe Testa∣ment to any (so far as euer I could learne) but to the mini∣sters of the gospell onely: Amongst whome because there was great inequalitie; Paule calleth those first twelue Apo∣stles, the chiefe Apostles: (as it is in the eleuenth chapter of the last to the Corinthians,) where he saith; I suppose, that I was not inferiour to the chiefe Apostles: (as it is also in the 11. verse of the 12. chapter.) By the which it appeareth most plainely, that besides those chiefe Apostles, who helde the commission of their ambassage immediatly from God, ther were many other also, which were in like manner called A∣postles:
either for that they were accounted of the Apostles, as fellow-labourers in their sea-apostolique; or els for that they were sent as Legates in the same busines, by the church of Ierusalem, which was the mother Metropolitane church. Among whom somtime, there foisted in of their own heads, certaine other iolly fellowes, false Apostles, whom Paul cal∣leth false brethren, and deceiptfull labourers: who vnder a coppie of faire semblance, could transforme themselues in∣to the colours and companies of Christ his Apostles. And these were they which sought by all possible meanes, to im∣paire the authority of Paule, as of one (forsooth) that sawe not the Lord in the flesh, and therefore not worthy to mate and match with the other Apostles, in like equipage of au∣thoritie. But doe you see their purpose? Or doe you con∣ceiue their policy? By this meanes they ment to thrust Paul into the last and lowest forme of Apostles, that themselues being mate with Paule, might more easily giue the trueth a checke. Against the malapertnes of these men, the Apostle main∣taineth the authoritie of his power Apostolique, affirming that he was chosen apostle, not by men, but of God. To how great, or rather to how smal purpose should the Apostle haue vrged this, had not the name of Apostle bene common vnto others also, which were not of that company and conuent of the twelue Apostles, but were sent from men, and by men, & were not immediatly from God? among whome are to bee accounted, Titus, Andronicus, Timothie, Marke, and many o∣ther, whom al posterity hath reuerenced, and accounted for Bishops and Archbishops of the church. May not the like be sayd of the name of Euangelists? For who knoweth not, that the same name was giuen vnto ma∣nie other, besides those seuentie two: because indeede, they were called to the same function, both vnder the seuenty, & vnder the Apostles. True it is, they had not the like measure of Gods spirite, and yet according to the moytie of their se∣uerall talent, they did much edifie the church, and magnifie the foundation which the Apostles had laid. And therefore
are they called Apostles, and Euangelists, not only in respect of the sense and signification of the wordes, but also in regard of the Apostolique, & Euangelike function, into the which they were associate and assumed by the Apostles, as helpers and fellow-labourers. But as for the name of Prophets; not only, they are so cal∣led in the scriptures, vnto whome God hath reuealed the se∣crets of things to come, but they also, which doe faithfullie reueile the secrets of Gods eternal truth to others, and know howe to apply auncient prophesies, to present circumstan∣ces. In which sense, all Euangelique teachers and interpre∣ters of sacred scripture, may be sayd to be Prophets. Of Deacons. Chap. VII. IF my purpose had beene in recounting the de∣grees of Ministers, to haue followed the course of honour, I would haue set next vnder Prophets, Pa∣stors and Doctors. But for as much as I haue tied my selfe vnto the order of time, in the which they were first or∣dained; of force I must first speake of Deacons, before I come to Bishops and Elders: for we read that they were first created, when as yet (besides the Apostles and those Euangelists, and Prophets, of the which wee haue lately spoken) the Church had no Elders: and reason to. For when as the Ministery of the gospell, according to Gods holy institution, hath annex∣ed vnto it a religious care, and consideration of the poore, the Apostles tooke that vnto themselues, as a thing pertay∣ning to their charge: vntill the murmure and mutinie of the Greekes against the Hebrewes, gaue occasion of the Deacons Election. But were there not at the begin∣ning, dispensers and disposers of the common treasure? When Christ himselfe kept residence here vpon earth, who but Iudas discharged that pension? and doubtlesse, if the A∣postles coulde haue performed both, they woulde neuer
haue giuen charge that others should haue beene chosen for that charge. And yet that charge, was not so wholie giuen ouer of the Apostles to the Deacons, as that after∣wardes, they thought the same nothing at all appertaining vnto themselues. Haue wee not read, what Paule and Bar∣nabas did, beeing requested to bee mindfull of the poore? how vigilantly they vndertooke that care themselues? And therefore they thought it requisite, that the men to be cho∣sen into that charge, should be men ful of the holy Ghost. But doe you not wonder now, that these new elects did not imploye themselues in gathering and giuing of almes onely? Why (men forgetfull of themselues) they take vpon them the office of teaching also. See how Phillip preacheth the gospell to the Samaritanes also, and baptiseth them that beleeue: how, while Stephen preached Christ more feruent∣lie, he is become the first martyr of Christ. May we not con∣ceiue by these presidents, what the rest of them did? or shall we be so foolish as to think, because there is nothing writtē of the rest, that therefore they did nothing, or not this? Of the greatest part, euen of Christ his Apostles, is there not deepe silence, or little sayd? of whom notwithstanding there is nothing more cleare, then that they performed their im∣posed pensions with impeachable diligence. The like president therefore, hath bene well followed of our godlie predecessours, who did also imploy their Dea∣cons in the ministerie of the word, and holy mysteries. For why? they doubted (and that not without cause,) least that profitable function should become contemptible, & be had in esteeme, as stewardish and too homely, and not at all be∣longing, or not beseeming the sacred ministerie. Wherfore, that they might be of greter reuerence & regard in the cler∣gy, they were permitted to read the gospel to the people, & to minister the cup in the Sacramental symposy. And at the length, their autority incresed so far, that no BB. wold want his Deacon: yea, sooner would a Bishop want his Priest, then be without this Deacon. But now, how this kind of Deaco∣nie deceased, it is nothing to our purpose: It sufficeth mee,
that I haue shewed, what was of olde the office of Deacons. I need not adde, that what thinges the Apostle requireth in Deacons, are in a manner equall with those he desireth in a Priest: But this I maye say, that by that onely one thing, it may full well appeare, that the office was then esteemed as a charge of no small import. And therefore, it neede not seeme so strange a matter to any man, if some greater thing then a Church-warden-ship was committed to the order of Deacons, by our honorable predecessors. The which I note to this end, that al men may know, how the churches of old committed no absurd thing in this, nor we (if there be any which at this day, doe immitate them) when they make the Deacony a degree to a further ministerie. This therefore is the fourth order of the ministery, acor∣ding to the order of time; and the first, that was deuised of man, when as yet there were no other Priestes created, then those whome the Lord himselfe had inuested with his own hands. Now, whether this order be obserued euery where, that they should bee created Deacons before they be ordai∣ned Priests, I cannot tel. In the epistle to Titus, in the which Paul commandeth, that hee should retaine Pastors in euerie citie: there is no mention made of Deacons. And in the 19. chapter of the Acts, where it is said of Paule and Barnabas, that they ordained Pastors in the churches, there is nothing said of Deacons. And indeed, for asmuch as there are grea∣ter parts required in a Priest, then in a Deacon; a competent Deacon might sooner be had, (where need was) then a suf∣ficient Priest: whose present want, the Apostles and Euan∣gelistes themselues (for a time) could better supply, then of Deacons: because the function Apostolique, is further from procuring the Church treasuries, then from Preaching the meere sacred mysteries. With the which, this also is to be considered, that the necessities of the poore, are not patient of any long delaies. That Paule in his fourth chapter to the Ephesians, ma∣keth no mention of this order, it need not greatly to trouble any: seeing his purpose was not to specifie al the degrees of
the ministery, but only to note the especial. Our Sauior him∣selfe taught, that care & compassion shewed to the poore, was a most blessed worke: when hee said, That was giuen or not giuen to himselfe, that was graunted or grudged the poore. But in the reformatiō of some churches in these dais, it is now no more a church office, but a ciuil duty. The care of the poore, ouer-sight of the hospitals and widowes, and orphans, which was wont to be the Bishops charge, the Magistrate hath taken to himselfe. But vpon what occasion it first grew to this vnder the Bishop of Rome, I will declare els where. No doubt the Magistrate, that desireth to restore the church to her first beauty, will refer that function to Ec∣clesiasticall persons. For if they shall find any corruption in them, it shall be alwaies in their power to punishe the offen∣ders, and to amend the fault: but it is not in the Bishops or Pastors power, to doe the like, if it shall fal out, that the Ma∣gistrates themselues, or they which are deputed by them in these affaires, shall in like manner offend. Ought they not to consider, that the same thing may befall themselues, which they feare in the ministerie? No question, the ministerie of the poore, is a religious thing, & part of gods seruice. Wher I find two thinges greatly to be complained of: First, that in some reformed churches, the whole office of a Deacon, is made oecono∣micke, rusticall, and not vnlike vnto an annuall baliwick: & then, That the order of Deaconisses, atending vpon the poore, impo∣tent, sick, (of the which, there is yet some shadow remaining in the Papacie) is among vs altogeather relinquished. It is much to the purpose (in my iudgement) how and of whom the necessities of the pore be relieued in the house of God. I am not ignorant indeed, that the old custom of the church is growen to some smacke of superstition: but this of ours, which we now haue, whether (a Gods name) wil that grow? Wee are apt to fall from superstition to prophanation, but to keepe the golden meane, we haue no meanes. It hath bene of olde, the greatest beauty of the Church, the greatest praise of the Pastors; bountie towards the needy, and mercy towards the distressed. And what should I say of
noble women (and no lesse renowmed) maids and widows, Queenes and Empresses, who of their earnest deuotion to∣wards God, & their inward compassion towards the poore, haue wholy consecrated themselues (vnder their superuigill Bishops) vnto this holy ministery. When I looke into our churches, I cannot but prefer the commendable care of them, who continue in the church the true Deaconie, before those, who (as if it were some vile and ciuill charge) trauerse it ouer to men of life and profession vnhallowed and prophane (For so they range the collectors for the pore, among the basest drudges of the cittie.) But in this I pittie them, that satisfiyng (if not rather deceiuing) themselues with the bare name, they seeme not sufficientlie to conceiue the true and full nature of a Deacon. Of the which, there are yet many thinges to be spoken, but my dis∣course plies it, and applies it selfe to the order of Elders and Bishops. That the churches in their beginnings, had no Bishops & El∣ders, besides the Apostles themselues, and their fellow-labou∣rers. CHAP. VIII. IN the eleuenth chapter of the Acts, is the first men¦tion made of Elders, in the church of Ierusalem: In the which, so long as the Apostles and Euangelists did thēselues cōtinue, they had no need of any other elders. But after they once began to be dispersed (Iames their head being cut of, and Peter slipt aside) then they began to haue their Elders, whome (from that time forwards) Luke alwaies ioyneth with the Apostles, which were at Ierusalem: but when and how, and of whome they were ordained, it is not read. Notwithstanding this order, although it was ordained in the church after Deacons in time, yet is it before thē in re∣gard. But that churches were for a time without Priests, (or Elders,) it is more manifest out of the epistle to Titus, & the fourteenth of the Acts, then that it can be denied. But how long they were so, I wil not define: In this matter, I suppose
the Apostle had not at anye time so great a regarde of the time, as of the persons, and their perfections. For it was not for the wisedome of the Apostles, rashly to lay their hands of any, or to appoint them ouer the church, whom God had not anointed with those graces, which are required in a Pa∣stor of the church. Wherefore, when as the churches which were newly conuerted to the faith, did consist but of noui∣ces: there was no remedy, but they must stay a time, vntill they had made triall of their dispositions, and taken notice of their abilities, vnto whom the church-gouernment was to be committed. In the meane while, all things were mo∣derated, by the vigilant ouer-sight of the Apostles, and E∣uangelists, and such, as they intertained to their succours, as helpers and fellow-labourers. No doubt, the Apostle Paul is like vnto himselfe in all his Epistles, & therefore it was not hap-hazard, that in the Epi∣stle to the Philippians only, he saluteth Bishops & Deacons, & in none of the rest. By the which, as we are put out of all doubt, that the church of the Philippians had their Elders and Deacons: so are wee left in suspence, for any of the rest. (If so be (as els where) we are to gather of his stile, the state of the church.) Here therefore it behoueth the reader to be very attent, that wil learn to know, what churches had their Priests, and what not. Is it likely, that hee which ordinarilie accustometh to greet so louinglie in all Epistles, all that hee knew to be indued with any vertue, so willingly to commēd al that he knew to be of any desert in the church, and also so freely to note all that he knew to be in any defect, (I say) is it likely, that of all other, he would haue left the Bishops and elders vnsaluted? in the epistle to the Rom. he saluteth many whom albeit he cal his fellow-laborers, yet ar they no wher said to haue borne any sway in the church of Rome. He re∣membreth Aquila (& the church which was in his house) who was now at Corinth, then at Ephesus, & sometimes a∣gain at Philippos: neither forgetteth he Andronicus & Vrba∣nus, wherof the one he commendeth, as notable among the Apostles, and the other he confesseth, as his fellow laborer.
These and all other, whom hee knew resiant at Rome, hee deygneth with titles of condign prayses, because they labo∣bored together with the Apostles. And therefore no doubt if so be any of them had beene the proper Pastor of that Church, he would surely haue taken some knowledge, or made some remembraunce of it: As we reade that he did in his Epistle to the Philippians, of Epaphroditus, and to the Colossians, of Epaphras, and Archippus. Moreouer when Paul came to Rome, we read how he was receiued of the brethren, and of the Elders: the which thing might euen as well haue beene there (if there had beene any such Elders there) as in the fifteenth of the Actes, and the one and twenty also, it is well noted, how he was intertay∣ned of the Elders. But by these it may appeare, what the state of the Church was at Rome, when the Apostle did write vnto them. The like may bee declared out of ei∣ther Epistle to the Corinthians, (that I name not any other) namely, That they had not theyr proper Pastors, or peculi∣ar incumbents, when those Epistles were written. For who knoweth not, that Paul did write vnto new born Churches, which eyther were then but in the mould, or as yet in theyr nonage? Who besides Timothy and Titus, Apollo & Lucas, Ste∣phanus and Fortunatus, Achaicus and such like, (whom the A∣postle did send to them in common) had no other Elders, nor yet any other Bishop, but the Apostle himselfe. And al∣though the Churches were not without order, yet ther was not that order, as afterwards they had, when they were not set in order, vnder Elders, that had taken orders. In meane season, the Apostles & Euangelists, and other religious tea∣chers, did visit them by turns, as theyr opportunity serued. And hence is it, that Paul and Apollo doe excuse themselues vnto the Corinthians, that they did not visite them so often as they could haue wished. The which was also very well no∣ted of Ambrose and Epiphanius. Epiphanius aduersus hereses, in the 75. heresie hath these wordes. When the Gospell was young the holy Apostle wrote according as the matter then stood. For where there were Bishops appointed, he wrote to Bishops and Deacons. Ney∣ther
could the Apostles appoynt all thinges at the first. In deed the greatest neede was of Priests, and Deacons, for by these two, all Ec∣clesiasticall functions may be discharged. But where there was not any man found worthy a Bishopricke, there they remayned without a Bishop. But where neede was, and there were that were worthy of it, there were appointed Bishops. But where there was no great mul∣titudes, ther were not found among them, that might be made priests. & so they contented themselues with one Bishop in that place, &c. And he addeth: So the Church receiued the fulnes of hir functi∣ons: for euery thing had not all things at the first, but in processe of time, those things were prouided, which were requisite to the perfe∣ction of things necessary. Ambrose vpon the 4. of the Epistle to the Ephesians, writeth thus: In al things the writings of the A∣postle, doth agree with the order which is now in the Church, because these things were written about the beginnings of the Church. For he calleth Timothy also a Bishop, whom he had ordayned a Priest; be∣cause the first Priestes were called Bishops; that one going away, the next might succede him. Thus sayth Ambrose: And there∣fore the writings of the Apostles are to be vnderstood, ac∣cording to the seasons in the which they were written. In deede the Apostles layd the foundations: but others raised the worke; Paule planted, Apollo watered. And therefore so soone as with the time the Church increased, and the num∣ber of beleeuers multiplyed, they were not sufficing for the multitude whome the Lorde himselfe had sent: for which cause the Apostles took vnto themselues fellow-laborers in the Ministery, first Deacons, then Priests or Elders. Of whō we are now to speake. Of Priests, or Pastors, and Bishops. Chap. IX. THe Apostle Saint Paul, next after Euangelistes, pla∣ceth Pastors and Doctors, but whether he ment by them, two distinct orders, or but one only, there is the question; and that because whosoeuer is a Pastor, ought also to be a Doctor, but it is not so conuersiuely on the o∣ther part: For it may be that he is a Doctor, which not any
where is a Pastor. This is once: that as by the three former names of Apostles, Prophets, and Euangelists, the Apostle seemeth to note those, which had an extrordinary vocation from God immediat, and not from men; so by these two last names of Doctors and Pastors (whether wee take them as both one, or otherwise) hee seemeth to vnderstand those, which by men were preferred to the Church. And that Bi∣shops and Elders are those, whome Paul calleth Pastors, it sufficiently appeareth by that in the twentith Chapter of the Actes, where Paul intertaining the Elders hee had sent for from Ephesus, telleth them, that they were appointed of god, Bishops to feede the Church. And thereuppon wee also ac∣knowledge no Elder or Bishop in the Church of Christ, that is not a Pastor or feeder. For it is in the essence of an Elder his office, with wholesome doctrine to feed the flocke of Christ. Presbyter is a Greeke word, and aunswereth to that which the Hebrewes call Zachen, which signifyeth not onely an El∣der in yeares, (who for his age is to be reuerenced, but also an auncient in the common wealth, who for his place and authority is to be honored: yea it is a title of honour, with the which the Nobles and Magistrates of the old Testament are graced: from whence also it is deriued to the Rectors of the Church in the new Testament, who are called Bishops, by reason of their ouersight and watchfull care; which is a title of work & labor, but the name of Pastor is a title decla∣ring a speciall charge & office, so called of feeding the Lords flock with the Angel-like food of his heauenly word. Albeit ther are many other titles also, common to the said Pastors in the Scriptures, as that they are called Stewards, Presidents, Prelats, Guids, Gouernors, Ministers, and such like. The vertue & property of which titles, I will not here stand to explaine: it is that you may haue else where: Only I will enforce from thence such arguments, as the occasion shall serue, and the matter which I handle shall require. In the meane time you shall vnderstande, that the office of these Pastors, and doctors (albeit ordained of men)
doth not differ in kinde, from that of the Apostles. For the chiefe part of them both, is to instruct, exhort, reprehend, and refell the aduersaryes of the truth, (Besides the admini∣stration of the Sacraments, a thing no lesse pertaining to Pa∣stors, then Apostles.) Neyther is a Pastorall ouersight disiu∣sticed of that Apostolick authority of Ecclesiastical censure, which remayneth, and is requisite for the edifying of the Church. For why? they succeede (that I may vse Hierome hys owne wordes) the Apostolique order: and in another place, It is no easy matter to stand in Paul his place, or to mayntaine the dignity of Peter, now raigning with Christ. Of two diueas degrees of Pastors. Chap. X. BVt now, for as much as there is not the same, or the like proportion of charge committed to all Elders; there is also no smal difference among those, whom the Scripture calleth by the same name of Bi∣shops and Elders. The which seeing it must be discerned, rather by themselues as they are in deede, then by their names as they are called, let vs alwayes chiefely regard, what they are, then, what they are called; that we may truely distin∣guish betweene thinges that differ, not so much in name as in nature. The first Elders therefore whome the Apostles or∣dayned, were theyr fellow-laborers in the Lord his vine∣yard, as Iohn, Marke, Titus, Luke, Timo hy, Demas, Siluanns, and many others of whō we read in the Scriptures. Al the which, by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, were crea∣ted Ministers, no otherwise then the rest, who afterwards were placed ouer their seuerall Churches. Notwithstan∣ding, that which wee read of Timothy, wee conceyue of
the rest; and therefore that charge which was giuen vnto these, was rather prouinciall, then particular: seeing they were the associats, and assistants of the Apostles themselues. But when as daily the number of the faithfull increased, and the increase of Churches was thereby more and more aduaunced, together (as supply could be made of able men for the Ministerie) the Apostles and Euangelistes, (or their associates) installed into particular Churches, particular Pa∣stors: who beeing placed in their wardes (as it were) should not range at large from thence, but vnder the Apostles (as faithfull Pastors) should keep watch and ward ouer the vine∣yard of the Lorde. And yet they were not so inuested into those their seuerall charges, that the sole and whole autho∣ritie being demised to them, they should rule the Church a∣lone, and the charge thereof should thence-forth concerne the Apostles no more: but to this ende were they so dispo∣sed, that seeing the Apostles themselues could not bee al∣waies resident in euery place, there might notwithstanding (by their good meanes) be nothing wanting in anie place. If twelue men could haue beene suffising for all Churches, there should neuer haue beene leuied any newe increase of other seuentie. But when they altogether could not serue, to serue the turne, both these, and they both, had need of more abettors, to helpe them out withall. And albeit the Ministerie of the Gospell vnder Christ, be onely one, as the priest-hood of the law vnder Moses was one: yet notwithstanding, as in one priest-hood there were diuers degrees of gouernement, so likewise in one Ministe∣rie of the Gospell, there are (as you haue heard) diuers de∣grees of Pastors. For haue you not seene, how of the Lorde himselfe, there were two degrees of Ministers ordeined? (& of them the one was superior to the other.) How afterwards of the Apostles, there were in like manner ordeyned two or∣ders? (for to some they gaue in commission the Churches of one whole prouince, and to some againe the single rectorie of one onely Church.) That Titus and Timothie, had a superior intendencie ouer
many Churches, as also ouer them, which were alreadie, or were to be preferred thereunto, it is sufficiently manifest vn∣to euery indifferent sense. For otherwise, why was hee so di∣ligently admonished to beware, that he lay not his hands v∣pon any man extemporie? And againe: to what purpose is hee so cautionately forbidden, to admit any accusation a∣gainst an Elder, without the testimonie of two or three wit∣nesses? This therefore leadeth vs thus farre, as it were by the hand, that of force wee must confesse, how that vnder the A∣postles, & of the Apostles, there were ordeined two degrees of Ministers, & they of diuers authority, though not of di∣uers titles: vnto whom, albeit the Scripture for the present, gaue no proper or distinct denomination, yet in good time Posteritie did it, wel aduised. For although the names of Pa∣stor and Bishop, were commonly giuen to all Ministers of old, yet presently vpon the Apostles time, the name and title of Bishop was imparted, as a proper addition to the first & chiefe order of Elders. And yet they were not destitute of their distinction by their more sacred titles, euen in the A∣postles time. For did not the Apostles themselues grace the chiefe Elders with the title of their fellow-laborers, & their fellow-labourers with their owne titles? In the which not∣withstanding, we find their posteritie very sparing, and that for iust cause; namely, for that obsequious reuerence, and re∣ligious regard they had of the Apostles lately deceased; the chiefe instruments and ornaments of Gods Church. That the doctrine of the Apostles acknowledgeth no annuarie Elders, to Rule onely in the Church, and not to Teach. Chap. XI. OVt of that place of S. Paul not well vnder∣stood (it is in the fift chap. of the first to the Corinthians) there are many now adayes which haue deuised a fond and new-found distinction, clean contrary to the Apostles meaning. (Alâs for them) hee thought no∣thing
lesse, then of anie temporall Elders, to play the bugs in the Church (like speciall bailyes) for a spurt, and be gone: whereas in the whole schoole of the Apostles, you shall not finde, the worst Elder, that is not placed in one of the two foresaid formes. Generally in all Elders, the Apostle requi∣reth thus much; That they be apt to teach: And,1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.9. that they may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improue them which say against it. If in this nouell kind, we looke for parts agrea∣ble to these: sure I am, we shall neuer finde, that dumbe El∣ders, of a yeeres grouth, mute to instruct, made to com∣maund in the Church, are any where comprised in this forme. As for that gouernment, the Apostle numbreth among the giftes of Gods spirit, it is to bee vnderstood indeed of a singular and supereminent gift. For no doubt the right art of gouernment, is a rare and a religious thing: the which albeit there are scarse anie that will not boldly arrogate vn∣to himselfe, yet is it truly to be found but in a few. Where∣fore (as I rather iudge) this so exquisite a gift of gouerne∣ment, is to be reserued vnto the more excellent order of El∣ders; as namely, the Apostles and Euangelists, and others the principall Ministers of that time, as were Titus and Ti∣mothie, and such other, which gouerned many Churches with power Apostolike. And therefore me thinkes, that they of all other are farre wide, who thinke so rare and singular a gift of Gods spirite, ought to be impropriate to so base an order of Elders, mute and momentarie, which gouerne not long, and teach not at all. Sure I am, that the Apostolike Churches, and the sequel of many yeares after, neuer interteined anie such kinde of al∣dermen, for Church officers. And had not the Apostles and Euangelistes, and their associates, sole preheminence ouer the Elders of particular Churches, in the absolute authority of Church gouernment? True it is, I find certaine Sages and Seniours, who did v∣sually sit in counsell with the Priests of the olde synagogue, who were not Priestes; but I reade not of anie in the
Church, of counsell with the Pastors, but the Pastors. And in verie deed, in the Apostles daies, and many ages after, there were not in Esse any Christian Magistrats, which could con∣sult with the Elders of the Church, in matters concerning the Church. As for those Elders and Seniors, whom we read to haue beene ioyned with the Priests in councell and com∣mission, they were the ordinary Magistrates of Israel, which lawfully could not be sequestred or secluded from the coū∣sels and constitutions of the Priestes, no more then at this day the Christian Magistrate is to bee restrained from the Sinods and assemblies of the Church. For albeit there bee two kindes of gouernement; one of the Cittie, an other of the Church: yet are they both deriued from one and the same author. The which also, although they bee executed af∣ter a diuers manner, and that the one proceed of God, as he is the creator and moderator of all things, and the other of one and the same GOD, as hee is the restorer and redee∣mer of mankind, and each of them haue their seuerall ende also: yet notwithstanding, seeing the same societie is both Church & Cittie, and the authority of them both is drawen from the same head: so likewise are they driuen to one end, and come all to the same passe. And of this it commeth to passe, that they both haue many thinges in common, which cannot easily be propounded without a common assembly, nor concluded without a generall assent. The Minister hath authoritie from the Lord our Sauiour, to gouerne the Church: the Magistrate from the same Lord our creator, hath the like soueraigntie to rule the Cittie. The which two diuers and distinct estates, so often as they doe friendly consort together in one vnisone, & direct all their counsels to the same end, I say so long, the Cittie must needs thriue, and the Church cannot doe amisse. As for anie other Elders in the Church (besides these of the which I haue now spoken, and you heard) I would to God some man would shew me which be they (if there be any such.) Doubtlesse it passeth my cunning, to finde any such Church-bugs or Bur∣gesses in the word of God.
Doe you not knowe, that the offices of the Church, are gifts of the spirit, and as it were talents of the Lord, laid out to loane among men; of the which there must one day an account be rendred to the Lorde? I tell you, it is not at the pleasure of anie seruant in the house of Christ, rashly to ex∣onerate himselfe of anie office he hath vnder-taken: He that once putteth his hand to the plough, and afterwards looketh backe, is not fitte for the kingdome of God. For my part, I could neuer yet read, that there was at anie time in the Church, anie of∣fice temporarie, if it were ordinarie. I admit, that Deacons may afterwards be made Ministers; but that cannot be ac∣counted a defection from the office, which is the perfection of the same, neither is that offfice forsaken, when in the same order a higher is vnder-taken; they fall not from that they were, but rise to that they were not. This custome Ter∣tullian sometimes reprehended in his booke De praescriptio∣nibus contra haereticos, in these wordes: Their giuing of orders is rash, light, and inconstant: sometimes they praefer yonglinges, some∣times wordlinges, and sometimes recreant reuolters, that they may bind them with their titles, whom they cannot hold with the truth: A man can neuer gaine more, or with more ease, then in the raunges of recreantes, where the onely beeing there, is to deserue pay. There∣fore one is to day a Bishop, to morrow another; to day a Deacon, to morrow a Parson; to day a Priest, to morrowe a lay man: (for they giue to lay men also Church offices.) The place of Ambrose expounded. Chap. XII. THat which is alleadged out of Ambrose, to confirme that kinde of Elder-shippe which some reformed Churches in this our age haue receiued, is nothing at all to this que∣stion. For Ambrose there speaketh of El∣ders in age, not in office.
Such indeed, the Bishops and Elders in times past, tooke in counsel with them, as did also of old the auncient Syna∣gogue; And yet Ambrose bringeth them not into any equi∣page with those, which were Elders in calling, whom he had about him, and who gouerned the Churches vnder him; but he greeueth that such graue and auncient men in yeres, whome the Apostle would not haue reprooued any thing roughly, should not remaine in the like esteeme with the Pa∣stors and Elders of the Church, as they were of olde. For ex∣pounding those wordes of Paule to Timothie:1. Tim. 5.1, Rebuke not an auncient (or an Elder) but exhort him as a father, hee writeth thus. That in reuerence of his yeares, an ancient man is to be prouo∣ked with mildnes to goodnes, that hee may the rather take warning: for beeing gentlie admonished, hee will be afraide, least afterwards hee should bee more roughly dealt withall; which were a shame for an Elder. For among all nations age is honoured, for which cause both the Synagogues of olde, and afterwards also the Church, had alwayes certaine auncient men, without whose aduise nothing was done in the Church. The which by what negligence it was lefte off, I cannot tell, except haplie it were through the sloth, or rather the pride of some Pastors, because they alone would seeme to bee some thing. Thus much sayth Ambrose: who (I dare bee bound for him) thought nothing lesse, then that anie or∣der of the Ministery, set downe by the Apostles, was nowe worne out: For himselfe had Elders, which did also rule the Church with him, or vnder him; besides that, the words doe shew as cleare as noone-day, that hee spake heere of El∣ders, not in office, but in age. If any vouchsafe certaine auncients (experienced in many thinges) the senate of the Church, I say not against it; but this I auouch that such (were they all more auncient then Iaphet) are not to bee accounted among the Church offi∣cers and Elders, which the Apostles ordained. And I dare be bolde further to affirme, that they are in no small errour, who thinke, that the Elders and auncients in cer∣taine reformed Churches in this our age, are of the same sute with those, whome the Apostles ordained in the four∣teenth
of the Actes, and Paule sent for from Ephesus in the twentie chapter, Whose order and office is described at large in the Epistles to Timothie and Titus. I perceiue here the reformation of the English Church, appointeth in euery place certaine Church officers, which represent in some sort those auncients and Elders, and they are commonly called Church-wardens. Notwithstanding these come short of that authority in Ecclesiasticall censure, To excommunicate: but if any excommunicate person, shall dis∣orderly presse into the holy assembly, they are to endeuour (by the aduise of the Minister) to remoue him. Their or∣dinary office, according to law, is this; To gather & collect, to lay vp, and lay out the rents and reuenews of the church; to keepe the bodie of the Church, and the rest in repayre, to keepe the Church booke (together with the Minister) to admonish offendors, and vnruly fellowes, and as for the stubborne, infamous, and offensiue, to present them to the Bishop, or his deputie, & that vpon their othes: furthermore also, to note who they are that absent themselues from di∣uine seruice, vpon the Saboth, or holy-daies, and to set a fine on their heads, according to the law prouided in that case: and also, to looke that due silence, and all other kind of ho∣nest seemlines bee obserued in the time of diuine seruice. If the ancient Primatiue Church, had any such kind of Elders, they were not (I am sure) at any time accounted of our el∣ders, among the Elders & Bishops of our Church: for they alwaies made a difference in the Church, betwene the laike officers, and the Church Ministers. In Tertullian his Apolo∣gie, the Elders, which wee reade, were present & president in christian assemblies, were Bishops and Elders, no temporall men; vnles wee would make him contrary to himselfe, who iustly vpbraided the Heretikes of that time with that fault, That they prophaned Church functions with lay persons. Neither are these things so spoken of me, neither wold I be so taken, as if I chalenged those reformed Churches, that vse some such like Seniors (for so they suppose) as Ambrose seemed to wish for: I my selfe did vse them, when I supplied
the place of a Minister in some reformed Churches. For the tyrannie of Popish Bishops beeing ouerthrowne, when as they which are indeed the true Elders, doe themselues in like manner sustaine the office of a Bishop: they could not well take vnto themselues the intire gouernment of the Church, without some suspicion of the like; if no lesse tyrannie. And therfore it was necessarie for them, to ioyne with themselues certaine godly men out of the whole corps of the Church: for that without the assistance of their associates, it was not possible for them alone, to counter-checke the immodestie of bad men, and to bring them into some Coram. That place of Paule expounded, in his first to Timothie, the fift chapter, What it is to labour in the worde and doctrine. Chap. XIII. IT neede not greatly trouble any man, when Paule saith; That those Elders es∣pecially are worthie double honour, which labour in the word and doctrine: as if it fol∣lowed therupon, that there were other Elders also in the church, which taught not: For these two, do not signifie one & the same thing, to Labour in the worde, and to Teach; seeing there was no Elder ordeined of the Apo∣stles, that was not apt to teach. But for as much as the measure of the gifts of Gods spirit, are not alike in all; (for there be which haue receiued fiue talents, who must also pay vse for fiue vnto the Lord; & there be againe, which haue receyued but two:) To whom much is giuen, of him manie things are requi∣red. If the dolours Paule suffered for preaching the Gospell, were compared with other mens labors, we might wel con∣ceiue, how well worthy he was of greater honour then they, whose labors were farre vnlike in the like labour. Some enioy their office, & haue ioy therof in rest & peace, & teach their
people at home, and indure no hardship abroad; whose do∣ctrine is determined within the precincts of theyr own pre∣cession. But others there be, which teach not one onely Church, but the whole Church, with theyr learned laboures, and that not once for all (while they liue onely) but also, (a great deale more) after many generations. The which that they may the better performe, they let for no labour, they spare nor oyle, nor toile, nor health, nor wealth, nor life it selfe, in that regard. Besides there be, that for the Gospels sake, set light by the losse of friends, and fauors, and riches, and reuenewes; they ouercome daungers not to be numbred, and vndergoe slaunders not to be suffered, onely that they may inforce and set forewards the Gospell of Christ. And such doth the Apostle seem to vnderstand in this place; not euery ordina∣ry and perfunctory Teacher, that gouernes in the Church, and instructeth with wholesom doctrine the people of God committed to his charge. The verbe , to labour, (vsed by him, not in this place onely) signifieth properly, great and grieuous labour. And therefore they are far wide, that thinke Paul meant in thys place the bare preaching of Gods word, and take this to be the ods betweene theyr Elders, that some teach the people, others gouern only, and that for a while onely, and therein supplying also, and applying themselues to the Ministers of the word. More proportionable to those times, and proper to this word , such Elders are to be vnderstood, as were at that present among them; as Titus and Timothy, and Tithi∣tus, Marke, Luke, and such like Paul his legates and ioynte labourers, which in deede feared no daunger, refused no labour, wherby they might aduance and diuulge the blessed doctrine of the sacred trueth. Of Timothy, Paul testifyeth in the last Chapter of the first to the Corinth: when as he thus writeth, If Timothy come vnto you, see that hee be without fear a∣mong you, for he worketh the worke of the Lord, euen as I doe. By which we may perceiue that Timothy was not without feare, nor yet without daunger, neyther that without cause. A
while after speaking of Stephanus, and Aechaicus, and Fortuna∣tus, who had giuen themselues to minister vnto the Saints, he sayth: And bee yee subiect vnto such, and to all that helpe with vs, and labour. After which sort, I also expound that place in the first to the Thessalonians, the first chapter & the twelfth verse. VVe beseech you brethren, that ye know them that labour a∣mong you, and are ouer you in the Lord, and admonishe you. In all which places, the Apostle vseth the same word , to la∣bour, by the which he vnderstandeth no ordinary, vulgar, or trifling exercise, but an extraordinary, vehement, difficult, and troblesome labour. And therefore Paul his meaning is, that how much greater trouble, and more troblesome tur∣moyle the Elders vndertake in their office, they are so much the more worthy to be graced with the greater Honors. So that Paul in these wordes, respecteth the singular care of some, not the single preaching of all. Writing to Timothy, he defineth a Bishopricke to bee a worke: of the which it followeth, that the greater the Bi∣shoprick is, the greater is the labour, the greater is the work. If he which is ouer one onely Church, shall finde himselfe somewhat to doe: what shall we say of them, vnto whome the care of many Churches is committed. So was it with Ti∣tus and Timothy, and diuerse other Bishops and Elders, of that order. The whole sum therefore of our assertion, resolueth into thus much: that among the Bishops or Elders in the Scrip∣ture, which gouerned Churches vnder the Apostles, there were diuerse degrees in deed, by what names soeuer ye please to call them; of the which some were ouer one Church only, and that vnder the direction of an other, and some againe ouer many Churches, suppliant to none of the same order: as it is wel knowen of Titus and Timothy, and the rest. I know there are many, who in the secret preiudice of their foresea∣soned opinions, wil not sticke to say, that Titus and Timothy, and the rest of that forme, were Euangelistes, and inuested
with an extraordinary kinde of a not immitable autho∣rity. To whom I aunswere, that I haue heard so in deede, and read it to: but without reason or proofe at al, of any credit. For where as Paul writeth to Timothy, and chargeth him that he doe the worke of an Euangelist,2. Tim, 4.5. 1. Cor. 16.10 it doth no more conclude that Timothy was an Euangelist, (so properly called) then that other place of Paul to the Corinthians: He doth the work of God euen as I, doth proue that he was an Apostle. That that order is of God, which appoynteth superior Elders, Bishops. And that but of man, where all Pastors and Elders are alike. Chap. XIIII. WEe haue shewed before, what was the extra∣ordinary calling, and the efficacy thereof, (which was to bee found in Titus and Timo∣thy.) To the which I adde, that all auncient and autentike writings held Titus and Timo∣thy for Bishops, vnto whome the Elders of in∣feriour orders were suppliant and subiect. In whose footings our fathers insisting (which next succeeded the Apostles) reteyned in vse that forme of gouernement, which they re∣ceyued of the Apostles. Now a dayes, there bee some of this beliefe, that there were onely these two degrees of Mi∣nisters left vs by the Apostles, namely Pastors and Doctors: who cutting short that difference of Pastors, which I haue noted, and casting of that auncient decency of Church go∣uernement, which I haue proued, doe christen a new a for∣rayne and a forged kind of Presbitery, and with much bold∣nes stand forth to auouch, that this theyr newe deuise, is di∣uine, & that other (continuing a lawful discent frō the Apo∣stles
time, is but humaine. Wherefore here (beloued) it is time to looke about vs. For they easely auoyd all that wee haue already auowed of the Apostles, Euangelists, and Pa∣stors; when they aunswere, that the gouernement Aposto∣lique was but temporanie and momentary, and determined with the Apostles and Euangelists themselues, long since deceased, so that now there is no more any one Apostle be∣fore another. But that the trueth of this question may the better ap∣peare, we must now haue an especiall eye to all those giftes, which were especially pregnant in the Apostles and Euan∣gelists, that thereby we may know, what was proper to the Apostles and theyr times, and what common to all Pastors vnto the worlds end. To which end, the first thing we are to reuise in the Apostles, is that theyr extraordinary calling (for they had it immediatly from God,) then also, theyr ge∣nerall Embassee and commission without restraint, or limi∣tation: Thirdly, that in all things which concerned theyr function, they had a neuer-errant director, (the spirite of trueth) who suggested vnto them, whatsoeuer they before had heard of the Lord, or should otherwise be requisite for them to know. And the last thing, is theyr power Apostolique. Of these, the first three were necessary, for laying the ground-worke of Churches, vppon the which others should build: the which vnlesse they had been semented (as it were) with the more sure ioynts and strongest sinewes of Gods spirite, what soeuer should haue ben raysed & reared there∣uppon by others, must needs haue reeled, and ruined toge∣ther with the same. As for the gift of miracles, I stand not vpon that, seeing that was bestowed vpon many other of the faithfull also, as it pleased God. Of all these gifts, they could communicate nothing vnto theyr successors, besides the Ministery of the Gospell: The which seeing it was inherent in the power Apostolique, they surrendered that also to theyr subsecutors: and that, because it is a thing necessary, not on∣ly for the increase, but also for the continuance of Chur∣ches. For without the word preached, the Sacraments ad∣ministred,
and the Church gouerned, there can no Church well continue. Wherefore as the preaching of the worde, and the vse of the Sacraments was not giuen to the Church, onely for the Apostles time, but that they might continue vnto the age to come, euen to the worlds end: So likewise the forme of gouernement, which was ordayned of God, and deliuered of the Apostles, and confirmed of the fathers, ought to remayne and continue in like sort. But that forme had Pastors inferior and superior, and therefore that also is to be retained in the Church of God. Neither doth the equa∣lity in the Ministery hinder, why there may not be an inequali∣ty in the policie of the Church. In the olde law there was one Priesthood equall and alike to al the Priests: & yet were ther diuerse degrees of Priests in respect of gouernment, and in an equall order of Priesthood, there was a not equall Honor of gouernement. Neyther is it preiudiciall to vs, that theyr Priesthood was Leuiticall and typical, seeing the state & go∣uernement which was among the Priests and Leuits, did not so much respect any intricate type, as a well ordered state: that al things might be done decently and in due order. Wherefore for as much as God himselfe was author of that policy and gouernment, in the which Leuits were subdued to Leuits, and Priests to Priests: it ought not to be recoun∣ted any humaine constitution, where a Minister is subiect to a Minister, and one Pastor to an other: For that is no more vnlawfull at this day, then it was at that. That our Sauiour by no statute repealed the supereminent au∣thority of Pastors among themselues. Chap. XV. AS for our Sauiour and his censure in this mat∣ter, I do not finde that by any meanes he did abolish the superiority of Ministers but rather that he did establish it, when as in the first or∣dinaunce of the Ministery, he appoynted Mi∣nisters
of the Gospell, some superior & some inferior to the rest. To the which ordinance of Christ, those his words are not any whit aduerse, where he sayth; The Kinges of the nati∣ons rule ouer them, and they which haue power among them are cal∣led gratious: but it shall not be so with you: but he that is greatest a∣mong you let him be as the least, and he which is chiefe, as he that mi∣nistreth. &c. The true and plain sense of which words is this. Your kinde of gouernment shal be diuerse from that which is proper to Princes, whether you take those which are more tyrannous and truculent ouer theyr people, or those which in theyr gouernment, are more milde and moderate, accor-to their lawes. Doth this sence or sentence take away that difference of persons, which the law of nature and the rule of gouernmēt do prescribe? If ther be any place in the Gos∣pell (and ther are many) which may be cited for the superiori∣ty of Ministers, this is one. For vnlesse the Lord had meant that in the gouernment of the Church, there should be some greater then the rest, he would neuer haue sayd, Hee which is greatest among you let him be as the least; he might haue made short worke of al, and as soon haue sayd, There is none first among you, none greatest, none chiefe. But he that is grea∣test among you (saith he) let him be as the least, and he which is highest, as he that ministreth. Which were no aduice, wher there is none higher then another. Where all shall be alike, what need there any precept, how he which is greatest amōg them should behaue himselfe? The meaning therfore of this precept is this: How much any of you is superior to the rest, so much more submisse shall he carry himselfe towards the rest. For albeit all the Apostles were of the same order and power, yet the difference of age, and diuersity of gifts was great among them, and therefore it could not be, but that they which had receiued greater gifts of the Lord, shoulde receiue greater countenance of men. The Apostle Paul in his first Chapter to the Galathians doth sufficiently declare this, where he sheweth that he had conferred of the Gospell with them, which seemed to bee somewhat, the which he foorthwith repeating againe, she∣weth, that there were certayne of these Apostles of chiefe
authority among the rest, of whome notwithstanding he af∣firmeth, that hee receyued nothing. Such was the mildnes and moderation of his spirite; hee would not goe about to make that equal in-equality odious, of the which the Lord himselfe was the author. For hee well knew, that neyther he which had receiued fiue talents, ought to thinke he hath but two, and much lesse, he which hath but two, to compare himselfe with him that hath fiue. And in deede, can there be any reason giuen, why there should be rather an inequa∣lity in gouernement, then in other gifts? or doe men abuse authority onely, to maintayne theyr tyranny? Doubtlesse it is not greatly materiall, with what giftes a man enthronize himselfe Pope ouer his brethren; whether for his fine witte, or deepe knowledge, or smooth eloquence, or any other such inward vertue: Whether for the holines of life, or strictnes of fasts, or largenes of almes, or any such outward complement: or else for his wealth, his worship, and supe∣riour authority. As for the aunswere of our Sauiour it ex∣tendeth far and neare: neyther is it to be referred to the A∣postles alone, as if it were onely forbidden an Apostle, to domineere ouer an Apostle, but it stretcheth it selfe vnto al other. For albeit the power was great, in the which they were to be installed of the Lord, to the benefit of the church; notwithstanding, that was rather to be imployed of priuate men ouer priuate persons: and thereupon the Lord forbid∣deth that they should after the manner of Kings and Prin∣ces , that is domineer, or rule by force. Hence is it that Paul writeth to the Corinthians; Not that we haue domi∣nion ouer your faith: but that we are ministers of your ioy:2. Cor. 1.24. 1. Pet. 5.3. And in the first of Peter; Not as if we ruled by force ouer the chosen. For that in deede, because it beseemed men priuate ouer priuat men, the Lord hath forbidden his Apostles that, and hath taught them rather to make the harts of the people to re∣lent by lenity and intreaty, as we read the Apostle Paul did in many places, & specially in the second to the Corinthes,2. Cor. 5.20. where he thus writeth; VVherefore are we now ambassadors in the name of Christ, as though God did beseech you through vs, wee intreate you in the name of Christ, that yee bee reconciled to God.
And yet notwithstanding in other places he is again more sharpe and seuere, as when he sayth, VVhat will yee? shall I come vnto you with a rod? or in loue, and the spirite of meekenes? And in the latter Epistle the tenth Chapter, when hee spea∣keth of that power he receyued of the Lord, he sheweth how little primacy was in the Church, in such things as pertay∣ned to the kingdome of God. By all the which it doth ap∣peare, that by that prohibition of violent dominion which Kings may vse ouer theyr subiects, the power of gouerne∣ment in the Church is not inhibited, by the which one Mi∣nister is eminent in authority ouer another, no more then the power of the Pastor is thereby intercepted, which is or∣dinary and ought to be ouer his people. Will any man say, that the Lord hath so confounded those two distinct or∣ders of Ministers, that the Apostles should differ in nothing from the seuenty Disciples? I doe therefore greatly wonder, that men learned should so far ouer-shoote themselues, as once to perswade, or to be perswaded, that out of this place (so often aledged to so little purpose) the superior authori∣ty of Bishops ouer Priests was forbiddē by Christ: the which they can by no means do, without the reproofe & reproch, the preiudice and impeachment of all the most auncient & best learned Fathers, whose persons they may soner accuse, then conuince of Tyranny, and whose gouernement they may more easely discommend, then mend. The Lorde his purpose was to take that error from the Apostles, which was in their minds, not to take that power from the Apostles, which he had giuen into their hands. That the forme of the Apostles gouernment, did not end with the death of the Apostles. Chap. XVI. THat the gouernment of the Apostles, is sayde by some to haue deceased with the death of the Apo∣stles, it is neyther grounded vppon true authority of Scripture, nor proued by any consequence of reason, nor maintayned by any president of the Fathers. Neither is it of
any greater force, nor haue they any greater reason, that say the Apostles authority was extraordinary: For by the same reason they may at this day deny, that any man hath any au∣thority to baptise and to preach. If what things were extraor∣dinary in the Apostles, they could not returne to theyr po∣sterity: may not the same reason serue to proue, that ther is no authority left vnto vs after the Apostles, either to preach or to baptise? I would gladly then hear some iust cause, why rather the Church gouernment should cease with vs which was vnder the Apostles, then the preaching of the Gospell, or the administring of the Sacraments. For in them ther was as much extraordinary, as in the other. This is much like, as if of olde a man should haue sayde, that after the death of Moyses and Aaron, the Priests and Leuites had not the same power with Moyses and Aaron, be∣cause theirs was extraordinary. Wherefore as after theyr de∣cease, the same order of gouernment which was vsed of Mo∣ses and Aaron, remayned to their posterity: In like manner, the Apostles and Euangelists were a lantherne and a law vn∣to vs which should come after them, of perfect Church go∣uernement. And that which our Sauiour sayd of the Priestes of the Iewes, That they did sit vppon the chayre of Moyses and Aaron, may be sayd of our Bishops, that they sit in the chayre of Peter and Paul, that is, that they haue succeeded them in the same seate and state of gouernment. There are two words, which being not well taken, may be very offensiue, namely, Temporarie and extraordinary: For it is to be vnderstood, that there are not ioyntly to be giuen alike to the whole function Apostolick, and euery part ther∣of. And yet some are made to beleeue, that whatsoeuer was in them extraordinary, the same was also temporarie: When as indeed, whatsoeuer was in them extraordinary, was not tem∣porarie: For all things in the Apostles were extraordinary, of the which many things in processe of time became ordinary. Onely those things which deceased with the Apostles were temporarie. But what things those were, I haue already de∣clared at large.
And nowe, that I may first begin with the preaching of the gospell: it were very hard to restraine that to the persons of the Apostles, and their age onely: For albeit so large a lega∣cie, as was the Apostles, bee not committed vno any: yet is there some such like of the same kinde, with the like autho∣ritie. That the commandement, To preach the gospell vnto all nations, (the Apostles beeing now receiued vp into heauen) doth in like manner bind the Church: to the which the Au∣thoritie Apostolique, is also requisite. Chap. XVII. THe command, to preach the gospell, and the commission, to all nations, wee vnderstand to bee so giuen in charge to the Apostles, that withal it obligeth the church also; ne∣ther did the charge of preaching the gos∣pell to the incredulous heathen, respect the apostles only, but al future ages to the worlds end. In the last of Mathew, when the Lord had sayd, that all power was giuen vnto him in heauen and in earth, and had commanded, that they should go forth, and teach al na∣tions, &c. he added; I am with you vnto the worlds end. Which cannot be restrained to the Apostles onely, seeing it concer∣neth all whom he commandeth to preach, and to whom he promiseth his diuine presence for euer: neither can this pro∣mise be deuorced from the former command, and thereby it appeareth, that Christ commanded the church also; that Apostles hauing takē heauen, order might be taken, that the gospell might be preached to the Gentiles in all coastes, vpon al occasions. And verelie if the Apostolique authority had bin Temporarie, that also had bene a personal gift, and par∣ticuler: neither would they haue presumed to haue taken themselues companions and co-partners in that Apostolik charge, to the which themselues only were appointed of the
Lord. But when as they knew, that their office, & whatsoeuer authoritie they had receaued, was rather giuen to the whole church, then to their sole selues; they therevpon were bolde, to make others, ioynt partners with them in their Aposto∣like power, whom they also knew should be their successors. Neither in nature, could so great a worke bee finished of so few labourers: and therfore also the commandement of the Lord, could no further bind the Apostles, then for the terme of their mortalitye: in the which time, the Lorde did not purpose to determine, either the promise of his helpe, or the preaching of his word. The Apostles then had need of many helpers in the Lord, and fellow-labourers for the busines of the Lord: the which when they could not accomplish themselues, they left their posteritie to finish that, which themselues could not effect. Had the Apostles carried their commission to heauen with them, and besides the priuate care of perticular Churches, the Bishops (whome the Apostles left their successours) had thought the further propagation of the gospel did nothing pertaine to them: I doubt me, the cōfines of Christ his king∣dome had neuer bene enlarged to so great a monarchie as it is. What neede I remember you of the rare and memora∣ble examples, of the thrise reuerend fathers in the Primatiue church? With what serious studie, with what earnest desire, with what constant endeuour, and last of al, with what great labours, and many streaming showers of the bloud of Mar∣tyrs, were the churches of olde planted, watered, and increa∣sed? It is a thing better knowen and commended, then that I need to repeat it, or themselues to repent it. Notwithstanding there be some in these daies, which take vp but to shrewdly this sentence of ours: as if it were some Anabaptisticall fancie, when it is said, that the Church hath at this day, if not Apostles, yet Apostolique Ministers: but as for the fancie, (if Anabaptisticall) let themselues looke to that, least they take themselues by the nose. For my part, I would but know, whether the gospel yet at this day, now af∣ter a 1500. yeares, be come to the eares of all Nations.
In the meane time, let them consider howe many nations, (whom the Apostles neuer saw) by the paines and preaching of godlie Pastors, (who in this labour succeeded the Apo∣stles) haue receiued the Lord Christ. I will not nowe stand to tell them, onely this I conclude, that the commaund and commission of preaching the Go∣spell, standeth yet in his ful strength and force in the church of God, and shuld, so long as there is any nation, that know∣eth not the Lord. That at this day there is none sent by the churches of Christ, to the nations which haue not knowen Christ, it is not long of the lacke of sufficient power to send, but of sufficient persons to be sent, or at least wise, of a better zeal to aduāce the kingdom of Christ. Indeed no man ought to tempt the Lord: Did not himselfe forbid his Apostles to stir one foot out of Ierusalem, to discharge their duty before they had receiued the holy Ghost? So requisite is it, that a man bee throughly furnished for so great an enterprise, be∣fore he vndertake it. And therefore, because the iudgement of one man may be ouer-weening and deceiued, (especially if he may be his owne iudge) it is requisite, that the authori∣tie of the church in that case be expected. But here is requi∣red an Authority Apostolique: the which if the Church haue not, (although it haue fit men) neither hath it the power to send. For who can giue that to another, which hee hath not himselfe? Whosoeuer therefore is sent (whether you please to call him an Apostle, or an Euangelist; or a Bishop,) hee hath need of the like, and no lesse power then Timothy and Titus had in the like, and no lesse charge. This therefore is the authoritie which is assigned to the church by the Keies: the which the Lord our Sauiour gaue, not so much to Peter and his collegiats, as to the Church it selfe: so that of right it maye doe that at this daye, which it could of old; namely, wher occasion serueth to giue in com∣mission vnto sufficient men, the publishing of the Gospell, with Authoritie Apostolique.
That the Apostolike authoritie is as necessarie for the con∣seruing and confirming, as for the founding and first plan∣ting of Churches. Chap. XVIII. BVt for as much as the power Apostolike, is no lesse needfull and necessarie for the conseruing and confirming, as for the planting, and first placing of chur∣ches, we must also haue a special regard to that. For by reason (as it is thought) of Bishops and Arch-bishops, Primats, and Metropolitanes, which haue suc∣ceeded the Apostles and the Euangelists, there is now some controuersie moued for that. And verely I haue oftentimes wondered with my selfe, what it is that should make anie learned or religious man thinke, that the office of Apostles and Euangelistes, is ceased in the Church, and that at this day there are none possessed of any authoritie Apostolike, to whom the other Elders ought to supply in the gouernance of the Church: and I wonder the more, that there bee any that should thinke the power Apostolike, a thing so extraordi∣narie, as if it were not possible, that it should be deuolued to their posteritie. Indeed the Church hath not continued those names a∣mongst vs: but is that sufficient to prooue, that with those titles, the authority also is surceased? First, if a man would but well marke the latter daies of the Apostles (of Paule es∣pecially) he should find, that the Apostolike gouernment could not possibly end with the Apostles. For by those things the sacred Scripture doth testifie of Paule, wee may iudge of the rest, who no doubt, were no lesse carefull for the good of the Church, euen to their last gaspe, wheresoeuer it pleased God to translate them out of this life: But the second Epi∣stle
of S. Paul to Timothie (indited about the last of his daies) doth witnesse abundantly, what an vniuersall care hee had euen then of the Churches. There hee maketh mention of his fellow-labourers, whereof some he had sent to goe vnto diuers Churches, and some hee sent for to come vnto him∣selfe; that beeing now readie to flit out of this life, he might giue them his last charge of all things, concerning the wel∣fare of the Church, and the furnishing of that building him∣selfe had left vnfinished. This his last will and Testament hee left with them. The which had beene to no purpose, had the power Apostolike died with him, or had the authoritie of that their legacie beene compelled within the circuit of euery particular parish. For they all, whom Paul there remembreth (as Titus, Marke, Luke, Crescens, Tithicus, and Timothie himselfe) were associate with Paule in his Apostolike sea, as vnto whose seuerall charge, hee had demised many and sundry Churches; The which if it were not free for them (with that recreant Demas) to cast vp, and giue ouer, while Paul yet liued, how much lesse, after he was dead? Wherefore now they were made, and remaine his heires (as before they were his peeres) of his Apostolike paines and praeheminence. That the other Apostles had also their consorts and col∣legiats in their Apostolike charge, vnto whom (themselues discontinuing this life) they demeaned the no lesse care of the Churches with the like authoritie, there was neuer wise man that doubted of it. And furthermore, that their lawfull authoritie, with the which they prosecuted and perseuered in the Lord his affaires, could no more be extinguished with them, then it was abolished with the Apostles (so long as there was any church remaining.) But as they succeeded the Apostles, so had they their successors: vpon whom if them∣selues did not bestow the power they had receiued, the Church did; which is heire generall of the power Apostolike. But goe to nowe: let vs imagine (if there can bee such a conceit) that it is not so, as I haue saide: let vs suppose also for a while, that the Apostles left all vnto Pastors and El∣ders
of equall authoritie, who had onely the charge of their seuerall Churches, and their prouinces limited within the precincts of their owne onely parishes; What then (shall we say) became of those Churches, in the which the Apostles (intercepted by death) or they which with the Apostles did gouerne the Churches, could not ordeine anie Pastors? Did their death fal out so pat, that euerie Church had their Pastors and Doctors, and that none of them was left out of fashion, (I meane without their Deacons, and Doctors, and Pa∣stors, and Presbyters) as were somtime the Churches of Creet vnder the Apostle Paule? Who then followed the work that was vnfinished? Was there no need then of some Timothie or Titus, to make perfect that, which was yet not performed? The Apostles yet liuing, it was needfull that Titus and Timo∣thie, and diuers such others, should haue a larger commissi∣on; how much rather after their death? Wherefore to con∣clude, either the worke of God, begun of the Apostles, was altogether to bee left off, or else to bee followed a fresh by those, whom for that purpose they left behind them. By the testimonie of Eusebius his Ecclesiasticall historie the former chapiter is confirmed. Chap. XIX. EVsebius, in the third booke and fourth chapter of his Ecclesiasticall historie, writeth thus; But that Paule preaehed the worde of God vnto the Gentiles, and that hee laide the foundation of Churches from Hierusalem, and the confines thereof, euen vnto Illyricum, it sufficiently ap∣peareth, not onely by his owne wordes, but also out of the booke of Luke, intituled, The Actes of the A∣postles. Furthermore, in what Prouinces or dominions, the A∣postle Peter preached the Gospell vnto them which were of
the Circumcision, and deliuered the worde of the newe Testament, it is plaine and euident enough out of his owne wordes, taken out of that Epistle, we haue truly proued to be his by the consent of all men, and which he wrote to the Iewes dispersed throughout Pontus, Ga∣latia, Cappadocia, & Bithinia, &c. And againe in the same place; But how many, and who were the true & natural followers of the Apostles, which were accounted able and fit men to gouerne the Churches which they had founded, it is not easie to say, they only ex∣cepted, whō some perhaps may gather by the way out of Paul his wri∣tings. For the which purpose Luke also maketh not a little, who rec∣koneth by name the Disciples of Paule, whilest he laboureth to record them in the Acts. Among whom was Timothie, who is said to be the first that obtained the Bishopricke of the Church which is at E∣phesus. Titus also was ouer the churches which are in Creet. And in the same place he saith: That among the rest of Paule his com∣panions and Disciples Crescens was one, whom Paule himselfe wit∣nesseth, was gone into Galatia: Linus was another, whō in his second to Timothy, he witnesseth to haue been with him at Rome, whom al∣so we haue declared before, to haue been the first Bishop of the Church of Rome, after Peter. And another was Clement, who was the third Bishop of Rome, whom Paule affirmeth, to haue beene his copartner and fellow-labourer in the Lord. Vnto which we may adde that Are∣opagite, Dionisius by name, of whom Luke in the Actes reporteth, that he was conuerted to the faith after that sermon of Paule, which he made in Mars street at Athens, and of whom an other Dionisi∣us, pastor of the Church at Corinth (a verie auncient writer) doth record, that he was the first Bishop of the Church at Athens. The same Eusebius in the same booke, the one & thirtie chapter, hath these wordes; And besides these, there were manie other of that age very famous, who both immediately succeeded the Apostles, and also as the Disciples of so great and excellent Mai∣sters, being adorned with many singular and diuine vertues, raised a most comely edifice vpon the the foundations of the Apostles, which they had well laid in all places: who both amplified more fully and plentifully the preaching of the Gospell, and sowed the seedes of the kingdome of heauen far and neare, throughout the vniuersall world. For all the Disciples for the most part, which liued in that age, being
inflamed with a more ardent Zeale and earnest loue of the heauen∣lie wisedome, and beeing rauished in minde with a rare kinde of de∣sire after Gods worde, executed verie exquisitely the commaunde∣ment of our Sauiour, which before was giuen; and to them which wanted their helpe they willingly vnfoulded all their treasures. Af∣terwards, straying farre from their owne home, they performed the pensions of Euangelists, and to those which had not as yet so much as heard of the word of faith, they laboured with all care and constan∣cie to preach Christ, and to deliuer the Scripture of the holy Gospell. Who, when as in diuers farre and foreine countries they had laide the foundations onely of the faith, and had ordained other Pastors, and committed the care to them of those which were newly brought to the faith, that they might be diligently trayned vp in the doctrine of Christ, themselues departed into other regions and countries, with the grace and power of God. For many wonderfull powers and miracles, by the helpe of the holy spirite, were done by them euen vn∣to that day: so that throngs of people beeing perswaded, euen at the first hearing of the Gospell preached, with readie wils enterteined and imbraced that religion and worshippe, which is onelie due vnto God, the author of all things. Thus farre Eusebius. I could alledge other particulars out of the same author, and others, of diuers Bishops, sent by diuers Churches, at diuers times, to conuert the Gentiles. In whome it was ne∣cessarie, that they should haue the like authority with that, which Titus & Timothie receiued of the Apostles. That some heere flie vnto their old starting hole of extraordinarie calling, when they are called vppon with these reasons; they haue small reason. For, an ordinarie Ministerie beeing established in the Church, it is as badly, as boldly done of them, and it will proue but an euill example to others, to alleadge an ex∣traordinary calling, vnlesse they could make some certaine profe thereof. Wherefore, if we would but a litle more attentiuely con∣ceiue and consider, what the state of the Churches was tho∣row out the world, when the Apostles departed from hence, wee should soone find that in many places they left well or∣dered Churches, in the which there was nothing a wanting,
that is, which had there one Bishop ouer them, (as were the seuen Churches of Asia, vnto whome the spirit of the Lorde speaketh in the Reuelation:) and again we should find some other Churches, as yet not finished and throughly fashio∣ned, which wanted many thinges to their perfection, some more, some lesse, according to the time, the place, the plen∣tie & scarcitie of the people, which had giuen their names to Christ. And besides all this, wee shall finde innumerable pla∣ces, whether the Apostles could not come, where were no Churches at all. But whatsoeuer, or of what manner soeuer they were, they were all dependant vppon the Apostles go∣uernment: whome if no man did succeede with like autho∣ritie, it must needes bee, that they were all left as widdowe Churches and Orphans; which is an absurd thing to say. But if wee shall say, that they chaunged that manner of go∣uernment, with the which they were acquainted vnder the Apostles: how could that possiblie bee permitted, without the great mischiefe and miserie of all those Churches? Of these things therefore I inferre, That there was left of the Apostles Authoritie Apostolike to their successors, whom they had disposed ouer many Churches: and that, partly for the establishing of such Churches as were throughly fi∣nished, and partly, for the finishing of such as were left not throughly formed, and partly also for the planting of newe, where as yet there was none founded. And this was the cause, why Paule beeing shortly to take his leaue of his life, sent Crescens into Galatia, and Titus into Dalmatia, and sent for Timothie and Marke to make their repaire vnto himselfe. Euen as the Lord himselfe, being now readie to giue vp this life, prouided for his Disciples; in like manner, the Apo∣stles tooke great care for those Churches, which were ga∣thered, and were to bee gathered from among the Gentiles; otherwise, how should the Churches haue receiued their so great increase after the Apostles? Verely, it is with teares to bee lamented, that their holy Apostolike zeale is at this day so cooled amongst vs, that no man so much as once thin∣keth of publishing the Gospell, vnto Nations altogether
estraunged from the faith of Christ. But now, seeing there were manie Churches lefte of the Apostles but newe begun, and more, not yet begun, accor∣ding to that power they had receyued of the Lord, the work of the Gentiles conuersion which was begun by them, was to be followed to the ende. Of the which it followeth, that the Apostolike power, giuen of the Lord for the edifiying of his Church, doth yet remaine in the Church. And those parts of Apostolike gouernment, as they were giuen of old to certain singular Bishops, so are they to be giuen at this day, where they are not giuen, and so are they to remaine, where they are giuen. If any man desire some reformation to bee had in that kind, for my part I am not against it. The disposing of this power, the Church hath, as it alwayes had; yet so, as where the Lord hath giuen a Christian Magistrate, hee bee not left out, nor loose his part. For they doubtlesse are those Seniors, Auncients and Elders, of the which there is so often mention in the Bible: whom we read to haue beene ioyned of old with the Priests and Leuites in weightie matters: for they are in stead of the whole people. That the authoritie of Bishops ouer Priests or Elders is appro∣ued by the consent of the Churches throughout the whole world. Chap. XX. THat which we read to be done of al Chur∣ches from the Apostles times, and of the Fathers throughout the compasse of the whole earth, and the same continued euen vnto these our daies, I do alwaies holde as a sacred Canon of the Apostles, not to bee repealed. Neyther is it a smal presumption to abrogate that, which hath beene receyued with so greate and vniuersall consent; from the which to reuolt, besides that it is in it selfe an vncouth declination of a conceit gid∣die
and head-strong, it will also bring with it a greater mis∣chiefe and misery to the Church, then many at the first will conceiue, or any in the end can releeue. Among the old Ca∣nons, which for their antiquity are called the Apostles, wee read this that followeth: It becommeth the Bishops of euery na∣tion to know, who is the chiefe among them, which is to bee accounted as it were the head, without whose opinion these ought to do nothing of any great moment, but that euerie man doe those things which be∣long vnto his owne parish, and the villages which are of the same. Neither let himselfe doe any thing without the knowledge of all: for so there shall be concord, and God shall be glorified through our Lord in his holy spirit. This Canon (a worde or two translated) is renued in the Councell of Antioch, in these wordes: The Bishops which are in seuerall prouinces ought to know, that he which is Bishop in the Metropolitane Cittie, hath charge also of the whole prouince, for that they which haue any businesse, recourse from all places to the Metropolis or mother Cittie. Wherefore it seemeth expedient, that hee excell the rest in honour, and that the other Bishops doe nothing of anie great moment without him (according to the auncient decree of our Fathers) but onely those things which pertaine vnto their owne precincts, & the Parishes subiect to the same. For let eue∣rie Bishop haue authoritie ouer his owne prouince, and let him go∣uerne the same according to his owne deuotion: and let him haue charge of the whole prouince which is subiect to his Cittie, that hee may create Priestes and Deacons, and dispose all things with iudg∣ment: besides this, let him doe no other thing without the Bishop of the mother Church, neyther hee himselfe without the opinion of the rest. In which Canon renewed and reestablished, I obserue two thinges: the first is, the Antiquitie of the Canon; the other is, That the prouince was not alwaies committed to the Bishop of the Metropolitane Cittie; seeing a cause is ad∣ded, why Ecclesiasticall controuersies are to be presented to the Bishop of the Metropolitane Cittie, rather then to any other: of the which seeing the Apostles Canon made no mention, the first Fathers seemed not alwaies to haue had that respect of the said Metropolis.
The antiquitie of this custome, is sufficiently declared in the seuenteenth chapter of the Nicene councel, as followeth: Let the auncient custome preuaile, which was in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolie, that the Bishops of Alexandria haue an excellency & supreme dignitie ouer all these: Seeing that this is also the custome with the Bishop of Rome. In like manner, at Antioch, and in other Prouinces, primacie, dignitie, honor, authoritie, is giuen vnto those Churches. But this is most plaine: that if any man he made a Bishop, without the consent of the Metropolitane, The great Councell defi∣neth, that he ought not to be a Bishop. Thus goeth the Law, nei∣ther were it anye great matter to confirm the same, with the Canons of other Councels, and Ecclesiasticall histories. But by this it may appeare, what was the iudgement of all those auncient fathers concerning this matter. That some are of opinion, that Patriarches and Archbi∣shops were first created of the Nicene councell, or (as some will haue it) of the first Constantinopolitane Councell; their opinion is their errour: for the Nicene councell, which was called about the twentie yeare of Constantine the great, te∣stifieth, that it enacteth no new thing, when it commaun∣ded, that the olde custome should bee continued: so that, it was no new thing at that time, for some one Bishop to haue superiour authority ouer the rest of his brethren, his autho∣ritie being limited by certaine lawes. But that some argue, how that to be president ouer diuers Prouinces, & to haue charge of them, belongeth to the office of an Apostle, and an Euangelist; and that one and the same man cannot bee an Apostle and an Euangelist and a Bishoppe, for that these are distinct offices: I may answere them, that neuer yet any before these our daies, did euer either so think, or write. The Fathers haue testified in their writinges, what they receiued of their fore-fathers, that Iames an Apostle was ordained of the rest, Bishoppe of Ierusalem. The which thing also see∣meth to haue bene done vpon iust and necessarie occasion: namely, for the necessary good of the Church. For when as that was the mother of all other churches, & that the Iews resorted thither out of al the parts of the world, it ought not
but to haue an Apostle resiant among thē, so long as might be: who might resolue the brethren in such doubtes, as were likely to arise among them. Although indeede, to pilgrime through diuers regions, & to preach the gospel, is most pro∣perly appertaining to the office of an Apostle: so that they may not abide in one place, but where necessitie requireth. As therefore the Apostles discharged the duty of a Bishop when as they took vpon them the particuler charge of some on special church (namely, when the necessity of the church vniuersall did so require,) neither did thinke they did anye thing therin; contrarie to their Apostolik calling, so likewse if that which wholy pertaineth to the Apostles, be cōmitted to the Bishops, it need not seme a thing either vnreasonable, or not profitable, when the good order of church gouerne∣ment doth require the same. But whereas the Canon sayth, that we should keepe the old custome, not the Lords institu∣tion: it may seme that the power of Patriarks, crept into the church of a contrarie custome, rather then of any diuine in∣stitution. I answere, that the canon doth not gaine-say, that the power Apostolique in church-gouernment was not left vnto the church, of the Apostles: but that, besides or aboue the rest, these or they, shuld inioy it (as namely he of Antioch Alexandria, Ierusalem, & Rome,) that indeed was of the mere custome, and at the sole disposition of the church. For those particular Bishops did not receiue their Apostolique power immediatly from GOD, as did the Apostles, but from the church and by the church; the which as it is not restrained to any certaine situate places or persons, citties, or Bishops: so neither is the autority Apostolik. Who doubteth but that the Nicen coūcell, or any other like to that, might haue transla∣ted the Patriarkie of the Romain BB. to some other place, & haue giuen it to the BB. of Rauenna, or of Aquiline, for good cause, if their had bene any? The like I say of the Patriarks of Antioch and Alexandria. But that the councels of Bishops had this authority, they declared then sufficiently, when as they made him of Constantinople com-peer in all things with him of Rome. By the which also it may euidently apeare, that
the prerogatiue of the power Apostolique, was not giuen by succession, but as it was best befitting the commodity of the church, by those especial cities. And therfore, in that the Ca∣non giueth that to custome, it doth not therby take from it the diuine institution. But that I may return to the next succes∣sors of the Apostles and Euangelists, Titus and Timothy, and the rest whom sacred writ recordeth, were ioyned with the Apostles as assistants, that they were Bishops, & had charge of many churches, the most ancient and authentike traditi∣on approoueth the same: neither are those thinges so far at variance betweene themselues, as some would haue them, to be a Bishop, & to do the worke of an Apostle, or an Euangelist. For this is the common consent of all the fathers, that the office of a Bishop, and an Apostle or Euangelist are all one, onely that the office of the one is more ample, and augustious. Cy∣prian in his 10. epistle writeth thus. The Deacons ought to re∣member, the Lord himself did chuse Apostles, that is Bishops & Pre∣lats: but the Apostles themselues ordeined them Deacons, after hee was receiued vp into heauen. Thus saith Cyprian; out of whose words we may learne, that a Bishoprick is an Apostleship, as al∣so an Apostleship is a kind of bishopricke. Herevpon the Apostle Peter in the Acts, calleth the Apostleship of Iudas a bishopricke. And in like maner speaketh Augustine. For no man is ignorant (saith he) that our Sauior ordeined bishops in the church. For before he ascended into heuen, he layd his hands vpon his Apostles, & made them bisheps. And Ambrose vpon that in the 4. to the Ephesians, some were giuen to the church Apostles: writeth thus. The Apostles are BB. but the Prophets are expounders of the scriptures, which may now be called Priests. For in a BB all the orders are contained, becaus he is first a priest, who is chiefe of ths priests, and a Prophet, & an E∣uangelist, to the furnishing of the rest of the offices of the church. The∣odoret also vpō the 1. to Tim. cap. 3. saith thus. Of old they called the same men Priests and BB. but those that are now called BB. they then called Apostles: but long since, they left the name of Apostles, to thē which were indeed apostles: but the additiō of BB. they imposed vpon such, as of old were called Apostles: so was Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philip, & so Titus of the Cretensians, & Timothy of Asia. All the fathers which succeeded the Apostles, were not
of opinion, that the forme of gouernement they had recei∣ued of the Apostles, should euer haue bene altered or exau∣terate: the which verelye they could neuer haue perswaded themselues, had they knowen, that the gouernement of Ti∣tus and Timothie, had bene but Temporarie, and Extraordina∣rie. But is it credible, nay is it possible, that Timothie & Ti∣tus, and others, vnto whome the like prouince was demised, should be ignoraunt of this themselues? Augustine expoun∣ding that in the 44. Psalme, Instead of thy Fathers, thou shalt haue children, sheweth that our Bishoppes inherited the Apo∣stles, as children their fathers. And were it not a point of frontles and vngracious in solencie to deny, that our fathers had their Bishops and Prelats, euen from the Apostles times, and a part of needles and superfluous diligence, to proue a thing so manifest: I might easilie, and would willingly staie vpon the citing & summoning of many more fathers, vntil we were fully compassed with a cloud of witnesses. But this is not the question: but rather it is nowe doubted, whether the ordinance of Bishops bee of God, or of men, as an order that slipt into the church, rather of humaine custome, then diuine cōstitution. Wherfore of things confessed & granted, let vs decide and determin things doubted and in question. That Bishops are ordained by a diuine institution and Apo∣lique tradition. Chap. XXI. THere is nothing more certaine, then this, That the Apostles ordained nothing in the Church, which they receiued not of the Lord. But they created Bishops, (as Titus and Timothie) wheresoeuer need was in the Church. And indeed, had not the Apostles created Bishops, as they dispersed themselues thorough out the whole worlde, how could euer the calling of Bishoppes haue bene so vniuersallie approoued by so general an assent of all citties?
But when as many Churches were infinitely distant from o∣thers, is it not straunge, that not any one Church retayned that diuine kinde, of gouernement (as it is thought) which is adored at this day in some reformed Churches? Doubtles, Churches so diuerse and distant, could not but greatly dif∣fer in things indifferent, where there was no certaynty sette downe by the Apostles. And therefore this could not bee without a miracle of eyther part: Namely, that eyther they should so vniuersally consort in this one gouernement, if it were not receiued by tradition frō the Apostles, or that with so generall a consent they should alter the same, if it were. For all the world knoweth, that in all the world the gouern∣ment was one, and the same for all the world. This is without question and beyond all exception, that all the auncient autentike fathers, (so many as held the right faith) were of this beliefe, that in this onely plot, they did follow the Apostolique tradition, and diuine institution. Ireneus in his thirde booke the third Chapter, against Heresies, writeth thus. It is easie for all men to see (that will see the truth) the auncient tradition of the Apostles in the Church, through the whole worlde: and we can recken vp those which were ordayned Bi∣shops of the Apostles themselues, and theyr successors also euen vnto our selues, which neyther taught, nor knew any such thing as these men doate of. Out of the which it appeareth: That, what thing was receyued in al Churches, which were founded of the Apostles, was an Apostolique tradition, and diuine institu∣tion, but the order of Bishops was receyued euery where in all Churches, and therefore an Apostolique tradition and a diuine institution. Ciprian in his fourth booke the ninth Epistle. From whence (sayth he) are scismes bred, and yet do breed, but where the Bishop which is one and ouer the Church, is condem∣ned by the proud presumption of some, and the man which is honored by the acceptance of God, is dishonored by dishonest men. &c. The same Ciprian in his seuen and twenty Epistle (according to the order of his Epistle) citing that of Mathews, Thou art Peter & vpon this work &c. he inferreth, That euē frō thence, according to the course of time and succession of ages, the
ordination of Bishops, & the computation of the Church doth run? So that the Church may seeme to be grounded vppon Bishops, and euery action of the Church to be gouerned by the same Presidents. Wherefore seeing this is thus founded vpon the diuine ordinance of God, I cā but wonder at som. That it was the opinion of Aerius, That there is no diffe∣rence betweene a Bishop and a Priest: which was condemned for an Heresie by the Fathers. Chap. XII. THus haue we heard of the acceptance of God, & the diuine ordinance, vpon which the authority of Bi∣shops relied, as our Fathers beleeued. To the which I now adde, that had not the orthodoctike fathers belie∣ued, that the order of Bishops was grounded vpon the word of God, they would neuer haue recounted the opinion of Aerius, among other Heresies: Who three hundred yeares long after the Apostles times, was the first that durst affirm, That there was no difference between the holy Bishop, and an ordi∣nary Priest. Of whom Epiphanius recordeth, that hee spake more like a fury, then a man; who (as hee also reporteth) was wont to say, VVhat is a Bishop to a Priest? there is no diffe∣rence betweene them: for there is but one order, and one honor, and one dignity. The Bishop layeth on his hands, the Bishop sitteth on his throne, so likewise doth the Priest. Thus sayth Aerius. But of the other side, Epiphanius first sheweth, That a Bishop may create Priestes, and that he cannot be created of Priests. The or∣der of Bishops (sayth he) is the begetter of Fathers, for be begetteth Fathers vnto the Church; but the order of Priests cannot beget Fa∣thers: by the regeneration of Baptisme it begetteth children to the Church, but not Fathers, or Teachers: For how shoulde he create a Priest, who hath not the power of laying on of hands in the election? And he aunswereth Aerius for his cauels, That his trifling & emulation deceiued him, and that he was ignoraunt of the nature of antique histories. For that when the preaching of the word was but a new thing, the holy Apostle writ according to the state of the thing, as it then stoode. And therefore where there were
Bishops appoynted, he wrote to Bishops and Deacons: (neyther could the Apostles doe all at once. But they had present vse of Priests & Deacons: For by those two all Ecclesiasticall functions are to be per∣formed) But where there were not any found worthy a Bishopricke, there the place was voyd of a Bishop, but where neede was, and there were that were worthy, there they placed Bishops. But where as ther were not many, there were not many to be found among them to be made Priests, and therfore they contented themselues with a Bishop onely in that place: But it is not possible, that a Bishop shoulde bee without a Deacon and the Apostle had an especiall care of that, that he should not be without his Deacons. And thus the Church recey∣ued the fulnes of his functions, according as the conditiō of time and place did require. For euery thing was not furnished with all things at the first: but in processe of time, such things were prouided as were requisite to the performance of things necessary, &c. These things he confirmeth by the example of Moyses, who finished hys common wealth, not all at once, but after a time. But as of old, he should haue taken a wrong course, who to reform the Churche of Israell, would haue taken his patterne from the imperfect, and not composed state thereof: So likewise at this day, they maintayn but too foul an error, that would bring the state of a Church well growen in yeares, backe a∣gaine to the swathling clouts. And therefore Epiphanius very well inferreth thus: So likewise (sayth he) are those things which are written in the Apostle, vntill the Church be enlarged, vntill it come to her ripe years, vntil it be most perfectly preyzed with the or-nature of wisedome, by the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Epiphanius perceyued that there were many things wanting, and that al things were not in theyr perfect temper, & that after a time, one and the same man was not both Priest and Bishop, as it well appeared by that which Saint Paul writ to Timothy, who was a Bishop: Against a Priest or Elder receiue no accusation with∣out two or three witnesses: He sayd not to any Elder; receyue no accusation against a Bishop, &c. Augustine in like manner, mightily confirmeth this the censure and sentence of Epipha∣nius, who also mustereth this error of Aerius among the mid-ranke of olde confused Heresies.
Hierom his opinion confuted. Chap. XXII. THat which is obiected out of Hierome, vppon the first Chapter of the Epistle to Titus, namely, that Bishops are greater then Priests, rather by the custome of men, then the constitution of God &c. I aun∣swere: that it was the priuate opinion of Hierome, consenting with Aerius, dissenting from the worde of God. Wherefore we are now diligently to examin his reasons, for that his assertion, least wee might seeme without cause to haue forsaken him. These therefore are his wordes: Before that (through the instigation of Satan) there were parts taking in the Church, and the people sayd, I holde of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas, the Chur∣ches were gouerned by the common consent of Eldres: but after that once euery man thought those that he baptised, were his owne, and not Christs: it was decreede throughout the whole worlde, that one chosen from among the Priests should be placed ouer the rest, vnto whome the whole care of the Church should appertaine, and by whom al occasion of Scisme should be taken away, &c. That here he saith, how that at the beginning, the Churches were gouerned by the common counsell of the Elders: I will not greatly stand with him: and yet that proueth not, that the Bishops were not afterwards preferred by the Lord his institution. For then might we not as well say and with as good reason; that the Elders thēselues, and the Doctors which the Apostles crea∣ted, were not according to the Lord his institution, because at the first the Church was gouerned of the Apostles with∣out Elders or Deacons, when as yet there were neyther Elders nor Deacons. But that the Apostles themselues gouerned the Churches by themselues (and some other theyr coadiutors) before there were any Elders, there is no man but knoweth,
or may learne to know out of the Epistle to Titus. And like∣wise, whosoeuer is of any iudgement (or hath not his iudge∣ment blinded) may easely gather of the thing it selfe, that in those beginnings, while yet the Churches might bee visited euer and anone of the Apostles themselues, and theyr asso∣ciats, so long it was not needeful they should annoint any o∣ther Bishops ouer the Churches; the Elders might serue the turne: Who also (so long as there were no other besides the Apostles) might likewise be called Bishops. So also I confesse, that there was a time, when the Churches were gouerned by the common counsell of the people, as in Creete (before the cre∣ation of Elders) and at Corinth, and at Rome: which after∣wards hauing theyr Elders (as at Philipos and at Ephesus) were then ruled by their more sacred counsel; but yet vnder the care and ouersight of the Apostles and Euangelists. Wherfore hi∣therto it followeth not of all this, that rhe Apostles (as God afforded able men) did not prefer ouer seueral Churches se∣uerall Bishops, & them ouer the other Elders; that they suc∣ceeding in place of the Apostles, might performe those very same things, which the Apostles them selues would, if they could eyther haue liued alwayes, or haue been euery where resident. But in deede, what need had they of Bishops, so lōg as the Apostles themselues discharged the duty of Bishops? And yet when as in the whole world, the number of Chur∣ches did daily increase, so that the Apostles could not stay in one place, nor goe to all places: of force (and as soone as neede was) they created Bishops, vnto whome they commit∣ted that charge (as were Titus and Timothy and many other) no doubt with the same power, and according to the same diuine institution of God, by the which before they crea∣ted Elders. But that Hierom saith, how that Bishops became greater then Elders, of custome rather then of any diuine institution; it hath no semblaunce of truth. Which challenge I make good vppon him, first from the time, when he saith this custome began. Before (sayth he) through the instigation of the diuell they began to make sects in the Church, aad it was sayd among the people;
I holde of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas, the Churches were ru∣led by the common counsell of Elders, &c. But now those facti∣ons began vnder the Apostles; and therefore, that custome began in good time, and the Apostles themselues for the a∣uoyding of scisme altered (if not abrogated) the Lord his in∣stitution. The which (me thinks) were more then absurde to say. Our Sauiour no doubt, who is the wisedome of his fa∣ther, knew much better then the Apostles, what was need∣full and commodious for the preuenting of scisme. Whome as it did not beseeme, to seeme more wise then their master; so was it not theyr partes, for the default of one Church, to alter Gods institution. Againe how knewe Hierome, that before those scismes brake foorth, the Church of Co∣rinth had theyr Elders, by whose councell they were ruled? It is more likely by Paul his Epistles (all circumstances con∣sidered) that they had as then none especiall and peculiar Elders. If any man come in and say, that these thinges happe∣ned after the Apostles time, and that Hierome did not so much respect the Church of Corinth, as diuerse others (and therefore speaketh not of Corinth, but of the people) who were fallen into diuerse scismes; I come vppon him againe, and tell him, it is not enough for him to say so, but it must bee proued out of approued Histories, what those scisms were, and how, and where, and when they began; and how from that time, this foresayd custome began. We read in the Reuelation of seuen Angels, the Prelates of seuen Chur∣ches, of the which one was Ephesus, the which (as it is mani∣fest) had many Bishops before that time (as were also at Phi∣lippos) all which, as I haue shewed, were Elders also. I say therefore, that in the originall of the Church, there was a time, when they had nor Elders, nor Bishops, besides the Apostles themselues, the Euangelists and theyr fellow-la∣borers: (as in Creete) (for the beginnings of all were alike.) Shall wee therefore say, that those Elders were set ouer the Church of custome, not of any diuine constitution, because the Churches at the first, vnder the Apostles gouerned thē∣selues
without Elders? or, that after they had abused that their popular kinde of gouernaunce, that thereuppon the gouernment was committed to the councell of Elders, of custome? Moreouer if this argument were good, we might argue in like manner, against the institution of Deacons, and say they were not ordained according to any diuine institution, be∣cause that in the beginning there were none of that order: namely, so long as the faithful were of one hart, & one soule, and no man said, the things he possessed were his owne: but after that through the instigation of Satan, the Greeks began to mutiny against the Hebrews: For the auoiding of contention there were some chosen to be Deacons among them: So ther∣fore ordained of custome, not of any diuine institution; the which how wekely it followeth, hee is but a weke man that cannot well iudge. For albeit the Apostles alledge som other secundary causes, yet (it is most certaine) the creation of Deacons did chieffy begin of that: And therefore I say in like manner, that albeit I should confesse, that the first occa∣sion of creating one Bishop, ouer & aboue the rest of the El∣ders, was by reason of scisme, notwithstanding it therfore fol∣loweth not that it was done for that cause onely, or that it was not done of any diuine institution. But the occasion of creation of Bishops alledged by Hierom, is a coniecture but too vncertain, & groūded vpon no likelihood of reasō; that for the offence of one Church, the Apostles (contrary to the Lord his institution) should place one Bishop ouer al the Chur∣ches, which had not offended, & that throughout the whole world: This were very hard. Neyther doe wee read at any time, that the Elders of the Church of Corinth, gaue the oc∣casion of this scisme, but that it was taken of the people by reason of that opinion they had of their Pastors and Elders, by whome they were eyther baptized, or brought to the faith. But for men to swell in the vanity of theyr humors, with an ouer-prised conceyt of theyr Teachers, as also of theyr parents, and place of theyr nauity and such like sin∣gularities, it is (as you know) an ordinary thing among men.
And yet they, for whose sake this scisme was set abroache at Corinth, were not at Corinth, so that, for the auoyding of this scisme, the Elders which were to be set in som better or∣der vnder one Bishop, were Paul himselfe, & Apollos and Ce∣phas, and such disordered fellowes, by whome the people were drawen to such a singularity. Without doubt, me thinks this was a vayne motion, and an idle conceite of Hierome, as is also that which he ad∣deth of a decree made throughout the whole world. Good now, let me aske him this question: When, or of whom that decree could be made? or at least wise how, or by what possi∣ble means so generall a consent could be obtained, agaynst the will of the Lorde in the first ordinaunce of Elders. For presently in all the Churches throughout the whole worlde, Bishops were aboue Elders, both in honour and authority: That blessed Paul would change the Lord his own instituti∣tutiō; or if he would, that he could, it is not likely. The other Apostles, dispersed throughout diuers regions, were igno∣rant of those thinges which were done at Corinth, so that they cannot be suspected to haue giuen theyr voyces to the ratifying of this decree. But that we may imagin, that this scisme at Corinth came to theyr knowledge at the length; & that, after some miraculous manner they all met together from diuerse foreine and the farthest partes in the worlde (I say) to imagin all this; yet can any man euer imagine, that for the auoyding of this one scisme, they all would conspire together for the ouerthrow of the Lord his owne institutiō? And much lesse could this be done after the Apostles time, that all Churches should assemble and consent, to alter and exautorate that which was both ordayned of the Lord, and deliuered of the Apostles: At the least some of them would haue still receyued the first institution. But of the antiquity of this custome, we will call Hierome himselfe for a witnes: and we shall finde him, not onely in this place, but also in his Epistle to Euagrius. At Alexandria (sayth he) euen to Heraclas & Dionisius, Bishops, the Elders chose one from among themselues, and placed him in a higher degree, and
named him their Bishop: In like manner, as if an armie should name them an Emperour. And yet by the way, I would not the peo∣ple should here be deceaued, & thinke by these words of Hie∣rome, that the Elders alwaies placed one of their owne compa∣nie ouer them. There are innumerable examples, where the Elders being discarded, the people and the cleargie, haue e∣lected either Deacons, or some others, which were not repu∣ted among the cleargie. By the which also it may appeare, that the churches were not acquainted at all with that gene∣rall decree, or that they had any such regard therof in their elections of Bishops, that they must alwaies choose from a∣mong their Elders, their ordinarie Bishop. Yet be it so: and let vs yeeld thus much to Hierome, that there was such a de∣cree made: then must wee needes say, that either they made the same, contrary vnto the Lord his institution, and so wee must also say, that al those fathers, & al their councels shame∣fully erred, (which wee cannot saye they did in anye other thing, and we haue shewed they could not do in this) or els we must say, that they made it in a thing indifferent, neither with the institution of God, nor against it, but in the meere power and sole disposing of them, from whome it procee∣ded: And then what are we, (sillie men) that we should once dare to condemne that decree, vnto the which all Christen∣dome did condescend? Wherefore, (as before) I now againe inferre, that this censure was but the priuate conceit of Hie∣rome, repugnaunt to the generall iudgement of all the fa∣thers, which either went before him, or liued after him. And therefore, when as he knew full wel, that it would be obiec∣ted against him, that this was but his bare censure, not the sentence of the holy Scripture, he assaieth to make good the same with scripture, and therupon he first pawneth Paul his Epistle to the Philippians, in the which hee greeteth the By∣shops & Deacons of that church: as also the 20. of the Acts, and the 1. of Titus, where they which were Elders, are called Bishops. To the which places, before I make any further an∣swer, it shal not be amisse to heare what Theodoret saith of this matter: he expounding this place of Paul, writeth thus: they
call Bishops, Elders, for that at that time, they had hoth the names, as it well appeareth in the 20. of the Acts, and the 1. to Titus. For with Bishops he ioyneth Deacons, when he had made no mention of el∣ders: neither could it otherwise be, that there should he many Bishops the Pastors of one citty: by which means it commeth to passe, that they were the Elders of one cittie, whom he calleth Bishops. But in this E∣pistle hee calleth the blessed Epaphrodite then Apostle, for hee saith, your Apostle and my companion in labour. So that he manifestly sheweth, that he had the dispensation of a Bishop committed to him, when he had the denomination of an Apostle. Thus much Theodoret Now you shal vnderstand, that the error of Hierom and Ae∣rius, grew of the not different and confused vse of these titles, (a Bishop and an Elder) as they were then in vse. But when as the same thing befalleth the title of an Apostle also: is it not strange, that they should rather erre in the one, then the other? For where as Barnabas, Epaphroditus, and manie o∣thers are called Apostles; yet no man thereby euer thought, that there was no difference betweene them and the twelue Apostles: but because the history of the calling of the twelue Apostles, (and those other, which were likewise called Apo∣stles,) is better knowen vnto them, and more familiar with them, then is that of the Elders and Bishops, (so commonlie called:) therefore this whole matter seemeth inuolued in more darke and thicke mistes of obscuritie, vnto such as are not expert in searching out hidden and vnknowen histories in the acts and monuments of the Apostles? For by reason of the interchangeable communitie of names, they think not that there is any difference, (or conceiue not what it is) be∣tween those distinct persons, which are called by names not distinct. As for exemple, this name (Apostle) would haue deceiued him fowly, that should haue gone about to haue e∣qualed all of this name with the twelue Apostles; & so stands the case also with the name of Bishops, for that it is in dan∣ger to deceiue (if it doe not daungerouslly deceiue) those, which indistinctly apply that one name, to the two degrees of Elders. Wherfore they must know, that the same name is not alwaies of the same nature, and many times one word is
significant as well for the general, as the particuler. And this must we conceiue of this word Elder, that in the capacity of his signification are indifferently intertained all degrees of Pastors, so that the Apostles themselues may generally be cal¦led Elders, when as properly the lowest degree of Pastors is best knowen, and most fitly called by that name. Besides all this, there is in many wordes an Etimology, or proper inter∣pretation, according to the which also it so falleth out, that many times, diuerse names haue the same vse: by which meanes, not onely Elders, but Apostles also may be deriued into the same name of Bishops. This may very easily bee ex∣emplified in ciuill things and names, where we may wel per∣ceiue the like vse of no lesse titles, (as Dukes, Earles, Knights, Lordes and Barons:) all which titles are giuen to many, which differ much in honour and dignitie: neither is it any new or insolent thing, for one mightie King to haue many meaner Kinges vnder him of his name, but not of his power. The like wee may say of Dukes, who haue also vnder them other Dukes, of whome they receiue due fealtie and homage: and some Earls also, (as the Count Palatine, of Rhene, & Flanders) are Lords also ouer other Earles. What should I speake of Knights, Lords, & Barons, which vnder the same titles, haue not the same tipe of honor or autority. He would be laugh∣ed to scorne of very children for his labour, that should in∣ferre an equality of their callings, from the qualitie of that they are called. I, but (will some say,) there is not that rea∣son of the Ecclesiasticke ministerie, and the ciuill policy. I al∣so tell them, that I doe not compare office with office, but name with name: that all the world may see, how childish a reason it is, for the community of names and titles, to take away the diuersity of things & persons. Albeit there be some new writers of this age, who hold opinion, that the presiden¦cy of on ouer many elders, is to be abolished, as a thing that hath preuailed in the church of custom, & vpon the curtesie of mē only, & that against the groūded verity of gods sacred constitution; yet for al that, the vniuersal consent of alchur∣ches in the world, consorting with gods word, shal further
with me, then the opinion male-content of the heretik Aerius, or the misconceited iudgement of Hierome alone, ha∣uing lost himselfe in the ambiguity of doutful words, & not foūd out the antiquity of the first age of the church. For this is manifest out of the word of God, that in the time of Iohn the Apostle, those 7. Cathedral Churches of Asia had their seuen Bishops, and they imposed ouer them by a certaine di∣uine, not any humaine ordinaunce. For when as the holie Ghost there conceileth nothing, in the which, either the An∣gels themselues, or they which were vnder there gouerne∣ment, had offended: he would neuer haue passed ouer with∣out iust reprehension so insolent and ambitious an inno∣uation, (for so it seemeth vnto some) as then but newly sub∣borned, and boldly brought forth into the church of God, and that confronting the flat ordinaunce of God himselfe. No doubt, those so famous and renowmed Churches had many Elders, and happely a colledge of Elders: and yet the defaults of those churches, were not laid vppon the many Elders, but hee calleth vpon the seuerall and principall El∣der of euery particular church: whose autority in the church gouernment, vnlesse it had bene somewhat more then ordi∣narie, they alone should neuer haue borne the blame of that function not well performed. A certaine writer of this age goeth about to defend, or at least to excuse this heresie, (or error if you had so rather) of Aerius: but his reasons with the which hee would doe it are so slanderous, scandalous, and reprochfull against the councels, and against the fathers, as of truth I am altogether ashamed of them. Aerius, like a good honest fellowe, is ex∣cused, & the fathers (poore soules) or openly accused of no small faults, ambition and tyranny: who seeing he bringeth nothing woorth any thing, besides that we haue before tou∣ched out of Hierome, I will not vouchsafe his cauils the con∣futing. How much more christian-like, & modestly hath that most famous man, and thrise reuerend father Zanchius, (ne∣uer sufficiently renowmed for his rare learning and religi∣on) how much more like a good christian, hath he written
in his Confession, what hee thought concerning the contro∣uersie? These are his wordes: My faith is grounded chiefly and simply vpon the word of God, and then somewhat also vpon the com∣mon consent of the whole Catholike Church; if so bee it repugne not the sacred writ. For I doe beleeue, that what things were concluded and receiued of the holie Fathers, assembled in the name of the Lord, by a common consent of all, without anie contradiction to the holie scriptures, that those things also (althogh not of like authoritie with the scripture) are of the holy Ghost. Hence it commeth, that what∣soeuer things are of this sort, I nor will, nor dare with a safe consci∣ence disallow them. But what one thing is more certaine, out of histo∣ries, out of Councels, out of the writings of all the Fathers, then that those orders of Ministers (of the which we haue spoken) were recey∣ued and established in the Church by the common consent of the whole Christian common-wealth? And who am I, that what the whole Church hath allowed, I alone should disallowe? Neither yet haue all the learned men of our time dared to disallow them, for that indeed they knew, that both these things were lawfull in the Church, also that they all were ordeined and performed of a godly religion, and to good ends, for the good of the elect. Besides that, reason was, I should haue regard of those Churches also, the which although they haue imbraced the Gospell, yet they retaine their Bishops, both in deed and name. And what shall wee say of the Churches of the Protestants also, where they want not their Bishops and Arch-bi∣shops in deed, whom (hauing cast their good Greeke names, into bad Latine) they call Superintendentes, and generall Superintendentes? But where also, nor those good old Greeke, nor these bad Latin names are in vse, there notwithstanding are commonly certaine priuate & especial men, in whose hands, in a maner, is all the authoritie. Wher∣fore now the controuersie is concerning names; but seeing we doe a∣gree in deed, what doe we contend about names? In the mean while, as I haue not disalowed the Fathers in this matter which is nowe in question; so also I cannot but loue the zeale of our brethren, who therefore were out of loue with those names, because they feared, least with the olde names, the olde ambition also and tyrannie should bee called in againe, to the ruine of Churches. Thus grauely diuineth that reuerend olde Zanchius: with whom I could ioyne ma∣nie
more testimonies (if it were needfull) of the best writers of our time, to confirme this matter: who are either who∣lie of our opinion, or very sparingly of the contrary. But for this time lonely Zanchius shal stand for the rest, least I should ouercharge this smal volume with a multitude of witnesses Of one Bishop in one Diocesse. Chap. XXIIII. NOw that we haue proued that gouerne∣ment of the Church to be of God, in the which Pastors are subiect to Pastors, and Elders suppliant to their Bishops: we are in the sequele of this our discourse, to see and examine, Whether one Church or di∣ocesse is not capiable of two or more Bishops, at the same time, of the same tipe and authoritie. True it is, that the Church of Hierusalem had the twelue A∣postles, the seuentie two Disciples, with the Prophets, their Bishops: neither are examples wanting of diuers churches, which haue had ioyntly together diuers Bishops. Epiphanius writing against the Arrian heresie, falling into some menti∣on of the Church of Alexandria, seemeth to intimate thus much; That in that age there was this custome in diuers Churches, that they might haue two Bishops at once, when as notwithstanding in the church of Alexandria, he affirmeth there was no such custome. To the which, I thus answer: First, that the twelue Apo∣stles, & the rest, remained at Hierusalem for a certaine time, but they were appointed Bishops & Teachers, not for that one Cittie onely, but for the whole world. Now for the cu∣stome of certaine Citties, which at one time had their two bi∣shops; what manner custome that was, how rare & extraordi∣narie it was, we may sufficiently learne by that one election of Augustine, who was made Bishop, while Valerius Bishop of Hippon yet liued. The which thing was done, as extraor∣dinarie, so contrary to the decree of the Nicene councel. But what rule so general, that suffereth no exception? It is no sin
I confesse, for one Church to haue many Pastors of equall power, but whether it be conuenient it should bee so, expe∣rience will teach. Indeed of old, the Bishops being of great yeares, sometimes would name their successor, and assume a fellow-laborer in office with them, and that, partly to pre∣uent the tumults which commonly infested their elections: and partly also, because sometimes the Bishops being disa∣bled by age & sicknes, were not sufficing to discharge their duties in their owne persons: for which cause it was lawfull for the new Elect to supply the aged his place, & sit together in the same chaire. As for Valerius the Bishop of Hippon, hee beeing moued thereunto by the example of foreine Chur∣ches, got Augustine with much adoe to be ioyned with him: but how vnwillingly hee vndertooke that place, albeit hee were importuned therunto, as well by the praiers, as by the presidents of others, he expressely testifieth in his 110. Epi∣stle; Wherein are reported what things were done at the as∣signement of Eradius Priest, to succeede Augustine in his Bi∣shoprike, as they were taken by the notarie, the people con∣senting and confirming the same: to whom hee thus speak∣eth: I know that you know (saith he) Eradius to be a fit man, and worthy of a bishoprike, but I would not there should bee that done by him, that was done to me: but what was done your selues can many of you witnes: they onely cannot tel, which either were not as then born, or as yet had not the capacitie to know. While as yet my Father and bishop, Valerius of famous memory liued in the flesh, I was ordeined then bishop, and I sate together with him, the which thing I then knew not that it was inhibited by the Councel of Nice, neither did he know. Wherefore, that which was reprehended in me, I would not should be reprehended in my sonne. And thus saith Augustine. Gregorie Nazianzen in an epistle to Gregorie Nyssen, writeth of this custome in these wordes: But if anie man contend, that whilest one Bishop is liuing, an other ought to bee elected, let him knowe that these thinges are of no force against vs. For it is manifest and apparant vnto all the worlde, that wee are president, not onelie at Naziantz, but also at Sosrie, and that (setting apart the reuerence of our auncient Fathers and graue Doctors,
and those that laboured the same of vs with their vrgent prayers) we tooke vpon vs that presidencie as straungers. Thus saith Nazi∣anzene. By the which we may vnderstand, how insolent and extraordinarie a thing it was, that one Church should haue two Bishops. Epiphanius also made some small mention of this custome, that he might shew the cause, why Athanasius did not immediately succeed Alexander, seeing hee was de∣puted thereunto by Alexander; namely, for that the cu∣stome of the Church of Alexandria did not permit, that hee should be chosen Bishop, while their Bishop yet liued. Most true it is indeed, that both the Bishops and the people were perswaded of this, That one Church did admit but one Bi∣shop: when it was otherwise, Necessitie which hath no lawe did excuse it. When Constantius, at the request of certaine noble Matrons, had called Bishop Liberius from exile, and would haue had him to gouerne the Church of Rome to∣gether with Foelix, who was then surrogate and substitute in his place: the people hearing the Emperours letters, and scorning the contents, thundred together with one voice; One God, one Christ, and one Bishop. Cyprian also writing of the lawfull election of Cornelius: Seeing that after the first (saith he) there cannot bee a second; whosoeuer is made after one (who ought to be one and alone) he is now no more second, but none at all. like manner Ignatius, who was in the age before Cyprian, and is accounted the second, or third Bishop of Antioch, after the Apostles; reducing the gifts of the onely one God, to an vnitie in the Church, writeth thus; There is one flesh of the Lord Iesus, one bloud that was shed for vs, also one bread which is broken to vs all, and one cuppe which is giuen to vs all, there is one Altar for the whole Church, and there is one bishop with the com∣panie of Elders. The Fathers reason was this: because God would (whose will is a law to vs) that there should bee but one high Peiest in the old Testament: with whome (so long as he liued) no o∣ther might bee surcharged: vnlesse haplie hee had defiled himselfe with anie notorious crime, or by chaunce had fal∣len into some vncleane disease, which might make him ey∣ther
vnapt, or vnable to perform his sacred dutie. The which although it contained in it a secrete mysterie, of the which the Church at this day retaineth no present memorie: yet the policie of this mysterie (which by no meanes is to be di∣uorsed from it) ought not to be controlled of any that pro∣fesse Christianitie. If anie man heere suppose, that by this reason the tyran∣nie of the Bishop of Rome may bee maintained: to him I say, that he taketh the matter amisse: For there is great ods betweene a pastoral prefecture ouer one region, and an em∣periall prerogatiue ouer the whole world. So ample and au∣gustious is that his supreme empire and superlatiue degree in the Church, as that it dilateth it selfe ouer all Christian churches wheresoeuer, throughout the whole world; but was the whole world at anie time demised to anie one Apo∣stle? Peter had the sea Apostolike ouer the circumcision, and Paule ouer the vncircumcised: but yet so, as they excluded not their compeers and copartners in the same power with them. For Iames also was the Apostle of the Iewes, which li∣ued at Hierusalem, and in all Iudea: but Peter ouer those which were dispersed among the Gentiles onely. So like∣wise Paule limited his sea Apostolike among the Greeks of Asia and Europe, leauing in the meane while other prouin∣ces for other Apostles. If in like manner the Bishop of Rome had contented and conteined himself within the precincts of his owne territorie, how should any man haue accused him of any impious or vsurped tyrannie? Againe, for as much as it appeareth, that the Apostolike traditiō (so much as concerneth the regiment of the church and the outward policie thereof) was taken of our Sauiour, and afterwards also of the Apostles, from out of the old Te∣stament; (so far forth as the condition of time and place, & the state of the people and persons might permit) can there bee any errour in this, if the Fathers (their successors) seeme in like manner to borrowe from the same foundation, cer∣taine politike constitutions, for the edifiyng of the Church? Vpon this occasion Hierome thus writeth to Euagrius: And
in that we knowe, that the Apostolike traditions were taken out of the old Testament: that which Aaron and his sons, and the Leuites were in the Temple, the same are the Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, in the Church. I conclude therefore, that ouer euery seuerall prouince or precinct (which make as it were one Cittie) they verie well and worthily placed seuerall Bishops; and likewise o∣uer euery whole cuntry or regiō, either Patriarchs, or Arch∣bishops, or Primates, or Metrapolitanes (call them as you please) & moreouer that this was done of the antique Coū∣cels & Fathers, to singular purpose, & well consorting with Gods holy ordinance. With the which that I may at the last determine this controuersie: of those things which I haue already declared and concluded, as well of the offices of the Gospell (which were ordeined of the Lord, and left vnto the Church by his Apostles) as also of the vniforme consent of the Councels, and continuall practise of the Church in all ages, it shalbe easie for all men to know, That that gouern∣ment is not of man, or from man, in the which the Elders ar subiect to their elder Bishops, & the Bishops to their high¦er Patriarchs, & Metropolitanes; but contrarywise, that the same is diuine, and ordeined of God, and that as well in the old, as the new Testament. Of the names of Patriarchs, Archbishops, & Metropolitans. Chap. XXV. HAuing laid downe my reasons and proofes, by the which I am taught to dissent from them, vnto whom in other things I yeeld not a litle; I take it now time to answere the cursing and cursed slanders of some, who casting aside the modestie of ciuill Christians, and neglecting the mediocri∣tie of all learned writers, do teare (like mad dogs) and tor∣ment the most reuerend names and religious functions of Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarches & Metropolitans, as pam∣pred and proud titles, antichristian & prophane. But wil you
heare the reasons of vnreasonable men? They alledge, that the Apostle Paul in recounting the degrees of the Ministers of the Gospell (in his Epistle to the Ephesians the 4. chap.) maketh no mention of Patriarches & Archbishops. To the which, before I goe any further, I make them this answere: That those offices are there comprised and contained in the names of Apostles & Euangelists; and in the 12. to the Rom. verse 8. in the word () Ruler, (or he that ruleth;) and in the first to the Corinthians the 12. chap. and 28. verse, in the worde () gouernors: by all which tearmes and ti∣tles, the sacred order of superior Pastors are vnderstoode. But that the aforesaid offices of Apostles & Euangelists are perpetuall, wee haue already proued, and it may also suffi∣ciently appeare by the sequele of that enumeration of those offices; namely, when he setteth down to what end our Sa∣uiour gaue to the Church, some Apostles, and other Euange∣lists. Was it not for the work of the Ministery, for the edification of the body of Christ? So that, so long as the Church is to be edi∣fied, so long those offices are to be continued in the Church which are there conteined. If the Church could haue beene edified without them, they should neuer haue ben ordeined in the Church. But againe, that part of them are thought to be temporal, & part particular; that thought is ouerthrown by the onely end of that for the which they were ordeined; which end is to be sought for continually of all the faithful euen vntill the comming of the Lord. For are they not still to edifie by these offices, & to grow together into one mysti∣cal body of Christ? Now albeit the office of bishops & arch∣bishops, primates, & patriarchs, doth not extend it selfe so far as did the office of the twelue Apostles: (neither are they inriched with the like treasure or measure of the holy Ghost) yet are wee to consider that this difference is in the qualitie not in the quidditie of the same function: in the measure, not in the matter of their commission. And therfore, whom at this day we call Bishops & Archbishops, Paul the Apostle called Apostles; for that (as we haue said) they are ioyned in the same combinatiō, & made partakers of that cōmission.
And for this cause the calling of Archbishops & Patriarchs, hath beene alwaies called, and is yet to be accounted Apo∣stolike in all places. Yet, for as much as these names and titles, doe seeme in some mens eyes, to be puffed vp with the tumors of pride and ambition, let vs take a further view of those principall obiects, and friuolous obiections, by the which they are cast into this no lesse straunge then strong conception. Their first argument is forced from the composition of the Greek words , and , which (as they take it) signifieth that principalitie and power, which is proper to the ciuill Ma∣gistrate only, impertinent to that modestie and simplicitie, which the doctrine of the Gospel requireth of a Pastor. To the which, they also adde the sentence of the Councell of Carthage, which forbad anie Bishoppe to bee called Prince of the Priests; The wordes of the Canon are these: . The which Gratian in his ninetie nine distinction translateth thus: The Bishop of the chiefe place shall not be called prince of the Priestes, or high Priest, or any other such thing, but onely, Bishop of the chiefe place. Besides all this (say they) the word Archbishop differeth no∣thing from the Greeke word  (Prince of Pastors:) the which name or title, seeing it is only proper to Christ alone we cannot see, how he should bee excused of heinous sacri∣lege, that doth any way vsurpe the same. And therefore all such names are to be cast ouer bord, and vtterly to be exiled the Church of Christ. Neither is the arguing of these names to be taken for trifling, when as they seem so greatly to de∣rogate from the name of Christ. And last of all those names which Antichrist himselfe, or the spirit of Antichrist, hath ei∣ther inuented, or inuested into the Church, are to bee auoy∣ded: but that Antichrist was the forger of these titles, it is a plaine case, and therefore to be auoided. To that, I answer: That the sence & true meaning of these names & titles by way of composition, with the worde , conteineth nothing in it, eyther arrogant for ambition, or
for custome insolent. For I will teach them, (if they bee to learne) that the greeke worde , doth not onely signifie Principality and Magistracie, but also the first, the beginning and original cause of any thing: and besides this, that in com∣position it foloweth the nature of that word, with the which it is compounded: and so, seeing the name of a Bishop doth signifie of it selfe, and in his owne nature nothing that is in∣solent or ambitious, take the name Archbishoppe which way you wil, it cannot any waies sound of any vaine or vain-glo∣rious sense: as it plainely appeareth in other wordes of like composition, as Architectos, Archiatros, Architriclinus, Ar∣chibubulcus, which signifie a Maister-worke-man, a Arch-phi∣sition, a Gentleman-vsher, a chiefe Herds-man, and such like. By all which we may manifestly see, that the name of Bishop, being in nature good, the name of Archbishop cannot be in composition euill: seeing that thereby it signifieth rather the first and chiefe Bishop, then the Lord and Prince of Bishops. Albeit I would not, (nor need I) greatly sticke with him for the name of Prince neither, were it in vse with vs, as in sense it is with the Latines, onely for a chiefe and principall man. But now seeing that name is aduanced to a more roiall and imperiall sense, from hence-forth, I will either not vse it, or vse it verie thriftely. The like may wee say of the word , that among good Grecians, it doth not alwaies signifie a Magistrate, or a man in authority, but many times also it standeth for the first au∣thor, or originall cause of any thing. So that Patriarche, doth no more signifie him which gouerneth in the Magistracy, or exerciseth authoritie ouer others, then doth Heresiarch, who is so called, for that hee is the first brother and brocher of that heresie, not that hee exerciseth anye dominion ouer the rank kamiel of that poysonous rable. In very deed, a Patriark signifieth the first parent of any people or ofspring: in which sence also the same word is deriued to our vse, to signifie an Archbishop; because that he among the other Bishops (which are counted Fathers) is as it were the Graundfather: and that thereby also wee might further conceiue, that the gouerne∣ment
he hath ouer others, is meere father-like, not tyrannik So that for modesty sake wer they called, rather Archbishops and Patriarkes, then  (Princes of the Priests) that all the world might know, that their power ouer their bre∣thren, and fellow-bishoppes, was no other, then that which Paule had ouer Titus and Timothy, and they ouer others. And thus at the last it may appear at the ful, that here is no name giuen to the Bishop of the chief place, which was forbidden by the Carthaginian Canon: seeing that a Patriarke & Arch∣bishop in their proper sense, doe signifie no other then the chief Bishop: who if he be called Prince of the Bishops, among them which write more pure Latine, no man ought to bee a∣greeued therfore: for that (as I haue alredy noted) the word Prince among them, is no more but as principall and chiefe a∣mong vs. And this is that which Ambrose hath written vpon the fourth of the Ephesians. In a Bishop (saith hee) are all the or∣ders contained, because hee is the chiefe Priest, that is, the Prince of Priests, and a Prophet, and an Euangelist. But now againe, that they say, the word Archbishop doth signifie the same with  in Peter, which signifieth the Arch-pastor: I can but greatly wonder, and yet not suf∣ficiently, that any such thing should proceed from men that would bee accounted learned, and linguists too. I shewed but euen now, what this worde Archbishoppe signified, and what might be made of the worde  and  in composi∣tion. Wherefore, seeing that in the construction of this word  (as also in other wordes) it may bee taken as well for the first and chiefe Pastor of any people: as for the chiefe Lord and Prince of all Pastours: I see no reason, why that also may not bee giuen to that man, which obtaineth the chiefe place among the Pastors of any place. But when as it signi∣fieth Christ, and that for his supreame gouernement, which he alone hath ouer all Pastors, as the Lord of all, both people and Pastors, the sense is altered, and the case: so that in that sense, there are none of our Archbishops, which in any case will suffer himselfe to bee called Archbishop. Christ is cal∣led
the Archpastor, absolutely, aboue al com∣parison, beyond all exception, without any limitation: when as our Archbishoppes are not so called simply and absolutelie, but such and such Archbishops, Archbishoppes of this or that sea, whose Suffraganes and Sub-bishops of such or such a Prouince, are sufficientlie known: Among whome onely they are accounted the Primates, or principall moderators: and ouer whom onely, and not ouer all absolutely, they are called Archbishops. Wherefore, seeing that by this name, is onely signified the chiefe and principall Pastour of some one Prouince, it doth no more derogat from the glory of Christ, then when wee call other Elders and Bishops by the name of Pastors and Doctors: seeing that properly Christ alone is our Mai∣ster and Teacher, and indeede that onelye good Shepheard, which gaue his life for vs. In like manner, albeit God and the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, be also our Father which is in heauen: yet not∣withstanding, wee may call men also our Fathers, and in so doing offer God no wrong at all. And therefore, whosoe∣uer hee be, that knoweth as well as I can tell him, that these names and titles are in sense manifolde, and ambiguous in signification, so that they may be giuen to diuerse things in diuerse respectes, and yet holdeth plea in this sort, hee doth but seeme to holde himselfe play in a serious matter, to make an idle shewe of his vaine wit, and a sinfull spoyle of the simple reader. For my part, hauing resolued vppon that which before wee haue taught: namely, That in the re∣giment of the Church, Bishoppes were placed ouer Bishoppes, accor∣ding vnto God his diuine ordinance and institution; I cannot see howe that methode of Gods distinct order, coulde haue beene expressed in more apt and fit termes (after the Apo∣stles decease) then by these reuerend titles of Patriarks and Archbishops. In the which also (setting aside the arrogancy and tyrannie of those which haue abused their authority, and doe abuse)
there is not so much state or pride, as some presume. I but (will some say,) our Bishops and Archbishops doe entertaine secular charges, and inuade ciuill honours, and are imbost with temporall titles: all the which, how crosly they confront the doctrine of the Apostles, and the good meaning of their titles, who so blinde as may not see it? To this I would answere, before I proceed any further: but it is not for this place, neither dooth this question fall into this treatise. Wherefore, hereafter I will set down what I thinke of this matter, when I come to his proper place. In the meane while (gentle Reader) suppose, I here de∣fend not those which now liue, (who whiles they ar in view, are enuied) but those faithfull seruants of Christ Iesus, who heereto-fore haue ruled the church with great fruit, before the tyranny of Rome abused the Church of God: namely, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregorie Nysen, Basil the great, Athanasius, Chrisostome, Cyprian, Ignatius, Polycarpus, Ambrose, Augustine, and such like: whose liues as they are further from our eies, so from our enuye. These cannot I with any good consci∣ence, doe not you of any conceit condemne of pride, ambi∣tion, tyranny, or Anticristianisme, for whome all the world will stand vp & witnes, that they were Bishops, Archbishops and Patriarches, and gouerned the churches after a singuler maner, and with an especiall power ouer the rest. If any man thinke hee haue a single gift in these thinges, and suppose he haue the spirit of discretion, as his familiar (to discerne spirits) good leaue hath hee, let him vse it: but let him take heed, his spirit of discretion proue not the spirit of presum∣tion. I verely can finde no such spirite of Antichrist in those most christian fathers: I find they were men, and had their errors: and yet in this argument, their writings are of grea∣ter authority with me, then are they which haue written of the same matter in this age, and within our memorie. But nowe concerning the last exception against their names (I meane of Arch bishops.) I answere, and deny that they were the inuētions of Antichrist; this first, & then also, that whatsoeuer was inuented, (or is vsurped either) of An∣tichrist
is hand ouer head to be reiected of vs; for of necessi∣ty (a necessary pollicy) he deuised, rather then inuēted, some good things, that with them he might ouercast many bad. So doth Satan many times transforme himselfe into an An∣gell of light, that he may deceyue without suspect; hee fay∣neth holines; that he may draw into wickednes: hee defen∣deth the truth, that he may driue into error. (For he should bewray himself too grossely, if he should teach nothing but leasings.) But yet, can there bee a more witlesse conclusion then this, Antichrist taught this, ergo it is false? Antichrist deuised this, ergo it is naught? vnlesse it should be interser∣ted, or at least vnderstood, that the same is contrary also to the worde of God. As for example, that which Peter was taught of the holy Ghost, hee confessed with a liuely faith, namely, That Iesus was the very Christ, and the onely sonne of the liuing God. But now, doth not Antichrist also con∣fesse the same with his mouth? yea whosoeuer dare deny the same, he condemneth to the fagot. Doth he not also im∣brace the sacred volumes of Gods holy word? yes and more then that forasmuch as the Lord hath taught vs in his word, that we should pray continually, he hath of himselfe deui∣sed, to deuide the whole day in matinges and euen song. But now (to come to the poynt) because hee abuseth vnto superstition both fasting and prayer, and the holy Bible, and the blessed confession of the sonne of God, shall we therfore (all in a fling) renounce these thinges? Admit it be his desire that the ministery should be of som reckoning in the world, and that it should be aduanced to no meane degree of ho∣nour in the common wealth: And what then? that we may not be like vnto him, shal we requite the Ministers of Christ with shame for fame, and with slaunders for honours? And because he seeketh to magnify them without meane, shall we suffer them to lie subiect and abiect among the basest routs of the common meany? If braine-sicke men vppon a quarelous minde may presently gainesay whatsoeuer the Bishop of Rome hath sayd, or don: I fear me in the end, they wil in their great hast ouerrun all christian religion, & leaue
it far behinde them. Wherfore, whosoeuer shall think euery thing forthwith to be reiected, for that eyther the author thereof abused the same to tyranny, or the Bishop of Rome inuerted the same to superstition, he is easely to be carried with euery shallow streame into any deepe error. What things soeuer are in the Church of Rome (that now is) may iustly be distinguished into three parts: Wherof ther are some things that wel consort with the word of God; and some, that do flatly contradict the same; but the most things are such, as there vse is; eyther good, or bad: which thinges are called, things indifferent. Now, albeit bad men may make a bad vse of good thinges, yet can they not inuert the na∣ture therof. Baptisme, the word of God, or whatsoeuer else (of that kinde) the Romanists haue in vse, no wise man will therefore reiect, as if they were euil, because they haue not v∣sed thē wel. As for things vtterly euil, because no man at any time vseth them well, they are vtterly to be reiected of vs, as is all kind of Idolatry, & whatsoeuer doth either vndermine, or ouerthrow the sound & substātiall doctrine of truth. But as for things indifferent, seeing they are such as is he that v∣seth them; they are left in our power to vse them, as time & occasion shal require. An indifferent thing is commonly that, whatsoeuer is nor cōdemned, nor commended in the word of God, & is left free to euery mans choise, either to vse, or not vse: vnles some other thing interchaunce, which altereth the vse of that which otherwise was free, by reasō of the time or place, or the person, wher the same is in vse. For my part, I think things mediat & indifferent might better be defined thus: if we shall say, those thinges are indifferent, which by no law, either Gods law or mās law, are bidden, or forbidden. For by the command of him which hath the authority ouer our persons, the vse of a thing, which otherwise is free, may many waies, & vppon many occasions be restrained, or ouer∣ruled: But of these things, in this place, we are not now to discourse at large. Onely thus much I chiefly note, & would haue iust notice taken of it, that indifferent thinges may bee vsed of vs, although the same things haue ben abused by the
bishop of Rome, or any other Antichrist. Is our liberty to be preiudiced by an other mans religion? specially, where pub∣lique authority hath any thing to do in the matter? suppose it either giueth vs in charge, or putteth vs in choise, to vse those things which the superstitious haue abused: Wherfore whensoeuer anything shal come in question among vs, that hath bene vsed among the Romanists, or other enemies of the truth, it is our part to examine and consider the matter, as it is in selfe, not as it was with them. There are some in England at this day, who take vpon thē more sowrely, then seuerely, against outward vestementes, cap & surples, musicke and organs, and such like rites of the Church: the which, because they were of some vse in the Ro∣mane Church, now out vppon them, they are sacriligious & prophane. In like maner, and with no lesse modesty, do they proceede against Bishops & Archbishops, their honors and reuenews; Al the which, vnles they could be proued contra∣ry to the word of God, what reason is this they bring (and it is al they bring) for the abolishing thereof: when they say, the author or inuentor therof was Antichrist? No doubt in∣different things which he abused for his tyranny, may be re∣turned to a better vse, for the good of the Church. Now, as for contētious natures & such, in whose brests this error hath taken fast footing, namely, That the authority of Bishops is a thing pernitious in itself, and preiudicial to the church; I know this my aunswere, as it fitteh not their humors, so it serueth not their turns. Neither yet will they vouchsafe of that, which I haue said of the natural signification of words compound with . Wherfore, albeit the plainest interpre∣tation of the names of Patriarchs and Archbishops like me best, yet notwithstanding I dare say thus much further, if we should grāt (that which they shal neuer euince) that by force of composition a kind of principallity were to be inferred: yet doth it not theruppon follow, that it is therefore a title abhorring from the state of our BB. For let it be lawfull for men to vrge the signification of euery sillable in this sort, & it shal forthwith be vnlawful for any, to be called a monarch,
or to be inuested with the title of an Emperour: for why? forsooth, these names in theyr proper sense, are common to none, but to God onely. These and such like titles of lawful and necessary vse among vs, must vppon this quirk be vtter∣ly abolished: neyther may it be lawfull for vs from hence∣forth to call our Ministers (as the Scripture doth)  or  (Rectors or Rulers, Prelates or Presidentes:) nay we shall not be able to auouch the name of Elders, because this, and these all in sacred Scripture, are proper to Magi∣strates and Princes, and the Nobles of sundry prouinces, and and yet for all this we see, that Ministers of the Church are called by these names. Last of all, if the authority of the Fathers, may be of any preuail, let vs hear what great dainty they make of the name of Prince, in the titles of the cleargy. Origen reprehending the clownishe sourenes of some Bishops, writeth thus; A man may see in some Churches, (especially in the greatest Citties) how the Princes of the christian people, shew no manner affability to any: esteeming thereof as a thing nothing at all pertaining vnto them, &c. And aftewards againe: We speake not these thinges as if we meant to discharge the Ecclesiasticall Principality. In like manner vppon the Epistle to the Romanes the thirteenth Chapter. By the which it appeareth (saith he) that the Iudges of the world do performe the greatest part of Gods law. For all the de∣faults that God would haue punished, he punisheth not by the Pre∣lates and Princes of the Church, but by the Iudges of the worlde. And vpon the twenty seuen Chapter of Numbers, the two and twenty Homily. Let the Princes (saith hee) of Churches learne, not to appoynt their successors after them, such as are allied vnto them, eyther in affinity of kindred, or consanguinity of bloud, neyther that they ought to make the Principality of Churches here∣ditary, &c. Ignatius, no lesse godly then grauely; My Son (saith hee) honour God and the King: and I say further, honor God as the author of al things and the owner; and honor the Bishop as Prince of the Priests, bearing, the image of God, by reasō of his principality, & the image of Christ, by means of his Priesthood. He that honoreth the Bishop, shall be honored of God, as also he that dishonoreth him,
shall be punished of God, &c. Besides many other things in the same place to the same sence. The same man in an other place. Therefore (saith he) let all things be performed among you according to a direct order in Christ: Let Lay men be subiect to Dea∣cons, Deacons to Priests, Priests to Bishops, the Bishop to Christ, as he is also to the Father. Againe to the Church of Antioch. You Elders feede the flocke which is committed vnto you, vntill God ma∣nifest him, which shal reign ouer you: For I am now sacrificed: that I may gaine Christ, &c. By which words, the holy Martyr hath sufficiently testified the authority of a Bishop ouer the rest of the Elders. Doubtlesse in auncient time, the authority of Bishops was great in the Church, theyr reuerence great, and theyr fauour great among the people: the which of al other things made most for the benefit and increase of the Church. Euen as in the common wealth, the fauour of the Magistrats and authority is beneficiall to the people, so likewise of Bishops in the Church. And therefore for good cause thought Hie∣rome, that the welfare of the Church did depend of the ho∣nour of the chiefe Priest &c. Neyther in deed is this the least slight of Satan, when he laboreth to bring the prelats of the Church into contempt, for by that meanes he thinketh to imbecil the doctrine of fayth, and to bring that into suspect, that so at the last he might (if possible he could) bring an vtter ruine, and a ruined ouerture to the whole state of the Church. To which purpose whosoeuer they be, that make themselues the Diuell his stipendaries, vnder what colour so euer they doe it, they discerue but badly, not onely of the whole Church, but also of the common wealth. That which a rebell is in the state, the same is a scismaticke in the Church. How iust cause the aduerse part here in England hath, to bring theyr Bishops into the obloquy and enuy of the peo∣ple, it smally cōcerneth me: I set not as arbiter between both parts. But this I say; that the same things which betideth the Bishops here in England, doth vsually befall all the best of the Ministery in Holland also, who are in no lesse enuy with the people there, then our Bishops are here. How malapart∣ly
(and the sacrifice) had men do rail and raue in their pub∣licke writing  the deare seruants of Christ, (and that by name) their shameful and shameles libels doe testifie at large. Of which wrongs seeing I my selfe (whiles I conuer∣sed with them) bate not the least share, & yet bear, no won∣der to any, if for my part, I like the better of Bishops. For I am not ignorant of this, that this is but the ordinary condi∣tion of al Gods seruantes; and that Satan of old and long since, hath by all possible and pestilent meanes endeuored, to make the presidents of Christ his Church, odious and in∣famous among men; that so, their credit especially, being ei∣ther altogether crackt, or very sore crased, himselfe might with more facility and lesse iealosie set abroach and cast a∣broad, all manner hideous and hellish Heresies. In so much that I am perswaded, if Moyses himselfe, if Peter, if Paul were resident among vs, and were in that honour and esteeme, which were fit and well-beseeming their so honorable a cal∣ling, they could not possible escape the cankred chaps of these foule-mouthed Hell houndes. But so long as the ser∣uantes of Christ are in authority in the Church, it is not much that the instruments of Satan can atchieue: but are they once brought vnder the hatch? alas, what is it that the seditious dare not attēpt? This matter need no great proof, it hath too much. Wherefore, of that degree of Honor, which the Prelats of Religion ought to inioy in an established christian common wealth, the very vilenes of this age doth inforce me to speak more at large. For if base men cannot abide, that Religion should be in any Honor, and villanous minds endeuor their worst, that the credit thereof may be none at all, or worse then it is, I thinke it no great wonder: but, that religious men (as they would seeme) should attempt the same, & euen they, which ought to be patrones and preseruers of the Church dignities, it is a thing odious, preposterous and too bad absurd. Doe they not yell in vaine, and cry out against abuses to no purpose, whose end is not so much to mitti∣gate the abuse of thinges, as to abolishe the whole vse? If
the gouernours of the Church, haue not so beautified theyr Ministery with that integrity of manners, and innocency of life, which reason & the reuerence of Religion doth require; I defend them not, but that according to the lawes they may be seuerely punished, and theyr betters surrogat into theyr places: Neyther are they exempt from the iurisdiction of the chiefe Magistrates, whereby they may not censure vp∣pon them, theyr liues and theyr goods, as vppon other cit∣tizens. No question, it greatly concerneth both Prince and people, that good men be placed ouer the Church, and euil men remoued theyr places: So that, whatsoeuer crimes are here, or else where obiected (and proued) against the Pre∣lates of Religion, they are staynes to the chiefe Magistrate, which tollerateth such Ministers in the Church, or aduan∣ceth such like to be Church officers. There is not the like reason of the Romish cleargy: For they haue theyr peculiar Magistrates; nor liue they vnder the common law of other Cittizens, neyther yet are they ac∣counted any part of them, (any longer then may stand with their owne commodity.) There the ciuill Magistrate, cha∣lengeth no right to conuert, nor any power to amend, what so euer they committe. But notwithstanding, if the Magi∣strate thinke best, to winke at these publique slaunders, I wil complain my selfe no further; onely if the slanderers wil so moderate themselues, as that they onely finde fault with the fault, not with the state; and whiles they rate abuses, the honor of the calling may be left intemerat. Let it be no mans slaunder, that he is a Bishop, or a Minister. But of the two-folde order of Elders, according to the Lorde his institution, and the Apostolique tradition, and the perpetuall vse of the Church (so much as the state of the argument doth require) these thinges I haue sayd may suf∣fice. Now it remayneth that wee say some thing also con∣cerning Doctors.
Of Doctors. Chap. XXVI. WHen the Apostle in the fourth to the Ephe∣sians nameth Pastors and Doctors, a man cannot certainely gather from the manner of his speech, whether hee would haue thē diuerse in office, or but one and the same, and that, because a Pastor is necessarily a Doctor or teacher, but not so conuersiuely. Wherefore the thing it selfe must help vs out: For not euery one, whome the Lord hath endewed with learning, and with a sound gift of teaching, hath presently withal receiued the authority of a Pastor: The knowledge and science of sa∣cred Scripture, may be giuen to any man; Kings, Nobles, Knights, may be learned, who notwithstanding are not fitte to be ouer any Churches. And albeit the administration of the Sacraments, and gouernance of the Church are so com∣bined with the office of teaching, that he cannot be a Pa∣stor, which is not a teacher; notwithstanding that followeth not in good conuersion, that euery one who hath receyued the power to teach, should forthwith be an Elder, or Bishop of the Church: these thinges are distinct each from other. From among those which are apt to teach, Elders and Bi∣shops are chosen, and of old, the Priesthood was neuer with∣out power to interpret: but yet the gift of prophecie, and the ability to interpret did not make a Priest. The Priest was of duety an interpreter of the law, and a Doctor, & a Prophet, but yet euery doctor of the law, or prophet, was not a priest. An Apostle in deed, was both Prophet, and Doctor, and Pa∣stor, but euery Prophet or Doctor, was not an Apostle or Pa∣stor. Seeing therefore that Doctors are distinguished from Pastors, & the knowledge of the mysteries of God with the faculty to expound them, is the gift of the holy spirit: who∣soeuer excell in that gift, and can as wel by writing as word of mouth edify the Church, they are to be reputed for Do∣ctors, of what estate soeuer they be: the king shal derogat no more from his royall Maiesty, if for the edifying of Gods
people, he compose any godly worke, then did Dauid or Solo∣mon of old, who in there time were no les renowmed for their heauenly wisdome, then for their princely power. Although the Apostle forbid a woman to speake in the congregation, yet if shee bee learned, shee may write, and priuately instruct her familie. Wherefore now, if we will come to the true vn∣derstanding of the Apostolike writings: wee must with sound iudgement put difference, between Pastors, & Doctors, who besides the teaching & interpreture of the word, did not o∣therwise intermedle with any thing in the church. For albeit in the infācy of the church, those first christiās, had no publik professed schooles: yet was it alwaies lawfull for Prophetes and Doctors to teach publicklie in the church; vnto whose graue aduice, the faithfull were no lesse bound to obey, then to their Pastors. But all this while, they had not the power of the Church censure, nor the right to redres whatsoeuer was amisse. Wee read of Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, that they taught in the church of Corinth: but wee finde not, that they had there the authority of Bishoppes and Elders. And therefore no woonder, though the corruptions and abuses which raigned among them, were not giuen them in charge to correct, or that it was not layde to their charge that they did not correct; for there was no remedye, they must suffer that they could not remedy, and in the meane while, expect Paule his comming amongst them. Likewise in the Epistle to Titus, a man might well wonder, why Paule ioyned not in like commission with Titus, Zenas and Apollos, expounders of the lawe (they beeing then also in Creat:) except it were for this, that they were Doctors onely: for hee was not ignorant, that they were then also with Titus. Doubtlesse, had they bin of the same order and power, they should also haue receiued the same charge. And might it not better haue bene perfor∣med of three, then of one? But yet wee see, that the Apostle gaue the charge of Teaching there to many, the power of Ru∣ling, to one alone. By the which it appeareth, that the Doc∣tors and Prophetes of those times, were an aide vnto the Pa∣stors, & that they taught vnder their direction. For indeed it chiefly concerneth the dutie of a Bishop, to teach the church
committed to his charge, by himselfe, and by others. such things are there in the Apostles writings,  we may take no smal view of the beginnings of , and of that forme of gouernment which was vsed of the Apostles, and receiued of the next immediate ages, & deliuered to Apostolique men, their successors. It is very wel ed of Epiphanius, that there are certaine histories hidden in the Apostles writings: the ignorance whereof, many times hath bene the cause of much error in the church. But thus it came to passe, that the Bishops gaue licēce to teach the scrip∣tures vnto those, which the Grecians call Lay-men: The which thing, Eusebius recordeth in his sixt booke, the 13. chapter, concerning Origen. That when as yet he was not priested, hee did notwithstanding set vp schoole at Caesaria, and was there in treated of the Bishops there abouts, not onely to dispute, but to open the scriptures also: The which thing Demetrius Bi∣shop of Alexandria, (Origen his riuall) did greatly reprehend, when as notwithstanding himself was the man, that had sent him before into Arabia to the same end: neither yet did hee except against him, when hee was catechiser in his owne church. But when as of mere enuy he cold no longer indure, that the renowmed fame of Origen should daily increase, (see∣king all manner occasions to picke a quarrell against him) he laid blame in the Bishops, that they would seeme to licence a Lay-man publikly to professe the scriptures. To the which, his malitious cauils, Alexander then Bishop of Ierusalem, and Theodistus Bishop of Caesaria, make answere in these words. For that you vrge in your letters, that it was neuer hard of before nor is vsed as yet, that lay-men should dispute, and expound the Scriptures in the presence of Bishoppes, In that thing you seeme (I know not how) to auouch a manifest vntruth. For where fit and able men are found that may be any aid to the brethren in the word, they are requested of the holy Bishops, that they would instruct the people in the same, as was Eusebius of Ne∣ro, at Larandy, Paulinus of Celsus, at Iconium, and Theodorus of Atticus among the Synadines, all the which were blessed & god∣ly bretheren and it is verie likely, (although it bee vnknowen to vs)
that the same thing is done in other places. Thus for Eusebius. Wherefore, albeit the Primatiue churches had not their vniuersity schooles, like vnto those we haue at this day: yet, that they were not altogeather without schooles, Alexandria alone is witnesse sufficient, which brought out Doctors be∣fore Origen, Pantaeus and Clemens Alexandrinus, and many o∣thers: Neither is it to be doubted, but that custome also was deriued from the Apostles. We know the knowledge of scrip∣tures to bee the gift of Gods spirite; but shall that therefore take away the exercises and the traueils of deuoted students: Amongst the people of God, the Prophets had their Colled∣ges, in the which Samuell and Elias, and Elizeus and such o∣thers were Maisters: neither was it any disparagement for the other Prophetes to liue vnder their discipline. God was neuer the authour of tumultuous confusion, but of order, nor were the men of God, a company of furious bedlames, but a societie of sage and wise men, of a milde and a mode∣rate spirite. They which at this day holde schooles, and their orders in contempt, are franticke in their owne conceit, and ignorant of al good societie and godly ciuilitie: nor do they know (nor can they conceaue) what infinite good they one∣ly doe in all estates. Who can sufficiently commend the reli∣gious purpose of those men, which were the first founders of Vniuersities? Are they not the fruitfull seminaries of all good litterature, and the holsome nurses of al honourable virtues? The which being taken away, all humanity and ciuill curtesie would languishe togeather: and not that onely, but within a short space we our selues, nowe learned and religious, should strangely degenerate into minds and manners more sauadge and barbarous, then are any of the nations. But no neede I should digresse any further into the praise of our well renow∣med Vniuersities: onely this I say, that the Doctors and Tea∣chers they send forth into the Church of Christ, and whoso∣euer els, by their priuate labours, and diligent traueils in the scriptures haue attained to the knowledge therof, ought not by any means to take vpon them any thing in the Church, a∣gainst the good will, or without the good leaue of their BB.
why? They are priuate men, & vnder their gouernance. But yet, being requested, or commanded by them, (as of old, so nowe) they may professe: alwaies remembred, that they doe it for the good of the church. A degree of the vniuersity, or any other testimony of learning, ought not to impair the authority of the Pastors, or to disturbe the good order of the Church. That at this day they which are created Doctors, are for the most part Elders: I doe not mislike it; for of olde also it was but a very rare and extraordinary thing, for lay-men to pro∣fesse the woorde publiquelie. But time, place, and necessitye may limite this matter, and prescribe an order therevnto, not to bee ordered by head-strong and desperate temeritie. Yong mē must here take heed, least they presuming for their learning vpon the Vniuersities testimony, they should there∣fore thinke, that they are already adopted into the orders of the holy ministery; (vnlesse they be otherwise ordained then so:) the which I would haue thought scarse worthy the no∣ting, were it not that I haue found some to farre ouershot in this error. There are also some others at this day, who disclaiming the office of Pastors, and that ordination which is solemni∣sed by the Bishops, will notwithstanding be accounted Doc∣tors in the church: but to baptise, to minister the sacraments, to visite the sicke, to bury the dead, to read publique prayer in the Church, they think it stands not with their credit. And why? For sooth because they see these parts of the ministery performed, sometimes by some not deeply learned. Againe, there are other, which thinke it no smal part of reformation, that euery church should haue with their Pastor a Doctor: as if (good men) one Pastor, (who of duetye is also a Doctor,) could not discharge both parts. Many such fancies I witting∣ly omit, and recount them amongst the wel-pleasing dreams of such as learne to feed themselues: whome verely I cannot so well like of. For albeit I confesse, that certaine Doctours publiquely professed in the Church, which were not Pastors: yet I find, how that was vsed in the Apostles times of neces∣sity,
and afterwards very extraordinarily, & onely then, when either the vrgent necessity, or the present commodity of the Church did so require. For the ordinarye Doctours of the church, are the Bishops themselues, who if they could suffise to perform al duties alone, they needed nor Elders nor Dea∣cons to ioyne with them. We know how in a small Church one Elder is enough: And that the greatnes, and great in∣crease of Churches, made this diuersity of ministers, both for order and number. But if anye man desire to see more of this argument, he may read the writers of this age: These thinges (as I thinke) may serue for this turne: who purpose not to treat of euery thing exactly, but onely to shew what I find wanting in some Churches, which would seeme the best reformed. To the which end, I haue recounted vnto you the diuers degrees of the ministers of the church, euen as they were or∣dained of the Lord, and deliuered of the Apostles, and recei∣ued of our first fathers, and Apostolik predecessors. In whose foot-steps we may more safely continue, then by not contai∣ning our selues therin, to intangle our proceedings in some other new and strange extrauagants.
The second Booke. Of the honour which is due vnto Prelats and Elders in the Church. Chap. I. That by a certaine law of Nature among all nations, the Pre∣sidents of Religion were esteemed worthie great honour. HOw great the dignitie and excel∣lencie of the Gospell is aboue all the vnhalowed mysteries of pro∣phane nations, and how farre it ex∣celleth the Leuiticall Priest-hoode of Moses also, and consequently in how great regarde of honour, the same ought to be amongst all that professe Christianity: the time hath bene, when it was needlesse to tell; but now, more then ne∣cessary to proue. For the lewdnes, (I might say the irreligi∣on) of some men in this our age, doth of force compell me somewhat more earnestly to lay to their charge, the neglect dutie of ingrate mindes towardes Gods Ministers; whome while they depriue of their due honour, they bring Religion it selfe into deepe disdaine, and withall they bewray that they make no great account of God himself, whose Legats they depraue. For there be, which think it were not a poinct matter, if they were not left woorth a poinct: and thinke it neuer the worse for the common-welth, if they had no place
at all in the common-wealth. Because (forsooth) it is said of our Sauiour & his Apostles, that they renounced all world∣ly honours; therefore are they thought worthy no honour in the world; any vile or vulgar esteeme (if so bee they may haue that) is enough for them, least haplie they should bee exalted in their owne sence, and become proud of nothing. Thus they thinke none worthie of honour, that either doe not affect it, or are not infected with it. This errour is to bee confuted in this discourse: in the which it shall bee shewed, that by all rights, both of God and man, the sacred ministe∣rie in a well ordered common-wealth hath alwaies beene had in greatest honour and estimation amongst all nations, and, that Christians (aboue all others) doe owe no lesse to their Pastors, then did of olde the people of God to their Priests. Albeit the life of man bee inuolued and ouer-cast with darke and thicke mistes of errour and ignoriunce, inso∣much, that manie times it is dazeled at the view and sight of such thinges, which of themselues are cleare enough: notwithstanding there are yet some thinges so cleare and so manifest, as in the which no man (beeing not sence∣lesse or besotted) can pleade or pretend any ignorance. Such are those generall notions of sinne, which GOD (the author of nature) hath imprinted and imprized in our heartes and mindes, as thinges which are ingendred and congenerate with vs: such is Religion towardes GOD, loue towardes our parentes, and reuerence towardes our progenitors. And albeit the relique of God his Image, is many waies disteyned in vs, since the attaindour of our first parentes, yet is it not altogether destroyed; there alwayes remay∣ned such a resplendent light of that diuine nature, as by the which men might naturally and clearely see, both what was good, and what was not good; and conceaue in some sort also, what was godly, and what was godlesse. In∣deede the Gentiles aberred from the true knowledge of the Godhead, and the true worship thereof: yet notwithstan∣ding
in this one thing they were well resolued, that there was a GOD, and that hee was to bee honoured. Their Religion was depraued by them, yet were not they depri∣ued of Religion: but now, where it is come to that passe, that men thinke eyther that there is no God, or no wor∣shippe of God: there the minde may bee sayde, not to erre, but to raue: for they alone offend against that no∣tion of God, which is ingrauen in the mindes of all men, and which ingrafteth a voluntarie Religion, and a religi∣ous inclination, (will they, nill they) in the heart of euerie man. Nor was there euer Nation so barbarous, nor was there euer people so sauage, which could liue without Reli∣gion: take away Religion, and take away all ciuilitie from men, all seueritie from lawes. There are many partes in a common-wealth, vnto the which for great cause, there are great honours giuen: es∣pecially to prowesse Martiall: of the which albeit the vse bee great, yet is it for no great time: But the vse of Religion is eternall: There may bee a state without a Soldiour, not without a Minister: The vse of a Soldiour is farre from perpetuall, the lesse, the better; the more seldome, the more welcome; but Religion is euerlasting, and can neuer bee casseered. But what should I compare the Mini∣sterie of Religion with other mysteries in the common∣wealth, which all haue their deserued honours? They all must vnuaile to Religion, whether you respect the excel∣lencie, or the necessitie, or the commoditie of that my∣sterie. Wherefore, that so notable and necessarie a fun∣ction to the state, should want honour in the common∣wealth, it wanteth common reason. All Nations were euer of this minde and opinion that they thought the Pre∣sidents of Religion, were alwayes to bee chosen from a∣mong the chiefe Nobilitie: or if haplie they were not by byrth Noble, then they were to bee innobled by the common-wealth. But that the consent of all Nations in anie one thing, is the verie lawe of Nature, it was verie well defined by that excellent & learned Orator Tullie (who
could very well define:) against the which now at the last to striue and storme, vnder the colour of reformation, is rather an outrage, then an errour, to be conuicted of frenzie, rather then to be suspected of follie. Did euer precept of our Saui∣our crosse and incounter, either the law which himself gaue vnto the Fathers, or the Edict which nature (God I meane) hath giuen and ingrafted in the secret penitralles of al their successors? Chap. II. How great the reuerence of Priests hath beene among all Na∣tions. I Will therefore remember vnto you in how great honour the worshippers of false Re∣ligions haue alwaies had their Priests in all places: that their follie may the rather ap∣peare, who (I know not with what religi∣on) would detract due honour from true religion. For albeit the Caldees, Persians, Aegyptians, Greekes Latines, French, Britons, and all other Nations, haue by diuerse errors, and most detestable super∣stitions, declined from that first and sincere religion, which our first parentes left to their posteritie: yet notwithstan∣ding, there alwayes remained many impressions as yet vn∣cancelled, and they not concealed; as are these, That the world is gouerned by the diuine prouidence of the eternall Godhead, and that the same ruleth ouer all earthly thinges: that whatsoeuer is good proceedeth from him, and what∣soeuer is euill is declined by him: and therefore that he is to be religiously worshipped: and therefore the sacred symysts of his religion, are especially to bee honoured. And thus it came to passe, that among the Assyrians and Babilonians, their Caldies: among the Medes and Persians, their diuines were alwaies of singular account, and supereminent authority; for why? They were the gouernors of religion, and the ex∣positors
of the law both sacred & prophane. To which ende they were exercised from their youth in all learned and li∣berall sciences: they did comprehend the motions of the heauens, and deuined by the errours of the stars: they read, and learned, and taught Religion, rites, and lawes: they were compeers with kings in their gouernment, so that, no∣thing was done without their councel and consent. Finally, of so great esteeme was the discipline of the Wise-men a∣mong the Medes and Persians, as that hee was not thought worthy the Empire, that was not found skilfull in theyr Artes and Emblemes. Theseus was the first that put a difference betweene No∣bles (whom he called Patritians) and husband men, and Ar∣tificers: to the Nobles hee gaue power and preheminence to professe religion, to chuse Magistrates of their own com∣panie, and also to moderate and interprete in matters sa∣cred and diuine. This law their posteritie, as they receiued it of their ancestors, so they obserued it very religiously: By which meanes it came to passe, that great reuerence was al∣waies giuen, both to the sacrifices, and to all other their re∣ligious actions. Neither could their Priests want their due parts of that diuine reuerence, whom they alwayes selected out of the noblest families, and who were euer one in their publique Councels. For, as if God himselfe was present (vn∣to whom we ought not to thinke that there is any thing vn∣knowne) euen so in the presence of the sacred Priestes, did they propound all their more serious actions; namely, the diuines among the Athenians, and the south-sayers sitting in counsell with the King among the Lacedemonians. Strabo in his twelfth booke writeth of two Temples sa∣cred to Bellona, which were called Comana: of whom the one was in Capadocia, the other in Pontus, both alike in all partes: for that indeede they were one made by the other, and had altogether the same rites and ceremonies common to them both. In those places, either of the Priestes were in greatest regard of honour next vnto the King himselfe: and albeit they were subiect to the prince, yet where the people suppli∣ant
them. They had either of them six thousand seruants which were called Hierodulists, or Church seruants, besides no small quantitie of land, ouer the which they were free Lords. Twise euery yeare did the Prelate were a diademe; the Prince and Priests, for the most part, being of the same family. Pla∣to in his booke deregno confirmeth these thinges, and sayth, that it becommeth all men to conceiue honourably of the Priests and Prophets, and that they ought of right to be had in great estimation, as wel for the greatnes of their actions, as the honour of their office. Wherefore (saith he) in Aegypt it is not lawfull for that King to sway the scepter, that holds not of the Crosyer. Insomuch, that if any, either by prowesse, or by policie haue inuaded the kingdom, who is not of that holy kind, notwithstanding afterwards (there is no remedie) he must be initiated into that mystery. And not there only, but in many places amongst the Graecians also, a man may find, where the chiefe sacrifices are committed to the chiefe Magistrates. Neither is this which I maintaine, lesse mani∣fest among your selues: for you also aduance the most mag∣nificent rites (especially the auncient sacrifices) to him, that by lotte is chosen your King. The same Philosopher in his twelfth Dialogue de legibus, speaketh much of that honour, which then, and of old was giuen vnto Priestes, both deade and liuing, as well in their publike assemblies, as at their so∣lemne funerals. The Romans and Latins were no whit inferiour eyther to the Greeks, or to the Aegyptians in this behalfe: for they al∣so ioyned the sacred Priesthood with the royall Maiestie. All the first Kings of the Latins & Romans were Priests. The Em∣perors also, which afterwards succeeded them, would them∣selues be the high Priests. But what reuerend regard the Ro∣mans themselues had of Religion, Valerius Maximus hath left recorded in these words: But such (saith he) was the care our fa∣thers had, not only for the present account, but also for the future in∣crease of religion, that euen then when the Cittie was most florishing fortunate, they deliuered ten sonnes, princes of the Senate, to the ten seueral prouinces and people of Hetruria, onely to this end, that they
might learne the sacred discipline of their Religion. But what the authority of diuines was at Rome, we may best heare by a di∣uine. Tullie in his second de legibus writeth thus: The greatest and the worthiest thing in the Common-wealth, is the priueledge and preheminence of Diuines, ioyned with the greatest authoritie: Neither doe I conceaue thus, because I my selfe am a Diuine, but be∣cause it becommeth vs all so to conceaue: For indeed, what greater thing is there, (if we speake according to the equitie and right of the thing) then with authoritie, either to dismisse the companies, and the councels of chiefe Empires and the greatest Potentats, when they are proposed: or to restraine them, when they are concluded? or what thing can there be more solemne, then to cease from the affaires wee haue already in hand, if one Diuine alone, doe but say the contrarie? VVhat thing can there be more magnificent, then of his intire power to appoint, that the Consuls should depose themselues from their Magistracie? Or what thing more religious, then to giue leaue, or not to giue leaue, to deale with the people, or not to deale? And what is it to repeale lawes, not lawfully made? that nothing can be allowed to be done by the Magistrat, in peace or in war, without their autho∣ritie? Thus farre goeth Cicero, whose authority I could con∣firme with many examples, if need were. But what should I speake of the Flamines and Arch-flamines, and other the Priestes, and Arch-priestes of the Romaines? It suffiseth, they thought the Imperiall maiestie it selfe to bee adorned with the honour of Hie-priest. But that all the societies of Priests, were in especiall honour among the Romains, it might verie wel be knowen, if it were but by this, that all the companies of Priests, had their places in publik triumphs, and solemne spectacles, (the chiefe Priests and the chiefe Curates:) There set (saith Arnobius) fifteene men crowned with lawrel wreathes, & Iupiters Arch-priests with their myters: there set the Diuines, in∣terpretors of the mind and will of God, as doe also the chast Vir∣gins, nurses, and nourishers of the neuer dying fire. Of these thinges, hee that desireth greater variety, may seeke them in the Romaine history: these things suffice me. But nowe I will trauell ouer the Alpes, and will set before your consideration, what religion was of olde amongst the
French and Britones, and what honour for religion. And first, it is sufficiently knowen, that the Druidists were Priests of the chiefe nations on this side the Alpes: of whome wee read in Caesar his Commentaries, that they were had in great esteeme, for so hee writeth: In all Fraunce there are two sortes of those, which aboue the rest are of especiall honour and account: The one are the Druidists, the other are the men at armes. They are con∣uersant in diuine seruice, they attend vppon sacrifices priuate, and publike, they are the expounders of Religion: Vnto them great flocks of youth recourse for their learning, and these haue especiall honour among them. For they doe determine of all controuersies (in a man∣ner) both priuate and publique: and if there bee any crime commit∣ted, any murther attempted, if any controuersie, about inheritance, or the bounds of lands, they also set downe their decree, and appoint the penaltie. If any person, either priuate or publique, will not stand to their censure, they lay the censure of the church vppon him, they excom∣mune him the Church: this is the greatest punishment among them. But who so are thus excommuned, they are forth-with accounted a∣mong the number of the gracelesse and vngodly: they are forsaken of all men, al men flie their companie and their conference, least by cōtagion they might take any infection, nor are they to haue any law if they desire it, nor is there any honor to be giuen them, though they deserue it. But ouer all these Drui∣dists, there is one as chiefe & principal, which hath the chiefe authority among them, &c. More-ouer, these Druidists vse not to be present in warre, neither doe they pay any tribute with other men, but haue an exemption from warres, and an immunity from all other incumbraunces. Thus witnesseth Caesar himselfe. By the which wee may see, howe all nations euē of that light of nature, which yet glimpseth in the brests of men, and by the which they haue esteemed, either GOD or Gods to be adored, haue likewise iudged according vn∣to the same, that the ancients of religion are worthy to be consacred with all condigne honor and due obseruance.
CHAP. III. What the honour of the Priest-hoode was among the people of God. THat this the iudgement of all nations, did not proceed of any error of mans mind, but of a certaine feeling of the law of God wri∣ten in their heartes, the most sacred histo∣ries & the lawes which God himselfe hath made, doe proue sufficiently: for doe they not al enthronize the Priest-hood among the most principal honours? Among the people of God, the Hie-priest had al∣waies the second place next vnto the King. Among the more ancient and antique fathers, when as yet there was no lawe written, wheresoeuer true religion did flowrishe, the first-borne had alwaies this prerogatiue of honour in their fami∣lies aboue the rest of their brethren, Hee was graced with the Priest-hood. But if at any time, the Lorde of his absolute au∣thoritie, did translate the right of the first-borne vnto the younger brother, with all hee inuested him also into the same dignity of the Priest-hood: so came Iacob to bee prie∣sted. And this custome continued with the people of God, euen vnto the age of Moses, vnder whome, by the expresse commaundement of God, the Priest-hoode was translated from the first-borne in generall, vnto the tribe of Leuie. But now howe carefull God himselfe was of this; That his Priest should be honoured, the processe of Moses his historie can sufficiently testifie: neither is it needfull for me to delate al things at large: it sufficeth to haue noted the chief groūds Only this is not to be omitted, (besides that our God wold haue him represent our hie and thrise honored Priest, Christ Iesu, that the rights which of dutie belong vnto God him∣selfe: God (as an especial fauor) he hath giuen to his Priests,
when as he demised vnto them the vse of those things which were offered and brought as presents vnto him, and which it was not lawfull for any man to touch and turne vnto his own vse, that was not the Lords Hie-priest. Againe, his plea∣sure was, that the right of the tythes and tenthes, and other honours of especiall prerogatiue, which by the lawes of na∣ture did belong to God onely, should be a stipend vnto the Priests for their sacred ministery: besides, first fruits, redem∣tions of their first borne, head-pence, subsidies & such like, were by his lawes referred to the vse & benefit of the Priests, and tabernacle of the Lorde. And last of all, hee appointed them onely, the dispensation both of diuine and humaine lawes: in honor whereof, he did by law enact, that the iudg∣ment of the Hie-priest should be held sacred and inuiolable in all controuersies: vnto the which, if any man were so ob∣stinate as not to supply, his death was the lieu of his contu∣macie. Chap. IIII. Of that double honour which is due vno those Elders which rule wel, and the arguments of those that hold the contrarie. THat the Elders which rule well in the Church are worthy of double honor, (according vnto the saying of Saint Paule) all that will be accounted chri∣stians, doe confesse in wordes; but when it once commeth vnto deedes, they can hardly award them a single (God knowes) and a simple honour. But verelie, if there bee a meed, due for euery merite, then doubtlesse there is an especiall dutie to be yeelded vnto the Ministers of the church. Doth not the onely regard of ho∣nesty decree, that Parents should haue of their children, the merite of their education? Lawyers of their clyents, the fees for their counsell? Phisitions of their patients, the reward for their direction? the Tutor of his people, the stipend for his instruction? But who so faithfullie administreth vnto
the faithfull seruantes of God in sacred thinges, he doth largely containe all these benefites in one; Seeing that God hath imposed vppon the Pastors of the Church the persons of all these. For which cause doubtles, the irreligion and in∣gratitude of some Magistrats in this age is worthy the grea∣ter dishonor: who while they will seeme to be fauourites of christian Religion, defeat the Ministers thereof of theyr due Honor, & so far are they from imparting any thing of their owne thereunto, that what so euer of old hath beene conse∣crate to sacred vses, they are ready to distract vnto pro∣phane Ministeries. These men, that they may seeme to haue some colour for theyr craft, will cunningly reason the case thus: That there is not the like regard to be had of the Mi∣nistery of the Gospell in this age, as was of old of the Priest∣hood vnder the law of Moyses: That God did cocker them in those Honors he spared them: but the Ministers of the Gospell are out of that age, they are past seuen, they may shift for themselues, and learne to liue in the world, poore and inglorious. And of this Christ gaue them a good exam∣ple, (and his followers the Apostles) who of purpose did choose a poore life, and neglected the honors and pleasures of this world. Besides all this, they preach to vs the contēpt of earthly things: why should they not lead the other way them selues, which they lay out vnto others. This you heare is a popular and plausible speech, well pleasing all greedy and mis-begetting men, who regard not so much that the Church may be furnished with godly and learned Ministers, such as Christ requireth; as, that vnder this colour, they them selues may be excused of theyr irre∣ligious contempt of Gods seruants, and theyr sacriligious imbecilling of Gods Church. But these men being obdu∣rate in their base conceite, seeme for their fained and inter∣fected religion, not vnlike vnto those, who with a counter-contempt of wealth, hunt currant after hid treasure, that so they may make a gaine of their beggery, and a sweete smell of theyr druggery. The nature of Cynicks is not clean worne out, together with the name: nor yet the cowherdly affectiō
of those, that thinke fryerly beggarlines, to be Apostolique holines. Doe you not see here, how the same error hath put on sundry shapes, least by any means he himselfe should ap∣peare in it, whom no man liketh in his own likenes? In deed the very colour of contemning those thinges, which com∣monly al men do admire (as pleasures, riches, and honors) doth bring the simple people into a religious wonderment; who for the most part worship with greater reuerence the bare counterfeit of vertue, then vertue it selfe, which cannot counterfeit. But if so be they do (as they say) so greatly de∣light in the imitable vertues of Christ and his Apostles; why doe they not also take view of those forward christians in the Primatiue Church, and goe presently and sell all theyr landes, and lay the price at the Apostles feete? But now I must haue a saying also to those other colours, which they lay on, to countenance this error, least the mind being fore-seasoned with preiudice, should auerre an appro∣ued truth without iust triall. For my part, I will not willing∣ly conceale any of those things, which are layd to our charge by the patrons of this Hypocrisy. Wherefore (say they) as ri∣ches do bring with them certaine prouocations to sin, & ad∣minister nourishmēt to the same: so pouerty is the mother of all vertue, and the stepdame of all vice. For that brideleth & bringeth vnder the vntamed wildnes, and wilfullnes of mās sinfull nature. And that this is so, the aduised sentence of the best Philosophers confirme the same. For when as they (gi∣uing ouer themselues to the study of Philosophy) were not ignorant, that worldly wealth would be but theyr hinde∣rance, they spared not either to leaue them, or to lose them. The Euangelike precepts subscribe together to this opini∣on, the which in euery place doe incite vs to the lothing of riches, to the liking of pouerty, and more then that, they do euen thunder out against the rich the woes of all wretched∣nes. Contrariwise our Sauiour promiseth his blisse to the poore, and affirmeth, that it is more easie for a Cammell to daunce through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to aspire to the kingdome of Heauen. Did not him selfe
choose to be borne poore, to liue poore, to dye poore? of him selfe he sayd, The birds of the ayre haue nests, and the foxes haue holes, but the sonne of man hath not where to put his head. Also if he entertayned any into his discipline, the first lesson was to sell al they had, and giue to the poore. For that in deed, riches, are but as certayne shakels to such as follow Christ, with which they being intangled, can not possibly keepe pace with him. Neither can the minde sur∣charged with the burden of externe things, mount vp and soare aloft into the highest Heauens. Moreouer to these it is more probably added, that in the time of Constantine, there was a voice heard from Heauen, which sayd, That poison was infused into the Church. The which was thought to be vttered because of those riches, & that great wealth, with the which the godly Emperour Constantine, is sayd to haue honored the Pastors, and Bishops of the Church. But these things you must consider are commonly trikt vp and set forth after the finest fashion, and with the best side outward; and yet how many absurd things, and absonant from the mind and mea∣ning of our Lord and Sauiour do follow out of these, and fall vppon heapes. Chap. V. An aunswere to the arguments of the former chapter. BVt that the truth of the controuersie may appeare to al, al must learne to know, that those Gospell precepts, of contemning ri∣ches, were not giuen to a certain few Apo∣stles, but to all, euen as many as woulde follow Christ. Wherefore first, that di∣stinction of counsells and precepes▪ ouertur∣neth it selfe, euen in those very wordes, which goe for counsels. For God hath sette downe one lawe for all, one rule to liue well, and hee hath layd out one path to eternal life, as well in the olde, as the new Testament. Notwi¦standing if any man of any priuate purpose sette do
with himself, that he will needs liue in pouerty, God forbid, I should be his hindrance. But they which thinke, that the forsaking of all thinges, and the profession of pouerty is a thing, not commaunded to all, but giuen in counsaile to some, as a more perfect course of a godly life; I say, they are in a false beliefe.Luke. 14.33. The wordes of our Sauiour are these: So like∣wise, who so euer he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, can not be my Disciple. Where you shall vnderstand, that what so euer is commaunded as necessarily to bee obserued of the Disciple of Christ, may not by any meanes be omitted: and therefore it is manifest, that there is no such counsell giuen in that place by the Lord our Sauiour, as that it is left in our owne free power to omit the same: but the precept there is set downe more absolute, vnder the paine of damnation, if it be omitted. The cause of this error, was the mis-conceyuing of that place in Mathew, the nineteenth, and Luke the eighteenth, & Marke the tenth, where there seem to be two distinct things set down, namely, an ordinary way to eternall life, by the obseruance of Gods commaundements, and another more perfect and ready way, by the alienation of all our goods, & the dispensation of them towards the poore. In Mathew we read how our Sauiour aunswered one; If thou wilt enter into life, keepe the commaundements. Who when he had very inso∣lently boasted, that he had kept them all from his youth vp: how far he was from that perfection he boasted of, our Sa∣uiour proueth, when he brought to light the secret corrup∣tion of a couetous heart, which lay hid within, and made knowen to him, how far he was from the intire loue of his neighbour, when he commaunded him to sell his possessi∣ons, and giue to the poore. In the which notwithstanding, our Sauiour required of him no new thing, no thing extra∣ordinary, nothing that hee was not bound to doe by that same law, which he presumed he had performed: (seing ther it is commaunded that we should loue our neighbour as our selues.) For the force of the precept is this, that we owe not onely all outward thinges to God and our neyghbour,
but euē our life also, if need doth require. Of the which per∣fection, how much this stripling wanted, he then bewraied, when as Christ commaunding him to giue but his goods to the poore, he seemed to be touched so neare. And yet vnles we be at that point with our selues, as that we could wil∣lingly depart frō al that we haue, for the meere loue of God and our neighbour, we can not enter into the kingdome of God. And therefore Christ did not propound vnto the Pha∣rasie a free thing, the neglect whereof did not exclude from the kingdome of heauen; but a thing altogether necessary for him that would enter into it. And therefore when he did perceyue him depart away heauily after this precept, he ad∣ded. Verily I say vnto you, it is harde for him which is rich to enter into the kingdome of Heauen; againe I say vnto you, it is more easie for a camell to goe through the eie of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God. By which words it is most ma∣nifest, that no voluntary thing is propounded, the which if a man did performe, he should do wel, if not, he should not doe amisse (as it is to liue a single life) but a thing altoge∣ther necessary for him that would be saued. But what then meaneth our Sauiour (say they) when hee sayth, If thou wilt be perfect, goe, sell all thou hast, and giue to the poore. Seemeth he not to graunt, that the keeping of the cōmandements of God are sufficient to eternal life, but not sufficing to perfection? No verily: For that this was not the meaning of the Lord, his very wordes sufficiently declare, but that in deede he spake of that perfection which is com∣maunded in the law; of the which the young man had ob∣serued an outward showe, when as he wanted the inwarde substance. For doubtlesse, he which is not ready and resol∣ued to lay down al that he hath, & to leaue his life bloud also for the loue of his neighbour, he can not be sayd to loue his neighbour as himselfe. And therfore, seeing he would needs know what he wanted, our Sauiour very wisely reioined him to the necessary duty of charity. Wherfore this is the sense of Christ his words. If thou wilt be a perfect obseruer of the law in deede, and art desirous to tread that path into eter∣nall
life, which is layd out in the sayd perfect, and absolute performance of the law of God, keepe those commaunde∣ments of the loue of God, & thy neighbour: goe thy waies, set thy things in an order, that thou maist be ready at all times to giue vnto the poore. Now, vnlesse this precept did concern al, to what purpose are these words, It is more easie for a Camell to enter through the eie of a needle, then for him that is rich to enter into the kingdom of God. Whosoeuer therfore wil serue vnder Christ his colours, is commanded to bid father & mother and all farewell, how deare so euer they be vnto him, yea he must also not spare his own life; for vnto all it is sayd, Whosoeuer forsaketh not al he hath, cannot be my Disciple. That our Sauiour here inioyned his Disciples no new or insolent thing, the example of Abraham may perswade vs, whō God of old also cōmanded, to leaue his countrey, his kindred, & al that was precious vnto him in Chaldea, that he might goe, whether it pleased the Lord to appoint him. So did God exercise the father of the faithful; that he might be alwaies at an howrs warning to surrender his riches, & al other emoluments of his life. In like manner Christ wil haue al the true legitimat children of Abraham, to depute all which they haue to his glory, and to benefit theyr bretheren, as the cause, the time, and the place require. And this is that perfectiō which God at this day requireth vnder the Gospel, and which God of old exacted vnder the law, & before the law, without the which no man at any time shall enter into the kingdome of Heauen. In deed it becommeth the preachers of the Gospel, to appeare before all others in the contempt of worldly things: but yet there is no peculiar precept thereof giuen to them, any otherwise then to all o∣ther christians. As also for the example of Christ which they aledge, they cannot be ignorant of this, that it is set forth to be imitated, not only of the apostles & ministers of the gos∣pell, but generally of al christians of what condition soeuer. But nor patterne nor precept of Christ, either confoundeth or controleth the degrees of honor which are necessary in a common wealth. All men may lawfully be liberall towardes
the poore, and be poore themselues also in spirit, euē in the midst of their welth. Nor Daniel his lieutenancy ouer the Ba∣bylonians, nor Ioseph his iurisdictiō ouer the Aegyptiās, nor Mardochai, nor Nehemias their courting among the Persians, were any hinderance to them in the worship of God: Ney∣ther was yet the roiall Diademe of Dauid and other godly Princes any preidiudice vnto them, why they might not in∣herite the kingdome of Heauen. Wee haue read of the great wealth of Iob and Abraham, and other Patriarches, who were religious towardes God, liberall towardes the poore, and farre from all coueteousnes. Neyther doth pe∣nury conclude, neyther doth plenty exclude the contempt of riches. If a man haue nothing, and yet languishe in a de∣sire to haue, he is couetous; againe, if a man haue much but yet is not bound to that which he hath, he is the true con∣temner of all that he hath. The precepts of Christ, concerning the selling of our pos∣sessions, are vnderstood to be obserued, not so much in the work it selfe, as in the willingnes of minde to performe the same, according as time and place doth require.Actes. . Barnabas (one of the seuenty) sold no lād, before he see the necessity of the brethren to exact the same. So long as the Lord liued (whom also he followed) he kept possession of all his possessions. In like manner, such times may fall (and we may fal into those times) in the which christian charity shal require euery chri∣stian to do the like: but where ther is no such need, it is bet∣ter kept, and it shall doe more good and vppon more occa∣sions, then if all were sold at once, & afterwards want wher∣with to relieue other, or themselues, &c. I dare say, that A∣braham, Iob, and Dauid followed the precepts of the Gospel, & good christians are as well to imitat them as Christ, & his Apostles. Our Sauiour himselfe witnesseth of Zacheus, that he was the child of Abraham, in imitation of the faith which was in Abraham n: amely, when as he vndertook to giue halfe of that he had to the poore, & to restore four fould wher he had defrauded. By which words of our Sauior, the vanity of that reason is conuinced, which affirmeth that God cockred
the Patriarches and the Leuitical Priests, (as a carnal people) in riches and honour, which thinges the Lord hath denyed to christian Pastors. In deede we will not deny, but some things were giuen in those times of an especial and a partiall fauor, and that God did winke at some things of old, which at this day he wil not ouer-see: For then the cōmon error of al nations, had in som things inuaded the people of God also, (as in their many wiues and often diuorses, &c.) But, that God did not onely pamper the Fathers with things externall, and did not erect the minds of the faithful to things eternal, it cannot be spo∣ken without a mouth of blasphemy against God, and a slan∣der of iniury against the Fathers. Ther was the same faith of the Fathers, & vs, the same doctrine of both the testaments: the time onely is altered, (such things being fulfilled which fore-shewed of the Messias) in religion & maners ther is no such alteration. Who wil say (and not repent him) that those most sage & wise Heroicks of that age, were ignorant of the nature of riches, & the condition of this present life? name∣ly, that they were diffluent & distrustful, & scarce worthy to be taken for goods; and that man ought to aspire to a grea∣ter & more excellent good, which is certaine, and not to be suspected, and stands vppon no die. The very Philosophers knew these things, and argued very religiously of them: and did the diuine Prophets, the seruants of God conceiue no∣thing more noble then these earthly things? nothing can be sayd of purpose more absurd. Wherfore let this opinion fly, and let vs resolue vppon that which is certain: That ther is one way of life prescribed to all men, and that, the onely one way of vertue, constant & to be continued in al ages: For it was gi∣uen of God. And againe: That we may safely follow the Fathers, when they cannot be proued to haue erred from that course of life, which was prescribed both to them & to vs: and ther∣fore, if it were then lawfull among Gods people, for the Priests and Leuites to inioy riches, and to be adorned with honors, the same is also lawfull at this day for the Ministers of the Gospell in a christian common wealth.
As for the Philosophers (which as they say) had riches in so light account: I also say, that the same thing is taught vs by Christ, after a more excellent maner, and that he is not wor∣thie the name of a Christian, that doth not excell the Philo∣sophers in the same thing. For they both erred from the true scope, and besides a vaine and popular applause, they gained nothing by their foolish and vnprofitable losse. Nei∣ther hath Christ taught vs to cast awaye our goods, but to giue them vnto the poore. Goods are receiued of God, for the vse of man; & they which are rich receiue them of God, not to loose, but to laye out: but they, as if the thinges themselues had beene euill, not of mans corruption, but of their owne condition, cast them cleane away. When goods are called the prouocations of euill, you must vnderstand that they are so called, not that themselues are in fault, but they onely which abuse them. Whatsoeuer God hath crea∣ted is good, and hath some good vse: that therfore one hath cast all his wealth into the Sea, an other hauing conuaied all his substance into a few precious stones, crusht them all vnto powder, it was an action of vaine and ridiculous applause, of no good vse. But the precepts of Christ do direct vs to the loue of God and our neighbours, vnto whome wee owe all that we haue. The contempt which wee see in some currish Philoso∣phers, and certaine smokie brethren of this age, is far from the loue, either of God, or of man: and it is well seene, howe farre it is estranged euen from that humanity, and humaine ciuility which ought to bee in men. But the pouertye of Christ and his Apostles, was of another kinde. Our Sauiour lead a priuate life with Ioseph and his mother Mary, and got his liuing with labour and handy-worke, not with begging and loytering. He tooke care for his mother Marie, and also prouided for her according to that poore estate, which hee of singuler and especial purpose had chosen. Neither could riches haue done him any hurt, if hee would haue possessed them: But that the least occasion of suspicion might not be giuen to any, that hee aspired to any earthly kingdome, his
diuine purpose was to liue poore, and lie hid for a time: for if the world had knowen the Lord of glorie, they would ne∣uer haue crucified him: but that which a few wise men did, no doubt all the worlde would haue doone the like: they would haue brought presents vnto him from the furthest parts of the world. And what would Tiberius (thinke you,) haue done amongst the rest: who (in glorious as hee was) canonized Christ amongst the number of Gods, and tooke order with the Senate, that the same should bee done by publique decree? After thirty yeares space, he betooke himselfe to preach, and within no great while, hee had no small family: hee in∣tertained first twelue Apostles, and after them seuenty other disciples. For all the which he so prouided, as that they ne∣uer wanted. And yet no small portion could suffice to kepe so great a company, were it to find them but sparinglie. By the which (as by the way) wee may geather, how great the bounty and liberality of good & deuout men was towards Christ. That he maketh answere to a certaine curious compani∣on, and telleth him, That the birds of the aire haue nests, and the Foxes holes, but the Sonne of man hath not where to put his head: the answere must be vnderstood according vnto the conceit of the demaunder, not according to the bare words of the re∣plyer. He expected some great commodity to be had by the retinue of Christ, and supposed hee could not be without some stately and magnificent receit. (For wee read in Iohn, that Christ shewed his house to a couple of his disciples) But our Sauiour would allure no man vnto him with such baits, as with the which most men are intangled, (as are honours and riches and such like,) rather did he lay before him such thinges, as with the which most men are most commonlie terrified (as are slaunders, and need, and dangers.) I marie sir (will some say) therefore it beseemeth not the Prelates of the church, and other ministers of the gospell, to roost aloft in Princely pallaces, and stately edifies. True in∣deed, if so be they were in like condition of time and place,
as in the which our Sauiour liued: that is, if they liued vnder a Magistrate estranged from the true religion, who were like to be iealous ouer the true Messias and his Ministers, least they should affect the kingdome, if he should see them frol∣like in such thinges, as by the which they might make some way vnto a kingdome, (as are great riches, stately pallaces, strong townes, & costly retinues:) and besides, if they shuld conuerse amongst a people, which could conceiue no other kingdome of Messias, but such as should flowrish in al such royall ensignes. But the Lord by this his meane estate affe∣cted two things: First he preuented the Iewes cauils, so that they could not iustly accuse him for affecting the kingdome; and besides, hee taught withall, that his kingdome had no inter-common with the kingdomes of this world: So that by the one, hee auoyded the enuy and iealousie of some, and with the other hee confuted the common error of all, concerning this one kingdome of the Messias? If so bee there had bene no danger of these thinges, but the mysterie of our redemption might haue beene wrought as well with the suspected pompe of externe maiestie: no doubt the ow∣ner of townes and towers and al external things, would not himselfe haue refused them. For all the pallaces and Prouin∣ces of the worlde ought of right to haue receiued the King Christ; when he came into the world, he came into his own; and the true heire came, not onely of his fathers kingdome, but also of the whole world. And therefore, that the blind and besotted Iewes, did not intertaine him with that ho∣nor which beseemed him, their negligence therein is not to be imitated, for their vngodlines cannot any waies be excu∣sed. I would they could but tell mee, with what triumphes, with what courteous and friendly intertainment our Saui∣our should haue beene receaued of the Romaine Empe∣rours and theyr deputies, if hee had beene well knowen of the Hye-priests of the Iewes, and other Princes and go∣uernours which ruled the world; (if he had bene wel know∣en vnto them?)
The people, and so many as beleeued that hee was the pro∣mised Messias, with what solemne clamors, and triumphant iubelies did they receiue him, and conuay him into the ho∣ly citty? Those honours and others which were giuen him, our Sauiour did not reiect them, but rather defended them as hee might, against the enuious. And had there bene that religion in the Hie-priests, Scribes and Pharises, and the rest of the Iewes which ought to haue bene; their duety was to haue thronged together for the receit of the Sauiour of the worlde, and to haue solemnised the intertainement of the promised Messias, with all honour and reuerence which is due, & might be done by men, not only to a mortall Prince, but to an immortall God. Wherefore, it is but a bad conse∣quence, to argue from that which was done of error & igno∣rance, to that which ought to be done of right & alegeance. Neither hath that any force to binde vs, which the Lord did of especiall purpose extraordinarily, where as there remai∣neth not now the like vse of that purpose. That his wil was to be borne in an out roome, and to be found in a fowle stable, and that his owne decree was to bee crucified of the Iewes: it prescribeth no law vnto vs, vnto the which wee are bound to obey. Neither is his example heerein to be admit∣ted, but his purpose to be admired. And that which I say of our Sauiour, the like do I af∣firme of his Apostles and other Ministers, according vnto euery mans place. For as the estate of our Lorde and Saui∣our, had beene after a far other sort, if all men, or the Iewes at the least, with whome hee did conuerse, had but know∣en that hee was the Lord of glory: So likewise doe I affirme, that the estate of the Ministery ought to be much more glo∣rious vnder a christian Magistrat, where Christ is wel know∣en, then vnder an Heathenish gouernment estranged from the knowledge of Christ. As for the estate of pouertie, I hold as I haue proued, that the same which is commanded in the Gospel indefinitlie, is inioyned all Christians generally: Neither are the Prelates of the Church any otherwise bound thereto, then are the rest.
How many soeuer the Lord in his last iudgement shall find vpon iust account to haue liued rich (against whom he hath pronounced the woe of his eternall curse) they all shall pe∣rish euerlastingly: and they onely which shall bee found a∣mong the poore in spirit (vnto whom the kingdome doth appertaine) shall liue eternally. The precept of Euangelike pouertie, which Christ followed, and left in charge to be fo∣lowed of vs, is this; namely, Lowlines of minde, which is the most peremptorie contemner of al visible things. The pore in spirit is he, which beareth not a hautie spirit, neyther ho∣nereth after dishonest desires: which liueth content with his estate, and committeth his whole life vnto God: if hee haue nothing, or if it be little which hee hath, he is not soli∣cited with disquiet cares; but trusteth in God his maker, of whom he hopeth for his daily bread: Againe, if he be rich, his spirit is not exalted by reason of his riches, but well re∣membreth, that he brought nothing vnto this world, ney∣ther shall carrie any thing away: hee knoweth, that riches are but wash, and waxe wayward, that they may easily bee translated from him, that they may many waies perish with him: he acknowledgeth, that he hath receyued them of the Lord, neither to be kept in ward, nor to be spent in wast. All which partes of spirituall pouertie the Apostle requireth in his first to Timothie, the sixt chapter, where he admonisheth Timothie to exhort the rich vnto this pouertie: Charge them that are rich (saith he) in this world, that they be not high minded, that they trust not in vncertain riches, but in the liuing God (which giueth vs abundantly all things to enioy) that they doe good, and be rich in good workes, readie to distribute. Heere haue we that po∣uertie which our Sauiour requireth to be in rich men: which (as you may see) doth nothing at all inuert the vse and pro∣prietie of earthly thinges. This I say is that pouertie, the mo∣ther of vertue, which all the holy Patriarches and Prophets, with all the Apostles & first Christians, and last of all, which all the godly haue alwayes obserued, and our Sauiour him∣selfe both in word and deede, both in plentie and pouertie, taught to be obserued. But is not this the verie Atheisme of
Iulian the recreant, and the onely Saracisme of the enemies of Christian religion, when they haue robbed and rifled the Churches of their wealth and dignities, to insult ouer the poore Ministers, and to say, they ought to be poore after the example of Christ and his Apostles? As for that they fetch in the vncertaine sound of a certain voice, heard in the time of Constantine: it is to be vnderstood (if it be to be beleued) of Arrius and his inuenomed doctrine, not of the forged donations of Constantine.. The wealth and riches which Con∣stantine vouchsafed, could not bee offensiue to the Church, seeing they were neither so great as they make them, nor yet seduced the Bishops and Elders from their Ecclesiasti∣call functions, as they would haue them. But then, the hus∣banding & disposing of them was after such a sort, as might easely cleare the Bishops from all suspition of auarice. Chap. VI. That the honour which is giuen to the Pastors of Christ his Church, is ioined with a certaine Religion towards God. THat the Priests and Leuites vnder the olde law were exceedingly well prouided for, & that according to Gods owne ordinance and institution, it is a thing better knowne, then that any man can make any question of it. The same is as plain a case also for the Ministers of the Gospell vnder the new Te∣stament, and that by the same authoritie, and for the same reasons; were it not for the sacrilegious impiety of some, who while (as they say) they seeke to shun one occasion of euill in the Church, they bring vpon the same many miserable extreems. Neither is want lesse to be feared then abundāce, to breed the bain of the church. In what things our Fathers (as we thinke) offended, we see verie clearely; but where wee offend our selues, we wil not grope with our hands: Lynces in other mens faults, Moules in our owne. That there is an honor due vnto Parents, Lawyers, Tutors, & physitions, it is
most manifest: neither is there any man, that is not a bad man, that will denie it. How much rather are all Christians deuoted vnto the Ministers of the Gospell, seeing they alone doe beare the person & the burden of these all? For they are both Fathers, & Tutors, & Lawyers, and Physitions: & ther∣fore, how much more they excell in worthines, so much more worthy to be preferred in worship. Besides all this, the reuerence which is giuen to these and such like, is, onely of curtesie & common ciuilitie, and respecteth man onely, and our duties to men: but the honor which is due vnto Gods Ministers, respecteth God himself, & his heuenly ministery. They are the seruants of God, his legates, the dispensers of the mysteries of God, & are sent of God to discharge an he∣uenly embassie for God in the person of Christ: whō, who∣soeuer contemneth, contemneth the Lord Iesus, & God the Father, their iudge and reuenger. The countenance, or con∣tempt of God his seruantes, toucheth God himselfe verie nearely, who is alwaies most honored or dishonored in his Minister. Wherefore that prerogatiue in the Church, with the which not man so much, as God him selfe is hono∣red, is sacred and religious, and hath the promise of reward not onely in this life, but in the life to come. Mathew the tenth and the fifteenth chap. He which receiueth you, receiueth me; & he which receiueth me, receiueth him that sent me. He which receiueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shal receiue a Prophets reward; and he that receiueth a iust man in the name of a iust man, shal haue a iust mans reward: & whosoeuer shall giue drinke to one of these little ones, euen a cuppe of cold water onely in the name of a Disciple, verely I say, vnto you, he shall not lose his reward. The A∣postle Paul in his Epistle to the Philippians, calleth those pre∣sents which were sent to him, an odour that smelleth sweet; a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God. So that in the poore, whose wants we releeue, Christ is worshipped, but in the Ministers, whose calling we maintain, Christ is honored. The Leuitical sacrifices haue had their end: but the Euan∣gelical sacrifices shal haue no end, vntil the worlds end. The Euangelike sacrifices are the confessiō of faith, vnfained thāks
giuing, and all the trophees of prayse, which wee erect and direct vnto the glorie of God: as also the chearefull boun∣tie, and charitable good workes wee shew foorth vnto the comfort of men. For which cause the Apostle to the Hebrues exhorteth all men that they would continually offer the sacrifice of prayse vnto God through Christ, that is, the fruit of the lips which confesse his name: and (moreouer,) that they would not forget to doe good, and to distribute: for they are the sacrifices (saith he) with the which God is well pleased. Howsoeuer therefore prophane men, make small account of that honour which is due vnto the Elders, notwithstanding, that the same is sacred, and to bee compared with the sacrifices which were offered of olde in the Lords Temple, it is apparantly manifest by the mani∣fold testimonies of Scripture. CHAP. VII. Certaine other reasons confuted, and the truth confirmed by manie testimonies of Scripture. BVt it shall not bee amisse for vs to see in this place, how farre out of all order the frenzie of certaine vngodly men will hurrie it selfe: who will not onely not deigne to contribute of their owne to the Ministers, but they hardly vouchsafe them those honest stipends, which they pay vnto them out of the robberies of their owne Chur∣ches. Out of that one example of Paule, they thinke they may set the Minister to plough and harrow, or whatsoeuer mannuarie drudgerie: that by this meanes, all sacred stu∣die might languish, and the little flocke of Christ, being left desolate of learned Pastors, might lie open to the rapine & torture of foxes, and cater-pillers, and wolues of all sortes. There is no great neede (say they) of any great store of Lear∣ning in a Minister: it is enough, if with a little zeale, and a few good wordes they can exhort the people to a certaine
kind of verbal deuotion: and for this, the Bible is extant in the mother toong: as for the deepe-sprung-brestes of the learned Muses, it sufficeth diuines, if they may get but a smacke of them by the way, or sucke them as through an hardle. O diuine wisedome, Christ, in thy Fathers bosome, is not this with that recreant Iulian, to enuy thy Christian people the liberall Artes? And that which not? And thou seest it. But let vs returne to Paule, who in an Epistle to the Co∣rinthians recounteth of the labour of his handes, by the which hee got his owne liuing, as a prayse to himselfe, and a reproch to the Corinthians; shall it followe of this, that all Ministers of the Gospell ought to doe the like? for so they thinke. But now can not I tell, whether I shal rather disclaim the impudencie, or disdaine the ignorance of these men: see∣ing the Apostle himselfe doth plainely resolue, that hee did more in that case then he needed, and lesse then hee might. For had he not as great right, to put them to as great char∣ges, as did the other Apostles? But for certaine causes hee would not, and therefore spared them. But who seeth not heere, that this the commemoration of the Apostle, is a cer∣taine exprobation vnto the people of that dutie they negle∣cted? So long as that Epistle shall bee read among men, that shame will sticke fast to the Corinthians, that they suf∣fered so excellent an Apostle to want, in so plentifull a Cit∣tie. Doubtlesse therefore, it is but too too bad dealing both with Paule, and with vs, to vrge that which the Apostle was vrged to doe once or twise vpon occasion of necessitie (that he might offend no man, or least any being offended, should say or thinke, he preached the Gospell, not so much for the loue of religion, as for the hope of reward:) and to passe o∣uer as neuer seene the more autentike examples of other A∣postles, and of Paule also himselfe, who else where openly te∣stifieth, that the Churches had abundantly ministred vnto him all thinges necessary, & that hee also freely exacted the same thing of them, and that of dutie: (as in the fourth to the Philippians, from the tenth verse to the twentie, and to
Philemon, from the eight verse to the nineteene. But what is the reason (may we thinke) that that one place of the Co∣rinthes should bee so much noted, which maketh mention of the labour of the Apostle his handes, and that notable place of the Actes should bee so little spoken of, where it is reported, that the faithfull layde the price of their possessi∣ons at the Apostles feete, and that they left all their substance in their handes? And why is not that example of Ananias and Saphira as well quoted, who for detracting somewhat of the price of their owne landes, were seuerely punished by present death? Ingrating couetousnes no doubt, and irreligious ingratitude hath made them there, as quicke sighted as Argus, but here as bleare-eyed as Oules, so that thereat they stare, herein they are starke blind. But, that the intoxicate frenzie of these men may ap∣peare the more outragious, it shall well requite our paines, if in this place we make regarde to the Euangelike precepts of Christ in this cause. In the tenth of Mathew, and the tenth of Luke, wee reade, and wee may remember, how the Lorde, when hee had sent his Apostles to preach the Gos∣pell, gaue them authoritie to feede vpon those things that they found amongst the faythfull. The labourer (saith hee) is worthie of his reward. And Paule in his first Epistle to Timo∣thie, the fift chapter: The Elders which rule well (sayth he) are worthie of double honour, especially they which labour in the worde and doctrine: For the Scripture saith; Thou shalt not mussle the mouth of the Oxe which treadeth out the corne. And in his first E∣pistle to the Corinthians the ninth chapter, from the fift verse to the fifteene, he maketh a plaine and a plentifull de∣monstration by seuen seuerall argumentes, that they which preach the Gospell, ought to liue of the Gospell. His first reason is taken from the Soldiour: That no man goeth to warre-fare of his owne costes and charges. The second, is drawne from the husbandmen: Who, if they plant a vine, it is reason that they should eate of the fruite of the vine. The third is borrowed of the shepheard: Who feed their flockes, and are fedde by their flockes. And that
no man should thinke the Apostle spake of affection, he ad∣deth: Say I these thinges according to man? Namely, as a man moued with auarice, or carryed away with couetousnesse? Nay then he prouoketh of his side the law it selfe, which al∣wayes inioyned vs a certaine ciuilitie, and semblable kind∣nes euen vnto brute beastes; (if they doe vs any seruice) that wee may well knowe, how much rather wee ought to per∣forme the same towards men, I say towardes men, which a∣boue all men, deserue well of all men. And this is the fourth argument in that place: which he amplifieth by the simili∣tude of him which ploweth, and thresheth out the corne, for the commoditie thereof. It is written in the law of Moses (sayth he) Thou shalt not mussle the mouth of the Oxe, that trea∣deth out the corne; Doth God take care for Oxen? eyther sayth hee not this altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt it is writ∣ten: that hee which eareth, should eare in hope, and that he which thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. The fift argument is drawne from them which sowe corne, in hope to make a good haruest: If we haue sowne to you (sayth he) spirituall thinges, is it a great thing if wee reape your carnall thinges? There is no proportion at all betweene these thinges; we giue you much greater things then we receiue of you. The sixt argument is drawne from the diuine institu∣tion of God, vnder the old Testament; because it was then of the Lord ordained, that the Priestes and Leuites, so many as minister at the Altar, should liue of the Altar: Doe you not knowe (sayth hee) that they which minister about holie thinges, eate of the thinges of the Temple? and that they which waite at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? And last of all hee sheweth, that the like institution was ordeyned of the Lord, vnder the new Testament: That they which preach the Gospell, shall also liue of the Gospell. By which reasons it is made as cleare as noone-day, that all Christians are bound in dutie to honour their Pastors. And how then should they be excused of ingratitude & vngodlines, which defraud them of their due honour?
That the contempt of the Minister redoundeth to God their Maister, and that no man so much as God himselfe is thereby held in scorne, that one place in the sixt to the Ga∣lathians the sixt verse doth abundantly declare, which is af∣ter this sort: Let him that is taught in the worde communicate with him that taught him, all his goodes. Bee not deceiued: God is not mocked; For whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall hee also reape; for he that soweth to the flesh, shall reape corruption, but hee that soweth to the spirite, shall of the spirite reape life euerlasting. Let him which is instructed (sayth hee) communicate all his goodes. Good Lord (will some say) what meaneth he by this? What he meaneth may easily be vnderstood by a Synecdoche: by the which he sayth All his goods, for part of all his goods. How great a part, it is not prescribed; vnto the old people the tenth part was layd forth; vnto the new people no part: seeing they owe of dutie vnto Christ their Lord and Sauiour, not the tenth onely, but the ninth, eight, seuenth, sixt, fift, and euen the whole, and all, if the necessitie of the Church requireth so much. To this he addeth; God is not mocked: as if hee should haue saide: It is but in vaine, that you make so many vaine excuses: for here the question is not of mans mainteinance, but of God and the Gospels countenance: not what honour you shew to man, but what due regard ye yeelde vnto God: thinke not you pintch on the Parsons side, when God himselfe is the partie; you may haplie de∣lude them, but God will not be dallyed withall. Here there∣fore, if wee could but once conceiue the least part of that which all rich men, and Nobles, Barons, Earles, Dukes, and Kinges themselues doe owe vnto the Ministers of Gods Church; and that the same might once bee freely giuen, ac∣cording as Gods lawes doe commaund, and the godly du∣tie of a gratefull minde doth require: how great might we think would the treasure of the Church be, in a good Chri∣stian common-wealth?
Chap. VIII. That the good examples of our fore-fathers, prescribe a lawe to their successors. WHen our Fore-fathers had well considered that there was no certaine prescription set downe, as a lawe vnto them for this mat∣ter vnder the Gospel, which precisely limi∣ted what and howe much euery man was to giue: they wisely & willingly set downe a law vnto themselues and their successors and they gaue vnto the church tithes, oblations, glebes, and yearly reuenues from out their possessions: that thereby the Pastor might bee maintained, the poore releeued, and the youth instructed: The which voluntarie donations are now ratefied vnto the Church by the same lawes, which make good to euerie man the propriety of his own possessions. Who doubteth of the liberality of the Primitiue Chri∣stians, (which brought the price of their lands to the Apo∣stles,) but that they might as well haue giuen them the land it selfe, if the state of the time and place had bene such? But they which did then expect the subuersion of that place and people, and looked for no better world vnder those vngod∣lie Priestes, then their Lorde and Sauiour had found before them, they thought good to sell all, and onely of their meer bountie, (no man compelling them thereunto) they com∣mitted al the mony to be at the Apostles curtesie. This their example hath beene well followed by our godly forefathers, who willingly out of their own wealth haue liberally proui∣ded for the church, not for once, but for all ages: the which thing they thought to be neerly appertaing to their duetie. I am not ignorant that this religious action hath degene∣rated into a preposterous zeale: for which cause, (curteous reader) I giue thee to vnderstand, that I do not here defend any godles, or superstitious donations, but onely note vnto thee the great vntowardnes of mans nature, which is alwais more prone to ruine into contrary enormities, then to run
on in the way of harmelesse mediocrity. Wee easily stumble from one extreame to another: but yet their fall is more to∣lerable, which transgresse in excesse, then they which offend in defect: as it is alwaies more easie to deduct from aboun∣dance that which is needlesse, then to supply in an exigent that which is needful. Happely some cur-modgen, or cursed Church-robber will scorn at this; who haue alredy set down this for their rest, ether with a gredy mind to rifle the church or with a galled conscience to reteine that they haue rifled from the church, rather then of any godly deuotion to passe any thing of their owne vnto the welfare thereof. But let him scorne at me, and scorne for me: yet let him beware he laugh not God to scorne▪ it sufficeth me, if he can so satisfie God. CHAP. IX. That the oblations of Christians, are part of Gods worship. ALbeit God be not to be wone by gifts (for what needeth he, seeing hee needeth not a∣nie) yet notwithstanding he requireth som fruit of our religious thoughts, and some testimonie of our loyall mind, and he will be honored of our earthly substance: for this is part of that worship which is due vnto God, and in the which wee prooue and professe our selues thankefull, for those benefits we haue receiued. Do you not know, that God will bee so worshipped in spirite and truth, (that is, in mind and faith) that in the mean while, there be no want of extearne worship in the honour and homage of our bodies? For he is the maker and maintainer, both of bo∣dy and soule, and therefore of right hee is to be worshipped in them both. And are not our bodies the temples of the ho∣ly Ghost, which dwelleth in vs? In like manner, seeing hee is also the onely doner of all our wealth and worldly goods, of like right he requireth our duty, and his honor in this be∣halfe. Whereupon our Lord and Sauiour, being mooued in a case of paying tribute to Caesar, made this answere, That wee must giue vnto God, that which is Gods, and vnto Caesar that which is due vnto Caesar: shewing thereby, that there is a tribute due
to be paid vnto God also, as well as to Caesar, as a testimony of our loyall subiection to his diuine Maiestie. And is not the reason also as great for our heauenly King, as an earthly Caesar? Solomon in his Prouerbs, among many other religious precepts, hath giuen vs this: Honour the Lord in thy riches, and in the first fruits of all thy increase: and thy barnes shalbe filled with aboundaunce, and thy wine presses shall burst themselues with new wine. For no doubt we owe a tribute to the Lord, as vnto the great King, no otherwise then to an earthly Prince: vnto whom wee may pay tribute for two respects: both that hee may be able for those charges he vndertaketh for the com∣mon-wealth, & also, that we may testifie vnto him our feal∣ty and subiection, as to our lawfull King: the first being for our vse, the second for his honour. But now, the first of these hath no place in God, neither doth hee require any thing of vs in that behalfe: but the latter is so much the more due to God, by how much the more God is greater than man, and the profession of subiectiō, is necessary in euery faithful chri∣stian. Wherfore, after the Lord had appointed Israel a pecu∣liar people to himselfe, forthwith, as Prince and chiefe Lord ouer his people, he demanded the tenth of all their increase, with orher rites and royalties of his supreame power; And wheras it was alwaies an heinous matter among the Esterne Monarks, to appear before the King without a present: God required the like honor of his people; namely for that hee was both king and Lord ouer his people. For which cause, in the law, where all the males are commanded to appeare be∣fore the Lord, they are forbidden to come neere without an offring. Moreouer, is there not yet extant in Malachy a sham∣full rebuke against the Iewes, which practised deceit in their first fruits, and in their tythes? That sacrilege the Lorde iust∣lie punished in them with the dire of a contagious dearth: the which notwithstanding, hee promiseth (if they will a∣mend that fault) that hee would open the windowes of hea∣uen, and powre out vppon them a gracious plentye of all thinges. The wordes of the Prophet are these: VVill a man spoyle his Iudges? but yee haue spoyled mee, and say, in what
what things haue we spoiled thee? in tythes and first fruits. Yee are cursed with cursing it selfe, for ye the whole nation haue spoiled me. Bring ye all the tithes into the store-house, and let there bee meat in mine house, and proue me now saith the Lord of hosts, if I wil not open vnto you the windowes of heauen, that I may poure vpon you a bles∣sing, that their may be no end of aboundance &c. Among the peo∣ple of God it was alwais reputed an special exercise of gods religion, to pay tithes truly of all that they possessed: which they knew to be giuen, not so much to a mortall priest, as to the immortall God. Doth not the Pharisie in the gospel glo∣ry in his fidelitie of true tything, as in a rare virtue? CHAP. X. An answere to certaine obiections: the which it is confirmed by that the ministers of the gospel are worthy no lesse honor then were the priests of old among the people of God. BVt it is excepted, that the times are alte∣red: that at this day vnder the gospel, the Priesthood is trāslated into Christ, whose shadow it was: that hee hath imposed an end to all outward rites: by which means the right of tything, is also antiquated with the Priest-hoode, and all that out∣ward glorie which made the antique Priests more honora∣ble is therwithall ecclipsed. Neither is there any man at this day which can arrogate to himselfe (without impiety) those auncient honours of the former priest-hood. Is it not rege∣stred among the chiefe errors of Antichrist, that he vaunteth and aduanceth himselfe for Hic-priest? Because that honour at this day, is proper and peculiar to Christ alone. In place of the auncient Priest-hood, which was accompanied with an externall and a religious maiestie, our Sauiour hath sub∣stituted the Ecclesiastical ministery, base and abiect, in great disgrace, and cleane out of countenance: And hath hee not giuen them their christning also, according to their calling?
For therefore he gaue them the seruile names of Apostles, and Ministers, and Deacons, and Bishops and Pastors, set∣ting aside all titles of Honor and dignity, as are the names of Fathers, and Doctors, and Lords and such like: that they might knowe, what they were to conceyue of them selues & their Ministery, and that the people might likewise learne what reckoning to make of theyr paines, and theyr persons. Here is a faire tale surely, and well soothed. But what of all this? that the Pastors and Bishops of Christ his Church, are worthy lesse Honor in a christian common wealth, then were of yore the Elder Priests? Why then let vs conclude with al a lya or too: that the leuitical priesthood is more ho¦norable thē Christs; & that the ministery of the law is more glorious, then that of the Gospell, then the which if there can be any assertion more absurd, this conclusion of theirs shall goe for no bad confection. For if the Honor due to the Minister, be to be measured according to the outward shew, we may well conclude, that Aaron was worthy double re∣uerence, and our Sauiour the high Priest thrise sacred, none at all. For why? he was inuestured with no mitre, no labels, nor did he glister with gold and precious stones. But let vs first take that they giue vs in good worth; (namely that the Priests of olde were to be honored with no small obsequy) & then let vs examine the case, what is to be deducted ther∣of from the Euangelique Minister. You are to vnderstand therefore, that in most parts of the old ceremonies, many times two things did meete in one, which notwithstanding were diuerse and distinct in them selues: of which the one did containe the shadow and promise of that which was to be exhibited in Christ, the o∣ther did pertayn to some proper and especiall duety in the Church: the shadowes are ceased (those things being perfor∣med which in Christ were promised:) but the bond of espe∣cial duty remaineth as yet not cancelled. For example sake: the commaundement of keeping the Sabaoth, hath a pro∣mise of eternall rest, and a shadow of the rest of our bodies the seuenth day; and besides that, it includeth a morall du∣tie
of seruing of God, and ceasing from our labours. The o∣ther precepts also do cōtain that duety of external worship, which is due vnto God, together with the rites of that time: the rites being relinguished, the worship of God to be retai∣ned. The like we may say of the Priesthood, in the which ther were sundry respects: Whatsoeuer was typical, was determi∣ned in Christ: but of the other partes which were morall, (namely such as concerned the instructiō of the people, the ministery of the Sacraments, & the regiment of the church) the manner is changed, but the kinde remaineth: ther is not the like order in circumstance, but the same ordinance in substance of the office. The chiefe parts of the Priests functi∣on were these: to teach religion, to interprete the law, to go∣uerne the Church, to administer the Sacraments, to stande between God and the people, to make sacrifice, & to purge sins. All which parts, albeit our Lord and Sauiour hath only wholly discharged, and some of them also so peculiarly im∣proued to himselfe, as that they cannot be imparted with any mortall thing besides him selfe: yet notwithstanding he hath made many of them of that nature, as that without a∣ny disparagement to his person they might be left in com∣mon to others. In deede no sinner can bee made a sufficient mediator between God and man. (Neyther can he which is not pure from the guilt of sinne him selfe, expiat with bloud the sinnes of man, or auert by death the wrath of God.) The auncient Priests bare the figure onely of those more then diuine functions, but the thing it selfe was in Christ alone; And therfore whosoeuer at this day shal challenge to himself the one of these, committeth blasphemy against Christ. But as the Lord did nothing in derogation of his heauen∣ly dignity, when he gaue power vnto all christians to offer spirituall sacrifice, namely the sacrifice of praise, and praier, &c. (For al they which in a true faith worship God are made Kings and Priests:) euen so likewise, without any prophana∣tion of his peculiar Priesthood, hath he committed the o∣ther parts thereof (which I touched before) namely the tea∣ching of religion, the expounding of the law, the ministring
of the Sacraments, the gouerning of the Church, and such like, I say he hath graunted and demised these and such like parts of his diuine Priesthood to his Apostles & Chuch mi∣nisters: who in this respect may participat the honor of the old Priesthood without impiety, & may also be called Priests without gealosie. The which name although in the first age of the Church, we doe not read that it was giuen to the Mi∣nisters of the Church, least happely the Ministers of the olde Synagogue, & the new Church might be confounded: (For as yet the old Priesthood remayned, or the flesh memory thereof continued) yet afterwards, the Fathers did not amis, when they renewed the same againe in themselues, the Pro∣phet Esay being their author, & the spirit of God their war∣rant, who diuined long before, that God should raise to him selfe Priests & Leuits out of the Gentiles. Neyther is there a∣ny daunger at all in the name at this day, were it not for the sacrilege of the Bishop of Rome, who hath set vp Altar a∣gainst Altar, & Priesthood against Priesthood, & the sacrifice of the Masse, against the sacrifice of Christ, inuading by all meanes those partes of the Priesthood, which are peculiar to Christ alone: of which matter we are not to speake in many words at this time Briefly, this we desire may be made kno∣wen to all, that we detest the impiety of the Romaine Anti∣christ, & for so much as pertaineth to this part of the Priest∣hood, we acknowledge no other Priest but the Lord Iesus. In the other parts (which we haue noted) wee hold, that the A∣postles & other Pastors of the church, haue lawfully vnderta∣ken the dignity, as of their legacy, so of the Priesthood also. Now then, I ioyne more chosely with them for the issue of their whole argument, & answere, That whatsoeuer in the le∣uiticall Priestood did fore-shadow the office of Christ, is vt∣terly abolished by the bloudshed of Christ, of the which no part may be vsurped by any mortall man: Againe, that the rites, ceremonies, & outward pomp of the Priesthood, as wel in the ornature of the body, as the ordinaunce of tithes (as they were then challēged) are togither deceased by the same meanes: but yet, that honor which was due to thē in regard
of the worthines of theyr holy ministery, is by no means im∣paired, perished much lesse. The Priesthood of Aaron being abrogated, the rights of that Priesthood after their seuerall manner are also abrogated, and with them the ministery of the Church is translated from the Tribe of Leuy, to the com∣pany of Apostles, and their successors. In whom seeing all things which merit any Honor, are greater then they which were in the Leuiticall Priests, doth it not necessarily follow, that a christiā doth owe no lesse honor to his Pastor, then the Iew did perform to his Priest? I confesse the duty of tithes & oblations (after that manner and order they were offered vnder Moyses) are ceased vnder Christ. Not that christiā peo∣ple should be lesse bounteous towardes their Pastors, then were the Iewish nation towards their Priests; but rather, that the free people should exceede the seruile, and that a chri∣stian should doe that of his owne accord, which the Iew did by constraint. For where as christians haue receyued of the Lord, not onely the like graces, but farre greater blessings then the Iewes: and seeing the Ministery of them whom the Lord hath set ouer his church, is in nothing inferior, or lesse necessary then the Ministery of the law, of force, if not rather of duety, there remaineth as great a necessity of due honor for this, as for that; at the least no lesse: seeing that what so∣euer was ceremonious in the olde oblations of tithes and offerings, is so diminished, as that what so euer was morall therein, reteyneth his force still. Had there been no propor∣tion between both these Ministeries, & the necessary duties of them both, the Scripture would neuer haue sayd, that, As they which minister about holy thinges, eate of those thinges whicb are of the Temple, and they which waite at the Altar, are par∣takers with the Altar: So the Lord hath ordained, that they which preach the Gospell, should liue of the Gospell. That our Sauiour ordayned the Ministery of the Gospell with no ornature of outward beauty, no magnificence of worldly statelines, as he did of old the Mosaicall ministery: it was not to this end, that Christians should doe lesse Ho∣nor to theyr Pastors, then did of old the Israelites; but for
that the worthines thereof is such, that it needeth no out∣ward ornaments: The which notwithstāding if it may haue, it is not magnified therin, if it may not haue, it is not dimi∣nished therefore. But where the ministery of the Gospell is receyued in a triumph (as it were) of publique authority, there al worldly goods ought to supply to the Honor of our Sauiour, and the health of his seruants: so that they may be denied where they are proffered, and requested where they they are denied; according as the cause, the time, the place, & the people doe require. As for the seruants of Christ, they ought to be ready for all assayes: for honor and dishonor, good report and euill report, plenty and pouerty, life and death, for that they are to vse this world as not vsing it, the fashion whereof passeth away. God vnder the old Testament framed to him selfe a pecu∣liar cōmon wealth, the which although afterwards it might receiue diuerse formes of gouernement, yet he did alwaies so prouide for the honour of the Priesthood, that they al∣waies retained that degree of dignity, which the Lord would haue them maintain among the people of God. God vnder the Gospell, hath impropriated no peculiar people, neyther hath he planted any certaine forme of gouernment: He sent vnto all nations preachers of the Gospell, priuate men, without any warlike accutrements. Them he appoin∣ted, not to alter any form of gouernment, least they might seeme to be sent, rather for the subuersion, then for the con∣uersion of the Gentiles. And yet this hindereth not, but that they may take vppon them a greater state, and better besee∣ming the worthines of theyr calling, where Religion it self is aduaunced by publique authority, and in wisedome is made the ground-work both of the lawes and the common wealth. In the old lawe, the Priests Honor was especially set downe, what, how great, after what sort, in what things it should consist. In the new Testament that limitation coulde not bee layd forth; because it could not (would they ne∣uer so faine) be like it selfe, or the same, among all people, in all places, at all times. But as good christians doe take vn∣to
them selues many other imitable examples out of the old Testament, and the law of nature, and the orders of nations, by the which they may the better be brought vnto a ciuill conformity, and a conformable ciuility of life: so likewise ought we to doe in this case. The minority & vnder-reckoning of the ministery, is not so held in the iudgements of those christians that haue their cōsciences acquainted with diuine causes, but in the sight of carnall professors, and the censure of the Churches enemies. All indifferent harts & eies may see and conceiue, that how much greater Christ is then Moyses, and the Gospel more ex∣cellēt then the law, so much more honorable is the Euange∣like ministery, then the Aaronicall Priesthood; the which we are abundantly taught by the manifest arguments of the A∣postle Paul, & we may very well learne by the manifold Ser∣mons of our Sauiour Christ. Of old among the people of God it was, for good cause, held a great matter, for any man to be like vnto Moyses, or Elias. For after the receite of the law, and his familiar conference with God in the mount, the face of Moyses is sayd to haue ben so radiant with passing all wonderous bright some rayes, that the eyes of the amased Israelites by no means might indure the Sun bright lustre of his resplendent countenaunce. After him was Elias no lesse honored and renowmed, as well for his wonderfull acts, at∣chieued in the zeale of God his law, as also for his miracu∣lous end, translated aliue into the Paradise of Heauen. Not∣withstanding all this, the Apostle in his latter to the Corin∣thians doth learnedly maintaine, that the Ministery of Moy∣ses was of the letter, and of death, but the Ministery of the Gospell, of the spirite and of life, and so much the more glo∣rious. As for the rest, our Sauiour himselfe preferreth Iohn Baptist alone before all the Prophets, whom he affirmeth to be more then a Prophet, and yet he resolueth, that the least Minister of the Church is greater then hee. And therefore if Christ may be Iudge, the least Minister of the lowest degree in the Church, is more honorable & to be honored more in his office, then are any, or al the Priests of the old Testamēt. As for the low titles the Lord gaue to his Ministers, for bid∣ding
the glorious insignes of honor, as of Lord, Father, and Doctor: I aunswere, that it was not done, that the Ministers should be of lesse honor among the people, then were of old the Priests & Leuits, or that they should be debased beneath all estates, & be of no esteem in a christian common wealth, but rather that they might retain a lowly & an humble con∣ceit in so lofty & so honorable an estate. For vnlesse the Lord in wisdome should temper & keep vnder the ouer-weaning waiwardnes of mans nature, euen in his dearest seruantes, Such is the excellency of the Ecclesiasticall calling, that the conceit thereof might easely ouercharge light mindes with lofty thoughts, & sodenly ouerturne rash heads into ruined estates. But as humility is taught them in their inglorious ti∣tles; so is their excellency taught vs by their magnificall sta∣tues. For are not these they which are called, the Salt of the earth, the Light of the world, Stars in the firmamēt, Angels, and Legats, Stewards & dispensers of the mysteries of God, Ministers of the spirit of life? what and how great is that ho∣nor and power they haue receiued of the Lord, that they can binde and lose in earth, what things are bound and losed in Heauen; that they can remit and retaine sins? that they can open and shut the highest Heauen? Can there be any thing giuen to men more Honorable in this mortality? As for the vse of those names, Doctor, Lord & Father, we will speake therof hereafter. Now, that I may determine this disputation, of those things we haue here set downe, I con∣clude, That christian people are no lesse deuoted to their Pastors in al duty, then were of old the Israelites to their Priests and Leuits. And, Where christian religion is publikely authorised, that there the same degree of honor is to be giuen to the Ministers in the common welth, which was vsed to the Priests & Prophets among the people of God. But if so be it so fall out, that among vngodly people & vn∣gracious Magistrats, there be no reuerend regard had of this honor due to the Minister, that there the professors be not offended therewith, seeing the worthines of ther Ministery is such, as that no iniury of man can any waies diminish it. For it becommeth them to be at this point with themselues,
that if so be the honor due to their ministery be giuen them, they may reioyce in the religious godlines of the faithfull to∣wards God: but if it be denied them, they may not grieue thereat, as if them selues had lost any thing. Neyther are they greatly to contend with the Magistrate for their right, especially at any intempestiue season: but they are to com∣mit their causes vnto God, and with Paul to expect a more conuenient time to expostulate. In the mean while let them pray vnto God, that he would vouchsafe thē better mindes that would be accounted for good christians. The chief care of a faithfull Pastor must be this, to gaine many soules vnto Christ, not much riches, or many honors: First let them seek the kingdome of God, and al these things shalbe cast vppon them. Wherefore, seeing there are many parts of that honor which is due to the Minister, I will chiefely prosecute those, which the ciuil society of life doth require in a christian cō∣mon wealth, and that aboue all others, which consisteth in the maintenance of Ministers; a thing neuer so much in con∣trouersie as at this day. Of the which we will first heare what was the opinion of those fathers which liued in time next after the Apostles. CHAP. XI. The iudgement of the Fathers concerning the oblations of the faithfull. I Wil first begin with Origen, who liued vnder Seuerus, about two hundred yeares after our Sauiour: Hee, vppon the eighteenth Chapter of Numbers, in his eleuenth Homily writeth thus. It is behooueful, and it is also beneficiall, that first fruits should be offered vnto the Priestes of the Gospell: For so hath the Lord also ordained, that they which preach the Gospell should liue of the Gospell, and they which serue at the altar should also be partakers of the altar. And as this is due & decent so of the contrary part; I account it both vnmeete and vnde∣cent, and vngodly also, that he which worshippeth God, and entreth into the Church of God, and knoweth that the Priests and Ministers do wait at the altar, and attend eyther vppon the word of God, or the
Ministerie of the church, should not offer vnto the Priestes the first things of those fruits of the earth, which God hath giuen by bringing forth his Sonne, and sending foorth his raine: Neither can I thinke such a mind to bee mindfull of God, neither that hee thinketh or be∣leeueth, that God hath giuen the fruits he hath receaued: which hee so hordeth togeather, as if they were none of Gods. For if he beleeued they were giuen him of God, hee would also acknowledge, that in re∣warding the Priests, he therby honored God for his gifts. And more∣ouer, that these things the better to be obserued, may bee taught by the word of God, let vs heare what the Lord saith in the Gospell. Wo be vnto you Scribes and Pharises, ye hypocrites, which tythe Mint, that is, pay tythe of Mint, & Cummin, and Ane-seeds, and let passe the greater things of the Law: Hypocrites these thinges ought yee to haue done, and not to haue left the o∣ther vndone, &c. The same authour proceedeth in the same booke. How then dooth our righteousnes exceede the righteous∣nes of the Scribes and Pharisies, if they dare not tast of the fruits of the earth, before they haue offered the first fruits vnto the Priestes, and the tythes are set forth for the Leuits: and I, doing none of these things, doe so abuse the fruits of the earth, as that the Priest know∣eth not of them, the Leuite is ignoraunt of them, the altar of God doth not taste of them. Ireneus the Scholler of Polycarpus in his fourth booke, the foure and thirtie chapter, writeth of the sacrifices and oblati∣ons of Christians, (the which thing hee also in many other places remembreth) whereby the custome and opinion of the church at that time concerning that matter, may the be∣ter appeare. The words of the holy Father are these: VVhere∣fore, we ought to offer to God the first fruits of his creaturts, as Mo∣ses saith, Thou shalt not appeare emptie in the sight of the Lorde thy God: that in what things a man hath shewed himselfe thankfull, in those things he which is deputed ouer him, might thank fully receaue that honour of him. And that kind of oblation is aain allowed: For there were oblations there, and there are oblations heere also: There were sacrifices among the old people, there are sacrifices in the Church also: but the manner of them is onelye altered; seeing that nowe these are offered not of bond slaues, but of free-men. For
there is one and the same Lorde, but there is a seuerall forme of ser∣uile oblations, and a seuerall forme of them which are free, that euen by these oblations also there might appeare some token of our liberty. For there is nothing idle or endlesse with him, without some signe, or sense. And for this cause indeed, they did consecrate theyr tenthes: but they which haue obtained their libertie, doe dedicate to the Lords vse, al things that they haue, chearfully & freely giuing those things which are of lesse account, hauing indeed a greater hope, that widowe and poore woman casting in heere all her substance into the Lord his treasurie, &c. Afterwardes in the same chapter, hee addeth this. Wherefore, seeing the church offereth with singlenes; for iust cause is the gift thereof accepted as a pure sacrifice before God: Euen as Paule also writeth vnto the Philippians: I was euen filled, af∣ter that I had receiued of Epaphroditus that which cam from you, an odour which smelleth sweete, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant vnto GOD. For wee ought to offer oblations vnto God, and in all things to be found thankefull vnto God our maker, of∣fering the first-lings of those his creatures, in a pure mind and faith without hypocrisie, in a ferme hope and feruent loue. And this ob∣lation, the church onely doth present pure vnto the Creator, offering vnto him of his owne creatures with thankes-giuing, &c. And a∣gaine in the same chapter, But we offer vnto him, not as hee nee∣ded our offerings, but to shew our selues thankefull vnto him for his bountie, and to sanctifie his creatures: For as God hath no neede of those th ngs which come from vs, so we haue need to offer some thing vnto God. Irenaeus calleth Almes and oblations good actions, as also Cyprian calleth them good workes: Paule beeing their Au∣thor, who calleth them good deedes and distributions, and good workes,1. Tim. 6.18. Tit. 3.14. Heb. 13.16. and Sacrifices, with the which God is wel pleased. Many other thinges of the like import, might bee cited out of the same Authour: But let vs attend vnto that of Cyprian in the like sense, the wordes some-what altered, who in his foure and thirtie Epistle writeth thus, of the Readers whome hee had ordained. Nowe you shall vnder∣stand, that wee haue appointed for them the honor of an El∣der,
that they should bee honoured with the same fees that the Elders are, and that they should deuide the allowaunce for euerie moneth in equall portions. The fees which were deuided euerie moneth vnto the Priestes, hee calleth the ho∣nour of the Presbyterie. But out of his sixtie Epistle, wee may also make some estimate, of what wealth the Church of Carthage was: namely, by a certaine contribution made by the Cleargie and layitie of that place. For there were colle∣cted no lesse then an hundred sestercees, which they sent to the Bishops of Mauritania to redeeme captiues: beeing also readie to send more, if need were. The wordes of Cyprian are these. VVee haue sent vnto you an hundred sestercees,That is 2500. du∣cates at the least, or vn∣les that may seeme to great a sum for that time 2500000 which were gathered heere in the Church, ouer the which I am president by the fauour of God: the contribution beeng made by the Cleargie, and people that are amongst vs: the which you shall dispose there, accor∣ding vnto your best indeuours. And in his sixtie sixe Epistle, he writeth thus: The tribe of Leuie which attended vpon the Temple and Altar for diuine seruice, might receaue no portion of that de∣uotion, but while the rest did husband the earth, they should honor the Lord onely, and therfore for their liuing and allowance, they were to receaue tenthes of the eleuen Tribes, of those fruites which did in∣crease. The which reason and order is now obserued amongst the Clear∣gie at this day, that they which in the Church of the Lord, are pro∣moted vnto anie Ecclesiasticall dignitie, should by no meanes bee cal∣led away from their deuine function, neither shuld be intangled with troubles and worldlie affaires, but according vnto the honour of the maintained brethren, as they which receiue tenthes of fruits, should not depart from the Altar and the sacrifices, but daye and night should attend vpon heauenly and spirituall busines, &c. About the same time, there were maintained at Rome vnder Cornelius the Bishop, sixe and fortie Priests, seauen Deacons,Eusebius lib 6.25. so manie Subdeacons, as also two and fortie Seruaunts, Exorcists, Readers and Doore-keepers, all togeather two and fif∣tie. The number of the whole Cleargie was an hundred fiftie
and fiue men, all the which no doubt, for the most part had their proper families: and yet besides al these, the widowes and other which were afflicted, either with pouertie or in∣firmitie, were a thousand and fiue hundred: all the which, as Cornelius himselfe doth witnes in an Epistle to Fabian Bi∣shop of Antioch, the grace and bountie of the Lorde did a∣boundantlie releeue: and least any man should thinke that this was done penuriously or sparingly, hee addeth, that so great a number of Ministers, so great a multitude of poore, by the prouidence of God were made rich, and abounding in all plenteousnes. The historie of Laurence, deacon of Rome, is sufficiently knowen: whome the tyrants of that time held in suspicion, that he had the custodie of the church treasure. And their su∣spicion was true in part, for the church had treasure; and in part it was false, for that it was not the maner of the church to lay vp, but to lay out the treasure they had. By the which meanes, Phillips oblations also and donations to the church were repealed all to late: for the ministerie of the Deacons by the handes of the poore, had there laid them vp, where neither rust nor moath, nor any caterpiller of the Church, could breake through and steale. Neither was this the least praise of the churches of that age, that as they were priuate∣lie poore, so were they commonly rich, after the example of the church at Hierusalem. CHAP. XII. That the church had no small reuenues, and certaine places in the which they did celebrate their assemblies, before the time of Constantine. THat professed Christians had farms & possessions, the increase whereof they distributed to the clear∣gy, & pouerty of the Church, the edicts of Constan∣tine the great doe sufficiently testifie. True it is, that vnder Dioclesian, the christians were spoyled of al they possessed, ei∣ther
priuatly, or in cōmon: but the godly & cristiā Emperor giueth in charge to the presidentes of the prouince, that those places in the which Christians did celebrate their as∣semblies, and all other things whatsoeuer they possessed, or any waies pertained to the right of their societie, should a∣gaine be restored vnto them.Enead. 7. 8. Sabellicus maketh mention of one Lucina, a noble and rich matrone, that was exiled by Maxentius, for that she had named the Church of Rome to be her heire. Indeed it is to be acknowledged, that from the time of Constantine, the state of the Church was no wayes impaired, (neither doe I speake of the false and fained donations of Constantine) but this is a thing most certaine, that he was a bountifull Prince towardes the Church, and worthily re∣nowned for his bountie. Sozomenus reporteth of Constantine his honorable liberalitie towards the Church of Christ;Lib. 1.8. that of those grounds which in euerie Cittie were tributarie, hee reserued a certaine pension, which accustomably was wont to bee paide into the Exchequer, and distributed the same vnto the Churches and the Cleargie; the which his great & gratious larges, he afterwards ratified by law to stand good for euer.De vita Cō∣stant. li. 4. 28 Eusebius in the life of Costantine witnesseth the same. That therefore all men may vnderstand what the welth of the Church was in those times, I will produce a few pre∣sidentes of that age, and begin with that which Augustine hath left in recorde concerning his owne Church at Hippon. (For he was himselfe also of an honourable house, & of great wealth.) I (saith hee) according to the common conceit of manie,Epist. 225. which compare themselues with themselues, seeme not to haue come from wealth, but to haue come to wealth; for my fathers inheritance can hardly be reckoned the twentith part, in comparison of the chur∣ches reuenewes, the which nowe I am accounted to possesse as chiefe Lord. Whence that Church had that great wealth, it is to bee seene in the same Epistle. Prosper in his booke De vitae contemplatiua, reporteth of Hilarie Bishop of Arelat, to his euerlasting praise, that hee
had, did not only retain those things which the church then but that he did also inlarge the same, by the manifold heri∣tages of the faithful which he receiued. Among Basil his epi∣stles there is one whole one, which testifieth, that there were manie at that time which vsed to leaue by testament a great part of their inheritance vnto the Church, and some some∣times which did make free gift of all. But what neede I to stande vppon the manifolde reports of such thinges? The lawes of the Emperours, concerning this whole matter, are sufficiently knowne. Nay this one thing I would admo∣nish the Reader, least at any time hee bee deceiued, when as manie times hee may reade in the Fathers, that the goods of the Church, are not onely the goodes of the Bishops, and the goodes of the Priestes, but the goodes of the poore also: I say, there hee shall but note, howe the auncient cu∣stome of the Church hath beene disordered, through aua∣rice and hypocrisie. When all the Church goodes of euerie Diocesse were in common vnto all the Church-men of the same territorie, to bee diuided to euerie Church-man ac∣cording to the discretion of the Bishop; then was that say∣ing in force: The goodes of the Church are the goodes of the poore: Not that the whole substance of the Church was to be con∣sumed vppon the poore, but because the fourth part ther∣of was their due by right. For the first part was for the Bi∣shop himselfe: the second, for the other Church-men: the third, for the Church workes: the fourth, for releeuing the poore, and redeeming the captiue. But when as by reason of the manifolde inconuenien∣ces, which did dayly arise by meanes of this communitie, and the great multitude of Churches which now began to bee euerie where erected and set vp throughout the coun∣trie, and indowed with peculiar commodities, they began to depart from this communitie, by a secrete consent (as it were) of the whole world, and so, that certain portions were designed for the Bishops allowance; others also, for the o∣ther Priests and Ecclesiasticall persons which were in ordi∣narie residence in euery Cathedrall Church; and last of all
other, Priestes also were ordained by the Bishops euerie where through the cuntrie▪ ouer parish Churches with stan∣ding titles, who were by that meanes called to a perticular part of the cōmon charge with the Bishop (least that which was to bee cared for by all, should bee neglected of euerie one) (as it commonly commeth to passe) there is no doubt (had none of the Church goodes beene taken from the Cleargie) but by this meanes the poore and needie should haue beene much better prouided for by the seueral Clear∣gie-men of euery particular territorie, then when the fourth part of the remaines of the Church goodes were imployed to their vse in common; and that also with more ease, and much lesse murmure. But the trumperie, not the pouertie of the Church, Munkes and Nunnes, and such others, which were called religious persons, purloyning that fourth part vnder the title of Euangelike pouertie, which they profes∣sed, haue vtterly robbed both the Cleargie and the pouer∣tie, and haue brought in a straunge and wonderfull disor∣der into the auncient ordering of Church goodes; so that, that part which of olde was due vnto the poore, is now in the winding vp deuolued to the rich: that I may omit the manifold abuses of Impropriations, and Commendams, & such other shifting sacrilegious titles. Ambrose in his thirtie and one Epistle, the fift booke: The possessions (saith he) of the Cleargie, are the prouisions of the needie: and therefore let the Churches keepe reckoning of this, how many captiues they haue redeemed, how many poore they haue refreshed, how many exiles they haue harbored. For the Church hath golde, not to purse, but to disburse, and to releeue the necessities of the needie. What profite is it to keepe that which pro∣fiteth not? Augustine also in his treatise vppon Iohn, the one and twentith chapter, disputeth of that right which the A∣postles and Ministers haue by the worde of GOD, to re∣ceyue carnall things of them, vnto whom they minister spi∣rituall things: They giue gold (saith he) and they receyue grasse. And in his tenth Tome, there is extant no lesse then a whole Homilie, concerning the paying of tythes as of dutie.
Hierome also in his third chapter vpon Malachie, amongst other thinges which concerne this opinion, hath these wordes: That which we say of tythes and first fruits, which of olde were giuen of the people to the Priestes and Leuites, vnderstand yee also to concerne the people of the Church, who are commaunded not onely to pay tythes and first fruites, but also to sell all that they haue, and giue to the poore, and to follow the Lord. The which so great a matter if we will not performe, yet at the least lets vs imitate the be∣ginnings of the Iewes, that wee may giue part of all vnto the poore, and affoord the Priests and Leuites their due honour. For which cause the Apostle sayth; Honour the widdowes, which are true widowes: And, That the Elder is to bee honored with double honour, especially he which laboureth in worde and doctrine: the which dutie who so now will not performe, hee is pro∣ued thereby to defraude and supplant God himselfe, and hee is cursed therefore of God in the penurie of all things: so that he which soweth sparingly, shall reape sparingly, and hee which soweth liberally, shall reape liberally, &c. Many other thinges of like sort may wee read in that place to this sense. But if I should repute vnto you whatsoeuer the Fathers haue written of this argument; I should but repeate the same things, and be tedious to the Reader in a matter of no controuersie. Chap. XIII. A distinction of Church goods. THe goods of the Church are not all of one fort: for there are some which cō∣sist in the oblations of the people; some, in proper possessions; some, in rents and reuenewes; some, in lawfull fees and ancient roialties. Al the which are commonly distinguished into two seuerall kinds: whereof some are cal∣led Spirituall, and some accounted Temporall. But seeing these tearmes do neyther so fitly, nor yet so fully expresse the na∣ture
of these things, more proper words were to be deuised by more perfect Ciuilians. For vnto that which is Temporall, there is nothing in nature opposite, but that which is Eter∣nall: and to that which is Spiritual, nothing is contrary, but that which is Carnal or corporal. They therefore speak more aptly of these thinges, who for the worde Temporall, vse the words Ciuil and humane: and for Spiritual, the words Sacred holy, and diuine. Now albeit, that ought generally to be ac∣counted holy & sacred, whatsoeuer is consecrated to God, and his Ministerie: yet notwithstanding, they cal oblations (because they more nearely concerne God and his seruice) more properly sacred and diuine thinges; not so much for di∣stinction sake, as for that the condition and proprietie ther∣of is such. But humane and ciuil goods, they account the fields and possessions of the Church; for that in nature and con∣dition they are not vnlike vnto those, which other Citizens possesse, and are therefore giuen vnto the Cleargie, that not onely in the Church, but also in the common-wealth, they may be of good estate, and wel able to maintaine the credit of the place and person they sustaine: the which by no good meanes they can be able to vphold, if in worldly welth they be so curtold, and kept so thread-bare, as that they cannot be in case to be as bountifull as other men. Great matters are looked for at the hands of the Cleargie; as hospitalitie, releeuing the poore, and such other thinges, which Christ himselfe not onely taught, but in person performed in some good sort. And is it not a shame for a Bishop to exhort o∣thers vnto charitie towards the poore and needie, and him∣selfe neither to put the same in practise, nor yet to be able? But least any man should thinke, that this distinction came out of the Popes Mint, and therefore to bee reiected; he shal vnderstand by those things we haue now cited, that it is the Fathers, the autentike Fathers. Ambrose in his Epistle de tradendis basilicis, maketh mention of the collations of the people, and the fields which the Church possessed. Where∣fore the gifts and oblations of the faithfull, which they offer of their owne accord, are to be accounted holy goods, gos
sacred and diuine: because in that case the chiefe respect is not of man, but of God. Vnder this kinde we comprise the paiment of tenthes and tythes also: albeit there bee great difference betwene those tythes, which eyther now the peo∣ple pay of their owne voluntarie, not constrained, or haue of olde religiously vndertaken by a lawe imposed vpon them∣selues and their posteritie, to pay vnto the Ministers; & those tythes which Princes gaue vnto them, and laid out for them by their Iniunctions. For wee must vnderstand thus much also, that tenthes haue beene paide of olde, not onely to the Priestes, but vnto the chiefe Magistrate also. Haue wee not heard of certaine tributes wont to bee paid to the common treasurie, which afterwardes were giuen by the Emperour Constantine vnto the Churches? Namely, for that albeit the superstition of the Gentiles were in many places put down by publike authoritie; yet the Nobles and richer sort, with the greater part of the people, hauing not forthwith recey∣ued the faith of Christ, the bare oblations of the faithfull, (althogh bountiful) were not sufficing to relieue the poore, and to maintaine the state of their Pastors. So that vnlesse I quite lose mine ayme, those tributes were eyther tenthes or tithes. For there is nothing better knowne, then that the Ro∣manes imposed the paiments of tenthes, vpon those prouin∣ces they conquered: and what proportion could they more fitly giue vnto professed Churches, then the tenthes of those they conquered? This example did Charles the great follow, who hauing ouercome the Saxons, and hauing put to flight their King Windekind, hee commaunded tenthes to be paid vnto him: part whereof the Bishops and other Pastors of the Church had, and part the Kinges officers also re∣ceiued. As for the coniecture of Crantz in his Metropolis, who thinketh that tenthes were giuen vnto Nobles in fee, by the Bishops, I cannot for my part allowe thereof: seeing it so euidently appeareth out of the approued Annalies, that those tenthes were receyued of the Kinges Officers before
there were any Bishops, and whereas yet there were none. But whereas tythes seemed not to suffice the state of the Cleargie, the godly Prince, of a religious and wise purpose, added glebes and landes vnto the vse of the Church. For indeed that wilde Nation, tamed onely by force & armes, receiued the Christian Religion for feare, but in affection were so estraunged from it, that they would sooner suffer the Bishops, and those preachers which the Emperour sent vnto them, rather to sterue among then, then to thriue by them. But who so desireth to reade more of this matter, may reade Crantz his Metropolis, and the Saxon Chronicles. In the meane while, wee haue thus learned, that those tenthes and tythes, which no religion of the Christian people, but the liberalitie of the religious Magistrate hath giuen vnto the Church, were properly to bee accounted among the Churches, Ciuill goodes. But when as at this day they are so intermingled, that the manner of their first donations is not known, for good cause they are now called by the more certaine and the more singular part of them, and are there∣fore accounted among those Church goods, which are not ciuill, but sacred and diuine. As for those goods of the Church which wee distinguish by the name of ciuill goods and humane, they may be distin∣guished into the possession of such fearms and rents, which the Church had euen vnder heathen Emperors before Con∣stantine; and into the possession of such fees and mannors, which vnder the Christian Magistrate haue annexed vnto them some ciuil iurisdiction. The which, because some con∣tend that no Ecclesiasticall person ought to inioy, wee are in like manner to examine that matter, the rather, for that there are some which thinke, they ought rather to liue of other mens Almes.
Chap. XIII That the Pastors of churches are not maintained of almes, but of the due reward of their labours. SOme haue beene of opinion (you will very hardly beleeue it) (neither doe I their opi∣nion) that our blessed Lorde and his Apo∣stles did not onely liue very bare, but verie beggers: and therefore that the Ministers of the Church ought to liue of meere al∣mes, according vnto their godly example. But the law of God defieth this errour, and forbiddeth the whole trade of begging among his people. Neither doe wee read, that the Lord at any time repealed this lawe; and sure we are, that there haue beene alwayes extant among vs cer∣taine lawes of the Emperours also against vpright beg∣gers. Almes are giuen for pittie sake to helpe and cheare the needie: but whatsoeuer is giuen as a testimonie of any ver∣tue, is eyther a stipend for certaine paines taken, or a present for a certaine reuerence conceiued (albeit the party be poore vnto whom it is performed.) When the Lord therefore sent forth his Disciples to preach, hee gaue them a commission to take vp their mainteinance of them to whome they prea∣ched: and hee therefore compared them to labourers, and their stipend to a reward, not to an almes; which being due, is to be charged, and discharged as of right. Whereby the nature of those things which the godly did contribute vnto the Lord his vse, and his Apostles, is easely vnderstood to be of the condition, not of almes, but of fees. Euen as the offe∣rings, and certaine parts of the sacrifices were alotted to the Priests, not as free almes, but as the fruites of their labours: so the godly Pastors doe receiue of the faithfull people, not a doale, but a duetie; the one beeing of right, the other of meere pittie. If any man vrge, that the sense of this worde
Almes, doth extend it selfe more largelie amongst learned Diuines, & that it is taken for all kind of beneuolence which is shewed for Gods cause vnto the benefit of our neighbor: Howe truly they so affirme, I leaue that to them which are but meanely seene in the Greeke tongue. In the meane while, I will not sticke with them for so much as this commeth to, that in such a sense, those thinges which are giuen to the Church for the benefite of the Mini∣sters, may bee called Almes also: this alwaies reserued, that they still differ white and blacke from those almes, with the which the poore are releeued. For what haue they deserued? You remember where I sayd, that there is no other law im∣posed vpon the Minister by the Lord, then vnto the rest of the faithfull (excepting onely the condition of their functi∣on.) Neither doth any man doubt, that the faithfull are for∣bidden by any religion, to become the free tenaunts of their Princes. But as for the lawes and conditions which perticularlie concerne the estate of Ministers, there is not any one which inhibiteth them to vse the benefite of Princes, and to be de∣uoted to them, as far as other Citizens. Ouer and besides all this, the Euangelique precepts are in no case an excuse vn∣to the right of nations, or the equity of Moses law: but they all (and all the worlde shall witnes the same) haue appointed for the Priests and sacred Ministers, both fields and farmes and other ciuill estates. And can they by any law, or equity be sequestred from the generall priuiledges of all cittizens, which are to liue now among citizens, and to sustaine vnder the same Magistrate the same burdens of the commonwelth with other Cittizens? And hath not God himselfe commaunded by his law, that there should be giuen vnto the Priests and Leuites, not onely tythes and offerings, but Cities also, with their towns and teritories? Or had they any lesse authority ouer these their townes and Citties, then had the other Tribes ouer their Citties and fields which fel vnto them by lot? The Go∣spell beeing receaued by publique authority, the Lord hath
no where forbidden the Ministers of the Gospell to possesse fields and farmes after the same manner, neither hath hee inhibited that anie such realties should bee giuen them to possesse. But is it possible there should bee any so base, and bad minded towards religion, that he could once wish the Ministers thereof to be of worse estate in a christian society, then were of olde the Priestes and Leuites in the Common-wealth of Israell? It is well knowen, that Ministers hauing to conuerse in a ciuill societie, had neede also of those helpes which are requisite in a ciuill society, & may reconcile them into fauor, and maintaine them in authority with the com∣mon people, as wisedome and wealth especiallie: Seeing that whosoeuer hee bee that neglecteth either of these, can by no meanes liue, and liue well in a ciuill societie. The wise man in his Ecclesiastes the seuenth chapter, hath verie well noted the practise of this: For wisedome is good (saith he) with an inheritaunce, and the excellencie of them which see the Sunne, because that man shall rest in the shadowe of wisedome, and the shadow of siluer: And indeed, vppon these two pillers doth rest the chiefe strength and stay of a ciuill life. There is one kind of life which is publique, and in the common prospect of men, and hath necessarilie to doe with men of all sortes: and there is an other kinde of priuate and priuie life, vnder an heathen Magistrate, full of danger; so that, there hee is to deale as wel with Magistrates as with priuate men: heere, he may well deale with none at all. I say in this case there is no comparison to be made of these two kinds betweene them∣selues, that without distinction wee should make the like condition of the Ministers life in all places, and subiect vn∣to the like conditions.
Chap. XV. Of those Lands which are held in fee, and haue annexed with them anie ciuill authoritie and iurisdiction. AND that which maketh all the doubt for those Landes which are helde in fee by the Church, is this, that manie times they haue annexed with them some Ciuill iurisdiction and Knights seruice. The which thing is forbid∣den the Pastors of the Church by the lawes of the Church; vnto whome al∣so the power of the sword seemeth to bee forbidden by the Lord himselfe. The ancient Canons, which are accounted the Apostles, allow not a Bishoppe to be busied in the seruice of warre, or anie ciuill function. The sixt Canon standeth thus. A Bishop Priest, or Deacon, shall not take vppon him anie worldlie cares, nei∣ther shall hee defile himselfe with such. Cyprian also in an Epistle vnto the Priestes of Furnam, writeth against one Victor, for that he made one Geminus Faustinus ouer-seer of his last wil, and forbiddeth them that there should bee anye oblation made amongst them for his death: His wordes are these. The Bishoppes our predecessours, religiouslie considering, and prouidentlie fore-casting of thinges, enacted, that no brother departing this life, should appoint anie Clearke to be his guardian or supra-visor: and if anie so did, there should bee no offering for him, neither should anie Sacrifice be celebrated for his departure: Neither indeed doth he de∣serue to bee once named in the praier of the Priestes, at the Altar of God, who sought by all meanes possible to with-draw the Priests & Ministers from the Altar of God. These decrees of the reuerend Fathers, are confir∣med by that example of the Apostles, who sequestred themselues from the ouer-sight of the poore, which not∣withstanding
is a godlie and a religious action, and resigned that charge vnto other godlie men, least themselues should bee with-drawen from the ministerie of the woorde, which thing chiefly was imposed vpon them by the Lord. Moreo∣uer, for so much as pertaineth vnto Knights seruice, or anie other ciuill function, the foure-score and second of the Ca∣nons, which are called the Apostles; decreeth thus: The By∣shoppe, Priest, or Deacon, that giueth himselfe vnto war-fare, and will occupie himselfe, both in the Romaine regiment, and also in the Ecclesiasticall gouernement: let him be diuested. Giue vnto Caesar, those thinges which are Caesars, and vnto God those thinges which are Gods. The councell of Chalcidon in the seuenth Canon the fif∣teenth action, hath laid a cursse also vppon those that dare presume to doe these things. The wordes of the Canon are these. VVee doe decree, that those which are once ordained in the Cleargie, (as also all Monks) shall neither come vnto anie militarie seruice, or to anie secular promotion. But they which dare do these things, and do not with repentance returne to that, of the which they made their first choyce for Gods cause; they are accursed. To these Canons wee maye adde the conditions of the fees them∣selues, the which are such, as by them all manner free-tenure is taken away from the Cleargie, and companie of Moonks: For a fee is defined by the Lawyers, to bee a Militarie seruice. but seeing the lawes of the Church doe forbid Church-men and Moonkes, to exercise anie Militarie seruice, they can∣not by any right, either receiue, or retaine the benefite of the seruice.
Chap. XVI. That Bishops and other Pastors of the Church, are not forbid∣den to be Lords of fees, & sometimes to vndertake secular and ciuill charges. TO the former obiections I first aunswere, according to that I haue already proued▪ as well by the lawes of the first christians, as by the testimony of the ancient fathers, that the Church long before Constantine his time had both fields and farmes, the com∣mons and commodities pertaining to the same. But is there now any other reason, why Ecclesiasticall persons may not also hold the same in fee (if they be giuen in fee) as well as did of old these Priests and Leuits, those Townes and Cittyes which they receiued of theyr brethren? As for those Canons before cited, I aunswere and affirme, that we allow, nor Elder nor Bishop to be detained, or with∣drawen with secular cares from theyr spiritual function any further, then may be beneficial to the Church and common wealth, or may satisfie the necessity of our christian neigh∣bour. That the charge of domestique secular affaires is here forbidden by any Canō, that a man should neglect his own family, vnto whom he is bound by the right of alyaunce or affinity; nor godly charity, nor christian faith, will suffer vs so to thinke: But that the charge of a Lordship or Mayrolty or such like, that a Bishop should be Consul in the field, Ma∣ior of a Towne, Clarke of the market, Chamberlaine to the King, or Factor for the state, and such like, we hold them to bee forbidden by that sixt Canon, and we vtterly renounce the same. To the fourescore and second Canon, I aunswer and af∣firme, that seruice of war is forbidden by the same, not that which is necessary, but that which is voluntary. Vppon which ground I hold this for a sure principle, that that Priesthood
or Bishop doth both against the honor and the honesty of the sacred ministery, whosoeuer without commaund of su∣preme autority, or constraint of extreme necessity, shal take vppon him any seruice of war, eyther as leader or as souldi∣er. But when such time and places betide, as shall exact this at our handes, we are vnwillingly to yeeld to vnwelcome ne∣cessity. Theodoret in his second Booke the third chapter, wri∣teth of one Iames Bishop of the Citty of Nisib, (which of som is called Antioche Migdon) that he was vppon occasion both Bishop and Captaine of the same his Citty, the which by the helpe of God he manfully defended against Sapor King of Persia, and deliuered the same as well with his prowes, as his prayers. The same Theodoret, in his fourth booke the twelfth Chapter, recordeth as much and much more, of the warlike power and prowes of Eusebius Bishop of Samosis, who mannaging himselfe with all manner warlike abilements, ranged along throughout Syria, Phenicia, and Palestine, wher he erected Priests and Deacons, and performed such other Eccesiasticall pensions. Neyther did I euer read of any that found himselfe offended with this action, or thought his ac∣tion offended against that Canon. I doe not so thinke (nor will I say so much) of Theophilus and Cyrillus Bishops of Alexandria, who tooke vppon them a secular principality ouer that Citty, the Emperour not noting it, but not com∣maunding it. As for the Canon which Cyprian citeth, I must needs con∣fesse that I cannot attayne vnto the reason thereof, onely this I am assured of, that it was but a particular and a pro∣uinciall decree, seruing onely for that time and that place. For no doubt, to take charge of Widowes and Orphanes, is an especiall worke of piety, and commaunded of God in euery place of his Lawe: and so, that they incurre no small blame, that deferre to take vppon them not the patrimony, but the patrociny of such. For good cause therefore was the old custome continu∣ed in the Chuch, that Bishops should be the patrons of Wi∣dowes,
and the Fathers of Orphanes, and that they espe∣cially before all others, were to take charge of them with∣out any shame to theyr calling, without any breach of the Canons. You shall heare how the Councell of Sardis doth allowe and recommend the same in plaine wordes. For this is the speeche which Osiris, then Bishop there, made. Much importunity and too much confluence, with vnlawful sutes, hath brought the matter to this passe, that we haue not so much either fauor, or credit committed vnto vs; whiles there are some, which cease not to repayr to the Court of the Bi∣shop, (and especially they of Africa) who (as we know) re∣iect and contemn the wholesome directions of our most ho∣ly brother and fellow Bishop Gratus. Who do not only pre∣sent diuers and sundry matters not materiall to the Church, (as many times it commeth to passe) that widows, orphans, and the poore might be succoured, but they doe further craue for certaine secular dignities, and ciuill offices. This bad order therefore stirreth vp not onely much muttering, but many offences also. Notwithstanding, this is a com∣mendable thing, that Bishops should be a meanes for those which are oppressed with wrongfull violence, (as if so bee a widow be molested or an orphan defrauded) and yet so, that these parties haue some iust cause of complaint, and some honest petition to praesent. Wherefore, if it so please you (my beloued brethren) let this be a decree, that Bishops come not to the Court, except happely they, whom the Re∣ligious Emperour shall by his letters inuite. But because oft times it commeth to passe, that they which suffer wrong, flye to the Church for succour, and they also which doe wrong, and are adiudged therefore to some ile, or exile, or in deede what sentence of iudgement soeuer they receiue, they ought here to be relieued, and without al doubt their pardon to be craued: Therefore if it so please you, as I haue sayd, so let it bee decreed. They all gaue a placet, and let it be enacted. This Canon containeth a certaine exposition of the sixt Canon of the Apostles, and it teacheth vs what secular cares a Bishop, or a Priest may vndertake, and what not. The
Bishops in this point were imitators of their Fathers the Prophets, which alwayes gaue their helping hand to wid∣dowes, orphanes, and other afflicted people. Doe we not read how fatherly and friendly the Prophet Elizeus greeteth the Sunamite after his entertainment?2. Reg. 4. VVhat wouldest thou that I should doe for thee? is there any thing to he spoken for you to the King, or to the Captaine of the host? Nor neede this seem to any man any such a strange duety of religion, that Bishops (or other Ministers) should repaire to Princes, to intreate for the distressed. Ambrose vndertaking an honorable Embassee for Valenti∣nian the Emperour (being yet a child) to Maximus the ty∣rant, spake thus in his case (as himselfe reporteth to Valen∣tinian in an Epistle) VVhom (sayth he) ought Bishops rather to defend, then orphanes? For it is written, Iudge the cause of the fa∣therlesse, and defend the widow, and deliuer him that suffereth wrong: and in an other place: Ye Iudges of widowes, and fathers of fatherlesse. As for that which is vrged from the example of the Apostles, ther is no childe so simple so to conceiue ther∣of, as if when the Apostles had once chosen Deacons, the care of the poore and the widow did no more pertayne to them. I noted before, how the necessity of the poore was commended to Paul and Barnabas after that and we reade how Paul also caried the beneuolence of the Corinthians and other Churches, to Hierusalem. Wherefore, to conclude, if it be lawfull (as it is) for bishops and Pastors, and that ac∣cording to the rules of charitye, to imploye their labour in outward affaires, and to detract some what from that time, which otherwise were to be spent in reading of holy writ, and other sacred trauels, and that onely for our priuate ne∣cessities, or our neyghbours: what labour shall we thinke too much, or what paines not to be performed in the com∣mendable affaires of the King or common wealth, for a pub∣lique necessity, and a greater commodity?
Chap. XVII. What a fee is, and what are the conditions thereof. NOw it remaineth that I make answere for those Church goods which are held in Fee, of which terme before the irruption of the more barbarous na∣tions into into the Romain Empire, there was no wher any mention: that phrase taking his original frō the Goths, Van∣dals, and Longobards, What may be the etimology thereof, and what is signi∣fied thereby, the learned at large discourse, & discusse: whose iudgements and opinions it were now too long to repeate. But for our purpose this is enough, and this is a cleare case, that a Fee with the Lombards, doth signify a priuiledge or an especiall benefite with the Latines: so that a Fendotarye with them is the same that a free Tenant is with vs, who hol∣deth by fealty and homage onely. But a Fee is defined among the Lawyers diuers waies: First, that it is a military seruice imposed and vndertaken vppon this condition, that the tenant for the benefite re∣ceiued performe his seruice in warre, and therein shewe his fealty and fidelity to his patrone and his benefactor. (By which we may vnderstand, what was the original of tenures in Fee.) Notwihstanding, for as much as there are some fees which are not military, neyther stand vppon knights seruice, this may serue for a more generall definition, that, a Fee is a benefite, or a priuiledge giuen vnto some man vppon this condition, that he which receyueth the benefite, shall in lieu thereof performe some duty or seruice, as a testimony of his thankefulnes. But here there are three things of necessity to be obserued: the Persons, the Things, and the Right. The Persons are the Lord, and the Vasall (that I may so speake with the Feudist) betweene whom the seruice is contracted: The which for the most part in deede is military or knights
seruice; I say, for the most part, because of the Ecclesiastike or church seruice. But the Thing is the matter & substance of the benefite receiued, as fields, fermes, iurisdictions, immu∣nities, courts, or whatsoeuer else is held in Fee. But last of all, the Right accrueth from these both: For the Fee in respect of the Lord, is a benefite giuen to the Vasall, vpon that condi∣tion that he should recognise the autor therof in some kind of seruice; but in respect of the Vasall, the Fee is the right of vsing and manuring another mans thing, vpon that con∣dition, that some seruice of duety, and testimony of his fe∣alty be due for the sayd thing. But now is there any of these three, more crosse of contrary to the calling and conditi∣on of Ministers, then of other Christians? But that it may the more plainely appeare what is the nature of the whole matter, and what therein is repugnant to the state of a Mi∣nister, we will more diligently examine the particulars of these pretended Fees. Chap. XVIII. A distinction of Fees. THis title of Fees is many waies deui∣ded: but that which maketh for the presēt purpose is this. Of Fees som are meere Ciuill, some are Military. The ciuill Fee is againe sub-deuided into an Ecclesiasticall or Church Fee, or a temporall or Lay Fee. In the nature of Ecclesiasticall or Church Fees, are our Parsonages, our Bishoprickes, Archbishoprickes, Abbies, and such like, which are giuen to hold in free tenure by the Princes Scepter. In the manner and nature of Ciuill Laye Fees, are those secular dignities and ciuil offices of the com∣mon wealth, as Lieutenancies, Mairolties, Consulships, and such like: of the which we doe not purpose in this place to make any particular discourse. It sufficeth for this time, that we haue noted, howe all Fees are not giuen for military
dueties, neyther doe all hold vppon Knights seruice. More∣ouer this also is most manifest, that the lawes of Fees haue of∣ten times altered, and the nature with the lawes, so that ther is nothing more variable then that title: And, that the whole matter dependeth vppon certaine customes, and the vncer∣taine pleasures of the Lords, who vppon any condition, or without any condition (if it please them) may freely giue the things they haue, to be held and vsed. In deed the first occasion of Fees was Knights seruice: that the Prince might alwayes haue a sufficient host, & Captains competent for the defence of the common wealth: So that Fees no doubt in the beginning were no other thing, but sti∣pēds for war, not hereditary but temporary, & not vnlike to Princes annual pensions at this day. And then no question, neyther young children, nor youthes vnder the age of four∣teen were capiable of those Fees, nor generally any, whoso∣euer was not apt & able for seruice of war; & yet we see after¦wards how they were made Hereditary also, so that in many places they now differ litle or nothing, from ordinary inhe∣ritance. Whereby we may see, that those lawes & conditions of Fees, which determine that a Clerke is no hable person to hold in Fee, are to be vnderstood no otherwise thē of knights Fee. In the which notwitstanding, if it seeme good to the Lord of the Fee, to alter the law thereof (as he iustly may by his absolute authority) he may also graunt the same Fee vp∣pon any condition, vnto the Church in generall, or to anye of the cleargy in particular. In the meane while, those Lawes which serue to restrain cleargy men from these Fees, do in like manner by the same reason exclude women and children, and young men, and old men, and all men that are not fit for military seruice: Who when as at this day they are notwithstanding admitted; what reason, that Clergy men alone, should be excepted? For they also may performe by an other man, or supply with another duety, that duety of Chieualry (if it be a duty) as wel as womē & boies: wherfore, seeing that at this day the Pastors and Prelats of the church, doe liue vnder the same Magistrat, & the same lawes, neither
do challenge vnto themselues any peculiar immunity from the burdens of the common wealth, any otherwise then o∣ther Cittizens; surely to depriue them of the like benefits, or to depose them from the like priuiledges with other citti∣zens, is an action no lesse odious to al, then iniurious to thē. But as of old for good cause it seemed necessary to them which had the chiefe place in the common wealth, to giue lands and Lordships in Fee to their Nobles and noble war∣riours for military attendance, and the peaceable continu∣ance of the common wealth: so also did they take it no lesse necessary, and as great reason for them to giue vnto Pastors and Bishops in the like name and nature of Fees both towns and towres, and parkes, & woods, and pooles, and fishings, and fermes, and fields, and tenths, and tithes, for the sacred ministery of Gods Church, and the reuerend administration of things sacred, thereby to aduance the honor, and support the worthines of that most honorable & heauenly calling. As for those things which the Bishops and other Ecclesi∣astical persons in England, doe hold in Fee, they are for the most part of that nature, as that they require no military seruice: for they are giuen in Franke almoigne (as they terme it) and yet notwitstanding, all ancient Bishopricks haue fre∣ly graunted many Fees and such like tenures, vnto theyr Te∣nants in fee, to hold in Knights seruice: Who by this means doe performe vnto the kings of England, as well military, as other necessary seruices in the Bishops behalfe: by the which the Bishops are enlarged and set free from them. Chap. XIX. An aunswere to the obiection, That ciuil iurisdiction, out∣ward pompe and honors which are annexed with these fees, doe not agree with the simplicity of the Euangelike ministery. IF any man obiect, that these tenures in fee, are ac∣companied with certaine Royalties, ciuill iurisdic∣tions, secular titles, honors and retinewes, in which
thinges, the auncient Nobilitie are an ornament vnto the King and the Countrey: and therefore not agreeable vnto the simplicitie of the ministerie: which thing the Lord him selfe taught, as well by expresse doctrine, as especiall exam∣ple: Because indeede such thinges they doe but intangle a man in extearne vanities, and solicite their heartes with the cares of this world, in the which it becommeth a Bishop to be secure. And furthermore, for that the Lord himselfe beeing re∣quested to sit but as arbiter betweene two brethren, deni∣ed the same. And againe, when the Apostles made the que∣stion, which of them should bee the greatest, hee made aun∣swere and sayd: The Kings of the Gentils raigne ouer them, and they which beare rule ouer them are called gracious Lordes: but yee shall not be so, but he that is greatest amongst you, let him be as the least, and he which is Prince, as he which ministreth. By which, the wordes and examples of our Sauiour wee are taught, that the Ministery of the Gospell hath nothing common with the Common-wealth. It may suffice for an answere vnto this obiection, which wee haue before noted: namely, that all this they talke of, hath his place in that estate, in the which, our Sauiour and his Apostles liued, not in that common-wealth, in the which the chiefe Magistrates acknowledge Christ Iesus their chiefe Lord, and soueraigne King. For as the Magistrate is of an o∣ther calling now in the Church, then before he had: so is it reason, also that the seruaunts of the Lorde should bee of better estate in the Common-wealth, then before they were. The Magistrate, which before was an enemie and a persecutour: (according vnto the prophesie of Esaias) is become a Foster-father of the Church, and a religious wor∣shipper of the Lorde Christ: vnder whome, were it not an absurd thing, that the seruaunts of Christ should haue no more honour, then vnder a persecutor? But because it is not set downe expreslie in the Scripture, what, of what sort, and how great the same ought to bee, many mens mindes are
heere at a maze, and some are of mind so to leaue it, as at a dead losse; and yet notwitstanding, the thing it selfe is not so hard to find out, and it is in his owne nature wel enough knowen, and that both by the written lawe of God, and the vniuersall censure of all nations: were it not for the awke∣warde interpretation of those scriptures which I haue nowe cited. Out of the which notwithstanding, there is nothing els di∣rectie concluded, but that it is not any part of the Ecclesi∣asticall function, to intermedle in ciuil affaires, the which in∣deed is out of all controuersie. Neither is that the question: but whether the same man that is a Pastor, may not togea∣ther with the ministery of the Gospell, bee lawfully imploy∣ed in politique affaires, for the benefite of the Church, and good of the Common-wealth. For when as the Minister of the church, is cittizen also of the common-wealth, he ought not thinke any thing not pertaining to him, that pertaineth to the Common-wealth: so that beeing lawfully called, hee may not vndertake some part of the ciuill estate. As for that which I lately cited concerning our Sauiour, who refused to be an arbiter, it is nothing to this question. For the spirite of Christ in the mouth of Paul doth plainly teach vs, that the meanest of the church, are good enough to iudge of earthlie causes, for that one day they shall iudge the worlde, yea, the Angels themselues; (a iudgement farre greater then this.) The which, seeing the Apostle affirmeth of any Christian: is it to bee thought, that onely Christ alone was no fit man to take vp a small matter betweene two brethren, if they both had bene content to stand vnto his iudgement? Wee cannot therefore imagine, that our Sauiour Christ simplye refused the office of an arbiter, but that hee denied himselfe to bee that iudge, which might command both parties to stand vn∣to his arbiterment. And is not this then a slight testimonie, for to proue it not lawfull for a Bishop, (who is both a Cittizen, and a sub∣iect) to exercise anye ciuill iurisdiction, the Magistrate so commaunding him? or to execute some other pension of
the Common-wealth, (not abhorring altogeather from his profession) beeing furnished with sufficient authority to discharge it? That the foure-score and second Canon commandeth him to be disordered, who vndertaketh both Prouinces (the Ecclesiasticall power, and the secular principality,) for my part, I say not against it: if so be that it bring no inconueni∣ence vnto the Bishoppes of the Church, and that it may bee done with the good leaue of the Prince, and without anie great hurt to the Church and Common wealth. And there∣upon we are also bolde to say, that Theophilus and Cyrill, By∣shops of Alexandria, transgressed that Canon: of whome Socrates reporteth, that of themselues they tooke vnto them∣selues the principality of that citty. In like manner doe the Bishops of Rome, when as they improoue vnto themselues those things which are Caesars. For when as they are the vas∣sals and subiectes of the Emperour, they haue notwithstan∣ding extolled themselues aboue their Lords, and aduanced the sheepheardes croysier aboue the royall scepter. But for those Bishops which vaile their bonnet to their Soueraigne, and obey their Princes in honest and godly things, there is not the like reason. And many things many times are done in the Common-wealth extraordinarilye, so that there can no lawe bee published or made, which it is not lawfull for to gain-say at some time or other, for the good of the Com∣mon-wealth. Neither is the other example that they vrge, of anye force. For had our Sauiour meant to haue inthronized himselfe in that earthly kingdome, (which he neuer ment) yet would hee haue refused that tumultuous course: For what power had that part of the people to annoint him King?
CHAP. XX That it is lawfull for Bishops to heare ciuil causes, and to deter∣mine vpon them. THat Bishops had to deale in ciuill cau∣ses, when as the parties submitted themselues to their iudgement, it is sufficiently known by the writings of the Fathers, & the works of Iustinian. The which, although it were a matter of no smal trouble vnto the godlie Bi∣shops: yet the iniquitie many times of secular Iudges, their delayes, demurs and cauils in lawe were such, as that the Bishops of meere charity were moued vnto this labour. Neither are they therein to be so censured, as if they vsurped the place of the ciuill Magistrate: for he did it by the consent of the chiefe Magistrate: as it appea∣reth in the writings of Iustinian in his first booke de Episco∣pali audientia, the fourth title, where hee commaundeth, that there should be that reuerence giuen vnto their iudge∣ment, which is due vnto the hiest powers: (from whome it is not lawfull to appeale) and more-ouer he commandeth that the execution of their iudgements, be done by his ciuil iudges. By reason of the statute of Praemunire (as they call it) (a∣gainst the which, whosoeuer offend, they are punished with is a matter of verie great daunger in England, for Church∣men to inuade the office of the ciuill Magistrates: and there∣fore, there is kept a most circumspeact distinction betweene the affaires of the Ciuil, and the Ecclesiastical Court. If at anie time anie of the Bishops (or anie other of the cleargie) are thought meet men to vndertake any ciuill charge, they doe it not by the especiall commaundement and commis∣siō
of the King, vnder the broad seale of England. But those charges are alwayes accompanied with some honour, so that they may be accounted rather a help, then a hurt to the proceedings of the Gospell: (as are the offices and dignities of a priuie Counseller, a Commissioner, a Iustice of peace, and such like.) Neither (as I doe thinke) will any man of sound iudgement say, that those charges are eyther impo∣sed vpon any Cittizen without the chiefe Magistrate, or if they be so imposed, that they can of any man be deposed, or laide aside. If any man except, that this is more abhorring from the office of a Bishop, then was of olde the charge of the poore, from the which notwithstanding the Apostles did abdicate themselues, because they could not attend vppon that, and their owne charge too: and therfore vrge, that it is not pos∣sible for Bishops, that they should discharge both charges well; for which cause they ought to sequester themselues from the one: I answer, first, that the Apostles did not so far foorth discharge themselues of the poore mans boxe, that that they thought it not appertaining to them to haue any further care thereof: for they alwayes continued patrons of the poore, as doe the Bishops also, whom we will not so intangle with ciuill causes, that they forsake their owne; but that, (as it especially concerneth their office) vpright dea∣ling, and sincere charitie may bee maintained among them, whose soules health is committed vnto them. But how much a godly and diligent Bishop may doe in this matter, Austine alone may serue for many examples, who wrote so many excellent volumes, when as yet he imployed no small part of his time in these troublesome affaires. Whose words I will heere infer, for that they inforce a sufficient confuta∣tion of this their cauill: I call the Lord Iesus witnesse to my soule (saith hee) in whose name I boldly speake these thinges, that for so much as concerneth my commoditie, I had rather worke euerie day with my hand (as it is vsed in wel ordered Monasteries) and reserue the other houres free to read, and to pray, and to exercise my selfe in the Scriptures, then to sustaine the tumultuous perplexities of other
causes, in determining secular controuersies by iudgement, or in taking them vp by arbitrement. To the which troubles the same A∣postle hath appointed vs, not of his owne will, but of his that spake in him. The which notwithstanding we read not that he himselfe sustei∣ned; for indeed the course of his Apostleship stood not with it. Nei∣ther did he say, If therefore you haue any secular controuer∣sies, bring them before vs, or appoint vs to giue iudgement of them, but those which are least esteemed in the Church, set them vp (saith he.) And I speak to your shame, is it so, that there is not any wiseman among you, which can iudge be∣tweene his brother, but the brother goeth to lawe with the brother, & that before infidels? Wherfore, those wise men which were resiant in some certaine place, beeing faithfull and godly (not those which discoursed this way and that way for the Gospel sake) I say, such would hee haue to bee the examiners of those matters. For which cause it is no where written of him, that he at any time atten∣ded vpon any such busines, from the which notwithstanding we can∣not bee excused, albeit wee bee of the number of those which are least esteemed, because he would haue those also set vp (if wise men were wanting) rather then that the controuersies should bee brought into the open and ordinarie Court. The which labour notwithstanding we vndertake, not without comfort in the Lorde, for the hope of eternall life, that we may bring forth fruit with patience. Thus saith Augu∣stine; whose reasons in my iudgement may satisfie any reaso∣nable man, verely they satisfie mee, neither can I finde anie thing to mislike in this action of his. This is one generall maxime in the rules of Christianity, That whatsoeuer wee reade in the word of God, eyther for∣bidden, beeing not euill of his owne nature; or commaun∣ded, beeing of it selfe not good; in those thinges Christian charitie dispenseth, and disposeth of the matter, as the time, the place, and the cause doth require. Vnto the which, whosoeuer doth refuse to subscribe, he doth it of stubborne and froward hypocrisie, not of any religion or deuotion he hath of the precept. Neyther is the Diuines rule vnknown, concerning those things which are bidden, or forbidden in the word of God;
namely, That some thinges are forbidden, because they are euill; and some thinges are euill, because they are for∣bidden, (suppose for some especiall purpose.) And againe on the contrary part, That there are some things comman∣ded, because they are good; and some thinges therefore to bee accounted good, because they are commaunded by God, who requireth such thinges of men for some especiall causes. Now those things which are of the first sort and section, are vnder a constant and perpetual law, and not to be chan∣ged by any means: but there is not the like condition of the other sort, neither do they bind anie man any further, then the reason and occasion of the law doth require. Examples of this matter wee haue in the obseruation of the Sabaoth, and the vse of the Shew-bread, of the which it was not law∣full for any man to eate, but the Priests onely: besides many other things of like nature, which we read to be either com∣maunded, or condemned. In this our case; it is no crime to be a King, nor to be a Magistrate, a capitall sinne. And ther∣fore the reason of the commandement abating the thing it selfe abideth free; and it remaineth lawfull for Princes, and other Magistrates, to be of power to command the Bishops of the Church in a Christian common-wealth, those things, which would rather be an aide and an ornament, then any hurt or impediment to their holy calling: I speake of cal∣ling in generall, not of any one mans calling (which haplie may be hindred, and shall haue neede of others which may helpe him) but of all theirs, which are in the same calling, vnto whome there ariseth any honour and authoritie from the rest. So that if all things be throughly examined, and all commodities with all discommodities compared together, which may any waies accrue vnto the Church and common wealth: I doubt not, but that which wanteth in one parte, shall be requited in the other with aduauntage.
Chap. XXI. An exposition of that place of Luke, in the two and twentith chapter. NOw I come to that place of Luke, the two and twentith chapter: where it is recor∣ded, that there was some question made amongst the Apostles, which of them should seeme the greater: the which for that it arose of a certaine perswasion of honor and rule, our Lord & Sauiour (the great Maister of humility) repressed the same, and confuted their misconceite, when as hee forbad them to imitate the proceedings of heathen Princes, and made himselfe an ex∣ample of his manner of gouernment. For albeit he had cal∣led them indeed to a singular kind of dignitie, notwithstan∣ding he would haue them vnderstand that the same differed heauen and earth, from that which is vsuall in imperiall kingdomes. For as the kingdome of God is diuers from the kingdomes of the earth, euen so it becommeth the Mini∣sters of that his kingdome, to be of diuers conditions also. Indeed it is the fashion of the Court, to sewe pillowes vnder the elbowes euen of most vile men: and commonly they which grind the faces of the people with bloud-thir∣stie tyrannie, and practise vpon them all kind of crueltie, are notwithstanding called most mercifull and most gratious Lords. Wherefore our Sauiour especially here taxed the ma∣nifest misdemeanors of them, which then did domineer o∣uer the people of God, noting withall the manifold abuses of other vngratious Tyrants, which by force and armes had inthralled mightie kingdomes vnder their dominion, vnto whome the grace of Gratiousnes was giuen euen by them, whom they oppressed most vngratiously. Moreouer, there was setled in the mindes of the Apo∣stles a certain conceit, that the kingdom of the Lord should
be earthly, as they did see that of the Romanes to bee, and as they had heard that of Dauid and Salomon to haue beene. Higher then this could not they aduance their conceits: for alâs they were as yet but meere infants in Christ, and did but learne as then to goe by ground. Whereuppon it came to passe, that they imagined very strongly, that they could be made no other by the Lord, then Lords Lieutenantes at the least: from the which their childish ouer-weening, our Sauiour doth in this place take them downe a little. But that it may be made yet more apparant vnto all, what might bee the Lord his very meaning in that his saying, I wil yet sound into the cause a little deeper. The Apostles seeme to make a verie plaine question, de∣maunding no more but this; Who should be the greatest among them: but in what things he should be the greatest, that is not there expressed. No doubt a man may be accounted greatest for sundry causes: as greatest in age, in experience greatest, greatest in learning, in eloquence greatest, greatest in wise∣dome, in wealth, in nobilitie of birth, in authoritie and po∣wer, and such like. But now, the Apostles were priuate men, in nothing singular, which commonly maketh mens minds ambitious, and causeth mens thoughtes to ouer-reach. As for age, experience, wealth, wisedome, nobility, & such like, they openly bewray themselues in whom soeuer they are the greatest, so that there is seldom any question about those things. It remaineth therefore, that the question betwene them was for honour and authoritie: the which also may seeme a ri∣diculous thing among the poore fraternitie of the twelue Apostles, vnlesse haplie a man would iudge them ambiti∣ous, rather for their desire, then for their honour. But farre be it from mee, that I should rashly condemne those good men of any sacrilegious ambition, seeing the Lord himselfe did not so much correct them, as direct them in their de∣maund. It appeareth rather by that the Lord answered, thē by any thing the Apostles propounded, that they did not regard the present state of thinges, as they were then, but
that they had an eye to that rather which they hoped to see shortly vnder Christ. They knewe, that the kingdome of GOD was now at hande, about the proclaiming where∣of they chiefly were sent; neyther were they ignorant how honorably the Prophets had written thereof; namely, that it should be, as a most mightie, so a most ample kingdome▪ not to bee bordered, but with the compasse of the whole earth; that all nations should come and acknowledge their fealtie, and doe due homage thereunto: and that, albeit they expected many enemies and aduersaries, both tyrants and traytors, yet notwithstanding, the rebellious of the people should be appeased at the last. Wherefore, when as they were of beleefe, that this king∣dome should be restored vnto Israell out of hand, their que∣stion is, who should be next vnto Christ in that kingdome. For as the Israelites had borne a long time the heauie yoke of some tyrannous Empires; so they were perswaded, that all Nations should nowe yeelde to the iust consequence of their renued title. And they did see indeed, that their pre∣sent number did well agree with the twelue Princes of the twelue Tribes of Israel, and that the seuentie two Disciples did as well resemble the graund Senate of Gods people. Whereby as they knewe, that amongst them of olde, there were diuerse degrees of dignitie vnder King Dauid, and o∣ther Princes, so they perswaded themselues, that the like distinction of orders and honours ought to bee continued amongst them. Neither could they so soone forget that ho∣norable speach of their Lord, when he promised them, that one day they should sit vpon twelue thrones, and iudge the twelue tribes of Israell. These conceites (I should conceiue) the Apostles had then in their heades, being made as yet, and not throughly exercised in the censure of heauenly things: & these I think rather to haue proceeded in them, of a certaine weake ig∣norance, and erroneous misconceiuing, then of any sacrile∣gious pride, or ambitious ouer-weening. But the Lord, per∣ceiuing their thoughts, correcteth their misconceite, & tea∣cheth
them, That he had not called them to sway an earthly scepter, but to seeke a spirituall Empire: in the which, not∣withstanding the power they should receiue of him, they should still continue, and content themselues, not Princes, but priuate men. Wherfore, albeit they should be the chiefe and principall of the new people of God, yet their princi∣palitie should not bee any thing more magnificent then the estate of other priuate men, and therefore in the forme of that gouernment he had appointed for his Church, the first and principall ought to imitate his example, who liued a∣mong them as a seruant and a Minister, when as yet they called him (as indeede hee was) both Lord and Maister. And this is the plainest exposition of Christ his words. Where we see, that our Sauiour, because hee would not stirre vp any headstrong innouation in the common welths and kingdomes vnto whom he sent his Apostles, of especial purpose he sent them priuate and impotent, without either warlike complement, or ciuil regiment; namely, to conuert soules, not to inuert states: least if hee should haue erected heere any earthlie kingdome, they might haue supposed, that there had beene no other kingdome to bee expected. No doubt the calling and state of the Apostolike function was for iust cause great and honourable, and their autho∣ritie in the spirituall kingdome autentike and inpregna∣ble: and yet all that did not aduaunce them aboue the state of priuate men in the common-wealth; and being priuate, hee would not haue them president therein. And verely these thinges were thus ordained of GOD, in a verie pru∣dent manner, and vppon a verie especiall purpose. For why should anie occasion bee giuen for the heathen to ca∣uill at the doctrine of the Gospell, as a thing seditious to the gouernement, and pernitious to the common-wealth? The Lord without doubt did in great wisedome foresee, that the wicked would bee ready to picke many quarrels at the do∣ctrine of the Gospell; when as notwithstanding all this, there is no politike Philosophie, no imperiall constitution, that doth more strictly binde the consciences of men vnto
subiection and obedience, then the doctrine of the Gospell doth. The principles of Philosophie, and the lawes of Na∣tions doe permit many thinges against Tyrants, which the Religion of Christ doth flatly inhibite. But the prudent aduise of this precept of Christ wil more manifestly appeare, if wee shall for a time but imagine the contrarie: namely, that the Apostles had followed that er∣rour, in the which they were found: and then let vs admit, that the whole worlde had beene wonne and wasted by them with warre and robberie: (for they must of force haue followed that forcible course, which that renowmed theefe Mahomet kept: a course farre differing from the means and manners of our Sauiour Christ.) But should not thus the Iewes haue bene confirmed in their errour? And should not by these meanes iust cause haue beene giuen to the Kings of the earth, to haue armed themselues against Christ and his Gospel? After the subuersion of Hierusalem, there was a di∣ligent inquisition made by the especiall commandement of Vespasian, if anie could bee found that were of the stocke of Dauid. For the Iewes, notwithstanding their ouerthrowe, gaue not ouer their hope, still expecting their Messias: They did see that the times which Dauid had foretold, were then fulfilled; and thereupon they did argue, that the Messias was borne, and that the time was now at hande, in the which the Romane Empire should impaire, and themselues pre∣uaile: The which thing gaue the occasion, that so great and cruell a persecution was afterwardes raysed against the same Nation. The like we reade of Domitian, who had the posteritie of Dauid in no small iealousie. For casting the worst, and fea∣ring least some new Messias should arise, and break the scep∣ter of their Romane Empire, he caused inquirie to be made after all that were of that kindred. Wherupon one Iocatus by name, brought before him the nephews of Iudas (who was the Lord his brother according to the flesh) who did not on∣ly draw their pedegree from Dauid, but were thought to be very nearely allyed to the Lord himself. But when they were
examined, what possessions they had, and of what wealth they were, & were found to be of very mean estate, (the hard∣nes of their skinnes warranting the labour of their hands,) and when they further vnderstood howe they beleeued, that the kingdome of Christ should not bee an earthly Monar∣chie, but an heauenly Hierarchie; neither yet, that he should come before the consummation of the worlde, to iudge the quicke and the dead: They were foorth-with reiected base and simple men, and were without suspicion set at liber∣tie. In like maner (no question) the priuate estate of the first Apostles, was both a testimonie vnto them of their inno∣cency, and a safe conduct among the nations for their secu∣rity. But what would not the Romaine Caesars and other like Magistrates haue doone, if the Ministers of the Gospell had bene sent and set forth with power of warre, and other abili∣ments of like power? These the precepts of our Sauiour, may therefore wor∣thely be alledged against the tyrannique Bishoppe of Rome, who chalengeth the right of all Empires, and holdeth the Romaine Empire, as his proper fee: but they cannot be al∣ledged against those Bishops, which liue subiect vnto lawes and Magistrates, and keepe themselues in a proportionable order with other Cittizens. Wherefore, where the Gospell of Iesus Christ is honorablie receaued by publique authori∣ty, how should this abatement of our Sauiour be wrested a∣gainst all Bishops? that they should not be in that reuerend account vnder a Christian Magistrate, which the lawes of all nations, and euen the very lawe of nature it selfe, and the written lawe of God also doth expresly award them? As for those places of scripture, about the which we now contend, this only may be gathered: That the Pastors of churches, in respect of their ministerie, haue no power ouer the bodies, or goods of Christians; Neither that they can chalenge vnto themselues those rights, which God hath placed in the power of the Magistrate onely. But that the same Magi∣strate in no place, at no time, for no cause, may commit no
portion of the Common-wealth vnto the Bishoppes of the Church, it is not as yet prooued, neither can be, (if I bee not deceiued.) Chap. XXII. That the Pastors of the Church, for the necessitie of the Com∣mon-wealth, may attend some times vpon worldlie affairs. IF it bee allowable, to detract some part of that time, which otherwise were to be im∣ployed in the studie of the Scriptures, that the Minister of the Church may the better prouide for the priuate good of his owne familie: much more may the same bee conuerted to the good of the Common-wealth, the man beeing able to assist the same, either by his aid, or his aduice. Where either the want, or the vnwillingnesse of anye Church is such, that either it cannot, or wil not afforde the Minister his due honour, it is lawfull for him to haue re∣course vnto the labour of his hands: Where-vpon the Eli∣bertine councell, often-times pretermitted Bishops, Priestes, and Deacons, to trafficke for their better maintenance: The which thing, is also allowed by diuerse other Canons, which I suppose superfluous to rehearse, seeing that one instaunce of Paule may suffice for all. But nowe, if so bee that priuate necessitie may priuelege the detenee of the Ministerie, what may publique necessitie doe? And yet if at any time, the Minister bee exercised (for his priuate commodity) in base and wretched busines, thereis no man greatly offended with it: But if hee bee imployed in any honest and honourable affairs of the Common-wealth, now a daies there is no man that dooth not inuie it and inuey against it: And whence for Gods-sake is this of deuotion? from loue, or from en∣uie.
I say not these things, as if I thought that Bishops, or o∣ther Pastors, were rashly to bee incombred in their holie course: But where the necessitie, or greater commoditie of the Church, or Common-wealth dooth require the same, there is nor reason, nor religion against it. Are not Bishops Cittizens also, and subiect to Lawes and Magistrates, as well as other men? Or may they not bee commaunded (if they cannot be entreated) by them vnto whome they are subiect, to doe good to the Church or Common-wealth? Neither is that of Paule to Timothie, any thing at all a∣gainst this assertion. (No man that warreth, intangleth himselfe in the affaires of this life:) For the affaires of this life are those, with the which we get thinges needfull for this present life: not those things which appertaine to the publique estate of the Prince or Common-wealth. War-fare it selfe is one of the publike affaires of the Common-wealth, vnto the which whosoeuer is leuied, must leaue his domesticall affaires: so that if a man would vrge the similitude thorowly, Hee which warreth vnto God, must leaue all his domestical affairs: against that example of Paule; of whom no man wil doubt, but that he discharged his Pastorall duty faithfully, & yet notwith∣standing intangled himselfe in the affaires of this life, when necessity constrained him, to get his liuing with his handie labor, and to spend that time in the affaires of this life, which other-wise he might better haue imployed, either in praier, or in Preaching: Beeing ready, no doubt, to haue done the like in publique affairs which he did in priuate, had the Ma∣gistrates commanded, and the good of the people required the same. Wherefore, the sense of the similitude is this, that we must abstaine from those things, which do so hinder the VVarre, to the which wee are called, as that they force vs to for-sake the same. That the vse of certaine things, which doe perteine vnto the Common-wealth, as to haue a Ciuill iurisdiction in cer∣taine Citties or townes, which a man may discharge by ano∣ther; to be of the Kings councel in certain causes; to be pre∣sent at the publik assemblies of the kingdome; to deliuer his
iudgement in thinges concerning the state; to vndertake and discharge a royall Embassee; at certaine times of the yeare, to be present at sessions, and assises, and to vndertake all these by the Kings especiall commaundement, or gene∣rall commission, that these things I say, and such like are of that wicked nature, that whosoeuer vseth them, cannot be a Bishop, or a Minister, this I say should haue bene prooued: and this also, that the Minister which intermedleth in any of these things for a publique commoditie, beeing there-vnto called and commanded by the Magistrate, dooth commit a wicked thing, and vnworthy his calling. CHAP. XXIII. That diuerse functions are not confounded, albeit vndertaken of one man. THAT which is commonly said of the state Ecclesiastique, (that it is distinct from the Ciuil estate,) is altogeather im∣pertinent to this question: seing both callings become not one, though one man be called to them both. Are not the parts of of a Lawyer diuerse, and the partes of a Physicion diuerse? yet the same party may play both partes, and prooue as good a Lawyer as a Physicion. In like manner, the same man may be both Physicion and Diuine, and cure the body, as a leach, and comfort the soule, as a spirituall Father. Spiridion was a husband man, and got his liuing by graizing: yet was hee a Bishop of the Church, and a Pastor of soules; shall we thinke that he confounded both these functions? I, but a Bishop re∣quireth the whole man, neither yet is one man sufficing for more charges. I, but this indefinite censure is vncertainelie true, and certainely false: and there are manye presidentes to the contrary, both in the old Testament, and in other an∣tique histories.
First, I would know whether Spiridion both Pastor of sheepe and of souls, were not a man able for both these char∣ges? No man as yet (so far as I can learne) hath enuied him his ferme with his Bishoprick: No man hath dared to con∣demne that holy men, but all men haue worthely admired both his simplicity and his sanctimony: and yet might hee haue beene more greedy of graizing, then of gaining soules, had his mynde ben set vppon coueteousnes. But why then might not the same man haue beene both Bishop, and the kings Counseller as well? No doubt the greatnes of euerye charge is chiefely to be considered, and then also, the supply of necessary ayde, which a man may haue in either charge, whereby he may well discharge the same. There are some Churches more great then other som; & som haue more bu∣sines, some lesse, in so much that the Pastor may haue much time sometime, to spare from his ordinary charge. And in a great Church, where the Bishop hath many and great af∣fayres, it may be, he hath many and great helps. Had these two functions beene so aduerse and contrary the one to the other, that they could neuer be exercised together by the same man, Moyses would neuer haue beene both Prince, and Priest ouer the people of God. But I feare me, some silly shrewd fellow wil haue his acti∣on against me, for that I haue called Moyses a Priest: And yet I would haue him first to vnderstand, that after he had crea∣ted Aaron, himselfe stil continued both Prophet and Pastor, as he was before. But that Ely & Samuel were both Iudges and Priests together, it cannot be denied. You will say, that was a thing extraordinary: and I say, that I do not speak of any or∣dinary thing, neyther of all the Pastors of the Church: onely I vrge what may lawfully be done, where the welfare of the Church or common wealth requireth the same, and in the meane while, these examples shal proue, that the same thing hath beene done. But if so be you would haue a view of a ciuill authority, which was also ordinary: may it please you consider those for∣ty eight Citties of the Leuites, and the gouernement thereof.
(For they could not be gouerned without a Magistrate and ordinary Iudges) shall we say that they chose them Magistrats out of other Tribes, to determine theyr controuersies, when as themselues were ordinary Lawyers, and not onely present, but president at ordinary Iudgements? Deutronomy the one and twenty Chapter, and first verse, euery question and con∣trouersie is determined according to theyr censure. And is there not the like reason of those royalties which are giuen to clergy men in a christian common wealth, with those Cit∣ties and suburbs the old Israelites gaue the Priests and Le∣uites by the commandement of God? Chap. XXIIII. That Dauid and Solomon vsed the aide of Priestes and Le∣uits in ciuill affaires. ANd as the most renowmed and religious Princes Dauid, Salomon & others, vsed the Priests and Leuites at their command (as other subiects) in ciuill gouernement, so likewise may christian kings vse the ayde of Bishops & other Pastors of the church, if there be any among them which may stand, either them, or the common wealth in any stead. In the first of the Cronicles the three and twenty Chapter, at the commaundement of Dauid, there is a suruey made of al the Leuites, from thirty yeares of age and vpwards: and ther were found eight and thirty thousand. Of the which, foure and twenty were appointed to bee ouerseers of the workes for the house of the Lord, and sixe thousand were ordayned Rulers and Iudges in all Israell. And least any man shoulde thinke that they were Iudges onely in Ecclesiasticall causes, (as some now a dayes would hold men in hād) (forcing the Scriptures to that forme of gouernement they see in some Churches) let the six and twenty Chapter of the same Booke be wel read, and aduisedly perused, and he shal find, that the Isharites, Chenanas and his brethren, men of might, were de∣puted
officers and Iudges for the businesse without, ouer Is∣raell. Of the Hebronits, Hesabias and his brethren, men of might, a thousand and seuen hundred, were appointed Offi∣cers for Israell beyond Iordan westward, in all the businesse of the Lord, and for the seruice of the King. And in the same Chapter it is sayd, that Dauid appoynted the kinse-men of Iedijas, men of might, two thousand & seuen hundred, Prin∣ces of families, ouer the Rubenites and the Gadites, and the halfe tribe of Manasses for euery matter pertaining to God and the King. To these I may adde, that which I read (in the nineteenth of the 2. of the Chronicles) of king Iehosophat, who inten∣ding the restauration of Gods worship, and the reformation of the common wealth, appointed Iudges, Leuits and Priests, and Princes of the families of Israell, for the iudgement and cause of the Lord. And where as some thinke by that in the last verse of this Chapter: That the Priests and Leuites were onely deputed ouer Ecclesiasticall causes, because it is there written, Behold Amarias the Priest shall be the chiefe ouer you in all matters of the Lord: and Zebadias the sonne of Ismaell, a ruler of the house of Iuda shall be for all the Kings affaires, &c. As if he had there put some difference betweene matters ciuill and Ecclesiastitall; It is an errour, growen (as I haue sayde) of a certaine fore-seasoned opinion of that gouernment, which we see now in the Church or Rome, and some other refor∣med churches. For who seeth not, that in this place, the kings affaires, and in the sixe and twenty of the former booke, the seruice of the King, doth not signify al one with ciuil matters, and politique affaires: but what so euer pertayned to the Kings right. (Such as were first described by Samuel, and af∣terwards eyther imitated, or augmented by the consent of the people, (as it often commeth to passe;) of the which ther was nothing prescribed by Moyses.) But what the businesse of the Lord was, the tenth verse going before, declareth by par∣ticulars. For the Priests were interpreters of the law, as well ciuill as ceremoniall, and the King so appointing, they were also the ordinary Iudges thereof.
These things I doe therfore remember, that all men may know, what is lawfull for the Ministers of the Gospell (who succeede the Leuiticall Ministery) in ciuill causes, vnder a christian Magistrate; (not that I would wishe them intang∣led therewith any otherwise, then the necessity of time and causes may require) and, that we may also know, that those precepts of our Sauiour were giuen to no other end, then that (as I haue sayd) that misconceite of his kingdom should not be strengthned in the mindes of his Disciples. Least they should thinke the power which was giuen them were annexed with such autority, as that they might alter at their pleasure, and innouate publique estates by theyr peculiar power. Chap. XXV. Theyr error confuted, that thinke no ciuill affaires of the common wealth ought to be committed to the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. NOw a dayes this common error hath inuaded the mindes not onely of the common sort, but of some part of the learned also: so that there are manye of that side very strongly opinionate, that the ciuill affaires of the common wealth, doe nothing at all appertaine to Bishops and Ministers, no more then if they were neyther cittizens, nor any suppliment of the common wealth. Curriers, Diers, Weauers, Beere-brew∣ers, Smithes, Fullers, Marchauntes and Pedlers, furnish the common house, and giue their voyce in things concerning the common wealth: (neyther can I dissalow the same in a common wealth) but that the Pastors of Churches shoulde stande excommunicate out of their generall assemblies, it is a thing vtterly against the equal right of al Cittizens. Seeing they liue vnder the same lawes, obey the same Magistrate, beare the same burdens of the common wealth: Seeing in
such publique assemblies, they doe consult as wel of theyr liues and goods, and what so euer else, vpon the which not onely theyr owne estate, but the publique good of theyr Churches also doth depend, seeing I say, they doe consult of these no lesse then of cloth, and wooll, and fish and felles, & importing and transporting any other commodities, is ther any light of reason, or light reason, why godly Ministers ought to haue lesse care of the common wealth, then com∣mon Burgomaisters? If they can alledge no reason, what co∣lour can they set vppon theyr mishapen ground? Why they aboue all others should be excluded the ciuill assemblies, or Parliaments prouincial, whom it chiefely concerneth to see, least the flocke committed to theyr charge be layd open to Wolues. In those things which concerne the safety of theyr soules? nay but in those things also which touch the security of theyr bodies. Are they not appointed of God watchmen and ouerseers (as it were in a hie tower, or heedeful centre∣nel) as they which are to see from far, what mischiefes are like to insue, that they may admonish as well the people as the Magistrats themselues of such things as are to be auoided? The which in deed they cannot doe, so long as they are kept fasting from the conscience and conference of such thinges, as are done in the common wealth. If the Church could stand safe, though the cōmon wealth fell to decay, or if the one might rise by the ruines of the o∣ther, I had the lesse to say: but when as Church and common wealth are imbarked in the same vessell, & saile together in the same danger: how should the deuout minister be lesse so∣licited for the safety of the common state, then are the com∣mon Burgesses, who for the most part iudge one thing cō∣modious for the Church, an other for the common wealth, & another for themselues and their own estate: These are in office but for a year, they neuer forsake theyr charges: These may prouide many waies for themselues & theyr own estate with the detriment of the Church, & danger of the commō wealth; they can by no means preserue themselues or theirs, vnlesse both Church & common wealth together be preser∣ued:
These consult that the common wealth sustaine no do∣mage in corne and cattell, in wares and marchaundise, least themselues at any time should want their sweet return: They doe not a little regard these things: but besides these, theyr especial care is that iustice, faith, godlines, and true religion decay not in the common wealth, least at any time the king∣dom of Christ should want his due increase. But do learned BB. vnderstand lesse what belongeth to the good of the cō∣mon wealth, then illiterat Burgreeues, & rank chapmen? Ve∣ry vnprofitably haue they consumed thēselues in their head-paine vigils, and heart breaking studies, if they haue learned nothing whereby they may benefite the common wealth. I, but Ministers are of priuate estate, Burgreeues are Ma∣gistrates: It is not conuenient that the same man should vn∣dertake both an Ecclesiastique, and a politique office. Truth it is, neyther doe I knowe any ignoraunt (except them selues) what is decent in this matter, and what is not. But to be present at the sacred Parliaments, to giue a voyce, and to giue aduice, is not to be a Magistrate. The books of the Prophets are plentifull in the precepts of peace, in the policies of war, and in the best counsels for al things which concerne the common wealth: and sacred histories doe re∣cord of purpose, how the people of God neuer aduentured vppon any action of weight and moment, before they had well consulted with the Priests and the Prophets. Such was the custome also of other countreis, wheresoeuer there was any religion or reuerence of God. What need I now againe put you in mind of the Chaldees and theyr Wise men, the Egyptians and theyr Priests, the Grecians & their Prophets, the Romaines and their Sooth-saiers, the French with theyr Druidists, without whose more sage aduice, it was alwaies thought a thing ominous, once to attēpt any notable thing in the common wealth. Neither were they deceiued in their opinion: For was the neglect of God euer left without re∣uenge? Yea the opiniō of false gods contemned, hath found the true God a sharp reuēger: wherfore al antiquity thought well, that nothing could goe well in the common wealth,
without due reuerence done to Religion: they began theyr wars with Religion, they ended their wars with Religion. But whence in Gods name (if it can be in Gods name) is this error sprong vp among those which glory in the true religion, that they disdayn in their counsels to take counsell of religion? Verily where God is banished publike assēblies, & religion is made but a scorn to the wicked, & the commō wealth a priuate gayne to euery varlet; happy Bishops, hap∣py Ministers of the Church which are farthest off from such Godlesse and irreligious conuenticles. Blessed is that man that hath not walked in the counsell of the vngodly, and hath not stood in the way of sinners, & hath not sit in the chair of the scornful. The time hath ben vnder our Lord Christ, when Bishops thought it not agreable with their honor, to sit in the coun∣sels of Emperors: whether it were of any superstitious error of thēselues, or of any contagious misdemeanor of the con∣sistorians, I cannot wel tell; but this I am sure of, that it is no indecorum for the seruāt of Christ, to be seen in the congregati∣ons of God. God standeth in the congregation of Gods, the iudgeth a∣mong Gods. But it ther, the counsels were held for priuat gain, or priuy deceit, for wicked treasons, or bloudy murthers, no wonder though the godly BB. were ashamed to stand in the vngodly assemblies: For albeit God be there also, as iudge & reuenger, yet the diuel is ther present, as Presidēt of the coū∣cel: otherwise ther was no reasō, why it might not be a thing decent & conueuient too, for a B. to stand in the consistory, (Admitte him) as a Doctor to giue aduice according to the word, as Legat for the Prince or the estate, as a Solicitor for the widow & the orphan, for the poore & the oppressed, for the traduced and condemned. This was then also a religious custom among the most ancient & best conceiued Bishops. What Ambrose did, & what he thought in this case, himself witnesseth of himselfe in his first Booke the 27. Epistle: who euen then whē as he excused himself to the Emperor Valenti∣nian, for that he would not dispute with Auxētius the Arriā B. in his Pallace, yet euen ther also he acknowledgeth his du∣ty in that behalfe, saing: Wherfore take it in good worth (gratious
Emperour) that I can not now come to the Consistory: For I haue not acquainted my selfe to stād in the Consistory, but on your behalfe: Neyther can I willingly contend within the compasse of your Court, who nor know, nor seeke to knowe the the secretes of the Court. So that albeit Ambrose thought it not beseeming the dignity of a Bishop, to stand as an ordinary man in the throng of the consistorians, yet he thought it pertaining to his duety, to be there present in the Princes causes, and the affaires of the cō∣mō welth. Wherfore, whencesoeuer this perswasion sprong, & whosoeuer they be, which thinke it either an vnlawfull, or an vnseemly thing, for any Minister to intermedle in ciuill causes, they doe greatly wrong the honour of religion, the welfare of Princes, and the publique state, whome they enuy the good vse, graue aduice, and louing fidelity of so necessa∣ry Cittizens and subiects of the common wealth. If the honest examples of ancient Bishops might be of a∣ny autority at this day, I would reckon vp many honorable Legacies vndertaken by most reuerend Bishops in ciuil cau∣ses: but ther are two presidents which may sufficiently serue for our purpose. The first is that of Ambrose who was twise Embassador for the Emperor Valentinian, to the Tirant Ma∣ximus; & that, not without great successe: the other is that of Marutha Bishop of Mesapotamia, whom the Romaine Empe∣rour sent Embassador to the king of Persia, as Socrates recor∣deth in his seuēth boke of Ecclesiasticall histories: the which his one Embassee was aboundantly beneficiall, both to the Church, and also to the Emperour himselfe. By these reasons and examples I am drawen to this conclusion, that it is both lawful and requisit for Princes, to demise certaine ciuil cau∣ses & affairs to the ancients of the Clergy; and that it is but the error of them which lust to go alone though they goe a∣wrye, that thinke, that the Minister ought to bee seque∣stred from all ciuill affayres, in a christian common wealth. As for those wordes of our Sauiour, and the tradition of the Apostles, they teach vs no other thing then this; That no publique ciuil authority is ioyned with the Eccesiasticall Ministery, as any part thereof. But the state of the Church
being altered; where the Church is the Common-wealth, and the Common-wealth the Church, there the state of the Euangelique Ministers, may lawfully bee the same, which was of olde in the Priests and Leuites among the people of God. CHAP. XXVI. Where the Church is the Common-wealth, the same man as Bishop, may take charge of the Church for the Lorde Iesus, and render fealtie and obeisance to the King, as one that holdeth by faith and homage. SOme there bee which thinke, that the Churche is in the Common-wealth, as a certaine part thereof, & that the whole Common-wealth it selfe is not the Church. But this di∣stinction hath no place in a Christi∣an people. In times past, when chri∣stians were mingled with the hea∣then, as at this day they are among the Mahometists, it was then of force a part by it selfe, and it might be said, the Church is in the Common-welth, as the people of Israell were sometimes in Aegypt, or at Babylon. I touch not now that state of a Common-welth, in the which the head-strong people are distracted into diuerse factions, and the headlesse Churches are dismembred vnder the same Magistrate. That is a waightie matter indeed, and such as re∣quireth a proper treatise of it selfe. But where the whole na∣tion hath giuen their names vnto Christ, and there is no man which is not sprinckled in his Baptisme, there doubtles the Church is the Common-wealth, and the Common-wealth the visible Church: vnder the which who so supplieth, whe∣ther in respect of the one onely, or in regard of both names (the order appointed by God being kept, and those things
remaining diuerse, which in nature are distinct) there is no∣thing in the Gospell that forbiddeth the same. In that a man is Pastor of the people, or Bishop of the Church, hee holdeth of Christ: in that hee is a subiect and a tenaunt to the Common-wealth, hee holdeth of the Prince: that he may performe his dutie to both these, he is not con∣strained to giue ouer either of these: the same man may giue vnto Caesar those things which are Caesars, and neuerthelesse, performe that vnto God which is due vnto God. A Bishop, as hee is a Pastor, doth owe vnto Christ a vigilant care ouer the flocke committed vnto his charge; and as hee is a subiect and free Cittizen, hee oweth vnto his Prince faithfull obedi∣ence, dutiful homage, and all other kinds of lawfull seruice. If it should so fall out at this day, (as it hath doone full oft and full well) that some noble-man holding in fee of the King, should bee called vnto the Ministery, (as one which hath sufficient learning, and no lesse deuotion) the doctrine of the Gospell doth not prohibit, that such a man should be made a Bishop, and yet retaine his free holde and the royal∣ties belonging there-unto. (Alwaies to bee considered, that the lawes of the Common-wealth permit the same.) Nei∣ther is there any cause, why any man should thinke, that this Bishop would be caried away with his secular affaires from his pastorall charge: For if there be any feare of God in him, and if he haue any care of the Church, hee will honestly, and may easily prouide, that such things be discharged by his ser∣uants, and wil gouerne his Church himselfe. We see that no∣ble-men haue the surplusage of as much time from their se∣cular affairs, to dispend in idle repasts, as might well suffice a Pastorall charge. And therfore it is not the possessions of the Kings farms and fees, which do so alienate a man, as that he cannot be both Lord of them, and a good Bishop too. And therfore, if any christian King shal thinke it behooful, either for the honor of his estate, or the stay of the Cōmon-wealth, that certain BB. of the church shuld hold in fee either manors or honors by their priuilege, I cānot find that ether he is for∣bidden to grant & demise; or that they are commaunded not
to receiue, & inioy the same. And that which I read not to be prohibited, I vnderstand to be permitted, nether can that be preiudicial to the Church, which is beneficial to the cōmon-wealth; especially when the Church is the Common-wealth. CHAP. XXVII. An other argument against the donation of fees confuted. IF so be any man vrge vs any further, and say, that the oblations which are made in the Church, with the which, as well God himselfe as his seruants are ho∣nored, are vtterly opposit to the nature of fees: because they are offered to testifie the gratefull memory of some benefite receiued: But contrariwise, a fee is graunted by the Lorde thereof vpon that condition, that the tenant in fee acknow∣ledge the doner in some kind of duty for a benefit bestowed. And therefore, seeing these two are opposite between them∣selues, and in condition crosse each other, it seemeth that Bi∣shops and Pastors are not rightfully indued with the title of fees: and this also is made good vppon them by this reason. Those thinges which are giuen to the Pastors of the Church, in regard of their ministery, are in the nature of certain pre∣sents, and are reputed amongst the holy actions of religion, which are to be rewarded of God onely: And therfore, to re∣quire in lieu of them any temporal recompence, or ciuil ob∣sequie, is a thing no lesse preposterous, then irreligious: but fees are granted vpon that condition that the feudatory re∣cognize his Patron in some kind of personall (or proportio∣nable) dutie: & therefore our auncestors haue not wel done, to honor the Church with their indowments of fees. The di∣stinction of Church-goods which before I remembred, doth containe a very easie & plaine answer to all this: namely, that the goods of the Church, are partly sacred and diuine, partlie ciuill and humaine. For fees are ciuil goods, & therefore not to be numbred among oblations, but donations: neither were those Cities and suburbs which were giuen by the people of God to Priests & Leuits, at any time recounted among their offeringes. Besides this, there is a difference betweene these things, to offer som thing to God, & to giue any thing to the church.
Things mooueable, which do perish togeather with their very vse, are said to bee offered vnto God, when they are gi∣uen to his Ministers, or to his poore members for Gods-sake, (albeit the one hath the name of a gift, the other of an Almes.) The which thing, for that the benefit thereof hath the nature of an oblation, or sacrifice, (for neither are they giuen for any reward, nor receaued vppon any condicion,) therefore, in nature they are nothing alike vnto the donati∣on of fees, as themselues very well confesse. I admit they also oblige a man to a gratefull memorie of that they haue re∣ceaued: yet are they not giuen vppon that condicion, that there-vpon some dutie should be performed. Wherefore, seeing that the donation of fees, are neither in vse, nor in sense like vnto the religion of oblations, why shuld they be confounded with them? Or how should a man ho∣nestly argue from thence, that the Ministers of the church may not be endewed ther with? Are they not Cittizens and subiectes, and liue vnder the same lawe, and obey the same Magistrate, and beare the same burdens of the Common-wealth? By what equity then can they be abridged the pos∣sessions of ciuill goods, by the benefit of the Prince & com∣mon-wealth? Besides, seeing it is thought but equall by the consent of the holy Fathers, that the fieldes and farmes of the Church, should yeeld a tribute vnder the most Christian Princes; that the increase and benefite of those fees, should serue for the good, partly of the Church, partly of the Prince, & partly of the Common-wealth, it is not repugnant to the state of the Church, or stay of religion. And indeed, why should not the same thing betide their fields, which befall the persons thē∣selues? who albeit they are dedicate to God, & mancipate to his seruice, yet they commit nothing vnworthy their functi∣on, or not beseeming their calling, when as according vnto the dignity of their place, they performe due seruice to their Prince, and other duties to the common-wealth. That which is added of the pension, or stipend of Mini∣sters, is easily answered by the same reason: for it differeth
not from the other. Wherfore as a man may consecrate him selfe and his labours to God and the Church, & yet reserue his due obsequie to his Prince and the common-wealth: so likewise may the Church inioy both fields, and fearms, and fees in the common-wealth, and yet make no claime to any extraordinary immunity from seruice, nor euer think much of any ordinary fealtie, due to the patrōs therof. The Bishop and euery other Minister of the Church, is subiect to the lawes and Magistrate of the common-wealth: and seeing he oweth homage to the Prince, as to the cōmon parent of the people: there is no absurditie committed, if by the ac∣cesse of some especial benefit he become more nearly bound vnto him, then the common sort. How many and how bloudie wars the Bishops of Rome haue made vpon the Emperours, and other Christian Prin∣ces, euen for the onely inuestiture of those fees which they chalenge vnto themselues as consecrate to God, & therefore (as they perswaded themselues) free from all ciuill seruice, all histories can well witnesse. Wherefore those Magistrates at this day doe shew themselues very ingrate, (I may say vn∣godly) to the present Ministerie; who, when as by defending the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate, which the Bishop of Rome had impayred, they haue now at the length brought to passe, that they haue recouered the same by their means, doe now notwithstanding enuie them their poore estate in the Church, and their small authoritie in the common-wealth. May not that of the Apostle (2. Cor. 11.19.) be truly said of this people? They suffered those gladly which brought them into bondage, which tooke of their goodes, which exalted themselues, which smote them on the face; I more, which afflicted them with fire and sworde, and made them runne through Purgatorie, glad that they might get to Hell. But the faithfull seruantes of Christ, which set them free frō the captiuitie of the Pope, and gaue them that libertie which they nowe abuse against the Church, those they doe not onely not reward with that honour they well deserued, but they depriue them of those dignities they once possessed: They lay baites for the bane
for some, & set snares for the liues of others, & contriue plots for the deposing and disparaging of all. Is this the thankes they giue to their Pastors? And is this the reward for so ma∣ny benefits receiued by their preaching? O God forgiue them this sin, if it be possible. But thou wilt one day iudge betweene them and vs, and reuenge this infamie done vnto thy selfe. Chap. XXVIII. Of the honorable titles which are giuen vnto Bishops. NOw we haue spoken of fees, and of that ci∣uill iurisdiction which is annexed vnto them, it remaineth that wee speake some∣what also of their titles of honour. Neither will I seeke into all, but will shew you vnto a few of them, and comprise in one or two all the rest, which either the custome of the time & place, or the curtesie of Kings and Princes, doe giue vnto the chiefe states of the kingdome. With the which here are some in England, which find themselues not a little of∣fended, & would hold others in hand (thogh they dare not hold their hand) that such titles are not to bee giuen to the greatest Bishops. The first that displeaseth them, is the title of Lord, which yet at this day is vsed to be giuen rather for honor sake, then for homage. The proper signification thereof is sufficiently known, to haue relation to the possession & proprietie of a thing: In which sense, euery man is Lord of that hee hath. It hath a secondary relatiō also to a Seruant: in which sense the Romane Emperours would not be called Lords, or Maisters. Suetonius reporteth of Octauius, that he abhorred the name of Lord & Maister, as curse, and a slaunder. Indeed the Barba∣rians acknowledge no other distinction of persons, but of Maisters & Seruants: & therfore their Kings also do domi∣neer ouer their subiects, as maisters ouer their seruants; & the fathers of families haue the same authoritie ouer their wiues & children, as ouer their seruāts. This would seem (& might
well) a very vnreasonable thing to vs, being not (as they are) a people base & seruile. And yet the Moschouites rule at this day after this manner; neither is the Empire of the Turkes much vnlike the same. And generally, all the Easterne king∣doms were once of this gouernment, & kept this foule rule ouer the nations wher they conquered. (Whether the Kings kindred had any priuilege besides the rest, it is to be doub∣ted, & so I leaue it.) But these a man might truly cal Dominos, Lords, or Maisters: in which sense our Kings themselues wil not be so called: nor will they take it in good part to be so slandered; for their subiects are not their slaues, or seruants, neither do they so vse them. They hold it their chiefest glory to haue a free people subiect vnto them; and thinke it more honorable, to command ouer a free then a seruile nation. And albeit the King may truly be called Lord, and indeed the only chiefe Lord in his own kingdom (referring the sig∣nification of that title, either to the subiection of the whole people, or the propriety of his own kingdome) yet conten∣ting himself with the royal title of King, (which glory he wil cōmunicate with no subiect) he enuieth not his subiects the name of Lords, but whō he thinketh worthy, hee honoureth with that title. Neither do inferior persons only cal superior personages Lords, but they also which are Nobles of equall authoritie do so salute their peeres. And doth not the King himselfe vouchsafe to greet the Honors of his lande by the names of Lords? The name of Lord is of many significations, and is (as I haue said) a title rather of honour and of fauor, then of rule and of Empire: the which argueth the no smal malice, or otherwise the great ignorance of them, which hold the title of Lord to bee of so great authoritie, as that it is not conuenable to the calling of Bishops. And yet at this day among the best Latinistes, the same name ordinarily is giuen to any man of any ordinary esteeme. So doth the sig∣nification of this title varie, according to the diuersitie of regions, and persons, and proprieties. They which in England do make the same a signification of greater honor, then that it may any waies agree with their
Bishops doe ground that their errour vpon an other, by the which they are perswaded that it is a thing insolent and ab∣surd, for Bishops to bee taken for peeres of the lande. But herein they seeme to bewray themselues in like passion with the sons of Iacob, when they enuyed their owne brother, for that he was made more honourable then themselues; who ought rather to haue thought themselues honored in their brother. It is vtterly against the nature of a well ordered common-wealth, that the order of religion should not bee accounted among the chiefe states of the lande: the which honour seeing it cannot bee giuen to all that are in the same order, it is wisely and worthily prouided by the chiefe Ma∣gistrate, that the whole order should be honored in a few of them. The which thing seeing it is agreeable to the lawe of God, and the custome of the auncient people of God, & the practise of al Nations vnder the Sun; may it not seem a wō∣der greater then their errour, that any learned men should be found in any wildernes of the world so ouergrown with mosse, (the melancholie of their distempered brains) as once to oppose themselues in any ciuill societie against the same? But let vs heare yet, with what reasons they are moued so farre beyond all reason. Those proud titles (say they) of do∣minion, are the inuentions of Antichrist: and our Sauiour answered his Apostles contending about the primacie, That the kings of nations rule ouer them, and they which exercise autho∣ritie vpon them are called gratious Lords; but it shall not bee so with you. And in the 23. of Mathew: You shall call no man your father vpon earth, for there is one your father which is in heauen: bee not called Doctors, for one is your Doctor, euen Christ. Whatsoeuer els is alleadged is of smal worth: & these words of our Sauiour beeing honestly interteined, the rest will willingly yeelde themselues. First therfore I affirme, that the titles of dominion were in∣uented, before Antichrist himselfe was hatched, hee beeing the author thereof, who is the author of dominion. Neyther is there any thing arrogant in the titles, but in the impotent and vsurped aspirement of such, which oft times reiecting
their commendable titles affect the contrary, and cal them∣selues seruants of seruants, which thinke themselues Lordes of Lords: & name themselues with the lesse and the least, which will bee accounted the greater & the greatest, that if for no∣thing els, yet for that they are so named. But the Lorde his meaning was not to abolish the vse of these titles, Lord, Doc∣tor, and Father, but to teach vs onely by these his precepts, to beware of two dangerous perrils: The first is, the vaine swel∣ling or swelling veine with the which Hypocrites are com∣mōly puft vp by reaso of these titles: the other is, the prepo∣sterous confidence which the simple people cōmonly haue in their elected Doctors, or Fathers: vppon which aduaun∣tage the popular professors distract the name of Christ, so that some hold of Paul, some of Apllo, and some of Cephas, and euery man best fancieth the Doctor himself hath chosen: when as no man ought to build vpon any Doctors wordes, but on his alone which cannot erre (the Lord Christ.) Ney∣ther was it the Lord his intent to inhibit vs, that we should not call those by their names, vnto whom the Lord hath gi∣uen the names of Doctors & Fathers in the Church, or that children should not cal them Fathers vpon earth, that begot them into the world; or that Disciples should not cal them Doctors in the Cittie, that instructed them in the Vniuersity; or that Christian seruants should not cal them Lords & Mai∣sters, which haue intertained them into their families. No doubt Onesimus both might & ought to call and recognise Philemon for his Maister: And did not Paul also (a most per∣fect imitater of Christ) cal himself the Doctor of the Gentiles? And why may not we also cal him, as well a Doctor as an Apo∣stle? In the first to the Corinthians, chap. 4. he calleth himselfe theyr Father. Although (saith hee) you haue ten thousand instruc∣ters in Christ, yet haue you not many Fathers; for I haue begotten you through the Gospell. The like we reade in many other pla∣ces: by the which we are giuen to vnderstand, that not the condition, but the ambition onely of those names was for∣bidden, with the singling out of some especiall Doctor, or Teacher, by the which wee will shew our selues to be singu∣lar:
For that indeed that knowledge of the truth, which we would seem to experience in some especiall men, is onely to be expected in that Doctor alone, who with the Spirit is able to lead vs into all truth. But now, what shall we say of the name & title of Lordes? First I say, it is no where written; Be ye not called Lordes: And againe I say, that although it were written, it could beare no other sence, or haue any other interpretation, then those o∣ther titles which before are noted. That dominion ouer the Lordes heritage is forbidden by the Lord, there is no man that doubteth: and did the word Lord alwaies implie a Do∣minion, it were some thing they saide. But we haue heard of the diuers significations of these words. As for that the Lord said vnto his Apostles, It shal not be so with you; what sober mā wil interprete him, as if he had said, Ye shall not be called Lords? If the Kinges and Princes of the common-wealth, will haue you to sit in the assemblies of great men, and wil heare your iudgement concerning the state of the Church, and will consult together with you concerning the affaires of the common-wealth, and in regarde of my name, and in reue∣rence of your calling, wil haue you reputed among the peers of the land, take heede, beware of that, and suffer not your selues to bee called Lordes: this is a proud title, and that is a foule matter. From hence no doubt did arise that odious hypocrisie in the Church of Rome, which vnder the base∣nes of mean titles, exerciseth the sharpnes of no meane tyran∣nie, and vnder the name of Seruant of seruantes, vsurpeth dominion ouer Maisters and Seruants. And hence it is also, that his champions do glory in this, to be called Friers (Mi∣norites) the lesse, or the least: as if forsooth there were, nor pride, nor tyranny lurking vnder these their lubarly names: or as if the name of Lord onely, were to bee attended with pride and tyrannie. Wherefore, the meaning of our Sauiour in those words, was not to forbid his disciples those ordinary tearms of ho∣nour, which are giuen them by the fauor of the Prince, and consent of the people: only his intent was to teach thē, that
the Gospel was no prince-like Ministery, or royal seigniory. By the which it neither is, nor can be concluded, that Prin∣ces may by no means vse the assistāce of Ministers, nor grace the learned Pastors with certaine principall degrees of ho∣nor. Hath Christ by any law diminished the Princes power? or hath he by any counsell aduised them to withdraw their bountie from his seruantes? or that they should haue no regard of those duties they haue performed? or not to grace with titles of honour their honest demerits, of whose truth & wisdom they haue made great vse, & had great experience? Nabuchadnezer preferred Daniel amongst the Babilonians; Darius aduanced Mardocheus among the Persians; and shall it not be lawfull for a Christian King to honor the seruants of Christ for their religion? & that vpon a certain religion for∣sooth? That the meane may be exceeded, no man doubteth; namely, when as diuine honors are giuen to mortal men; or where immoderate dignities are ambitiously affected of them, who ought to be the patterns of modestie, & the Do∣ctors of humilitie: but yet, that ciuil honour cannot bee thought immoderate (but of immoderate men) which ac∣cording to the custome of the Cuntry, is giuen for iust cau∣ses by the aduised Prince to his approued Subiects. How many most holy men, whose liues were only priuat, (yet publikly renowned) which haue suffered themselues to be called Lords? witnesse the two Testaments.3. Reg. 18. Did not Abdias the seruant of K. Achab, meeting with Elias, salute him by the name of Lord?4. Reg. 4. Was not Elizeus honored of the Sunamite by the name of Lord? Did not the keeper of the prison call Paul and Barnabas by the name of Lordes?Acts. 16. And yet the mo∣destie of their mindes notwithstanding was no lesse, then that of Peter, who would not suffer himselfe to bee hono∣red of Cornelius aboue measure. We read of Paul & Barnabas, how they rent their clothes, and ran into the throng, & re∣pealed the diuine honors which Iupiters Priest, with the pe∣ple, would haue done vnto them; and verely, if so bee in the name of Lord, ther had bene any such eminent honor, or im∣minent danger, as som think, they would haue refused that.
I conclude therefore, that in a Christian common-wealth, which is the Church of Christ, all externe things, as wealth, riches, preferment, and ciuill honours, may bee referred of all and euerie the faythfull, of any calling or condition whatsoeuer, to the glorie of GOD, and the good of the Church, and the benefite of the common-wealth. (For so indeede they ought to bee referred.) With the which I in∣clude this also, that the seruantes of Christ ought so to pre∣pare themselues, both for honour and ignominie, both for wealth and want, as that they may vse all thinges aright, to the honour of God, and edifiyng of his Church. Chap. XXIX. Of the Bishop familie and retinue. BEsides all this, the Bishops retinue & or∣dinarie attendants, are no small motes in the eies of some, that cannot without en∣uie behold the same. For doe they not therein imitate the peeres and potentates of the lande? Not Christ (I warrant you) not Peter, not Paule, were euer thus gar∣ded. But alâs poore popular, and child-pleasing speech: sim∣ple are the men, whom these faire wordes make faine: for I dare be bold to say, that the retinue of Christ & his Apostles was as honorable as it might be, in respect of the time, & the thing for the which he came into the world; & much more honorable should haue beene, if God had meant to restore mankind after an other sort then he did. And yet as it was, our Lord and Sauiour was not without aboue fourescore men in his family, which waited vpon him whither he went, or went before him whither he was to come. I, but there were no gallant Gentlemen to braue it in their chains of gold, there were no barbed steeds to praunce it in their siluer studded raynes: In that solemne pompe, when Christ would shewe his glorie vnto the Cittie, hee was well
mounted vppon a sorie Asse, attended with the simple com∣panie of his weake Disciples. I, but this againe is but a popu∣lar perswasion, in the which ther is nor pith nor rind against the thing in question. Will they neuer learne, that our Saui∣our after that manner prouided for that season, least eyther hee should incurre the suspicion of affecting an earthly king∣dome, or other-wise might haue hindered the worke of our redemption? Doubtles, had he bene knowen in his kind to Herod, to Pilate, and to the chiefe Priests: that which the peo∣ple did of a good zeale, they would haue done for their own aduancement; but then would they neuer haue crucified the Lord of glorie: Neither would he which tooke in good worth the honor of that oyntment which was powred vpon him, and receiued royall presents of the wise men, (golde, myrhe, and frankincense,) haue euer refused that honour which was due vnto him from all earthly Princes, might it haue stoode with the saluation of mankind. But is not this a worthy kind of arguing (which is vsed aswel against the Papists as against vs) to reason from the times & actions of a faithles people, to the times and duties of a christian nation? neither doe I commend in our Bishops, either pride or ryot, or any super∣fluous excesse; but this I say, that that retinue is not to be dis∣alowed, which the receaued and continued custome of the countrey requireth. It was an auncient custome in the Church, that a Bishop should neuer walke forth alone, or be alone: hee had records and eie-witnesses of al his actions. Now they which are more indifferent to Bishops, had rather they should bee attended with gown-mē: the which I also had rather. But let vs weigh the matter in an euen ballaunce: for they which would haue the Bishops retinue to be men of his owne quality, seeme to say some-what, and to stand to the examples of the ancient Fathers. But it is wel knowen that our BB. are neuer without such also. Wherefore, the question is now of the number: which cannot bee prescribed to all alike, for that their reue∣nues are not all alike. But go too: let vs once againe alow Bi∣shops their ancient attendants. The more there is of them, the
greater is his family, & so a greater number of seruants, and so a greater retenue by ods, then is as this day: and shall not their enuy also increase with the company for company? But the seruing mens swords, and the Gentlemens chains do gall them at the heart, and paine them in their eies, as if (good men) it were a thing misbeseming the calling of chri∣stians, that a Bishop shuld be attended by Gentlemen, whe∣ther old or young? That yong Gentlemen and wel nurtered, should be preferred to some godly BB. that they may attend his person, and marke his maners, & therby become the bet∣ter, and better learned: there no is no man without an enuious eye, that can mislike the same. Bishops houses haue bene al∣waies Colliges of learned men, and schooles of al virtue; and what hindreth that they may not now be? But least I should seme to haue taken vpon me the patrociny, rather of BB. then of their calling, I may not seeme to set forth the virtues of a∣ny, which at this day do gouern the Church of England. And yet, neither the zeale of my duty, nor the conscience of their demerits will suffer me, to passe ouer in thankles silence the sacred memory of that most reuerend Father, Iohn, L. Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, with that godly Diocessan VVilliam, L. Bishop of Couentry, mine own Ordinary. As for the rest, they are all known to me alike. I knew some-times, (neither shall they euer bee vnknowen) that most reuerend L. and Father Edward Grindall, (the memorye of which man is renowned in all the Churches of Christ:) and two other BB. no lesse fa∣mous for their learning and religion, Iewell L. Bishop of Sa∣lisburie; and Horne, L. Bishop of VVinchester: whose religious godlines & rare knowledg, I could wish that al the BB. euil-pleased emulists had among them, euery man his part. What other Bishoppes and Archbishops happy. England hath bred within our memory, their lerned works declame in our stu∣dies, and their inflamed bloud doth yet speake in the booke of Martyrs. That they were men both of sincere life and sin∣gular learning, what man, (if a man) that will deny it? I te∣stifie therefore, that I do not defend Bishops (if there be any euill,) but the calling of Bishops, which in my conscience I
iudge before God (who shall iudge my conscience) to bee godly, christian, ancient, Apostolike, profitable, and necessa∣ry. As for the crimes and abuses, with the which the euil spi∣rits charge our Bishoppes, they touch their person, not their function. The tyranny of Rome being surprised, & the autho∣rity of Princes restored to their right places, wherin so-euer any Bishop offendeth (if indeed hee offendeth) it may easily be corrected: and it chiefly concerneth the chiefe Magistrate to see, that godly men, well noted for their virtues, (such as the word of God doth commend) be set ouer the churches: If the Princes neglect this, let the peple know, that scisme is a remedy worse then the malady: for what sedicion is in the Common-welth, the same is scisme in the Church of Christ. And albeit these things doe litle concerne those churches which are committed to your charge (reuerend Brethren,) where there are no Bishops, or rather where they are all Bi∣shops: notwithstanding, I haue more largely dilated of these things, that the whole matter may be made manifest vnto al you, and that you all may vnderstand, that the honor which is giuen vnto Bishops, is both an aid and an aduauncement to the Church or christian Common-wealth; and that you may take aime by this, how farre wide they are, which inuey them this honor, & desire to make them, or to make no more of them, then of ordinary men. That which I am perswaded, Satan with a certain wile hath procured, that so he may bring downe all the Pastors into contempt togeather, that so the whole authority of religion being little or naught woorth, himselfe might freely cast forth al manner contumelies and blasphemies against Christ. For who are they (which durst, oppose, or could preuaile against the enterprises of his more mightie complices? I know what I speake, neither can you (beloued) bee ignorant thereof. But I haue said enough of this matter for this time: and wil one day (if God wil) speak more plainely of that which remaineth.
CHAP. XXX. Whether it be better for Ministers to liue of the stipends of the Magistrate, or of the oblations of the faithfull. AL they which thinke, that the Ministers of the Gospell may liue of the Gospell, are not of one iudgement: For there bee some which hold, that Ministers ought to liue of the tythes and oblations onely of Christians, renouncing all temporall goods, and sur∣rendering them to the Prince and people. Other are of opinion, that they ought so to liue, for so long onely as the Magistrate is an enemy to christianitie: who so soone as he hath receaued the Gospel, ought to prouide, that Ministers may be allotted their sufficient stipends: the which thing when hee hath once performed, from thence foorth, there ought to be no more oblations. For my part I am of a contrary opinion, for that I am taught by the word of God, that oblations ought to continue in the Church: and that, because they are the exercises and testimonies of our religion towards God and his seruantes, by the which wee not onely pay our vowes to the Almighty, but therewith also the Pastors to the people, and the people to the Pastors are mutually deuoted the one to the other. For (I know not how) a man doth not onely binde with his bounty, but is bound himselfe also, after a secret manner: And as the benefactor maketh him his owne of whome hee doth deserue, so likewise himselfe becommeth his, and they both, (if so be there be a free and an ingenious disposition in both) reioyce in the same benefit, as wel he which giueth, as he which receiueth. Now therefore, me thinks theyr rea∣sons are too too politicke and prophane, by the which obla∣tions are abrogat in som Churches. For albeit religion ought not to be measured by allowance, yet is it not to be without a reward. As for that they so hotly alledge of the many and
manifold abuses thereof, it is to no purpose: vnles we should say, that the ceremonies also which were commaunded, were to be abrogated euen then while they were comman∣ded, and all other sacred rites which God hath ordained, were together to be abolished, because Hypocrites haue and doe wickedly abuse the same. For what is there so sacred, which the impiety of men will not prophane? Wherefore, we are rather to inquire, what God hath commaunded, not what this or that man thinketh most commodious. If any man obiect, that oblations are antiquated, as are also tithes, and all other sacrifices and ceremonies of the old lawe; I would haue him to know (if he be yet to learne) that they are not exacted at this day in that manner, neyther were so exacted of our Fathers (as it may appeare by those theyr testimonies which I haue before noted) but that they are onely required, as testimonies of a thankfull mind towards God, and a propensiue deuotion towards his Church. But this kinde of duety hath no temporall prescription, it is per∣petual, and bindeth the faithfull to the worlds end. It is also obiected, that where the Pastors are abundantly prouided for, by the ample reuenews of the Church, or o∣ther set & certaine stipends, there oblations ought to cease. I aunswere, that the oblations may be the lesse or not so of∣ten, as otherwise they ought to be, where the Church hath no fermes, or receyueth no annuall increase of theyr fieldes: but not, that there ought to be none. The end of oblations, is not only the necessary reliefe of the Ministers, but our du∣tifull deuotion towards God. And hence is it, that the wise man sayth in the third of his Prouerbes, Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits of thine increase, &c. He doth not say Honor the Priest, (who notwithstanding was to bee honored, and was honored) but honor the Lord. And Paul to the Philippians the fourth Chapter, telleth them, that he de∣sired not a gift, but the fruite which might abound for theyr reioycing, not for his. So then they which take away obla∣tions depraue the faithfull of this fruite of theyr Religion,Tit. 3.14. and consequently of that Communion of theyr goods,
which good christians ought to exercise betweene them∣selues. Wherefore, as we haue proued, that it is lawfull for Pastors to liue of the possessions which are giuen vnto Chur∣ches, the like do we say of oblations. Chap. XXXI. The stipendaries cald to accompt and confuted. NOw let vs call their reasons to an euen reckoning, which appoint Ministers their maintenance by the Magistrate his allowance. For now a dayes this is thought a better deuise, then the ancient receyued vse of offerings & glebes. And reason too: for by this means, many inconueniences may be auoyded, which mans infir∣mity bringeth with it. But theyr reasons and arguments are of a new mold, & not knowen to the Fathers, or not thought worthy, for the which oblations should be deposed from theyr former state. Theyr first reason is this. That by this means an occasion might be taken away, so that men could not so readily make marchandise of the word of God, which otherwise might be easie for them to doe, who imploying their whole Ministery to gain and vsury, would apply them∣selues vnto thē most, of whom they hoped to receiue most. I aunswer, that the contrary may rather seeme more like∣ly, seeing that the very couenanting for a stipend, is in the next degree to a flat bargayn (vnlesse we would iudge bar∣gaining by giuing and taking, and measure the same by the minds of men rather then the matter.) For what other thing is it to marchandise, then to sel any then for lucre sake? But when the Magistrate setteth down a certain price for the Mi∣nisters labor, or the Minister himselfe requireth the same, al∣beit in plain termes there is no bargain made of either side, yet notwithstāding of both, these may seem rather to buy & sell the word, then they which liue by the oblations of the faithfull, or the increase of theyr fields. Oblations are not certayne, and they haue in them a certayne kinde of Reli∣gion: but stipends are certaine, and are in theyr nature more ciuill, religious not at all. Now whether, I pray you, may be
sayd rather to sell? He which in respect of his holy Ministery receyueth the free gifts of his people, or he which rateth his labour at a certaine set stipend? Our fore-fathers in wisedom thought, that this religious marchandise of religion could by no meanes be better auoided, then if on both parts they made a religion in that very action of offering and receiuing. I conclude therfore, that this mischiefe which som are affraid of, namely that the whole Ministery should be giuen to gaine & vsury, can neuer by this means be auoided in coue∣teous men: their minds being so affected (or infected rather) as that they would make a gaine of any thing, and being al∣waies ready to conuay themselues thither, wher the greatest wages might be had. Againe (say they) that liberty of speech which is necessa∣ry in a Minister, may thus be better performed: For of whō they shall daily receiue somwhat, they either could not taxe their vice, or else they must doe it with losse to themselues: but now where no man giueth any thing of his owne, they may admonish all degrees of men, with more boldnesse and lesse daunger. This reason partly confuteth it selfe, and may easely bee retorted, and partly falleth in his own strength, and can no waies be relieued. For is it not to bee feared also, that the Ministers should speak in fauor of them, of whom they take wages? These men for the most part haue greater faults then the most part; and yet if the Pastor chaunce but to stir their humor, their stipend is in hazard. Let a Preacher with his li∣berty offend a whole multitude, he shal not endanger either himselfe, or his estate so much, as if he displease but one Ma∣gistrat. As for liberty of speach, it is generally a very popu∣lar and plausible thing, with the which while a few are offen∣ded, many are well pleased, and the euill will of a few got∣ten by this meanes, procureth the good will of a great many. Besides, our Sauiour prouided but badlye for his Disciples, (if this reason bee of any force) when as in the olde law hee commaunded the Priests and Leuites to liue of the oblations of the people, as also in the new Testament,
he would haue his Apostles and theyr successors to liue of the Gospell, If the daunger be such, that therfore they may not taxe vice. But it seemeth, these men haue eyther not at∣tayned to the knowledge of oblations, or regard but a little what is read in the most ancient Diuines, concerning the same. First he which thinketh, that by this meanes the suspi∣tion of flattery is taken away, greatly deceyueth himselfe, & rashly condemneth the auncient Fathers. But goe to: let vs confer the Sermons of the Fathers which liued by oblations, and the seuerity of Ecclesiasticall discipline vsed in those dayes, with the Sermons and proceedings of our Preachers of this age. Shall we not be ashamed (if we blush not) of our selues and our times, in the which all vice are so rise, and all discipline so slacke? doubtlesse, that liberty of our Fathers in reprehending sins of old, doth euen now reprehend vs. Again let the Pastors Sermons, where they liue of the deuo∣tion of the people, be compared with those, where they stād to the stipend of the Magistrate, and it will easely appeare whether of them doe best performe theyr duety in this be∣halfe. But last of all, what need they depend vppon the vo∣luntary deuotion of the people, where besides their ordina∣ry oblations, there are fayr glebes and sufficient lands pro∣uided for the vse of the Church? To the which we may also adde, that it is the duty of a christian Magistrat, to cause the people to performe their duety towards theyr Pastors: so that it is altogether a needelesse fear which is here alledged. And whereas they thinke that the suspicion of flattery is by this meanes auoyded (as if they were in daunger to be smo∣thed in theyr sinnes, which are rich, and giue with a full hand) it is but a foolishe conceit, arising from that error, that christians are not bound to their oblations; or else of this nicety, that it is vnseemely (forsooth) and superstitious to bring them to the Church, or otherwise to gather them. By the which in deede they haue made themselues the patrons of the sacriledge of this age, which hath left nothing for the Ministers worthy the gathering vp: so that if there bee any want in oblations, there want must be supplied else where.
But by certaine stipends (say they) the modesty of Mini∣sters, and the honesty of their family are prouided for. For what ingenious man would willingly make his neede know∣en to euery man? and with what face can they of the familye goe doore by doore to gather things necessary? verily their credite is indangered, and theyr modesty. But did you euer heare, that the Ministers of the Church were brought to such an exigent, as that of force they must gather their relief from dore to dore, among their own peo∣ple? In deed, there was such a custome in the time of Popery for mendicant Friers, brought vp among them of a cer∣tayne superstition, without any precedent president of the auncient Fathers. But is there no other way to gather chri∣stian oblations, but so? and are they not eyther brought by the faithfull of theyr own voluntary, or collected by some of the honest neighbours appointed for that purpose? But of the other side, by the certaine stipends which depend vp∣pon the vncertaine pleasures of the Magistrates, it is very badly prouided, both for the necessity of the family, and the modesty of the Ministers, where either so small wages are allowed, or their allowance so slenderly paied, that the poor Pastors (pittifull complayning) for meere pouerty are con∣strained to giue ouer theyr trade, and to forsake theyr Mi∣nistery. Where the people are perswaded, that they owe no∣thing to theyr Pastors, and that it pertaineth to the Magi∣strate onely to prouide for the Ministers (alâcke poore Pa∣stors) I am ashamed to report, how both people and Magi∣strate beare themselues towards them. But furthermore they dispute,, that in these stipends the Ministers can vse no deceite, when it shalbe sufficiently kno∣wen, how much they receiue: when as otherwise, a couetous Minister may pretend, that eyther he receiueth lesse then he receiueth, or not so much as sufficeth. To this I aunswere, that the oblations, of the which we argue the case, are not so secretly giuen, or so closely kept, but that it is commonly knowen how much they are, and what the Minister receiueth. But to what purpose is al this?
or to what end should al know how much the minister either receyueth, or hath? or who can prescribe a meane for that matter? The Pastor layeth out as well as he taketh in: & must that also needs be knowen? That which they adde, of the co∣ueteous Minister, who may pretend that he receyueth lesse, then either he receiueth, or may well suffice, it proceedeth of the same errour. I haue knowen many Ministers in my time, among whome there is not one, whose wealth is not commonly knowen, and what he ordinarily receyueth eue∣ry year; so that there is no other means for them to lie here, then there, vnlesse you would lie for them. But to what end are these reasons? or how, thinke they, did the ancient Bi∣shops of the Church liue? Ignatius, Ireneus, Cornelius, Cyprian, and such like, whose memorial wil continue with their glo∣ry to the worlds end? A man shall neuer preuent the cauels of malitious men, whether the Ministers liue of tithes and oblations, or whether they stick to theyr certain allowance: both here, and there, whatsoeuer is receiued wil be thought too much of some.A Flemishe florence or gilderne, is 2. shillings sterling. I haue often times heard the Boores groyn and grunt to this effect, that a stipend of two, three or foure hundred Flemish Florences was great wages. I (sayd they) can keepe my family for lesse: Neyther do I re∣ceyue so much of all the gayne that I can make; thus vne∣qually comparing not them selues with them selues, but theyr styes with the state of they Ministers. As if ther were no difference betweene a priuate man of the basest rout, & a publique Minister at the hie Altar: And yet two or three years wages wil scarce serue to buy him books, & bsides, of duty he ought to be boūtifull & intertainable to the needy. But now they say, that by this means it is well prouided for the subiects, who for the most part are but poore, & liue hardly in theyr Villages: For how should they maintain the Minister, who are themselues to be maintained? Here in deed is the error of our age to be noted, which in some places giue to the ciuill Magistrate the goods of the Church, and permitteth them to gather vp tithes, which are due to the Minister. But to the purpose. In villages, the poor
which haue nothing, giue nothing, if it be litle which a man hath, he giueth litle: euery man payeth his tith according to his wealth, and according to the greatnes of his increase, whether the commodity lie in tillage, or in herbage. And in deed the poore could no waies better be prouided for, that they should not relieue theyr Pastors, themselues being to be relieued, then thus; for by this means the Pastors are maine∣tayned by them which haue much, & they maintaine them which haue nothing. The increase of theyr fields, for the most part, keepe a certain scantline, & euermore the number of them is greater, which receiue, then of the poore which want the same. But these their reasons are too blame, that both poore & Pastors are so badly prouided for, as they are: for by thē the goods, which are consecrate to holy vses, are betraied to prophane wretches, of whom themselues must now goe beg their allowance, and be glad to serue and flat∣ter in most slauish sort for their iust reward. But yet again they argue, that men will seek occasion to dis∣charge their Minister, when they shal see that they must giue often, & shal hear their vices inueighed against; & so wil fain causes with greater autority & contentiō to thrust him out. But who seeth not here, how weakely this argument is grounded euen vppon an euil grounded gouernment of the Church, who leaue in the peoples hands, to place & displace their Pastors at their pleasure; & yet, if it so falleth out at any time (as it falleth out, so often as they fall out) the christian Magistrat must be but an idle auditor in this iniury, & haue no autority at all to compell the wicked in this case to theyr duty. But let Cornelius Bishop of Rome an holy Martyr aun∣swere this, who being destitute of the ayde of the christian Magistrate, and being infested by Nouatus his faction so far forth, as that he was not far from giuing vp his hold, and yeelding to the wicked; yet did he euer want of those his or∣dinary oblations, euen in the midst of so much euil will, and so many dissentions, so that he could not maintain therewith his 500. and 50. clerkes, and a 1000. 500. poore people? Neither were any of the Fathers, which liued of oblations,
euer fearefull of the wicked, but were euer fearfull to the wicked, and were feared. Of no greater force is that which they say, that euil men being reprehended, wil giue nothing, but will rather suffer their Minister to famish for hunger. As if that were not ra∣ther to be feared least it should be done, (as we haue experi∣ence of the doing) by the Magistrat which payeth them wa∣ges, when so euer a good Minister shal displease a bad Magi∣strate, But it seldome falleth out, that Pastors haue only euil men in their parishes; the Lords flocke is mixt of good and bad. The good doe loue that which the wicked doe hate, whom to displease is a great praise among good men; who will not suffer the faithful Minister to suffer losse for his wel doing, but will themselues supply that, which they shall see wanting on the part of the wicked. But there is commonly alledged an other commodity of these stipends, namely this, for that the Ministers may not seeme to take any thing of them of whom they ought not, as are the notorious vngodly, and noted Heretiques, with whom a man ought not to haue any thing to doe: as also of the good and godly, beeing poore and needy, to whome a man ought rather to giue: as are widows, orphans, the sick and needy, whome to pill and pole is a point of cruell Re∣ligion. But I pray you, where doth the Magistate receaue, or of whome doth he contract those things, by the which the Ministers are paied their stipends? Of their owne goods, or out of the publique treasurie? but is not that confusedly ga∣thered of the wicked togeather with the godly, of the poore together with the rich? This is indeed a strange religion, that it shall not be lawfull for Pastors to take of them, of whome the Magistrate taketh that he giueth them. All men pay sub∣sidie, and other tributes of the common-wealth, without re∣spect of person, euery man according to the moity of hys substaunce: Of them which haue nothing, they take no∣thing. But this their religion is like vnto that of the Franciscanes, who when they make great daintie to handle anye money
with their proper fingers, they haue other to doe it for thē. I admit, it is a thing not beseeming a godly Pastor, to take of all commers: but as the voluntary oblations of wicked rich men are not to bee receaued, so the free offerings of godlie poor men are not to be refused (so that they exceed not the ability of the giuer) For although it be litle which is giuen, yet seeing it is the fruite of godlines, it ought neither to bee contemned of the Pastor, nor yet suppressed in the faithfull. But bee it remembred, that I said, the voluntary oblations of the wicked: for no doubt, a Minister of the Gospel may take tythes euen of infidels also, if they be due to the Minister by the law and custome of the Countrey: neither is religion a∣ny more violated in so doing, then when the rents of farmes are paid, or receaued of husband-men our tenants, that are heretiques. As for the argument they drawe from the vaine ostenta∣tion of the contributors, who because they could not be vn∣knowen, contention might arise among them, who should exceed the rest; it is an argument none at all: vnlesse by the same reason, we will haue Christians to abstaine from good works, to auoyd ostentation. But no man is to be diswaded from bounteous beneficency, least he should fal into the af∣fectation of vaine-glory. And that contention and emula∣tion is good, when one man striueth to excel another in wel∣doing: as for the hearts and minds of men, let vs leaue them for God to iudge. But their last argument is this, that there is no comman∣dement, that Ministers of the Church should be maintained by the oblations of the people: by the which it may be con∣cluded, that it is not necessary that the same maner of main∣taining the Ministery should bee maintained alike in all pla∣ces, and at all times: but that all things ought to be referred to good order, that they may be done to edification. I answere, that albeit the Minister of the Church be not commanded to liue of the oblations of the people: (for hee may liue of his owne, and for certaine causes spare the peo∣ple for a time:) yet notwithstanding, in the meane while the
commaundement abideth, by the which the people are bound to honour their Pastor, and by the liberall participa∣tion of their goods, to testifie their gratefull & godly deuo∣tion towardes God, and him. Neither is the question so much for the Ministers maintenaunce, as for the godly re∣gards and grateful minds of the faithful towards God, who is alwaies most honored, or dishonored in his seruants. For my part, I knowe not as yet the customes of all nations and countreys: Neither am I he, that will prescribe to any man in this matter. In the meane while, I speake of those things which I haue learned by great vse and long experience; and it greueth me, that in many things of like nature, wee abolish olde thinges, and suborne worse. True it is, that parishes vnder the Pope, had their priuileges, their glebes, their rents and their tithes, by which their Pastors were wel maintained; & now, because some abuses be crept in, shall the whole vse of them be taken away? Me thinks these are but cold reasons I haue now con∣futed: with the which it were to be wondered, that any man should bee caried away, were it not that the hatred of Pope∣rie did hurry men headlong into vaine contrarieties in such things as are, or haue bene vsed among them. Chap. XXXII. Certaine reasons why Stipendaries are disprooued. WHere as the Apostles rule commandeth vs, that all things be done in good order, and to edifiyng, it will be a labour worth the paines to see, whether that may better bee done, by paying Ministers their stipends, or rather by that auncient manner deliue∣red by the Apostles, and receaued by the Fathers, which giueth to Pastors their tythes and their of∣ferings.
First, I doe not thinke that wisedome is growen vp with vs, that we should dispose of things better then our Fathers haue done. Besides, there is no man that desireth to be clear from the aduersaries cautels, that ought at this day to make any innouation in the Church of Christ, without the appro∣ued example of former ages. But this is a nouel kind of hono∣ring the Pastors of the Church, not read of in the scriptures, not knowen of vnto the Fathers, nor euer heard of before these our daies (the common brokers of all newes) that the Church had their Stipendary Ministers. Notwithstanding, when I say, that Stipends taken out of the Exchequer, (or other-wise collected,) doe blast the fruites of religion, and depriue the people of the comforts thereof: I would not so bee taken, as if I thought it vnlawfull for the Magistrate to contribute out of the treasury to the Church: But this I say, that the Christian people ought not∣withstanding continually to be deuoted vnto their Pastors, in the bonds of a religious affinity, and religiously to ho∣nour their Ministers with the testimonies of their gratefull memory: the which when it is hindred by the one part, it must needs be, that charity should waxe very colde on both parts. Saint Paule (as wee haue sayde before) gaue it in com∣maundement, that he which is taught, should communicate in all his goods with him that taught him: from the which duty no stipēd ought to excuse the able auditory, no excuse to dispence with an expence of duty. For that communica∣tion of their goods, is not so much to releeue the others necessity, as to approoue their own duty. The poore Chri∣stian brother is honoured for his want; but the holy Mini∣ster of God, for the worthines of his office. Besides this, the good will of the Magistrate is variable, who being once offended with the Ministers, whether right or wrong, they shall be sure to leape short of their stipends. But whensoeuer the cōmon treasurie shal shrink (as by many meanes it may be brought to a low eb) then alack pore Mi∣nisters, needs must your state be most miserable. The people
not accustomed to passe any thing to their Pastors, wil think it perteines nothing to them wheather they sincke or swim: and most men are of that boorish nature, as that they wil ra∣ther leaue the Pastor destitute, then they wil seem to contri∣bute: and so, hee being forsaken of his flocke, of force must needs forsake his flocke, (as at this day it is come to passe in many places of Holland.) But how wretched the estate of the Ministery is in that countrey, by reason of the basenes of their stipends, and the badnes of their paiments, they knowe best that smart for it: when as (poore soules) they are constrained to trudge no small iorneis to begge their wages of their good maisters: of whome many times, they beeing intertained with disdaine, are sent away with a mischief, and bring nothing home with them but night, (besides the wearines of their lims, the losse of their time, the expence of their money, and anguishe of their relenting soules.) To these miseries we may adde this also, that the Magi∣strate, accustomed to pay the Ministers their wages out of the common treasury, beginneth to take them for ciuill of∣ficers, and towne-seruants: so that base men will not sticke some-times, after they are once out of office, (as Curriers, Tinkers, Carpenters, Pedlers, and such like) to insult ouer their Pastors with a villanous mind, and in a shamelesse ma∣ner, and to say, What, sir-priests? you are our seruants, we are your good maisters, we pay you wages: I would be ashamed (so God mee helpe) so disdainefully to shake vp the veriest page or basest drudge in my Lordes kitchin, and as soone I should be called to mine answere for it. I remember, in a solemne banquet made at Gaunt, to the Prince of Orange, it was my hap to sit ouer against a cople of iolly Burgo-maisters: who when they once began to be som∣what warme in their liquor, and were now come from neuer a word, to neuer a wise word; at last they spied me busie in talke with another, and thinking I marked not what they said, they began to speake their pleasure, and by chance I o∣uer heard thus much of their good talk. We must take heed
(said they) least these busie Ministers becom more comber∣some vnto vs, then were euer our corne-fed Papists: we must therfore keepe them vnder least they grow too lustie, & creep too far in fauor with the people, and so become a terrour to the Magistrates: but especially we must looke to this, that their wages be not too great: Hee that bringeth vp his seruant delicately, at length shall find him maister-full. These men (a Gods name) would seeme the patrons and pillers of Christ his Church: but they (bee it spoken without any preiudice to any other) did afterwards bewray the ve∣nome they fostered in their harts, when not long after they both became traytors to God and their country. Whether Holland harbour any more such mates, let them looke to it vnto whom it belongeth: but the like effects giue a shrewd gesse of the like affects. In the meane while wee see, how this disdainefull dealing against Gods Ministers commeth of this, because they are so bragge that they pay them their sti∣pends; being indeed no other thing, then that which they haue before purloined frō the church, & crambd into their guiltie coffers. Wherefore, let no man wonder, if I like but a little of this manner honoring of the Ministerie: for smal is the honor that is braued with contumely. And therefore in the name of God, let that manner of honoring Gods Mi∣nisters bee continued in the Church, which was appointed by the better wisedome of the Lord, aswell in the olde, as in the new Testament, I say let it be continued in that manner as it was well conceiued, and worthily receiued by the anci∣ent Fathers: Neither let the prerogatiue of our owne con∣ceits any longer deceiue vs, as if we were the onely men that could deuise a better. Let abuses bee corrected; but so, that the lawful vse be either retained, or restored. Nor let the in∣iquitie of those men which haue defiled thinges sacred and prophane, so farre preuaile with vs, that wee should therefore confound things secular and sacred, or that wee should take away that distinction in things, which nature, reason, and religion hath set downe.
The third Booke. Of Sacrilege, and the punishment thereof. Chap. I. That donations are made firme to Churches by the same lawes, by virtue whereof other Cittizens hold their possessions. THE studie and bountie of our forefa∣thers in inriching the Church are suf∣ficiently knowne; in whome, it may seeme no small wonder, that euerie where, alwayes, and at all seasons; they should so farre mistake the matter, that is, so childishly to deale in this matter, and that their posteritie should nowe at the last see more and conceiue better then they, who in the same cause take a cleane contrary course to them, & that without any commaund of God, any example of former age. No doubt, as to stand vpon the examples of our Fathers in their offences, is foolish and vnreasonable; so rashly to condemne the same where iustly they cannot bee conuin∣ced, is vtterly godlesse and irreligious. True it is: wee are all prone to euill, Fathers, and Fathers children; but to whether of these may wee bee more easely perswaded, iudge you: to giue of our owne, or to take away other mens? Our Elders gaue, (which no man can denie) of no euill mind: our vpstarts take away that our Elders gaue;
with what mind, the thing it selfe doth shew. Our Fathers gaue according to law: our nouices take away contrarie to law. Wherfore seeing the indowments made to the Church haue their strength and assurance from the very same lawes, by the which other Citizens possesse their goods, is there a∣ny man that would not iudge it a tyrannous act, if any Ma∣strate (shewing no cause) should thrust any subiect out of his possessions? Wherfore, the Churchmen ought to haue bene first heard, and iust cause should haue beene brought in against them, why they were not any longer to bee suffered to enioy the possessions of the Church in a Christian common-wealth. They also ought to haue bene heard which were to succeed the Masse-Priestes in pastorall charge, whome it chiefly did concerne what was to be done with those goods. But what need all this? without any iust knowledge, or further trial of the cause, a quicke course must be taken; & the Chequer (if it were the Chequer) swopt at al. But if the Church-men were found ready to renounce all Popery, and to receiue the true profession of Christ his religion what cause was there lefte, or what occasion might be found, why Bishops and Pastors should be expelled their parishes & possessions? vnlesse hap∣ly they did reckon the Church goods among the other he∣resies? which error is already confuted. But where now shall I lay the blame? vpon the ignorance of the Ministers? or the auarice of certaine Officers? No doubt, they were both in great fault. But certaine craftie & vngodly men, who not in the zeal of godlines, but for the desire of goods (presuming of a pardon for the contempt of all religion) ioyned them∣selues vnto vs; and while they would seem the more serious fauorites of the Gospell they became the most sacrilegious instrumentes of this mischiefe: so that the same which of som was thought to be done of error or ignorance, in these was brought to passe of a malitious wickednes. For who can excuse them of most hainous sacrilege, who vnder colour of reformation in some partes of Germany, & the Low Coun∣tries, haue made a pray of whatsoeuer was giuen for holy &
necessary vses, to the Church and Church Ministers? With due reuerence I acknowledge the chiefe Magistrates, as the chiefe patrons of religion: and I hold it alwayes lawfull for them, according to their royal right, to make lawes for the Church and Church goodes; alwayes prouided, that they so take not the matter vpon themselues, that they take al vnto themselues. For it is not the part of a patron to spoile his clyent; neither was it euer heard of, before these dayes, that any Christian Magistrate brought into his Chequer all the Church goods, & made no bones therof. They which vpon occasion rifled the Church, onely of some small part therof, & that when the Chequer was in some great consumption, are but euil spoken of for their labour in all histories. What then may we iudge of thē, who haue set the cards, & drawne the Church of euery penny? I name none; But I mean them, who by their example haue giuen the hint to their neigh∣bors, and set them a patterne of an holy robbery. Lord, how like are these ranke professors to Iulian the recreant, or the Turkish tyrant, which make no difference betweene thinges sacred & prophene? how vnlike to any Christian Magistrate, (so far as I know) either of this age, or our fore-fathers? But is it a foule matter for sacrilege to be obiected to a Christiā Magistrate? a more filthy thing is it to be committed. Chap. II. What Sacrilegeis. THere are some found now adaies (not far to seek) who thinke that no sacrilege can now bee com∣mitted, because the, difference betwene sacred & prophane in externe thinges, was taken away by the death of our Sauiour; which seemeth to mee not the iudgement of a Diuine, but the opinion of an Athe∣ist. For albeit to the holy all things are holy, and to the pro∣phane all things prophane; yet that distinction of things is not taken away, which they haue in their appointed vse. There was alwayes among all nations a great difference put,
betweene those thinges which were dedicated vnto diuine seruice, and those thinges which serue men for their com∣mon vses. Thinges for the most part take their denominati∣on from their ende for the which they were ordained. So priuate men haue their treasure; and the common-wealth her treasure: If you doe respect the matter, they are both of one nature; namely, gold and siluer, and whatsoeuer else is of any price: but if you respect either the end, or the pos∣sessor, you shall finde a great difference betweene them. The end of a priuate man his treasurie, is the commoditie of a familie; but the end of the publike treasure, is the benefite of the Prince and the whole Country. In like manner the treasure which is giuen or gatheted to the worship of God, it hath his proper end, diuerse and distinct from both those before mentioned: the which ende seeing it is sacred, it gi∣ueth the name also to the treasure, and it is called sacred. Furthermore, because the inuiry is greater which is com∣mitted against a Prince, or a publike state, then if the same be done against a priuate mans person, or his estate; there∣fore the robbing of a priuate treasure, is called plain Theft; but of the common treasure, a Robbery of the common∣welth. So likewise how much the more horrible the offence is which is committed against God, then against man, so much more detestable is the direption of the sacred treasu∣rie, then common theft, or the robbing of the cōmon trea∣surie. For which cause they call that also by his proper name Sacrilege, which is commonly defined, to bee the theft of a thing sacred. The deformitie of which theft is so much the more notorious, by how much the more sharper punish∣ments God himself, as also the laws of al nations haue deui∣sed against the same. Albeit the definitiō cōteineth, not on∣ly things sacred to the worship of the true God, but of false gods also: for that it is the conscience that maketh the sacri∣lege, & an opiniō of the holy godhead contemned. But how all those goods the Romish Cleargie did possesse (vnder the title of the poore, & the Church) haue beene translated to priuat & prophane vses, I need not tel, for it is too manifest.
Chap. III. The reasons with the which they commonly excuse their Sa∣crilege. BVt sacrilegious persons and their patrons, will not onely maintaine themselues with their theft, but they will maintaine their theft; that is was well and worthily done, for the ouerture of the Pope, and the inuestiture of the true Church. Their reasons are these. That the goods of the Church did serue to Idolatry, & pro∣phane vses, the which beeing taken away, they could by lawe deuolue no man, but onely to the common treasury, of the which the Christian Magistrate hath the care and custodie. And as the godly Emperours Constantinus, Theodosius, Hono∣rius, and Areadius, hauing by their lawes put downe the Ido∣latry of the Gentiles, had the places and reuenues of their temples and their prebends in their owne power, to dispose of them as they thought best, and that without any sinne of Sacrilege: so likewise at this day, the Papacie being exiled, the goods & annuities of Munks, Nuns, and Masse-Priests, may be chalenged by the same right to the Christian Magi∣strate. But that wast goods pertaine to the common treasu∣rie by way of excheate, it is a knowne point in the lawe, and a common case. Neyther were the Bishops of olde of this opinion, that the Church had nay right to those goods which were desti∣nate vnto the seruice of Idols: so that it may seeme a verie straunge thing to vs, that at this day there should be found any faithfull Minister of the Gospel, which should once pre∣sume to make chalenge to the goods of the Popish Church, to the vse and behalfe of reformed Churches. In the first of the Codices de paganis & sacrificijs, the 14. title, there is an im∣periall decree extant, the words wherof are these: We wil & commaund, that all places which in the olde time of errour were de∣puted to sacred vses, be ioyned to our substance. But what so euer by that right, either the liberalitie of former Princes, or our Maiestie, would haue come to the hands of any particular persons her soeuer.
let that remaine in their inheritance, with an euerlasting assurance: but those things which by many decrees our pleasure is should appe∣taine to the hly Church, Christian religion shall chalenge that vnto it selfe. Giuen the 3. of the Calend. of September, at Rauenna. Ho∣norius 10. & Theodosius 6. A A. Coss. By which decree it is manifest, that it was alwaies in the power and right of the Emperour to giue those things which were wast by the a∣bolishing of Idolatry, vnto whom it pleased them. And Dig. the 23. bookes, . title, Da vsu & vsu fructu Legalis. Leg. 16. Le∣gatum. We read of Legacies giuen to the setting foorth of Pa∣geants, which might not beset forth; the which, chaunging but the name of Pageantes into the name of Popish-Masse, are all alike: the words are these: A Legacie is left to a Cittie, that of the yearely neuenewes therof a Pageant might be solemnized in that Cittie, for the sacred memorie of the deceased, which thing it is not lawfull to celebrated. I aske therfore what you thinke of that Le∣gacie? Modestinus maketh answere; Seeing the testator his will was, that a Pageant should be set foorth, but such as was not lawfull there to bee set foorth, that it is no reason, such a quantitie of money, which the deceased bequeathed to the shew, should returne the be∣nefite of the heire. And therefore the heires of the deceased, and the chiefe of the Cittie being gathered together, they are to consider vn∣to what vse the thing commised to their trust, may bee conuerted, that the memorie of him that made the testament, may be solemni∣zed in another, and more lawfull kind. These thinges siath Mo∣de inus in the ninth of his answeres. By which law any man may see, what is to bee though of such behestes, as are be∣queated to the celebrating of vnlawfull Masses. To these thinges it may bee added, that the auarice of Church-men was insatiable, procuring to themselues infi∣nite donations, both superstitious and superfluous. Yea when liberalitie waxed colde, they purchased of themselues, both fieldes and fearms, and many times whole countries, so that at last they would haue incroached vppon all Chri∣stendome, had not the lawes of aduised Kinges and Empe∣rours limited them, who did perceiue that thier ouer-thri∣uing was to the ouer-turning of the Common-wealth. And
therefore euery wise Magistrate had need to take heed, that they dash not their feet against the same stone. Chap. IIII. An answere to the arguments of the former chapter. I May answer, that we haue no lesse need to beware least while like wise men wee plie vs to run from one fault, we rush like fooles into another. Haue not our fore fathers kept a meane? Why then let their errour bee a warning vnto vs. For wee are men al∣so; and it is a more ordinary thing among vs, to slide into a contrarie vice, then to keepe a commendable meane: and therefore it may also come to passe, that too much niggard-lines may carrie vs whither wee ought not. But to admitte the vtmost, that the Cleargie would haue raked together their wealth, to the ruine of the Common-wealth; and that of olde, donations were made, partly superstitious, & part∣ly superfluous; yet of all this it followeth not, that there were none lawfull, none religious, none acceptable vnto GOD, and a greeable vnto his worde, and profitable vn∣to his Church. But was there any thing in their goodes su∣perfluous? it might haue beene cut off: was there any thing in his vse superstitious? it might haue beene taken away, or turned to better vse. That they say it was doone, for the ouer-ture of the Popes tyrāny, & the inuestiture of true christianity, it is but a meere colour, and that but a bad one neither. Craftie men abused the preaching of the Gospell, and the simplicitie of godlie men (whome it was easie to hold so in hand) that so them∣selues might gourmandize the goods of the Church, as a fat pray that hung fit for their lips. That it was so, the thing it selfe preacheth vnto vs. Neyther will I any longer stay ther∣in, least this sinke beeing stirred, should exhale a vapour too filthie and vnsauorie. But that which is aleged for the defence of sacrilege, may not so passe, vnexamined. The first is, That the church goods serued
to idolatrous & prophane vses: which being taken away, could by no lawe deuolue to any but to the publike treasury. Now that the fallacie of this proposition may the better ap∣pear: I assume that to me which themselues cannot deny me, namely, that there is a difference to be found betweene those thinges which are dedicated to idolatry and excesse, and those thinges which are abused to idolatry and excesse. There is no∣thing so holy which the wicked may not abuse: and yet the a∣buse of a good thing dooth not inuert the nature thereof. As for the welth of the Romish Cleargy, it was not all giuen to ido∣latrous and vngodly vses: for there were many thinges giuen of old, to the vse of the poore, and Pastors of the Church. The which albeit the Popish Cleargy haue abused, yet the nature of the donation is not thereby altered. Of the donations which were made to Churches, some were before the corruption of the Church, and some after. (For I shewed before, that the ob∣lations and donations of the faithfull, had their beginning e∣uen with the Apostles.) But that these, which were made be∣fore the corruption, are sacred to God, no godly man will de∣ny the same. Now, the Bishop of Rome and other heretical Pa∣stors, found the churches founded by the Apostles, and furni∣shed (according to those times) with sufficient riches: to the which, albeit they added much by much naughtines, yet the same is not to be esteemed of alike, but so to bee accounted of as the rest was. No question, in the Church of Rome, and other heretique Churches, there are diuerse and sundry thinges, the which if they be taken in their proper kind, are very christian, and commaunded by God himselfe: (such is the sacred Mini∣stery of the Church, & holy care of the poore:) So that what∣soeuer was bequeathed to either of these, or vnto them both, hath a godly end, and may haue a godly vse. As for the propha∣nation of things, it ought not so much to mooue vs, as the na∣ture of things: against the which there is no litle to be gained, ether by prescription of time, or abuse of the thing. But if it so fall out, that the prophane vse be abolished, they ought to be reuersed vnto their lawful vse, for the which they first serued. The Arke of the Lord was taken of the Philistines and propha∣ned; but it did not therefore cease to be sacred to God, & be∣ing
receiued againe from the Philistines, it was no lesse to be esteemed, then it was before. The vessels and ornaments of So∣lomons temple, were translated by Nabucadnezar to Babylon; the which things beeing laid vp in the Temple of his Gods, after his manner he vsed them religiously. But Babylon beeing con∣quered, Cyrus in the right of a conquerour, might haue praied vpon them: yet when he once knew, that they afore-times per∣tained to the holy worship of the most holy in the temple of So∣lomon, he abstained from them, and cōmanded that they shuld bee restored to their former vse againe. More wisely or more religiously done? least hapiy hee might haue incurred the same crime of cursed sacrilege, for the which the Lord had iustly pu∣nished prophane Balthasar his predecessour. By the which it may appeare, that what things are once destined to the vse of the Church, are sacred vnto God for euer; not is it lawful at a∣ny time to distract them to foraine vses. CHAP. V. A distinction of those Church-goods, which the Church of Rome possesseth at this day. BVt when as all the goods which we see in the Church of Rome, are not of the same kind, we cannot giue the same iudgement of them al. There is therfore a thre∣fold difference of them alwaies to be remembred: In the first order I place those, which our godly Fathers gaue to the Church, for the maintenance of the Pastors, and the relief of the poore. In the second order I place those, which were granted to the church for superstitious vses; as for Masses, Dir∣ges, Monks and Nuns, & morow Masse-priests. And in the last order I place those infinite donations, pernitious to the Com∣mon-welth, which were either rashly made by Kings and Em∣perors, or wrongfully extorted from them, by force or fraud: of which kinde are the inuestiture of those Ecclesiasticall fees, which were giuen by godly Princes to the churches; the which when as by that title they do pertaine to them of right; yet the BB. of Rome doth chalenge the whole right therof to himselfe But these things, seeing that by the lawes both of God & man, they pertain to Kings alone, that which is Caesars is to be giuen to Caesar. The Lord hath forbidden ministers to be Kings ouer
their churches: & therefore, in the 22. of Luke, he purgeth that humor in the heads of his Apostles with this Aloes. The Kings of nations rule ouer them, and they which haue power ouer them are cal¦led bountifull, but it shall not be so with you: that is, you shall not be Kings: with which magnificent titles of bountifull and grati∣ous, they flatter them which haue smal cause, bearing the hea∣uy yoke of their cruell dominion. Wherefore in this case, chri∣stian Kings may lawefully reuerse, what-soeuer the Bishop of Rome hath vnlawfully raked to himselfe, by fraud or by force. But heere I require discretion and moderation to bee vsed, that Caesar do not so reuerse those things which are Caesars, that together he fal to rifle those things which are Gods. Indeed the cleargy of Rome hath rauisht them both; but they are not wor∣thy whom the christian Magistrat shuld imitate: neither is he a mā of worth, that wil punish theft with sacrilege. What things the error of our fathers gaue to superstitious vses, they ar void I confesse, (supestition and idolatry being taken away,) & the godly Magistrat may dispose of such goods, as hee shall thinke good: neither hath the church any right to chalenge in these. And yet, if the authority of the former law aleadged, and the counsel of the learned father Augustine be of any worth, those legacies which were giuen for the celebrating of masses, & the nourishing of Monks may be conuerted to some better vse, by the which, the memory of the testator may be solemnized in another & a more lawful kind. In the 16. of Numb. the censors with the which, the 250. rebels offered vp incense, as Priests in sin & vngodlines, were notwithstanding hallowed before God: and therfore, that in no wise they might afterwards be imploi∣ed in any common vses, he commanded them to be drawn in∣to brode plates for a couering to the altar. So were the instru∣ments which the irreligious abused conuerted to a sacred and a religious vse. The which commandement indeed, althogh it be not general, yet it conteineth therein an especiall instructi∣on, by the which we are taught, what ought to be done in such a case. Augustine in his 154. Epistle to Publicola, is of opinion, that the Idols, Idol-temples, & groues which were put down, were not to be diuerted to any priuate vse, but to bee conuer∣ted into publike seruices, and the honor of the true God; that
the like thing may be done by them, which is done in the men themselues, who are conuerted from a sacrilegious & impious people, to the true religion of the liuing God: Least otherwise it might seem to be done, not of conscience, but for couetous∣nes. But seing the law of God prescribeth nothing in this mat∣ter, and whatsoeuer Moses hath written therof, concerneth the people of Israell in perticular, I make it no matter of religion why the Magistrate may not determine herein as it shal seeme best to his godly wisedome. Nor doe I disauow the decree of the Emperours Honorius and Theodosius, but I aduise al Princes and other chiefe Magistrates, who haue earst reformed Chur∣ches, or shall here-after, that this one thing be alwais wel con∣sidered of them, namely, that Churches were but robbed of their rights by Monestaries, when they gleaned to themselues the duty of tythes and oblations: which things christian Prin∣ces and people haue consecrated of old, to the honor of their Pastors, & the comfort of the poore. For they preposterouslie take vpon them the gouernement of Churches, contrary vnto the order of the ancient Church, and vnder the title of volun∣tary pouerty, these gathered that to themselues, which was gi∣uen to the poore for necessity. CHAP. VI That the goods of Monks are not all of one kind. AS in those goods which the Pastors and rectors of the Church possesse, I haue shewed that ther is great dif∣ference: so neither are we to think, that the goods of Monks are all of one sort. It were to long to repeat, how they came to so great wealth, neither is it needfull; onely this I wuld haue wel noted, that whatsoeuer the Monks posses∣sed, which of right was due to the Pastors of the church, that al that did pertaine to the first order of church-goods (which I before noted:) the which indeed after the subuersion of Mo∣nasteries are not to be taken for wast, so long as there is anie Church remaining. Wherevpon I infer, that all popish idolatrie being put down, onely those things which maintained, either tyranny, or idolatry, do deuolue by right to the Chequer: the rest, which had nor cause nor end erronious, was to be testo∣red the Church againe.
If so be in any place, all is come to the common treasury, whatsoeuer the Monkish professors had in possession, and that, not so much with the consent, as by the counsel of those, whō the matter it selfe did concerne, and ought rather to haue in∣tercessed, and taught the Magistrate the contrary, let them beare the blame for that part themselues, worthy also to bear the burthen. We know that the prophanation and abuse of Church goods could not be such, as that they could inuert the nature of things giuen, or infring the vertue of the donation it selfe. That which the Arke of God was, was it not still, euen among the Philistines? Neyther were the vessels of the Lorde his Temple vnhallowed, though they were in the midst of Ba∣bylon. That the Pope of Rome with his clergy haue abused, and doe abuse the true and lawfull goods of the Church, it ought not to be any preiudice to the godly Ministers of the Church: Seeing the possessors thereof are not Lords, but ste∣wards onely, who haue the vse, benefite, and bestowing of the Church goods, not the propriety. As for that they say, that the Bishops of old thought, that the Church had no right to those things which were dedica∣ted to the seruice of the Heathen gods: it maketh nothing at all against the truth of our position: For neyther do we hold, that the Church hath any right to those things which are im∣mediatly destinate to vngodly vses: I haue already confessed, that those things are in the second order of Church goods: & therfore in the power and at the pleasure of the christian Ma∣gistrat. I remember that I sayd, that I did not dislike the de∣cree of Honorius and Theodosius, and other godly Emperours: whose better examples, if they had imitated, whose error hath vrged me to write thus much, there had beene no neede of this discourse. Chap. VII. That it is an other thing to come from Paganisme to Christia∣nity, then to come from Popery, or some other heresie. MOreouer this also is not to bee omitted, that it is one thing for a people to be conuerted from Paga∣nisme to Christianity, and an other thing to come frō
Popery, that is frō Heresie to true Christianity. The difference which is between Paganisme and Christianity is much grea∣ter, then that which is betweene Christianity & Popery. Paga∣nisme hath nothing in common with Christianity: Popery is Christianity, Christianity alayed; alaied, or rather rackt with foule Idolatry, and (that I may so speake) it is a certayne med∣ley, or a kinde of mongrel and motley Christianity. For the sa∣cred Scripture both of the old and new Testament, the coue∣nant of God, the Baptisme of Christ, the remission of sins, and the name of a christian, with many other things of the same profession are there, peculiar to the Church, which are notes of christianity, & are no wher to be found out of the Church: Not in Paganisme, not in Iudaisme, not in Nahumetisme. So that the Heresies & Superstition which being substracted, are added to the Romish Church, the remainder is meere Christi∣anity. Very Popery is but a botch of the Church, not the very Church: but that which the foule Leprosy is, or any other deadly contagion in the body of man, the same is Popery in the body of the Church. So that, to forsake Popery is not to forsake the Church, but to fly frō the infection of the church. Now then; when an Ethnicke becommeth a Christian; an A∣lyen and a straunger, is receyued and inserted into the newe people, & then beginneth he to be a member of the Church. But in the reformatiō of any erronious or stragling Church, an adulterous Church becommeth a chast spouse, and base christians are made lawfull, (the wife being reconciled to her husband:) and therefore, what things so euer the adulterous Church vsurped of the goods of her husband, the lawfull Church (as true spouse) doth challenge the same to her selfe by his right. In Theodosius Records the sixteenth Book and the foure and forty title, against the Donatistes, thus it goeth. But those places, in the which cursed superstition as yet remayneth, let them be ioyned to the holy Catholique Church, so that theyr Flamines and Priests, theyr Prelates and all theyr Ministers, be spoyled of all theyr goods, and exiled into diuerse Iles and sundry prouinces. There also in the fourth Booke, we reade of a decree from the same Emperours Honorius and Theodosius, against the Montanists, in these wordes. If there now remayneth any proper edifices, which
ought to bee called rather dens then Churches, let them bee awarded to the holy Churches of the Orthodoctike sect, with all theyr indow∣mentes. Before our times there haue beene not a fewe alterati∣ons in the Church. In the which when godly Emperours put downe the Heretikes, they robbed not the Churches of theyr possessions, but restored them to the true professors. Of the which thing Sainct Austine in his fifty Epistle to Bone∣face a certayne Capitayne, writeth thus. VVhat so euer was possessed of the Donatistes parte in the name of theyr Churches, chri∣stian Emperours by their religious lawes haue commuanded, that they come with the Churches them selues to the catholicke Church. Thus sayth Austine: And were it not as he sayth, I would confirme the same with many witnesses. Wherefore, that I may now comprise those thinges I haue sayd: Those Church goods which were gotten, eyther by fraude or by force, and vsurped without right; or else if they were freely giuen, but to a superstitious end, are in the power of the chiefe Magistrate. But those thinges which are lawfully graunted and receyued of the Church, (to no such end, by no such meanes) are consecrate to GOD, neyther can they bee any wayes transuersed without sinfull Sacrilege. Sainct Austine, in his Treatise vppon Sainct Iohn the twelfth Chapter. Behold Iudas (sayth hee) is among the holy men, and that you shall not need to contemne him, a Sacrilegious Church-robber, not a petty Lassoner: hee was a thiefe of the Tresure, but the Lordes Treasure; of the Treasure, but the sacred Treasure. And if crimes are distinguished in the Court, whether it be theft, or publique robbery, (for publique rob∣bery is sayd to be a theft from the common Treasury) howe much more sharpely is a Sacriligious thiefe to bee iudged, which presumeth to steale, not from euery place, but from the holy Church? Doubtlesse he that taketh from the Church, may bee compared to Iudas the wretch. So sayth good Fa∣ther Austine.
Chap. VIII. How gracious and inble the sin of sacrilege is. PLato, being to set downe a law against Church-rob∣bers, beginneth the matter with a large preface, and first concludeth, that the sin of Sacrilege is vncure∣able, and that he which is infected with any such wretched couetise, is not moued thereunto eyther for Gods euill, or for mans, so much as for his owne, and that by rea∣son of some other old and odious sinne, not yet punished, nor euer to be expiat. And therefore he exhorteth those, vppon whome this deadly desire groweth, that they would vse to sa∣crifice for the same, and humbly to fly to the Temple of the Gods; to frequent the company of good men, to heare theyr godly conference, and to endeuour themselues to doe and to speake those things which are honest and iust. But if so be, that infirmity wil not so depart, death for such a wretch were better then life. Wherefore he enacteth this Law. VVhosoeuer is aprehended for Sacrilege,De legib. Dialog. 9. (if hee be a seruant, or a foreyner) his fault being written in his forehead, and his handes, and being well whipped with so many stripes as the Iudge shall award, let him bee thrust naked out of the borders of the land: For happely by this punish∣ment, being brought to shame, he may amend his manners. For no pu∣nishment is appointed for any mans hurt; but of two thinges it com∣monly effecteth the one, it maketh him eyther much better, or not so bad, that sustaineth the punishment. But if it be a Cittizen which shall be found to haue commited any such thing against the Gods, or to haue done some great and gracelesse wrong to his parentes, or his countrey, let the iudge so censure of him, as of one which is incurable, considering this with himselfe, what honest instruction and education he hath had of a childe, and yet hath not absteyned from the most hey∣nous sinnes. VVherefore let this mans punishment be death, the least of all euils. So shall he profite others by his example, while he is made infamous among all, and is put to death beyond the borders of his own countrey. The lawes of the twelue tables prouide thus against the same sinne. VVho so stealeth or pilfereth any holy thing, or committed to the holy place, let him be held and handled as a murtherer of his Fa∣ther.
But what neede I recite the seuerity of Lawes in this be∣halfe? it is a thing well enough knowen, if it were but halfe so much feared. But euen they also which escape the lawes and iudgements of men, because they are eyther too mighty, or too crafty, yet can they not escape the vengeance of God. For it is one of the most detested sins, after the which the wrath of God yearneth, till it be reuenged. The examples whereof are to be seene in Histories both sacred and prophane. Chap. IX. Certaine examples of Gods vengeance against Sacrilege. THe first example of Sacrilege, may be that which we read of Achan, in the 7. of Iosua, who took of the ex∣communicate things of Hierico, a Babylonish gar∣ment, two hundred sickles of siluer, & a wedge of gold. For this offence of one wretched fellow, did not all Israell feel the heauy wrath of God, till satisfaction was made by the death of that accursed party, and his whole family? To this I may adde an other, committed by the Priests, and no lesse seuerely puni∣shed of God, then was that of Achan. In the first of Samuel, the second Chapter, we read of a certayn man of God, who came to Ely the chiefe Priest, and sayd vnto him. Thus saith the Lorde, did not I plainly appeare to the house of thy Father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaos house? and I chose him out of all the tribes of Is∣raell to he my Priest, to offer vppon mine Altar, and to burne incense, and to weare an Ephode before me, I gaue to the house of thy Father al the offerings made by fire of the children of Israell. VVherefore haue you kicked against my sacrifice and against mine offerings, which I cō∣māded in my tabernacle, & honorest thy children aboue me, to make your selues fat of the first fruites of all the offerings of Israell my peo∣ple? VVherefore the Lord God of Israell sayth, I sayd that thy house and the house of thy Father should walke before me, but now the Lord saith, it shall not be so: for them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me shall be despised. Behold the dayes come that I will cut off thine arme, and the arme of thy Fathers house, and ther shall not be an old man in thy house. And thou shalt see thine enemy in the habi∣tation of the Lord in all things wherein God blesseth Israel, and there
shall not bee an olde man in thy house for euer. Neuer the lesse, I will not destroye euery one of thine from mine Altar, to make thine eyes to fayle, and to make thine heart sorrowfull: And all the multitude of thine house shall dye when they bee men. And this shall be a signe vnto thee, that shall come vppon thy two sonnes Ho∣phny and Phinees: In one day shall they die both. And I wil stirre mee vp a faithfull Priest, that shall doe according to mine heart and according to my minde: And I will builde him a sure house, and hee shall walke before myne annoynted for euer. And it shal come to passe, that whosoeuer is left in thy house, shal come and bow down to him for a piece of siluer, and a morsel of bread, and shal say, appoint me I pray thee to one of the Priests offices, that I may eat a morsel of bread, &c. Thus saith the mā of God: al which things, as he foreshewed, came to passe not long after. For the sons of Ely were slaine in battayle; the Arke of the couenant was taken of prophane men: And Ely hearing the dolefull messenger of these wret∣ched newes, fell from his seate backeward, and brake his necke: his daughter in law the wife of Phinees died in childe∣bed: the holy mount Sylo was forsaken of the Lord, neyther was the Arke of the Lorde euer brought thither againe. And after all this, 80. and 5. men, Priests, of the house of Ely were slain vnder Saul. I need not speak of the calamities which befel that whole family, for the Sacrilege of two men only. And al∣beit the prophane Philistines did honorably vse the sacred Arke after their manner: Yet notwithstanding God plagued them also for their prophanation, neither was it forgiuen thē, that they once handled so holy a matter. But I omit the Sacrileges committed from that time, to the captiuity of Babylon. Wher the infamous act of Balthasar, may be a notable exāple of Gods iustice against al Sacrilegers. He in a brauery cōmanded those holy vessels which his father Nabu∣chadnezar had stollen frō Hierusalem, to be set forth for a cup∣bord of plate in sumptuous banquet, that out of them, both he & his cup-mates might carouse a full despite to the disho∣nor of God. But the wrath of God found the sot in the deede doing, & brought him in a sharp reckoning, with an heauy vp shot in the miraculous motion of a hand writing. And here Daniel cald before the king to read & expound the heauenly
drawn writ, in stead of a taking away, taketh him vp, & amōg many other things bordeth him thus. Thou hast lift vp thy self a∣gainst the lord of heauē, & they haue broght the vessels of his house be∣fore thee, & thou & thy Princes, thy wiues & thy cōcubins haue drōk wine in them, & thou hast praised the Gods of siluer and gold, of bras, iron, wood, & stone, which neither see, neither hear nor vnderstand, & the God in whose hād thy breath is and al thy waies, him hast thou not glorified: Then was the palm of the hand sent from him, & hath writ∣ten this writing. MENE, MENE, THEKEL, VPHARSIN. This is the interpretatiō of the speach: MENE, God hath nūbred thy king∣dom, & hath finished it. THEKEL, thou art weighed in the balance, & thou art foūd too light. VPHARSIN, thy kingdom is deuided, & it is giuen to the Meeds & Persians. After this maner did Daniel salute him. But the same night was Balthazar slaine, & the Em∣pire of the Chaldees and Assyrians, which continued an hun∣dred and thirty yeares, was now finished, and theruppon gi∣uen away by God to the Meedes and Persians. But I passe on to the time of the Grecians, vnder whom the Iewes suffred much sorrow, as wel by their own nation, as by the Grecians. Amōg the rest the diuelish enterprise of Alsimus hie priest of the Iewes, attempting the ouerthrow of the Tem∣ple, was not left vnpunished: For hee was strooke with a dead Palsy, & ended his life in great misery. In like manner Heliodo∣rus, sent by king Seleucus to Hierusalē for no other end, thē to ransanck the temple (which he vnderstood to be the guardian of great treasure) felt in himself the reuenging hand of God, neither had he escaped present death, had not Onias the Priest intercessed for him. But he being glad he had so escaped, deli∣uered to the king. That God was the ouerseer of that temple, & the great guard of that treasury: yet notwithstanding, if the king had any man he would gladly do a spite, he might send him thither. The rob∣bing of that Temple, cost Marcus Crassus Romaine Emperour ful dear. Did not God reuenge his Sacrilege by his enemies the Persians? They infused molten gold into his head being dead, because hee thirsted after ill gotten good in his life. But Iudas the Traytour is worthy to haue the first place a∣mong this holy rabble: Whose Sacrilegious couetousnesse bread such a monster in his brest, that for base lucre he spared
not his own Maister, his conscience euer yelling, that he be∣traied the innocent. Wherefore afterwards, he being his own ac∣cuser, and iudge, & tormentor, set down his due punishment, and in desperate manner tooke it of himselfe. Much of this making were that holy couple Ananias & Sa∣phyra, whom God tooke in the manner, and took down with suddaine death, onely for that they aduentured to conceale & keepe backe some part of that theyr owne treasure, which them selues of theyr owne accord had dedicated to the Lord. The fact no doubt might better haue beene excused in theyr own, then in another mans treasure, and yet wee see the dire∣full censure of God in this case, to the terror of all other. How Iulian the Emperour was paied home at the last, as wel for his Sacrilege, as his Apostacy, the fame of al histories hath made a iust record. This is he, that in a mockery of Christ and christianity, when he had libde the Church, and left it neuer a good thing, sayd: He had well prouided of theyr souls health: For to be poore is one of the priuy Counsels of the Gospell. I may ioyne with this Iulian, Iulian his Vncle, one caterpiller with an other. This Gentleman, when he had well ransackt the Church, and raked together theyr most precious vessels & sumptuous Monuments at Antioch in Syria, and had cast them vppon the ground all vppon one heape, he began very game∣somely to play vppon Christ, and to wanton at his pleasure; & to increase the disgrace of that holy spoyle of the Church, at last he vncased his postherne parts, and sat him downe vp∣pon the same: But now, see if God could see the same, and not reuenge it? Nay; but presently thereuppon, his priuy disgrace∣ful parts, and those poores which nature had ther placed for necessary vses, were straungely benummed, in so much that the canckred flesh about those vnseemly parts cōtinually pu∣trified and turned into wormes; but last of all, the vgly disease grew on so far, that it passed far the Art of Phisicke. For the greedy vermine, hauing once entred the inner partes, still scrawled to the quicke and sound flesh, nor imight they euer cease their restlesse gnawing, till he had yelled out his cursed soule. Many more instances might be remembred of christian
Princes, were it not to tedious a thing for me to repeat them: as also, for that there are some things regestred for wicked sa∣crileges, which if they had bin done without the contempt of God, might very well haue bene excused. For no doubt, it had bin sacrilege in Dauid, when hee eat the Shewbread, were it not that necessity did excuse it. And therefore, sacrilege is to bee measured according to the mans irreligion, which is bewray∣ed aswell in the contempt of false Gods, as the neglect of true: namely, whensoeuer that is contemned by vs, which is wor∣shipped by other men, and we do it not of any true deuotion towardes God, but of a certaine irreligion in our selues. Ge∣nerally so greatlye is it to bee regarded, with what minde a thing bee done, as that to destroy the groues and temples of false Gods, of a certaine religion towardes the true God, is to be accounted for great godlines in the true worshippers: The same thing, if it be done of the worshippers thēselues of false Gods, or of some other Atheist and contemner of al the gods, it is to be taken for godles impiety, and wretched sacrilege. If any man aske the question, how he should be said to con∣temne God, that thinketh there is no God: I aunswere, that that onely thing it selfe, that he thinketh there is none, procedeth of a contempt, & so consequently of him which is. And ther∣fore it need not seeme straunge to any man, that the wrath of the true God hath bene so inraged, not onely against sacrile∣gious idolatours, but euen in the sacrilege of idol Gods. Of which iudgement, seeing prophane histories affoord vs infinit copie, we will take view of a few of that company. Nor Brennus nor Xerxes could violate the temple of Delphos, and not taste the cuppe of gods vengeance for it. As for the sacrilege of the Tholosian gold (from whence the adage grew) I shal not need to speake of it beeing so generally knowen. But the souldiers of Cambyses, sent to spoile the Temple of Ammon, were ouerwhel∣med quicke in vengeable heapes of heauy sand: and their ma∣ster a scorner of the Aegyptian religion, albeit superstitious: yet because he did it irreligiously; not long after he had slaine Apus, was slaine himselfe by his owne sword. And how present was the vengeance of God in the reuenge of Pyrrhus? Hee ra∣uisht at his pleasure the Lucresian Proserpina: but when he wold
haue sailed away full fraught with his nefarious pray, he wrac∣ked with his whole nauy vpon the next shore: there was he left to the rage of the seas, but the treasure was found, & brought home to the Goddesse. To these I adde the like example (but the euēt vnlike) of Dionysius the Syracusan tirant. It is the rather to be remēbred for their sakes, whose gretest sport amōg their secret cōpanions, is, whē they haue made a pray of the church, to play vpon God, as if they would laugh him but of heauen, for his losse in the church. This Dionysius, as I suppose, hath set vp schoole among our religious Atheists of these daies. Wher∣fore, you haue here the words of Tully concerning this Diony∣sius, as they are set downe by Valerius maximus. Dionysius borne at Syracusa, counted it in part of his greatest sport, to set forth with gibing termes, his so many sacrileges as we now repeat. For hauing ran∣sacked the temple of Proserpina at Locris, when he had passed the seas with a prosperous gale, geering to his followers, doe you see (saith hee) how fortunate a cut those very Gods haue giuen vs, whom we haue rob∣bed? Hauing taken away from the Olympian Iupiter a golden vest∣ment of great waight, with the which King Hiero had honored him a∣mong the Carthagenian Gods, and hauing cast him into a new liuery of Mockado, he said; that a golden coat was to heauy for sommer, and to colde for winter, but his Lincie-wolsie would fit him for both seasons. The same also at Epidaurus, commaunded Aesculapius his golden beard to be barbd, because (as hee said) it was not fit that Apollo his father should be beardlesse, and he thus ouer-barbed. Moreouer he seased vpon their siluer and golden tables in the Temples, and whereas according to the custome of Greece, it was written vpon them, These are the good Gods, he said, hee was very well content to accept the goodnes of the Gods. Againe, hee tooke away the golden wreathes, and boles, and garlands, which were helde out at armes end by the images, and in so doing, hee said, he did receaue them, not deceaue them: ar∣guing, that it were a meere folly, seeing that we aske good things of the Gods, not to take them, when they proffer them. But this man, albeit hee was not punished, as hee deserued, yet when as hee died, for verie shame of his vntowarde sonne, hee receaued that punishment by his death, which hee escaped in his life. For the wrath of God proceedeth but an easie pase to reuenge himselfe: but in the end hee requiteth the slownes of his patience, with the sharpnes of their punishments.
Thus farre goeth Valerius: who albeit he say some-what, yet that is much more which the same Tullie noted: namely, that tyrants are stoong with a continuall disquiet of consci∣ence, the villanies they haue committed neuer suffering them to rest, but wringing their minds with incessant torture, no o∣ther-wise then a hang man doth a condemned person. Wher∣fore Dionysius laghters in so many sacrileges were but so many girnings: neither could hee, being condemned in himselfe of so many misdeeds, be without a miserable and mangled con∣science. I suppose, in the opinion of men, he might outward∣lie seeme a happy man, but yet within, he knew himselfe how wretched he was, and hee felt the same. For this cause he suf∣fered Damocles to make iust triall thereof, (beeing desirous to trie) he sat him down in a golden throne, inuironed of al sides with a consort of well tuned pleasures, euery note prouoking him to a sweet relishe of this desired happines: But when hee perceiued a glittering sword hang ouer his head, strong with a slender haire point de-uice: his heart was done, and all the sport was dasht: Damocles sware, he would no more be hap∣pie, desiring the Tyraunt to forgiue him his felicitie. But how much more tortured were the braines of the tyrant him∣selfe, who had not the sworde pendant ouer his most wicked head, but felt it alwaies ready braundished in his wide woun∣ded heart? But now what shall I say to the Satyricall Poet: Yea, but tell Prelates, what good golde dooth in a Temple? Albeit there is small reason (that I may put in an answere for the priests of the hea∣then) why you of all other should bee made priuie to this: yet notwithstanding, thus much dare I saye in defence thereof, that that gold what-soeuer it was, was hollowed, euen vnto the most impious and idolatrous Priests. But for that which was kept in the Temple of GOD, wee may learne, by that which Onias the Hie-Priest said to Heliodorus, what vse it had: namely to releiue the poore widows, and maintaine the more needfull ophanes. And as for that which concerneth the treasure of the Church, when it had anie, it was neither idle I assure you, nor euill occupied, but as occasion serued it, it serued the
necessities of the distressed: and wee may say with Saint Am∣brose, The Church hath gold, not to lay vp, but to lay out. For that indeed, to feed the poore, releeue the needy, and defend the opressed, were the actions and exercises, for the which the BB. of old haue bene worthely commended. And to that end also, because the christian people, would haue BB. aboue all other to be bountiful, they did abundantly prouide, that they might so be with the best. But now this is the only drift of po∣licy in some, of simplicity in many, that by all means the state of our BB. might be brought to begers estate: they may teach charity (good leaue haue they) and preach liberality, (there is no man against it) but practise it they maye not; they are not forbidden, but they are not allowed. I know they will obiect the auarice of fom, & the riotousnes of many BB. in the goods of the Church, that by one meanes or other, they imbecil that part, which of right pertaineth to the pore. But to admit, that the pore mans part were in the BB. purse: (of the which not∣withstanding they haue had their quietus est) with what strange reason, or with what new religion do they go about to excuse sacrilege with sacrilege? as if the BB. error could qualifie their rage. But I perceiue, least the Pastors of the Church should bee the onely sacrilegers, they which haue got the church-goods into their hands, had rather bee found of both, the greater church-robbers. For who seeth not, that whatsoeuer is once ta¦ken from the church vnder this colour, the poore neuer licke their lips after it? yea, the pore are in far worse case at this day, then euer they were before; who haue found poore church∣men more liberall of old, then they can finde rich gentlemen now, or any other, which at this day by wrong and robbery v∣surpe the goods of the Church. The tyranny of the Romish Pre∣lats being dissolued, might not the pore more easily haue ob∣tained their due of the godly Pastors, then of thē which now haue crept into their possessions? But to concluded, I affirme, & you shall find it true, that whosoeuer they be, that wrongfully lurch the Church of their good, or by any meanes abuse thē, let them bee of what title they may, or let them doe it vnder what title they will, they cannot bee excused of sacrilege, nor their sacrilege excused, when God shall visit with a vengeance. FINIS.
