25110 S119561 99854768 20212
BRIEFE PRIN∣ciples of religion, for the exercise of youth: done by Christopher Watson. DEmaund. How wast thou created?The firste parte pro∣nounceth our con∣demnations Answere. By the hand of God. De. VVhat is God? An. He is almightie, creator of all things, incomprehensible, inuisi∣ble, eternal, preseruer and gouernour of heauen and earth. &c. De. Why did he create thee? An. To serue him. De. What seruice requireth hee of thee? An. Obedience to his lawes. De. Which are they? An. God spake all these wordes: 1 Thou shalt haue none other Gods but me.Exod. 21.10. the 18. 2 Thou shalt not make to thy self any grauen Image, nor the likenesse of any thing that is in heauē aboue,
or in the earth beneath, nor in the water vnder the earth: thou shalt not bow downe to them nor worship them. 3 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in vaine. 4 Remember that thou kéepe ho∣lie the Saboth day. 5 Honour thy father & mother. 6 Thou shalt doe no murther. 7 Thou shalt not commit adul∣tery. 8 Thou shalt not steale. 9 Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour. 10 Thou shalt not desyre thy neighbours house: thou shalt not co∣uet thy neighbours wife, nor his ser∣uant, nor his Maide, nor his Oxe, nor his Asse, nor any thing that is thy neighbours. De. Art thou bounde to obserue these precepts, in thought worde and deede? An. Yea, for if I breake but one of them in thought, once onely in all my lyfe, I shall be guiltie of eternal death. De. Is eternall death then the re∣warde
of breaking these statutes? An. Yea. De. Doest thou keepe them? An. No, nor no man liuing. De. Then thou grauntest thy self, with all men worthye of Gods dis∣pleasure and eternall damnation. An. Yea trulye, I feele Gods wrath, & see hell to be my proper in∣heritance, and the fruites of my de∣serte. * De. How shalt thou escape gods wrath and this damnation?The second declareth our de∣liuerie by Christ. An. Onely by Iesus Christ. De. How shall he saue thee? An. Because he being God and man, hath suffered al the punishmēt due for my sinnes, and fulfilled the law. De. Shall all men be saued by Christ? An. No, none but such as be∣leeue effectually in him. De. Who beleeue thus in him? An. They onelie whiche assure themselues that all his sufferinges was for them, and so trauell morti∣fication of the flesh.
De. Who assures thee of this be∣leefe? An. The holy ghost works it by hearing the word preached. De. Declare the effect of thy be∣leefe. An. I Beléeue in God the Father almighty, maker of heauen & earth. And in Iesus Christ his only sonne our Lord. Which was conceaued by the holye Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. Suffe∣red vnder Ponce Pilate, was cru∣cified dead and buried. Hee discen∣ded into hell. The thirde day hee rose againe from the dead. He ascen∣ded into heauen, & sitteth on the right hande of God the father almightye. From thence he shall come to iudge the quick and the dead. I beleeue in the holy ghost. The holy Catholyke Church. The Communion of saints. The forgiuenesse of sinnes. The re∣surrection of the body, and the lyfe e∣uerlasting. Amen. De. Is thy faith perfect assoone as thou beleeuest? An. No, but encreaseth continu∣ally
by hearing the worde preached, with vsing ye Sacraments & praiers. De. How many Sacramentes be there? An. Two, Baptisme and the Lordes supper. De. What meanest yu by Baptisme? An. It declareth the washing a∣way of my sinnes by Christes bloud, and my new birth. De. Then without this sacrament none can assure thēselues of saluatiō. An. I say not so, Gods grace is not tyed to outwarde signes: we be∣leeue his promise, & therefore doubt not, but the children of the faithfull are saued, which dye before they be baptised. De. What thinkest thou by the Lordes Supper? An. I beléeue, that as my body is nourished wt ye bread there broken, & wine powred foorth, that euen so my soule is nourished spirituallye by Christes body broken, & bloud shed for the remission of my sinnes. De. Are all, named Christians, fit to receaue this sacrament?
An. No, none but such as are a∣ble to discerne the Lords body. * De. The thirde our duty to God for all his benefits.Thou saydest, prayer was a help to encrease faith. An. Yea, for it assures me that I shall haue all that I aske in Christes name, according to Gods word. De. What praiest thou for? An. For such things as ye Lorde hath taught me, Sayings. OVr Father whiche art in hea∣uen, halowed hee thy name, Thy kingdome come. Thy wyll be done in earth, as it is in heauen. Giue vs this day our day∣ly bread. And forgiue vs our trespas∣ses, as we forgiue thē that trespasse against vs. And lead vs not into tēp∣tation. But deliuer vs from euil. For thine is the kingdom, ye power, & the glory, for euer & euer. Amen. De. Doest rhou pray to god one∣ly, and not to the saintes? An. Yea, for prayer is due to god onely. De. Art yu not bound to God for this thy wonderful creatiō, preserua∣tion, & deliuery from eternal death?
An. Yea, so I account my selfe. De. What duties craues he at thy hands for the same? An. To serue & honour him pre∣cisely, according to his word: which I purpose to do, as he by his holy spirit shall enable mée, knowing yt he shi∣neth to none but ye elect, which labor according to their measure in refor∣ming themselues, wt a certaine per∣suasion that Christ hath performed al their duties, & discharged their dis∣obedience, in which holy work, God giue me strength (for Christes sake) to labour all the dayes of my lyfe. De. Euen so. And God encrease thy faith, to the full assurance of thy saluation in CHRISTE. God saue our Queene Elizabeth. PRINTED AT LONDON, by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Creede lane, neere vnto Ludgate. 1581. Cum priuilegio. printer's device of Hugh Singleton, of his rebus and a tun or barrel, after McKerrow 127, with the motto arranged in a surrounding square as in McKerrow 250 GOD IS MY HELPER.
