25169 S119583 99854790 20234
AN APPEALE to Truth, Jn the Controuersie betweene ART, & VSE; About the best and most expedient Course in LANGVAGES. To be read Fasting; For the greater benefit of the deluded innocencie of our owne, and other Nations. Drawen, and Exhibited, by IOS. WEBBE, Dr. of Ph. Non fumum ex fulgore, sed ex fumo dare lucem Cogitat: vt speciosa dehinc miracula promat. Hor. LONDON, Printed by H. L. for George Latham: and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard, at the signe of the Brazen Serpent, 1622.
Great LADY, and sole GOVERNESSE of my best Endeuours: HAuing a purpose to divulge an vnattempted Course whereby desired Languages may in their natiue puritie, and vnac∣customed perfection be archie∣ued: and finding Opinion (taken on Trust, rather then grounded on due examination) to be the maine impediment in my proceedings; I thought it vsefull partly by reason, partly by expe∣rience, but especially by ancient, weightie and vn∣stain'd Authoritie, to reclaime it; And by this Ap∣peale to referre all vnto the censure of thy most iust, and vncorrupt vprightnes. Thou knowest (O Truth) that Grammar (an Art whereby Languages are now cōmonly held to be sufficiently taught in euery Nation) was not in vse amongst the antient Romanes; Tranquillut. Th. zuing. l. 1. much lesse in any reputation. And when it had accesse vnto their children, it was at the first full of humilitie; and tooke vpon it no more than the name Grammatica
(translated Quint. de Inst. Or. l. 2. cap. 7. literatura or Mr. Gill Logon. cap. 1. literatoria) could well war∣rant: which was (not to teach the language; for that was their owne alreadie, but) to Lud. Viu. de caus. corr. Ar. lib. 2. & Com. l. 1. c. 2. &. c. 5. teach the letters, syllables and words (therof) and how to pronounce, write, and place them rightly (not according to any mans new found precepts, but) after aunti∣ent receiued Custome; lest with Philost. in Soph. et vol. 18. vrb. com. Zuin. l. 1. Th. Pausanias they might confound the letters, and make of long short, and of short long syllables: Or fall vpon an euill pronunciation (which Sob. ser. 2. de imprudentia. Theocritus so prettily reprehended in a Grammarian.) Or transpose words (which was so hatefull to Pomponius Marcellus; that Tranquillus. Zuing. Th. l. 1. in the height of his pleading, he (like a wise Gram∣marian) left and lost his Cause, to fall vpon his ad∣uersaries transposition.) Or lest words might bee vsed which were not Latine (for which Id. ib. Tiberius Caesar was accused by the same Pomponius.) Or lest words, and languages might be abused by a rude, and externe ignorance: as Annalium l. 1. Auentinus reports of that Bauarian who baptiz'd a boy, In nomine Patria, filia, et Spiritus sancta. And in this nature, such as teach to read and write by th' A. B. C. Primers, horne bookes, and the like, may be truly said to teach the Grammar: Quint. Inst. l. 2. c. 1. for these were the vttermost limits of the first Grammarians. Which Plato's Socrates makes manifest as fol∣loweth. In Philebo. After Voice was thought (saith he) to be infinite, some God, or diuine Man (as that Thenth was reported to haue been amongst th' Aegyptians) considered this in that infinite generalitie, the first letters were vocall; and that they were of more
than one sort. And, further, that there were other which did not partake of the voice, but of the sound: And hee also reduced them into a certaine number. Then, he distinguished a third sort of let∣ters now called Mutes. Last of all, he distributed those that were without sound, and Mutes, euen to certaine particulars. So did hee with those that were vocal, and halfe vocal; till he had found out their number, as well in part, as in whole, and called them Elements. And when he had wel weigh∣ed, that none of vs could euer gather any thing of these in particular, vnlesse we knew them all, and had considered that all made but one kinde of knot, and was but a reduction of dispersed things togi∣ther, and that in these he had found out there was an Art; he call'd it Grammar. But, this little creeping fountaine, Quint. ib. hauing in time, through continuall, and vniuersall imploi∣ment, gotten credit, wealth, and patronage, grew ambitious; and vnder the first title of intire simpli∣citie, hath at length engrossed riuers, streames, Lud. Viu. de causis corr. Art. l. 2. and branches, out of Orators, Poets, and Historians, yea and almost all the greatest artes, and sciences; and is become a full-swolne, and ouer-flowing Sea, which by a strong hand arrogates vnto it selfe (and hath well neere gotten) the whole traffick in lear∣ning, but especially for languages. And though it be herein iudged by Quintilian, l. 2. c. 1. and other antient Authors, to haue vsurped the function and the right of others: yet imboldned by partiall fauour, and a trick of it owne inuention,
call'd Synecdoche, it dares without blushing tearm it selfe by that former poore, and sillie name, Gram∣matica. This Arte (or Science, De Causis Ling. Lat. l. 1. c. 1. as Iul. Scaliger would haue it) in it owne circuit & first humilitie, is to be reue∣renced for th' antiquitie, & for the place & prece∣dence thereof amongst the liberall Arts, or Scien∣ces: Com. l. 2 (though neither it, nor any of the rest can teach the languages.) But, as it is ambitious, and assumeth to it selfe the right of others, promising that which it performeth not; so is it warily to be lookt into: least (as hitherto) it trifle awaie our time, consume our exhibitions, frustrate our la∣bours, disinable our selues, and wrong the ends of our intentions. For, neither hath the name propor∣tion with the thing, nor the thing with what it pro∣miseth. Which being at the last iudiciously considered by a diligent and able Grammarian, appointed (doubtlesse) to be the first who should begin to ar∣bitrate betwene the lawfull owner, and this bould intruder; hee hath ominously dispossessed ould and toothlesse Grammatica, Cap. 18. and conferr'd the art of wri∣ting and of speaking rightly, vpon a more deseruing heire, Logonomia. Which, as it comprehends the whole speach of a Nation, so the Author meaneth it shal include al things necessarie to their language; as, Grammar, Etymologie, Syntax, Prosodie, Logick, Rhe∣torick, Oratorie, and what else soeuer. Otherwise, this name should not imbrace what the speech of a Nation comprehendeth; nor should th' Inuenter
haue so full and reuerent an opinion thereof as it behoueth. But (to goe a little further than the name) had this vnderstāding Master (whē he dispossest the one, and inuested the other) altered the crazy tenure by which Grammatica formerly held the principalitie of writing and of speaking rightly (making that which was vsurped by the tenure of Art, rule, and precept, to be more surely houlden vnder vse, cus∣tome, and authoritie) all nations had beene happie in his iust arbitrement. Yet howsoeuer, I shall die contented, to haue but seene this onely name thus altered. For, in this case had Truth com rushing all at once amidst her enemies and ill-willers, it might haue imported daunger to her person: but as it is, I may liue in hope, that by that time this new name be well digested, th' oulde tenure wil be some-what altered. For, if we open the right eye, the eye of Equitie; & wink with the left of Partialitie, and aime only at the publick good of our Nation & posteritie, and speake what we apprehend ingenuously; wee shall be forced, by that which followeth, to confesse, that this Art neuer was or can be perfected; and that of such as pretend pure languages it ought in no case to be followed. The truth whereof shall appeare aswell by the dissension of her chiefest vphoulders and the best Grammarians; as by their accusation produced from authentick Orators, Historians, Poets, and Philoso∣phers.
For, In Ep. ad Rest. & alibi. Cominius tels vs, that the best Grammarians haue from Age to Age successiuely quoted the de∣fects and errors of each other. Grammarians dissenting. Donatus, Seruius, and Priscianus, accused their predecessors; and were afterwards themselues taxed by Beroaldus, Politi∣anus, Philelphus, and Laurentius Valla: and these, by Baptista Pius, Georgius and Petrus Valla, Aldus Ro∣manus, Perottus Sipuntinus, &c: and these, by Pylades Brixianus; and hee, and the former by Quintianus Stoa: and Stoa, by Phineus, Domitius and others: and to come to our owne times, Martinus Crusius was inuay'd against by Frischlinus; and our English Lilie by the Spanish Aluarus; Mr. Ralph Git∣tins. and, as I heare, by a gentle∣man of our owne Nation, who brings him on the stage for many errors. Some of these call the rest Grammatistae, Stoa in arte versif. Suetonius. Zuing. l. 1. Th. seu litera∣tores; Grammaticuli; Grammatociphones; and by other names of ignorance; as, incuriosi, and Scioli: yea, and some of them tell their companions, that their works, and precepts are tedious; and that they are not able to vtter their owne name in good latine; as Valla tels Priscianus. c. 1. Com. in Ep. And this Valla tels others, that they vnteach the latine tongue. But, Pius Bononiensis honestly reprehends his own iudgement formerly deliuered vppon Plautus, and Sidonius Apolinaris; making (with others) the world a witnesse of his retractations. So that I may, according to the Pro∣uerb, conclude with Horace, "Grammatici certant, In arte po∣etica. et adhuc sub Iudice lis est. Now, if these men may be credited, the Art of Grammar is vnperfect: if wee should not credit
them, wee are but fooles in my conceit to follow them. For, to learne what is vnperfect, breeds but imperfect knowledge: and I despaire of better; in that I am not able to conceiue how those defects which could not in a thousand eight hundred years past (from the time of Ennius, till this daie) be cor∣rected, can at anie time heereafter by the same course that others haue hitherto followed, bee a∣mended; V.S. Alb. Or∣gano mag. Aph. 6. It beeing a follie and against all sense to conceiue that those things which were neuer here∣tofore brought-to-passe, can bee effected by other means then such as no man yet attempted. But leauing this vnattempted means to langua∣ges till a fitter opportunitie; let vs, Grammarians censured. while these Grammarians are at variance, giue eare to what the Standers-by and men of credit wil say of them. Crassus was of opinion, Cic. in. Or. l. 3 that they took a course to dull yong wits, & make them shameless, In learning that wch amōg mē of sort was thought ridiculous. Plinie tells vs, Com. in Ep. they corrupt the bookes of aunci∣ent writers, and make them more obscure, by their vaine and ouerthwart corrections; and that their curiosities are Hist. nat. l. 35. c. 3. peruerse subtilties: and that for telling these truthes hee alwaies In Prolog. Hist. Nat. expected some∣thing from Grammarians, in opposition of those bookes which he had written de Grammatica. Quintilian cals their diligēce mischieuous, l. 1. c. 10. or ma∣licious; auouching, that he holds it l. 1. c. 14 fitting, that a∣mongst their other vertues, they should insert some kinde of ignorance. He also holds they are vnlear∣ned: And Epig. l. 14 Martiall knew it as well as he; and there∣fore said,
Quamuis me Ligulam dicant equites{que} patres{que}: Dicor ab indoctis Lingula Grammaticis. Though I be Ligula to th' wise and Noble man: Thou call'st me Lingula, vnlearn'd Grammarian. Moreouer, Iab. 1. cap. 10. the same Quintilian tels them plainely, that they may well be able to teach their Scholars to write and speake like Grammarians, but they shall neuer be able to doe either of them like the Latines: Ibid. for they are of sundry conditions; Aliud est Grammaticè, aliud Latinè loqui. And further he saith, lib. 1. cap. 14. that all their Cōmentaries are full of impediments, & such as are for the most part vnknowne vnto themselues the Commentators. And this made Laur: Valla say, there is nothing more arrogant then their eye; or more insolent in the correction, or rather corruption of Authors. Whereupon Hermolaus Barbarus reporteth, In calce castiga∣tionum suarum. that some are now adaies growne so audacious, as to hold euery thing faultie, and to be corrected, that falls not within the reach of their capacitie: which kind of haste (saith hee) or rather rashnesse, is the most pestilent euill that can happen in the latine language. And (knowing that Crassus in the time of his Censorship had by edict put such as these to silēce) he wisheth, Cic. in Ordib. 3. that (now also) there were a law made, whereby such bould and indiscreet attempts might hereafter wholly be forbidden: Affirming that the vnlearned may sometimes fall into this error; but the learned more often, and with greater daunger: for, as others are wont to rely much vpon their
iudgement, so are they still able to produce new false allurements to perswade them. And Master Tho. Haine (one of the most sufficient School-masters about this cittie of London) in Fol. 1 b. a latine Discourse of his, written to the effect of this Appeale, Too too dili∣gent. Lud. Viu. lib. 2. de caus. cor. Art. Say more then they ought, & and yet not all they should. holds some Grammarians to haue been nimiùm diligentes; and that they fall within the com∣passe of Quintilian's complaint against such as Plura quam par sit dicunt, non tamen omnia: And that they haue inriched themselues, with the spoiles of Lexi∣cons, & other arts; and adorned their plumes with filched feathers: and that when they haue done what they can, they doe but breake young Scho∣lars backes with the burthen of vnnecessary pre∣cepts; Repetitions of the selfe same things with o∣ther words. and that setting their tender witts vpon the rack they pull and teare them with Tautologies. Other some; though (saith he) they be succinct, and methodicall in their precepts: yet bring they with them disaduantage. For no man can run spee∣dily to the mark of languages, that is shackled and ingiu'd with grammar precepts. And hence it pro∣ceeds, that such as onely depend on the rules of Grammar, wrote barbarously, as appeareth ex libris Tenebrionumseu Dunsarum, et ex epistolis obscurorum vi∣rorum. And such as attribute much to precepts, and something to authoritie, must needes be fearefull, and irresolute. For, following authoritie, they many times run against rules; and obeying rules, they di∣sturb authoritie: without whose hand and feale, the best of rules is but irregulare. And Cominius concludes, that they teach, Rest. lib. 1. cap. 1. and
command children, and such as would learne the tongue, to follow things of a contrary nature. For, first they would haue them learn by Grammar, and then they send them to reade Authors: which things are contrary. And Despauterius runs with him against him∣self: for he is constrained to say, Construit Orator propriè, In Syntax. quae destruit ipse Grammaticus; quibus est fermè contrarius Ordo. What th' Orator builds decently's destroy'd By the Grammarian, other waies imploy'd. And in an other place. Si bene discutias doctorum scripta virorum, Multa secus cernes quàm lex vult Grammaticorum. If thou with care discusse what wise men wrote, Thou'l't oft finde other things then Grāmars note. Wherevnto Cicero alluding, Or. l. 1 saith, I omitt to speak of Mathematicians, Grammarians, and Musicians; with whose arts, this of Oratorie hath not so much as the least coherence. Howbeit we are not ignorant (saith Cominius) that Grammarians endeuoring to vphold their er∣rours (either to please the people, Rest. 1.5. or (rather) be∣cause they had no better way to get, or teach by) haue wrested all the sentences & authorities of the Ancients, to the approbation of their Art of Gram∣mar. For whereas Varro, Quintilian, and others dis∣puting about Grammar, are inforced to alledge the arguments that may be brought on both sides; the Grammarians catch those that make for them∣selues, and produce them as the iudgement, and
established opinions of the same Authors on their behalf: but such arguments as made against them, as also the conclusions, & absolute determinations of those Authors in the shutting vp of their disputa∣tions, they ouerslip without remembrance. And therefore, saith hee, (though somwhat roughly) they haue hitherto deceiued vs, and are themselues full oft deceiued. Neither doth he exclude our new writers from this censure: Ep. Rest. for he houlds that they haue nothing, but what they haue taken from others. And he wrote since Lilies Grammar was composed. But, saith he, Rest. l. 1.15 let these & many other Authors speak their pleasures, Grammarians wil not be reformed. Trew it is, that finding their collections taxed of being vaine, tedious, disordered and superfluous; they affect breuitie and better method: but, as they growe shorter, so are they more insufficient, and less intelligible; euer intricated in the self same La∣byrinth, commending their reproued precepts, and perswading all the world to follow them. Thus far our Authors haue declared themselues concerning Grammarians: Grammar censured. now let vs patiently heare them about their Art. It is very likely (saith our alledged Author) that those which in speech proceed by Art, l. 1.10. Rest. rules and reason, ought to speake better, then those that fol∣low the people, and such as are vnlearned. So is there a likely hood in musick, that the distances of a third, a fift, a sixt, and an eight, should by reason of these numbers, make a concorde, or consonant
harmonie: but (saith hee) this dependeth meerely vpon the iudgement of the eare, because God and nature would haue it so: And they were not found out by numbers, but by experience; for this obser∣uation of nūbers therein came afterwards. We may also by likelyhood say, the Suns rising is a cause of the Cocks crowing; & the setting therof of the Owles better seeing: But presumption vpon likely∣hood is often a wronger of blamelesse truth, & an ouerthrowe of greatest knowledges: and in many things there are seeming reasons at the first incoun∣ter thought to be irrefragable, which experience at length assureth vs to be vaine, and friuolous. And this appeares in Grammar, in that there is a likely∣hoode, that all Nounes, and Verbes should followe by Analogie the grammaticall Declensions, and Conjugations: Prisc. lib. 7. cap. de dat. & abl. plur. sec. dec. yet looking into Custome, and Au∣thoritie wee finde daily some irregularities, which we cannot excuse, or make good, but by new∣found exceptions, and inlarging the doctrine of the Heteroclites. And all our actions that proceed frō na∣ture are sooner & better learned by vse & exercise, then by Art, Inst. Or. or Precept. For Quintilian saith, there are many things that cānot be deliuerd by Art; as, sucking, eating, drinking, standing, running: to which we may add the actions of our outward senses and the like; which are not onely giuē to men, but chil∣drē, & vnreasonable creatures. And as in these, so in speech (which is the sixt externall sense according to Raymundus) we beginne not by Art, but by Art. Mag. Plato in Cra∣tylo. Na∣ture; and proceed by vse, custome, authoritie, and
exercise, gouern'd by the eare; which is in this kind pleased, or displeased by an inbred, secret, & vnpe∣netrable harmony in nature. And let vs be cōtent to know thus much de facto: for, of the first causes we neuer yet had solider doctrin, thē those likelihoods. Neither will Nature be compeld to dance within our circle; or haue a coat, or a cocks-comb put vpon her, by her owne Apes; Though I must confessethat all these may be helped by Art, & also adorned: But this is not to be vnderstood in childhood; but in men of iudgement, and of good discretion, that are capable of Art, and the reasons thereof. And that made Quintilian say, they would doe it better, con∣ducted by nature, then by Art; lib. 9. cap. 4. yet nature (saith hee) hath in it Art. But though there be an Art of helping and ador∣ning speech, yet is it not Grammar; Com. lib. 1.10. except we take it in the first simplicitie. For, our fore-alledged Au∣thor Cominius would haue vs knowe, lib. 1. cap. 9. that Grammar hindreth the elegancie of speech: because Gram∣maticall construction, and precepts, commande that words be otherwise placed then antient Authors placed them. And this, saith hee, is a great error amongst vs, that we are now afraide to produce the same sentences, and periods which were vsed by them, in the same words that they did, and in their manner of position: but by Art of Grammar wee in∣uent new words, and put them in an other order, then the best Writers placed them; Though Quin∣tilian say, that if any man dissolue a clause, lib. 9.4. sentence or period that is in it selfe sweet, ful, and wel spoken;
he wil driue away all the force, pleasure & ornamēt thereof; and altogither foile the composition. And he takes his authoritie from Cicero; In Or. who, dissoluing periods of his owne, makes them harsh, & ill-soun∣ding: and by correcting the hard, and crabbed com∣positions of Gracchus, makes them sweet, and plea∣sing; the better to demonstrate that, which other∣wise might haue beene thought but meer imagina∣ry. Wherfore, it appeareth, that in following Gram∣mar, we abandon elegancie, and the pleasure of the eare; and speake and write Grammar-latine, English∣latin, Dutch-latine, French-latine: and, in a word, euery nation, by this Art, writes it owne peculiar latine; and not the latine of the Latins, nor anie fo∣raine language as it should be. For, in euery tongue there are many things, which if wee should vtter by any other order then as they are vulgarly spo∣ken, they would not run well, and wee should be thought to speake improperly; as euery man may iudge by the clauses, sentences, and especially Pro∣uerbs, of his owne language: which, transposed, or made-vp with other words than common, would for the most part lose their pleasing grace, delight∣full sound, and (many times) their sense, and mea∣ning. Or. l. 3 Whereupon Cicero concludes, that these men separate words from sentences, in the same manner that the Soule is separated from the bodie; which is not to be done (saith hee) without their manifest destructions. l. 1 of the brin∣ging vp of youth. By mine aduice, saith * Ascham (who read to
Queen Elizabeth) a Scholar shall not vse the cōmon order in common schooles, for making of Latins: whereby the child commonly learneth first an euill choice of words (and right choise of words, Cic. de clar. Or. saith Caesar, is the foundation of eloquence;) then, a wrōg placing of words; and lastly, an euill framing of the sentence; with a peruerse iudgement both of words and sentences. These faults, taking once root in youth, be neuer, or hardly pluckt-away in age. Moreouer, there is (saith hee) no one thing that hath either dulled the wits, or taken away the wills of children more from learning, then the care they haue to satisfy their Masters in making Latins. For, the Scholar is commonly beaten for the making, when the Master were more worthie to be beaten for the mending, or rather marring of the same; the Master many times being as ignorant as the childe, what to say properly, and fitly to the matter And he produceth two Schoolemasters, Horman and Whittington. which haue sett foorth in print, either of them, a book of such kinde of Latins, that (if we beleeue him) a childe shall learne of the better of them that which an other day (if he be wise and com to iudgement) he must be faine to vnlearne againe. Further: our Cominius saith, Rest. l. 1.9 This Grammar hinders vs in writing rightly, in respect of the di∣uersirie of Grammaticall opinions about dipthon∣ges, aspirations, hissings, accents, and infinite other particularities, about which they are euer in con∣trouersie; as appeareth by Priscianus, Tortellius, Lan∣cilotus, Nicholaus Ferettus, Georgius Valla, Aldus
Romanus, Nestor, Stoa, Frishlinus, and a thousand others; in whom you shall finde almost nothing but contentions about letters, syllables, accents, quan∣tities of syllables, & corrections of Authors, euery man after his owne humour and inuention: so that in so great a diuersitie, you are not able to deter∣mine how you should proceed either in speaking, or in writing rightly. Whereupon he further inferres, Ib. that Grammar hinders men from the vnderstanding of Poets, and antient Authours, and makes them more obscure, and difficult. So that, such as are otherwise (for the language sake) desirous to reade them, drawe back, and are discomfited. And things are brought to that passe, that the very name of Latin is hatefull almost to euery man; excepting such, as (hunting after gain, and commoditie by some science, or profession) are constrained to fall vpon the very froth, and dregges therof: and these for the most part despise elegan∣cie, and scorn such as endeauour to attaine vnto it; in that themselues are brought-vp vnder the disci∣pline of Grammar; which neither respecteth the names of things, nor the custom of antient Authors, nor the iudgement of the sense of hearing, wherein elegancy hath her maine foundation. Besides: Ib. he holdeth it an occasion of the losse of much time, and (consequently) of many of the best and chiefest Arts, and knowledges. For, if any man would be exquisite therein, and speake rightly according to the rules thereof, it is necessarie hee should turne ouer the most part of Grammaticall
Commentaries, that he may the better make elec∣tion which of them were fittest to bee sollowed; though he confesseth, Ibid. that it would be a perpetuall and an vnprofitable labour, to gather all rules, to examine all places of Authours, and out of all these to put all occurrent exceptions vnto rules; in that there is no man but had rather speak after the ex∣ample of Cicero, Liuius, Salustius, Virgilius, Ouidius, Plautus & Terentius, than vse the precepts of Gram∣marians; Inst. Or. Fabius houlding it a more excusable er∣rour, to fall in following of these great men, than in following of these great mens Followers. But (to turne to our election) our Grammarians will questionlesse reject Priscianus, as condemned by Val∣la; and Valla, as found tripping by Perottus. So (to be short) by further inquisition he will neglect our common Grammar, Mr Gittins. as taxed by him that hath col∣lected centum errores Lilij: And, as wel it, as all other Grammars now in vse; De caus. linguae latinae. as branded by Iulius Caesar Scaliger, in aboue seuen hundred and fifty noted errours. Thus hauing found all the former Grammars faulty; hee cannot warrant the last, infallible: yet must he be constrained to follow it, or make a new one of his owne; which will be liable with the rest to all taxation. For, by reading antient Authours, he shall still discouer something that fals not vnder the collections of other Grammarians; and heere∣vpon will make an exception to some former rule; or make a new rule, and call the former Collecters, block-heads. Thus did our Fathers to our Grand∣fathers:
thus will our children deal with vs. But stay: If, before we can justly tax our Prede∣cessors of ignorance, we must necessarily take pains in reading them; and to read both new and ould Grammarians, were worke enough for a Methushe∣lah; what shall we be able to elect or judge of, that haue but a span of life; and in it, before our toppes be ripe, our roots bee rotten? Certainly wee may commence the sute: but we shal neuer liue to hear the Sentence. For, besides the infinite number of them, the very thought of one onely Quint. l. 1.14 Arist. Rhet. 3. Zuing. l. 1. Th. Didymus, which wrote but three thousand and fiue hundred volumes, makes me despair of doing well amongst Grammarians; In moriae enco∣mio. Insomuch that Erasmus concludeth well, that only Grammar is enough to make a man spend the circuit of his whole life in tortures. And, Rest. l. 1.9 saith Haloinus, we haue this experience, that many of the Master-grammarians (which lost no time, either in writing of Grammar, or in teaching it) haue been so far from perfection in their owne profession, that they were neither able to speak La∣tine rightly, nor to write it with elegancy. Further: wee may note a number of their scho∣lars which haue taken infinite pains til twenty years of age, sometimes till thirty, and yet are not able to write or speake any thing worth the reading: nor haue they any knowledge in other arts or professi∣ons; though they haue suffered many stripes, and are almost deaf with cries and exclamations. Half our age, Essaies, l. 1. c. 25 saith Montaigne, is confumed that way: we are kept foure or fiue years in learning to
vnderstand bare words, and to join them into clau∣ses; then, as long in proportioning a great bodie extended into foure or fiue parts; and fiue yeares more at least, ere we can succinctly knowe how to mingle, joyn, and interlace them handsomely into a subtile fashion, and into one coherent orb. I remember, saith Ascham, when I was young, l. 2. in the North they went to the Grammar-schoole lit∣tle children, they came from thence great lubbers; alwaies learning, but little profiting; learning with∣out book euery thing, vnderstanding within booke very little: their whole knowledge, by learning without book, was tied onely to their tongue and lips, and neuer ascended vp to the braines or head; and therefore was soon spet out again. They were as men alwaies going, but euer out of the way: and why? for, their whole labour (or rather great toile without order) was euen vaine idlenesse without profit. Indeed, they took great paines about lear∣ning; but imployed small labour in learning. Now, if Grammar should be the best Course to languages, and Kings may haue their choise of best Courses; I wonder what choise of Grammars was made by Mithridates. And that, that makes mee wonder more: we, that haue no businesse but a lan∣guage, spend all our life, and are not perfect in one; and hee, that had a Kingdomes affairs to look vn∣to, had two and twenty compleat languages. Val. Max. l. 8. c. 7 I wonder also how the Romans came all to be ex∣pert in Oratory, Husbandry, Astrologie, Geometry, A∣rithmetick, Musick, and many other sciences, before
they were admitted to martiall discipline, or other imployment: as by Livius, Valerius, Plutarch, Sue∣tonius, Frontinus, Vegetius, and many others, is recor∣ded. Assuredly, they knew no Grammar: or, know∣ing it, they did neglect it. And no maruell: for, Alexander, Amigonus, A∣chilles, Themistocles, Epaminondas, Hanibal, Scipio, and a thousand others, were instructed by Aristotle, Ca∣listhenes, Leonides, Perseus, Phenix, Phreareus, Lysias, Socilaus, Terentius, and the like. And all these for∣mer Potentates were knowne learned, almost in all sciences, through the assistance of these and other Masters. Of whom, some were Oratours; some, Poets; some, Philosophers, and of other professi∣ons: but, none of them were found to bee Gram∣marians. Yet now adaies, lib. 1.9. saith Cominius, they are so fre∣quent, that if a man would pen an eloquent Oration after the manner of the Antients, were it neuer so pleasing and sufficient; if hee obserue not, euerie where, the Grammar-rules, hee dares not vtter it, for fear of being thought to speak incongruously. And of this I was lately my self a witnes; where a Gentleman, making a Verse to his owne purpose, and imitating in all points Martiall, was by one, that thought himselfe a great Proficient, reprehended for false Latine: But, the Gentleman producing his Authour, the Critick was half disparaged. Haloinus, l.  1. Rest. coming yet a little neerer the quick, tels vs (and it stands with reason) that no Grammar can bee made perfect, vnlesse it were as often renewed
as new words are coined, or ould ones newly recei∣ued. Neither can it, saith he, be perfect, vnlesse it teach vs the Dialects of Nations, or the diuersities of language and pronounciation in sundry Regions, Prouinces, and distant places; with the changes and alterations in the maner of speaking, as well in La∣tine as in other languages. And our experience giues vs to vnderstand, that not onely those of Flanders, Brabant, Holland, Zeland, and others in the lower-Germanie; and those of Na∣var, Aragon, Catalonia, Galicia and Portugall, in Spain; and our owne Eastern, Western, Northerne, Sou∣thern, and middle parts of England, doe much vary one and the self-same language: but euery twenty-miles-distance from any place, yeelds a manifest differēce in the tongues of all, or any of these parts or Prouinces; as also euery twenty yeares alters e∣uery one of the said differences. Insomuch that few of vs, if we consider the antient Records and Au∣thours of our Nation, can beleeue, that a Grammar made in the time of Chaucer, Robert of Gloster, or of Aelsrick, can be vsefull now in ours; though doubt∣lesse these men wrote in the choisest Dialect the time afforded. And, certainely, all other Dialects are and will be changed in the same proportion. Now, if Grammars bee composed according to the purity of speech especially; and the puritie of speech in any nation is thought to be at the height, at that very instant that the Grammar was or is cō∣posed; and that euery time and place, according to the alteration & inconstancy of that instant, is like∣wise
altered and inconstant: I cannot see how anie Grammars of any languages, that are not daily (ac∣cording to these alterations) altered, can be of any certainty or perfection; in that, as a Grammar is made to be vniuersall, so should it, according to the Authours intention, be perpetuall: which, for the reasons alledged, is in both impossible. For, l. 1.2 saith my Author, if words be changed, it is necessary that Conjugations, Declensions, Num∣bers, Tenses, Moods, and all other Grammaticall obseruations (in what tongue soeuer) be also chan∣ged: which since it is impossible, the perfection al∣so is impossible. And Ludovicus Vives saith, Be corr. art. l. 2 that after Grammar∣forms or precepts were inuented out of a propor∣tionable correspondencie of Art; some haue at∣tempted to draw the immeasurable stream of vse through them, as through fitting trenches or cha∣nels: whereas Grammar, with Logick and Rheto∣rick, were obserued and deriued from vse; and not vse, from them. Therefore they haue not onely weakned and broken speech, by reducing it vnto the poore and penurious prescript of Grammar∣rules; but haue also corrupted it with many errors, in that they haue spoken otherwise than they ought to doo: well, in respect of rules; but ill, in respect of custome, which is the Lady and Mistresse of spea∣king. You may see full many most exact Masters of th' Art in this manner pollute their speech with foule enormities, whil'st they follow Art, which is not capable of vse; because vse is various or change∣able:
neither doth it follow Grammar or Analo∣gie; and therefore all things could not bee rightly gathered. This beeing sufficiently knowne vnto the Anti∣ents; though this Art, as suetonius reporteth, de claris Gram. be∣gan at the first to draw many (as is vsuall) through the nouelty thereof, and by a likelyhood of reason, and vain hopes that depended thereon: yet Comi∣nius, In Ep. Rest. subscribing to the fore-alledged opinion of Martial, saith, If any man read with diligence, and examine antient Authors, hee shall finde, that the Roman Nobility, the men of authority, the Gen∣try, and the learnedest Citizens, neuer followed that Art, or euer approued it: neither was it at any time praised or receiued by Poets, Orators, Histo∣rians, or any other of perfection: but, true it is, saith he, they discommended, scorned and rejected, as well Grammar, as Grammarians. Neither did Quintilian think, l. 1. c. 10 that this Art was sent from heauen when men were first formed, to giue lawes of speaking; but that it was found out after they spake, and had taken notice how euerie thing did sound in vtterance: for many, saith Co∣minius, whose labours for the most part perished in the combustion of the Gothes, as Actius, Pacuvius, Plautus, Navius, Livius, Andronicus, Laberius, Lu∣cretius, and manie others, wrote Latine before this Art of Grammar was inuented; and are cited by Nonius Marcellus, Aulus Gellius, Macrobius, Pris∣cianus, and other Writers. And no man doubteth, but the Inuenters of Grammar had the language
before they had the Art; and must therefore con∣clude, that it may be learned without Art. And the same Quintilian, lib. 1. Inst. considering how much this Art had (by the best sort of people) been re∣proued, ingenuously confesseth, that hee, in what he wrote of Grammar, did not vndertake to com∣pose an Art thereof: but, it comming in the way of his discourse, he would not omit to speak of it, lest exceptions might bee taken, that hee should slight and vnder-value it. Cicero, Or. l. 1. alluding heerunto, saith, I vnderstand the power and force of all precepts to be thus; not that Orators had the name of being eloquent by follow∣ing them; but that some obserued and did those things, which of their owne accord had made men eloquent: so that eloquence is not bred of Art; but Art, of eloquence. Yet I reject it not, saith he: for, though it bee not so necessary to teach a man to speak well, yet the knowledge thereof is not illibe∣rall. And in the same maner may we say, that speech was not bred of Grammar; but it, of speech: and, if the precepts of Orators are not so necessary in well-speaking, what shall we gather of the precepts of Grammarians? Let vs leaue them to those whose profession they are, Essaies, 1.25. saith Montaigne; and let vs that seeke, not to frame a Grammarian, but a compleat Gentleman, giue them leaue to mis-spēd their time in precepts: wee haue else-where to doo, and somewhat else of more importance. There are that knowe neither Ablative, Conjunctive, Substantive, nor Grammar;
no more doth their Lackey, nor any Oyster-wife about the streets: and yet (if you haue a minde thereto) they will entertain you your fill, and per∣aduenture stumble as little and as seldome against the rules of their Tongue, as the best Master of arts in France. And, saith he, Essaies, l. 1. c. 24. I hate such as can brag of their rules of Grammar, and can neither write nor speak a language; and so doo others: nay, saith he, I finde the choisest men were they that most con∣demned them. Thus it appeares, saith Cominius, l a. c. 10. Rest. that this Gram∣mar, which giues rules and lawes of speaking, that now euery where is taught, is a deceitfull, vain and vnprofitable Art; drawing men on, onely by like∣lihoods. And it may wel be said, to be a Labyrinth: for, such as are brought vp, and are Proficients in it, can finde no way to winde them out againe. Some of them perceiue they are intangled, and intimate as much to all men in their works, though but ob∣scurely: yet for gains sake they commend it, teach it, and professe it. Wherefore, saith hee, l. 1. c. 15. I cannot but grieue and lament, that in so cloudy and so false an Art, so many men, and of so exquisite an vnder∣standing, should thus long be deceiued & stupefied. And that which makes me grieue the more, is, that by it all antient elegancy, the Art of Oratorie, Rhe∣torick, and many other Arts and knowledges, haue perished, been stifled, and abandoned. And Scaliger did often wonder at the presumpti∣on and stubbornnesse of such as were vpholders of other mens errours: De caus. linguae latinae. l. 3. c. 67 whereas if they which had
cōmitted them were now aliue again, they would recant them. Neither is it so great an offence to erre: for, it is the beginning of wisdome; if not to him that was deceiued; yet to others, that they may not deceiue. But to foster errors, is either ex∣tremity of madnes and folly; or like the choise of those, who being once or twice foiled, had rather be stain then reconciled. I cannot thinke, VSE AP∣PROVED these antient Authours would in this manner slight either Grammar or Gramma∣rians; had they thought the Tongues of Nations might haue been sufficiently learn'd by their gram∣maticall rules or precepts: for, none made more account of speech then they did; or were more di∣ligēt in adorning it; or more desir'd to make them∣selues and posterity, Oratours and eloquent: but they knew full well, that there were other courses to come sooner, and with greater ease in all perfec∣tion, vnto languages: whereof though something haue been said already; yet, because wee haue had the judgements of graue men to disswade from Art and precepts, let vs also vse them to direct vs to that way of greater benefit. If we ask Quintilian what this way is; Inst. Or. l. 1. c. 10 he will tell vs plainely, that Custome is the best approoued School-mistress for languages; and that all the La∣tines were taught by vse and custome, from the mouthes of nurses and other women which had the keeping of them, from their cradle; and not by Grammar or Grammarians, as was erroneously thought by Leonardus Aretinus, and his Followers.
And he boldly affirmeth, that speech depends not on reason, but example: neither will he hear of a∣ny other law therein, but obseruation; or that the Art it self had any ground or foundation, but in cu∣stome. Experience also confirms, that if wee speak not according to custom, few or none will giue vs hea∣ring: and, amongst those that will, the most part of them will deride vs, because they cannot vn∣derstand our meaning. Whereupon, 1 Cor. 14.11 the Apostle saith, If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be vnto him that speaketh a Barbarian; and hee that speaketh shall be a Barbarian vnto me. Yet was this custome limited by the iudgement of hearing: and therefore Cominius saith, Custom, Rest. l. 1. c. 11 concurring with the pleasure of hearing, is the su∣rest rule and foundation of the latine language. By Custome, antient Authours vnderstand the common form of speaking vsed by the people; and especially, as Quintilian saith, Inst. Or. l. 1. c. 12 by consent of that part of them that are learned. But, saith Cominius, Rest. l. 1. c. 11 these learned must be such as are least tainted with grammaticall instructions, or corrupted with ex∣tern custome: for, saith hee, Quintilian vnderstood not the consent of Grammarians; but of men, that by much knowledge and experience came by lear∣ning and vnderstanding; as being exercised by fre∣quent custome of speaking, both in priuate and in publique places; and of such as resorted daily to Princes Palaces; as, Cicero, Caesar, Livius, Salustius, and the like, who as well in warre as peace were
Courtiers; and joyned to their owne learning much other studie and diligence in reading, and ex∣periēce of all other matters that might inrich their Tongue in speaking. And if any man read Cicero's works de perfecto O∣ratore, and de claris Oratoribus, he shall also finde ma∣ny sentences of the judgement, pleasure, measure, and sweetnes of the ear: whereunto he concludes, all Tongues and euery speech of man is tied, and must be subject; as well in prose, as in verse or poe∣sie: Ord. 3 for heerunto, saith hee, and not vnto Art, the Tongue and custom of the antient Latines was sub∣mitted. In a verse, we look, saith hee, as well to the be∣ginning and middle, as the end thereof; and wee spoil all, if wee faile in any part: but in prose, few mark the beginnings, but most mē mark the ending Cadences; which because they appear and are ta∣ken notice of, they are to be varied, lest they be re∣jected by the judicious, and through satiety growe odious. But, saith he, lest any man should admire, how the very weakest sort of those that are vnlearned should take notice of these sounds & endings, wch the wisest and most vnderstanding hearers doe di∣stinguish; let him knowe, that nature hath, as well in euery other thing as in this, a kind of stroke more then ordinary. For, euery man by a secret feeling discerneth those things without Art, which are right or wrong in Art and reason; which, since they doe in pictures, statua's, and in other worke∣manship,
to whose vnderstanding their instrument so well serues them not; they shew, they are much better able to judge of words, of numbers, and of voices. For, these are things that run with cōmon sense: neither would Nature haue any man to be wholly without the knowledge of them. For, see∣ing art is produced out of nature; except she moue nature and delight her, shee seemeth not indeed to haue done any thing. For, there is nothing that hath so neer an alliance with our soules, as numbers and voices: for, by them wee are provoked, infla∣med, appeased, and growe timorous, & are brought to mirth and melancholie. But, saith our Authour, as in verse the Vulgar finde what is amisse: so in our prose, if there be a∣ny haulting, they perceiue it. And they pardon not the Poet, though they wink at vs: yet inwardly they knowe, that what we also said was neither apt nor perfect. Whereby, Cicero giues vs to vnderstand, that all speech, whether prose or verse, dependeth vpon the judgement of our hearing; and that it must by Orators, as well as Poets, be regarded, that euery man in hearing may be pleased. And this is not only commanded by our antient Authours, but acknowledged and prescribed by Grammarians: for, Diomedes is by Despauterius ci∣ted, saying thus; Wee must alwaies bee carefull of Good sound, or pleasant vt∣terance of words. l. 12. aut. 13. Noct. Attic. c. 19 Euphonia: for, Euphonia in words is sometimes of more worth in speech, then is Analogie or Gram∣mar-precepts. And Aulus Gellius (or, as late Criticks call him,
Agellius) saith, Amongst the elegantest Writers, there was more account made of the sweet sound of words and voices, called Euphonia by the Greci∣ans; than of the rule or discipline which was ob∣serued by the Grammarians. But let Gellius, Macrobius, or others, say what they please; they almost all proceed by Art, and not by hearing, Rest. 1.12 saith Cominius. And whatsoeuer they ac∣knowledge in this kinde, they still return to Gram∣mar, Ib. 13 and leaue the vse and custome of speech, that hath been so much celebrated by our Ancestours. Had Cominius read the Preface to our English Grammar, he would doubtlesse haue acknowled∣ged, that our better sort of School-masters haue an honest desire to follow the best, easiest, and most ready way to languages: for, saith hee that wrote that Preface, It is not amisse if one, seeing by triall an easier and readier way than the common sort of Teachers doo, would say what he hath pro∣ued, and for the commodity allowed; that other, not knowing the same, might by experience proue the like, and then by proof reasonable judge the like: not heerby excluding the better way when it is found; but in the meane season forbidding the worse. Yet I must needs with Cominius confesse, They still reflect vpon some Grammar: for, all this speech hath relation to our common Grammar; and that, because they know not how to bring that way of custome into practice. For, though some will grant, that in the vulgar languages of Nations, Vse and Custome may doo
much: yet for such Tongues as haue their maine foundation in the works of antient Writers, and are now in vse onely amongst Scholars, they cannot think of any course, but onely Grammar. And yet I make no doubt, but these men wil grāt, that the best and most imitable part of Custome, whether in languages extinct or flourishing, con∣sists in Authors; and that (as well in Greek & La∣tine, as any other vsuall Tongues) there is no want of worthy Authors. Now, we that desire not to follow the drosse of Custom, but the purity; what should keep vs from learning languages also by written Vse and Custome? which is common, not alone to those that are in daily vse; but also such as are extinguished. They 'l say, In such as are extinct we cannot hear or imitate the custome of their natiue Tone, their accent and deliuery. 'Tis true: but, finding none aliue that may bee made our lawful Iudges heerin, let euery man hold that to bee the best that's judged best by his owne Nation. They 'l tell me, that the same in euery School is at this Present put in practice. I acknowledge, it is done as well as their Gram∣mar-bounds will suffer it: but, this is but Gramma∣ticè. I would haue it, as the Authours themselues would haue it, to bee done Latinè, and without the Grammar. But, this reducement of Custome to practice, hath been thought first impossible; and then, ridi∣culous:
impossible, because it neither is nor hath been found out, nor heard of; ridiculous, in that, beeing to be done without the rules of Grammar, it would bee done without all reason, and such as learn should learn like Parrats. Th' objection of impossibility makes mee smile, that knowe and finde it fesible: and that inference [it cannot] drawn and wrested from [it is, or hath not] breeds but a deceitfull argument. About the being ridiculous, because thought to be without reason; is but a ridiculous reason: for, though I knowe the world to bee possest, that hee onely giues a reason that giues a Grammar-rule; yet, if I should ask them what were the reason of that rule, it were impossible that they should giue me any other reason then this written Custome or Authority. Wherefore, theirs and ours is one and the same reason: different in nothing, but that they relie on the Dependent; wee, on the Principall: which I hould the better and the neerer reason, and the reason of their reason. And yet, if I be not de∣ceiued, there is a greater difference: for, Gramma∣rians, in th' exposition of Authours, tell their scho∣lars, that this or that construction is by reason of this or that rule; but truth it self will tell vs other∣wise: for, out of those Authours, this or that was made a rule, by reason of this or that construction. And, in my poore opinion, it is a more allowable answer to say, Cicero said so; than to say, Priscianus saies that Cicero said so. Some, that are thus far conuinced and brought
forward, fall vpon this block of opinion, that they are bound (as, of this, or that Vniuersity) to defend Grammar: which is like that old and rotten positi∣on, Wee are bound rather to erre with the multi∣tude, than to follow truth with two or three. But these are such as doe not perceiue, that in Grammatica there is a thing required besides the name and shadow thereof. The thing is that, that they are tied vnto; which is, the Art of writing & of speaking rightly (which, though it may bee vn∣derstood of Grammar in the first simplicity; yet let vs now take it as they doe): this thing if it be not to be found in ordinary Grammars, they are bound to seek it elsewhere; and where they really do find it, there to honour and obserue it; whether vnder name or title of Grammatica, Logonomia, or what else soeuer, so the thing be there: for, though it should haue the properest name in opinion that might be; if the thing bee absent, all's but deceit and vanity. And, for mine owne part, I haue as long suckt the milk of Vniuersities, and acknowledge as much re∣spect and obedience vnto them, as many others; and therfore haue some reason to knowe their mo∣therly loue to be such, that, what we receiue, they had rather should turne to holesome and effectuall nourishment, than a seeming and diseasing fulness. But, let deeds dispute the rest, and let vs returne to Custome: in which, I had rather satisfie the world with other mens authority, than mine owne opini∣on. And to this purpose Cominius saith, Rest. 1.13. If wee would
followe the example of auntient Authors, Orators, Historians, and Poets, either in Latine, or in Greeke; and should be exercised in their custome of speaking, which wee finde within their writings; Ib. 1.11. there is no doubt but wee may arriue vnto their very height of elegancy. But, there are fower especiall reasons, alledged by mine Author, why fewe, or none perceiue the custome of the Auntients. First, they put whatsoeuer they would speake, word for word, into an other language, in the same order wherin they speake it in their owne. Now, though this may in some fall out well; yet there are manie speaches, sentences, prouerbs, sayings and authorities, of two wordes onely, or of moe; which, translated into three or foure languages, are to be set downe in euery one after a diuerse order, and other wordes are to bee receiued. For, euery tongue hath proper and peculiar words, which are neither agreeable to other tongues, or lyable to trā∣slation; by which the eleganter sayings, the grauer sentences, and the more vsuall prouerbs are especially cōposed. Wherfore they are deceyued, which speake according to the order of other lan∣guages: which is knowne to be much vsed, & most amongst the more vnlearned. Secondly: though such as follow Grammar, and are a middle sort of Scholars, do not alwayes tran∣flate verbally; yet they speak not by the order, and custome of the Auntients; but, place their words after a grammaticall order, and construction; ra∣ther
obeying the rules, and precepts of Gramma∣rians, than the custome of the Auntients, and the iudgement of hearing: which is contrarie to the precepts of Cicero. Thirdly: though the learned sort, and such as would be called Poets, and Orators, translate not alwayes word for word; nor doe euery where ob∣serue a grammaticall construction: yet they come not neere the Latine elegancie; as hauing beene brought vp from their child-hood by th' Art of Grammar, and Analogy. They take a pride to frame new words, without regard vnto the iudge∣ment of the eare: which though they bee some∣tymes placed according to the order of the Aunti∣ents, yet are they harsh, and without elegancie; be∣cause they are not moderated, and measured by th' eare, as their Auncestors would haue them. Fourthly: the greater part of men, and especial∣ly of the learneder sort, are ashamed forsooth, to speak in the same words, and in the same order pla∣ced, that the Auntients spake them; lest it might be cast in their teeth, that they knew not how to speak of themselues, without vsing the wayes, and words of others. From these fore-alledged reasons, there arise (saith hee) innumerable Soloecism's, and Barbarisms, not onely in the Latine, but all other languages: of which, saith he, Grammarians dream many things; but I dare say, that fewe of them know what either a Soloecism, or a Barbarism meaneth; because they make all to haue relation to their Grammar. And I
so much the rather beleeue him, in that Our Tho∣masius Dictionary translates the word Soloecismus, Incongruitie; euen to th' eleuenth Edition. And, saith he, By how much the more they endeauour to flee these Solaecisms, so much the more and oftner by their rules and precepts doo they fall into them. For, Inst. Or. l. 1. c. 9 Quintilian saith, Soloecismus non est in sensu, sed in complexu; is not in the sense, but in the dispo∣sition of the words, or foulding of them one with another: Ib. which in * another place he makes more manifest; saying, A Soloecisme is an inconuenient placing of last and first together in a speech of one sentence; meaning, by inconvenient, that which is not in vse among the antient Writers. For, whatso∣euer is in vse, is neither inconuenient, nor a Soloe∣cism. Now, let Grammarians consider the deceit of their Art: for, I will proue, saith hee, that they in∣troduce many Soloecismus and Barbarisms in the latine language; and I will admit of no other testimonies heerin, then such as are of their owne profession. For Servius, which is called the Prince of Gram∣marians, writeth, that the Art of Grammar com∣mandeth many precepts to be followed, against cu∣stome, and the vse of antient Authours. So saith Nonius Marcellus also: which being true, it necessa∣rily followes, that they command and teach men many Soloecisms. And that made Servius say, The authority of th' Antients confoundeth Art; and Quintilian, that there are some things that cannot be deliuered by Art: l. 9. c. 4. for, if the case wee beganne
withall be harsh, it is to be changed: wherein hee sheweth, that all grammaticall proceedings should be altered, if th' ear be not well pleased. And that made Cicero say, In Or. Wee ought rather to offend in Art, than in the sweetnes of the eare. Which, No∣nius Marcellus ratifieth; shewing, that cases, genders, tenses, conjugations, declensions, and all other grammaticall precepts, are often changed by anti∣ent Authours, against the rules and precepts of Grammarians; as well in prose, by Cicero, Livius, l. 1.14. Rest. Salustius, and the like; as in verse, by Catullus, Virgi∣lius, Ovidius, Lucanus, and other of the best & wor∣thiest Poets. And thus they wound themselues, saith he, with their owne weapons. Ascham, citing the words of Salustius, l. 2. f. 66. Multis sibi quis{que} imperium petentibus, saith; I beleeue, the best Grammarian in England can scarse giue a good rule, why quisque, the nominatiue case without a∣ny Verb, is so thrust vp amongst so many oblique cases. I must confesse, he condemns him for it: but, by Mr. Aschams leaue, if I could not better out of better Authors expresse my self, I had rather trust Salust in the Latine, than Mr. Ascham. It followes therefore, that they labour in vaine, that hope to write or speak eloquent Latine, or o∣ther languages; and would make their way there∣unto by learning or following Grammar. For (as it is said) if the last did justly and deseruedly repre∣hend the former, then could not the former teach vs to write or speak rightly: but, if the last did vn∣deseruedly reprehend the rest, it is impossible that
hee should teach vs. Now, if nor first nor last can teach vs, then may we justly cōclude with our alled∣ged Authors, that of Grāmarians there's none cā teach vs. Rest. l. 1.15. Wherefore, Cominius aboue an hundred years since said, It was necessary that we should ex∣pect others: but, if any man would further knowe why or to what end we should expect them, hee is lately most learnedly answered; Vic. S. Alb. Org. mag. vel Rest. Mag. Vt res de integro ten∣tetur melioribus praesidijs. And those that are expected to new-mould the way to languages, must draw their course by Vse and Custome, till Babel be reformed by Zorobabel. For, l. 1.15. R. saith Cominius, if wee exercise our selues in Vse and Custome, we shall sooner, easier, and more securely attain vnto the elegancy of the latine lan∣guage; than by art, or all the rules thereof: for, by exercise of reading, writing, and speaking after an∣tient Custome, wee shall conceiue three things which are of greatest moment in any languages: first, the true and certain declining and conjugating of words, and all things belonging to Grammar, will without labour, and whether wee will or no, thrust themselues vpon vs. Secondly, wee shall taste of the manner of spea∣king vsed by the Antients, together with the ele∣gancy, grace, pleasure, and delightfulnesse of the Latine. Thirdly, we shall get the judgement of the eare, and retaine the same for euer: which, Grammar cannot helpe vs to; in that it is imperfect, and be∣guileth vs.
Linacer, Camden, and some others, haue made them stiles of some perfection: yet they'l tell you in your eare, that they haue gotten it rather by rea∣ding, and a memory or taste of the custome of Au∣thours, after reading, and practice vpon that taste; than by Art, rule or precept. For, if it be well exa∣mined, we shall finde few scholars arriued to a lau∣dable stile of writing, but haue forgot the most part of their Grammar-precepts. And indeed, the soo∣ner they leaue them, and fall to reading, and after it to writing; the sooner doo they come to their perfection. Wee finde, that such as are brought vp by Vse, and exercise, in any other sciences, are for the most part in short time great Proficients: nay, if we look into the ordinary Tongues of Nations, there are none so harsh or difficult, either in speaking or in writing, wherein a boy that shall be exercised, will not within the compass of two or three years with∣out any Art, but meerly by vse, example, obseruati∣on and eare, growe very perfect. Which, our Tra∣uellers might with my self obserue in the lower & higher Germany, Bohemia, Italie, Spain, France, and o∣ther Countries, in children of our owne and other Nations: As also that among the Polonians, and in many other regiōs, there are euery where seruants, boyes and wenches, found to speak both good and congruous Latine; and that without all Art, but ear and exercise. Which, Montaign veresies in his own person; Essaies, l. 1. c. 25 tel∣ling vs this following History. I must needs, saith
he acknowledge that the Greek & Latin tongues are great ornaments in a Gentleman; but, they are pur∣chased at an ouer-high rate. Vse it, who list: I will tell you how they may bee gotten better cheape, & much sooner than is ordinaryly vsed; which was tried in myne owne education. My late father (hauing, by all possible means & industrie, sought amongst the wisest and men of best vnderstanding, to finde a most exquisite and readie way of teaching) being aduised of the in∣conueniences then in vse, was giuen to vnderstand that the lingring while, and best part of our youth that wee imploy in learning the tongues (which cost the Greekes, and Latines nothing) is the onely cause that wee can neuer attaine to their absolute perfection of skill, and knowledge. I doe not be∣leeue that, to be the onely cause. But, so it is, that the expedient my father found out was this, that being yet at nurse, and before the first loosing of my tongue, I was deliuered to a Germane (who dyed, since, a most excellent Physiciā in Fraunce) hee being altogether ignorant of the French tongue, but exquisitely readie and skil-full in the Latine. This man, whome my father had sent for of purpose, and to whome he gaue very great enter∣tainement, had me continually in his armes, & was myne onely Ouerseer. There were also ioyned vn∣to him two of his countrie-men, but not so learned, whose charge was to attend, and now and then to play with me; and all these togither did neuer en∣tertaine me with other than the Latine tongue. As
for others of his howsehould, it was an inviolable rule, that neither himselfe, nor my mother, nor man nor maide-seruaunt were suffered to speake one word in my cōpanie; except such Latine-wordes, as euery one had learned to chatt and prattle with me. It were strange to tell, how euery one in the howse profited therein. My father and my mother learned so much Latine, that for a need they could vnderstand it, when they heard it spoken: so did all the howshold seruants; namely, such as were nee∣rest, and most about mee. To bee short: wee were all so Latinized, that the townes round about vs had their share of it; In so much, as euen at this daie, many Latine names both of workmen, and their tooles, are yet in vse amongst them. And as for my selfe, I was about six yeares oulde, and could vnderstand no more French, or Perigordine, then Arabick; & that without Art, without books, rules, or Grammar, without whipping, or whyning, I had gotten as pure a Latine tongue as my Master could speake; the rather because I could neither mingle or confound the same, with other tongues. If for an essaye they would giue mee a Theame; whereas the fashion in Colledges is to giue it in French, I had it in bad Latine, to reduce the same into good. And Nicholas Grucchi, who hath written de comitijs Romanorum; William Guerenti, who hath commented Aristotle; George Buchanan, that famous Scottish Poet; and Mark Authony Muret, whom (whilest he liued) both Fraunce, and Ralie to this daie acknowledge, to haue beene the best Orator;
all these haue beene my familiar Tutors, and haue often told me, that in mine infancy I had the Latin Tongue so ready and so perfect, that themselues feared to take me in hand. And Buchanan (whom afterwards I saw attending on the Marshall of Bris∣sack) tould me, he was about to write a Treatise of the institution of children, and that hee took the modell and patern thereof from mine. And this Form of teaching and learning of lan∣guages was of that authority with Ludovicus Vives, De corr. Art. l. 2 that he confesseth, he had rather be thus imployed for one year, than to bestowe ten yeers to this pur∣pose vnder the best and most reputed Schoole-ma∣sters. The practice also of written Vse and Custome, which I shewed to a most graue, wise, and powerfull Noble-man of this Kingdome, did so content him, that he spared not to tell me, hee had rather giue ten pounds a month to haue his childe haue this instruction, than to giue fiue pounds a yeer for other ordinary education. Ascham in like manner affirmeth, l. 2. that Queene ELIZABETH, who neuer took yet Greek or La∣tine Grammar in her hand (after the first declining of a Noun and a Verb) did in a yeer or two attaine to such a perfect vnderstanding in both Tongues, and to such a ready vtterance of the Latine, and that with such judgement; as they were few in number in both Vniuersities, or elsewhere in England, that were in both Tongues comparable with her Maje∣stie.
Scaliger also, without any Grammar at all, Mr. Th. Hain. did come to an admired perfection in the Greek Tong. And other heer in England, more worthy remem∣brance, are comne without any rules at all to many languages. Thus did Tib. and Ca. Gracchi: Rom. Ciceronia∣nus. f. 10 thus did Laelia, the Mutiae and Luciniae: thus did Hortensia, thus Curio, learn their eloquence: And thus, among the Crassi, the Scipiones, the Mutij, and many other Roman Oraters before Iulius Caesar, the name and ho∣nour of well-speaking flourished entire and incor∣rupted: not by reason, art or science; but onely by good Vse, Custome and conuersation. And thus, and no otherwise, for aboue three thousand yeers, were all languages learned; and so are still, though in some places the Art of Grammar, with greater toil and lesser profit, be imbraced. And that made Schorus say, Wee are perswaded, In specim. &c. that children may by imitation, example and Cu∣stome (not onely come to speak, but) be made bet∣ter Grammarians, Orators and Philosophers, than by precepts. Now, if Custome, saith Varro, be to be followed, l. 1. de Analogia. there is no need of precepts: for, if we follow Cu∣stome, precepts will follow vs. And he spares not to confesse, that he cannot command the Custome of the people; but their Custome will command his: for, saith hee, whatsoeuer confused Custome hath receiued, must and will passe without contra∣diction. And that made Marcellus tell Tiberius Caesar, Tranquillus cis. a Zuing. Theat. l. 1. that he could not make words, though hee could make
men, free of the City: and he gaue Capito the lie a∣bout it, l. 1.13. in Caesars presence. And this Custome, and the change thereof, Quintilian acknowledgeth, not onely in speech, but in Orthographie. The fruitlesse endeauours also of many in our owne language, namely of Smith and Mulcaster (cited by Mr. Praef. Logon. Alex. Gill) make them acknowledge, that, after the loss of much time & paper, all must be remitted to the sway of Custom. And yet haue men of note, and the more noted for knowing thus much, once more endeauoured against their owne knowledge: which, I wonder at. Moreouer: Or. l. 1. Cicero tels vs, that it is intolerable, in discourse to forsake the ordinary forme of speech, and the vsuall or common sense of Custome: for, Vse of all other is the best Lord & Master; which, ruling it self by the judgement of the ear all speech must be likewise ruled by it. And, saith he, experi∣ence teacheth vs, that such, whether in prose or po∣esie, are especially to be commended, as, by the po∣sition or counterpoize of their words, bring plea∣sure to their Auditory, and by their sentences doo teach them something; yet so, that the peoples or∣dinary Vse and Custome be obserued: for, Vse & Custome are of that authority, that they transform antient languages, degrade words present, coyne new ones, and recall old ones at their pleasure. And this made Horace say, Art. poet. Vt syluaefolijs pronos mutantur in annos, Prima cadunt: ita verborum vetus interitaetas, Et invenum ritu florent, modo nata vigent{que}.
As woods are chang'd in leaues by winters fall: So words do change their age that's past recall, And new-born youth-like flourish and top all. And then, Ib. —mortalia facta peribunt: Nedum sermonum stet honos & gratia vivax. Multa renascentur quae iam cecidere, cadent{que} Quae nunc sunt in honore vocabula, si volet vsus: Quem penes arbitrium est, & ius, & norma loquendi. —all mortall facts giue place: Much lesse should speech keep it first praise and grace. Custome brings words vnus'd, to Vse; and such, As are most vsuall, to displease as much. The worth of speech is judg'd by Customes touch. And this made Aulus Gellius likewise affirm, that the latine Tongue proceeded not by Art, but by Vse and Custome. Thus wee may gather, that Art and Vse are al∣most opposite: which, In Virgilianis expositionibus. Servius the Prince of Gram∣marians plainly ratifies; telling vs often, that Au∣thoritie (which is nothing but the written Vse or Custome of antient Authors) doth confound Art. Whereof, Nonius Marcellus giues vs this Instance: All that haue followed Art, deny that we ought to adde a Preposition vnto Verbs: but the authoritie of th' Antients bids vs place it before them. And Servius giues vs another; saying, Art requires, that we should not put a Preposition with the names of Cities, but with the rest we should: yet Authors,
saith he, for the most part, vse the contrary; and he citeth Cicero & Virgil comprehending verse as well as prose; lest Grammarians in Poets should excuse it with poeticall licence. And for this cause, Quin∣tilian said, Inst. l. 9. c. 4 The case is to bee altered, if that which wee beganne withall run harshly. As if Quintilian should say with Nonius Marcellus, The case, gender, tenses, conjugations, declensions, and all gramma∣ticall collections, are to be altered if speech sound ill in pronunciation.: for, authority and experience tell vs, that we can neither in the Latine, nor in any other Tongue, be obedient vnto other rules or rea∣sons, than Custome and our sense of hearing. And Badius affirmeth, In Comment. super Virg. in 1. Aeneidos. that construction is to bee sometimes taken from the custom of speaking: for, if it be taken according to the rules of Grammari∣ans, it is altogether displeasing; in that it depriueth words of their dignity, and sentences of their waight and grauity: l. 1. de Analogia vid. Iul. C. Scal. de caus. ling. lat. l. 9. a. 161 and Varro concludes (what Iu∣lius Scaliger confirmeth) There are many in this kinde, in which wee rather follow Custome, than the reason of words. Whereupon, Hermannus Buschius was not afraid to tell vs plainly, that it is a very childish and ridi∣culous thing, especially in one of mans estate, to al∣low of nothing but of boyish rules; and to bee so besotted in them, that hee houlds it a great offense to step a nails breadth from the bounds that they haue limited; and to be altogether ignorant in the authority of the grauest Writers, or despise it; and to accost rather trifling precepts, than th' approued
Authours of so many ages, on whom the latine Tongue depends, and lies as at anchor: for, wee must not speak onely as wee are commanded by Grammar-rules; but rather altogether as most ex∣cellent Authours haue written. Makest thou any doubt of following that which Cicero, Varro, Livius, Florus, Valerius, and both the Plinij, and others of the purest Authors haue spoken? Do'st thou as yet imagine, that he that vseth Cicero's & Virgil's words, doth speak improperly? Such as are inthrald to A∣lexanders Grammar, reade in Virgil, Pars & certare pa∣rati. Pars ingenti subiere feretro. Pars ingentem formidi∣ne turpi scandunt rursus equum. O vir fortis at{que} amicus clamāt: and those that Quintilian produceth; which seem, saith he, and are not faulty; because it is the custome of speaking amongst Authors, as Tragaedia Thyestes, Ludi floralia & Megalesia, and the like. But, say they, we must not imitate this form of speaking or writing; as if wee were necessarily tied like chil∣drē to attēd rather the regular proceeding of som one word, than vnto the matter it self. Donatus, on the Prologue of Adelphos in Terence, wrote, In A∣delphis Terentiana: but, if I shall say so, you will re∣proue me, and make me write, In Adelphis Terentia∣nis. But I'le esteem you but as a freshman, or an ele∣mentary scholar. If therefore you shall think Maxi∣ma pars homines morem hunc habent, not to be rightly said, because the Grammar-rule hath, Two Sub∣stantiues in one and the same case cannot be joyned without a Copula. [or, Two Substantiues cannot come together, betokening diuers things, vnlesse
the later be put in the genitiue case] you are decei∣ued: In Orat. pro C. Rab. for, Cicero saith, Quid vociferabere, decem millia talenta Gabinio esse promissa; and not, decem millia talen∣torum. And Livius saith, Et Philippei nummi aurei de∣cem quatuor millia, vigintiquatuor; and not, aureorum nummorum millia quatuordecim, &c. Wherefore, saith hee, I bouldly affirm, that the latine Tongue is not to be sought-for out of rules or Gammars, but out of Authors. Thus it appeareth (saith Cominius) that Herman∣nus Buschius allowes of all that I haue written of this subiect, and confirmes it. For first he perceiu'd, and prou'd, that ancient Authors spake neither by Art, nor by the rules of Grammar. Next, that he that will follow Gram∣mar or her rules, must of necessitie despise Orators, Poets, and other ancient Authors: whereby he con∣cludes, that the precepts of this Art, and the vse of the Ancients are contrarie: and that we should not speak according to the rules of Art, but according to the custome of Antients. Then, that it is a foo∣lish thing to be afraid to follow the speech of the Ancients. And that Grammarians cōmand things contrarie. For they iudge Terence, Virgil, Cicero, and the like to be the elegantest Writers: and yet they prohibit our imitatiō of them in many things; l. 7. c. de dat. & abl. plur. prima decl. as Priscianus himselfe, where (he saith) the ancient Authors are found to haue written many things a∣gainst rule, vitiously, both in these and in other ca∣ses, l. 7. c. de dat. & abl. pl. 2 a. decl. wherein they are not to be imitated. And in another place, he intimates the contrarie: as, that
we ought to knowe the reason of Analogie; but ra∣ther to follow the custome of Authors. And a lit∣tle before, hee sayth; There are some Nounes whose cases are not all in vse: which though wee may by Analogie produce; yet because wee finde them not in Authors, I hold they ought to bee re∣fused. No man can deny but these are diuers and contrarie. And then, this Buschius teacheth that the antient Authors very often bring many things against the rules of Grammarians; wherefore it is most certaine, that these neither wrote, nor spake by this Art. Which Nonius Marcellus sheweth, and proueth by innumerable examples. And it fol∣lowes, that the first and later Grammarians are de∣ceiued. For they drewe their Art out of ancient Authors, and went about to proue it out of their authoritie. Again: it followes that others were yet more deceiued, that excuse the custome of Au∣thors, by figures, poetical licence, and other Gram∣maticall inuentions; whereas they finde that these ancient Authors neither knew them, nor obserued them. And in conclusion, he affirmes the Latine Lan∣guage is not to be sought by Art, but out of Au∣thors. And it manifestly appeares that there are two kindes of Latine; one naturall, the other a∣dulterate. The naturall is that which the men of authority amongst the Romans, the Nobilitie, and that which almost all men spake, and wherein the ancient Authors Cicero and the rest did write; in which are the pleasures of the language, true elo∣quence,
all delight & perfect elegancy; who com∣posed their works by no Art of Grammar, but af∣ter the Vse and Custome of speaking, and especial∣ly the judgement of hearing. In perf. Or. And therefore Cicero said, Our Ancesters thought good, that we should obey Custome, linked with the judgement of hea∣ring: for, Custome hath giuen leaue, that it shall be lawfull to offend for sweetnes sake. Yet Custom permitteth, that wee should produce something which the common people speak not; but not vn∣lesse it be for sweetnes sake, the pleasure of the ear, and to vtter those things which haue better sound than others; and in pronouncing, fal better, without offense to Vse and Custome. And this is that li∣cence which the Grāmarians call poeticall Licēce: which they think to be giuen onely vnto Poets, to help the measure of their Verses; and doe not vn∣derstand, that it is as well giuen vnto Orators, Histo∣rians, Philosophers, and all other whatsoeuer, accor∣ding to their inclination or election. And of this licence, onely Grammar doth defraud vs; nay, it doth confound and drown it. And this begets that other latine Tongue which is adulterate, and daily depraued with new rules and precepts; and so in∣volued and intricate, that how thou should'st ei∣ther reade, write or speak, saith he, thou knowest not. And this almost euery man perceiues, that hath betaken himself to reading of antient Authors, and begins but to taste their elegancie: And this, should euery man of wisdome look vnto. For, there is no diligence or subtilty, saith he, that can bring vs to
the latin elegācie, vnless we absolutely so renounce Grammar, that wee doe not regard so much as the least rule thereof; but onely rely vpon the judge∣ment and pleasure of the eare, and speak after Cu∣stom, so far as it is limited by antient Authors. And thus without any toil we shall bee eloquent. For, Grammar is so far from beeing the foundation of the latine Tongue (or any other); that it is rather the greatest hinderance therein, and cause of all the errors & contentions that daily rise among Gram∣marians: As it is also in my judgement, saith hee, the main root, fountain and beginning of all barba∣risme. Nor finde I other out of Varro, Cicero, Plinie, Quintilian., or other antient Orators or Poets. And whosoeuer shall be led by it, will be deceiued, and neuer come to elegancy, either in this or any other languages. But, notwithstanding all these reasons, all these experiments, all these graue and waighty testimo∣nies; I doubt not, but I shall heare of some Demetri∣us, who with his Associats, to keep vp the trade, wil still be crying, Magna Diana Ephesiorum. Wherefore, I appeal to thee, my Defendress, and to thy Tribunall; most humbly imploring no other redresse of injurious oppressions, but that the pre∣sence of thy self, O Truth, may be so much respec∣ted, that blinde-fould Opinion, Patronesse of Grammar and Grammarians, may cease to gouern and to keep the people (as her self is) hood-winkt: And that, vpon thy straight and imperiall Command, shee may leaue all men indifferent, and in the posture of
an equall balance, readie to turn, where reason, sense and demonstration are most ponderous. And the waking part of Students shall not onely acknowledge thy diuine & powerfull hand in the cure of their deplored lethargie: but my selfe, thy deuote suppliant, in lieu thereof shall bee obliged in my next endeuours, to discouer in what manner this vse, Custome, and Authoritie should be sought and ordered, for the speedie, cheape, easy, and in∣fallible furnishing of this, and euery other Nation, with all sorts of purest Languages. FINIS. Faultes escaped, in some Copies. Pag. Line   2. 28. Thenth, read Theuth. 2. 30. this in that reade that in this. 23. 26. Liuius, Andronicus, reade Liuius Andronicus. 32. . been found reade been hitherto found.
