2734 99838108 2467
All the French Psalm tunes with English words BEING A COLLECTION OF PSALMS Accorded to the verses and tunes generally vsed in the Reformed Churches of France and Germany. Perused and approved by judicious Divines, both English and French. Omnis spiritus laudet Dominum. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, with permission of the Company of Stationers. 1632.
CONSECRATED to the glory of GOD, DEDICATED to the pious Benefactors and Patrons of this well inten∣ded and laborious work, SVBMITTED to the censure of them onely, who shall haue duely exami∣ned these expressions of pla∣ces most difficult, abstruse, and of most various inter∣pretation and exposition: Which if it proue favorable may produce another Edition more ex∣act, compleat, and of a larger letter; if otherwise it may provoke those who are more able to performe it better.
The Preface. THe remarkable con∣formity of many Languages to the French in their Psalmody or Psalm tunes and verses, hath appeared so gracious and di∣uine (in regard no humane power commanded them thereunto) that it hath affected many of our Nation with wonder and emulation; Inso∣much that some Personages of emi∣nent quality and fame, haue not only desired, but also endeuored that those so celebrated tunes might bee sung with English words, and that En∣glish people in French or Dutch
Cities or Families might sing En∣glish Psalms in those tunes which they vse among whom they liue. To this & other purposes all the Psalms of Dauid are composed with all care and diligence, principally to expresse the genuine sen of the originall He∣brew text, as near as might be attai∣ned vnto, by the help of the best Ex∣positers, without respect to any con∣trouersie which hath bin, or is now in agitation. As also that the mat∣ter be alike disposed of in euery cou∣plet, staue or line agreeable to the French. In euery verse (which are of as many kindes, almost, as the tunes) is obserued the same accent in the beginning, continuance, and end of the line. Note that some long lines should be set in two, and accordingly accented in reading them. The reso∣nancies are as many, so disposed; and so many of the same kinde, as in the
French, by which rimes (and in some Psalms by Alphabeticall letters) the lines and staves are knit together for better help of memory. The seuerall kindes of tunes being in number a∣bout 124, and formerly expressed in 6 systems or cliffs, are now reduced into 2 for more facility in learning them, and are placed, for the most part, where the Psalm is most in sight. Other obseruations for breuity are omitted. To conclude, it is wish∣ed that not any Christian would spend their leisure worse then in singing these or such like Psalms, vn∣till we all together in heauen sing praise to the Eternall, to whom bee all honor, thanksgiuing and glory for euer. Amen.
Psalme j Doctrine. WHo vvalketh not in counsell levvd astray, VVho standeth not in sinners vvicked vvay, VVho sitteth not in scorners chaire deriding: But day and night in Gods pure lavv abiding, VVith true delight theron doth meditate, That man is sure to liue in blessed state. He shall appear like to a tree that grovvs Fair planted neer the riuer cleer that flovvs, VVhich vvholsom fruit abundant timely beareth, VVhose leaf still green, norfals nor fails nor seareth: So that this man, and all he takes in hand. Shall prosper vvell, in happy stare  and. But vvicked men shall no such fauour finde, They shall be like the chaff before the vvinde, And as the dust, driuen to and fro, contemned. Therfore they shal not stand, but fall, condemned, In iudgement iust; nor shall the vvicked train Appear in place vvhere righteous men remain. For God most iust, vvho righteous men doth loue, Their vpright, vvay doth knovv, and vvell approue: And he on them eternall life bestovveth: But those that be vniust he ouerthrovveth. For euery vvay that vvicked men do take, Shall perish quite, & them accursed make. Psalme 2. Prophecy. WIth brutish rage vvhy do the heathen rise, Tumultuously assembling combinations? VVhat is the cause rude people enterprise, To execute their vain imaginations?
Kings of the earth, and Potentates aspiring, ogether all their armed forces bring, They counsell take, rebelliously conspiring Against the Lord and his anointed king. Come let vs break, thus vvith themselues they say, Come let vs break their seruile cords in sunder, Come let vs cast their slauish yoke avvay VVhervvith they think to keep vs strictly vnder. But he tha ls vvithin the heau'ns for euer Shall laugh at them, and their audacious pride, The Lord of hosts shall scorn their vain endeuer And euermore them and their deeds deride. VVhen pleaseth him, then vvill he thunder dovvn His dreadfull voyce on them, and in displeasure And fury fierce vvith terror of his frovvn He vvill perplex, and vex them out of measure. Kings, vvill he say, in vain is your endeuer, For I my king anointed haue to raign On Sion hill my holy mount for euer, His throne theron I haue set to remain. Pause▪ And I the king vvill publish this decree, Seeing the Lord hath this to me expressed Thou art my son, this day begot I thee, Novv to appear my heir eternall blessed. Demand of me, and I vvill sure endovv thee VVith Nations all for thine inheritage, The ends of all the earth I vvill allovv thee, Thou shalt possesse them all from age to age.
VVith iron rod, and scepter in thy fist, As pleaseth thee, thou shalt controul & check them, And vvith the same, vvhen, vvhere, and hovv thou list Thou shalt them bruise, like potters vessels break thē. O therfore novv ye Kings be vvell aduised, Ye Potentates bevvise and vnderstand, Ye Magistrates in ruling exercised, Be learned novv ye Iudges of the land. Serue ye the Lord in humblenesse and avv, Fear ye his vvrath, forbeare ye to displease him: Ioy in his loue, reioyce ye in his lavv, And as ye ought, endeuer ye to please him. O kisse the son, embrace vvith lovv submission His sacred loe, lest mouing him to vvrath, Ye misse the vvay, and perish in perdition, To ruin run in blinde erronious path. For if his ire like fire begin to flame, And kindled once but little be extended: O blest are all that in his sacred Name Haue put their trust, and on his grace depended. Psalme 3. Doctrine. O Lord vvhat numbers rise Of spitefull enemies, Euen ready to assail me, VVhat multitudes, vvhat svvarmes, Are ready vp in armes, To ouercome & quall me. Hovv many is the roul Of them that tell my soul, It cannot be relieued, It must be vndertrod, No help comes from his God, But they are all deceiued. For Lord thou art my shield, My buckler in the field, My succour and my safety, My glory, my renovvn, Thou hast vpheld my crovvn, And born my head so lofty. Aloud I often cry'd Vnto my God my guide,
VVhom I alone rely on: And he as alvvay neare Vouchsaft my voyce to hear Out of his sacred Sion. Therfore of peace possest, I vvill ly dovvn, and rest, And take my timely sleeping: And vvithout fear likevvise, Avvake again, and rise, For God hath me in keeping. Should millions. , strong and stout Besiege me round about, It nothing should affray me: Their numbers and their force Of charrets and of horse, Should not a vvhit dismay me. Arise O Lord my God, And saue me vvith thy rod, For thou hast deepely vvounded The cheeks of all my foes That vp against me rose, Their very teeth are pounded. But from thee Lord alone, And thy supernall throne, Is ay to be expected, All ayd and all defence, VVhich thou dost free dispence To all thy ovvn elected.
Psalme iiij. Prayer. O Lord, my God, my rights defender, Ah hearken to me vvhen I call, As thou my liberty didst render. Deny me not, thy pitty tender, But hear my earnest prayer vvithall. Hovv long O sonnes of mortals mighty, My glory to disgrace, disguise, And turn to shame, and scandall fight ye? Hovv long vvill ye in sinne delight ye, In levvd designes, and seek for lyes? Knovv ye, vvho me haue disrespected, The Lord himself ahoue the rest, Him that is godly hath selected, And louingly to me affected, VVill hear from heau'n, vvhat I request. Tremble therfore, and see ye sin not, Striue not against his sacred vvill: Consider if as yet ye see not VVhen busy toild abroad ye be not, But in your chamber sole and still. Then daily offer to him duly, Iust sacrifice his proper right, And broken hearted, humbled truly, Before his presence vvalking nevvly, Trust in the Lord his gratious might. The most part only this inquire, VVho is it that vvill shevv vs vvealth? But shevv vs Lord I thee desire Thy face vvithout thy frovvns of ire, Thy smiling grace, thy sauing health.
For only that shall more content me, And make me much more to reioyce Then all their store in time of plenty, VVhen they haue thousands reapt for tvventy, Of corne, and vvine, and other choyce. In safety therfore and secured, VVill I ly dovvn, and soundly sleep, For thou O Lord, I rest assured, Me vvith thy grace hast round immured, Me in thy kingdome safe vvilt keep. Psalme v. Prayer. VNto the vvords of my complaining, O Lord incline thy gratious ear, Vouchsafe to vnderstand and hear, O thou that in the heau'ns art raigning, My cause of plaining. Hear thou, and that vvith expedition, My crying voyce, my God, my King, For only vnto thee I bring, And offer vp vvith all submission, This my petition. Lord in the morn my prayer ascending, If it may please thee, thou shalt hear: My voice vvhen morning doth appear VVill I to thee address, attending Thy grace descending. Thou art a God, all Gods excelling, VVho art not pleasd vvith vvickednes Nor vvinkest at vngodlines: Ill doers haue not any dealing VVith thee, nor dvvelling. The foolish rash, the proud dare neuer Thy dreadfull presence come before: For thou abhorrest euermore The vvicked all, that still perseuer In bad indeuer.
The smooth deceiuer, and the lyer, That make good euill, euill good: The murderer, the man of blood Thou vvilt in fine confound in fire, In thy fierce ire. But I for mercy vvill implore thee: Thy mercyes great and many be, In reuerence, and feare to thee, Tovvard thy sacred house before thee I vvill adore thee. Guide me my God, & safe protect me, According to thy righteous guise, From ambush of my enemies, And in thy vvay made plaine direct me, Vpright erect me. Pause. For in their mouth, no truth remaineth, Their heart is double vvickeder, Their throte an open sepulcher, Their tong by smoothing, soothing, gaineth, And alvvaies faineth. Lord let them euer quite be quelled, Confound them in their ovvne deuice, Disperse them for their hainous vice: For they against thee haue rebelled, And proudly svvelled. But let all those vvhose expectation▪ Is fixt on thee, in thee reioyce: And ioy they ay in heart and voyce That haue thy Name in admiration For their saluation. For Lord, the iust thou ay dost tender, And them thou couerst vvith thy grace, As vvith a shield in euery place: Thou free from danger them dost render, As their defender.
Psalme vj. Prayer. LOrd in thy furies terror, Reproue thou not my error, Though I thee high incense: Nor in thy dread displeasure, Correct me to the measure Of my extreme offence. Lord haue commiseration. On me shevv thy compassion, For grief me vveak doth make: Heal me O Lord, recure me, Release from pain procure me, For all my bones do ake. My soul vvithin perplexed, Is also greatly vexed, In agony & grief: O Lord my God, vvhy stayest thou, Alas hovv long delayst thou? VVhen vvilt thou send relief? Return O Lord in fauer, Of my soul be the sauer, From danger safe me make, Though I cannot deserue it, Yet saue my life, preserue it For thy ovvn mercy sake. For vvith the dead, and buried In darknes deep interred, None do record thy Name: Amid the fields infernall, VVho shall extoll th'Eternall, Or magnifie thy Fame? Pause. In vveary toyl and anguish, VVith sighs & grones I languish: The tedious night out-vveares, All restles vvithout sleeping:
My bed I bathe vvith vveeping, My couch doth svvim vvith teares. Through my incessant sorrovv, VVhich ay doth pierce me thorough, Mine eyes vvax dim and ould, My countenance doth vvither, It sinks and shrinks together, To see my foes so bould. Avvay ye vvicked, vanish, You from my sight I banish, VVho vvork iniquity. Because the Lord hath daigned, To hear vvhen I complained, And vvaild my misery. The Lord hath not reiected The prayer I erected, But heard it from on high: He hath not only heard me, But also did regard me, And ansvverd graciously. Let all my foes be vexed, And blush vvith shame perplexed Ezceedingly disgrac'd: Let them turn backvvard vvounded, VVith sudden shame confounded, And vtterly defac'd. Psalme 7. Prayer. IN thee my God, my trust is euer, Then saue me Lord, and me deliuer, From all that me pursue vvith hate, And from the cruell Potentate. Lest like a Lyon in his povver, He tear my soul, and me devovver: VVhile succorles I seem to be, And ther is none to rescue me. O Lord my God, my hopes foundation, If I deserue this imputation, If I haue done him vvrong in ought, In deed, or vvord, or but in thought: If I haue him vvith ill requited, VVho vvas at peace vvith me vnited:
Nay if I haue not done him good, VVho vvithout cause hath sought my bloud. Then let my eager foe pursue me, Till he oretake, and quite subdue me: Yea, let him cast my life avvay, And in the dust my honour lay. Arise O Lord vvith expedition, In vvrath to vvorke my foes perdition: And vvatch for me both day and night, Till I obtain my promis'd right. So multitudes of people pressing, Shall come to thee freely confessing Thee Lord and King, and Iudg supreme: Then rouse thy self for loue of them. And thou of all men Iudg supernall, Novv iudg thou me, my God eternall; According to my innocence, Sincere and cleer, free from offence. Pause. The vvickeds rage to cease constrain thou, The righteous iust confirm, sustain thou, For God most iust the reins doth try, All thoughts, all hearts he doth discry. The Lord is my defence assured, My shield vvherby I am secured VVho saueth by his povver and might, All those that are in heart vpright. The Lord is iust, and iustice giueth To euery one that iustly liueth, God threatens them that disobey, To vvrath prouoked euery day. But if hard hearted not relenting, He vvil not turn, Gods vvrath preuenting,
Then he his svvord vvill sharper vvher, His bovv is bent and ready set. His instruments of death destroying, Prepared are: his shafts imploying Against them, vvho inflam'd vvith spight, In persecuting, take delight. Behold, iniquity he vveaued, VVith mischief great vvhich he conceiued: In trauell painfull he brought forth A lying issue nothing vvorth. A pit he digged, darke and deeply, A bloudy caue descending steeply, To haue intrapt my harmles foot, But he himself is faln intoo'r. The euill that he hath proiected, Vpon himself shall be reflected: His cruelty and fell despight, On his ovvn head shall surely light. Therfore vvill I extoll the iustice Of God the Lord, in vvhom my trust is: Him vvill I praise, and magnifie The glorious Name of God most high. Psalme 8. Thanksgiuing. ETernall God, our Lord incomparable, Hovv excellent is thy Name, admirable Ore all the vvorld, thy glory manifold, Is far aboue the highest heau'ns extold. Euen by the mouthes of babes, and sucklings tender, Thou hast confirmd thy mighty povver to render. Thy enemies confounded, and by those To stop the mouthes of thy reuengefull foes. VVhen I behold in sacred contemplation, The heau'ns, the vvorks of thy high hands creation; The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars about, In their due place so orderly set out: Lord think I then (as in my self amazed) O vvhat is man, that thou O Lord art pleased To visit him? or vvhat is all mankinde That thou vouchsafst to keep them in thy minde? Pause.
For thou hast made him but a little vnder Thy Angels bright, thy ministers of vvonder: Thou hast vvith vvealth, and honor girt him round, And thou hast him vvith glory richly crovvnd. Thou hast ordaind him Lord, and ruler ouer Thy handy vvorks vvhich all the vvorld doth couer, And all therin (as to thee seemed meet) Thou hast subdevvd beneath his regall fee. Both Oxen, Sheep, and euery kinde of cattell, VVhich on the hils, or on the playns imbattell: The sauage beasts, vvhich in the forrests breed, And vvhich in fields, or in the foulds do feed. The vvinged fovvls through ayrie regions flying, Fish in the Seas and riuers multiplying Through vvatry paths vvhat passeth great, or small, Thou vnto man hast them subiected all. Eternall God our Lord incomparable, Hovv excellent: and O hovv admirable Is thy great Name, vvith praises most deuout To be extold the spacious vvorld throughout. Psalme 9. Thanksgiuing. WIth all my heart O Lord most high, I vvill extoll and magnifie All thy great vvorks incomparable, VVhich vvondrous are, and admirable, In thee O Lord I vvill reioyce. VVith chearfull heart▪ and chearfull voyce: O thou most high thy Name relating, Ile sing, and praise it celebrating. Because by thy almighty might, Mine enemies are put to flight.
Dovvn shall they fall vvith fear surrounded, And at thy presence all confounded. For thou hast daignd my friend to stand, Thou hast vouchsaft to take in hand My guiltles cause, thy Throne ascending, As righteous Iudg, my cause defending. Thou hast rebukt the heathen rout, The vvicked ruind, raced out, Their fame their name extinct for euer, Repriued or reuiued neuer. Pause. Proud foe, vvhers novv our threatned spoil? Our cities leueld vvith the soil? And are their names vvith them consumed? Hast thou preuaild as vvas presumed? No no the Lord on high doth raign, VVhose kingdom euer shall remain, His regall throne he hath prepared VVhere iudgment iust shall be declared: Loe he vvill iudge, and iustly too, The vvorld, and all that vvorldlings doe: Yea, he vvith equall doome vvill duly All people censure, iust and truly. God vvill the refuge be, and ayd Of the opprest, and ouerlaid. Their refuge, and sure consolation, Euen in the midst of tribulation. And they that knovv thy holy Name, VVill put their vvhose trust in the same: For vvho himself to thee betaketh, Thy mercy Lord neuer forsaketh. Pause.
Sing thankfull praises to the Lord, Who dvvels in Sion, and record His high exploits, to nations, telling His great and glorious acts excelling. When he of guiltles bloud inquires, Remembring them he it requires: And neuer doth forget the crying Of the opprest, on him relying. Haue mercy Lord on me distrest, Consider hovv I am opprest By those that hate me thou that euer From gates of death dost me deliuer. That I in Sion may declare Thy praises all past all compare: Reioycing vvith intire affection In thy saluation and protection. The heathen folk into the pit Are faln themselues that digged it: Yea their ovvn feet are fast insnared, In hidden nets themselues prepared. And therby hath the Lord bin knovvn For hauing such a iudgment shovvn: In that the vvicked are surprised Euen in the snare themselues deuised. Pause. The vvicked all shall suffer vvrack, And headlong into hell fall back: And all the nations God forgetting, Their mindes vpon him neuer setting. For th' humble hearted poor shall not Be euerlastingly forgot: Nor shall the meek in tribulation For euer lose their expectation.
Arise O Lord, and let not still The proud preuail and haue their vvill▪ But vnto iudgment bring before thee The Gentiles vvhich do not adore thee. O Lord vvhose povvr is euery vvhere, Strike thou the nations all vvith fear: And make them knovv, O God immortall, They are but men, but mould, but mortall. Psalme x. Of prayer, and comfort. WHy dost thou Lord vvithdravv from vs thy grace? Why standest thou from vs departed far? Why hidest thou the fauor of thy face In troublous times of need and grieuous care? Inflam'd vvith rage and pride the vvicked are. To vex the poor, but let them be surprised In their ovvn plots malitiously deuised. The vvicked proud doth boast his hearts desire, When not to fail he findes his enterprise: The greedy rich he doth commend admire The couetous, vvhom God doth hate despise: The vvicked lookes so high so proud, his eyes Disdaine to seek for God, vvhom he neglecteth; In all his thoughts the Lord he nere respecteth. His vvayes succeed, alvvays to mischief tend; Far from his thoughts are all thy iudgments high Puft vp vvith pride, defiance he doth send Vnto his foe, puffs at his enemy:
Sayes in his heart nor fall nor fail shall I: My setled state shall be remoued neuer, I fear none ill, assur'd, secur'd for euer. His cursing mouth inur'd to periury, Is fully fraught vvith fraud, deceit and yes; His tong breeds grief, and broods iniquity, He priuily in theeuish corners pryes. VVithin his caue, in secret ambush lyes, The innocent he kils vvhom there he catcheth, His murdrous eye poor passengers still vvatcheth. Pause. He lurketh close, as in his secret denn The Lyon lyes, that sudden, vnavvares, He may intrap poor silly simple men: To catch, and snatch, and snap them in his snares: He crouching creeps, lovv couching dovvn he fares, That many poor vvhom he seeks to deuovvr, May fall into his clavves, strong pavves and povver. And he hath said this in his heart (grovvn hard) God hath forgot, vnmindfull sure is he, These matters he doth not at all regard, But hides his face, vnvvilling them to see: O Lord arise, that thy povver knovvn may be, Lift vp thy hand, send ayd, and consolation, Forget not thou the poor in tribulation. VVhy doth the levvd vilde vvretch prouoke Gods ire? Contemning him, so gratious, good, and kinde? And say ins heart thou vvilt not it require, But thou hast seen, this mischief out dost finde;
Spite to requite thy strong hand is inclinde: Therfore the poor seek thee, to be redressed, For thou dost help the fatherles distressed. Breake thou the arm, and ouerthrovv the might Of vvicked men, and of that euill one: His vvickednes search out, bring it to light; Cease not to seek, till more thou findest none; And novv the Lord our God is King alone. The Lord doth raign foreuer, king of glory, The heathen are driuen from his territory. Lord thou hast heard the humble mans desire, Thou vvilt prepare their heart on thee to rest, Them vvith thy spirit establish and inspire, And cause thine eare to hear their iust request, VVhile orphans vvrongs are all by thee redres, Their rightfull Iudg: so that the poor distressed By earthly man shall be no more oppressed. Psalme 11. Comfort. IN God, my hope of safety I haue placed: VVhy say ye then that I must take my flight To mountains high, for refuge, as birds chased? The vvicked loe, their bended bovv haue dight, And on the string their arrovvs set, lye lurking To shoot at them that be in heart vpright, Close out of sight their deadlie mischief vvorking. For if strong forts, foundations seēming stable Be all cast dovvn, and quite demolisht lye, To bring to pas vvhat are the righteous able?
The Lord in heau'n, his sacred palace high, Inthroned sits, and he from thence discryeth Mens children all, obseruing vvith his eye All their designes, their actions all he tryeth. The Lord doth proue the iust, and them approueth, But his soul hates them that vse violence, Abhorting him that vvrongfull dealing loueth. On vvicked men, his iust vvrath vvho incense, He raineth snares; he fire and brimstone shovvreth VVith burning storms of vvind for recompence, VVherof full cups he for their portion povvreth. The Lord is iust, and iustice he affecteth, In faithfull vvayes vvho vse all diligence To vvalk vpright, his countenance respecteth. Psalme 12. Prayer. SEnd help O Lord, thy speedy succor daigning, For vpright men departed are avvay: Among the sons of men are none remaining, VVho speak the truth, the faithfull do decay. Vain complement, lying, dissimulation, To their neer friends in all their speech they vse; VVith flattring lips, deceitfull conuersation, And double heart each other do abuse. The Lord of truth, all falshood vvho detecteth, Deceitfull lips that flatter, off shall cut; The God of povvr, vvho arrogance deiecteth, Their boasting tongs to silence dumb shall put. VVith our ovvn tongs, (say these imporious Masters) VVe vvill preuail, for lavv, our vvill shall stand: Our lips are ours, vve feare no crosse disasters, Who ouer vs is Lord, or shall command?
Euen for the poor mans plaint in tribulation, The vvastfull spoil of vveak and needy ones; Novv I vvill rise (saith God) and shevv saluation. They shall haue rest for I vvill hear their grones: The vvord of God, his promised saluation, Is sure more pure then gold, and siluer tride In fornace flames by perfect sublimation, Seuen times in fire refin'd and purifide. Those that to thee O Lord make supplication, Thou vvilt both help and keep in safety sure: Thou vvilt preserue them from this generation, In safgard they for euer shall endure. By vvicked men the righteous are surrounded, About they vvalk, here, there, on euery side; Vile men, and vice haue mightily abounded, Since they haue bin so highly dignifide. Psalme 13. Prayer HOvv long Lord vvilt thou me forget? For euermore? and vvilt thou let My prayer be remembred neuer? Lord vvilt thou hide thy face for euer, From me vvith vvoes and foes beset? Hovv long shall my soul carefully, Seek counsell in perplexity, With grief in heart daily consulting? Hovv long shall my proud foe insulting Triumph exalted ouer me? Consider Lord, my God most deare, Thy gratious ansvver let me hear, Inlighten vvith thy rayes bright shining, My eyes to vvatchfull life inclining, Lest I to sleep in death appear.
And lest my foe, that me assaild, Say, I haue ouer him preuaild. That they vvho me afflict and trouble, Their ioy and pleasure do not double, To see me quite cast dovvn and quaild. But I trust in thy clemency, My hope is euermore in thee: My heart shall ioy in thy saluation. Ile sing to God vvith exultation, Who bounteously revvarded me. Psalme 14. Doctrine. THe fool in heart, the holy God denyes: They are corrupt in all their enterprises, To be abhord in all their exercises: Good vvorks none do, nor therunto aduise, All are vnvvise. The Lord from heau'n the sons of men lookt on, To see if there vvere any vnderstanding To vvorship him, obeying his commanding. He searcht mankinde, to see if any one Sought God alone. But vvhen he had them fully searcht and tryde, He found they vvere become abhominable In all their vvorks, corrupt; and detestable: Not one doth good, none follovv God their guide, All vvander vvide. Are all that vvork iniquity, past sense? That hauing got my people in their povver, They them as bread do greedily deuovver. They call not on the Lord of povver immense, Through negligence.
There suddenly great feare did them oppres, They vvere cast dovvn vvith horrid consternation, For God is in the righteous generation: His grace doth saue all them that righteousnes. In heart possesse. Ye vvith reproch the poor and meek despise, Ye his designes and counsels haue disgraced: Because his trust in God the Lord is placed: For refuge he in danger to him flyes, On him relyes. From Sion vvho vvill vnto Israel, Saluation send? vvhen back the Lord returneth The grieuous thrall, vvherin his people mourneth: In gladnes then shall ioyfull Iacob dvvell, And Israel. Psalme 15. Doctrin. WHo is it Lord vvhich shall remain Within thy sacred tabernacle? To vvhom vvilt thou the fauor daigne? Whom shall thy mountain entertain To est in holy habitacle? It shall be he vndoubtedly, Who euermore vprightly vvalketh, And alvvay vvorketh righteously: Who in his hearts sincerity Doth speak the truth vvhen ere he talketh. Whose tong doth speak no infamy, Nor yet malitiously backbiteth: Nor doth his neighbour iniury: Whose eare vvill heare no obloquy, That vvith reproch his neighbour-smiteth.
Within vvhose eyes he that doth beare Himself debosht, is scorned euer, But they are grac'd vvho God do feare, Who doth perform vvhat he doth svveare, Though to his losse, yet changeth neuer. Who lends, but not for vsury: Who vpright iustice exerciseth: And sels it not by bribery. Who doth these things mou'd shall not be, A blest estate him eterniseth. Psalme 16. Thanksgiuing & prophecy. PReserue me Lord, be thou my help and ayd, For I do trust in thee my hope reposing. And thou my soul, this vnto God hast said, Thou art my Lord, I am at thy disposing, Of all the good thy bounty to me lendeth, No benefit at all to thee extendeth. But to thy Saints on earth vvho ex'lent be, All my delight in them is still inlarged, But they vvho haste to serue strange gods, not thee, With multitudes of plagues shall be surcharged: Nor shall my hands once touch their bloud oblation, Nor shall my lips of their name make relation, My portion Lord thou art, the heritance Assign'd to me, by thee am I sustained. Thou art my health, my vvealth, my lot, my chance, A pleasant place by thee I haue obtained. A goodly seat to me thy grace assureth. Which vnto me and mine for ay endureth. Pause.
The Lord be praisd, vvho hath so prudently o me aduice and counsell deep declared: My reines, my thoughts, and my affections he Euen in the night to schoole me hath prepared. Before me still the Lord I haue propounded: ince he's near hand, I shall not be confounded. Wherfore my heart doth ioy, vvith thanks, and praise, My glory makes my spirits glad relation: My soul her flesh in hopefull rest dovvn layes, With confidence expecting thy saluation. Thou vvilt not leaue my soul in graue, deep buried, or let thy Saint corruption see, interred. But from the tombe, aloft thou vvilt me raise, o triumph in a glorious resurrection: For thou vvilt shevv, and guide me to the vvayes Of life, vvhere ioyes abound in full perfection: Euen in thy paths, me to thy presence bringing, At thy right hand are pleasures euer springing. Psalme 17. Prayer. LOrd hear my right, and entertain My ernest suit for iustice crying, Thy eare vnto my prayer applying. I plead vvith lips that do not fain. Let my doom be by thee avvarded, Let it come forth iust Iudg from thee. And in thine eyes vvhich all things see, Let all the righteous be regarded. Thou in the night of my distres My heart hast visited and tryed.
But nothing in me hast discryed, Resolu'd my mouth shall not transgres, VVhat vvorks so ere men haue pursevved. Vnto thy Word I haue respect. VVhich hath in me vvrought this effect, That I destroyers paths eschevved. Vouchsafe my steps to stay and guide, For euer in thy paths approued, And neuer let my steps be moued, That from thy vvayes I neuer slide. Thou vvilt me heare, thy ansvver daigning, O Lord vvhen to thee pray I shall In perill vvhen to thee I call, Thine eare vvill heare my iust complaining. Thou mighty sauer of all those VVho haue their hope in thee reposed, Lord let thy mercies be disclosed, To saue them from their rising foes. Let me of safety rest assured, Keep me as th' apple of thine eye, In shade of thy vvings let me lye Hid there from danger safe secured. Pause. From vvicked men that scape I may, From cruell hands that doe oppres me, From mortall foes, that to distres me, Besiege me round, be set my vvay. In their ovvn fat they are inclosed, Their mouths vvith speeches proud abound
Our steps they haue novv compast round, Their eyes are dovvn on earth reposed. 12 Like as a Lyon vvhich doth spy His prey, runs svvift to seaze it speedy, Or Lyons vvhelp vvith hunger greedy, In secret caue doth lurking lye. Raise vp thy selfe, him dovvn deiect thou, Preuent and disappoint him Lord, From vvicked men vvho are thy svvord, My soul deliuer, and protect thou. Lord let thy povvrfull hand me saue From men of this vvorlds fading glory, VVhich is but vain and transitory, Who in this life their portion haue. Whose panch thou fill'st vvith thy hid treasure, Of sons and daughters full tey be, And leaue to their posteritie The rest of their vvealths plenteous measure. But I shall vievv thy gracious sight, In righteousnes being iustified: I vvakened, shall be satisfied With thy most glorious image bright. Psalme 18. Thanksgiuing & prophecy. THee vvill I loue vvith heart pure affection, O Lord my strength, and my most sure protection. God is my rock, my refuge, my defence, My Sauiour dear, my hope, my confidence.
My God, my strength, the horn of my saluation, My trust, my shield, my strong fortification. I on the LORD most vvorthy praise vvill call: And so from all my foes be sau'd I shall. The pangs of death did round about dismayme, And torrents strong of vvicked men did fray me. Encompast round vvith sorrovves of the graue, The snares of death my life preuented haue. In my distres I to the LORD applyed My ernest prayrs, loud to my GOD I cryed, He heard my voyce out of his Temple high, And my complaint vp to his eares did flye. Incontinent the earths foundation quaked. His vvrath the hils and mighty mountaines shaked: All trembling they exceedingly vvere mou'd, For he vvas vvroth, and vnto anger mou'd, His nostrils smoke, and vapor from them povvred, Out of his mouth the flaming fire deuovvred, His burning ire like lightning forth did fly, That coles of fire euen kindled vvere therby. He bovvd the heaun's, & dovvn from thence descended Beneath his feet dark misty clouds extended. On Cherubins he riding mounted high, And on the vvings of svvift vvinds he did fly. Pause. Black gloomy clouds vvith darknes him did couer, And as a tent about him, hong all ouer. Aahining light that bright before him vvas, The heas of clouds disperst avvay did passe.
Hail mixt vvith fire, amaz'd the vvorld vvith vvonder: The Lord from heau'n threvv forth his bolts of thunder, The most high God sent forth his voyce, vvhose ire Cast lightnings forth, hailstones and coles of fire. His shafts he shot their troups disperst distrayed, His lightnings he threvv forth, and them dismaied. At thy rebuke O LORD, and at the blast That vvhirlvvind like, thy nostrils forth did cast. The chanels void of vvaters, vvere espyed, Foundations of the vvorld vvere bare discryed. From heau'n he sent to take me safe to keep, And drevv me out of many vvaters deep. He set me free from my strong foe remoued, From hatefull foes too strong for me, vvho proued Me in distres, vnvvares they did preuent, But then the Lord my stay, me succour sent. He brought me forth, set free in place most spatious, Because to me he pleased to be gratious. As I vvas iust, the LORD did me regard, And as my hands vvere clean, did me revvard. Because the vvayes of God I had obserued, And haue not from him as the vvicked svverued. His iudgments all before me vvere alvvay His lavves from me I did not put avvay. I vpright vvas vvith him, clear and vnstained. And from my sin my self strictly restrained. GOD did revvard me as I vvas vpright, And as my hands vvere clean in his eye sight. Pause. VVith gracious men, thou to be gracious louest, Good to the good, iust to the iust thou prouest, Pure to the pure, kinde thou art to the kinde, But frovvard men shall thee as frovvard finde. For thou vvilt saue thy people poor afflicted, But vvilt cast dovvn high lookes to pride addicted, The LORD my GOD vvill giue my candle light, And make my night, as day shine clear and bright. For I brake through the battaile by thy povver, By thee my God I leapt ore vvall and tovver. The vvay and vvord of God is perfect tride, As gold in fire refinde and purifide. He is a shield, and fort of strong resistance
To all that trust in him and his assistance. For vvho is GOD, besides the LORD of might? Who is a rock▪ but God that iudgeth right? With strength God girds me, high atchieuements daring Before me strayt and clear my vvay preparing. He makes my feet to run svvift as the Hinde, Sets me on high vvhere places safe I finde. Such vvarlike skill he teacheth me, tis vvonder, Makes my armes breake a bovv of steel in sunder. Thou hast giu'n me thy strong saluations shield, And thy right hand hath firmly me vpheld. Thy gentlenes my errors rectifying, Hath made me great in goodnes multiplying. My steps thou hast made steddy, large and vvide, From vnderme, that my feet did not slide. My foes I chas'd and ouertooke them flying, I turnd not back, till they were dead or dying. I vvounded them, they could not rise at all, Beneath my feet I made them dovvn to fall. Pause. Thou hast girt me vvith vvarlike strength endevved And vnderme hast all my foes subdevved. Thou hast giu'n me my foes necks subiugate, That I might them destroy that me doe hate. They cry'd for ayd, but there vvas none to saue them, They calld to God, but he no ansvver gaue them. Before the vvinde as dust I bet them small, I cast them out as dirt i'th street to fall. Thou hast me sau'd from their rage that inuade me, Ore Nations thou to rule as head hast made me. A people strange vvhom I did neuer knovv, Shall vnto me submissiue seruice shovv. When they shall heare of me vvithout delaying, Strangers shall yeeld me homage-faind obeying. Strange children vvhich in secret places dvvell, To vanish from their sorts, feare shall compell. LIue blessed LORD, my strong fortification, Exalted be the God of my saluation. With vengeance iust the LORD my foes pursevvs, Ad vder me the people he subdevvs. I from my foes am freed by thy protection, Ore them that make against me insurrection.
Thou hast me raisd and safe deliuerd me From violence of men that cruell be. Therfore my GOD among the heathen Nation, Ile praise thy Name vvith thankfull gratulation. It is the LORD our GOD omnipotent, Who to his King hath great deliuerance sent. VVho mercy hath, to Dauid his anointed, And to his race for euermore appointed. Psalme 19. Doctrin. THe heau'ns so framed are, That they to all declare GOD'S glory doth excell. The skyes and firmament, Bright, clear, and permanent, His handy vvork doth tell. Day vnto day doth teach, And of the LORD do preach, His vvondrous povvr relating: Night vnto night doth shovv, That euery one may knovv. His vvisdome them creating. Ther is no speech nor land, But doth this vnderstand. Though it far distant lyes: Yet doth it hear the noise, Acknovvledging the voice, And language of the skyes, Their line and vvords extend.
To earths remotest end, Throughout the vvorld directing. VVherin he for the Sun, Built a pauilion, Bright radiant rays reflecting. Who like a braue bridegrom, Fresh from his chamber com, When he abroad appeares, As champion stout of hart, Doth ioy to act his part, To run his race him cheares, He setting forth to goe His iourney to and fro, From heau ns remotest ending, Huge circle runs amain, Till he returns again His heat to all extending. Pause. The Lavv of God the Lord Most perfect is, his Word The soul vvith life supplyes. His testimonies true, With vvisdome do indue, The simple making vvise. Of God, the LORD of might. The statutes all are right, The heart vvith ioy relieuing, The LORDS comands are pure, Directing safe and sure, Vnto the eyes light giuing. The vvorship and the fear Of him do cleane appeare, To perpetuitie. The iudgments of the LORD, With truth and right accord, All full of equitie. They are to be admir'd, And more then gold desir'd, Then much fine gold beloued, Then hony that doth come From dropping hony comb. To tast more svveet approued. Therby also from sins, Th seruant vvarnd begins,
To stand vpon his guard, For vvho vvith vvisdom deep, Doth them obserue and keep, Obtaineth great revvard. The errors of mans life, So many are and rife, Who can knovv them reuealed? Clense me from crimes vnknovvn. Lest I be ouerthrovvn By secret sins concealed, From sins presumptuous bold, Thy seruant LORD vvith-hold, Let them rot domineer, So shall I freedom vvin, From guilt of greatest sin, And innocent appeare. Let all my thoughts & vvords Which heart or mouth affords, Finde gracious acceptation, My strength consists in thee, Thou hast redeemed me, LORD GOD of my saluation. Psalme 20. Prayer. WHen thou dost pray, the Lord attend thee In thy necessity. The Name of Iacobs God defend thee In thy aduersity. He send thee help, thy cause maintaining Against thine aduersary. He strengthen thee, thy state sustaining. From Sions Sanctuary. Let him remember thy oblation, Thy offrings vvhen they burn,
In signe of gracious acceptation, Heau ns fire to ashes turn, According as thy heart desireth, Let him to grant be vvilling, Thy counsels all vvhich he inspireth, Effectually fulfilling. VVe vvill reioyce in thy saluation, And in GODS Name vvill vve Our flags display in exultation, Thy prayrs GOD grant to thee. I knovv the Lord saues his annointed, From heau'n his holy tovver Doth hear his prayr and hath appointed Help by his hand of povver. Our enemies to be victorious, In horse and charrets trust▪ But vve inuoke the Name most glorious Of GOD the LORD most iust. They are cast dovvn and quite amated▪ They headlong fell deiected; But vve are raised, animated, And stand vpright erected. O LORD do thou saue and defend vs, Let him vvho is our King, The day vve call, an ansvver send vs, Which may vs comfort bring. Psalme 21. Thanksgiuing. THe King O Lord in thy great might, Doth ioy vvith exultation. Triumphs in thy saluation. O vvhat exceeding great delight In him alvvay remains That thy grace him maintains.
Thou freely gau'st him large supply, Of all his heart desired, And his high state required: Thou nothing to him dost deny, But strayt he is possest Of that his lips request. To vnaspired high renovvn, Thy goodnes him presented, Thy blessings him preuented: Thou gau'st to him a royall crovvn Of pure fine gold compos'd, Vpon his head impos'd. He asked only life of thee, VVho art God euerliuing, And by thy bounteous giuing, He life receiu'd perpetually, Euen length of blessed dayes, VVhich shall endure alvvayes. VVith honor great he is arayd, And vvith high exaltation, By meanes of thy saluation, Thy bounty hath vpon him layd Imperiall dignity And glorious maiesty. For thou vvith thy abundant grace, VVhereof he is possessed, Hast made him euer blessed, And thou hast shevved him thy face, Thy fauor vvhich he had, Made him exceeding glad. Because the king vvith constancy, Vpon the Lord relyeth, VVith faith on him affyeth, Through mercy and benignity Of God most high approu'd, He neuer shall be mou'd. Pause. Thy enemies, thy povverfull hand Shall finde out, hauing found them, Shall punish and confound them: Those vvho vvith hate against thee stand,
Thy povvr thou vvilt imploy, To finde out and destroy. Thou vvhen thy angry heat shall fume, As in an ouen shalt burne them, And into ashes turne them: The Lord in vvrath shall them consume, And svvallovv in his ire, Deuovvring them vvith fire. Thou shalt destroy the fruit they breed, From off the earth out-race them, And finally deface them: Thou shalt abolish all their seed, Cut off their memory, From all posterity. For they against thee enterprise Mischieuous machinations In their imaginations: But they their vvicked vain deuice, VVhich they do vndertake, Effectuall cannot make. Therfore thy foes turn back vvith shame Thee to affront, not daring Thy shafts on string preparing! Their backs as Buts make thou thy aime, As marks their faces lay, VVheron thy shafts may play. Be thou exalted mighty LORD, In thy ovvn strength and glory, So thy renovvned story, In songs and Psalmes vve shall record▪ VVe shall the praise recite Of thy great povvr and might. Psalme 22. Prayer and prophecy. MY GOD my GOD, vvhy leau'st thou me distre? O vvhy hast thou forsaken me opprest? Far from my ayd and cryes to thee exprest, Thy selfe detayning All day my GOD, to thee my voyce high straining, Thou hear'st me not, to me no ansvver daigning, All right I call to thee, no time restraining, re no space.
Thou holy art, and thy ovvn resting place, Thy Temple is thy only sauing grace Of Israel▪ and to the faithfull race, The crovvn of praises. Our fathers in afflictions greatest mazes, Trusted in thee, and in thy loue that blazes, Light to the vvorld this from their thraldom, raises Their libertie. Out of this faith they cry'd a lovvd to thee, Thy ansvvers their deliuerances be, They of their trust in thy fidelitie, VVere not ashamed. But I as if I had not man bin framed, Am as a vvorm, the scorn of men defamed. Reuilde, reproacht, endure the rage vntamed Of peoples spight. Pause. All they that look vpon my vvretched plight, Laugh me to scorn, make movves the lip they bite, And nod the head, insulting at the sight: My torments eying. Vpon his God, say they, vvas his relying, Of vvhich his trust novv is the time of trying, Novv let him saue him if that his out crying Approach his eare. VVhen in her vvomb my mother did me beare, From thence to thee thou didst me take, and vvhere My infancy suckt natures vigor there, Mad'st me belieuing. Then vvas I cast on thee for my relieving, Euen since the time of that my mothers grieuing, VVhen from the vvomb thou tookst me, succor giuing, My GOD thou art,
VVithdravv not thou thy face, nor far depart VVhen troubles great do dravv so nigh my hart: For there is none but thou that can impart, Help that is speeding, VVith foes vvhose strength and riches are excee Fierce like youg Buls of high and mighty feeding, Like Buls that had on Basahils their breeding, I am beset. Like Lyons fierce, vvho vvith sharp honger vvhet, Run rampant, roare, and raue their prey to get: Their gaping mouthes they did vvide open set, Me to haue eaten. Like vvater spilt I am, vvhile me they threaten, And all my bones seeme as in sunder beaten My heart like vvax melts vvith the fires that greaten Vpon my feares. Pause. My moysture like a potsheard dry'd appeares, My silent tong to my mouthes roof adheares, And in the graue, the dead to dust that vveares, Thou hast me placed. Dogs hem me in, that haue my footsteps traced▪ The rudest rout that cruell deeds imbraced, Inclose me round, transfixing they defaced My hands and feet. VVith leannes all my flesh avvay doth fleet, That I can tell my bones; yet vvhen I meet My cruell foes, their eyes my sorrovves greet VVith scornfull staring My garments they among them fall to sharing, My seamles coat to cut in pieces sparing, They keep it vvhole, and try by lots, declaring VVhose it shall be.
But O my God, be thou not far from me▪ Thou art my strength, I only rest on thee, Therfoe make haste to let thy seruant see Thy succor speedy Saue from the edge of death my grassy, reedy, And helplesse life, my darling poore and needy: Let not these dogs so hatefull fierce and greedy, At once deuovvr. From Lyons mouthes, that threaten euery hovvr To svvallovv me and from the horned povvr Of Vnicornes guard me, thou art my tovvr Of preseruation: I vvill declare to brethren of my Nation, Thy sacred Name, and sing of thy saluation, In midst of all the holy congregation VVhich thus Ile raise. O ye that feare the LORD, exalt his praise, Ye Iacobs seed, extoll him in your layes, And O ye race of Israel, let your vvayes Shevv that ye feare him. For he nere scornd nor hated to vpreare him, VVho vvas brought lovv, afflicted, vvho drevv neare him, Nor hid his face from him, nor loath'd to heare him VVhen he did cry. My voyce among the multitude shall fly VVingd vvith thy praise, and in the open ey Of those that feare thy Name, O Lord, vvill I, My vovves deliuer, In feasts of ioy the meek and patient liuer, Shall feed his fill, and those that seek the giuer Of this high grace shall praise the Lord▪ for euer Your soules liue shall. Vnto the Lord shall be conuerted all The coasts of earth vvhen they to minde him call, And all the tribes of men to thee shall fall In adoration. For vvith suprem and soueraign exaltation, The LORD is crovvnd, and euery high gradation Of royaltie is his, and ore each Nation He beareth svvay. All that are rich, shall sacrifice and pray, All that dovvn to the graue do goe their vvay,
Shall bovv to him, and those that rotting lay, Past all reuiuing. Their seed that are still after them suruiuing, His seruants shall become, by his atchieuing, A people vvho are counted euer liuing Vnto the Lord. And they shall of his righteousnes bring vvord. To folk vvhose birth shall aftertimes afford, And make them knovv that he vvhom they ador'd, Deserues belieuing. Psalme 23. Thanksgiuing. THe liuing LORD, me euer louing feedeth, My Pastor true, my soul novv nothing needeth, He leads me forth in fields and foulds inclosing, Of plenteous food by fountains clear reposing, My soul reuiues vvhere he me safely leadeth For his Names sake in right paths my foot treadeth. Though in the vale of deaths shade I vvalk straying▪ There dreadles I shall be vvithout dismaying: For LORD vvith me, my comfort thou remainest, Thou vvith thy rod and staffe my life sustainest. A table rich vvell furnisht setst before me, Euen in the face of foes that hatred bore me. VVith precious oyl, my head thou hast anointed. My cup vvell filld, and all things vvell appointed. Thy fauors thou to me art alvvayes giuing. Thou daignst to me such grace vvhile I am liuing, That I on thee in thy ovvn house attending, Shall praise thy Name O LORD, vvorld vvithout ending.
THe earth belongs vnto the LORD, VVith all the store it doth afford, VVhat in the vvorld hath scituation. For on the flouds he plac'd the land, VVhich on the vvaters firm doth stand, Establisht on a sure foundation. LORD to thy hill, vvho shall ascend? VVho shall remain vvorld vvithout end VVithin thy sacred mountain placed? VVhose hand or heart, nought can defile, Whose mouth hath neuer svvorn to guile, VVhose soul vain things hath not imbraced. He of the LORD shall sure be blest, Of righteousnes shall be possest, Euen from the GOD of his saluation. Of those that Iacobs GOD inquire, Who seek his face, and him desire, This is the blessed generation. Ye gates your heads aloft vphould, Eternall dores yourselues vnfould, The king of glory entertaining. Who is the King so glorious? The Lord most strong and valerous, The LORD in battell mighty raigning. Your heads aloft ye Gates vpraise, Stand vp eternall Dores alvvayes, To entertain the King of glory. Who is the King so glorious? The LORD of Hoasts victorious, He only is the King of glory.
Psalme xxv. Alphabeticall Prayer. ALl my hearts desire is raised To thee LORD, I trust in thee, Let me neuer be disgraced, Nor my foes ioy ouer me. By thy grace, do thou protect Them from shame, vvhich do attend thee, But confound, vvith shame deiect Them that causelesly offend thee. Cause me LORD to be instructed In the knovvledge of thy vvay. Let me safely be conducted, In thy paths that vvalk I may. Do thou guide me in the vvord Of thy truths cleare declaration: For thou art my help O Lord, And my daily expectation. Euer thou art good and gracious, Call thy mercy still to minde, For thy loue is large and spacious, Thou hast euermore been kinde. Faults and follies of my youth. Holy LORD do not remember, For thy goodnes and thy ttuth; Deale vvith me in mercy tender▪ Good and holy in perfection, Iust and righteous is the LORD, Therefore he vvill giue direction Vnto sinners by his vvord. He vvill make in iudgment tread, Humblemen truly conuerted.
GOD vvill teach and safely lead In his vvayes the lovvly hearted. Pause Iustice, mercy, and saluation Are the paths of God the Lord, Vnto those vvhose conuersation Is still guided by his vvord. Keep me from iniquity, For thy Names sake Lord relieue me, My sin great and many be Shevv thy mercy and forgiue me. Let that man be vvell assured, VVhoso feares the Lord of might, That he shall be taught inured In the vvay he doth delight. Moued neuer shall he be, But at rest in minde and spirit, Likevvise his posteritie Shall the plenteous land inherit. Novv Gods secret is vnsealed Vnto them that him do feare, Knovvledge is to them reuealed, VVho in heart his couenant beare. On the Lord my heart is set, Alvvayes him my eye beholdeth, He my feet dravves from the net, If I slide, he me vpholdeth. Poore I am, do not forsake me, But O Lord shevv me thy face, From this great affliction take me, Shevv thy mercy and thy grace. Quit me free from my hearts grief, VVhich augmenting doth distres me: Send deliuerance and relief From all troubles that oppres me. Restles grief of my vexations, Lord behold and pitty me, Many are my molestations, Let my sins all pardoned be. See O Lord mine enemies, Mightily are multiplied, Offring me great iniuries, VVith fell hate they me enuyed.
Thou LORD keep my soul vnblamed, From all ill deliuer me, That I do not blush ashamed, My hope euer is in thee. Vpright and intire keep me, For I vvait on thee depending, LORD from all aduersitie, Saue thy Israel him defending. Psalme 26. Prayer. O LORD GOD, iudg thou me, For in integritie, I vvalked haue, and so abide, In God I trust assured, Who hath me safe secured, Therfore I shall not fall nor slide. Let thy al-plercing eye, O LORD me serch and try, Proue thou my reins, my heart, my minde, Of euery cogitation: Make strict examination, Take notice hovv I am inclinde. For I thy mercy place, Before my eyes thy grace Doth euermore before me bide, And in thy truths direction, I vvalk vvith circumspection, Thy veritie my steps doth guide. By all meanes I eschevv, The levvd inconstant crevv: With them I sit not that are vain, Who vse dissimulation Within their habitation, I neither enter nor remain.
Euen from my heart I hate Th'assemblies congregate, Of them that vvorke iniquitie, Their courts shall not be hanted, Nor vvill I be acquainted Nor bide vvith them that vvicked be. Pause. My hands pure innocent, To thee I vvill present Washt cleane and cleare they shall be found, And so vvith sacrifices And sacred exercises Thy altar LORD vvill I surround. That all may heare the noyse Of my thanksgiuing voyce, Thy honor I vvill celebrate, Thy vvorkes incomparable, Thy vvonders admirable, To all abroad I vvill relate. I loued haue O GOD, The place of thy abode, Of most renovvned high account, And vvhere thy Honor dvvelleth, The glorious house excelleth My loue thereto doth all surmount. To thee I humbly pray, Take not my life avvay, Inuolu'd vvith sinners vild accurst, But let my soul be spared, When fury is prepared Their bloud to shed, vvho bloud do thirst. Within vvhose traitrous hand, Mischieuous plots do stand, VVho study falsly to accuse, VVhose right hand detestable, With bribes abhominable, Is filled, iustice to abuse. But I vvith vpright heart VVill vvalk and not depart From my sincere integritie, ign thou so to esteeme me,
Vouchsafe thou to redeeme me, And be thou gracious vnto me. By thy assisting hand, My feet do firmly stand In plained paths of righteousnes, I in the congregation, VVith thankfull adoration. The Lord my God vvill praise and bles. Psalme 27. Thanksgiuing. THe Lord God is my light and my saluation. Then vvho is he that can make me affraid? The Lord is my lifes strong fortification, VVhat then is he that can make me dismaid▪ VVhen vvicked men approached against me To eat my flesh, my cruell deadly foes, My enemies, vvhose hate did me oppose, They stumbled then, and fell dovvn fearfully. Though mighty hoasts vvith all their force surround me. Yet shall my heart fear nothing nor distrust, Though vvars arise and foes seek to confound me, Yet confident in this still I vvill trust. I of the Lord this one thing humbly craue, And daily this vvill I seek to obtain, That all the dayes of my life vvhich remain, In Gods house I may my abiding haue. There to behold in sacred contemplation, The beauty of hjs Temple I desire.
To visit there his holy habitation, VVith diligence attending to inquire. For he in time of trouble vvill me hide Within his tent vvhen dangers me assault▪ In secret of his house: he vvill exalt And set me safe vpon a rocke to bide. Pause. And novv my head shall be high eleuated Aboue my foes, about me circling round: Therfore vvill I in Gods house animated, Sing, sacrifice, reioyce, his praise resound. Lord hear my voyce, giue eare vnto my cry, Grant my request, and to me gracious be: Haue mercy Lord, vvith fauor ansvver me, To this my suit vouchsafe thou to reply. When first thou spakst these vvords of fauor saying, Seek ye my face, encourag'd by thy grace, My heart strait vvays thy iust cōmand obaying, This vovv replyd, Lord I vvill seek thy face. Then far from me thy face O do not hide, In vvrath from thee thy seruant do not chase: My helper thou hast bin in euery place, Forsake me not, my health, my God, my guide. Though Parents both abandon and reiect me, The Lord vvill me to his tuition take. By foes opprest in thy vvay Lord direct me, Teach me thy path, it plain before me make. Commit me not vnto mine enemies. Let them not vvork on me their ovvn desires, False vvitnes rise against me, shameles lyers They be, and breath out vvong and cruelties. My heart vvould faint, but that I haue reposed My confidence O Lord vpon thy vvord: To see thy grace and goodnes great disclosed, Euen in the land of life by thee O Lord. Wait thou on God, him patiently attend, With courage bould quit manfully thy part, The Lord thy God, make strong thy valiant heart, Wait on the Lord, for he vvill thee defend.
Psalme xxvlij. Prayer. O LORD, my strong fortification, To thee I make my supplication, Be not as deaf or silent to me, Lest thy long silence quite vndo me, And I my self to them compare, That in the graue deep buried are. Heare thou my voyce, to thee directed, VVhen I do cry vvith hands erected, Tovvards thy most holy place elected. My God let me not be reiected VVith vvorkers of iniquitie, VVith vvicked men destroy not me. Whose vvords speak peace, but harts malitious Do hide and harbor hate pernicious. According to their deeds regard them, And as their merits are, revvard them▪ As they deserue, pay them their hire, Such vvages as their vvorks require. Because vvith diligence they learn not, To knovv Gods vvorks, and them discern not, Nor his hands mighty operation He vvill them ruin to desolation. His force to fall shall them constrain, And neuer build them vp again. The LORD our God be euer blessed, VVho heard my voyce to him addressed. GOD is my strength, he me defendeth, My help on him, my shield, dependeth, Therfore my hearts ioy doth abound, His praise vvith thanks my song shall sound.
God is their strength, and hath appointed Deliuerance to his king anointed. Saue thou thy people, thy ovvn nation, Be thou the strength of their saluation, Vouchsafe to bles thine heritance, Them euer guide, feed and aduance. Psalme 29. Doctrine. ALl ye Princes, mighty States, Monarchs, Kings, and Potentates, Render to the Lord his right, Glory, Maiesty, and might. To his Name most honorable, Render praises ansvverable: VVorship God performe this duty, In his house of sacred beauty. Ore the vvaters roring noyse, Is the Lords most mighty voyce. God most glorious from his seat, Thunders ore the vvaters great. Gods most mighty voice preuaileth Euer povverfull, neuer faileth. Gods voyce all subdevveth vnder, Full of maiesty and vvonder. VVhen the voyce of God doth speake, Strong tall Cedars it doth breake. VVhen the Lord his voyce extends, It the Leban Cedars rends. By the roots torn vp he shakes them, Like a Calf to skip he makes them. Leban mounts, and Shiryon danced, Like yong Vnicornes they pranced.
Gods voyce dreadfull doth abide, Flames of fire it doth diuide. Deserts it to tremble makes, Kadesh vvildernes it shakes. His voyce, Hindes so terrifieth, That their fruit abortiue dyeth. His voyce forrests flying ouer, Suddenly doth them discouer. They that in his Temple be, Speak his praises ioyfully: All that in his house do dvvell, Of his glorious acts do tell. God his mighty povver shovveth On the floud that ebbs and flovveth. Sitting on his throne supernall, God the Lord is King eternall. VVherfore God the Lord of might, VVill maintain his peoples right. God his people vvill increase, He vvill bles them all vvith peace. Psalme 30. Thanksgiuing. I VVill exalt thee Lord vvith praise, For thou from troubles didst me raise, And hast not suffered them that be My foes, to triumph ouer me; Therefore thou shalt be magnified And euer highly glorified. O Lord my God, I cry'd to thee, And thou to health restoredst me. Lord vvhen for ayd I thee besought, Thou from the graue my soule hast brought.
Thou hast kept me aliue, reuiu'd me, From going dovvn the pit repriu'd me. Ye Saints vvho God so good haue found, Sing Psalms to him, his praise resound, His holines commemorate. For he his vvrath doth mitigate, VVhich in a moment is appeased, His anger suddenly is ceased. But vvho are vvith his fauor grac't, Blest life inioy, vvhich ay shall last, Though euening sorrovves cause ye vveep, And grief all night, ye restles keep: Yet vvhen the morning light appeareth, Refreshing ioy, vvith comfort cheareth. Pause. When I vvas in prosperity, I said I neuer mou'd shall be, For euer I am safe and sure, Thou LORD vvhose fauor doth endure, Hast, by thy grace to me applyed, My mountain strongly fortified. VVhen thou didst hide from me thy face, I troubled and afflicted vvas. Then vnto thee O LORD I prayd, Complaining to my God, I said, VVhat profit by my bloud is gotten, VVhen in the graue I shall ly rotten? VVhat vvorthy praise shall dust afford? Shall ashes glorifie thee Lord? Can rottennes thy truth declare? Vouchsafe O LORD, to hear my prayr? On me take thou commiseration, LORD be my helper, my saluation. Then thou to ioy my griefe didst turn: And vvhen in sackcloth I did mourn, Thou tookst it off, and girtst me round VVith pleasures pure, thy praise to sound. Il sing thy praise LORD, ceasing neuer, My God Ile giue thee thanks for euer.
Psalmē xxxj. Prayer. IN thee alone O Lord my trust is, My hope is in thy Name, Let me not suffer shame: But me deliuer in thy iustice, VVhen trouble me assaileth, For thy vvord neuer faileth. VVith tender pitty and compassion, Bovv dovvn thy care to me, Me soone from dangers free: Be thou my strong fortification, From troubles all secure me, Of thy defence assure me. Thou art my fortres and my tovver, VVhere I may safe abide, For thy Name sake me guide. Pull me out by thy mighty povver, From nets they hide to take me, Thou art my strength, safe make me. My soul into thy hands I tender, Thou hast redeemed me, Lord God of veritie. I trust in thee, Lord my defender: All vanities defying, I hate them that loue lying. I vvill be glad in thy saluation, Thy mercy doth me fill VVith ioy, praise thee I vvill. Thou hast knovvn me in tribulation, My troubled soul hast vievved, And hovv it vvas pursevved: Thou hast not let me be inclosed VVithin their cruell povvr, That vvould my soul deuovvr. My fee from bands thou hast vnlosed,
And to me being gracious, Mad'st my roome large and spacious. Haue mercy LORD, my soul relieuing, For in distres am I, Consumed is mine eye, And fretted sore vvith pain and grieuing, My soul vvith grief doth languish, My belly pines vvith anguish. My life is spent, vvhile I bevvaile me, With grief in sighs and teares Consumed are my yeares: Because of sin, my strength doth fail me, So long affliction lasteth, That all my bones it vvasteth. Pause. My enemies that hatred beare me, Haue sought me to defame, Reproaching me vvith shame: My neighbours and acquaintance feare me, They that vvithout did spy me Far off, avvay did fly me. I am as dead, and deep interred, Quite out of minde forgot, Or as a broken pot: For many great ones me deterred, I heard their shamefull rayling On all sides, feare assayling. In all their crafty consultation, Against me they conspire, To kill me they desire: But my trust is in thy saluation, I said O LORD eternall, Thou art my GOD supernall. In thy hands are my times decreed, From my fierce enemy, Do thou deliuer me: From my foes hands let me be freed, From all that do distres me, And cruelly oppres me.
On me thy seruant, shine refulgent, In fauor shevv thy face, O saue me by thy grace. In mercy be to me indulgent, LORD let no shame light on me, For I do call vpon thee. But let the vvicked be ashamed, And in the silent graue, Their mouthes stopt let them haue. Their lips strike dumb, that lyes haue framed, Who righteous men reuiled, With slanders foul defiled, What goodnes great incomparable, Hast thou for them in store, Which thee in feare adore. Thou hast vvrought vvonders admirable, For them to all disclosed, Who trust in thee reposed. Before thee in thy habitation, Thou safely vvilt them hide From foes outragious pride. Thy Tents shall daign them preseruation, Kept safe by thy preuention, From slandrous tongs contention. The LORD be praisd & magnified, For vvondrous svveet and kinde To me I him do finde. For in a City fortified, He hath kept me immured, In time of vvar secured. I rashly said in my vexation, I am depriued quite Of thy al-blessing sight. But thou didst heare my supplication, VVhen vnto thee I cryed, My suit vvas not denyed. Ye Saints loue ye the LORD all-blessed, For he the faithfull gards, The proud vvith scorn revvards. Ye meek of courage be possessed, Their hearts GOD fortifyeth, Whose trust in him relyeth.
Psalme xxxij. Prophecy, IN blessed state he euermore remaineth, VVho of his sins, forgiuenesse free obtaineth. VVhose trespasses shall neuer be reuealed, And vvhose offence shall euer be concealed. Thrice happy is that man to be reputed, To vvhom his sins the LORD hath not imputed▪ Within vvhose soul doth dvvell integrity, Free from all fraud, guile, and hypocrisie. VVhen silence I did keep from speech long ceasing, My hainous sins concealed, not confessing, My flesh and bones consumed, as vvith age, And all day long roaring vvith torments rage For day and night thy hand me sore distressed, Thy heauy plagues incessant me oppressed. So vvasted vvas my natiue moisture spent, It did the drought of summer represent. Then I to thee my trespasses confessed, And freely my transgressions I expressed. LORD I vvill shevv (said I) my faults to thee, And thou forgau'st my sins iniquitie. For this each one thy grace and glory minding▪ By prayr shall seek thy face in time of finding, The vvaues of vvoe to him shall not come neare, Afflictions stouds he needeth not to feare. Pause. My refuge sure thou art, me secret hiding, From trouble thou shalt keep me safe abiding,
For giuing me deliuerance by thy grace, VVith songs of ioy thou vvilt me round imbrace. Come thou to me that so I may instruct thee, And in the vvay that thou shalt goe, conduct thee: Thee to direct, my counsell thou shalt try, And I vvill guide thee alvvay vvith mine eye. Be not like them vvho haue no vnderstanding, Like horse and mule, vvhom vvithout bit commanding▪ Thou canst not rule, vvhose mouth must be restrained, With bit or spur, to stay or goe constrained. With many griefs the vvicked shall be vexed, With sorrovves great they shall be all perplexed: But in the LORD, vvho all his trust doth place, Compassion shall him compas and imbrace. Be glad ye iust, and in the LORD take pleasure, Reioyce in GOD, vvho is your comforts treasure: All ye that are in faithfull heart vpright, Shout ye aloud for ioy vvith true delight. Psalme 33. Doctrine. WIth ioyfull shouts, peals gladly ringing, Ye righteous in the LORD reioyce: It vvell becoms you his praise singing. Praise ye the LORD vvith Harp and voice: Making musick meetest, Consorts sounding svveetest On the Psalterie, VVith ten strings resounding, Sing Psalms to him sounding, Praise his Name vvith glee. Sing to the LORD vvith voice melodious, In nevv songs shevv his praise, your ioyes,
Play skilfully vvith sounds harmonious, Triumphantly vvith lovvdest noyse. For Gods Word delightfull, Is most iust and rightfull: His vvorks thfull bide, All things he composeth, Faithfully disposeth, Them in truth doth guide. He righteousnes for euer loueth, And Iudgment iust doth please his vvill, The earth his bounteous mercy proueth, The Lords great goodnes doth it fill. GODS Word heau'n created, On high scituated: When the vvord he said, His mouth on them breathed, He their form bequeathed, All their Host he made. Pause. The vvaters he vp heaps together, VVithin the Sea by povvr diuine, The deeps he keeps all flovving thither, Stor'd vp vvithin his magazine. Then let all earth feare him, And high reuerence beare him, Who is GOD the LORD, In the vvorld all dvvelling, Feare his povvr excelling, Tremble at his vvord. For vvhat he said, it vvas fulfilled, It vvas performed readily, And vvhat his sacred vvord had vvilled, It stood remaining steadily. Heathen enterprises, Counsels and deuises, GOD doth dissipate Peoples consultations Wicked machinations He doth nihilate. The Lords most sacred cogitations, Shall stand for euer firm and sure, His counsels through all generations
And thoughts of his heart ay endure. Blessed is that Nation, People, Congregation, Whose GOD is the LORD: VVhom he doth inherit, Chosen by his spirit, Purchast by his Word. Pause. The Lord our God the heau'n vnfoldeth, And looketh dovvnvvard from the sky, He all the sons of men beholdeth, And on them sets his vvatchfull ey▪ From his habitation, In high contemplation, He beholdeth vvell, His eye doth discouer All the earth quite ouer, Them vvho there do dvvell. For he his might & povver shovveth, Conforming all their hearts alone, He vnderstandeth vvell, and knovveth Their vvorks considering euery one. Great Hosts compleat armed, Though like Bees they svvarmed, Cannot saue a King: Strength of man can neuer Him saue or deliuer From deaths killing sting. He is deceiued, vvho accounteth Himselfe to saue by strength of horse, Though he in courage fierce surmounteth, He none shall saue by his great force.
Lo the Lord ay vievveth Them, vvith grace rendevveth VVho vvith feare him serue, Who in him affyeth, On his grace relyeth, He vvill them preserue. Pause. Their souls he vvill keep, saue from dying, Death shall not them of life depriue, With plenteous food them all supplying, In famin them to keep aliue. On the Lord relying, To him vve applying, Our soules him attend, His ayd and his fauer Is our shield and sauer, He doth vs defend. Our heart reioyceth in him solely, In him vve ioy vvho is most iust: For in his Name vvhich is most holy, We setled haue our hope and trust. Lord our God most gratious, Let thy mercy spacious Euer on vs be: Let thy might maintain vs, And thy grace sustain vs As vve trust in thee. Psalme 34. Alphabeticall. Doctrin. AT all times I vvill bles The Lord my God, his vvorthy praise, His glory and renovvn alvvayes, My mouth shall still expres. Break forth my souls glad voyce, Boast in thy gloriou Sauer deare: The faithfull meeke, therof shall heare, And shall vvith me reioyce. Come laud the Lord vvith me, Him magnifie, extoll his Name: Let vs him praise, and raise his fame, Together all ioyntly.
Duely the Lord I sought. VVho graciously my suit did heare, And freed me soone from all my feare, My full deliuerance vvrought. Euen they that did expect And looke for fauor, gaind his grace, Shame did not make them hide their face, Nor did it them deiect. For this poor man did call, For help at need, the Lord did heare, And freed him from distres and feare, Sau'd him from troubles all. Pause. Gods Angels pitch their tent About them that in feare him serue: From all distres them to preserue, All dangers to preuent. Hovv gracious is the Lord, Hovv good is he, O tast and see, He blessed shall for euer be, VVho trusteth in his vvord. Iehouah's children deare, Feare ye the Lord, but feare no vvant, For nothing is or shall be scant To them that him do feare. In hunger Lyons ly, But they that seek God shall not vvant, Nor any good to them be scant, VVho on the Lord rely.
Keep ye attentiue eare My children deare come neer and learn Tru vvisdom to knovv and discern The Lord your God to feare. Long life vvho doth desire, VVho loueth many dayes to see, Of comfort and prosperitie, Tru riches to acquire Must keep his tong from ill, Must gard his lips from subtle bayt, Of fraudulent and false deceit, From speaking any guile, No ill do thou at all, Do good, seeke peace, and it pursevv. The eyes of God, the iust do vievv. His eare doth heare their call. Pause. Opposed hath the LORD, His face against ill doers all, To cut off their memoriall From earth vvith his ovvn svvord, Plaining the righteous cry, The Lord doth hear vvhen they complain, And saueth them from all their pain, And all their misery. Quite broken humbled heart, Doth finde the Lord is neare to saue All them that contrite spirits haue, And to him soone conuert. Right iust men and vpright, Afflictions many do endure, But GOD in vvhom their trust is sure, Doth free them by his might. Safe kept by him alone, Both vvhole and sound all his bones be, So carefull of them all is he, That broke there is not one. The vvicked shall be slain By euill meanes, and desolate They shall be vvho the righteous hate, They guilty shall remain.
Vndoubtedly the Lord, His seruants soul redeemes, and them As guilty he vvill not condem, VVhose trust is in his Word. Psalme 35. Prayer. AGainst my foes Lord plead my right, And smite thou them vvho me do smite, VVith shield & speare compleatly aimed, Stand for my ayd, saue me vnharmed: Charge on them, march before my face, Block vp their vvay vvho me do chase: Say to my soul, loe, I am hee That can and vvill deliuer thee. Let shame confounding them surround, Them backvvard driue, and quite confound, Them that do seek my soules surprising, To mischief me my harm deuising, Let them like dust be cast avvay, As vvith the chaffe the vvinde doth play, And let Gods Angell driue and chase Them all abroad from place to place. Let dark and slipry be their vvay, That groping stumbling, fall they may: And let Gods Angell fiercely chase them, Them persecuting quite out-race them. For vvithout cause they hid for me Pernicious nets of cruelty: And causelesly they digd a pit, That they might take my soul in it.
Let him be ruind vnavvares Let him be caught in his ovvn snares In nets vvhich he for me intended, Let his ovvne feet be apprehended: In that destruction let him slide, Which he for me did secret hide. Novv shall my soul right ioyfull be, In God that hath preserved me. Pause, My bones shall ioyntly say vvith me, O LORD vvho may compare vvith thee, Who sau'st the vveak by thy assistance From foes too strong for his resistance. Yea the afflicted indigent, From spoylers outrage violent. Against me vvitnes rise vntrevv, They charge me vvith vvhat I nere knevv. VVith ill for good they me repay, Seeking to take my life avvay. Though in their sicknes, pain & anguish, I sackcloth vvore, did fast and languish: My prayr for them vvhen I did mourne, Into my bosom did returne. Such loue to them I did extend, As to my brother or deare friend. Bovv'd dovvn vvith grief I far'd as one, His mother dead doth vvall and mone; But vvhen I vvas distrest, they sported, And to deride me, they consorted: Against me, abiects base did plot Together, and I knevv it not: Reuiling me vvith open throat They did me teare, and ceased not. Gainst me, teeth-gnashing hypocrites And bitter scoffing Parasites Did mock and iear vvith scurrill ieasting, To make guests merry at their feasting. O Lord hovv long vvilt thou looke on, Daign thou to saue my only one: My soul from their destructions free, From Lyons iavves deliuer me. Pause. In midst of great assemblies I VVill praise thy Name O GOD most high: In the most frequent congregation,
Iof thy praise vvill make relation, Let not my vvrongfull enemie Reioyce and triumph ouer me: Nor let their eye vvith causeles hate, VVinke on my poore deplor'd estate. For they nor think nor speak of peace, But to deuise they do not cease, Deceitfull plots abhominable, To trouble them that are peaceable. Against me they set open vvide, Their mouths, that they might me deride: And euery one cryes out on me, Aha the vvretch our eye doth see. LORD thou hast seen this hovv it vvas, In silence do not let it pas: LORD be not far, norme forsake thou, Stir vp thy self, my God avvake thou To iudg my cause: my God art thou, O LORD my GOD, O iudg me novv According to thy equitie, That they reioyce not ouer me. Among themselues let them not say Ha ha, so so, be glad vve may: VVe haue deuovvrd him, quite destroyed. Let them that at my grief haue ioyed▪ Confounded and disgraced be. VVho magnifi'd themselues ore me, Let them all ouer be arayd With shame, dishonord and dismayd. But let them all true ioy obtain, Who me in my iust cause sustain. For euer let them sing resounding, Blest be the mighty povvr abounding, Of thee O Lord vvhom it doth please To giue vnto thy seruants peace. My tong thy iustice shall relate, All day thy praise Ile celebrate. Psalme 36. Doctrin. THe vvicked man hath so transgrest, That in my heart tis manifest He hath Gods fear reiected, For so long himself flattereth he
In his ovvn eyes, till his sin be Found hatefull vvhen detected. His vvords vniust are fraud and lyes, He hath surceased to be vvise, No good he exerciseth, On's bed he mischief doth inuent, In vvayes not good to vvalk, he s bent, No euill he despiseth. O Lord thy large benignitie, Fils heau'n, and thy fidelitie To reach the clouds thou daignest. Thy iust acts highest hils surmount, Thy iudgments deepest depth vve count, Thou man and beast sustainest. Hovv precious Lord thy mercies be, Therfore men put their trust in thee, To thy vvings shade betake them. The fatnes of thy house shall them Full satisfie, to drink the strem Of thy ioyes thou shalt make them. For our lifes fountain is vvith thee, And in thy light, vve light shall see, VVhich neuer shall haue ending. To them thy mercy still impart, Who knovv thee, to the vpright heart, Thy righteousnes extending. Let foot of pride not tread on me, Nor vvicked hand make me to flee, Nor captiue me surprising. There are the vvicked ouerthrovvn, And irrecouerably cast dovvn, Disabled quite from rising,
Psalme xxxvij. Alphabeticall. Doctrin. AT vvicked men to enuy be not moued, Frit not at them vvho vvork iniquitie, Nor grieue that their designs haue prosprous proued For they shall fall to ruin suddenly, Like grasse movv'd dovvn, they perish shall for euer, And as green herbs shall vvither finally. Beleeue in God, good deeds to doe, perseuer, So shalt thou in the land thy dvvelling haue There shall he feed thee, faithfull, failing neuer. Delight thy selfe in God, vvho doth thee saue, Reioyce in him, thy comsorts multiplying, VVho vvill giue thee all good thy heart doth craue. Commit thy vvay to God, on him relying, Trust thou on him, vvho for thee by his might, Shall it perform vvith thy designes complying. He shall bring forth thy iustice as the light, As at noon day thy righteousnes reflecting, Resplendent rayes shall make it shine most bright. Depend on God vvith patience, him expecting, Rest in the LORD, and fret not discontent At him vvho thriues in's vvay, levvd plots effecting. From anger cease, let mildnes vvrath preuent, And be not thou to actions ill addressed, Nor vex thy self to do a bad intent. Extirped quite shall levvd men be suppressed, But they that on the LORD vvayt constantly, Shall of the land be euer sure possessed. Stay but a vvhile, the vvicked thou shalt see Extinguisht quite; mark vvith due obseruation His dvvelling place no vvhere is found to be. Fair flourishing in setled habitation, Meek minded men inherit shall the land, In plenteous peace enioy true delectation.
The vvicked plots by fraud, or by strong hand, To ouerthrovv the iust, vpright abiding, And vvith his teeth doth gnashing at him stand. God from his throne shall laugh at him deriding, His counsels vain, foresees his dismall day, VVhen he shall fall dovvne into ruin sliding. The vvicked dravv their svvords, bend bovves to slay The humble poore, to bring the needy vnder, Quite to confound the vpright in their vvay. Herein the LORD shall shovv a vvork of vvonder, For their ovvn svvords shall their ovvn hearts destroy, And their strong bovves shall be all broke in sunder. That little vvhich the iust man doth inioy, More precious is, then vvhat the vvicked gaineth, Though treasures great vvhich turn to their anoy. In strength of arme, the vvickeds trust remaineth, VVhich shall be broke, but by his povvr and might Th'eternall Lord, the righteous man sustaineth. God knovves the dayes and times of men vpright, And those that be of perfect conuersation, VVith heritage eternall vvill requite. Kept safe from shame in times of tribulation They shall remain, from foul reproaches free, In famin they shall haue full sustentation. But vvicked men shall perish vtterly, Gods foes shall be as fat of Lambs decaying, And into smoke they shall consumed be. Pause. Levvd vvicked men do borrovv, not repaying, The righteous man his mercy doth expres, And freely giues his bounty not delaying. The land they shall inherit and posses, VVhom God doth bles vvith his grace fauorable, VVhom he doth curse shall perish in distres. Mans faithfull steps are by the Lord made stable, And in his vvay doth his delight remain, VVhich vnto him is alvvay acceptable, Though he from fall himself cannot contain, Yet shall he not be vtterly deiected, Because the Lord his hand vvill sure sustain. Nor in my youth nor age the iust elected Haue I ere seen to be forsaken quite, Nor yet his seed to beg their bread reiected. Mercy to shevv he euer takes delight, To them that need, he freely giues and lendeth, A blessed state his seed enioyes by right.
Offence eschevv, and vvhat to euill tendeth, Do vvell, and dvvell to perpetuity, In place vvhere grace to thee and thine God sendeth. For iudgment he doth loue, and equity, Nor leaues his Saints, they ay haue preseruation, But vvill cut off seed of iniquity. Pause. Perpetually the iust his habitation Shall haue, i'th land of his inheritance, From euery age to euery generation. The righteous man in euery circumstance Of his discourse, his vvisdom graue discloseth, In all his speech he iustice doth aduance. Quite voyd of doubt he in his heart reposeth Gods sacred Lavv, his steps shall neuer slide, For it his guide, he in his vvay proposeth. The vvicked man himself doth slyly hide To vvatch the iust, his life seekes to bereaue him, When first he shall aduantage fit haue spide. Remaining in his hand, GOD vvill not leaue him, Nor him condemn vpon his iudgment day. But to his grace, as innocent receiue him. On God attend, and vvalk thou in his vvay, Who vvill exalt thee in thine ovvn land blessed, The vvicked thou shalt see cut quite avvay. Seen vvicked men I haue, of povvr possessed, Fair flourishing a vvhile, like Laurell green, Spreading abroad all gallantly addressed. But vanisht soon as if he had not been, I sought for him, but seeking could not finde him, His dvvelling place could not be found nor seen. The perfect man behold, obserue and minde him, For righteousnes the vpright shall defend, And blessed peace be in the end assign'd him. But vvicked men, destruction shall attend, They finally shall suffer extirpation, And vtterly be cut off in the end. What say I more? the LORD is the saluation Of righteous men: for he vvill euer be Their hope and strength in time of tribulation. The Lord shall them deliuer and set free, From vvicked men they shall haue preseruation, Because they trust in him, them saue vvill he.
Psalme xxxviij. Prayer. LOrd my God, in thy displeasure, To the measure Of my sins, rebuke not me: Neither in thy furies terrors, For my errors, Let me not chastised be. For thine arrovves terrifying, fiercely flying, Piercing deep, in me sticke fast, Heauily thy hand doth pres me, and distres me, Prostrate dovvn it doth me cast. Thy incensed vvrath so raged vnasvvaged. That in me no flesh is sound: My offences haue perplext me, and so vext me, That my bones no rest haue found. My iniquities do couer my head ouer, They so great and high appeare: Burthen so intolerable, that vnable s my vveaknes them to beare. From my stripes and svvelling tumors, corrupt humors, Stinking, putrify, and run: Since I rashly enterprised vnaduised, What I foolishly haue done. Pause. Heauines, distres, and trouble, pres me double Dovvnvvard bovvd I crooked grovv: Sorrovves cease not me tormenting, that lamenting All day long I mourning goe. For my reines are fild vvith anguish, that I languish Sore diseased, full of pain: In my flesh vvith inflammations, sharp vexations, Novv no soundnes doth remain. Lately strong, novv vveak and mamed, broken, lamed, I am bruised very sore: Torment vvhich my heart sustaineth, me so paineth, That for grief I grone and rore.
Lord of mercy I implore thee, for before thee Is my vvhole desire made knovvn. Thou dost heare my sighs and groning, and my moning Is not vnto thee vnshovvn. My heart trembleth, panting shaketh, fainting quaketh Wonted strength from me is gone. These my eyes to light inured, novv obscured, Darkned are, sight haue I none. All my louers to me dearest, my friends nearest, From my grief departed are. My acquaintance late incroaching novv reproaching, From me neighbours stand off far. Pause. They that seeke my life a decaying, snares are laying, Others seeking me to grieue. Me vvith speeches vile abusing, still are musing, Hovv vvith craft me to deceiue. Yet I seemed vvithout hearing, still appearing, As if I vvere deaf become, Not a vvord I then did vtter, nor once mutter, Shut my mouth as mute and domb. All their foul reproches beating, them forbearing, As one deaf that nought perceiu'd, Their false slanders not reprouing nor disprouing, As I vvereof speech bereau'd. For my hope in thee affyeth, and relyeth On thee Lord do I attend. Thou O Lord my God eternall, high, supernall, Wilt me hear and answer send. Giue thou eare vvithout delaying, to my praying, Lest they triumph ouer me. If my feet once fall to sliding by misguiding, They ioy at my misery. Pause. By infirmity vnsteddy, I am ready, Dovvn to halt in feeble plight For my fault I grieue and sorrovv eue and morrovv, Euermore before my sight. Of my sin Ile make confession, my transgression I vvill open and declare. Sins vnfainedly repenting and lamenting They so great and grieuous are. But my foes vvhich do oppose me and inclose me, Merry make, strong fortifide.
They that vvrongfully do hate me, grinde and grate me, Mightily are multiplide. They for good vvith ill requite me, still despight me, Ae my foes, and seeke my bloud: Therfore they so rate and blame me, seek to shame me, Cause I do vvhat's iust and good. Gracious Lord doe thou not leaue me, nor bereaue me Of thy fauour to me deare. Far off from me be thou neuer, but for euer O my God to me be neare. Haste thee timely, help to send me soone defend me, Speedy ayd to me impart: Thou art God of consolation, my saluation, And my Sauer Lord thou art. Psalme 39. Consolation. I Said I vvill to all my vvayes take heed, That I sin not in vvord or deed: My tong from speech I strictly vvill restrain, VVhile vvicked men vvith me remain: And lest my mouth my meaning do vnfould, As vvith a bridle I le vvith-hold. As mute and domb long time I speechles stood, Refraind to speak euen vvhat vvas good. But I perceiu'd my dolour did augment, And more heat did my heart torment. My zealous thoughts on fire the flame forth brake, And vvith my tong these vvords I spake. Eternall LORD, make me to knovv my end, And to vvhat length my dayes extend: Vntome shovv my frail and vveak estate, Behold, my dayes abreuiate. But as an hand bredth thou hast made them be, My age is nothing vnto thee. Man verily is but meer vanitie, VVhen in best state he seems to be. Selah.
Doubtles as shades men vanish vvithout rest, Themselues in vain they do molest, To heap vp vvealth, his minde he doth imploy, Not knovving vvho shall it inloy. Pause And novv O Lord for vvhat, vvhom vvait I on? I hope for thee, on thee alone. From all my sins vouchsafe to set me free, And let me not reproched be. By fooles, nor them permit, vvho are vnvvise, With scornes, and scoffs me to despise. I hold my peace, as I vvere mute becom, Nor ope my mouth, as I vvere domb, Because that all this hath beene done by thee. Thy heauy plague remoue from me, Thy hand such strokes confounding on me lay, That fainting I consume avvay. When thou vvith thy rebukes dost once begin, Man to correct and scourge for sin. His beauty thou consumest, as the moth The garment frets and eates the cloth: For euery man doubtlesse, vvhat ere he be, Is nothing else but vanitie. LORD hear my prayr to my cry bend thy eares, Hold not thy peace at these my teares, For I vvith thee as all my fathers vvere, A stranger am, a soiorner. Spare me a vvhile, and my lost strength restore, Ere I goe hence, and be no more. Psalme 40. Thanksgiuing. WHile I did long vvith patient constancy, The pleasure of my GOD attend, He vnto me his eare did bend, And to my cryes he hearkned graciously. Me from deep pit bemired, From dungeon he retired, Where I in horror lay: And set my feet vpon A stedfast rocky stone, And my vveak steps did stay. And in my mouth a nevv song did accord, That to our GOD I might sing praise,
VVhich many hearing hearts shall raise, To fear vvith trust, & trust vvith fear the Lord, That man is truly blessed, VVhose trust is so addressed, And on the LORD relyes, Who giueth no respect To them that pride affect, And turn aside to lyes. O Lord our God, thy works are manifold, And vvonderfull vvhich thou hast done, Thy thoughts vvhen vs thou thinkest on, In order due to thee cannot be told. Their number so surmounting, Far passeth our accounting. If sacrifices vvere Accepted in thine eyes, Then vvould I sacrifice, But thou didst ope mine eare. Burnt offrings thou of me didst nor demand For sin. Then said I lo behold Me ready here I am, enrould VVithin thy book my vvritten name doth stand. VVhat thy vvill hath ordained To doe vvith heart vnfained, My GOD is my delight. VVithin the middle part, And center of my hart, I beare thy lavv vpright. Pause. Thy righteousnes and iustice I did preach, VVhere multitudes assembled vvere,
O Lord thou knovvst hovv, vvhen and vvhere, That I thy truth refrained not to teach. Thy constant faithfull dealing, Thy mighty ayd reuealing, To all I do declare, I shovv thy bounty great, Thy mercies I repeat, VVhere great assemblies are: Thy tender mercy hold thou not avvay From me O Lord, but vvith thy grace And louing kindnes me embrace, And let the truth preserue me safe alvvay, VVoes numberlesse surround me, My sinnes do so confound me, That vp I cannot looke, They moe in number are, Then on my head is hair, My heart h me forsooke. Be pleasd to saue me Lord send help vvith haste, Confound them all at once vvith shame, Who my destruction seek to frame. VVho vvish me ill, driue backe vvith shame disgrac't, And let them be destroyed, VVho at my vvoes haue ioyed: All desolate them lay, Their shame vvith shame repay, Who in derision say To me, aha, aha. But fill their hearts vvith ioy vvho bend their vvayes To seek the beauty of thy face: Let them that loue thy sauing grace, Say euermore, exalt the Lord vvith praise. Though I be poore and needy, Yet God me mindes, helpes speedy. Thou art my ayd alvvay, Thou only, thou art he That dost deliuer me: My God make no delay. Psalme 41. Prayer and prophecy. HE blessed is that doth compassion shovv To them that are brought lovv: He from the Lord of comfort shall not mi, VVhen he afflicted is.
The Lord vvill him preserue aliue, that he On earth shall blessed be. He vvill not him deliuer, no expose Vnto his furious foes. VVhen on his bed he lys vveak, sick, and sore, God vvill his strength restore: And turn his couch from all disease and pain, To health and ease againe. Therfore I said in mine infirmitie, Haue mercy LORD on me, O heal my soul, let it recured be, For I offended thee. My foes ill vvords against me hate display, While thus of me they say, VVhen, vvhen vvill death oe take this vvretched vvight, And his name perish quite. Their visits are but comlementing lyes, They invvard hate disguise▪ They vvicked thoughts vp heap, vvhich strayt they shovv As soone as forth they goe. Pause. Together all they that bare hate to me, Against me vvhispering be: Against me they conspire, and enterprise, To hurt me they deuise. An ill disease, say they, vvill not him leaue, It fast to him doth cleaue: Deiected lovv cast dovvn, there novv he lyes, That neuer more shall rise. Nay, my neere friend, to vvhom I did impart The secret of my heart: Who ate my bread, and did my bounty feel, Against me lift his heel. Therfore O Lord abandond thus of all
On me let mercy fall. And raise me vp, that I may haue the might, Their merits to requite. By this I knovv to me it doth appear, That I to thee am deare: Because thou dost not make mine enemy To triumph ouer me. But vvell triumph I may, vvhom thou dost stay In my most rightfull vvay. Whom thou of thy good grace dost firmly place, For ay before thy face. O bles the Lord, the God of Israel, His praises euer tell: From age to age, vvorld vvithout end. Amen. Amen I say agen. Psalme 42. Consolation. AS the chased Hart pants braying, Seeking some refreshing brooke: So my thirsty soul longs praying, Zealous on my GOD to looke. My soul thirsteth eagerly, Euerliuing GOD for thee: LORD vvhen shall I come before thee, In thy presence to adore thee. Day and night great grief sustaining, Briish teares are all my food: VVhile they question me disdaining, Where is novv thy God so good. My heart melts this thinking on, Hovv I marching late had gon, Leading troups Gods praises singing, To his Temple offrings bringing.
VVhy art thou my soul so sory, So disquiet, so disma'yd, Wait on God, for still his glory In my song shall be displayd. VVhen but vvith one looke of his, He shall me restore to blisse. O my God, vvhose grace erecteth, See my soul it self deiecteth. For my minde on my God thinketh, Euen from Hermon mountain high: From the land that Iordan drinketh, And vvhere Missar hillocks lye. One deep vvith noise of his fall Other depths of vvoes doth call: While my GOD vvith dreadfull vvonders, On me vvretch his Tempests thunders. Pause. All thy flouds ore me abounded, All thy billovves ore me vvent: Yet on this my hope is grounded, That thine anger being spent I by day thy loue shall tast, Singing shall the night be past: Praying praising, and thanksgiuing, To my God vvhile I am liuing. I vvill say, O GOD my Tovver, VVhy am I forgot by thee? Why should grief my heart deuovver. While the Foe oppresseth me? Bitter scoffs of haughty ones, Wound and pierce me to the bones, Whilst my foes aske me deriding▪ Where hath novv your God his biding? Why art thou my soul so sory, So deiected, so dismaid? Wait on God, for still his glory In my songs shall be displayd. To him shall my thanks be payd, VVho is still my present ayd, Whose saluation me hath raised, Is my God for euer praised.
LOrd iudg me, make examination, Plead thou my cause, and set me free From this vniust and cruell Nation, Deceitfull in their conuersation. From them that deal iniuriously, Saue and deliuer me. My God thou art my strength and tovver, From thee vvhy dost thou me exclude? Why goe I mourning euery hovver? My foes vvho vvould my soul deuovver, Oppres me vvith their multitude, By them I am pursevvd. Send out thy light for my instruction, And let thy faithfull truth diuine, Conduct and saue me from destruction, And let them be my introduction Into that sacred hill of thine, Me to thy house assigne. Then vvill I goe vvith mirth and pleasure Vnto the Altar chearfully, Of God vvho is my comforts treasure. In vvhom my ioy exceedeth measure. Vpon the Harp I vvill praise thee, Thou LORD art GOD to me▪ My soul, vvhy then art thou deiected And so disquieted in me? Wait thou on God, vvith hope erected, With patience let him be expected. For he by me shall praised be, My health, my God is he. Psalme 44. Prayer. LORD GOD of high renovvn and glory, Our eares haue heard the ioyous story Which our forefathers haue vs told:
Of vvondrous vvorkes thou didst of old, Hovv thou the heathen didst expell, And in that land our fathers planted By thy strong hand therein to dvvell, Their foes vvere plagued and supplanted. For they haue not this land possessed By their ovvn svvord to vvar addressed: Nor could the might of their ovvn arme In doubtfull fight, saue them from harme. But it vvas that right hand of thine, And thy strong arme that vvas their Sauer, On them thy face vvith light did shine, Because thou didst thy people fauer. O GOD thou art my king most royall, To Iacob, to thy seruant loyall: Help and saluation timely send, And him as thou vvert vvont defend. For if our armies thou dost lead, We shall push dovvn them that distres vs, And in thy Name vve shall dovvn tread, All them that rise vp to suppres vs. My bovv I knovv vvill not secure me, Nor shall at all my svvord assure me, In them no confidence I haue, Nor hope that me my armes shall saue. But it is thou, and thou alone, Which sauest vs from our distressers: And thou hast put to shame each one, Who vvere our haters and oppressers. Pause. In God vve all day long do glory, And vve record the sacred story Of his all-blessed Name most high, Which euermore vve magnify.
But novv hast thou cast vs dovvn lovv, Thou dost vs shame, and quite reiect vs: Thou vvith our armies dost not goe, Forth dost not lead vs, nor protect vs. To turn vs back, thou dost novv make vs, From enemies that captiue take vs: Our hatefull foes giue vs the foil, And vvhat they please, they take and spoil. Thou hast appointed vs to dy, As sheepe for slaughter be ordained: Thou hast disperst vs that to ly Mongst nations strange vve are constrained. Thy flock as nothing vvorth thou prisest, For nought the selling, thou despisest: Thou letst them goe at rates so cheap, For them no profit thou dost reap. To them reproch that neer vs bide, Thou makst vs be, they mock and flout vs, They scorn and scoff vs, they deride That are our neighbours round about vs. VVe to the heathen are a fable, Their by vvord, common talke, and bable: When vs the vvicked people see. They nod their heads in mockerie. Confusion mine continually, Is in my sight, spreds me all ouer: And my reprochfull infamie. With shame my blushing face doth couer. Because of his voyce that blasphemeth, And at our ebbe so flovving streameth: For that the foe in rage and ire, To be reueng'd is set on fire. Yet haue vve not forgotten thee,
Though this befall vs notvvithstanding, Nor haue vve dealt deceitfully Against thy couenant and commanding. Pause. Our harts vvhich long distrest haue mourned, Yet are not from thy seruice turned: Our steps from thee go not astray, Nor do vve vvander from thy vvay. Though thou hast vvounded vs in place, VVhere monstrous Dragons haue their biding: And hast vs couerd vvith disgrace, VVith deaths shade vs in darknes hiding. If vve forget the Name eternall Of our good gracious God supernall: If vve haue lifted vp our hands To other gods of godles lands. Shall not our God this search and spy, Who all thoughts, vvords & vvorks vnfoldeth, All secrets knovvs vvith piercing eye, All harts most invvard parts beholdeth. Euen for thy sake our bloud is spilled, For thee vve all day long are killed: And vve are counted but as sheepe, Which they for present slaughter keep. Vp Lord, vvhy sleepest thou, avvake, Arise, and let thy povver erect vs: For euer do not vs forsake, Be not far off, nor quite reiect vs: VVhy is it that thy face thou hidest From vs, still absent thou abidest, Vnmindfull yet dost thou remain, Forgetting our distres and pain. Dovvn to the dust our soul doth bovv, Our vitall spirits, grief bereaueth: We on the ground ly prostrate novv, And to the earth our belly cleaueth. Arise, and shevv vs thy saluation, Deliuer vs from tribulation: And for thy mercy sake vs free, Redeem vs from aduersitie.
Psalme xlv. Doctrin. A High designe my feruent heart inflameth, Of King diuine heroycall song i frameth. Inuention quicke to fluent tong indites, VVhich faster flovves then svviftest penman vvrites. Thy beauty rare the fons of men exceedeth, Past all compare grace from thy lips proceedeth: Therefore thy God hath thee foreuer blest, And thou of blisse eternall art possest. Then povverfull Prince aduance thy self all-glorious, Vpon thy thigh gird thou thy svvord victorious. Ride on, triumph in thy maiestick might, Prosper, preuail in vvord of truth and right. Thy mercy milde, vvith rigorous iustice bideth, Thy gracious heart▪ thy vigorous arm still guideth. But those thy foes vvhose hearts no loue can vvin, Thy hand to fright vvith terrors shall begin▪ Then thy sharp darts vpon them all shall thunder, And thy foes hearts shall pierce and strike in sunder: To thee O King, the Nations all shall bend, Thy mighty arm, thy rule shall far extend. Thy Throne O GOD for euermore endureth, Thy Scepter right through all thy Realme procureth. Thou louest truth, iustice and righteousnes, But hatest vvrong, deceit, and vvickednes, VVherfore thy God hath thee his Christ appointed, And thee vvith oyle of gladnes hath annointed: Much more and far aboue thy fellovves all, Whom to partake vvith thee, thy loue doth call. VVith Aloes, Mirrh, and Cassia svveetly sented, Thy robes perfumde are vnto thee presented,
From palaces of precious iuorie, Wherby they haue exhilarated thee. Pause. Then Ladies fair present attendant duty, Kings daughters rare, prime paragons of beauty, Boue all, the Queene, thy ioyous louely Bride, In Ophir gold doth stand at thy right side. Fair daughter novv behold, a vvhile attend thou, Consider vvell, thine eares to my vvords bend thou, Thy fathers house forget, thy peoples guise, And natiue rites thou also shalt despise. So shall the King thy Spouse take greater pleasure In thy pure loue, and in thy beauties treasure, Him honor thou thy Lord vvith pleasing grace, Bovv fair to him, his loue intire imbrace. The Tyrian state shall then vvith other Nations, Great Princes shall to thee bring rich oblations. Kings daughter fair vvithin deckt gloriously VVith robes of gold embroidred gorgeously. Thus shall O King thy beauteous spouse admired, Be brought in robes of Phrygian vvork attired. And Virgin troupes her lou'd associates deare, Attending, shall in thy blest sight appeare. VVith pleasant mirth and chearfull acclamations, Triumphant ioy, and glad congratulations, She shall be brought, vvith all her Princely train, The Palace royall shall them entertain. For Parents left, shall children be supplyed VVith royall Sons thy of spring multiplied: VVhom Princes in all lands thou shalt ordain, VVhose Scepters right and iustice shall maintain. Therfore vvill I of thy name crovvnd vvith glory, From age to age, record th'eternall story: The people all thy honour high shall raise, And celebrate perpetually thy praise. Psalme 46, Victory. WHen s aduersity offendeth, God is our refuge, vs defendeth. In all distres, and time of need, His help vve finde vvith present speed. Therfore vve feare no molestation, Though moued be the earths foundation,
Although the mountains high and steep, Were throvvn i'th middle of the deepe. Though surging billovves of the Ocean, Roar, troubled tost vvith violent motion: And though provvd svvelling vvaues do make The mighty mountains high to shake. In time of troubles fiercely grovving, There is a riuer fairely flovving: Which shall refresh vvith ioy renovvn Of God most high, the sacred Tovvn. And in the midst of her excelling, The LORD eternall hath his dvvelling▪ Nor shall it moue, for God vvill send It early ayd and it defend. The heathen kingdomes vvere inraged An mou'd to fury vnasvvaged; Till they his voyce had heard and felt, That vvith the noyse the earth did melt. Pause. But this vvith comfort our hearts cheareth, The LORD of hosts vvith vs appeareth: The GOD of Iacob most of might, Our refuge is, for vs doth fight. Come see in serious contemplation, The vvorks of God, vvith admiration: What he to pas on earth hath brought, What desolation there he vvrought. All cruell vvars and iarrs he ceaseth, Throughout the vvorld he them appeaseth, He cuts the speares, he breaks the bovves, And into fire the charrets throvves. Knovv I am God, be pacified, My might, my right is knovvn and tryed:
Ore all the heathen I vvill raign, On earth exalted I'le remain. In brief, this is our consolation, The LORD of hosts is our saluation: The God of Iacob gracious iust, Our refuge is in vvhom vve trust. Psalme 47. Reioycing. PEople of all Lands, Ioyfull clap your hands Praising God our King, Shout, triumphant sing. VVith a strong shrill voyce, Chearefully reioyce. For the LORD most hig Far aboue the sky, Is of dreadfull might, Terrible in fight: Monarch ouer all, Kings terrestriall. He the people shall, Vnto vs make thrall, He them dovvn belovv, Vnder vs doth throvv, Nations shall submit Themselues at our feet: He our heritance, Chosen doth aduance, Iacobs excellence Is in his defence: Whom he hath approu'd, And intirely lou'd.
Our God vp is gon, Mirthfull marching on With triumphant noise, High expressing ioyes. In the LORD reioyce, With the trumpets voice. Sing praise to the Lord, Psalms to him accord, Praise to our God sing, Sing praise to our King. GOD is ouer all Kings terrestriall. Psalms instructing vvell, Sing ye that excell. God raigns and commands All the heathen lands: He doth sit vpon His high holy Throne. Peeres and Princes ioyn, And vvith them combine, Who themselues declare, That they people are, Of him that became God of Abraham. For God sole soueraign, Doth keep and retain In his povverfull hands, All shields of all lands. His fame high is rais'd, His great Name be prais'd. Psalme 48. Thanksgiuing. GReat is the LORD in this his seat, His praises are exceeding great: In our God's city his ovvn dvvelling, His sacred mountain high excelling, Sion mountain is in place, Full of beauty full of grace: Northvvard being scituated, To the great King consecrated: All the earth therevvith delighted, To reioyce there are inuited. In Sions palace God is knovvn,
For refuge and deliuerance shovvn. For lo the Kings their forces ioyned, They marched there in league combined. When they had therof the sight, They amazed tooke their flight: They and all their troupes astounded, Terrifyde vvith fear, confounded. So great horror them agasted, Quite avvay they headlong hasted. Such trembling fright hold on them tooke, That they like traueling vvomen shooke. Thy eastern tempests, storms like thunder, Their Tarshish nauy tore in sunder. VVondrous acts such as vve heard, Like hath novv to vs appeard, In the city high renovvned▪ VVith the LORD of hosts name crovvned: VVhere remaines the sacred dvvelling, Of the LORD our GOD excelling. Pause. The LORD vvill it establish sure, For euermore it shall endure. In midst LORD of thy habitation, Thy mercies are our meditation. LORD according to thy Name, And the greatnes of the same: So is thy great praise transcending To earths vtmost ends extending. Iustice plentifull redoundeth, In thy right hand it aboundeth. Let all in Sions sacred mount Be glad, and let the ioyes surmount
Of Iudahs daughters amiable, For all thy iudgments admirable. VValk about fair Sions mount, Tovvers built thereon recount. Vievv the Forts vvith circumspection. Mark the Pallaces perfection: That ye may make the relation To each future generation. For this God is our God for ay, Is euer our defence and stay: He is and vvill be our protection, In life and death all our direction. Psalme 49. Doctrin. TO this my speech all people giue good eare, All dvvellers in the earth attentiue heare. The noble and the base, both rich and poore, All famous and obscure, both high and lore. My mouth shall speak of vvisdom prudent speach, My hearts discourse shall vnderstanding teach. I vvill incline my eare to heare reuealed, VVith harp exprest, my parable concealed. VVhy should I feare vvhen euill dayes approach? VVhen on me grief and trouble doe incroch? And vvhen my sins and foes vvhich do abound, Me close at heeles, pursevving shall surround? VVho of his vvealth and povver is confident, And boasteth of his riches insolent, His brothers life cannot saue, nor redeeme it, Nor ransom pay, at vvhich God doth esteem it.
Too deare the price is, their souls to release, For him to pay it shall for euer cease. That euer he might liue perpetually, And in the pit corruption neuer see. For he obserues the vvise and prudent dyes, They perish as the bruitish fool likevvise: At length their strength, health, vvealth, breath, death bereaueth, All he did ovvn, to heirs vnknovvn he leaueth. Their invvard thought vvhich busieth most their brain, Is that their house for euer may remain, Their dvvellings to eternize, and their fames From age to age their lands do beare their names. But man by no meanes can himselfe assure, That he being in honor, shall endure, He bideth not, nor long this life enioyeth, Him like to beasts that perish death destroyeth. Pause. This is their vvay, vvhich to no other end, But vanity and foolishnes doth tend: Their children yet, all trained to their trade, Approue, applaud, and laud vvhat they haue said. Selah. Slain as the sheep, they in the graue are put, Death on their flesh feeding, himself doth glut. But the vpright all in the morning glorious, Dominion shall haue ouer them victorious. Their beauty shall be vvasted in the graue, Quite from the place vvhere they their dvvelling haue: But God vvill me redeem from povvr of hell, For he shall me receiue vvith him to dvvell. VVhen one grovves rich, fear not, nor him enuy, VVhen honors of his house do multiply. Selah▪ For vvhen he dyes, he nought avvay shall carry, His glory shall not vvith him goe not tarry. VVho in this life himselfe doth gratulate, And to himself doth good, they celebrate. He shall goe to his fathers out of sight, In place obscure, and neuer see the light, The man vvhose state in vvorldly honour flovves, But knovvledg vvants, still sensuall senceles grovves; Nor vnderstands at all vvhat he enioyeth, Is like brute beasts vvhom sudden death destroyeth.
Psalme l. Doctrin▪ THe mighty GOD, the LORD eternall blest, Hath spoke, and cald the earth from East to VVest, From Sion fair, in perfect beauty bright, Our God hath shin'd, and shovvd forth glorious light. Our God vvill come, his Maiesty reuealing, His sentence iust, in silence not concealing. Before him fire deuouring shall abound, About him stormes and tempests shall surround: To heauen aboue for vvitnes he vvill call, And earth beneath to iudg his people all. My gracious Saints, assemble ye combined With me in league by sacrifice assigned. The heauens shall shevv his righteousnes and might, For God himself is Iudg most iust and right: Sela. My people heare to Israel speak vvill I, I am thy GOD, to thee Ile testifie. For sacrifice I vvill not novv reproue thee, Thy offrings made by fier do not moue me. That I should take of thee, I haue no need, Or Beeues or Goats in field or fold that feed. On thousand hils the beasts are my ovvn goods, The vvilde beasts all are mine in Parks or vvoods. The mountain birds are all my ovvn I knovv them, Beasts of the field are only mine I ovve them. If hungry I vvere, vvould I tell it thee? The vvorld and all therein belongs to mee. That I vvould eat the flesh of Buls dost think, Canst thou suppose that I Goats bloud vvould drink? To God most high, praise offer, and thanksgiuing, And pay thy vovves to God in him beleeuing. In thy distres to me thy plaints apply,
I vvill thee ayd, thou shalt me glorifie. To vvicked men saith God, dar'st thou presume My gracious Lavv in graceles lips assume, Thy stubborn heart my counsels hath disdained, My sacred vvord thou hast despis d, profaned. My lore, my vvords, thou hatest, dost reiect, Thou seest a thief, and him thou dost affect, His race thou run'st vvith strumpets league dost make, Adultrers lust vvith them thou dost partake▪ Thy mouth speaks ill and thy false tong beguileth, Deceit and lyes it forgeth and compileth. Thou sitst and speakst thy brother to defame, To scandalize thy mothers son vvith shame. I silence kept vvhilst these things thou hast done, Thou thought'st me as thy self euen such a one, But I vvill thee reproue for euery error, And marshall them before thy eyes vvith terror. Consider vvell all this, I you entreat, You that neglect the Lord, and him forget▪ Lest I doe teare you vvhen ye helples be, VVho yeelds me thanks and praise, he honors me, VVho ordereth aright his conuersation, To him vvill I declare the Lords saluation. Psalme 51. Prayer. HAue mercy Lord haue mercy most of might. On me alas, most vvicked vvretch of vvretches; According to thy mercies boundles riches, Remit my sins, remoue them from thy sight. Wash me O Lord, and throughly clense my soul, From th'odious fact my folly hath committed, And from my crimes so crying, fell, and foul, By thy free Grace let me be cleard, and quitted. For vvell I knovv vvith sad acknovvledgment, My hainous sins, and my exceeding errors, Still in my sight, vvith gastly frights and terrors, Incessantly my minde my soul torment. Against my God, against thee holy Lord, And in thy sight I trespast and offended▪ That vvhat thou sayst may still haue iust record, And euermore thy sentence be commended.
Behold alas in sin I vvas brought forth, When first my brest this breath of life receiued, In sin alas my mother me conceiued, A child of vvrath, and lesse then nothing vvorth. Lo also Lord thou louest truth vvithin, VVithin the heart, vvithin the soul sincerity, Therfore to me so gracious thou hast bin, To make me knovv thy invvard vvisdoms verity. VVith hysope then O purge my filthy plight, So shall I be reclensed to perfection: O vvash me, vvash me from this foul infection, So shall I pas the purest shovv for vvhite. So shalt thou make me ioy and gladnes hear From th'invvard voice of thy good grace relieuing, So shall my bones vvhich almost broken vvere, Reioynd, reioyce, their former strength receiuing. Pause. No longer novv my loathsom sins behold But hide thy face, and turn avvay thy terrors: VVipe out my vveak my vvilde, my vvilfull errors, And all my faults and follies manifold. In me a nevv heart O my God create, A nevv clean heart vnto thy vvill inclined, In me a nevv right spirit renouate, From naturall corruption, pure refined. Nor from thy face LORD cast me quite avvay. Nor from thy sight in thy displeasure driue me, Nor of thy grace nor holy Spirit depriue me, Nor in thy vvrath abandon me for aye. The comforts of thy face to me restore, And sauing health vvhich I had once conceiued,
VVith thy free spirit confirm me more and more, That I of them may neuer be bereaued. Then vvill I teach them that transgressors be, To knovv thy vvayes, and learn thy mercies ample, And sinners shall be brought by my example, Soone to returne conuerting vnto thee. Vouchsafe O LORD my God and sauer sole, To expiate my brute and bloudy madnes. Then shall my tong thy righteousnes extoll, And of thy grace sing praise vvith ioy and gladnes. O open thou my closed lips O LORD, And then my mouth shall thankfully be telling The vvonders of thy glorious vvorks excelling, And of thy Name, the praises iust record. Thou vveighest not externall sacrifice, Although I should, else vvould I giue thee many, Burnt offrings are not pleasing in thine eyes, Nor art thou vvont to take delight in any. The sacrifice vvhich thou dost most respect, Is a sad soule, a broken heart lamenting, A contrite heart vnfainedly repenting: These, these O God thou neuer dost reiect. To Sion shevv thy goodnes bounteous beam, Vpon thy mount for euermore extend it, Build vp the vvals of thy Ierusalem, VVithin direct it, and vvithout defend it. Then shall vve to thine altar vvelcome bring, Oblations free, vvhich thou thy selfe demandest: The sacrifice vvhich thou O LORD commandest, Lambs, kids, and calues and euery offering. Psalme 52. Consolation. IN mischief vvhich thou multipliest, And thy iniquity VVhy vantest thou? and magnifiest Thy self in vanity?
But yet knovv thou Gods goodnes sure, Doth euermore endure. Thy tong in vvickednes aboundeth, Mischieuous in thy thought, Like to a rasor sharpe it vvoundeth, Pernicious fraud hath vvrought, Ill more then good doth thee delight, And falshood more then right. Selah. Thou lovest all vvords that deuovver, Reioycing to do vvrong. God shall destroy thee by his povver, For euer, thou false tong. He shalll remoue thee, quite deface And pull thee from thy place. Thee vvretch from the land of the liuing, He shall roote out and teare. Selah. The righteous this shall see, thanksgiuing, And this behold vvith feare, But they at thee shall laugh that day, And in derision say, Lo this is he that hath refused To take God for his ayd, But trusted in his vvealth abused, And on his ovvn strength staid. Who sought himselfe to fortifie, In his iniquity. But I shall fairely grovv and flourish, Like to an oliue tree, And God vvill in his house me nourish, VVhere planted I shall be: For in his mercy I alvvay Do put my trust for ay. For this thy mercy and saluation: He praise thee vvithout end: And on thy Name vvith adoration, VVill I vvayt and attend: For gracious is thy Name diuine, And good to all are tine. Psalme 53. Doctrin. THe foole in heart the holy God denyes, They are corrupt in all their enterprises, To be abhord in all their exercises,
Good vvorks none do, nor therunto aduise, All are vnvvise. The Lord from heau'n the sons of men lookt on, To see if there vvere any vnderstanding To vvorship him, obeying his commanding: He searcht mankinde, to see if any one Sought God alone. But vvhen he had them fully searcht and tride, He found they vvere become abhominable In all their vvorks, corrupt and dtestable. Not one doth good, none follovv God their guide, All vvander vvide. Are all that vvork iniquity past sense, That hauing got my people in their povver, They them as bread vvith greedy iavves deuovver▪ They call not on the Lord of povver immense, Through negligence. VVhere no dread vvas, they vvere brought in great feare, For God the Lord the bones of them hath scattred. VVho thee besieg'd and those thy vvals haue battred: Thou hast them sham'd of God despis'd they vvere, Quite cast off there. From Sion vvho vvill vnto Israel Saluation send? vvhen back the Lord returneth, The grieuous thrall, vvherein his people mourneth, In gladnes then, shall ioyfull Iacob dvvell, And Israel. Psalme 54. Prayer. LORD GOD almighty saue thou me, By thy great Name my soule sustain thou, And by thy strength my cause maintain thou, And vouchsafe thou my Iudg to be. O hear me vvhen to thee I pray, Thy saced eare to me dovvn bend thou, And gratiously O Lord attend thou o all the vvords that I shall say.
For strangers vp against me rise, And mighty Princes tyranizing, Do seek my soul to spoil surprising, They set not God before their eyes. Selah Behold, my helper, God me gards, The LORD vvith them for ay remayneth, Whose faithfull loue my soul sustaineth, Them vvith his presence he revvards. Euen he it is that vvill distres, With their ovvn mischiefs my enuyers: Deal vvith them as thy truth requires, Them all cut off and quite suppres. Then shall I vvith alacrity, Bring sacrifices acceptable, And praise thy Name most honourable, Replenisht vvith benignity. Because from grief he set me free, Me from all trouble he inlarged, My foes vvith vengeance he surcharged, Mine eyes on them my vvill did see. Psalme 55. Prayer. O LORD heare thou my poore petition, Hide not thy eyes at my contrition, Do not despise my deprecation. But bend thy gracious eare to me, My cryes, oh heare, my sorrovv see, Regard my mournfull meditation. For vvhy my furious foes take pleasure, To vex, perplex me out of measure: The vvicked vvork me vilde vexation: VVith most malitious madnes they,
Foul blots and spots vpon me lay, VVith much despightfull imputation. My soul vvith fear doth faint and tremble, The pains and pangs of death assemble, And me, oh me, haue so surrounded, That dreadfull, direfull shiuerings mke My heart, each vitall part to quake, In vvoe I am vvound vp and vvounded. Then this I vvisht thus to relieue me, O that some one Doues vvings vvould giue me Wherby from dangers vvhich inclose me, I might escape and fly avvay Into some desart there to stay. Selah. VVhere I might rest and safe repose me. Then from those storms & blasts loud-blovving, Fast vvould I fly svviftly be going, Timely to seek some safe protection: Their tongs O LORD diuide, forth pull, For I haue seen their city full Of rage and vvrongs most foul infection. With vvickednes like vvals inclosed, VVithin, vvithout, of sin composed. They night and day are bout it vvalking, All guilt and guile are in her streets, Deceit, debate, there slyly greets, There shameles sins are stoutly stalking. Pause But had my enemy thus vs'd me, And thus reproachfully abus'd me, I could it better haue endured: Or had it been my open foe, That raisd himself to bring me lovv, I might haue hid my self immured.
But it vvas thou my deare befriended, VVhose loue to guide me had pretended, VVith vvhom in secret oft I talked. In consultation ioy'd to meet, And mutually took counsell svveet, And to Gods house together vvalked. Therfore shall sudden death dispatch them, Hels gaping mouth aliue shall catch them: For vvith them violence remaineth, And in their dvvellings holdeth place. But I vvill call to God for grace, The Lord me saues, and safe maintaineth. My prayers I to him applyed, At euen, morn, noone to him I cryed, Who heard my suit, nor did deny me. In peace from vvas he set me free, From bloudy battell saued me. For heau'ns angelike host stood by me. God vvill me heare, vvho changeth neuer, Who ruled hath, and raigned euer. Selah. But he shall punish them deiecting, Because that they no change do finde, Therfore Gods fear they do not minde, With hearts obdurate him neglecting. They on their friends lay hands iniurious Against the peacefull raging furious, Their cou'nant they haue violated. VVhen from his mouth, vvords slyly sooth, And seem as butter soft and smooth, War in his heart is meditated. Dissembling deep vvith hony speeches, With crovvching, creeping, sly beseeches, His ollyvvords like svvords haue vvounded. But cast thy care vpon the LORD, For he svveet succour vvill afford, The iust shall neuer be confounded. Bloud-thirsty homicides pernicious, Deceitfull iuglers, vildly vitious, Thou Lord vvilt bring to dire perdition. They shall not liue out half their dayes, But thy sure help my hope shall raise, And I vvill trust in thy tuition.
Psalme lvj. Prayer. HAue mercy LORD on me, for certainly The cruell man at once vvould svvallovv me; He fights against me daily furiously, Oppressing me each houre. My enemies vvould daily me deuoure, And many fight gainst me vvith all their povver, O GOD most high in thee I trust, my tovver, To thee in feare I fly. Ile praise the LORD, for my trust doth rely Vpon his Word, assur'd, secur'd therby, What man can doe, no vvhit affrayd am I, For I shall be defended. What euer I to do or speak intended. To vvrest against me daily they contended, And all their thoughts to this are chiefly bended, That mischief me they might. With ioyn'd consent, and most malitious spite, They vvatch my steps in ambush day and night, To haue me in their povvr, they vse their might. At my life they haue aymed, Shall they escape vvithout rebuke vnblamed, By vvicked plots and stratagems they framed. Confound their hope O LORD, make them ashamed, In thy vvrath them dovvn cast. Pause. My vvandrings to and fro thou numbred hast, And stored vp my teares, none fall in vvast: Writ in thy book, their memory shall last, VVhen I to God haue cryed. His gracious eare to me he hath applyed, My foes he vvill turn back all terrifyed;
This sure I knovv, for I haue often tryed, That God is still vvith me. The Lord my God, by me shall praised be, And of his Word vvill I sing ioyfully, Because perform his promise sure vvill he, The LORD is my saluation. On him I trust, and build my hopes foundation, Therfore I vvill not feare the machination Of mortall man. My vovves gratification To thee Lord vvill I pay. Vnto thee Lord vvill I giue thanks alvvay, And I vvill sing thy praises day by day, To thee O Lord I vvill confes and say, Thou Lord vvilt me deliuer. From direfull death, thou art the only giuer Of safety sure, so that my feet shall neuer In danger slide, but vpright vvalk for euer In thy lifes lightned vvay. Psalme 57. Prayer. THy mercy shevv, some pitty take on me, For O my God, my soul doth trust in thee: And till these vvoes and troubles be past ouer, My soul doth hope thou my defence vvilt be, And that vvith thy vvings shade thou vvilt me couer. Vnto the Lord my God, vvho is most high, Will I lift vp my voyce, and to him cry. His promise sure vvho keeps, vvho by his povver From heau'n vvill saue me from mine enemy, Confounding him vvho seeks me to deuovver. Selah. My soul alas distres doth novv compell, Mongst Lyons fierce and raging, still to dvvell:
Among men set on fire, inflamed fuell, Whose teeth are speares, and shafts sharp long and fell, Whose tongs like svvords do vvound vvith vvords most cruel. Pause. Exalt thy self O God aboue the sky: And on the earth aduance thy glory high. They set a net my steps to haue insnared, My humbled soul dovvn bovved, lovv doth ly, For me, my foes a deep pit haue prepared. Mine enemies before me digd a pit, And they themselues are faln dovvn into it. Selah. Wherfore O God my heart is novv prepared, My heart O Lord to praise thee is made fit, Thy praises in my song shall be declared. My glory vvake, Harpe, Lute, avvake I say, For I my self vvill vvake ere break of day. Among the throng in frequent congregations, To thee O Lord confessing I vvill pray, And praise thy Name O Lord among the Nations. For mercy thine is as the heau'n most high, Thy truth extends vnto the cloudy sky: Exalt thy self aboue the heau'n supernall, Let all the earth O GOD thee glorifie, And sound thy praise O Lord most high eternall, Psalme 58. Consolation. YE Rulers all to vvhom the trust is Committed to defend the right Against oppressors vvrongfull might, Are all your iudgments truth and iustice? Ye sons of men haue you regard To all iust iudgment to avvard? Your mindes on mischief still are musing, Your hands vvith vvrongs ye do pollute, For cruelties ye execute, The Land vvith measures false abusing. These vvicked men vvho iustice hate, From God are strangers alienate. Eu'n from the vvomb they haue reiected The truth for error, speaking lyes, Within their brests fell venim lyes,
VVith poysnous Serpents rage infected, And like the Adder deaf, vvhose eare He stops because he vvill not heare. The skilfull charmers voyce not hearing, Though of all Charmers chief vvere he. LORD let their teeth all broken be, Within their yavvning mouthes appearing, Lord break the Lyons cruell iavves, Pull out their fangs, cut off their clavves. Pause. Let them as vvater in the riuers, Avvay all vnregarded fall, Their arrovves cut in pieces small, Them scatter, shatter into shiuers. Let them consume avvay as snailes, That dry and dy vvhen moysture failes. As vvomens fruit vntimely dyeth, Nere seeing light abortiue born, Before the bramble bush or thorn Do prick or burn: svvift vengeance flyeth, And like a vvhirlvvind them aliue, VVith furious force avvay shall driue. Then shall vvith gladnes, mirth & pleasure, The righteous man right ioyfull be, When he the vvicked men shall see Fall vnder vengeance dreadfull measure. He in the bloud of vvicked men Shall vvash his feet. Man shall say then, The righteous shall be vvell regarded, He shall the fruit and profit gain Of all his labour, not in vain. With plenty he shall be revvarded, For sure there is a God of might, That iudgeth all the vvorld by right.
Psalme lix. Prayer. MY GOD, my enemies surround me, Saue me from them that vvould confound me, Let me my God defended be, From them that rise vp against me. Deliuer me from all transgressors, saue me from them that be oppressors: From vvorkers of iniquity. From cruell men, and bloud-thirsty. For loe they all my vvayes espying, To take my life, in vvait are lying▪ Lord, mighty men their forces bend, Gainst me, vvho them did not offend. With speed prepard they haue intended To punish me vvho nere offended: Therfore arise, behold and see, And vvith thy might assist thou me. Lord God of hosts vvhose mighty povver, Is Israels defensiue tovver: The heathen visit thou, avvake, And on them all, due vengeance take. To none let mercy be extended, Who of meer malice haue offended. Selah. I'th euening they run to and fro About the streets they rambling go. ike hounds they hovvl their mouthes loud sounding, Their speech vvith brags and boasts abounding; ith cruell lips like sharpned svvords, For vvho say they do hear our vvords? But thou LORD vvilt reproue and chide them, isdainfully thou vvilt deride them: nd laughing at their lust disgrace, halt mock the heathen to their face.
Because my strength on thee dependeth, On thee alone my soul attendeth, For only God defendeth me, My high tovvr of defence is he. The God of mercy is my Sauer, He shall preuent me vvith his fauer: The Lord vvill surely suffer me, On my foes, my desire to see. Pause. But suddenly O Lord them slay not, That our remembrance soone decay not: But by degrees, them all abroad Disperse, by thy great povver O God. Them all vvith shame dovvn lovv deiect thou, Thou art our shield▪ vs Lord protect thou. Because their vvicked mouthes abound In sin, their lips vvith lyes resound. They in their pride shall be surprised, For cursed plots vvhich they deuised: For execrations, fraud and vvrongs, Proceeding from their lying tongs: In thy fierce anger, fury fuming, Confound thou them all quite, consuming, That nothing may them ere restore, Destroy them that they be no more. That they may knovv, in Iacob raigneth, The God that euermore remaineth, Whose rule and empire doth extend Vnto the vvorlds remotest end. Selah. They in the euening back returning, Enraged mad vvith fury burning: As dogs do grin, bark, vvhine and cry, About the city rambling pry,
From place to place they shift, still changing, Sharking for meat, in hunger ranging: And vvhen they cannot satisfie Their greedy mavves, they hovvl and cry. VVhile I shall sing vvith voyce high strained, And publish forth vvith heart vnfained, Thy mercy, povvr, and grace diuine, As soone as early day doth shine. For thou hast safely me defended, When I distrest on thee depended. Thou art my strength, my God my King, To thee O Lord I Psalms vvill sing, For God is my fortification, My high defence, and my saluation: His grace to me, I euer proue, The God of mercy, peace and loue. Psalme 60. Prayer. O God thou didst vs quite reiect, And scattring vs thou didst deiect. Thou hast against vs bin displeas'd, Return to vs, and be appeas'd. The earth to tremble thou hast made, Thou hast it broke, and vvaste it layd. The breaches and the broken shiuers, Heal thou, for novv it quakes and quiuers. Thou in thy vvrath didst vs procure, Great grieuous troubles to endure, To tast and drink didst vs assigne Abhorred cups of deadly vvine. But yet thou Lord such loue dost beare To them that thee do serue and feare: That thou hast giuen to them a banner To be displayd, thy truth to honor. Selah. That they vvho are belou'd of thee; May by thy ayd deliuer'd be: With thy righthand, them gard and saue, And let our prayr thy audience haue. God in his holines hath said, I vvill reioyce in giuing ayd, I Shechem vvill diuide at pleasure, And Succoth valley I vvill measure, Pause.
Of Gilead land, both vale and mount, As my possession I account: Manasseh rich I vvill assigne, That it for euer shall be mine. To me doth Ephraim belong, The chief part of my army strong: And I the kingdom vvill deliuer, To royall Iudah my Lavv-giuer. The Moabites to their disgrace, Shall haue employment, seruile, base: As they deserue, Ile them allot, Vnder my feet to vvash the pot. And as for Edom, this I'le doe, I ouer it vvill cast my shoe. Ore Palestina that proud nation, I vvill triumph in exultation. But vvho vvill lead me novv along, Into the city builded strong, For sure defence vvhere I may bide, VVho into Edom vvill me guide. VVilt thou O God not this effect, VVho vs thy people didst reiect? And thou O God vvouldst not instruct vs, Nor lead our armies, nor conduct vs. But giue vs novv help from distres, Against them that vvould vs oppres: Saue vs, for there is none that can On earth, vain is the help of man: God giues vs valor to preuaile Against all them vvho vs assaile, And he vvill by his mighty povver, Tread dovvn them that vvould vs deuoure.
Psalme Lxj. Prayer. LOrd my God, hear thou my crying, To thee flying, Giue eare to my prayr and mone. From earths end, vvhen griefs oppres me And distres me, I vvill cry to thee alone. To the rock then I far higher, I aspier, By thy ayd O lead thou me, For thou art my safe strong tovver, thy great povver Saues me from my enemy. In thy sacred house before thee to adore thee. Euermore vvill I remain Vnder thy vvings shade protection, and refection, Confident I shall obtain. Selah. For thou Lord my God hast daigned, vvhen I plained, To my plaints thy gratious care, And hast giu'n me by thy spirit, to inherit VVith them vvho thy Name do feare. To the royall King elected, high erected, Length of dayes thou added hast, Many yeares to thy annointed, hast appointed, Which from age to age shall last. In Gods presence him safe guiding, he abiding Shall remain eternally: Make thou for his preseruation, preparation Of thy grace and verity. So shall I vvith thanks abounding, Psalms resounding, Sing praise to thy Name for ay That I vvith my best indeuer, may perseuer. Daily all my vovves to pay.
Psalme Lxij. Consolation. MY soul on God alone attends, VVho me assistance surely sends. He is my Rock, & my saluation, In greatest dangers dravving nigh, He me defendeth from on high, Vnmou'd I stand, on firm foundation. Hovv long vvill ye bend all your might, To harm the man that is vpright? A violent death shall you deuovver, So shall ye all be slain and fall, Like to a crazie broken vvall, And as a ruind tottring tovver. Consulting, they complots contriue, Him of his honour to depriue: And him deiect by their false dealing, They in deceitfull lyes delight, Their tongs do blesse in outvvard sight, But invvardly curse, spight concealing. But thou my soul, on God only Attend and vvayt thou patiently: From him is all my hope expected. He is my rock and sure defence, He saueth me from violence, Vnmou'd, I shall not be deiected. Pause. God is my glories excellence, God is my Rock and sure defence, Ye people trust in him assured, Alvvay your selues to him conuert, To him confes, povvr out your heart, God is our refuge safe secured. Selah.
All men of high and lovv degree. Are lyes, deceit, and vanitie, Of no account or reputation, If in the ballance they be layd And vvith light vanity be vvayd, They less appear in estimation. Ye that are mighty, povvrfull, strong, The poor and vveak rob not nor vvrong, Nor vainly trust in proud oppression, If riches ye increasing get, Your heart vpon them do not set, VVhich are vncertain in possession. The Lord hath said this once and tvvise, I heard his voyce giue this aduice, That vnto GOD, all povvr pertaineth. All mercy LORD is thine alone, For by thy bounty euery one According to his vvork obtaineth. Psalme 63. Prayer. O LORD I haue no God but thee, I vvill seek thee betimes, in anguish, For thee my soul vvith thirst doth languish, And oft it faints, and failes in me. My flesh such pining pain hath tryed, For vvant of thee to ease my grief, Longing to tast of thy relief. In desart land, vnvvatred dryed. That I might yet again once more Behold thy povver and thy glory, Within thy sacred Sanctuary, As I haue seene thee heretofore. For better far then life desired, Thy grace and loue is vnto me: Therfore my lips shall vnto thee Sing lovvd thy land and praise inspired. And so shall I thee celebrate, Still blessing thee vvhile I am liuing, And in thy Name, to thee thanksgiuing, My heart and hands vvill eleuate. So shall my soul be satisfied With marrovv and vvith fatnes store, With ioyfull lips I euermore Shall praise thee highly glorified.
I thee remember, vvhen to sleep On silent bed I rest reposed On thee to meditate disposed, VVhen nightly vvatches gardo keep. Because thy succour safe hath made me, And I thy ayd and help haue had: Therfore vvith thanks I vvill be glad. Reioycing that thy vvings do shade me. My soul doth follovv after thee, Close cleauing to thee it remaineth: Thy strength, my vveak estate sustaineth, And thy right hand vpholdeth me. But they that seek vvith all their povver, My soul to slay or ruin it, Fall headlong dovvn earths deepest pit, The greedy graue shall them deuovver. The cruell svvord shall make them fly, Bloud-shedding hands shall ouertake them, A prey for Foxes they shall make them, For vvilde beasts food they torn shallly. Then shall the King reioyce victorious, In GOD vvhom he doth serue and feare, All that deuoutly by him svveare. In him reioycing, shall be glorious. But hypocrites vvho craftily Do exercise deceit and lying, Their speech to falshood vain applying▪ Their mouthes vvith silence stopt shall be.
Psalme Lxiiij. Prayer. LOrd hear my voyce and prayr ascending, To me vouchsafe thy gracious eare, Preserue my life safe from the feare Of enemies, me succour sending, My soul defending. Hide me safe vnder thy protection, From secret counsell of all those, VVho vvicked plots contriue, compose, From sinners traitrous insurrection, For my deiection. Their tongs vvith slanders false defiling, They vvhet as sharp as piercing svvords, They shoot their arrovves, bitter vvords, Backbiting vvith false speech beguiling, They rayle, reuiling. At vpright men to shoot preparing, They ly in ambush secretly: At vnavvares, and suddenly, VVithout all fear they shoot, not sparing, Most boldly daring. In vvicked purposes they ply them, And therein obstinat abide, Their talk is, closely snares to hide: They say ther's none vvho shall discry them, VVho shall espy them? Pause. They seek, search, practise, all sins trying, Iniquities hid mysteries, Inuenting still nevv villanies, Thoughts, vvits, hearts depth, all in them lying, Thereto applying. The LORD shall shoot his shafts confounding, At them in vvrath and anger fierce, And his sharp arrovves stroke shall pierce Them suddenly vvith plagues, abounding, Them deeply vvounding.
So shall their ovvn tongs detestable, Make mischief on themselues to fall: And euery one beholding shall Fly from their vvoes abhominable, Insupportable. All men vvith feare shall make relation Of this vvhich God to pas hath brought, Considering vvisely vvhat he vvrought, They shall behold vvith admiration, His operation. But righteous men their ioy expressing In God, shall in him put their trust, And all in heart vpright and iust, Shall glory in the Lord him blessing, His grace confessing. Psalme 65. Thanksgiuing. ALl praise on thee O GOD attendeth, In Sion peacefully, To thee on vvhom our trust dependeth, The vovv there paid shall be. And thou again thy eare applying, The prayr of thine dost heare, All flesh vnto thy presence flying, Before thee shall appear. Both vvicked deeds, and vvords expression Preuailed against me, Our trespasses, sins and transgressions, By thee shall purged be. VVhom thou dost chuse that man is blessed, VVhom neere thee thou dost take, That in thy courts of blisse possessed, He may his dvvelling make.
VVith good things in thy house of glory, VVe shall be satisfi d VVith blessings of thy sanctuary, Content vve shall abide. After thy righteous distribution, LORD vvho dost vs maintain: Thine ansvvers avvfull resolution, VVith fear vve doe obtain. The earth and ends therof reposeth All confidence in thee, Their hope vvhom farthest sea incloseth, In ships or Iles that be, Thou by thy povvr incomparable, With strength about bedight, Dost hold the mountains, firm and stable, Fast setled by thy might. The roaring vvaues of seas inraged, Thou makest still to cease, The peoples tumults are assvvaged, Thou them dost soon appease. Beholding thy vvorks admirable, VVho dvvell in vtmost parts, Thy signes and vvonders formidable, Do strike vvith fear their hearts. Pause. The morn sets forth on's vvay ascending, The euen declineth dovvn, Their iourneys rising and descending, Reioyce thee to renovvn. To visit this dry land thou daignest, And vvatered it thou hast: Inriching it thereon thou raynest, Thy plenty it doth tast. The streams vvhich thy large floud dischargeth, The land doth ouer-flovv, Thy prouidence our store inlargeth, Preparing corne to grovv. On ridg and furrovv, plenty povvring, Thy rain doth them redresse: Hard earth thou softnest, moysture shovvring, The springing blades doth blesse.
Thy goodnes largely thou bestovvest, Wherevvith the yeare is crovvnd: Thy paths drop fatnes vvhere thou goest, Thy steps inrich the ground. Distilling drops of rain abounding On desarts dryed earth: The mountains all about surrounding, With gladnes, ioy and mirth. The pastures all are clothed ouer VVith flocks of cattell store: And plenteous crops of corn do couer The fruitfull dales all ore. With shoutings and shrill acclamations, Loud peales of ioy they ring, With gladnes, mirth, and exultations, Svvet ongs of ioy they sing. Psalme 66 Thanksgiuing. TRiumph and shout vvith ioy abounding, In God, all people on the earth. His glorious Name vvith Psalms resounding, His vvorthy praise sing ye vvith mirth. To God say, in thy vvorks of vvonder, Hovv terrible thou shevvst to be, Thy great povvr shall thy foes bring vnder, Faining subiection vnto thee. Thy royall maiesty and glory, The earth shall all feare and adore; And of thy praised Name the story, They all shall sing still more and more. Selah O come, behold, and note beholding, What vvondrous vvorks from God do flovv, To Adams sons more povvr vnfolding▪ And dreadfull acts then they can shovv.
The sea he into dry land turned▪ Euen in a moment suddenly▪ They through the red sea dry foot iourned, And there in him reioyce did vve. The vvorld he vvith his povver svvayeth, His eyes the nations do behold, The rebell vvho him disobeyeth, To boast himself shall not be bold. Selah▪ O let the Lord our God be blessed By all the people far and neare, Let his high praise be so expressed, That euery eare the voyce may heare. For he our souls in life maintaineth Aliue, refresht in him vve bide▪ Our feet from falling he sustaineth, And vvill not suffer them to slide. For thou O Lord God hast vs tryed And proued hovv vve are inclinde, And as the siluer purified By fiery fornace flames refinde, Thou broughtest vs to be insnared, To be intrapped in the net▪ Afflicting vs thou hast not spared, And on our loyns, distres hast set. Pause. Men riding on our heads haue mounted, As on the back of horse or Asse, As beast thou mad'st vs vile accounted, Through fire and vvater vve did passe. But novv since thou vs here hast placed, In such a rich and vvealthy vvay. I in thy sacred house high graced, Will sacrifice, and my vovves pay. The vovves vvhich I to thee addressed, And vvhich my lips to thee did make When I vvas grieuously distressed, And vvhich my mouth in trouble spake. Ile offer vvhole burnt sacrifices, The fat of rams vvith svveet perfume: Both Buls and Goats of greatest prises, Fire on thy altar shall consume. Selah. All ye that feare the LORD most blessed, To vvhat I say, attentiue be:
While by my tong shall be expressed, What for my soul performd hath he. VVhen vvith my mouth to him I cryed, His ayd assisted me alvvayes, Therfore my toug him magnified, And highly did extoll his praise. If sins aspect my heart affecteth, If vvickednes in me remains, Me vvith neglect the Lord reiecteth, He heares me not, my suit disdains. But certainly the Lord bath heard me, Apparent proof therof I finde, VVhen I did pray, he did regard me, Attentiue he my voyce did minde. My soul praise thou the Lord most blessed, VVho faild me not vvhen I did pray, VVho from me vvhen I vvas distressed, His mercy did not take avvay. Psalme 67. Thanksgiuing. LOrd God to vs be fauourable, To vs vouchsafe thou blessings thine, Thy gracious face most amiable, Vpon vs make thou bright to shine. Selah. That thy vvay excelling, to all on earth dvvelling, May be fully knovvn: And that thy saluation, vnto euery nation▪ May be plainly shovvn. Thy praise O GOD be magnified By all the people on the earth, Thy Name O Lord be glorified By nations all vvith ioy and mirth.
Voyces shill be singing, Shouts of ioy be ringing, Their acclamations, Thou art Iudg vnto them, Thou vvilt iustice do them, Guide thou the Nations. Selah. By all the people magnified, Be thou Lord, for thy gracious peace, By people all be glorified. Then shall the earth yeeld large increase, GOD shall blessings send vs, Our GOD vvill defend vs, And his grace vs giue: God shall giue vs blessing, All earths ends possessing, In his feare shall liue. Psalme 68. Of praise publique. LEt God the povvrfull Lord arise, And let his hatefull enemies, VVith fear and dread confounded, Be all disperst from place to place, Fly from the frovvning of his face, VVith gastly terror vvounded. As smoke by vvindes is suddenly Driuen quite avvay, so let them be, From Gods high presence banisht: As vvax doth melt before the fire, So be the vvicked in his ire, Consum'd for euer, vanisht. But let the iust before the Lord, Be glad, his honour to record, His vvorthy praise resounding: Let them before the Lord reioyce, Extolling him, lift vp their voyce With mirth and ioy abounding. Sing to the Lord of high renovvn, His sacred Name vvith praises crovvn, Whose glory is supernall: VVho rideth on the clovvdy sky, In royall maiesty most high, Iah is his Name eternall.
Before him ioy vvith thankfulnes, A father to the fatherles, In fauour and compassion. A Iudg that vviddovvs right maintain, A God that vvith delight remains In's holy habitation. God fils the empty family, The barren vvith posterity, With issue store indevved, He frees them that vvith chains are bound, Makes Rebels till the desart ground, Quite vanquisht and subdevved, Pause. O GOD vvhen marching thou didst goe Before thy people to and fro, In vvildernes them trying. Selah. The heau'ns did drop vvith melting heat, The earth did quake vvith terror great, Thy face them terrifying, When God, euen Iacobs God drevv neare. VVhen he in presence did appeare, The mountain Sina moued. A gracious rain, a plenteous shovvr. Thou on thy heritage didst povvr Thy bounty it hath proued. VVhen it vvas vveary, faint, and dry, Thou didst refresh it vvith supply. Thy people there remained, Thou LORD preparedst for the poore, Thou giust them of thy goodnes store, Wherby they are sustained.
VVhen thou O GOD didst giue the vvord, And ioyfull tydings didst afford Amid thy congregation: Fair troups of Virgins pure vvere found, VVho vvith triumphant thankfull sound Thereof made declaration. Strong Kings vvith armies great took flight, Fled from the field in feare and fright, Their shamed faces hiding: Weak vvomen vvont at home to stay, Marcht brauely forth, and tooke the prey: Rich spoiles and lands diuiding. What though ye haue endured long, The fornaces of pots among Besmeared and defaced With mone soot all ouer soild, And vvith hard labour ouer-toild Obscured and disgraced. Yet you a great change soone shall see, For you made louely bright shall be, As Doues vvings siluer couer, In sight all glorious to behold, With fethred plumes of purest gold, All glittring, burnisht ouer, VVhen God almighties povvrfull hand Disperst the Kings driuen from the land In fear and terror flying. His peoples darknes turnd to light, And they became as pure and vvhite, As snovv in Salmon lying. Pause. This is the mount of God most high As Basan mount so near the sky: As Basan mount excelling. Why do ye mounts thus leap & hop, As if ye vvould vs ouertop? Against vs proudly svvelling: This is the Mount God loues so vvell, That therein he is pleas'd to dvvell: His fauour it obtaineth. The Lord in grace and mercy great, Hath this elected for his seat, For euer here remaineth.
Gods charrets tvvise ten thousand are, Of Angels, vvhich his povvr declare, Attending he hath millions, The Lord among them shevves his face, As Sina's Lord in sacred place, Possesseth his Pauilions. Ascending in high maiesty, Thou captiue leadst captiuity, O God of hosts victorious, Thy gracious gifts thou dost impart To men, thy seruants, for thou art Most bountifull and glorious. VVith them vvho of rebellious foes, Become thy seruants, thou vvith those, For ay hast habitation. The Lord be blessed, our strong God, VVho vs vvith gifts doth daily load, The God of our saluation. Selah. He that is GOD, our God vvill be, Of our saluation GOD is he: Our Sauiour he remaineth. The LORD eternall is most strong, To him the keyes of Death belong, All povver to him pertaineth. Pause. But God vvill vvound vvith povverfull hand, The heads of those that him vvithstand, In hatefull opposition. And he vvill break the hairy pate Of him that sinneth obstinate, Procuring self perdition.
The Lord this to his people spake: From Basan I again vvill take, And bring you by my povver: And I vvill lead ye once again, Safe through the gulfe, the red sea main Shall foes, not you, deuovver. That thy feet hauing trampled ore Dead corpses vveltring in their gore, In bloud may be imbrevved, Of all thy foes that thee vvithstood, Dogs tongs shall lick the purple bloud, From gaping vvounds issued. O God thy marches they haue seen, My God, my King, hovv thy vvayes been VVithin thy holy places! The vangard, singers led the vvay, The Reer on instruments did play, They marcht vvith stately paces. On timbrels beating them among, Triumphant Damsels sang this song Amid their congregation. Bles ye the Lord, his praise declare, O Israel, all ye that are Of Iacobs generation. There Beniamin, vvho of a fevv And little, great and mighty grevv, The chief of many Nations. There royall Iudahs Princes be, There zabulon and Nephtaly, The Princely congregations. Pause. Thy God he is by vvhose command It is that thou so firm dost stand, Thy strong fortification, Giue strength to that vvhich thou hast vvrought For vs, vvhich thou to passe hast brought, O God grant confirmation. Because so gracious thou vvilt be To thy ovvn Temple vnto thee Shall Kings bring gifts abounding: Rebuke and scatter by thy might, The troupes of spear men, armd for fight, Their armies huge confounding. Knock dovvn the mighty multitude Of Buls and Calues, of people rude,
As in the shambles slay them, Who glory in their siluer spoiles, And vvho delight in vvars and broyles, Defeat, disperse, dismay them. Great Lords shall come from Egypt lands, The Mores in hast shall stretch their hands, And hearts to God thanksgiuing. Sing to the Lord both Prince & King, Throughout the vvorld to God Psalms sing, And praise God euer liuing. Selah. Praise him vvho rideth mounted on The heau'n of heau'ns his ancient Throne, VVhose vvorks are full of vvonder. Behold, he makes his voyce rebound More dreadfull mighty, strong in sound, Then loudest noise of thunder. Ascribe to God omnipotence, In Israel his excellence: Appeareth admirable, His povver let all magnifie, His strength is far aboue the sky, His might vnutterable. O God most dreadfull is thy face, For thou out of thy holy place, Hast all thy foes distressed, Thy strength maintains thy peoples right, Thou Iacobs God dost giue them might, The Lord be euer blessed. Psalme 69. Prayer & prophecy.
SAue me O God, the vvaters me to drovvn, To svvallovv vp my soul, the seas are ready, I sinke in mire, vvhere is no footing steady, Plungd in the deep, the flouds haue me oreflovvn, With crying vveak, I vveary, vve and vvall, My throat is hoarse vvith dolefull lamentation, VVith shovvring teares consum d, my eyes do fail, VVhile on my God I vvait vvith expectation. Haires on my head in number fevver be, Then they that seek vvithout cause to destroy me: My foes vvith hate that vvrongfully annoy me, Are great and strong, preuailing mightily: That I restord vvhat I tooke not avvay, O GOD to thee my folly is reuealed: Thou knovvst vvhen, hovv, and vvhere I vvent astray; And from thy sight my sins are not concealed. LORD GOD of hosts, all povvr belongs to thee, Wherby thou hast thine ovvne from foes defended. With constant hope, vvho haue on thee attended: O let them not be put to shame for me. Lord Israels God, O suffer no disgrace For me be fall them that seek thy saluation, Because for thy sake, shame did hide my face, And I endur'd reproach and defamation. Pause. A stranger I am in my kindreds sight, Me as vnknovvn, my brethren haue neglected, Because so much, thy people I affected, Zeal of thy house hath me consumed quite. Reproches vvhich the vvicked on me cast, Are faln on me, for thy sake I am blamed, I chastised my soul, did vveep and fast, For vvhich I vvas reproched and defamed. My self I haue vvith sackcloth garments rayde, Their by-vvord me the scoffers mock, iests breaking. The proud sit at their gates against me speaking, The drunkards sing of me, their pastime made, While I O Lord my feruent prayer make To thee alone in time of acceptation, On me, in thy great mercy, pitty take, Heare me Lord in the truth of thy saluation. Deliuer me out of this mire profound, Let me not sink therin, lest it confound me;
Free me from foes vvho hatefully surround me, O let me not in vvaters deep be drovvnd, Let not the flouds & streams me ouerflovv, Let not the gulf me svvallovv and deuovver, Let none into the greedy graue me throvv, Nor let the pit in tomb me in her povver. Lord ansvver me, hear me for thy good grace, And for thy loue and kindnes, goodnes treasure, Accoding to thy mercies boundles measure, Turn thou to me the fauour of thy face. Thy face from me thy seruant do not hide, For I in grief and trouble am distressed Make haste therfore, my God, my gracious guide, To hear my prayt vvhich is to thee addressed. Pause. Dravv neer my soul in my aduersity, Redeem my life, vvith ransom quite discharge me: From spitefull foes, from thraldom soon inlarge me, And set me free from this captiuity. Thou my reproch hast knovvn, and my disgrace. Thou seest my shame, and hovv they do oppresse me, My enemies are all before thy face, And in thy sight they are, that do distres me. Reproch and shame haue broke my grieued heart, With heauines, and sorrovv sick I languish: I lookt, but noe I found bemone my anguish, None vvould me ayd, not one vvould take my part, All comfortles amid my troubles great, Not one vvas found to succour or to saue me: And bitter gall they gaue me for to eat, And in my thirst, sharp vineger they gaue me.
Before them let their table them orethrovv, Their pleasures turn to be as snares vnto them: Their treasures make as trapfals to vndo them, Their ioy to grief, their vvelfare change to vvoe. Let both their eyes so euer darkned be, That vvanting sight, the light may not auaile them, Their vveakned loynes, so shake continually, That thighs & legs, and feeble feet may faile them. Pause. Let thy fierce vvrath, fast hold vpon them take, Pour out on them thy vvrathfull indignation: Make desolate and voyd their habitation, And in their tents let none their dvvelling make. Because they him to persecute, nere cease, Whom thou hast smit, their strokes haue more abounded; His sorrovves, their insultings more increase, Whom thy ovvn hand afflicted hath, and vvounded. Vpon their sins, heap sins, shame on their shames, Let them into thy righteousnes come neuer: Wipe them out of thy booke of life for euer, And vvith the iust, vnvvritten be their Names. But as for me afflicted, making mone, Raise thou me vp, O God by thy saluation, That I may sing, and praise thy Name alone, Extolling thee vvith thankfull gratulation. And this my song the Lord shall better please, Then Ox or Bull, that horns and clou'n hoof vveareth, The humble, meek, and vvho the Lord God feareth, Shall ioy vvhen they do see such things as these, All ye that seek the LORD, your hearts shall liue. For God doth hear the poor mans supplication, An eare to his ovvn people he doth giue, His prishers scorns not in their tribulation. Let heau'n and earth vnto him praises yeeld, Praise him all seas, and all that therin moueth: For God vvill saue his Sion vvhom he loueth, And strongly vvill he Iudahs cities build, The seruants of the LORD therin shall dvvell, Their race, as heirs therof shall be possessed, Who loue and feare his Name, vvhich doth excell, Shall dvvell therin, and bide for euer blessed.
Psalme Lxx. Prayer. O God in vvhom I trust repose. Make speedy haste, me to deliuer: Make hast O Lord, of ayd the giuer, To send me help against my foes. Who haue my soul pursevvd and chased, Let them vvith shame confounded be, Let them that seek to ruin me, Be turned back, destroyd, defaced. Let them vvho ouer me insult, Who say Aha, my harmes delighting. Be put to shame, the vvrongs requiting, Which they against my soul consult. Let them vvith gladnes high be raised, And ioy in thee vvho seek thy face, Let them that loue thy sauing grace, Say euermore, the Lord be praised. O God my only hope and stay, Make haste to help me miserable, Thou art my ayd, be comfortable, O Lord, make thou no long delay. Psalme 71. Prayer. IN thee alone O LORD, my trust is, And in thy holy Name, Let me not suffer shame.
Deliuer me Lord in thy iustice, And for thy tender pitty, From dangers quite acquit me. Incline thy eare to me, and gard me, Be my defence and fort, Wherto I may resort, Thou gau'st expresse charge to safegard me, For thou art my tuition, My rock, and my munition. From men of vvicked conuersation, From hands of crueltie, My God deliuer me. Thou art my God, my expectation, My trust on thee dependeth, From my youth, still attendeth. Euen from the vvomb thou hast sustaind me, My shape thou there didst frame, From thence by thee I came, And euer since thou hast maintaind me. Thy goodnes high shall raise thee, For euer I vvill praise thee. Pause. As on a monster, many gazing, With vvonder me behold. But thou art my strong hold. Let me vvith full voyce thee be praising, And daily sing the story Of thy eternall glory. Cast me not off, nor quite neglect me When I am aged old, My failing strength vphold. O do not leaue me, nor reiect me When old age doth ore take me, O do not thou forsake me. Because my foes their hate displaying, Against me euery day Do bitterly inuay. nd they vvho seek my souls betraying, Do ly in vvait, and vvatch me, Consulting hovv to catch me. Come (say they) none shall him deliuer, His God doth him forsake,
Him novv pursevv and take. From me far off, Lord be thou neuer, My God, thy help novv send me, VVith speedy hast defend me. Let them be shamed and consumed VVhich to my soul are foes, Reproch shall them inclose, To vvork me mischiefe, vvho presumed, VVith patience Ile attend thee, For thou vvilt safe defend me, Pause. Thy praises more and more resounding, My mouth to all shall tell, Thy iustice doth excell. Thy fauours daily so abounding, Can neuer be recounted, So high they are amounted. I vvill go forvvard vvell assured, Thou Lord vvilt strengthen me, That I preseru'd shall be: By thy almighty povver secured, I vvill declare thy iustice, Thine only vvhich my trust is. Thou from my youth, Lord didst instruct me, The vvonders thou didst do, I haue shevvd hitherto: Grovvn aged, gray, do thou conduct me, Lord do not thou forsake me VVhen age doth feeble make me. Vntill thy strength I haue recounted To all that liuing be, And to posteritie. Thy iustice Lord hath all surmounted, O God incomparable, Thy vvorks are admirable Pause.
Lord vvho vvith thee may be compared, Thou vvhich to me didst shovv Great troubles, grief and vvoe, Wilt haue thy loue to me declared: For my life vvas depriued, By thee again reuiued. In depths of earth I vvas interred, Thou thence didst me release. My greatnes didst increase: To honor thou hast me preferred, With comfort me surrounding, On euery side abounding. Therfore my God Ile praise thee solely, And sing vvith Psaltery Thy honor'd verity Of Israel, Lord God most holy, VVith thanks I vvill confes thee, My harp, my song shall blesse thee, My lips vvith ioy and mirth abounding, Thy praise my Lord my King. Thy glory high shall sing, My soul shall merry make resounding, Thy praises high esteemed, Who hast my soul redeemed. My tong also shall vvithout ceasing, Thy righteousnes declare, To publish shall not spare, Thy loue me from my foes releasing: Which my soul vvould haue vvounded, For shame hath them confounded. Psalme 72 Doctrin of politique gouernment. VPon the King by thee elected, Thy iudgments Lord bestovv, His princely Son by thee directed, With iustice thine endovv. That he thy chosen people guiding, His iustice may shine bright, The poore opprest vvith patience biding, By him may haue their right. Vnto the people shall the mountains
Bring peace and quietnes, And from the hils, as from pure fountains, Shall flovv forth righteousnes. Then shall he iudg the poore distressed, Their children he shall saue: The vvicked vvho haue them oppressed, Sharp punishment shall haue. Therfore thy loue to thine assureth, They shall serue and feare thee: As long as Sun and Moone endureth, To all eternitie. He shall come like the rain dovvn povvring Vpon the grasse nevv movvn: Dispersing moysture timely shovvring On thirsty ground nevv sovvne. In his dayes shall the righteous flourish, To iustice vvho incline: Peace vvith abundance shall them nourish, VVhile moone or stars do shine. His large dominion far extending, From sea to sea shall stretch: From great Euphrates, to earths ending, His royall rule shall retch. All they that dvvell in desert places, Shall bovv to him most iust: His foes faln dovvn in foul disgraces, Shall lick the loathed dust. The Kings of Tarshish, merchants royall, The vvealthy Ilands King, The kings of Cush remote, yet loyall, To him shall presents bring. Pause. All other Kings shall fall before him, And humbly him obserue:
And all the Nations shall adore him, Submitting him to serue. For he the needy to him crying, Shall heare and set him free: The poore vvith present ayd supplying, When helper none hath he. And he vvill spare the poore and needy, And pitty on them haue: Deliuerance he vvill send them speedy, And he their soules vvill saue. By him their soules shall be redeemed From violence and lyes: Their bloud shall dearely be esteemed, As precious in his eyes. And he shall liue, they gold shall send him From rich Arabia: Prayr shall be made, ay to defend him, And bles him euery day. A little corne shall be so taking, Though sovvn on tops of hils: The fruit therof like Liban shaking, The garners large fulfils. The Citizens shall fairly flourish, So numerous quickly grovvn▪ As grasse vvhich fruitfull medovvs nourish, Millions of blades vnknovvn. His honord Name, renovvned euer, In glory high shall raigne: And his remembrance failing neuer, Shall as the Sun remain. All men by him of blisse possessed, For euer blesse him shall: All Nations shall in him be blessed, And him right blessed call. The Lord God, Israels God be praised, Who vvonders vvorkes alone▪ His glorious Name on high be raised For ay by euery one. Recorded be the sacred story Of his renovvned fame: Let all the earth, fild vvirh his glory, For euer blesse his Name. Amen.
Psalme Lxxiij. Doctrin. YEt sure the LORD is good and kinde To Israel, his loue they finde, Who be of righteous conuersation, And serue him vvith pure adoration. My steps vvere like to goe astray, And neer to misse the rightfull vvay, My feet did almost svverue aside, And into error neer did slide. For I enuy'd and vext to see Vainglorious fooles in dignitie: VVith grief of heart I vvas annoyed, That vvicked men such peace inioyed. In prosperous state they alvvay stand, Vntill their death they feel no pain: In health and strength they still remain, And all things haue at their command. VVhen others grieu'd and troubled are, They knovv no sorrovv, take no care: As other men they are not vexed, They are not troubled, nor perplexed. VVith pride as vvith a Carkanet, VVith ievvels rich they are beset: As vvith a garment for defence, They armed are vvith violence. Their eyes do stand out of their head With fatnes they so full are fed: They haue more then their hearts desired, They are more high then they aspired. In all their vvayes corrupt they are, Their speeches, vvicked hearts declare: They of oppression boasting tell, Their vvords like mountains, proudly svvell. Pause.
Their mouthes against heau'n they oppose, Their lips vvith blasphemies vnclose: Their bold tong vncontrouled talketh, Throughout the vvorld vnbounded vvalketh. Gods people vnaduis'd also, Do thither turn, and vvith them goe: Quite tyred out vvith grief and vvoe, Drink of their cups, vvhich full do flovv. And this they say, th' Almighty one From his so high supernall throne, Doth he regard, doth he take notice, Hath he intelligence that so tis? Behold the vvicked, such as these, Their vvealth, their might, their ioyes increase; They still do liue in rest, at ease, Haue plenteous happines and peace. And do I (as it seems) in vain, Still in my innocence remain: My heart from vvickednes I clensed, My hands in righteousnes I rensed. Yet all day long, plagues me torment, And early in the morn betimes Am I reproacht vvith grieuous crimes, And suffer seuere chastisement. Yet surely if I this do say, Then do I vvrong, and falsly lay A scandalous calumniation Vpon the righteous generation. When this in minde I did reuolue, This doubt indeuering to resolue: I found it vvas too hard for me, The depth therof I could not see. Till in the Temple of the Lord, Consulting vvith his sacred VVord: VVhere I their finall end perceiued, Of all their comforts vain bereaued. For thou didst iustly place them all In slipry places soone to fall: And suddenly didst cast them dovvn Into destruction hast them throvvn; Pause. Hovv are they brought so suddenly Forlorn in vvoe and misery: With terrors errors, deadly vvounded,
For euer finally confounded. Thou vtterly dost them deface, And root them out from humane race, Like to a dream vvhich lasteth not, But vvhen one vvakes, is quite forgot. When thou Lord vvakest, vve arise, Their image vain thou vvilt despise. My heart imbittred vvas perplexed, I in my reins vvas prickt and vexed. I vvas as bruitish vvithout sense, Depriued of intelligence: I in thy sight vvas as a beast, And in my ovvn account the least. Yet neuertheles I am vvith thee, And so I hope shall euer be: For thy right hand, me firm vpholdeth, VVhich vnto me thy loue vnfoldeth. The counsell vvhich thou vvilt me giue, Shall guide me safely vvhile I liue: And after vvhen this life I leaue, To glory thou vvilt me receiue. VVhat help or hope in heau'n aue I, But only thee vvho dvvelst on high? On earth I none but thee desired, To thee alone I haue aspired. No arme of flesh for me preuailes, My courage and my heart me failes: God is the strength of my poore heart, He euer is my choice, my part. For loe all them that thee forsake, Destruction quite avvay shall take: For thou hast euery one consumed, False gods to vvorship vvho presumed. But as for me, I hold it best, To dravv neare God to him addrest: I trust in God, in him I rest, By me his vvorkes shall be exprest. Psalme 74. Prayer. WHy Lord hast thou for euer vs off cast? VVhy is thy vvrath and fury so inflamed Against thy flock, thy congregation named, Thy pasture sheep, that thou forgot them hast▪
Think thou on thy ovvn people bought of old, The rod of thy inheritance esteemed, Thy mercy svveet hath dearly it redeemed, In Sion mount thy dvvelling thou didst hold. Stand vp and let thy povvrfull feet stamp dovvn hy foes for their perpetuall desolation: VVhose sacriledge and vvastfull deuastation, Haue all things in thy Temple ouerthrovvn. Insulting foes, a rude tumultuous rout VVith out-cryes fierce, and horrid exclamations, Make vvar against thy sacred congregations, Set banners vp for trophes round about. As vvorkmen strog, contending for renovvn, VVith lofty strokes, sharp axes, armes of vigor, In forrests thick, vvith mighty force and rigor, Make haste to fell the vvel-grovvn Cedars dovvn. So novv the posts ingrau'd, caru'd curiously, The polisht stones in corners of thy Temple: They cut and spoil those buildings past example, With axes and vvith hammers furiously. VVith fire they burn, vvirh hands prophane pollute, Thy Sanctuary dovvn cast, ruinated: The dvvelling place of thy Name violated, All cruelties theron they execute. Proceed, say they, come let vs out of hand Destroy them all together, they haue burned Gods Temples all, and into ashes turned All Synagogues of GOD, throughout the land. Pause. Novv vve no signe of vvonted comfort see, Nor any hope at all thy fauour shevveth: No Prophet novv there is, nor one that knovveth Hovv long vve shall endure this misery. Hovv long O Lord? hovv long vvilt thou abide This vile reproch? this scoffing aduersary?
Shall they blaspheme thy Name, thy Sanctuary, For euermore? Both thee and vs deride? VVhy dost thou thus thy hand from vs vvith-hold, Thy mighty right hand, thervvith vs defend thou, Vs to restore, thy povvrfull arme extend thou, For euer shall thy bosom it infold? Lord it is thou vvho from antiquitie, My royall King hast bin, thou hast me guided: Thou hast for me saluation sure prouided, Throughout the earth, from danger didst me free: Thou didst diuide the Sea by thy great might, The Dragons in the vvaters thou hast killed, The shores along, and riuers thou hast filled VVith monsters huge, slain in the main out-right. Thou gau'st the flesh of those sea monsters king, To them that dvvell in desarts to deuovver: And thou hast made by thy almighty povver, From out hard rocks, clear fountains fresh to spring. The torrents strong streame thou hast dride vp quite, The day, the night, at thy command abideth, Created vvere they by thy hand that guideth The shining Sun, and comfortable light: Tis thou alone, vvho after thine ovvn vvill, The borders of the earth hast scituated: The summer thou, and vvinter hast created, And all thy vvorks thy pleasure do fulfill: Pause. Do not O Lord forget our enemies, Thy glory hovv they haue reprocht, reuiled: Hovv vvith their tongs the foolish haue defiled Thy sacred Name, vvhich they blaspheme, despise. Thy Turtle true, vvith multitudes beset Of vvicked foes thy Doue, thy Deare, thy ievvell, Commit not thou to their hands, vvho are cruell, For euer do not thou the poore forget.
Consider thou thy gracious couenant made, For novv the earth is full of caues obscured, Wherin lurke theeues to bloud and spoil inured, VVho vvith all rage and fury vs inuade. O let not thou the poore returne vvith shame, Refuse not thou the cryes of men oppressed, Let not the poore be euermore distressed, But giue them cause to sing and praise thy Name. A rise O Lord, implead, improue thy right, Remember hovv the foolish folk defame thee: Hovv senselesly they do reproach and blaine thee, From day to day, thy honor they despite. Forget not LORD the vprores, the loud cryes Of those thy foes, vvith fury fierce inraged, The tumults rude increase, still vnassvvaged, Of enemies vvho vp against thee rise. Psalme 75. Thanksgiuing and Doctrin. LOrd our God, vve vvill praise thee, We vvill praise thee for thy Name: And the glory of the same, Neer and deer appeares to be, This thy vvondrous vvorks declare, VVhich for vs performed are. VVhen I ore the people raign, Iustly shall I iudg the same: Though the earth be out of frame, And all that therin remain, I shall set them right again, All the pillers I sustain. Selah. To the foolish, this said I, Do not bear your selues so bold: You that vvickednes vphold, Lift not vp your horn so high:
Set not vp so high your horn, Speak notvvith such pride and scorn. For of this yourselues assure, That preferment comes not forth From the East, VVest, South, or North: Being come, is not secure. God is Iudg of high renovvn. He sets vp, and he puts dovvn. God holds in his hand of povvr, Flagons flovving vvith red vvine, He the mixture doth assigne, And therof he forth doth povvr: Wicked men out of this cup Shall vvring dregs, and drink them vp. But for euer I vvill sing To the God of Iacob praise, Of his honor frame my layes. Wicked horns I off vvill vvring, But exalt the glorious might Of all those that vvalk vpright. Psalme 76. Thanksgiuing. IN Iuda, GOD the LORD is knovvn, He there hath vvoon eternall fame, In Israel of great renovvn, And glory, is his mighty Name. In Salem is his house excelling, In Sion is his sacred dvvelling. He brake the main battalions there, VVithout compare his forces are: Bovves, shafts, svvords, spears shields, shiuered vvere By his hands, thunderbolts of vvar. Selah. More excellent art thou, victorious Then mounts of prey, O thou most glorious.
The stout of heart, the haughty minde, All spoiled are, haue slept their sleep: None of the mighty men could finde, Or hands or hearts themselues to keep. O God of Iacob thy face frovvned, Both horse and charriot slept, and drovvned. Thou art of vvondrous dreadfull might, Thee all do fear, and only thee: For vvho can stand before thy sight, VVhen angry thou beginst to be? From heau'n vvas heard thy iudgment thundring, The earth did fear vvith silent vvondring. VVhen God arose in maiestie To iudgment, giuing sentence iust: Then vvere the meek on earth set free, And saued, vvho in him did trust. Selah. For vvhen mans vvrath most fiercely burneth, It to thy greater glory turneth. But of that rage vvhat doth remain, Thou vvilt restrain vvithout delay. Make vovves to God ye thankfull train, VVhat hearts haue vovved, let hands pay. You that are sau'd by his safe guiding, VVho round about him haue your biding. From dangers freed, bring offrings free To God vvith thanks, rich presents beare, Who neer and deer vnto him be, VVhom all that feared are, do feare. VVho Princes pride prunes off, dovvn smiteth, Terrestriall Kings vvith terrors frighteth. Psalme 77. Doctrin. WIth my voyce to God I cryed, To him I my plaints applyed: I to God my voyce did reare, He to me gaue gracious care. In the day I vvas distressed, To the LORD I me addressed. Nightly sorrovves did not cease, Hands erected sought release. Former comforts vvhich I vsed, My sad soul hath novv refused. God remembring, grief I found, still my troubles did abound.
VVith my hearts desire vnfained, I vnto my God complained: Grief my soul did ouerthrovv, Being ouervvhelmd vvith vvoe. Thou my eyes didst hold from sleeping, Night and day avvake them keeping: Much amazement me assayld, That to speak, my tong me fayld. Then vvith better thoughts inspired, Dayes of old, long since expired, I considering, thought vpon Ancient yeares, times past and gon. I to minde those songs recorded, Which my tuned Harp afforded Of Gods mercy, iustice, might, Meditated in the night▪ In my serious meditation I had much communication, With my heart, much talk I found, Soundly I my soul did sound. VVill the Lord novv quite reiect vs? VVill he neuer more protect vs? Is his mercy euer gone? Will he neuer heare our mone? Will the Lord be absent euer? VVill he shevv his fauor neuer? Neuer shall his grace preuail? Shall his Word for euer fail? Pause. Hath our God, our sole Defender, Quite forgot his mercy tender? Can it be that our God hath Selah. Shut his mercy vp in vvrath? And I said, my grief expressing,
This my vveaknes is, confessing: But recall to minde vvill I, Yeares of Gods right hand most high. Ile record the sacred story Of Gods actions full of glory: All thy vvonders vvrought of old, To remembrance shall be told. Of thy vvorkes, the obseruation Shall be all my meditation: My discourse shall be vpon All the deedes that thou hast done. Lord, thy vvay doth neuer vary From thy sacred Sanctuary: Nor can any Deitie With our God compared be. Thou art God, vvho euery hovver VVorkest vvonders by thy povver: Thou in all the peoples sight Hast declard thy strength and might. People vvhich are thine esteemed, With thine arme thou hast redeemed: Iacobs sons thou dost defend, And from Ioseph vvhich descend. Selah Thee O God the vvaters spyed, Seeing thee vvere terrified: Seas beholding thee did shake, Depths vvith dread of thee did quake. Dark thick clouds the rain dovvn povvred, From the skyes the vvaters shovvred, VVith loud noise and dreadfull sound, Heau'ns high arches did rebound. Forth thy shafts flevv, vvorking vvonders, From the heaun's vvere heard thy thunders: Lightning flashes flaming bright, Gaue the vvorld amazing light. Earths foundations moued, shaking Fearfully, it trembled quaking: Thy vvayes are in seas vnknovvn, Nor can there thy steps be shovvn, Thou thy people hast instructed Them like sheep thou hast conducted To the promis'd plenteous land, By Moses and Aarons hand.
Psalme. Lxxviij Exhortation. ATtentiue be vnto my Lavv declared, My people all, let your eares be prepared The vvords to heare vvhich my mouth novv propoundeth, My voyce to you a parable expoundeth, Which I vvill shevv, and vnto you vnfold, Graue secrets hid, dark sentences of old. Which vve haue knovvn, & many times haue heard them, VVhen to vs our forefathers haue declar'd them. VVhich shall not from their children be concealed To future times they shall be all reuealed. The praise and povvr of God shall be made knovvn, And all his vvorks of vvonder shall be shovvn. For he a league in Iacob firm hath planted, And he a Lavv to Israel hath granted, VVhich his command appointed and ordained, That it should be establisht and maintained. That ages all the same might propagate, And fathers to their children it relate. That they in God might place their expectation, And nere forget his mighty operation: To keep his lavves, his statutes all obseruing, From his decrees, not as their fathers svveruing: VVhose stubborn hearts vvere neuer set aright, Nor to the LORD vvere faithfull in their sprite. Pause. For Ephraims tribe, vvhose strength & skill abounded VVith bovves vvel armd, yet vvere they foild & vvounded, Their valor all in day of battell faild them, Who turnd their backs as soon as foes assaild them: Because they did not Gods decrees obay, And of his lavv refus'd to vvalk the vvay. Those mighty acts, those deeds incomparable, Those vvondrous vvorks, and maruels admirable,
VVhich he to them had shevvd, they quite forgate them, Vnthankfull they did not commemorate them. He vvonders vvrought in their forefathers sight, In Egypt and in Zoan by his might. The vvaters of the red sea he diuided, Through midst vvherof his people he safe guided: The sea like vvals on both sides heapt he reared, And vvith a clovvd vvhich vnto them appeared, Did lead them forth by day and all the night, A flame of fire made shine to giue them light. In desarts vvilde, the rocks he rent and cleaued, From vvhence as from deep streams, they drink receiued, In stony rocks his povvrfull might he shovved, From vvhence at his command great flouds there flovved. The vvaters he made gushing forth abound, Like riuers they did ouerflovv the ground. Pause. Yet ne'retheles to sinne they neuer ceased, The most high God prouoking, they displeased. They tempted him vvith in their hearts, desiring In vvanton lust, flesh meat of him requiring. Full fed, complaint for dainty food they made, Repiningly against the LORD they said, In desarts here, can God (vvhere he doth guide vs) A table full of plenteous food prouide vs? Behold he smote the rock, that vvater gushed, The streams flovvd forth, and torrent like they rushed. But can he giue such store of flesh and bread, That thervvith all the people may be fed? The LORD heard this, therfore his anger burned, His patience milde to fury fierce vvas turned: The fire did flame in Iacobs habitation, On Israel ceazd his fierce indignation. Because in God alone no faith they had, Nor did they trust to haue him for their ayd. Although the Lord almighty, charge had giuen Vnto the clouds that are aboue in heauen, The dores vvherof to set vvide ope he daigned, And Manna had vpon his people rained, Which he did giue vnto them for to eat, And earthly men he fed vvith heau'nly vvheat. Pause. To mortall men, O vvonder admirable, He gaue the bread of Angels delectable, Whervvith he them euen vnto fulnes filled.
The vvindes to moue vvithin the air he vvilled, He in the heau'ns the East vvinde causd to blovv, The South vvinde he brought thither in also. By vvhich means, flesh vpon them dovvn he shovvred, As numberles as dust on them he povvred: And fethred fovvles, most delicate and dainty, As sand on sea shore for abundant plenty. Within the midst of their camp, dovvn it fell, And round about the tents vvhere they did dvvell. So they did eat of that store he supplyed, Their greedines he fully satisfied, Their vvish he gaue, his bounty exercising, Their hunger ceas'd, but not their gurmondising: Their luxurie and lust they did retain, While in their mouthes their meat did yet remain. Euen then the vvrath of GOD vpon them seazed, And slevv the chief before he vvas appeased, Of Israel, the choisest men selected, He in his vvrath, did smite them dovvn deiected. Yet stubbornly to sin they ceased not, His vvondrous vvorks neglecting they forgot. Pause. Their dayes vvere spent in vanity and errors, And their best yeares in sudden plagues and terrors. When euery one savv present death before him, They sought the LORD, for mercy they implore him: And presently returned from their sin, And early sought the LORD, his grace to vvin. They cald to minde▪ then in their tribulation, That God the strong rock is of their saluation: The most high God, their sauer they esteemed, Acknovvledging that he had them redeemed.
But vvith their mouth they spake dissemblingly, Their glosing tong did flatter, fain and ly. For in their hearts, vvith God they dealt vntruly, Disloyall, they his Lavv obseru'd not duly: Yet ne'rtheles he to them fauourable, Did pardon all their sins abhominable. He slevv them not, but svvag'd his anger great, Nor did he stir vp all his vvrathfull heat. For he did vvell consider and remember They vvere but flesh, frail, feeble, vveake, and tender, As vvinde doth passe avvay, no more returning. Hovv bitterly oft times in their soiourning Did they prouoke him in the vvildernes, I'th desart grieue him by their vvickednes! Pause. Yet they again their former sins attempted, Vngraciously their gracious GOD they tempted, And limited the GOD of povvr vnbounded, The holy one of Israel they bounded. They quite forgot his hand, the day that he From all their foes did set them safe and free. In Egypt he vvrought vvonders admirable, In Zoan fields shevvd signes reformidable: For all their pooles and riuers of cleare vvater, He turnd to bloud, and filthy gory matter: That they became so loathsom did so stink, Although their thirst increas'd, they could not drink. Of vermin svvarus, so thick he sent among them▪ That greedily did them deuovvr, and stong them: Them he vvith frogs corrupted and annoyed, Their fruits and trees he gaue to be destroyed, And their increase, to Locusts of the field, Their vvorks he did to caterpillers yeeld. Their fruitfull Vines vvith hail he stroid and vvasted, Their Sycomores vvith frosts and tempests blasted: He to the hayle gaue vp their heards inclosed, To thunderbolts he all their flocks exposed: On them he cast rhe fiercenes of his ire, His furious vvrath against them burnt like fire. On them he tooke iust vengeance for offending, Enrag'd among them, euill angels sending:
He to his vvrath a ready vvay prepared, Their soul from death, he nor vvith-held nor spared. From Pestilence their life he did not saue, But their vvilde beasts he to the morain gaue. Pause. Their first born he throughout all Egypt killed, Their firstlings all vvith deadly stroke he thrilled: In all Chams tents, of all their youth the flovver, And prime of all their strength, did death deuovver▪ But his ovvn folke, like to a flock of sheep, I'th vvildernes he safe did guide and keep. He led them safe vvithout all feare secured, To drovvn their foes, the vvaters he procured: And them of feare, their foes of life depriued, They neer vnto his holy place arriued. To borders of this mountain he them brought, Which his right hand had purchased and bought. Before them he the heathen people chased, His people he in their possessions placed: To Israels tribes their lands by lot assigned, Yet they vvere still to stubbornes inclined. For they the most high tempting, did prouoke, His statutes they neglecting quite forsooke. For they turndback, vnfaithfully departing From his decrees, as their forefathers, starting Aside, like to a bovv deceitfull proued, They him to vvrath vvith their high places moued: They him prouokt to irefull iealousie, With idols vain, and grau'n imagery. Pause. VVhen God heard this, his anger vvas exceeding, To shevv his vvrath, inflamed vvas proceeding: He Israel abhorred and disdained,
He Shilo left, vvhere he had long remained, In sacred Tent diuine, vvhich he did place Among fraile men, vvho vvere of earthly race. He yeelded vp his strength to be captiued, The beauty of his glory vvas depriued By force of foes: his people to the povver Of bloudy svvords, he gaue them to deuovver: So deadly vvas his dreadfull anger mou'd Against his ovvn inheritance approu'd. Their choise yong men his vvrathfull flame destroyed, Their Virgins praise, nor nuptiall feast inioyed: Nor vvere they grac'd nor giu'n in vvedlock sacred, Their Priests did fall by murdring svvord massacred. Their vviddovvs these euents did not bevvail, For them their life, or sense, or heart did fail. But yet the Lord not vtterly forsaking His once belou'd, as one from sleep avvaking, As after vvine a Champion strength renevveth, With shovvts and strokes his flying foes pursevveth: His enemies so he behinde them smites, With pain and shame deserued, them requites. Pause. Also the tent of Ioseph he refused, Nor as his choise, the tribe of Ephraim vsed: The royall tribe of Iuda he elected, Fair Sions mount vvhich he lou'd and affected. His sacred house he builded in that place, As palaces that be of highest grace. His palace there, his holy habitation, He stablished vpon a sure foundation, Like to the earth vvhich he for euer founded, To his elect so hath his loue abounded: He of his seruant Dauid, choise did make, And from the folds of sheep he did him take. From keeping evves that pregnant vvere he brought him And faithfully to feed his sheep he taught him: Iacob to him, and Israel he committed His heritage, and therunto him fitted. Who feeding them, intire his heart did bide, With vvisdom them his faithfull hand did guide.
Psalme Lxxix. Prayer. THe heathen haue thy heritage obtained, Thy holy house O Lord they haue prophaned; Ierusalem thy sacred habitation, On heaps is laid, and brought to desolation. Thy Saints dead bodies they To fovvls of heau'n for prey; Haue cast vvithout the city Thy seruants flesh made food For vvild beasts of the vvood, Inhumane voyd of pitty. Thy Saints about Ierusalem vvere killed, Their bloud despis'd, vpon the ground vvas spilled, Like vvater streames on euery side it flovved, A graue on their dead corpses none bestovved. VVho neer to vs abide, Reproch vs and deride, They scoffe, and scorn and flout vs. VVe falsly are condemd, Disgraced and contemd By them that dvvell about vs. Hovv long vvith vs Lord vvilt thou be displeased? For euermore vvilt thou nere be appeased? And shall thy vvrath inflam'd nere be assvvaged? Like fire, still burns thy iealousse inraged? Those Nations ouerthrovv, That neuer thee did knovv, On them thy vvrath dovvn povver, And on those kingdoms all, Who neuer yet did call Vpon thy Name of povver.
For Iacob they haue eaten and deuoured, And on his race, destruction they haue povvred, They desart quite haue made his habitation, His dvvelling place haue brought to desolation. Our sins remember not, O let all be forgot, VVhich euer vve committed. Make haste our souls to saue, Thy mercy let vs haue, For vve are lovv submitted. Pause. Assist thou vs O GOD of our saluation, Because of thy Names glorious exaltation, Deliuer vs, for our safegard prouide thou, For thy Name sake, all our offences hide thou. Why should the heathen say, VVhere is their God I pray? To them vvho God regard not. In our sight make him knovvn, By vengeance on them shovvn, Thy seruants bloud vvho spar'd not. O let the sighs of prisners poore tormented, Before thy face, vvith fauour be presented; According to the greatnes of thy povver, Saue them aliue, vvhom death threats to deuovver. Our neighbours to repay Seau'n-fold, do not delay, Into their bosom render Reproch and infamie, Thervvith they raild on thee, Thy self O Lord remember. So shall vve all, thy people, seruants loyall, The pasture sheep of thee our shepheard royall: Thy praises sing in an eternall story, From age to age, Lord of supernall glory. Psalme 80. Prayer. HEar vs, thy Israel vvho feedest, VVho like a flock thy Ioseph leadest Vouchsafe to shevv, to vs thy grace, That vve may vievv thy shining face. Thou that dost dvvell in maiesty, Betvveen the Cherubs gloriously.
March thou before, in might and povver, Be Ephraims defensiue tovver: Go thou before thy Beniamin, Before Manasseh, glory vvin: Stir vp thy strength, thy ayd vve craue, Vs novv at length vouchsafe to saue. To former freedom, Lord restore vs, Return thou vs, and shine before vs: Shevv thou to vs thy glorious face, And vs inlighten by thy grace: Defend thou vs, and so shall vve By thy protection saued be. Lord God of hosts insuperable, Hovv long shall thy vvrath formidable, Thus smoke against thy peoples prayr? Thou feedest them vvith bread of care, They drink the cups vvhich thou dost fill With teares, vvhich from their eyes distill. VVe are a strife to all about vs, Our enemies do mock and flout vs: Deriding vs vvith scornfull spight, Return thou vs O God of might: Thy face let shine on vs, that vve By grace of thine may saued be. Pause. From Egypt thou a Vine approued Hast brought, the heathen hast remoued, And planted it, them far didst chase, Mad'st room for it, prepard a place VVhere grovving, it deep root did take, To fill the land, thou it didst make. The shade therof did spred and couer The neighboring hils, and mountains ouer: The boughs it stretched forth abroad, VVere like the Cedar trees of God,
It branches to the sea did send, The sprigs to the riuers did extend. VVhy hast thou broke the hedg, vvaste layd it? All passengers their prey haue made it: The sauage Boare out of the vvood, Hath rooted all vp vvhere it stood. To herds of beasts it seru'd for meat, Vntill they it quite vp had eat, Lord God of hosts insuperable, From heau'n return thou fauourable: Behold and visit this thy Vine, So planted by that hand of thine. This branch see hovv it is decayd Which for thy self so strong vvas made. It is cut dovvn, destroyd, and burned, The fire hath it to ashes turned, They all shall perish at thy frovvn, But let thy hand that man renovvn, VVho to thy right hand doth belong' VVhom thou hadst for thy self made strong. And so shall vve forsake thee neuer, Reuiue thou vs, and vve shall euer Call on thy Name, thy praises sing: Return vs Lord of hosts, our King. Let thy face shine on vs, that vve By grace of thine may saued be. Psalme 81. Thanksgiuing. SIng vve vvith loud voyce to God our saluation. Make a ioyfull noyse, Iacobs God praise vve, sing Psalms ioyfully, sing vvith exultation. Sing a ioyfull song, holy pleasure taking, Instruments among, Timbrel, Pipe, and Flute, Psaltry, Harp, and Lute, consort musicke making. Euery moon in Prime, blovv the trumpet, sounding At appointed time, keep your festiuall, Merry make, vvith all ioyfull chear abounding▪ For to Israel, this Lavv he ordained, Who in heau'n doth dvvell, Iacobs God is he, Who did this decree still to be maintained.
Vnto Iosephs seed, he this couenant granted, VVhen they being freed, did from Egypt range, Of vvhose language strange, they the knovvledge vvanted. Pause. Burdens I did take from their shoulders pained, Them I free did make, from base labour spar'd, From task-masters hard, vnder thrall constrained. Thou distrest didst call, I by vvorks of vvonder Set thee free from thrall, ansvvering thee vvith grace From the secret place of dark clouds and thunder. Yet at Meribah vvaters of contention, I thee prou'd vvhich vvay thy heart vvas inclinde, Vndermin'd thy minde, sounded thy intention. O my people hear, I protest vnto thee, Thou to me art deare, O my Israel Mark vvhat I shall tell, giue good eare vnto me. No strange gods haue thou, from my seruice changing, To them do not bovv, no false gods adore, Nor their ayd implore, thee from me estranging. Thy Lord God am I, vvho from Egypt brought thee, Thou my povvr didst try, I did set thee free From the crueltie of them that ore-vvrought thee. Pause. Thy mouth open vvide, it shall be fulfilled, Thou shalt be supplide daily more and more With my blessings store, dovvn on thee distilled. But my people dear vvhom I thus inuited, My voyce vvould not hear, and my Israel My vvords did repell, me their God they slighted. Then I gaue them ore to their hearts intentions, Let them as before vvalk in vvayes vniust, To themselues to trust, and their ovvn inuentions.
O my folk indeard, that ye had obeyed My vvords vvhich ye heard, O that Israel VVhom I lou'd so vvell, had not from me strayed. Suddenly all those I vvould haue subdevved, VVho had bin thy foes, all that the distrest, I vvould haue supprest, vvith my hand pursevved. All that hatred beare to rhe Lord supernall, Shall submit for feare, and their time shall sure Euermore endure, it shall be eternall. I vvith flovvr of vvheat fully had supplide them, Fed them vvith svveet meat, them vvith hony sild, From the rock distild, I had satisfide them. Psalme 82. Doctrin. GOd is amidst the congregation VVhere Princes meet in consultation. As Iudg supreme, his place hee takes Mongst Iudges, vvhom as Gods he makes. Hovv long vvill ye in place of iustice, Avvard such sentence as vniust is? Far off from equity ye erre, For ye the vvickeds cause prefer Selah. Do iustice to the poore oppressed, Relieue the fatherles, distressed. The guiltles innocent defend, And to the helples, succor send. Make haste them to deliuer speedy, VVho are afflicted, poore and needy: Them free from their oppressors hand, Their vvicked cruell foes vvithstand,
But ignorant, they doe not knovv it, Nor vvill they vnderstand or shovv it: They vvalk obscure vvithout remorse, That all the earth is out of course. Although as gods I haue you stiled, Be not deceiued nor beguiled: For though vnto you this said I, Ye children are of the most high. Yet do not think your selues immortall, For ye shall dy as men, as mortall▪ As earthly Princes, so ye shall From high estate, deiected fall. Arise O GOD, iudg thou the Nations, And gouern thou all congregations: For to inherit, appertains To thee all that on earth remains. Psalme 83. Prayer. IN silence Lord hold not thy peace, Delay not thou, nor longer cease: Defer not Lord, be still no longer, For lo thy foes in tumults rising, Exalt themselues, thy povvr despising, Make head against thee, still grovv stronger. Against thy people they combine, Take counsell them to vndermine: They meet in secret consultations, Against them vvhom thy bosom hideth, For vvhom thy secret loue prouideth▪ They plot mischieuous machinations. Come let vs all their land inuade, And cut them all quite off, they said,
That they may cease be a Nation, That they confounded and ashamed, May Israel no more be named, But lose their names commemoration. For they together counsell take, Against thee they a league do make. The Edomites and Ishmalitish, The Moabitish generation, And those that be of Hagars nation, The Gebalites and Ammonitish. VVith them doth Amalec conspire, The Philistims and they of Tyre, Together haue their forces ioyned, Assyrian Ashur, hath applyed His arm of strength, and fortified The sons of Lot, vvith them combined. Selah So in thy anger deal vvith them, As once thou didst vvhen Kishon strem The Midianites drovvnd and destroyed, As Sisera and Iabin flying▪ Were slain at Endor, putrifying Became as dong, the fields annoyed. Pause. Make thou their Nobles like Oreb, Their Kings and them like to Zeeb. Like Zeba and Salmana Princes, Who said, come let vs novv addres vs, Of all Gods houses to posses vs, And them adioyn to our Prouinces. My God make them like rovvling vvheels, As chaffe or stubble, tumbling reeles, Which circling round, the vvhirlvvind turneth, As fuell vvhich the forrests beareth. The fire consumes, flame scorching seareth, The mountain tops to povvder burneth. So them Lord vvith thy storm surround, And suddenly consume, confound With tempests of thy fury fierie, Their faces fill vvith shame distained, That they therby may be constrained, After thy Name to make inquirie. Let them be sham'd, their hope make voyd,
Let them be vtterly destroyd, And make them knovv this vnderstanding, That thou alone art God eternall: Dread sou'raigne Lord, supreme, supernall, Heau'n, earth, and all therin commanding. Psalme 84. Prayer. LOrd God of hosts, hovv louely fair, Hovv svveet thy dvvelling places are: Hovv pleasing and hovv amiable My longing soul faints vvith desire: That to thy courts I might aspire, VVhose beauty is so admirable: My heart, my flesh▪ doth pant and cry▪ The liuing God to come more nigh. The Sparrovv findes a house to rest, The svvallovv vvith her yong do nest Near to thy Altar safe abiding, Lord God of hosts, my God, my King, O vvhen vvilt thou me thither bring, My steps vnto thy Temple guiding▪ They all in thy house blessed be, There still they vvill be praising thee. Selah. Blest is the man, vvhose strength thou art, To vvhom thou fauor vvilt impart: Their heart to thy path-vvayes applying, They pas the vale vvhere berries grovv Through places dry, vvhere teares do ovv: On thee the vvell of life relying, Deep pits they dig in thirst and pain, For springs to fill, and shovvrs of rain. Pause. From strength to strength they forvvard go▪
Till Sion they attain vnto, Before the Lord their God appearing. Lord God of hosts vvhose povvr and might Doth guide and gouern all by right: Grant my request, my prayer hearing, Lord God of Iacob, vvhen to thee I make my suit, giue eare to me. Selah. O God our shield, behold the face Of thy annointed, look vvith grace, For better is one dayes abiding With thee, then thousands elsevvhere be: Much rather vvould I choose for me To keep thy gates therat residing, Then lord it vvith the vvicked train, Chief in their Palace to remain. For God the Lord is gracious, He is a sun and shield to vs: Our God vvill giue grace and saluation, With glory high to be extoll'd: And no good thing vvill he vvith-hold From men of vpright conuersation. Lord God of hosts, that man is blest, VVhose hope and trust in thee doth rest. Psalme 85. Doctrin. LOrd to thy land, thy grace thou didst declare, Thou Iacob hast freed from captiuity, Thy peoples sins by thee all cou'red are, Thou hast forgiuen them their iniquity. Thou tookst avvay thy anger and thy rage, The fiercenes of thy vvrath thou didst assvvage, O God of our saluation, vs returne, Cease thou thy vvrath against vs, vvhich doth burn.
From age to age shall still thy vvrath remain, For euer vvilt thou vvith vs angry be? VVhy vvilt thou not reuiue vs once again, That people thine may all reioyce in thee. Eternall God, to vs thy mercy shovv, Thy sauing health on vs daigne to bestovv: VVith fauor thine, vouchsafe vs to embrace, Once more let vs inioy thy glorious grace. Novv vnto God the Lord vvill I giue eare, That I may knovv vvhat he to vs vvill say: He vvill speak peace to vvhom he loue doth beare, And he his Saints from sins relaps vvill stay. To them that feare him and to them that fly To him for ayd, is his saluation nigh, VVhich to his ovvn is surely neare at hand, That glory may inhabit in our land. His mercy and his truth together meet, Iustice and peace each other kissing greet: And faithfulnes out of the earth shall rise, And righteousnes shall look dovn from the skyes. The Lord shall giue that vvhich is good vvith peace, And fruitfull make the land yeeld large increase. In brief, before him in his righteous vvay, All shall go right and strait, not one shall stray. Psalme 86. Prayer. TO my humble supplicatiō, Lord giue eare & acceptatiō, Hear me novv, so vveak, so poor, That ah I can beare no more. Saue my life O my defēder, for my holy heart is tender, Saue thy seruant Lord most iust, for in thee alone I trust. After thy svveet vvonted fashion, shovvr dovvn mercy and cōpassion On me, for incessantly vnto thee O Lord I cry. Send O Lord reuiuing gladnes To my soul opprest vvith sadnes, Which frō clog of earth set free, vving'd vvith zeale, flyes vnto thee, To thee rich in mercies treasure, And in goodnes vvithout measure, Neuer failing help to those, vvho on thy sure help repose.
Let thy eares vvhich haue bin closed, To my prairs be novv vnclosed, That my cryes may entrance gain, entred may thy grace obtain. As I haue, so vvill I euer, in my stormy time perseuer, Vnto thee to pray and cry, for thou hearst me instantly. No God else is comparable vnto thee, none else is able Once to coūterfeit but one of the vvorks that thou hast done Nations all thy hand did fashion, And of this round globe each Nation, With bovvd knee shall com before thee, and thy great name adore. For thou darter of heau'ns thunders, Thou art great, and vvorkest vvonders, Other gods are vvood and stone, thou the liuing God alone, Teach me Lord thy vvay, conduct me, Walking in thy truth, instruct me: Knit my heart to thee sincere, thy most sacred name to feare Lord my God thou shalt be praised, With my heart to heau'n vpraised, And vvhile I haue breath to liue, Thanks to thee my breath shall giue. For vvhē iustice I deserued, thy svveet mercy me preserued Rescuing me from deaths sharp clavvs, And from hels deep svvallovving lavves. Lord the proud vvith malice endles, band against me help. Vsing vvithout feare of thee, fraud or force to ruin me. But thy might their malice passes, And thy grace, thy might surpasses, Svvift to mercy, slovv to vvrath, bound nor end thy goodnes hath. Thy kind looks no more deny me, But vvith eyes of mercy eye me. Me thy seruāt giue at length, easing ayd or bearing strength: Some good gracious token shevv me, That my foes vvho seek t'orethrovv me, May be sham'd or vext to see thee to help and comfort me. Psalme 87. Prayer and prophecy. ON sacred hils and mountains, her foundations The Lord hath layd, they neuer shall remoue, Fair Sions gates the most high God doth loue Aboue the rest of Iacobs habitations. What glorious things throughout the vvorld reported, Are said of thee, thou City of the Lord: Selah. Of Babylon and Rahab I'le record, And mention them among my friends consorted,
The Tyrians, Mores, Philistims, euery nation, Shall citizens becom, and natiues there: It shall be said of Sion, that in her All people had their birth and education, The Lord vvhose Word most sure he doth rely on, His Sion vvill establish by his might: The people there recounting, he vvill vvrite, The Nations and all others born in Sion. Selah. VVith instruments and voyces ioyfull singing, His honor high they all shall euer sound: Thus saith the Lord, in Sion shall abound My fount of grace for euer freshly springing. Psalme 88. Prayer. ETernall Lord, my Sauer dear, Both day and night my cryes implore thee, O let my prayer come before thee: Vnto thy presence entring near: Incline to heare, thy eare applying To my sad plaints, and rufull crying. My soul is fild vvith misery, My life dravves to the graue neer ending, VVith them that dovvnvvard are descending In dungeon deep account they me, To help my self I am vnable, A strengthles man, poor, vveak, vnstable. Among the dead, become as free, As if some murdrous hand had slaine me, And that the graue did entertain me: As if thou hadst forgotten me: As thy remembrance me had balked▪ As from thy hand I vvere defalked.
I'th lovvest pit thou hast me layd, In darknes deep vncomfortable, Thy heauy vvrath insupportable, To ouerpres me thou hast made. VVith all thy vvaues thou hast me vexed, With storms and tempests me perplexed. Selah. Me far from my acquaintance all, Thou hast remou'd, they care not for me, VVhom late they lou'd, they novv abhor me, And thou hast shut me vp in thrall, Close prisner made in such a tovver, From vvhence to scape, I haue no povver. Pause. Through anguish vvasted vvas my fight, O Lord to thee my griefe vnfolding, I daily call, my hands vpholding. Wilt thou to dead men shevv thy might, And vvilt thou them vvith povver enable, To knovv thy vvonders admirable? Selah Shall dead men rise to magnifie Thee, vvith vvhom none may be compared, And shall thy kindnes be declared By them that in the graue do ly. Shall they vvhom thou hast quite destroyed, To praise thy iustice be imployed. Shall thy great vvonders vvrought, be shovvn Where darknes euermore remaineth, I'th land vvherin obliuion raigneth, Shall there thy righteousnes be knovvn. VVith these my cryes, Lord I implore thee, My earely prayr shall come before thee. Lord vvhy dost thou my soul reiect, And hid'st thy face from me in anguish, Afflicted from my youth I languish, Expiring, present death expect. Enduring thy affrighting terrors, Distracted still vvith doubtfull errors. Thy uries fierce pas ouer me, Thy horrors, feares, dismay, confound me, Like vvater-flouds about surround me, On euery side continually.
The dread of them doth make me tremble, VVho to beleaguer me assemble. My knovvn acquaintance are estrang'd, My fellovv friends vvhich me haue loued, From me far off thou hast remoued, Their former loue to hate is chang'd: They in my grief no fauor shovv me, In darknes hid they vvill not knovv me: Psalme 89. Prayer. THe mercies of the Lord Ile sing continually: To ages all record his truths fidelity. For this is truth most sure, it cannot be denyed, His grace doth ay endure, establisht, verified. As heau'n perpetually, keepes course inuariable, So his fidelity, much more is firm, and stable. Th' eternall Lord hath said, vvith my ovvn folk elect, I haue a couenant made, and svvorn it to effect. On Dauid and his race, vvho is my seruant loyall, I vvill bestovv my grace, and bles vvith blessings royall: His throne I vvill aduance, and build his habitations, For his inheritance, throughout all generations. The heaun's O Lord shal praise thy vvondrous acts diuine, Thy faithfulnes alvvaies among thy Saints shall shine. For vvho is there so high aboue the clouds declared, Remaining in the sky vvith thee to be compared? Or vvho the children are of mighty States supernall, May they vvith thee compare, vvho art the Lord eternall? The Lord vvith fear renovvn'd, among his Saints vvil be, To all about him round, most reuerend is he. O Lord of armies might, thy strength is admirable, VVith thee in povvrfull fight, vvhat lord is comparable? Thy avvfull maiesty is all about surrounded With faithfull constancy vvhich euer hath abounded. Pause.
In thee alone it lyes to rule the raging seas, When vvaues therof arise, thou them dost soone appease. Proud Egypt thou struckst dovvn, al vvounded, ruinated, Thy foes thou hast orethrovvn, thy arm them dissipated. Both heau'n & earth are thine, The vvorlds store thou hast founded, By thy great povvr diuine & by thy might vnbounded. The north, east, south & vvest, by thee vvere plac'd & made West Tabor, Hermon east, in thy Name shall be glad. A mighty arm thou hast, thy hand is strong prepared, That thy right hand is plac'd on high thou hast declared. Iudgment and equity thy royall throne sustaineth, Thy truth and clemency before thy face remaineth. That people blessed is, vvho knovv the ioyfull sound, Their hopes do neuer mis, their comforts do abound: Lord they their vvalk shal frame, in light of thy face shining, Reioycing in thy Name from morn till dayes declining. Thy iustice to confes, They shall be dignified, And in thy righteousnes on high be magnified. For if vve strength obtain, vve shall thee glorifie, Thy fauor if vve gain, our might shall rise on high. Vs ayd he doth afford, against them that offend vs, He only is the Lord vvhose povver doth defend vs. He is out King alone, by vvhom vve are redressed, VVho is the holy one of Israel most blessed. Pause. Vnto thy sacred Saint, thy mind knovvn thou hast made, And thou didst him acquaint vvith thy vvill: thou hast said To him in vision, this my ayd I haue assigned To one vvho mighty is, and him therto inclined, I one haue raised high, on him my grace conferred, My seruant Dauid I among my folk preferred. I nointed haue his head vvith holy oyle, that long He shall raign stablished, my arm shall make him strong, That of his enemies fierce raging, fell and furious, Nor force nor subtilties shall be to him iniurious. The sons of vvickednes shall not deuovvr nor vex him, They shall not him oppres, nor haue povvr to perplex him. But I before his face, his foes vvill quite destroy, VVho hate him, I'le disgrace, and vvith sore plagues annoy My grace & truth shall he haue vvith him firmly placed, His horn of strength shall be in my Name highly graced. On seas I'le set his hand in his povvr comprehended, And make his other stand ore Euphrates extended.
Me father he shall call, and say, my God thou art, My rock vvho to me shall saluation sure impart. Him also make vvill I my first born son celestiall, In honor far more high then are the Kings terrestriall. My grace to him shall last for euer kept assured, My faithfull promise past shall stand for him secured. Pause. I'le propagate his seed to perpetuity, Time of his Throne decreed, as dayes of heau'n shall be. But if his children shall my sacred lavves abandon, From my iust iudgments fall, and loosely run at randon. If they my statutes blest, shall break or haue profaned, And keep not my behest, and precepts I ordained. That they t'offend may feare, my scorge their sin shall smite, With chastisement seuere, my strokes on them shall light. My grace ye neretheles, they shall not find frustrated, To them my faithfulnes shall not be abrogated. My promise shall remain for euer firm and stable, My Word I vvill maintain and keep inuiolable. Once by my holines, to Dauid svvorn haue I, That I the truth expres, and to him vvill not lye. His progeny and race shall euer be assured, His throne before my face establisht and secured. While Sun and Moon do shine vvithin the heau'ns enduring, As faithfull vvitnes mine, my verity assuring. Selah. But thou dost scorn vs novv, and vs thou dost reiect, Thine ovvn annointed thou in anger dost deiect. Thy couenant seems made voyd, vvith thy ovvn seruant loyall, Cast to the ground, destroyd, profaned his crovvn royall. His hedg thou hast broke dovvn and fenced habitations To ruin brought, orethrovvn his strong fortifications. Pause.
By all that pas him by, he spoiled is and torne, To all the dvvellers nigh, he is become a scorne. The hands thou high dost raise, of all our aduersaries, The hearts reioyce alvvaies of his foes and contraries. Of his svvord dravvn to fight, the edg thou hast rebated, In battel put to flight, by thee vvith fear amated. The glory of his Name thou hast made cease to sound, His throne of regall fame, thou hast cast to the ground. Thou shortned hast his dayes of youthfull strength and pleasure, And couerd him alvvaies vvith shame in grieuous measure. Hovv long Lord vvilt thou hide thy self frō vs quite turning For euer shall vve bide thy vvrath like fier burning. Remember vvell hovv short my life thou dost ordain, Why hast thou in this sort made all men be but vain. VVhat liuing man is he vvhom death shal not deuovver, Or vvho his soul can free from graues fast holding povver? VVhere are thy mercies Lord to vvhich vve vvere inured, To svvear thou didst accord, to Dauid truth assured. Remember Lord the scorn vvhich on thy seruants light, Hovv in my brest is born the shame, reproch, and spight Of all the multitude, they mock vs disappointed, They scoffe vvith speeches rude, the paths of thy annointed, Let vs the Lord adore, and praise him ceasing neuer, The Lord bles euermore, Amen, Amen, for euer. Psalme 90. Prayer of Moses. LOrd thou hast bin to vs a habitation From age to age in euery generation: Before the hils or spacious vvorlds creation, Long time before thou laidst the earths foundation, Before all things receiued form from thee, Thou Lord art God from all eternitie. By thee man to destruction is reduced, VVhen thou dost say return ye creatures mortall, To dust, from vvhence ye vvere at first produced. A thousand yeares vvith thee vvho art immortall, As yesterday are passed in thy sight▪ Or as a vvatch, one quarter of the night. Thy storms driue them avvay, and flouds ore-flovving,
They vanish as a dreame in sleep decayeth, As vvhen the morn his early beams displayeth, The flovvring gras doth flourish fairly grovving. I'th morn green grovvn at euen is cut avvay, And being movvn, is turn'd to vvither'd hay. For vve are quite consumed and destroyed Through thy iust vvrath, and thy deseru'd displeasure, We troubled are, and fearefully annoyed. For of our sins the grieuous heaped measure, Before thy face appeares, before thy sight, And thou hast brought our secret sins to light. Pause. For all our dayes are vvasted, aye sustaining The heauy vveight of thy iust indignation, Our yeares do end like to a brief narration. Our life is novv cut shorter, scarce attaining To seuenty yeares, but if by natures strength It eighty reach, vve count it vvondrous length. Of all our life the flovvr but sorrovv being, But grief and pain are our best dayes of vigor, Cut quickly off, and vve avvay are fleeing. VVho knovves the force of thy fierce vvrath & rigor? For as vve are affected vvith thy feare, Euen so to vs thine anger doth appeare. And novv O Lord vouchsafe thou to instruct vs, Our dayes to count, and times of life svvift flying, That vve our hearts to vvisdom true applying, It safely may to thee the vvay conduct vs. Return O Lord hovv long? thy vvrath appease, And let thy rage against thy seruants cease. Replenish vs betimes, vvith thy compassion, And vvith thy grace, that vve vvith mirth and gladnes May all our dayes reioyce in thy saluation, In lievv of all the times & years of sadnes.
VVherin vve haue so much afflicted been, And of the ills vvhich vve haue felt and seen. O let thy vvork, and thy magnificency To seruants thine, and their seed be declared. Of God the Lord, O let the excellency Appeare on vs, and on our vvorks prepared. All our designes and vs, guide and direct, Our handy vvorks establish and protect. Psalme 91. Doctrin. WHo in the house of God most high, For his defence resideth, And to th'Almighties shade doth fly, In safety sure abideth. Of God the Lord this say I must, He is my sure saluation: In him my God I hope and trust, My strong fortification. For from the subtle fovvlers snare, He vvill thee free for euer: From euils that contagious are, He vvill thee safe deliuer. He vvith his feathers thee vvill hide, His vvings vvill safegard yeeld thee: His truth vvill thee defend and guide, And as a buckler shield thee. Thou shalt not feare the darkest night Of horrors terrifying, Nor yet the arrovv by day light, That deadly vvoundeth flying. Nor for the vvalking pestilence, That in the dark annoyeth: Nor for the plague, vvhose violence At noone day light destroyeth.
On both sides though ten thousand fall, All dangers quite shall cleare thee, Therof haue thou no feare at all, It shall not once come neare thee. Thine eyes shall only this obserue, And see it vvorth regarding: The vvicked shall, as they deserue, Receiue their full revvarding. Pause. Since thou the mighty Lord hast made Thy refuge, thy saluation: To God most high, this vvord hast said, Thou art my habitation. No euill shall to thee befall, Of this be vvell assured, The plague shall not approach at all, In thy tent rest secured. For he his Angels vvill command, To them this charge expressing, To keep thee that thou safe maist stand In all thy vvayes thee blessing. They in their hand thee vp shall beare, VVith them in safety biding, Lest thou thy foot do dash or teare Against a stone dovvn sliding. Thou Lyons, Adders, shalt dovvn tread, Their povvr to hurt bereauing, And trample on the Dragons head, No harm at all receiuing. I vvill him free, because on me He all his loue bestovveth: I vvill exalt him high, for he Feares me, and my Name knovveth. VVhen he inuokes me, I vvlll heare, And ansvver him distressed: I vvill release him free from feare, VVith honor make him blessed. Of long life he shall haue his fill, To his ovvn contentation: Make him to see my loue I vvill, And shevv him my saluation.
Psalme XCij. Consolation. TO God giue thanks, confessing It is a gracious thing, Thy Name most high to sing, In Psalms thy praise expressing. I'th morn betimes prepared, Thy mercies forth to shevv, Thy faithfulnes most trevv, Each night shall be declared. VVith many strings abounding, vpon the Polyphon, Lute and Psalterion, vvith song and harp svveet sounding, Thou hast me recreated Lord by thy Word diuine, In handy vvorks of thine, I'le shovvt exhilerated. Lord vvhat magnificency is in all thou hast vvrought, And hovv profound thy thought in vvisdoms excellency. This knovvledge is not gained by men of shallovv vvit, The vnvvise do not knovv it, fooles haue not this attained. That vvhen the vvicked flourish, & as the grasse do grovv, Though they in vvealth do flovv vvho vvickednes do nourish, Yet soon i th pit infernall, they fall perpetually. But thou eternally art Lord supreme supernall. Pause Lo Lord thy foes shal perish, gainst thee vvho be imployd, And they shallbe destroyd, vvho vvicked vvorks do cherish. But thou vvilt high erect me and as an Vnicorn Thou vvilt exalt my horn aloft, and still protect me, My head shall be annointed vvith fresh oyle, and my eyes Shall see my enemies, of their hope disappointed: My eares as I desired, shall hear the ouerthrovves Of my rebellious foes, against me vvhich conspired. The righteous generation, as Palm shall flourish fair, And grovv as Cedars are, of Lebanon plantation.
VVho in Gods house haue dvvelling, And by him planted vvere, Shall fairely flourish there, in our Gods courts excelling. More fruitfull still increasing, Though they be aged old, Them fat and strong behold, to flourish neuer ceasing. Gods righteousnes reuealing, in him my rock I trust, For he is euer iust, vvithout iniurious dealing. Psalme 93. Consolation. THe Lord doth raign in soueraign royalty, Is cloath'd vvith strength and highest maiesty, VVith povvr hath girt himselfe, supreme hath prou'd, The vvorld he set so sure, shall not be mou'd. Establisht is thy Throne eternally, O God thou art from all eternity: The flouds O Lord haue lifted vp their voyce, The surging vvaues mount vvith impetuous noyse. Though seas do rore, and boistrous billovvs beat, Incountring fierce i'th Ocean, outrage threat: Thy countermand O Lord becalms the sea, The skyes declare thy povver more then they. Eternall Lord, most faithfull and most sure, Thy sacred Lavves and testimonies dure For euermore: O Lord thy sanctity Adornes thy house to all eternity. Psalme 94. Consolation.
O Lord to vvhom reuenge pertaineth, The God vvho vengeance iust ordaineth: Of all the earth, thou Iudg suprem, O let thy iustice shine forth clear, Aduance thy self, in povvr appear, Cast dovvn the proud, revvard thou them. Hovv long shall vvicked men shevv gladnes, Hovv long triumph vvith merry madnes? Lord shall their railing speeches loud, Not cease to vtter crueltie, And all that vvork iniquity, Themselues still vanting, grovv so proud. Thy people Lord they haue oppressed, Thy sacred heritage distressed: They rob and spoile it all they may, The vviddovv and the stranger they Do murther, and the Orphan slay, Not sparing any, yet they say, The Lord shall neither see nor knovv it, To Iacobs God not any shovv it, He marks not vvhat vve enterprise. But O ye bruitish in the Land, Among the people vnderstand, When vvill ye learn O ye vnvvise. VVho planted hath the eare for hearing, VVho made the eyes for sight appearing, Shall he not heare, shall he not see? VVho all the Heathen scourged hath, Shall he not make them feare his vvrath? Who giues all knovvledge, knovves not he? Pause. The LORD doth knovv mans cogitations, Discouers his imaginations: Knovvs all his thoughts, but vanity, O blest vvhom thou Lord keepst in avv, VVhom thou dost teach out of thy Lavv, The vvay to all felicity. To giue him quietnes, assured From euill dayes, at rest secured From troubles and aduersity, Vntill there digged be a pit For vvicked men to fall in it, Revvarding their impiety▪
For God his people so affecteth, That them he leaues not, nor reiecteth, Nor vvill his heritage forsake; Return to iustice iudgment shall, Who be of heart vpright, they all To follovv it, their vvay shall take. Who vvill me ayd, or succor send me, Against the vvicked, or defend me Gainst vvorkers of iniquity? Vnlesse the Lord had vvith his arm My helper bin, sau'd me from harm, My soul had perisht suddenly. VVhen I complaind, my footing slideth, Thy mercy Lord, vvhich sure me guideth, Did me sustain, held me vpright. VVhen many thoughts do trouble me, In anguish and perplexitie, Thy comforts svveet, my soule delight. Shall vvicked Tyrants, cruell raigning, Haue fellovvship vvith thee remaining, Their throne mischieuous lavves inuents. Themselues assembling gainst the iust, To lay his honor in the dust, They spill the bloud of innocents. But God the Lord is my defender, My refuge is his mercy tender: He vvill revvard their vvickednes, And make their sons themselues oppres, And in their ovvn vnrighteousnes, The Lord our God shall them suppres. Psalme 95. Doctrin. COme let vs sing vvith pleasant voyce To God, and make a ioyfull noyse Vnto the rock of our saluation▪
His presence let vs come before, With thanks and praises him adore, Sing Psalms to him vvith exultation. For he the Lord is GOD of might, Great King aboue all gods by right: He in his hands the earth infoldeth, Therof the secret places deep, VVithin his compas he doth keep, The strength of hils he also holdeth. The sea is his, he did it make, The land at his hand form did take All creatures haue of him creation. Come therfore let vs fall dovvn novv, Before the Lord our maker bovv, All kneeling, yeeld him adoration. He is our God, his people vve, And sheep of his ovvn pasture be: His hands our safety hath procured, If ye vvill heare his voyce to day, Obserue ye vvell vvhat he shall say, Bevvare your hearts be not obdured. As vvhen ye did at Meriba, And Massa desert disobey: When in the day of prouocation, Your fathers prou'd and tempted me, VVhere they my mighty vvorks did see, Beholding them vvith admiration. Tvvice tvventy years, thrice tedious space, Haue I endur'd this irksom race; So long this people vext and grieu'd me, I said in heart this people erre, Before my vvayes they theirs prefer, They haue not knovvn mine, nor belieu'd me. Wherfore in my fierce vvrath and ire, VVhich in my brest did flame as fire: I svvare this in my indignation, Since they my vvords and vvorks forgot, Into my rest they enter not, Much les shall haue their habitation.
O Sing to God nevv songs composed, To God Sing all on earth reposed: Sing to the Lord, his praise expres, His sacred Name praise vve and bles, Let his grace daily be disclosed. Among the heathen shevv his glory, To people all his vvonders story. For God is great, and greatly prais'd, His feare aboue all Gods is rais'd, For other Gods are transitory. For all the gods of other Nations Are idols, vain imaginations: But God the Lord vvho is most high, The heau'ns hath framed, and the sky, Prime parcels of his ovvn creation. Might, maiesty attend before him, In's Sanctuary they adore him. Ye people all vvith one accord, Ascribe all glory to the Lord, VVith honorable praises store him. Pause. The Lord vvith praise be celebrated, His Name vvith glory eleuated. With you an offring for him take, Into his courts an entrance make, VVhich vnto him are consecrated. Before the Lord your selues assemble, To vvorship him, do not dissemble: Approch to him vvith comly grace, In's Sanctuary, at his face Let all the earth both feare and tremble. Say Nations all, the Lord God raigneth, His raigne eternally remaineth: The vvorld by him shall stablisht be Vnmou'd. The people iudg vvill he, With iustice vvhich his might maintaineth.
Let heau'n reioyce vvith iubilation, Let earth be glad vvith exultation, Let all the spacious Ocean rore, Let fields and forrests vvith their store, Ring out their ioyfull acclamation. Before the Lord vvithout delaying, He comes, he comes, no longer staying, To iudg the earth vvith righteousnes, And all the vvorld vvith faithfulnes, With iustice, people all repaying. Psalme 97. Doctrin & prophecy. THe Lord eternall raignes, VVho righteousnes maintaines: Let all earth, lovv and high lands, Therof reioyce all Ilands. Thick clouds obscurity, Surround his Maiesty▪ Both iustice and iudgment, His thrones establishment, On him attendant be. The fire before him goes, the flame consumes his foes, VVhich round about them burneth, and into ashes turneth. His lightning flashes make the vvorld inlightned quake, Which vvhen the earth did see, it trembled fearfully. VVith terror it did shake. As vvax by fiers might, so mountains melt at sight Of God the Lord eternall, of earth and heau'n supernall. The heaun's his iustice tell, and people all that dvvell On earth his glory see, his might and maiesty, His bounty doth excell. Pause.
Confounded be vvith shame, vvho idols serue or frame, VVho boast that they haue serued Vain idols grau'n or kerued: Let all Gods Saints vvho be, him seruing bovv the knee. VVhen Sion this did hear, her ioyes did then appear, For them declare did shee. Thy iudgments Lord to knovv, VVhich thou to them didst shovv, Hath brought great consolation to Iudahs generation. For thou O Lord art high, boue all the earth and sky, Thou art exalted far aboue all gods that are, To thee can none come nigh. VVho loue God, loue him still and haters be of ill, Abhor all levvd deuices, and vvicked enterprises. His Saints liues he doth saue, Keeps their soules from the graue. Puld from the vvicked hand of Tyrants in the land, By him they freedom haue. Novv clearest light is sovvn, to be by iust men movvn, Delight and ioy he gaineth, Whose heart vpright remaineth: Ye iust your ioyes expres, your selues to mirth addres: The Lord God praise and bles, his gracious Name confes, Record his Holines. Psalme 98. Doctrin & prophecy. SIng to the Lord nevv songs delightfull, For he great vvondrous vvorks hath done: His holy arm of iustice rightfull, His right hand victory hath vvon. The Lord our God hath his saluation, Most gratious to all made knovvn:
And in the sight of euery Nation, His iustice openly hath shovvn. He cald to minde his promise royall, His mercy and his verity, To Israel his seruant loyall, He shevved his fidelity. Throughout the vvorld, the Lords saluation Hath clearly manifested been. Therfore to God vvith exultation, Let all the earth be ioyfull seen. VVith loudest shovvts, and shrillest noyses, Reioyce and sing vvith instrument. VVith Harps svveet sound ioyn cheerfull voyce, To praise the Lord, nevv Psalms inuent. Before the Lord our King most gracious, VVith trumpets, and vvith Cornets sound, With roring noyse let th' Ocean spacious, The vvorld and all therin rebound. Before the Lord the riuers flovving, In signe of ioy shall clap their hands: The hils also their gladnes shovving, Reioyce together in all lands. For God the Lord vvho euer liueth, To iudg the earth comes speedily: He to the vvorld, iust iudgment giueth, And to the people equity. Psalme 99. Consolation. GOd the Lord doth raign, suprem doth remain, People obstinate, quake amaz'd therat: He doth sit vpon Cherubims his throne, Let the earth be moued, vvhich his povvr hath proued▪ God the Lord is great, Sion is his seat, He is high ore all, people serue him shall. Let them all giue praise to his Name alvvaies, For his great Name solely, dreadfull is and holy. This great King of might, loueth iudgment right, He makes permanent, all iust gouernment: He in Iacob vvrought, and to pas hath brought Righteousnes prepared, iudgment iust declared.
God exalt vvith praise, laud the Lord alvvaies: Serue him as is meet, prostrate at his feet, To him be submis, for he holy is. Moses rule maintaining, Aaron Priest ordaining. Pause. He set Samuel, vvhere the Priests do dvvell, For the people all, on his Name to call: They to God did pray, vvho heard them alvvay: When to God they cryed, he to them replyed. From the cloudy sky, he spake from on high, VVhere his pillar bright, gaue them fiery light: They did him obey, vvalking in his vvay, Did vvhat he vvould haue them, Kept the Lavv he gaue them. Lord so good vvast thou, vvho to them didst bovv Dovvn thy gracious eare, for they ansvvered vvere: Thou O God dost liue, vvho didst them forgiue: Though some vvere corrected for their crimes detected. Giue the Lord all praise, high his honor raise: Let vs euermore, him serue and adore: By his sacred vvill, at his holy hill, For our God is solely, glorious and most holy. Psalme 100. Thanksgiuing. ALl people dvvelling on the earth, Sing to the Lord vvith ioy and mirth: The Lord adore vvith thankfull voyce, Approach his presence, sing, reioyce.
Knovv ye the Lord is God, euen he It is that made vs hath, not vve, We are his people, he doth keep Vs safe, as his ovvn pasture sheep. Then enter in his gates vvith praise, And in his courts giue thanks alvvayes: Vnto the Lord let vs confes, His sacred Name vvith praises bles. For God is good, his clemency, His mercy and benignity, His truth and his fidelity, Endure to all eternity. Psalme 101. Doctrin of policy. OF mercy milde, vvith iudgment iust vniting, Novv vvill I sing to thee O Lord, inditing: The Psalm I sing, to thee my God belongs, Such Psalms, such songs. In perfect vvayes my feet shall vvalk precisely, And I at home my vvorks vvill order vvisely: Vntill my heart sincere approach thy sight, All blest, all bright. By me ill vvorks shall not be imitated, Backsliders deeds by me are euer hated: These, all of these my heart shall quite disdain, Refuse, refrain. My vpright soul shall neuer be acquainted With vvicked men, vvhose vvorks vvith sin are tainted▪ From me a levvd and frovvard peruerse heart, Shall pack, shall part. Backbiters tongs that vvickedly haue vvounded Their neighbors name, by me shall be confounded:
I neuer could a supercilious looke, Once beare, once brooke. My eyes of loue shall euer be reflected On faithfull men to be by me protected: The man that liues religiously vvith me, Shall honord be. A fellovv fraught vvith fly dissimulation, Shall neuer haue vvith me cohabitation: A lyer from my presence presently, Shall fall, shall fly. I vvill destroy, and that vvith expedition, All vvicked men accustomd to transgression: Not one of these in Gods all holy land, Shall stay, shall stand. Psalme 102. Comfort. TO my prayr O Lord attend thou, Gracious eare to my suit bend thou: Let my cry come vnto thee, Do not hide thy face from me. In the day I am distressed, When I am vvith grief oppressed: When I call, afflicted needy, Daign to me thy succor speedy. For my life avvay consumeth In the ayr, as smoke that sumeth: Burnd and parched are my bones, As an hearth of mouldred stones. My sad heart vvith dolour vvasted, Like the vvitherd gras is blasted: Bread I eat none, though they set it Ready for me, I forget it.
Long laments my voyce bereauing, Dry my skin to my bones cleauing. Like a Pollican I mone In the vvildernes alone. Like an ovvle it selfe that hideth, In the deserts vvilde abideth: To the vvoods alone retiring, Solitarines desiring. As a sparrovv sole alighted On the house top trembling frighted: Or in couert out of sight, I vvatch restles all the night. All the day my foes iniurious, Me reproch, against me furious, To destroy me are inraged, Gainst me are by oath ingaged. Dust and ashes ouer-spred me, Which in sted of bread hath fed me: All my drink is mingled still VVith the tears my eyes distill. For thy vvrath and indignation, To my trouble and vexation, Me on high hath eleuated, Dovvn again precipitated. All my times and dayes assigned, Like a shadovv are declined: Wasting they avvay do pas, I am vvithered like the gras. But thou Lord our God supernall, Art for euermore eternall: Thy memoriall dureth euer, To all ages failing neuer. Thou shalt raise thy self arising Povvrfull iustice exercising▪ Thou vvilt shevv thy mercy great, On thy Sion thy ovvn seat. For if euer thou vvilt saue her, Novv is time to shevv thy fauer: To compassion be inclined, Novv is come the time assigned. For the stones therof deiected, Haue thy seruants much affected:
Mouldred dust therof doth moue, Them to pitty vvhich it loue. Heathen people thy Name hearing, Shall submit, thy great Name fearing: All the Kings on earth aspiring, Shall thy glory see, admiring. When the Lord vvhom vve rely on, Shall rebuild his sacred Sion: He shall in his glory bright Vnto all appeare in sight. He vvill hear the supplication Of the poore in tribulation: When the destitute complaineth, Their complaints he nere disdaineth: Pause. For the future generation, Shall be vvrit this declaration: That all ages may relate, And vvith praise it celebrate. People vvhich shall be created, To Gods seruice consecrated: Shall sing praises and thanksgiuing, To the Lord God euerliuing. For he hath in mercies ample, Lookt dovvn from his sacred Temple: God did vievv vvith gracious eyes, Lovvly earth frem lofty skyes, For to heare the prisners groning, And compassionate their moninge To release their bonds inclined, VVhich are vnto death assigned. That in Sion, of Gods glory, They may celebrate the story:
And declare his sacred praise In Ierusalem alvvayes. VVhen together all the nations Meet in frequent congregations, And the kingdomes povvr combined, Ioyn to serue the LORD inclined. Pause. He my strength i'th vvay abated, And my dayes abreuiated, In such sort, that then I said, O my God, my only ayd: In my mid age, do not take me Quite avvay, nor yet forsake me, For thy years endure for euer, Through all ages, fayling neuer. Thou hast layd the earths foundation, And by thy hands operation, Thou the heau'ns hast framd and made, They shall quite consume and fade, But thou shalt endure, remaining, Euer blessed state retaining, They shall all grovv old, appearing As a garment torne vvith vvearing, As a robe, so shall their fashion By thee suffer alteration: From their former shape estrang'd, They shall certainly be chang'd. As for thee O Lord supernall, Thou art still the same eternall. Thou art infinite transcending, Thy yeares neuer shall haue ending. Children of thy seruants loued, Shall continue firm, vnmoued: Thy grace shall them all sustain, Their race euer shall remain. And their seed from them proceeding, Their posterity succeeding: Shall for euer dvvell before thee, In thy presence to adore thee.
Psalme Ciij. MY soul praise thou the LORD for euer blessed, Let all that is vvithin my povvr possessed, His holy Name extoll and magnifie: Of all his gifts so gratious, great and many, VVhich he on thee bestovvd, forget not any, But bles the Lord my soul, him glorifie. Him euer bles, vvho euer gracious liueth, VVho all thy sins defaceth and forgiueth: VVhen vveak and sick, he makes thee strong and sound, VVhose loue thy life from hatefull death protecteth, Who euer thee most tenderly affecreth, Hath thee vvith grace and boundles bounty crovvnd. VVith all good things, vvho thy mouth satisfieth, VVherby thy  vvith vigor he supplyeth, And he renevvs as th' eagles, so thy youth. The Lord it is vvhose iudgment iust redresseth The vvronged poore against him that oppresseth, Relieuing them in righteousnes and truth. To Moses he did teach his vvaies, and shevv them, So manifest all Israel might knovv them, And his great acts so vvondrous, so renovvnd. The Lord to grace and mercy soone inclineth, To vvrath is slovv, his anger soone declineth, In mercy he doth plenteously abound. If he giue place to vvrath, small time abiding, Yet vvill he not continue alvvaies chiding: Nor vvill he long keep anger in his heart. Our ill vvrought vvorks, he hath not ill regarded, Nor vvith sins due, our sinfull souls revvarded, Nor deales vvith vs according to desert. Aboue the earth, as heau'n is high and spacious, So is the Lord in mercy, great and gracious
To all that feare him and on him do rest. The Lord vvho vs hath chosen and approued, Hath all our sins and trespasses remoued, As far from vs, as th' East is from the VVest, Pause. As to his childe, the fathers loue extendeth His pitty milde, although it him offendeth, So doth the Lord them pitty, vvho him feare. For God the Lord, creator of each creature, Doth vvell record our frailty, and our feature: In minde doth beare hovv soone to dust vve vveare. And euery day mans life is altogether Like gras or hay vvhich instantly doth vvither: As fragrant flovvrs do flourish on the green, But vvhen theron the storm or cold vvind blovveth, They soone are gone, their place no more them knovveth; They faile and fall, they shall no more be seen. But as for God, his mercy ay remaineth, His childrens state he euermore sustaineth, Who vvorship him vvith feare in verity. VVho in their brests his hests and statutes treasure VVho truly knovv, and doe his vvill and pleasure, His iustice is to all posterity. VVithin the sky most high, suprem, supernall, The Lord hath plac d his regall Throne eternall, And rules the vvorld by his imperiall might. Ye Angels, povvrs most potent, most obedient To vvork his vvill, by all meanes most expedient, Publish, proclaime his honors glorious right. O ye his hosts most valiant, most victorious, His Ministers, praise ye his Name all glorious, You that are prest, addrest to do his vvill. Let all his vvorks in euery place applaud him, Yea, let my heart, my minde, my spirit laud him And all vvithin me, prise and praise him still. Psalme 104. Praise. BLes thou the Lord my soul, O Lord my God, Thy greatnes far exceedeth all abroad: Thou maiesty most glorious daily vvearest, VVith honor thou most beautifull appearest.
VVith light most bright, resplendant euery morn, As vvith a robe, thy self thou dost adorn: The firmament bedeckt vvith stars extending, Like curtains dravvn forth by thy povvr transcending. Thou layest fast thy lofty chamber beames Vpon the seas and vvaters gushing streames: Thou on the clouds vvhich in the ayre are byding, Triumphant com'st, as on a chariot ryding. And vvhen to vvalk it is thy sacred minde, Thou marchest on the vvings of euery vvinde. Thy Angels all are Spirits of thy ovvn framing, Thy Ministers are like a fier flaming. Foundations of the earth so vastly round, On bases thou didst set, so fastly found: That thou hast made it euer firm and stable, No povvr but thine to moue it shall be able. And this same earth thou vnderneath the deep, As vnderneath a mantle close dost keep: Whilst thou great God didst cause the vvatry fountains To rise and flovv, and stand aboue the mountains. But then as soone as thy rebuke they heard, They past avvay, and fled as all afeard: And at the voyce of thy most dreadfull thunder, They haste avvay, each one their vvay a sunder. Vp by the hils they high ascend a main, Dovvn by the dales they lovv descend again: Vntill in their ovvn place they be surrounded▪ Which at the first for them thy vvisdom founded. Pause. Beyond the bounds vvhich for them thou hast set, The surging vvaues restraind, can neuer get:
Lest if they should at any time pas ouer, The surface of the earth they vvould recouer. Into the Vales belovv thou daignst to bring The vvholsom svveet cleare vvater of the Spring, VVhich midst the hils a pleasant murmur keepeth, VVhilst through the vales the silent current creepeth. The riuers store of vvater, drink doth yeeld, To euery beast that rangeth in the field: And the smooth brook, vvhich here and there still passes, Doth quench the thirst of vvilde and sauage asses. By these the fovvls of heau'n do take delight, To make their nests, abiding day and night: By thee each bird melodious notes aduances, Amidst the trees yong tender slender branches. From chambers high among the clouds he fils VVith shovvrs of rain, enricht the fertill hils, Yea the vvhole vvorld vvith his vvorks fruits aboundeth, And satisfi'd thervvith, his praise resoundeth. He maketh gras out of the earth to grovv, The bruitish beasts he doth prouide for so: And for mans vse, the vsefull herbs he planteth, That they may till the ground, vvhich labor vvanteth. He maketh vvine vvhich hath a secret art, To cure the sad, and to make glad mans heart. He maketh oyle, vvhich makes mens faces shining, And bread that breeds hearts strength, the povvrs combining. Of the great Lord, the trees are very great, In sap, in grovvth, either for shevv or meat: The Cedars high on Libanus that grovveth, Gods plants, not mans, then mans more goodly shovveth. In them the birds do make their dovvny nest By natiue skill, and take therin their rest: As for the storke, vvhile other liketh others, Amidst the firs her and her yong shee smothers. For the vvilde Goats vpon the highest hils, Their refuge they do make, and sport their fils: On th'other side among the rocks so stony, Thou placest safe the vvilde and fearfull cony. Pause. The changing moone he sets vpon her change, From West to East in seasons fit to range: He makes the Sun knovv his fixt course neere slovving, In th' East his rise, i'th West his dovvnvvard going:
He darknes makes, and takes avvay the light, The glorious day is turnd to obscure night? Within their dens, the forrest beasts all sleeping, Out of their dens then boldly all come creeping. The Lyons yong that lurke beside the vvay, Do rage and rore incessant for their prey: These seek their food by meer instinct vvith crying, From the strong God, their vvant of food supplying. Yet in the morn at rising of the Sun, They gather them in one, and homevvard run: There in their dens, close couching they repose them Till night, so that no eye can there disclose them. VVith break of day man breaks his rest and goes To labour, vvhere the field him profit shovves. In husbandy, vvhose painfull toyle nere endeth, Till tovvards euen, the shadovv longer tendeth. O holy Lord, vvhat register can hold Thy vvondrous vvorks, they are so manifold: From vvisdom of thy prouidence proceeding, The earth is full of riches, thine exceeding. So likevvise is the deep and spacious Sea, Stretching its arms to euery creek and key: Where svvim and creep creatures innumerable, Both small and great to name them vvho is able? The goodly ships therin do ride and saile, And therin thou hast made the mighty whale: There svvims the huge Leuiathan, in straying, Thy greatnes shevves, and in his sportiue playing: Pause.
All these, all else, beasts, fishes, flying fovvles, Avvait on thee, for to refresh their soules: That thou shouldst giue them meat in meetest season, Which else should vvant their food, as they vvant reason. What thou dost please, in goodnesse them to giue, They gladly take, and therby they do liue: VVhen once thy hand of bounty is extended, All good to thy good creatures is expended. But vvhen thou hid'st thy face, the place of ioy, No comfort then, all trouble and annoy: When thou vvithdravvst their breath life is adiorned, And to dead dust, is liuing dust returned. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, Lord, and then In formes and seeds they are remade agen And vvhen they fail, vvith force from thee indevved, The surface of the old earth is renevved. The glorious praise of our good gracious Lord, From age to age all ages shall record. And in his vvorks vvhich he in vvisdom framed, He shall reioyce so oft as they are named. If against earth he bend his angry brovv, Therof the strength and pillars trembling bovv: If but to touch the hils, him vvrath prouoketh, For very fear, the hils vvith terror smoketh. So long as God that I shall liue shall please, Vnto that God to sing I vvill not cease: Yea vvhile I shall in being be protected, Vnto my God, my Psalms shall be directed. All my discourse of him, and thoughts of heart, Shall svveetnes to him, to my self impart: No sorrovv shall from him my solace seuer, My ioying in the Lord shall be for euer. Men that are giuen to sin, be all consum'd, None vvicked be on earth, except intomb'd Vp, vp, my soul to God in thanks be raised, The vvorlds great God, of all the vvorld be praised. Psalme 105. Thanksgiuing. LEt euery one of vs confessing, Giue thanks to God, his praise expressing: The glory of his sacred Name, Among the people all proclaime.
His honor great and precious, Make knovvn his actions glorious. Sing ye vnto him Psalms resounding, Declare his vvondrous vvorks abounding. Let his great Name your glory be, In his renovvned sanctitie: With gladnes let the heart and voyce Of them that seeke the LORD reioyce. Seek God and his omnipotency, Ay seek his faces excellency. Remember his high acts made knovvn, The vvondrous vvorks that he hath done: The iudgments vvhich pronounced are▪ By his ovvn sacred mouth declare. Of Abraham the generation, Gods faithfull seruants propagation: Ye Iacobs children his elect, VVhom God as his ovvn doth affect. He is the Lord our God, his grace And iudgments are in euery place. For of his couenant failing neuer, He mindfull is: remembring euer The vvord that he did once command, To thousand ages firm doth stand. VVhich to obserue he hath decreed, With Abraham fully agreed. And vvhich by oath he hath secured, Vnto his Isaac firm assured. To Iacob likevvise sure hath he Established this his decree. To Israel confirmed fast, This couenant euermore to last. This saying to them, I vvill giue thee The land of Canan to relieue thee.
Of your inheritance the line, Which I vnto you do assigne. VVhen yet their number vvas but small, But strangers there not knovvn at all. VValking from Nation vnto Nation, Hauing no setled habitation: From place to place, novv here, novv there, They safe by hm conducted vvere. Who suffred them no vvrong to take, But scourg'd great Princes for their sake. Commanding, touch not mine annointed, Nor harm the Prophets I appointed. He in the land did famin make, And there the staffe of bread he brake. But for his people prouident, Before his ovvn a man he sent. This Ioseph they did sell ingratefull, To seruitude and bondage hatefull. Where they his feet vvith fetters bound, The irons sharp his soul did vvound: Vntill the time appointed came, Gods VVord assigned for the same. So vvhen the Lord enough had tryed His faith and patience, testified. The Kings comand vvas straitvvay sent To free him from imprisonment. VVho did the people rule and guide, For his inlargement did prouide. And from a seruant him reputed, Lord of his houshold constituted: And ouer his possessions all, Made him the ruler generall. His Princes to his minde to tye, And teach his Elders policy. Pause. Then into Egypt Israel turned, And long time in that land soiorned. In Chams land Iacob did abide, VVhere God his people multiplide: And in short time made them more strong, Then they that them had hated long. But from his people he estranged Their hearts, from loue to hate them changed:
That they might exercise their hate Against his people obstinate: Who many mischiefes did inuent Against his seruants innocent. His seruant Moses chief respected, He sent vvith Aaron his elected: He these his faithfull seruants chose, Who manifestly shevv'd to those, Among them all, his signes of fame, And vvonders in the land of Cham. He darknes sent, and them obscured, They darknes palpable indured: Against his Word vnto them sent, Were they not disobedient. He turnd their riuers into bloud, And slevv their fishes in the floud. Pause. He them vvith frogs innumerable, Annoyd vvith stinks abhominable: In presence chambers of their Kings, He sayd the vvord, and on them brings A mixed svvarm of noysom flyes, Throughout their land dust turnd to lice. For rain, he hailstones on them povvred, And on their land, fire flames he shovvred. Their Vines and fig-trees he orethrevv, And all that in their borders grevv. The caterpillers at his call, Grashoppers numberles did fall. All fruits and herbs they did deuovver, Their first born all, and euen the flovver Of all their strength vvith deadly vvound He struck, and them did quite confound. His people safe from them he brought, With store of gold and siluer fraught.
Among their troupes, the strong vvere many, But sick or feeble vvere not any. Th'Egyptians all vvere very glad, VVhen from their land they passage had: For feare and avv of them did fall Vpon th'Egyptian dvvellers all. Pause. By day a clovvd he spred them ouer, That them from heat the shade might couer: A flame of fire he set for light, To guide his Israel by night. When they desired flesh to eat, He dainty quails gaue them for meat. With bread from heau'n he them relieued, When drought or thirst them vext or grieued He from the Rock made riuers flovv In desarts dry, large streams did goe. For he his promise did renevv, To Abraham his seruant true. His people forth vvith ioy directed, And safe conducted his elected: Reioycing vvith triumphant shovvt. The heathen people he cast out, And gaue them their possessions, The labours of the Nations. That they his statutes iust ordained, Might duly keep vvith hearts vnfained, His precepts strictly to obserue, And neuer from his lavves to svverue: Then let vs solemnly alvvaies, Th'Eternall mighty Lord God praise. Psalme 106. Comfort. PRaise ye the Lord, to him confes, Giue thanks to God for his goodnes: For his svveet mercy lasteth euer, VVho can expres Gods povvr and might, Or shevv his praise vvhich ceaseth neuer, Or vvorthily his acts recite? O blessed man vvhose vvorks alvvayes, re iust, vvho vvalks in vpright vvayes. Lord in that loue vvhich thou extendest
To thy elect remember me, And as thou safely them defendest. So let me Lord protected be. That I may see thy grace diuine, Which thou bestovvest vpon thine: That of thy mercies boundles measure, VVith thy elect I may partake, And vvith thy heritage in pleasure, And glorious state, may merry make. Our fathers all, and also vve Haue sinned and offended thee: An vniust peruerse generation, Committing vvickednes and sin. A thankles and forgetfull Nation, In Egypt vvhat thy vvorks haue bin. Our fathers minded not aright Thy mercies great, thy vvondrous might, But frovvardly themselues behaued, Rebelling at the red sea deep. VVhere for his Name sake he them saued, To shevv his povvr, them safe did keep. At his rebuke the red sea dry'd, In haste avvay the vvaters hy'd: Through gulf of vvaters deep diuided, They passed safe as on dry land, As through the desart he them guided, And sau'd them from their foes strong hand. Pause. From cruell forces of their foe, Pursuing them to ouerthrovv: He set them free, and them relieued, For all their foes i'th sea he drovvnd,
And then his vvords they vvell beleeued, And sang his praise, vvhose help they found. But all his vvorks they soone forgot, For his aduice they vvaited not: His counsell iust no time attending. They burnd vvith lust and levvd desire, I'th vvildernes the LORD offending, And tempting him prouokt to ire. Then gaue he vnto them their vvill, And their request he did fulfill: But leanenes sent, their soules consumed, They Moses in the Campe enuy'd, And to rebell gainst him presumed, Nor holy Aaron vvould abide. The earth then Dathan did deuovvr, And prou'd Abiram vvith his povvr. Then in their camp the fier flamed, And all the vvicked therin burnd. Yet they a Calf in Oreb framed, And to adore that idoll turn'd. Pause. Their glory so resembled vvas, Vnto an Ox that eateth gras: Like bruitish beasts vvas their behauior, Vnthankfull they remembred not, The Lord their God and mighty Sauior, His vvorks in Egypt they forgot. His vvondrous vvorks of maruelous might, Which all the land of Cham did fright: And dreadfull povvr vvhich he declared, At the red sea in all their sight. Therfore the Lord in vvrath prepared, Resolued to consume them quite: But Moses his elect did see, VVhat danger this to them might be: Himself betvveen he interposed, Gods anger fierce to turn avvay, Lest he to ruin them disposed, Them all should in his fury slay. The land of promise they disdaind, VVhich vnto them he had ordaind:
Vpon his Word, no trust they builded, But in their tents did oftrepine, Obedience none to him they yeelded, Nor hearkned to his vvord diuine. Pause. Therfore he lifted vp his hand, Them to destroy in desart land: An oath he made, there to destroy them. That their seed might be ouerthrovvn, Among the heathen to annoy them, And scatter them in lands vnknovvn. They vvith Baal-Peor did combine, Themselues vvith them they did conioyne: Eating dead Idols sacrifices, Wherby to vvrath, the Lord they mou'd, VVho for their vvicked enterprises, With grieuous sore plagues them reprou'd, Then stood vp Phineas vvhen he knevv Their vvickednes, and them he slevv: VVhen iudgment he had executed, Gods vvrath appeas'd, the plague did cease, And this vvas vvorthily imputed To him alvvay for righteousnes. But still they caus'd Gods vvrath and ire, At Meriba to burn like fire: So much milde Moses spirit they vexed, That doubting vvhat he enterpris'd, Displeas'd his God (in minde perplexed) VVith vvords impatient, vnaduis'd. Pause. Nor vvould they as God did command, The Gentiles chase out of their land: Mongst them, vvhom they should not haue spared,
ey mixt themselues, and learnd their lore: And vvith their idols vvere insnared, Which they did vvickedly adore. VVith theit ovvn hands most inhumain, Their sons and daughters yong vvere slain: They sacrific'd their sons and daughters To Deuils, them they did present, To Canaan idols diu'lish slaughters, They sacrific'd bloud innocent. Such mutders they did execute, With bloud the land they did pollute. Thus their ovvn vvorks, themselues defiled, Which they did practise and inuent, Bevvitching Idols them beguiled, A vvhoring after them they vvent, Therfore the vvrath of God vvas mou'd Against the people he had lou'd: That his inheritance he hated▪ The force of foes gaue them the foil Vnder the heathen subiugated, VVhose rauenous hands of them made spoil. Pause. Their foes vvho hate to them did beare, Set ouer them their rulers vvere: Oft times the Lord did them deliuer, But they prouok't him vvickedly, VVith their ovvn counsell: they vvere euer Brought lovv for their iniquity. The Lord yet had a gracious eye To their distres, and heard their cry: And in compassion he relented, In minde his couenant did repeat, Of their affliction he repented, According to his mercy great. Them to be pitty'd he did make Of them that did them captiue take: O Lord be thou our gracious father, And saue vs by thy holy Name, Thy people from the heathen gather, That they may magnifie thy Fame. The God of Israel let vs bles, Eternally his praise expres:
Extoll his honor, ceasing neuer, Let all the people ioyfull say, Amen let it be so foreuer, The Lord our God praise vve alvvay. Psalme 107. Doctrin. GIue thanks to God, confessing His goodnes, giue him praise, Vs vvith his mercies blessing, VVhich do endure alvvayes: Let them declare and shovv, VVhom God to saue decreed, Hovv from their cruell foe, he them redeem'd and freed. He like a louing Father, From North lands, and from East, Together them did gather, from South sea, and from VVest, In desarts they did stray, and vvander solitary, Wheras they found no vvay, nor City vvhere to tary. VVith thirst and hunger vexed, In vvants they did remain, Their souls vvere sore perplexed, Their hearts did faint vvith pain. In extreme misery they cry'd to God repenting, Who heard them, and did free Them from grief and tormenting. He did guide and instruct them, And set them in right vvay, To Cities did conduct them, vvhere they might safely stay. Therfore let men confes Gods grace incomparable. To Adams sons expres his vvonders admirable. Pause. For he hath satisfied the longing soule vvith good,
The hungry he supplyed vvith plenteous vvholsom food. They that in darknes sit, Whom deaths shade doth inuiron, Bound in afflictions pit, in dungeons chaind vvith iron. Because that they neglected on Gods Word to rely, His counsell they relected, vvhose vvisdom is most high. To labour they vvere bound, VVhervvith their hearts he humbled, To help them, none vvas found, When they fell dovvn or stumbled. Then to the Lord they cryed in trouble and distres, He them vvith ayd supplyed▪ their grief he did release. From iayle he did them take, From deaths shade darke obscured, Their bonds in sunder brake, and chains vvhich they indured. Gods grace incomparable, let men therfore confes, His vvonders admirable, to Adams sons expres. He brake the gates of bras, And freed them vvith vvonder, That they from thence might pas, Iron bars he cut in sunder. The foolish are afflicted for their iniquity, VVho are to sin addicted, procure their misery. Their souls all meats abhor, No delicates can please them, Approching to deaths dore, From vvhence none can release them. Then to the Lord complaining, They cry in time of need, From troubles all them paining, he saueth them vvith speed. To heale them then he gaue His Word for their instruction, Which them did free and saue, from ruin and destruction; Gods mercies and saluation, Let men vvith thanks confes, For Adams generation, Gods vvondrous vvorks expres. To God vvith feruent zeale, giue thankfull sacrifices, His vvorks vvith ioy reueale, vvhich from the heart arises. Pause.
They that in ships are sayling, And dovvn the seas descend, In vvaters great not fayling, their busines to attend, The vvorks of God they see, VVithin the deeps contained, VVhose vvorks so vvondrous be, they cannot be explained. VVhen he the vvinde commandeth. The storms strait vp arise. The vvaue so lofty standeth, it seemes to threat the skyes. To heau'n they vp are tost, Strait headlong dovvn are tumbled: Their liues seem to be lost, their fainting souls are humbled▪ They stagger, stumble, reeling, Like him that is in drink, VVithout vvit, sense, or feeling, Their spirits dovvn do sink. But vvhen to God they cry, Their great distres lamenting, He hears them from on high, And saues them, death preuenting. The stormy vvinds he stayeth, He makes them calm and still, The lofty vvaues he layeth, and they obey his vvill. But vvhen the storms do cease, With ioy they are reuiued, At their vvisht hauen in peace, by him they are ariued: Gods mercy and saluation, let men vvith thanks confes, To Adams generation, Gods vvondrous vvorks expres. Among the people met, let them exalt his glory. Before the Elders set, in their great Consistory. Pause. He into flouds conuerteth the thirsty vvildernes, And he again reuerteth the streams to thirstines.
The fruitful fertile ground, to barrennesse he turneth, VVhen peoples sins abound, vvhich in the land soiourneth VVheras the riuer rangeth, a land of drought he makes, And desarts dry he changeth, to pooles and vvater-lakes. He seats the hungry there, Where they full vvell haue fared, In vvhich they cities reare, for dvvelling vvell prepared. There fruitfull vineyards plant they, And sovv the fertile fields, In that land nothing vvant they, Which large reuenevv yeelds. His mercy doth them bles, they greatly are increased, Their flocks are numberles, their cattell not decreased. But vvhen he is offended, they are becom far les, Broke dovvn, forlorne, vnfriended, restrained in distres. On Princes, scorn he layes, Shovvrs of contempt he rayneth, Interrors, errors vvayes, to vvalk he them constraineth. The needy he vp taketh, from dust to dignity, Like to a flock he maketh their numerous family. Good men shall this behold, Therin take ioy and pleasure, Bad men their tongs shall hold, perplexed vvithout measure VVho vvisdom true attaineth, And vvill these thing obserue, Of Gods grace knovvledg gaineth, That he the Lord may serue. Let men vvith thanks confes Gods mercies fauourable, To Adams race expres Gods vvorks most admirable. Psalme 108. Prayer. O God my heart is firm prepard, In Psalms thy praise shall be declar'd: My glory sing his vvorthy praise, My Lute, my Harp, your selues vpraise. Before the day do davvn, avvake, Right early I this taske vvill take, With heart and hand, my voyce concenting, Betimes i'th morning, day preuenting.
O Lord I vvill thee celebrate Among the people, I'le relate With my vvhole hearts affections, Thy praise among the nations. Because thy great benignity, Thy mercy and thy verity, Aboue the heau'ns most high ascendeth, Aboue the cloudy sky extendeth. Exalt thy self O God most high, Thy glory ore the earth and sky. Thy ovvn beloued, saue and free, With thy right hand, and ansvver me. For vvhy the Lord to vs hath said, In holines I vvill be glad: Diuiding Shechem at my pleasure, The vale of Succoth I vvill measure. Of Galaad land both vae and mount▪ As my possession I account: Manassa rich, that vvealth of thine, Without all doubt becommeth mine. To me doth Ephraim belong, The chief part of my army strong, And I the kingdom vvill deliuer To royall Iuda my Lavv-giuer. The Moabites shall then submit, For seruile base employments fit, As they deserue, such is their lot, Vnder my feet to vvash my pot. And as for Edom this I'le doe, I ouer it vvill cast my shoe: Ore Palestina that proud nation, I vvill triumph vvith exultation. But vvho vvill lead me novv along,
Into the city builded strong, For sure defence, vvhere I may bide? VVho into Edom vvill me guide? Wilt thou O God, not this effect? Who vs thy people didst reiect, And thou O God vvouldst not instruct vs, Nor lead our armies, nor conduct vs. Novv giue thou vs help from distres, Against those vvho vvould vs oppres: Saue vs, for there is none that can On earth, vain is the help of man. God giues vs valor to preuaile Against all those that vs assaile: And he vvill by his mighty povver Tread dovvn them vvho vvould vs deuoure▪ Psalme 109. Prayer. O Lord God of my praise and glory, From me in silence do not tary. From false tongs levvdly lovvdly lying, Against me vntruths multiplying: Their mouthes deceitfull novv s cope, Me falsly to condemn they hope. VVith vvords malitious they surround me, With vvar pernicious to confound me, For loue vvhich I on them bestovved, Their hate against me they haue shovved: But I to pray, my self addrest, For succor causelesly distrest. My good vvill they vvith ill requited, My loue to them their hate excited. The vvicked one vvhich doth deuovver, Shall therfore ouer him haue povver: His enemy shall ready stand, Perniciously at his right hand. VVhen he before the Iudg is proued, As guilty he shall be remoued: When he his prayr shall haue erected, VVith shame it shall return reiected. His dayes a number small shall make. Another shall his office take. Pause.
His Orphans all shall be oppressed, His vviddovv euermore distressed, His children vagabonds be taken, And vvandring lurke in streets forsaken, In secret beg from gate to gate, And lurke in corners desolate. His goods by vs'rers shall be snared, His toyles be spoyles by robbers shared. VVhen he in vvant is like to perish, In mercy no man shall him cherish: Nor shall there any for his sake, On his poor Orphans pitty take. Pause. His race, and all his generation, Shall suffer vtter extirpation: And in the age that next doth follovv, Obliuion shall his black name svvollovv. The Lord shall euer mindefull be Of his fathers iniquity. Forgetfulnes shall neuer smother The vvickednesses of his mother. The Lord shall giue them pardon neuer, They shall be odious to him euer. He shall them put to endlesse shame, From earth shall cut their hatefull name. For he had no commiseration, Nor minded poor mens tribulation: But on the needy vvhich did languish, Perplexed in extremest anguish: His fury he did execute, Their life to death did persecute. In cursing others he delighted, With curses he shall be requited;
He blessing hated, neuer loued, From him shall blessing be remoued. Himself vvith cursed furious vvrath, As vvith a garment, cloath'd he hath. Into his belly, like to vvater, Throughout his bovvels it shall scatter. Into his bones still penetrating, Like corsiue oyl them macerating: As garments git about his vvaste, Close to him alvvaies sticking fast, This shall to my foes be avvarded▪ The Lord vvill haue them thus revvarded: He vvill confound them that annoy me, Whose slandrous tongs seek to destroy me: But thou O Lord for thy Names sake, Be good to me, some pitty take. Pause. Thou Lord of goodnes art the giuer, Of thy great mercy me deliuer. For I am needy and oppressed, My heart is vvounded and distressed. Like to a shadovv I decline, At euen vvhen light doth cease to shine. From place to place, tost I betake me. Leap like a locust they do make me. My knees are feeble grovvn vvith fasting, My flesh avvay from bones is vvasting▪ My ioynts all fleshles, naked are, And all my body leane and bare. I their reproches haue endured, Their scoffs to beare, I am inured: Beholding me in anguish painfull, At me they shake their heads disdainfull. My Lord, my God, O ayd thou me, In mercy let me saued be. Let them all knovv, thou Lord didst do it, That thou didst set thy hand vnto it: VVe this deliuerance had not gained, If thy might had not vs sustained. Though they their curse on vs bestovv, That thou dost bles vs, let them knovv. VVhen they arise vvith rage inflamed, Cast thou them dovvn, abasht, ashamed,
Thy seruant raise vvith ioy abounding, But cloth my foes vvith shame confounding, By themselues let them couer'd be, As vvith a cloke of infamy. Lord vvith my mouth I vvill confes thee, In great assemblies I vvill bles thee, I'le praise thee for thy excellency, For thou by thy omnipotency, VVilt ayd the poore, him saue from them VVhich vvickedly his soule condem. Psalme 110. Doctrin & prophecy. THe mighty Lord, vnto my Lord declared His sacred minde, to him these vvords he spake: At my right hand take thou thy seat prepared, Vntill thy foes thy footstool I shall make. From Sion hill, to thee the Lord eternall Shall send the rod, and scepter of thy might: And thou shalt rule vvith soueraign povvr supernall, Amids thy foes amazed at thy sight. Thy people free to thee most amiable, Shall run vvhen thou vvith sacred povvr art cround, As morning devv, drops so innumerable, To thee the youth of thy vvomb shall abound. The Lord vvhose vvord and promise changeth neuer, VVho nere repents, hath svvorn great Prince to thee, A Priest thou art Melchisdec like foreuer, Thou shalt of that eternall order be. At thy right hand, the Lord vvith his saluation, Shall thee assist, and all thy foes confound In dreadfull day of his fierce indignation, Proud Princes heads shall break, and Kings shall vvound. Ore Gentiles all he iustice exercising, Shall fill the fields and streets vvith bodies dead Of Monarchs great, imperious tyrannising, That ruled far and vvide, shll vvound the head▪
In thirst and heat pursuing his foes chased, He of the brooke shall drink in speedy vvay: Therfore shall he exalt his head high raised, Victoriously triumph and raign for ay. Psalme 111. Praise & Thanksgiuing. TO God the Lord I vvill confes, VVith all my heart him praise and bles, Among the righteous congregation, His benefits I vvill relate, With thanks his glory celebrate, And of his praise make declaration. The vvorks are great vvhich God hath vvrought, By euery one they out are sought, In them vvho true delight obtaineth. His deeds shevv glorious Maiesty, His iustice and benignity, To all eternity remaineth. By vvonders vvhich the Lord hath done, He euerlasting fame hath vvon: He gracious is, full of compassions, He hath them fed, vvho do him feare, His couenant he in minde vvill beare, For ay throughout all generations. Pause. He shevved in his peoples sight, His actions full of povvr and might, The heathens lands vnto them giuing. Iust truth are all vvorks of his hands, And faithfull are all his commands, To his in due obedience liuing. Established they are most sure, For euermore they shall endure, In truth and righteousnes ordained. He freedome to his people sent.
To keep his couenant he is bent, At his command it ay remained. Most holy euer is his Name, Most reu'rend also is the same: VVho feareth God, true vvisdom gaineth, Of sauing knovvledg sure are they, That his commandments do obey, His praise eternally remaineth. Psalme 112. Consolation. THe man is blest, the Lord vvho feareth, And to his Lavv affection beareth. His seed vpon the earth remaining, Shall mighty be, as Princes raigning: The iust and righteous generation, Shall euer be a blessed Nation. Abundant vvealth his house containeth, His righteousnes euer remaineth. Though night a vvhile the iust surpriseth, Cleare light to him betimes ariseth: He gracious is, full of compassion, And righteous in his conuersation. A good man to the needy lendeth, Iudiciously his vvords expendeth: In all affairs he doth indeuer, With iust discretion to perseuer. He doubtles shall be moued neuer, His memory shall last for euer. He neuer feareth euill rumors, He doth not harbor fickle humors: His heart is fixt vvhat ere betideth,
His faithfull trust in God abideth. His constant heart him feareles guideth, He sees his foe to ruin slideth. His goods he giueth free and speedy, Dispersing to the poore and needy: To all his iustice neuer ceaseth, To do all good, himself addresseth: The strength and honor he possesseth, Shall be exalted, still increaseth. The vvicked man shall ay be vexed, And seeing this, shall be perplexed: Gnashing his teeth in rage and ier, Shall melt avaay as fat in fier: His hope is crost, and lost his hyer, He perish shall, and his desier. Psalme 113. Praise. PRaise ye the Lord his seruants all▪ The Name of God right blessed call: His Name to praise, let all endeuer, His honor'd Fame let all relate, His glorious Name to celebrate, And magnifie both novv and euer. From orient East vnto the West, His honor make vve manifest: The Name of God the Lord be praised, Aboue all nations God is high, Exalted far aboue the sky, Aboue heau'n is his glory raised. Like to our God, vvhom may vve count, He only is Lord paramount: VVho to his Throne most high ascendeth, And yet from heau'n to earth belovv, All matters there to see and knovv, To rule and guide, he dovvn descendeth.
The poor vvhich in the dust do ly, He raiseth vp to honors high: The needy from filth foule defaced, To high preferment he vp takes: To sit vvith Nobles he them makes, Among his peoples Princes placed. By him the vvombs sterility, Is changed to fertility: Dead hopes by him to life are raised, He makes the barren to conceiue With children, mothers ioy receiue, The Lord our God be euer praised. Psalme 114. Thanksguing. WHen Israel from out of Egypt vvent, And Iacobs house from people strange vvere sent, From cruell thrall secured: Then Iuda vvas his Sanctuary made, He Israel for his dominion had, Vnto himself procured. The sea did fly amazed at the sight, And Iordans floud did backvvard take his flight: To turn his streams constraining. The mountains high then leaped like the rams, And little hils did skip it like the lambs, In fearfull plight remaining. VVhy didst thou fly thou sea in such affright? What ayled thee thou Iordan taking flight, To turn thy streams constraining? Ye mountains high vvhy did ye leap like rams? Ye little hils vvhy did ye skip like lambs, In fearfull plight remaining? At presence of the mighty Lord of hosts, Of Iacobs God, thou earth vvith all thy coasts,
Quake, shake, ye frighted mountains. VVho turns the Rocke into a vvater lake, Hard stones to streames, and from the flint doth make To flovv fresh flouds and fountains. Psalme 115. Prayer. NOt to vs Lord, not to vs vve intreat, But to thy Name giue thou the glory great: For thy truth and thy fauer: Why should the proud, the heathen, mock and ieer, VVher's novv your God vvhy doth he not appear, Wher's novv your trust, your Sauer? In heau'n our God is, all things to him bovv, There he doth rule aboue, and here belovv: He doth vvhat ere he vvilleth, Their idols vain, are gaudy to behold. Of siluer fram'd, or at the best of gold, As hand of vvorkman skilleth. A mouth they haue, but yet are speechles quite, And eyes they haue, but neuer see the light: No life in them remaineth, Though they haue eares, yet do they nothing heare, They smell not though their nostrils doe appear, Their bulk no sense containeth. They cannot feel themselues vvith either hand, They neuer vvalk vvith feet vvheron they stand: Their throat nor sings nor cryeth, For blockish trunks vvho so vvill, may them take, As senseles sots are they, vvho do them make, And vvho in them affyeth. Pause. O Israel place thou thy confidence In God, thy ayd, thy shield, and thy defence: From perils he vvill vvard thee. O Aarons house, place thou thy confidence
In God thy ayd, thy shield and thy defence, From dangers he vvill gard thee. VVho feare the Lord, place all your confidence And trust in him your helper, your defence, He is your sure saluation. The Lord did not forget vs in distres, He Israel for euermore vvill bles, And Aarons generation. All those that him do fear, the Lord vvill bles▪ Both yong and old, the greater vvith the les, Shall high be dignified. Gods mercy, grace, and great benignity▪ Both vnto you and your posterity, Shall still be multiplyed. Of God the Lord ye euer blessed are, VVho heau'n and earth hath made, vvhich do declare His povvrfull operation. The Lord himself inhabiteth high heau'n, And all the earth, vvith all therin hath giuen, To Adams generation. Thy praise O Lord by deadmen is not shovvn, By those vvho in the silent graue go dovvn, Thy honor is not raised. But liuing vve, thee liuing Lord adore, And vve vvill praise thee euer more and more, Therfore the Lord be praised. Psalme 116. Thanksgiuing. I Loue the Lord, because he eare doth giue, Vnto my voyce, and to my supplication, Since he inclin'd to hear vvith acceptation, Therfore vvill I call on him vvhile I liue. The pains of death did compas me about, With grieuous pangs afflicted, I did languish:
Neere to the graue in dolefull grief and anguish, I on the Lords Name cald and cryed out. O Lord saue thou my soule, and set it free, Then did I finde the Lord most iust & gracious, The mercies of the Lord are large & spacious The Lord doth keep thē safe that simple be. Cast dovvn vvith grief, I vvas brought very lovv, He rais'd me vp in safety me inclosing, Return to rest my soule, on him reposing, For God on thee doth freely gifts bestovv. Because my soule from death thou didst release, My eyes from teares, my slippry feet from sliding, Before the Lord vvill I vvalk, my steps guiding, Into the land of life through paths of peace. Pause. I did beleeue, and therfore haue I said In my distres afflicted and tormented: My hasty tong, my troubled sense preuented, That lyers all men are, vain is their ayd. VVhat shall I to the Lord repay for all His bounty to me? vvhat gratification? I vvill take vp the cup of his saluation, And thankfully on Gods Name I vvill call. Vnto the LORD, my vovves novv I vvill pay, In presence of his people all redeemed, The death of Gods deare Saints is high esteemed, Most precious in his sight it is alvvay. Thy seruant Lord, thy seruant loe am I, Thy hand-maids son, to serue thee ay addressed, In sorrovvs straits vvhen I vvas sore distressed, Thou didst release me, all my bonds vnty. A thankfull heart to thee I offer vvill, And call vpon thy Name vvith adoration, In presence of thy sacred congregation, Novv vnto thee vvill I my vovves fulfill. VVithin the Courts of Gods ovvn house sound vve The praises of his Name vvith glory crovvned, In midst of thee Ierusalem renovvned, Praise ye the Lord, to him a thankfull be.
Psalme Cxvij. ALl Nations laud the Lord our God, Praise him all people all abroad. For in his mercies bounteous, Hath he exceeded tovvard vs: His truth abides eternally, Him therfore euer magnifie. Psalme 118. Thanksgiuing & prophecy. TO God giue thanks, all praises render, Because so gracious good is he, For his compassion, mercy tender, Endureth sure eternally. Let Israel make declaration, And singing publish solemnly. That his so great commiseration, Most sure endures perpetually. Let Aarons house and generation, Novv say, declaring publikely, That his great bounty and compassion▪ Endureth sure continually. Let euery one, all, vvhosoeuer Doth feare and serue God faithfully, Novv say his mercies ay perseuer, Enduring euerlastingly. In great afflictions straits distressed▪ I called on him earnestly: He ansvverd me, my vvrongs redressed, From thrall at large he set me free.
The Lord almighty vvho commandeth Both heauen and earth, stands firm for me, Me safe defending vvhile he standeth, I need not feare mans enmity; Pause. VVith them vvhose help I haue acquired. The Lord for me stands stedfastly, What I to see haue much desired, My foes before my face shall flee. Tis better far to haue affiance In God, then in mans amity: In God 'tis best to haue affiance, For frail earths greatest Princes be. All nations me about surrounding, Me haue besieg'd perniciously: In Gods Name vvith his ayd abounding, I shall destroy them vtterly. They compast me about, inclosing On euery side maliciously: But in the Name of God reposing, I vvill destroy them totally. Like Bees about me they haue svvarmed, Their vvings vvere singed instantly, In Gods Name I at all points armed, Shall them destroy vndoubtedly. Against me thou hast rudely rushed, That I might fall dovvn suddenly: At me vvith all thy povvr hast pushed, But God did help me certainly. The Lord almighty is my povver, Of him vvill I sing chearfully: He is my refuge and my tovver, He keeps me safe assuredly. The voyce of shovvting and saluation. Is heard to sound most ioyfully Within the righteous habitation, The Lords right hand doth valiantly. Pause. The Lords right hand is magnified▪ Exalted in most high degree: The Lords right hand is dignified, His vvorks are vvrought most povvrfully. Inspite of them that me enuyed, I shall not dy, but liue to see
Gods vvorks declar'd and testified, My self vvill shevv them openly. The Lord seuerely me chastised, I must confes deseruedly, To my instruction exercised, Not to destruction finally: Ope ye to me the gates of iustice, That entring in humility, I to the LORD GOD, vvho most iust is, May render praises thankfully. This gate so beautifull erected, Is God's the Lord of sanctity, The righteous in his sight respected, Shall enter therin peacefully, With thanks & praise, I vvill confes thee, Thou gau'st me ansvver graciously: For thy saluation I vvill bles thee, And for thy great benignity. Pause. The stone vvhich builders had reiected, Refusing it disdainfully, Is novv the chief and choise selected, Adorns the corner gracefully. To be so done, the Lord best thought it, He did it most apparently: He that vvorks vvonders, he hath vvrought it, In our sight it shovvs maruelously. This is the day, the Lord hath made it, Let vs inioy it holily, Since he vvith brightnes hath arayd it, Therin reioyce vve merrily. Lord saue our King, novv vs deliuer From dangers and aduersity,
Of good succes thou art the giuer, O send vs novv prosperity. VVho in Gods Name doth come is blessed, We bid him vvelcome heartily▪ Out of Gods house to you addressed, From him vve bles you vvillingly. God is the Lord, his mercy minding, He hath giuen vs light plenteously: Bring offrings, them vvith cords fast binding, To th'Altars hornes abundantly. Thou art my God, I vvill confes thee, I vvill giue thanks and praise to thee: My God I vvill exalt and bles thee, VVith voyce and hearts integrity, To God all glorious, praises render, Because so gracious, good is he: For his compassion, mcy tender, Endureth sure eternally. Psalme 119. 1. Aleph, Consolation. ALl they are blest, vvho keep the perfect vvay, Of vpright life, and spotles conuersation, VVho in the lavv of God do vvalk alvvay: O happy they, vvho vvith due obseruation. Do truly keep his statutes constantly. And seek him vvith their vvhole hearts application And they vvhich do not vvork iniquity, But vvalking in the vvayes of God, perfeuer, Alvvay therin persisting stedfastly: It is thy vvill that each one should endeuer To keep thy lavves, thy precepts to fulfill, With diligence and prudent strictnes euer Ah that I might by thee be guided still, That all my vvayes might alvvayes be directed To keep thy ests, and to obserue thy vvill. Then shall I not vvith shame be dovvn delected, Hauing regard to thy Commandments all, When in my heart I haue them most respected. An vpright heart in me on thee shall call. By me thy praise vvith thanks shall be expressed,
VVhen iudgments thine most righteous learn I shall, I carefully vvill keep thy statutes blessed, Thus I intend, but vvhen I fail or fall, O leaue me not quite when I am distressed: 2 BETH BY vvhat means might a yong man (prone to ill) His vvayes reform by taking heed perseuer, Him to conform vnto thy Word and vvill. VVith all my heart to seek thee I indeuer O let me not from thy Commandments stray, And from thy paths O let me vvander neuer. Before my eyes, and in my heart I lay Thy sacred Word, as my most precious treasure, Lest I offend thee, guide me in thy vvay. O blessed Lord, thy praise exceedeth measure, Do thou vouchsafe me in thy lavves to teach, That I may knovv and do thy vvill and pleasure. Betimes my lips haue publisht and do preach The iudgments of thy mouth most venerable, VVhose equity and right to all doth reach. Thy precepts path is far more delectable Vnto my soule, then all the vvorlds rich store, Thy vvay to vvalk, is vvealth inualuable. Bearing in minde thy precepts euermore, On them shall be my serious meditation; Thy sacred vvayes respecting more and more. Thy Statutes shall be all my delectation, I vvill not be vnmindfull of thy lore, Nor of thy Word forget the obseruation.
3. GIMEL. Confer on me thy seruant sauing grace, Deal bounteously vvith me, my state sustaining, That I may line still thy vvord to embrace. Ta thou avvay the vaile my sight restrayning, Ope thou me eyes that I may clearly see The vvonder  hy Lavv, thy vvill containing. Conduct me in the vvay, O guide thou me, A stranger heer on earth to heauen aspiring, From me let not thy lavv concealed be. The knovvledg of thy iudgments iust inquiring▪ To them alvvay so feruent is my loue, My longing soule doth languish them desiring. Consuming quite the proud, thou dost reproue Them vvith thy curse against thee vvho rebelled, Who erring from thy precepts far remoue. Let all reproch from me be quite repelled, From me auert contempt and infamy, For I to keep thy vvord my self compelled. Conspiring Princes sat accusing me, While I thy seruant all my meditations Did bend vpon the Statutes made by thee. Thy precepts are my ioyes and consolations, All my delight thy testimonies bee My counsellers in all my consultations: 4. DALETH. Deiected lovv, my soule cleaues to the dust, Such grieuous vvoe doth ouercom and quail me, O quicken me, for on thy vvord I trust. I shevv'd my vvayes to thee, thou didst not fail me, But didst me heare vvhen I to thee did pray, Thy Statutes teach me for they most auail me, Direct my mind to vnderstand the vvay Of thy decrees, and my communication Shall be of all thy vvondrous vvorks alvvay. My soul doth melt in fire of tribulation, According to thy promise me relieue, My drooping soul raise vp vvith consolation. Diuert me from that vvay vvhich doth deceaue, Let me be of thy sacred lavv possessed,
VVhich gracious gift, let me of th receiue, Thy faithfull vvay I choose, myself addressed, To vvalk therin before me I haue plac't Thy iudgments iust, vvhich be for euer blessed. Deuoted to thy Precepts I stick fast, To them I cleaue firm fixed and vnmoued, Lord therfore let me neuer be disgrac't, When thou my heart vvit isdom hast improued, And vvith thy Word it more inlarged hast, Ile run the vvay of thy Decrees approued, 5 HE ETernall Lord, to me the knovvledge send, Of thy Edicts, teach me thy statutes solely, That I may keep thy Word vnto the end, Of thy Lavv giue me vnderstanding holy, That I may keep it vvithout doubt or dread, It to obserue, applying my heart vvholy. Euen in the paths of thy Edicts to tread, Guide thou my steps to follovv thy direction, For I delight to goe vvhere thou dost lead, On thy Edicts I settle my affection, Vnto thy lavves do thou my heart incline, Expell from me all couetous infection. Eyes vvandrers are, turn thou these eyes of mine From vanity, that they be not allured, Grovvn dull, reuiue me in that vvay of thine, Establish thou thy promis'd Word assured To me, vvho am thy seruant, vnto thee, And to thy feare, deuoted and inured. Expell thou far this my reproch from me, And turn avvay the shame that I haue feared, For iust are all thy iudgments knovvn to be. Loe my desire to thy Lavv hath appeared, For thy Commands do, I seek earnesy, And let my heart by iustice thine be chared. 6 VAV FVlfill to me thy gracious promise Lord, Saluation thine shovv, and thy mercy tender, Accordingly as thou hast said the vvord, That vnto them, an ansvver I may render,
VVho me reproch and mock, because I make Thy Word my trust, vvho art my sole defender. From out my mouth, thy true Word do not take, For iudgment thine is my hopes expectation, The vvord of truth, O let me not forsake, From generation vnto generation, For euermore, and to perpetuall ay, I to thy lavv vvill yeeld all obseruation. Fair, large, and vvide, shall be my spacious vvay, At liberty, vvhere I shall still be vvalking, Because I haue thy Precepts sought alvvay. I vvill be of thy testimonies talking, In presence of both Noble, Prince and King, Not bashfully their honor'd mention balking. Fulnes of ioy thy Lavv to me doth bring, There in haue I my hearts affection placed, From it to me all true delight doth spring, My hands I lift vnto thy Lavv embraced, For vvith thy vvord, vvhose vvorthy praise I'le sing, My study and my voyce shall still be graced. 7 ZAIN. GRant I may proue, that thou the Word dost minde, VVhich thou to me thy seruant hast declared, And vvhich thou madst me vvait and hope to finde. VVhen I in grief, neer death, full ill haue fared, Thy gracious Word hath me reuiu'd again, For me by thee this comfort is prepared. Great men in pride, vvith all their scornfull traine, VVith scoffs and mocks, thy seruant haue disdained, Yet I to keep thy Lavv, did not refrain. Remembring Lord thy iudgments iust ordained, Which vnto vs remained haue of old, VVith comfort great, I haue my heart sustained. Grief, horror feare vpon me yet take hold, VVhen I behold the vvicked, vvho despised Thy gracious Lavv, vvhich to them hath bin told. Thy Lavvs in layes vvith praises high comprised, Haue bin my songs, mirth, musick vnto me, My pilgrimage in them I exercised.
Good gracious Lord I still remembred thee, And thy great Name at midnight I haue blessed, I did obserue thy Statutes vvatchfully. Because I kept thy Lavv, and am addressed To keep it still for euer this I see Redounds to me, of fauor thine possessed. 8. HETH. Hovv euer men for vvealth haue toild and vvrought, O Lord thou art the portion I obtained, I vovv to keep the vvord that thou hast taught. Thy face I sought vvith earnest heart vnfained, According to thy vvord and promise made Let thy free grace of me be freely gained. Hauing in mind vvell vvay'd my vvayes and trade, And vvhat estate I stand in search'd and tryed, My course I turn'd, and thy Lavves I obey'd. To keep those Lavves vvhich thou hast testified, To please thee best, and practice thy commands, VVithout delay in hasty speed I yed. Harmles vnarm'd me armed troops and bands Of vvicked men haue spoil'd, of goods depriued, Yet in my mind thy lavv still firmly stands. For iudgments of thy iustice I reuiued, At midnight vvill arise for to praise thee, And giue thee thanks by vvhom I haue suruiued. His faithfull friend I am vvhat ere he be VVho feareth thee, and thy behests obserueth, I take delight in all such company. Thy mercy Lord vvhich highest praise deserueth, Doth fill the earth: in thy lavv teach thou me, For me from sin such knovvledg safe preserueth, 9. TETH. In dealing vvith thy seruant gracious Lord Thy goodnes great thou faithfully hast shevved, Thou hast perform'd according to thy vvord. This I desire, that I might be endued VVith knovvledg true, and vnderstanding right, For I thy lavv beleiu'd, and sin eschevved. I vvent astray all day till darksome night Of my distresse so heauy on me lighte,
But novv I keep thy vvord restor'd to light, Thou goodnes art, and to doe good delighted, As thou art good, so thou all glorious art, Teach me thy lavv, make me therein clear sighted. Informers proud and false haue playd their part, Against me lies and forged tales inuenting, Thy precepts I do keep vvith all my heart. They senseles are thy goodnes not resenting, Their heart is grosse and fat, they vvanton grovv, I in thy lavv delight, my self contenting. It's good for me that I vvas troubled so, Afflicted and distrest in such great measure, Thy Statutes I the better learn to knovv. Then golden heaps, high state or sugred pleasures, The lavv of thy mouth me more good doth do. Much more belou'd incomparable treasure. 10. IOD. Knit are my ioynts together by thy hand, Thou hast in this proportion me composed, Make me thy lavv to learn and vnderstand. VVho fear thee, shall be glad, to ioy disposed, When they shall see that I thy grace obtain Because I in thy vvord my hope reposed. Knovvn is it, Lord, thy iudgments iust remain, I knovv it: thou hast iustly me afflicted, Thy faithfulnes therein appeareth plain. But novv forgiue me by thy lavv conuicted, O let thy grace and mercy comfort send, As promise me thou didst to thee addicted. Kinde mercies thine in loue to me extend, That I may liue still in thy lavv delighting, VVhich is my ioy, and shall be vvithout end. Confound the proud me causlesly dispighting, For meditate do I continually On thy Decrees, their exercise exciting. Kindle their loue, and let them ioyn vvith me VVho fear thee, and haue knovvn thy lavv proclaimed, For I delight in their society. O keep my heart intire, in life vnblamed,
Make me obserue thy statutes perfectly, That euer sound, I nere be found ashamed▪ 11 CAPH. LOng time I vvait, still longing for thy Word, My heart, my soul doth faint, for thy saluation, For only it can me relief afford. Vouchsafe to hear my humble supplication, My eyes faile, for thy Word some comfort daign, O vvhen vvilt thou grant me thy consolation. Like bottles scorcht in smoke, dry'd I remain, VVith brinish teares, my vvrinckled cheeks polluted, Yet fresh in minde, thy lavves I still retain. Hovv many dayes shall I be persecuted, For seruing thee? vvhen shall thy iudgment be On my foes, me pursuing, executed. Loe hovv deep pits the proud haue dig'd for me, In their corrupt proceedings, quite contrary To thy iust lavves in them opposing thee. All thy commands are faithfull, neuer vary, My foes vvithout cause▪ persecute me still, Me to assist, delay not long, nor tarry. Life precious is, my life vvho sought to spill, Had me on earth consum'd, almost destroying, Yet ceast I not thy Precepts to fulfill. Reuiue me by thy mercy, vvhich inioying The testament of thy ovvn mouth I vvill Obserue and keep, my life therein imploying. 12 LAMED MOst mighty Lord in heau'n vvher thou dost raign, Is setled sure, the vvord of thy saluation, For euer there inthron'd it doth remain. From ages all, to euery generation, Thy faithfulnes endures, the earth shall stand, VVhich thou hast set vpon a sure foundation. Maintained still by thy Almighty hand, They do abide as thou hast them ordained, Thy seruants are they still at thy command. Vnles in thy lavv I delight had gained, In my distres I then had perisht quite, My ioy in thy Word hath my life sustained.
My minde thy Lavves all vvhich are iust and ight, Shall nere forget vvithin my soul ingraued, By them thou hast restor'd my life and light. I am thine ovvne, O let thine ovvn be saued, O saue thou me, for I am only thine, For I haue sought thy Precepts, them I craued. Malicious men, this harmles life of mine Haue vvayted long and sought to haue destroyed, VVhilst I think on thy sacred vvord diuine. My minde this to consider I imployed, That to an end, perfections all decline, Thy perfect Lavv most large is aye inioyed. 13 MEM NO time I cease, euen throughout all the day, To meditate thy Lavv most deare beloued, O hovv I loue thy gracious Word alvvay: Thou by thy Lavv, mak'st me more vvise approued, Then are my foes, vvith me it is at hand, And euermore abideth vnremoued. Novv more I knovv, and much more vnderstand Of vvisdoms lore, then all they that haue taught me, For I muse on those Lavves thou didst command. To vnderstand far more thou hast novv brought me, Then those that are my elders, more I knovv, Because to keep thy precepts thou hast vvrought me. No vvicked vvay I vvent, not vvill I go, From all such paths I haue my feet refrained, That I might keep the vvord vvhich thou didst shovv. I nere did part vvith thy iust lavves ordained, I nere forsook thy iudgments iust and meet, For vvisdom I haue by thy doctrine gained. No taste is to my palat half so svveet, Not hony pure vvithin my mouth receiued, As vvhen thy vvords vvith grace me kindly greet. By precepts thine, I knovvledge haue conceiued, Therfore I hate all false vvayes, keep my feet From them far off, since I the true perceiued.
14. NVN. Only thy vvord, vvhich is a lamp of light, Doth guide my steps and giues my feet direction, It shevves my vvay before me shining bright. I vvill perform it, hauing vovvd subiection Vnto thy lavves, to keep and to obey The iudgment of thy iustice in perfection: O Lord I am afflicted night and day, Do thou reuiue me, to thy grace restore me According to thy vvord as thou didst say. Vouchsafe to heare my suit Lord I implore thee, Accept my vovves and all my offrings free, Thy iudgments teach me, set them all before me. Oft is my soul, nay euen continually, As in my hands vvith dangers dread dismayed, Yet is thy Lavv no vvhit forgot byme. The vvicked haue for me snares secret layed. Yet from thy iust commands thou didst decree, Nor from thy vvayes most straight I haue not strayed, Of all those Lavves and precepts giu'n by thee I am as of my heritage possessed, My hearts delight and my chief ioyes they be, My heart I haue inclined and addressed Still to performe to perpetuity Thy statutes all and testimonies blessed. 15. SAMECH. Presumptuous vain inuentions I do hate, And sickle mindes vnconstantly that vvauer, Thy lavv I loue, vvith praise I celebrate. Thou art my shield▪ my refuge safe, my Sauer, Vpon thy vvord my hope, my trust doth stay, For vvhich I vvait, and for thy gracious fauer. Part hence far off from me all ye alvvay VVho iustly for your vvicked deeds are blamed, That I the lavves of my God might obey. According to thy faithfull promise claimed, VVherto I trust, do thou my life maintain, O frustrate not my hope lest I be shamed. Perform this my request, me to sustain, So saued shall I be, by thee protected,
And in thy Lavves my ioyes vvill ay remain. From Statutes thine vvho stray thou hast deiected, Dovvn vnderfoot all such thou trampled hast For their deceit and falshood foul detected. Perpetually to cease, like drosse to vvaste, The vvicked on the earth thy iustice maketh, Therefore vpon thy vvord my loue is plac t. My flesh for dread of thee for horror quaketh, VVhen iudgments thine the vvicked dovvn do cast, Thy terrors, fear, and dread, hold on me taketh, 16. AIN. Quarrells vniust I quench and quiet make, VVith iudgment I haue Iustice executed, Qite leaue me not to foes, nor me forsake. My patron be, and let them be confuted VVho me accuse, let my good cause preuaile, That by proud men I be not persecuted. Quite vveakned is my sight, my eyes do fail VVith longing looks expecting thy saluation, And for thy vvords most iust vvhich me auail. On me vvho serue thee haue commiseration, According to thy mercy vvith me deal, And of thy lavv teach me the obseruation. Quick iudgment and true vnderstanding zeale Giue me vvho serue thee at thy hand attending, The knovvledg of thy vvill to me reueal. 'Tis time for thee to vvork, thy truth defending, Almighty Lord thy lavv they ouerthrovv, To abrogate it vtterly contending, Quintestence of all vvealth on earth belovv, Yea pure fine gold I hold vnfit compared Vnto thy Lavves, my loue esteems them so. Therefore to thy commands my acts are squared, But all false vvayes vvhich sinners daily go I do abhor, and haue my hate declared. 17. PE, Remarkable and most strange vvonders are VVithin thy Lavves and counants comprehended Therefore to keep them is my souls chief care. VVhen as thy vvord gos forth by grace attended,
It giueth to the simple glorious light, And knovvledge by it is to them extended. Right vvide I set my mouth that so I might My panting breath dravv in to thee aspiring, For in thy Lavv is all my soules delight. Look thou on me, thy grace and face desiring, As thou vvert vvont to them that loue thy Name, Thy custom still to deal so thee requiring. Reduce my steps that I my course may frame By thy Decrees, and therein be directed, And let no sinne rule ore me to my shame. Let me from mens oppression be protected, And I vvill keep thy Statutes most diuine, Obseruing all thy Lavves, vvhich I affected. Resplendent rayes of thy face make to shine On me by vvhom thou ioyfully art serued, Teach thou to me those sacred Lavves of thine. Hovv far from thy obedience men haue svverued Large streames of teares run dovvn these eyes of mine Because thy lavves are not by them obserued. 18. ZADE. Sole suprem Lord eternall and most iust Thy iudgments all vvhich righteous are reuealing, Thy iustice vve acknovvledge perfect must. Thy Statutes all and thy most faithfull dealing Thou straightly bidst vs practice and make knovvn, Thy faithfulnes not faithlesly concealing. Suppressed by my zeale I am cast dovvn Because that they vvho oft haue me distressed, Thy vvord out of their mind haue quite forgon. Refined is thy holy Word expressed, Most perfect pure, of loue intire therto And ioy therein thy seruant is possessed. Small is my state, I little am and lovv, Of lofty great ones I am but despised, Yet from my minde thy lavv I let not go. Thy righteousnesse is rightly eternized, Thy iustice is and shall be euermore. And thy Lavv is the Truth most highly prised.
Sad sorrovv and distresse do vex me sore, Haue found me out, and finding captiue take me, Yet still thy Hests delight me more and more. To Statutes thine most sacred I betake me, For euer iust are all thy Lavves and lore, That I may liue to vnderstand them make me. 19. KOPH. Thee haue I call'd vpon vvith my vvhole heart, Vouchsafe O LORD an ansvver soon to giue me, Thy statutes I vvill keep, from them nere part. Yea euen on thee I call vvhen troubles grieue me, Preserue me safe, and then obserue vvill I Thy precepts lust, O saue thou and relieue me. The early day preuenting, I did cry To thee, my hope vpon thy vvord depended, My trust vpon thy promise doth rely. More vigilant then vvatchmen I attended To meditate vpon thy holy vvord, To exercise therein I haue intended. Thy gracious eare in mercy me afford. Reuiue thou me, restore my life decayed, According to thy custom, gracious Lord. Hovv near they are vvho dangerous plots haue layed Thou seest and knovvst them giuen to vvickednes, And hovv far from thy doctrine they haue strayed. Thou Lord art near to help in all distres, And on firm truth all thy commands are grounded, And thou hast them ordaind in righteousnes. I knovv thy lavves antiquity vnbounded Of thy Decrees yeares shall be numberles, For euermore to last thou hast them founded, 20. RESH: Vexations of my heart do thou behold, Free me, for I thy lavv haue not neglected, But stedfastly in minde I do it hold, Plead thou my cause, and let me be protected, O saue me by thy sacred vvord alone, Reuiue thou me and let me be erected. Vain is the vvay that vvicked men haue gone From safety far off, far from their saluation
Because of thy iust Statutes they keep none. Thy mercies mild, vvith thy commiseration, Are manifold, O Lord, and very great, Reuiue me by thy Iudgments declaration. Vngodly men, my foes, in vvrathfull heat Are many, strong, still seeking to confound me, Yet from thy vvayes my steps I do not set. Transgressors I did vievv vvhich did surround me, Their sins against thee I vvith grief behold, Because thy lavv they keep not, vvoe doth vvound me. Vie, Lord, my loue, hovv I myself vnfold Vnto thy lavv, most vvorthily beloued, Reiue me by thy mercies manifold. Thy vvord is truth originall approued, Thy Iudgments iust eternally entold, Do all endure for euermore vnmoued. 21. SCHIN. VVithout a cause though Princes hatred beare Against me, vvhom they cruelly pursued, Yet still my heart of thy lavv stands in feare. I vvith more ioy by thy vvord am endevved Then they vvho vvith great spoils enriched be, Thy Sayings haue my ioyes much more renevved. VVho lying vse, most odious are to me, Deceit and fraud abhorring I haue hated, But dearly loue the lavves ordain'd by thee. Seau'n times a day thy praise is celebrated, For Iudgments thine most righteous and thy grace Thy Name to laud my layes are consecrated. VVho loue thy lavv and thy vvord do embrace Are blessed vvith great peace by them enioyed, And no affront shall their content deface. I trust thou vvilt not let me be destroyed, Lord, I for thy saluation hope and craue, Thy Statutes I to do am still employed. VVholly to keep thy lavves my self I gaue, Them to obserue I haue my self applyed, I loue them best, by them thou vvilt me saue. 68 All thy Decrees vvhich thou hast testified,
Thy Precepts and thy Statutes kept I haue, For all my vvayes to thee are knovvn and tryed. TAV YEeld me such grace, that my cryes may ascend Before thy face O Lord let them come neare thee, Me by thy Word, true vnderstanding send. O let my prayr approach thine eare, O heare me According to thy gracious sauing Word, Deliuer me, that I may loue and feare thee. Yeeld laud my lips shall, and to thee afford Due thanks and praise, most vvorthily deserued, VVhen thou thy lavves to teach me, shalt accord. My tong shall sound thy sayings iust obserued, For iustice all is vvhich thou dost command, Most vvorthy still in minde to be preserued. Yeeld me thy ayd, reach me thy helping hand, For I haue of thy Precepts made election, VVhich I desire to knovv and vnderstand. Thy grace to gaine, O Lord giue me direction, For I haue longd thy sauing health to see, Thy Lavv delights me, vvins my hearts affection. Yet let my soul liue, that it may praise thee, And let thy lavves vvhich neuer haue decayed, Be still my ayd, and helpfull vnto me. Though like a lost sheep, somtime I haue strayed, Thy seruant seek, restored let me be, For in my heart, thy Word hath euer stayed. Psalme 120. Prayer & Complaint. WHen sharp afflictions me oppressed, I to the Lord my prayr addressed: He heard me vvhen to him I cryed, And me vvith timely ayd supplyed. Novv also Lord my soul deliuer From lying lips of the deceiuer: Preserue my life safe from the vvrong And harm of the deceitfull tong, Deceitfull tong tell me vvhat profit Or vvhat exceeding gain comes of it? Hovv canst thou get so great aduantage By this thy soothing smoothing language?
Thy vvords like svvords, pierce bone and marrovv, As vvhen the strong shoots his sharp arrovv: The vvounds of thy inuenom'd tong, Like coles of Iuniper, burne long. O vvoe is me, vvho am constrained To stay in Mesechs tents detained: O painfull long peregrination, In cruell Kedars habitation. My soul vvith them hath irksom byding, VVhich hate to loue, loue to be chiding: Imbracing strife and enmity, Abhorring peace and amity. Them seeking to haue pacified, The more their rage is multiplied. VVhen I my minde for peace declared, Then they themselues for vvar prepared. Psalme 121. Comfort. VP to the hils I lift mine eyes, From vvhence comes help to me. My help Lord comes from thee, VVhose povvr hath made the earth and skyes, He hath them surely founded, On him my hope is grounded. He vvill not let thy footing slide, For he that doth thee keep, Nor slumber vvill, nor sleep. Behold, vvho Israel doth guide, VVith vvatchfull eye him keepeth, He slumbers not, nor sleepeth.
The Lord doth keep thee from all harm, The Lord at thy right hand, Thy shade, thy shield doth stand. And gard thee safe vvith his right arm, Nor Sun nor Moon shall smite thee, Nor day nor night afright thee. The Lord vvill keep thy soul from ill, VVhen thou comst in or out. What ere thou goest about, Shall by his blessing prosper still, And all thou dost indeuer, The Lord vvill bles for euer. Psalme 122. Consolation. WHen I did hear the peoples voyce, Say, let vs goe vvith one accord, Into the Temple of the Lord, O hovv my heart it did reioyce. Our vvilling feet novv vvalk the vvay, VVithin thy gates vvhere vve shall stay, Ierusalem thou city blessed, Ierusalem novv built doth seem A city of most high esteeme, VVithin it self, of peace possessed. The people thither bend their vvayes, There do the tribes of God ascend To Israels ark, vvhere they intend To giue God thanks, his Name to praise. For there are seates of iudgment plac't, The thrones of Dauids house high grac't, Are there establisht, failing neuer. Pray for Ierusalem, that peace May flourish there, and neuer ceas: VVho loue thee, they shall prosper euer,
Let peace and ioy dvvell plenteously VVithin thy vvals and fortresses, And in thy royall Palaces And houses, all prosperity. For my deare friends and brethren sake, VVhich dvvell in thee, this prayr I make, Let peace vvithin thee be assured. Euen for the house of God the Lord, For thee vvill vve vvith one accord, Seeke all the good may be procured. Psalme 123. Prayer. TO thee O Lord, vvhose throne is in the skyes, Do I lift vp mine eyes: As seruants loe, distressed by disaster, Haue recourse to their Master, As handmaids on their Mistres hand attending, So vve on God depending, Attend the Lord, till he most gracious Haue mercy vpon vs. O Lord our God, to vs be gracious, Haue mercy vpon vs, For vve are fild vvith scorn intollerable, Contempt insufferable. Our tired soules exceeding ill are vsed, VVith bitter scoffs abused, By th' rich at ease, the proud ore vs do vant, Disdainfull, arrogant▪ Psalme 124. Thanksgiuing. LEt Israel novv say▪ and make it knovvn, Vnles the Lord of hosts had fought for vs. Vnles the Lord his mighty, povvr had shovvn, In our defence, vvhen men most furious, Their forces ioynd vs to haue ouerthrovvn,
They had deuourd vs quick in gulf profound, When their fierce vvrath inam'd, thirsting for bloud, Against vs rag'd: euen then the bolstrous floud Had vs orevvhelmd, and sunke vs to the ground, The surging vvaues and storms our souls had drovvnd. The vvaters proud then ouer vs had gone, VVe had bin lost, and all quite cast avvay. But blessed be the Lord our God alone, Who left vs not, nor gaue vs as a prey Vnto their teeth, vvho sought our soules to slay. Like as a bird escaped hath the snare, That secretly the subtle fovvler layd, The net is broke, and vve escaped are: Our help is in the Name of God, vvhose ayde Our safety is, vvho heau'n and earth hath made. Psalme 125. Doctrin. WHo trust in God, and him rely on, Reposing confidence Alone in his defence, They shall stand sure like to mount Sion, Vnmou'd remaining failing neuer, But biding euer. As mighty mountains fortifying, Ierusalem inclose, The Lord is so to those That do his vvill, on him relying, The Lord vvill keep him safe assured, Euer secured. The rod of vvicked men remaineth Not long vpon the iust▪ But he on vvhom they trust, Them safe deliuerance, speedy daigneth, Lest they be forced by oppression, vnto transgression.
To good men; Lord grant thy saluation, And vvho vpright abide, But they that turn aside, With sinners shall haue due damnation, Let Israel of peace possessed, Be euer blessed. Psalme 126. Praise. WHen Sions sad captiuity, The Lord returnd to liberty, Amaz'd tvvixt sudden ioy and feare, Much like to them that dream, vve vvere. Our tears & grones vvho long had mourned, To songs of ioy and laughter turned: The heathen people vvere afraid, God vvonders vvrought for vs, they said. Tis truth, the Lord our God hath vvrought Great vvorks for vs, surpassing thought, Of all our ioyes he is the ground, In him alone our ioyes abound. Lord let those captiues be returned, Which yet in thrall long time haue mourned: As streams refresh the parched South, As vvelcom shovvrs in time of drouth. They that in tears do sadly sovv, Shall reap in ioy, full crops shall movv. Who going forth in time of need, Sovving vvith teares the precious seed, Shall home return, all sadnes ceasing, And making merry, ioyes increasing, Great store receiue, vvhich haruest yeelds, Bring vvaighty sheaues, from fertile fields. Psalme 127. Doctrine. VNles the Lord the house doth build, The builders cost and care is vain, Their charge is lost, and all their pain,
Though stuffe be strong, and men be skilled, Vnles the Lord the city gard, In vain men vvatch, in vain they vvard. In vain so early vp ye are, In vain ye goe so late to bed, In vain ye pain both hand and head: In vain so homely hard ye fare, Vnles God bles vvake they or sleep, Whom he doth loue, he safe vvill keep. Lo also vvhen a man is blest VVith hopefull issue of his ovvne, His heirs to vvhat he hath possest, It is the gift of God alone: God onely of his goodnes giues The vvomb due fruit, that after liues. And vvhen the children men become▪ Of body strong, and stout of minde, So apt and actiue in their kinde, That arrovves to the head dravvn home, With strongest arm and nimblest slight, Seem not more terrible in fight. He happy is, vvho hath fulfill'd His quiuer vvith such shafts as these, For in the tryall of their pleas▪ They shall not be abasht nor illd: Nay, they shall make their foes asham'd Before the Iudg and iustly blam'd. Psalme 128. Doctrin. BLessed is vvhosoeuer doth fear the Lord of might. And truly doth indeuer to vvalk his vvaies aright. For thou shalt in thy calling of thy hands labour eat. And all things fair befalling thy vvelfare shall be great. Thy vvife vvith timely eeming hall multiply thy line, About thy chamber seeming, a fresh and fruitfull vine: Thy children all assembling thy table round about, Yong oliue plants resembling that fairly spring and sprout.
Lo thus the man is blessed, vvho feares the Lord of might, To them this is expressed, vvho vvorship him aright, From Sion God almighty shall giue thee blessings store, Thou shalt see Salems City to flourish euermore. Thou shalt see vvith his blessing, thy sons posterity, And Israel possessing peace and prosperity. Psalme 129. Thanksgiuing. OFt from my youth novv Israel may say, They haue beset me round, & sore assailed, Oft from my youth they haue sought euery vvay My ouerthrovv, but neuer yet preuailed. And yet I beare the tokens and the track Of their despight, delighting in my sorrovvs: For on the ridg of my bare naked back, The plovvers plovvd and eared vp long furrovvs. But God is iust, and the iniurious snares Of vvicked men he hath cut quite in sunder. Confounding shame he for them all prepares, That vvrong his Saints, or vvould bring Sion vnder. They shall be like vnto the gras that grovves On tops of vvals, or battlements of tovvers, Which vvithers soone, though for a vvhile it shovves, But dryes and dyes, or ere it beareth flovvers. Of vvhose increase, and all that it doth yeeld▪ He filleth not his hand, vvho so it reapeth, Nor yet the poore that gleaneth in the field, Of vvha s left, his little lapfull heapeth.
Nor passenger that passeth by the same, shall bid God bles, or vvishing say vve bid ye Good luck from God, or to them in his Name, So much as say, God speed your vvork, God speed ye. Psalme 130. Prayer. FRom depth profound distressed, in grief and miserie, My cryes I haue addressed, O Lord my God to thee. Lord heare my lamentatiō, vouchsafe my voyce to hear, And to my supplication, bovv dovvn attentiue eare. Lord if thou mark our errors, and vvhat is done amis, To suffer thy dread terrors, O Lord vvho able is? But mercy and compassion are euermore vvith thee, Therfore vvith adoration, thy Name shall feared be▪ On God my soul attendeth in him is all my trust, My hope and faith dependeth vpon his promise iust. My soul to God aspireth, more earnestly alvvay, Then he vvhom vvatching tireth, doth look for break of day. Lay thy firm hopes foundation, on God O Israel, For in him sure saluation, and boundles mercy dvvell, He dearly doth esteem thee O Israel by his grace, He freely vvill redeem thee, and all thy sins deface. Psalme 131. Consolation. O Lord I haue no haughty minde, I haue no lofty looking eye, I haue nought dared nor design'd, Too great for me, too hard, too high. Nay, if I haue not meekly milde, VVith humblenes my self demeande, In quiet silence as a childe That nevvly from the brest is vveand.
If that I haue not soly set My soul on thee, to trust in thee: As th'infant taken from the teat Of his ovvn mother, minde not me. Euen so O Israel elect, trust in the Lord on him depend, His pleasure euermore expect, From this time forth, vnto the end, Psalme 132. Prayer. O Lord our God recall to minde Thy seruant Dauids misery, Affliction, and calamity. Hovv he by oath himself did binde, To Iacobs God vovv'd solemnly. Behold said he this vovv I make, My house shall neuer me inclose, Nor on my bed vvill I repose. My eyes no sleep at all shall take, No slumber shall my eye lids close. Vntill I finde a resting place Where Gods Ark may vvith vs remain, VVhere vve the Lord may entertain, The God of Iacob and his race, Whose might doth Israel sustain. Because his seat oft changed vvas From time to time, as vve heard say, It oft had bin at Ephrata, From place to place it oft did pas, In vvoods and fields vve found it stay. Novv since this place he liketh best, Into his palace vve vvill go Before his footstooll falling lovv. Arise O Lord into thy rest, Thy self and thy Arks strength there shovv. Cloath thou thy Priests vvith righteousnes, Let them from thee glad tidings bring, Let all thy Saints reioyce and sing.
Thy seruant Dauid daigne to blesse, Refuse not thine anointed King. The Lord hath svvorn in verity, Who vvill not change nor turn from it, To Dauid, saying, I permit That one of thy posterity Vpon thy throne shall euer sit. My couenant if thy sons obey, And this my testimoniall Which vnto them declare I shall, Their sons also shall sit for ay Vpon thy Throne imperiall. For God the Lord hath made his choice Of Zion fair vvhich doth excell, Saying I haue delight to dvvell Herein I rest, here I reioyce, For ay this place doth like me vvell, His poore vvith bread I'le satisfie, VVith all good things they shall abound: His Priests vvill I inuiron round, VVith my saluation there vvill I Make all her Saints their ioyes resound. There vvill I make to bud and spring, The horn of Dauid raised high: A lamp of light prepar'd haue I For mine annoynted sacred King, Whose glory I vvill multiply. His enemies vvill I confound, VVith shame they shall be cloathd all ore, His glorious state vvill I restore, And on his sacred head renovvnd, His crovvn shall ourish euermore. Psalme 133. Doctrin. BEhold▪ hovv good, hovv pleasant, amiable, And gracious is the loue inuiolable, Of brethren vvhich together dvvell. Resembling right the precious oyntment smell, The sacred oyl vvhich Gods lavv did appoint, The high Priest Aaron to annoint. VVhich plenteously vpon his head vvas poured, And to his beard and garment skirts dovvn shovvred,
VVith svveetest scent perfuming all, Distilling dovvn like devvs that timely fall On Sion mount, and fertile Hermon hill, Which all the land vvith fruit doth fill. Euen there the Lord his bounty large expressing, Will povvr and shovvr his fauor, grace and blessing, And life eternall giue he vvill. Psalme 134. Doctrin. YE seruants of the Lord of might, VVho in his house do vvatch by night, Attending there, your selues addres, The Lord our God to praise and bles. VVho in his Sanctuary stand, To bles the Lord, lift heart and hand: To sound his praise, your selues prepare, And let your voyce his acts declare. The Lord bles thee for his Name sake, VVhose povvr the heau'n and earth did make: From Sions mount vvhere he doth raign, Thou blessed shalt for ay remain. Psalme 135. Doctrin.
ALl ye seruants of the Lord Praise his name vvith one accord. Ye that in Gods house do stand There performing his command, Ye that in his courts do dvvell Praise his Name vvhich doth excell. Praise the Lord for good is he, Sing his name in Psalmody, Nothing can more pleasant be. He hath chosen graciously, Iacob and his Israel He accounteth his ievvell. For I this do knovv right vvell That the Lord is great and high. Our God doth all Gods excell, He doth in the earth and sky, In the riuers, and the seas, Whatsoeuer he doth please. He the vapors makes ascend from the earths remotest end, He from heau'n the lightning flings, Dovvn to earth the raine he brings, From his treasures of all kinds He lets loose the vvrastling vvinds. All first-born in Egypt land Were slain by his dreadfull hand, Firstlings all they dead did find Both of beasts and humane kind, Egypt in the midst of thee Thou his vvondrous vvorks didst see. Pharo and his host he droun'd In the red seas depth profoūd. Kings and nations he orethrevv, Mighty Sihon king he slevv. Og the King of fat Basan, all the kings of canaan. To his people Israel He bequeathed all the land To possesse it, there to dvvell, This vvas done at his cōmand. Lord thy name and clemency lasteth to eternity. Lord thy euerlasting name Is from age to age the same. For the Lord of povvr and might VVill his people iudg vvith right, When his seruants him displease He his vvrath vvill soon appease. Idols of the Gentils are Bought and sold as other vvare, Made of siluer or of gold, VVhich the vvorkmans hand doth mould. Mouths they haue, yet speechles be, Eyes they haue, yet cannot see. Eares they haue, yet heare no sound, Nostrils vvhere no breath is found.
Like in nature, like in name, To them are they vvho them frame, They haue all as little sense vvho in them haue confidence. Bles the Lord O Israel, Ye that in his house do dvvell, Aarons house your selues addresse God the Lord to praise and blesse. House of Leui yeeld him praise, Magnifie his name alvvayes▪ All that loue and feare the Lord Praise his name vvith one accord. Blesse the Lord for euermore, Out of Sion him adore, Where his glory high excels, In Ierusalem vvho dvvells. Psalme 136. Thanksgiuing. PRaise the Lord, to him confes, Giue him thanks for his goodnes, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. To the God of Gods giue praise, Giue him praise and thanks alvvaies, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. To the Lord of Lords giue praise, Giue him glorious thanks alvvayes, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Giue him praise and thanks each one, VVho doth vvonders great alone, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Giue him thanks, his praise relate, Heau'n his vvisdome did create, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Praise him, vvho the earth out spread, Ore the vvaters stablished, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. In the heau'n he made great lights, Shining therin dayes and nights, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. He the Sun made vvith his rayes, Domineering ore the dayes, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity.
Moon and stars of lesser lights, To command and rule the nights, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. He did smite vvith povvrfull hand, In their first born, Egypt land, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. He brought thence his Israel, VVho long there opprest did dvvell, For his great benignity dureth to eternity: VVith strong hand, and stretcht out arm, He protected them from harm, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. He the red sea did diuide, Seeming vvals on euery side, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. And vvhile so it standing vvas, Through it safe did Israel pas. For his great benignity▪ dureth to eternity. Pharoh and his army dround, Follovving in sea profound, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity▪ He did lead his people in VVildernes of Shur, and Sin, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Giue thanks to the Lord of might, Praise him, vvho great Kings did smite, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Killing Kings incontinent, By his povver euident, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Sihon King of Amorites, He slevv by his Israelites, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity: Og the King of Basan land, Dyed by his dreadfull hand, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Then their land avvay he gaue, That his people it might haue, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. To his seruant Israel, To possesse it there to dvvell, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity.
VVhen in ill estate vve stood, He remembred vs for good, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Our distressers he destroyd, Freedom vve by him inioyd For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. All his creatures he doth feed, Nourishing them at their need, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. To the Lord, the God of heau'n, Let all thanks▪ and praise be giuen, For his great benignity, dureth to eternity. Psalme 137. Complaint. BY Euphrates vve captiue sat lamenting, Proud Babels streams vvith streaming tears augmenting, O Sion dear vvhen vve remembred thee, In midst of thrall abiding exiles vve, VVith hearts grief pang'd, vvith flouds of plaints oreflovving Our harps vve hang d on vvillovv plants there grovving. Then they vvhose rage and fury vs captiued, Importun'd vs to sing our ioyes depriued: Insulting bid vs Sion songs expres. Alas said vve, hovv can vve here addres Our mournfull hearts to sing the songs ordained, To praise our God in strangers land prophaned? Let my right hand disus'd, forget for euer All harping skill, if I do not perseuer, Ierusalem thee in my minde to beare. To my mouths roof let my tong fast adhere, Nere let me be vvith any ioyes endevved, Vntill I see thy former ioyes renevved. Remember Lord hovv Edoms race inflamed With rage against Ierusalem exclamed, That dismall day vvhen it quite vvaste vvas layd, Remember hovv inhumanly they said,
Sack, kill, spoil, burn, turn all to desolation, Race dovvn to ground, demolish the foundation. Euen so shalt thou O Babel be destroyed, Thrise happy he vvhose povvr shall be imployed, As thou hast vs, more vvretched thee to make. May they be blest vvhose zealous hand shall take From brests impure, thy brauling brats, and brain them, And dash their bones gainst stones, till they haue slain them Psalme 138. Thanksgiuing. WIth all my heart I vnto thee Will thankfull be, Thy goodnes praising, VVhere mighty States assembled be, I'le sing of thee, Thy Name high raising. And in thy sacred Temple I Will magnifie Thy Name renovvned, Adoring thee for mercy thine, And truth diuine, VVith glory crovvned. For thou aboue all thy Name Lord, Thy sacred VVORD Hast magnified: VVhen I did cry, thou didst heare me, My soule by thee Was fortified. All Kings on earth shall thee renovvn, VVith praise shall crovvn Thee LORD most blessed, VVhen thou to heare shalt them incline, Thy Word diuine, By thee expressed.
They in the vvayes of God my King, Shall vvalk and sing, His sacred story, Confessing that the Lord of might Doth shine most bright In grace and glory. For though the Lord be God most high, his gracious eye The meek respecteth, The proud a far off he doth knovv, their fall doth shovv, He them deiecteth. Though I in great distres be toyld, tost and turmoyld, Nevv life thou giu'st me: Thy rightfull hand quite ouerthrovves my spitefull foes, But thou relieu'st me. Thou vvilt accomplish this for me, for thy mercy Endureth euer. This vvork vvhich novv thou hast begun, till it be done, Forsake it neuer. Psalme 139. Consolation. O God thou hast me search'd and try'd, VVhat is in me thou hast espy'd, And vnto thee is throughly knovvn, My rising vp, and lying dovvn, What thought so ere my heart conceiued, By thee a far off is perceiued. VVhere so I goe, or dovvn do ly▪ Still thee I see approching nigh, My vvayes and paths all thou dost fan, Familiarly them out dost scan. My vvords from thee are not concealed, But loe thou Lord knovvst all reuealed. Before, behinde, thou dost me hol, Me round about thy hands infold, On me set fast thy hand doth ly. Thy knovvledg is for me too high, Too precious far for me to gain it, So high that I cannot attain it,
If from thy sight escape vvould I, I knovv not vvhether I should fly. For vvhether can I fly from thee, If into heau'n, there thou vvilt be: And if into the deep I enter, Euen there I finde thee at the center. If I vvere able to ariue At farthest shores vvhere seas do driue Their vtmost vvaues there to abide, Or on the morning vvings to ride. Yet thy right hand me thirher leadeth, Thy hand me holds, vvhere my foot treadeth. If I suppose I shall me hide, In darknes from thee vnespide, The night about me shall be light. The darknes hides not from thy sight, Thy sight, the night, as bright day cleareth, The dark as light to thee appeareth. My invvard parts to thee are knovvn, My reins possessing as thine ovvn: VVhen first the vvomb did me inclose, Thou didst me couer and compose, So full of vvonder I'le confes thee, With thankfull praises euer bles thee. In truth thy vvorks all vvondrous are, As the effects do vvell declare Vnto my soule: Thou vvell dost knovv Hovv vigorous strong my bones did grovv, VVhen thou in secret didst create me, In place obscure didst animate me. VVith curious vvork thou hast me vvrought, In earths lovv cels to fashion brought. Thine eyes did vievv me vvhen I vvas A shapeles lump imperfect mas, Thou mad'st my parts, time, form decreeing, VVrit in thy book before my being. O God hovv precious and hovv deare To me thy counsels do appeare? Of vvhat in estimable prise, Hovv great, hovv high the summe doth rise? I them account inualuable, Rich pearles as sand innumerable. VVith thee am I still vvhen I vvake,
Thy early counsell I partake: Lord vvhen it is thy sacred vvill, Let thy strong arm the vvicked kill. Therfore you bloudy men I banish, For euer from my presence vanish. I mean thy vvicked enemies Who speake against thee blasphemies: Who thee Lord and thy Name do hate, Do I not them all execrate, Against thee vvho do rise contrary, Do I not count my aduersarie? I hate them vvith a perfect hate, Am vvith them euer at debate, And them account my mortall foes. Lord vvho all secrets dost disclose, Of my heart search each cogitation, Try me by strict examination. Of all my thoughts the tryall take, And of my heart, experience make. Considr vvell, behold and see If vvicked vvayes remain in m▪ And vvhen thou hast exactly ide me, Then in thy vvay for euer guide me. Psalme 140. Prayer. LEt me O Lord be quite released, From vvicked men be my defence, Meto preserue, O be thou pleased, From men of vvrongfull violence. VVho in their vvicked hearts malitious, A thousand mischiefs do prepare▪ Consult together, plots pernicious, Continually renevving vvar. They haue made sharp their tongs to vvound me, Like Serpents they against me rise, Vnder their lips vvho vvould confound me, The Adders deadly poyson lyes.
Lord keep me safe, thy succor send me, From vvicked hands, and from my foe, From men of violence defend me, Who seek my steps to ouerthrovv. The proud haue laid a snare to catch me, For me they secret cords do hide, To take me in their trap they vvatch me, And set their net by my vvay side. I said to thee O Lord eternall, Thou art my God, I trust in thee: O Lord my God, most high supernall, Heare thou my cry, giue eare to me. Of povvrfull hosts, Lord God most gloriou My safety resteth in thy might, For thou dost shield my head victorious, The day our armies ioyn in fight▪ What vvicked men desire, Lord grant not▪ Nor vvith their levvd deuice comply, Crosse their designes, so that they vant not, Lest they themselues do magnifie. As for the chief, the rest misleading, And those that do besiege me round, Let their ovvn counsels, mischief pleading, From their ovvn lips themselus confound. Let fall vpon their heads, coles burning, Cast into flames let them remain, Dovvn deepest pits them headlong turning, That they may neuer rise again. To slander vvho his tong imployeth, On earth shall haue no biding place: The cruell man his sin destroyeth, To ruin, mischiefe shall him chase. The Lord I knovv the cause maintaineth Of the afflicted in distres: Through him the poore man right obtaineth Against them all that him oppres▪ The righteous all thy Name excelling, With hearty thanks shall laud and praise, The iust vvith thee shall haue their dvvelling, And in thy presence bide alvvaies. Psal. 141. Prayr. TO thee I crie, LORD heare my crying, Make haste to me approching neere,
Do thou vouchsafe my voyce to heare, Heare me, my cryes to thee applying. Accept thou this my supplication That it as incense may ascend, VVhen I to thee my hands extend, Be't as an euening free oblation. Lord let my speech bevvell obserued, Before my mouth set vvatch and vvard, The dore of my lips keep and guard, From rash vvords let me be preserued, To vvhat is vvicked▪ vilde and vlcious, Let my heart neuer be enclin'd, Nor vvith bad men in practice ioyn'd, Let me not tast their cates delicious▪ VVhen iust men smite me, they relieue me, VVhen they reproue  I count them kinde, As precious oyle I shal it finde, It shall not break my head, nor gleue me▪ As for their euill day and hovver VVhen I behold their misery, Affliction and calamity, Aggrieu'd for them, my prayrs I povver. VVhen their chief Iudges execrable Shall be cast dovvn in stony place, They'l hear my vvords, and them embrace, For they are svveet and amiable. Our bones about the graues mouth scattred As chips of vvood dispersed ly, VVhich from the hevvers axe do fly, As clots of earth vvith mattocks shattred, Yet are my eyes to thee erected, O Lord my God, vvho art most iust, In thee, and thee alone I trust, My soul forsake not, lovv delected. Let me partake thy preseruation, In safety keep me from the snare VVhich vvicked men for me prepare, And from their vvicked machination,
In nets of their ovvn close contriuing Together let the vvicked fall, VVhile I escape the dangers all, In port of harbor safe riuing. Psalme 142. Prayer. I VVith my voyce to God did cry, My prayer for grace I did apply. Before him seeking for reliefe My plaint I povvr'd, shevv'd him my grief. VVhen my sad heart vvas vvoe begone My fainting spirit vvas ouerthrovvn, VVhat course I hold vvhere I should goe, VVhat path I take thou vvell dost knovv. And vvhen I vvalked in my vvay They for me secret snares did lay, On my right hand I lookt to see If any vvere vvho vvould knovv me. VVhen meanes and friends I sought and try'd They me forsook on euery side, All hope of succor failed me, For my soul none vvould carefull be. O Lord to thee then I did cry, Thou only art my hope said I, Thou art my refuge still at hand, My portion in the liuing land. Attend vnto my vvofull cry, For very lovv novv brought am I, From cruell foes deliuer me, Far stronger all then I they be. My soul out of close prison bring, That to thy name I praise may sing, The iust about me shall resort. For largely thou shalt me comfort. Psalme 143. Prayer. LOrd hear my prayer and inuocation, Giue eare vnto my supplication,
Me ansvver in thy faithfulnes, Relieue me vvith commiseration, According to thy righteousnes. Let not thy seruant terrified, VVith horror of his sin be tryed, By rigor of thy iudgment right, For no man can be iustified, That liues in thy al-seeing sight. My foes my soul haue persecuted, Their fury on me executed, Struck dovvn my life to earth they haue, I dvvell in darknes, am reputed As dead, long lying in the graue. Therfore my spirit is distressed VVithin me, ouervvhelmd, oppressed, Amazed, desolate, perplext: Of vvonted comfort dispossessed, My heart disconsolate is vext. In miserable state inthralled, The dayes of old to minde I called, On all thy vvorks I meditate, To comfort me vvith grief appalled, The vvorks of thy hands I relate. To call on thee thy Word requireth, My humble heart to thee aspireth: VVith stretcht out hands thy grace to gain, For thee my thirsty soul desireth, As parched lands for shovvrs of rain. Lord haste thy ansvver fauorable, My spirit failes, be comfortable, Thy face from me O do not hide, Lest I become as miserable As they that dovvn the pit do slide. Betimes to heare thy mercy make me, In thee I trust, do not forsake me, The vvay that I should vvalk, shevv me,
That errors do not ouertake me, For I do lift my heart to thee. O Lord thou art my hope foreuer, Me from my enemies deliuer: To thee for refuge I do fly, Of sure defence thou art the giuer, Hid vnder thy shield let me ly. Teach me to doe thy vvill directed, To be by me knovvn and effected: Thou art my God, my comforts spring, By thy good spirit me elected, Into the land of iustice bring. O Lord in vvhom my trust is stayed, Reuiue thou me so much decayed, For thy Name sake vvhich I profes Let me from trouble be conuayed, According to thy righteousnes. And of thy mercy failing neuer, My cruell foes cut off for euer: And let thy might them all destroy, Who to afflict my soul indeuer, For thee to serue is all my ioy. Psalme 144. Prayer. THe Lord vvho is my strength, my God be blessed, VVho hath my hands to manage armes addressed, VVith vvarlike skill my fingers taught to fight, Victoriously conqu'ring my foes to smite. His fauor is my freedom, my saluation, My tovvr of strength, my strong fortification, My only hope, my sure defence, my shield, By him subdevvd to me the people yeeld. Lord vvhat is man that thou vouchsafst to knovv him, That thou such grace, such loue dost daign to shovv him, VVhat is the son of man that thou shouldst take Such liking of him, such account to make? This earthly man may fitly be resembled Vnto a heap of vanities assembled: His dayes are fevv, and soon they do decay, And as a shade they svviftly pas avvay. Bovv dovvn the heau'ns O Lord, from thence descending The mountains touch, they'l smoake, in sunder rending. Cast lightning forth: them scatter and disperse, Shoot out thy shafts, destroy thou the peruerse.
For my release, thy hand from heau'n dovvn send me, From vvaters great deliuer and defend me, From fearfull fall into the Of children strange, born, bred in barbarous lands. Whose mouth speaks fraud, vvhose vvhole discourse is lying Their hands and hearts to vanity applying: To thee O God, my voyce a nevv song sings, I'le sound thy praise vvith harp and lutes ten strings. He Kings from feare and trouble doth deliuer, Of victory he is the only giuer: By him is sure his seruant Dauid made Safe and secure from vvounds of trenchant blade. Deliuer me betimes, vouchsafe to saue me From strangers hands, vvho in their povvr vvould haue me: VVhose mouth doth talk of vanity and lyes, And vvhose right hand deceit doth exercise. Grant that our sons may in their generations Grovv vp in youth, as flourishing plantations, As louely make our daughters, and as fair▪ As pollisht coignes of royall buildings are. Make thou our fields for one, yeeld fiue times tvventy, Our garners fill of all sorts stor'd vvith plenty: And let our flocks vvhich streets or pastures hold, Bring thousands forth, increase ten thousand fold. Do thou make strong our oxen toil enduring, Inuasions and excursions spoil procuring: Make quite to cease all violence, restrain, That there may none in all our streets complain, O happy are the people thus instated, Who to the Lord are vvholy consecrated: True blessednes hath them for euer cround, VVhose God the Lord eternall is renound.
Psalme Cxlv. Thanksgiuing. MY God, my King, I vvill thee magnifie, And bles thy name for euermore vvill I. Bles thee I vvill and praise thee euery day, And glorifie thy sacred name for ay. The Lord my God is great and admirable, To comprehend his greatnes, none is able. Due praise of all thy vvorks, each generation Shall giue, and of thy povvr make declaration. I vvill discourse of thy great dignity, And celebrate thy glorious Maiesty: I vvill declare the vvonders by thee vvrought, And maruelous vvorks vvhich thou to pas hast brought. And men shall speak of thy povvr testifying, Hovv dreadfull are thy actions terrifying: I vvill declare thy high magnificency, Thy great renovvn and honors excellency. They shall make knovvn, and that abundantly, Thy goodnes great, most vvorthy memory: Thy righteousnes to all doth so abound, That they the praise therof shall sing and sound. The Lord is kinde, and full of svveet compassion, To anger slovv, of much commiseration. His goodnes God doth vnto all discouer, His mercy great extends his vvorks all ouer. Lord all thy vvorks vvhich thy hands did create, Giue thanks to thee, thy praise they celebrate: Especially thy Saints all thee do bles, Most vvorthy praise they all do thee confes. They shall speak of thy endles kingdoms glory. And of thy povvr relate the sacred story. That men may knovv thy mighty acts victorious, And of thy realm the maiesty most glorious. Eternall is thy kingdom and thy raigne, Through ages all, thy Empire doth remain. The Lord vpholds the vveake, and them that fall, Who are bovvd dovvne, he rectifies them all.
Expecting thee each creatures eye attendeth, Thy plenty great their timely food them sendeth. Thy bounties hand thou openest, freely giuing The full desire of all things that are liuing. The Lord our God is iust in all his vvayes, He holy is in all his vvorks alvvayes. The Lord is nigh to all that on him call, VVho call on him in truth he helps them all. He them that feare him vvith good things supplyeth, Their hearts desire he fully satisfieth, Them he vvill heare to him for mercy crying, Them he vvill saue to him for succour flying. The Lord vvill them preserue that in him ioy, But vvicked men all he vvill quite destroy. My mouth shall speak the praise of God alvvay, All flesh shall bles his holy name for ay. Psalme 146. Thanksgiuing. PRaise to God my soul be giuing, To the Lord my soul giue praise. Him Ile laud vvhile I am liuing, To my God Ile sing alvvayes, To the Lord my God, my King, VVhile I am I Psalms vvill sing. Princes are no sure foundation, On their promise no trust haue, Nor in Adams generation, For themselues they cannot saue. VVhen no breath they do retain, They return to earth again. VVith them all their thoughts do perish, And their enterprises vain. Happy vvhom the Lord doth cherish, Iacobs God doth him maintain, Happy vvho doth place his trust In the Lord his God most iust,
VVho created and sustaineth Heauen and earth by his great might, Sea, and all that it containeth He hath framed all aright, His truth and fidelity He doth keep eternally. He relieueth the oppressed, Giuing sentence on their side: For the hungry and distressed He doth food and ayd prouide: By him prisners freedom finde, He the bondmen doth vnbinde: God to them that are in blindnes Giueth eyes to see the light, God in mercy great, and kindnes, Makes the crooked vvalk vpright, God loues them that iust remain, He the righteous doth sustain. God doth keep and saue the strangers, His strong guard doth them attend, He doth free them out of dangers, Orphans vviddovves, doth defend, He doth comfort them that grieue, He the helplesse doth relieue VVicked men the Lord destroyeth, He doth ouerthrovv their vvay. God his kingdom ay enioyeth, God the Lord shall raign for ay, Sions God endures alvvayes, Vnto God the Lord giue praise. Haleluiah. Psalme 147. Thanksgiuing. PRaise ye the Lord, such praise is meetest, Sing Psalms to God, such Psalms are svveetest, The Lord to praise sing, neuer ceasing, His praise is gracefull, euer pleasing. The Lord most gracious, full of pity, Builds vp Ierusalem his city, His Israel disperst, deplored, He hath assembled and restored. The contrite broken heart he healeth, And comfort vnto them reuealeth, Full of compassion, them he mindeth, He salues their sores, their vvounds vp bindeth.
His knovvledg all in all surmounteth, The number of the Stars he counteth. Them in their order he installeth, Them by their proper names he calleth. Great is our God, great is his povver, Our refuge, of our strength the tovver, Is infinite in vnderstanding, In might and vvisdom all commanding. The Lord almighty magnifieth The meek vvhose trust in him relieth, He to the ground the vvicked casteth, Confounding them, to nothing vvasteth. Sing to the Lord God euerliuing, Praise him vvith Harp, in Psalms thanksgiuing. VVho spreadeth clouds the heauens all ouer, VVith them the firmament doth couer: Prepareth rain, vvhich dovvn he shovvreth, On earth a main the shovvrs he povvreth: The verdant grasse he multiplieth, VVhich on the mountains fructifieth. The beasts vvith food he satisfieth, The rauens yong brood vvith meat supplyeth, VVhen hatcht they hungry ly a crying, Or fledg they forth for food are flying. God hath no pleasure nor delighteth In strength of horse that fiercely fighteth, Svvift running legs vvith prize revvarded, He hath nor prized nor regarded. But God vvhose grace exceedeth measure, In them that feare him taketh pleasure, VVho on his mercy giue attendance, And on his promise haue dependance.
Ierusalem vvho art renovvned, Praise thou the Lord, vvith glory crovvned, Praise thou thy God, and him rely on, Thou holy mountain, sacred Sion. For he thy gates reedifieth VVith strongest bars them fortifieth, And all thy children he hath blessed VVithin thy vvals by thee possessed. He planteth peace vvithin thy borders, There setleth lavves and rightfull orders: To satisfie thee he bestovveth The flovvr of finest vvheat that grovveth. On earth his precept forth he sendeth, His mighty povvr on it attendeth: His vvord runs very svviftly speeding, VVith all celerity exceeding. He makes the snovv, and vvhen it snovveth Like fleeces of vvhite vvoll it shovveth: His frost all ouer hoary grovveth, VVhich he abroad like ashes strovveth. The stream to ice congealed lasteth, VVhich like to morsels forth he casteth, His frosts are so intollerable Them to enduer vvho is able? And vvhen the vvorld enough hath felt the, He sendeth forth his vvord to melt them, At his command the vvarm vvind blovveth, And then again the vvater flovveth. His vvord to Iacob he declareth, And to obedience him prepareth, The lavves and iudgments he ordained To Israel he hath explained. In such a kind and gracious fashion He hath not dealt vvith any nation, For those his iudgments iust and sacred He vnto them hath not declared. Psalme 148. Thanksgiuing. PRaise ye the Lord from heauen on high, Praise him ye dvvellers in the sky, All ye inhabitants of heau'n To God all praise by you be giu'n. All ye his Angels high renovvn him, Victorious hosts vvith glory crovvn him.
Both Sun and Moon, praise ye his Name, All stars of light his praise proclaime. Praise him ye heau'n of heau'ns most high, Ye vvaters in the cloudy sky. Let all his vvorks vvhich vvondrous are, The praises of his Name declare. At his command, they vvere created, And to his glory consecrated: He them establisht firm and sute, Ay to continue and endure. Their bounds of time and place decreed By him, they neuer shall exceed. Praise him ye Dragons vvhich do keep In caues of earth: Whales in the deep: Fire vapors, hail ice, frost and snovving, Ye tempests, storms, vvinds boistrous blovving, VVhich execute his sacred vvill, Praise ye the Lord, his vvord fulfill. O praise his Name ye mountains all, Ye fruitfull trees, and cedars tall: Beasts of the earth both vvilde and tame, All creeping creatures praise his Name. Ye fetherd fovvls i'th ayr svvift flying, Praise ye the Lord him magnifying. All Kings and people euery vvhere, Earths Princes, Iudges vvhich rule beare. Men, vvomen, children yong and old, To praise the Lord, your ioyes vnfold: His Name is high aduanc't alone, Ore heau'n and earth his glories knovvn. His peoples horn he high erecteth, His Saints to praise him he affecteth: The children of his Israel, To him most deare and neare do dvvell.
Psalme Cxlix. Thanksgiuing. SIng to the Lord nevv songs excelling, All in the Church of his Saints dvvelling, Sing praises in your congregation, To God vvith adoration. Let Israel in songs relate His high praise vvho did him create, Let Sions sons reioyce and sing, And triumph in their King. His Name to praise vvith ioy abounding, Let Timbrels, Fife, and Flute be sounding. Praise him vvith Harps svveet strings according, His praise in Psalms recording. God in his people pleasure takes, His people his delight he makes: VVith his saluation dravving nigh, The meek to dignifie. His gracious Saints in glorious measure, Shall be all glad vvith ioy and pleasure: Vpon their beds in iubilation, Shall shout vvith exultation. Their mouths vvith shrill notes shall abound, The Lords praise high to raise and sound: They vvith their tvvo edg'd svvord in hand, In arms compleat shall stand. To be reueng'd on euery Nation, Their foes to plague vvith desolation: To punish them for their offences, VVith condigne recompences. Their conquerd Kings captiue to take, Their vanquisht Princes, prisners make: In strongest holds them to restrin, In irons them to chain.
On them the iudgment iust avvarded, To execute as tis recorded: His Saints are to this honor raised, The Lord our God be praised. Psalme 150. Praise. LEt vs all Gods praise expres, Praise him in his holines: Praise him in the firmament Of his povver permanent, And his high magnificency. Praise him in his greatnes shevvd, In his goodnes multitude, VVitnessing his excellency. Praise him, ioyning vvith the noyse, Both of Trumpets and Hautboyse, Praise him in the Psaltery, And the Harps svveet harmony. Laud the Lord vvith praise abounding, Timbrel, Taber, Fife and Flute, Organ, Sagbut, Cornamute, Laud the Lord, his praise resounding. Praise to him for his goodnes, Let the Cymbals loud expres Viall, Virginall and lute, Let nor string nor breath be mute, Him to praise, let all indeuer. All his vvorks, aboue, beneath, VVhat so ere doth moue or breath, Praise the Lord most blessed euer.
The Song of Simeon, Luke 2. NOvv let thy seruant Lord. According to thy Word, In peace depart contented. 2 For novv my eyes haue vievv'd Before all people shevv'd, Thy sauing health presented. To be a shining light To all the Gentils sight, This grace thou hast declared, And Israel to crovvn VVith honor and renovvn, This glory hast prepared. Decalogue, Exod. 20. LIft vp your hearts to God addressed, All people hear vvhat he doth say: Giue ear vnto his word expressed, And his commandments all obay. I am (saith he) thy God eternall, From Egypt I deliuerd thee, From cruell seruitude infernall, Therfore haue thou no God but me. No image make thou to adore it, Of any thing in earth or sky, To vvorship or to bovv before it, Because a iealous God am I. Gods sacred Name in vain take neuer, Let no oathes false or vain be vsd,
For he vvill hold him guilt er, Who hath his sacred Name abus d. Six dayes in labour profitable, Spend thou and thine, the seuenth in rest, For God from his vvorks admirable, Repos'd the seuenth made holy, blest. Thy Father and thy Mother honor, That thou long dayes mayst happy liue, I'th laud vvherof thou art the ovvner, And vvhich to thee thy God doth giue. Thou shalt not kill, mans life destroy not. Adultrous thoughts, and acts eschevv. Nor rob nor steale, goods stoln enioy not. Beare no false tales, speak euer true. Thou shalt not in thy heart desier Thy neighbours house, nor vvife to gai, Nor any seruant he doth hyer, Nor ought that to him doth pertain. Haue mercy on vs Lord most blessed, Inspire vs vvith thy grace diuine▪ VVrite in our hearts thy Word expressed, To keep thy lavves our hearts incline. FINIS.
