4669 99843238 7954
ACHITOPHEL, OR, THE PICTVRE OF A Wicked POLITICIAN. Diuided into three PARTS. 2. SAM. Chap. 17. Verse 23.And when Achitophel saw that his counsell was not followed, hee sadled his Asse, and arose, and gate him home, and set his house in order, and hanged himselfe, and was bu∣ried in the Sepulchre of his Fathers. Printed for M. S. 1629.
To the most Reuerend Father in God, IAMES by the Grace of God Archbishop of Ardmagh, and Primate of all IRELAND. Most Reuerend Father in God, MY best endeauours, long since engaged to your Graces seruice, haue neuer yet found them∣selues sopropitiously befriended by occasion, as to make the World the witnesse of their sinceritie: my deepe apprehension of your Gra∣cious fauour, which first inuited mee into those parts, seconded by my inbred disposition, more ambitious to expresse a thankefull heart than directed to priuate ends, could not sleep with∣out some publicke acknowledgement. But it is the greatest vnhappinesse of thankefull in∣dustrie, to entreate no better Orators to pleade in
her behalfe than the tongue or penne; both of which oftner subiect themselues to the command of sycophanticke Parasites, than obseruant friends, and suffer themselues sooner to be armed against worth, than drawne in defence of inge∣nuitie. But with me the case stands otherwise; as with one whose words or writings can neuer sufficiently enable themselues, eyther to com∣mend the sinceritie of mine owne affection, or flatter the eminencie of your deseruing. The one beeing set aboue expression: the other of enuie or adulation. Sorry I am, that this deformed childe of my industrie, presuming rather on the precedencie of birth than worth, should before others of his brethren (worthier in my choyce) ad∣uenture to aske your Graces patronage. But op∣portunity in this can challenge an aduantage be∣fore worth, in that shee can as well improue the worst as crown the best. Could I haue proportioned this poor present eyther to your Graces Iudicious acceptance, or my affectionate obseruance, it had cast it selfe into another mould than the modell of this slender Treatise, readier to shrinke from his patrons learned censure, than able to stand out in the Authors approbation. But such as it is, I hum∣bly present with my selfe vnto your gracious ac∣ceptance; wishing it no other destinie than my
selfe, whom you since my cōming hauing cheri∣shed in your fauour, haue confirmed your grateful Votarie. The subiect I here offer to your view containes the pith and matter of three Sermons, presented heretofore to my Mother the Uniuersi∣ty of Oxford, in whose name they will no doubt find an easier passage into your Graces protectiō. Not that I hold these riuelets worthy so copious & sweet a fountain whence they sprung; but that your Grace hauing often honoured our ancient Mother, as well with your acceptable presence as learned exercise; cannot but cast an indulgent eye vpon her vnworthiest children. The scene, wherin I haue bounded my discourse, presents vnto your censure a sacred Tragedy, consisting of four chief Actors, viz. Dauid an anointed King: Absolon an ambitious prince: Achitophel a wicked politi∣cian, & Chushai a loyal subiect: a passage of hi∣story for variety pleasant, for instruction vseful, for euent admirable. If the pen-man climbe not the height of such a subiect, I shal not I hope fall below the measure of your gracious acceptance. In which confidence I shall find my ambition a∣bundantly satisfied, and rest, Your Graces in all Christian duty to be commanded N. C.
The Text. 2. SAM. Chap. 17. Verse 23.And when Achitophel saw that his counsell was not followed, hee sadled his Asse, and arose, and gate him home, and set his house in order, and hanged himselfe, and was bu∣ried in the Sepulchre of his Fathers.
ACHITOPHEL, Or The wicked Politician. THe chiefest obiects whereon TreasonPart . sets it selfe a worke, are, Ambition and Discontent: whereof the former is wont to fashion the greatest hopes out of the least aduantages; the other seemes like tinder to catch fire at the first touch, and turnes the least indig∣nitie into the greatest indignation. This was well known to that grand Polititian Achitophel, who finding Absolon Dauids sonne affected with eyther maladie, determined to apprehend the least opportunitie to execute his own malice, and Dauids ruine. Dauid, He a long time hated (as is probably coniectured by some in∣terpreters) for the murder of Vrias his neere affine, yet subtilty and secrecy, the two hand-maides of humane policie, stood alwaies betwixt his hypocrisie, and the kings suspition. Absolon he found, in the heat and pride of his youth, aboue measure ambitious of his fathers Scepters, extreamely discontent with his foule disgrace, and long banishment: The one pointed him out the way to supre∣macie, the other to reuenge, easily perswading his errone∣ous iudgement, that it seemed too small a satisfaction for
Absolon, againe to be entertained as a subiect, too great a courtesie for Dauid to liue a King. Euery houre which addes to the length of his Fathers reigne, seemes to bor∣row years from the threed of his expected Royaltie, and Iustice her selfe seemes to claime a part in his trayterous ambition: Such is the prerogatiue of selfe-bred actions, to shut out preiudice, and promise to themselues as much successe as they find excuse. Here Policie taught Achitophel to strike whilst the Iron was hot, and ioyne issue with the first aduantage. Time, the best moderator of hasty humors, might perhaps haue smoothed ouer Absolons guile, or haue slacked Dauids indignation: And occasions of this kinde at first let slip, are afterwards rather wisht than found. What he long plotted is now come to execution, and his expectation so long groaning with ambition and reuenge, at length rackt on the last extremitie. What his policie in proofe deserued, it promised it selfe in mens opinions, and himselfe, the first proiector, Hee found entertained the chiefe Actor in this conspiracie. Nothing now seemes wanting to the proiect but an open attempt to inuade applause: and hostile preparations must show themselues in a readinesse, rather for formali∣tie than opposition; as though hee had already wonne as much, as expectation, and victorie seemed already legible in Absolons gracious presence, and the peoples forward acclamations. But such consultations neuer speed well, where God is excluded the Counsell Table, and Hope, which vsually flatters the ambitious with the best suc∣cesse, oftentimes betrayes them to the worst. Dauid all this while lyes secure, as one who out of a fa∣therly ingenuitie might sooner expect the hostile inuasion of a forreine enemy, than the secret stratagems of so deare a friend: For what indulgent Parent could feare his own ouerthrow to spring out of his owne bowels? Or there to finde the ruine of himselfe, where hee hoped to erect the Trophee of his name and memory? But treason at length earely knocking at his doores, awakes his sleep∣ing
iealousie; and time it is to flye vnto forreine succours, where he findes his owne sonnes and subiects the forgers of seditious treason and vnnaturall rebellion. But that great Counseller which turneth humane wisedome into folly, and directs all purposes to his own ends, is not wan∣ting to his seruant Dauid, making earnest intercession: Chusay is secretly suborned by Dauid, vnder the pretence of loue and seruice, as a supposed friend, but disguised ene∣mie, to creepe into Absolons bosome, and oppose Achito∣phel that transcendent Polititian: Achitophel, who as an Oracle of God had for his deep wisedome hitherto passed currant, is now shut out, and Chusay this new Counsellour admitted audience. Here begins the dawning of Dauids happy deliuerance, and Achitophels deserued tragedie; for as the distemper of our first concoction (as Naturalists obserue) is seldome or neuer corrected in the second; so the first ground-worke in State policie, ill layd or tempe∣red, can afterwards scarce promise a reformation. But Princes actions are commonly confin'd to no other lawes than their owne wils, and bootlesse it is for Achitophel to giue further counsell where he wants perswasion: Despair and indignation are at hand to second his repulse: and nothing now seemes left him for refuge (so far as the eye of his worldly policie could discerne) but the preuention of Dauids officers in his shamelesse execution: And when Achitophel saw that his counsell was not followed, &c. 2 This parcell of Scripture, containing a briefe history of Achitophels last Actions and End, naturally shoots into these two branches: first his Prouocation: secondly, his Action: the Prouocation was the neglect of his counsell, expressed in the former words of my Text [And when A∣chitophel saw that his counsell was not followed] His actions are deciphered in the latter clause [Hee sadled his asse, and arose, &c.] In the Prouocation or motiue wee may obserue these two circumstances. First, what Achitophels counsell was, and wherein it consisted. Secondly how, and which way it was defeated. To beginne with the first, wee may
reduce his Policie into two heads: for it consisted, either in his apt choyce, or wise direction: the former was euident, in that he took aduantage of such a Subiect to countenance his Rebellion, who amongst all the children of Israel was the likeliest to go farthest. Absolons birth, feature, plausa∣bilitie, and high spirit seemed to speake him a King at first sight: as though ature and industrie, policie and valour stood in competition which should challenge most in his aduancement. In the first place to examine his birth, we shall finde him a Kings sonne: and although the second of his fathers race, yet the first in the peoples hope. Of the eldest little mention is left vs saue the name, as of one by impotence of nature, or disasterous influence of the stars, halfe canceld out of the Catalogue of Dauids sonnes: besides the claime and title to his fathers kingdome, but newly began, and not yet establisht on succession, gave no small encouragement to his high ambition: where birth∣right affords no certaine challenge to kingly dignitie, and the fathers choyse in designing out his successor is scarce reputed warrantable, what other obstacle can stand be∣twixt him and Soueraigntie, but Gods immediate will, or the Peoples suffrage? The former (as it seemes) hee little regarded, as one who eyther doubted of his prouidence, or shewed himselfe too confident of his conniuence: the latter as a matter out of question seemed sooner found than sought. As though opinion, which had so long faw∣ned on his worth, could as easily perswade their suffrage, as command their seruice. Had yet any sense of religion, or care of the publicke good inuaded the mindes eyther of yong Absolon the Prince, or Achitophel the old coun∣sellour, they might first of some Prophet or other haue enquired Gods secret purpose of depressing Dauid, and ex∣alting Absolon: or at least haue esteemed hereditary suc∣cession the best challenge: Well might Gods almighty hand disdaine opposition, which neuer yet met resistance, and common equitie, haue stampt that currant which customary right, and the law of nature had already esta∣blisht
amongst most nations. But their designe is not grounded vpon Gods law, or natures priuiledge, but their owne seeming aduantage; as though the diuine counsell ought to sloope to humane policie, and nature forsake the scene where worldly wisedome comes in action. Behold here the first and chiefest character of a worldly wise Po∣litician, who cares little how great a rupture he make through God sacred lawes and common equitie to meet with his own aduantage, choosing rather to lose his soule than his wicked purpose; as one by Patent allowed to dispense with any obligation of conscience and religion. Hence may easily be discouered the error of vulgar iudg∣ments, who measuring inward sufficiences by the im∣prouement of our outward fortunes, repute those men wisest which rise highest: But true wisedome in whose. scale consists the choyce of the best ends and fittest means, hath taught vs rather to entertaine than serue prefer∣ments; and prize the quiet calme of a settled conscience, before the stormy  of ambitious greatnesse. Tis not the want of wit to proiect, but of wickednesse to practise, which keepes vertue poore, and desert vnregarded: nei∣ther are great aduancements the vsuall badges of great worth. 2 The second thing whereof Achitophel tooke aduan∣tage in Absolons persn, was his faire and comely feature. Absolon amongst all the children of Israel, was reputed the fairest: His louely visage, disheueld haire, the seemely symmetry and proportion of all his parts were as so ma∣ny silent Orators to be speake applause, and perswade af∣fection. Our friends and foes we seldome owe to choyce but Nature, which stamps in euery mans face her especiall characters of beautie and deformitie, of loue and hatred, ordaining them rather commanders of our fancie, than seruants to our discretion. Whence Aristotle had good cause to make this comely feature of the body, one of the complements of humane happinesse; as that which giues the habite of our vertues a more glorious lustre, and opens
a more speedy passage to Heroicke actions. What greater motiue could haue happened to a seditious multitude, whose affections, led rather by sense than reason, are bet∣ter taught to fawne on shewes than substance, and swallow the most poysonous drugges in golden pilles. Nothing more dangerous than painted sinne; and vgly vice couched vnder the protection of a comely countenance, will lose the name, and seeme a vertue. So much is the bewitch∣ing power of a beauteous personage to inchant the wisest iudgement, that perswasion is oftner found in the Orator than the Argument, as though his lookes went as herbin∣gers before his language, to prepare a roome, and enter∣taine attention. Of these eminent gifts of nature, not∣withstanding not granted to our free choyce, but rather trusted to our husbandry, no question but Almighty God the lender, will expect an interest. Hee that eyther hides his Talent in the ground, or mis-spends his portion, shall finde the reward of a faithlesse seruant: Much more such gracelesse Tenants, who turne their endowments to their worst vses, and make Gods munificent gifts the meanes and ground-worke of wicked and irreligeous actions. Where God sowes hee expects his haruest in the same kinde: and no graine so meane in our estimation, out of which in proportion he requires not a timely crop. But where hee findes our industrie slacke in performance of this duty, or our malice opposite to his profit, he common∣ly workes his own ends out of our iniquities; and what parts and endowments we abuse to sinne, he iustly directs vnto reuenge. 4 A third aduantage in Absolons person suggested to A∣chitophels obseruation, was his faire carriage and popular plausibilitie. A sweet and courteous deportment, seasoned with moralitie and religion, neuer wants deserued com∣mendation; as the surest character of an ingenuous dispo∣sition, and the most powerfull seruant of honest policie. For as in our most religious actions, wee should study ra∣ther to profit than to please our auditors: yet who neuer
affects to please, shall seldome haue the happinesse to pro∣fit. So much more in ciuill affaires, the best improuement is popular estimation: and vertue, though neuer so emi∣nent, shall scarce be reputed currant, if not stampt by ap∣plause, or crowned with common approbation. —Non te quaesiueris extra seemes rather an axiome of a speculatiue and retired Stoicke, than a practicke Statist. An vpright and honest man (I confesse) would rather find himselfe at home in his owne conscience, than seeke himselfe abroade in other mens opinions: as one, whose first care ought to bee to forme himselfe to Gods will, and his owne content, his second to husband his meanes to mens applause; yet comes this farre short to disproue an affable and kinde be∣hauiour, or countenance a harsh or Cynicall disposition. Had no other affection than this, possessed the soule of Ab∣solon, or in him presented it selfe to Achitophels obserua∣tion; discretion might haue pleaded in the behalfe of the former, and honesty of the latter; and neither haue wan∣ted its deserued commendation: the one perhaps might haue been thought ambitious, to inherit as well the peo∣ples loue, as his fathers vertues: the other, to haue ap∣plauded his Princes happinesse in the peoples loue. Neuer∣thelesse popularitie at the best is a fauour which wise and discreete subiects sooner winne than affect: beginning vsually with the Princes ealousie, and ending with the ow∣ners ruine. The defect might better become a subiect, the excesse a King: neither euer had those Athenian Ostracismes found place in Iustice, had not popular greatnesse threat∣ned the state with danger or dissolution: How much more dangerous shall wee esteeme this popularity of Absolon, springing from a rotten and corrupted heart, managed by wicked meanes, and directed to a treacherous conspi∣racie? Three especiall stratagems were here put in practice, which might well seeme fashioned in Achitophels forge. For the sending of Absolon for Achitophel to Hebron, ex∣cludes
not a former consultation; neither is it probable, he would so far haue trusted him with his secret counsels, had he not first found him inclining to his faction. The first engine of his seditious purpose, was, his Glossing, and fine complement, both in words and gesture, whereby hee was said to steale away the hearts of the people from his father Da∣uid: he vsually stood in the palace gate, hee obserued the appproach of suiters, hee examined their particular grie∣uances, enquired the place of their abode: finally, he kissed and embraced them, O (saith he) that I were made Iudge in the Land, that I might heare euery mans cause, and do him Iu∣stice. What zealous subiect almost out of the seeming sim∣plicitie of his words, would not swell with expectation, and become as prodigall in his hopes, as the other in his promises? The distance between Princes and priuate men, makes vs often ouervalue courtesies, and the indiscouery of such mens natures causeth diuers times their worst actions to carry the best construction: but great promi∣ses are cōmonly seconded by smal or slow performances; and an easie matter it is to be ouer prodigall on the score, where we neuer intend a payment. To boast wisely of our actions and sufficiences, howsoeuer opposite to simple mo∣destie or plaine-dealing honesty, was neuer accounted a solaecisme in the iudgling art of humane policie. But admit Absolon in this case had promised to himselfe as much as the people, and suffered his confidence to spread her wings beyond his abilities: yet serues this little, to excuse his action from vnnaturall disobedience, or masked treacherie. It was the part of a shamelesse Cham to bee an industrious spectator of his fathers nakednesse: of a rayling Rabshakeh or cursing Shimei, to diuorce him from his Subiects hearts. Nature would haue perswaded a gracious childe with Noahs two modest sons, to haue lookt awry, or gone back∣ward, no sooner to see ere hee could hide his fathers shame. Allegeance might haue instructed a loyall Subiect to prize his Soueraignes credit before his owne, and drowne his greatest honours in his Princes seruice. But
setting aside these neere and high relations of a Sonne to his father, or a Subiect to his Prince, the diuision and di∣uorce of friends to a generous temper, euen amongst the Heathens themselues, hath alwayes seemed a wicked re∣uenge, or base ambition. Honour seldome bestowes her fauours, but on such as win them in open fielde: and He∣roicke spirits haue alwayes chosen rather dearely to buy, than basely to steale a victorie. To steale away the hearts of our friends, sauours more of a fleering Parasite than a wise Politician; and to seeke secret ambushes in case of open triall, argues rather the weakenesse of our cause, than the strength of our discretion. Neuerthelesse this seemed a good ground for Absolon to set, and Achitophel to worke on: And little can true wisedome or Religion perswade in the Reare, where wicked policie commands the Vant-guard. A second stratageme put in practice by Absolon, and perhaps plotted by Achitophel, to augment his owne plausabilitie, was, publickely to slander his fathers gouernment with iniustice and oppression. The same Art which taught him to flatter his inferiours, instructed him the way to calumniat his superiours: So neere are these two opposite vices knit together in a wicked cause. See (quoth Absolon) (after examination of each Sutour) thy cause is iust and good, but there is no man deputed of the king to heare thee. Dauid began now to decline, as well in strength as go∣uernment. Age and Disease commonly grow together: and where the master begins once to droope, the seruants proue eyther carelesly negligent, or lawlesly insolent. These inconueniences perhaps admitted by Dauids Offi∣cers, and obserued by Absolon, rendred him obuious to ex∣ception. Greatest places are commonly subiect to the greatest censures: But when Almighty God was neuer wanting to Dauid, I cannot imagine Dauid to bee much wanting vnto his people. And although Strength and Valour, the darlings of his youth, began in him to faint, yet Wisedome and Experience, the children of his riper
age, stept in to vndertake his quarrell. No otherwise then can we interpret this exception of Absolon against his Fa∣ther, than a malitious slander, deuised for no other end, than to make him odious, and himselfe acceptable; which hee by so much the more hoped easily to effect, by how much hee saw the giddy multitude (as at all times, so) especially in this declining age of Dauid, as desirous of Noueltie, as subiect to discontent. The best Gouernours seldome please long, and the worst may for a time. Worth is seldome so eminent as in the absence: And the best Ma∣gistrates, like the Images of Brutus and Cassius (related by Tacitus) seeme then most glorious, when they are most wanting. Enuie and Detraction, like two venemous Ser∣pents, lurke alwayes in the path of Iustice: and the best Rulers seldome finde the freest passage. He that goes about to perswade a multitude they are not so well gouerned as they ought to bee, shall sooner want argument than atten∣tion. The reason wherof (as a learned man hath obserued) is, because the abuses and corruptions in euery State most incuitable, are (for the most part) sensible to vulgar capa∣cities; but the hinderances of Reformation only apparant to men of experienced iudgements. As easie was it here for Absolon to slander, as to speake: his eyes could no soo∣ner open, but espie some obiect or other to animate his owne proiects, or the peoples discontent. Such is the boundlesse malice of base Informers, with the venome of their aspicke tongues, to poyson our sincerest actions, and present, as in a Perspectiue, the least mites and mole-hils of our imperfections like huge and mighty Mountaines. This found Dauid in the midst of a calme and settled State, when mischiefe had scarce yet known her own strength, nor time as yet teemed with all the engines of gracelesse villany. What then shall wee now expect in these dogge∣dayes of the worlds declining age, wherein malitious de∣traction is esteemed the quintessence of wit, and an inge∣uous acknowledgement of mens good deseruing, accoun∣ted too great a courtesie? Surely the best reuenge I can
here inuent for innocence, can be no other than preces & lachrymae, the armour of a Christian, and that constant re∣solution of the sweete Psalmist, I will pray yet against their wickednesse. The third and greatest imposture Absolon pra∣ctised to make himselfe plausible, was the pretence of Religion: A vow hee pretended at least, to haue made of his return to Hebron, and there praising God after his safe returne to Ierusalem. Dauid is sollicited to consent vnto his iourney: neither could such a petition brooke a deni∣all, which comes vshered in vnder the shew of a religious office. Hebron seemed to Dauid a place fit for sacrifice, to Absolon for conspiracie. Ierusalem was too neere his fa∣thers sight, or rather too farre from his treacherous pur∣pose to admit of such a wicked Conuenticle. The mee∣ting of such Conspirators so neere the Court, might soon haue opened the eyes of sleeping iealousie, and betrayed the treason to discouerie: Dauids countenance might perhaps haue daunted the courage of his friends, or haue wonne their loues. And lest the peoples affection to Abso∣lon should grow cold in his absence, he leaues behind him his Parasites to sollicite his cause, and at his approach to giue the signall. Moreouer to strengthen himselfe the bet∣ter against publicke hostility, or priuate mistakes, hee car∣ryes with him a garrison from Ierusalem to defend his person, and sends for Achitophel to Hebron, to direct hi counsaile. Nothing but the pretence of Religion could be thought a fit vizzard to hide the face of this dangerous conspiracie, from the sight of suspition. Deceit neuer thriues better, than when she least seemes her selfe: and Vice seldome dares to shew her selfe in publicke, vnlesse she steale the robes of vertue, and actuate her malice with slye hypocrisie. Satan transformes himselfe into an Angell of light, when hee intends the greatest mischiefe, and in∣structs his disciples in the like Policie. This hath beene the Diuels shift and practice in all ages: neither euer comes wickednesse better armed than with the shew of seeming sanctitie. Ieroboam the Sonne of Nebat who
made Israel to sinne, had no other pretence than Religion to withdraw the ten Tribes from Ierusalem, by setting vp a new Idolatry. The Scribes and Pharisees in the New Testa∣ment, who vnder colour of Fasting and long Prayer, de∣uoured Widowes houses, professed the most rigorous and strict obedience of the Law. Amongst the three sects in Ierusalem in the time of the siege by Titus and Vespasian, Iosephus obserued those to haue been the most notoriously wicked, who termed themselues the zealous. But alas Pandora's boxe was not yet emptie: the most of euils was reserued to these last and worst times, wherin the greatest sinnes are accounted Articles of Faith, and a sincere pro∣fession stiled Heresie. Ignatius had not yet sent his broode into the world with the Popes patent, as so many Pedlers, to sell damnation: Nor the Tridentine Councell concluded, that Idolatry and Superstition should passe for true Religi∣on. But since the approach of this Medusa's head, the world seemes to haue suffered a fatall Metamorphosis, and wonders to finde her selfe so grosse a changling. Could our small scantling of time dispence so farre as the disco∣uerie of the Romane Church, we should finde their whole Religion to be little other than a politicke hypocrisie, directed to nothing else, but gaine or greatnesse; pretending no∣thing but pietie, professing little else than malice or pro∣phanenesse. What vulgar iudgement can interpret other∣wise of their pedlers-packe of Indulgences, and sundry other superstitious iuglings, but as of a meere merchandise of Souls, wherein euery gracelesse Parricide, as in a common Market, at the hands of a mercenarie Priest, may cheapen and buy his own saluation? Had all the Achitophels or Ab∣solons in the world lost their politicke inuentions, they might (I suppose) finde them againe improued in this State-Religion. No dis-vnion of the Church so small, which their rigorous constitutions pronounce not heresie: No sinne so haynous, for which their Pope dares not grant a dispensation: As though sanctitie consisted not in the in∣ternall disposition of the man, but in the outward confor∣mitie
of the Church, and Pietie, were pinned on the sleeue of worldly Policie. This politicke sinne of hypocrisie, I no sooner lose among the Romanists, than I finde againe a∣mongst our homebred Scismaticks. A sect of men, I confesse, with whom I should hardly grapple, stood they not armed in my way. How much the odious name of a Puritane hath abused many a sincere Christian, wee may learne by the writings of Becanus the Iesuite, who hath paralleld our Puritanes in England, with the Huguenots of France, and the Caluinists of Germany: or not to go so far abroad, we may well see in some of our own mungrell Diuines, who as it were betwixt hawke and buzzard, can see nicely to distinguish betwixt a Puritane in opinion, and a Puritane in discipline: and haue taught the name contrary to the first institution, so farre to enlarge it selfe, that a Protestant must make a hard shift (eyther by Popery or Arminianisme) to saue himselfe harmelesse. But with such mens humors I neuer sided, to whom I professe my selfe as opposite in Affection, as in Opinion. Neuerthelesse I haue obserued in the world a sort of People, of a malignant spirit, enuying in others what they want in themselues, hauing common∣ly neither will to learne, nor wit to teach; neither humi∣lity to obey, nor discretion to command: Yet (forsooth) will they seeme so precise and contemptuous of other men, as if Religion might be quoted in their lookes, and Sanctitie were onely engaged to their seruice. These can sooner espye a Mote in other mens eyes, than a Beame in their own: as though Conscience were set to the height of their Spleene, and Zeale were neuer taught any language but detraction. Sometimes, like those ancient Andabates, they fight with their eyes shut, striking the man that stands next: Or like vnskilfull Gunners discharge their shot cre they approach the marke: other times perhaps they take their ayme; yet so, as they seeme to mistake the Man for the Matter, as if they intended to spare the Vice, and wound the Person. Hence are Pulpits become like Ro∣mane Pasquils, stucke full of malitious slanders and infa∣mous
libels, apter to disturbe the Passion than informe the Conscience. But such fiery spirits I carelesly passe ouer scarce worth a Schollers pen; in whose greatest down-fall can scarce bee hoped the honour of a victory. But hauing dwelt so long on this last circumstance, I must (leauing many matters behinde) follow my first man Achitophel ob∣seruing Absolon. 5 The fourth and last aduantage obserued by Achito∣phel in Absolons disposition, was, his stont courage, and manly resolution. What greater argument of valour, than to rouze a Lion in open chase, and promise to himselfe a passage to victory through the iawes of danger, and de∣position of a lawfull King? Dauids fortunate successe he might well haue read in Goliahs ouerthrow, and the yoke imposed on the furious Philistines. Time had not yet razed the Trophees of his triumphant youth, nor age cancelled from his countenance the Characters of his vndaunted courage. The subuersion of a stately kingdome was neuer esteemed an easie conquest: And Soueraigntie seemes a Centre, vnto which Prouidence hath chalked out the lines of few mens ambition. Tis more than one Hesperian Dragon of difficultie and disaster, which is set to guard this Golden Tree: And what combate can be expected, but of such a Captaine, whose least feare is his greatest dan∣ger? Yet Absolon, engaged by Achitophels aduice, vnder∣takes the combate. Absolons stout heart giues sudden fire to his ambition, and Achitophels counsell stands in readi∣nesse to backe and strengthen his ambitious courage: the one to Act, the other to Proiect; the meanes his aduance∣ment. Strength and Policie, which seldome shake hands, are here accorded, or at least, for a time they will enter∣taine a truce. Achitophel beeing confident enough of his counsell, required no fitter instrument to actuate his ma∣lice, than Absolons couragious resolution; knowing right well that nothing could proue more preiudicial to a State, than armed madnesse. This is no small worke of worldly policy, to stand aloofe, and giue ayme to wicked purposes,
and abuse the hasty humours of hot spirits to their owne aduantage. Which may bee well obserued in our latter Machiuillians, who haue deliuered this precept as a prin∣ciple; Make no difference betweene an euill seruant and a good, but vse them both to thy own ends. Cateline, thirsting for nothing more than the ruine of his country, and expiation of his disgrace receiued from the Senate, could make vse as well of the pride of Leutulus, as the rash valour of Ce∣thogus: The high bloud of the one, and the fiery spirit of the other, serued him to good purpose: the one to coun∣tenance, the other to animate his wicked action. In like sort the Persian Nobilitie (as we reade in Zenophon) enra∣ged against Artaxerxes their King, sought occasion to side with the valour of the Grecians, and stirre vp the high spirit of Cyrus the younger brother, to reuenge himselfe against the elder. The fairest colours are subiect to the deepest staines, and the most free and eminent dispositions are commonly obuious to the greatest alterations, and suffer themselues to be soonest poysoned, if once tempted with vaine-glory or discontent. No maruell then if the sonnes of Achitophel, suruiuing in our times, instructed by their fathers counsell, take aduantage to worke their owne ends out of other mens discontented passions. If a search were made, some (I feare) would be found amongst vs as farre transcending Achitophel in malice, as perchance they come short of him in wi and policie: who daily labour to fasten on their associates the badge of their own virulent disposition; for which perhaps, besides the glory of their own shame, they cannot with Achitophel, so much as pretend a cause, or deuise an end. But such men shall surely answer as well for their own seducements, as other mens transgression: neither shall our faults herein bee re∣puted lesse, than the interest we challenge in our Brothers friendship. It is the part of the foulest Spider out of the fairest flowers to sucke poyso▪ Of industrious Bee out of stinking Hemlocke to gather Honey. And those who would rather bee accounted tes than Spiders, should ra∣ther
labour to improue the worst humours to some good temper, than peruert the best vnto vngodly actions. In the former wee should follow Gods owne example, who di∣rects, and disposes wicked mens actions to his own good purposes: in the latter the Diuels, who takes occasion out of the most sacred things to worke mischiefe. Hi∣therto (Beloued) haue wee taken a suruay of Achitophels wicked policie in electing a fit subiect, and apprehending of his best opportunities for the treason. The next point left to our examination, is, his Direction: the which while I, according to my small scantling of time, and your pati∣ence, (I feare already tyred) shall striue to open, my small in-sight in worldly policie, shall (I hope) excuse my errors, or at least the discourse of so great a mischiefe, deserue your best attention. 6 Thus long haue wee beheld Achitophel, as in his priuate study, designing out a fit subiect, whereby to work his reuenge on Dauid. We are now to obserue him sitting in counsell, and instructing Absolon. The aduice hee gaue, we find to be twofold: The first subordinate and preparatory to strengthen the faction: The second last and principall to execute the action, and secure the successe. In the former he counsels Absolon to goe in, and abuse his Fathers Con∣cubines: Goe in (quoth he) to thy Fathers Coucubines▪ whom hee hath left to keepe the house, and when all Israel shall heare that thou art abhorred of thy Father, the hands of all that are with thee, shall be strong. In which counsell we may obserue a double proiect: first in securing his own, and his friends estate: secondly, in vniting the people more firmely to Absolons obedience. Neither in this stept he besides his policie: He serued himselfe first, and his Master no other∣wise than for himselfe; and thought that counsell lost, as ill bestowed on Absolon, wherein hee could not promise himselfe either safety or aduancement. Hee thought it ill siding with a doubtfull rebell, or inconstant friend. Ab∣solon, howsoeuer professedly hee had engaged himselfe to Treason, might deceiue his opinion or faile his expecta∣tion.
His pretended discontent towards his father, might (for ought he knew) bee onely personated, to make triall of their allegeance, or his resolution inconstant to forfeit them to danger. Absolon, though a Traytor, was yet a Sonne. Dauid, though prouoked, was yet a Father. No Gordian knot was euer so cunningly knit by policie, which nature cannot cut, or time dissolue. The priuiledge of youth, or prerogatiue of a Sonne may make this action seeme rather a scape, than a sin. His faults, how great soeuer, will seeme rather Achitophels, than his owne▪ And that which Iustice in others will tearme Treason, indulgence in him will interpret weakenesse. Dauid may remit, and Absolon reconcile, what the one suffered, and the other acted: and then must Achitophel and his associates eyther stand at stake to maintaine their Masters action, or hazzard their liues on the brittle confidence of the Kings mercy. The breach of a sonnes disloyaltie may perchance bee peeced vp with filiall submission: but Achitophels reuolt seemes to expect no issue but death or victory. The middle way in policie is alwayes reiected as dangerous, and the ex∣treame requires the most desperate, and extreame attempts. Achitophel is not here wanting to himselfe; Absolon must yet be engaged to a more Notorious action, vncapable of forgiue∣nesse, where in all Israel may reade his absolute reuolt, and his Fathers greatest indignation. Absolon must be known neither to regard, or hope for his fathers reconcilement. Dauids an∣ger must bee thought inexorable, as that which Iustice re∣quires, and the honour of a king commands. If Absolon hope to wedde the Throne of Israel, hee must first violate his Fa∣thers Bed: and to this his notorious act of treason, let him further adde the sinne of incest. Petty crimes are the effects of inferiour offenders; Absolon must bee thought as great as himselfe: as one, who would play the King as well in his sins, as his ambition. Neither can this wickednesse bee safe or shamefull enough, if secret. Secrecie, which in other mat∣ters commonly proues the mother of securitie, is here repu∣ted the nurse of danger, and Guilt, which vsually shunnes the light, is here desirous of discouerie. To sinne closely, argues
either feare or modestie: neither of which can protect a re∣bell, or beseeme a King. Set up a Tent (quoth Achitophel) on the house toppe, that all Israel may witnesse thy sinne, and thy fa∣thers shame, and make the world at once both blush and wonder. Let thy Brother Ammon sinne in a corner to decline censure: Sinne thou in publicke to strike censure speechlesse, and out-face the seuerest frownes of Iustice. Let Ammon com∣mit incest with his Sister▪ Go thou in vnto thy Fathers Con∣cubines. What was the weakenesse of lust in him, ought to be the strength of thy aspiring greatnesse. Thy greatest safety consists in thy greatest villany: and the least blush seemes to betray thy cause to dissidence and danger. Let Ruben trespasse with one of his Fathers wiues: Go thou in vnto ten of thy Fa∣thers Concubines; that this thy fact at once may surmount both example and imitation. Then the hands of all that are with thee shall be strong: They shall speede no worse than Abso∣lon, and therefore ought to feare no more. To fall with our Captaine seemes the least duty: To rise with him the greatest honour: and who but a Coward would feare to hazzard the life of a Subiect, to make a King? Great dangers and great honours beginne and end in the same circle: Neyther is the path strowed with Violets and Roses, but death and slaugh∣ter, which leades to the tents of Victorie. This was Achitophels first counsel, as dangerous to decline, as desperate to execute: But desperate and extreame purposes are engaged to the like meanes; and sincere honesty in the course of policie, where she findes not her selfe admitted as the chiefe Mistresse, will seldome proue a trusty seruant. 7 Out of this counsell of Achitophel, not onely plotted by himselfe, but acted by Absolon, will arise two especiall obser∣uations: The first is, the fulfilling of Gods iudgement, and Nathans prophecie, threatned before to Dauid for his sinning with Bathsheba, and  murder▪ Behold (saith God through the mouth of Nathan) I will raise vp euill against thee out of thine owne house, and will take thy Wiues before thine eyes, and will giue them vnto thy neighbour, and he shall lye with thy Wiues in the sight of the Sunne: for thou diddest it secretly, but I will doe this thing
before all Israel, and before the Sunne. Such is the wisedome of Almighty God, which can worke his owne good out of our wickednesse, and make ourvniustest actions the instrumentall examples of his owne iustice. Our very sinnes, though false traytors to the owners, proue trustie executioners of Gods iudgements: and an easie matter it is for that wise disposer of all worldly actions, to turne mans greatest shame into his greatest glory. Secondly, we may obserue it as a Maxime in worldly policie, That a sinne can seldome secure it selfe, but by addi∣tion of greater. Where the house is swept and garnished, and one Deuill is too little to enter, seuen Deuils greater than him∣selfe, are prest to giue a fresh assault: For there is no way left for sinne to propagate its power, but sinne; nor can truth euer be entreated to aduenture her selfe as a pledge for falshood, or stake her credit for a professed enemy. Religious proui∣dence, and worldly policie, may (I confesse) sometimes runne together, but seldome shake hands. The path of the one, as a strait line, we finde alway as one, and like it selfe: of the o∣ther, crooked, and various, and engaged to many difficulties. If euer they chance to meete, it is but as in a point, and so soone part The further then we runne in this maze of world∣ly policie, the further we estrange our selues from Pietie: and the distance▪ which at first seemed below the Sese, will at length be found aboue the vnderstanding. Euery ponderous substance (as Naturalists obserue) the more it descends, the faster the motion: No moment of space or time, where∣in we trauerse the way of wickednesse, which addes not some weight to the massie burthen of our originall impietie, and hastens not our passage to perdition. One sinne seekes to se∣cure it selfe by many, and smaller crimes finde no safe pro∣tection, but in the shelter of the greater. Treason and vsurpa∣tion cannot support themselues, but by the sword of Tyrannie. Malice iuokes Reuenge to helpe her, assisted with her ser∣uants, Murther and Detraction. Ingratitude will soone breake into open defiance, and neglect of Gods precepts is commonly seconded with Contempt; at the least when all others withdraw their forces, Impudence and Hypocrisie are sworne to backe
their quarrell; whereof the former can out-face the seuerest censure, the latter blinde the eies of the strictest inquisition. Who cannot here obserue a great distance between Christian and worldly policie? The one counsailes vs to make vp the breach of our sinnes by a sincere repentance; the other to en∣large it with greater villany. Binde not two sinner together, for in one thou shalt not scape vnpunished, saith the wisest of Kings. But these Politicians holding themselues wiser than the wisest, hold repentance base, and perseuerance in sinne generous. Nobler they suppose it to aduenture forward with danger, than retire backe with shame; as though they meant to shew themselues industriously resolute to sell their part in heauen, and purchase their owne damnation. But these we must leaue a while to their owne resolutions, perhaps we shall find them againe, with Achitophel hanging on the gallowes; whose se∣cond and last counsaile, offers it selfe in the next place to our examination. 8 Hitherto hath Achitophels care bin to strengthen the faction, both to secure himselfe, and vnite the hearts of Israel more firmely to Absolon their leader. His second Direction concernes the speeding of the execution; Let me now choose out (quoth Achitophel) twelue thousand men, and I will arise, and pursue after Dauid this night, and I will come vpon him while he is wearie and weake-handed, and make him affraid, and all the people which are with him shall flie, and I will smite the King onely, and I will bring back all the people vnto thee. The man whom thou seekest, is as if all returned: So all the people shall be in peace. In which politicke aduice of Achitophels, three remarkeable circum∣stances offer themselues to our obseruation; which by reason of the scantling of time, and your wronged patience, I shall be constrained rather to touch, than handle. In the first place, his desire was to haue as well as his Head in the conspiracie, so his Hand in the execution: perhaps because hee hated Da∣uid, hee was ambitious to shew himselfe the executioner of his owne reuenge and Dauids ruine; perhaps out of vaine∣glorie, that he might seeme as able to act, as wise to proiect a mischiefe▪ perhaps out of an officious flattery to engage Ab∣solons
thankfulnesse by a doble seruice: But that which seemes to mee most probable, was his extreame iealousie, not daring to trust so young an experience with a matter of so great moment. Absolons youth seemed perchance too shallow to entertaine the depth of his directions, his bloud too neare to out-face the frowns of a fathers anger, or the awe of filiall duety, could not be supposed a fit actor in Dauids Tragedie. The hardest Iron at the first touch of the Load▪ stone is restored to its first temper, and conceiues a Magneticke inclination. And why might not Dauids fiery assault, or gracious counte∣nance in his rebellious sonne Absolon, enforce nature to return vnto herselfe, and kindle in him the sparkes of filiall duty and obedience? Here may a man reade the state and condition of wicked poicie, exposed to a thousand dangers, and subiect to a thousand ialousies. Well may such men, as Damocles at Dio∣nysius Table, feed their hopes with the choisest dainties; yet Gods fearfull iudgements, as a sword pendulous ouer their heads, is alwaies ready to threaten a destruction. 'Tis not then a good, but an euill conscience which makes men cowards: Onely hee, who wants guilt, wants feare; and nothing but a cleare conscience can challenge true mother-hood in a cou∣ragious resolution. The second point we obserue in Achito∣phels counsaile, was a stratagem of Diuersion: His quarrell was not against the people, but Dauid; his purpose to preserue the Kingdome, but destroy the King: and therefore thought it not so meete to hew out his passage to Dauids ouerthrowe through the bloud of the subiects, as by the Kings forfeit, to purchase them to Absolons obedience. His first care was to strike at the roote it selfe, well knowing the branches would fall of their owne accord; and the peoples alleageance once dead in Dauid, would soone quicken againe in Absolon. The strength of Israel is shut vp in the Princes palace; and the same power which conquers the one, is soone master of the other. This counsaile seemes to partake as well of good as bad: with the death of one, to redeem the life of many, in the rigorous lawes of hostility, seemes not a duety, but a great courtesie: But to sell a King to buy a kingdome, and stake one
Prince for many subiects, is lesse than courtesie, and more than cruelty. Neither was this course affected by Achitophel to spare the liues of innocents, or auoide a greater mischiefe; but that he found it an easier way to conquer Dauid, and re∣duce the people vnder the yoake of Absolons iurisdiction. The good which politicians vse to pretend, commonly swels in shew, but shrinkes in substance: as the Ocean, they would seeme to flow in their kindnesses, and embrace vs with twi∣ning armes, as the waues the continent; but seeking to lay hold on them, we find them commonly to ebbe into nothing, and snatch backe their owne with some aduantage. If they chance to be authors of any good, it serues only to flatter opi∣nion, and deceiue simplicity; not that they loue good, but that they may be the better armed to worke mischiefe. To commit euill for a good end, seemes to beare a better pretence before men, than excuse before God: but to suffer, or act some good for an euill end, is the height of mans wickednesse, and the Diuels institution. The third and last circumstance in this Achitophels counsaile, was, by a suddaine and vnexpected assault, to take the best aduantage of his owne strength and Dauids weaknesse. I will (saith he) suddenly fall on Dauid while he is wearie and weake-handed, and the people shall flie. To ioyne with mens misfortunes and adde to misery, serues rather basenesse of the man, than confidence of the cause; and to se∣cond Gods afflictions with our owne reuenge, is a marke of Gods instrument, but the Diuels seruant. The apprehension of an apt opportunity, is of it selfe (I confesse) a matter indif∣ferent, as well to good as wicked policie: Yet hasty and vn∣expected actions commonly carry with them a greater suspi∣cion of guilt, than discretion; as that which seekes to preuent a tryall, and feares discouery. Time, the father of truth, would (questionlesse) haue betrayed Absolons cause to com∣mon examination, and reduced the discontented Commons to their first temper. Dauid might haue giuen satisfaction, & al∣legeance haue reuiued in his subiects hearts. Necessity, which perhaps begat the effects of ill gouernment, might haue vrged the causes; and reason, which at the first seemed to fawne on
their discontent, might afterwards be taught to correct her errors and suppresse their insolence. All this Achitophel knew right wel; and therfore chose rather to take aduantage of the peoples sudden passion, than their maturer iudgements: as one who had good cause to shunne a legall ury, where he could promise himselfe no other than losse in the fatall verdict. Hi∣therto (beloued) haue we traced the foote-steps of our grand traytour Achitophel through all his politicke counsailes, and vnnaturall rebellions. Your expectation I know (though al∣most tyred) hath long ere this runne to the place of executi∣on, and proclaimed his comming: But your wronged pati∣ence and my want of time, hath enforced mee to repriue him till another Session. COmmon censure hath stampt it for a currant Prouerbe,Part That it is better for a man to bee fortunate than wise. For worldly wisedome, though she seeme alwaies to fawne on fortune, yet can neuer command, and seldome entreate her serice. It hath been thought the pride and priuiledge of that power which we call Fortune, to bestow her best fauours where she findes least worth; to crowne folly, and crosse wise∣dome; to make fooles happy, and the wise vnfortunate: As a Queen, she is supposed to shew her greatest Maiesty in Mans weaknesse; to pity sloath, and enuie industry; as most iealous, lest mans wit or endeauours should challenge any part in her prerogatiue. But he that knowes wisely to arbitrate betwixt the clouds of Pagan ignorance, and the cleare Sun-shine of Christianite, betwixt Poeticke fancies, and Propheticall visions, shall finde vulgar opinion only mistaken in the name, ascri∣bing that transcendent power of disposing worldly actions, to a Deitie which they called Fortune, which Christian know∣ledge might have taught them more properly to haue termed Prouidence. And howsoeuer they haue bounded her large Em∣pire beyond their owne reason; yet Christianity hath trauel∣led much farther, and yet can prescribe no limits: as that which transcends into an infinite, and out-reacheth the eye of all discouerie. And though no place hath beene found so
base in the Theater of Nature or Ciuill actions, wherein Pro∣uidence cannot shew the abundant Trophees of her magnifi∣cence: Yet there desires she to triumph most, where to men she seemes to haue least power. Her chiefest glory is to set vp her Ensignes on the gates of mans pride, and tread on the necke of worldly policy. No maruell then, that in the great politician Achitophel, in whom neither loyalty could com∣mand restraint, or perswade duety; whom neither vndoub∣ted valour could checke, or danger terrifie: onely Prouidence could challenge a iurisdiction. His politicke obseruation of Absolons disposition and rare endowments, designing him out as a fit subiect for his treason, seconded by his craftie and irreligious counsell of abusing Dauids Concubines, (through which in my former Sermon in this place, I vshered forth your attention) had hitherto passed currant, and found in euent as much as it promised in expectation. Absolon had hitherto expressed himselfe no worse a learner than he a tea∣cher; that the world might well doubt, whether the one were more happy to proiect, or the other to put in practice. Nothing now seemes remaining behinde, but to strike the last stroke, and giue the fatall on-set. Dauids ouerthrowe, and Absolons aduancement together appeare in sight; and his long and tedious ambition, as it were within a league, arriued at the port of victory. Let not Absolon play the truant in his last lesson, and within a few houres the voice of Israel shall salute him King. But the change of a good Master, oftentimes makes a non proficient Scholler: Achitophels precepts must be cor∣rected by Chusay, his second Tutor. Two eyes are presumed to discerne more than one; and the rugged and vneuen knots in our first inuention, ought to be filed by the second. Though Achitophel in counsell be a Politician, yet Absolon in ambition is a King: and therefore ought to arrogate to himselfe as well the honour of the Conquest, as of the Scepters. Too much it might seeme for Achitophel to haue both; too little for Absolon to haue no hand at all in this Kingly proiect. If Absolon dare not trust his owne aduice, yet let him shew his liberty of con∣sent. Wisedome consists as much in choice, as in inuention;
neither seemes it the least of Absolons prerogatiue, amid di∣uers counsellors to declare himselfe a King.: Achitophel shall be suffered to speak his minde as an assistant, not to determine causes as a Iudge; and therefore must pardon Absolon, if ap∣prouing him in all the rest, he in this one dissent. But often∣times he that can best act, can worst pen his owne part. And therefore no maruell, if Absolon, vsurping the office of Achi∣tophel, beganne to faile in his last act. But to leaue Absolon to his head-strong will, wee must here search more neerely into the neglect of Achitophels counsell: which being the second part in the former subdiuision of my Text, offers it selfe as a subiect for this dayes exercise. And when Achitophel saw that his counsell was not followed, &c. 2 Achitophels counsell thus defeated (as you haue heard) offers it selfe to our enquiry vnder the obseruation of the causes, and their concomitant circumstances. The causes pre∣ceding the fact, we may obserue to bee twofold: either Pri∣marie, or Secondary. The primary we finde to be no other than Almighty God, from whom all other inferiour agents deriue their strength and action. Where Nature begins and Reason ends, there must we place that omnipotent and eternal power, as the centre from which all operations first spring, and the boundlesse circumference into which all discourses runne. Betwixt this Eternall and Inferiour Agents, as the distance knowes no proportion, so Reason could neuer finde resistance or opposition: and easie was it for that omnipotent proui∣dence, to whom Achitophels counsels were from all eternitie discouered, to decree as well the means, as the end of his de∣feate. For as in the vast frame of nature, bodies compared one with the other seeme Heterogeneall, consisting of diuers and opposite operations: yet as so many wheeles in an artificiall engine, are by the same hand directed to the same common vse; so the actions and counsels of men, howsoeuer casually they seeme to meete, and iustle one the other, are notwith∣standing preordained by the same Infinite counsell, to co∣operate to the same vniuersall end. Whence will naturally arise this obseruation, That howsoeuer men may propose to them∣selues,
it is onely in the power of Almighty God to dispose. A pro∣position better knowne as a Prouerbe among men, than ac∣knowledged in their practice. Had yet the great Polititians of this world as much Logicke to iudge, as cunning to con∣triue their owne plots, they would questionlesse out of the combination of second causes, without respect vnto the first, rather suspect a fallacie, than promise a demonstration. Had they as much acquaintance with Gods Word, as their owne wicked and prophane Axiomes; they would haue heard the Lord often threatning in holy Scriptures to stagger the coun∣sell of the wicked, and turne the wisedome of the wisest into folly. Had they rather desired to be instructed, than flattered by experience, they would haue found of their profession, in steed of a few crowned happy by euent, tenne thousand mis∣carry in the meanes. A good successe, like a slye Parasite, ra∣ther soothes than commends our actions, and like a coy Mi∣stresse, prostitutes her selfe to mens neglect, but frownes on their ambition. But these are popular arguments, subiect al∣most to common sense; wherein euery common obseruation may claime a share. Should wee search with more subtiltie, either as sound Diuines, or deep Philosophers, into the mysteri∣ous manner of Gods working; wee shall finde no small argu∣ment to bee drawne from the disparitie betwixt Diuine proui∣dence and Worldly policie. The plots and counterplots of men are vsually grounded, either vpon open Resistance, or slye Di∣uersion. The one is taught vs in the Booke of Nature; where∣in wee may reade the interchangeable conquest of the ele∣ments in their mutuall conflicts and operations: the other is grounded on Ciuill obseruation as well as nature, which in the shortest and easiest way commonly findes the safest victo∣rie. But Gods Almighty hand, which neuer knew Resistance, or needes Diuersion, easily knows how to worke his own ends by his supernaturall concurrence with worldly agents, in their most affected proiects. The same meanes which wicked men propose to themselues, as the safest agents for their desi∣red ends, hee makes the instruments of their owne ruine; that the most exacteft plot, wherein policie could euer▪ hug
her own inuention, may seeme the most exquisite example of her owne shame. Easie was it for that great King of Heauen and Earth, with thunder and lightning from heauen, to haue pashed Absolon in pieces, and scorched vp his seditious army; more easily could he haue broken the subtile nets of Achito∣phels politicke inuention, than Sampson the Philistines bands, or an Elephant a Spiders webbe: But intending rather to make them their owne executionrs, hee suffers them to runne in their owne Labyrinth, till they meet their owne ruine. What way in Nature could Pharaoh deuise more exquisite to increase the strength of Israel, and make them populous, than to tye them to their daily burthens? Whence could Moses haue better deriued his greatnesse in Pharaoh's Court, than from the bulrush cradle floating on the teares of the weeping riuer? How could Pharaoh haue feared or expected, euen in his own tyrannous decree, proiected for his owne safeguard, and Isra∣els extirpation, to haue found Israel ransomed, and himselfe ruined? that his owne daughter should preserue that as a Cabinet of pleasure, which Moses mother bestowed on him as a mournefull Coffin? Little thought Iosephs brethren in sel∣ling him to the Egyptians, to haue purchased their own shame, and his future greatnesse. Little thought those Romane Empe∣rours, in their raging persecutions to haue sowne the seede of the Church in the blood of the Martyrs, and haue seene Christianitie most triumphant in her greatest wounds. Little thought Pope Leo the tenth, in sending his Indulgences into Germany, to haue met with such an opportunitie as the peo∣ples discontent, and the Heremite Fryars defeat, to haue stirred vp the hot spirit of Luther, to haue giuen such a fatall blow to his owne greatnesse, and see his tyrannous Hierarchie in such a terrible combustion. Such is the infinite wisedome of that Prouidence, to ordaine worldly policie to afford not onely the aptest instruments, but the exactest opportunities to destroy it selfe; and there to declare our greatest weakenesse, where we repose our greatest strength. Whence by way of applica∣tion wee may draw two other consectaries, expressing no lesse apparant footsteps of Gods Almighty prouidence in disposing
the affaires of men. First, that in preuention of worldly plots & stratagems he commonly shewes not himselfe but at the last push, and seldome discouers our danger till wee suppose our selues most secure. Had Gods wisedome ranne the course of humane policie, he might haue preuented, as well as defeated Achitophels designe; he might haue stirred vp Dauids iealousie, betime to haue shut vp Absolon in prison; or according to the preposterous rules of the Ottonian Iustice, haue rewarded his future treason with a present execution. Absolon might haue failed as well in the first as last precept; or at least Achitophel might haue read in Absolons disposition, his wilfull weakenesse or inconstancie. But God pursues not ours, but his owne glory, as one who is then most willing to shew his power, when our hopes or abili∣ties can challenge least. 8 Our second Consectary drawne from Gods omnipotent prouidence, is, That God sits not as an idle spectator, but interpo∣seth himselfe as a chiefe actor on the Theatre of worldly actions. It was not only an idle, but a wicked dreame of Epicurus and his followers, that God, busied in the contemplation of heauenly matters, gaue ouer the gouernment of the World to Chance, or Nature: as if he supposed it a Mill or Water-worke, which once framed by an Artificer, and animated by an actiue power, should worke of its owne accord, and preserue in it the prin∣ciples both of motion and continuance. Which opinion (for ought that I know) might bee fastned on our Master Aristotle, who not only in his Physickes seemes to deny a Prouidence; but in the whole course of his Phylosophy seemes to preferre Nature as a Deitie, whom God should rather serue than command: yet here, should I freely discouer mine opinion, I should thinke our Philosopher mistaken, in diuiding one and the selfe same thing into diuers names. To separate God from Nature is to diuorce Nature from her selfe: which seemes of it selfe absurd; but to ascribe act and motion vnto the lat∣ter, and appoint the former to sit idle as a spectator, or at least as a necessary agent to serue Nature, is more absurd to thinke a finite more excellent than an infinite; which is strange how so great a wit should once imagine. But we out of the prin∣ciples
of Christian Philosophy, may easily be taught a double concourse of the Creator with the creature: the one Gene∣rall, which I hold to bee no other than that wee vsually call Nature: the other Speciall, which humane Ignorance or Ad∣miration hath tearmed Miracle. Neither can reason imagine the naturall generation of things to be any other than a conti∣nuate Creation, wherein Almighty God, according to the Aptnesse and Preparation of the subiect, daily ministers new formes, or conserues the same: which the Diuines tearme Preseruation. For to giue a Creature, without Gods immediate concurrence, an abilitie of producing the like or equall sub∣stance to it selfe, or by his owne power to deriue out of that first Chaos a new forme or nature, seemes to me to trench too farre on Gods Prerogatiue; I had almost said, to emulate God in the second part of his Creation. But to leaue this Com∣mon-wealth of Nature to its first institution, and enter into the view of mens actions, we shall finde a more speciall con∣currence of Diuine prouidence, than in the former. To what other cause else should wee owe that miraculous preseruation of Gods Church, which through the violence of so many ages hath saued it selfe entire, with so small a number, and great an opposition. Time, which hath seene the Rise and Fall of so many famous Kingdomes; the inuention and decay of so ma∣ny learned labours; the erection and defacing of so many stately Trophees; Time, which in her vast gulfe hath not one∣ly swallowed vp antiquitie, but for the greatest part enuied her historie; hath yet cherished in her bosome this one darling, and kept a sure register of all her actions. Should I descend to particular examples of Gods concurrence in mans actions, I should sooner lose my selfe, than finde an end. The most irreligious Heathen, through the thicke clouds of ignorance, haue often espied the glimpse of Gods dreadfull lightning, and often quaked at his thunder: They haue felt his finger in their wounds, and acknowledged his strength in their weak∣nesse: Yea, such hath beene the power of Almighty God, to expose their owne wicked actions as a table of their confes∣sion, and extort an acknowledgement of his victorie out of
their blasphemy. Iulian, that wicked Apostate, though as po∣liticke to obscure, as malicious to oppose the truth of Christ Iesus; was yet in the end constrained to shut vp his tyrannie with a Viisti Galleae. In like sort, we reade of Mahomet the second, the first Emperor of the Turkes, that at the siege of Scodra against the Christians, in the defence of so small a Citie against his mighty Army, finding God his enemy, he blasphe∣mously asked by way of exprobation, whether God had not enough to doe in Heauen, that he should interpose himselfe in his affaires on earth? He that will not deny a God, must of necessity grant a prouidence, and who knowes himselfe, and sifts into his owne will and actions, must needs acknowledge a supernall power, which determines them to good or euill. Here, stood it with my time or your patience, could I proceed to taxe Pelagius, and his latter spawne the Iesuites and Armini∣ans: who imagining our will to be her owne mistresse, haue admitted God no otherwise than as a seruant or assistant; as though that Almighty power were not authorized to preor∣daine, but onely bound to second our conuersion Their sal∣uation they would rather owe vnto themselues than grace; as though they sought the first cause in their own inclination, and expected nothing of God but a Morall and strong per∣swasion. But although in deede they will deny a certaine and speciall Predestination, yet in words they will grant a Presci∣ence. Here would I willingly aske a question out of my Text: Whether God absolutely foresaw Absolons inclination of re∣iecting Achitophels counsell, or not? If they grant the Negatiue, they deny a Prescience: If the Affirmatiue, I demand againe, whether this fore-sight could imply a necessity of euent, or leaue Absolon to his owne free choice? If the former, they must deny him a Free-will of declining to the other side, which they labour by all meanes to establish: If the latter; they must eyther acknowledge Gods prescience to bee vncer∣taine, against the ground they haue already granted; or at least affirme, that a certaine knowledge may be of such things as shall neuer come to passe. Here the Iesuites are bet∣ter prouided to shift than answer; like the subtile Seps, to
make an escape by troubling the water: and rather than they would be thought to know nothing, they will say any thing. Where the Scripture shewes no faire countenance, and Reason faints, their recourse to Schoole-subtilties must be their only refuge. But were there no Smith in Israel, yet might these Philistins be entreated to sharpen our sword for our defence against their battery. God (say they) from all eternity fore∣saw the inclination of mans Free-will, vpon which he groun∣ded his decree of withholding or conferring farther grace. Here I must aske againe, Whether God foresaw it in his own decree, or the disposition of the second causes? If they assent vnto the former, then must this foresight in the order of our vnderstanding, not preuent, but rather second the decree; which they deny. If they sticke to the latter (as indeede they doe) I demand how second causes may be supposed to work, except they were predetermined and actuated by the first? That second causes worke not in their owne, but their owners strength, is their owne principle; and to grant them an ope∣ration, not depending on the first Agent, were to set an instru∣ment to worke without a hand. I would aske moreouer, Whether God foreseeing Achitophels counsell and Absolons in∣clination, bad the power to hinder it or not. If so, then was it in his power to foresee what himselfe could hinder; which checkes the certainty of Gods knowledge, and inuolues an ap∣parant Contradiction. If not, how can we imagine him Omni∣potent, which cannot challenge so much power ouer second causes, as to turne and diuert them to his owne vses? This ar∣gument Vorstius and Episcopius found so strong against them, that to backe their absurdity, they must adde apparant blas∣phemy; allowing God eyther no Prescience at all, or such as is onely vncertaine and ; which impious and grosse opinion I hold sufficiently confuted in the mention. But I haue stayed here too long, and haue farre to goe: wherefore hauing taken a generall suruey of the primary, or chiefe cause of Achitophels defeate, let vs descend to the second causes, which in the next place offer themselues to obseruation. 4 Gods power hath expressed it selfe legible as well in the
Book of Nature as of Grace: and naturall Agents (as you haue heard) as they deriue their operations from his strength, so they are determined by his will, and directed to his glory. Here we finde Nature in second Agents not set against her selfe, though raised a pitch beyond her priuate inclination; and the first cause without eyther neede or violence, to enter∣taine the seruice of the second. Whence, ere we descend to each particular inferiour agent, will arise one generall obser∣uation: That Almighty God bringing to passe miraculous and great euents, commonly admits the cooperation of second causes. As easie was it questionlesse for that great Architect of nature, who out of waste and emptinesse begat a world, to create, as to command, to cause, as to entertaine the operation of inferior Agents. Here might History shew her selfe prodigall of ex∣amples, but neuer bank-rupt: euery moment, in the ordinary course of humane actions, begets some instance or other to demonstrate Gods gracious loue and fauour to the world; who, able to dash both Policy and Nature out of countenance, is notwithstanding pleased to admit them as his obedient hand-maides. But to expresse the secret cooperation of God, working by second causes, is a matter which hath heretofore staggred Philosophy, and puzled the apprehension of the shar∣pest and acutest Diuines. Neuerthelesse, so farre forth as the infinite power of God may dispense with mans enquiry, we may reduce the manner of his working to certaine heads; to decline as much as we can the two enemies of vnderstanding, Obscurity and Confusion. The action then of Gods concur∣ring with second causes, concernes either the beginning, pro∣gresse, or end of the same act. In the beginning we may call it either Positiue or Negatiue. The Positiue consists either in the furtherance or hinderance of humane actions; both which may be either internall or externall. The internall promotion or hinderance is againe diuided into two acts: for eyther it concernes the supportance of the creature, which in the first moment is tearmed Creation; in continuance, Preseruation; or the preordination of the Agent, which with our Diuines, a∣gainst the Tenent of Arminius, I dare to call Predetermination.
The externall, is the presentment of some externall and pre∣sent obiect to the apprehension of the sense, will, or vnderstan∣ding; which latter acts, concurre as well in Gods hinderance of humane actions: For the same Almighty power, can at once both promote his owne, and hinder mens counsels. This Hinderance is many waies brought to passe; for either the im∣pediment is cast on our authority, power, will, or state. Our au∣thority of free-working i curbed and restrained by the Law, whereof the breach is a sinne: as that of Adam in Paradise, whose liberty could not dispense with the tasting of the for∣bidden tre. Our Naturall power is checkt by many interue∣nient causes: first by cutting off the agent from life and being, as that of the siege of Ierusalem by Senna herib, by smiting in one night an hundred fourescore and fiue thousand; or the bringing of  the Prophet to , by the consumption of  men by ire from heauen▪ Secondly, by detraction or diminution of the power; as Iroboam was resrained from ap∣prehending the Prophet, by the drying vp of his hand. Thirdly, by opposition of equall or greater strength; as Vzziah was hindred by  and his fourescore Priests from offering in the Temple. Fourthly, by remouing or subtraction of the obiect, as our Sauiour saued himselfe from the violence of the Iewes, and the Tribune Paul from the conspiracie. An impedi∣ment may be cast on our will, either by Gods Predetermining power, which against Arminius we haue formerly maintained, or by some outward perswasiue argument. The arguments, wherewith he vsually dis-swades our will from commencing any action, are commonly drawne either from the Topickes of seeming impossibilitie, and apparant difficultie; or vnpleasant∣nesse, losse, and dishonour. By the first, for a while the Scribes and Pharises were restrained from offering violence vnto our Sauiour, because they knew him of the people to be esteemed as a Prophet. In like sort, God heretofore set a barre betwixt his owne people and the Idolatrous Israelites, lest they should trafficke as well sinnes as familiarity. By the second, Iosephs brethren were diuerted from the murther of their Brother, becouse a milder course seemed to serue their purpose. By
the third and last, Ioseph was disswaded from adultery with Potiphars wife, and Dauid from touching the Lords anonted. An obstacle may be cast on the act it self two maner of waies; ey∣ther by taking away the obiect, which with some we haue re∣duced to the impediment of the power, or by disabling the in∣fluxe and power of the agent, in regard of the patient: whereof we haue an example in the three Children, vnconsumed in the fiery surnace. The Negatiue act of Gods concurring, is permis∣sion, & is cleane opposite to the other; and therefore ought to be squared by the same distinction: for as Logicians haue taught vs, Opposites ought to suffer the same diuiston. Onely from hence we must except the impediment caston our actions by the law or anthoritie; for otherwise would there follow an apparant contradiction, that the same act should be a sinne, and yet no sinne: a sinne as it is by the Law forbidden, and yet no sinne, as it is by the same power permitted. These acts forespoken of Gods concurrence, seeme to pruent and pre∣cede the action of an inferiour agent. In the action it selfe, we finde two speciall acts; the one, an actuall determination of the agent to the obiect, the other, a direction to the end. An in∣stance of the former wee haue in  cruelty vpon the children, which was diuerted by our Sauiour, by the substitu∣tion of another obiect. Of this latter, in King Ahasuerosh, who amidde the spoyles of so many virgin concuines, lighted on Hester, whom Prouidence had marked out to be the preser∣er of the Iewesh nation. The concourse of God, after, and in the end of humane actions, is no other than the direction of the euent to a further purpose: which we obserue in the Iewes crueltie in crucifying our Sauiour; the execution of whose malice, was found to be the most exquisite meanes of our sal∣uation. But I haue almost lost my selfe in this Labyrinth, whereinto, though Philosophy seemes to haue taught an en∣trance in, yet Diuinitie neuer discouered a passage out; as that which begins with mans smallest knowledge, and in his grea∣test ignorance. Hence are we taught, not so fare to trust to Gods prouidence, as to neglect the ordinary meanes which God offers to our industry or obseruation, Hezekiab, though
he had already receiued vnder Gods owne hand and seale, a lease of fifteene yeares to the date of life almost expired, neg∣lected neither the Prophets counsell, nor the helpe of his Physitians: and Dauid in this place, a man after Gods own heart, and confident enough of his protection, hath notwith∣standing his present recourse to second causes, as preordained of God for Achitophels defeate, and his deliuery. Which se∣cond causes comming next in order particularly to be traced out, your fauourable attention will (I hope) a while longer hold the candle while I briefly reade them. 5 The inferiour agents concurring to the neglect of Achi∣tophels counsell, are reduced vnto two heads: The impulsiue, and instrumentall. The impulsiue cause which moued God to defeate Achitophels counsell (so farre as according to the language of men wee may speake of God) was Dauids prayer, whereby he besought him to confound the counsell of Achito∣phel his profest enemy. The good vse of prayer amongst de∣uout and religious men, hath alwayes beene esteemed both the first and last remedie in our greatest dangers, as the surest key which opens and shuts the doore of Gods secret closet. When our friends shrinke from vs, and all worldly stratagems are out of sight; when dangers present their Gorgon faces as hideous as our feares, and death stands at our elbowes to summon our appearance to the last arraignement; only prayer is left to intercede as a gracious Orator, and effectiue aduo∣cate. Though Achitophel in wit and industry would shew him∣selfe a politician, yet Dauid in sanctitie must expresse himselfe a Prophet: and though Absolons hopes are grounded on his worldly strength, yet Dauids strength is erected on Gods pro∣tection. Neither in his sacred iaculation, where in he addres∣sed himselfe to Gods will and mercie, was his desire vntutu∣red, or his deuotion ignorant. Hee knw to whom he spake, and obserued a distance: as fearing lest his religious zeale might seeme vnmannerly if vnseasonable. The greatest offices are commonly subject to the greatest solaecismes, and Prayer, deuotions must trusty messenger, if not well directed or ac∣quainted with her Embassage, may soone degenerate into su∣perstition.
But so well instructed was Dauid in this religious courtship, as if the end of his suite had been others institu∣tion, and his example our rule. Whether we respect the Au∣thor, nd, Obiect, Time, or Forme of his earnest petition, wee shall obsrue him as discrecte as religious, as one which owd his oraizons as much to knowledge as deuotion. First we find his prayer neyther to be ignorant, nor hypocriticall; but as proceeding from a generous and vncorrupted heart, vshred in by sinceritie, and accompanied with contrition. He mea∣sured his meditations rather by weight than number. Hee was not taught, as a Popish peniteutiary, to count his beads in stead of his prayers, and make his fingers the intelligecers to his faith. Hee knew not so much complement as the Di∣uels formall Courtiers, who desire as little to bee beleeued of God, as vnderstood of men; and esteeme praier rather as a de∣cent formalitie, than a religious exercise. Secondly, the end of his Prayer, was, no other than the preseruation of his peo∣ple, and his owne defence: neither in his own defence sought he reuenge but iustice; his prayer was not directed against the person, but the sinne; neither his desire (for ought I see) so much in the ruine of Achitophel, as the diuersion of his po∣licie. Ture (saith hee) the wisedome of Achitophel into folly. We finde not in this forme the affected curses of the Romish Synagogue, which rauing  at the time dogging him in his way, might as easily haue taught as Dauid suffered. But the Pope perhaps may command what Dauid neuer durst to entreat of God: And what is a King and Prophet to Christs vniuersall Vicar? or Dauids prerogatiue to his Supremacie? Too much might it be thought for Dauid to banne or excom∣municate a gracelesse Sonne, or a rebellious Subiect: yet may it perhaps seeme too little for Peters successor, in whose hands are the keyes of heauen, hell, and purgatory, to shut and open at his pleasure. Loath I am (beloued) to ieast in earnest, or turne a serious blasphemy into a pleasant Irony. But nothing workes vs more, than our shamefull actions: and the same power which turnes humane wisedome intofolly, makes it vnto men ridiculous. To bewaile folly with Heraclitus, argues
charitie; and yet to laugh at it with Democritus, can be inter∣preted no sinne but iustice. Thirdly, the obiect to which Da∣uids prayer was directed, was no other than God himselfe, as one best acquainted with his , and most able to re∣lieue him. Had   tought the complement of our Ro∣mane Courtiers, o the religious mysteries of , hee might haue prepared Gods ares before, by the meditation of some , or at least haue made prnision of some  , to  him safe from danger. The holy Legend (had he liued in these riper times) might questionlesse haue instru∣cted him in the particular ffices of each Saint, as well as the ancient Romane records in the prerogatiue of each inferiour Deie. A thousand to one but some humble S. Francis would haue been singled out to deliuer his petition; or some chari∣table S. Thomas Becket, who could not deny a Parrat his assi∣stance, would haue been mued with the petition of a King. But Dauid (it seemeth, better knw the King himselfe, than these his Courtiers, and neglecting these inferiour officers, presents his suite to o other than God himselfe, whom neuer∣thelesse hee found (if wee beleeue Scriptures) facile enough both to heart his prayer, and grant his request. Fourthly, the time and opportunitie of his prayer cannot but minister some∣what to obseruation. Hee deferred not his petition, like a malefactor on the , or a prophane Sea-man in perplexi∣tie, to the last extremitie: but he begins where desperate and carelesse sinners would (at least) desire to end. No sooner had Fame, as a swist Pursiuant, euertaken Achitophel in his re∣nolt, but he makes his  to Almighty God, as one who knew well that it was his office rather to gouerne than obey Destinie. The same hand of vengeance which by Moses en∣treatie was restrained from the ouerthrow of the idolatrous Israclites, and by a generall prayer and repentance from the desolation of Niniuch, hee could not imagine either slacke or impotent in defeate of his enemies, or defence of his faith∣full seruant. Fifthly, wee obserue his prayer to bee short and pithy, not tedious and impertinent; as thinking it meerer that his heart should dictate to his tongue, than his tongue inter∣prete
to his heart. His prayer was not crude and vnconcocted, abounding with as many Tautologies as words, but seasonable and Patheticke, expressing no lesse than his earnest desire, and directed no further than the present purpose. Here, as our Sauiour in the Gospell heretofore taxed the Pharisees of long and tedious babling, might I proceede to reprehend some Pharisees of our time, were I sure to bee mine owne interpre∣ter. But I am much affraid, lest, through the sides of a few factious and fantasticke spirits, I should be suspected to wound Religion. The sixt and last circumstance in Dauids prayer, was, that it proceeded from him extemporary, as best suting with an extemporary and sudden accident. Hence our moderne Masse-priests might haue beene taught a more profi∣table Art of Prayer, than the sale of set Liturgies for all occa∣sions. No inuention of man could euer proue so infinite as to sift the precise corners of euery mans conscience: neither is it in the wit of man, but God, to dictate a present forme for all future accidents, and prescribe a speciall Antidote against all temptations. Herein commonly the Physitian shewes himself no sooner than the disease, as one who would haue vs depend rather on his present fauour, than our premeditated counsell. And in such cases I take that of our Sauiour, [Dabitur in illà horâ] to be vnderstood. Neuerthelesse from this, or other the like eiaculatory prayers, warranted by Scripture, and practised by holy men, little ground of argument can the Brownists take for their opinion; who admitting no distinction betwixt pub∣licke and priuate prayer, would haue all to proceede from an extemporary and sudden meditation. As though God could not as well direct our studie, as strengthen our deliuerie; and there were not a place as well for attention to follow, as in∣uention to dictate in our Deuotion. For the confutation of which mens vnwarrantable industrie, we neede go no further than our Sauiours own example, who prescribed vs a set form of Prayer; or Dauid at least, of whom we now speake, who hath left behinde him so many sweet and diuine meditations, as a testimony of his sanctitie, and a patterne for our imitati∣on. Hitherto (beloued) haue I discoursed of the Impulsiue se∣cond
cause of Achitophels defeate. The instrumentall causes, whereunto my method in the next place is engaged, con∣cerne either the immediate preuention of Achitophels designe, or discouery of it to Dauid and his Army. The former consi∣sting of Chushai's loyalty and Absolons weaknesse, discouers vnto vs as well the character of a trusty Subiect, preferring his Kings safety before his owne ambition, as of an vnexperi∣enced young Prince, more willing to hearken to the voice of flattery, than wise direction. The latter, Gods power in the weake simplicitie of a silly Made, the instrument of this dis∣couerie. In the briefe touching of which points, I hope to finde your patience a little more propitious than the time. 6 As much as the dignity of a King transcends the Sub∣iect, is the obligation of the Subiect to his King: neyther is the duety lesse we owe to the safety of our Soueraigne, than the safeguard wee challenge in his protection; as the center, next vnder God, from which we deriue our honours, and to which we owe our seruices Of this duety, Chushai, Dauids trusty seruant, was not ignorant, neyther was his knowledge better tutoured than his industry. The same hand of Kingly munificence which dispensed him his honours, pointed him out the lies of his obliged loyaltie; neither was hee more slacke to obey than Dauid to command. Returne into the Citie (quoth Dauid to Chushai) and say vnto Absolon, I will bee thy seruant, O King, as I haue beene thy fathers seruant; so shalt thou defeate the counsell of Achitophel. Almighty God, who for∣merly heard Dauids prayer, directed his aduice, and Chushai's industrious loyalty. In vndertaking of which designe, wee shall finde Dauid blessed in so good a seruant, as Chushai wor∣thy of so good a Master; whose carriage of so dangerous a bu∣sinesse in so honest and discreet a fashion, seemes to coppy out vnto vs all the offices of an honest politician. In the first place, we finde his obedience and resolution, neither shrinking from the awfull lookes of danger, or forfeyting his Masters trust. The apprehension of an vnexpected friend, or reconciled enemy, might haue betrayed his errand to watchfull iealou∣sie: suspicion might haue called his very lookes to examina∣tion,
and guilty feare, the childe of treason, might haue deli∣uered him ouer as a spie to present execution. Achitophels deep in sight in State affaires, and Absolons confidence in his oraculous aduice, might haue eyther sounded his disposition, or dasht his counsell out of countenance; and then should he find his best seruice rewarded with death or torture: at least, had his message met the best successe, and ransomed his Ma∣ster Dauid from so imminent a conspiracie, yet, according to the rules of worldly policy, he could not yet suppose Absolons iealousie more dangerous than Dauids obligation. Princes, vnwillingly owe courtesies greater than themselues, and com∣monly preferre a bank-rupt debtor, before an ouer-deseruing creditor: as if the very sight or remembrance of a beneficiall friend, should seeme a perpetuall exprobation of ingratitude. A smaller disparagement it seems among worldly Tyrants to want Iustice, than Power; rather to bee thought willing to offend, than not to be thought able to requite. These obiecti∣ons vrged to Chushai's likely coniecture and politicke obser∣uation, might easily haue checkt his forwardnesse in Dauids seruice, and strangled his resolution in the very birth. But he out of a cleare and couragious spirit, neither feares an enemy, nor suspects a friend, nor seekes his dutie abroad in other mens forecasts, which he might finde at home in his owne bosome. In the second place, we may obserue his trusty loue to his Master Dauid: occasion might here seeme to smile on his aduancement, and Absolons growing fortunes, as the ri∣sing Sunne, might haue tempted his ambition: Dauid seemes ready to depart, and Absolon to enter the Scene of life and so∣ueraignty: and who, in policie, would not rather chuse to haue his fortunes to liue in Absolon, than dye in Dauid? To haue betrayed the fathers trust, might haue ingaged the sons affection; and to raise himselfe a fortune out of his Masters ruine, though the greatest breach in the lawes of loyalty, had seemed one of the chiefest Maximes in the art of Policie. But hee, as a faithfull subiect, respects not what he might, but what he ought; not so much what occasion might seeme to offer, as what religion might be knowne to iustifie: as one
who would rather owe his misfortunes to his trusty seruice, than his preferment to dishonest treachery. Thirdly, we may note his secrecie and discretion in managing so dangerous and great a proiect. He inuaded not the young Princes eares with a sudden and vnexpected on-set, or like an intruding Poliprag∣mon, shewed himselfe more officious than wise, to out-runne the goale, and let slip before occasion. He expected, not pre∣uented his opportunity; and suffered Absolon to aske, before hee thought it conuenient to giue his counsell: that Absolon might seeme more indebted to Chushai's wisedome, than Chushai to Absolons approbation. Neither in his aduice did Chushai shew himselfe factious or vnmannerly; hee seemed onely to dislike Achitophels direction in this one designe, not without a silent acknowledgement of his former wisedome. The counsell (saith he) which Achitophel hath giuen at this time is not good. The aduantage of Achitophels reputation amongst those that had tryed his policy, & of the peoples preiudice of such as should contradict, taught Chushai's discretion to dis∣approue rather the counsell, than the counseller, and mitigate his dissent with some colour of former approbation. This de∣signe, inspired by God himselfe, directed by Dauid, and practi∣sed by Chushai, seemes to giue warrant to this obseruation, That there is as well a good as an euill policie; as well an honest and discreet conueyance of our actions, grounded on religion, as an indirect proceeding ingaged to vnwarranted and vn∣lawfull actions. Hee that would haue vs to be innocent as Doues, hath taught vs also to be wise as Serpents; and he that dispenseth vs the means to atchieue our ends, permits vs also the proper and best direction. But how precisely to diuide be∣twixt an honest prouidence, and vnlawfull policie▪ neither on the one side to violate Gods precepts, nor on the other to neglect our own right, seems a matter as curious to determine, as ne∣cessary to vnderstand. To be Gods seruant and the Times, at once, seemes incomparable; espcially, in such a disorderly mixture of humane actions: in which (as Bodin would coun∣sell vs) it behooues a wise man to shew himselfe as various as the season. We cannot command, but obey occasion. The
meanes and opportunities whereof Statesmen take aduantage in defeating of their opposites, are rather found than chosen; and the manner and direction of our proiects rather prescri∣bed vs by chance than skill, as such whose causalitie depends not on our will, but obseruation. Neuerthelesse between the iniquitie of our times, and the strictnesse of a good conscience, a space is let wide enough to giue a passage for a religious & wise discretion: and by how much the plots of men, and changes of State seeme more dangerous to Gods children, by so much is their care and prouidence, in declining the snares of the wicked, the better warranted. For God condemnes in vs as well the neglect of our care, as his prouidence; as on whose wisedome workes seldome without, but with and in our industrie. 7 The second instrumentall cause which shewes it selfe in the priuation of Achitophels counsell, was found in Absolons in∣clination. Achitophels proiects hauing long since past the first conception, are now come vnto the very birth: but Absolons vnexperienced youth, as an vnskilfull midwife, made it abor∣tiue in the deliuery. The ground of his errour I can inter∣prete to be no other, than the vsuall disease of Princes, who had rather bee soothed than aduised, and haue eares more fa∣cile to the tongue of flatterie, than the heart of loyaltie. Flat∣tery by Tacitus, was well termed the old sicknesse of the Ro∣mane Common-wealth, as the loue of flatterie, the staine and blemish of the wisest Emperours. Those whom neither the sword could conquer, nor treason vndermine; whom neither pleasure could allure, nor riches perswade, nor greatnesse tempt to the least dishonour, onely flatterie could bring into subiection. For as the obiect of flatterie, selfe-loue, is most vniuersall, and no where excluded humane nature: so adula∣tion in it selfe, euery where, findes occasion to enter without resistance or impeachment. And whereas all other vices are countermanded and checkt by their contrary vertues, this one seemes to challenge a prerogatiue aboue vertue her selfe, in that she findes acceptance among her enemies, and growes stronger by opposition. No maruell then, if Absolons youthful
weakenesse, vnable to endure the siege of so puissant a belea∣guer, reuolted from Achitophels (as I may say) irreligious loyal∣ty, and yeelded to Chushai's pious flatterie. Chushai's adulatory counsell wee may obserue to consist in three especiall circum∣stances. First, that he perswaded him to enter the field in his owne person, and make himselfe the owner as well of the vi∣ctory as the Soueraigntie; as though it had seemed a matter not becomming the greatnesse of a King, to owe the honour of his Scepters to the valour of a seruant. Secondly, in that in his aduice hee seemed more firmely opinionated of the peo∣ples loue, and Absolons popular estimation. What wee desire, that wee easily beleeue: neither prize wee our periections dearer in themselues, than in other mens admiration. Our vertues neuer please vs better, than when, by reflection, they seeme augmented in the false glasse of popular opinion. Nei∣ther shall Sophocles the Tragedian, bee so well accepted in de∣scribing mens manners as they were, as Eu ipides, who pre∣sented them as they should be. More honour found Homer in expressing mens manners to the best, than Hegemon to the worst. And howsoeuer the two famous Painters, Pauson in limming out the most deformed, and Cleophon the most sem∣blable and likely Pictures, expressed in their worke as much art as industrie: yet who with Polignotus, so cunningly can handle his pensill, as to paint out mens best parts beyond truth or existence, shall easily purchase the reputation of the rarest workemanship. Thirdly, Chushai's counsell seemed more to aymeat Absolons honour and magnificence, in that he perswaded him to oppose his Father Dauid, rather by open strength than vndermining policie. For Absolon to haue entrapped his Fa∣ther Dauid by a secret ambush, had beene termed rather a treason than a victory: and by how much the field is more ample than the closet, seemes a clancular conspiracie, inferi∣our to an open hostile opposition. To scrue himselfe into his Fathers kingdome by cunning engines, might derogate from his valour, and obscure the glory of the conquest. A pitcht field would be thought the best scene, whereon honour ought to display her Ensignes, and the sword the most graceful actor.
These adulatory suggestions of Chushai, howsoeuer preiudici∣all to Absolons designe, had neuerthelesse the aduantage of A∣chitophels well wayed policy. For as sicke and queafie sto∣mackes had rather appetite should vmpire their desires, than iudgement; affecting for the time, rather to be pleased than profited: so Chushai's aduice tempered and seasoned, (as it seemes) to Absolons vain-glorious and ambitious humour, was as soone swallowed as suggested. From which example, pra∣ctised by Chushai, and paralleld by the like inances in all times and histories, will arise this obseruation: That flatterie is the most exquisite and dangerous policie. A proposition requi∣ring no other confirmation, than common practice; wherein we esteeme those axomes established as the most vndoubted truth, which by ordinary experience are found most succes∣full. A happy successe is that which crownes our actions; neither is our naturall knowledge more indebted to sensible experiment, than our politicke to ciuill obseruation. Hence an ordinary path, by policy, seemes to be troden out to all preferments, through the back-doore of adulation, through which, euery base and vndeseruing Parasite shall finde an easie entrance, while desert, waiting for a turne at the fore-gate, shall freeze ere it obtaine admission, and pine away in fruit∣lesse expectation. No maruaile then, if flatterie, which some haue tearmed the eight liberall Science, haue gotten the start of the other seuen, hauing beene tried to be most compendious and readie way to all aduancement; at least one, to whom all other professions owe their grace, and direct their seruice. The curious workemanship of artificers, the subtile nets, and pleasant dreames of Philosophers, the hyred voyces of Lawyers, the sugred pils of Physitians, the sett and formall grauitie of Diuines, the oylie tongues of Courtiers, the scraping legges of Peasants, seeme all corriuals in courting this proud Mistresse, and prostituting their seruice to adulation. Here (Reuerend and Beloued) might I in modesty aske of you, as sometime the King of Israel of Elisha the Prophet, Father, shall I strike? But your grauity checks my swelling passion, and seemes to answer me with the same Prophet, Thou shalt not strike. What,
wouldst thou smite them whom the Lord hath made already captie? I am no shamelesse Cham, to discouer a fathers nakednesse, no remorselesse Nero, to open and expose the entrailes of my mother. The vaile of Charity is in my hand, to couer a mul∣titude of sinnes, if I chanc to meet them in my passage; yet had I rather euer to shut mine owne eyes, than behold mine owne sorrow, and my mothers shame. With Noahs two mo∣dest sonnes, I purposely looke awry and goe backwards; not so much as to see that, which I haue no hands to hide, no browe to iustifie. Should I wander with Acteon in so wide a forrest, my vnwarie eye-sight might vnhappily glance on Di∣ana naked, and make it selfe guilty, as well of danger as obser∣uation. But casting mine eyes on this learned and graue as∣sembly, me thinkes I could promise my selfe as much liberty to speake, as truth prerogatiue to warrant. Can any prescrip∣tion pleade a stronger immunity from the yoake of flattery, than the charter of the Muses? or any nation vnder heauen vaunt of a larger freedome, than the children of the Prophets? and yet here I may well feare, lest my obseruation may betray flattery to discouery, and my language to exception. Affraid I am almost to open mine eyes and looke abroad, lest I should espie flattery dispensing offices, conferring dignities, conni∣uing at offences, violating priuiledges, debasing worth, dis∣gracing learning, and vndermining honesty. Flattery is not alwayes clothed in the same weeds or colours; she can put on blacke as well as white: in the seate of Iustice she can shew her selfe in purple, in the Court of Princes shee can strut in gaudy silkes, and (for ought I know) in the chiefest place of learning and religion, can shrowd her selfe in scarlet. There was a false Lucifer among the Angels, a wicked Saul among the Prophets, a trayterous Iudas among the Apostles: and an ea∣sie inquiry, might heretofore, haue discouered a scycophan∣ticke Shaw among the Doctors. —Satis esse vidsse, reuertor. If adulation should bee now found to soiourne in our Cloy∣sters, I could wish, by Chushai, shee should be taught her best office, which is the common good, and the Princes preserua∣tion:
so should wee neuer feare that censure, which Tacitus giues of the Romane Senators liuing vnder Tyberius, That they ambitiously stood vp in Senate, and stroue to out-vie one the ther in seruile basenesse: much lesse should we deserue to bee laught at with those Thebans, who (as we reade in Iustine) faw∣ning too much on Philips greatnesse, bought their new prote∣ction with the losse of their ancient libertie. But I haue too long intangled my selfe in this discourse of Flatterie, where∣in (I feare) I haue neither obserued the time, nor flattered your patience. I must now briefly descend to the instrument of the discouerie, which in the next place presents it selfe to examination. 8 Almighty God, in bringing to passe matters of the grea∣test moment, rather makes than findes the fittest instruments; as one who would rather haue the subiect indebted to his choyce, than his choyce to our estimation. Hee, to whom it was as easie to create as suborne a creature, could as well giue as take occasion, and for his sacred purpose as soone for∣tifie the weakest, as single out the strongest. Achitophels poli∣ticke aduice suggested to Absolon, defeated by Chushai, com∣municated to Zadocke and Abiathar the priests, is at length by Dauids seruants, discouered by a Woman, a silly Maide, whose vnexperienced youth, vnable sexe, and meaner estate, could expresse no other character than weakenesse; is notwith∣standing design'd out by God as the choysest instrument of securing the state of Israel, and a Kings deliuerie. The rarest workemanship is commended as much by the worst, as the best instruments; and it is Gods frequent practice (to speake with the Apostle) to make knowne the riches of his glorie on the vessels of his mercie. Our Sauiour Christ, to whom all the Kings and Emperours of the earth owed obseruance, whose least alliance could haue royalized the basest familie, was pleased notwithhanding as an inmate to make himselfe a passage into this world through Maries neglected wombe; his cradle was no better than a cribbe, and his first entertainment no higher than Iosephs fortunes. Neither was his birth a better argument than his life and actions. He might haue breathed in the ayre
of some Princes court a kingly education, or committed the tuition of his youth to the institution of the learned Doctors: Rome was then in her pride, and set the foote of her magnifi∣cence on the necke of the proudest nations. Athens, the mo∣ther of the Grecian wisedome, had long ere this triumphed in her fruitfull and glorious off-spring: And the Scribes and Doctors at Ierusalem, sitting in Moses chaire, could haue chal∣lenged a right beyond the Delphicke Oracle: and yet we find neither his knowledge fathered by the most famous teachers, nor his manners indebted to the seuerest institution. The shop of a Mechanitian seemed his first Academie, the Publicans and sinners his familiar hosts and friends, and the poore fishermen, returning from their broken nets, admitted into the number of his choice Disciples. By which, wee Christians may be taught, not to repose so much confidence in the strength of our mighty and great confederates, as to neglect the industry and good will of our weakest and meane associates. Virgils silly Gnat could awaken the sluggish shepheard from his im∣prouident slumber, to decline the approching Serpent; and the impotent Pismire hath bin taught to rouze vp the sleeping Lion, to make an escape from the hunters snares. Thus wee finde the chaine of God Almighties prouidence linkt together by so many dependant causes, began in Gods counsell, seconded by Dauids prayer, continued in Chushai's loyaltie, and Absolons weaknesse, shut vp at length in the action of a silly Maide: which as an introduction might leade our discourse a Scene further, to the last Catastrophe, and Achitophels bloudy Tragedie: to which, hauing so much at this time trespassed on your pati∣ence, I shall (God willing) engage my next exercise. HEe must needes runne, whom desperation leades, and thePart 3. Deuill driues. That old Serpent that first set mischiefe a worke, scornes as much to retire, as delights to perseuere, and neither slackes or stops his pace, till he finde the place of execution. How far his wicked industrie hath gone hand in hand with Achitophels treacherous designes, your present me∣mory may witnesse, in my former exercise, and your attention.
The defeate of his pernicious counsell, with the causes pre∣senting themselues to the horrour of a guilty conscience, se∣conded as well with outward disgrace as inward discontent, turnes his owne weapon against himselfe, and makes his poli∣cie▪ the most exquisite instrument of his owne destruction. This great Politician, whom (as the Oracle of God) the people of Israel had neuer suspected of inconstancie, or accused of indiscretion; whose wise seruice had instructed Absolon in all his parts, and so iudiciously (as it were) chalkt out vnto him the way to soueraigntie, might seeme to deserue more in the eyes of Absolon than misprision. What lesse reward can our best industrie expect, or gratitude expresse, than acknowledge∣ment or approbation? What greater euidence of present abi∣litie can our vnderstandings minister, or our hopes promise, than the stampe and seale of our former actions? Had Chushai euer shewed himselfe so wise, or Achitophel so weake, that Chushai in the scale should ouerpoize Achitophel? Shall the fancie of a shallow Courtier conquer the wit and experience of so great a States-man; and the smooth tongue of flattery, ouer-reach the deepe grounds of a settled iudgement? What then remaines for Achitophel, than by his sudden flight to ex∣presse his noble indignation, and foreshew Absolons ruine in his owne? He will hang himselfe first, to teach Absolon the way to the same end; and to out-strip him in the last act, ra∣ther politickly preuent, than basely feare the shamefull stroke of execution: And Achitophel saw that his counsell was not fol∣lowed, &c. 2. The Scene whereon we now enter, containes the last actions of Achitophel, whose Catastrophe shuts vp all in his shamefull end, and honourable buriall. The actions preceding his death, are expressed in these foure circumstances. 1. That he sadled his asse, 2. That he went home, 3. That he put his house in or∣der, 4. That he hanged himselfe. In the first, we may obserue his Tyrannie, in imposing on his silly Asse the burthen of his transgression. In the second, his Treacherie, in leauing his Ma∣ster in his greatest extremity. In the third, his worldly Pro∣uidence, in preferring the preseruation of his temporall estate
before the preseruation of his owne soule. In the fourth, his desperate execution of himselfe, in distrust of Gods mercy, and daring his iustice to the last extremity. The latter clause con∣cernes his ceremonious funerall; which, howsoeuer in it selfe a passion, as we respect Achitophel as the subiect: yet so farre as it may haue reference to his former testament and or∣dination, wherein this may seeme included, it may be termed an action, wherein he shewed himselfe ambitious, to file and furbish ouer the staine of his shamefull life and end, with an honourable buriall. These are the lists of my present medita∣tions, wherein as God shall enable my discourse, and your Christian patience second, I shall proceed in order, and first of the first [He sadled his asse.] 3. So contagious hath been the sinne of our first Parents, that it not onely vsurped iurisdiction on mankinde, the spawne of our Father Adam, but inuaded, without resistance, natures vniuersall Monarchy: in so much, as the Heauens, E∣lements, Plants, and Beasts themselues, by the diuine institu∣tion of their creation, as disdaining to serue ingratitude, are by the Apostle, said to groane vnder their tedious burthen, and desire to bee at liberty. Why the creature should desire this freedome, foure reasons are alleaged by Peter Martyr on the Romans. First, because of his perpetuall turmoiles & labours, seruing onely for the vse of man. Secondly, because they to∣gether suffer the same affliction. Thirdly, out of the sympathy and fellow-feeling of one anothers aduersity. Fourthly and lastly, which is the greatest of all, because they are constrai∣ned to become the seruile instrument of sinne, and by conse∣quence, the subiect of Gods fury. This wrath of God, though general (as we haue said) to all the creatures, we find no where more legible than the silly Asse; a beast created, as it might seeme, to torture it self, to supply the defect of mans industry: wherein, according to the Egyptian Hierogliphickes, nature seemes to haue patternd forth vnto vs the exact image of Pa∣tience, Fortitude, and Frugalitie; gifts not vnworthy the choice of the most generous temper, had not the sinne of man expo∣sed them rather to scorne than imitation. Such is the vnchri∣stian
censure of our supercilious times, who disdaine to sa∣lute vertue, except shee come accoutred in golden garments. Of this poore creature notwithstanding, whereof they scorne the name, they cannot want the vse. The ignominie of a seruile disposition is the reward of his best seruice; the pro∣fitable fruits of his painfull industrie, the glorie and improue∣ment of his Masters ambitious husbandrie. If such iniustice, offered by a man to a seruile beast, seeme opposite to the lawes common equitie, which commands euery thing his owne: how huge in the eyes of euery Christian Iudge swels their tyrannie, who command their seruants and inferiours to car∣ry the burthen of their transgressions; as though they meant to ride them on the spurre with themselues to hell? The obe∣dience of Achitophels Asse to serue him in this wicked action, was onely passiue, as of one to whom the law of nature had prescribed no other rule than his masters raines. But the sacred image of God, stampt in the reasonable soule of man, is to vs both law and libertie, as well to preserue the rights of Magistrates, as our owne priuiledge. An obedience we iustly owe to our superiours both actiue and passiu, so farre forth as it may stand with the right of nature, and Gods honour, as that which God expresly commands, and no communitie can want. But when the sword of the Magistrate pretends a title to any part of diuine prerogatiue, it findes alwaies, in the way of resistance, the right of the cause, or sinceritie of a good conscience, whereon, as on a rocke of Adamant, it may sooner hacke it selfe to pieces, than make a breach for entrie. Hence wise Magistrates may be taught to exact no more of their in∣feriours, than their commission from God dares to counte∣nance, or their duty to him commands: much lesse in regard of their owne worth, to sleight the good offices of the mea∣nest seruant. Our consciences and opinions are seldome so flexible, as our ioynts to fawne on greatnesse: neither is the iudgement of the wisest gouernour able so much to challenge a Monarchie in the weakest vnderstanding, as to command opinion. Balaams Asse could see the Angell of the Lord with his sword drawne against him, when his Masters eyes were
shut; and therefore had good reason to leaue beating his poor beast, when he opened his mouth to preuent his danger. But if any wise Christian desire the ministeriall offices of these ser∣uile creatures, let them imitate the example of our Sauiour Christ, who came meekely on an Asse riding into Ierusalem, where the Ensignes of gracious acceptance, and the shouts of Hsanna's applauded his arriuall: Not as Achitophel, who arose in haste, and went home to his house; not like our Sauiour to saue, but like himselfe to betray his friend: which is the next circumstance which awaits our obseruation. [And hee arose, and went home to his house.] 4 The truest touch▪stone of friendship, is aduersity, which commonly vnmasketh our enemies to discouerie; and singles out our best friends for triall. Here Achitophel, as an ill actor, fainted in the last Scene, and chose rather to shew himselfe what he was, than what he ought. His master Absolon, whom he had engaged to so great a danger, he left to greater. Sinke he might or swimme for him, as the windie gut of his new counsell, or the inconstant tyde of occasion pleased to befriend him. His great hopes, grounded on the rise of Absolon, hauing promised so much in the bud, beganne to wither ere they saw the blossome: And a vaine proiect it seemed vnto him to venture with a banckrupt, and out of his masters blasted field to expect a haruest. If Absolon will needes wed himselfe to his owne will, and his seducers counsell, let him runne his owne hazzard; Achitophel stands engaged no farther, than his owne direction. If Absolon fall so short of his ambitious wi∣shes, as Achitophels wise augury, let him suffer alone himselfe, as not deseruing Achitophels pitie or societie. Hee was once warned, and therefore twice armed, to withstand so weake an assailant as Chushai his fained friend. And why shall Achi∣tophel shew himselfe so superstitious to obserue him, who neglects himselfe, and sleights his friends? Two dangers here offered themselues at once; the one the desertion of his young master, the other the neglect of his owne estate. But with a Politician the choyce is easie; and therefore it is time to hye him home, to order his owne house, which had left
the Common-wealth in a combustion. His master might as well finde him absent, as neglect him present, and sooner meet him in his death than counsell. From whose example, a good Christian may be taught so much policie, to trye his friends in aduersitie, ere he trust them in prosperitie. Those vermines which vndermine the house, are taught to runne from the ruine, and quit that mantion which preserued them, because they neuer loued it further than it serued their own purpose. But a true friend hides himselfe as a glow-worme, obscured in the day of prosperitie, to reserue his light for the obscure night of aduersitie. Chushai, as wee haue formerly shewed, had lesse reason to suspect Achitophels head to want Absolons arme, than Dauids arme to want direction: yet to preferre the loyaltie of a friend, hee chose rather to cast himselfe on rash aduenture, than knowne experience, and hazzard the ship∣wrack of himselfe to saue a friend. If any man should de∣mand how farre friendship may challenge a iurisdiction in our conuersation? God will answer, that he must first ioyne ere we shake hands. A true and iust amitie shines not so much in the subiect wherein it growes, as on the subiect whereon it workes; as that which desires not so much to purchase, as to deserue applause. It was a poore shift of Naaman, out of the sinceritie of his vnfained loue, to excuse his fained Idolatrie in this sort: When I come into the Temple of Rimmon, and my Master boweth downe to the image, and leaneth on my shoulder, and he leaneth down with me, the Lord be mercifull vnto me in this thing. Had his eye offended him, or his hand mistooke his message, he had not only sufficient warrant, but command to pluck out the one, and cut off the other: Much more are we warranted to dissolue the strongest contract betwixt outward friends, where God shakes his rodde betweene a friends impietie and our affection. But neither of these motiues found foo∣ting in Achitophels designe. Had the distrust or dislike of his Masters cause disswaded furtherance, he had not suffered him so farre to runne beyond preuention. Had his motiue after∣wards grounded it selfe on iustice, hee might haue turned his counsell another way, rather to his masters good than his own
ruine; at least, by his submission he might haue pieced vp this breach of Treason, and haue cast his fortunes on so fauourable a calme as Dauids attonement, with his deere, though rebel∣lious, Absolon. But Absolons case was desperate, his owne trea∣son euident, Dauids remissiue pardon vnlikely, his own house vnsettled: and therefore out of the grounds of his own world∣ly policie, he thought it more expedient to arise and go home to his house, and set his house in order. Which is the third, and comes next in order to be handled. 5 In setting of Achitophels house in order, wee may by way of explication, obserue two points. First, what we ought to vnderstand by his house: secondly, wherein this ordering of his house consisted. A house so far as the word , in the ori∣ginall language renders it, signifies as much as an Artificiall re∣ceptacle fitted for habitation: whence afterward by an apt Metonomie, expressing the place containing for the persons contained, it was taken for a Familie, as we finde in Scripture mention made of the house of Saul, and the house of Dauid: in which sense  or a house, is by Aristotle, in the first of his Politickes, defined to a daily ocietie of people dwelling together. And howsoner the name of family among the ancients seeme to deriue his originall from the scietie of diuers seruants, li∣uing vnder one roofe and regiment: yet vse hath taught it so far to enlarge it selfe, as to signifie a companie, consisting of three essentiall parts, to wit, of the Husband and the Wife, of the Father and the Sonne, of the Master and the Seruant; the due administration of which, wherein euery member answers in harmonie to preserue the whole, we call Oeconomie or good husbandrie. An institution founded on the law of nature, as the first and strongest band of humane societie, and the first ground-worke of a common-wealth. The setting of such a house in order, which is the next point to be scanned, is ei∣ther the generall administration of a family, which wee may call husbandry; or else a finall determination or maters, as we would they should stand at the time of our death, expres∣sed in our last will and testament. Herein Achitophel, although a wicked caitiffe, scarce deseruing a good Epithete, seemed to
shew as much piety as policy, in settling his estate by proui∣dence while he liued, which after his death, might be ship∣wrackt by dissension or confusion. So much of the image of God he had left vndefaced in him, as to shew him some ob∣scure glimpse of eternity, to seeke that being in posterity by propagation, which the times disasters were readier to can∣cell than preserue. A president surmounting the example of many Christians of our times, who imagining all the world to be borne for them, and them for themselues, neglect former presidents, and stop the passage to all posterity, as if the line drawne out so many ages from their first father A∣dam, should breake off with themselues, and attaine its highest pitch in their perfections. It was a noble, though arrogant reply of Iphicrates to Hermodius in Plutarch, boasting too much of his continued line, and ancient nobility; Nobilitas mea in me incpit, tua in te desijt: wherein hee vaunted himselfe by prouidence and vertue to haue so much improued, as the o∣ther to haue decocted his fortunes and an ancient family. To lend posterity a head, may to a wise man seeme a greater glo∣rie, than to borrow from ancestry a taile; and on the other side, to play away in sport our predecessors labours, a greater dishonour than to pisse on our Parents ashes, or raze their monuments. Amongst all the temporall blessings of Almighty God, promised or deriued as rewards to his faithful seruants, I finde none greater in holy Writ, than the multiplying of their seed, and spreading of their family. Behold (saith God to Abraham) I will make of thee a mighty people: And that which God in his especiall fauour prizes, as so great a guerdon to his best fauourites, shall vnworthy man esteeme a trifle, and va∣lue so farre below the rate? He that prouides not for his famili, is worse than an Infidell, saith the Apostle. Not (I suppose) that a prouident Heathen was absolutely to be preferred before a negligent professor: but that in this comparison of settling a mans estate after him, in regard of posterity; a wise Infidell might challenge a precedency before a carelesse Christian; according to that of our Sauiour in the Gospell, The children of this world, are wiser in their generation than the children of light.
Herein Achitophels policy shooke hands with honesty, which seldome met before in consort: but no sooner could they meete, but part; as if they meant to meete no more. He settled his worldly estate on earth, but forgot his eternall hope in heauen. He reserued to himselfe out of all his legacies, the worme of a guilty conscience, which he could as well shake off as himselfe; which leades our discourse to a second obser∣uation, arising from this point, That worldly wise politicians proue most vnprouident for future life, and preferre temporall bles∣sings before eternall happinesse. 6. Where a mans treasure is, there will his heart be also, saith our Sauiour. Whence a reason may be rendred, why Achito∣phel, despairing of any portion among the Saints in heauen, set his minde to dispose of his possessions here on earth. Riches, which the wisest sort of Philosophers, haue esteemed no other than the complement of temporall felicitie, are the maine of their ambition, while the fruition of the eternall ioyes in heauen, stands as doubtfull in their hopes, as vnsettled in their opinion. But this prouidence in disposing worldly af∣faires, at the best, can be reputed no other than the childe of Nature, whose Mole-eyes, through the glimmering light of hu∣mane reason, can hardly pierce so farre as its owne spheare; much lesse through the clouds of humane ignorance, and the worlds contagious fogs, open to it selfe a passage to that eter∣nall glory, to which none but the light of grace can direct or command an entrance. No maruaile then, if worldly men, hauing all their cares bounded in this world, runne alwayes in the same circle, and respect onely their owne center, dis∣daining (as it were) any interest in any superior Orbe. This, they esteeme their highest heauen; without the which, with Aristotle, they can imagine neither Locus nor Tempus; neither place to containe their treasure, nor time to adde to their mortality: if at any time, by the permissiue indulgence of Al∣mighty God, some sparkle of grace presents itselfe, it is but as the lightning, no sooner seene but lost; enough to shew it selfe, but too little to giue direction; enough for their curio∣sity to dispute, but too much for their faith to apprehend:
And therefore rather resolue they to set vp their rest in this world, which they know, than to hazzard themselues on so dangerous a discouery, wherein they should shew themselues, at least diffident, if not desperate. This seemes to haue been the resolution of wicked Cain, who, although shut out from Gods presence, sought out a place in the land of Nod to build a Citie, which might beare his name, and preserue his fa∣mily. Himselfe, as it were, branded with the blacke coale of reprobation, he quickly submitted to perdition, in this despe∣rate resolution, My sinne is greater than can be forgiuen me. His posterity, he committed rather to chance and policy, than to Gods protection; as though his owne care had been sufficient to vndermine the Diuine prouidence: or at least he had pro∣ued so good a proficient in the schoole of policie, as to work his owne desperate fortunes to his sons aduantage. Amongst many such examples of this kinde, which in this age of ours are too too frequent, I finde none more remarkable than of a certaine Lawyer, whom Bellarmine (as himelfe reports) in the time of his sicknesse comming to visite, and vrging vnto prai∣er and confession, replyed, That he could wish, that prayer were made for his wife and children, whose welfare in this world he greatly tendred; for himselfe, as lost and desperate, he gaue ouer to perdition: Bellarmines obseruation of this de∣sperate man, might, me thinkes, haue opened his eyes to haue seene that mysterie of iniquity, closed vp in their Babylonish Hierarchie. How many thousand soules, whom they ought to purchase vnto Christ, sell they daily vnto Sathan, to buy their owne gaine or greatnesse? as if they conspired, all in one, to shipwracke their hopes of another life in heauen, to bolster vp a Papall Monarchie here on earth. Their fire of Purgatorie had long since been extinct, had it not maintained the Popes kitchin. Their Indulgences had long since waxed stale, and laine vpon their hands, had not the costly marriages of the Popes Neces, or rather Daughters, set them out in a new Edi∣tion, to make them vendible. The doll of their pretended Supremacie had wanted adoration, and Peters imaginary Chair been broken and hurled to the ground, had not couetousnesse
on the one side, pompe and ambition on the other, as two sup∣porters, laboured to keep it vpright: And little could St. Paul himselfe effect by his powerfull preaching among such Athe∣nians, with whom there is neuer wanting a Demetrius, a siluer Smith; who, lest his shrines should want sale, will stoutly stand vp for the honour of Diana's Temple. Well may we call that a meere politick religion, or rather a masked Atheisme, wher∣in, Gods pretended seruice is set vp as a pillar to vnderprop an Antichristian Hierarchie; and Religion, which should com∣mand our best obseruance, becomes the slaue and seruant to ambition. Herein Achitophels designe seemes to fall short of their industry: He sets his house in order, (for ought we find) without any sense of Religion, or preiudice to Gods Church. These men vse the sword of the Church against Religion, con∣straining her at once both to inflict, and smart at her owne wounds. Achitophel left the common-wealth in a combustion to set his owne house in order: but these fire-brands of State, set their owne houses in order first, that they may the more easily disturbe the good temper of a settled Common-wealth. Achitophel, for ought we know, shut vp all his treacherous designes in his owne execution; leauing as hereditary, rather the staine than the guilt of his odious treason to posterity. But these Iesuiticke factours, vnwilling to cut off the entaile of their traiterous inclinations, either by despaire or repentance; like a brood of Vipers, bequeath a legacie of their venemous qua∣lity vnto their off-spring: in which, as out of a Cockatrice egges, is hatched, preserued, and multiplied, the accursed spawne of treachery and sedition. Which last clause, leades our discourse to a second point, to wit, the consideration of Achitophels death, in that he hanged himselfe, which comes next in order to be handled. 7. In Achitophels death, you may with me obserue two espe∣ciall points; 1. The cause. 2. The manner. Th cause, grounded on the motiue fore-mentioned in my former exercise, was Despanre: The manner of his death, as shamefull and ignomi∣nious as his life and action. To begin with Despaire, we shall finde it an infirmity of mans nature; rather deseruing mens pitie than indignation. A childe it is, whom the guilt of sinne
begets on an euill conscience; which no sooner beholds the light, but couets darknesse, as if it made no more vse of life, than to instruct him the next way to death. In this bottom∣lesse pit of despaire, wherein no passenger could cast anchor, Achitophel now finds himselfe plunged; and therefore, as arre∣sted by deaths immediate sergeant, prepares for his next ap∣pearance. Better dye once, than feare alwaies; and shut vp all mischiefes in one death, than spin out life in many mischiefes. Those lofty Scenes of State, wherein Achitophel hath either hi∣therto acted himself or prompted others, must now shut vp in an ill Catastrophe; and who sitter to end, than hee who began this Stately Tragedy? To liue at another mans beneuolence, seemes the smallest priuiledge of a subiect to dye at his owne command, the greatest prerogatiue of a King. A base heads∣man must not share so great a glory, as the chopping off a head enriched with so much policy, nor lustice seeme to en∣treate any other hands than his owne in his stately execution. Behold here the last resolution of this matchlesse politician, proposed afterwards (as it seemes) as a patterne to many high spirits amongst the Heathen; whose iudgements infatuated with false principles, misconster the badge of cowardise, for the most honourable seale of courage: as if it were a point of valour to shake hands with death, & faintly giue themselues ouer to his mercy, with whom, as an enemy, they ought to combate. True honour neuer feares to stare death in the face, but seldome courts it as a friend; often, as a corriuall, it strug∣gles with it for victory: but neuer giues vp the hilts, or cryes quarter, till ouer-mastred by a greater and disproportioned strength, he finds them wrested from his hands. So great an impression not with standing got this wicked opinion of selfe∣killing amongst the ancient Romanes, that a speedy dispatch of our selues in case of extremity, seemed to challenge as much honour, as with a Christian it deserueth shame; as we find it not recorded only, but in a maner recómended, by that turn-coat Lipfius out of the principles of his Stoicall Philosophy: whose broken rudiments he had (as it seems) better conned than Chri∣stianity. But how far out of our voluntary disposition, we ought to entertain the stroke of death, is not easie to determine with∣out
distinction. A concurrence of our wils we may interpret two waies: either for a Passie obedience, indebted rather to constraint than choice, wherin Nature submits her selfe to Iu∣stice or necessity: or an Actiue violence, deriued for the most part from fear or rashnesse; wherin reason suffers her self to be led captiue by boistrous frensie, arming the strength of vnwil∣ling Nature against her own bosome, & life, her sweet compani∣on. The former concurrence of our assent, or at least submission to such extremities, we find warranted not only by permission but cómand, so far forth, as the Iustice of the cause conspiring with a regulated conscience, imports necessity. Those blessed Martyrs of the Church, whose glorious wounds & scars, shine as so many orient pearles in their white robes of sanctity, haue markt & seald them out to posterity, as examples of the highest imitation. Those valiant champions in defence of their Country & Religion, exposed to the merciless iaws of death, or the blou∣die phangs of vncertain hazzards in a Christian warfare, what age so enuious which will not crown with present honour, & register to future admiration? Yea, wicked malefactors them∣selues, in whom Iustice often preuents Nature in an vntimely execution, may seem to cancell some part of their former guilt, in giuing by their submissiue patience, the strictnes of the Law a iust satisfaction. And therfore without question, the sweetnes of life ought not to share so great a moyty in our affections, as to shut out our obedience, when either Religion stands at stake, or our Country craues our assistance, or Iustice challengeth her prerogatiue. The other exposure of mens liues to certain death, where necessity on either hand threatens apparant ruine with∣out repriuall, I could charitably interpret, as of Sampsons de∣signe in razing the house to his own & the Philistins destructi∣on, or of Lucans and Seneca's aduice in making choice of their owne death, by cutting their owne veines: but that Gods Al∣mighty prouidence in our greatest designes, shewes it selfe most pregnant beyond mans expectation, & commands rather our patience than preuention. But for such vntimely and vn∣naturall designes, where in the hands are made instrumentall executioners to the heart, as prickt on with the horrour of a guilty conscience, and distrust of Gods fauours, neither Christi∣anitie
gaue euer president, nor Stoicall Philosophy among all her strict axiomes a warranted precept; as an action odious both to God & man, wch begins with sin & ends with shame. Which leads our discourse from the immediate cause of his death, to wit, his despaire, to the maner & qualitie of it, his shameful end. 8 Shame is the sworne seruant vnto sinne, an odious but officious hagge; whom life could neuer entertaine without sorrow, or death easily shake off, till memory forfeit her re∣cords to time, and time to obliuion. Tis the misery of guilt with constraint to cherish in her bosome the childe she hates, and bequeath such a fatall issue to posteritie, whose browes shall carry the true stampe and character of her owne defor∣mitie. And how great a soueraigntie soeuer sin might seeme to challenge in the spheare of humane nature, which our first Parents by their disobedience forfeited to her iurisdiction; yet shall in the end finde himselfe conquered, in that sinne liuing for the most part in darkenesse, shuts vp all her malice with death, while her vntoward babe shall suruiue to vpbraid her actions in the light, and arraigne her after death at the barre of Iustice. Had Achitophel been as prouident to preuent an ill report after death, as ambitions to preserue reputation during life, he had measured his actions by a betterend, or at least in the euent directed his worst ends to a better pur∣pose, than lose at the last cast which he was so long a winning, or haue stained the fame of his former actions with so base an execution. His eminent gifts of Wisedome, howsoeuer sorded and wicked in themselues, as directed rather to his own pri∣uate ends, than Gods glorie, or the honour of the Common∣wealth; might not with standing, out of a foreconceiued opi∣nion of his worth, haue found in the common voyce, a fauou∣rable construction. Old vices commonly find welcome vnder new names; and nothing so witty as Sinne to inuent new Epi∣thets to shut out shame, and entertaine plausibilitie. Luxuris and leacherie, the bane of nature, may passe currant vnder the title of Good-fellowship. Ignorant pride and supercilious contempt may call themselues retyred grauitie, or stout  Grping Couetousnesse and base Vsury, may finde entertainement vnder the shew of thrifty husbandry:  and Oppression
shall be stiled seuere Iustice and strict Government. At least from each of these, common conniuence would make a shift to extract somewhat which might sauour of ingenuitie, to couer guilt from the strict inquisition of truth, and stoppe the harsh mouth of censure: wherein at least it should shew it selfe no lesse ingenious, than Aristotle in his Ethickes, who in painting out to the life his I doll , is obserued to haue stolne the chiefest markes of many notorious vices to chara∣cter one imaginary vertue. No worse, but rather better fauor, might Achitophels life seeme to haue deserued, especially a∣mongst the common rout of his inferiours, who valuing the worth of their superiours, imagine them as eminent in wise∣dome, as they transcend in greatnesse, as if they conceiued them fashioned in another mould, and wrought to another nature; that the least slips or scapes which in ordinarie men wee can interprete no other than the effects of infirmitie, should in them bee thought to proceede from premeditated counsell, and mature deliberation, as critically directed to some especiall end or other in the State. But admit his sinne∣full proiects had laine open to discouerie, yet sauouring of a reaching wit or seasoned with discretion, they might seeme rather amongst vulgar iudgments, the fruits of politicke pre∣uention, than humane weaknes. Our intellectuall gifts we com∣monly value aboue our Morall vertues, and therefore hold it a smaller disparagement to be taxed of dshonesty than indiscreti∣on: As if wee rather coueted an inheritance here amongst the children of this world, than to haue our names enrolled with the children of light. Thus far Achitophel had carried his mat∣ters in such fashion, as might speak his wisedome though not his honesty. Had Absolon through his aduice, aduanced himself to the Throne of Israel, his notorious treason had passed for profound policy; neither could the world euer tearme that act treason, which is of a King, or for a Kings promotion. Had A∣chitophels proiect falne below expectation (as he did afterward) it was Absolons weaknesse to reiect aduice, not Achitophels to suggest the best counsell. But shift the Scene, and let the selfe same Theater which euen now found him plotting Absolons aduancement, contriuing the meanes and manner of his owne
death; and you would imagine him all this while but to haue personated a wise man, and now in the end to resume his pro∣per habit: like a certain beast of Scythia recorded by Pliny in his naturall history, whom he reports to be able to change himself into all variety of shapes & colours, yet returning to his owne forme, expresses the resemblance of an Asse. A good embleme of a wicked politician, who sitting as it were at the sterne of state, & holding the helme in his hands, must of necessity vary him∣self a thousand wayes to obey all winds, & second all tides. But Nature, wch is the worst dissembler of guilty actions, will one time or other betray it selfe to discouery, or atleast plain-dea∣ling Death wil strip him naked, & lay him open vnto shame, & leaue him as a fool to mens cōtempt & Gods vengeance Shame & reproach, the most vnwelcom guests to Achitophel in his life, are here inuited as friends to bear him to his sepulchre; & the kind & maner of death most odious to God & man, is thought the safest and sweetest in his foolish choice. Among so many waies wherby euery man may make himself a passage to death, he must needs chuse the worst, to dye as a dogge on a tree, and make himself guilty aswel of his shamefull death, as the igno∣minious motiue. Death is the cōmon destinie of mankind; to feare or wish for death, is the mark of a coward & shame of a man. To end our course of life in a warm bed, is natures tribute, and the crown of siluer haires: to cancell cares in the field by the hand of an enemy, is the chance of war, & the honour of a souldier: To die by the sentence of iustice & stroke of the exe∣cutioner, is a satisfaction of the law, & expiation of the guilt. But to die out of cowardise & despair, to die by the enforced violence of our own hands, to die as a theefe on a tree, not ex∣piating the guilt of sin by giuing satisfaction to the law, or af∣fording nature any right in expectation; &, which is more than all the rest, to quit the vexations of this world, to incurre greater in the next, & to treade with vnresolued feet that vn∣known path of death, whose cōmon entrance shuts vp in as doubtfull an end, as celestiall ioyes & infernall torments; what settled iudgement will not brand with the odious blot of ex∣treamest folly? in sight and comparison of which, the greatest vanitie in the world should lose her name & seeme discretion.
Here may we see the weaknes of humane wisedom tutored by temptation, & directed by the cōmon enemy of mankind; as the strength of Sampson ouer mastred by the wiles of Dalilah; which cōmonly affords the owner no greater courtesie than confusion, & their names and memorie no other Trophee, than a liuing shame, or a lying sepulchre. Which by occasion di∣rects our enquiry to the third & last action, preordained (as it seemes) by himselfe in his life, but executed by his friends after death, his pompous buriall: Hee was buried in the Sepulchre of his Fathers. 9 Whether this last action of Achitophel bee rather to bee ascribed to Achitophel himselfe, as prescribed by his last Will & Testament; or to his children as their last duty & obligation to their dead Parent, we will make no long dispute. It seemes an act of both, wherin either partie may share an interest, as com∣manded by the one, & executed by the other. From each ob∣seruation may be copied out vnto vs some vseful doctrine for instruction. In Achitophels prouidence in seeking to preserue his name & memorie, in so fleight a Trophee as a stone or statue, we may reade the shallow reach of many politicians of our age, ambitiously setting vp their garnished sepulchres in Churches & high places, as idols of admiration to bee worshipt by igno∣rant spectators: which, notwithstanding in a iudicious cen∣sure, liue only for a time to vpbraid their folly, and fall after a time into the dust & ashes, as the rotten bones they shrowd vp in obliuion. Enuious time which hath eaten out the worke∣manship of so many famous Architects, & left not so much as stones or ruines for antiquitie to boast, or posterity to admire by the mouth of History, his best Secretary, might hane disco∣uered the weaknesse of such considence, as grounds it self on such vncertainties. Babel the greatest ambition of humane in∣dustry, vndertaken (as it were) by the ioynt handicraft of mankinde, neither by disparitie of religions, or difference of languages as yet diuided into factions; wherein (as Philo Iu∣daeus notes, and holy Scriptures not obscurely intimate) the chiefest men of ranke and estimation in engrauen stones sought to preserue their memory; what other legacie in her fal hath shee bequeathed to our obseruation, than the want of
discouery, the whetstone of diligent Antiquaries, & tortures of the most curious inquisition? How much better is the content of a quiet conscience, grounded on the assurance of Gods pro∣mises for future happines, than such painted sepulchers, which present in a maner, nothing to posterity but their own ruines, and their founders weaknesse. Neuerthelesse, from this officious care of Achitophels children toward their decea∣sed Father, may Christians bee taught the reuerend respect they owe to the ashes of their dead ancestors. The raising vp of monumentall statues to the memory of others, ought we rather to interpret the duety of Posterity, than the ambition of our deceased parents: yet in such wise, that they ought rather to humble vs, with the thought of mortality, than puffe vs vp with glory of our Parents Nobility. Neither can such mo∣numents, besids shame & infamie, (if erected to wicked men) expresse any other than the common Epithaph of mankinde. That he liued and died. The greatest Tyrant in the world can command no more; the poorest beggar can challenge to him∣selfe no lesse. Hitherto, Beloued, hath my discourse, seconded by your fauourable attention, followed Achitophel through the by-paths and indirect passages of his life & actions, from the beginning of his conspiracy with Absolon, to his shamefull death and pompous sepulchre: whose story deseruing a more able discouery than my poore discription, out of all these cir∣cumstances, will minister this one true and vndoubted Corro∣lary: That honesty is the best policie. When worldly policy com∣monly hides her selfe in darknes, and Proteus like, transformes her selfe into a thousand shapes, to auoide discouery; this one only dares boldly aduenture in the light, and iustifie all her actions: this one, couets no other likenesse than her owne, as not ashamed to present her face to view and censure. Finally, this alone, is sufficient to preserue a competent estate in this life, and after death aduance vs to Christs glorious Kingdome, where we shall raigne with him for euer amongst the Saints in heauen. To which Kingdome &c. Deo Triuni laus in aeternum. FINIS.
