6791 99856906 22548
A lamentable Dittie composed vpon the death of Robert Lord Deuereux late Earle of Essex, who was beheaded in the Tower of London, vpon Ashwednesday in the morning. 1601. To the tune of Welladay. SWeet Englands pride is gone welladay welladay, Which makes her sigh and grone euermore still: He did her fame aduance, In Ireland Spaine and France, And now by dismall chaunce, is from her tane. He was a vertuous Peere, welladay welladay, And was esteemed deere euermore still: He alwaies helpt the poore, Which makes them sigh full fore his death they doe deplore, In euery place. Braue honor grac'd him still gallantly gallantly, He nere did deede of ill, well is it knowne: But enuie that foule fiend Whose mallice ne're hath end; hath brought true vertues friend Vnto his thrall. At Tilt he did surpasse gallantly gallantly: all men that is and was euermore still: One day as it was seene, In honour of his Queene, Such deeds hath ne're been séen, As he did doe. Abroade and eke at home, gallantly, gallantly, For vallour there was none, like him before: In Ireland France and Spaine, (They feared great Essex name, And England lou'd the same, In euery place. But all would not preuaile welladay welladay: His deedes did nought auaile, more was the pittie: He was condemn'd to die, For treason certainely, But God that sits on hie Knoweth all things. That Sunday in the morne, welladay welladay: That he to the Cittie came, with all his troupe: That first began the strife, And caused him loose his life, And others did the like, As well as hee. Yet her Princely Maiestie gratiously, gratiously, Hath pardon giuen free to many of them: She hath released them quite, And giuen them their right, they may pray both day & night God to defend her. Shrouetewesday in the night. welladay, welladay, With a heauy harted spright as it is sayd: The leiftenant of the Tower Who kept him in his power. At ten a clocke that hour. To him did come. And sayd vnto him there, mournefully, mournfully, My Lord you must prepare, to die to morrow: Gods will be done quoth he, Yet shall you strangely see, God strong in me to be, Though I am weake. I pray you pray for me well day, welladay, That God may strengthen me, against that houre: Then straightway did he call, The Guard vnder the wall, And did intreate them all For him to pray. For to morrow is the day welladay welladay, That I the debt must pay, which I doe owe: It is my life I meane, Which I must pay my Queene, Euen soe hath iustice giuen, That I must doe. In the morning was he brought, welladay welladay: Whers a Scaffold was set vp, within the Tower: Many Lords were present then, With other Gentlemen, Which were appointed then see him dye. You noble Lords quoth he welladay welladay, That must the witnesse be, of this my death: Know I neuer loued Papistrye, But did it still defye, And Essex thus did dye, Heere in this place. I haue a sinner been welladay welladay: Yet neuer wrong'd my Queene in all my life, My God I did offend, Which grieues me at my end, May all the rest amend, I doe forgive them. To the state I ne're ment ill welladay, welladay, Neither wisht the commons ill in all my life: But loued all with my heart, And alwaies tooke their part, VVhereas there was desert, In any place. Then mildely did he craue mournefully mournefully, He might that fauour haue priuate to pray: He then prayed heartely, And with great feruency, To God that sits on hie, For to receiue him. And then he prayed againe mournefully mournefully, God to preserue his Queene from all her foes: And send her long to raigne, True Iustice to maintaine, And not to let proude Spaine, Once to offend her. His gowne he slipt off then welladay welladay, And put off his hat and band and hung it by. Praying still continually, To God that sits on hie, That he might paciently, There suffer death. My headesman that must be, then said he cheerefullie, Let him come heere to me, That I may him see: VVho kneeled to him then, Art thou (quoth he) the man, VVhich art appointed now, my life to free. Yes my Lord did he say well a day, welladay, Forgiue me I you pray for this your death: I heare doe ther fore, And may true iustice liue, No foule crime to for giue, VVithin their place. Then he kneeled downe againe, mournefully mournefully: And was required by some there standing by: To forgiue his enemies, Before death closde his eyes, VVhich he did in heartie wise, Thanking them for it: That they would remember him welladay, welladay: That he might sorgiue all them, that had him wrong'd: Now my Lords I take my leaue Sweet Christ my soule receiue, Now when you wil I prepare, For I am readie. He laide his head on the blocke, welladay welladay: But his doublet did let the stroke some there did say: What must be done (quoth he) Shall be done presently, Then his doublet off put hee, and laye downe againe. Then his headesman did his part cruelly, cruelly, He was neuer seene to start, For all the blowes: His soule it is at rest. in heauen among the blest, Where God send vs to rest, When it shall please him. God saue the King. FINIS. Imprinted at London for Margret Allde, and are to be solde at the long shop vnder Saint Mil∣dreds Church in the Poul∣try. 1603.
