7091 99842400 7050
THE FIRST BOOKE of Songes or Ayres of fowre partes with Ta∣bleture for the Lute: So made that all the partes together, or either of them seue∣rally may be song to the Lute, Orpherian or Viol de gambo. Composed by Iohn Dowland Lute∣nist and Batcheler of musicke in both the Vniuersities. Also an inuention by the sayd Author for two to playe vp∣on one Lute. Nec prosuit domino, quae prosunt omnibus, artes. ¶ Printed by Peter Short, dwelling on Bredstreet hill at the sign of the Starre, 1597
COMME IE TREVVE
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE SIR GEORGE CAREY, OF THE MOST HONORABLE ORDER OF THE GARTER KNIGHT: Baron of Hunsdon, Captaine of her Maiesties gentlemen Pensioners, Gouernor of the Isle of Wight, Lieutenants of the countie of Southt. Lord Chamberlaine of her Maiesties most Royall house, and of her Highnes most honourable priuie Counsell. THAT harmony (Right honorable) which is skilfullie exprest by Instruments, albeit, by reason of the variety of number & proportion, of it selfe it easilie stirs vp the minds of the hea∣rers to admiration & delight, yet far higher au∣thoritie and power hath been euer worthily attri∣buted to that kinde of Musicke, which to the sweetnes of instrument applies the liuely voice of man, expressing some worthy sentence or excel∣lent Poeme. Hence (as al antiquitie can witnesse) first grew the heauenly Art of musicke: for Linus, Orpheus, and the rest, according to the number and time of their Poemes, first framed the numbers and times of musicke: So that Plato defines melody to consist of harmony, number, & wordes; harmony na∣ked of it selfe, words the ornament of harmony, number the common friend & vniter of them both. This small booke containing the consent of speaking har∣mony, ioyned with the most musicall instrument, the Lute, being my first la∣bour, I haue presumed to dedicate to your Lordship, who for your vertue & nobility are best able to protect it, and for your honourable fauors towards me best deseruing my duety and seruice. Besides your noble inclination and loue to all good Artes, and namely the diuine science of musicke doth challenge the patronage of all learning, then which no greater title can bee added to No∣bilitie. Neither in these your honours may I let passe the dutifull remem∣brance of your vertuous Lady my honourable mistris, whose singular graces towards me haue added spirit to my vnfortunate labours. What time and di∣ligence I haue bestowed in the search of Musicke, what trauel in forren coun∣tries, what successe and estimation euen among strangers I haue found, I leaue to the report of others. Yet all this in vaine, were it not that your hono∣rable hands haue vouchsaft to vphold my poore fortunes, which I now who∣ly recommend to your gratious protection, with these my first endeuors, hum¦bly beseeching you to accept, and cherish thē with your continued fauours. Your Lordships most humble seruant, Iohn Dowland.
To the courteous Reader. HOW hard an enterprise it is in this skilfull and curious age to com∣mit our priuate labours to the publike view, mine owne disabilitie, and others hard successe doe too well assure me: and were it not for that loue I beare to the true louers of musicke, I had concealde these my first fruits, which how they will thriue with your taste I know not, howsoeuer the greater part of them might haue been ripe inough by their age. The Courtly iudgement I hope will not be seuere against them, being it selfe a party, and those sweet springs of humanity (I meane our two famous Vniuersities) wil entertain them for his sake, whome they haue already grac't, and as it were enfranchisd in the ingenuous profession of Musicke, which from my childhoode I haue euer aymed at, sundry times leauing my natiue countrey, the better to attain so excellent a science. About sixteene yeeres past, I trauelled the chiefest parts of France, a nation furnisht with great variety of Musicke: But lately, being of a more confirmed iudgement, I bent my course toward the famous prouinces of Germany, where I founde both ex∣cellent masters, and most honorable Patrons of Musicke: Namely, those two mira∣cles of this age for vertue and magnificence, Henry Iulio Duke of Brunswick, and learned Maritius Lantzgraue of Hessen, of whose princely vertues and fauors towards me I can neuer speake sufficientlie. Neither can I forget the kindnes of Alexandro Horologio, a right learned master of Musicke, seruant to the royal Prince the Lantz∣graue of Hessen, and Gregorio Howet Lutenist to the magnificent Duke of Brunswick, both whome I name as well for their loue to me, as also for their excellency in their faculties. Thus hauing spent some moneths in Germany, to my great admiration of that worthy country, I past ouer the Alpes into Italy, where I founde the Cities fur∣nisht with all good Artes but especiallie Musicke. What fauour and estimation I had in Venice, Padua, Genoa, Ferrara, Florence, & diuers other places I willingly suppresse, least I should any way seeme partiall in mine owne indeuours. Yet can I not dissem∣ble the great content I found in the proferd amity of the most famous Luca Maren∣zio, whose sundry letters I receiued from Rome, and one of them, because it is but short, I haue thought good to set downe, not thinking it any disgrace to be proud of the iudgement of so excellent a man. Molto Magnifico Signior mio osseruandissimo. PEr una lettera del Signior Alberìgo Malueziho inteso quanto con cortese affetto simo∣stri desideroso di essermi congionto a'amicitia, doue infinitamente la ringratio di questo suo buon' animo, offerendomegli all incontro se in alcuna cosa la posso seruire, poi che gli me∣riti delle sue infinite uirtù, & qualità meritano che ogni vno & me l'ammirino & osser∣uino, & per fine di questo le bascio le mani. Di Roma a' 13. di Luglio. 1595. D. V. S. Affettionatissimo seruitore, Luca Marenzio.
Not to stand to long vpon my trauels, I will onely name that worthy maister Gio∣uanni Crochio Vicemaster of the chappel of S. Marks in Venice, with whome I had fa∣miliar conference. And thus what experience I could gather abroad, I am now ready to practise at home, if I may but find encouragement in my first assaies. There hau∣bin diuers Lute lessons of mine lately printed without my knowledge, falce and vn∣perfect, but I purpose shortly my selfe to set forth the choisest of all my Lessons in print, and also an introduction for fingering, with other books of Songs, whereof this is the first: and as this findes fauour with you, so shal I be affected to labor in the rest. Farewell. Iohn Dowland. Tho. Campiani Epigramma de instituto Authoris. Famam, posteritas quam dedit Orpheo, Dolandi meliùs Musica dat sibi, Fugaces reprimens archetypis sonos; Quas & delitias praebuit auribus, Ipsis conspicuas luminibus facit. A Table of all the Songs contained in this Booke. VNquiet thoughts. I Who euer thinks or hopes of loue for loue. II. My thoughts are wingd with hopes. III. If my complaints could passions moue. IIII. Can she excuse my wrongs with vertues cloake. V. Now, O now I needs must part. VI. Deare if you change ile neuer chuse againe. VII Burst forth my teares. VIII. Go Cristall teares. IX. Thinkst thou then by thy faining. X. Come away, come sweet loue. XI. Rest a while you cruell cares. XII. Sleepe wayward thoughts. XIII. All ye whom loue or fortune hath betraide. XIIII. Wilt thou vnkind thus reaue me of my hart. XV. VVould my conceit that first enforst my woe. XVI. Come againe; sweet loue doth now enuite. XVII. His goulden locks time hath to siluer turnd. XVIII. Awake sweet loue thou art returnd. XIX. Come heauy sleepe. XX. Awaie with these selfe louing lads. XXI. A Galliard for two to plaie vpon one Lute at the end of the booke.
I. CANTVS. VNquiet thoughts your ciuill slaughter stint, & wrap your wrongs with in à pensiue hart: And you my tongue that maks my mouth a minte, & stamps my thoughts to coyne them words by arte: Be still for if you euer doo the like, Ile cut the string, ij. that maks the hammer strike. But what can staie my thoughts they may not start, Or put my tongue in durance for to dye? When as these eies the keyes of mouth and harte Open the locke where all my loue doth lye; Ile seale them vp within their lids for euer, So thoughts & words and looks shall dye together, How shall I then gaze on my mistresse eies? My thoughts must haue some vēt els hart wil break, My tongue would rust as in my mouth it lies If eyes and thoughts were free and that not speake. Speake then and tell the passions of desire Which turns mine eies to floods, my thoghts to fire
ALTVS. VNquiet thoughts, your ciuill slaughter stint, and wrap your wrongs within a pensiue hart, and you my toung that makes my mouth aminte, ij. and stamps my thoughts to coine them words by art, be still, ij. for if you euer do the like, Ile cut the string, ij. that makes the hammer strike. BASSVS. VNquiet thoughts, your ciuile slaughters stint, and wrap your wrongs within a pensiue hart, wrongs within a pensiue hart, that makes my mouth amint to coine them words by arte, euer do the like, Ile cut ye string, ij. the string that makes ye hāmer strike. TENOR. VNquiet thoughts, your ciuile slaughter stint, and wrap your wrongs within a pensiue hart, and you my tonge, my tonge that makes my mouth amint, and stampes my thoughts, my thoughts, to coine, ij. them words by art, be still for if you euer do the like Ile cut the string, ii. that makes the hammer strike.
II. CANTVS. WHo euer thinks or hopes of loue for loue, or who belou'd in Cupids lawes doth glorie, who ioyes in vowes or vowes not to remoue, who by this light-god hath not ben made sorry: Let him see me ecclipsed from my son with darke clowdes of an earth: ij. Quite ouer runne. Who thinks that sorrowes felte, desires hidden, Or humble faith in constant honor arm'd, Can keepe loue from the friut that is forbidden, Who thinks that change is by entreatie charm'd▪ Looking on me let him know loues delights Are treasures hid in caues, but kept by Sprights.
ALTVS. WHo euer thinkes or hopes of loue for loue, or who beloud in Cupids lawes doth glory. Who ioies in vowes or vowes not to remoue, who by this light, God hath not bin made sorry: Let him see me. ij. Eclipsed from my son my son with darke clouds of an earth. ij. quite ouer run Quite ouer runne. BASSVS. WHo euer thinks or hopes of loue for loue or who beloud in Cupids laws doth glory, who ioies in vowes or vows not to remoue, who by this light-god hath not bin made sorry, Let him see me eclipsed from my son, with darke clouds of an earth. ij quite ouer runne, clouds of an earth quite ouer runne let him see. TENOR. WHo euer thinks or hopes of loue for loue, or who be- lou'd in Cupids lawes doth glory, Who ioies in vowes or vowes not to remoue, who by this light-god hath not bin made sorry, Let him see me eclipsed from my son, eclipsed frō my son with darke clouds of an earth▪ ij. quite ouer runne, of an earth, quite ouer run.
III. CANTVS. MY thoughts are wingde with hops, my hops with loue, moūt loue vn- to the moone in cleerest night, and say as she doth in the heauens mooue in earth so wanes & waxeth my de- light: And whisper this but softly in her cares, hope oft doth hang the head, and trust shed teares. And you my thoughts that some mistrust do carry, If for mistrust my mistrisse do you blame, Say though you alter, yet you do not varry, As she doth change, and yet remaine the same: Distrust doth enter harts, but not infect, And loue is sweetest seasned with suspect. If she for this, with cloudes do maske her eies, And make the heauens darke with her disdaine, With windie sighes disperse them in the skies, Or with thy teares dissolue them into raine; Thoughts, hopes, & loue returne to me no more, Till Cynthia shine as she hath done before.
ALTVS. MY thoughts are wingde with hopes my hopes with loue, mount loue vnto the moone, the moone in cleerest night, and say as she doth in the heauens mooue, in earth so wanes & waxeth my delight, & whisper this but softly in her eares, hope oft doth hang the head the head and trust shead teares▪ BASSVS. MY thoughts are wingd with hopes my hopes with loue, mount loue vnto the moone in clerest night, & say as she doth in the hea- uens mooue, in earth so wanes and waxeth my delight, and whisper this but softly in her eares, her eares hope oft doth hang the hed, and trust and trust shed teares. TENOR. MY thoughts are wingde with hopes my hopes with loue, mount loue vnto the moone in cleerest night, and say as she doth in the heauens mooue in earth so wanes so wanes & waxeth my delight, & whisper this ij. but softly in her eares, softly in her eares, hope oft doth hang the head, and trust shead teares.
IIII. CANTVS. IF my complaints could pas- si- ons mooue, or make loue my passions weare e- nough to prooue, that my des- see wherein I suffer wrong: O loue I liue and dye in payrs had gouernd me to long, thy wounds do fresh- ly bleed in thee thy griefe in my deepe sighes still speakes, yet thou doest mee my hart for thy vn- kind- nes breakes, thou saist thou hope when I des- paire, and when I hope thou makst me hope in vaine▪ canst my harmes re- paire, yet for re- dresse thou letst me still com- plaine. Can loue be ritch and yet I want, Is loue my iudge and yet am I condemn'd? Thou plenty hast, yet me dost scant, Thou made a god, and yet thy power contemn'd. That I do liue it is thy power, That I desire it is thy worth, If loue doth make mens liues too sowre Let me not loue, nor liue henceforth: Die shall my hopes, but not my faith, That you that of my fall may hearers be May here despaire, which truly saith, I was more true to loue, then loue to me.
ALTVS. IF my complaints could passions moue, or make loue see wherein I suffer wrong, my passions were e-nough to proue, that my dispaires had gouernd me to long. O loue I liue I liue and die in thee, thy griefe in my deepe sighs deepe sighs stil speakes, thy wounds do freshly freshly bleed in me, my hart for thy vn- kind vn- kind-nes breakes. yet thou dost hope dost hope when I dispaire, and when I hope thou makst thou makst me thou saist thou canst yu canst my harms repaire, yet for redresse thou letst thou letst me hope in vaine. still complaine. BASSVS. IF my cōplaints could passions moue, my passiōs were e-nough to proue, or make loue see wherin I suffer wrong, that my dispaires had gouernd me to long. O loue I liue and die in thee, thy greefe. ij. Thy woūds do freshly bleed in me, my hart. ii. in my deepe sighes still speakes, for thy vn- kindnesse breakes, and when I hope thou makst, ij. me yet for redresse thou letst ii. me hope in vaine. still complaine. TENOR. IF my complaints could passions moue, could passions moue, or make loue see wherein I my passions were e- nough to proue, e-nough to proue, that my dispaires had gouernd suffer wrong, O loue I liue and die I liue and die in thee, thy griefe in my deepe sighes me to long. thy wounds do freshly bleed do freshly bleed in me, my hart for thy vn- kinde deepe sighes still speakes. Yet thou dost hope when I dispaire, and when I hope thou makst mee vn-kind-nes breakes. thou saist thou canst my harmes repaire, yet for redresse thou letst me hope in vaine. still complaline.
V. CANTVS. CAn shee ex- cuse my wrongs with vertues cloake: Shall I call her are those cleere fiers which van- nish in to smoake: must I praise the good when she proues vnkind. No no where shadowes do for bo- dies stand, thou maist leaues where no fruit I find. Cold loue is like to words written on sand, or to be abusde if thy sight be dime. Wilt thou be thus a- bused still, seeing that bubbles which on the wa- ter swim. she will right thee neuer if thou canst not ore come her will, thy loue will be thus fruitles e- uer. Was I so base that I might not aspire Vnto those high ioyes which she houlds frō me, As they are high so high is my desire, If she this deny what can granted be. If she will yeeld to that which reason is, It is reasons will that loue should be iust, Deare make me happie still by granting this, Or cut of delayes if that dye I must. Better a thousand times to dye Then for to liue t still tormented, Deare but remember it was I Who for thy sake did dye contented.
ALTVS. CAn she ex- cuse my wrongs with vertues cloake shall I call her good when she proues vnkind. are those clere fiers which va-nish in to smoake, must I praise ye leaues where no fruit I find. No no where shadowes do where shadowes do for bodies stand thou maist be abusd abusd if thy light Cold loue is like to words writ like to words writē on sande or to bubbles which on ye water wa- be dim. Wilt thou be thus abused still, seeing that she will right thee neuer if thou canst not ore come her ter swim. will thy loue will be thus frutles euer. BASSVS. CAn she excuse excuse my wrongs with are those cleer fiers cleer fiers which vanish vertues cloak in all I call her good when she prooues into smoake must I praise ye leaues where no fruit vnkind, no no where shaddowes do for bodies I find, Cold loue is like to words written on stand thou maist be abusd if thy sight bee dimme. sand, or to bubbles which on the water swimme. Wilt thou be thus abused still, seeing that she will right thee neuer if thou canst not ore come her will thy loue wil be thus fruitles euer. TENOR. CAn shee excuse my wrongs, with vertues cloake, shall I call her good when she proues vnkind. are those cleer fiers which va -nish into smoake, must I praise the leaues where no fruit I find. No no no where shadows do for bodies for bodies stand thou maist be abusd if thy sight thy sight Cold loue loue is like to words to wordes written on sand or to bubbles which on the water wa- be dim. Wilt thou be thus abused still, seeeing that she will right thee ne- uer if thou canst not ore ter swim. come her will thy loue, will be thus fruitles euer.
VI. CANTVS. NNow O now I needs must part, parting though I obsent while I liue I needs must loue, loue liues not when hope is mourne, absence can no ioye em- part, ioye once fled can not re -turne. gone, now at last despayre doth proue, loue de- ui- ded lo- ueth none: Sad dis- paire doth driue me hence, this dispaire vnkindnes sends. If that parting be of- fence, it is she which then of- fendes. Deare when I from thee am gone, Gone are all my ioyes at once, I loued thee and thee alone In whose loue I ioyed once: And although your sight I leaue, Sight wherein my ioyes doo lye Till that death do sence bereaue, Neuer shall affection dye. Deare if I doe not returne, Loue and I shall die togither, For my absence neuer mourne Whom you might haue ioyed euer: Part we must though now I dye, Die I doe to part with you, Him despayre doth cause to lie, Who both liued and dieth true.
ALTVS. NOw O now I needs must part, parting though I absent mourne, Absence can no ioy em- While I liue I needs must loue, loue liues not when hope is gone, now at last despaire doth part, ioy once fled can not returne. Sad dispaire doth driue me hence, this dispaire vnkindnes sends. If proue, loue de- ui- ded loueth none. that parting be offence it is she which then offends. BASSVS. NOw O now I needes must part, parting While I liue I needes must loue, loue liues though I absence mourne, absence can no ioy em- not when hope is gone, now at last despaire doth part, ioy once fled cannot returne. Sad dispaire proue, loue de- ui-ded loueth none. doth driue me hence, me hence, this dispaire vnkind- nes sends. If that parting be offence it is she which then offendes. TENOR. NOw O now I needs must part, parting though I absent mourne, absence can no ioy em- While I liue I needs must loue, loue liues not when hope is gone, now at last dispaire doth part, ioy once fled can not return. Sad dispaire doth driue me hence, this dispaire dispaire vnkindnes proue, loue de-ui-ded loueth none. sends. If that parting be of- fence, it is she which then offends.
VII. CANTVS. DEare if you chāge ile neuer chuse againe, sweete if you shrinke Ile neuer thinke of loue, Fayre if you faile, ile iudge all beauty vaine, wise if to weake moe wits ile ne- uer proue. Deare, sweete, faire, wise, change shrinke nor be not weake, and on my faith, my faith shall ne- uer breake. Earth with her flowers shall sooner heau'n adorne, Heauen her bright stars through earths dim globe shall moue, Fire heate shall loose and frosts of flames be borne, Ayre made to shine as blacke as hell shall proue: Earth, heauen, fire, ayre, the world transform'd shall vew, E're I proue false to faith, or strange to you.
ALTVS. DEare if you change ile neuer chuse againe, sweet if you shrinke you shrinke ile neuer thinke of loue, faire if you faile, you faile ile iudge all bewtie vaine, wise if to weake to weake moe wits moe wits ile neuer proue, deare sweet. Deare, sweet, faire, wise, change, shrinke, nor be not weake, and on my faith, ij. my faith shall neuer breake. BASSVS. DEar if you change ile neuer chuse a- gaine, sweet if you shrinke, you shrinke ile ne- uer thinke of loue, faire if you faile ile iudge all bewty vaine, wise, if to weake moe wits ile neuer proue, Deare, sweet, faire, wise, ij. change, shrink nor be not weake, and on my faith, my faith shall neuer break. TENOR. DEare if you change ile neuer chuse againe, sweet if you shrink, you shrink ile neuer thinke of loue, faire if you faile ile iudge all beauty vaine, wise if to weake moe wits ile neuer proue moe wits, ile ne- uer proue, Deare, sweet, faire, wise, ii. change shrink nor bee not weake, and on my faith my faith shall ne- uer breake.
VIII. CANTVS. BVrst ij. forth my teares as-sist my forward griefe, And shew what paine im-perious loue prouokes: Kind tender lambes lament loues scant reliefe, and pine, since pensiue care my freedome yoaks. O pine to see me pine ij. my tender flocks. Sad pining care that neuer may haue peace, At beauties gate in hope of pitty knocks: But mercy sleeps while deepe disdaine encrease, And beautie hope in her faire boosome yoaks, O greiue to heare my griefe, my tender flocks. Like to the windes my sighes haue winged beene, Yet are my sighes and sutes repaide with mocks, I pleade, yet she repineth at my teene: O ruthles rigor harder the the rocks, That both the Shephard kis, & his poore flocks?
ALTVS. BVrst, burst forth my teares assist my forward greefe, And shewe what paine ij. imperious Loue prouoaks: ij. Kind tender lambes, la- ment ij. Loues scant re- liefe, And pine since pensiue care my fredom yokes: ij. O pine to see me pine, O pine to see me pine, to see me pine my tender flocks. O pine. BASSVS. BVrst forth: And shew what paine imperious Loue ii. prouoaks: Kind tender lambs lament Loues scant reliefe, and pine since pensiue care my fredom my freedō yoaks, O pine to see me pine, to see me pine my tender my tender flocks. TENOR. BVrst, ij. forth my teares asist, asist my forward greif, And shew what paine, paine, imperious Loue prouoaks: ij. Kind tender lambes lament ij. Loues scant reliefe, re- liefe. And pine since pensiue care, since pensiue care my free- dome yoakes, O pine to see me pine, to see me pine, O pine to see me pine my tender flocks.
IX. CANTVS. GO christall teares, like to the morning showers, & sweetly weepe in to thy Ladies brest, and as the deawes reuiue the dropping flowers, so let your drops of pittie be adrest: To quicken vp the thoughts of my de-sert, which sleeps to sound whilst I from her departe. Hast haplesse sighs and let your burning breath Dissolue the Ice of her indurate harte, Whose frosen rigor like forgetfull death, Feeles neuer any touch of my desarte: Yet sighs and teares to her I sacryfise, Both from a spotles hart and pacient eyes.
ALTVS. GO christall teares like to the morning showers, and sweetly weepe in to thy Ladies brest, & as the dewes reuiues the dropping flowers, so let your drops of pittie be addrest, to quicken vp the thoughts of my desert, which sleepes too sound whilst I from her, from her depart, from her depart. To quicken BASSVS. GO christall teares: And sweetlie weepe in to thy Ladyes brest, and as the deawes reuiue the dropping flowers, so let your drops of pittie be adrest, adrest: To quicken vp the thoughts of my desert, which sleeps too sound whilst I from her depart, from her departe. TENOR. GO christall teares like to the morning showers and sweetly weepe in to thy Ladyes brest, and ij. as the deawes reuiue the drooping flowers, so let your drops of pittie be adrest: to quicken vp the thoughts, the thoughts of my desert, which sleeps too sound, whilst I from her, from her, departe, ij. from her departe, to quicken.
X. CANTVS. THinkst thou then by thy fayning, sleepe with a proude Or with thy crastie closing, thy cruell eyes dis- daining, To driue me from thy sight, when sleepe yeelds more delight, such reposing, and while sleepe fayned is, may not I steale a kisse, thy harmles beauty gracing. quiet armes embracing. O that thy sleepe dissembled, Were to a trance resembled, Thy cruell eies deceiuing, Of liuely sence bereauing; Then should my loue requite Thy loues vnkind despite, While fury triumpht bouldly In beauties sweet disgrace: And liu'd in deepe embrace. Of her that lou'de so couldly. Should then my loue aspiring, Forbidden ioyes desiring: So farre exceede the duty That vertue owes to beauty? No, Loue seeke not thy blisse, Beyond a simple kisse, For such deceits are harmeles, Yet kisse a thousand fould, For kisses may be bould When louely sleepe is armlesse.
ALTVS. THinkst thou then by thy fai- ning sleepe with a proud disdaining, to driue Or with thy craftie clo- sing thy cru- elleies reposing, and while me from thy sight, when sleepe yeelds more delight, such harmlesse beautie gracing. sleepe fained is, may not I steale a kisse, thy qui-et armes embracing? BASSVS. THinkst thou then by thy faining, Or with thy crafty closing, sleepe with a proude disdaining, to driue thy cru- ell eyes reposing, and while me from thy sight, when sleep yelds more de- sleep fained is, may not I steale a light, such harmles beautie gracing. kisse, thy qui- et armes embracing. TENOR. THinkst thou then by thy faining, sleepe with a proud disdaining, to driue me from thy Or with thy craftie closing, thy cru- ell eyes reposing, & while sleepe fained sight, when sleepe yeelds more delight, such harmeles beauty gracing. is, may not I steale a kisse, thy qui- et armes embracing.
XI. CANTVS. COme away, come sweet loue, The goulden morning breakes All the earth, all the ayre Of loue and pleasure speakes, Teach thine armes then to embrace, And sweet ro- sie lips to kisse, And mixe our Eies were made for beauties grace, Vewing ru- ing Loue lōg pains, Procurd by soules in mutuall blisse. beauties rude dis-daine. Come awaie come sweet loue, The goulden morning wasts, While the son from his sphere, His fierie arrows casts: Making all the shadowes flie, Playing, staying in the groue, To entertaine the stealth of loue, Thither sweet loue let vs hie, Flying, dying, in desire, Wingd with sweet hopes and heau'nly fire. Come away, come sweet loue, Doe not in vaine adorne, Beauties grace that should rise, Like to the naked morne: Lillies on the riuers side, And faire Cyprian flowers new blowne, Desire no beauties but their owne, Ornament is nurce of pride, Pleasure, measure, loues delight, Hast then sweet loue our wished flight.
ALTVS. COme away, come sweet Loue, the goulden morning breakes. Teach thine armes then All the earth all the aire, of Loue and pleasure speakes. Eies were made for to embrace, And sweet ro- sie lips to kisse, And mixe our soules in mutuall blisse. beauties grace, Vew- ing ru- ing Loue long paines, Procurd by beauties rude disdaine. BASSVS. COme away, come sweete Loue the All the earth, all the ayre of goul- den morning breakes. Teach thine Loue and pleasure speakes. Eies were armes then to embrace, And sweet rosie made for beauties grace, Vewing ruing lips to kisse, And mixe our soules in Loue long pains, Procurd by beouties mutuall blisse. rude dis-daine. TENOR. COme awaie, come sweet loue, the goulden morning breakes. Teach thine armes then All the earth, all the aire, of loue and pleasure speaks. Eies were made for to embrace, And sweete rosie lips to kisse, And mixe our soules in mutuall blisse. beauties grace, Vew- ind ruing Loue lōg pains, Procurd by beauties rude disdaine.
XII. CANTVS. REst a while you cruell cares, be not more seuere thē loue beauty kils & beautie spares, & sweet smiles sad sighs re- moue: Laurae fayre queen, of my delight, Come grāt me loue in loues de- spite, and if I euer faile to honor thee▪ Let this heauen -ly sight I see, be as darke as hel to me. If I speake my words want waite, Am I mute, my hart doth breake, If I sigh she feares deceit, Sorrow then for me must speake: Cruel, vnkind, with fauour view, The wound that first was made by you: And if my torments fained be, Let this heauenly light I see, Be as darke as hell to me. Neuer houre of pleasing rest, Shall reuiue my dying ghost, Till my soule hath repossest, The sweet hope which loue hath lost: Laura redeeme the soule that dies, By fury of thy murdering eies, And if it proues vnkind to thee, Let this heauenly light I see, Be as darke as hell to me.
ALTVS. REst a while you cruell cares, be not more seuere then loue, beauty kils and beauty spares, and sweet smiles sad sighs re- moue, Laura faire queene of my de- light, come grant me loue in loues de-spite, and if I euer faile to honor thee, let this hea- uenly light I see, be as darke as hel to me. BASSVS. REst a while you cruell cares, be not more seuere thē loue, beauty kils & beauty spares, & sweet smiles sad sighs re- moue, Laura faire queen of my delight, come grant me loue in loues despite, and if I euer faile to honour thee, let this heau'nly light I see, be as darke as hell to me. TENOR. REst a while you cru- ell cares, be not more seuere then Loue, beauty kils and beauty spares, and sweete smiles sad sighes remoue, Laura faire queene of my delight, come grant me loue, in loues de-spite, and if I euer faile to honor thee, let this heau'nly light I see, be as darke as hell to me.
XIII. CANTVS. SLeep wayward thoughts, and rest you with my loue, Let not Touch not proud hands, lest you her an- ger moue, But pine my loue, be with my loue dis- easd. Thus wile she sleeps I sor-row for yon with my long-ings long dis-pleasd. her sake, So sleeps my loue, and yet my loue doth wake. But ô the fury of my restles feare, The hidden anguish of my flesh desires, The glories and the beauties that appeare, Between her browes neere Cupids closed fires Thus while she sleeps moues sighing for hir sake So sleepes my loue and yet my loue doth wake. My loue doth rage, and yet my loue doth rest, Feare in my loue, and yet my loue secure, Peace in my loue, and yet my loue opprest, Impatient yet of perfect temprature, Sleepe dainty loue, while I sigh for thy sake, So sleepes my loue, and yet my loue doth wake.
ALTVS. SLeepe waiward thoughts, and rest you with my loue, let not my loue be with my Touch not proud handes, least you her an- ger moue, but pine you with my longing loue diseasd, Thus while she sleepes I sorrow for her sake, so sleeps my loue, ij. and yet long displeasd, and yet my loue doth wake. BASSVS. SLeepe waiward thoughts and rest Touch not proud handes least you you with my loue, let not my loue be with my her anger moue, but pine you with my longings loue diseasd, Thus while she sleepes I sorrow for long displeasd, her sake, so sleepes my loue, so sleepes my loue, and yet my loue doth wake. TENOR. SLeep waiward thoughts, and rest you with my loue, let not my loue be with my loue Touch not proud handes, least you her an-ger moue, But pine you with my longings long diseasd, Thus while she sleeps I sorrow for her sake, so sleeps my loue, ij. and yet ij. displeasd, my loue doth wake.
XIIII. CANTVS. AL ye whō loue or fortune hath betraide, All ye that dreame of blisse but liue in greif, Al ye whose hopes are e-uer- more delaid, Al ye whose sighes ij. or sicknes wants releife: Lend eares and teares to me most haples man, that sings my sorrewes ij. like the dying Swanne. Care that consumes the heart with inward paine, Paine that presents sad care in outward vew, Both tyrant like enforce me to complaine, But still in vaine, for none my plaints will rue, Teares, sighes, and ceaseles cries alone I spend, My woe wants comfort, and my sorrow end.
ALTVS. ALl ye whom loue or fortune hath betraide, betraide, all yee that dream of blisse but liue in griefe, are euermore delaid, All ye whose sighes, ij. or sicknesse wants re-liefe, lend eares and teares, ij. to me most haples man, that sings my sorrowes sorrowes, my sorrowes, like the dying Swan. BASSVS. ALl ye whō loue or fortune hath betraide, but liue in griefe, ye whose hopes are euermore delaid, all ye whose sighs whose sighs or sicknes wants relief, lend ears and teares, ij. ij. to me, ij. most haples man, that sings my sorrows, my sorrowes like the dying Swan. TENOR. ALl ye whom loue or fortune hath betraide, All ye that dream of blisse but liue in griefe, in grief, all ye whose hopes are eu-ermore, euermore delaid, delaid, all ye whose sighes or sicknesse wants reliefe, lend eares and teares to me, most haples man, most haples man that sings my sorrowes sorrowes, my sorrowes, like the dying swanne.
XV. CANTVS. WIlt thou vnkind thus reaue me of my harte, ii. and so leaue me: ii. Farewell ii. but yet or ere I part (O cruell) kisse me sweete ii. sweete my Iewell. 2 Hope by disdayne growes chereles feare doth loue, loue doth feare, beautie peareles. Farewell. 3 If no delayes can moue thee, life shall dye, death shall liue stil to loue thee. Farewell. 4 Yet be thou mindfull euer, heate from fire, fire from heat none can seuer, Farewell. 5 True loue cannot be chainged, though delight from desert be estranged. Farewell.
ALTVS. WIlt thou vnkind vnkind thus reaue me of my heart, ii: and so leaue me, farwell, ii. but yet or ere I part (ô cruell) kisse me sweet, ii. sweet my Iewel. BASSVS. WIlt thou vnkind thus reaue me of my heart, ii. and so leaue me, farewell, ii. but yet or ere I part (ô cruel) kisse me, ii. sweet my Iewel. TENOR. WIlt thou vnkind thus reaue me of my heart, ij. ij. and so leaue me, ij. farewell, ij. but yet or ere I part (ô cruell) kisse me, ii. sweet my Iewell.
XVI. CANTVS. WOuld my conceit yt first enforst my woe, or els mine eyes which still ye same encrease, might be extinct, to end my sorrowes so which nowe are such as no- thing can release: Whose life is death, whose sweet each change of sowre and eke whose hell re-nu-eth euery houre. Each houre amidst the deepe of hell I frie, Each houre I wast and wither where I sit, But that sweet houre wherein I wish to die, My hope alas may not enioy it yet, Whose hope is such bereaued, of the blisse, Which vnto all saue me allotted is. To all saue me is free to liue or die, To all saue me remaineth hap or hope, But all perforce, I must abandon I, Sith Fortune still directs my hap a slope, Wherefore to neither hap nor hope I trust, But to my thralles I yeeld, for so I must.
ALTVS. WOuld my conceit, that first enforst my woe, or else mine eies which still the same encrease, still the same encrease, might be extinct to ende my sor- rowes, so which now are such, are such as nothing can release, whose life is death, whose sweet each change of sowre, and eke whose hel renueth euery houre. BASSVS. AOuld my conceit that first enforst my woe, or else mine eies which stil the same encrease, which now are such as nothing nothing can release, whose life is death and eke whose hell, whose hell renueth euerie houre. TENOR. WOuld my conceit that first enforst my woe, or else the same which stil which stil the same encrease, the same encrease, might be extinct extinct to end my sorrows, so which now are such as nothing can re- lease, whose life is death, ij. death, whose sweet each change each change of sowre, and eke whose hell, whose hell renu-eth eue- ry houre.
XVII. CANTVS. COme againe: sweet loue doth now enuite, thy gra- ces that refraine, to do me due de- light, to see, to heare, to touch, to kisse, to die, with thee againe in sweetest simpha- thy. 2 Come againe that I may cease to mourne, Through thy vnkind disdaine, For now left and forlorne: I sit, I sigh, I weepe, I faind, I die, In deadly paine, and endles miserie. 1 All the day the sun that lends me shine, By frownes do cause me pine, And feeds me with delay: Her smiles, my springs, that makes my ioies to grow, Her frowes the winters of my woe: 2 All the night, my sleepes are full of dreames, My eies are full of streames, My hart takes no delight: To see the fruits and ioies that some do find, And marke the stormes are me asignd, 3 Out alas, my faith is euer true, Yet will she neuer rue, Nor yeeld me any grace: Her eies of fire, her hart of flint is made, Whom teares nor truth may once inuade. 4 Gentle loue draw forth thy wounding dart, Thou canst not pearce her hart, For I that do approue: By sighs and teaes more hote then arethy shafts: Did tempt while she for triumps laughs▪
ALTVS. COme againe: sweet loue doth now inuite, thy gra- ces that refraine, to doe me due delight, to see, to heare, to touch, to kisse, to die, ij. with thee againe in sweetest simphathy. BASSVS. COme againe: sweet loue doth now enuite, thy graces that refraine, to do me due delight, to see, to heare, to touch, to kisse to die, ij. with thee againe in sweetest simpathie. TENOR. COme againe, sweet loue doth now enuite, thy graces that refraine, to do me due delight to see, to heare, to touch, to kisse, to die, ij. with thee againe, ij. in sweetest simpathie:
XVIII. CANTVS. HIs golden locks time hath to siluer turnde, O time too swift, O swift-nes neuer ceasing, his youth gainst time & age hath euer spurnd, but spurnd in vaine, youth waneth by en-creasing: Beautie, strength, youth are flowers but fading seene, Duty, Faith, Loue are roots and euer greene. His helmet now shall make a hiue for bees, And louers sonets turne to holy psalmes: A man at armes must now serue on his knees, And feed on prayers which are ages almes, But though from court to cotage he departe His saint is sure of his vnspotted hart. And when he saddest sits in homely Cell, Hele teach his swaines this Caroll for a songe, Blest be the harts that wish my soueraigne well, Curst be the soule that thinke her any wrong: Goddes allow this aged man his right, To be your beadsman now yt was your knight.
ALTVS. HIs golden locks time hath to siluer to sil-uer turnd, O time to swift, O swift- nes ne-uer ceasing, his youth gainst time and age hath e-uer spurnd, but spurnd, in vaine, youth waineth, waineth, by encreasing, bewry, strength, youth, are flowers but fading seene, duty, ij faith, loue, are roots and euer greene. BASSVS. HIs golden locks time hath to sil-uer turnd, O time to swift, O swiftnes ne- uer ceasing, his youth gainst time and age hath euer spurnd, but spurnd in vaine, youth waineth by increasing: bewty, strength, youth are flowers but fading, seene, deuty, faith loue are roots and euer greene. TENOR. HIs golden locks time hath to siluer turnd, O, O time to swift, ij. O swift- nes neuer ceasing, his youth gainst time and age hath euer spurnd, but spurnd in vaine, youth waineth by encreasing, bewty strength youth are flowers, but fading seene, deuty, faith, loue are roots and e-uer greene.
XIX. CANTVS. AWake sweet loue thou art re-turnd, my hart which lōg in Let loue which ne-uer ab-sent dies, now liue for e-uer absence mournd liues nowe in per-fect ioy, only her selfe hath see-med in her eyes when came my first a-noy, dispayer did make me wish to faire, she only I could loue, she one-ly draue me to dispaire when she vnkind did proue. die that I my ioyes migyt end, she one-ly which did make me flie my state may now a-mend. If she esteeme thee now ought worth, She will not grieue thy loue henceforth, Which so dispaire hath proued, Dispaire hath proued now in me, That loue will not vnconstant be, Though long in vaine I loued. If she at last reward thy loue. And all thy harmes repaire, Thy happinesse will sweeter proue, Raisde vp from deepe dispaire. And if that now thou welcome be, When thou with her dost meete, She al this while but plaide with thee: To make thy ioies more sweet.
ALTVS. AWake sweet loue thou art returnd, my hart which long in absence mournd, Let loue which ne-uer absent dies, now liue for e-uer in her eies, liues now, liues now in perfect ioy, Only her selfe, her selfe hath seemed faire, she onely I could whence came, whēce cāe my first anoy, Dispaire did make, did make me wish to die, that I my ioyes might loue, I could loue, she onely draue me to dispaire when she vnkind did proue. end, ioies might end, she only which did mak me flie, my state may now amēd, BASSVS. AWake sweet loue thou art returnd, Let loue which ne-uer absent dies, my hart which long in absence mournd, liues now liue for e-uer in her eies, whence nowe in perfect ioy, Only her selfe hath came my first a-noy, Dispaire did make me seemed faire, she onely I could loue, she onely wish to die, that I my ioies might end, she only draue me to dispaire, when shee vnkind did which did make me flie, my state may now a- proue. mend. TENOR. AWake sweet loue thou art returnd, my hart which long in absence mournd, liues Let loue which ne-uer absent dies, now liue for e-uer in her eyes, whence now in perfect ioy, Only her selfe, her selfe hath seemed faire, she only I could loue, she only came my first anoy, Dispaire did make, did make me wish to die, that I my ioies might end, she only droue me to dispaire when she vnkind did proue. which did make me flie, my state may now amend.
XX. CANTVS. COme heauy sleepe, ye Image of true death: And close vp these my weary weeping eyes, whose spring of tears doth stop my vitall breath, And tears my hart with sorrows sight swoln crys. Com & posses my tired thoghts, worne soule, that liuing dies, ij. ij. till thou one me bestoule. Come shadow of my end: and shape of rest, Alied to death, child to this black fast night, Come thou and charme these rebels in my brest, Whose waking fancies doth my mind affright. O come sweet sleepe, come or I did for euer, Come ere my last sleepe, coms or come neuer.
ALTVS. COme heauy sleepe, the image of true death, and close vp these my weary weary weeping eies, whose spring of teares doth stop my vitall breath, and tears my hart with sorrows sigh swoln cries, Come and possesse my tired thoughts, worne soule that liuing dies, ij. till thou one me one me bestoule, BASSVS. COme heauy sleepe, the image of true death, and cloase vp these my weary wee- ping eies, whose spring of teares doth stop my vitall breath, and tears, ij. my hart with sorrows sigh swoln cries, Come and pos- sesse my tired thoghts worn soule, yt liuing dies, ij. till thou, ij on me, on me bestoule. TENOR. COme heauy sleepe, heauy sleepe, the image of true death, and cloase vp these, my weary, ij. weeping eies, whose spring of teares doth stop my vitall breath, & tears my hart with sorrows, sigh swolne cries, come and possesse my tyred thoughts worne soule, that liuing dies ii. till thou one me one me bestoule.
XXI. CANTVS. AWay with these selfe louing lads, whom Cupids arrowe neuer glads: A-way poore soules that sigh & weepe in loue of them that lie & sleepe, For Cupid is a medooe god, & forceth none to kisse the rod. 2 God Cupids shaft like destinie, Doth either good or ill decree: Desert is borne out of his bow, Reward vpon his feet doth go, What fooles are they that haue not knowne That loue likes no lawes but his owne? 3 My song they be of Cyntihas praise, I weare herrings on hollidaies, On euery tree I write her name, And euery day I reade the same: Where honor, Cupids riuall is, There miracles are seene of his▪ 4 If Cinthia craue her ring of me, I blot her name out of the tree, If doubt do darken things held deere, Then well fare nothing once a yeere: For many run, but one must win, Fooles only hedge the Cuckoo in. 5 The worth that worthinesse should moue Is loue, which is the bowe of loue, And loue as well the foster can, As can the mighty Noble-man: Sweet Saint, tis true you worthie be, Yet without loue nought worth to me.
ALTVS. AWay with these selfe louing lads, whom Cupids arrow neuer glads, away poore soules that sigh and weepe in loue of those that lye and sleepe, for Cupid is a medow God, and forceth none to kisse the rod. BASSVS. AWay with these selfe louing lads whom Cupids arrow neuer glads, Away poore soules that sigh and weepe in loue of those that lye and sleepe, for Cupid is a medow God, and forceth none to kisse the rod. TENOR. AWaie with these selfe louing lads, whom Cupids arrow neuer glads A- way poore soules that sigh and weepe in loue, of those that lye and sleepe, for Cupid is a me- dow god, and forceth none to kisse the rod.
My Lord Chamberlaine his galliard. CANTVS. BASSVS.
