7023 99845444 10344
This was for youth, Strength, Mirth, and wit that Time Most count their golden Age; but t'was not thine. Thine was thy later yeares, so much refind From youths Drosse, Mirth, & wit; as thy pure mind Thought (like the Angels) nothing but the Praise Of thy Creator, in those last, best Dayes. Witnes this Booke, (thy Embleme) which begins With Love; but endes, with Sighes, & Teares for sin̄s. Will: Marshall. sculpsit. IZ: WA:
The First Anniuersarie. AN ANATOMIE of the World. Wherein, BY OCCASION OF the vntimely death of Mistris ELIZABETH DRVRY, the frailtie and the decay of this whole World is represented. LONDON, Printed by M. Bradwood for S. Macham, and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the Bull-head. 1612.
TO THE PRAISE of the Dead, and the ANATOMY. WEll dy'de the World, that we might liue to see This World of wit, in his Ana∣tomee: No euill wants his good: so wilder heyres; Bedew their fathers Toombes, with forced teares, Whose state requites their losse: whiles thus we gaine
Well may we walke in blacks, but not complaine. Yet how can I consent the world is dead While this Muse liues? which in his spirits stead Seemes to informe a world: and bids it bee, In spight of losse, or fraile mortali∣tee? And thou the subiect of this wel∣borne thought, Thrise noble maid; couldst not haue found nor sought A fitter time to yeeld to thy sad Fate, Then whiles this spirit liues; that can relate
Thy worth so well to our last ne∣phews eyne, That they shall wonder both at his, and thine: Admired match! where striues in mutuall grace The cunning Pencill, and the ceom∣ly face: A taske, which thy faire goodnesse made too much For the bold pride of vulgar pens to tuch; Enough is vs to praise them that praise thee, And say that but enough those prai∣ses bee, Which had'st thou liu'd, had hid their fearefull head
From th'angry checkings of thy mo∣destred: Death bars reward and shame: when enuy's gone, And gaine; 'tis safe to giue the dead their owne. As then the wise Egyptians wont to lay More on their Tombes, then houses: these of clay, But those of brasse, or marble were; so wee Giue more vnto thy Ghost, then vnto thee. Yet what we giue to thee, thou gauest to vs, And maiest but thanke thy selfe, for being thus:
Yet what thou gau'st, and wert, O happy maid, Thy grace profest all due, were'tis repayd. So these high songs that to thee sui∣ted bine, Serue but to sound thy makers praise, in thine, Which thy deare soule as sweetly sings to him Amid the Quire of Saints and Se∣raphim, As any Angels tongue can sing of thee; The subiects differ, thothe skill agree: For as by infant-yeeres men iudge of age,
Thy early loue, thy vertues, did presage What an hie part thou bear'st in those best songs Whereto no burden, nor no end be∣longs. Sing on thou Virgin soule, whose lossefull gaine Thy loue-sicke Parents haue be∣wayl'd in vaine; Neuer may thy name be in our songs forgot Till we shall sing thy ditty, and thy note.
The First Anniuersary. AN ANATOMIE of the World. WHen that rich soule which to her heauen is gone,The entrie into the worke. Whom all they celebrate, who know they haue one, (For who is sure he hath a soule, vnlesse It see, and Iudge, and follow wor∣thinesse, And by Deedes praise it? He who doth not this,
May lodge an In-mate soule, but tis not his.) When that Queene ended here her progresse time. And, as t' her standing house, to heauen did clymbe, Where, loth to make the Saints attend her long, Shee's now a part both of the Quire, and Song. This, world, in that great earth∣quake languished; For in a common Bath of teares it bled, Which drew the strongest vitall spirits out: But succour'd then with a perplex∣ed doubt, Whether the world did loose or gaine in this, (Because since now no other way there is
But goodnesse, to see her, whom all would see, All must endeuour to be good as shee.) This great consumption to a feuer turn'd, And so the world had fits; it ioy'd, it mournd, And, as men thinke, that Agues physicke are, And th' Ague being spent, giue ouer care, So thou, sicke world, mistak'st thy selfe to bee Well, when alas, thou'rt in a Le∣targee. Her death did wound, and tame thee than, and than Thou mightst haue better spar'd the Sunne, or Man; That wound was deepe, but'tis more misery,
That thou hast lost thy sense and memory. T'was heauy then to heare thy voyce of mone, But this is worse, that thou art speechlesse growne. Thou hast forgot thy name, thou hadst; thou wast Nothing but she, and her thou hast o'repast. For as a child kept from the Fount, vntill A Prince, expected long, come to fulfill The Ceremonies, thou vnnam'd hadst laid, Had not her comming, thee her Palace made: Her name defin'd thee, gaue thee forme and frame, And thou forgetst to celebrate thy name.
Some moneths she hath beene dead (but being dead, Measures of times are all determi∣ned) But long shee'ath beene away, long, long, yet none Offers to tell vs who it is that's gone. But as in states doubtfull of future heyres, When sickenesse without remedy, empayres The present Prince, they're loth it should be said, The Prince doth languish, or the Prince is dead: So mankind feeling now a generall thaw, A strong example gone equall to law, The Cyment which did faithfully compact
And glue all vertues, now resolu'd, and slack'd, Thought it some blasphemy to say sh'was dead; Or that our weaknesse was disco∣uered In that confession; therefore spoke no more Then tongues, the soule being gone, the losse deplore. But though it be too late to suc∣cour thee, Sicke world, yea dead, yea putrifi∣ed, since shee Thy'ntrinsique Balme, and thy pre∣seruatiue, Can neuer be renew'd, thou neuer liue, I (since no man can make thee liue) will trie, What we may gaine by thy Ana∣tomy.
Her death hath taught vs dearely, that thou art Corrupt and mortall in thy purest part. Let no man say, the world it selfe being dead, 'Tis labour lost to haue disco∣uered. The worlds infirmities, since there is none Aliue to study this dissecti∣one;What life the world hath . For there's a kind of world remai∣ning still, Though shee which did in animate and fill The world, be gone, yet in this last long night, Her Ghost doth walke; that is, a glimmerig light, A faint weake loue of vertue and of good
Reflects from her, on them which vnderstood Her worth; And though she haue shut in all day, The twi-light of her memory doth stay; Which, from the carcasse of the old world, free, Creates a new world; and new creatures bee Produc'd: The matter and the stuffe of this, Her vertue, and the forme our practise is. And though to be thus Elemented, arme These Creatures, from hom-borne intrinsique harme, (For all assum'd vnto this Dig∣nitee, So many weedlesse Paradises bee,
Which of themselues produce no venemous sinne, Except some forraine Serpent bring it in) Yet, because outward stormes the strongest breake, And strength it selfe by confidence growes weake, This new world may be safer, be∣ing told The dangers and diseases of the old:The sick∣nesses of the world. For with due temper men do then forgoe, Or couet things, when they their true worth know. There is no health; Phisitians say that weeImpossibility of health. At best, enioy, but a neutra∣litee. And can there be worse sicknesse, then to know
That we are neuer well, nor can be so? We are borne ruinous: poore mo∣thers crie, That children come not right, nor orderly, Except they headlong come and fall vpon An ominous precipita∣tion. How witty's ruine? how impor∣tunate Vpon mankinde? It labour'd to frustrate Euen Gods purpose; and made woman, sent For mans reliefe, cause of his lan∣guishment. They were to good ends, and they are so still, But accessory, and principall in ill.
For that first mariage was our fu∣nerall: One woman at one blow, then kill'd vs all, And singly, one by one, they kill vs now. We doe delightfully our selues al∣low To that consumption; and pro∣fusely blinde, We kill our selues, to propagate, our kinde. And yet we doe not that; we are not men: There is not now that mankinde, which was then When as the Sunne, and man, did seeme to striue, (Ioynt tenants of the world) who should suruie.Shortnesse of life. When Stag, and Rauen, and the long-liu'd tree.
Compar'd withman, dy'de in mi∣noritee. When, if a slow-pac'd starre had stolne away From the obseruers marking, he might stay Two or three hundred yeeres to see't againe, And then make vp his obseruation plaine; When, as the age was long, the the sise was great: Mans grouth confess'd, and recom∣penc'd the meat: So spacious and large, that euery soule Did a faire Kingdome, and large Realme controule: And when the very stature thus erect, Did that soule a good way to∣wards Heauen direct.
Where is this mankind now? who liues to age, Fit to be made Methusalem his page? Alas, we scarse liue long enough to trie; Whether a true made clocke run right, or lie. Old Grandsires talke of yester∣day with sorrow, And for our children we reserue to morrow. So short is life, that euery peasant striues, In a torne house, or field, to haue three liues, And as in lasting, so in length is man. Contracted to an inch, who was a span,Smalnesse of stature. For had a man at first, in Forrests stray'd,
Or shipwrack'd in the Sea, one would haue laid A wager that an Elephant, or Whale That met him, would not hastily assaile A thing so equal to him: now alas. The Fayries, and the Pigmies well may passe As credible; mankind decayes so soone, We're searse our Fathers shadowes cast at noone. Onely death addes t'our length: nor are we growne In stature to be men, till we are none. But this were light, did our lesse volume hold All the old Text; or had we chang'd to gold
Their siluer; or dispos'd into lesse glas, Spirits of vertue, which then scat∣tred was. But 'tis not so: w'are not retir'd, but dampt? And as our bodies, so our mindes are cramp't: 'Tis shrinking, not close-weaning, that hath thus, In minde and body both bedwarfed vs. We seeme ambitious, Gods whole worke t'vndoe; Of nothing he made vs, and we striue too, To bring our selues to nothing backe; and we Do what we can, to do't so soone as hee. With new diseases on our selues we warre,
And with new phisicke, a worse Engin farre. Thus man, this worlds Vice-Empe∣ror, in whom All faculties, all graces are at home; And if in other Creatures they ap∣peare, They're but mans ministers, and Legats there, To worke on their rebellions, and reduce Them to Ciuility, and to mans vse. This man, whom God did wooe, and loth t'attend Till man came vp, did downe to man descend, This man, so great, that all that is, is his, Oh what a trifle, and poore thing he is?
If man were any thing, he's no∣thing now: Helpe, or at least some time to wast, allow T'his other wants, yet when he did depart With her whom we lament, he lost his heart. She, of whom th'Ancients seem'd to prophesie, When they call'd vertues by the name of shee, She in whom vertue was so much refin'd, That for Allay vnto so pure a minde Shee tooke the weaker Sex, she that could driue The poysonous tincture, and the stayne of Eue, Out of her thoughts, and deeds; and purifie
All, by a true religious Alchi∣my; Shee, shee is dead; shee's dead: when thou knowest this, Thou knowest how poore a trifling thing man is. And learn'st thus much by our Anatomee, The heart being perish'd, no part can be free. And that except thou feed (not banquet) on The supernaturall food, Reli∣gion Thy better Grouth growes withe∣red, and scant; Be more than man, or thou'rt lesse then an Ant. Then, as mankinde, so is the worlds whole frame Quite out of ioynt, almost created lame:
For, before God had made vp all the rest, Corruption entred, and deprau'd the best: It seis'd the Angels, and then first of all The world did in her Cradle take a fall, And turn'd her brains, and tooke a generall maime Wronging each ioynt of th'vniuer∣sall frame. The noblest part, man, felt it first; and than Both beasts and plants, curst in the curse of man.Decay of na∣ture in other parts. So did the world from the first houre decay, That euening was beginning of the day, And now the Springs and Som∣mers which we see,
Like sonnes of women after fifty bee. And new Philosophy cals all in doubt, The Element of fire is quite put out; The Sunne is lost, and th'earth, and no mans wit Can wel direct him where to looke for it. And freely men confesse that this world's spent, When in the Planets, and the Fir∣mament They seeke so many new; they see that this Is crumbled out againe to his Atomis. 'Tis all in pieces, all cohaerence gone; All iust supply, and all Rela∣tion:
Prince, Subiect, Father, Sonne, are things forgot, For euery man alone thinkes he hath got To be a Phoenix, and that then can bee None of that kinde, of which he is, but hee. This is the worlds condition now, and now She that should all parts to reuni∣on bow, She that had all Magnetique force alone, To draw, and fasten sundred parts in one; She whom wise nature had inuen∣ted then When she obseru'd that every sort of men Did in their voyage in this worlds Sea stray,
And needed a new compasse fo their way; Shee that was best, and first origi∣nall Of all faire copies; and the generall Steward to Fate; shee whose rich eyes, and brest: Guilt the West Indies, and per∣fum'd the East; Whose hauing breath'd in this world, did bestow Spice on those Isles, and bad them still smell so, And that rich Indie which doth gold interre, Is but as single money, coyn'd from her: She to whom this world must it selfe refer, As Suburbs, or the Microcosme of her,
Shee, shee is dead; shee's dead: when thou knowest this, Thou knowst how lame a cripple this world is. And learnst thus much by our Anatomy, That this worlds generall sickenes doth not lie In any humour, or one certaine part; But as thou sawest it rotten at the heart, Thou seest a Hectique feuer hath got hold Of the whole substance, not to be contrould. And that thou hast but one way, not t'admit The worlds infection, to be none of it. For the worlds subtilst immaterial parts
Feele this consuming wound, and ages darts. For the worlds beauty is decayd, or gone, Disformity of parts.Beauty, that's colour, and propor∣tion. We thinke the heauens enioy their Sphericall Their round proportion embracing all. But yet their various and perplexed course, Obseru'd in diuers ages doth en∣force Men to finde out so many Eccen∣trique parts, Such diuers downe-right lines, such ouerthwarts, As disproportion that pure forme. It teares The Firmament in eight and forty sheeres,
And in these constillations then arise New starres, and old doe vanish from our eyes: As though heau'n suffred earth∣quakes, peace or war, When new Towers rise, and old demolish'd are. They haue empayld within a Zo∣diake The free-borne Sunne, and keepe twelue signes awake To watch his steps; the Goat and Crabbe controule, And fright him backe, who els to eyther Pole, (Did not these Tropiques fetter him) might runne: For his course is not round; nor can the Sunne Perfit a Circle, or maintaine his way
One inche direct; but where he rose to day He comes no more, but with a cousening line, Steales by that point, and so is Ser∣pentine: And seeming weary with his reele∣ing thus, He meanes to sleepe, being now falne nearer vs. So, of the starres which boast that they doe runne In Circle still, none ends where he begunne. All their proportion's lame, it sinks, it swels. For of Meridians, and Paral∣lels, Man hath weau'd out a net, and this net throwne Vpon the Heauens, and now they are his owne.
Loth to goe vp the hill, or labour thus To go to heauen, we make heauen come to vs. We spur, we raigne the stars, and in their race They're diuersly content t'obey our peace, But keepes the earth her round proportion still? Doth not a Tenarif, or higher Hill Rise so high like a Rocke, that one might thinke The floating Moone would ship∣wracke there, and sinke? Seas are so deepe, that Whales be∣ing strooke to day, Perchance to morrow, scarse at middle way Of their wish'd iourneys end, the bottom, dye.
And men, to sound depths, so much line vntie, As one might iustly thinke, that there would rise At end thereof, one of th' Anti∣podies: If vnder all, a Vault infernall be, (Which sure is spacious, except that we Inuent another torment, that there must Millions into a strait hot roome be thrust) Then solidnesse, and roundnesse haue no place. Are these but warts, and pock∣holes in the face Of th'earth? Thinke so: But yet confesse, in this The worlds proportion disfigured is,
That those two legges whereon it doth rely,Disorder in the world. Reward and punishment are bent awry. And, Oh, it can no more be questi∣oned, That beauties best, proportion, is dead, Since euen griefe itselfe, which now alone Is left vs, is without propor∣tion. Shee by whose lines proportion should bee Examin'd, measure of all Symme∣tree, Whom had that Ancient seene, who thought soules made Of Harmony, he would at next haue said That Harmony was shee, and thence infer,
That soules were but Resultances from her, And did from her into our bodies go, As to our eyes, the formes from obiects flow: Shee, who if those great Douctors truely said That th'Arke to mans proportions was made, Had beene a type for that, as that might be A type of her in this, that con∣trary Both Elements, and Passions liu'd at peace In her, who caus'd all Ciuill war to cease. Shee, after whom, what forme soe're we see, Is discord, and rude incongrui∣tee,
Shee, shee is dead, shee's dead; when thou knowest this, Thou knowst how vgly a monster this world is: And learnst thus much by our Anatomee, That here is nothing to enamor thee: And that, not onely faults in in∣ward parts, Corruptions in our braines, or in our harts. Poysoning the fountaines, whence our actions spring, Endanger vs: but that if euery thing Be not done fitly'nd in propor∣tion, To satisfie wise, and good lookers on, (Since most men be such as most thinke they bee)
They're lothsome too, by this De∣formitee. For good, and well, must in our actions meete; Wicked is not much worse then indiscreet. But beauties other second Ele∣ment, Colour, and lustre now, is as neere spent. And had the world his iust propor∣tion, Were it a ring still, yet the stone is gone. As a compassionate Turcoyse which doth tell By looking pale, the wearer is not well, As gold fals sicke being stung with Mercury, All the worlds parts of such com∣plexion bee.
When nature was most busie, the first weeke, Swadling the new-borne earth, God seemd to like, That she should sport herselfe sometimes, and play, To mingle, and vary colours euery day. And then, as though she could not make inow, Himselfe his various Rainbow did allow, Sight is the noblest sense of any one, Yet sight hath onely colour to feed on, And colour is decayd: summers robe growes Duskie, and like an oft dyed gar∣ment showes. Our blushing redde, which vs'd in cheekes to spred,
Is inward sunke, and onely our soules are redde. Perchance the world might haue recouered, If she whom we lament had not beene dead: But shee, in whom all white, and red, and blew (Beauties ingredients) voluntary grew, As in an vnuext Paradise; from whom Did all things verdure, and their lustre come, Whose composition was miracu∣lous, Being all colour, all Diapha∣nous, (For Ayre, and Fire but thicke grosse bodies were, And liueliest stones but drowsie, and pale to her,)
Shee, shee, is dead; shee's dead: when thou knowst this, Thou knowest how wan a Ghost this our world is: And learnst thus much by our Anatomee, That it should more affright, then pleasure thee. And that, since all faire color then did sinke, Tis now but wicked vanity to thinke, To colour vitious deeds with good pretence,Weaknesse in the want of corres∣pondence of heauen and earth Or with bought colors to illude mens sense. Nor in ought more this worlds de∣cay appeares, Then that her influence the heau'n forbeares, Or that the Elements doe not feele this,
The father, or the mother barren is. The clouds conceiue not raine, or doe not powre In the due birth-time, downe the balmy showre. Th' Ayre doth not motherly sit on the earth, To hatch her seasons, and giue all things birth. Spring-times were common cra∣dles, but are toombes; And false-conceptions fill the ge∣nerall wombs. Th' Ayre showes such Meteors, as none can see, Not onely what they meane, but what they bee. Earth such new wormes, as would haue troubled much, Th' Egyptian Mages to haue made more such.
What Artist now dares boast that he can bring Heauen hither, or constellate any thing, So as the influence of those starres may bee Imprisoned in an Hearbe, or Charme, or Tree, And doe by touch, all which those starres could doe? The art is lost, and correspondence too. For heauen giues little, and the earth takes lesse, And man least knowes their trade, and purposes. If this commerce twixt heauen and earth were not Embarr'd, and all this trafique quite forgot, Shee, for whose losse we haue la∣mented thus,
Would worke more fully' and pow'rfully on vs. Since herbes, and roots by dying, lose not all, But they, yea Ashes too, are me∣dicinall, Death could not quench her ver∣tue so, but that It would be (if not follow'd) won∣dred at: And all the world would be one dying Swan, To sing her funerall praise, and va∣nish than. But as some Serpents poison hurt∣eth not, Except it be from the liue Serpent shot, So doth her vertue need her here, to fit That vnto vs; she working more then it.
But she, in whom, to such matu∣rity, Vertue was growne, past growth, that it must die, She from whose influence all Im∣pression came, But, by Receiuers impotencies, lame, Who, though she could not tran∣substantiate All states to gold, yet guilded eue∣ry state, So that some Princes haue some temperance; Some Counsaylors some purpose to aduance The common profite; and some people haue Some stay, no more then Kings should giue, to craue; Some women haue some tacitur∣nity,
Some Nunneries, some graines of chastity. She that did thus much, and much more could doe, But that our age was Iron, and ru∣sty too, Shee, shee is dead; shee's dead: when thou knowest this, Thou knowest how drie a Cinder this world is. And learnst thus much by our Anatomy, That'tis in vaine to dew, or mol∣lifie It with thy Teares, or Sweat, or Bloud: no thing Is worth our trauaile, griefe, or pe∣rishing, But those rich ioyes, which did pos∣sesse her heart, Of which shee's now partaker, and a part.
But as in cutting vp a man that's dead,Conclusion. The body will not last out to haue read On euery part, and therefore men direct Their speech to parts, that are of most effect; So the worlds carcasse would not last, if I Were punctuall in this Anato∣my. Nor smels it well to hearers, if one tell Them their disease, who faine would thinke they're wel. Here therefore be the end: And, blessed maid, Of whom is meant what euer hath beene said, Or shall be spoken well by any tongue,
Whose name refines course lines, and makes prose song, Accept this tribute, and his first yeeres rent, Who till his darke short tapers end be spent, As oft as thy feast sees this wi∣dowed earth, Will yearely celebrate thy second birth, That is, thy death. For though the soule of man Be got when man is made, 'tis borne but than When man doth die. Our body's as the wombe, And as a mid-wife death directs it home. And you her creatures, whom she workes vpon And haue your last, and best con∣coction
From her example, and her vertue, if you In reuerence to her, doe thinke it due, That no one should her prayses thus reherse, As matter fit for Chronicle, not verse, Vouchsafe to call to minde, that God did make A last, and lastingst peece, a song. He spake To Moses, to deliuer vnto all, That song: because he knew they would let fall, The Law, the Prophets, and the History, But keepe the song still in their memory. Such an opinion (in due measure) made
Me this great Office boldly to in∣uade. Nor could incomprehensiblenesse deterre Me, from thus trying to emprison her. Which when I saw that a strict graue could doe, I saw not why verse might not doe so too. Verse hath a middle nature: Hea∣uen keepes soules, The Graue keepes bodies, Verse the same enroules.
A FVNERALL ELEGIE. TIs lost, to trust a Tombe with such a ghest, Or to confine her in a Marble chest. Alas, what's Marble, Ieat, or Porphiry, Priz'd with the Chrysolite of ei∣ther eye, Or with those Pearles, and Rubies which shee was? Ioyne the two Indies in one Tombe, 'tis glas; And so is all to her mate∣rials,
Though euery inche were ten escu∣rials. Yet shee's demolished: Can we keepe herthen In workes of hands, or of the wits of mn? Can thse memorials, ragges of paper, giue Life to that name, by which name they must liue? Sickly, alas, short-liu'd, aborted bee Those Carkas verses, whose soule is not she. And can shee, who no longer would be she, Being such a Tabernacle, stoope to bee In paper wrap't; Or, when she would not lie In such a house, dwell in an Ele∣gie?
But 'tis no matter; we may well al∣low Verse to liue so long as the world will now For her death wounded it. The world containes Princes for armes, and Counsailors for braines, Lawyers for tongues, Diuines for hearts, and more, The Rich for stomachs and for backes the Pore; The officers for hands, Merchants for feet By which remote and distant Coun∣tries meet. But those fine spirits which doe tune and set This Organ, are those peeces which beget Wonder and loue; And these were shee; and shee
Being spent, the world must needs decrepit bee. For since death will proceed to tri∣umph still, He can finde nothing, after her, to kill, Except the world it selfe, so great as shee. Thus braue and confident may Na∣ture bee, Death cannot giue her such another blow, Because shee cannot such another show. But must we say shee's dead? May't not be said That as a sundred Clocke is peece∣meale laid, Not to be lost, but by the makers hand Repolish'd, without error then to stand,
Or as the Affrique Niger streame en∣wombs It selfe into the earth, and after comes, (Hauing first made a naturall bridge, to passe For many leagues,) farre greater then it was, May't not be said, that her graue shall restore Her, greater, purer, firmer, then before? Heauen may say this, and ioy in't; but can wee Who liue, and lacke her, here this vantage see? What is't to vs, alas, if there haue beene An Angell made a Throne, or Che∣rubin? We lose by't: And as aged men are glad
Being tastlesse growne, to ioy in ioyes they had, So now the sicke staru'd world must feed vpone This ioy, that we had her, who now is gone. Reioyce then nature, and this world, that you Fearing the last fires hastning to subdue Your force and vigor, ere it were neere gone, Wisely bestow'd, and laid it all on one. One, whose cleare body was so pure, and thin, Because it need disguise no thought within. T'was but a through-light scarfe, her minde t'enroule, Or exhalation breath'd out from her soule.
On, whom all men who durst no more, admir'd, And wom, who ere had worth e∣nough, desir'd; As when a Temple's built, Saints emulate To which of them, it shall be conse∣crate. But as when Heauen lookes on vs with new eyes, Those new starres euery Artist ex∣ercise, What place they should assigne to them they doubt. Argue, and agree not, till those starres goe out: So the world studied whose this peece shuld be, Till she can be no bodies else, nor she: But like a Lampe of Balsamum, de∣sir'd
Rather t'adorne, then last, shee soone expir'd; Cloath'd in her Virgin white inte∣grity; For mariage, though it doe not staine, doth dye. To scape th'infirmities which waite vpone Woman, shee went away, before sh'was one. And the worlds busie noyse to ouer∣come, Tooke so much death, as seru'd for opium. For though she could not, nor could chuse to die, Shee'ath yeelded to too long an Extasie. He which not knowing her said Hi∣storie, Should come to read the booke of destinie,
How faire and chast, humble and high shee'ad beene, Much promis'd, much perform'd, at not fifteene, And measuring future things, by things before, Should turne the leafe to read, and read no more, Would thinke that either destinie mistooke, Or that some leaues were torne out of the booke. But 'tis not so: Fate did but Vsher her To yeares of Reasons vse, and then infer Her destinie to her selfe; which li∣bertie Shee tooke but for thus much, thus much to die. Her modesty not suffering her to bee
Fellow-Commissioner with desti∣nee, Shee did no more but die; if after her Any shall liue, which dare true good prefer, Euery such person is her dele∣gate, T' accomplish that which should haue beene her fate. They shall make vp that booke, and shall haue thankes Offate and her, for filling vp thir blanks. For future vertuous deeds are Lega∣cies. Which from the gift of her example rise. And 'tis in heau'n part of spirituall mirth, To see how well, the good play her, on earth. FINIS.
The Second Anniuersarie. OF THE PROGRES of the Soule. Wherein: BY OCCASION OF THE Religious Death of Mistris ELIZABETH DRVRY, the incommodities of the Soule in this life and her exaltation in the next, are Contem∣plated. LONDON, Printed by M. Bradwood for S. Macham, and are to be sould at his shop in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the Bull-head. 1612.
THE HARBINGER to the Progres. TWo soules moue here, and mine (a third) must moue Paces of admiration, and of loue; Thy soule (Deare Virgin) whose this tribute is, Mou'd from this mortall sphere to liuely blisse; And yet moues still, and still aspires to see The worlds last day, thy glories full degree:
Like as those starres which thou ore-lookest farre, Are in their place, and yet still moued are No soule (whiles with the lugage of this clay It clogged is) can follow thee halfe way; Or see thy flight; which doth our thoughts outgoe So fast, that now the lightning moues but slow: But now thou art as high in hea∣uen flowne As heau'ns from vs; what soule besides thine owne Can tell thy ioyes, or say he can re∣relate
Thy glorious Iournals in that bles∣sed state? I enuie thee (Rich soule) I enuy thee, Although I cannot yet thy glory see: And thou (Great spirit) which her's follow'd hast So fast, as none can follow thine so fast; So farre as none can follow thine so farre, (And if this flesh did not the pas∣sage barre Had'st raught her) let me wonder at thy flight Which long agone had'st lost the vnlgar sight
And now mak'st proud the better eyes, that thay Can see thee less'ned in thine aery way; So while thou mak'st her soules by progresse knowne Thou mak'st a noble progresse of thine owne. From this worlds carcasse hauing mounted hie To that pure life of Immorta∣litie; Since thine aspiring thoughts them∣selues so raise That more may not beseeme a crea∣tures praise, Yet still thou vow'st her more; and euery yeare
Mak'st a new progresse, while thou wandrest here; Still vpwards mount; and let thy makers praise Honor thy Laura, and adorne thy laies. And since thy Muse her head in heauen shrouds Oh let her neuer stoope below the clouds: And if those glorious sainted soules may know Or what we doe, or what we sing below, Those acts, those songs shall still content them best Which praise those awfull powers that make them blest.
The Second Anniuersarie. OF THE PROGRES of the Soule. NOthing could make mee soo∣ner to confesse.The en∣trance. That this world had an euerla∣stingnesse, Then to consider, that a yeare is runne, Since both this lower worlds, and the Sunnes Sunne, The Lustre, and the vigor of this All,
Did set; t'were Blasphemy, to say, did fall. But as a ship which hath strooke saile, doth runne, By force of that force which be∣fore, it wonne, Or as sometimes in a beheaded man, Through at those two Red seas, which freely ran, One from the Trunke, another from the Head, His soule be saild, to her eternall bed, His eies will twinckle, and his tongue will roll, As though he beckned, and cal'd backe his Soul, He graspes his hands, and he puls vp his feet, And seemes to reach, and to step forth to meet.
His soule, when all these motions which we saw, Are but as Ice, which crackles at a thaw: Or as a Lute, which in moist wea∣ther, rings Her knell alone, by cracking of her strings. So strugles this dead world, now shee is gone; For there is motion in corrup∣tion. As some Daies are, at the Creati∣on nam'd, Before the sunne, the which fram'd Daies, was fram'd, So after this sunnes set, some show appeares, And orderly vicisitude of yeares. Yet a new Deluge, and of Lethe flood,
Hath drown' vs all, All haue forgot all good, Forgetting her, the maine Reserue of all, Yet in this Deluge, grosse and ge∣nerall, Thou seest mee striue for life; my life shalbe, To bee hereafter prais'd, for pray∣sing thee, Immortal Mayd, who though thou wouldst refuse The name of Mother, be vnto my Muse, A Father since her chast Ambition is, Yearely to bring forth such a child as this. These Hymes may worke on fu∣ture wits, and so May great Grand-children of thy praises grow.
And so, though not Reuiue, em∣balme, and spice The world, which else would pu∣trify with vice. for thus, Man may extend thy pro∣geny, Vntill man doe but vanish, and not die. These Hymns thy issue, may en∣crease so long, As till Gods great Venite change the song. Thirst for that time, O my insatiate soule,A iust dis-estimation of this world. And serue thy thirst, with Gods safe-fealing Bowle. Bee thirsty still, and drinke still till, thou goe; T'o th'onely Health, to be Hy∣droptique so. Forget this rotten world; And vnto thee,
Let thine owne times as an old sto∣ry be Be not concern'd: study not why, nor whan; Do not so much, as not beleeue a man. For though to erre, be worst, to try truths forth, Is far more busines, then this world is worth. The World is but a Carkas; thou art fed By it, but as a worme, that carcas bred; And why shouldst thou, poore worme, consider more, When this world will grow better then before, Then those thy fellow-wormes doe thinke vpone That carkasses last resurrecti∣one.
Forget this world, and scarse thinke of it so, As of old cloaths, cast of a yeare agoe. To be thus stupid is Ala∣crity; Men thus lethargique haue best Memory. Looke vpward; that's towards her, whose happy state We now lament not, but congra∣tulate. Shee, to whom all this world twas but a stage, Where all sat harkning how her youthfull age Should be emploid, because in all, shee did, Some Figure of the Golden times, was hid. Who could not lacke, what ere this world could giue,
Because shee was the forme, that made it liue; Nor could complaine, that this world was vnfit, To be staid in, then when shee was in it; Shee that first tried indifferent de∣sires By vertue, and vertue by religious fires, Shee to whose person Paradise ad∣hear'd, As Courts to Princes; shee whose eies enspheard Star-light inough, t'haue made the South controll, (Had shee beene there) the Star∣full Northern Pole, Shee, shee is gone; shee is gone; when thou knowest this, What fragmentary rubbidge this world is.
Thou knowest, and that it is not worth a thought; He honors it too much that thinks it nought. Thinke then, My soule, that death is but a Groome,Contempla∣tion of our state in our death-bed. Which brings a Taper to the out∣ward romme, Whence thou spiest first a little glimmering light, And after brings it nearer to thy sight: For such approches doth Heauen make in death. Thinke thy selfe laboring now with broken breath, And thinke those broken and soft Notes to bee Diuision, and thy happiest Har∣monee. Thinke thee laid on thy death bed, loose and slacke;
And thinke that but vnbinding of a packe, To take one precious thing, thy soule, from thence. Thinke thy selfe parch'd with fe∣uers violence, Anger thine Ague more, by cal∣ling it Thy Physicke; chide the slacknesse of the fit. Thinke that thou hearst thy knell, and thinke no more, But that, as Bels cal'd thee to Church before, So this, to the Triumphant Church, cals thee. Thinke Satans Sergeants round about thee bee, And thinke that but for Legacies they thrust; Giue one thy Pride, to'another giue thy Lust:
Giue them those sinnes which they gaue thee before, And trust th'immaculate blood to wash thy score. Thinke thy frinds weeping round, and thinke that thay Weepe but because they goe not yet thy way. Thinke that they close thine eyes, and thinke in this, That they confesse much in the world, amisse, Who dare not trust a dead mans eye with that, Which they from God, and An∣gels couer not. Thinke that they shroud thee vp, and thinke from thence They reinuest thee in white inno∣cence. Thinke that thy body rots, and (if so lowe,
Thy soule exalted so, thy thoughts can goe.) Thinke the a Prince, who of them∣selues create Wormes which insensibly deuoure their state. Thinke that they bury thee, and thinke that right Laies thee to sleepe but a saint Lu∣cies night. Thinke these things cheerefully: and if thou bee Drowsie or slacke, remember then that shee, Shee whose Complexion was so euen made, That which of her Ingredients should inuade The other three, no Feare, no Art could guesse: So far were all remou'd from more or lesse.
But as in Mithridate, or iust per∣fumes, Where all good things being met, no one presumes To gouerne, or to triumph no the rest, Onely because all were, no part was best. And as, though all doe know, that quantities Are made of lines, and lines from Points arise, None can these lines or quantities vnioynt, And say this is a line, or this a point, So though the Elements and Hu∣mors were In her, one could not say, this go∣uernes there. Whose euen constitution might haue worne
Any disease to venter on the Sunne, Rather then her: and make a spirit feare That he to disuniting subiect were. To whose proportious if we would compare Cubes, th'are vnstable; Circles, Angulare; Shee who was such a Chaine, as Fate emploies To bring mankind, all Fortunes it enioies, So fast, so euen wrought, as one would thinke, No Accident, could threaten any linke, Shee, shee embrac'd a sicknesse, gaue it meat, The purest Blood, and Breath, that ere it eat.
And hath taught vs that though a good man hath Title to Heauen, and plead it by his Faith, And though he may pretend a conquest, since Heauen was content to suffer vio∣lence, Yea though he plead along posses∣sion too, (For they'are in Heauen on Earth, who Heauens workes do,) Though he had right, and power, and Place before, Yet Death must vsher, and vnlocke the doore. Thinke further on thy selfe, my soule, and thinke;Incommodi∣ties of the Soule in the Body. How thou at first wast made but in a sinke; Thinke that it argued some infer∣mitee,
That those two soules, which then thou foundst in mee, Thou fedst vpon, And drewst into thee, both My second soule of sence, and first of growth. Thinke but how poore thou wast, how obnoxious, Whom a small lump of flesh could poison thus. This curded milke, this poore vnlit∣tered whelpe My body, could, beyond escape, or helpe, Infect thee with originall sinne, and thou Couldst neither then refuse, nor leaue it now. Thinke that no stubborne sullen Anchorit, Which fixt to'a Pillar, or a Graue doth sit
Beddded and Bath'd in all his Or∣dures, dwels So fowly as our soules, in their first-built Cels. Thinke in how poore a prison thou didst lie After, enabled but to sucke, and crie. Thinke, when t'was growne to most, t'was a poore Inne, A Prouince Pack'd vp in two yards of skinne. And that vsurped, or threatned with the rage Of sicknesses, or their true mother, Age. But thinke that Death hath now enfranchis'd thee,Her liberty by death. Thou hast thy'expausion now and libertee; Thinke that a rusty Peece, dis∣charg'd, is flowen
In peeces, and the bullet is his owne, And freely flies: This to thy soule allow, Thinke thy sheel broke, thinke thy Soule hatch'd but now. And thinke this slow-pac'd soule, which late did cleaue, To'a body, and went but by the bo∣dies leaue, Twenty, perchance, or thirty mile a day, Dispatches in a minute all the way, Twixt Heauen, and Earth: shee staies not in the Ayre, To looke what Meteors there themselues prepare; Shee carries no desire to know, nor sense, Whether th'Ayrs middle Region be intense,
For th' Element of fire, shee doth not know, Whether shee past by such a place or no; Shee baits not at the Moone, nor cares to trie, Whether in that new world, men liue, and die. Venus recards her not, to'enquire, how shee Can, (being one Star) Hesper, and Vesper bee, Hee that charm'd Argus eies, sweet Mercury, Workes not on her, who now is growen all Ey; Who, if shee meete the body of the Sunne, Goes through, not staying till his course be runne; Who finds in Mars his Campe, no corps of Guard;
Nor is by Ioue, nor by his father bard; But ere shee can consider how shee went, At once is at, and through the Fir∣mament. And as these stars were but so ma∣ny beades Strunge on one string, speed vndi∣stinguish'd leades Her through those spheares, as through the beades, a string, Whose quicke succession makes it still one thing: As doth the Pith, which, least our Bodies slacke, Strings fast the little bones of necke, and backe; So by the soule doth death string Heauen and Earth, For when our soule enioyes this her third birth,
(Creation gaue her one, a second, grace,) Heauen is as neare, and present to her face, As colours are, and obiects, in a roome Where darknesse was before, when Tapers come. This must, my soule, thy long-short Progresse bee; To'aduance these thoughts, re∣member then, that shee Shee, whose faire body no such prison was, But that a soule might well be pleas'd to passe An Age in her; shee whose rich beauty lent Mintage to others beauties, for they went But for so much, as they were like to her;
Shee, in whose body (if wee dare prefer This low world, to so high a mark, as shee,) The Westerne treasure, Esterne spiceree, Europe, and Afrique, and the vn∣knowen rest Were easily found, or what in them was best; And when w'haue made this large Discoueree, Of all in her some one part then will bee Twenty such parts, whose plenty and riches is Inough to make twenty such worlds as this; Shee, whom had they knowne, who did first betroth The Tutelar Angels, and assigned one, both
To Nations, Cities, and to Com∣panies, To Functions, Offices, and Dig∣nities, And to each seuerall man, to him, and him, They would haue giuen her one for euery limme; Shee, of whose soule, if we may say, t'was Gold, Her body was th'Electrum, and did hold Many degrees of that; (we vnder∣stood Her by her sight, her pure and elo∣quent blood Spoke in her cheekes, and so di∣stinckly wrought, That one might almost say, her bo∣die thought, Shee, shee, thus richly, and large∣ly hous'd, is gone:
And chides vs slow-pac'd snailes, who crawle vpon Our prisons prison, earth, nor thinke vs well Longer, then whil'st we beare our brittle shell. Her igno∣rance in this life and knowledge in the next.But t'were but little to haue chang'd our roome, If, as we were in this our liuing Tombe Oppress'd with ignorance, we still were so, Poore soule in this thy flesh what do'st thou know. Thou know'st thy selfe so little, as thou know'st not, How thou did'st die, nor how thou wast begot. Thou neither knowst, how thou at first camest in, Nor how thou took'st the poyson of mans sin.
Nor dost thou, (though thou knowst, that thou art so) By what way thou art made im∣mortall, know. Thou art to narrow, wretch, to comprehend Euen thy selfe: yea though thou wouldst but bend To know thy body. Haue not all soules thought For many ages, that our body'is wrought Of Ayre, and Fire, and other Ele∣ments? And now they thinke of new ingre∣dients. And one soule thinkes one, and a∣nother way Another thinkes, and ty's an euen lay Knowst thou but how the stone doth enter in
The bladders Caue, and neuer breake the skin? Knowst thou how blood, which to the hart doth flow, Doth from one ventricle to th'other go? And for the putrid stuffe, which thou dost spit, Knowst thou how thy lungs haue attracted it? There are no passages so that there is (For ought thou knowst) piercing of substances. And of those many opinions which men raise Of Nailes and Haires, dost thou know which to praise? What hope haue we to know our selues, when wee Know not the least things, which for our vse bee?
We see in Authors, too stiffe to recant. A hundred controuersies of an Ant. And yet one watches, starues, free∣ses, and sweats, To know but Catechismes and Alphabets Of vnconcerning things, matters of fact; How others on our stage their parts did Act; What Caesar did, yea, and what Cicero said. Why grasse is greene, or why our blood is red, Are mysteries which none haue reach'd vnto. In this low forme, poore soule what wilt thou doe? When wilt thou shake of this Pe∣dantery,
Of being thought by sense, and Fantasy? Thou look'st through spectacles; small things seeme great, Below; But vp vnto the watch∣towre get, And see all things despoyld of falla∣cies: Thou shalt not peepe through lat∣tices of eies, Nor heare through Laberinths of eares, nor learne By circuit, or collections to dis∣cerne. In Heauen thou straight know'st all, concerning it, And what concerns it not, shall straight forget. There thou (but in no other schoole) maist bee Perchance, as learned, and as full, as shee,
Shee who all Libraries had throughly red At home, in her owne thoughts, And practised So much good as would make as many more: Shee whose example they must all implore, Who would or doe, or thinke well, and confesse That aie the vertuous Actions they expresse, Are but a new, and worse edi∣tion, Of her some one thought, or one action: Shee, who in th'Art of knowing Heauen, was growen Here vpon Earth, to such perfe∣ction, That shee hath, euer since to Heauen shee came,
(In a far fairer point,) but read the same: Shee, shee, not satisfied withall this waite, (For so much knowledge, as would ouer-fraite Another, did but Ballast her) is gone, As well t'enioy, as get perfecti∣one. And cals vs after her, in that shee tooke, (Taking herselfe) our best, and worthiest booke. Of our com∣pany in this life and in the next.Returne not, my soule, from this extasee, And meditation of what thou shalt bee, To earthly thoughts, till it to thee appeare, With whom thy conuersation must be there.
With whom wilt thou Conuerse? what station Canst thou choose out, free from infection, That wil nor giue thee theirs, nor drinke in thine? Shalt thou not finde a spungy slack Diuine Drinke and sucke in th'Instructions of Great men, And for the word of God, vent them agen? Are there not some Courts, (And then, no things bee So like as Courts) which, in this let vs see, That wits and tongues of Libellars are weake, Because they doe more ill, then these can speake? The poyson'is gone through all, poysons affect
Chiefly the cheefest parts, but some effect In Nailes, and Haires, yea excre∣ments, will show; So wise the poyson of sinne, in the most low. Vp vp, my drowsie soule, where thy new eare Shall in the Angels songs no dis∣cord heare; Where thou shalt see the blessed Mother-maid Ioy in not being that, which men haue said. Where shee'is exalted more for being good, Then for her interest, of mother∣hood. Vp to those Patriarckes, which did longer sit Expecting Christ, then they'haue enioy'd him yet.
Vp to those Prophets, which now gladly see Their Prophecies growen to be Historee. Vp to th'Apostles, who did braue∣ly runne, All the Sunnes course, with more light then the Sunne. Vp to those Martyrs, who did calmely bleed Oyle to th'Apostles lamps, dew to their seed. Vp to those Virgins, who thoughts that almost They made ioyntenants with the Holy Ghost, If they to any should his Temple giue. Vp, vp, for in that squadron there doth liue Shee, who hath carried thether, new degrees
(As to their number) to their dig∣nitees. Shee, who beeing to herselfe, a state enioyd All royalties which any state em∣ploid, For shee made wars, and tri∣umph'd, reson still Did not ouerthrow, but rectifie her will: And shee made peace, for no peace is like this, That beauty and chastity together kisse: Shee did high iustice; for shee cru∣cified Euery first motion of rebellious pride: And shee gaue pardons, and was liberall, For, onely her selfe except, shee pardond all:
Shee coynd, in this, that her im∣pressions gaue To all our actions all the worth they haue: Shee gaue protections; the thoughts of her brest Satans rude Officers could nere ar∣rest. As these prerogatiues being met in one, Made her a soueraigne state, reli∣gion Made her a Church; and these two made her all. Shee who was all this All, and could not fall To worse, by company; (for shee was still More Antidote, then all the world was ill, Shee, shee doth leaue it, and by Death, suruiue
All this, in Heauen; whether who doth not striue The more, because shee'is there, he doth not know That accidentall ioyes in Heauen doe grow. Of essentiall ioy in this life and in the next.But pause, My soule, and study ere thou fall On accidentall ioyes, th'essenti∣all. Still before Accessories doe abide A triall, must the principall be tride. And what essentiall ioy canst thou expect Here vpon earth? what permanent effect Of transitory causes? Dost thou loue Beauty? (And Beauty worthyest is to moue)
Poore couse'ned cose'nor, that she, and that thou, Which did begin to loue, are nei∣ther now. You are both fluid, chang'd since yesterday; Next day repaires, (but ill) last daies decay. Nor are, (Although the riuer keep the name) Yesterdaies waters, and to daies the same. So flowes her face, and thine eies, neither now That saint, nor Pilgrime, which your louing row Concernd, remaines, but whil'st you thinke you bee Constant, you'are howrely in in∣constancee. Honour may haue pretence vnto our loue,
Because that God did liue so long aboue Without this Honour, and then lou'd it so, That he at last made Creatures to to bestow Honor on him; not that he needed it, But that, to his hands, man might grow more fit. But since all honors from inferiors flow, (For they doe giue it; Princes doe but show Whom they would haue so ho∣nord) and that this On such opinions, and capaci∣ties Is built, as rise, and fall, to more and lesse, Alas, tis but a casuall happi∣nesse.
Hath euer any man to'himselfe as∣signed This or that happinesse, to'arrest his minde, But that another man, which takes a worse, Thinke him a foole for hauing tane that course? They who did labour Babels tower to'rect, Might haue considerd, that for that effect, All this whole solid Earth could not allow Nor furnish forth Materials enow; And that this Center, to raise such a place Was far to little, to haue beene the Base; No more affoords this worlds, foundatione
To erect true ioye, were all the meanes in one. But as the Heathen made them seuerall gods, Of all Gods Benefits, and all his Rods, (For as the Wine, and Corne, and Onions are Gods vnto them, so Agues bee, and war) And as by changing that whole precious Gold To such small copper coynes, they lost the old, And lost their onely God, who euer must Be sought alone, and not in such a thrust, So much mankind true happinesse mistakes; No Ioye enioyes that man, that many makes.
Then, soule, to thy first'pitch worke vpon againe; Know that all lines which circles doe containe, For once that they the center touch, do touch Twice the circumference; and be thou such. Double on Heauen, thy thoughts on Earth emploid; All will not serue; Onely who haue enioyd The sight of God, in fulnesse, can thinke it; For it is both the obiect, and the wit. This is essentiall ioye, where nei∣ther hee Can suffer Diminution, nor wee; Tis such a full, and such a filling good;
Had th'Angels once look'd on him, they had stood. To fill the place of one of them, or more, Shee whom we celebrate, is gone before. Shee, who had Here so much es∣sentiall ioye. As no chance could distract, much lesse destroy; Who with Gods presence was ac∣quainted so, (Hearing, and speaking to him) as to know His face, in any naturall Stone, or Tree, Better then when in Images they bee: Who kept, by diligent deuo∣tion, Gods Image, in such repara∣tion,
Within her heart, that what decay was growen, Was her first Parents fault, and not her own: Who being solicited to any Act, Still heard God pleading his safe precontract; Who by a faithfull confidence, was here Betrothed to God, and now is mar∣ried there, Whose twilights were more cleare, then our mid day, Who dreamt deuoutlier, then most vse to pray; Who being heare fild with grace, yet stroue to bee, Both where more grace, and more capacitee At once is giuen: shee to Heauen is gone,
Who made this world in some proportion A heauen, and here, became vnto vs all, Ioye, (as our ioyes admit) essen∣tiall. But could this low world ioyes es∣sentiall touch,Of acciden∣tall ioyes in both places. Heauens accidentall ioyes would passe them much. How poore and lame, must then our casuall bee? If thy Prince will his subiects to call thee My Lord, and this doe swell thee, thou art than, By being a greater, growen to be lesse Man, When no Physician of Reders can speake, A ioyfull casuall violence may breake
A dangerous Apostem in thy brest; And whilst thou ioyest in this, the dangerous rest, The bag may rise vp, and so stran∣gle thee. What eie was casuall, may euer bee. What should the Nature change? Or make the same Certaine, which was but casuall, when it came? All casuall ioye doth loud and plainly say, Onely by comming, that it can away. Onely in Heauen ioies strength is neuer spent; And accidentall things are per∣manent. Ioy of a soules arriuall neere decaies;
For that soule euer ioyes, and euer staies. Ioy that their last great Consum∣mation Approches in the resur∣rection; When earthly bodies more cele∣stiall Shalbe, then Angels were, for they could fall; This kind of ioy doth euery day ad∣mit Degrees of grouth, but none of loosing it. In this fresh ioy, tis no small part, that shee, Shee, in whose goodnesse, he that names degree, Doth iniure her; (Tis losse to be cald best, There where the stuffe is not such as the rest)
Shee, who left such a body, as euen shee Onely in Heauen could learne, how it can bee Made better; for shee rather was two soules, Or like to full, on both sides writ∣ten Rols, Where eies might read vpon the outward skin, As strong Records for God, as mindes within, Shee, who by making full perfecti∣on grow, Peeces a Circle, and still keepes it so, Long'd for, and longing for'it, to heauen is gone, Where shee receiues, and giues addition. Here in a place, where mis-deuo∣tion framesConclusion.
A thousand praiers to saints, whose very names The ancient Church knew not, Heauen knowes not yet, And where, what lawes of poetry admit, Lawes of religion, haue at least the same, Immortall Maid, I might inroque thy name. Could any Saint prouoke that ap∣petite, Thou here shouldst make mee a french conuertite. But thou wouldst not; nor wouldst thou be content, To take this, for my second yeeres true Rent, Did this Coine beare any other stampe, then his, That gaue thee power to doe me, to say this.
Since his will is, that to poste∣ritee, Thou shouldest for life, and death, a patterne bee, And that the world should notice haue of this, The purpose, and th'Autority is his; Thou art the Proclamation; and I ame The Trumpet, at whose voice the people came. FINIS.
