A274 11994770 52074
AN ACCONUT OF THE DEPORTMENT AND LAST WORDS OF MR. Richard Langhorne, WHO WAS Drawn, Hang'd and Quarter'd AT TYBURN FOR High-Treason, On Munday, July 14. 1679. LONDON, Printed 1679.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Deportment & Last Words OF MR. Richard Langhorne, WHO WAS Drawn, Hang'd & Quarter'd AT TYBURN FOR High-Treason. MR. Richard Langhorn being Convicted and Condemned at the same time with the five Jesuites late executed, for conspiring the death of his Sacred Majesty, the destruction of the Protestant Religion, and the Government established; His Majesty was graciously pleased to reprieve his Execution for some time, in ex∣pectation of his making some Ingenuous Confession of what he knew concerning this horrid Popish Plot; but he persisting in his Jesuited obstinacy, and offering to discover some incon∣siderable things, but such as could no way deserve the continuing his Majesties Clemency to∣ward him. Order was given for his Execution on Monday morning the 14th. of this instant July, and accordingly he was put into the Siedge at Newgate, having a black Suit and Periwig on, with a vast multitude of people accompanying him; being come to the place of Execution, the Executioner having pull'd off his Periwig and put on his Cap, was putting the Rope over his head, which he taking in his hands zealously kissed, and then applying himself to the Sheriffs, be∣gan to speak to them, but in so low a voice, that it was audible to very few of the Spectators.
The substance of his Speech was, That he did not think he should have had an opportu∣nity to to speak in that place, but since he had, he did declare that he was not directly nor indirectly guilty of what he was accused of; not that he did accuse the Judges nor the Jury, who (he said) were at their Liberty to have believed the witnesses or not. And that whereas he was charged with having Commissions signed by Paulus de Oliva, he denyed that ever he saw any such under his hand. Being asked, whether he did not see any Commissions under any other hand, he denyed it, or whether he did not see some Patents, he said, he knew not of any; neither to the Lord Petre, nor the Lord Arundel of Warder, having never seen one of their Faces, as he had declared in a Paper, which Mr. Sheriff said, he did not think fit to be printed, and that he had already printed a Paper or some body for him, which Mr. Langhorn denied he was concerned in, he said he was no way concerned in designing to raise any forces or making any disturbance in the Go∣vernment any manner of way. And being then told that he had but a little while to live, and that he would therefore do very well to imploy it for the good of his soul, since it was very well known that those who were of his Party had Liberty to deny any thing, or to make any kind of Equivoca∣tions, when they were once absolved for the fame. He then applyed himself to his Devotions, and one of the Spectators saying, The Lord have mercy on your soul, he turn'd back and said, I thank you for your charity. He then proceeded praying God to bless this Kingdom and His Majesty, and that God would forgive them that designed or rejoyced in his death, and that further bloodshed might be prevented: and then said, he had no further to say in publick, and asking the Execu∣tioner whether the Rope were right or no, he proceeded to his private Devotions, (being told by the Executioner that if he pleased he might have half an hour for doing the same,) and by some words which he spoke louder than ordinary, it appeared that some of his Prayers were in English and others in Latine; having continued some time in these his Ejaculations with the Cap over his eyes, he said at last, That they need stay no longer for him, and was thereupon turned off. And the Hang-man having struck him on the breast, and pulled him by the Legs to dispatch him, he was stript, and being quite dead he was cut down, and his bowels were burnt, and his body quartered according to his Sentence. And thus this man ended his life in denying all against the clearest evidence imaginable, and thus we may expect that the rest will do too, if any more should suffer, for as that Gen∣tleman told Mr. Langhorn, at the Gallows, after they are absolved, they have liberty to say, or swear, or equivocate upon any thing, and by the Tenents of their Church they ought and must dye thus, if it may be instrumental for advancing their Religion and Interest, which having been so fully and ingenuously proved, by the several animadversions and obser∣vations which have been made upon the speeches of the Jesuited Traytors last executed, need not be any further insisted on at this time. And we have this to say, That never any men in any Nation suffered upon more full evidence, nor had ever more liberty to have pro∣ved their innocence (if possible) in this matter than they. FINIS.
