A310 11921356 50977
AN ACCOUNT Of the Late Great Victory, Obtained at Sea, against the FRENCH: By their Majesties Fleet, Commanded in Chief by Admiral Russell; and the Dutch Commanded by Admiral Allemond, near the Cape of Barfleur in May 1692. LONDON, Printed for John Rawlins at the Anchor in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1692.
THE PREFACE. BY the ensuing relation, it will appear that France which was not until of late, accoun∣ted amongst the Nations, that were conside∣rable for their Maritime strength, was at last become not less formidable at Sea than Land; and how great it has been on the Continent is too well known by the Mighty acquisitions that Crown has made in one Age, that France it self is almost lost in the midst of that vast Empire which it is now become, by most unjust∣ly wresting from all the Neighbouring Princes; But the full Force was never known untill these last three Years, in which it has made head against almost all the Christian World, and for the most part, rather gained than lost of those Princes, and States in War with her: From whence it is Obvious in what conditi∣on the rest of Europe had been in, but for the power∣full opposition England has made, being influenced by their Heroick King, which sufficiently shews the
Necessity there was for the late Revolution. For from that time may Lewis the Fourteenth date the destru∣ction of his Project, and the rest of Europe their Enlargement from the Slavery he designed, and pre∣pared for them, for whatever turns like Fortune he may have, they will rather seem, than really be the effects of Strength, for nothing is plainer than that France has been at the Zenith of its Greatness, and now in the Declension may strugle sometimes, and do some mischief, but never recover power enough to re∣pair the Structure he was forming. The Victory their Majesties Fleet has obtained, having so shooke that Monarchy, that not their Alpes, nor Barrier in Flan∣ders can secure France from being pierced to the Heart. Another way being now opend which a few months will plainly demonstrate, and which perfor∣mance I shall rather choose to write after, than the Predictions now. I shall therefore proceed to relate some particulars of this great Conquest, which is like yet to be much greater in the Consequence.
AN ACCOUNT Of the LATE ENGAGEMENT, &c. THE Power of France was so much encreas'd in Shipping under the Reign of their Present King, that it has not been an Imaginary hopes which the French, and their Friends in Eng∣land Conceiv'd, that they might make themselves Ma∣sters at Sea, especially after they had in the Year Ninety, made some Experiment of their Strength, which, if they had been able to Effect this Present Year, they had provided themselves of Forces, Artillery, and Ammuniti∣on, upon the Coasts of Normandy, to have Embarkt on Transport Ships for that Purpose, to have made a descent on England, under pretence of restoring the Late King James. The French promis'd themselves such assur'd Suc∣cess in this Design, that they acted with an unusual Free∣dom, openly declaring their Intentions, (it being well known, that whatever advantages they have obtain'd
for the time past; Treachery, or Secrecy, at least were the means whereby they Compassed them) and that their Actions might accompany their great Words, with indefatigable In∣dustry they work'd on their Fleet at Brest, and on the 12th. of May (their Stile) the Count de Tourville set Sail out of the Road of Bertaume, for the Coasts of England. The French Endeavours were not Confined only to their Port of Brest; but at Thoulon also they had equipt 16 large Ships to bring round out of the Mediterranean to joyn the rest, but the difficulties they met with had prevented their haste, and they had not Patience to expect their Coming, but put to Sea with what Strength they had, their Party in Eng∣land having given them repeated Assurances, that the English Preparations were very backward, having as yet but few Ships at Sea, and those small, and weakly Mann'd, that the Capital Men of War would not get out until the end of May at the soonest, the Dutch Squadron were not yet joyn'd, nor ready, and that it was possible to get between what were already out, and the other, and pre∣vent their ever coming together, and by these means de∣stroy both. But as an Earnest of their other Successes, they had News that the Count d' Estree with the Thoulon Squa∣dron, which at first consisted of 16 great Men of War, 6 Fireships, and 3 Galliots, had on the 18th. of April, as he was about to pass the Streights, fallen into a Storm wherein 2 of his Ships, one of 64, the other of 70 Guns, run ashore on the Coast of Barbary near Ceuta, where 250 Men were drown'd, and about 500 more made Prisoners by the Spaniards, besides these lost, several others were separated.
Notwithstanding this ill Accident to the French, Mon∣sieur Tourville on the 10 of May appear'd near Dartmouth, with about 100 Sail of all Sorts, but the Wind being Easterly in the Evening, he stood off towards their own Coasts; the English Fleet which was then out, under the Command of Sir Ralph Delaval, and Rear-Admiral Carter, was about St. Hellen's; on the 12th▪ Vice-Ad∣miral Callenburge, and Rear Admiral Evertzen, with 9 or 10 great Dutch Ships pass'd by Deal, and sailed Westward, and on the 13th. the Wind still Favouring, another Dutch Man of War sailed after them, and on Thursday, the 12th. in the Afternoon, Admiral Russel weigh'd out of Rye-Bay, and about 11 a Clock on Friday Morning joyn'd the Eng∣lish and Dutch, at which time the whole Fleet consisted of about 90 Sail for the Line of Battle; on the same Day Admiral Russel acquainted the Officers that he had receiv'd a Letter from the Earl of Nottingham by Her Majesty's Command, wherein he signified that Her Majesty had been inform'd, that a Scandalous Report had been spread abroad, as if some of the Officers of the Fleet were dis∣affected to their Majesty's Service, and that her Majesty had order'd the Discharge of several of them, but that Her Majesty was assured this Discourse was raised Mali∣ciously by the Enemies of the Government, and that Her Majesty was so well pleased, and satisfied with their Zeal and Service to their Majesties, and the Defence of their Country, that she had resolved not to displace any one of them. As soon as this was made known to them by the Admiral, they made and sent up an Address, which was the next Day presented to the Queen by the Lord's Commissioners of the Admiralty. And was in these following Words.
The Address. VVEE Your Majesties most Loyal Subjects, and Servants, Flagg Officers, and Captains in your Majesties Fleet, out of the deep and grateful sense we have of your Majesties good, and just opinion of our Loyalty, and Fidelity, imparted to us by the Right Honourable Admiral Russel, in a Letter to him from my Lord Nottingham, do in behalf of our selves, and all the other Officers and Seamen, humbly presume to Address our selves to your Ma∣jesty at this Juncture, to undeceive the World in those false and malicious reports, that have been lately spread in prejudice of your Majesties Service, by People of unreasonable disaffection to your Majesties Government; and an obstinate Aversion to the quiet, and good of our Country: That there are some amongst us that are not truly Zealous, for, and en∣tirely devoted to your Majesties Service. We do therefore most humbly beg your Majesties leave to add to our re∣peated Oaths, this Assurance of our Fidelity. That we will with all imaginable Alacrity, and Resolution, venture our Lives in the Defence of your Majesties undoubted Rights, and the Liberty, and Religion of our Country; against all Foreign, and Popish Invaders whatsoever. And that God Almighty may preserve your Majesties most sacred Person, direct your Councels, and prosper your Arms by Sea and Land against your Majesties Enemies, let all the People say Amen, with your Majesties most Dutiful, and Loyal Sub∣jects. Dated on board the Brittannia, this 15th. Day of May, 1692.
This Address was Signed by Sir John Ashby, Admiral of the Blew, Sir Ralph Delaval, Vice-Admiral of the Red, Mr. Rooke, Vice-Admiral of the Blew, Sir Clousley Shovel Rear-Admiral of the Red, Mr. Carter Rear Admiral of the Blue, and the other Commanders of Their Majesties Fleet, and Her Majesty received it very Graciously, being plea∣sed to say, That She always had this Opinion of the Commanders; but was very glad this was come to satisfie others. The day before this Address was formed, the French Fleet was seen off of the Start point near Dartmouth, and her Majesty was assured that the Rochfort Squadron under the Command of the Sieur De Vilette, had joined. the Count de Tourville; but that the Thoulon Squadron was not as yet arrived at Brest. And Admiral Russel on the 17th. Sailed with the whole Fleet English, and Dutch to the Westward, having a fair Wind; and here it may be ob∣served, that from the time the French put to Sea until this time, the Wind proved Easterly, or to the North; and that there had not been six hours of Southerly, or Westerly Winds which are so frequent, more especially at this time of the Year: Or else in all probability that part of the Fleet which was first at Sea, was in danger to have fallen under the power of the French. The French King had most certainly given positive Orders to his Admiral to attack the English, and Dutch Fleet, when, and where ever he met them; his Reasons for so peremptory a Command, considering how care∣fully France has managed it self during the whole War,
both at Sea and Land, has occasioned the most curi∣ous observers to enquire very carefully into the Cause, and has produced very different Opinions concerning the same; with some of which I shall acquaint you (viz.) That the War bore so very hard upon him that he lay under a necessity to make use of his utmost Efforts to end it; which a great Victory at Sea would have Contributed much to, and that if he was defeated the loss could be scarce heavier to him, than the vast Charge of maintaining such a Fleet at that extream Ebb the War has reduced him to: But this being a Notion taken up by Men of too fine Speculation, I shall wave repeating any more of it; but proceed to some other more believed, and more probable Reasons; which are, that Monsieur Pontchartain, his intendant General for Maritime Affairs, or his Agents, had recourse to the old French method of Bribery. And had made such offers of Money to some that had Command in the English Fleet, that they making it known had leave to accept the Money, and were only exhorted to perform their duty to Their Majesties, and their Country, or whether the Jaco∣bite party in England, after having told so many lyes of their own strength, and the general Inclination of the People to return to their former Slavery, had also brought themselves to believe; that the Officers of the Fleet would revolt, and had imposed the same upon the French King for Truth, or whether they had assured him their weak∣ness, or Cowardice was such, that they were easily over∣come; one of these it's generally believed hastned the French to Sea, and upon the English Coast, and which∣soever it was, tho' no thanks are due to such as would betray their Country, yet more advantages have hap∣pened
by this Advice and Intelligence, to this Nation than ever so inconsiderable a party for Sence, Fortunes, or Courage, could have contributed with all their best Inten∣tions, and Services, which makes it evident that there is nothing so bad, that at sometimes is not good for some∣thing. For now on the 19th. Their Majesties Fleet about six Leagues from Cape Barfleur, got sight of the French, who came down with Wind at S. W. upon the English; the first News of the Engagement, came from Admiral Russel's own Hand to my Lord Nottingham; which I shall recite Verbatim, being as brief, as it is an exact ac∣count of the first days Action. A Copy of Admiral Russel's Letter. YEsterday about Three in the Morning, Cape Barfleur bearing S. W. and by S. distance Seven Leagues, my Scouts made the Signal for seeing the Enemy, the Wind Westerly; The French bore down to me, and at Eleven Engaged me, but at some distance; we continued Fighting till half an hour past Five in the Evening, at which time the Enemy Towed away with all their Boats, and we after them. It was calm all day; about six, there was a fresh En∣gagement to the Westward of me, which I supposed to be the Blue. It continued Calm all Night. I can give no par∣ticular account of things, but that the French were beaten: And I am now Steering away for Conquet Road, having a fresh gale Easterly; but extream Foggy: I suppose that is the place they design for; if it please God to send us a
little clear weather, I doubt not but we shall destroy their whole Fleet. I saw in the Night three or four Ships on Fire, but I know not what they are, so soon as I can give you a more particular relation, I shall not be wanting. May the 20th. 1692. Cape Barflur, S. W. distance 7 Leagues. This Letter was sent from the Admiral by the Com∣mander of the Mary Galley to Portsmouth; who brought a further account (viz.) That at Eight a Clock on Friday Morning, being the 20th. of May; he left the Fleet at S. and by W. about Fifteen Leagues distance off of the Isle of Wight, that he saw the Seconds of two of the French Admirals sink, and many Ships on Fire; that the Sea was full of Wrecks of Ships for two Lea∣gues together; but that he knew not, that any of Their Majesties Ships were lost: That the French run, and ours pursued them; and on the one twentieth we heard from Portsmouth, that Their Majesties Ship the Montague came in disabled, and Captain Foulk the Commander confirmed the News of the French being beaten; that the English were in pursuit of them at Nine in the Morning the day before; which was the time he left the Fleet: and further said that Admiral Carter was Killed, who was Rear Admiral of the Blue, his Death was the only allay to all this good News, being generally la∣mented both at Sea and Land; he was a very brave Officer, and Faithful to Their Majesties Service; and his Memory will Live and serve for an Example to Encou∣rage others, for the Honour he had obtained was for his Gallantry, having risen from a much lower Capacity.
Captain Killingworth Commander of the the Fox Fire∣ship, came also to Portsmouth in his Boat, and Confirmed the foregoing Account, and further added, that he had burnt his Fireship on Board a French Rear-Admiral, but was put off with great Difficulty, that he saw a French Man of War of about 70 Guns blow up, and another 3 Deck'd Ship on Fire. Thus every day produced several fresh Advices of the happy success of their Majesty's Arms, and more were expected, for Victory was not doubted from such a Fleet, so Commanded; for Admiral Russel before the Engage∣ment, went on Board all the Men of War, to animate both Officers and Sea-men, assuring them he had no distrust that they wanted Courage or Loyalty, and for his own Part, if he failed in his Duty, he desired that they would not spare to throw him Over-board, and as he proposed himself the Pattern they should follow, so if any such were found that neglected to imitate him, they should be made severe Examples. Although this might be of excellent use, yet all the Commanders left us without Knowledge, whe∣ther it would have been wanting, every one striving to excel. On Saturday the 21st. of May, the Queen receiv'd by Ex∣press, that by the former days Action the French Fleet was so diminished, that their Number was reduced to Thirty Six, which were seen to the Leeward of us, at about two Leagues Distance, the Wind at E. N. E. the Eng∣lish Fleet endeavouring to get up with them, and they retiring, and on Saturday the 21. the Wind serving in∣differently both for Eastward and Westward, the Enemy
divided: about 9 that Morning, Admiral Russel took his Course towards Barfleur, having got sight of several French Ships under the Shoar, and Admiral Allemonde with the Admiral of the Blue, sailed to the Westward. The Dutch Admiral Discovered Sixteen French Ships, which he sup∣posed were coming from France to joyn their Fleet, and endeavoured to get up with them; in the mean time Sir John Ashby pursued the rest of their Fleet, who strove in great Confusion to get into the Race of Orney. Ad∣miral Allemonde lost Sight of them he pursued in the Night, and believing they had got in amongst the Rocks thought it not adviseable to follow them, and so sailed Eastward again to join Admiral Russel. On the 22d. in the Forenoon, Sir Ralph Delaval Burnt under Cape de Wyke near the Shoar, the Royal Sun, being the Ship of the Count de Tourville Admiral of the French Fleet, she carry'd 104 Guns; the Admirable comman∣ded by Monsieur Beaujeau his Second, that carryed 102 Guns, and the Conquerant of Eighty Guns, with two Friggats, and three Vessels of lesser Rank; at this time also Admiral Russel was in close pursuit of another part of them. The Prisoners of the Ships that Sir Ralph De∣laval Burnt, Declar'd, that during the Engagement 4 or 5 of their biggest Ships were destroy'd. Colonel Anthony Hastings who Commanded the Sand∣wich was kill'd in the Fight, and his Ship disabled, which was afterwards brought into Portsmouth to refit: Captain Grayden that Commanded the Hampton-Court was Woun∣ded, and his Ship, with the Seven Provinces, one of the Dutch Squadron, and one or two more being disabled were
brought into Portsmouth, but not one Ship English nor Dutch was missing. Her Majesty commanded that Care should be taken that able Chirurgeons should be sent down to look after the Sick and Woundd Seamen▪ that were brought into Portsmouth, belonging to the said Ships, or any other, and that the Hospitals in Southwark and Smithfield might be fitted up to receive them. Four French Ships of Three Decks lay on the back of the Isle of Weight very much disabled, and two English Men of War that were refitted, with two Dutch Friggats and a Fire-ship, were ordered to go out, and take or de∣stroy them. This Extraordinary Victory which cost so little on our side, and so much exceeded the expectation of all People, was received by Her Majesty with a great deal of Mode∣ration, plainly shewing that She had no other Joy in it than the safety of Her People, and the Interest the rest of Christendom had in their Majesty's Successes. But the People so universally discovered their Pleasure in having beaten the French, who had so shamefully scandaliz'd the English Nation two Years before, that they knew not sufficiently how to express themselves; no other Business was much talkt off, but Praises and Encomiums on the Conduct and Courage of the Admiral, and other Com∣manders, and for several Days and Nights, Ringing of Bells and Bonefires, yet such was the Care of the Govern∣ment, that not a Person nor a House was Damnified by the common People of those who were known to wish well to the Enemies of this Kingdom, and were rea∣sonably suspected to have gone further than Wishes, to
Contribute towards enslaving us, and all posterity to the French. On Wednesday the 25th. in the Evening came Captain Mees, Commander of the Ruby, a Fourth Rate, with Letters from Sir Ralph Delaval to my Lord Nottingham, bearing Date the 22d. giving a particular Account of his Burning the Three Ships before mentioned (viz. the Roy∣al Sun, and his two Seconds, the Conquerant and the Ad∣mirable. The most material Passages were, that after Ad∣miral Russel had given the Signal for the Ships to cut their Cables, Sir Ralph Delaval found that the French had quit∣ted the Race of Orney, and that some of them stood for the Bay of Cherbourg; he followed them, and saw three 3 deck'd Ships, but so close to the Shoar, that it was unsafe to follow them further, untill he had inform'd himself of the Road, they being within shoal Water, and sounding within Gun-shot, they strove to hinder it by continual Firings; so to prevent loss of time, Sir Ralph Delaval went on Board the St. Albans, and hoisted his Flag, ordering the Ruby and two Fireships to attend him, with which he stood in, leaving the great Ships without, but coming near, the French gauled him so extreamly, and finding the Fire-ships could not get in, he retreated out of shot, and Anchored, and called a Council of War, where it was re∣solved to attempt them in the Morningwith all the Third and Fourth Rates, and Fireships, but finding that would not doe the Business, the Water being shoal, Sir Ralph Delaval order'd Three Fire-ships to attempt the burning of them, going himself with Barges, and Tenders to take them up, if the Enemies shot hinder'd the Design. The Service was sharp, the Enemy firing both from their Ships
and Fort, yet the Bravery of the Officers and Men, o∣vercame the difficulty, so that two of the Fire-ships did Execution, burning two of them, the other Fire-ship by a Random shot was set on Fire, being ready to Board the Enemy. The Action was brave beyond Expression, and was earnestly recommended to Her Majesty by Admiral Delaval, who observing the People goe out of the re∣maining French Ship by Boatfulls, he commanded the St. Albans and the Reserve, with others to fire at her, be∣lieving it would make them quit her, and after some time finding no resistance, took all the Boats armed, and went on Board where were a great Number of Men, but no Officers, he took them all out maimed and whole, and set her on Fire. Sir Ralph Delaval had set all the French on shoar, but that he was told thirty sail of Ships were stan∣ding with him, which afterwards prov'd to be Sir John Ashby and the Dutch coming from the Westward, by which means all the Prisoners remained on Board, and were very uneasie to him; from hence they sailed Eastwards towards the Bay of la Hogue, where it was expected to find 3 or 4 more French Ships. This Action was of very great Consequence, and as great danger but the Admiral, Sir Ralph Delaval, well knew the bravery, and Loyalty of them he Command∣ed, would surmount all difficulties: The Captains of the Fireships Names were, Captain Heath, who burnt the Royal Sun, which was the greatest Action of all: For that Ship, being the Admiral, made a stout Resistance. Captain Greenway, burnt the Conquerant, which was also a brave Enterprise: The Admirable, was burnt by the Boats, after Captain Fowlis his Fireship was de∣stroyed
by the Enemies Shot; which if he had escaped there was no fear of his performing his Orders. A Captain of a French Fireship being taken declared, that during the first Engagement on the Nineteenth day, Monsieur Gabaret Admiral of their Blue, lost his Ship which carried Ninety Guns, and that four others were burnt, or sunk at the same time, and at the time when the three afore mentioned Ships were burnt, in the Bay of Cherbourg, four smaller were destroyed, and a∣bout three hundred of their Men perished; what the English could save were made Prisoners, and some others were not hindred going on Shore. Whilest this Gallant Action was Effecting, Admiral Russel lay with the remainder of the Fleet before La Hogue, having closely shut up all that were left of the French biggest Ships; there being Ten three Decks each, besides others. But about Twenty of their smaller Ves∣sels got away through the Race of Orney, and made to∣wards their own Harbours: It was impossible for the rest to escape the Vigilance of the English Admiral; who had now almost finished his Proposals, in the Let∣ter he sent to My Lord Nottingham, in which he says that if it pleased God to spare him a little clear weather, he doubted not to destroy their whole Fleet. And that such weather he had appears by the success; and through the whole time it is very Remarkable, that an especial Provi∣dence attended their Majesties just undertaking; for from the day the French Fleet put first to Sea, the Wind was for the most part full against them, or so contrary, that they could never get up to Admiral Delaval, and Carter,
when they had the only time to perform any thing, and as soon as Admiral▪ Russel▪ and the Dutch were joined, a Wind served fair which brought them to their destructi∣on, and hindred their Return. Thursday the 26th▪ came an Account by Letter from Admiral Russel, bearing Date the 24th of the last and greatest Destruction of the French Fleet, which I menti∣oned lay in the Bay La Hogue: That on the day before he sent Admiral Rooke, with a Squadron of Ships, and Fire∣ships, and all the Boats in the Fleet, to burn Thirteen Ships that lay there: And notwithstanding the continu∣al Firing the French made from their Ships, and Platforms (it being at their own Shore) it succeeded so that six three Deck Ships were burnt that Night, but then it be∣coming dark, and thick weather, the remainder were let alone until the next Morning, at which time the enter∣prize was renewed; the Enemy were beaten from several of their own Ships, and the English Seamen took possessi∣on of them, and turned their own Guns upon them, with which they beat them from their Platforms. This Acti∣on caused a great slaughter of the French, for one Ship of Fifty six Guns was overset and utterly lost▪ the rest were all burnt: and now there was not known to be one more of that Fleet at Sea, from which the French King and his favourers in England derived such hopes, and had cost him so much labour and Treasure to get together. That that which had been the Work of an Age to Compleat with all the Assistance England had in some foregoing Reigns been able to afford him, was in less than one Weeks time so Shattered, that it's now impossible France should ever make any Considerable Figure on that Ele∣ment,
either in War, or Trade, so that the Hands that raised them, have pull'd them down. And their own Dear Friends the Jacobites, who have so magnified the strength of that now Vincible Monarch, and so Contem∣ned that of their Native Country, from which they have▪ under the Government of Princes (to whom they would render themselves Obnoxious) received greater Bene∣fits and Advantages than the French King's Favourites in France. These also have Contributed their shares by deceiving themselves first, and next their Master, for whom they gathered Intelligence; by which means the French Fleet was Trusted at Sea, and have given an opportunity to that Admiral and other Commanders (which can never be sufficiently commended) to obtain a Victory, the greatest that ever was upon the Ocean, and as great in its Consequences. For at the lowest Computation, there have been burnt, and sunk no less than Twenty Eight, or Thirty (the greatest part be∣ing) of the biggest Ships not only that the French had, but that were in the World, and more than seven Years Peace, and all the Hands, and Treasure he can imploy can build over again, and set forth: But of that he will find his account short, being not in view of a prospect of Peace, nor may it be expected that England will fall into such another Lethargy, as to suffer themselves to be Rivalled in a Fleet, that had nothing that rendred them inferiour to us, but the Cou∣rage of our Officers, and Seamen.
To the End it may be known what strength the French Fleet was composed of (without the Thoulon Squadron) I shall insert the most exact Account that could be obtained thereof (viz.) Eighteen Ships, from upward of Eighty Guns to One hundred and six, and Thirty six from upwards of Sixty Guns to Eighty, Twelve Ships from Fifty Guns to Sixty, and Seven from thirty to Forty six, besides Twenty four Fire-ships, Twenty six Frigats, Twenty six Pinks, Fourteen Long-boats: The whole of the Men of War being de∣signed to be Seventy three, which were to have on board Forty thousand, Two hundred, Ninety nine Men, and Five thousand and Nineteen Guns: Besides these, Officers and Volunteers. And in the Fire-ships, One hundred, Sixty Guns, and Two hundred and Forty in the Long-boats. By the foregoing relation it will be found, that whatever part of this Fleet was out; yet the great Ships are very near every one destroyed, and the smaller so disabled, that some will never be repaired; and such that can, will be a work of Time, and when that is done will be very incon∣siderable; for 'tis easie to determine the strength of such a Fleet, whenas they had that vast Addition, and were not able to dispute with the Force and Bravery of the English and Dutch. Besides, all the loss of the Seamen is irrepara∣ble, the huge number of them that have been cut off by the several ways of burning, drowning and killing in the time of the Battel, may reasonably be supposed to be more in num∣ber than remains in Service in the Trade of France; and though those may be possibly spared for their King's Ser∣vice (for I question not but their Trade is near at an end, their victorious Neighbours will carefully attend the Increase of more Seamen by that means) it is plain that the Power
of France is in its declension at Sea, which is the place England had most reason to fear it; and as 'tis not probable they can ever recover their strength; so 'tis possible and that by a reasonable Conjecture, that in a few Months to come, the French King will be Master of as few Ships as he found at his coming to the Crown. For since the coming away of the News of this last de∣struction of their Men of War, we have received advice of burning more than twenty of their Transport-Ships, which lay in the Bay of La Hogue, and which the Prisoners declare were designed for embarking of Men for the inten∣ded Invasion of England, the Admiral found some Ob∣struction in the Execution of this Design, from two small forts that were on the Shore, and their small Shot, which the French and Irish being drawn down from their Camp, made upon our Seamen. But the former Successes, and the Chearfulness they undertook this Enterprize with, made all resistance ineffectual, so that the Admiral's Com∣mands were as punctually performed, as they were readily obeyed; for not one Ship that lay in all that Bay escaped. The Admiral after this, commanded the Admiral of the Blue Squadron to sail towards Havre de Grace (and if it was practicable) to serve the rest of the Transport-Ships that were in that Harbour in the same manner, whilst him∣self, with the rest of the Fleet, sailed towards the Coast of England; and where on the 26th. he arrived at Spithead, and commanded that the 27th. should be observed with Publick Prayers and Thanksgivings throughout the Fleet, for the Victory obtained over Their Majesties Enemies. On the 30th. of May it was credibly reported, that a Person of great Quality received a Letter from Plymouth, or some place near adjoining, that of the four great French
Ships, formerly mentioned to be disabled, and seen off the Isle of Wight, three were taken by those refitted at Ports∣mouth, and one sunk. Thus nothing but further Additions to the Victory come from all Parts, and the Reports of the French Prisoners confirm their loss greater than we knew, and some material Passages, which we had no other way to be informed of, but from themselves; one of which I shall in this place recite, which is, that the French Admiral of the Blue Squadron, which was set on Fire the first night of the Engagement, had Mr. Fitz James on board, that is Brother to the Duke of Berwick; but whe∣ther he perished in the Flames, or saved himself by chan∣ging his Ship, is not yet certainly known. The Dutch, both Officers and Seamen, showed great forwardness as often as it was their Turn to have the Ene∣my to engage: But they who had so melancholy a share two years before when they were over-powered by the Enemies superior Force, were now made amends by the English, who happened to have the greatest part of this Action upon their own hands, and so gallantly behaved themselves, that they never gave an Opportunity to them to signalize themselves when they had the French first to engage (as it appears for the most part the English had the Chance of that.) The first Five hours on the 19th. day, the French are owned by all that have hitherto given any Account of the Fight, to have pursued the Attack they so briskly begun, with more Resolution and Bravery than ever that Nation were known to fight at Sea before; and had they had any other than such Enemies to deal with, might with great Reason have expected the Advan∣tage. But the two extreme parts of the English Fleet, that composed the Line of Battle, not being able to come up
with the French to assist those of their own part, yet knew how to make the best Improvement of the Time, which they did; for whilst Admiral Russel engaged the French Admiral and another or two, singly by himself, part of the Blue Squadron got the Weather-gage, which the French had before from the beginning of the Fight. And as this very much animated the English and Dutch, so it dispirited the Enemy; they soon after towing off West-ward. And thus happily concluding what may materially be expected at Sea both for this Year, and others to come, I will en∣tertain you with a Copy of a Letter from an Officer in the Fleet to his Friend in London; which is in these Words.
UPON the opening of the Day in the Nineteenth in the Morning, we were Alarm'd by our Scouts from the Windward of the approach of the French Fleet, which oc∣casioned us both to draw into a Line of Battle, with the Star∣board Tacks on board, the Dutch leading the Van. The White Squadron of the French commanded by Tourville, bore down with all imaginable Gallantry on Mr. Russel our Admiral, and the Red; the White and Blue, commanded by Amfrevile on the Dutch, though at so great distance there was little done on either side; and Gabaret with the French Blue Squadron kept so far a-Head, that the last Twenty Ships of ours a-Stern, had hardly any Body to Fire at, but what was at a great distance; the Rear-Admiral of the Blue, who was next the Red, had something to do, but not much; and the Vice-Admiral of the Enemies Blue, who ought to have engaged the same Division on our side, took Heart-a-grace, and with his whole Division run quite away from the Fleet, without Firing a Gun the whole Day; so that the whole Battle fell on the Red on our side, attacked by the French White, and assisted by the Rear-Admiral of their Blue: For some time of the Day Sir Cloudsley Shovel en∣gaged them of the Blue: It was very hotly disputed doubt∣less on both sides, being within Musquet Shot, pelting such vast Quantities of great Shot; but the advantage in less than two Hours appeared on our side, by the Britannia's so handling the Royal Sun, that she lay by an Hour without hardly Firing a Shot. The whole Day there was but a little Gale of Wind, and hindred our Blew Squadron from getting in nearer to Windward of the Enemy; and to add to this Misfortune the whole Day was attended with such a Fog,
that after the first two Hours of the Fight, one could scarce see the next Ship's Head. Just in the close of the Evening the French White, taking the occasion of the Fogg, and the Flood Tide, and a little Wind, let go their Anchors to fa∣cilitate their retreat, and our Blue in the thick Fogg drove through them, which caused hot Firing on both sides, which was at Night stopt by the Fogg, the Darkness being such that we could not see a Ship's length a-Head; and so ended this Day with all Honour to the Red, who were engaged very hard, and bravely beat all their Opposers; and Ad∣miral Russel hath all Honour imaginable due to him, First, in commanding in Chief on so Happy a Day; next having al∣most the whole Battle with his Squadron; but in my Opi∣nion chiefly having Hand to Hand silenced the best Ship of the Enemies in less than two Hours time, so as to be Fired at without making a Shot. This Gentleman, Monsieur Tour∣ville, was handled just as he did two years ago the Crippled Dutch. And thus you may see what influence inequality of Number has on the best of Men; for Monsieur Tourville, (brave Enemy) could not move Amfreville in the Van hard∣ly to come within a long random Shot, nor Vice-Admiral Panetir in the Blue to strike a stroke; and indeed Admiral Gabaret so far kept his distance that little could be done by him; yet these three Men have particular Characters in France for Fighting Men, the two latter, being Soldiers of Fortune, raised  heir Merit. The French will plead doubtless that we oumbred them much; it's true, but by what I saw, and am tainly told, they were beaten by equal Number, or less; f though I have said they were few in Number, and hardly half fought yet our Red Squadron was not more; and I do not find our Great Number stood us in any other stead than to frighten their Fighting Ships, which
gave us a Victory with saving of much Blood, and with de∣struction of their Ships, which has since happened. And so, Sir, I have given you the Proceedings of a Happy Day to our Country; but unhappy to my self, who had no share in this Honour, my Post being the very last of the Fleet, on that Tack of the last Twenty Ships of ours, with which the Vice-Admiral of the French Blue run away, and the rest wearily kept the Wind, so that we had not one Ship to Fire at. The little Wind and very Foggy Weather hin∣dred us from getting up to our Friends. Next to our Admiral, Sir Ralph Delaval, Sir Cloud∣sley Shovel, the London, St. Andrew, Sandwich, and Royal Katharine, have suffered much with loss of Men. As I said the whole Fleets coninued driving all Night in a Fogg, without seeing one another: The Morning following the Wind came about to the East, when we all met, both English and Dutch, and pursued the Enemy to the West-ward; about ten a Clock it cleared up, and we saw above Thirty Sail bear∣ing down, who about Noon came to an Anchor with the strong Flood Tide near Cherbourge; when the Wind came West, at the Night Flood the French got loose; and plyed, and in the Morning were at an Anchor near to Alderney; and we without having better ground and less Tide, by Eight a Clock happily found about Twenty Sail of their best Ships to drive to the Eastward along their own Coasts; and when it was fit, our Admiral made the Sign to cut our Cables and follow them, which we did, and Monsieur Tourville's, and Two other Three-Deck'd Ships, and Two Frigats run ashore at Cherbourge, and were since burnt by Sir Ralph Delaval: Thirteen more of their Ships, of which Eight were Three-Deck'd, run into La Hogue, near Cape Barfleur, and these thir∣teen are since burnt by Vice-Admiral Rook, as Admiral
Russel commanded, with all their Boats, and some Transport Ships; five other got away in the Night; Two of Sixty Guns sunk in the Fight, and one Three-Deck'd Ship burnt by Acci∣dent. May 28▪ 1692 I am, Sir, &c. This Account agreeing with our former Advices, and being something more at large, I thought I would not be amiss to insert in this place; and shall next proceed to mention the Names and Strength of such of the French Fleet that have been destroyed since the beginning of this Great Action, which though they are not all, yet so many as are here being true, perhaps it may be some satisfaction to those that are rejoyced at this Prosperity of their Majesty's undertaking.
A True List of some of the Ships, and their Names who Commanded them, together with the number of Men, and Guns they carryed, that were de∣stroyed by their Majesties Fleet in the Battle, and pursuit, viz.   Guns. Men. Commanded by THe Royal Sun of 104 900 Admiral Tourville The Admirable of 102 650 by Mons. Beaujeau The Conquerer of 82 552 Monsieur Du Maignon These were burnt at Cape de Wycke near Cherborrge, by Sir Ralph Delavale.   Guns. Men. Commanded by The Ambitious of 96 550 Vice Admiral Vilette. The Thunderer of 84 600 Count De Relingue. The Magnificent of 76 550 Mons. de Coerlogon The Triumphant of 76 490 M. Manch. d'Ablemont The St. Philip of 84 550 Chevelier D'Amfreville The Feirce of 76 490 Monsieur De Alteloire The Amiable of 68 420 Monsieur de Reales The Arrogant of 60 350 Monsieur de la Vigiere These Eight with four more whose Names, &c. are wanting, were Burnt, and one Overset in the Bay la Hogue, by Vice Admiral Rooke. Admiral Russel, who had the high Trust and Command of the English Fleet, under their Majesties, upon which de∣pended the fate of all Europe; and of which he has so worthily acquited himself, and with such inexpressable ad∣vantage
to the English Nation in particular, having gain'd this Glorious Success, without the loss of one of their Ma∣jesties Men of War, or of their As the Dutch. I shall therefore give you a brief account of their Number, Rates, Men and Guns, both English and Dutch, (viz. of the Eng∣lish) Six ist Rates, which carry 4615 men 796 Guns. Ten Second Rates, which carry 6420 men 900 Guns. Thirty five 3d. Rates which carry 14650 men 2333 Guns. Thirteen Fourth rates which carry 14650 men 550 Guns. Besides these there were Twenty three Fireships. The Number of the Men of War were Sixty three, which carried on Board 28570 men and 4489 Guns. The Dutch Squadron consisted also of Nine First Rates, carrying 4015 men 769 Guns. Ten Second Rates, carrying 3765 men 718 Guns. Nine Third Rates, carrying 2835 men 570 Guns. Eight Fourth Rates, carrying 1735 men 410 Guns. Besides these there were to this Squadron fourteen Frigats and Fireships: This Squadron was composed of thirty six Men of War, which carried on Board 12350 men and 2494 Guns. The total of both the English Fleet, and Dutch Squadron being Ninty nine Men of War, 40920 Seamen, and 6983 Guns, Friggats and Fireships Thirty seven, besides Tenders, Scouts, Spyes and other Boats. But of these some of the English were either not ready, or not all the Dutch Joyned, or were otherwise disposed of, for in the Engagement there was not quite Ninty Sale, however so many as there were, are still remaining through the mercy of God, and the singular Care and Conduct of the Admiral, who being safely arrived at Spithead, Her Majesty ordred some of the principal Nobility down to Compliment him upon his prosperous Success; and Her Majesty has made provision to give testimonies of Her
Approbation to all the rest of the Officers of their Fidelity, and Gallantry: And commanded a great sum of Money to be distributed amongst the Seamen, who behaved themselves to Admiration. And thus ends the total Defeat of the French Fleet, and the most considerable Action that ever was done on these Seas; and earlier in the year then two great Fleets ever fought in the memory of Man. Her Ma∣jesty dispatched away Expresses thereof to the King at his Campe in Flanders, who has since acquainted his Allies with it, by whom it was recieved with all the Demon∣strations of Joy, and it is hoped this is an earnest of further Successes to their Majesties Arms. FINIS.
