a657 12881652 94947
ADVICE to the Livery-men of London, in their Choice of a LORD-MAYOR, on Michaelmas Day, 1692. Gentlemen, IT was a Custom among the Romans, that who∣ever procured them new, or maintained their old Liberties, were made Patricii of that Noble City: It ought therefore certainly to be the equal Care of the Citizens of London, in their present Election of a Lord-Mayor. In order to which, be plea∣sed to consider whether it be reasonable to side or join with those who leave no Stone unturn'd to de∣stroy and subvert the present Government; and whether 'tis sitting to Poll for such Men whom all the Jacobites and Papists make their Interest for, in op∣position to Persons of known Loyalty, Honesty, and Zeal to the present Government, and Rights and Libertics of the City: which makes us fear they have the same ill Design now in hand, as they had when the French Fleet was invited upon our Coast. And now I humbly offer to your Consideration, whether Sir Jonathan R—d and Sir Peter D—l be Men qua∣lified for that great Honour and Trust, considering, 1. We suppose Sir Jonathan R—d was for the surrendring of the Charter of London, because after Judgment entred against it, 8 worthy Aldermen that would not comply, were turned out, and 16 or 17 kept in by Commission during Pleasure, of which number Sir Jonathan R—d, and Sir Peter D—l, were two. 2. Sir Jonathan R—d being Alderman (in the Mayoralty of Sir William Pritchard) of Bishopsgate-Ward, he adjourn'd the Wardmote for the Service of his Party five Weeks, in order to the Choice of such Common-Council-Men, as would comply with the sur∣rendring of the City-Charter. 3. That day my Lord Russel was convicted, the said Sir Jonathan R—d came rejoicing from the Ses∣sions-House to the King's-Head-Tavern in Leadenhall∣street, and declared the Jury had done like honest Men. 4. Sir Jonathan R—d recommended a Jacobite Parson to preach last Summer at Tunbridg-Wells to the Nobility and Gentry, who omitted praying for King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, nay not so much as any King or Queen at all; for which he received a severe Reprimand from a Person in great Authority. 5. His only Son Sir Gemmitt Raymund pays double Taxes for not taking the Oaths to the present Go∣vernment, and keeps one Hart, a non-swearing Par∣son, for his Chaplain, who quitted two Preferments rather than he would comply to take the said Oaths. 6. And now consider whether so weak and easy a Man (to say no worse) as Sir Jonathan R—d is by his very Friends esteemed to be, and who is wholly under the Government of his Wife and Deputy L—m, is fit to be Lord-Mayor for the Year ensuing. And for Sir Peter D—l; 1. He was Sheriff of Surry, and impannell'd that Jury who gave 800 Pounds Damages to Boldsworth the Powder-man at Temple-Bar, against Sir Thomas Pilkington, late Lord-Mayor of London, when upon the Trial not two Pence Damage did appear; and some short time after the said Trial, being in Company, he declar'd it to be an honest Verdict. 2. We suppose Sir Peter D—l was for the sur∣render of the Charter of London, because he was so zealous for the surrender of the Haberdashers Char∣ter, when he was Master of that Company; at which time, he put these two ensnaring Questions to the said Company, viz. As many of you as are for sur∣rendring your Charter, hold up your Hands.—And so many of you that are against the King, and will not comply to surrender your Charter, hold up your Hands. And accordingly the Charter was surrendred. 3. Sir Peter D—l being chose a Member of Parliament for the Borough of Southwark in K. James's Reign, declared the Letter E ought to be branded in the Forehead of all those who were for the Bill of Exclusion; and voted for and sided with those who were for making the Militia of the Kingdom useless, and for keeping up a standing Army to inslave the Nation; which was carried in the Negative but by one Voice, upon which the Parliament was soon after dissolved. 4. And when that Wicked Design was on foot, to subvert the CHƲRCH OF ENGLAND, in order to establish Popery, (and as the proper means to effect it) K. James then closetted, among others, this Gentleman Sir Peter D—l, who promised him to take off the Penal Laws and Test in the new Parliament he was then preparing to call; and there∣upon Sir Peter D—l was left in Commission of the Peace in the County of Surry, when several worthy Gentlemen, refusing to comply, were turned out. 5. In the aforesaid Reign he was look'd upon to be a Spy upon the Court of Aldermen, betrayed their Se∣crets to K. James, and was thereupon deservedly nick∣named Sir Peter Tell Tale. Sir R. J. amongst several other Aldermen, resenting his Treachery to that Court, meeting him upon the Exchange, threathed to cut him over the Pate. 6. The same Sir Peter D—l was the first Person presumed to act as Sheriff by Commission, not being elected by the Livery-men of London; and returned that Jury who murdered Colonel SYDNEY, and assisted at his Execution. Now, Gentlemen, consider the Characters of the above-mentioned Persons in these few things offered to your Consideration; and besides, the present Lieutenancy of London make their whole Interest for them, which, if carried, they doubt not upon the least Alarm to bring out the Trained Bands, which if out but for a Week, will put each House-keeper in the City to near twenty Shillings Charge or more. Now (Fellow-Citizens) if we have two such good Men as Sir JOHN FLEET and Sir JOHN HOƲBLON, Persons of unspotted Reputation, both to the Interest of the present Government in general, and to the Rights and Liberties of this City in particular; Why ought we not to give our Votes for these Gentlemen, rather than for Men guilty of the aforementioned Crimes?
