A778 R22487 12489171 62331
THE AGREEMENT OF THE Associated Ministers In the County of NORFOLK And City and County of Norwich, Concerning Publick Catechizing, and their resoluti∣ons to revive it in their severall Congregations. Together with some Explanatory Discour∣ses annexed, declaring the particular grounds, moving to the Agreement expressed in the severall Articles. To which is also subjoyned, An Exhortation to the Members of their respective Congregations, exciting them to a submission and mu∣tuall assistance of their Ministers in this method of Instruction. 1 Cor. 14.20. Brethren be not Children in understanding, howbeit in malice, be you Children, but in understanding be you Men. Ego etiam Theologus sum, qui mediocrem usum, & peritiam sacrae Scripturae variis periculis sum consecutus, sed non ita efferor hoc dono quin quotidie unà cum pueris Decalogum, Symbo∣lum, & decem praecepta mecum orem, & intento corde inspiciam non tantum verba transcur∣rens, sed etiam observans quid singula verba significent: & sanè cum hoc non facio & aliis negotiis occupor, sentio inde certum incommodum. Luther in Psal. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford, and are to be sold at his Shop next door to the Castle, over against the Guild-Hall in Norwich. 1659.
To the Reverend, our much honou∣red Brethren, the Ministers of the Gospell within the County of Norfolk, and City and County of Norwich, whether agreeing with us, or dissenting from us in their perswasi∣ons, concerning Ecclesiasticall Discipline. IT is an excellent Rule, prescribed by the great Apostle of the Gentiles, (in case of Brethrens dissentings each from other,) that wherein they have attained, they should yet walke by the same Rule, minding the same thing. By vertue of which we presume, to offer our Brethren our Agreement in the matter of Catechizing, being the first fruits of our long debates, and what we perswade our selves, will meet with a desirable acceptance from them. We cannot in the least doubt (Dear and Reve∣rend Brethren,) but that many of you (however of dif∣fering perswasions from us in some things of Ecclesi∣asticall Order, or in regard of your remoteness of Ha∣bitations, not Associated with us,) have with an equall moving of Bowels with (if not exceeding any of) us, considered the sad effects, which the want of a setled Discipline in the Church; the divisions of Brethren in their Sentiments, concerning the things of Religion, and (we are afraid) our own too great deficiency to our
respective Duties, have produced in severall parts of these as well as other Counties in this Nation. If both we, and our fellow Servants had not too long slept, the enemy (doubtless) had not sown Tares, to such an unhappy advantage. The consideration of which, did at last Alarum some of us (more conveni∣ently scituated for a correspondence each with other;) to a serious consideration of what (in this dissetled estate of the Church of God amongst us) might by a volun∣tary Association, and mutuall Obligation laid upon each other, be done to give a little check to that torrent of confusion, which we saw every day like a streame of mighty waters rushing in upon us, and upon the people for whom we must be accountable in the day of Jesus Christ. Having therefore first agreed in some Rules of Order to be observed by us, for the managing of more generall, and particular meetings, for the best ad∣vantage to so noble an end, as is the preserving amongst us the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; the first thing we propounded for the Subject of our debates, was an uniforme agreement in the Administration of all the Ordinances of the Gospell, of which the Lord had made us Stewards: that having by a joynt owning of the Doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith and Catechismes, advised by the Late Reverend Assembly, de∣clared our oneness of judgment in the things of God, We might likewise agree in the same practice, especi∣ally as to publick Administrations, serving the Lord with one heart, in one and the same way; and by this meanes taking away all stumbling blocks out of the way of weak Christians. Upon a survey of publick Ordinances, we found that some (which we must look upon as publick Ordi∣nances,) had been for a long time disused, and that some
began to question, whither there were any divine war∣rant for them: these were publick Catechizing, Read∣ing of the Scriptures, and singing of Psalmes in the pub∣lick Congregations. We resolved to begin with the first, in our debates. And because it is questioned by some, whether there be any warrant for it in holy Scrip∣ture, or any great need or profitable use of it; and o∣thers question, whether any but Children be the Sub∣jects of it? and others are again divided in their fan∣cies, concerning the particular forme of Catechisme, most fit to be universally used: And lastly, (while the Magistrate pleaseth to interpose his authority,) We perceived some at a loss to determine, what could be done by us as Ministers, to promove it, amongst fro∣ward people, who should not be found willing to sub∣mit themselves to this Method of instruction. We of∣fered all these things first to the more private debates of our Brethren in their particular Associations, who be∣ing first agreed amongst themselves, were desired to send in their thoughts to the generall meeting; which results of their more private debates, when we had ob∣tained from them, and came to compare them each with other, we found no difference in judgment amongst us concerning the things, and very inconsiderable differen∣ces, in the Sentiments of particular Brethren, relating to the uniforme practice and exercise of them. What small diversities there were in the severall Papers, were easi∣ly reconciled, upon a debate in a generall Meeting. And considering with our selves, what a prejudice the world (this part of the world especially) hath entertained a∣gainst this usefull exercise, because it is represented to them as a puerile exercise; and by reason of the scan∣dall which others have brought upon it, as tending but to a forme of knowledg, or at most but to a forme of
godliness, and (in their opinions) anticipating the teach∣ings of the spirit, (which many cant of in these daies, but wofully betray themselves, that they know not of what they speak, the spirit teaching men not by Enthu∣sianismes, but by and in the use of meanes, and much, (Secundum quod nctus est Organum) (to use Erasmus his expression) not using now adaies to teach men, to speak diverse Tongues, without learning the Rudi∣ments of the Grammer, nor yet the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, without meanes proportionate to that end. We say considering these things, that we might (together with our Brethren in other parts of the Nation,) beare a publick Testimony, to the use∣fulness of this ancient exercise, and let our people know, upon what grounds we have so deliberately pro∣ceeded to the Agreement we are come to (through Gods blessing) upon our debates, as to the reviving the prctaice of this exercise amongst us; As also how far they stand obliged to a submission to it: We thought sit to refer it to one of our Brethren, out of our seve∣rall Papers to draw up, the Summe of our Agreement in this thing, with some explanatory Discourses, contain∣ing the Arguments which prevailed with us, to enforce such an Agreement from us; and an Exhortation to the severall persons, who are Members of our particular Congregations, to a just submission and performance of their duty, both in reference to us their Ministers, and more especially to their own souls, and the souls of those who are committed to their domesticall charge. Which being done, and the draught (as is here presen∣ted to you, appproved by us) we thought fit to publish it to the world, as a testimony of our unanimity in this thing, and concurrence with our Brethren in other parts, and as a witness, both against our selves, and our peo∣ple
too, if our people shall hereafter perish, through want of such knowledg, as may this way (through the blessing of God upon our endeavours) be communicated unto them. We hope our Reverend Brethren will not conceive every person in our Association, respon∣sall for every particular passage in the Explanatory Discourses, or Exhortation annexed, much less for eve∣ry failer the Press may be guilty of; but only under∣stand, that we are joyntly agreed in the Articles, de∣claring our judgment and resolutions to practice in this thing, and to the substance of what is contained in the discourses annexed, explaining the grounds of our a∣greement, and the matter of the Exhortation, though we have not particularly examined every Quotation, or accent; or (if we had thought it considerable) possibly this or that phrase might have been altered by some one or other of us. The summe of what we here present is the Agreement of foure score and odde Per∣sons in Association with us, and that upon due and mature deliberation. And nothing herein, having been imposed by us upon his Brother, by the Magi∣steriall dictate of any one, but being first propoun∣ded and debated, freely consented to by all present and concerned in it, as overruled by the dictates of their own consciences, and force of Argument, we conceive it both will & ought to make the deeper impression upon others; and will be conceived by all, who have concurred in it, more highly obliging to a suitable practice, of what in these debates they have either pleaded for, or at least by a silent vote consented to, refusing the liberty grant∣ed them throughout the debates, to produce their argu∣ments, either against the whole, or any part thereof. And we trust that we need not multiply words to our other (Deare and Reverend Brethren) in these Coun∣tries, who have not been equally concerned with us,
in these debates, and this Agreement which comes forth as the result of them; considering that we know they are sufficiently instructed, how much they are concerned,Non est quod bonus dicat Pastor, quid mihi cum sordi∣do coriario, aut cum abjecto mendico, aut tri∣obolari malier∣culâ? Nulla no∣bis anima vilis videri debet, pro quâ domi∣nus gloriae mori dignatus est. Erasmus in Ecclesiaste. that the souls of all in their particular Con∣gregations, should not perish for want of knowledg. And for any to say, what have they to do with poore and ig∣norant persons? (as Erasmus long since noted) cannot be the voice of a good Shepheard; for no soule ought to appeare vile in our eyes, for which the Lord of glory vouchsafed to dye upon the Cross. We trust none of our Brethren will take it ill at our hands, that they have not been called into counsell with us, (upon which ac∣count we have only stiled it the Agreement of the Associated Ministers in the County of Norfolk, &c.) We trust the most of our Brethren know, that the doores of our Association have been open to all those who were willing but to declare, their consent to the substance of the Doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith,Ord. 3d. Jan. 1644. Forme of Church go∣vernment, 29th Sep. 1648. and Catechismes, lately advised by the Reverend Assembly of Divines; and their approbation (so far) of the Directo∣ry for Worship and forme of Church-government, so also advised and established by the Authority of Parliament, as that they would Preach nothing contrary to the former, nor practice any thing contrary to the two latter. So that we are not justly to be charged with slighting of any of our Brethren, because as we conceive our selves obliged to conforme so far as might be, to the authority of the Parliament, in things wherein our con∣sciences were fully satisfied; So we judging it reasona∣ble (especially in such times of reproach and blasphemy as these are) that some common Test, should be put up∣on those, to whom we gave the right hand of fellowship in such an intimate degree of communion, could think of none more fit, then what (agreeing with the judgment
of most sober Christians, and the best reformed Church∣es) had also the approbation of so grave and Learned an Assembly, and the signature of publick authority. Nor would we have our Brethren interpret us as if we thought our selves the only Ministers of the Gospell, in these Countries thus far agreed; We know and are perswaded, that we are not, but are aware of many, who have been hindred from this concurrence withus, only by their disconveniency of habitation, at such distances from us and the place of our generall meet∣ing, that they could with no conveniencies personally attend these debates, and who we doubt not will (though as to the debates they were absent in the body) yet as to the practice evidence that they were present in spirit with us, and will rejoyce in what we here ten∣der unto them. For any of our Brethren to whom this may be any rock of offence that they have not been present with us; we shall only speak unto them with allusion to the words by which Gideon once pacified the Ephraimites, contending with him because they were not called to fight with the Midianites. What have we done, in comparison of what you yet may do? If God shall put into your hearts to practice with us what we have agreed. The gleaning of your Grapes of that nature, will be better then the Vintage of our debates, in reference to the end which we have pursued in all that we have done of this nature. The generality of our Brethren being (as we con∣ceive) sufficiently with us convinced of their duty in the reviving of this ancient and usefull exercise. We have nothing to do but only to stir up their pure minds by way of remembrance. That as they believe so they would also speak and do. If any of our Brethren shall think we have extended the obligation too far, in
bringing aged persons under a duty of submission to to this method of instruction, and declaring our resolu∣tions, to deny the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to such as refuse such a submission; we shall (besides what we have hereafter produced in our justification) mind our Reverend Bretheren, That we are inform∣ed by a Reverend Brother, who upon diligent search had found it in the Records of the Bishops Courts, in the City of Norwich; That Ministers were anci∣ently enjoyned to go from seat to seat and to require of their severall Parishoners, as well old as young, an account of their knowledg in the Principles of Religion, and both Minister and People were presentable in the Ecclesiasticall Courts, if either the one neglected his duty in inquiring such account, or they omitted their duty in giving it to them. It hath been the constant judgement of all reformed Churches, that ignorant persons ought not to be admitted to the Lords Supper. Those Reverend Persons, who by command of King Henry the eighth, and afterward of Edward the sixth, drew up that Book called Re∣formatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, determine that none ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper, whose Faith was not perfect in all parts.Tit. de div. offi∣cis. cap, 7. Nam ad sacro∣sanctam domini mensam nemo admitti debet, cujus fides om∣nibus partibus perfecta non sit. Our Brethren (we trust) will easily be perswaded, that in their spirituall fishing, (to which God hath cal∣led them) the little fishes are not those alone whom their Nets are laid out for, he is doubtless a lamen∣table Fisherman, who contents himself with enclo∣sing the Fry within the compass of his Net. And if any of our Brethren, can obtaine so easie a dis∣charge from their consciences in the discharge of the great work of the Ministry, as to think the Preaching of a Sermon or two in a Week, is a
due fulfilling of the work of their Ministry, to∣wards all but Children, we shall but desire of them to confute themselves, by taking account from some one or two of their People, (such especial∣ly as are of the poorer sort, and have wanted like advantages of Education with others,) how farre they are profited in a distinct knowledge of the Principles of Religion, by the many yeares paines, which they, or others before them, have spent a∣mongst them in Preaching the word of righteous∣ness; yea even in those places, where Preaching hath been mannaged with the best tendency, and to the best advantage for such an end, Oh! how dreadfull is the work of the Ministry, concern∣ing which the great Apostle cryes out, Who is sufficient for these things? We cannot without trembling thinke of that passage of Chrysostome. I speake (saith he) no otherwise then I thinke,, &c. Chrysost. in Acta. homil. 3a. and judge; I do not thinke that there are many Ministers will be saved: but the much greater number of them will perish: The reason is, be∣cause the work of the Ministry requires an ex∣traordinary Spirit; for he will meet with many things that will take him off from his Duty: and he had need of a numberless number of eyes to see to the discharge of it. Do not you see (saith he) how many things are required of a Minister? he must be apt to teach, full of for∣bearance, faithfull as to the Word of God; how great is this difficulty? The sinnes of o∣thers will be reckoned to him. I say no more, if but one poore soul goes away not instructed, his whole Salvation is hazarded by it, for the loss of one soul is so great, as cannot be compen∣sated:
for if the Salvation of this or that indivi∣duall soul, was judged by God of so great conse∣quence, that for its sake, the Sonne of God must become Man, and suffer so great things; how great must the punishment be, which the ruine of one soul, will require for satisfaction. And if that man who hath contributed to the loss of his Brothers naturall life, deserves to dye for it; what doth he deserve who contributes to his Brothers de∣privation of eternall life? Oh that this Meditation might so farre sinke, both into our hearts, and the hearts of all our Bre∣thren, who have been called to this Sacred Office, and so far operate, as to ingage both us and them, To take heed to our selves,2 Tim. 4.2. and the flock of Christ committed to our and their charge, that we may neither contribute to their ruine by example,Acts 19.41, 27. nor yet by Doctrine, neither by the Commission of any thing unworthy of us, or Omission of any du∣ty incumbent upon us, but that we may Preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and Doctrine, not ceasing to warne every one with teares night and day. Nor shunning to declare unto all the whole Counsell of God, warning and instructing them from house to house, not counting our life, much less our labours deare to us, So that we may finish our course with joy, and the Ministry, which we have received of the Lord Jesus Christ, to testifie the Gospell of the grace of God. We know to whom we are speaking, and shall therefore forbeare further to multiply words, to press a confessed duty. We have only further to be∣seech our Brethren, to consider, how conducible, to those glorious ends, which both they and we
aime at in the reviving of this exercise; an uni∣formity in our practice, as to the exercise of it, will be: at least as to the formes of Catechisme, which we have agreed, in using that first, which is contained in the lesser Catechisme, advised by the late Reverend Assembly of Divines, and published by Authority of Parliament, (as appears by the Or∣der prefixed to it, dated the 15. of September, 1648. What reasons have constrained from us an Agreement as to the use of that forme, Our Brethren will see in the following sheets; and we hope they will appeare as cogent to them, as they have been to us. The great Apostle 1 Cor. 1.10. hath taught us how conducible to the avoiding of divisions amongst us, it is, that people speake all the same thing, in matters of this nature, and our Brethren will easily con∣ceive, with us, how much it will gratifie, such as are of weaker judgements and apprehensions, to say nothing of the expediency of it, in refe∣rence to the removals of Families, out of the precincts of one Congregation, into the Precincts of others. In which cases (especially as to Children and Persons of weaker capacities) the work will be toties quoties, to be again began, if different formes be used in severall pla∣ces. Having premised thus much, we leave our A∣greement in this thing with the grounds of it, to the serious consideration of all our Brethren, and fellow labourers in the work of the Lord, Commending both their and our labours herein to the Lord, and the blessing of his grace, and assuring them, that we have nothing more in our desires, then that we might all walk toge∣ther knitted in love, and preserving the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Though we all waies judg, it would be as great an errour in us, to sell the truths of God, or
part with the purity of Administrations in the worship of God; to hold correspondency with men, as it was in the Romans,G. Cassander, De officiis pii veri. to build their Temple of Concord, in the very place where their most seditious outrages were committed. And we are so far of Cassanders mind as to think; That alone to be true, and solid peace amongst Christians, which is conjoyned with the glory of God, and the obedience of his will, and is seioined from all deprava∣tions of Heavenly Doctrine and divine Worship. In which we trust also our Brethren are agreed with us.
ARTICLES Containing the AGREEMENT Of severall Associated Ministers Of the Gospell, within The County of NORFOLK, AND City and County of Norwich, Concerning Publick Catechizing. I. WEjudg, That Catechizing by way of Question and Answer is the most accommodate way of teaching the Foundations of the Doctrine of Christ, and an Ordinance of Christ, under the Gospell, falling under the more generall Pre∣cept of Teaching; necessary, highly usefull, and ex∣pedient:
and we unanimously agree to revive the practice of it in our respective Congregations in confor∣mity both the practice of primitive and lately reformed Churches. 2. We judge, That the Subjects or Persons to be thus instructed, are the ignorant, whither old or young, though a difference of age or quality, may in point of prudence require a different Method, in dealing with them: We (ac∣cordingly) agree to use all proper meanes to discover such in our Congregations, as be ignorant, and accordingly to deal with them. 3. We judge, That the use of a forme in this ex∣ercise (at least at first is most expedient) and we (accordingly) resolve to practice, making use of that forme, which we find in the lesser Catechisme, pub∣lished by Authority of Parliament, upon advice first had, with the late Reverend Assembly; yet we shall not rest in that forme: nor tye up our selves in that exercise, to those Questions alone which we find there, but shall, as we see cause adde others for Explication. 4. We judge, That the most convenient time and place for this exercise, is the Lords day, and the place of publick Meeting for the Congregation; and we agree to practice it, upon the Lords daies, at least six Moneths in each year. 5. We judge it reasonable considering, the long disuse of this Exercise amongst us, and the present state of our Congregations, that such as are above eighteen years of Age, and cannot be perswaded, to come publickly to be examined; be incouraged to submit to this instru∣ction; by our gratifying their infirmity, so farre as to allow them a time for private conference; and we a∣gree, to allow them some proportion of time weekly, or o∣otherwise, when they may come to us; or we will go to them for this purpose.
6. We judge it our duty, as to this exercise, to a∣void all occasions of scandall, and accordingly agree, to examine, no young Women privately, without other witnesses, and to observe all tenderness, and prudence, towards others, especially Superiours, having respect to every ones Capacity, Education, Age and Qua∣lity. 7. We do agree, in case our people desire it rather, and be willing, by conforming to it to inconrage us in such extraordinary labour, to set apart some time weekly, upon some week-day for this exercise, so farre as our other necessary occasions will give us leave. 8. We do judge Catechizing to be not only a piece of the Ministeriall duty, but also of the duty of all such as are betrusted with the charge and Governement of others, as Parents, Masters, and Governours of Schooles: and we do agree accordingly, to press it, upon all such within the Precincts of our Congrega∣tions. 9. In case there shall be found, within the Pre∣cincts of our Congregations, any concerning whom we shall not have a reasonable ground, to presume them competently instructed in the Principles of Religion) who, being in their own power, or un∣der the government of others, who shall refuse to be thus instructed by us, or by those under whose governement they are; We do agree in our admini∣strations of the Lords Supper, to deale with such, as persons that are ignorant. Or in case there shall be found any trusted with the charge, and governe∣ment of others, who (being able) shall refuse, thus to instruct those under their charge, and after ad∣monition persist in such refusall, either themselves
to instruct them, or to send them to us to be so instructed. We do judge it matter of scandall in such governours, and shall accordingly deale with such (in our Administrations of the Lords Sup∣per) as persons living under the neglect of a known duty.
Having thus far expressed our Agreement in Judgment concerning Catechizing and Resolutions, as to the re∣viving of the practice of this piece of our Ministeriall duty: That we may not seem to obtrude any thing upon our Brethren, without just and sufficient rea∣sons: We have thought fit (in the following Chap∣ters) to subjoyne, those reasons which have prevailed with us to the aforementioned Agreement. CHAP. I. Concerning the Nature of Catechizing. The Divine warrant for it. The Expediency of that way of teaching. The Ancient usage of it in the Church of God, and the present necessity of reviving it in our Congrega∣tions. IT is a Rule fit to be observed in all matters both of Dispute and Treatise,. to begin with the Explication of Terms. The Term Catechizing is properly of a Greek extra∣ction. The Greek word from whence it is derived, properly signifies to sound into a mans eare what we would have him to understand.Institutio quae fit vivâ voce aures cir cum∣sonantes. Alsted. The word is often used in the New Testament, Luke 1.4. Acts 18.25. & 21.24. Rom. 2.18 1 Cor. 14.19. Gal. 6.6. from the com∣paring of which Texts together, it may be observed, that it signifies a teaching by a lively voice, opposed to that which is by writing. And this signification of the word
is evident from all ancient Writers: thus the Translator of Clem. Alex. ordinarily interprets it. But the word taken in a more strict and proper sense,Ea institutio quae est ex au∣ditione. hath been used to denote a more peculiar kind of teach∣ing, restrained both as to the matter taught, and the man∣ner of teaching. As to the matter taught, it denotes in∣struction in the first Principles of any knowledg: And in Eccle∣siasticall usage, an instruction in the first Principles of Religion, which the Apostle cals the Principles of the Do∣ctrine of Christ. Heb. 6.1. For as in every Art and Science, so also in Religion, there are the first grounds and Principles, and then the larger deductions and more re∣mote conclusions; The Apostle cals the first, milk, the atter, strong meate, the first fit for those whom he cals Babes in Christ: the second for such as are perfect (in his sense) And accordingly there is a twofold teaching, the first, per modum, , which we call Catechizing: the second, per modum, , by way of further instruction, which Grotius thinks is implyed by the two words , and , used Mat. 18.20. Luke 1.4.. Clem. Alex. in Paedagogo. Vid. Erasm. praef. in Lucam. Grot. in Luc. 2.18. which distinction some of the Ancients seem also to have noted betwixt Catechizing and Preach∣ing. As to the manner, Catechizing seems to imply such a kind of teaching, as is 1. By a lively voice, by word of mouth, not by writ∣ing. Thus the term is used in Scripture, Luke 1.3, 4. (compared together,) Hence the Hebrew word expressing it, comes from a root which signifieth to hear. And those in the Primitive Church who were thus instructed were called Audientes, Hearers. 2. It signifies such a kind of teaching as is by way of Dialogue, Sonus re∣ciprocus, vox reciproca. Vid. Cypr Epist. ad Jovianum, &c. praem. Con∣cil. Carthag. or Questions, and Answers; after the manner of an Eccho. Where there is a double sound direct, and reflex. So Catechizing consists of two integrall parts: The proposall of interrogatories from the teacher: and the re∣turn of an Answer from the learner. Such was the exa∣mination of the Adulti in the Primitive Church before
Baptism. Of which Philip gives us a president, Acts 8.17. and that phrase which is used by Peter, The Answer of a good conscience, 1 Peter 3.21. is thought to referre to it. It is thought the Apostles themselves ordinarily used this way of instruction. It is certain,Apostolica Ca∣techizandi ra∣tio cujus speci∣em in mysteriis Baptismi ad∣huc retinent Ec∣clesia interro∣gationibus & responsionibus constabat. Vid. Praefat. ad Rom. Cate∣chism. Bp And. On the Commad∣ments. that this way of teaching was early used in the Church of Christ. (of which more her easter.) 3. It signifies A teaching by frequent Repetition, and in∣culcation of the same things, and thus fitly answers the Hebrew word, used Deut. 6.7. Hence Zepporns makes the work of Catechizing to consist of a double act. Actus instillandi & repetendi vel dictata reposcendi. Bishop Andrews cites out of Clemens this description of it, . By what hath been hitherto said, sufficiently appeares, what we mean by Catechizing, viz. That kind of teach∣ing by which the ignorant are instructed in the first Rudi∣ments of Religion, by the lively voice of him that teacheth, familiarly instructing them, by way of Question and Answer, in which the teacher hath a liberty frequently to inculcate and repeat the same things again and again, for the advantage of those who are taught. And thus it standeth distinguished from Preaching. 1. As Preaching is by way of more dilated discourse up∣on particular Subjects, that is, , (to use the expression of that Ancient Catechist of Alexandria, this is . 2. As Preaching respects , those who are more grown, Catechizing , those who are yet Babes in Religion. 3. As Preaching is as well to stirre up the affections, as to informe the judgment. This only respects the informati∣on of the judgement, and that chiefly in the very prin∣ciples of Religon, to which Preaching is not li∣mited. 4. As Preaching is the continued discourse of the Preach∣er:
this requires a vocall account from the hearer. Now concerning this exercise of Religion,§. 2. It is questi∣oned, Whether it be a Gospell institution, yea or no? If we take Catechizing in this strict notion, for the instilling of the Prin∣ciples of Religion by word of mouth, into the minds of those who heare us, and that by way of Question and Answer, it may possibly be hard to prove it,Hunc adhuc puerum initia∣tum fuisse affir∣matur in libro Zohar. Jacob. Alting. a Gospell institution, either by direct precept or practice from Christ and his Apostles; but that, It was the will of God, even from the Creation of the world, that people should be instructed in the Principles of Religion, appears from the example of God himself, who read the first lecture of this nature to fallen man, Gen. 3. And the very name of Enoch im∣ports as much. Some of the Hebrew Rabbins thinke, that Abrahams trained servants, mentioned Gen. 14.14. were such as were trained up in Religion: Certaine it is, that Abraham instructed his Family, Gen. 14.14. And that God commanded that his Laws should be whetted by us upon our Children, Exod. 13.8, 14. Deut. 6.7. Hence the Jews had a Book, which they called their Book of Catechisme:Jos. Antiqu. l. 4. cap. 8. and Josephus tells us, they were exceeding∣ly and above all things carefull, that their Children should learne the Law. It was an usuall saying amongst them, That the world would soon return again into its Chaos, if it were not upheld by the spirits, and breathings of little ones, and such good persons as learned the Law. Hence they cursed every Towne which had ten (or as others 120.) Israelitish Families; if there were not amongst them an instructer of little ones.. To which custome it is very probable that the Apostle St Paul alludeth in that phrase, Rom. 2.20. However by that phrase in the 18. Verse of that Chapter, he plainly confirms such an u∣sage in the Jewish Church: Luke 2.46. We find under the Gospell our Saviour Christ at twelve years of age, hearing the Do∣ctors, and asking them Questions. And severall times af∣ter condescending to Answer Questions in Religion propounded to him. And we thinke it not improbable, that the forme of sound words mentioned,Exod. 12.26. 2 Tim. 1.13. and
that forme of Doctrine,Psal. 78.6. Rom. 6.17. may imply some such method of teaching the Principles of Religion; u∣sed in the very beginning of the Gospell. But we con∣ceive there needs no such industry to prove the divine in∣stitution,2 King. 12.2. for that a teaching of Christians the things which Christ hath revealed and commanded, is a Gospell institution, none will deny. That Children ought to be taught, ap∣pears, not only from the will of God revealed to the peo∣ple of the Jews,Gen. 18.19. the examples of Abrahem instructing his Family (for which God admitted him of his Privy Counsell in the business of the destruction of the five Ci∣ties,) and of David instructing Solomon, Prov. 4.4. but also under the Gospell,Prov. 4.4. Parents are enjoyned to educate their Children, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Timothy from a Child was instructed in the Scriptures by his Mother, and Grandmother:2 Tim. 1.13. Heb. 5, 6.1. And the Apostle plainly speaks of milk, and teaching the first Principles of Reli∣gion. And thus much being granted, that the ministeriall work lieth as much in Doctrine, as Application; as much in informing the judgment in the Principles of Religion, as in stirring up the affections, and inciting to practice; and that Children and Babes in Religion, as well as years, are to be thus instructed; we thinke it will easily be evinced, that Catechizing (even in the strict∣est sense) fals under the generall precept of teaching, as a species of it, and the most accommodate way of teaching such as are first to learn the Principles of Religion, and not obscurely hinted in that ancient precept, Deut. 6.7, 8 especially considering we find our Saviour setting us an example, Luke 2.46. and to his Disciples, Mat. 16.14, 15. to say nothing of Philip's dealing with the Eunuch in this method, Acts 8. and the Apostolicall generall precept, (however it might be calculated for a peculiar Meridian) that Christians should be ready to give account of their hope to every one that asks them.1 Pet. 3.15. Besides that, it is yet disputable, Whether the office of Doctors or Teachers in the Church, mentioned Eph. 4. and
elsewhere, might not relate to this kind of exercise; or at least whether the exercise be not there asserted, as a di∣stinct Act of the Pastors office? Nor doth the early usage of this method of teaching the Principles of Religion,§. 3. in the Church of Christ a lit∣tle confirme us in the opinion of its Divine Institution. A Learned Prelate saith, the Evangelist St Mark was the first Catechist at Alexandria: Sure we are the orders of Catethisbae, and Catechumeni, were very ancient in the Church. Eusebius tels us, Pantaenus bare the office of Ca∣techist at Alexandria, and tels us, this was of ancient u∣sage.. Euseb. Hist. l. 4. c. 9. Origen succeeded him in the same Schoole and Office. We have the , of Cyrill of Jerusalem, and Clemens of Alexandria, his . The anci∣ent usage of Catechizing Converts before Baptism, is testified by so many Authors, that it can (modestly) be denied by none.Durantus de rit. Eccles. Pareiedit. Ʋr∣sini Cat. Andr. on the Command∣ments in Pro∣leg. Johannes Stephanus Durantus tels us, it began to cease when Children were universally Baptized; Pareus (in his Edition of Ursine's Catechisme,) tels us, that Confirmation succeeded instead of it. Bp. An∣drews tels us, that Hegesippus saith, that by meanes of this exercise, the most part of the world had within forty years after Christ, received the Tincture of Christian Religion; And Julian the Apostate never shewed his spight more to the Christian Religion, then in his de∣stroying of these Schooles.Canisius in Catech. Canisius boasts of Augustine, Basil, Ambrose, and Cyrill, as his predecessors in this work, and he therein speaks no more then truth (saith Doctor Donne.) It is apparent also from the records we have of the practice of the Primitive Churches practice, that they had two sorts of Catechumeni. The first, such as were born of Christian Parents, who being Baptized, and of years capable of such instruction, were entrusted to the care of some, who was to instruct them in the Principles, and exhort them, to the practice of Christian Religion: to which purpose we find a passage in Dionys. Areop. (an ancient Author doubtless,Dionys. Areop. De Eccles. Hi∣erarch. cap. 7. though not so ancient as to be Pauls contemporary.) ,
&c. The other sort of persons Catechized, were such as were converted from Paganism,Rabanus, l. 1. De institut. Cle∣ri. unto the Faith of Christ; and these again Rabanus Maurus di∣vided into two sorts; The first such as heard Sermons and had some desire to turne Christians, but had not yet of∣ferred themselves to Baptism, these they called Audientes. The second, such as desired Baptism; these were called Competentes. For whose Baptism two solemn times of the year, Easter and Whitsontide, (called Pentecost,) were appointed. Which times approaching, those converts who desired Baptism,Aug. l. De cura pro mortuis, c. 12. de fide & operibus, c. 6. Cyp. l. 3. Ep. 22. Ego in juit The∣ologus sum, qui mediocrem u∣sum, & periti∣am sacrae Scrip∣turae variis pe∣riculis sum con∣secutus; sed non it a efferor hoc dono; quin quo∣tidie unà cum pueris Cate∣chismum Deca∣logum, &c. Luther t. 4. p. 57. in Psa. 126. were for the space of forty daies called Competentes. Augustine hath left us one Book di∣rected to the Catechumeni, and another De Catechizandis rudibus; and Cyprian makes mention of Optatus, under the notion of Doctor Audientium. And as we find it of early usage in the Church of Christ; so neither was it quite forgotten in the darkest times of Popery, as appeares by the Master of the Sentences: l. 4. dist. 6. But no sooner was the work of reformation began by Luther in Germany, and Calvin in France, but their first thoughts were to revive this exercise: witness Luthers Catechism, which he delighted in above all his works: And Cal∣vin's Catechism, afterwards by Tremellius translated in∣to the three learned Languages. Most commendable was the resolution and practice of the Magistracy of Ge∣neva in those daies, witnessed by their Decree mention∣ed by Beza in the life of Calvin to this purpose. It is decreed, that not only the Ministers instruct their people by their publick Sermons; which many neglect to hear, others heare to little purpose; but also that at a certain time of the year, a civill Officer, together with one of the Elders shall go from Family to Family, and house to house, and re∣quire of every one an account of their faith. The profit which followed upon which practice (saith Beza) is hardly to be credited.
And no sooner was that famous Synod of Dort conve∣ned, but having perfected their debates concerning the Translation of the Bible, they fall upon debates for the reviving of this exercise: what they decreed about it, may be read in the acts of their seaventeenth Session; where we observe, that they conceive it the duty of Pa∣rents, Shoolmasters,Acta Synodi Dordracenae, sol. p. 4.6. Pastors, and Elders of Churches; and judge it reasonable that the Civill Magistrate should be desired to interpose his civill authority, for the pro∣moving the practice of it. Nor was it only the care of forreign Churches, in the beginning, of their severall resormations, but of ours al∣so at home, witness that famous Catechism of Edward the sixth, in the very dawning of reformation, and the severall Catechismes published by particular persons since, (it is too tedious to rehearse them all.) And the act of our whole Church enjoyning this practice by her Canons. To which we may adde the greater and lesser Catechismes, advised by our late Reverend Assembly, and published by Authority of Parliament, agreed to also by the Church of God in Scotland, as a piece of the uniformity desired in the three united Nations. Having therefore such a cloud of witnesses,§. 4. we can∣not but look upon it as an institution of God, being a ne∣cessary and most accommodate way of teaching. And as we conceive it exceeding usefull in any state of the Church (considering that when we shall know most, we shall but know in part,) so we conceive it more especially necessary, and highly expedient, considering the present state of the Church amongst us in England. Judicious Mr. Calvin stuck not to say; that it could no where be o∣mitted without a publick reproach and scandall.Iustitut, l. 4. c. 19. And in an Epistle to the Protector of England, is so free as to bid him, be assured the Church could not want this kind of exercise. Indeed it hath a very great influence both up∣on the preservation and propagation of Religion in any place. 1. Catechismes being breviaries of those truths, which
lye at large, dispersed in the Scriptures, serve as a touch∣stone at hand to discover erroneous opinions; as the bal∣lance of the Sanctuary, whereby the light notions of men are discovered from the weighty truths of Christ. In all Sciences it hath been found advantageous, and necessa∣ry to have Systemes and Epitomes. The Physician hath his Aphorismes, the Mathematician his Elements, and what those are to them, the same are Catechismes in matter of Divinity. The necessity which the Church saw betimes of such abstracts of the Doctrine of Christian Religion, produced the severall famous Creeds, as Touchstones, to discern truth from the errors in those times springing up: and the notice, which the Popish Doctors took of the efficacy of Catechism for this end, was it, which made the Church of Rome fall upon this course; and Ca∣nisius for them all, to bestow his pains this way, and then to glory in it. 2. As the purity of Doctrine is hereby preserved, so the superstructure upon this foundation, which is holi∣ness in conversation is much advanced by it. It is an old and certain saying of Augustine, A good faith and life are inseparable: those who first make shipwrack of faith, will not long keep a good Conscience. Without knowledge (saith Solomon) the soul is not good. Catechizing in the Judgment of Augustine teacheth Christians not only what to believe, but what to do.Male vivitur u∣bi non recte cre∣ditur, Aug. It makes them ea∣gle-eyed, and fit to discern the Lords Body in the Sacra∣ment of his Supper; it instructeth every one in his place and teacheth him how to performe his generall and Re∣lative duties. A well learned Enoch will walk with God.Aug. de cura pro mortuis, c. 12. A well instructed Jacob will be faithfull to an unfaithfull Laban. The feare of God is ordinarily taught by the knowledg of him; and though sometimes God begins with the Affections, and makes his way by them to the head, yet as this cannot be done without some degree of Catechisticall knowledg, so we believe upon experi∣ence it will be as ordinarily found, that God makes his way to the heart by the head, reflecting notions of truth
(learned in youth) upon the souls of persons, when they come to ripe years, and sanctifying their knowledg to their conversion and eternall salvation. 3. If it be worth any thing to preserve Christians stable in the faith, without which they are but like reeds shaken with every wind, the confessed usefullness of Catechizing to this end will abundantly testifie the necessity of revi∣ving of it. It was the observation of King James, That the mis∣leading of people into Popery and other errours, was oc∣casioned by their ungroundedness in the points of Cate∣chism. This made Dr. Donn so earnestly press the re∣viving of this exercise,In a Sermon Preached at Pauls Cross, Sep. 15. 1622. on Jud. 20.15. and the Provinciall Assembly of London, commend it as the proper Antidote against the errors of these times. The neglect of it (saith Bp. Hall) breeds instability of judgment, mistakes of necessary truths, fashionableness of profession, frothiness of discourse, obnoxi∣ousness to all error, and seduction. The soul that hath a smattering of some knowledg without orderly Princi∣ples, is like a tree without roots, soon overturned, es∣pecially in a wind. And it is no wonder, if there have been and still are many such like reeds overborne with every gust of wind; and whose souls are at the beck of e∣very new upstart Fable or fancy: the walls must needs be tottering, where the foundation is not laid deep e∣nough. How can they chuse but be carried away with every wind of Doctrine, who want the balast of sound in∣formation in solid and consistent Principles? Had there been more Catechizing, it is probable there would have been less Apostatizing in England. 2. Nor is this exercise of Catechizing less usefull for the propagation, then for the preservation of true Religion. We mentioned before the opinion of Hegesippus, that by this meanes Christian Religion so early overspread the world. Sr. Edwin Sands takes notice of it, as a great meanes, whereby the Protestant Party enlarged its bounds. And the Prefatory Epistle to the Romane Cate∣chism, confesseth the same, sadly complaining, that the
Popish cause suffered most by those Writings of ours, which we call Catechismes.Haec si unquam aliàs sentit no∣stra aetas, quan∣ta damna hae∣reticorum filii: non modo tarta∣reâ suâ linguâ, verum multo maximè pesti∣lentibus scriptis, quae Catechis∣inorum titulas ornare solent, Ecclesiae Christi inserant, Pre∣sat. ad Catech. Rom. Bishop Andrews takes no∣tice of the same success, by the same meanes, in our first Reformers, and further adds, That if ever our adver∣saries get advantage of us (which God forbid) it will be by our negligence, and their diligence herein. And how can we expect either the inlargement or continu∣ance of the reformed Religion, but by the same experi∣enced waies and meanes whereby it was at first revived? Nor is there only a future good, forelaid for posterity, but a present advantage also accrewing unto particular Christians, who are hereby rendred more fit for Hearing, Reading, Prayer, discerning the Lords Body in his Supper, &c. We cannot but look upon this, as one reason of our Preaching so long to People, with so little profit, that (through the omission, or former slighty performance of this duty, we do but build up Walls without a founda∣tion, and graff without a stock of Principles. Imitating (saith Bp. Hall) an indiscreet Schoolmaster, who too much affecting the thanks of an overweening Parent, marres the Child by raising him to an higher forme, before he hath learned his first Rules, from whence follows nothing but an empty ostentation, and late disappointment. Yea so ne∣cessary did he (and not he alone) judge this wholesome spoon-meat (which many now adaies think themselves either too old, or too good, to be sed with) that he could even quarrell with his Sermons, and wish that a great part of them had been exchanged for this Preach∣ing conference. For the usefullness of it we need say no more, considering how much hath been already said by others. By the reviving of this exercise, we shall in some measure know the state of our flock. Our Chil∣dren shall be taught to know the Lord: The heavy eares of our people will be made to hear: the knowledge of the Gospell will be propagated: Our people armed against false Teachers: and also against many dangerous temp∣tations, founded in the ignorance of Fundamentall Prin∣ciples; Christians will be taught to reduce what they
read and hear, to their proper heads: and a foundati∣on will be fairly laid in the understanding, for a naturall conscience to conscience to build Application upon, and to restraine much sin by; and as it were a Wall builded in the soul, from which the holy spirit in his good time, may reflect saving beames, for the healing the will and affections. The usefullness of it was suffiently experimented by our Forefathers. Eusebius gives a Catalogue of seaven or eight, who commenced Martyrs out of Origen's Catechisticall Schoole at Alexandria. So much having been said of the usesullness of it at all times,§. 3. the particular expediency of it in our times is easi∣ly evinced. to say that we have the ignorant alwaies with us, and shall have so long, as it is the lot of the best, to know but in part, were enough; but the slighty perfor∣mance of this duty in former times, and the long omissi∣on of it in later times, hath caused a greater degree of ig∣norance amongst our people, than either suiteth our pro∣fession, or the meanes of knowledg indulged to this last age. And the hasty and plentifull growth of the tares of error and most absurd opinions, is a too sad evidence to the world, that we have too long slept, as to the per∣formance of this piece of our duty, and that it is more then time the practice of it should be revived amongst us. To say nothing of the expediencie of it in reference to the prosecution of the intended reformation, so far as it re∣lates to the admission of Communicants to the Table of the Lord; which is much hindred through the igno∣rance and sinfull modesty of a people not tutored, in this Method of instruction. All these things evince it highly expedient in these thimes, where many sleep under Ser∣mons without knowledg, and the little knowledg of o∣thers is overgrown with the weeds of error.
CHAP. II. Concerning the Persons, upon whom the duty of sub∣mission to this exercise, is incumbent. IT appearing from what hath been said in the former Chapter, That Catechizing is an accommodate way of instructing Persons in the Principles of Religion, we suppose it will easily be evinced, that the ignorant are the persons thus to be instructed: these are easily distri∣buted into two sorts; 1. Such as are Children in yeares. 2. Such as are Children in understanding. Though the latter have Mens háires, yet they have but Chil∣drens heads. 1. That Children ought to be Catechized will be gran∣ted by all, not willfully blind, or malitiously stubborne: the fitness of their years to receive instruction, and their ingagement upon Baptism to listen to it, are arguments strong enough to this cause. Childhood and youth is the time, wherein Solomon adviseth the Children of men should be trained up in the way wherein they should go.Prov. 22.6. The lamentable experience that we have of the frowardness, and perverseness of age, Men and Women who overslipped their golden time of youth, chusing rather to hazard the eternall ruine of their souls by covering their ignorance, than to submit to a gentle cure thereof, is a sufficient evidence that the twigg had need be bended, while it is young. Nor is that the fittest time only to receive Principles, but also to retaine instruction. Old trees transplanted seldome thrive, nor do Walls builded in Winter usually stand. A new cloath (on the other side) hardly looseth its first dye, nor the vessell the savour of that liquor with which it was first seasoned. Timothy was trained up in the Scrip∣tures, from his infancy, and departed not from them in his age.
2. We conceive all Religious Parents, will be sensi∣ble, that by their engagement for their Children in Bap∣tism, they stand bound to God on their behalf, to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.Exo. 13.8, 14. The Jews were to instruct their (hildren in the reason of the Passover. And there is no doubt, but Abra∣ham minded Isaac his Sonne of the Covenent made in his slesh. 2. But we are sensible, That our greatest opposition to this practice, will be from such as in years are no Chil∣dren, but more than Children in understanding. These, through a sinfull loathness to discover their own igno∣rance, and pretended modesty, will and do plead hard for an exemption from this usefull way of instruction. For our parts, as we are satisfied concerning their and our own duty, So resolving (through the grace of God) not to be defective on our part, we shall, as becomes those (who have the oversight of souls) require of them a performance of theirs, of which we verily believe they are sufficiently convinced in their own consciences; but that (without a faile of our duty to God) we may gra∣tifie them as much, as may be, we shall (as we have said) be content to deale with them in a more private way, having it not in our designe to discover their infir∣mities, but as much as in us lieth, to hide them. To this purpose we have resolved, 1. To allow some time on the week daies, in which they may come to us, or we to them, that we may discharge our duty in instructing them, and taking account of their pro∣ficiency. 2. We shall be also content to gratifie them in point of pri∣vacy, as to company, and conferre with each one apart (only here we except all young Women for we are sensible how many scandals have beenraised, and may be raised of us by such private examinations: but yet we shall allow sitch Women, what company themselves shall desire to have with them.) 3. If any through too much pride, shall think himself above
Catechizing by way of Question and Answer, we shall be willing to deale with them by friendly conference. All that we aime at, is a cognisance of their knowledg in the Principles of Religion, and by what lawfull meanes we attaine it, we are not solicitous, so they have it and we for the discharge of our consciences be satisfied that they perish not for want of knowledg. 4. To take away all prejudice from our people. We have thought fit also further to declare, That we are sensi∣ble of the distance which God hath set between Parents and Children, Masters and Servants: and far be it from us to do any thing which may render Superiours contemptible to such as are under them; we shall therefore carefully a∣void, any such kind of Catechizing or conferring with persons that have a preheminency in respect of years, and place, before such as are young, or in any degree of subje∣ction, or inferiority to them. 5. We are also sensible of differences betwixt the naturall parts of severall persons; and which have arisen or may arise, through a disproportion of education. We have therefore declared, That we will carefully avoid all rigour and harshness, and in the performance of this duty conforme our selves according to that measure of prudence which God hath given us, to the severall parts and capacities of those with whom we deale, so as to give all due encou∣ragement to the weakest, and not the least discourage∣ment to any; our design being to instruct and edify, not to confound or discredit them. 6. But yet we have thought sit to limit the age of such to whom we shall at present indulge the liberty of a private conference, or addresses to us for instruction. For although we judg such a course (however burdensome to us) at present necessary, considering the long omission of this exercise; yet we conceive a publick Catechizing farre more advantageou for the good of others, and would gladly lay in for posterity, a better foundation to build upon, in the Reformation of the Church, then we our selves have met with.
7. And lastly, As to the place, (for such persons, as will not be perswaded to come into the open Congregation upon the Lords Day) to meet us, we are not overmuch sollicitous. Whether it be in the Church, or some of our houses, or at their own dwellings, we shall leave this to the prudence of each particular Minister, and gratifie the weakness of our People in that circumstance, as they shall with any co∣lourable reason desire at our hands. CHAP. III. Concerning the forme to be used in Catechizing, and why we have made choice of that in the lesser Ca∣techisme, advised by the late Reverend Assem∣bly, &c. VVE are not ignorant, how much some in the world (through weakness) are prejudiced a∣gainst formes in matters of Religion. The Apostle hints the possibility of mens being possessed with a forme of God∣liness, and denying the power thereof. Yet doubtless a forme of Godliness in any is more commendable, then a course of prophaneness. All know how much this part of the world in these late years hath been engaged against formes of Prayer. Though we hope judicious Christians will distinguish betwixt the lawfullness of a forme, and the lawfullness of this or that forme: and again, betwixt the lawfullness of using a forme, and the lawfullness of obli∣ging Ministers and People constantly to the use of one and the same forme. The Apostle (who speaks slightly of a forme of godliness) yet speaketh honourably of a forme of sound Doctrine.2 Tim. 1.13. And however some ignorant people may be offended at the sound of the word, yet we hope judicious Christians will judg, That as there were not much to be said against the constant usage of the same formes of Prayer,a Tim. 2.3. if they were alwaies to pray for the same
things, without adding and detracting, (for surely God is not pleased with varying of phrases expressive of the same thing.) So the same right reason will informe them, that the Doctrine of the Gospell being sealed, (so that neither an Apostle nor Angell from Heaven may adde a∣ny thing to it,) a forme of sound words, may be kept to cxpress that, we have therefore declared our judge∣ment. 1. To make use of a forme, the lawfullness of it being evident, the expediency of it constraines us to this. For besides the disproportion of Ministers gifts and abilities, the capacity of our people doth require this at our hands, how shall they know what to answer? must we after e∣very question expect a satisfaction by Euthusiasme? Nor let any tell us, this is but to learne Children by rote, and to nurse up a forme of Godliness; that the teaching of the Spirit is the Gospell teaching, &c. We would faine learne of these our weaker Brethren, what it is that Children learne at first otherwise then by rote? do they not learne to speake by rote? &c. Or why our Brethren suffer their Children to learne to write by Copies, (which are formes in that art) besides that some Children may be found so apprehensive, as to conceive the thing ex∣pressed by the forme of words. However this Argu∣ment lyeth as much against Timothies being instructed from his infancy, 2 Tim. 3.15. as against what we are driving at. And supposing that without the concur∣rence of the sanctifying Spirit, the issue of this teaching, will be but a notionall knowledg in the head, and a forme of godliness in the life. May not as much be said against Preaching as against this? nor do we intend, either to anticipate, or justle out the teaching of the Spirit; we hope judicious Christians know how to distingiush betwixt ministeriall and effectuall teaching. Our designe is no higher by this exercise, then to prepare the way of the Lord in the souls of his People. But these Objections are too vaine to be insisted upon: Having agreed the lawfull∣ness, and expediency, if not the necessity of using a forme,
we come in the next place to agree the particular forme. Where 2. We declare our resolution, to make use of that forme which is found in the lesser Catecbisme, advised by the late Re∣verend Assembly. We are aware, that this Agreement of ours may be liable to the exeptions of some and more es∣pecially three forts of persons. 1. Such who can allow nothing good, but what was established by (what they call) the Church of England. These will possibly quarrell at our laying aside the forme prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer. We are very far from condemning those Reverend Persons, that had an hand in composing either of the Lyturgy in gene∣rall, or that forme of Catechizing in particular: but ve∣rily believe they walked up to their light, and did wor∣thily in their generation. But surely, God expects high∣er improvements from us, and we thinke any (reasona∣ble learned) Divines upon perusall of that forme will find some Questions inserted, not so proper for a Cate∣chism, and severall Fundamentull Priaciples of Religion, very obscurely hinted, if at all touched: Which toge∣ther with the injunction of the Civil Power upon us to disuse that Book, is sufficient warrant for us without condemning our Reverend Fathers, to lay aside thoughts of using that. 2. A second fort are such, who for want of this form, when they entred upon their charges, have for a long time inured their people to another forme, either composed by themselves, or some other Reverend Men: Or else who out of a desire to conceale some opinions of their own in matters of Doctrine, chuse rather to make Catechismes of their own, then by the use of this to discover their o∣pinions to the world by entring a dissent unto the things contained here. For these latter we have nothing to say it being very usuall for men to usher in , by,  to avoid which (as we shall more fully express by and by) we have pitched upon this forme. For the former, As we desire to reverence those of our
Brethren, who indeaved to supply the defect of former times, by using their people to Catechismes, more full then that which then had the signature of publickautho∣rity, and judge it but just they should reape the fruit of their own labours. So we hope, that ere this time they may have brought up their people to such a proficiency, in that forme, that they may pass on to this, and keep Uniformity with us, which we perswade our selves they will find more easie; because in matter they will find no difference. We have nothing to say to such as out of designe, or singularity, set up another method, judging that those lusts ought to be mortified and not humoured, and indulged. And for the opinion of some, that this forme is too large; Experience hath taught some of us the vanity of it, it being no more then Children of seaven yeares of age, have with much facility, in a short time got through. 3. But there is a third sort, who have nothing to say against it, but that it was agreed by that Reverend As∣sembly, and they are over jealous for us, as if we would jurare in verba Magistri. To convince therefore our Brethren, that we have more to say for the adhering to this then any other forme extant, we shall shortly sa∣tisfie our Brethren with our Reasons, why we have pitch∣ed upon it. There are five things which we judg reasonable for us to attend, in making choice of a forme of Catechism. 1. Fulness of matter. 2. Purity of Doctrine. 3. Brevity of Answers. 4. Plainnoss of phrase. 5. Orderliness. To which we may adde two others, which yet may be comprehended under the latter. 1. Uniformity, and 2. Pub∣lick Authority. And we hope every reasonable Christian will judge with us, that in the choice of a forme to be used in Ca∣techizing, if we can find any forme, that hath in it a full Systeme of the Doctrine of the Gospell, and that in its na∣tive purity, expressed plainly, and comprized in answers suited (for their brevity) to the capacity of the meanest,
and this forme hath also the countenance of Publick Au∣thority, and be generally approved and used by other Churches of the same perswasion with us in the things of God: this in all reason ought to be pitched upon by us, and preferred before any other forme, and may give a just supersedeas, to any needless indeavours of particu∣lar persons, in compiling any other Catechismes for their particular Congregations, especially considering how sus∣picious such actions may be, and of what ill consequence in opening the like doore of liberty to others, who possibly may have less ability, or further designes, and may too much affect a foolish singularity. Every understanding Christian will discerne, the reasonableness of these pro∣perties and adjuncts in reference to the choice of a parti∣cular forme. 1. Fullness of matter. The designe of Catechiz∣ing being the instruction of people in all the Fun∣damentall Points of the Gospell, in reason we should chuse such a forme as is a full Systeme of Do∣ctrine. 2. Purity of Doctrine. Where the Doctrine of the Gospell is not dasht with erronens Principles, but the milke is (as the Apostle calls it) , sincere with∣out mixture. That forme of Catechism is doubtless best, which is not, as many corrupting the word of God, but as of sincerity, as of God, as in the sight of God speaking in Christ, (as the Apostle speaketh of himself and his Preaching, 2 Cor. 2.17.) One great end of Catechizing is the preservation of the purity of Doctrine. The Devill himself grants his vote approbatory of Catechizing by a forme, as the probablest course to propagate errors, and Doctrines of Devils, (witness the Racovean Catechism) and those of the Romish Doctors, — Habet & vespae suos savos. 3. Brevity of Answers. For it is a way of instru∣ction, fitted to every capacity, and the weakest memories, are to be considered in the exercise of it.
4. Plainness or perspicuity. Catechisticall Doctrine is called the Foundation by the Apostle, Heb. 6.1. Men use not to bestow carving worke upon foundation stones. Truth needs no flourishes to adorne her, she looks best in her native habit. 5. And lastly, Orderliness, is a thing not to be neg∣lected. By which we chiefly understand here, an orderly Connexion of the Fundamentall Principles of Religion. This doth not only make the whole more beautifull, but tends much both to the helping of the memory, and the understanding also. These things being chiefly desirable in the choice of a forme, and all of them (if we mistake not) evident to every judicious Christian in this particular forme, which we have pitched upon, we have from other two conside∣rations been over-ruled to this choice. 1. From the consideration of the generall approbation which this forme hath received in the Churches of Christ. It be∣ing that to the Doctrine of which the Churches of God in New England have subscribed, and the whole forme agreed upon, by Brethren of different perswasions, (a∣mongst our selves) in matters of Church-Governement. It being also receive by the Church of God in Scotland, and agreed to be used as part of the intended, and desired Uniformity betwixt the two Nations, and that in which our Brethren of the Province of London, and in other As∣sociations in sever all Counties have agreed; And we are aware of how much consequence it is, especially as to matters of Doctrine, in the things of Religion, that Christians should learne to speak  the same thing: That passage of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.10. doth in this thing lay a Law upon us. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name of our Lord Je∣sus Christ, that you all speake the same thing, and that there be no divisions amongst you. 2. Nor lastly, Do we think the authority inconsidera∣ble, with which that forme is more clothed then any o∣ther. If we should not allow that Reverend Assembly,
which composed that forme to have had all the form ali∣ties of an Ecclesiasticall Synod, and consequently de∣ny the obligation of their Acts, yet it must be confes∣sed, 1. That they were convened and directed to this work, by Authority of Parliament. 2. That this was a worke proper to them. 3. That there were many of them, and those holy and Learned Men, Pastors of severall Churches, mighty in the Scriptures, furnished with all internall qualifications, for the work to which the pro∣vidence of God called them. 4. That in the composing of it, it was set up like a Butt, against which any of that As∣sembly (in which were also persons of differing perswa∣sions) might shoot their Arrowes: and every parcell of it deliberately perused. That being thus composed, it was openly read in the Parliament, by that Parliament Ordered to be Published, and all due care taken, that it might be saithfully communicated to the Nation from the Press. We must profess, when we consider the matter, the forme, the Composers, the care taken in the Composure, and Publication, the intendment of the Assembly in Com∣posing, and of the Parliament in the Publication, we cannot but admire, the designs of any, who since the Pub∣lication of that, hath needlesly laboured to Publish any other Catechisme of his own, at least with any designe to use it in the publick Congregations, and for our own parrs, if we could allow our selves such an humour, we should feare it would signifie to the world that we had some designs under some covert expressions, to innovate in matter of Doctrine, or that we too much sancied our own methods, and singularities, or at least that we were not so well wishers to Uniformity, in matters of pra∣ctice in the things of God, as we desire we may be found in our generations. And thus much we hope may satisfie our Brethren for our resolutions concerning the choice of this particular forme.
CHAP. IV. Giving an account of the two last Articles of our Agree∣ment concerning Catechizing. THe two last Branches respect our Agreement in judgment concerning the persons upon whom this duty is incumbent, and our Agreement as to point of practice, in order to the enforcing of it where there shall appear to us a wilfull neglect of it. As to the first, We humbly conceive it a duty incum∣bent, upon all those who have the charge of others, though in a different degree and manner. 1. Upon Magistrates, Qua Magistrates, to command the performance of it; and to take care that those under their charge discharge their duty in it; we find an honou∣rable mention in Scripture, of those godly Princes, that commanded the performance of those things, from their Priests, and Levites, and people, which God had given them in charge to do.2 King. 22.12. Josiah commanded Hilkiah and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah to go and enquire of the Lord for him: and again he command∣eth the people to keep the Passeover. Asa commanded his peo∣ple to seek the Lord, and to do the Law,2 Chro. 14.4. 2 Chron. 29.21, 24, 27. and Command∣ment. Hezekiah commands the Priest to offer Sacrifice and the Levites to sing. Manasseth when he was turn∣ed to God commanded the people to seek the Lord God of Is∣rael. And we cannot think that the Schooles of the Pro∣phets (of which we read so often in the Old Testament) were erected otherwise then by publick Authority. We are sure if the Magistrate be entrusted with the custody of both Tables, this will follow. We will easily grant that the Magistrate hath nothing to do, to command that in the worship of God which God hath not first command∣ed: But that it is not his concernment (by the interpositi∣on of his civill authority) to inforce the observation of
what God hath commanded, is a piece of new Divinity to us, and we conceive calculated only for the Meridian of some Atheisticall Principles. We are sure those who neglect these duties are evill doers, and to such the Apo∣stle tells us the Magistrate ought to be a terror. We con∣clude therefore with the suffrage of that never enough re∣nowned Synod of Dort.Acta Syn. Dord. sess 17a. —Ut omnes diligenter officium fa∣ciant rogandierunt Magistratus Christiani, ut tam sanctum & necessarium opus authoritate suâ promoveant. And we bless God that we are not out of hopes of seeing our desires in this thing. We shall beg of God, that as he hath in the su∣preame Councell of the Land, given strength to conceive and to bring to the birth, something of this nature, so that in his own time he would give also sttength to bring it forth: But we shall proceed to such, whom the work more immediately concerns: Those are suchas have the charge of others under their more immediate inspection. 1. All Ministers of the Gospell, and Elders of Churches. 2. Such as are entrusted with the education of youth in Schooles. 3. Such as have an Oeconomicall charge, either as Parents or Masters. 1. For such as are Elders of Churches, we conceive the case is plaine enough, not to dispute whether Pastor and Teacher be two distinct offices, or exhorting, and teach∣ing two distinct acts of the same office. We conceive it the duty of all such as have a pastorall charge, under a larger or stricter notion, this being common to both to feed the people with wisdome and understanding, we know none will dispute this with us. As for such Church∣es where are Ruling Elders, we cannot wholly exempt them from this concernment. The secluding of the ignorant from the Lords Supper, being an act of Jurisdiction, in which all that rule in the Church, in reason must be concerned, and we cannot judg it reasonable, that they should be blindfolded in judgment. Besides that we find this the express sense of the Synod of Dort, in the place before men∣tioned, and the Decree of the Magistrates of Geneva, (be∣forementioned) includeth them. 2. For such as are intrusted with the education of youth
in Schooles,Ʋt juventus Christiana à teneris annis, in fundamentis verae Religionis, instituatur, &c. Triplex Cate∣chizandi ratio, observare debet domestica à Parentibus, Scholastica, à Iudimagistris & Ecclefiastica à Pastoribus, senioribus, & Lectoribus, &c. Acta Synodi Dordrac. sess. 17a. We conceive we have no obscura hints in Scripture, The Jewish Schooles being principally for in∣structing youth in their Law, and we conceive we have made an ill exchange under the Gospell; if the design of our Schooles should be meerly to acquaint youth with the stile, and matter of Heathenish Authors, while in the mean time there is no regard of the knowledg of God. Nor can we conceive it ought to be neglected in petty Schooles, for wherefore do Children learne to read the Scriptures, but in order to the comprehending of the Do∣ctrine contained in them? for which we conceive Cate∣chizing the most proper and accommodate meanes: This hath made us resolve to press this duty upon all Schoole-masters, and Schoole-dames in our Parishes, and we hope we shall in it approve our selves to the consciences of all such, as desire to know and feare the Lord. 3. The third sort are such as are Parents and Masters, their duty lies in reference to their Children and Ser∣vants. We have spoken so much before to prove this their duty from the example of Abraham, David, Timothies mo∣ther, and grandmother, the command of God, Deut. 6.7. and Exod. 12. that we need not repeate any thing, how Parents (without instructing their Children in the Princi∣ples of Religion, should according to the Apostles com∣mand bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, we cannot tell. Nor what account Masters shall in the great day of the Lord, be able to give concerning their Servants for whose souls they shall certainly have some account to make. It is an honourable record, the holy Ghost hath left of Cornelius, Acts 10.2. that he was a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much almes to the people, and prayed alway. We judg it a good old Principle, that the Master of a Family, is there a Prophet, Priest, and a King? A Prophet to instruct his Fa∣mily, by Reading and Catechizing, a Priest to pray for them, and a Prince to rule them, and to see to the executi∣on of the will of God, by those within his doors, and ex∣pelling such as will not: in this they have David's
president, Psalm 101.2, 3, 4, 6, 7. As to the last thing mentioned in our Agreement, be∣cause it may possibly give some cause of stumbling, we shall adde a few words to convince our Brethren of the reasonableness of it. The Magistrate not pleasing yet to interpose his Civill Authority, enjoyning Parents and Shoole-masters, &c. to do their duty. We have been at the greatest loss to consider, how those who are engaged to this duty, and whom no private or more publick admonition will quicken to the performance of their duty; may be enga∣ged to the performance, or deterred from the neglect of their severall duties in this thing: Corporall and pecuni∣ary mulcts, being neither lawfull for us to impose, nor yet proper to the sohere wherein God hath set us. We find the Divines of Hassia, and Helvetia, and Breme, together with Reverend Diodate, and Tronchinus, thus giving in their sense in their Papers presented to the Synod of Dort concerning this Subject.Acta Syn. Dord. sess. 15a. Jud. Hassiac. Ad Coenae Dontinicae usum, praesertim in pagie nemo admittatur nisi qui Doctrinam Cate∣chisticam proberteneat, & fidei suae rationem, coram totâ ecclesiâ publicè-redd it. Sponsi non copulabuntur, nisi pastoribus suis in Religione Christianâ profectus, satis comprobaverint. The Helvetian Divines thus, Ut discendi studium accendatur & foveatur, quicun{que} Ma∣trimonium suum publicè consecrari volunt, tenentur se sistere Pastori suo, ut huic suum in causa Religionis profectum probent. Est{que} penes pastorem, horum vel petitionem admittere, vel sus∣pendere,Helvetiorum Judicium. ibid. certum{que} praescribere tempus, &c. —Nemo etiam ex juvenibus ad Coenae communionem admittitur; nisi prius exa∣minatur an mysterium hoc sanctum probè intelligat. —Ex ju∣nioribus non admittitur test is Baptismi nisi prius examinetur an mysterium Baptismi, & quodnam sit officium test is intel∣ligat. Qui Matrimonium meditantur, ei{que} benedici volunt, pri∣vatim occasione,Bremensuum Judic. ibid. prudentor & amicè eaptâ (quale apud Au∣gust. de Catechizandis rudibus est legere) de Religione seu oc∣culte, & quasi aliud agatur, audiripossuni. Similiter opportu∣num
erit Christianum cum eo instituere colloquium qui infan∣tem suum tingendum offert, aut qui ad Baptismum test is adhi∣betur: In primis autem ad Sacram Coenam, nemo sine justâ fidei, ac vitae exploratione, ac religiosa stipulatione est admittendus. Pastores—Omne ope at{que} etiam pro authoritate suâ id a juni∣nioribus pueris, & puellis exposcant & obtineant.Judicium Jo∣hannis Deodati & Theod. Tron∣chin. ibid. The Divines of Great Brittain, insist only upon the Magistrates Authority. Our Question being only concerning the power, which may be exercised by the Officers of the Church untill the Magistrate pleaseth to exercise his power. We have only to consider what the other Divines thought in this case; Their advice is reducible to these heads: 1. That Ministers should deny Marriage to such as should not first give them account of their faith. 2. That they should deny, to admit any as Sureties in Baptism, who should not first do the like. 3. That they should before the Baptizing of the Chil∣dren of any offered to Baptism, take a Catechisticall ac∣count of the Parents, (in case he refuseth they do not ad∣vise the withholding Baptism.) 4. That they admit none to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but such as shall first openly give an ac∣count of their proficiency in the knowledg of the Princi∣ples of Religion. For the first of these, Marriage being an Ordinance of God, which concerns men, as men, not as Christians, and Members of a Church meerly, and the Act being a Civil Act, and being not within the Ministeriall commission, which the Gospell Ministers have from Christ, (though an Act to which we conceive they may be commissioned from the Civil Magistrate, and most proper for them to performe by the Application of the generall Acts of their Office exhoting and prayer: they being persons most fit for those works, and Marriage the most weighty action of our lives, and fit to be attended with exhortation and prayer and so sanctified.) We cannot see clearly what power Ministers as Ministers, have upon the solemnization
of Marriage, to engage parties to be Married to a submis∣sion to this duty, though we judg it necessary that Christi∣ans who are concerned to marry in the Lord, and to car∣ry themselves in their relations, as becometh the Gospell of Christ, should be instructed in the Christian faith, and know the relative duties which the Gospel requireth of them. As to the second, If we could suppose Sureties in Bap∣tism in all cases necessary, or expedient, we should judg it reasonable and necessary, that he who admits them under that notion, for the education of a Child, in the true Religion, should be first assured that they should be fit for such an undertaking. But we cannot lay much stress there, because it neither appears to us from Scrip∣ture-precept, or president, that such Sureties ought to be admited; nor yet have we any record of any Compatres, for many hundreds of years after Christ; Propatres indeed were allowed, in case the Parents were unknown, dead, sick, or absent upon necessary occasions: and there is none ignorant how grosly that usuage of the latter Church hath been and is still abused in the Church of Rome, and how absurdly it hath been used in our own Church. 3. Concerning Baptism, we do cleary agree, that it is a piece of prudence fit to be exercised, when persons come to us to desire Baptism for their Children, to try if we can get an account of their proficiency in the knowledg of Religion, and we shall our selves (as we see occasion) practise it. But in case any Parents be so stubborn, that they refuse to give us an account whether this may be judged by us a sufficient warrant to deny, or withhold the administration of the Ordinance to the Child, is not so cleare to us. Our Reverend Brethren in the Synod of Dort say no more, then opertunum tempus erit, &c. it would be a fit time to deale with such Parents. It is true, that Bap∣tism belongs to the Child in the right of the Parent, and that the unbelieving Parent hath no such right, but it is as certain that the Child may have a claime in the right of either Parent, and that not the immediate Parent only.
As to the fourth, We are the more confident, that it is our duty to withhold the other Sacrament from such refusers, not only because we find this the Unanimous sense of the Churches of God, met in the Synod of Dort, and also of se∣verall Divines in their particular writings, but because the Apostle plainly tells us, that he who discerneth not the Lords body, eateth and drinketh unworthily, and so becomes guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and eateth judgment to himself. And we being Stewards of the Mysteries of God (of whom it is required that they should be faithfull, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.) cannot conceive we should be faithfull in dispen∣sing of that Sacred Mystery, to those concerning whom we have no evidence, that they are able to examine them∣selves, or to discerne the Lords Body. We must therefore look upon such, 1. As Ignorant, and upon that account unwor∣thy. 2. As Scandalous, obstinately refusing instruction, and upon that account also unworthy of that Commu∣nion. And it being (as before) concluded from Scripture, from reason, and from the Judgment of all the Divines in that famous (aforementioned) Synod, and by diverse others in their particular writings, to be the duty of Parents and Masters of Families, and such as have the education of youth in Schooles, to be a piece of their duty also; in not doing of it, they shall fail in their duty, both to God, and to the souls of those committed to their charge, and there∣fore will deserve the more private admonition of the Pa∣stor, and more publick admonition of the Church, if that will not do; and being under such admonition, we shall conceive it our duty to withhold the Administration of the Lords Supper to them, as persons that are scandalous, untill such time as we have evidence of their submission and reformation: Only we thinke the case of these may admit of exception in the case of such Parents and Gover∣nours as cannot read, and some other speciall cases. We have therefore added, [In case they refuse to instruct them themselves, or else to send them to us to be instructed:] We hope we speak to persons, that know so well the Autho∣rity,
which God hath give them over their Children, or Servants, that none of them will say to us, what if we can∣not make them come? surely the rod of Correction is not only made, but also put into the hands of Parents and Master too for the backs of such fooles: And as none is fit to be trusted, with the government of the bodies of Chil∣dren or Servants, who if they should be so lazy that they would not worke, could not tell how to bring them to a better mind: So we judg them every way as unfit to be trusted with their souls, who know not how to use their Authority to them, to make them submit to the Instru∣ction of their souls in the things of God. FINIS.
To all Christian People, Inhabi∣tants in any Parishes, within the County of Norfolk, or the City and County of Nor∣wich, especially such as are un∣der the charge of any of the Associated Ministers in those Counties. Dearly beloved in the Lord: WE having (through the blessing of God up∣on our long debates) come to a setled Agreement as to practice, relating to the reviving of an ancient and usefull exer∣cise of Religion amongst you, (the par∣ticulars of which Agreement, with the reasons moving us to a consent in them, we have before exprest) we have nothing to do, but to beseech you, if there be any regard to be had, either to your own immor∣tall souls, or to the souls of those whom God hath betrust∣ed you with; if any bowels and mercies in you towards them, if you put any value upon the rooting, or establish∣ing of souls in the Principles of Faith, That you would in this thing submit unto us, as unto those whom God hath set over you, and who must be accountable for
your souls in the day of the Lord Jesus; that our ac∣count concerning you in that day, may be given up with joy, and not with grief, for that will to us be grie∣vous, (and we are sure) for you unprofitable. What we desire from you we have already told you, and it is re∣ducible to these two heads; 1. A just account from you of your proficiency, un∣der the means of grace, so long continued to you: that you may fullfill our joy, while we shall have some assu∣rance from you, that we have not laboured amongst you in vain. 2. A mutuall assistance from you, Inabling us to discharge that duty which we confess our selves to owe to those under your roofs. As to the first: When you shall have duly considered, that we are those who watch for your souls, and stand charged with them in Gods Book, we trust that you can∣not but judge our motion exceeding reasonable, consider∣ing that we cannot perfect our accounts without confer∣ring Notes with you; What a sad account shall we have to give for those souls, for whom we shall be only able to say, Lord! what they are, or how they have profit∣ed we cannot tell, for they kept their souls reserved from us. How can you say that you own the Ministery of the Gospell, or us as the Stewards of God, and yet re∣fuse that instruction which we are ready to give you, or that duty of submission which you own unto us? With what satisfaction can we either Administer the Sacra∣ment of Baptism to your Children, or the other Sacra∣ment to your selves, whenas you who address your selves unto us, to demand the first in your right for your Chil∣dren, or the latter for your selves, refuse to give us a∣ny evidence, that you have his warrant (whose Stewards we are) to require either the one, or the other, and we
(possibly) know not, whither you know any thing, either of the nature of that God, to whose Ordinances you lay claim, or of those mysteries of which you desire to be made partakers? We are sufficiently convinced, that those amongst you in whose hearts we shall find such Principles of frowardness working, are of the number of such as the Apostle calls Children in understanding; and stand in most need of, what you will see no need at all of; at least we have no reason to judge otherwise concerning you: for the gracious heart is willing to be searched and tryed: the knowing souls are alwaies desirous of instruction; and those who are awakened to a stedfast belief, that they must one day give an account to God, will not only be fre∣quently taking account of themselves, but ready also to give an account unto such, as they judge faithfull; not finding it an easie matter to satisfie themselves con∣cerning the state of their own souls, or concerning a just improvement under the meanes of grace. Give us leave therefore to treat you, under the notion of Babes in Christ, and to intreate you to consider with us; 1. The excellenty of the knowledge of the things of God. All knowledge hath its proportionate goodness, but this a more eminent excellency, both in regard of the excellency of the Object, and also the usefullness of the Act. It is the homage which the understanding gives to God, and without it, though the Affections may be laden with the fruit of good desires and zeale, &c. yet the un∣derstanding will be barren and unfruitfull. That God who hath made the Affections, hath (doubtless) made the Understanding also, and expects an homage from the latter, as well as the devotion of the former; be hath made them both for himself, and is uneavenly serv∣ed, by any single power of the soule. Is it dishonoura∣ble
for him that pretends to any profession, to a practice in any Mechanick, or intellectuall mystery, not to know the principles of that Art or Mystery, to which he pro∣fesseth; and is it not much more dishonourable, to him who ownes the Reverend name of a Christian, to be ig∣norant in the Principles of Christianity? Is light pleasant to the eye? and all knowledg pleasant to the understand∣ing, because its proper Object? and is there no delight to be found in the souls comprehension of the things of God? Is that knowledge sweet, the utmost issue of which is but satisfying an itch of curiosity, fitting us for converse with Men, or the gaining of an estate or interest in the world? and is there no sweetness in that knowledge, which prepares us for converse with Saints and Angels, for a converse with God in duty, and for the enjoyment of God himself to all eternity? The knowing Christian who is zealous also, is far better than him, that is, zea∣lous without knowledge; if knowledge and zeale lye in the soul together, there will be heat; if zeale runs so fact that it stumbles (as it did in Pauls case, and in the Jew; too) knowledge will lift it up; if a temptation to errors or Apostacy prevaile against zeale, if knowledge be with it, those two shall withstand it, and the threefold cord of knowledg, zeal, and sincerity, in any soul will not be easily broken. 2. Consider (we beseech you) the danger of igno∣rance in the things of God.2 Thes. 1.8. Christ will come in fla∣ming fire, to take vengeance, as well upon them that know not God, as upon them, who obey not the Gos∣pell of Christ. The ignorant as well as the disobedient, shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Besides how can you believe on him, of whom you have not heard? or worship that God whom you do
not know? or performe that homage of holiness to him which you do not understand? Knowledge is not only it self, a piece of the Tribute which we owe to God, but the foundation, upon which every Altar built to the living God, must be erected; an ingredient in every composition, from whence he can smell a sweet savour. A meer ne∣science of things necessary to be known, pollutes us, and makes way for our damnation. But 3. Consider (Brethren) that an affected ignorance is much more dangerous. The soul that is without knowledg is not good, Prov. 19.2. But he that refuseth instruction (saith Solomon,) despiseth his own soul; he is one who judgeth himself unworthy of eternall life, making a covenant with darkness; and subscribing his own damnation: and this (saith our Saviour) is the condemnation. The poor Pagan gropes for the Wall, because he wants light, this man falls into the pit because be shuts his eyes; The former knows not how to get a know∣ledge of God, further then his invisible things are clearly seen from the things that are made. These like not to retain God in their knowledg; they are of the num∣ber of those of whom Job speaks, who say to the Al∣mighty, depart from us, for we desire not the know∣ledge of thy waies. The wilfull self-murther is the greatest murther, and the wilfull soul murtherer is (doubtless) most shut out of the hopes of eternall life. Give us leave therefore to beseech you in the words os So∣lomon, that you would attend unto wisdom, and bow your ears unto understanding. —Lest you mourn at the last, when your soul and body shall be consum∣ed; and say, How have we hated instruction? and our heart despised knowledg, and have not obeyed the voice of our Teachers, nor inclined our eares unto those who would have instructed us? Lest any of you
say; do not we read the Word, and hear Sermons, in order to our instruction, what needs Catechizing? We be∣seech you 3. To consider how many years some of you have sate under our publick Preaching, and yet how unskil∣full you are to this very day in the word of Righteous∣ness. What the Apostle saith to the Hebrews, we fear may be applied to you. When as for the time you ought to have been teachers of others, you have need that one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are such as have more need of milk then of strong meat, Heb. 5.12. For the demon∣stration of this, you need do no more then Catechize your selves, concerning the nature of Originall Sinne, the Justification of the soul before God, &c. things of highest concernment to your immortall souls; to say no∣thing of that wofull ignorance which we daily find a∣mongst you, concerning the Natures and Person of Christ, and the great mystery of mans Redemption; and daily experience shews us, how much this ignorance exposeth Pious souls to the temptations of Satan, both those which are to sin, and those which are for sin, as also to every wind of Doctrine, and the errours of such, who go about to deceive. Nor indeed can we reasonably expect less. The Principles of Religion are in the bottom of our Ser∣mons, but in those exercises, the truths of God are but lightly insisted upon; now and then one of them passeth by the soul, and it receiveth a little thereof, but it is atten∣ded with many expressions, serving only to stirre up the Affections; for the croud of which, those who are small in stature as to knowledg, can hardly discerne what the Principle is, which is the Subject of our Discourse, (it is lost in the retinew) so that the fruit of Preaching is seen rather in warming the heart, than in the information of
the judgement; There the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ are one by one, (and that cursorily too) brought to the soul; but in these exercises they make a stay at the door of your hearts, and knock once and again, besides that you see them in their native dress, nor are they dis∣missed from you, untill you have viewed them in every part and got a full cognisance of them. 4. And lastly, Let us beseech our dearly beloved Friends to consider, The vanity of their pleas for a non-submission to this exercise. We are aware, that some of you will plead your Priviledges, others their temptations, a third sort, their naturall infirmi∣ties, Give us leave to reason out the case a little with you. Those who think themselves priviledged from this piece of their duty, challenge to themselves such a priviledge, either from their Age, or outward quality of the world; or from their Married Relation, or lastly, from their former Admission to the Supper of the Lord. But will any of these excuse an affected ignorance, when the day of the Lords vengeance shall come to be executed upon them that know not God? 1. For the first it is true, Daies should speak, and the multitude of years should teach understanding; and that it is a business of more difficulty, for aged, than for younger persons to receive, or retaine Principles of Instruction, experience teacheth; but we are yet to learne, that it is a business of less duty for such. It had indeed been well, if in the morning, they had not neglected to have sown their seed, but shall their hand be therefore slack in the evening? shall one neglect excuse another? or is not the difficulty that attends the work in aged per∣sons, a just penance rather, for their neglect in youth? Necessity will teach those to dig in their age, who knew
not in their youth how to do it; and will it do nothing to constraine ignorant persons that are aged, to learn the things of God, that their souls maybe saved in the day of Christ? Shall the danger of starving or begging our bread, prevaile further with us, then the danger of burning in Hell for ever? will it excuse you to answer the judge of the quick and the dead, hereafter calling you to an account for your ignorance in daies of light, to say, Lord! we were too old to learne? It was possi∣ble but your misery (through want of good education) not to be instructed when you were young; we are sure it will be a damnable sin unto you, to refuse instruction, be∣cause you are old; you are nearest to eternity, it should be judged your greatest concernement to be preparing for it, and John 17.3. It is life eternall to know God, and whom he hath sent, the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. For those who pleade their Quality, in bar to this piece of their duty, we trust they will desert their Plea, when they shall have seriously considered, that these acci∣dentall differences betwixt pieces of the same clay, will not hereafter be considered by the great Potter, with whom there is no respect of persons. When the grave shall have stripped us of all our gawdry, and our severall honours shall be laid in the dust, and the resurrection shall again present us before the great Tribunall of God; there will be no Heralds of Armes, to distinguish us according to our severall dignities, Lords and Ladies, Esquires, Gentlemen, &c. will be all known, but under the com∣mon notion of the Sons of Men; At that day the Kings of the Earth, the great, and the rich Men, the chief Captains and the mighty men; as well as the poor Bondmen and Apprentices, or ordinary Freemen, and Yeomens Children, if they have not known God, and obeyed the Gospell of our Lord Jesus Christ,
(which without a pravious knowledge of it they cannot do) will be seen, indeavouring to hide themselves in Dens, and it in the Rocks of the Mountains, and be heard crying to the Rocks, and to the Mountains to fall upon them, and to hide them from the face of him that shall that day sit upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, before which none shall be able to stand. Besides it is impossible there should be a greater Argu∣ment of ingratitude and disingenuity, than for us to plead the favours of God towards us, in bar or abatement of our duty toward him, from whom it is that we are made thus to differ from our Brethren, and who hath therefore done it, that we might be the more obliged to our homage. How contrarily doth that good Man Nehemiah argue in this case, should such a man as I flye? saith he, he makes his greatness an engagement to duty: we pleade it in ex∣cuse for duty. He argues from it, an engagement upon him, to be an example unto others: We argue, that be∣cause of it, we should not be obliged to follow the good ex∣ample of others. God of old complained of his people Israel in this Language:Jer. 2.2. I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals; when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a Land that was not sown; Israel was holiness to the Lord: and the first fruits of his increase, Verse 5. What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me? and have walked after iniquity, and are be∣come vain? And again, I did know theee in the wil∣derness, in the Land of great droughts. But Verse 6.Hos. 13.4. According to their pasture, so were they filled; and their heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me. Oh that it might not be said of any towards whom God hath set us in relation; when they were poore, and low in the world, when they went after God in the wilder∣ness
of many streights, and difficulties, then they were holiness to the Lord, then they seemed to delight to know and to follow on to know the God of their mereies; they and their houses then served the Lord. Themselves were not above Ordinances, (to use the improper phrase of these sinfull times,) nor their Children, above Cate∣chizing. But God hath blest them with increase upon Trading, or exalted them to some places of profit or trust, and they are grown great in the world; and now According to their pasture, so they are filled, and they have forgotten him that lifted them up. This is indeed to become like the beast that perisheth: while the wan∣ton horse is out of flesh, every Child can take him, every Rider rule him; but when he is grown fat, he becomes unruly, and unfit for his Masters use. We read concern∣ing Saul, that God once said. It repenteth me that I have made Saul King, 1 Sam. 15.11. For he is turned back from following me. We are afraid lest God should say concerning many, in this proud and licenti∣ous age; It repenteth me that I have advanced such or such persons in the world, that I have given them plen∣tifull estates, titles of honour or dignity; for since that time they have forgotten me. 3. There is a third sort, who think themselves pri∣viledged by marriage, The Apostle indeed tells us, that marriage is an honourable estate, and it is a shame to a∣ny to be under an engagement to the performance of du∣ties, in which he is ignorant; The Wife is commanded to learn of her Husband at home, and the Husband to walk with her as a man of knowledg; but experience tells us, how few there are to live up that this duty: yea that there are not many in a capacity to performe it. We thinke it reasonable that persons in such relation, should be prudently dealt with by their Ministers, but we cannot
think them excused from their duty, in the use of, and submission unto all means proper for their instruction in things of God, without a knowledge of which, we are sure they can never have eternall life. 4. For those who have been admitted to the Supper of the Lord in particular Churches; We confess some∣thing more may be said. This exercise chiefly intend∣ing the due information of Christians, in the Funda∣mentall and more necessary Principles of Religion, in which such should be competently instructed, who are re∣gularly admitted to that piece of Communion with God. But yet in regard that all such Christians stand obliged to a growth in knowledge, as well as any other grace, and we are sure those who know most know but in part, and this (as we have formerly argued) is a most accommo∣date meanes in order to such a growth, we are not satis∣fied that this is a sufficient plea for any, unless both they, and their Pastors find that they have attained, some more than ordinary persection in knowledge, before their ad∣mission into that degree of Communion. We look upon Catechizing, as an exercise designed to an higher end, than the meer preparing of Communicants for the Table of the Lord; and though we presume that none admit∣ted to that Table, by any consciencious Minister, shall need be examined like Children, as to their knowledge in the first Rudiments of Religion; yet we trust, this ex∣ercise may in a short time be so farre improved, that it will not appeare a puerile exercise; we intend (God wil∣ling) to begin with the short Catechism, (composed by the Assembly) and to examine it throughout, Without the Scriptures annexed, then to examine the Scriptures also, that it may appeare to our people, that their faith is not to be bottomed in the words of Men, but in the wis∣dome of God; and we would hope that in time, we might
bring some of our people beyond that shorter forme, to give us some account of the larger Catechism; we heartily wish all those in Sacramentall Communion with us, were thus farre instructed: but we find by too frequent experience, that even their knowledge is very disproportionate, to the meanes of grace which they enjoy; and that few of them have a distinct and orderly knowledge of the first Princi∣ples of Religion, and are much at loss, to prove by Scripture, what they profess to know, and believe. Nor would we willingly rest here, but would gladly bring up some of our people, to give us account of our Sermons, and of such Questions, as we shall out of the reade of the Catechismes, propound for the further explication of the Answers found there. Now if we can ever ripen this exercise to such a perfection, every one will judge that here will be something more done, than can be expect∣ed from Children; And we conceive that if any such who are in fullest Communion with us, shall think fit to An∣swer us some Questions, in the face of the Congregati∣on, besides the advantage may redound to others, who may thereby be encouraged to their duty, there may no small advantage accrew by it to their own souls, whilst by this meanes, their knowledge will be perfected, and their judgements setled concerning the things of God, and they will be enabled to give a reason of their hope, to every one that shall aske it of them. 2. There is a second sort, who have nothing to plead but the force of a temptation, from the scorne and reproaches of their Neighbours, or possibly those that live in the same Family with them. Who so remem∣bers Abraham's Family, was not free from an Ishmael, and that a Michal was found in the bosome of him, who was the man according to Gods own heart, cannot reasonably expect, that the large family of God, (which
is his Church) should be without some profane Scoffers at those who are better than themselves. Nor is this a small discouragement to those, who are not so well exercised in the things of God, as to have tasted the comfortable ad∣vantages, which are the returnes and rewards of duty in this life. The Pharisees scandall, (John 7.49. Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him, but this people which knoweth not the Law, and are cursed?) thrown in the face of these young Disciples, made the generality of them turn head, and go every man to his own house. They had not sate down before and con∣sidered, what it would cost them to become Christians. We heare the whisperings of vain persons. What? will you go to be Catechized like Children? will such as you go? do you see any but Children, and those the Children of ordinary persons too that come there? &c. It being not in our power to prevent the throwing of thosedarts, we shall only make it our business to arme you against them. 1. In the first place. What is said of honour, That it is more in him that gives, than in him that receiveth it, is (we are sure) much more true of reproach and dishonour. It is a poyson only hurtfull to that soul which spitteth it, and sticketh not at all to the face upon which it alighteth. It is that which comes out of a man, such as vain words and sinfull actions, or lusts within a man which defiles him, not what is thrown upon him from the hands of another; It is, and ought to be a small thing to a Christian, to be judged of Men; be should remember that its his lot to go through evill as well as good report. 2. Suppose they be most of the poorer sort that sub∣mit to this method of instruction, Yet Hearken our Beloved Brethren,James 2.58. hath not God chosen the poore of this world to be rich in faith, and heires of the King∣dome, which he hath promised unto them that love
him? The reason is not because the richer should not sub∣mit to it, but because they are held captive by their lusts, that they will not submit to this instruction; And there is a more secret cause of that too. Not many wise Men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called but God hath chosen. The base things of the world; and things which are despised hath God chosen, That no flesh might glory before the Lord. 3. It was a smart reply which David made to Michal, mocking him out of a window, while he was dancing be∣fore the Arke, 2 Sam. 6.20. How glorious (saith she) was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself in the eyes of the Handmaids of his Servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelesly uncovereth himself? He re∣plies, Verse 21. It was before the Lord, who chose me before thy Father, and before all his house to ap∣point me a Ruler; therefore I will play before the Lord, and I will be base in my own sight; and of the Maidser∣vants, which thou hast spoken of, I shall be had in ho∣nour. Why should not the same spirit be found in our Brethren, which was found in the Man according to Gods own heart? why should not they answer the Michals and Ishmaels of this generation, in the same dialect and say, It is for the Lords sake that I am willing to submit to any method of instruction, for the Lords sake who hath com∣manded me to bow my eare to understanding, for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for which St. Paul accounted, all things loss and dung, that he might but win Christ? For the Lords sake who (I trust) hath chosen me to obtaine eternall life through the knowledge of his truth, and possibly hath cast off your souls, and left you to your own lusts, lest in seeing you should see, and hearing understand, and your souls should convert, and be healed; It is for my immortall souls
sake, that I do it (which I know without knowledge can∣not be good, Prov. 19.2.) If by any meanes I might attaine to the resurrection of the dead. I will therefore submit to instruction, is this in your eyes to be vile? Nay sure (if Solomon may be judge) shame belongs to them who refuse instruction. I will yet be more vile in this sense, I will be base in my own sight, and not disdaine to be ac∣counted a fool, that I may be wise to eternall salvation. My soul is infinitely more precious to me, than my name a∣mongst the Sons of Belial. Of all sober Christiaus, yea of all who are but morally virtuous, I shall be had in honour. Yea those vain persons of whom you speak that they will reproach me, shall honour me in the day of their visitation. Mourning for sin, never destroyed beauty; kneeling at Pray∣er, never spoiled a silk stocking; nor did a submission to Ca∣techizing, ever hinder any ones preferment in Marriage. 4. And lastly, (Brethren,) If we cannot get over so small a stumbling block, as a scorners tongue in our way to Heaven, how shall we endure a Prison? how shall we (if called to it) resist unto blood? The Apostle tells us, That all who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecutions. Of all persecutions that from the tongue is (doubtless) the least. We have read of some who from this form of Catechumeni in Origen's School pro∣ceeded Martyrs, but we never read of any that did so who stumbling at the threshold, would not come into this School. 3. There is yet a third Plea, which some put in to excuse them from this piece of duty, and that is from their natu∣rall infirmity. Which by a mistake, they nickname mo∣desty; this they say will not suffer them, to express their conceptions, especially in a publick Congregation. In this plea Women are chiefly concerned, who make highest pre∣tences to this virtue, and would seem to have monopoliz∣ed it to their Sex. To which we answer,
1. That we conceive it is a plea insisted upon in this licentious age at a farre lesser advantage, than formerly it might have been urged upon. Heretofore indeed such a modesty had possessed the female world, that a Virgin must not be seen in a Congregation with a face uncovered, (Re∣beccah would not meet Isaac, before she had put on her vaile) and the violation of this Law of modesty, was such a scandall,Lacteas quid prae te fers sine linteo mammil∣las? Quid hoc est nisi dicere, posce! posce! trado. Pontan. that Tertullian calls her, that in his times was seen without her vaile in the Congregation, Caput nun∣dinatitium, pudor ostentatitiae virginitatis. None but Jeze∣bel then would paint herself, and look out at a window; and the very Poets would deride them, as presumed stru∣pets, who made their breasts naked. We say had this plea been insisted upon in that bashfull age, it might have signi∣fied something inreality. But when we consider the immo∣dest liberty taken in these duties, by too many of that Sex, in discovering their nakedness in the sight of the world, yea even in the publick Assemblies, for divine worship (without regard to the Angels) stretching out their want on necks, and mincing it as they go, conversing with wantons, in mixed dances, yea at publick Taverns and Innes, &c We are apt to think, that the guard of modesty, which na∣ture seemed originally to have set upon them, is long since dimissed, and wonder to hear of it any more in the world. 2. Doth not nature it self teach you, to make mode∣sty give place in cases of necessity, though of no higher concernment than bodily welfare? And have we not de∣monstrated a necessity of being instructed in the things of God? or are soul necessities less considerable than those which incumber bodily life or health? may the barres of modesty be honourably passed for the latter, and lest for stumbling blocks to the former? Neither do we think true modesty in the lest concern∣ed, as an hinderance to this submission. Which of you who
make this your plea, should any of us (though before never so many witnesses) enquire of you concerning your health, the welfare of your Parents, or other relations, or your other worldly concernments, would be so overcome with modesty, as not to give us an answer? and why should your modesty be pleaded only when we come to quaery you concerning the things of God, and the concernment of your immortal souls? 4. To conclude this therefore, we can easily grant, that there may be a shamefac'dness in some, which may hinder their submssion to this usefull exercise; But as the Philoso∣pher will allow nothing of this nature the name of a mor∣rall virtue; so much less is this , to be humoured, which is an excessive shame, restraining us from what of it self is praise-worthy and honourable. If therefore any plead this in earnest, we have nothing to do but to tell them, that it is a lust not to be gratified, but mortified. And in ve∣ry deed, whatsoever of this is reall in any, ariseth meerly from a fear of disgrace, which (as to this thing) will no longer abide in any, than until they be raised to a confidence of their ability to satisfie their duty in it, and be convinced of this as their duty, and the eternall concernment of their souls, that they may not perish for want of knowledg. We have (we trust) said enough to press the first thing which we had to request of you. The second was 2. A mutual assistance from you, as you are governours of others, enabling us to discharge that duty, which we confess our selves to owe unto the Children and Ser∣vants committed to your trust. And this in two things 1. Your more private preparing them for our work. 2. The exercise of your authority, in requiring their appearance to us when we are waiting upon this service, As to the first of these we do desire our Brethren to consider 1. That besides the common Obligations which arise from the bonds of naturall affection and common charity, and engageth Parents and Masters, to take care of their
Childrens and Servants souls, as well as of their outward being and wellfare; they also lye under the obligation of a positive divine Law to the performance of what we desire of them. The Israelites were obliged to take all opportunities to whet the Law of God upon their Children, Deut. 6.6, 7. and to cause their Children to understand the Passeover, Exod. 12. Both Children and Masters are char∣ged (in the fourth Commandment) with the souls of their Children, and of their Servants; to say nothing of the ex∣amples of Abraham, David, the Mother and Grandmother of Timothy, &c. Elie's neglect of his Family caused the ruine of himself and it. Whatever any of our Brethren may fancy, there never comes a Child or Servant into any of their families, but he comes with this warrant from the great Lord of Heaven and Earth. Keep the soul of this Child, this Servant: for if it be missing amongst the num∣ber of my sheep at the great day, through thy neglect in reproving, instructing, or timely correcting, or restrain∣ing it, thy soul shall go for it. 2. We beseech our Brethren to cousider, That the duty, which we press upon them, is within the compass of their power. You cannot teach your Children, or Servants the fear of God, but you may teach them the knowledg of God, you cannot convey grace into their hearts, but you may con∣vey instruction into their minds. You cannot bring them to Christ, but you may bring them to Church; Doubtless the o∣mission of no duties will be so severely revenged upon peo∣ple, as those which even in our lapsed estate we have a pow∣er to performe, if we want not an heart to them, and refuse the performance of them. 3. We dare assure every one of you, that in the per∣formance of this duty, you will be like the Husbandman (of whom the Apostle speaketh) who reapeth, first of his own fruit. Those who know most of God will best performe their duty to you; we cannot but look upon the undutifullness
of your Children, and debauchery of your Servants, as very much caused, from the neglect of your duty, who should have taught them better things; and in your punishment in their miscarriages you may many of you read your iniquity in this neglect of them. 4. We are sure, That by this performance of your duty you would much facilitate our work. The neglect of Ma∣sters and Parents, in the instruction and gorvernment of their families, hath almost made the work both of Magi∣strates and Ministers unpracticable as to the latitude of their duty. Whence is it that your Children or Servants, are either ashamed or afraid, to give any account to us of their knowledg or proficiency under our Preaching to them, but because it is a strange thing to them, to which they were ne∣ver accustomed at home. 5. We might further adde, That by the practice of this duty you would find no small advantage arising to your own souls, and this not only in the satisfaction you would have, while you should see their proficiency in the knowledg of God, and you shall in the death, or miscariage of any of them, have the testimony of a good conscience that you have not been defective in your duty to them: But also in the further confirmation of your own souls in the truths of God, stirring up your own minds by way of remem∣brance. It will be of the same use to you, that the Jewish Phylacteries were to them, by means of which the truths of God will be alwaies kept in the eye of your minds. The second thing which we have to beg of you is, The exercise of your authority in commanding and requiring your Children and Servants to appear unto us waiting upon this piece of our Ministry. And for this we must be the more importunate, untill the Civill Magistrate shall be pleased to interpose his authority, (it being the only means we have to bring our wholesome designe for the good of their souls, to any comfortable issue.)
We would hope the perswading of you to this, should be the easiest part of our work; In our first request we pleaded with you to put off something of your selves, that you might put on Christ, performe (we mean) your duty to him. Here we aske you but to put on your selves, cloathing your delves with, and exercising that due Authority, which God hath given you, over those under your roof. Those who will not put themselves to the inconsiderable trouble, once a week or oftner, to propound a few Questions out of a Catechrsm to their Children or Servants, in order to so great an end, as we have proved this exercise conducible unto, will doubtless do very little to help them to Heaven. But those who refuse this latter part of their duty, will do much less. We will not suppose that any Master or Parents shall so little understand the Authority, with which God hath invested them, as to tell us, that they cannot make them come. The Centurions Servants (of whom we read in the Gospel) were at better command. And unquestionably if the Lord had not thought he had cloathed you with a sufficiency of power over your Children and Servants, he would never have charged it upon you, to take care that they should keep his Sabbath holy. We shall adde no more, but commend you all to the Lord, and these things to your serious consideration, imploring the blessing of his grace. FINIS. Reader: Though all due care was used, to prevent thy trouble in the per∣usall of these Sheets, yet the Printer must (besides failers in stopps, and accents,) beg thy pardon for these following Errataes. IN the Epist. presatory. p. 9. in marg. l. 4. r. . l. 5. dele . l. 10. r. . l. 12. r. . p. 10 in the Epist. l. 19. r. nor. In the Art. p. 2. l. 3. r. to the. In the Book. p. 1. in marg. r. circumsonants. p. 3. in marg. r. retinet. p. 3. l. 16. r. . p. 6. l. 9. r. Catechistae. p. 6. l. 13. r. . p. 14. l. 6. r. passeover. p. 19. l. 1. r. indeavoured. p. 25. in marg. r. observari. p. 27. l. 20. r. parent. p. 28. l. 23. r. opportunum.
