A87 07915194 40378
SCOLDING NO SCHOLARSHIP: IN THE ABYSS OR, GROUNDLES GROUNDS OF The Protestant Religion, as hol∣den out by M. Menzeis in his Brawlings against M. Demp∣ster. We have heard of the Pride of Moab (he is very proud) even of his haughtiness, and his Pride and his wrath; but his lyes shall not be so, Isaiah 16. V. 6. According to Protestants Translation. The house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Tim. 3.15. Printed for the Author, 1669.
Sr. William Baird of Newbaith Bart.
AN Advertisement. HAving but a very few things whereof to Advertise the Read∣er, I address no Epistle to him; Yet one thing I must friendly tell him, being to ask a Courtesie or two at his hands. 1. Then he shall know this short Reply to Mr. Menzeis greater Book, was offered to the Press at Aberdene within a moneth after it first appear∣ed; but the Stationer being inhibited by Publick Authority (and that as is thought at M. Menzeis desire) I was forced first to make it to be transcribed, and then fitted for abroad, where it is not easie to us, to have any thing well Printed or returned in hast. 2. I must beg upon this account, the Errata and faults in Orthography may be excused, I not being present to correct them. 3. I desire none would think tedi∣ous or superfluous in some Sections, very many
Quotations, yea some even here and there repeated; for that in questions of fact, things cannot be o∣therwise proved; and to remit the Reader either to the first Authours of them, or the places where∣in they were cited before, or in other Controversie Books, were to divert his thoughts and attention, and put him to such pains as few will take. 4. I pray that he do not mistake me in refuting M. Menzeis Grounds, for I onely take to prove, that the Scrip∣ture and Doctrine of the Primitive Church can be no ground to Protestants, denying an Infallible Vi∣sible Judge, for both these as infallibly propounded by the true Church, I most cordially imbrace, and wish all may do with me.
AN Answer to a Letter sent from Aber∣dene, with Mr. John Menzeis his Reply to Mr. Dempster, for Reclaiming a Country Gentle∣man from Popery. SIR, YOur Letter shewing equally such zeal for the Protestant Cause, and affection to me, hath made me read the Book inclosed, with such a Chara∣cter of the Writer, as careful∣ly, as if it contained Responses, and as impartially as if I were a Seeker. The Question here moved, I ingenuously grant,
is the main Point (if solidly answered) could best reclaim me, and most of my Profession, who amid'st so many Storms raised against us, have no small motive to comply, if we could look at present to our little Temporal Interest, without making a greater and Eternal loss, whereof there could be no hazard, if Protestants (as is here debated) could shew any assured and infallible ground for what they profess. This, Sir, is all Mr. Dempster through all his ten Papers requires, and we with him; he pro∣pounds and states the Question most clearly and smoothly, though in homely terms, by reason of his long absence from home; he makes no Di∣gression from the main Point, what ever be re∣plyed beside: (yet engageth after this Point once decided, to answer what ever is here retorted, in∣stanced, or urged against him) he answers hum∣bly and mildly, however provok'd with most bit∣ter and lofty words; Like another Fabius or old Warriour, he keeps his Post, neglecting all the Flowrishes and Skirmishes of his insulting Adver∣sary, who having engaged under his hand, to defend the Protestant Religion (the onely occa∣sion of this Dispute) strives still nevertheless (fde & arte punicâ) that is most deceitfully, to impugne the Catholick Roman Faith with a like success to that of Hannibal, who let Car∣thage be demolished and redacted to ashes, whil'st he insisted in vain to Sack and Ruine
Rome. And this is proper to him with most Hereticks; all Heresy tending rather to destru∣ction then edification, Atheisme rather then Religion, and to question what hath been since Christ and his Apostles constantly believed in the Church of God, rather then to settle their own new wavering and inconstant Faith, upon any so∣lid Principle or Ground. Yet Mr. Menzeis most confidently thinking he had got as an unbloody, so an undoubted vi∣ctory (hearing his Adversary was dead) Petiti∣ons the Senate of Aberdene as for a Triumph, that his Papers may be put in Print: His Learn∣ing, Loyalty, and Religion most justly deserving it, for as he is of a daring and stirring spirit, so in all things Martially minded, his Learning being most in Polemics, his Loyalty much in debate, and his Religion ever in controversy; neverthe∣less as Umpire in all, he deserveth well a Crown, as his late late Victory by the Pen a Chariot of Paper. This his Triumphal Chariot is not drawn, but carried in the Air, with high and vio∣lent blasts; most suitable to his fierceness in fight∣ing with a scolding and railing Tongue, which makes his Adversaries deepest wounds. Before it, go indeed some worthy Persons, at least in black upon white, and in the Paper, follow immediately the flying Colours, wherein his late Arms sent from Edenbrough, (viz. The Bible reversed) do shine, with this new Motto, I take
from the present Subject The Grounds of the Protestant Religion. The acclamations of the People are not wanting in the mouthes of some sighing Sisters. He is Herauld himself, sound∣ing constantly his own praises aloud; nothing is brought into the Treasury, as in Triumphs had wont in old, but some hundred Marks for the charges of the Triumph (that is, the Printing of the Papers) exported. One thing onely is want∣ing, practised in such glorious showes, one Ad∣monitor sitting with the Triumpher, to keep him in mind of humane weakness, least too great honour should so puff him up, as to think himself above the condition of men. And this defect, Sir, I intend to supply, in perusing his Book, advertising him now and then of some weakness, both in Conduct, Courage and Strength, as his Answers to the Question pro∣pounded shall deserve. And first, if I should answer his most invective Babling, Scoldings, and Railings, with all the Venom he spits out to Ciment the Grounds of his Religion, I could easily pay him home, even with the general Applause and Acclamations of most Protestants, amongst whom the more Mo∣derate, and most constant Professors scarce own him, his Religion, or Grounds; as best know∣ing his Arragant, Proud, Contentious Spirit, his unbridled Tongue, his scandalous Carriage in so many Encounters, his wavering Belief, un∣setled
Faith; and how oft he hath been Episco∣pal, Presbyterian, Independent: His Pulpit jars with his Collegue in the time of the Covenant, his base complyance with the Usurper in the time of Rebellion, his variance with his Bishop at the time, the Government of the Church was re-establisht; how many living Witnesses have heard him Preach and foment Schism, and Divi∣sions in the Church, Sedition in the State, and even treacherous and Treasonable Sermons a∣gainst his Prince and King. I instance only that base and perfidious bewraying of Gods Word, belying of the known truth; and betraying of his Countrey and King, in that most unchristian Sermon, upon these words, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, whom I have rejected? Apply∣ing them to our most Gracious Soveraign; which I should have been ashamed to relate, if this no∣torious Impostor, and most absurd abuser of Gods Word, had not first in the Preface of a Sermon in Print, and now again so often in this his Book most deceitfully and maliciously cryed out, Papists could be no good Subjects, as if their Tenets did tend to Rebellion; whil'st all Loyal Protestants in the three Kingdoms, both love and respect our Loyalty, how ever they hate our Profession; and look upon him, with all his Co∣venanting Fry, as a most fiery Incendiary of Re∣bellion. Now Sir, if such a man (whom you most cry up for his Eloquence, as, if like another
Samson, his strength consisted in his hair) be a Person fitted to give the Grounds of Religion, defend the Protestant Faith, or convert any one to his Belief, for that with a Pharisaical counte∣nance, a Puritanical tone, and a strong voice, colouring some slight Learning and reading of Pamphlets, with plagiary Phrases and Passages, to stuff up a Book in Print, and turn the Glass twice in his Sermons, let any be judge. As that Philosopher of old, hearing himself praised by the rabble, who commonly approve nothing but such stuff as is in themselves, did presently make an examen of his actions: I hope Protestants seeing their Religion Defended by such a Writer, will more diligently enquire of its weakness, which they can never better see, then in his Papers, where having undertaken to give the Grounds of the Protestant Religion (the only Subject of this Dispute, either by Word or Writ) in them all has not (as his Adversary well re-marks) so much as ten lines to settle, clear, or defend them in the least; but scraping together objections against Catholicks (so often answered by them) borrows some passages to no purpose at present, and heaps up undervalu∣ing words, with such injurious scoldings, rail∣ings, and imprecations against an Old, Grave, Learned, and Modest Man, that after he hath called him an impudent Liar, a Knave, Rogue, Sycophant, Fool, a dull and Lethargick-head, a
Neat-herd in Ignorance, a Devil in Malice, and what not? He imprecates in fine (out of his corrupt Bible, changing the word Imperet, with imreet) the same curse Saint Michael did in their conflict to the Devil, such is the Pride, Passion, and poison of his heart, so contrary to the Spirit of God. After this, what may we ex∣pect of such a person, if we hear the Wise mans saying, In malevolam animam non introibit sapi∣entia: True Wisdom never enters into a wicked and malicious soul; yet Sir, to satisfie your lo∣ving and friendly desire, I intend to examine more at length, what Wit and Learning he shews, and first in his two long Epistles Dedi∣catory, and to the Reader, which could receive no Answer, from Mr. Dempster, as appearing but a twelvemonth after his death: After this, God willing, I wil positively refute (which he so ur∣ges may be done) First, his great Principle of No Infallible visible Judge of Controversie, and then both his Ruinous Grounds.
SECT. I. Some brief Reflections on the Title of Mr. Menzei's Book, and his two long Epistles Dedicatory, and to the Reader. HIs Title being in Latine Papismus Lucifugus, (according to that saying, a strong Thief shall have a strange name,) must needs be ex∣plained, and surely understood of that New Gospel Light in the Covenant, for in it Mr. Menzeis was a bright Star of the first Magnitude, or Fiery Comet himself, of which Light, a Pre∣latick Poet in answer to a Satyre, upon the Con∣secration of a Bishop, Writes thus, Your Phoebus from the West did rise A light that did put out mens eyes, Welcome Confusion. This Light indeed Popery shuns, as all other New Lights against old received Christian Veri∣ties; but not that either of Scripture or An∣tiquity, the onely true Light of the Christian
World, as flowing from Christ the Sn of Ju∣stice, and carried by so many holy Popes, Bi∣shops, and Priests in Communion with them, even unto the most remote corners of the Earth, as the conversion of all Kings and Countries to the Christian Religion do testifie, which Light Mr. Dempster, no where declines, but constant∣ly holds out to make nothing for clearing the Grounds of the Protestant Religion, except it be in shewing them both ruinous and false, so that Mr. Menzeis here, Offendit in Luce & in limine, that is, stumbles both in the light, and in the specious Title of his Book, whereof the very first line is not to the purpose. The Question being only of the Grounds of the Protestant Re∣ligion, and not of Popery at all. He begins with a great show of humility, who am I, the meanest of the thousands of Israel? An∣swer, Est qui se nequiter humiliat & interiora ejus plena dolo, Eccles.—19. But let his late Bi∣shop in the Church, Principal in the Colledge, and fellow Brethren in the Ministery bear witness of this, when they have opposed him in the least: Yea, his own Jactancy through all his Papers and Book, with his base revilings in every page, and under-valuing of his Adversary. It is those his humble thoughts of his own abilities makes him so boldly assert there was consultation used in the present Dispute, Surprizal intended, and a choice Champion pitched upon to Encounter
with him as a Hector. But the known truth is to all them who had a hand in the undertaking (as they did witness in his presence at the Meeting) that they had only yielded to his Importunity in desiring a Meeting, and that they had taken him only who was next at hand for the time, a man most able indeed for a civil Conference, but most unable for a Clamorous Dispute, as being of a very weak Constitution, and of a totally confiscated health. But all this Conference must be set out by him in a disguised Dress; Mr. Demp∣ster proclaimed an Ignorant, Catholicks char∣ged with Calumnies, the better to Paint out his Victory and Triumph. As in like case another Conference (as he quotes) by Dr. Prideaux; and Dr. Featly of late, whom he might have spared to name, being as good at Calumniating Inven∣tions as either of them, and no doubt but he will be cited hereafter, as they now, who never∣theless most deceitfully relates both the occasi∣on of the Conference, and what passed in it. The clamours of women he speaks of, if any (for it was a most modest person did speak) was onely to suppress his clamours heard even at the Cross, and witness to his face, that he had pas∣sed from his engagement to them, which was to give and defend the Grounds of the Protestant Religion, as he had engaged under his hand; and this his missive, was the Paper Mr. Dempster kept open at the Meeting (which he would have
generally supposed to have been the first exchan∣ged Paper with him) but it is particularly known to us, Mr. Dempster had never then in∣tended to write a line. But Mr. Menzeis cau∣tious, and conscious to himself, that it had been easie to reverse his Grounds, and Involve him in inextricable difficulties (as shall hereafter ap∣pear) if he had answered directly by word, re∣fuses the performance of his promise, or to speak for the Protestant Religion at all, but will only Impugne some Opinions of Authours in the School, which are neither fit for the Pulpit, (where he did first challenge them) nor the ca∣pacity of common hearers, and much less that which he chiefly insisted on, any Point of our Faith. The first is, That men are not bound present∣ly to repent when ever they have offended God, under the danger of incurring a new sin; Where∣upon Mr. Menzeis frameth his Argument, as if this were a Dicision of the Catholick Roman Church; and then sayes he, Mr. Dempster de∣nied the Major, whence he took witness that the Jesuit admitted the Minor, a rare Inference and quick. He passeth under silence the con∣firmation of the Major denied, because disgrace∣ful to him, who though he did think it a point of Faith, and that so unquestionable, yet could never prove it by Scripture, contenting himself with a weak comparison, which he is ashamed
to set down in his Book. But however Doctors vary in prescribing a limited time wherein we should repent, all hold the shortest delay both surest and best, and publick Repentance is ge∣nerally taught to be necessary for publick trans∣gressions, as publick Recantations for open Ca∣lumnies, like to that of Mr. Menzies against his Soveraign, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, &c. His Penitential Sermon being as yet to make, so well doth he presently repent. Yea, not only his Practice, but Doctrine also (if truly a Protestant) is so far from presently repenting, that Teaching mens best actions to be sinful, he must either confess repentance at no time to be commanded, or else blasphemously avouch, God hath commanded us to sin. Is it not a jear∣ing of Gods Commands, and a scoffing of men, to affirm the Commandements to be impossible, and yet urge that even affirmative ones should be hourly, and instanly kept? Forgetting two Maxims of the School, Nemo tenetur ad impos∣sibile, and Praecepta affirmitativa obligant semper sed non pro semper. In the second Argument, he both argues and and answers to himself, (Mr. Dempster being si∣lenced by his clamours) concerning the intenti∣on of Priests in administring the Sacraments, which if requisite, he will have it to make all Faith uncertain. But in vain, there being grea∣ter assurance of their intention, then that Mini∣sters
use aright the Elements, and pronounce the words, or that they teach not false Doctrine, and set not out corrupt Bibles. The assistance of Gods Spirit promised to his Church, and his particular Providence in Governing and Ruling it, assures us nothing necessary either to Faith or Salvation can be wanting in her; No want of Intention can wrong them who are come to age, they may supply by their own Intentions, De∣sires, and Acts of the love of God: And for children whom Protestants▪ will have to be saved by the faith of their Parents, and not by Bap∣tism, Is it not more sure, that publick persons in the Church want not a right Intention, then that private men have true Faith? The confer∣ring of a Sacrament is not only Actio Hominis I hope, but also Humana, as the Divines speak. What then if a Mad man in a frolick, or a Co∣median for a jeer, (as we read to have been done in derision of Christians) should pour out wa∣ter on any one, and pronounce the words? yea, what if a Priest shewing a new Convert how he is to be Baptized, should do the same? Were these lawful and valid Baptisms, where nothing save the Intention is wanting. It is easie to ca∣vil at the chief Heads of the Christian Religi∣on, but hard to say any thing solidly against them. After this; he comes to his Apologies, First, for so much writing on so little purpose;
Answer, he should have said, so little to the pur∣pose, there scarce being ten lines precisely to the purpose in all his Papers and Book. Secondly, That he was not so speedy in Answer∣ing as Mr. Dempster, upon his Incombacy's; and up∣on deliberating whether he should answer, the emp∣tiness of Mr. Dempsters Scriblings, who antida∣ted his Papers, yet that he might guess with A∣pelles, at his great hast by his foul work. An∣swer, his greatest Imcombacy's, as I am inform∣ed, are but to dite and declaim Bellarmines Ob∣jections, or such like, out of other Controversy Books: And if it be an empty Question to ask the Grounds of his Religion; Sure it must be an empty Religion, and void of Grounds. Nei∣ther did Mr. Dempster Antidate his Papers, but did write back to him as currantly as any man could do a missive Letter, never intending they should see the Press, and finding very little so∣lidity in his Answers. He guesses at his great hast by his foul work, but can shew nothing foul in it, save onely when he resumes his filthy scold∣ings: but we may easily guess at his little wit by his Foolish Work and Answers no where to the purpose. His third Apology, is for the Acrimony and bitterness of his expressions, which he sayes had their rise from Mr. Dempsters Dunghil Eloquence, Repetitions, Praeteritions, Calumnies. An∣swer, Mr. Menzies scoldings are the only Elo∣quence
of the Dunghil: most Learned men of∣tentimes be not very Eloquent in the Vulgar Tongue. As to his Repetitions, he is no good Disputant, who passes from his medium before the Argument be answered. For Preteritions, all wise men pass what is not to the purpose, as most of his papers and Book. And as for Ca∣lumnies, I leave to his papers to justifie his mo∣desty, however Mr. Menzies most injuriously Calumniate him. In his Epistle to the Reader, he continues his Apologies for Disputing, Writing, Printing, grant∣ing one might have said more in a very few sheets, for the satisfaction of a lover of Truth, then he in all his Papers, and this is most true; Nay, but he has been constrained to follow the anomalous motions of a tautologizing Jesuit. Answer, These two words set together sound well in a Pulpit, but signifie nothing or little: for how can his motion be anomalous or irregu∣lar, who steers still to the same point, constant∣ly propounding the same thing? Or how can he be said to Tautologize and use idle Repetitions, who insists still in the same question, till he get a full and satisfactory Answer? as if a man come to require his money from a Debtor, should hear from him many news of the late Wars, and then asking again his money, the Debtor should speak of our new League with many Forraign Princes: But the Creditor still mindful of the
main, did reiterate the occasion of his coming, and ask a new, when he could expect his mo∣ney? were this a tautologizing, and vain repe∣tition? And in this sense I grant Mr. Dempster tautologizes, and in no other. But are not rather Mr. Menzies many In∣stances in this his Epistle against the Catholick Faith, and so many times repeated in his Book, both tautologies and anomalous motions, as altogether false, frivolous, idle, and impertinent to the present Question, concerning the Grounds of the protestant Religion? wherefore I reflect only on the last, viz. That Popish Principles, as improven by the Jesuited party, are highly injuri∣ous to Princes, Ergo, The Protestant Religion hath solid grounds; for this should be his In∣ference in all he sayes: And this an arch Cove∣nanter is not ashamed to write, who so treason∣ably, and publickly did preach against his lawful Soveraign; but the love and esteem, so many of the Greatest and Wisest Monarches in the Christian World have for Jesuits, sufficiently vindicate them from all the Calumnies of such a disloyal person. After this he sayes, If he know his own genius well, he takes no pleasure in altercations: Answer He is then of a most austere Nature, who so shuns all pleasure; for it seems Mr. Menzeis lives in altercations, as the Salamander in the fire, all his Preachings and Writings being full of them.
He delights so to cavil, that he lets not pass Mr. Dempsters Orthographick trespasses, which should have been at most imputed to his Ama∣nuensis or Scriviner. But, if Mr. Menzeis were as Orthodox as Orthographick, all were well. In his voyage to London to complement the U∣surper, he made himself Orthographick in the English Tongue; but coming down an Indepen∣dent, he was far from an Orthodox mind, yet thinks to keep up some reputation amongst Pro∣testants, by his Imputations on Jesuits. No hope, sayes he, of prevailing with the Jesui∣ted Faction, whose Design as appears, is to keep up a stated Schism in Christendom, they hinder the conversion of Jews and Infidels. Answer, No Sir, it is only the Hidra of Heresy, and chiefly yours, divided in so many heads, keeps up Schism and Division from the Church, and amongst themselves; which Monster Jesuits strive to sup∣press, they, yea, one of them, called Saint Fran∣cis Xavier, hath converted more Infidels to the Christian and Catholick Religion in ten years time, then all the Protestants in the World, for a hundred and fifty, if all Records of History be more worthy of credit, then you. The conversion of Jews, Infidels, Hereticks as ever in old times, so constantly now, is a mark of the true Church, to which Hereticks can no wise pretend, whose business is to pervert Catholicks, rather then to convert Infidels, as Saint Hierome well remarks,
so that in all prudence, this he should not have mentioned, his younger brethren the Jansenists, (of whom he borrows most of his Objections a∣gainst Jesuits) speak not of this, being no little ashamed, when yearly the notable conver∣sions of so many thousand Infidels, only by Je∣suits, and other Priests in Communion with the Sea of Rome, come out, wherein neither they nor he have any hand. Next amongst many controverted points ob∣structive to the peace and unity of the Catholick Church, he sets down first, the Churches Infalli∣bility, as if the true Church were not infallible, both according to the Scripture and Fathers (as I shall, God willing, hereafter prove at length) or as if the Church being infallible, peace and unity could not be had. Secondly, the Popes Universal Supremacy, as obstructing Unity, forgetting what St. Hie∣rome sayes, l. 1. in Jovin. That even amongst the Apostels themselves, one was made head, that the occasion of Schism and Division might be taken a∣way, Ut capite constituto Schismatis tolleretur oc∣casio: Doth the Popes Supremacy in the whole Church hinder peace and unity, more then my Lord Archbishops Primacy in the Kingdom? Is not this a fling at Bishops in their Diocesses, and the Primate in each Nation, to say their Supremacy over inferiour Pastors, is a let and stop to Peace and Unity in the Church? So all
Covenanting Ministers speak with him, the Uni∣ty they aim at being nothing but a Monopoly to set themselves above Pope and Primate, upon the ruines of both Church and State. Are not these strong and witty Objections, put in the Frontispiece of his Book, as in the Van? The rest I prosecute not, they being the ordina∣ry controverted Tenets betwixt Protestants and us, answered in every Pamplet of Controversie; but the last is too remarkable to let it pass: Nay, says he, Is it not one of the first Queries wherewith Jesuites do assault our people, how do you know Scripture to be the word of God? As if they would have people rather turn Atheists, then remain Pro∣testants. A very pretty Reply; shews not this his Answer, Jesuits and others have great rea∣son to move the Question, to which so great a Divine can not better reply. Protestants call Scripture their ground of Faith, but can evi∣dence by no sufficient Motive of Credibility, (standing to their principles) this Book they call Scripture, is the true and Authentick Word of God, should not Mr. Menzeis then have setled, cleared, and vindicated from all Objections and Cavils this his ground? but that could have diverted him from Impugning the Romish Faith: no it would have done more against it, then all his Calumnies of Idolatry; being more to the purpose, yea ended, (to the Protestants great advantage) all the present debate, but all Mr.
Menzeis can answer, is to call the question Athe∣istical, and a demand proper to Infidels; as if good Christians might not ask for Instruction, how they may prudently believe, and firmly ad∣here to the grounds of their Religion and Faith. In fine, he says, Many Romanists have called for Reformation. Answer, true, and do as yet daily call for Reformation in Life and Manners, but not in matters of belief, none of them with Pro∣testants, presuming to correct Gods Word, and reform the Doctrine of his Church, or to censure their Pastors, and all the Ancient Fathers, with Pharisaical, and Puritanical pride. This way of calling for Reformation was proper to prote∣stants at their first rise, for reforming the Ca∣tholick Roman Church, and again in the Cove∣nant for the reforming their own; They like Foxes indeed, (to use Mr. Menzeis compari∣son) did raise such dust (not to say worse) with their tails and heads both, that ever since, the very air they breath is infected, and their eyes so blinded, that they cannot open them to see the manifest truth. After all this, fearing his Book may have a re∣ply, he desires all things then be noticed he hath said. Answer, No, this his demand is most un∣reasonable, that at the time one only question is in debate, and that a main one, concerning the Grounds of the Protestant Religion, any thing else should be taken notice of, till this be put to
a closure. On this all the Protestant Religion depends; let their grounds be proved solid, and we have done; for by that we look not on his Di∣gressions as Golden Apples, to make us run out of our way in the least; they being scarce like to the Apples of Sodom (in his confused Rapso∣dy) that is pleasant to the eye, though no less rotten in the heart, as who has best right to the Root and Tree, may justly claim the Branches and Fruit; so whoever proves he hath the true Grounds of Religion, may easily prove all Su∣perstructures on this ground to be true, the ac∣cessary followeth the principal; and this is the chief and principal question amongst us; let this be once decided in their favour, and we have no more process with them. Secondly, he desires nothing be brought has been answered by Protestants. Answer, if he had given example in this, he had never written a line: However, if any thing has been solidly answered, to what I bring against his great principle, of no Infallible visible Judge of Controversie, or both his grounds, as I most sincerely protest, it ne∣ver did come to my hands, so let Mr. Menzeis send it me, and here an end. Thirdly, That personal Criminations be laid aside. Answer, then these personal Criminati∣ons, when he calls Mr. Dempster a dull and Le∣thargy-head, a Neat-herd, a man of a Prostitute reputation, a Knave, a Sycophant, a Devil, should
have been blotted out of his Book. As Infa∣mous persons are not received for witnesses, so Calumnies can be no wise sooner refuted, then by shewing that he who calumniates has lost all reputation and credit. If it were not softly insi∣nuated, what a quick wit Mr. Menzeis is, who names Mr. Dempster a dull and Lethargy-head: How learned a Pastor, who calls him a Neat-herd; how famous, who challenges him to be of a prostitute reputation; how honest, who calls him a Rogue and a Knave; how sincere and ingenuous, who terms him a Sycophant: and how great a Saint, who compares him to a De∣vil, his sole authority in Print might perhaps endanger Mr. Dempsters good name, wherefore he must not take ill a little hath been said of this, not for Criminations, but as Answers to Ca∣lumnies, and notorious falshoods; especially his Apology being the greatest of his wrongs, as if Mr. Dempster had extorted them, he was forced to it, because for sooth, he can suffer no man to withstand him, or not to be satisfied with what he brings: This is all the Injury we read in Mr. Dempsters papers, which can be no excuse certainly to him, who easily foreseeing what might be replyed, dare glory with Job, he takes injuries for a Crown, citing as a Heroick word in Luther, Indies magis mihi placeo, superbus fio, quod video nomen pessimum mihi crescere. I please my self more and more daily, yea I be∣come
proud, to see that I have got a very ill name, and that it grows upon me; which if true, his pleasure may be great, and his pride too, for few of his coat after Luther have got a worse name, for changes in Religion, Jars and conten∣tions with his brethren, disobedience to his Bi∣shop, and disloyalty to his Prince. Here presently to set up his good name a little, he playes the Prophet, striving to pry into Mr. Dempsters Intentions and thoughts, why he slight∣ed all the points stated by him, and Instances only that he should prove, there be two Sacra∣ments and no more; but here the Spirit fails him in all his Divinations, the only reason of this being, for that all other controverted Tenets with Protestants are borrowed from divers old condemned Heresies, and this only proper to them. However, Mr. Dempster should have proved seven Sacraments. Answer, No, not this, or any thing else (in the present dispute, as not to the purpose) save only, that Protestants for their Religion could shew no solid ground, this he sticks to, this he insists upon, and this only whilest Mr. Menzeis like a Bird ever upon wing flies from branch to branch, a mark of no great Constan∣cy, and Solidity, either in Wit or Learning. But he will needs bring in the Romish Religion by the head and shoulders upon the Stage, and have Mr. Dempster to decline it be tryed by Scrip∣ture,
and the Doctrine of the Church in the first three ages. Answer, The Romish Religion has no part in the present Scene, neither is Master Dempster acting any thing directly in defence of it, but Impugning the Protestant grounds, and this Mr. Menzeis in his first answer clearly grants; his words are: The Thesis—then which we defend, and you impugne is this: The Protestant Religion is the true Religion; No mention here of the Ca∣tholick Roman Faith, and yet Mr. Menzeis in all his papers and Books speaks very little for the Protestant Religion, but always against the Popish, laying aside the Thesis which he sets down himself, as his Text so often in the Pul∣pit, to rail at random against us. And this with a like Sincerity and Candor, as when he says, Quakerism is but Popery under a disguise. Answer, then most men mistake it, thinking it so far from Popery under what ever disguise, that it is nothing but Puritanism, in pu∣ris naturalibus, and undisguised. Is the private Spirit our Ground and Guide? Do we allow Laicks and Women to preach? or private per∣sons whatsoever, upon pretence of New Gospel Light to reform the Church? This Presbyteri∣ans and Puritans in the beginning of the Refor∣mation, and again in the Covenant, did with them: Yea on the same very ground, of ad∣hering to the pure Word, and to the Spirit and Light within them, against all Authority in
Church and State; Is not this the Quakers chief Argument against Protestants, when they ask their Power and Call: We are come to Reform you, say they, and all your Hirelings, even as you the Papists and Priests; We ground our selves on the pure and naked Word; the Spirit speaketh with∣in us; we regard not men; Church, Councels, Fa∣thers have erred. Which Answer, Mr. Menzeis if constant to his own principles, with all his Needle-headed Nicities (as he speaks) will hard∣ly refute. In fine, he sayes, Romanists boast his Papers shall have an Answer; these six Moneths might have done it; Our Reply will discover we apprehend some danger; &c. Answer, Few Romanists do think his papers deserve a Reply, yea, nor their pains to read them, as saying little to the purpose; much less do they esteem the enterprise to answer them so high, as it should be called a boast: He who ra∣ther contends with us in solidity of reason, then celerity of dispatch, will neverthleess have this expected answer six Moneths before his Book did appear, at which time he makes the Magi∣strates command the Stationer under the highest pains, that he should Print no Reply. Yet after his Book has been a twelve moneth under the Press at home, we may have a Book Printed at a start abroad, neither is there such hast in replying for any danger we apprehend, his railings never ha∣ving wronged Catholicks in the least, but much
Protesiants, many whereof have turned Qua∣kers, to hear Tub-preachers professing greater Modesty, Sincerity, yea, and Solidity in belief, then he; who by his frequent changes in Reli∣gion, from Prelaticks to Presbyterians, from Pres∣byterians to Independants, from Independants to I know not whom again, is more like the Wea∣thercock on the Steeple (turning at every wind) then the Member of any one Church. His Exclamations wherewith he concludes his two long Epistles, are both ludibrious and childish, in misapplying so many Scripture Phrases to the Catholick Roman Church, whose Faith is so highly commended by the Apostle St. Paul, and holy Fathers in all Ages; who e∣ver amongst them did tax her of Errour, flie her Communion, renounce her Faith, decline her Censures, question her Authority, disapprove her Doctrine, or chalenge the Supreme power and Headship of her Bishop? In the second age St. Irenaeus extols her Authority; All Churches (says he, l. 3. c. 3.) round about ought to resort to the Roman Church, by reason of her more powerful Principality. In the third, St. Cyprian Ep. 55. calls her St. Peters Chair, and the principal Church, to which Infidelity or false Doctrine cannot have access. In the fourth, St. Athanasius has his recourse, both to her Bishop and her, against all his Ad∣versary
Hereticks. In the fifth, St. Augustine thinks her Sentence an end of Controversie, Scrip∣simus Romam, Roma rescriptum est, quaestio finita est, &c. And in following ages do not St. Gregory, St. German, St. John Damascene Venerable Bede, St. Bernard, St. Thomas of Aquine, and generally all the Fathers and Doctors of the Church the same? So that I answer his places of Scripture, as St. Augustine Petilian's the Donatist Heretick, l. 2. c. 5. He brings the words of the Law, but takes not heed against whom, as the Devil speaks Scrip∣ture to Christ, not discerning to whom. Verba legis dicitis sed in quos dicitis, non attenditis, sicut Dia∣bolus verba legis dicebat sed cui diceret non agnos∣cebat. And with the same St. Augustine, I answer to all Mr. Menzeis pretended victory and triumph over Mr. Dempster. Facile est ut quisque Augustinum vincat, quanto magis ut vicisse videatur, aut si non videatur, vicisse dicatur facile est, St. Aug. Ep. 174.
SECT. II. Wherein the Question is stated, as propounded by Mr. Dempster, and Mr. Menzeis great Prin∣ciple and Grounds set down as cleared by him; with the Design of the Author thereon. THe sole Argument that I find Mr. Dempster urges in all his papers, in substance runs thus, in this one Syllogism. That Religion cannot be a true Religion, which hath no peculiar principle or ground to prove that it is a true Religion, and conform to the true sense of the word of God. But the Protestant Religion hath no peculiar ground or principle to prove it self the true Re∣ligion, &c. Then the Protestant Religion cannot be true. Mr. Menzeis cavils at this Syllogism, as not being in form, both the premises being Nega∣tives, as well as the Conclusion. Mr. Dempster Answers, the second is Affirmative, and only ob∣jectively
Negative: As if one should say in Latin (wherein the form of Syllogisms best ap∣pears) Sed omnis Religio Protestantium est talis, ut nullum habeat peculiare fundamentum quo se pro∣bet veram, or else, Est habens nullum peculiare fundamentum, &c. which the least Logician in the Colledge presently sees to be an Affirmative Proposition: And yet what Clamours hath not Mr. Menzeis made for this? as if at the first bout he had disarmed his Adversary: So well this great Professor of Divinity is versed in Lo∣gick, that he cannot resolve and answer a propo∣sition, if not set down as to a Bajan: Like to that young man who lately come from the Fen∣cing-School, and hardly put to it, mistaking the thrust, is put off his Guard, and so both wounded and mocked. So the Syllogism standing in good Form, the first Proposition in it suffers no debate. The se∣cond is denyed by Protestants, whereupon they are required to produce this peculiar Ground which proves their Religion to be true. Master Menzeis after many Wheelings, Turnings, and Windings in his Scoldings, Digressions, Retorsi∣ons, at the end brings two grounds for the Pro∣testant Religion. The first Scripture, and that clear in Fundamentals, or things necessary to Sal∣vation. The second, its agreement in Essentials, with the Faith of the purest and most ancient Primi∣tive Church, in the first three Centuries or Ages.
To clear his first Ground (which in his sixth paper he storms to have called his Achilles or strength, seeing he had given another, which it seems he holds no less strong then it) he sets down, That all Scriptures are not clear: Secondly, that Protestants do not exclude means of Interpretation. Thirdly, by perspicuity, he understands in Terms, or by firm and clear consequence. Fourthly, that by this perspicuity again, he means an External and objective Evidence which is nothing impeached, by the misunderstanding of Hereticks or others. Fifth∣ly, that by things necessary, is here understood, whi∣ther necessary as means, or as commands. What he cites in his eight paper, as Maximes taken out of George Scholarius a Grecian, is but to the same purpose with what he hath formerly said. One onely thing I add, which he urges most in all his Book, that though Protestants do not exclude means of Interpretation in explaining of Scripture, and in deducing consequences from it, yet no necessity there is, that we should know that he who gives the true Interpretation and Sense, have the assistance of the Holy Ghost, be∣cause forsooth, this savours rankly (says he) of that Erroneous Popish Tenet, concerning the necessi∣ty of an infallible visible Judg of Controversie: whereof he proves in his third paper there is none, for that a Jurist without any such Infal∣lible assistance, may be known to explain aright
a Municipal Law, and a Mathematician to de∣monstrate a Proposition of Euclydes. This is the state of the Question, as pro∣pounded by Mr. Dempster, and this in substance is Mr. Menzeis Answer to it, their debate is long; Mr. Dempster constantly putting Mr. Menzeis to it, that he would prove these Grounds to be peculiar to Protestants, and support their Con∣troverted Tenets with us; but this he still de∣clines to bring any Positive proof for either, de∣siring his adversary should rather Positively prove the contrary. No says Mr. Dempster, make good your Assertion, as he who affirms should prove; I will not be so put off of my medium, I have taken against you: Let us see the Grounds you build on in the sence you take them, and without any Infallible visible Judg of Contro∣versie, assuring you either of the uncorrupt Wri∣tings, and sincere Doctrine of the Fathers in the first three ages, or of the uncorrupt Letter, and genuine sense of Scripture, first, to be solid and Infallible, and then to agree peculiarly to you, and the business is done. You confident∣ly assert both; but what Sectary sayes not the same? their claim to the foresaid Grounds, say ye, is meerly pretended; rests to see how your own is proved as just. Many Digressions and Re∣torsions against Popery are made: Many Pro∣testant Writers spoken of who have done this, but nothing as either borrowed from them, or as
laid out by himself is brought in: Many passa∣ges of the Fathers are misapplyed; Many Cavils, Criminations and Calumnies are objected: Many strong words, as Logomachies, Vertigo's, —and Needle-headed Nicities, with Prophe∣cies from Poets are used; a great part of Eras∣mus Chilias spent in Proverbs: Much paper blot∣ted, but what concluded? I shall not here in∣terpose my judgment, as Mr. Menzeis publishes his victory, as Trumpet in the Triumph himself, leaving to each one to read and judge of the pa∣pers; adding only of him, what was said of a Prolix and tedious Orator, who on little matter spent much time in many flourishes of words, and frequent Digressions. Nullum vidi qui magis operosè nihil diceret. Multa sed non multum. Magni passus sed extra viam. Seneca. That is, I have seen none take greater pains to say no∣thing; he sayes many things, but not much; he walks at a great pace, but out of the way. For me as I mind not here, actum agere, so neither do I presume to add any thing to what Mr. Dempster has said in his way of Disputing, which I ac∣knowledge both the shortest and best, to make Mr. Menzeis prove his Grounds; but he ever declining this, and urging we should shew in them any weakness or defect; this I here under∣take for Mr. Menzeis further conviction, and hap∣pily some Protestants conversion, by the good∣ness and mercy of God. My design being to
prove positively the falshood and nullity, as well of his great Principle, of no Infallible visible Judg, as of both his Grounds, and that very succinctly, in a few Sections, without Digres∣sing in the least, or medling with what hath been said. SECT. III. Wherein Mr. Menzeis great Prin∣ciple, That there is no Infallible visible Judge of Controversie in the true Church is Positively re∣futed, as the main Ground of all Divisions, Schisms, and Heresies, and contrary to the Scriptures, Fathers, and Reason. AS all Rebellion in Kingdoms and Com∣mon-wealths, has its rise from contempt of the lawful Authority of Princes and Magistrates, upon the specious pretence of abuse of Power, against the Laws of the Kingdom, and Liberties of the Subjects: So all Heresies
in the Church begin with appeals from the Pa∣stors of the Church, (the only Judges establisht by Christ) to his Written Word, which is to all Christians as their Law Book. LEX REX, cry out Rebels with their Calipha Buchanan: LEX JUDEX, or nolo verba quae non sunt scripta, An∣swers the Heretick with an Arian in the Councel of Nice. They will believe what they read, and not what they hear; though the Apostle teach us, that Faith comes of hearing, and the rea∣son is, because with Mr. Menzeis, they acknow∣ledge none speaking in matters of Faith and Reli∣gion Infallible. No Infallible Visible Judge. This is indeed that great Principle Protestants did broach to themselves in the beginning of Re∣formation, and at their very first leaping out from the Church, they would admit of no In∣fallible visible Judge, stand to no Sentence or Decree of Church, Councils, Fathers. Now this Principle being supposed by them to be so∣lid, and an unquestionable truth, nothing can follow thereon, but what is true. Ex vero nil nisi verum, and consequently any private Pro∣testant reading Scripture with a sincere intenti∣on, may, yea ought to adhere to what he thinks to be in Scripture, should all the Protestant
Church, with all her Assemblies, Synods, Preach∣ers be of a contrary mind. Upon this, Luther and Calvin leave the Catholick Roman Church, and all visible Congregations in the Christian World at that time, because sayes Chamiers Ep. 49. (though Mr. Menzeis deny it was so) Then Apostacy averted the whole body from Christ. They made all the Kings and people drunk, from the first to the last, says Calvin, Inst. l. 4. c. 18. and Whi∣taker, Cont. 4. q. 5. c. 3. No Religion but the Papistical had place in the Church. Duditius apud Bezam; Ep. 1. sayes more, if that be true which the Fathers have professed, with mutual consent, it is altogether on the Papists side. Upon this same Principle, innumerable other Sects and Sectaries, have left again Protestants, and the Protestant Church upon this, and this only Principle; every particular man reading Scripture, and taking it as he thinks both words and sense clear, is made his own Judge, and so as many heads almost, as many sentences, and di∣verse Opinions in Religion: some thinking Scrip∣ture clear for this, some for that Sect, some ad∣mitting or rejecting whole Books of Scripture at their pleasure: Yea some, and that too too ma∣ny seeing most clear Scripture tossed and wrested by contrary Sects, suspend their Judgment, re∣nounce their Faith, and quit all Religion, not knowing with what party to side. Others in fine, who think themselves deeper wits, as they
are more speculative and searching brains, having run through all can be said, to ascertain any point of Faith (save only the Divine Oracle in the Church) have turned Scepticks in Religion, grounding themselves on meer probability. Which Seed of Infidelity (sayes the Author of a Treatise, Intituled Faith vindicated from possibility of Falshood) Sowen, when the Infallible Authority of the Church, as the rule of Faith, was renoun∣ced, dared, first appear publickly above ground, in the Writings of Mr. Chillingworth, and the L. Falkland, dressed up in a plausible Rhetorick, and set out under a yet more pleasant Title to Protestants, as being against Popery, was most graciously received by many. Yea when it ap∣peared in Mr. Tilletson his Eloquent and Famous Sermon, did begin to get credit, as an Evangeli∣cal truth; and all this upon the foresaid great principle. Upon it the holy work of Reformation by pri∣vate men, opposing the Law and Gospel, to the judicial Sentence and Decrees of the whole Ca∣tholick Church: Upon it the glorious work of the Covenant by some factious Zelots against Prince and Pastors in the Protestant Church: Up∣on it Preachers and Pulpits clash at randome, Sects and Sectaries multiply, the Christian world is put in confusion with endless Jars and Debates in Religion: And all this because there is no In∣fallible Judge of Controversie, to give Sentence
in favour of any one party silencing all others. In a word for that (according to Protestants) God hath given us a Law without a Judg, however inconsistent this may seem, with Order, Provi∣dence and wisdom. This one Principle, I say once more with the great St. Augustine, Serm. 14. de verbis Ap. Ru∣ines the very Grounds of Religion. In aliis quae∣stionibus non diligenter digestis non plenâ Ecclesiae Authoritate firmatis, ferendus est disputator er∣rans, ibi ferendus error: non tamen progredi de∣bet ut fundamentum ipsum Ecclesiae quatere molia∣tur: According to the same St. Augustine, ib. whosoever run their heads, were they never so great, (with Mr. Menzeis) against this Inex∣pugnable wall of the Church Authority, are crusht. Hoc habet Authoritas matris Eccelsiae, hoc fundatus veritatis obtinet canon, contra hoc robur, contra hunc Inexpugnabilem murum quisquis arie∣tat ipse confringitur. Is it not on the Church her Infallible Authority, St. Augustine admits the Scriptures, contr. Ep. fund. c. 5. Ego vero Evan∣gelio non crederem nisi me Ecclesiae commoveret Au∣thoritas; Doth he not stick so close to the same Authority of the Church, that he sayes, Ep. fund. c. 4. If any clear testimony were brought out of Scripture against it, he would neither believe Scripture nor Church, for that on the Church her Authority he believed the Scripture. Quod si for∣e in Evangelio aliquid apertissimum de Manichaei
apostolatu invenire potueris, infirmabis mihi Ca∣tholicorum Authoritatem, qui jubent ut tibi non cre∣dam quâ infirmatâ jam nec Evangelio credere po∣tero, quia per eos illi credideram. Was not the Church Judge in Religion for the first two thousand years, before any Scrip∣tures were written? Was not again the Church of the Jews the same Judge after the Law was gi∣ven, till Christ his time, and this by the express Order of God in Scripture, Deut. 17. v. 8. would God there direct them unto a Judge, and pu∣nish them with death, for not obeying in mat∣ters of the Law and Religion, an Authority which might any wise deceive them? Or in the Law of Grace it self, has Christ in St. Matth. 18. v. 17. commanded us to hear a Church not In∣fallible or subject to errour? Is not the Church of God built on a Rock, so that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, S. Matth. 16.19. Has not the Church this promise from Christ, S. Matth. 28.20. And loe I am with you, even to the end of the world. Is not the Church called by the Apostle S. Paul, 1 Tim. 3.13. The Ground and Pillar of Truth? However Mr. Menzeis will have this ground sole Scripture. In fine, if these and such like Texts we should hear the Church, receive her Decisions, obey her commands, be not clear, what is clear in all the Scripture? or if they be subject to diverse Interpretations, who can better judge of their true sense, then the same
Church? Will you say Natural Reason with the Socinians, or the private spirit, with Anabaptists, and Quakers, or conferring of places and passa∣ges with Protestants? Is there any one more ra∣tional then the whole Church of God? any spi∣rit to be trusted, rather then the Spirit of Truth promised to her? or any one better versed in all the places of Scripture, then all the Bishops and Pastors of the Church composing her Supreme Judicatory in a general Council. Let us hear I pray you the Fathers upon this I mean the Authority both of Church and Coun∣cils, as an Infallible Visible Judge, the better to silence Mr. Menzeis vain glorious bragging. S. Irenaeus l. 1. c. 49. We must believe those Priests that are in the Church, those that have a succession from the Apostles, who together with Episcopal Power, have according to the good pleasure of the Father, received the certain gift of truth. And again the same S. Irenaeus c. 62. the Church shall be under no mans judgment (he excepts not Mr. Menzeis, yea nor Luther, nor Calvin to re∣form her) for to the Church all things are known, in which is perfect Faith of the Father, and of the dispensation of Christ, and firm knowledge of the Holy Ghost, who teacheth all truth. Origen praef. in lib. periarch. That only is to be believed for truth, which in nothing disagrees from the Tradition of the Church, and in understand∣ing Scripture, we must not believe otherwise, then
as the Church of God hath by succession deliver∣ed to us. S. Cyprian de unit. eccl. That the Church can∣not be adulterated with Heresy. S. Chrysostom in c. 2. is, That all the Hereticks in the World cannot pervert her Doctrine. S Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. Myst. 18. That what she once hath received from Christ, she ever holds. S. Cyril of Alexandria, l. 5. in Is. c. 54. That she is founded by Christ in truth for . S. Ambrose, l. 4. Hexam. c. 2. That she can∣not fail. Eusebius Caesariensis de praeparat Evang. l. 1. c. 3. That her Faith is invincible to the very Powers of Hell. S. Augustine l. 4. de bapt. c. 4. I know by Di∣vine Revelations, that the Spirit of Truth teacheth the Church all truth. S. Augustine again, l. de Utilit. cred. c. 16. Fear not to run to the bosom of the Church, which by succession of Bishops descending from the Apostoli∣cal Sea, manifestly even to the acknowledgment of all mankind, hath obtained the height of Authority, Hereticks who on every side barked against her be∣ing partly by the consent of Nations, partly by the Authority of Councils, partly by the Majesty of Mi∣racles condemned, to which Church not to yield pri∣macy, is a point either of highest Impiety, or headlong Arrogancy.
In fine, the same S. Augustine Ep. 118. To think not right what the Catholick Church practises, is most insolent madness. I leave to the Physicians judgment, what foot of this Distemper and Madness had the first Re∣formers of the Church, not only thinking and calling what she practised Idolatry and Super∣stition, but even judging and condemning her of Apostacy, Schism, and Heresy, as Mr. Menzeis here of Arrogancy and Pride; Odi Ecclesiae illius fastum, I hate says he that Churches Pride, speak∣ing of the Catholick Roman Church, for calling her self Infallible, but let me answer him as Plato Diogen. Calcas Ecclesiae fastum majore fastu, he most persumptuously accuses her of Pride, no lawful establisht Judicatory, being proud in censuring private Delinquents as they deserve, but Rebels to their lawful Judges in censuring them, both Presumptuous and Proud with him. But least any with Mr. Menzeis should apply all these Testimonies of the Fathers, to the diffu∣sive body of the Church, and not to the Repre∣sentative in a general Council, as if the one were Infallible in Believing, and not the other in Teaching, according to that promise of Christ, in S. Matth. 28.20. Go teach all Nations, and lo I am with you all days to the end of the world. We must remark that when the necessary good, and preservation of the Church requires the per∣formance
of Christs words and promises in fu∣ture ages, no less then in the Apostles time, then we are to take them, for all ages, except there be some express limitation made, as to Preach, Baptise, remit Sins, feed his Flock, lead men in all Truth, &c. Yet because each Apostle had a power over all the Church, this is said to eve∣ry one of them, but to their Successors, who have not each one this power, together in a Council, which for this all the Fathers in all ages have acknowledged as a Soveraign and In∣fallible Judicatory, what ever Mr. Menzeis standing to his Great Principle, say to the con∣trary. Thus S. Cyril l. 10. de trin. averres Decrees of General Councils to be most Holy and Divine O∣racles. S. Leo Ep. 37.64. A Sentence inspired by the Holy Ghost. S. Epiphanius haeres. 77. A Decision not to be que∣stioned. S. Athanasius Ep. ad Episc. Afric. The Word of God which endureth for ever. S. Basil Ep. 10. The Touch-stone to discern He∣reticks. Vincensius Lyrinensis in his Book against Heresies c. 4. says, all who will not be accounted Hereticks, must conform themselves to the Decrees of Oecume∣nical or General Councils. S. Augustine Ep. 162. Calls them the last Sen∣tence
can be expected in matters of Faith. S. Gregory the great l. 1. Ep. 24. Reverences the first four General Councils as the four Evan∣gills. And Constantine the great, the first Christian Emperour, Ep. ad eccle. Alex. as witness Sozome∣nus, l. 1. c. 24. and Socrates l. 1. c. 6. holds the De∣crees of the Council of Nice, against Arius, a Di∣vine Sentence flowing from the mouths of so many, and great Bishops inspired by the Holy Ghost. Wherefore S. Augustine de bapt. contra do∣nat. l. 1. c. 7. concludes, That no doubt ought to be made, of what is by full Decree establisht in a Coun∣cil. Neither is Mr. Menzeis Objection from him of any force, for when he speaks, l. 2. de bapt. c. 3. of mending Councils by Councils upon fur∣ther experience, his words are, Cum aliquo re∣rum experimento aperitur quod clausum est, & cog∣noscitur quod latebat, clearly shewing he means not any Decision of Faith can be mended, which no experience can learn us, but Divine Revelati∣on alone can teach. Thus to shun prolixity in Citations, do not all the Fathers who were ever present at Coun∣cils, Subscribe their Canons and Decrees, annex∣ing Anathemas and Excommunications against all who oppose them in the least. I hear Mr. Menzeis Reply to all this first▪ but where is that Infallible Church the Scriptures and Fathers speak of? Answer, That is not here
the question, but that there is one, which is contradictory to his great Principle, That there is no Infallible visible Judge. Only I add the Pro∣testant Church cannot be this, they speak of, she not being Infallible as themselves confess, and consequently cannot be the Church and House of God, which the Apostle calls the Ground and Pillar of Truth. Secondly, How many Questions may be mo∣ved touching the lawfulness of Councils, now the Fathers speak not of the Council of Trent, but only of lawful ones? Answer, a contentious spi∣rit will question any thing; but St. Augustine a∣bove cited, tells you of what is by full Decree establisht in a Council, no doubt or question ought to be made. Whatever Protestants ob∣ject against the Council of Trent, did not the Arians against the Nicene Council? Nolo ver∣ba quae non sunt Scripta, that is, I will believe no∣thing but the written Word, which is but the ec∣cho repeating now, what was at first cryed out then. Thirdly, God has obliged no man to hear Church or Council against his express and clear Word. Answer, This is true, but is not the Church the most faithful Depositary of Gods Word, best Judge of what is clear, and best Interpreter of what is Obscure? For no Scrip∣ture, says St. Peter, Is of private Interpretation; and doth not Christ in his written Word most
clearly and expresly command us to hear his Church, if we will not be holden as Publicans and Heathens. Fourthly, No Council can be general, where all are not called, and sit with a decisive voice. Answer, Should even Hereticks be called to, and have in Councils their decisive voices? What agreement could this make in Points controvert∣ed? why not Socinians, Anabaptists, Quakers, as well as Protestants? should Presbyterians sit with Bishops & Prelaticks in Protestant Assemblies? what a pitiful shift is this? If so, let the Cove∣nant be renewed, Bishops again thrust out, and Mr. Menzeis set high, for yielding obedience to them, only through compulsion and fear of loo∣sing his place. Fifthly, The Church her self when fallen in er∣rour, cannot be Judge, being Criminal and Im∣peached of most hainous crimes, she cannot be both Party and Judge. Answer, This Objection is all Utopian and Chymerical, if we hear the Scripture and Fathers assuring us she cannot err: But giving, and not granting she did; who then her Judge? When Subjects rise against their So∣veraign, Citizens against their Magistrates▪ Children against their Parents, leave they to be their Judges, because arraigned by them? Even Hereticks, must submit to the Sentence and Cen∣sures of the Church, when they fall at vari∣ance with her; though they turn Unnatural,
she cannot become a Stepmother to them. Sixthly, Infallibility in judging is proper to God. Answer, yes, none but God has it Es∣sentially, and by Nature, but none I hope will deny, he may make the Pastors of his Church, as well Infallible in teaching points of Faith, as his Prophets and Evangelists, in penning the Scripture Books, or at least as any Protestant in reading and understanding them. Seventhly, The Church of Rome is but a par∣ticular Church. Answer, we take it not so, when we say the Catholick Roman Church, but for all Churches in Communion with the Ro∣man, as all Countries under the Roman Empe∣rour, are called the Roman Empire, and all people under the Law of Moses, the Jewish Church, though that name taken strictly, belong∣ed to the Tribe of Juda, because the chief City appertained to that Tribe, where the High Bishop resided. So the Universal Church is called the Roman Catholick Church, by reason of St. Peter and his Successors, her high Bishops residing there, whence Rome is the Centre of Ecclesiastical Communion, infusing unity in the whole dispersed body, as the Form of Universa∣lity or Catholickship. Wherefore St. Cyprian Ep. ad Cornel. Calls her, Ecclesiam principalem unde unitas Sacerdotalis exorta est: That is, the Principal and chief Church, the Source and Centre of Unity amongst the Priests of
all other Churches, and consequently the peo∣ple. Eighthly, But whereon Grounded this Infal∣lible Authority of the Church? Answer, On the clear places of Scripture and Fathers above cited; It is the Ground and Pillar of truth, there∣fore cannot err. It hath the promise of Gods Spirit to lead it into all truth, therefore cannot err. It is said to be built on the Rock, against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail, there∣fore cannot err. Christ hath placed in it Apo∣stles, Doctors, Pastors, and Bishops to the con∣summation and perfection of the whole body, that we be not carried away with every blast of new Doctrines, therefore it cannot err. It is the House, the Spouse, the Mystick body of Christ, his Lot, Kingdom, and Inheritance in this world, therefore cannot err. On the Authori∣ty of the Church the Fathers have received the Originals, Translations, and Sense of Scripture Books, yea some chief Points of Faith, not men∣tioned in Scripture, as persons in the Trinity, Sacraments in the Church, keeping holy the Sunday, &c. therefore cannot err. Christ has commanded, and that under pain of Damnati∣on, to hear the Church in matters of Faith and Religion, therefore it cannot err. All are obliged to live in Communion with the Church, therefore cannot erre. The Church hath from Christ, and ever has exercised a Ju∣dicatory
Power in all belonging to Faith and Worship, therefore cannot err. Christ hath sealed constantly in all Ages her Doctrine with Wonders, and Miracles, therefore it cannot err: To conclude, if the Church and her Pastors assembled in Councils mistake clear Scripture, misapply Scriptures, deceive, or be deceived, what particular man can either justly censure her, and them, or solidly Ground himself? Magna vis veritatis, great is the strength of Ve∣rity, and nothing more true then what is here holden out, that to admit with Mr. Menzeis, of no Infallible visible Judge of Controversie, is the only Fountain and Spring of all Divisions, Schisms, and Heresies, to which this one Prote∣stant Principle, opens so wide a Gate.
SECT. IV. Wherein Mr. Menzeis first Ground of the Protestant Religion, to wit sole Scripture, is shewn to be no Ground to them; and that they have not reformed the Church ac∣cording to the uncorrupted Scrip∣tures, but corrupted the Sciptures to deform the Church. SCripture then is Protestants ground of Re∣ligion, and in it all Fundamentals are clear, this is very plausible, to the ignorant peo∣ple, who think it to be so upon their Ministers Tradition, and highly Glory both in reading and explaining the Bible. Yet no peculiar Ground to them, as was required, all Hereticks for ought M. Menzeis hath said, pretending with as great reason, the same. Neither have Heresies, says St. Augustine, l. 1. c. 4. contr. ad vers. leg. & proph. or certain Doctrines bewitching the mind sprung from any other Head, then from good Scriptures
not well understood. But to proceed with order, before we come to the understanding of Scrip∣ture. First, What Scripture, I pray you is this the Protestant Ground? Is it the Scripture Transla∣ted, or in the Original Tongues? Mr. Menzeis speaks nothing of this. The learned Chamiers ci∣ted as a chief Protestant Champion by him in his Panstratia l. 1. c. 2. s. 15. Says only true Ori∣ginals, adding, as for Translations, the sense of Protestants is, that all of them, of what standing, name, or credit soever they be, and with what Dili∣gence, Sincerity or Learning soever they were made, are only so far certain, as they agree with the first Context, I mean says he, as they express that, sense which is certainly manifest, to be the true sence of the Hebrew and Greek words. And Doctor Dani∣el in his Treatise, the Dippers Dipped, has these words, p. 1. No Translation is simply Authentical or the undoubted Word of God. To these Subscribe Doctor Baron our Countrey man, inferiour to no Protestant, I know, either in Loyalty or Learning, Tract. 1. c. 2. p. 46. Laici illiterati, &c. Unlearned Laicks, says he, believe only Im∣plicitly, confusedly, and  upon the Divine Au∣thority of Scripture formely taken; by reason they can have no certain express and distinct knowledge of the Doctrine contained in Scripture as such, or of the agreement of Translations in vulgar Languages, with the Originals, yea, they know not so much, but
upon other mens testimony and report, as that the Doctrine propounded to them to be believed, is set down in the Scripture or written Word at all. Whence followeth according to these learned Protestants, the ground of the Protestant Religi∣on must be only the Scripture in the Original Languages, that is Greek, Hebrew and Syriack, which of a thousand Protestants, 2. does not under¦stand: Where then must all other Protestants ground their faith (a very few number of Lin∣guists being excepted) shal they believe only Im∣plicitely, and on other mens report, as D. Baron will have them? But this is the Colliers Faith Mr. Menzeis jears, though I fear all his skill in Languages, often force him to turn a Collier himself: or shall they rely on Translations which Chamiers after all diligence used, and Doctor Daniel with him, confess not to be the undoubt∣ed Word of God, but in so far as they are known to agree with the Hebrew and Greek Texts, and how few undoubtedly know this? Yea Prote∣stant Translations of the Bible are so generally corrupt, that you shall find none that has not been challenged, even by most learned Prote∣stants, for manifold corruptions, and that very gross. To begin at Luther, let us hear Zuinglius of him, Tom. 2. ad Luther C. de Sacram. fol. 412. Where after detection of many corruptions in Lu∣ther, he concludes thus, See how thy case stand∣eth, that in the eyes of all men thou art seen to be a
manifest and common corrupter of holy Scripture, which thing thou canst never deny before any Crea∣ture, how much are we ashamed of thee, who hereto have esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now find thee to be such a false fellow. Neither can Luther deny his corruptions himself, for in that place of St. Paul, where a man is said to be justified by faith, he grants l. Contra Cochleum p. 408. he puts into the Text, the word, only, which the Apostle has not, Licet Paulus verbo, sola non u∣tatur qou ego usus sum; and is not this a main place Protestants use against us, so well are they grounded in Scripture. Of Calvin, Charles Mo∣linaeus in his Translation of the New Testament, part. 2. fo. 110. says Calvin in his Harmony, maketh the Text of the Scripture to leap up and down, as the truth it self declareth, he useth violence to the Letter of the Gospel, and in many places clearly transposes it, and besides this addeth to the Text. Are these the Reformers of the Church by the uncorrupted word, or corrupters of the Word to deform the Church? Castalio saith of Beza, That to note all his Errors in translating the New Testament, it would require a great volume. Five times he differs from himself, though one of the best Linguists ever Protestants had. King James a great Scholar, as a great Monarch in the sum of the conference before his Majesty, thinks the Geneva Translation the worst of all others. And Mr. Parkes in his defence of the first Testimony
concerning Christs descending into Hell, says, as for the Geneva Bibles, it is to be wished that either they be purged from those manifold Errours, which are both in the Text, and at the Margent, or else utterly prohibited. Now as to our own Transla∣tions in English, Mr. Bruges in his Apology, Sect. 6. Says plainly, that the approved Protestant Translation, hath many omissions, many additions, which sometimes obscure, sometime pervert the sense. And M. Carleil p. 116. remarkes that the English Protestants in many places detort the Scriptures from their right sense, and shew themselves to love darkness more then light, falshood more then truth, they have corrupted and depraved the sense, ob∣scured the Truth, deceived the Ignorant, and sup∣planted the simple. And Mr. Broughton a chief Linguist in England, in his Epistle to the Lords of the Privy Council, desireth them to procure speedily a new Translation, because that which is now is full of Errours. And in his Adver∣tisement of corruptions to the Protestant Bi∣shops, saith, that their publick Translation of Scriptures is such, as it perverteth the Text of the Old Testament in four hundred forty eight places, and that it causeth millions of millions to reject the New Testament, and run to Eternal flames. How many divers and different Translations in Queen Elizabeths and King James times? how often what was first at the Margent, hath been put in the Text? Now if Translators of the
Scripture in English, men furnished with so ma∣ny helps, endued with so many gifts, so well versed in the Hebrew, and Greek tongues, so guided by all the Rules Mr. Menzeis gives to at∣tain the right meaning and sense of Holy Writ, have fallen into so many, and so gross errours and Mistakes, as to have depraved, detorted, wrested, obscured the Scripture and Word of God, so that it, as Translated by them decieveth the Ignorant, supplant∣eth the simple, perverteth the Text in so many places, as that it carrieth milions to Eternal Flames; What hope can any one have of meaner Talents with fewer helps, and less learning and knowledge, to attain by his own private reading of Scripture, the undoubted Truth, Steadiness in faith and Re∣ligion, a full and satisfactory solution of all doubts, or security of Salvation? and yet these very same so corrupt Translations (as their own Ghospellers testifie) are read in Churches, ex∣pounded in Pulpits, and put in the hand of eve∣ry one who understands neither Latine, Greek nor Hebrew, as his sole ground of Faith; and Judg of controversie, whereby he is made able to Judge, not only of Popish Errors, the Writings of the Fathers, and Decrees of Councils, but even of his own Pastors Doctrine, his Churches Faith, and his Countries Religion. Secondly, to come to the Originals; Shall they then onely be the Protestants Ground of Faith? If so, I ask Mr. Menzeis where we shall
find them? Yea we are so far from having all the Originals, that it is doubted in what Lan∣guage some parts of Scripture were written. The purity of Originals is sometimes called in Que∣stion, and Calvin Inst. l. 1. C. 13. Doth imagine even these the Fountains run not always clear. Lu∣ther Enar. in Is. Cryes out on the Jews for cruci∣fying the Text, as well as Christ, and upon Gen. C. 24. Says again, he has often told many words there be in the Hebrew Text, which the He∣brews themselves do not understand. And to say true, amongst the Jews, the least of their three Massoreshe's (so they call the Book which contains the many corruptions, and di∣vers Lections in the Hebrew Text) counts eight hundred places disagreeing, ambiguous or cor∣rupt, neither do the most learned Rabbies agree in the Letter of Scripture: In Hebrew it self, some reading according to the Points, or Vow∣els put in by Rabbi Jacob, and some by these of Rabbi Aron, most different one from another; all the points being added to the Text, Five hun∣dred years after Christ, and that by his professed Enemies the Jews, long after the Vulgar Latine Translation which was made before the Text, and Letter of Scripture was corrupt. But Prote∣stants take in also with these the corruptions of the Greek Text remarked in part by St. Ireneus, Tertullian, Origen, and others, says Eusebius, when the ancient Hereticks the Arians, Macedonians,
Nestorians, &c. had corrupted and adulterated the Word of God, to support their Errours, as Protestants at present in all their Translations do. I know M. Menzeis will tell me perhaps he hath seen both the Hebrew and the Greek Texts; well but who assures him they are not corrupt? Yes, but the Protestants have corrected them, and that according to the Authenticks, which never any Protestant did see. The most Learned a∣mongst Protestants have never seen the Original Scriptures which were first penned by the Pro∣phets, Apostles, and Evangelists; Copies are no less subject to faults in the Letter, then Trans∣lations to mistakes in the sense. Yea, the Au∣thors of that great & famous Bible that is Print∣ing at London (if not yet ended) in so many Lan∣guages, witnesseth in the Preface they have set out, not so much as one Copy could be found they can assure to agree in all things with the O∣riginal: their labour may be great in this vast Volume to correct the Copies they find defici∣ent, but their Authority is not Infallible: In a word, no Infallible Authority is admitted by Protestants to judge either of the Letter or Sense, For that savours rankly, says M. Menzeis of that Erroneous Popish Tenet, of an Infallible visible Judge of Controversie. And I Answer, to deny one in all these and such like cases savours rank∣ly of a tottering, wavering, groundless Faith, most like to that of M. Menzeis.
I say yet further, if no Translations of Scrip∣ture can be a ground of Faith, as most learned Protestants grant, so neither any Original it would seem, without some Infallible Judg; for I must ever be sure they are unccorrupted; and again all the defect in Translations coming from the misunderstanding of Originals; I ask who dare say he understands them, better then they who have Translated, and upon this, as he him∣self reads, and conceives, ground his Religion and Faith. Thirdly, before all this, if M. Menzeis will prove it a solid Ground to rely on sole Scripture, as the onely ground of Faith, without any In∣fallible visible Judge, or assurance, that he who tells me this is the uncorrupted Letter, this the true and genuine Sense, has the peculiar assist∣ance of the Holy Ghost: I demand what Infal∣lible Motive can prudently perswade Protestants that the Word of God they rely on, was ever set down in Writing, or is extant at this day? Is it the testimony of Scripture calling it self Gods Word, or the Innate Light of the same Scrip∣ture, showing it self to be such, to a well dispo∣sed Intellect and mind? If the first, do not Ni∣codemus and S. Thomas Gospels carry the same titles, with these of St. Matthew and St. Mark? If the second, then the Fathers of the first three ages (whom M. Menzeis most owns) were not well disposed persons, who did not acknowledge some
Books of Scripture till the Authority of a Council at Carthage had declared them Canoni∣cal; and much less Luther, that holy man, who rejecteth St. James Epistle with some others. As Protestants ground their Faith, say they, on Gods word, so Quakers on the Spirit: and we deny not but both be equally Infallible, if once known Infallibly to be the Spirit or Word of God. But we demand of each Sect, what Infal∣lible External Rule or Motive they give us, to know either Gods Word speaking in Scripture, or Spirit in them? Both answer with M. Men∣zeis, they both show themselves to all who are well disposed. But this clears not us, the well disposed heart being only known to God; let all then be objectively true, (as M. Menzeis sayes his Religion is) which they both teach, (as cer∣tainly is, what ever by Gods Word or Spirit is revealed) we only insist to know Infallibly that God did reveal such Doctrine as theirs, either by his Word or Spirit. For we receive now no Immediate Revelations, as the Prophets and A∣postles did in old times, nor have we Evidenti∣am in attestante, as the Divines call it, that is any Evidence that it is God who speaks; points of faith being only propounded to us by men, who either put the Scriptures in our hands to read, or teach us by word of mouth. The Protestants great Principle, let's own no man or Church as an Infallible Judge; yea M. Menzeis in his sixth
paper, offers upon this to turn Papist, if the In∣fallible assistance of the Propounder can be pro∣ved necessary: but never clears what other way we can be Infallibly assured that all which the Prote∣stants do teach, was revealed by God. Unless it be in his third paper, where speaking of the True and Genuine Sense of Scripture, he tells us we may have it as from a Jurist, the Explication of a Municipal Law, or from a Mathematitian, a demonstration of Euclides. But what a weak Answer is this? Do any receive Demonstrati∣ons on Authority as Points of Faith? Or is the assent I give to the Law so explained by a Jurist Infallible? If Christ himself had not shown his Divinity by his Works and Wonders, he grants the Jews had committed no sin in refusing to be∣live him: The Apostles Credentials were their Miracles, both did thus evidence the Infallible assistance they had of Gods Spirit to the World; and shall any man trust M. Menzeis boldly asserting there is no necessity of any? was it not for this the power of Miracles was left in the Church, as the marks of her assistance, and seals of her Doctrine, with other Motives of cre∣dibility? Notwithstanding Protestants with M. Menzeis will propound to us the Catalogue of Canonical Scripture Books, assure us of the un∣corrupt Copies and Letter, enforce upon our Consciences the sense they give, whil'st so con∣fidently obtruding all this, they neither dare,
or do say, nor can evidence by any external mark or sign, they have the particular assistance of Gods Spirit; As if all this were clear in it self, with Mathematical Demonstrations. But doth Scripture in our Bibles, show it self better to be the Word of God now, then when Christ was speaking in person? Then an external Evidence, God did speak by his Son, is acknowledged as ne∣cessary by him, and now shall any man reason∣ably say, there is no necessity of any, when he speaks by his servants and Church? however this prove efficacious and strong for M. Menzeis conversion, it would seem to me more then suf∣ficient for his▪ or any mans conviction. Fourthly, to claim to Scripture, yet so as they can no wise evidence they take it aright, is com∣mon to Protestants with all Hereticks, so no pe∣culiar Ground. When Sectaries clash with Sectaries, is not all their babling out of Scrip∣ture? You shall see, says Vincentius Lyrinensis, c. 35. Hereticks so abound with Scripture, as they fly through all the Volumes of the holy Law, through Moses, the Books of Kings, the Psalmes and Pro∣phets, &c. read the works of Paulus Sam satenus, Priscillian, Eunomius, &c. you shall not find ae page which is not Coloured and painted out with the sentences of Old and New Testament. Nestorius to support his Heresie gloried (as Gennadius re∣porteth in his Catalogue) in the evidence of threescore Testimonies which he produced, as
the Covenant in three hundred, whereof scarce three any wise to the purpose. The Valentini∣ans, Marcionists, Arians, will submit to none but Scripture, as St. Augustine witnesseth of Maxi∣minus the Arian Bishop in his first Bok a∣gainst him. Neither doth it avail M. Menzeis to say Scriptures are clear in terminis, or made clear by conferring of places, or show themselves clearly to a well disposed mind. First, for that though a place of Scripture be clear in it self, yet when divers Sects take it di∣versly, a man may justly suspect his own judg∣ment, seeing so many of a contrary mind. So that it wanteth not difficulty to determine always what is absolutely clear, there being many clear places as would seem, not to be taken in the clear and obvious sense, as the passages Here∣ticks did most build on, will presently shew. As when Marcion despiseth Moses and the Prophets upon Christs own clear words in S. John the 10. How many soever have come before me are Thieves and Robbers. The Manichees affirmed Christ to be the Sun, upon a like Scripture in St. John the 8. I am the light of the world. The Waldenses taught no man could be put to death, no not by the lawful Authority of a Judge, up∣on clear Scripture again, Exod. 20. Thou shalt not kill, &c. The Devil citeth clear Scripture to Christ, and the Jews against his death, we have heard in the Law the Messias abideth for ever.
Moreover many seeming Contradictions in Scripture, you shall find in Becan and others, one might think clear. And many things are be∣lieved even by Protestants, which be not in Scri∣pture at all: as Persons in the Trinity, Sacra∣ments in the Church, and the Command of keep∣ing holy the Sunday; the Scripture neither naming persons, or telling what a person is, defining Sacraments (as M. Menzeis doth) or setting down their number; abrogating the keep∣ing of the Sabbath, or having for the Sunday any command. Many places of Scripture again are flatly against Protestants, and clear for us, as for the Real Presence, This is my Body, this is my Blood, S. Matth. 26. For Justification not by Faith only, but also good works. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by Faith only, S. James 2.24. For Traditions from the Apostles, besides the written Word. There∣fore brethren stand fast and hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle, 2 Thes. 2.13. And such like places ci∣ted in most Books of Controversie, for all Con∣troverted Tenets, Protestants never being able to bring any one clear place of Scripture against any of our Tenets, not evidently mistaken or confes∣sedly corrupted, as when they make S. Paul say, a man is justified by faith only; Luther above cited, granting he has put in the word only, which Saint Paul hath not; or, Thou shalt not make to thy self
any Graven Image, in place of Idol, as is clear∣ly the word Pesel in the Hebrew Text. Secondly, as to conferring of places, and ex∣plaining the more obscure, by these which are clear, did not Arius boast of this against the Fathers of the Council of Nice, proving the uni∣ty in Nature of the Father and Son, out of these words in S. John the 10. I and my Father are one. No, says the Arian, this place as obscure to us, and passing the reach of Humane capacity, must be explained by this other more clear in St. John 17. where Christ prayes his Apostles, May be one with him, as he and his Father are one; that is in will and affection, and surely the se∣cond place is clearer to us, and consequently according to M. Menzeis Rule, the Arian Here∣sie must prevail; neither will he ever be able standing to his Rule, to answer an Arian Cob∣ler making this Objection, as Learned Writers remark. Eutyches conferring these two places, The Word was made flesh, in S. John 1. and the water was made Wine, in S. John 2. fell in this detestable Blasphemy, That the Humane Nature was changed into the Divine, as the Water was converted into Wine. And without all doubt again, the second is the clearer place to us, the first, that two Natures should be united in one Person, surpassing as the Divines teach, even the Natural capacity of Angels. Manicheus explains the same passage, The Word was made flesh, Fi∣guratively,
and in show, as Protestants, This is my body, and that by a clear place of S. Paul to the Phil. 2. v. 7. where it is said, Christ took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. Most clear words as would seem in favour of this Heresie, and such that if Protestants could bring any, with as great a show against the real presence, all their Pulpits should sound with them till their hearers became deaf. But there be none in all the Scripture so clear a∣gainst the real presence I say, as the words quoted have a seeming clearness against the real Incarna∣tion of Christ, the four Evangelists, and S. Paul speaking in so express and formal words for the former, that the Fathers with St. Chrysostome, Hom. 6. have recourse to the words for the real presence as clearer, to prove, that giving in the Sacrament his body and blood, he must have taken the Nature of Man. Nestorius on the con∣trary will have these words of S. John the 2. Dis∣solve ye this Temple, and in three dayes I shall raise it again, to be taken Litterally, and not Figura∣tively; and upon this holds out a new Heresie, that the Son of God did dwell only in his Holy Humanity as in a Temple. Valentine and Apol∣linaris reading in S. John 3. no man hath ascend∣ed into heaven, but he that descended from Hea∣ven, gain sayes the Mystery of Christs Incarnati∣on, and wil needs have his flesh to have descended from Heaven, as his Manhood afterwards ascend∣ed
thither. And this Heretical Exposition, they confirm by conferring the ensuing places in St. Paul to the Ephesians 4. He that descended, the same is also he who ascended. And in the first to the Co∣rinths 15. The first man of Earth Earthly, the se∣cond Man of Heaven Heavenly. A thousand such Errors in the greatest Fundamentals of Christia∣nity have Hereticks drawn out of the clear Foun∣tains and Brooks of holy Writ, by the decei∣vable, and deceiving search of weighing places; Why not Protestants with them? they sail on the same Sea, and deep of Scriptures with them; they direct their course by the same Card of con∣ferring clearer and obscurer places: the same Rule they apply to all the crooked lines of their Errors and Deviations. What can be answer∣ed to all this: M. Menzeis Principle always standing, No Infallible visible Judg, but to have recourse with him to the well disposed mind, wherefore▪ Thirdly, I say this doth not yet satisfie to the Question, no not with all the means of Interpre∣tation M. Menzeis doth bring, it being as hidden, Intricate, Doubtful and Inscrutable, who per∣forms all these Conditions aright, as to find out certainly and infallibly the true sense of Scrip∣ture, without an Infallible Judge. Yea suppo∣sing one uses them aright, yet let us learn from no lesser Protestant then Doctor Jeremy Taylor, what certainty of the true sense men can attain by
them: His words are so remarkable to my pur∣pose in a Discourse of liberty in Prophesying, Sect. 4. that here I even set them down at length. First then says he, Sometime the sense is drawn forth by the Context, and Connexion of Parts. It is well when it can be so. But when there is two or three Antecedents and Subjects spoken of: What Man, or what Rule shall ascertain me, that I make my Reference true, by drawing the Relation to such an Antecedent, to which I have a mind to apply it, an∣other hath not. Secondly, One other great pretence is, the conference of places, which is of so indefinite capacity, that if there be ambiguity of words, va∣riety of sense, alteration of Circumstances, or difference of Style amongst Divine Writers, then there is nothing which may be more abused by wilful people, or may more easily deceive the unwary, or that may more amuse the most diligent observer. Thirdly, Oftentimes Scriptures are pretended to be expounded by a proportion and Analogy of reason, but it is with Reason as with mens tasts, When a man speaks reason, it is but reason he should be heard, &c, yet because it must be reason that must judg of reason, unless other mens understandings were of the same Air, the same Constitution and ability, they cannot be prescribed unto by another mans rea∣son; especially because such reasonings as usually are in Explication of particular places of Scripture depend upon minute Circumstances and Particulari∣ties, in which it is so easy to be deceived, and so
hard to speak Reason regularly and always, that it is the greater wonder, if we be not deceived. Fourth∣ly, Others pretend to Expound Scripture by Analo∣gy of Faith. This he says is but a Chimera, a thing in the Clouds, which varies like the right and left hand of a Pillar, &c. Fifthly, Consulting of Originals, is thought a great matter to Interpreta∣tion of Scriptures; but this is to small purpose, for indeed it will expound the Hebrew and the Greek, and rectifie Translations: But I know no man that says, that the Scriptures in Hebrew and Greek are easy, & certain to be understood, and that they are hard in Latine and English. The difficulty is in the thing, however it be expressed, the least in the Lan∣guage, &c. Then numb. 6. he saith in general, All these ways of Interpreting Scriptures, which of themselves are good helps, are made either by de∣sign, or by our infirmities, ways of Intricating and Involving Scriptures in greater difficulty, because men do not learn their Doctrines from Scripture, but come to the understanding of Scriptures, with precon∣ceptions and Idea's of Doctrines of their own, and then no wonder Scripture look like Pictures; where∣in every man in the room thinks they look on him on∣ly, and that wheresoever he stands, or how often soever he changes his Station. So that now what was intended for a remedy, becomes the Promoter of our Disease, and our Meat becomes the matter of sickness: and the Mischief is, the wit of man cannot find a remedy for it; For there is no Rule; no Li∣mit,
no certain Principle by which all men may be guided to a certain, and so Infallible Interpretation, that he can with any Equity prescribe to others to believe his Interpretations in places of Controversie or ambiguity. Osiander in his confutations of the Book which Melancton wrote against him, observes there are twenty several Opinions concerning Justification, all drawn from the Scriptures, by the men only of the Augustan confession. There are sixteen several O∣pinions concerning Original sin; and as many De∣finitions of the Sacraments as there are Sects of men that disagree about them. Lastly, He concludes Num. 8. since those ordinary means of Expounding Scripture as searching the Originals, Conference of places, Parity of Reason, and Analogy of Faith, are all dubious, uncertain, and very fallible: He that is the wisest, and by consequence the likelyest to Expound truest in all probability of Reason, will be very far from confidence; because every one of these, and many more are like so many degrees of Improbability and uncertainty, all depressing our certainty of finding out truth in such Mysteries, and amidst so many Difficulties. Remark well all this discourse from so great a Protestant Doctor, finding no certainty of the true sense of Scripture, by all the means of In∣terpretation, and reflect with all a little in how hard a condition Protestants stand, admitting no Infallible visible Judge in Controversy, but bold∣ly
undertaking to decide all that which is contro∣verted by sole Scripture, Explained by such fal∣lible means, and yet more fallible men. It is but a Labyrinth of windings and turnings to pass from Scripture as clear in words, to conferring of pla∣ces, and deducing consequences, after Prayer u∣sed, and diligent search made, with a well dis∣posed mind, then to the inward motion, or the private Spirit, against which the Prophets and Apostles so generally exclaim, Ezekiel in his 13. Chapter, wo be to the foolish Prophets, who follow their own Spirit. S. Peter in his 2 Epistle Chap. 1. No Prophecy of Scripture is of Private Interpreta∣tion. Neither is the question here, what is in∣wardly required in every private man to believe Scripture (but what is the external, visible, and infallible Rule of Faith) for that is out of all doubt with us. Faith is a supernatural and in∣fused virtue, to which the pious motion in the will is no less requisite, then the Supernatural light in the understanding to assent to what is re∣vealed by God. But seeing neither this light nor pious motions as they are supernatural, and in∣cline only to believe a revealed truth, do mani∣fest themselves to be such: Therefore many thousands even well disposed persons, and who seek God in the sincerity of their hearts, often∣times perswade themselves (till they be better instructed) they believe such a thing as a reveal∣ed truth by God, which is a condemned Error
by him. And this none can deny, who will not maliciously condemn a world of zealous Igno∣rants, yea some even most learned and holy Fa∣thers, who with St. Cyprian in the Point of Re∣baptization, have believed an Error for a reveal∣ed Truth, before it was clearly decided by the Church. However, whether it be this, or something else M. Menzeis calls a well disposed mind; others the Spirit, or the private spirit, the Spirit of the Righteous man, and so forth; I say, it cannot be either with the holy Scripture, or alone, the Rule of Faith, and Judg of Controversie. 1. Be∣cause none without some Particular help can be Infallibly assured of this Interiour Motion, Af∣fection, or Spirit, whether it be Natural, or Su∣pernatural, from God or the Devil, the Spirit of Darknes or Light, now no man, as M. Field confesseth, L. 4. C. 7. Proveth any thing is, or may be doubted of, by that which is as much to be doubted of as it self. 2. We are counselled in the 2 Epistle of St. John Ch. 4. Not to believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits if they be of God: But if the Spirits must be brought to the Touchstone of Trial, if they must be judged and approved by some other well known and undoubted Au∣thority, they are not the sole Rule and Supreme Judg of Faith and Controversy: Because this Spirit is secret and hidden, our Faith publick and evidently credible; this Spirit particular, our
Faith Catholick or Universal; this Spirit the gift of every particular man, our Faith subject to no private censure. Wherefore M. Hooker Eccl. Pol. L. 1. Sect. 14. and Whitaker against Stapleton C. 2. C. 4. Ingeniously grant, that the outward Letter of Scripture, sealed with the inward and private Spirit, is not a sufficient Warrant for every particular man to receive or reject Scripture Books, but that the pub∣lick Authority of Gods Church, is necessarily required. Whence I say further with S. Au∣gustine l. Contr. Ep▪ fund. c. 5. That Authority which we obey and believe, testifying the Books of the holy Ghospel, the same must we believe, witnes∣sing this to be the sence of the Ghospel, that is not the private Spirit, but the same Authority of the Church. Thirdly, This private Spirit is so far from being the Judge of controversy upon any pretence of adhering to Scripture, either as clear in it self, or explained by it, that instead of compounding debates and keeping unity (the chief Office of this Judg) it is the very Root of Dissention, and Fountain of Heresies and Schisms, for as by experience we see it to be dif∣ferent in divers persons, so as the Bell to fools, it speaketh as they fancy, it inclines as they are affected, it points out the Object according to the Colour which is in the eye; It is like a false light which makes the Aspect of best and fairest Figures vary; It is often a blind zeal, or a pre∣judicate
Opinion, which hinders to see what is clear in Scripture, as S. Augustine l. 3. de Doctr. C. 10. well Remarks, If the Prejudice, saith he, of any Erroneous Opinion preoccupate the mind, whatsoever the Scripture hath to the contrary, men take it to be a Figurative Speech. So that it fur∣nisheth to every Sectary reading Scripture, his own Spectacles, in conferring places, his own Rule of proportions: His private Weights to ponder Reasons▪ his particular Forge to coine Opinions, his secret Touch-stone to try Do∣ctrines, his own Reed to measure the Temple, Sanctuary and Altar: Makes him his own high Priest, Pastor, and Judg, setting up within him∣self a Supreme Judicatory, giving ever sentence in his favour, and censuring all the world beside; So that none standing to this Rule, can be com∣pelled to the unity of the Church, and yet none can be accounted Hereticks, as the learned Suares, l. 1. de defi. fid. C. 11. most judiciously remarketh, if we take Scripture as men read, who think themselves well disposed, or Expound∣ed by it self according to the Dictamen of the private Spirit, for ground, for who can swarve from Scripture as clear, according to his parti∣cular Judgment and Spirit, which he even esteem∣eth to be the Spirit of God. Scripture therefore cannot be Judge of Con∣troversie, as M. Menzeis will have it. 1. By rea∣son the sentence of this Judg must breed a cer∣tain
and Infallible assurance of all that can come in doubt, which Scripture cannot do. It being infallible indeed in it self, but not to us, who may doubt if such a Book be Canonical, such a Copy conform to the Original, such a Translation Authentick, such a place clear, such a sense genuine. 2. The Judge of Controversie ought to give a clear sentence, which the learned and unlearned may equally understand, and as the Law, sayes the Apostle, is not for the just, but the unjust, so the Judg of Controversie is not only for the well disposed, but more in some manner for o∣thers, and especially the unlearned and unstable, who according to St. Peter, Wrest the Scriptures to their own damnation; Yea the most learned a∣mongst the Fathers, as S. Basil, and S. Gregory Nazianzen, after much pains in the study of Scripture, as testifieth Ruffinus l. 11. Hist. C. 9. refuse to interpret them, but according to the Rule and Uniform consent of their Fore-fathers, not relying on all the means of Interpretation M. Menzeis prescribes; and they had reason, the Scripture being the Book S. John describeth to be clasped with seven Seals, Apoc. 5. v. 16. which Ezekiel termeth the enrolled volume, written within and without. S. Ambrose Ep. 44. A Sea contain∣ing most profound Senses of Prophetical Riddles. S. Augustine l. 2. de doctrina. Christ. C. 6. hard in the Stile, Discourse, Places, as well as in the Sub∣ject
and Matter: which makes him cry out, l. 12. Confess. c. 14. O the wonderful depth of thy speeches, O the wonderful depth; S. Hierome Ep. 13. C. 4. Says the Text of Scripture has a Shell to be broken, before that we can tast the sweetness of the Kernel: and Vincentius Lyrinensis, C. 2. That all take not holy Scripture by reason of its deepness in one and the same sense, but some interpret one way, some an∣other, so that there may seem to be picked out as many senses as men; for Novatus doth Expound one way, and Sabellius another, otherwise Donatus, otherwise Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, otherwise Photinus, Apollinaris, and other Hereticks with them: there∣fore very necessary it is for the manifold turnings and by-wayes of Errors, that the Line of Propheti∣cal and Apostolical interpretation be levelled accord∣ing to the Square of the Ecclesiastical and Catholick sense, whereof Tertullian de Praescript. gives this reason, for that the sense adulterated, is alike pe∣rillous as the Stile corrupted. But what danger of this, says M. Menzeis if Scripture be clear, men cannot mistake (if not wilfully blinded) what is so▪ Could not the Law-maker speak as clear as the Judg? Answer, we have seen there is no∣thing almost in Scripture, but has been, and so may be mistaken: Therefore the necessity of a Judge, however the Law speak clear, has been acknowledged by the greatest men, and best wits in the world; Aristotle in the first Book of his Mo∣rals, and fourth of his Politicks, And Plato in his Republick, prefers good Judges even to best
Laws: Judges have been ever establisht by the Laws in all Nations, as by Scripture, in the Church of God; and the necessity of one to keep concord and unity, is partly grounded on the nature of most clear Words and Sentences, which may be taken according to the Letter or Sense, Properly or Figuratively, Morally, or Mystically, and so forth: Partly on the diversi∣ty of Opinions, men commonly judging as they are affected, and diversly of one and the same thing as their understandings, inclinations, or interests leads them. His Majesties Secretary of State may write no doubt, as clear as the Lords of Council and Session speak, yet his Let∣ters are directed to them in most businesses of weight, least others should take them otherwise then written, or wrest them to their own ends; even so is it of Scripture written by the Pro∣phets, and Evangelists, and delivered to the Pastors and Doctors of the Church. Whence Catholick Romans build their Be∣lief upon Scripture, not taken as they fancy, but Explained by Apostolical Tradition conser∣ved in the Church, and the unanimous consent of the Fathers, and if any doubt arise of both these, on the General Definition and Decision of the present Catholick Church. Protestants, as M. Menzeis holds out, ground their Faith on Scripture, which they have cor∣rected, or rather corrupted, as clear in it self, or
made clear by diligent reading and conferring of places with prayers, and (as they imagine) a well disposed mind, that is a Prejudicate Opinion that their own Tenets are right. Now let any man judg, which of these two is most conform to Scripture it self in both Testa∣ments, to the practice of the Church in all ages; to the consent of Fathers above cited, and Rea∣son. For first, This the Protestant way would seem vain, arrogant and presumptuous, in so far as that a man who followeth it, must be so confident of himself, that if he fancy Scripture to be clear for such a Tenet, were all the Chri∣stian World in a contrary judgment, yea had all Christians been so from the time of the Apostles, yet must he stand to his fancy grounded upon clear Scripture, as he thinks; So that no per∣swasion can remove him from it, for that it is a point of his Faith, but for a man to be so peremp∣torily resolute in the sense he hath found in Scrip∣ture by his private reading, is very presumptu∣ous, I say, for wherein can he ground prudent∣ly such a strong assent, as is required in Divine Faith, which ought to be above all can be said a∣gainst it. Shall it be on the clearness of the words? conference of places? on his skill in Tongues? on his weighing the precedent and con∣sequent places? or on the assistance of the Spi∣rit given to him? If so, is it not intollerable pride and presumption in any one man, to think
that no other was ever so clear sighted, or quick witted, to see and understand in Scripture what is clear? no other in such a multitude of Doctors and Fathers, so well versed in the Original Lan∣guages, so circumspect to confer places, so exact to weigh Circumstances, so acute to draw Consequences, in fine, so well disposed to find the Truth, so fervent in Prayer, so par∣ticularly enlightned, directed, and assisted by the Spirit of God? What is whymsical, Pha∣natick, and Foolish, if this be not? wherefore Doctor Field ashamed any should think this to be Protestant Doctrine, says, None of their Di∣vines teach the Scriptures to be so clear, that they may be certainly understood by reading and conferring of places. For the Rule of Faith says he, in his Ap∣pendix 2. p. p. 12. is Doctrine descending by Tra∣dition from the Apostles, according to which the Scriptures are to be Expounded. And in his fourth Book C. 14. The Rule of Faith is the consenting judgment of them that went before us, the Rule with∣out which we cannot know the meaning of the things that are in Scriptures, for who shall be able to un∣derstand them, but he that is setled in these things which the Apostles presupposed in their delivery of Scripture. Afterward in the 15. Chap. having said, There is no question but there be many obscu∣rities in Scripture. And in the 18. Ch. having set down many senses of Scriptures, in the 19. he writes thus, We confess that neither conference
of places, nor consideration of what followeth, or goes before, nor looking into Originals, are of any force, unless we find the things which we con∣ceive to be understood and meant in the places inter∣preted to be consonant to the Rule of Faith, (that is, Tradition conserved in the Church) neither is there any of our Divines that ever taught other∣wise. Where you see by Doctor Field, M. Men∣zeis is discarded from being a Protestant Divine; the Scripture however clear, is declared to be no Rule or Ground of Faith, but according to the sense of them that went before us; as all other means besides Tradition in his 16. Ch. are pro∣pounded to be but probable Conjectures, and not infallible grounds. And this most ratio∣nally, for what private man, as I have said, can assure himself, that either the finding out the true sense of Scripture, as to him, is tyed to the means of Interpretation M. Menzeis sets down, or that he makes a right use of all these means? For as the same Dr. Field judiciously remarks, and ingenuously grants with S. Augu∣stine, contra. Ep. Fundam. and de Util. cred. few men have leasure, fewer strength of understand∣ing to examine the particular Controversies, so many, and so intricate in these our dayes: and that the way to satisfie their Consciences in this most important affair, is to find out the true Church, and rest in her judgment. Ad sapientiam, says S. Augustine, in Ecclesia Spirituales pauci per∣veniunt;
caeteram vero turbam non intelligendi vi∣vacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissimam facit; that is, few, even Spiritual ones in the Church at∣tain to perfect knowledge, the rest being made most sure, not by their quickness in understanding, but by their simplicity in believing. 2. This the Protestants way is but a trifling loo∣sing of time, never having been found able to settle debates amongst themselves, as witness 60. Sy∣nods holden in 60. years time, says Rescius l. de Atheismo, in which all taking Scripture for their ground, without any Infallible Judge, did so little agree, that they parted not so much as good friends. Neque dantes dextras fraternita∣tis aut humanitatis. How many Examples of this amongst Lutherans, and Calvinists, Prelaticks, and Presbyterians, and even in our confessions of Faith, and Covenant among our selves? I know M. Menzeis Answer will be, their Dissentions are not in Fundamentals, (of these I shall speak pre∣sently in the next Section) only here I ask, why then so great cruelty, so much bloud, so many Excommunications and Curses? If they did not think them so, who moved such troubles, they were either most cruel, or mad, as Tertul∣lian, l. de praescr. most truly says, in Disputing out of Texts of Scripture (that is as every man reads and understands) there is no other good got but either to make a man sick or mad. It is not so in the Catholick Church, what ever M. Men∣zeis
says of Jesuits and Dominicans, neither par∣ty having ever contested in any thing, that was once decided by the Church. 3. The Protestants way is Preposterous, Re∣ligion being Established before the Scriptures, and they only written to true believers, whence Tertullian prescribing against all Hereticks, says, We do not admit them to dispute from Scripture, till first they can show who their Ancestors were; from whom, by whom, when and to whom, the form of Christian Religion was delivered. Whereupon to conclude all this, I ask at M. Menzeis, is e∣very particular man amongst Protestants infal∣libly assured by Scripture of what he believes? If so, why not then Catholicks, and all the Ca∣tholick Church? they receive the Scriptures with Protestants, yea Protestants only from them: their Churchmen read the Scriptures with as great diligence, they be in a far greater number, they have ten for one who have Ex∣pouded it; they apply no less all the means for a right Interpretation, they study the Ori∣ginals, confer Places, pray many hours both day and night, have no Wives, Children, or Family to divert them, most of them have renounced all pretence to Riches, Honours, and all Temporal Interests, wherewith they might be Byassed any wise in what they profess: The extraordinary and unparallel∣led pains they take in the most Barren,
Savage, and cruel nations of the Earth, for their conversion to Christianity would seem sufficient to evidence both the good disposition of their minds, and the sincere intention of their hearts, beyond the Preachers, of whatsoever Sect: Their manifold Writings witness enough the solidity and quickness of their wits; and e∣ven their Wonders and Mracles in latter ages, in all most Authentick Records of History, would make believe they want not the assistance of the the Spirit, yea, and of the power of God; and yet that we should think that they are blinded, Protestants see clear; they mistake Scripture, Protestants take it aright; they are misled by the Spirit of Errour, Protestants directed by the Spirit of Truth; what Reason, Proof, or Proba∣bility for this? But why do Protestants pretend it is so? Forsooth chiefly, because they acknow∣ledge one high Bishop in the whole Church, as Protestants a primate in each Kingdom, with the Negative voice to silence all private sowers of Dissention, and keep unity; because they take the Canons and Rules of their Faith from Scrip∣ture explained in general Councils, and the U∣nanimous consent of the Church and Fathers, and not by private Reading; because in a word they reverence Publick Authority establisht by God in his Church, above particular Opinions and Conceits. Why then should Scripture be called a Ground to Protestants, who neither
did receive it from Christ and his Apostles (as all Historians, and Chronologues marking the rise of Protestancy in Luther his dayes do evi∣dence) nor have it uncorrupt, as their own Do∣ctors, and Ghospellers do acknowledge: Nor take it in the true sense upon publick Authority, but as they fancy upon private Reading, and In∣terpretation against the Apostle? And not ra∣ther to Catholicks, who having received the Scriptures from Christ and his Apostles, as the Word of God, left to his Church, which she is bound to have an Eye to in all her Decisions, Statutes, and Laws; so that none of them be Repugnant to it in the least, neither by adding or pairing in Words or Sense, but all fully consonant and conform to both: In acknow∣ledgement whereof, in all her General Coun∣cils, she placeth it above Pope, Prelates, Pa∣stors, who in all the search they make into for∣mer Councels, Fathers, Schoolmen, Tradition or practice of the Church, intend nothing else (generally speaking) then to find out by all pos∣sible diligence, the true sense and meaning of what is taught us in General and Particular Terms in the Written Word. Yet Protest∣ants with all Hereticks most vainly bragg of Scripture as their Ground, and Catholicks be calumniated to abandon it; as if Loyal Subjects did less rely on the Acts of Parliament, and fun∣mental Laws, who receive them, their Sen∣tence,
and meaning from the lawful Judges esta∣blisht in the Kingdom; then Out-laws and Re∣bels pretending to adhere immediately to them, as they themselves read, Think them clear, or expound. SECT. V. Scripture however clear in Funda∣mentals, clearly mistaken by Pro∣testants, and clearly making a∣gainst them. LEt us come at last to the Fundamental Points of the Protestant Religion, which Mr. Men∣zeis holds out to be clear in Scripture. Whereupon his Adversary demands, what things he esteems Fundamental? He Answers, to ask a Catalogue of Fundamentals, is to ask how to make a Coat to the Moon in all her chan∣ges. And this his quick Reply he borrows, from a learned Divine, as he calls him, (Mr. Chillingworth is the man, as I conceive, for he has the same words, a meer Sceptick in Religion, and who takes away all certainty in Faith) and to say true, the Protestant Religion is so Obnoxious to
Reformations, Alterations, Innovations, that it is most fitly compared by him to the Moon in all her changes. Yea Protestants are of so different Opinions, even in what they call Fundamentals, that scarce two set down the same, Perkins in Cath. Reform. p. 407. and in his Exposition of the Creed, p. 503. will have all Fundamentals included in the Apostles Creed. Du∣plessis in his Treatise of the Church, C. 5. in the Decalogue. Du Moulin, after Melancton in C. 4. Matt. the Creed and Decalogue. Luther Tom. 7. in Enchir. f. 118. in the Creed, Decalogue, and Lords Prayer. Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 4. p. 340. in the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Sacraments. Sadeel Praef. Resp. ad Turr. to believe Christ crucified, and the Pope to be Antichrist. Chillingworth in his Treatise Intituled, the Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation, p. 408. n. 35. says plainly, Pro∣testants do not agree, touching what Points are Fun∣damental, and page 166, we know not precisely, just how much is Funtamental: Again page 23. he that will go about to distinguish what was written, because it was profitable, from what was written, be∣cause necessary, shall find an intricate business of it, and almost impossible, that he should be certain, he hath done it, when he hath done it. Wherefore he says in the same page, n. 27. that Protestants give not a Catalogue of Fundamentals, it is not from Tergiversation, but from Wisdom and Necessity, and when they had done it, it had been to no pur∣pose,
there being, as matters now stand, as great necessity of believing those Truths of Scripture, which are not Fundamental, as those that are. And yet other Protestants with M. Menzeis, harp upon nothing more then the Distinction of Fun∣damentals from not Fundamentals, as if those were necessarily believed, these not. I know in other places of the same Treatise, this Author contradicts himself, which shews not only Pro∣testants disagree in Fundamentals, one from another, but even the same man from himself; so well grounded they are in these their Funda∣mentals and Grounds, wherein, notwithstand∣ing their monstrous Divisions, they vainly bragg to agree. But how can it be discerned, whether all Protestants, or a few agree in Fundamentals, unless it be precisely known, what and how ma∣ny Fundamentals there be? Potter, in fine, ex∣tends the number of Fundamentals beyond all his Brethren have said; his words are, page 24. it is Fundamental to a Christians Faith, and neces∣sary for his salvation, that he believe all revealed Truths of God, whereof he may be convinced they are of God. And doth not this diversity of O∣pinions equal the changes of the Moon? Or is not all this a most clear and manifest Demon∣stration, however Scripture be clear in Funda∣mentals (which now I do not dispute) at least it is not so even to the Learnedst and most sharp sighted Protestants, who so little agree in that
Point, that scarce two are of the same Judg∣ment and Mind. If others did thus mistake what is perspicuous in Scripture, Mr. Menzeis would presently tell us, no wonder they do so, by reason of their evil disposed intellect. But that Protestants, and these not of the Vulgar sort, but even the Pillars of their Religion, and Defenders of their Faith, by Volumes in Print, should not see what in Scripture is most clear, but so vary and divide in such a multiplicity of Opinions, and yet maintain Scripture in these same things, wehrein they so vary, is clear, what a wonderful thing is this? Or who I pray you, can trust men, both at once saying Scripture is clear in Fundamentals, and yet setting down the same Fundamentals diversly? By this plainly confessing either their own blindness, and so that they are not good Guides, nor to be belie∣ved, when they speak of what in Scripture is clear, or else that their Doctrine in this is false. What M. Menzeis holds Fundamental, so great a secret it is, that neither will he tell us himself, nor can any other know it, he having so often changed House, and built upon diverse Grounds. Yet that he should not seem to say nothing, a mark he gives us, to know what in Scripture is Fundamental, to wit, if we find it commanded to be believed by all, or a Character of necessity to be put upon it.
Whereupon I reflect first M. Menzeis Doctrine is here very Incoherent, for both he teaches, it is commanded in Scripture all men believe Funda∣mentals, as things absolutely necessary to salva∣tion; and nevertheless the Catalogue of these same things, he will have impossible, as a Coat to the Moon. Would not this argue he is igno∣rant himself, of what all should know and believe? Otherwise surely, he should ne∣ver have judged this Catalogue impossible, it being easie to a man to call to memory what he knows, yea we know no more then we can call to memory, says the Roman Orator, Tantum scimus, quantum memoriâ tenemus. Secondly, I reflect, that rejecting the Infal∣lible Authority of the Church, teaching every particular person what is Fundamental, and what we must necessarily know, and explicitely believe to attain salvation; & pretending all this is clear, and may be found, by the marks he has given in Scripture; he remaines obliged to a very hard task. 1. To prove in General, from evident and clear Scripture, that all things ne∣cessary to be believed are clear and evident in Scripture. Let him answer then, First where he reads this, and to the Fathers teaching the con∣trary as we shall see below. 2. To prove eve∣ry Fundamental Point in particular immediate∣ly, and clearly from Scripture: And this so, that the words cannot be taken obviously and li∣terally
in any other sense. For if they can be so taken, then I have no Infallible Evidence but they should be so taken, without some Infallible Guide, telling me they should not be so taken in the place alledged. As for example, these words, This is my Body, undoubtedly may at least signifie, and that most Obviously and Lit∣terally, that Christs Body is really in the Sacra∣ment, as when I say, this is a piece of Gold, this a piece of Silver, these words litterally signifie re∣al Gold and Silver: Wherefore, if I will take the words Figuratively, as clearly so spoken in Scripture, some other place of Scripture must be brought, or some other Infallible Authori∣ty, telling me this in express words, otherwise I cannot have that certainty of it, which is re∣quired in Divine Faith. 3. Amongst all the clear places in Scripture, to pick out the Funda∣mental ones, how hard is it for every one? Not to say Morally impossible, M. Menzeis him∣self granting he cannot do it, more then make a Coat to the Moon. For by this means all should be obliged to know all Texts of Scripture, and then to examine diligently each one, first, whe∣ther it be evident or obscure, least it should ap∣pear upon examination to be evident, which at the first sight did not seem so. And secondly, Whether it be generally commanded, and have a Character of necessity to be believed by all, for then according to M. Menzeis Rule, I know
it to be a Fundamental, but Chillingworth, his learned Divine, tells him a little above, to distin∣guish what was written because it was profitable, from what was written, because necessary, is an intri∣cate piece of business. S. Paul to the Heb. 2. C. 6. V. requires no more as necessary (as would seem) then that he who cometh to God, be∣lieve, he is, and that he is a rewarder of them who diligently seek him. S. John 3. Ch. 6. says, he that believeth in the Son, hath everlasting life; the Prophet Royal, that all who fear the Lord are blessed; and many other such passages there be in Scripture, which might make a n think one thing or two at most were necessary to Sal∣vation, as sometimes the believing of one Point, sometimes the doing of one good action; Hea∣ven is promised to Prayer in one place, full Re∣mission of sins to Alms deeds in another, &c. and yet who will say either of these two is sufficient for working a mans Salvation? Add to all this, I find in Scripture, If thou wilt enter into life, keep the Commandments, S. Matth. 19. Yet Pro∣testants teach that to be impossible, and con∣sequenly this Fundamental must lead all to despair, as that other make all to presume; it being a Fundamental again amongst Protestants, that every man should believe he is one of the Elect, which being an Article of his Faith, may reasonably secure him, and yet all not be∣ing of this number, some from this Fundamen∣tal
must or should at least presumptuously be∣lieve a lye. Further the eating of blood and strangled meat, is generally forbidden by the Apostles, to all the Gentiles converted to the Christian Faith, as it was before to the Jews, whence I infer; what is generally commanded to all, should generally be believed by all; and so if M. Menzeis Rule be good, this must come in amongst the Fundamentals of the Protestant Re∣ligion; which if it be so in the Pulpit I know not, but at Table I am sure it is not. A hun∣dred such absurdities follow, upon seeking Fun∣damentals in Scripture, by these deceiving signes and uncertain marks M. Menzeis gives us, with∣out any Infallible Guide. 2. It is to be remarked, that Protestants nei∣ther agree in setting down Fundamentals, nor can∣not give a precise Catalogue of Points of Faith, they think to be Fundamental, as was required of M. Menzies; but that also they mistake the very Notion and name: A Fundamental verity in the Christian Religion, being either that which makes us believe all the rest, or without the ex∣press knowledge and belief whereof, none can be saved. Now the Question amongst us, is not a∣bout this; but whether a Man may either sus∣pend his assent, or positively dissent, from lesser things then these, when they are revealed by God, and propounded to him by the same Authority with the former. For then say Catholicks he is
equally obliged to believe them, by reason of the form Object, which is Divine Revelation, & can in nothing deceive, or should in any thing be ca¦lled in question, though in respect of the Mate∣rial Object or thing revealed, we be not so obli∣ged to know it. For there is nothing less or more certain when God speaks, he being the first verity, yea verity it self, who delivers all he says with one and the same Infinite Certainty, where no degrees, of more or less certitude can have place. Protestants it would seem, as they take Fun∣damentals, will not be tyed to this, whence they receive in communion with them, and as the true Members of their Church, some who hold most contrary Tenets, as M. Menzeis, the Waldenses, Wickliffians, Hussists, who in his se∣venth Paper grants the whole body of the Church collectively taken, cannot err in Essentials or Fun∣damentals, yet so as that in some whole ages the In∣tegrals may be vitiated. But if he understand by Integrals lesser Points of Faith, as to their Ob∣ject and Matter, yet equally revealed by God, and propounded by his Church to us, with chief Mysteries, (wherein the Protestants mistake, and Errour in their Distinction of Fundamen∣tals and Integrals consists) his Assertion is both Erroneous & Heretical, because an Act of Faith grounded on the Motive of Gods Infinite and in∣fallible Veracity in revealing, is a Vertual and Implicite Belief of all he has revealed, so that
the true Belief of one Article, implyes a belief of all. Wherefore S. Athanasius says in his Creed, whosoever doth not hold the Catholick Faith whole and inviolate, he shall perish for ever. And S. Hierome l. 3. contr. Ruff. for one word or two con∣trary to the Faith, many Hereticks have been cast out of the Church. Yea, S. Gregory Naz. tract. de fide, says, nothing can be more dangerous then those Hereticks, who when they run through all things uprightly, yet with one word, as with a drop of poyson corrupts the true and sincere Faith of our Lord, and of Apostolical Tradition. S. Basil as Theodoret reports l. 4. Hist. c. 6. being desired to relent a little to the time, Answered, That such as were instructed in the Divine Doctrine, do not suffer any Syllable to be corrupt, but for its defence if need require, willingly imbrace any kind of death. And the Church in her Publick Decrees of Gene∣ral Councils strikes with the Thunder bolt of Gods Curse and Excommunication all such as refuse to believe any one Point decided to be of Faith; which she could not justly do, if every Article she declares were not necessarily belie∣ved, when known to be decided by her. So doth the Church of England Excommunicate all who hold any thing contrary to the 39. Articles, though they judg them not all Fundamental. As the Athenians punished without remission the least word against the received opinion of their Gods, and the Jews (says Joseph contra Appion.)
the least transgression of the Law. So God threat∣neth that he shall be blotted out of the Book of Life, who ever shall deminish any word of the Revelation, Apoc. 22. v. 19. Yet Luther reject∣ing whole Epistles of Scripture, in M. Menzeis Book is called a holy man; but so speaketh not Luther of him denying the Real Presence, who in his Book against the Sacramentarians, says plain∣ly, They believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in vain, all these things avail them nothing, for as much as they deny, this Article of the Real Presence, and attach him of falshood, who said of the Sacrament, This is my Body. And he had reason, for St. Thomas 2.2. q. 5. a 3. with other Divines teach he has no Spiritual Faith, who believeth not every thing little or great, Fun∣damental or not, Proposed to him by the same Authority. Whereupon they infer, that no Se∣ctary upon his own choice adhering to this or that, believeth any thing. So Tertullian, l. de praesc. speaking against Valentine, says, some things of the Law and Prophets he approveth, some things not, that is, difalloweth all, whil'st he dispro∣veth some. 3. From all this appeareth, how idlely this distin∣ction of fundamntals, & not fundamentals in the Protestans sense was brought in by them, it ser∣ving to no other purpose, then to palliate their di∣visions at present, & deceive Ignorants in the pre∣tended succession, they claim to in old condemn'd
Hereticks, whose Errors they will have to be no Fundamentals. As M. Menzeis taking Hie∣rome of Prague, John Huss, Wickcliff, the Wal∣denses, and Grecians, for true Protestants, before Luther, to make up an imaginary Succession in the Protestant Church: which to do with any apparent shew of Truth. 1. He should prove those Sects to have been the Catholick Church spread through the whole world, and owned as such by the Fathers of those times. 2. Justifie their Doctrine, which we find partly in their own Writings, partly in the most Authentick Re∣cords of the Ages wherein they lived, to have been in many things most false, erroneous, and unchristian. 3. Their succession from the A∣postles times, finding their Bishops and Pastors in the Registers of the Church History or Fa∣thers. Neither will he make this good by the Authority of Friar Reiner, who speaking of the Waldenses, whom he names Lionists, says at most (even as Illiricus quotes his words) some affirm they have been from the time of Pope Sylve∣ster, others from the dayes of the Apostles. (M. Menzeis to make the Argument stronger, will have Friar Reiner to say absolutely they were from the time of the Apostles, with his ordina∣ry ingenuity▪) but what I pray you concludes he from this? Those who said so, being Lionists themselves, as witnesseth Pilihdorphius. So a little before Waldo, there arose Hereticks who
falsly bragged of the same, even as after them Protestants do now. But if you or they either sir, were in all ages from the Apostles, tell us the Authours in every age who marked the suc∣cession of your Pastors, where lived your peo∣ple, &c. & then refute the great number of learn∣ed Writers, who lived when such Sects did start up in a suddain, as a Mushrome in a night, mark∣ing their Rise, and noting their Errours, which certainly they had never done, if such Doctrine had been professed before, as that of the true and visible Church. But to speak a word in particular of every one of those Sects; with what ignorance and falshood M. Menzeis calls them true Protestants, you shall presently see. And first in John Huss, to whose name, I am sure, he has a more just claim then to his Religion, if we trust all the most Authentick Records of Huss his Doctrine. I cite not for this the Juridick Acts of the Council at Constance, because Popish; not Fa∣ther Gordon of Huntley, no less eminent for his Learning then Birth, because a Jesuit, though living in Prague in Boheme, where Hussits most abound, and having made most diligent enqui∣ry of their Tenents, he found as he witnesseth, Cont. 3. de Euch. c. 17. they did hold Invocati∣on of Saints, Prayer for the dead, the Fastings and Ceremonies of the Catholick Church with free will, confession of Sins, seven Sacraments, &c.
But I hope he will trust Fox, a most firy Prote∣stant speaking thus upon the 2. Ch. of the Re∣velation. What did Huss at any time teach or de∣fend in the Council, wherein he did not seem super∣stitiously to consent with the Papists? what did the Popish Faith decree concerning Transubstantiation; which he likewise with the Papists did not confirm? who celebrated Mass more Religiously then he? or more Religiously observed the Vows of Priestly Cha∣stity? Concerning Free Will, Predestination, in∣formed Faith, (that is without Charity) the cause of Justification, and merit of good Works, what other thing did he hold, then is taught at Rome? All this he, and more in his Monu∣ments, that he did acknowledge seven Sacraments▪ and the Popes Supremacy, p. 216. and 227. And if he should as yet disown Fox as a private Writer, yet must he trust Luther as a man ex∣traordinarily sent by God to Reform the Church, and the 14. Apostle: The Papists burned Huss, says he, (Colloq. Germ. C. de Antich▪) when as yet he departed not a fingers breadth from the Pa∣pacy, for he taught the same which the Papists do, only he found fault with their Vices, against the Pope he did nothing. To the same purpose Luther has much more, Tom. 2. in Assert. art. 30. and Tom. 3. in Ps. 2. But in fine, should not Huss himself be trusted better then any, his works are extant, and perusing them, you shall find he did hold seven Sacraments upon the fifth of
S. James; Transubstantiation in his Book of the Lords Supper, Ch. 2. and 3. the Sacrifice of the Mass in his Sermon of Funerals; Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead in the same place, confession of sins to a Priest in his Treatise of pennance, invoca∣tion of Saints in his Epistles 22.30.35. Venerati∣on of Relicks upon Ps. 115. yea in his question of believing, the Popes Supremacie as to his office, dig∣nity and power: though with this Caveat, com∣mon to him with Wicliff, that ecclesiastical digni∣ty, as well as Civil, was grounded on Inherent Ju∣stice, and so lost by Mortal Sin, which neither Catholicks nor Protestants do teach: Neverthe∣less M. Menzeis is not ashamed to own Huss for a Protestant, so constant is he in professing his Fundamentals, which he will have to be in Scripture so clear. I insist not so much on the rest, yet to say a little of every one. Of Hie∣rome of Prague; Fox. pag. 585. relateth whatever was his Opinion in other things, yet stood he con∣stantly in defence of the real Presence, and Tran∣substantiation, saying, he did give more credit to S. Augustine, and other Doctors of the Church (who affirmed the same) then to any that denyed it. Wik∣cliff again M. Menzeis is not ashamed to call a Protestant, who in his own Writings so expresly holds against them. 1. Worship of Images in his 9. Ch. of the Eucharist, Images, says he, we a∣dore purely as signs, but God we must adore with all our power: It is therefore granted, that Relicks,
Images, and the Sacraments be with prudence to be adored. He did also hold Invocation of Saints in his Sermon of the Assumption into Heaven of our blessed Lady, Auricular confession on the 5. Ch. of James, seven Sacraments in his Postscript on the first Ep. and 1. Ch. to the Corinths. Wherefore Melancton Ep. ad Micon. thus censures him, I have read Wickliff and found in him many Errors, he never held nor understood Justice of Faith, which is the Protestants main Fundamental. With the same confidence M. Menzeis calls the Wal∣denses Protestants, who held the Real Presence, that the Apostles were but Lay-men, that all Ma∣gistrates fall from their Dignity by mortal sin, that it is not lawful to swear in any case, &c. as witnes∣seth Illyricus in Catal. Wald. Confess. Bohem. &c. And with these the Grecians upon a private Let∣ter sent (as he pretends) by a Patriarch to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; though all who e∣ver conversed with Grecians know, they say dai∣ly Mass, hold Transubstantiation, seven Sacra∣ments, Prayer to the Saints, and for the dead, &c. as all may see in the censure of the Orien∣tal or Grecian Church; and deny the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, and consequent∣ly make no distinction betwixt these two Persons in the Godhead. But it is enough to M. Men∣zeis it seems, that they disown the Pope, to be called Protestants, and so Turks and Tartars may come in with them. Whence I leave to judg
how constant a Protestant M. Menzeis is, own∣ing such Doctors and Doctrine, and what Cre∣dit again he deserves, after so many clear Testi∣monies, and that even of learned Protestants, and the very writings of the persons in question, con∣vincing him of most notorious falshood and Er∣rour. The most antient and holy Fathers, as S. Ire∣neus Tertullian, Philastrius, S. Epiphanius, S. Au∣gustine, Theodoret, S. John Damascen, and others, who have written a Catalogue of Heresies, did not certainly distinguish Fundamentals and In∣tegrals amongst Divine Truths, sufficiently pro∣pounded, as Protestants do, when they condem∣ned many lesser things as Heresies, and conse∣quently damnable Errours, then what they think to have no repugnancy with Fundamentals and essentials in the Doctrine of the true Church; as in the Pelagians, Novatians, Donatists, Mono∣thelits, who all embraced the Trinity, Incarna∣tion, Passion of Christ, &c. S. Epiphanius, Heres. 75. and S. Augustine, l. de heres. C. 33. condemn the Arians for denying the Fasts commanded by the Church, the first remarking, they were ac∣customed to eat flesh on Fridays, and in the Lent, yea chiefly in the holy Week wherein Christ died. S. Hierome in his 2. book against Jovi∣nian condemneth him, for saying Fastings, and all other Exercises of good works, were not meri∣torious: S. Augustine in his Book of Heresies, c.
54. condemns the Eunomians for teaching no sin could hurt a man, if so he had but only Faith▪ S. Epiphanius haeres. 64. all who denied free will: S. Hierome, Vigilantius, in his Book against him for affirming the Relicks of the Saints ought not to be reverenced: the same S. Hierome a∣gainst Jovinian with S. Augustine in his Book of Heresies, C. 82. condemn him, for holding Wedlock, equal in dignity and merit to virgi∣nity. S. Augustine again l. Contr. Julian. C. 2. the Pelagians for teaching the Children of the Faithful Parents did not need Baptism, but were born holy, and in his 1. Book 2. C. and last a∣gainst Maximus, the Arians for not receiving Traditions. Now let M. Menzeis choose ei∣ther to acknowledge all these, and many such like condemned Heresies by the Fathers to be no Fundamentals, and consequently that many o∣ther things then these which Protestants call Fundamentals, are necessary to be believed under the danger of incurring Heresie and Eternal damnation: or owning them as such, let him confess, Protestants Err even in Fundamentals with them, seeing all here condemned is Prote∣stant Doctrine, borrowed from those more an∣cient Hereticks, and condemned by the Fathers even then. 4. As to that he says all Fundamentals are clear in Scripture, and that according to S. Chry∣sostome, S. Augustine, S. Irenaeus, S. Thomas of
Aquine, and Sixtus Senensis, holding what ever is obscure in one place, to be clear in some o∣ther. I answer, very easily with a manifold di∣stinction, 1. To such eminent Doctors of the Church, as he cites, most Scriptures are clear I grant, to all indifferently I deny. 2. To such as take the places of Scripture commanding us to hear the Church; and hold fast the Traditi∣ons of the Apostles conserved in her, as two main Fundamentals, for clearing all the rest, I grant, to others I deny. 3. With Vincentius Lyrinensis c. 2. to such as level the Line of Pro∣phetical and Apostolical interpretation, to the square of the Ecclesiastical and Catholick sense I grant, to others I deny. 4. With Do∣ctor Field a Protestant in his 4. Book C. 14. to such as be first setled in those things which the Apostles presupposed in their delivery of Scriptures, I grant, to others I deny. Neither are these my Distinctions any wise to shift the Argument, which maketh nothing either against us, or for him. But to clear the Fathers words in the very genuine sense they speak them. See S. Chrysostome his meaning in his 14. Hom. on S. John. S. Augustines contra Cresconium. C. 33. where he says, if any one fear to be deceived in this question, through its obscurity, let him ask Councel of the Church, which the holy Scriptures do demonsrate without any ambigui∣ty. That of S. Irenaeus in his 2. Book Ch. 47.
and more expresly in his 1. Book Ch. 49. S. Tho∣mas his words, That what ever is necessary to be believed under the Spiritual Sense, that some where is manifestly declared by the Letter, as they do not specifie to whom this manifest declaration is made, so we grant it to the Church and her Doctors, for to her all things are known, says St. Irenaeus in which is perfect Faith; as to the Apostles it was given by our Saviour Christ to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, 5. But I would ask M. Menzeis did ever any of these Fathers receive the Scriptures as the un∣doubted Word of God, otherwise then on the Churches Authority? S. Augustine saying, I would not believe the Scriptures, if the Authority of the Church did not move me to it, is no less clear for this, then Scripture it self in Funda∣mentals. Or did ever any of them fancy to himself a place of Scripture, as clear for any thing, the whole Church standing in a contrary Judgment? For this is the only Point we de∣bate with Protestants, and clearly prove both by the Scriptures and Fathers against them. 6. However Scripture be clear in Fundamen∣tals, in the sense I have given, that is particular∣ly, and in as many words, or generally, and as commanding us to hear the Church, yet surely it doth not set down all that is Fundamental in express terms, if we trust the Fathers, whom M. Menzeis appeals to, as holding Scripture
clear in Fundamentals; or can all be so evident∣ly deduced from scripture, but by the Authori∣ty of the Church, that Hereticks be silenced, and Unity preserved in Faith. S. Chrysostome on 2 Thes. 2. says it is evident that the Apostles did not deliver all things by Writing, but many things without, and those be as worthy of credit as others. Which he could not have said, if Fundamen∣tals were only the infallible Truths, and they clearly revealed in Scripture. S. Epiphanius, Heres. 61. we must use Traditions, for the Scrip∣tures have not all things; yet no necessity of using Traditions, if all Fundamentals were in Scrip∣ture, they only being necessary according to Pro∣testants. S. Augustine l. 5. de Bapt. Contr. Do∣nat. Ch. 23. the custome of the Church in bapti∣zing Infants, is neither to be contemned, or any wise thought superfluous, yet not to be believed if it were not an Apostolical Tradition. If this was not in his Judgment, a Fundamental, hear him∣self again, l. 3. de Orig. Anim. C 9. if thou will be a Catholick, believe not, teach not, say not, that In∣fants prevented by death before they are baptized, can come to the pardon of their Original sin. Is it not a Fundamental to believe Scripture to be the Word of God, which S. Augustine takes on Tradition? What if a man should receive the New Testament as sufficiently containing Fun∣damentals, and reject the Old with the Mani∣chees? admit of some of the Evangels, but not
others with the Ebionits? What if one should deny the word Person, the name and definition of a Sacrament, the keeping of Sunday, because not clear in Scripture, and consequently no Fun∣damentals according to M. Menzeis Rule. Mar∣cion, and with him the Anabaptists, teach Bap∣tism should be conferred more then once. The Donatists, that Baptisme of Hereticks, at least should be reiterated. Sabellius, one only Per∣son in the Godhead. Nestorius, two Persons in Christ, and for this are accounted Hereticks; yet no clear Scripture is brought condemning their Errours. S. Augustine l. de unitate Eccl. says expresly of the Donatists Errour, this neither you nor I read in express words. 7. How many Scriptures are clear against Pro∣testants in all controverted Tenets? So that however it be clear in Fundamentals, it clearly speaketh against them. See for this the Touch∣stone of the Reformed Gospel; with the Manual of Controversie, and after you have pondered the places quoted in them, judge whether the Protestant Religion be rightly defined by M. Men∣zeis, The Christian Religion as contained in Scrip∣ture, and their protestancy, only their protesting a∣gainst Popish Errours. Which Definition if good, having its Genus proximum & differentiam ulti∣mam, should distinguish Protestants from all o∣ther Sectaries; but this it doth not, it being common to them with most Hereticks, who
have ever been: all of them professing with you Sir, to adhere to the written Word they re∣ceived, and as understood by themselves, as the Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians, Photinians, &c. and all protesting against the Churches Errours, and Popes Authority. For as the sole Roman Church did ever oppose all Hereticks, as the only zealous Defender of the true Faith and Doctrine, which S. Paul calls the Depositum en∣trusted to her; So all generally how soon they turn Hereticks, Protest, prattle, Preach chieflly against her; turn over all the Writings of Au∣thours, who have made mention of Heresies, and you shall find that all from the first to the last have opposed themselves to that company of Christians, which was in communion with the Pope and Bishop of Rome for the time; and that this company hath opposed it self to them all, neither did they oppose themselves all to any o∣ther company whatsoever. Yea this was ever the distinctive mark of Hereticks, not to com∣municate with the Pope and Sea of Rome; as may be seen in the Writings of the Fathers. St. Irenaeus l. 3. C. 3. S. Hierome Ep. 57. S. Cyprian, in his Epistle to Pope Cornelius, S. Augustine in Ps. Contr. part. Don. and generally in all ages, and by all, so that you protesting with them a∣gainst the Church and Pope, take their very Badg and Livery, and shamefully declare by this Cha∣ractaristick Mark of your Defection, from the e∣ver
acknowledged true Church, and high Bishop thereof, by all the Fathers, your Apostacy, Heresie, and Schism. It is very plausible I must confess to poor Ignorants, when Preachers make them believe they teach nothing, save only the pure Scripture and written Word, protesting a∣gainst all unwritten Traditions as Popish Er∣rours. But if any man consider a little with himself your Tenets in particular, he shall pre∣sently find, it is openly against God, and his written Word ye protest, in all points of Con∣troversie, under the false pretence of protesting against Popery; and that not so much as one Te∣net peculiar to you is contained in Scripture. This I evidence in most Articles of Popish Do∣ctrine you protest against, where all may see and judge how well your Religion is contained in Scripture. Is it not to protest against the goodness of God to say with you, he created some for Hell independently, of their works, and likewise a∣gainst his Word, 1▪ Tim. 2. where it is said, he will have all to be saved, and in the 2. Ep. of St. Peter 3. where he is declared not willing any should perish. Is it not to protest against his Mercy, and ex∣press word again, to say he died not for all? The Apostle S. Paul, assuring he did die for all, and as that in Adam all died, so in Christ all be restored to life, 1 Cor. 13.
Is it not to protest against his Justice and Word, to teach that he punisheth us for what we cannot do, as for the want of good Works, which Protestants will have not to be in our power. Yet the Apostle says, Heb. 6.10. God is not unjust that he should forget our work. Is it not to protest against the Wisdom and Word of God, to say he obliges us to perform things impossible, as Protestants call the Com∣mandements? where as Saint John in 1 Ep. C. 5. says they are not so much as heavy. Is it not to protest against his Veracity and Word, to affirm that the Church can teach Er∣rours, and stand in need of Reformation; Christ having commanded us to hear it, in S. Matt. 18. and the Apostle S. Paul 1 Tim. 3. calling it the Pillar and Ground of Truth. Is it not to protest against his Providence and Word, to assert that he has given us the dead Letter of the Law, (without an Infallible Visible Judge, leaving to every poor Ignorant to Inter∣pret Scripture according to his fancy, S. Peter, having said, no Scripture is of private interpreta∣tion, and Christ having commanded us to hear his Church. Is it not to protest against the Efficacy of Christs Mediation, Sufferings, Death, and also his Word, to hold that he hath freed us from the pain, but not from the guilt of sin. S. Joh. 1. Rev. 5. Saying he washed us from our sins in his
own blood. And S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. we are Washed, justified, Sanctified. Is it not to protest against his Divine Order, to tye our Sanctification to Faith only, and his express word in S. James 2.24. Ye see then how that by Works a man is justified, and not by Faith only. Is it not to protest against his Divine Ap∣pointment again and his Word, to teach that good Works done in his Grace, and by his Grace, merit nothing? when through all the Scripture Heaven is promised as a reward to our Works, and in St. Matth. 10. It is said, Christ shall render to every one accord∣ing to his Works. Is it not to protest against his Divine Autho∣rity and Word, to deny the Real Presence? All the Evangelists speaking so clearly, This is my Body, this is my Blood. Is it not to protest against his express Com∣mand and Word, to forbid Images as Idols? He having ordered two Cherubims to be set on the Ark of the Covenant, Exod. 25. Is it not to protest against his own Practice and Word, to deny we should honour his Saints, whom God himself Honours, yea, and glorifies. Them that honour me, I will honour, 1 Reg. 2.30. Is it not to protest against his Dispensation and Word, to deny the Power given to his
Apostles and their Successours to forgive sins? he having said in S. John 20.23. Whose sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven. Is it not to protest against the Satisfaction which his Justice requires for our sins, even after the guilt is forgiven, to deny Purgatory? The Scripture witnessing that he did exact satisfacti∣on of David, and many holy penitent sinners after he had forgiven their sins. And S. Paul▪ 1 Cor. 3. If any ones work burn, he shall suf∣fer loss, but himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire; where we have clearly a purging, and pu∣nishing, yet saving fire. Is it not to protest against Christs Eternal Priesthood, according to the order of Melchi∣sedech, Ps. 109. and S. Paul, Hebr. 5. to reject the unbloody and unspotted Sacrifice of the Mass, which the Prophet Malachy 1. C. 10. V. calls a clean Oblation to be offered amongst the Gentiles, from the rising of the Sun, even to the setting, and that in every place. Is it not to protest against all God commands us and his Word? to take away free Will in obeying, Deut. 30.19. I have set before you life and death, chuse. To conclude, what Point is there in all the Ca∣tholick Faith, which Protestants protest against, which is not either Directly against Gods Di∣vine Attributes, Christs Mediation, and Dispen∣sation, his Churches Authority, his Saints,
and Servants honour, some part of Christian duty, belief, or life, or generally not against his express written Word, as it is plain in it self, or expounded, by the unanimous consent of the Fathers? And yet so impudently bold is this spirit of Heresie, as to dare say, that that is contained in Scripture, which Scripture most evidently contradicts; that is only in op∣position to Popish Errours, which impugnes the very Fundamental, and most substantial Veri∣ties of the Gospel and Christian Faith; that by the pure and uncorrupted word, it will reform the Church, when corrupting the Word, and cor∣recting the Church as subject to failings and Errours in Religion, it ruinateth both Church and Word.
What has been said in this, and the former Section, further in∣stanced in two Particular Con∣troverted Points; The Real Presence, and two Sacra∣ments. THE Protestant Religion is, The Christian Religion as contained in Scripture: Sole Scripture is their Ground, and in it all Fundamentals are clear; Says M. Menzeis. How false all this is in general, doth evidently I hope appear, by what I have said above. Here I in∣stance only further two particular Points, he handles at length, the better to make see the falshood of his strong and bold Assertions, in the weakness and nullity of his Proofs. And this first in his refuting one of our chief Tenets, viz. The Real Presence, then in maintaining one of his own, to wit, That there are two Sacra∣ments, and no more.
1. Then to prove Christs body is not really in the Sacrament, these most clear words, This is my body; must not, says he, be taken in the lite∣ral sense, but Figuratively: why so, doth the Scripture say this? no, no Scripture is brought. What then? a Philosophical Demonstration as he pretends. The word this, in the literal sense is inexplicable, and the Proposition implyeth a contradiction, ergo, &c. But why the Pronoun this inexplicable, because let Romanists strain their wits, Answers M. Menzeis; and squeeze their Authors, they cannot tell what it can signifie, whe∣ther the Bread, Body, or something indeterminate∣ly. Who would not laugh here to see Mr. Menzeis, a professor of Divinity take such a weak Argument for a Demonstration? most like in this to a certain Romantick Knight Er∣rand call'd Don Quicsot, who imagining to himself a Windmil to be a Gyant, and then fighting with it, as with a Hector, he did both blunt his Sword, and batter his Reputation. For what, I pray you, doth the Pronone this signifie in any proportion, but Indeterminately, till it be de∣termined to some particular thing, by the fol∣lowing words. So that let a man say a hundred times this, he determines nothing but by the en∣suing words, as here This is my Body, makes a determinated sense, the last words determi∣nating the first, which alone, and of it self signi∣fies nothing determinately, and so to seek what it
signifies determinately alone, and before the other words be pronounced, is to quibble and speak non-sense, by seeking a determinate Ob∣ject under a word, which of its nature hath none. And this is the first part of his Demon∣stration for establishing, by a Logick Sophism, without any clear Scripture, a main Point of Religion. The second part of this Demonstration is, That it implyes a manifest contradiction, a true Affirmative Proposition, de praesenti, should pro∣duce its Object. Why this, because in the in∣stant of Nature wherein the Proposition is con∣ceiv'd before its Object, as the cause before its Effect: the Proposition should be true as is supposed, and not true, because the Object in that instant is not. The same Argument he ur∣geth in the instant of time wherein the Copula is pronounced, or Particle is, before the two last words. And for that Catholick Authours give many and diverse Solutions of this Argu∣ment, as the Custome is in the School, he will be satisfied with none. But because Mr. Menzeis is good at Retortions, I re∣tort his Argument thus: Is not this a true Affirmative Proposition, de praesenti, which produces its Object in St. John 15. This is my command, that ye love one another. Now what difficulty in the former Proposition, either in the word this, or in the Instants of Nature
and Time, or that a true affirmative Propositi∣on make its own Object, which is not here? do not these words make a new Command says Christ, as the former his body? what if M. Men∣zeis could have brought an Axiome of Philoso∣phy against the Real Presence (as that Maxime, so commonly propounded and answered in the School, quae sunt eadem cum uno tertio sunt ea∣dem inter se) proving as would seem, that the three persons being Identified, and the same thing with the Godhead and Divine Nature, cannot be really distinguished one from another. Should a Christian bely Christ, who is the first Verity, upon pretence he speaketh against na∣tural reason? who will so reason with God; let him hear S. Bernards most Excellent saying, Ep. 109. What is more against Reason, then that one should strive to go beyond Reason by force of Reason. But true it is, no Mystery of our Faith is against Reason, though some there be above the reach of Humane Weakness. Wherefore as the former Maxime, though much stronger, then what M. Menzeis here objects, is shown to have no repugnancy with the distinction of persons by our Divines; So I easily answer him, the Proposition is true in the instant of Nature, the Object being only extant in the instant of Time wherein the Proposition is compleatly end∣ed, because it affirmeth only its Object to be extant, in that instant of time, and not before.
In that instant of Nature, wherein the Proposi∣tion precedes its Object, it affirms indeed the Object to be, but not for that instant, as I say tru∣ly this day what will be to morrow; In instanti naturae vera est propositio, sed non pro instanti na∣turae, say they in the School. But M. Menzeis Argument if solid, would prove against all Phy∣losophy, there could be no Practick Knowledge, which hath no real Object, but what it makes to it self; for that in such conceptions of the mind, the act of the understanding is ever prior to the Object, as its cause; and so in that instant of priority (if his Objection have place) we shall have a knowledge of nothing, because in it the Object is not. Yea it should prove in all these places of Scripture, Let the Light be made, let the Firmament be made, young man I say unto thee rise; I will, be thou healed, and in such like, the Omnipotent Word of God not to be effectu∣al, if the words did not produce what they sig∣nifie, as these other words, This is my body. So that M. Menzeis here, taking this his trifling, & whimsical Sophism, for an unanswerable Argu∣ment, shews not only his weakness both in Phy∣losophy and Grammar, but also manifestly that Hereticks contradict Christs most clear words, and the Authority of his Church upon most in∣significant and frivolous objections. And upon such trifling Sophisms shall any Christian refuse to believe, what Christ hath taught in so express
terms? what the Evangelists have so accurate∣ly set down in holy Writ: what the Fathers have confirmed in so many Volumes: what the Martyrs have subscribed with their blood: what the Church doth testifie by her Pastors and pra∣ctise: what God hath sealed with so many Mi∣racles and Wonders; sometime appearing in the Consecrate Host in form of a man; some∣times (when it has been stabbed by Jews and Hereticks) making it gush out in blood; some∣times by its vertue, casting out Devils, or quenching fire, as so many Authentick Records, both of History and Fathers do witness. O bold∣ness and impudence of Heresie so to cavil at Christs own words, and yet proudly pretend, pure Scripture is its only Ground! 2. To instance how M. Menzeis again, from Scripture clear in Fundamentals, proves that Fundamental Tenet of Protestants, yea their proper and only Tenet (all the rest being bor∣rowed from old condemed Heresies, as we have seen.) There be two Sacraments and no more. Af∣ter a huge work in his last Paper, and a whole year spent, before the answer to this Query did appear, instead of clear Scripture (which he was only desired to bring) he gives the follow∣ing discourse. 1. To clear the state of the Question, he says, know we do not affirm, that the word Sacrament is to be found in Scripture.
2. We understand by a Sacrament of the New Testament, a Substantial Visible Sign instituted by God, recorded in the Gospel, to Seal up the Pro∣mises of Salvation, which is to endure in the Church to the end of the world. 3. We do affirm in this sense, there be only two proper Sacraments in the New Testament, Baptisme and the Lords Supper. 4. Then coming to prove there be two Sacra∣ments, and two only; that there be two, he proves it thus, to Baptism and the Lords Sup∣per, agree all the parts of the foresaid Description, for you have, says he, the Divine Institution of Bap∣tizing with water,, Mat. 28.19. and of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. That they are Seals of the promises of Salvation is no less clear: And first of Baptism, Act. 2.38, 39. and also of the Lords Supper, in so much that the Cup is called the New Testament, which you must acknowledge to be no proper speech, but it is only so called, be∣cause it is, sigillum foederis; hence also in the In∣stitution, mention is made of the remission of sins, and of the giving of the Body of Christ, and shed∣ing of his blood for us, holding forth that for∣giveness of sins, and all other blessings, purchased by the Death of Christ, and promised in the new Covenant; are by this Ordinance sealed to the peo∣ple of God. And that these Ordinances are to con∣tinue to the end of the word, is no less manifest from Matt. 28.20. and 1 Cor. 11.26. In fine, he proves
there be only two Sacraments, by this Argu∣ment, more cannot be produced out of Scripture, as shall be proved, solutione objectionum er∣go, &c. Now to reflect how judiciously, and learned∣ly M. Menzeis here proves from Scripture there be two Sacraments, and two only. 1. He doth not affirm the Word Sacrament to be in Scripture. 2. Of all the Definition or Description he brings, not so much as one Particle is affirmed in Scripture to be Essential to a Sacrament: (I do not dispute at present how much of it is true in it self, or granted by us) I only desire it may be made clear from Scripture, as clearly con∣taining all Fundamentals of the Protestant Re∣ligion, which is the only thing in question. But nothing is proved by him, save only that Baptism, and the Lords Supper are of Divine Institution, as many other things be, which are not Sacraments. To prove they are Seals of the promises of Salvation, he cites for Baptism, Act. 2.28, 29. The words omitted by him, I hear set down. But Peter said to them, do pen∣nance, and be every one of you Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for remission of your sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: for to you is the promise, and to your children, and to all that are far off, whomsoever the Lord our God shall call. No word here Baptism is a Seal
of the promises of Salvation. It is said indeed to be given for the Remission of sins, and that to whom it is given, they receive the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which both Protestants deny; maintaining there is no virtue in Baptism to confer either of these Effects. It is said further, that to the Jews and their children, yea to all that God shall call, promise is made, but that Baptism is a Seal of the promise of Salvation, neither the Text, nor any consequence he draw∣eth from it doth evince it. The way he proves from Scripture, the Lords Supper to be a Seal of the promises of Salvation, is rare; for that says he, it is called the New Testament, which we must acknowledge to be no proper Speech, but to be only so called, because it is, Sigillum foederis. This is his Commentary on the Text; but what a necessary and clear consequence is this? If ever such a consequence as clearly deduced from Scripture was heard of, I leave it to the Reader to Judg; So clearly are the Sacraments, and main Fundamentals of the Protestant Religion, contained in Scripture, or clearly deduced from it. But M. Menzeis thought it (as it seems by his so long a digression in his last paper) a more easie task to impugne our Sacraments (though no part of the present work) then to prove his own. No Scripture, Councils, or Fathers hold out seven Sacraments. Answer, yes Sir, both
Scripture, Councels, Fathers do; not as bare signs with you, but as visible or sensible signs of the invisible grace they produce in the Soul, as instituted by Christ our Lord, for our San∣ctification. In this sense, there be seven Sacra∣ments set down in the Gospel, Decreed by Councls, approved by the Fathers. And 1▪ That the Fathers did so understand a Sa∣crament, is confessed by Protestants, who even dare censure the Fathers for this: As Musculus loc. comm. p. 299. did S. Augustine, for affirm∣ing inconsiderately, that the Sacraments of the New Testament give salvation; Zwinglius, Tom. 2. de Bapt. fol. 70. All the Antient Do∣ctors for supposing the water of Baptism to purge sin. The Century Writers, Cent. 2. C. 4. Col. 47. In particular censures, S. Clement Dis∣ciple of the Apostles, and Justin Martyr, for thinking Regeneration not only to be signified, but wrought by Baptism: and in the 3. Cent. C. 4. S. Cyprian, for teaching that the person Baptizing doth give Sanctity, and the Holy Ghost, to the Baptized. 2 That such a number of visible or sensible signs instituted by Christ, for conferring grace, and taking away sin, is set down in Scripture, is clear from the following Texts. For Baptisme, Acts 2.38. Be every one of you baptized for the Remission of Sins. Ephes. 5.25.
Christ loved the Church, cleansing it by the La∣ver of Water. For Confirmation, Acts 17. Then they did im∣pose their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 1.22. And he that confirmeth us with you in Christ, and hath anoyled us, God who also hath sealed us, and given the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts. For Pennance, S. John 20.23. Whose sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven, &c. Acts 16.18. And many of them that believed, came confessing their deeds. For the Eucharist, S. Matt. 26. S. Mark. 14. S. Luke 22. This is my body, &c. S. John 6. I am the living bread, I am the bread of life, he that eateth of this Bread, shall live for ever. For extream Unction, S. James 8.14. If any be sick, let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him, anoyling him with Oyl, in the name of our Lord, &c. And if he be in sins, they shall be remitted him. S. Mark 6.13. And they anointed with Oyl many that were sick, and healed them. For Holy Order, 2 Tim. 1.6. I admonish thee, that thou resuscitate the grace of God, which is in thee, by the imposition of my hands. For Matrimony, Ephes. 5.32. This Sacrament is great. In all which places of Scripture we have mani∣festly the External Sign, either called a Sacra∣ment,
or to it annexed the forgiving of sins, or conferring of Life and Grace, which makes it a Sacrament of the New Law. So that there is no lurking here under ambiguity of words, as M. Menzeis will have it. However Hereticks vary in explaining Scripture, the Word of God doth not vary, nor his Church in understand∣ing it. 3. As for the Fathers and Councils, See the Summary of Controversies, of the efficacy and number of Sacraments, where the places are marked, and the Manual of Controversie, Art. 28. where both Scripture and Fathers are ci∣ted at length. Luther himself de Captiv. Ba∣byl. granteth S. Dennis Disciple of S. Paul to stand for seven Sacraments. S. Augustine hath them all. Baptism in his 28. Epistle to S. Hierom. Confirmation in his second Book against Pe∣tilian, C. 104▪ Pennance in his 2. Sermon upon the Ps. 101. Eucharist, in his 26. Treatise of S. John, and his Ep. 120. to Honoratus, where he calls it both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament. Ex∣tream Unction in his 5. Book of Baptism, C. 5. Holy Orders, in his 2. Book against Parmen. C. 13. Matrimony in his Book of Faith and good Works, C. 7. And de bono Conjug. C. 24. So that, when he speaks of two Sacraments of the Church (Gemina Ecclesiae Sacramenta) he understands there is two chief ones, to wit
Baptism by reason of its necessity to salvation. And the Eucharist for its Excellency, and ne∣cessity both in his opinion. But to insist fur∣ther on this here, is neither to the present pur∣pose, or any part of what I did at first under∣take. M. Menzeis running here and there, as in a Labyrinth, to shew the fathers take not alwayes the word Sacrament in the strict and proper sense, doth only involve himself in un∣extricable difficulties, standing to his ground of Scripture clear in Fundamentals, which no where defines what properly a Sacrament is, or any where resolves and determinates what may be ambiguous and doubtful, either in it self, or the Fathers. How then shall we be assured of this without an Infallible Visible Judge? When some take even the clearest Scriptures and Wri∣tings of the Fathers in one sense, some in an∣other. But the Catholick Church having re∣ceived the Sacraments from Christ and his A∣postles, and constantly Administrated them in the sense, and for the ends they were In∣stituted, hath sufficiently declared both the Number and Nature of Sacraments, accord∣ing to the Tradition of the Apostles, and constant practise of the same Church, which is an infallible Ground to us, whilest all He∣reticks, with M. Menzeis are so intricate in the present Question, by the Diversity of Notions, they either find in Authours, or fan∣cy
to themselves, (some admitting not only seven, sayes Mr. Menzeis, but seventeen Sa∣craments, some, seven times seven, some se∣venty seven, yea, and more) that they lye still either in the Lurking Holes of Obscuri∣ty and Ambiguity, the better to Palliate their Errours, or wander up and down in their un∣setled Belief, following their Fallible Conje∣ctures, uncertain Opinions, and Groundless Faith.
SECT. VI. Mr. Menzeis second Ground of the Protestant Religion, Viz. The Doctrine of the Church in the first three Centuries or Ages, proved no Ground to them, yea their very Ruine. AS Historiographers remark, the greatest Empires have begun to decay, how soon they left off to ground their great∣ness on new Conquests: And the Naturalists observe, that Trees, and Plants do presently fade, when their Roots do not spread as the Branches spring up: So the Protestant Religion should have instantly been chocked in its Rise, and as smothered in the Cradle; If Protestants stand∣ing constantly to their first Principle, had still rejected the Doctrine of the Church, under the specious pretence of adhering only to the pure and naked Word as a Ground most pure and
clear, Scriptures making▪ so clearly against them. Wherefore, though the first Reform∣ers (as I shall presently shew) did disclaim the Doctrine of the Church in any Age after the A∣postles, as infallible, or Ground of Faith, dis∣claim the Fathers, disclaim Miracles, disclaim a Succession from any: Yet others after the first heat of passion had a little relented, finding all this most disgraceful, and a most evident Conviction of their Errours, and fearing their Religions both fall and ruine, if not speedily prop∣ped; claim a Succession, though from Old con∣demned Heresies, with M. Menzeis here, from the Waldenses, Wickliffians, Hussits, as we have seen: Cite the Fathers, though either to no purpose, or else corruptedly with Du Plessis, so evidently confuted by the Cardinal Du Peron, pretend to Miracles with M. Pool in his Nullity of the Romish Faith, though falsly, most Pro∣testants disowning Miracles since the Apostles time, and all the world witnessing, it did never see a Miracle amongst them; yea they grant in fine, the diffusive body of the Church to be in∣fallible in believing, but not the Representative, or Pastors even assembled in a General Coun∣cil, Infallible in Teaching, with M. Menzeis again here: Who upon this gives us for a second Ground of the Protestant Religon; The Do∣ctrine of the Church in the first three Centuries or Ages.
The sole reason he gives for the Churches Doctrine, as being a Ground of Faith at that time is, because, if the Catholick Religion was not then purely conserved in her, it was no where to be found (ab sit says he blasphemia) which without blasphemy cannot be thought. Whereupon I first reflect, that if it be blasphemy to deny, the Ca∣tholick Religion must always be purely conser∣ved in some Church; many chief Protestants surely speak open blasphemy, who most boldly affirm before the Reformation made by Luther and Calvin, no Church to have conserved true Religion in its purity at all. Luther comment. in 1 Cor. 1.15. I was the first to whom God vouchsafed to reveal these Doctrines which are now Preached; this praise they cannot take from us, that we were the first that brought light to the world: Without our help, no man had ever learned one word of the Ghospel. This M. Wotton both acknowledgeth and confirmeth in Exam. Jur. Rom. Luther might well say he was the first, a Son without a Father, a Schollar without a Master, &c. Calvin in an Epistle of his to Melancthon, It doth not a little concern us (sayes he) that not the least suspition of any Discord risen amongst us descends to Posterity, for it were a thing more then absurd, after we have been constrained to make separation from the whole world, if we in our beginning should also divide from one another. Chillingworth, Ch. 5. Sect. 55. as for the Ex∣ternal
Communion of the visible Church, we have without Scruple formerly granted, that Protestants did forsake it. Bucer. p. 660. All the world erred (he speaks before the Reformation) in that Article of the Real Presence. Bibliander, in orat. ad princip. Germ. c. 72. it is without all question, that from the time of Gregory the great, the Pope is the Antichrist, who with his abomination hath made drunk all Kings and people from the highest to the lowest. Brochard, on the second Ch. Rev. p. 4. when the first assault was made upon the Papacy by Luther, the knowledge of Christ was wanting in all and eve∣ry one of his members. White, in his defence, C. 37. Pa. 136. Popery was a Leprosie breeding so universally in the Church, that there was no visible company of men, appearing in the world, free from it. Bennet Morgentern, in his Treatise of the Church, calls it ridiculous, to say any before Luther had the purity of the Gospel. Simon Voyon, Cat. Doct. in his Epistle to the Reader, says, when Pope Boniface was installed, then was that universal Apostacy from the Faith, which was foretold by Paul. M. Jewel upon the Revelation fol. 110. The truth was then unheard of, when Luther and Zwingle came to preach the Ghospel. Febustian Francus, in his Epistle of abrogating
Ecclesiastical Statutes, says, for certain, through the work of the Antichrist, the External Church, toge∣ther with the faith and Sacraments vanished away presently after the Apostles departure, and for these thousand and four hundred years, the Church hath been no where External and Visible. From all which Testimones of most renown∣ed Protestants, yea, and of the very first Re∣formers is evidently proved: First, that they did not think any visible Church to have conser∣ved at all times, the purity of the Gospel, which M. Menzeis calls blasphemy to deny. Second∣ly, that they claim not a Succession from any that went before them (except only from the Apostles) what ever later Protestants do falsly pretend. Thirdly, that they own no more the diffusive body of the Church infallible then the Representative, seeing no Church prosessing the Doctrine they did teach, is acknowledged by them for many hundred years before the Refor∣mation. Fourthly, That Popery was the only Religion generally prevailing, and openly pro∣fessed, for no less time then fourteen hundred years before Luther. Fifthly, how well M. Men∣zeis agreeth with other Protestants in this his second Ground of Faith. You shall presently, God willing, hear both greater and better witnesses deposing against him; but first I ask what peculiar reason he has, why the Church in her childhood, and younger age,
should be a ground of Faith, and not after∣wards, and in her full maturity? as we grant her, the fulness of Divine Wisdom even from her birth, which did not increase by age, so by age it cannot decay. We shall now presently see, how like the Protestant Church is to that of the three first Centuries; but before this, I would know, why M. Menzeis gives her Do∣ctrine rather for a ground, then in following times? Is there any peculiar promise made to her, any particular reason militates for her, or any testimonies of the Scriptures, or Fathers gi∣ven to her in one time, rather then in another? was her Doctrine then purer? her Condition more flourishing, her authority greater? Doth not M. Menzeis grounding his Faith upon the Do∣ctrine of the Church in any age after the Apo∣stles, confirm that Romish Tenet of the Church Doctrine as a Ground in other Ages, by pari∣ty of reason? Secondly, I reflect that M. Menzeis, who will admit of no Infallible Visible Judg of Con∣troversie, of no Infallible Tradition not contain∣ed in Scripture, nor of any Assembly of the Fa∣thers, and Pastor of the Church in a General Council as infallible in their Decrees: Here either acknowledgeth the Records of the Ecclesi∣astick History, and Writings of the Fathers, as witnessing infallibly to us, the Doctrine of these ages, or else must grant he hath no infal∣lible
assurance that this his second ground of Faith is solid and Infallible. There being no o∣ther way left us (without particular Revelati∣on) to know what Doctrine the Church did teach, and believe in the first three Ages, save only the Writings of the Fathers, and Tradition of the present Church; which consequently M. Menzeis must either here own as Infallible, or avouch he builds his Faith upon a sandy and fal∣lible ground. The first Reformers standing better to their own Principles then he, and of much greater sincerity and learning, grant plainly the Fathers of the Primitive Church, to hold many things in opposition to them. Luther L. de servo arbitr. C. 2. and in his Table Conferences C. de patrib. Eccl. The Authority of the Fathers is not to be regarded; in the Writings of Hierome, there is not a word of true Faith in Christ, & sound Religion: Tertullian is very Super∣stitious: I have holden Origen long since accursed: of Chrysostome, I make no account: Basil is of no worth, he is wholly a Monk, I weigh not him a hair; Cyprian is a weak Divine, affirming there yet further, that the Apology of Melancthon doth far excell all the Doctors of the Church, yea even Augustine himself. Calvin L. 3. Inst. C. 5. It was a custome 1300. years ago (that is in the second age) to pray for the dead, but all of that time,
(says he) I confess were carried away with Er∣rour. And in the fourth Book of his Institutions, Chapter 9. he will stand to no Decision of Coun∣cils, Fathers, Bishops, but try all by Scripture alone; granting generally all the Western Churches to have defended Popery, Resp. ad Versipell. p. 134. Melancthon on the first Cor. 3. speaks plain, presently from the beginning of the Church, the antient Fathers obsced the Doctrine of Justice by Faith, encreased Ceremonies, and devised new Worships. In like manner, Peter Martyr 1. devotis p. 477. that in the Church, Errours did begin, Imme∣diately after the Apostles; and therefore as long as we stand to Councils and Fathers, we shall be al∣wayes in the same Errours. Whitaker cont. 2. q. 5. C. 7. it is true which Cal∣vin and the Centurists have written, that the anti∣ent Church did Err in many things, as touching Limbo, free Will, merit of Works, &c. Chemnitius in Exam. conc. trid. pa. 200. most of the Fathers did not dispute, but avouch, that the souls of Martyrs heard the petitions of those who prayed to them, they went to the Monuments of Mar∣tyrs, and Invocated Martyrs by name. D. Fulk in his confutation of Purgatory, grants Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierome, Augustine do wit∣ness, that Sacrifice for the Dead is a Tradition of
the Apostles; yea in his retentive, says, Prayer for the dead prevailed within the first 300. years. And in his Answer to a counterfeit Catholick, That Pope Victor in the second Age, did practise Supremacy in the Church. The Centurists do reprehend Cyprian, Origen, Tertullian in the third Century; and S. Gregory Nazianzen in the fourth, for teaching Peters Pri∣macy; as they do also S. Cyprian in the third Century, of Superstition for saying, that the Priest (at Mass) holds the place of Christ, and offers up Sacrifice to God the Father. Sacerdotem Cypria∣nus inquit, vice Christi fungi & deo patri sacrifici∣um offerre. And generally confess, the Fathers of the third Age do witness, and that not in obscure terms invocation of Saints; videas, in doctorum hujus soeculi Scriptis non obscura vestigia invocati∣onis Sanctorum. They say further in the second Century, S. Irenaeus admitteth free Will, even in Spiritual actions, and that S. Clement every where asserteth it, so that the Doctors and Parstors of that Age, were in this manner of blindness, say they, reckoning out in this number, S. Cyprian, Theophilus, Tertullian, Origen, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justine, Irenaeus, Athenagoras, Tatianus, &c. As doth al∣so Abraham Scultetus with them. Yea Doctor Humphrey in his Jesuitisms, pa. 2. and else where Eccl. C. 15. says, it cannot be denyed, but that S. Irenaeus, S. Clement, and other Fathers of the first and second age called Apostolicks (for that they
were Disciples of the Apostles, or immediately followed them) have in their Writings the Opini∣on of free Will, and Merit of Works; The Cen∣ury Writers, and Scultetus Tax for the same Clement of Alexandria, S. Cyprian, Justin Mar∣tyr, &c. In the third Century, they say, Origen made good Works, the cause of Justification, and in the 5. accuse, S. Chrysostome for handling the Doctrine of Justification impurely, as attributing Merit to Works. M. Whitaker saith, that not only Cyprian, but al∣most all the most holy Fathers of that time were in that Errour, as thinking so to pay the pain due to sin, and to satisfie to Gods Justice, in so far as Lu∣ther on the 4. ch. to the Gallathians calls for this, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, and other Fathers Justice-workers of the old Papacy. And M. Wotton in his defence of M. Perkins, forbeareth not to censure, for this very Point of Merit, the un∣doubted and confessed Writings of Ignatius, Dis∣ciple of S. John. Chemnitius in his Examine, par. 4. p. 20. affirm∣eth the Antient Fathers Erred in making Pilgri∣mages to Relicks of Saints; and Osiander with the Centurists, Cent. 4. that S. Hierome did foolishly contend, that the Relicks of Saints ought to be wor∣shipped. For owning Traditions, Chemnitius in his Exam. Par. 1. p. 87.89.90. reproves Clement of Alex∣andria; Origen, Epiphanius, Hierome, Ambrose,
Basil, Maximus, Damacene, and M. Whitaker, de Sacr. Script. S. Chrysostome as speaking inconside∣rately when he admitteth them. D. Reynolds in his Concla. 1. p. 689. somewhat more mode∣rate, leaves the censuring of S. Epiphanius, for this to the Church. M. Whitgift in his defence against Cartwrights Reply, grants Ignatius Disciple of the Apostles, to have said of Hereticks, They do not admit the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sins. And M. Beacon in his Treatise, the Relicks of Rome, says the Mass was begotten, conceived, and born anon after the Apostles time, if it be true, what Historiogra∣phers write. Calvin L. 1. Inst. C. 4. confesseth in the Pri∣mative Church, Confession, Pennance, and Ab∣solution by the Priests: and the Century Wri∣ters, that in the times of S. Cyprian and Tertul∣lian, there was used private confession, even of thoughts, and lesser sins, then so commanded as ne∣cessary. Where any judicious Reader may evi∣dently see, how by chief Protestant Authours, both the Primitive Church, and the Fathers are censured for many Errours. Yea and for the very same, which are most objected against the Romish Church, a most invincible Argument from the confession of our Adversaries; That the Church and Fathers of the three first Ages, did teach the self same Doctrine with the pre∣sent
Roman Church, and with Pope Pius in his confession of Faith in all those Points quo∣ted by them, Free Will, Merit of Works, In∣vocation of Saints, honouring of Relicks, Pray∣er and Sacrifice for the Dead, S. Peters Prima∣cy amongst the Apostles, the Popes Suprema∣cy in the Church, Mass, Traditions, the Real Presence, Confession, Pennance, Absolution, &c. So that if M. Menzeis will stand to his own word, and trust the Writings of his brethren, He is here again engaged to turn Papist. Many more such Quotations could I pro∣duce from chief Protestant Writers, acknow∣ledging both the Church and Fathers, of the first three Ages, holding most controverted Tenets, flatly against Protestants. And yet so confident M. Menzeis is, he dare take the Church Doctrine at that time, for a Ground of the Pro∣testant Religion, and this no doubt to shew the deepness of his Learning, and how well he is versed in Antiquity, till presently we hear the Fathers themselves speaking, the better to make both his Weakness and Igorance appear. But before I enter upon this, I remark M. Menzeis in his 8. paper, says, we agree with Prote∣stants in all their Positive Tenets, and only in their Negatives disagree. How true this is, I do not now dispute; yet must here reflect, that all chief Heresies, for the most part, with that of Protestants have ever consisted in Negations,
and in denying some Points of Faith, general∣ly received in the Church. Sabellius denyed three persons in the God-head, Eutiches two Na∣tures in Christ; Nestorius in Christ one Per∣son: The Monothelites two wills in Christ, as two Natures: The Arians, Christ to be con∣substantial with his Father: The Macedonians, the consubstantiality of the Holy Ghost: Mar∣cion, that Baptism in the Church should be con∣ferred but once, The Novatians, that sinners af∣ter Baptism could be absolved upon Repentance; and even such Heresies Protestants most claim to; as the Grecians deny the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son; the Wal∣denses deny Princes and Magistrates to conserve their Digities and Power when fallen in mortal sin: The Hussits deny that the predestinate could sin; the Albigenses, Marriages to be lawful; the Wickliffians, Free Will, and so forth. Ne∣gatio est Malignantis naturae, say the Philoso∣phers, Negations are of a Malignant Nature, whence we see, that as Atheism consists in de∣nying God, so Heresies are most in Negations, as flowing from the Spirit of Pride, contradi∣ction, Rebellion. However it is time we shew what conformi∣ty there is betwixt Protestants Negative Tenets, and the Doctrine of the Church in the first three Centuries, or Ages; M. Menzeis provoking so confidently his Adversary to bring any Essen∣tial
difference from the Authentick writings of these Fathers, and upon this engaging to turn Pa∣pist. I do not here question further then I have done in my second reflection, how he who admits of no Infallible Visible Judge, can be sufficiently assured of their Authentick Writings, for if he take this only upon their conformity with Scripture, they can make no peculiar Ground to him, rather then other mens Writings, having the like conformity with it, or can they be cal∣ed properly a distinct Ground from it; But ha∣ving seen how many chief Protestants disown the most antient Fathers, chalenge them of ma∣nyfold Errours; censure their Doctrine (a most strong conviction against M. Menzeis, that they take not their Writings for a Ground) let us hear themselves deposing clearly in our fa∣vour against him, and see if they who have confounded so many Atheists, convinced so ma∣ny Infidels, converted so many Hereticks, may even happily prevail with M. John. I cite here only the Fathers in the first three Centuries af∣ter Christ, as M. Menzeis makes only his ap∣peal to them: In which Ages, the Church being still under persecution, had not indeed so ma∣ny Writers as in following times, to witness her Doctrine against all Hereticks: Yet you shall God willing see how clearly the chiefest of them dissent from Protestants in all contro∣verted
Tenets, and most disgracefully bely him. The Fathers of the first three ages clearly speaking against Prote∣stants in all Chief Controverted Tenets. I Begin even at what is most Principal, to wit, the Popes Supremacy, this Potestants de∣ny. But in the first Age, S. Denis de divinis nominibus, C. 3. calls S. Peter first Bishop of Rome, the Supreme and most antient top of Divines. Where both Primacy and Supremacy is given to him. S. Clement Disciple of S. Peter in his first Epistle, declares him both the ground stone of the Church, and the most powerful of the A∣postles. S. Ignatius Disciple of S. John, in his Epistle to the Romans, extolling their Church, calls her, The Church that presides at Rome. In the second Age, S. Irenaeus l. 3. contra Va∣lent. C. 3. says, the Romish Church is the greatest
and most antient: And again, l. 3. C. 3. all Churches round about ought to resort to the Roman Church, by reason of her more powerful Principality. In the third Age, Zepherinus Pope, in his E∣pistle to the Bishops of Sicily decreed, That the greater causes of the Church, were to be determin∣ed by the Apostolick Sea, because so the Apostles and ther Successors had ordained. In the third Age, Origen on the 6. Ch. to the Rom. says, The chief charge of feeding Christs Sheep was given to S. Peter, and the Church founded upon him. In the same Age, S. Cyprian Ep. ad Jul. We hold Peter the Head and Root of the Church; and again, Ep. 55. he calls the Church of Rome S. Pe∣ters Chair. Yea in the second Century, Aman∣dus Polonus, M. Spark, and M. Whitaker, (though Protestants) confess, that Victor then Bishop of Rome (whom M. Whitgift calls a godly Bishop) carried himself as Pope, or Head of the Church. So well has Protestant Doctrine in this Point, a Ground in rhe Fathers of the first three Ages; that Danaeus a Protestant, in his Answer to Bel∣larmine, acknowledgeth Soveraign Authority to have been practised by the Popes of the third Age, the Centurists, Cent. 3. that Tertullian did think the keys to be committed chiefly to S. Pe∣ter, and the Church to be built on him; and S. Cyprian to have taught, that the Roman Church ought to be acknowledged of all others, the Mo∣ther Church.
Now shall all this be called Protestant Do∣ctrine, that S. Peter was Head and Root of the Church, that the Church was founded upon him, that the chief charge of Christs Flock was given to him, that he is the Supreme a∣mongst Divines; that the Church of Rome is his Chair, which for this hath a more power∣ful Principality, as greatest, so that the greater causes in the Church ought to be decided by her? where by parts, all the Controversie of the Popes Supremacy is holden out against them. Secondly, Protestants deny we should believe any thing not contained in Scripture, upon Apo∣stolical Tradition conserved in the Church. But in the first age, S. Denis, Eccl. Hierarch. C. l. speaking of the Apostles, says, These our first Captains of Priestly Function, did deliver to us the chiefest and most Substantial Points, partly in written, partly unwritten Institutions. In the same Age, S. Ignatius, apud Euseb. l. 3. Hist. C. 36. doth exhort all to stick to the Traditi∣ons of the Apostles. In the second Age, S. Irenaeus, L. 3. C. 4. what if the Apostles had left no Scriptures at all, ought we not to follow the Order of Tradition, which they have delivered unto those, to whom they did commit their Churches? and to which assent many Barba∣rous Nations who believe in Christ without Chara∣cter or Ink.
In the same Age, Origen Hom. 5. in lib. num. there are many things in Ecclesiastical Traditions which all ought to do, and on the 6. Ch. to the Ro∣mans, he sayes, to baptize Infants is one. In the third Age, Tertullian de praescr. teach∣eth Hereticks are to be confuted rather by Tradition then Scripture; and L. de Cor. mil. speaking of the Ceremonies of Baptism, the Sign of the Cross, Sacrifice for the Dead, &c. he addeth, of these, and such like things, if thou require a ground in Scripture, thou shalt find none: Tradi∣tion did begin them, Custome has confirmed their Practice, and Faith doth observe them. In the same Age S. Cyprian l. 1. Ep. 12. says, he that is Baptized, ought to be anointed, but of this Unction, there is no mention in Scripture; and in his second B. Ep. 3. he admonisheth Water should be mixed with Wine in the Chalice at Mass, upon a like Tradition from the Apostles. See in what I have cited heretofore, how the Fathers have re∣ceived the Scriptures upon Tradition, and ma∣ny most substantial Points with it, and upon due consideration of all this, let any one judg, whether the Fathers of the first three Ages, in these their most Authentick Writings I know, do make a ground for Protestant or Catholick Doctrine, speaking so plainly, the chiefest & most Substantial Points of our Faith, were delivered partly in Written, and partly in Unwritten In∣stitutions, exhorting us to stick to Traditions
conserved in the Church, which serve for con∣version of Infidels, conviction of Hereticks, and generally ought to be kept by all. 3. Protestants deny the unbloody Sacrifice of Christs body and blood offered up to God in the Mass. Yet in the first Age, the very Liturgies of the Apostles are extant, and in that of S. James, we offer unto thee (O Lord) the unbloody Sacrifice for our sins: And S. Andrew in the Book of his Passion, written by his Disciples, sayes unto the Tyrant. I sacrifice daily the Immaculate Lamb to Almighty God. And in the same Age, S. Clement, Ep. 3. It is not lawful to celebrate Masses in other places, but in these wherein the proper Bishop shall appoint, these things the Apostles receieved from our Lord, and de∣livered to you. S. Ignatius, Ep. ad Smyrnens. It is not lawful without a Bishop to offer, or Sacrifice, or Celebrate Mass. In the second Age, S. Irenaeus l. 4. ad u. heres. C. 32. calls the Body and Blood of Christ, the Oblation of the New Testament, which the Church having re∣ceived from the Apostles, offereth to God through the whole world. And Tertullian, l. de Veland. virg. it is not per∣mitted that women should teach, or speak in the Church, nor Baptize, nor Offer. Origen hom. 13. in Exod. you think your selves guilty, and unwor∣thy
if any part of the Consecrated Host be lost through your negligence. S. Hippolitus, Orat. de Antichr. bringeth in Christ speaking thus, Come you Bishops and Priests, who have daily offered my precious Body and Blood. How clear are the following Fa∣thers, S. Epiphanius, S. Chrysostome, S. Athanasius, S. Basil, &c. with S. Augustine for this? as even in the third Age, S. Cyprian Serm. de coena. dom. the Eucharist is a Holocaust to purge our sins, and in his Epistle, ad Cyrill. he calls it a Sacrifice se∣ven times. 4. Protestants deny the Real Presence, and Transubstantion. But in the first age, S. Ignatius in his Epistle ad Smyrnenses (often cited by Eusebius, Atha∣nasius, S. Jerome, Theodoret and other antients) speaking of the Saturnian Hereticks, says, They admit not of Eucharists and Oblations, because they do not confess the Eucharist to be our Saviours flesh, which suffered for our sins; and in his Epistle to the Romans, I do not delight in any corruptible food, nor in the pleasures of this life, I desire the bread of God, the heavenly bread, which is the flesh of Christ the Son of God. S. Denis Areop. l. de Eccl. Hierarch. C. 3. O most Divine and holy Sacrament, vouchsafe mer∣cifully to open the Veils of those signifying Signs, wherein thou hidest thy self, and appear plainly unto us.
In the second Age, S. Irenaeus, l. 4. C. 34. di∣sputing against the Hereticks, who denyed Christ to be the Son of God; asks how it shall be manifested unto them, that bread upon which thanks are given, is the body of our Lord, and the Challice, his Blood, if they say he is not the Son of the Maker of the world. S. Cyprian serm. de coena dom. The Bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, being changed not in shape, but in nature by the Omnipotency of the word is made flesh. In the third Age, Origen, We eat the bread of∣fered by Prayer, made a certain holy Body. And a∣gain, hom. 5. in div. loca Evang. When thou re∣ceivest the holy Food, thou Eatest and Drinkest the Body and Blood of our Lord, then the Lord en∣treth under thy roof, &c. In the same Age, Tertullian l. 4. contra Mar∣cion. C. 40. The Bread taken and distributed to his Disciples he made his body. What can be said more clearly then all this, either for the Real Presence, or Transubstantiation, which is nothing but the change of the Bread in Christs Body, here so plainly asserted. Add to this, for communion under one kind, denyed by Protestants, it is said to have been so given to Infants; by S. Denis l. Eccl. Hierach. C. ult. to both Infants and sick, by S. Cyprian, serm. de lapsis n. 10. and by Tertullian l. ad Uxorem, to have been carried to private houses, yea and over
Sea by Eusebius l. 5. hest. which could not be done, but under one kind. 5. Protestants deny purgatory and prayers for the dead. But in the first Age, S. Denis Eccl. Hierarch. part. 3. C. 7. says the Venerable Pre∣late approaching powereth forth his holy Prayer up∣on the dead, by that Prayer he doth beseech the Di∣vine clemency to forgive all the sins of the dead com∣mitted trhough humane Infirmities, and to place him in light, and in the Region of the living. In the same Age, S. Clement l. 8. Const. C. 48. has a long Prayer accustomed to be said for the dead. Again the same S. Clem. Ep. 1. de S. Petro, tells us, S. Pe∣ter taught them among other works of mercy, to pray and give alms for the dead. And in the Liturgy of S. James Apostle, we have Prayers also for them. Tertullian l. de Corona. militis, numbreth prayer for the dead amongst the Traditions of the Apostles, and speaks thus, l. de anima C. 58. Seeing we understand that prison which the Gospel demonstrates to be places below, and the last far∣thing, we interpret every small fault there to be pu∣nished, by the delay of the Resurrection, no man will doubt but that the soul doth recompence something in the places below, Ibid. we make yearly Oblations, says he, for the dead. Origen hom. 6. in Exod. he that is saved, is saved by fire, so that if a man have something mixed with Lead, that the fire doth purge and resolve, that all may become pure Gold.
S. Cyprian, l. 4. Ep. 2. It is one thing to be purged a long time for sins by Torment, and clean∣sed by a long fire, and another thing to purge all sins by patience and sufferings. What fire is more clear then S. Augustine and others be with S. Cy∣prian and Origen here for a purging fire? I know Protestants Expound that place of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. v. 13, 14. of the fire of Tribulation in this life, but not so, S. Augustine in Ps. 37. where citing the words of the Apostle, he shall be safe, yet so as by fire, says, and because it is said, he shall be safe, that fire is contemned, yet that fire shall be more grievous then what ever a man can suffer in this life; and then entring in a most fervent Pray∣er continues, Purge me, O Lord, in this life, that I need not that mending fire. 6. Protestants deny Invocation and honouring of Saints. But in the first Age, S. Denis eccl. Hie∣rarch. C. 7. says, I constantly affirm with the Di∣vine Scripture, that the Prayers of the Saints are very profitable for us in this life, when a man is inflamed with a desire to imitate the Saints, and di∣strusting his own weakness, he betakes himself to any Saint, beseeching him to be his helper and petitioner to God for him, he shall obtain by that means very great assistance. In the same Age S. Clement l. Apost. Constit. 5. We command you, that the Martyrs be in all honor among you, even as James the Bishop, and Stephen our fellow Deacon have been amongst us, for God
has made them blessed, and holy men have honoured them. In the second Age, S. Cornelius Ep. 1. ex∣horteth to beseech God and our Lord Jesus Christ, that his holy Apostles making Intercession for you, he would purge you from your sins. And Justin Martyr Apol. 2. We worship and adore both God the Father and his Son, &c. as also the company of his followers, and the good Angels, and we worship them both by words and deeds, and in truth even as we our selves have been taught and instructed. In the third Age S. Cyprian l. 4. Ep. 9. The sufferings and days of Martyrs we celebrate with a yearly remembracne. And Origen in Lament. I will begin to fall down on my knees, and pray to all his Saints to succour me, who dare not ask God, for the exceeding great∣ness of my sins. O Saints of my God, with tears I beseech you to fall down before his mercy for me a wretch. 7. Protestants deny the use of the sign of the Cross, and Images. But in the first Age, S. Denis l. 2. Eccl. Hierarch. c. 2. The sign of the Cross is so much honoured, that it is often used both in baptism and other Sacra∣ments. In the same Age, S. Martial Ep. ad Burdegal. Remember the Cross of our Lord, keep it in your mind, speak often of it, have it in the Sign, for it is your in∣vincible Armour against Satan. Tertullian l. de
Coron. milit. c. 3. In every thing we do, we sign our forehead with the sign of the Cross, of which practice, Tradition is the defender, Custome the con∣server, and Faith the observer. And in his time he sayes l. 2. de pudicit. The Image of Christ bearing a Lamb, was graven on the Chalices used in Churches; And how famous is the memory of many more Images in the first three Ages, as that of our Saviour sent to Abgarus Prince of Edessa, of which see Evagrius l. 4. c. 26. Mataphra∣stes, in the life of Constantine, S. John Damascon in his book of Images. That which the woman cured of a Flux set up in brass at Caesaraea Phi∣lippi; as witness Eusebius in his 7. Book Ch. 14. So Zomenus l. 5. c. 20. and Damascene again, Ibid. a third made by Nicodemus, which being afterward taken by the Jews, and in mockery crucified, was honored by God with many Miracles, as is related by S. Athanasius, or some other most an∣tient Author of the Book Intituled, of the Passion of our Lords Image. Besides these, Theodorus Lect. l. 1. Collectan. maketh mention of one of our bles∣sed Lady, drawn by S, Luke▪ Eusebius relateth, that he did see many antient Images of Christ placed betwixt S. Peter and S. Paul, as much wit∣nesseth S. Augustine l. 1. De cons. Evan. c. 10. Da∣masus in the life of S. Silvester, writeth that Con∣stantine in the place where he was Baptized, E∣rected Silver Images of our Saviour and S. John Baptist, as also others in the Church of S. John
Lateran, which the first Christian Emperour had never done, nor S. Silvester permitted, if the practice of the Church from the Apostles had not been such. 8. Protestants deny Free will, after the fall of Adam, but in the first Age, S. Clement l. 3. recog∣nit. Asketh how doth God judge every man by his deeds according to truth; if he have not in his pow∣er to do what is commanded, if this be held, all things are frustrate, in vain shall the study be of following better things; In the same Age S. Igna∣tius Ep. ad Magn. If any man do wickedly, he is a man of the Devil, not made so by Nature, but by his own free will. In the second Age, S. Justin Martyr in Apol. Unless mankind can both fly foul and undecent things, and follow fair and good things of his own free will; it is without all cause and blame of theirs, howsoever things be done. S. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 72. not only in works, but even in Faith hath Almighty God reserved liberty of will to Man, saying, be it to thee according to thy Faith. In the third Age, S. Cyprian in Deut. & l. 3. ad Quirin. c. 52. The freedome of believing or not be∣lieving, is placed in the will. In the same Age Origen hom. 12. in Num. O Is∣rael, what doth thy Lord God require of thee? let them be ashamed of these words, who deny free will in man; how should God require of man, unless
man had in his power, what to offer to God re∣quiring. 9. Protestants deny merit of Works. But in the first Age, S. Ignatius Ep. ad Rom. says, Give me leave to become the food of beasts, that by that means I might merit and win God. In the second, Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. We think that men who by works have shewed themselves wor∣thy, &c. shall by their Merits live and Reign with him. In the third, S. Cyprian l. de Unit. eccl. We must obey his Precepts and Admonitions, that our Merits may receive their reward. And in his Serm. de Eleem. If the day of our return shall find us unloadned, swift, and running in the way of good works, our Lord will not fail to reward our merits. 10. Protestants deny the possibility of keep∣ing the Commandements, which S. Basil. orat. in illud attende tibi; calls a wicked thing to say. S. Hierome on the 5. of S. Matthew, Blasphemy: S. Augustine, serm. 61. de tempore, a denial both of the justice and holiness of God. In the the third Age, Tertullian as cited by the Centurists, Cent. 3. says, No Law could tye him, who had not in his power due obedience to the Law. This is a maxime in Philosophy; wherefore Ori∣gen hom. 9. in Jos. sayes plainly, the baptized may fulfil the Law in all things. Now not to be more tedious or prolix in ci∣ing
either Passages or Fathers (whose Quotati∣ons could easily make a just Volume) of the Sacraments I have spoken in the former Section; and of the Pastors of the Church, their infallible Authority in a general Council, in the third: which with what is here said, are the main things and most substantial denyed by Protestants, but clearly asserted by the Fathers cited, who all confessedly did live in the first three ages, a ve∣ry few excepted; I have brought, of the fourth and fifth age, only as witnesses of what was pra∣ctised in the Church before their time; leaving the Canons of the Apostles, and many things by Tradition from them conserved in the Church, and witnessed by the Fathers, with the De∣crees of most holy Popes and Martyrs of the first and second Age, as these of Anacletus, Alex∣ander, Sixtus, Telesphorus, Pius, Anicetus, Soter, &c. holding out so many of our Tenets against Protestants: and this to shun Cavils and Ex∣ceptions, which they might take either at their writings or place, as they do. As for the same cause many other most renouned Authors, as Policarpus, Cornelius, Prochorus, Methodius, Ni∣lus, Agapetus, Dorotheus and others, upon this only account, with the Book of Hermes (of whom S. Paul to the Romans, Ch. 16. maketh mention) called the Pastor, which Hamelmanus and M. Hooker both Protestants, grant to have been reckoned by the antient Fathers in the num∣ber
of Ecclesiastical Books, and particularly as seemeth to Hamelmanus by no less men then Ire∣naeus, Clement, and Origen. Yet this Book in such esteem with them, he will have to be impure, as laying the ground of Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Merit and Justification of Works, of pro∣fessed Chastity in Priests and Church-men, of fasting from certain Meats at times, &c. But I hope M. Menzeis will make no exception a∣gainst most Authors I have produced, unless passing from his appeal to the Fathers of the first three ages; he pass also from his second ground of Faith, as certainly after all has been said he should do, seeing I may justly speak home to him here, with S. Augustine in his 11. Book against Julian, the Pelagian Heretick, c. 10. What the Catholick Fathers and Doctors have found in the Church, that they hold: what they have re∣ceived from their forefathers, that they have deli∣vered to their children. Whilest we had no debate as yet with you before them as Judges, our case was pleaded amongst them; we were not as yet contest∣ing with you, and nevertheless by their decree we have the victory over you. Neither is this victory imaginary (as that of M. Menzeis) but real, as the three Arguments I have brought make good; which by way of recapitulation, I set be∣fore him in this one Argument: the Doctrine of the Church, and writings of the Fathers in the first three Ages, can be no ground to Prote∣stants
for what they teach: First, if the chief Re∣formers disown them. Secondly, if most learn∣ed Protestants accuse them of many Errours. Thirdly, If their own Writings in all contro∣verted Tenets be flatly against Protestant Do∣ctrine: but all this is true from the places pro∣duced; then their Writings can be no ground to them. Yet Protestants will needs make up their Religion from the Writings of the Fathers, as some Poets from the Centons and broken Verses of Virgil and Homer, the life of Christ. They challenge the Fathers for their Heresie up∣on a word or two picked out of places wherein they have an Orthodox sense: In so many hun∣dred Volumes of the Fathers writings, that some word or passages seem to favour Heresie, what wonder? Gods own Word, if we will stick to the naked Letter, seeming to favour so many, as we have seen above. They oppose Fathers to Fathers, and sometimes one to himself, so they are possessed with the Spirit of contradicti∣on, that all may turn Problematick, and be con∣troverted among them. They cite the Scrip∣tures against the Fathers, as if their new and giddy headed start-ups, did better understand them, then the most antient and solid Divines; they will at times, by passages of the Fathers or Scripture, strive to condemn the practice of the Church, and Decrees of Councils: but who∣ever amongst the Fathers did so? doth any one
of the Fathers (with the first Reformers) op∣pose Scripture as understood by them) to the Authority of the Church, or to the same Scrip∣ture, as explained by her? Doth any of them attach the Roman Church of Errour? To say such a Church, so great and glorious in the Christian world, did Apostatize, and none did remark her Apostacy; is like a general Eclipse of the Sun, remarked by none. The least Er∣rours of particular Hereticks, the Fathers have so narrowly sifted, so sharply censured, so so∣lidly confuted: and shall we think, they have ei∣ther not spyed, or spared to censure the corrup∣tions of a whole body and Church. But let wise men and greatest Shcollars be at variance as they please, about some places both of Scriptures and Fathers, as surely it will be to the Worlds end; God hath given us both a sure and short way, promised by the Prophet, wherein even igno∣rants and fools cannot err, Christ having left us the present Catholick Church in all ages, as the most faithful Depositary of his Doctrine, and the Infallible Visible Judge of all that can be con∣troverted in matters of Faith. Before I end this Section, to give you but a scantling with what sincerity and candor Here∣ticks cite the Fathers; this I borrow from M▪ Menzeis in his third paper, where in general, he most confidently says, That whatever the antient Apologists, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and A∣thenagoras
have said for the Christian Religion, the same Protestants may say for their own. Where∣upon having diligently read over the first of these Apologies, which is that of Justin Martyr (as any may do in an hour) I have found him so grosly mistaken in citing this Father, that I may justly say, he could not more forfeit his reputa∣tion. This I evidence in four chief Points as∣serted by us, and denyed by Protestants. The first is Free Will, for which Justin in his Apology is so clear, that having said, If men had not in their Free Will, to fly what is filthy, and choose what is honest, they should be no wise to blame for what ever action; he will have it a Demonstration, That men have freedom to live virtuously, or fall in sin, because we see them by ex∣perience to pass from one of these contraries to the other. His words are, ac nisi libero arbitrio & ad turpia fugienda▪ & ad honesta deligenda facul∣tatem habeat mortalium genus, non fuerit in cau∣sâ sive culpâ qualiumcunque demum, factorum: Sed enim libero id delectu tum recte per virtutem vivere, cum per peccatum labi, ad hunc demonstra∣mus modum: hominem eundem ad contraria subin∣de transire videmus. The second is Merit of Works, in acknow∣ledging a reward to them, his words again are, Atque hoc etiamsi paucis persuaferimus, maximum tamen inde feremus lucrum; nam ut boni agricolae amplam à domino capiemus mercedem.
The third is the efficacy of Baptism, in clean∣sing us by water from all former sins, and making us the children of God, Ut ne necessitatis & ignorantiae liberi permaneamus, sed ectus & scientiae filii fiamus, ac remissionem ante commis∣sorum peccatorum consequamur in aquâ. The fourth the Real Presence, saying of the Consecrated Bread and Wine in so express words; Not as common Meat and common Drink do we take these things, but even as by the Word of God, our Saviour JESUS Incarnate had flesh and blood for our Salvation, so we are taught that the Eucharist is the flesh and blood of the self same JESUS Incarnate: His words are; Non enim ut communem panem neque communem potum ista sumimus; sed quemadmodum per verbum dei, caro fa∣ctus Jesus Christus Servator noster, & carnem & san∣guinem habuit: ad eundem modum, etiam eam in quâ per preces verbi ejus ab ipso profecti gratiae sunt actae, alimoniam, incarnati illius Jesu carnem & sanguinem esse edocti sumus. Nam Apostoli in com∣mentariis à se scriptis, quae Evangelia vocantur ita tradiderunt. Diverse other things in the same Apology I pass, these few things being sufficient, to shew M. Menzeis ingenuity, and how he with other He∣reticks dare cite the Fathers, who even most evidently and expresly condemn them. But to close this Section (which citations
have made longer then I intended) with one Query I ask M. Menzeis where he shall find, so much as in one of the Fathers, any point of Do∣ctrine taught by the present Roman Church con∣demned of Heresie: as many Protestant Tenets they hold against us, are declared Heretical by so many, as by S. Ireneus l. 1. c. 20. to say with Simon Magus, that men are not saved by good works; by S. Epiphanius haeres. 8. to say with Cerin∣thus, That children may be saved without Baptism. By the same S. Epiphanius, to say with the Po∣mas, That God has commanded some impossible things. By S. Augustine, l. 20. contr. Faust. to pull down Altars with the Manichees. By the same S. Augustine l. 2. Contra lit. Petil. C. 32. and 34. To say with the Donatists, That the Baptism of Christ, and that of S. John Baptist were all one: by S. Epiphanius haeres. 75. and S. Augustine haeres. 53. To say with the Arians, that Fasts of the Church are not to be observed, nor Prayers, nor Sacrifice to be used for the dead. By Sozomenus l. 5. c. 20. and Eusebius l. 7. C. 14. To forbid with Julian the Apostate, the use of Images, and Sign of the Cross. by S. Hierome l. contr. Helvidianum. To equal mar∣riage with Virginity. By the same S. Hierom l. contr. Vigilant. To say with Vigilantius, Saints are not to be Invocated, nor their Relicks to be honoured. By S. Hierome again, l. 3. contr. Pelagian. To brag as the Pelagians did, that they were sure of their
Salvation. By S. Augustine to say with Jovinian That such as are regenerate by Baptism, and once received in Gods grace and favour cannot finally fall away. By S. Hierome contr. Vigilant. To say Churchmen ought to marry. By S. Cyril in Epist. ad Calo-syrium Episc. of Madness as well as Er∣rour. To say with some in these dayes, Christs bo∣dy did not remain in the Eucharist, if it were kept untill the morrow. By S. Augustine l. 6. con∣tra Julian. C. 2. & 3. and ad Bonifac. C. 2. & 4. To say with the Pelagians, That the children of the Faithful are born holy, and need no Regenera∣tion by Baptism. By S. Augustine l. de haeres. C. 54. To teach with the Eunomians, A man is saved by Faith only. By S. Augustine l. 1. C. 2. & ult. contra Maximin. To deny Apostolical Tra∣ditions in the Church. By S. Cyprian Ep. 55. to say with most Hereticks, To Peters Chair and the Principal Church, Infidelity or false Doctrine can have access. By Irenaeus l. 3. C. 3. to deny all Churches round about ought to resort to the Roman Church, by reason of her more powerful Principality; By all the Fathers in the Coun∣cil of Calcedon Act. 16. To deny that all Prima∣cy and chief Honour is to be kept for the Arch-Bishop of Old Rome. So that the Protestant Religion is not only void of all Solid Ground either in the Divine Scriptures, or Holy Fa∣thers, but also in most clear and express
words is condemned as Heretical by both. It being indeed nothing but a new Heresie, patcht up of many old condemned Errours, joyned to some fresh Notions and Conceits, flowing from the same Spring and Spirit of Pride and Rebellion against all the Antient Fa∣thers and present Pastors of the Church; Its frequent changes, show it is not from God: Its Monstrous Divisions in so many Sects, that it has not the Unity of Faith: Its inconstan∣cy in Principles, Tenets, Form of Worship and Government, that it is not built upon the Rock, and consequently hath no solid Foun∣dation or Ground.
Conclusion of all that has been said, wherein also the true Grounds of the Catholick Religion are set down. A Little Error in the beginning, turns great in the end, sayes the Prince of Philoso∣phers Aristotle in his Physicks: which as it is most true in the first Principles of all Na∣tural Sciences, so it is in the Grounds of the Christian Faith. The innumerable by-wayes of Sectaries; their monstrous and manifold Divisi∣ons from the true Church & amongst themselvs; so many Controversies among Christians in our days, such wranglings and jars for Religion, flow all from one Spring, to wit, The mistake of true Principles and Grounds. And this one Er∣rour in the beginning, makes them run them∣selves in so many, and infinite great in the end. Pride and Contention (the two Pillars of Heresie) will let them acknowledge no Au∣thority of Councils or Fathers, yield to no evi∣dence of Reason, submit to no Judge. Whence
Controversies are driven to nothing, but idle and endless Contentions and Quarrels: Coun∣cils are called Conventiles when they sentence or censure them; the Church is changed into a Synagogue; the Fathers forfeit their credit; places, and passages from Scripture, are applyed or misapplyed as they list; Now a jeer, now a jest in handsome Language (which jovial and jeer∣ing humours most look upon) are their com∣mon Answers to solid Reasons: Evidence in Motive of credibility is mocked at: Faiths cer∣tainty is changed into probability: a few Funda∣mentals comprehending chief Mysteries (what or how many they cannot tel) are judg'd only neces∣sary to be believed; Errors in Integrals (as they call them) which make the greatest part of Chri∣stian Doctrine, are taught to be things indifferent to our belief: In them even the Apostles were not in allible, say Rainolds and Whitaker, with some other Protestant Divines; In them the whole Church may err, says M. Menzeis; and upon this, as if she had erred, come in all Sectaries to reform her: she is old, and her Spirits ex∣hausted; they have the fulness of the Spirit: her Eyes by age are dimmed, she sees not what is manifest in Scripture, they as younger see clear: shee is too Superstitious in her Religious Ceremonies, they as more familiar with God use none: like Prophets Extraordinarily sent by God, they preach against Priests and people:
they set out a New Gospel of their own, as if they were Apostles and Evangelists, finding no true Scripture before: Yea as if they had Christs own power, they abandon the Antient Church as the Synagogue, and make up a new one, changing both the Priesthood and Sacrifice: No more pennances and satisfactions of men to Gods Justice for their offences, because Christ hath satisfied for all: No more fasting, except very seldom, and that only for temporal ends: No good Works are left in our power, they are too hard, yea impossible, seeing even our best actions are sins, Faith only justifieth, and to believe is an easie task: So the strait path is made plain, and the narrow way broad to them: Whil'st others strive to work their salvation with fear and trembling, chastizing their bodies with the Apostle S. Paul, least they be∣come reprobates; They live secure, that each of them is one of the Elect, making even this an Article of his Faith. And this they perswade to simple ones with some refined words, uttered in the tune of the Sybilles, giving responees from the belly, so far they are fetched with a deep sigh, as if they breathed nothing but zeal: some more Learned, relying on the acuteness of their wits, go willingly along with them, not to cap∣tivate their understandings, or submit to any Visible Judg;  men of interest com∣ply outwardly with the prevailing party, keeping
their own retentions of mind; and this it is which their Preachers for the most part desire of us, that we would but comply in hearing, that is, believe one thing, and force our Consciences to profess another. Come hear us say they, and you shall not be troubled, we seek no more, and of their most understanding hearers they get no more, as I have often heard from them∣selves. We are not (say they) so Proud and Arrogant as Papists, to call our Church and her Doctrine Infallible, the Scripture is only so: By it judg of us and what we teach, as you your selves read and understand: This is the liberty of the children of God, to be tyed to no Churches Faith, to no Councels Decrees, to no Fathers Doctrine: The Word as clear in it self, or ex∣plained by it self; the Spirit speaking inwardly in our hearts, and every mans Natural Reason directed by certain Rules for the right under∣standing of both, is the only means God hath left for the conversion of Infidels, conviction of Hereticks, and setling of every good Christi∣an in his belief. O Liberty, Liberty and Freedom of the children of God, from the Popes Supre∣macy, Councels, Infallible Authority, the Churches Jurisdiction in matters of Faith and Religion, and generally the usurped power of any Visible Judg. This is M. Menzeis, and Protestants great Principle, (which as I have demonstratively I
hope above proved) makes all our Debates in Religion, and takes away all cerrainty in Faith. But because to ruine Protestant Grounds, and give no better in their place, were rather to de∣stroy then edifie, to throw down then to build, and in a Controversie of Religion, rather to set up Atheism, then root out Heresie, (as M. Men∣zeis continually cavilling at our Tenets, but never once settling his own, with so much labor hath done) I therefore do here for a Conclusi∣on briefly here set down, and clearly prove so∣lid, the Grounds of the Catholick Faith. The Ground then of true Faith and Religion Established by Christ and his Apostles, not on∣ly solid and infallible in it self, but also clear and perspicuous to all, yet special and parti∣cular to us in Communion with the Sea of Rome, to which no Sectay, Schismatick, or Heretick doth or can pretend; removing all Doubts, de∣ciding all Controversies, silencing all sowers of false Doctrine and Errours, keepng Unity, stop∣ping Divisions, quieting mens Consciences, in∣structing the Ignorant, setling the Unstable, cap∣tivating the understanding of the most Learned to the obedience of Faith, and which the great∣est and quickest wits of the Christian World, (that is all the holy Fathers) have ever built their faith upon; Is Scripture and Apostolical Tradition conserved in the Church, as delivered
expounded by her, both as an infallible Propounder and Judge. Whence if any man here ask the Analysie and resolution of our Faith? I answer him in a very few words: We believe such things as are from Scripture, and Apostolical Traditi∣on taught in the Church, to be true, because God hath revealed them: The reason again why we believe God did reveal such things is, for that we see evident Motives of credibility in this Church, and none else, wherein God shows himself Author of her Doctrine, confirming it with diverse infallible Marks, and chiefly Mi∣racles,  which manifestly appear both his Sub∣scription and Seal. Digitus Dei hîc est, Pharaoh's Magicians could not but acknowledge this, Exod. the 8. V. 19. Seeing only the Dust of the Earth suddenly by Aaron changed into Vermin, they cryed out, The hand of God is here: So that there be two things to be remarked in the Resolution of Divine Faith. The first is, God re∣vealing, Deus revelans: And the second is, God showing himself Authour of such a Revelation; Deus proponens se authorem revelationis, say the Divines. What God hath revealed, is taught us by his Church as an infallible Propounder; that he is Author of the Revelations made to her, he attests in the Motives of credibility, as infallible marks, that it is he who speaks: So all in our Faith is infallibly from God, and all infallibly propounded to us. The things re∣vealed
by the true and infallible Church; and the Revelation by infallible Motives, which be∣ing clear to all who have Eyes, Ears, and Un∣derstanding, make evidently credible, and infal∣libly certain all and every one Point of our Re∣ligion and Faith. Now to prove what I have set down, to be the only true solid and infallible Grounds, of the true Christian and Catholick Faith. 1. That Scripture is this Ground, is granted by M. Men∣zeis, and all Protestants, so needs no proof as to them. 2. That sole Scripture without the De∣claration and Exposition of the Church, as an infallible Propounder, Expounder, and Judge, cannot be this Ground, is proved at length in my fourth Section, and presently you shall see it a∣gain. 3, That Apostolical Traditions are ne∣cessarily joyned with Scripture; Is 1. proved from clear Scriptures, most expresly command∣ing us to receive them, 2 Thes. 2.13. Therefore brethren stand fast, and hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or by Epistle. 2 Thess. 3.6. Now I command you bre∣thren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the Traditions which he received. 1 Corinth. 11.2. Remember me in all things, and keep the Traditions as I de∣livered them to you. 2. By the Authority of the Fathers of the first three ages quoted in my
sixth Section, with that of S. Chysostome, S. Au∣gustine and others above mentioned. 3. From manifest and Demonstrative reason, in some chief Points which all Christians believe without any express Scripture, as I have instanced in per∣sons in the Trinity, Sacraments in the Church, the keeping of Sunday, &c. and in many Here∣sies condemned by the Church, Councils, Fathers, yea and Protestants themselves, with∣out any clear Scripture can be brought against them▪ as S. Augustine avoucheth of the Errour of Donatists, &c. Rests then only to prove that the Church's Authority as an infallible Propounder is neces∣sary, to make all these Divine and infallible Truths in themselves, contained either in Scrip∣ture, or delivered by Apostolical Tradition, both solid and infallible Grounds to us. For this I presuppose, 1. From the Apostle S. Paul, Hebrews 11. That without Faith it is im∣possible to please God. 2. From the same Apostle, Ephes. 4.5. That there is but one Faith, one Bap∣tism, one Lord JESUS Christ. 3. From him again, Hebr. 10.23. That we must hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering. From which Texts, importing the Necessity of Faith, the Unity of Faith, and the steadiness in belie∣ving required in Divine Faith, it doth follow that some infallible means which all may make use of, must be appointed by God to attain to
this Faith so absolutely necessary to all. For to say God hath commanded us, and that under the pain of Eternal Damnation, to believe un∣doubtedly; and not furnished infallible means to attain to such belief, were to accuse his Good∣ness, Providence, and Wisdom. And this no Christian or rational man will deny, so that all the Question that can be moved, is about the infallible means to attain without doubt or wa∣vering to Divine Faith, which may perswade infallibly all sort of persons, that such things are revealed by God, removing all reasonable doubts that can arise, either concerning Gods Revelation (which is the formal object of Faith) or the things he hath revealed (which makes its material Object) and this means I say again, must not only be solid and infallible ob∣jectively and in it self (as M. Menzeis will have the Protestant Religion and Grounds of it) but also subjectively, and to us; it being the same thing, as to make a perswasive motive, not to appear, and not to be, according to that Max∣ime, Idem est non esse & non apparere. Where∣fore a ground however infallible in it self, yet not appearing so to us, and known to be such availeth nothing as to our belief. The Mathe∣maticians Demonstrate, the Sun to be many times greater then the Earth, and their Demonstration no doubt is both certain and evident in it self, yet never shall perswade a Country clown that it
is greater then his Cap, for that no Demonstra∣tion of this is clear and certain to him. Even so is it in the Ground of Faith, it must be both solid and and infallible in it self, and it must be known to be such by all who prudently rely upon it. This presupposed, to conclude all that has been said, and fully prove both the Ground of Faith in the Catholick Roman Church, solid as the Rock it is built on, and the means for con∣veying it to us infallible; I first show against M. Menzeis, or rather for him and his conversion, the necessity of an infallible Propounder of what e must undoubtedly believe (for if this can be made good, he engageth again to turn Pa∣pist) 2. That the true Church is this infallible Propounder. . That the Catholick Roman Church is the only true Church. 1. Then as to the necessity of an infallible Propounder: If no men, no Church be infallible in propounding, then ho∣ly Scripture, and consequently all that is con∣tained in it, is only delivered to us by fallible means, and so no infallible certainty in Faith. The consequence is clear, for most infallible Truths may be changed, altered, corrupted, and both fallibly and falsly propounded to us, as the first and chief Mysteries of the Christian Religion by Hereticks have been. 2. Faith comes of hear∣ing, says the Apostle then as there be infallible believers and hearers, so must there be infallible
Teachers, for Hearing and Teaching are Corre∣latives. 3. No other infallible means is, or can be assigned by Protestants to Ignorants, yea to all who understand not the Original Lan∣guages, for what is contained in Scripture, save only the Authority of their Pastors and Church, but this Authority in propounding is not ac∣knowledged infallible by them, then no infallible means is left. 4. There is no less necessity the Church be infallible in propounding, then the E∣vangelists in penning, and the Apostles in Preach∣ing, no disparity can be given, Gods Word be∣ing equally infallible in it self before both, as i is now. 5. Our Saviour Christ most expresly owns the necessity of an infallible propounder, granting the Jews had not sinned in refusing to believe him, if by his Works and Wonders he had not evidenced himself to be the Son of God, and consequently infallible in his Doctrine. 6. For this, the gift of Miracles is given to the Apostles, and left in the Church, to show their infallible assistance in propounding. If you answer that was necessary at first, but not now, because it is the same Doctrine you teach, which the Apostles did propound infallibly: You say nothing, for that it is we doubt of, or rather un∣doubtedly we deny, that your Doctrine is the same. You presently appeal to Scripture, but in vain, till first you answer to all that is ob∣jected in my fourth Section, how ye know in∣fallibly
what ye call Scripture to be Gods Word, then the Letter you read to be uncor∣rupted, the sense you give to the genuine, &c. and to all the clear places of Scripture I have brought against most of your particular Tenets. I do not here ask ye  prove that to be infallibly Gods Word which was preached by the Apo∣stles, this they did sufficiently themselves: Nei∣ther that the Doctrine of Authentick Scripture is infallibly true, (that was also done before there was a Protestant in the world) but com∣ing from those Generals (which make all the Answers of your best Writers) we desire ye shew by some infallible sign that your Bible is Gods pure Word; and your Glosses on it con∣form to the Sense and Letter. To reply, Scrip∣ture doth evidence it self by its innate light to be Gods Word, so that all may sufficiently know it by this, and all be obliged to believe it, is re∣futed by Christ himself, presently telling us his own hearers had not sinned in not receiving it as such, if he had given no External Evi∣dence of his infallibility in propounding; for as I have remarked above, Scripture hath no greater Efficacy, Evidence, or Light in our Books, then in our blessed Saviours own mouth. Neither will the Majesty of the Stile, or the purity of the Doctrine do it, both these being as great in the the Books of Wisdome and Ecclesiasticus, which Protestants reject, as in the Ecclesiastes and Can∣ticles,
which they receive. Besides that the first of these two is imaginary, as to the Letter, there being less Majesty in the Letter of Scripture, then in the Philosophers and Orators Writings, as is conessed by Paul. And the second is in question chiefly in Protestant Bibles, which do not agree with any Original or Copy that before Luther can be found, if we trust their own Authours whom I have quoted. Lastly, If all Councils, all the Fathers, all the Pastors of the Church be fallible, then let Protestants bring nothing but Scripture against us, (for we will receive nothing but upon in∣fallible Authority) and all their Volumes of Controversie shall not come to one line. Yea further, could they bring Scripture for what they teach (as they will never be able to do) yet without an infallible Propounder and Judg, well might we dispute, but conclude nothing, wrangle, but agree in nothing to the Worlds end. For as sole Scripture without an infallible Church propounding, and Explaining it, so a naked Church without infallible Marks, and a Doctrine without infallible Motives, prove no∣thing. Secondly, I say the true Church is this in∣fallible propounder, on whose Authority we must rely. For proof of this, It is to be ob∣served, that in holy Scripture there be three Foundations or Grounds of Faith mentioned
by the Apostle S. Paul. The 1. Is our blessed Saviour Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Another Foundati∣on no man can lay then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. The 2. Is the Apostles and Prophets, Ephes. 2.29. Built upon the Foundation of A∣postles and Prophets. The 3. The Church, 1 Tim. 3. The house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth. From which clear places of Scripture, I re∣mark, 1. The Foundation of Faith is ever a Living, Visible, and Speaking Ground, to wit, Christ, the Apostles, Prophets, and Church, the dead Letter of Scripture being no where called this Ground. 2. That these three Grounds of Faith, both in the Old and New Law, proper∣ly speaking make but one, according to the same Apostle, for another Foundation no man can lay, sayes he, beside Christ JESUS. So that the Prophets, Apostles, and Church must not be thought different Foundations from Christ, all their Vertue in upholding Faith, and Veracity in propounding Faith (Whence they are called the Foundation and Ground of it) coming from the particular assistance of his Spirit, Strengthening, Inspiring, and Direct∣ing them. Hence also is their infallibility, for the Foundation of Christ stands sure, says the Apostle, 2 Tim. 2.19. And consequently is al∣together infallible. 3. That the Church here
called a Ground which supporteth our Faith, is not to be said the only diffusive body of all true Believers, but more the Representative Church in her chief Pastors, as the Prophets and Apo∣stles in old. Wherefore some few Catholick Authors so often objected, as holding the Ca∣nons and Decrees of Councils only infallible, when they are generally received by the whole Church; in my opinion are highly mistaken, and surely to be understood (if any in Express terms speaks so) of Councils not wholly Oecu∣menical, or not Lawfully convocated, and known∣ly approved by the Pope, or whereof some ra∣tional doubt may be made in things essentially required; in which cases I grant the general belief of the Church could best warrant the in∣fallibility of their Decrees. Otherwise a few particular persons might cope with General Councels, as Luther and his Adherents at first, Vendicating to himself the Negative voice, as if he had been high Bishop in the whole Church; which were to take away all possible means of preserving Unity in Faith, yea to foment all Schisms and Divisions, every one pretending the whole Church holds no such Doctrine; whil'st he who is a Member dissents. So that such Doctors if they should allow no obligati∣on in receiving the Decrees of the Representa∣tive Church, to the which they do and must submit even this their Sentence, could neither
be thought Catholicks or rational men. But however some few speak or think, God did promise us an infallible Church, Isa. 2. V. 2, 3. Wherein he should teach us his ways, and judge amongst the Nations himself, not personal∣ly, for he never went out of Jewry, but by her Pastors. He has establish'd this infallible Church, in St. Matth. 16. V. 19. Upon the Rock. Christ hath commanded us to hear her, in St. Matth. 18. V. 17. And the persons we should hear in this Church, as well as the end wherefore we would hear them, and rest upon their Authority, is clearly set down in these words, 4. Ephes. 11. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evan∣gelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, till we all come in the Union of Faith, that we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, and car∣ried about with every wind of Doctrine, &c. From all which places of Scripture, it is De∣monstratively manifest, that as the true Church is infallible, and we bound to hear her, yea and to rely upon her Authority, as the Pillar and Ground of our Faith; so is it most evidently clear, that as she speaketh only to us infallibly by the voice of her Pastors and teachers united, it is them we should hear, seeing God in her, (not personally as I have said, but by them) both Judgeth and Teacheth, as the infallible Propounders of his Divine Truths (with the
Prophets and Apostles in old) and the infal∣lible Judges of our Controversies and De∣bates. 2. The same is proven from the unanimous consent of the Fathers, quoted at length in my third Section, for the infallibility both of the Church and Councils; And may be confirmed even by the confession of many Rational and Mo∣derate Protestants, who receive the Scripture, and consequently all, and every Point contained in it, as the Word of God, upon the sole Au∣thority of the Church; As M. Whitaker against Stapleton, p. 1. c. 11. I deny not but the Churches Tradition is the Argument whereby to convince, what Books are Canonical and what not. M. Fulk in his Answer to a Counterfeit Catholick; The Church hath judgment to discern the Word of God from the Writings of Men. M. Covel in his defence of Hoo∣ker, Doubtless it is a tolerable Opinion of the Church of Rome, to affirm, that the Scriptures are holy in themselves, but so esteemed of us for the Au∣thority of the Church. And M. Hooker in his Ec∣clesiastical Policy, we all know that the first out∣ward Motive leading men so to esteem of Scripture, is the Authority of the Church. And as these own her Authority in Propounding the Scripture Books, so other Protestants in resolving all Doubts, and deciding all Debates; as Bancroft Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Sermon on the 8. of February 1588. God, says he, hath bound
himself to his Church of purpose, that men by her di∣rection might in matters of doubt be relieved, he speakes of the Representative Church, which onely directeth. Master Field in the Epistle to his Treatise of the Church; Seeing the Con∣troversies of Religion are grown in number so ma∣ny, and in Nature so Intricate, that few have time and leasure, fewer strength of understanding to ex∣amine them; what remaineth for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, but dili∣gently to search out, which among all the Societies of men in the World, is that blessed company of holy ones, that houshold of Faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, that so they may imbrace her Communion, follow her Doctrine, and rest in her judgement? Here again the Representative Church both Judging and Teaching. M. Hooker in the Preface of his Books of Ecclesiastical Policy: We are right sure of this, that Nature, Scripture, and Experience have taught the World to seek for the ending of Contentions, by submitting it self to some judicial and definitive sentence, whereunto neither part that contendeth, may under any pre∣tence refuse to submit. And what is this but a General Council? M. Bilson in his perpetual Go∣vernment is clear for it; To have no Judge, sayes he, for the ending of Ecclesiastical Contentions were the utter subversion of all peace. Synods are surest means to decide doubts. Sr. Edwin Sands in his Re∣lation
of the Religion used in the West parts of the World. The Protestants are as severed and scat∣tered Troops, each drawing a diverse way without any means to take up their Controversies, &c. No or∣dinary way to Assemble a General Council of their part, which is the only hope remaining ever to a∣swage their Contentions. 3. Reason evinceth it: The true Church is the School of infallible and Divine Truths, then she must have infallible Masters and Propoun∣ders. A fallible Church is most properly named by a Learned Writer, a Spiritual cheat; it may well be called the Ground of Opinion, Doubt and Despair, but not of Infallible and Divine Faith. If the Sheep hearing the voice of their Pastors, and following them be misled, who shall be their sure Guide? And if all the Fathers, and Doctors of the Church together assembled, may mistake either the uncorrupted Letter, or true sense of Scripture; who I pray you can as∣sure himself he takes it aright? No infallibili∣ty in matte of Faith and Religion is left up∣on Earth;  the high Bishop and chief Pastors of the Church unanimously Teaching and Pro∣pounding, cannot err; It were more then madness any man should say the contrary, and yet hold himself infallibly secure of what he believes. Would a Protestant be but once at the pains to speak to an Infidel for his conversion to the true Church, calling all her Pastors, even assem∣bled
in a Council fallible: I should willingly hear what he could so much as say in general for Protestancy, yea or for the Christian Religion. No doubt he should first speak of one true God, then of Christ and Faith in him, as necessary to salvation, telling his Proselyte, how out of his Goodness and Mercy towards us, he had made himself Man, and died upon the Cross for our sins; Yet afterwards had risen again, and by his Miracles, showen both his Civinity and Power, and by these strange Works and Wonders, ha∣ving established his Church, he had delivered his Will and Doctrine to her in his Written Word, called the Holy Scripture. Upon this, the Infidel no little astonished at such a Dis∣course, surely should ask him some Ground for it, and how he could be perswaded it were true? Here I imagine the Bible is produced, as the Word of God, and sole ground of Faith: But who assures me of this, says the infidel? It was attested by many Miracles which Christ and the Apostles did work, who first prehed it, An∣swers the Protestant, they were holy men, cho∣sen by our Saviour Christ, for the conversion of the World: they did Teach his Word Infal∣libly; They did set it down in Writing, con∣firmed it with Wonders, and left it to the Church. How long ago replies the Infidel? Nigh 1700. years answers again the Protestant. One Question more, says the Infidel; have you
any infallible Witness in your Church, or any Infallible External Motive, that this is the same Word of God that was Preached by the Apo∣stles, and delivered by Christ; or that in con∣firmation of it, ever any Miracle was wrought? The first needs none, says the Protestant, it is clear to all well disposed persons; turn Prote∣stant and you will Evidently see it to be the Word of God; and the second is sufficiently attested in it. Presently the Infidel having re∣ceived further instruction in most Points of Pro∣testancy, and made more earnest to see how all that has been taught him, is true; desires he may have for a time the Bible, and diligently perusing it, finds some things in the Historical Books, look like Fables, many more in the Pro∣phets he doth not understand, many seeming con∣tradictions betwixt the two Testaments, many points he was taught by his Protestant Master, not in Scripture at all, yea many things clearly against it. Of all which he asks his Master a di∣ligent account; And first whether at present there be no man, or company of men can re∣solve him infallibly of all these doubts? None, concludes the Protestant but Scripture it self, for since the Apostles there is in the Church no Judg, no Propounder infallible. If so, Sir, you conclude nothing with me, says the Infidel, but here I end with you; for the Book you ground all you have said upon, as if it were
clear and infallible to me, like the first Prin∣ciples in our Philosophers Schools, is so deeply obscure, and highly above the reach of reason, that without some powerful motive and induce∣ment, no reasonable man can believe it. And since you grant it was at first propounded with infallible Motives which now have ceased, It seems God would have it believed no more. For who can prudently believe things not clear in themselves, or at least not so to us, without some infallible Propunder evidencing by Super∣natural Motives (as Miracles) that such a Do∣ctrine is from God? Neither can a Protestant standing to his Principles say any more; whence no conversion of Infidels amongst them. But no end of their cavelling with us. They here urge, 1. Suppose the true Church were infal∣lible in her Pastors assembled in a Council; yet all we bring in proof of this, may be retorted a∣gainst our private Teachers, who are not infal∣lible in propounding. But to this it is easily an∣swered, that as God most infallibly, both by his general Providence, and particular Promise directs, rules, and governs his Church; so she by vertue of his special assistance oversees infallibly her private persons, in order to our certainty in Faith. For in the holy Hierarchy of the Church, God hath placed Watchmen most vigilant over their flocks, who suffer them not to be misled: they have discovered the very least Errors, sowen
in Corners, and branded their Authors as false Teachers. Wherefore as unity in belief is the Form and Soul of that great body of the Catho∣lick or Universal Church, so whatever Doctrine is commonly taught and received in her without any contradiction from her Pastors, is suffici∣ently known to be infallible. 2. They object there is no infallible Pro∣pounder of this Article of our Faith; The Church is Infallible, Answer, Yes, 1. God shows himself the Propounder of this in the Markes of the Church, which we shall presently see. 2. As our Saviour Christ calling himself the Son of God, and working Miracles, did sufficiently, yea, infallibly evidence to the Jews, that it was true what he said: So the Church calling her self infallible, and working the like Miracles in all Ages, doth infallibly evidence to the world that it is true what she says, otherwise it would follow that God did employ his Omnipotency and Power to work Miracles in favour of an Impostor, thus cheating the world with a lye. 3. Therefore I say, the Catholick Roman Church, is the only true Church, in which the Doctrine of Christ is infallibly propounded, and certainty in Faith and Salvation to be found. This Point is of highest concern according to the Fathers; For, it is only the Catholick Church, says Lactantius, l. 4. that hath the true Worship and Service of God: That is, the Well-spring of
Truth, the dwelling place of Faith, the Temple of God, into which, whosoever entereth not, and from which, whosoever departeth, is without all hope of Life and Salvation. Whosoever is divided from her, says S. Augustine in his Epistle, 152. how laudable soever he seems to himself to live, for this only crime, that he is separated from the unity of Christ, he shall be excluded from life, and the wrath of God shall remain upon him. And again in his 50. Epistle, as a Member cut off wants the spirit of life, so a man separated from the body of Christ, cannot have the spirit of Justice, &c. They have not the Holy Ghost who are out of the Church. S. Cyprian de Unitat. Eccl. The Spouse of Christ cannot be defiled with adultery, whoso∣ever divided from this Church cleaveth to the A∣dulteress, he is separated from the Promises of the Church, he cannot have God for his Father, who hath not the Church to his Mother. S. Irenaeus l. 3. C. 40. in the Church God hath constituted A∣postles, Prophets, Doctors, and all the rest of the O∣peration of the Spirit, whereof those are not par∣takers who repare not unto the Church; where the Church is, there is the Spirit of God. Vincenti∣us Lyrinensis, contr. haeres. C. 1. & 2. says, That he having very often most diligently inquired of many Holy and Learned men, how he might certainly distinguish the true Catholick Faith from all Heresies, it was ever answered him by the Law of God, and the Tradition of the
Church, Divinae legis authoritate & Catholicae ecclesiae traditione. Then making to himself the common Objection of Protestants, seeing the Rule of Scripture is perfect, what necessity of joyning to it the Tradition of the Church? He presently Answers, because all take not Scrip∣ture one way, and in the same sense, because of its deepness. All the Fathers run upon this, out of the Catholick Church, no true Religion, no Divine Faith, no infallible Guide, no sure way to Salvation, no hope of Heaven, no means to attain Eternal Happiness and Life. Wherefore God by his Divine Appointment, Order, and Decree having tyed us, and that un∣der no less pain then the damnarion of our Souls, to live in the Unity and Communion of this Church, in which only he has placed the Chair of his Doctrine, and Channels of his Graces. I presuppose, 1. This Church may be easily known, and that by clear Marks in all Ages, and by all, she being so amply great, and Emi∣nently high, that the Prophet Isa. Ch. 2. calls her, The Mountain of the Lords house established in the top of Mountains, and exalted above the Hills, to which all Nations should flow 2. Tat those Marks be the same now, which did evidence her in Christs, and in the Apostles time; for all things are best conserved by the same means by which they received their being, says the Phylosophers, Conservatio continuata productio.
3. That whatever Church is found to have these Marks, should be undoubtedly acknowledged for the true one, otherwise they could not have pro∣ved her the true Church at first. This presupposed, that the Catholick Ro∣man Church is the only true Church, I most evidently prove in short (for this hath been often done in large volumns) and that by a ve∣ry few undoubted Signes, and as it were most legible Characters of the Primitive Church in the time of the Apostles, paralelling the one with the other. Three things are chiefly remarkable in the A∣postles, and Church under them. 1. Their Sanctity and Holiness of Life. 2. The great conversion of Infidels wrought by them. 3. Their manifold and wonderful Miracles. These be the Marks of their mission, by which they show themselves to be the servants of God, to be sent by God, and that God by his Vertue and Power concurreth and cooperateth with them. Their Holy, Humble, Poor, and Au∣stere Life, makes them like to their Master Christ, and fit Instruments for the great Em∣ployment they are going about: Miracles make their Credential Letters, and witness the fulness of their power; Conversions are the end of their Embassy, which as it was to last till all the Nations of the earth were brought to the Unity of Faith, and bosome of the
Church, according to that Promise of Christ, There shall be one shepherd, and one Fold, so their true Successors are constantly known by the same Signs in all Ages, as the undoubted Marks and Badge of the Apostles. I begin at Miracles, which I call the Apostles Credentials, and make the chief infallible Mark of the true Church, and all infallibly credible which is taught in her, as the great Seal God sets to her Doctrine. In the first Age, the Mi∣racles of the Apostles and Disciples are set down in holy Scripture, so need no other Testi∣mony. In the second Age, Justin Martyr quaest. 28. reporteth many wrought by the bodies, and at the Sepulchers of Martyrs, and Irenaeus, l. 2. C. 58. innumerable others for the conversion of the Gentiles. In the third Age many most great ones are wrought by S. Gregory sirnamed Thau∣maturge, or worker of Miracles, related by S. Gre∣gory Nissen in his Life, and S. Basil de Sp. Sanct. c. 29. divers whereof by the Sign of the Cross. S. Cyprian serm. de laps. relates with many others, three very strange Miracles in this Age, confirm∣ing the Real Presence. In the fourth Age, a dead body is restored to Life by the holy Cross, when it was first found by the Empress Helena, as witness Ruffinus, Nicephorus and others. Ma∣ny other Miracles are wroughe by Reliques, wit∣nessed by S. Chrysostome, orat. contr. gentes, by ho∣ly Water attested by S. Epiphanius, haer. 30. by
Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament; witness S. Gregory Nazianzen orat. 11▪ by Prayer to our Lady says the same Authour, in S. Cyprian, by the Merits of Martyrs, as relateth S. Ambrose Serm. 21. In the fifth Age, S. Augustine l. 22. de civit. c. 8. many by the Reliques of S. Stephen, and an house dispossessed of Devils by saying of Mass, S. Chrysostome says, by the sign of the holy Cross. Eusebius Cremon. writes, S. Hie∣rome being dead, the blind, deaf, dumb, and sick were cured by touching and kissing his Corps. In the sixth Age, Miracles are wrought to con∣firm the Sacrifice of the Mass, witness S. Grego∣ry l. 4. dial. C. 57. by the Reliques of S. Martin, as is related by S. Gregory of Tours, de Miracul. S. Martini l. 1. c. 11. Two others says S. Gregory, l. 3. dial. C. 3. by John the first, and Agapitus, both Popes. In the seventh Age, we have Mi∣racles in defence of vowed Virginity, related by Sigibert, an. 670. wrought by Reliques, in Bede, l. 5. c. 11. By the Images of S. Anastasius, at the very sight whereof evils fled, and diseases were cu∣red, in act. 2. Synod. Nicen. In the eighth Age, divers Miracles are wrought at the translation of S. Augustines Reliques from Sardinia to Ticinum, by Luitprand King of the Longbards, after he had redeemed it with a great sum of money from the Sarazens, witness Oldardus Ep. ad Ca∣rol. Magn. A Crucifix in the City of Berith, stab∣bed by the Jews, bleedeth, and the blood cureth
all diseases, witness Crantius with the Magde∣burgians Cen. 8. In the same age Pope Leo the third, having his tongue cut, and his Eyes pul∣led out by the Pagans, had them both restored by the Intercession of S. Peter, as it is Recorded by Anastasius, Baronius, and many others. In the ninth Age, innumerable Miracles are done at the Tomb of S. James, and by a Picture of S. John Baptist, related by Curopalates, Baronius, and other most approved Authors, as also most famous Miracles of three Popes, Stephen the fifth, Paschalis the first, and Formosus. In the tenth Age by S. Romuald, and S. Dunstan to be seen in Surius, Baronius, &c. by touching S. Pe∣ters Chains in Sigibert, an. 965. In the approba∣tion of the single life of Priests, and the exem∣plary punishment of them who opposed it; see for this Matthew of Westminster, an. 975. And Osbert in the life of S. Dunstan. In the eleventh Age, by three Popes, Leo the 9. Victor the 2. and Gregory the 7. the Authors you have in Baronius, who with him confirm them. By S. Edward King of England, for which see Alredus in his life; by S. Anselme Bishop, S. Odilo Abbot, S. Chune∣gunde Virgine, related by Surius and other Wri∣ters of their lives. In the twelfth Age, the Mi∣racles of S. Malachy, Apostle of Ireland, are re∣counted by S. Bernard (whom even Calvin calls a holy man) one whereof confirmeth Extreme Unction, and another the Real Presence. Many
likewise are to be seen in the Life of S. Bernard himself, and one most notable in confirmation of the whole Catholick Roman Faith. In the thir∣teenth Age, we have the many famous Miracles of S. Dominic, S. Francis of Assisium, S. Antony of Padua, S. Lovis of France, S. Celestine Pope, and S. Clare witnessed by S. Antonine, S. Bonaven∣ture, Petrus Cardin. Camerasc. Baronius and others, all most renowned Writers. In the fourteenth Age, the Miracles of S. Nicholas Tolentine, S. Roch, S. Katherin of Siena, are Chronicled by S. Antonine, Surius, Baronius, &c. In the fifteenth Age, S. Antonine 3. par. hist. tit. 23. testifieth thirty eight dead persons to have been restored to life, by the Prayers and Merits of S. Vincent. Many sick are also cured by the Intercession of our blessed Lady, at her house in Loreto, and the Turkish Army terrified by Miracles from sack∣ing it, as Reports Tursellin l. 2. hist. laur. In the sixteenth Age, many great Miracles done by S. Francis of Paula, S. Ignatius of Loyola, and S. Terese are Authentickly proved in the process of Canonization, and the Authours of their lives. In the same Age, S. Francis Xavier, called com∣monly the Apostle of Japonie, and the first Je∣suit sent to the Indies, raiseth four from death, and worketh innumerable other Miracles attest∣ed by the Viceroys, Governours, Prelates, Pastors, and people of those Countries, in which it is re∣ported he Baptized about twelve hundred thou∣sand
souls with his own hand. Some moderate Protestan even honour his memory, and make mention of his admirable Conversions; and if o∣thers should deny his Miracles, we might come to that S. Augustine calls the greatest of all, to wit, that he should have converted so many, and wrought none. Many thousand more Miracles are recorded in the Writings of the Fathers in all Ages, in the Monuments of the Church, yea, and in the Hi∣stories of each particular Christian Nation; as in France, that famous apparition of our Saviour Christ in the Consecrate Host at Paris, in the time of King Lovys the 9. to which were eye witnesses, most inhabitants of that great City: In Spain, that miraculous Cross placed on the Altar by an Angel, at the conver∣sion of a King of the Moors, desirous to hear Mass, which is kept in the Town of Caravaca, and worketh Miracles to this day. In Italy, the wonderful Translation of that holy house where∣in our blessed Saviour lived at Nazareth, to Lo∣reto, at which so many Miracles have been wrought by the Intercession of our Lady, and attested by so great Gifts and Offerings, that of a mean Cottage, it is now the richest Chappel in the World. In Flanders, the miraculous cures at our Ladies Chappels of Hall and Sichem, writ∣ten in two Books, by that Famous and Learned Authour Justus Lipsius, and of which he giveth
this Testimony in his first Chapter; Behold, things done in the Eyes of us all, behol them cele∣brated with the Concourse, Applause, Fruit and Bene∣fit of whole Countreys; what truth can there be in Humane Affairs, if no credit be given to these things? In Poland, that most notorious Miracle of a man raised to life after he had been seven years dead, and brought before the King sitting in Ju∣stice, to witness he had sold such a piece of Land to the Church. In England we have from their best Authors, how in a publick Assembly the op∣posers of a single life in Priests are all smothered under the ruines of the room, only S. Dunstan and those who with him defended it, being mi∣raculously preserved; where also the many Mi∣racles of S. Winefride, Virgin, to the great good and constant cure of the multitude having re∣course to her Chppel and Fountain, continue even in our days. In Scotland, a Miracle makes the armes of one of our chief Cities, others of S. Mungo, S. Fiaker, S. Margaret, &c. are famous in our Chronicles, yea the ever continued Mi∣racles in many places consecrated in old time to God and his Saints, make the people as yet to frequent the very rubbish and ruines of our Chappels. Now to reflect a little upon what I have said. 1. The Miracles I here speak of, are for the most part the same, or like to those which Christ and his Apostles did  as the suddain cure
of naturally incurable Diseases, the raising of the Dead, the casting out of Devils, &c. 2. They have been done in all Ages, in the Catholick Roman Church, and in no other. 3. The Workers of them, are Popes, Bishops, Priests, Eremits, Monks, Fryars, Jesuits, and o∣thers, all knowingly opposers of Protestancy; all living in Communion with the Sea of Rome. 4. They are witnessed by the most Learned, Judicious, and Vertuous Witnesses of the Chri∣stian World, yea are so notoriously Evident, that Hereticks cannot but avouch them, with the Centurists of Magdeburg and others. 5. Many of them are not only Personal Miracles, Wit∣nessing the holiness of the Person that Work∣eth them (as these which serve for the Cononi∣zation of our Saints) but also Dogmatical, confirming our Doctrine against Protestants, as being wrought by Reliques and Invocation of Saints; the Sign of the holy Cross, holy Wa∣ter, saying of Mass, Exorcisms, Pilgrimages to holy Chappels of our blessed Lady and other Saints; by real Apparitions of our Saviour Christ in form of a Man in the Consecrate Host, &c. What then can Protestants Answer with any show of Probability, to this first Mark of the Catholick Roman Church? Shall they grant a false Religion to have so many Miracles, and theirs which is the true, to have none? or shall
Christs promise in S. John Ch. 14. made to faith∣full Believers prove false, that Protestancy may at least seem to be true? They will rather deny these Miracles which I have brought, and all others since the Apostles, for their Negative Faith, Engageth them ever to a strong Denial, as all their New Religion is but a denying of most Antient and known Christian Truths; Yet shall any man upon their bold denyal di∣strust such a croud of so Famous Witnesses, and Writers? Shall they say many Miracles have been fained? so some Gospels; but what maketh that more against these of the Catholick Roman Church, then those of Christ and his Apostles? What has not been counterfeited? Gold, Silver, Jewels, Wines; doth it follow there be none true, or that no man can distin∣guish things Sophisticated from pure and real? Could not S. Justin, S. Irenaeus, S. Chrysostome, S. Basile, and S. Augustine, relating so many done by Reliques, and Invocation of Saints, judge of true ones? Or were S. Athanasius, and S. Hierom, relating the Miracles of S. Anthonie, S. Gregory of Nisse, and S. Basile, those of S. Gregory Thauma∣turgus, Severus Sulpitius, and S. Gregory of Tours, those of S. Martin, Theodoret, those of S. Nicolas, S. Gregory the great, those of S. Bennet, S. Bona∣venture, those of S. Francis, so easily deceived? shall they deny the Workers of such Miracles, to have been Members of the Roman Church, or them to have been wrought in Confirmation of
the present Romish Faith? But it is by saying of Mass, making the sign of the Cross, Invoca∣ting of Saints, honouring of Reliques, they have been done. Shall they have recourse in fine to the false Miracles of Infidels, Hereticks, Magi∣cians, the Antichrist or Devil? So did the Ari∣ans, Eunomians, and other Hereticks, as reports S. Ambrose in his Sermon of S. Gervase and Pro∣tase, S. Hierome against Vigilantius, and Victor Uticensis in his second Book of the persecution of the Wandales, and is the same the Jews did say to Christ, but more then either Men or De∣vils can do. All those things which Hereticks, or Infidels have done, or that Antichrist shall do, being but like these of Pharaoh's Magicians, little curious Trifles of a short lasting, and that may proceed from Natural Causes: But so are not the Miracles I speak of, for they are the very same with those of Christ and his Apostles; they are attested by the holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church, who could best judge of true and real ones; and as they have been wrought in the Catholick Roman Church, and in her on∣ly in all Ages, so in every Age have they brought in some Nation of Infidels to the bosome of the same Church. This is the second thing remarkable in the A∣postles, and no less Conspicuous in the Catho∣lick Roman Church. Whosoever then desires to see this second Mark of the true Church veri∣fied
in the Roman Church▪ Let him but cast an Eye over all the Nations which were ever con∣verted from Infidelity to Christianity since the Apostles, and then but take a view in their re∣spective Histories and Records, who were their Apostles? out of which Church they were sent, and to which Church they did at first bring in their Proselytes and Converts. And he shall find all this great Work to have been done by no other then Popes, Bishops, Priests, and Religious men, all living in Communion with the Roman Church, all acknowledging her Headship over other Churches, all teaching her Doctrine, all submitting to her Authority, and all propaga∣ting her Faith. See for this in general, the Theater of the Conversion of all Nations, Writ∣ten by Mermannius, and the History of the Church by Baronius, and Spondanus, ll in par∣ticular, the Records of each Nation; yea and the Magdeburgian Centurists, though Protestants: It being so notoriously evident, that even our ad∣versaries cannot deny it, and if they should, the very Walls of Churches, Chappels, Monaste∣ries, adorned with Crosses, Statues, Images, and other marks of the present Roman Religion, might sufficiently prove it against them. Pope Alex∣ander the 1. is glorious for the conversion of so many of the Roman Senators and Nobles: Pope Sylvester, for that of the first Christian Em∣perour Constantine the great, the Bulgarians are converted by Pope Nicolas the 1. the Bohemians by
Stephen the 7. Norway by Adrian the 4. the Po∣meranians by Nicolas the 3. all Popes. S. Elu∣therius Pope, sends to this our Island two of his Clergy, who convert King Lucius and his Sub∣jects; Scotland ows its conversion to Pope Vi∣ctor by his Envoys and Legates; Ireland to Pope Celestine, who sent thither S. Patrick, England to S. Augustine sent by S. Gregory the great: Clovis first Christian King of France is converted by S. Rhemigius Bishop of Rhemes; the Franconi∣ans by S. William; the Thuringians, Hassits, and a great part of Germany, by S. Boniface; the Fle∣mins by Eligius; the Danes and Swedes by Ans∣gratius; the Sclavonians and Hungarians by the two Adelberts; the Polonians by Aegidius, Tus∣culanus sent by Pope John the 13. run thus through all the other Kingdomes and Provinces of the Christian World, you shall constantly find the same: And this as in all former Ages, so in ours, witness the Conversions of the Ja∣ponians, Indians, Brasilians, Mexicans, Peruans, Canadas, Algonquins, and many other Savage Nations in America, the Coasts of Afric, and remotest corners of the Earth, where the Ca∣tholick Roman Church ever like to her self in the Primitive times, and her Pastors and Preach∣ers to the Apostles, continue their Labours to this day, with such success by the blessings of God, that they have converted ten to the Chri∣stian Faith, for one Protestants have perverted.
But what Kingdom, Province, or Town did ever Protestancy enter in, which it did not find Ca∣tholick? Never so many Sects of Hereticks, yet not one goes to convert Infidels, all their business is with Papists, and all their Forces employed against the Roman Church, a clear Demonstration she is the only true Church, so ge∣nerally opposed by them all. But whatever they can do is in vain, shee being built on the Rock, against which all the Powers of Hell shall not prevail. Their Disputes serve for nthing but to clear her Doctrine, their Controversies but to confirm her Faith, their Persecutions but to Crown her sufferings, their unchristian Maxims against the Evangelical Counsels of voluntary Poverty, vowed Chastity, and a retired, humble, devote, austere, and obedient life, but to make more gloriously appear, the incomparable San∣ctity, Holiness, and Vertues of her Saints. And this is the third thing remarkable in the Apostles and Primitive Christians, which in all following Ages hath so gloriously shined in the Catholick Roman Church, their examplary ho∣liness in following Christ by renouncing to the World, living chast, contemning both Riches and Pleasures, their holy hatred of themselves, the hardship of their travels, and labours for the conversion of others, their continual Fasting, and frequent Prayer. This Mark of the Churches Sanctity is set down in the Creed, I be∣lieve
the holy Catholick Church; It is confirmed by Authority of Scripture, S. Paul in the begin∣ning of all his Epistles almost, calling the Churches to which he writes, holy, as in that to the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians, Philippi∣ans, and Colossians, as S. Peter calls the Church generally the holy Nation, it is also Visible to all; as the goodness of a Tree is seen by the Fruit, so the holiness of the Church, by her Works. Now let us see in what Church the greatest Lights of the Christian Religion have shined? what Church hath most Monuments of Christi∣an piety? in what Church the Examples of Christ and his Apostles, have been most narrow∣ly followed? Who have built most glorious and goodly Edifices of Churches to the honour and for the service of God; who so many Mo∣nasteries to harbour his more devoted Servants; who so many Hospitals for the poor? who best Evidenced true Faith by good Works? who have most put in practice all the hardest Max∣ims of the Gospel? who taken greatest pains for the Salvation of Souls? who show'n greatest love towards God, and greatest charity to their neighbour? whether Papists giving so liberally to God and his Church, or Protestants taking back what they had given? By their Fruits ye shall know them, says our Saviour Christ, our actions give testimony of our Faith. The holy Fathers writing so many lives of our Saints, witness e∣nough their unparallel'd piety, yea and God
himself working so many Miracles by them. How many Princes and Monarches in the Ca∣tholick Roman Church, have laid down their Crowns at the foot of the Cross, have quitted Kingdoms, renounced pleasures, forsaken the World, taking themselves to a poor, humble, mortified, and austere life? how many thou∣sands, yea millions of Eremits, Monks, and other Religious persons, men and women have total∣ly consecrated their lives to the service of God? No Age, no Order, no degree of Persons in this Church wanteth most Eminent men in Sanctity and Holiness: Above 30. Popes have been all most glorious Martyrs, besides many more Saints, as our Gregories, Leo's, Celestines, &c. our holy Bi∣shops are in number above the Stars of the fir∣mament, and our Priests and Religious like the Sand of the Sea: S. Henry Emperour, S. Lovis K. of France, S. Edward King of England, S. Mal∣colme and S. David Kings of Scotland, with S. He∣lena Mother to Constantine the great, S. Marga∣ret, S. Cunegund, S. Elizabeth, and many others all Kings and Queens, have shown the Sanctity of our Monarchs. See the holy Court, and Histo∣ry of the Church for the holiness of so many a∣mongst the Nobility and Gentry, and the Lives of our Saints, and Writings of the Fathers, for the eminent virtues of innumerable f others, both amongst the Gentry and Commons. S. Chry∣sostome, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Bernard, and
other holy Fathers having honoured their Me∣mory, and Festival days with most Eloquent Ser∣mons in their praise, as God by his Omnipoten∣cy and Power, hath sealed their sanctity with undoubted Miracles, both in their Lives, and in their Deaths. What can all the Sectaries which have ever been, shown like to this, or what can they say against it? shall it be that all are not Saints even amongst our most Austere Religious men? but neither were all Saints amongst the Apostles; and the Primitive Church even in their time wanted not its scandals, which showeth it was not only composed of the Elect: the total separation of the good from the bad, is not the work of men now, but of the Angels at the last day; till then as the Tares grow up in the best Fields of Corn, so shall there be ever many wicked and scanda∣lous in the true Church. But out of it, no Saints, no safety for sinners, no Sacraments that sancti∣fie, no means of reconciliation with God. I insist not here any further on the other Marks of the true Church, as their Antiquity, U∣niversality, Unity, and the very name of Catho∣lick, which are to be found at length verified of the Roman Church, in many whole and large Vo∣lumes. No other Church having eer been ge∣nerally called by this name, or known under it, but all by their private Denominations, as the Arians, Pelagians, Eutychians, Macedonians, &c.
in Old; so the Lutherians and Calvinists now. And if we call this Catholick or Universal Church also the Roman Church, we speak with S. Paul calling the Catholick Faith spread through the whole world, theirs. No other Church having constantly appeared visible in her Pastors and people, by a continued successi∣on from the Apostles, which held S. Augustine in her, Tenet me in Ecclesiâ, says he, Successie fa∣cerdotum, I am holden in the Church by the suc∣cession of Priests, then he reckons out the only high Priests and Bishops of Rome as the lawful Successors of S. Peter, as in his 162. Epistle, he says, in the Roman Church has ever been the Authority of the Apostolick Sea, In ecclesiâ Ro∣manâ semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit authori∣tas. No other having unity in Faith, or the means to preserve it by General Councils, which have all been holden in her. No other, and spe∣cially the Protestant Church, having either U∣niversality or Antiquity, as is clear from their late Rise, and little Extent. Whatever Protestants and other Sectaries so∣phistically or Subtilly Object against all this, is but weak, and should stumble none, many stronger Objections, Atheists, Infidels, and Hereticks have made against God, our Saviour Christ, and the holy Scripture. The first Principles most clear by the light of Nature, suffer their Objections, whence the Scepticks amongst Philosophers, as the
Socinians amongst Hereticks, those admitting of nothing as unquestionably clear, and these as infallibly true. Wherefore to conclude all, I have said: the Catholick Roman Church being so gloriously marked, so generally attested, and so notori∣ously known to be the true Church established by Christ and his Apostles, ever conspicuous and visible, ever working Miracles, converting Infidels, making Saints; ever holding Councils, deciding controversies, keeping unity, opposing Hereticks, and maintaining true Faith upon Solid and Infallible Grounds, having so clear testimony from the Fathers, from Scrip∣ture, from God; having charisma veritatis cer∣tum, the Gift and Grace of certain and infallible Truth, says S. Irenaeus; origines firmas, sure begin∣nings saith Tertullian, Veritatem undequaque mu∣nitam, verity solidly grounded and guarded, says S. Epiphanis, haeres. 55. authoritatem stabilis∣simam, most solid and constant Authority, says S. Augustine, Ep. 8. may  not say justly with our Countryman Richard of S. Victor, l. 1. de Tri∣nit. c. 2. Si error est quem credimus à te decepti sumus. If it be Error we do believe (in this Church, and upon her Authority) it is thou (O God) who hath deceived us, for with such signs this Doctrine is confirmed, that it can be from no other but thee. Let the impartial Reader here compare both Protestant Grounds and Doctrine with ours,
and see, after all their Objections and Cavils, what they bring for their new, doubtful, and in∣constant Opinions, against our old infallible and constant Faith: what against our just claim, our clear right, our long and uninterrupted possessi∣on. They come in with the Scripture in hand, as the Fundamental Law against which there can be no prescription, but what Scripture, I pray you, save that they have wrested from us? olim possi∣deo, prior possideo, says Tertullian, it was first de∣livered to us, we have it of old, and we con∣serve it whole and intire. But not so Prote∣stants; the many Books they reject shows it is but like a torn bond in their hands, blotted in as many places, as there be things put in of new, or others rased out in their Bibles. And then as they bring it, it is altogether forceless, and can make no security as a rent Charter without Subscription, Witness, or Seal: Gods Subscip∣tion would be seen and acknowledged if it were presented by them, as at first by the Apostles with Supernatural  Motives: wit∣nesses, if they could show it handed down from age to age by infallible Propounders; his-Seal in Miracles. But the Protestant Church granting her self to be fallible, and being destitute both of infallible Motives of credibility and miracles, can be no sure propounder of Gods Word, nei∣ther can it as propounded by her, be any sure ground to us.
Yea, Examine well all the Principles Prote∣stants build their Pretended Reformation upon, and you shall find them all mearly Whimsecal, Paradoxal▪ and improbable. For what Proba∣bility can there be, 1. Of what they say against us, that the Popish Church (as they call it) which they grant to be most antient, should have continued so long, and ever possessed the greatest part of the Christian World holding Councils, condemning Heresies, converting In∣fidels, working Miracles, and that the Prote∣stant Church which they will have to be the Ca∣tholick or Universal, all this time was no where to be found, never once made mention of by any Author; without Councils, Statutes, or Laws published to the World; never converting one Kingdom, opposing one Heresie, having one Wri∣ter of note witnessing her Faith and Doctrine, her doings or sufferings, her Pastors or People: That the antient Congregation diffused through the whole World, should be Heretical, and the new one in some few corners be Orthodox: That corruption of Doctrine did enter so insen∣sibly into the Roman Church, that no Councils, no Fathers did see or censure it, who have observed many lesser things in private men; that all the Fathers I have quoted in my 6. Section, should have unanimously holden ever since the A∣postles, what Protestants call Popish Er∣rors, or that so many Learned men in the Roman Church, who have dived into the very depth
of most abstract Sciences, could not see before Luther, what in Scripture was clear. 2. What probability for what they vent of their first Apostles and Reformers? that God did send one Apostate Friar (who in the Mona∣stery as he confesseth lived so mortified, chast, and devote, but quitting it, is so hurried with his passions of Lust, and stings of Conscience even for this his new Doctrine, as may be seen in the Preface of his Works in Latine, and his Table Conferences) without any visible mark of his Mission, to reform both his Word and Church, in opposition to all her ordinary Pastors at that time: that the Church before him (I mean Luther) as he himself glories, should have been destitute of the true Letter and sense of Scripture, of true Worship, true form of Government, &c. that notwithstanding so many solemn promises made by God, the Word should not depart out of the mouths of Pastors, nor the true Church be so much as obscured, yet that Christ should have suffered the light of the Gospel to be under a Bushel, and the Cuhrch invisible for more then a thousand years: That his Reformation should be the work of God, and the world ever worse since it: That Protestancy should bring back true Faith, which is divided into so many Heresies, and has caused so many Troubles, Divi∣sions and Schisms. 3. What show of probability or solidity in Pro∣testant
grounds? that the ground of Faith (which they will have to be sole Scripture as every one reads, and understands) should support all the Heresies in the World: That this Ground gi∣ven us for keeping of Unity, should make all our Divisions in Religion: To deny the Autho∣rity and Tradition of the Church infallible, and yet take Scripture on it; that the whole Repre∣sentative Church in a General Council is not in∣fallible in its Decrees, and yet private men read∣ing Scripture are infallible in what they believe: That what was at the Margent in their first Bibles, would be now put in the Text: That pure Scrip∣ture should be a cleer Ground for Protestancy, and not one Point specifical, or special to it, to be found in Scripture in express words: In fine, that Protestants should have the pure Word, and rely on the Originals; their best Writers granting they have not found so much as an Authentick Copy any where. If you will see what probability at last they have either for their Doctrine or Church, consi∣der amongst Protestants (with the Author of a late Answer in Writ) Faith without Unity, a Bo∣dy without united Members, a Law without a Judg, a Church without an Altar, Religion with∣out a Sacrifice, Sacraments that do not sanctifie, Divine Service without Religious Ceremonies, Preachers without a call, Doctrine without Infallibi∣lity, Belief without a ground; Commands impossible
to be kept, Exhortation to what is not in our power, Reward without Merit, Reprobation without demerit, Sin punished where there is no free will, new Apostles without Mission or Miracles, Reformation without Authority, the private Spirit against the whole Church, new lights against old revealed Verities, single mens Opinions against the common consent of the Fathers, Scripture received or rejected upon the Catalogue of the Jews; in a word, wavering Pastors, unsetled Government, unstable Faith. FINIS.
