B3126 18177012 106895
GODS SOVERAIGNITY, HIS SACRED MAJESTIES SUPREMACY, THE SUBJECTS DUTY. Asserted in a SERMON, Preached before his MAJESTIES High COMMISSIO∣NER, and the Honourable PARLIAMENT of the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND, At Edinburgh, the 31. of March, 1661. By Mr. HUGH BLAIR, Minister of the Gospel at GLASGOW. Give unto Cesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God, the things which are Gods, Mat. 22. 21. Jam pleno redeant tempora circulo Promissumqumque serant diem. Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu & Reges constituuntur. Irenaeus lib. 5. c. 24. GLASGOW, Printed by ROBERT SANDERS, and are to be Sold at his Shop: ANNO DOM. 1661.
TO THE TRULY HONOURABLE, AND NOBLE LORD, The EARLE of MIDLETON, Lord Clairmont and Fettercairn, His Ma∣jesties High Commissioner for SCOTLAND. May it please your GRACE, I Can not so overlove and overvalue this ensuing Discourse, as to hold it worthy of Your GRACES judicious eyes, much less of Your HIGHNESSE Patronage, yet now my verie dutie hath commanded me to look thus high, and tells it would be no lesse then injurious, if I should not lay down my work where I discharged my service, and that I should offend, if I presumed not tus: Whether should the Rivers run, but into the Sea whence they came. This being first Preached upon a call from Your GRACE, and the Honourable Court of PARLIAMENT, and being a little Mite from one who desires to carrie in his bosome a Religious and Loyal heart to GOD the Supreme Law-giver, and o our Sacred SOVERAIGN. May it please Your GRACE therefore, with an favourable aspect to look upon this as a present for CAESAR, though a verie mean one, yet the little All I have, and as a testimonie of that Religiou Reverend, and due respect I owe to Your GRACE, for the undeserved favour soown to Your GRACES humble, and unworthie Servant, knowing also that such Pieces are oboxicus to the
obloquies, malice, & envy of some, whether could I flee more rationally for shelter then o Your GRACES Parociny and Protection, whose high understanding in all knowledge Divine and Humane, and espe∣cially in these Primitive Truths here asserted, is no mean accession to all Your oter Noble and Heroicall indowments. Much is now expected rom Your GRACE, both by the Almightie GOD, raising and reviv∣ing Your GRACE as another Joseph out of the Dungeon, and another Jonah out of the blly of the Whale, the depths of the earth; And from Your Sacred SOVERAIGN, thus exalting You to this highest Pinacle of Honour, and for reviving the languishing Laws of this withering Nation. Unto all which that Your GRACE may be sutablie answerable, and that the LORD may make You eminentlie instrumentall as a skilfull Pilot, to bring this tossed and only not sinking Vessell of this poor distracted Church and State to the desired Harbrie of truth and peace, and for restoring His MA∣JESTIES just Piviledges, and Royal Prerogatives: And that the Grace of GOD may be assistant to Your GRACE to go on in the Work of GOD, and Your GRACES Master, THE LORDS ANOINTED, the breath of our nostrils: Shall be the humble desire and heartie prayer of him who is lesse then the least of Your GRACES Servants. So intreating this may passe under Your GRACES favourable Patrocinie: And commending Your GRACE to the Protection of the ALMIGHTY GOD. I am, and remain still, Your GRACES in all humble observance and duty, HEW BLAIR.
GODS SOVERAIGNITY, HIS SACRED MAJESTIES SUPREMACY, THE SUBJECTS DUTY. PSAL. 82. 1. God standeth in the Congregation of the mighty: He judgeth among the gods. THere is here a Congregation, yea, a Congregation of great ones, yea, of Gods, convocat and congregat together. And O how necessary is Gods presence in all Congregations and Assemblies; even as necessary as the presence of the soul is to the body naturall, as necessary is his presence to the body politicall, or as the Sun to the air and to the earth, to recreate all with his light, to revive all with his hot beams; therefore Moses the supream Magistrate, the hie Governour, who was appointed to lead his people like a flock through the wildernesse, he doth breath out this as the marrow of all his desires, that the Lord would go alongst with him, If thy presence go not with me, let us not go up hence, for wherein shall it be known here, that I and thy people have found favour in thy sight, is it not in that thou goest with us, so shall we be separate from all the people which are on the face of all the earth, Exod. 33. 15. And as his presence is necessary, so it is promised here to you thus convocate together, he who said, Mat. 18.20. Wheresoever two or three come together in my Name, there will I be in the midst of them, in futuro, here he performeth what he had promised, and saith in praesenti, God standeth, &c. Surely that deep wound given to his Disciples by our dear Lord, Yet a little while and ye shall not see me; fil∣led their heart with so much sorrow, that it was only curable by that plaister and promise, Behold I am with you, Mat. 18.20. , O that every one in this great Congregation might say from his personall experience, with divine Bernard, nunquam à te, absque te recedo, I never come to to thee in any Ordinance, duty, dispensation, that I go away without thee, without some lively stamp up on my spirit, speaking thy presence with me, expect then in faith, and ye shall enjoy his presence, even in him, in whom all the promises of God are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Keep thy promise made to thy servants, wherein thou hast caused us to trust, Psal. 119.49. These words begin in the Hebrew Text, as the sacred Bible, with a Verb in the singular, and a Name in the plurall Number, Elohim Nitsab, as Barah Elohim, dii stat, as dii creavit, that as the ineffable mystery of the blessed Trinity of Persons is holden forth in the unity of Essence in the one, so the presence of the blessed Trinity is holden out here, or to point out the necessity of unity, unani∣mity
and sweet harmonie among you who are thus convocat together, so what is in the Pluall Num∣ber in the first and last words, is in the Singular in the midst of the Verse, that alone is Gods own Congregation, as Grotius observes here, which is thus lawfully convocat and united. PSAL. 82. 1. God standeth in the Congregation, &c. There is here couched up together in these words three secret and sacred Riddles, which only can be understood by these who plough with his Heifer. 1. Here is Jehovah the only God, yet mention of many gods, yea, these many gods convocat, called, countennced by this one God. Hath not this great Jehovah said, Thou shalt have no other gods bfore my face, but me, Exod. 20.3. and, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, Deut. 6. 4. Yet that same Jehovah here creating and approving many gods, countenancing and authorizing them in their great Congregation, stamping them thus created and convocat, with such deep impre∣sions of divine Majestie, power and authority, that Divinum quid in illis appareat, when Moses went up to the Mount, little difference betwixt Aaron and him, but when he came down as Law-giver, with the two Tables of stone in his hand, then his face did so shine, that not only all Israel, but Aa∣ron himself could not behold him, but did all flee from him, Exod. 34.29,33. Such brightnesse of glory was put on him, as the supream Magistrat, and as eustos utriusque tabulae, Gods then they are unto men, but they are but men unto God, therefore as he behoved to be vailed when he spake to Israel, so when he went to speak with God he took off hi vail, his brightnesse to men, was but basenesse to God, and so the Aposle, 1 Cor. 8.5,6. looseth this Riddle, though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or earth (as there b gods many, and lords many) But to us there is but one God, the Father of whom are all things, and we by him, even these gos have their being as men, as Christians, as gods from this one God, from him and for him as their Alpha and Omega. 2. This one great Jehovah standeth, these many and petty gods sitting in their Congegation, we know that standing is the posture of a servant befoe his Master, and sitting the posture of the Master befoe the Servant, Blessed are these thy servants, which stand alway before thee, said the Queen of Seba to Solomon, 1 King. 10.8. And you shall have place among them that stand by, is promised to Zechariah, Zech. 3.7. Joshua even with his Mitre, as hie Priest, see for this also, Luk. 17. 7, 8. Or it is the posture of the Paty to stand, and the Judge to sit; Hence, Moses father in Law sayes to him, Exod. 18.14. What is this thing thou dost to the people? Why fittest thou thy self alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning to even? Yet here the Master is brought in as standing, the servants sitting, the Party sitting, the Judge standing: This though spoken then  is to be understood . 1. Then he standeth, as standing is opposed to falling, ver. 6. He will stand when they all shall fall as men, Job 19. 25. Or, he standeth as attentive to all that is spoken or done by you as gods in his Name and stead, he standeth then not only as present with you, but seriously and attentively, observing every one of your hearts, voices, acts passing fom you, weighing them all in the Ballance of the Sanctuary. Or, he standeth as waiting for an Invitation to be intreated to sit down with you, Behold I stand at the door and knock, &c. Rev. 3. 20. Or doth he stand, because he alone can make all stand fast which is inacted by you, The Counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all gene∣rations, He spake and it was done, He commanded and it stood fast, otherwise who is he that sayeth, and it cometh to passe, when the Lord commandeth it not; If you do all as from him, as before him, as for him, he will sit down with you, and make all stand fast which is done be you. The 3 Riddle is, This great Jehovah with whom is no variablenesse, nor shadow of changing, yet, here changing his site, with these many and mighty, yet petty gods, and taking the place due to him and sitting down on the bench, even as the Supream Judge, and bringing these gods thus congre∣gat before his barr, to give an accompt to him of all he hath done in the body, as men and
Christians, much more of all you have done, or shal do in this their bodie made up of so many gods to ender to every one according to his works done in the body, and the Acts of this their body thus convocat, which is a great check to their high and honourable tittle of gods given you in the text, least dotting too much with Narissus on their own shaddow, some wetigo sould overtake you, while ye sit as gods: Behold an antidot to prevent this, ye shall dye as one ex vulgo yee Pinces, shal be judged their selves who judge others, two ingredients of death, and judgment to make their plumes to fall, and their combs to crowch, you sit on the Bench, He standeth, but you shall stand at the Bar, and He sit down on the Throne to all Eternity, and your Lordships shal think it your great∣est happinsse to have places to walk among these that stand by, Zach. 3. 7. But how judgeth hee, among the gods, in the Original it is Bekerbelohim, in medio deorum the 70. turn it  in the mids, and surely the word is taken for the mids and inward parts of e∣very one, Jer. 31. 33. Ps. 49.11. In the mids then, 1. As the center of their felicity as Men and Christians, the oul finds no rest, can have no satisfaction but in him, or as the center of their Au∣thority as gods and Judges, yee have all from him, and shall be accomptable to Him. Or, in medio to keep you in unity among your selves, surely after our Lord arose from the dead, twise did our Saviour come unto his Disciples, the Doors being shut, and stood in the midstst, and said, peace be unto you, Joh. 20. 19. 26. so doth He now judge in medio. Or, is it in medio singulorum, having his Deputy sitting in the midst of every one of you, as His Depuies on Earth, accusing or excusing, cherrishing or convincing each of you, so Kreb imports. Or in medio betwixt you all, in that day when he shall make the separation and set some of you it may be on his right hand, and some on his left, if there be any left handed men, here, which (God forbid) who for a bribe, or for respect to persons will pervert Justice and Judgement. Or, in medio Deorum, because of his supream, and illimited Power and Authority over all, all creatures must be subject to him, He ruleth therefore in the midst of his enemies. Ps. 110. 3. All must submit to His Soveraignity, and when the Son himself shall be subject, as Man and Mediator, His mediatorie Kingdome being at an end, then shall all these gods be subject also, that God may be all in all to all eternitie: which the very Hathen saw be the light of nature, so the Poet saith, Regum timendorum in proprios greges Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis. Clari Gigontaeo triumpho Cuncta supercilio moventis. Therefore Calvin saith, Who could have expected such a Testimony from a Heahen of the Al∣mighty Power of this great Jehova, be his brow commanding all, and subduing all thee gyants on earth so called: Gen. 6. be his verie frowning upon them. The last thing is He judgeth, eiher in praesenti, because these gods judge in His Name, and somtime He even on earth executeth judgement in the view of the world on evill doers, that man may say Verily there is a God that judgeth on earth, as wel as a God that will judge from Heaven; Ps. But in the Originall their spot is in the future, because he hath appointed a day, wherein Hee will judge the world, and sentence against every evill Work, and Worker is not executed speedily, He is so patient and long-suffering, giving every one time to judge themselves, and that with a pro∣mise, If yee will judge your selves, you shal not be judged: Thus for the explication of the Words. But I hasten to the Divine truths holden out, in these Words, 1. I see that the high and Ho∣nourable Tittle o being gods, is given here to Judges and Magistrats, especially to the Supream One, even be his Great and only Almighty Jehovah, and that Kings hold their Cown, Scepter, and Sword, Honour, Power, and Authoity immediatly from God: v. 6. Ego dixt Dii est is. 2 That it is expedient, yea sometimes necessar that those Magistrats, Judges and Law-givers, be congregat together, and that lawfully, by the Power and Authority of the Supream Magistrat, for the Word Guadah, signifieth only such a Congegation as is cited and convocat together be Autho∣rity,
being come from Jagnad condicere coetum, judicere locum & tempus conventus: see Ex. 12. 3. 21. convocat be Moses is thus called. There is an Hebrew Word Kalah that signifieth any, though tumultuary and unlawfull meeting, as Ex 32. 1. as well as lawfull; but Guadah is never used but for a lawfull Congregation gathered, citante Magistratu, and a Synagogue be the Archi-Synagogues, named were no other lawful Syna∣gogues: Acts 18. 8. 17. As the light which for three dayes was dispersed throw the whole Hea∣vens, Hee was pleased to gather together in one body, and unite into one Sun, that that one Star might be the Treasury of Light both to Heaven and Earth, to show how well this God of Order loveth the union and reduction of all things of one kinde, to their own head and center; so the ge∣neral Light diffused in the three dayes, was called together, and compassed in one Sun . So Stars Ye are my Lords, and Stellae primae magnitudinis, yet one must be to you thus convocat your Sun, by whose Authority alone ye come together, and by whose lightsome Beams heat, and influences you are countenanced and cherished in this your Congregation, and so you give light to the Inferiour World, yea, so pleasant is this subordination to the God of Order, that when He had made two great Lights in the Firmement, The one to rule the Day, the other the Night. Gen. 1. 16. Yet will he have all the World taking notice, that the one of them borrowes all its Light from the other. If ye be fair as the Moon, he is clear as the Sun, ere Ye can be terrible as an army with banners: If ye be all of you the Sons of the most High, yet is he the first born, whose priviledge it is, Be thou Lord over thy Brethren, and let thy Mothers Sons bow down to thee. Gen. 27. 29. And so God hath given in the Heavens an Sacred Emblem of the Royal Monarchick Power in a subordination of all Powers unto Him as , no coordination with the Supream Power, Nec Regna socium ferre, nec tae dae sciunt: The Throne and the Bed admit of no rivals one or many, he must then be as your Sun, Aureo vitalique calore suo, vos cunstos creatque fovetque alitque. Ps. 19. 6. 7. And therefore when the 70 Elders were to ease Moses of his insupportable burthen under which he groaned and complained to the Lord, Numb. 11. 16. 7. The Lord himself commandeth those 70 to come to the doore of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and there I will come down and talk with Thee; and I will take off the Spirit that is upon Thee Moses, and I will put it upon them and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee: O the great necessity then of their Depen∣dance on their Supream Lord: How is it here eminently and clearly holden out, while He calls the Spirit of Government gevin the 70 Elders, (which were the Parliament of Israel?) No, the Spirit of God (though it be so mediate) but the Spirit of Moses, from Him the Power is derived both for Convocation, Gubernation, and Action, So that KINGS are that same to the State Po∣litick which humid radicall is to the body naturall, for as when it is dryed up the blood becomes pituit, and hurtfull Predominant humors do infest the body, so in those Dayes wherein there was no KING in Israel, See what fell out: Judg. 17. 6. &c. 3. Observ. The presence of God as it is exceeding necessar to those Gods thus convocat, so is it given and performed as is promised. 4. That this his presence is in posture of standing, and that God is very attentive and diligently observeth, their whole carriage in all particulars coming before them. And as it is spoken of the land of Israel as its Piviledge, The eyes of the Lord thy God are alwaies upon it from the beginning of the Year to the end of it; Deut. 11. 12. So from the beginning of Your sitting down, to the close, the Eyes of the Lord Your God are upon You, even those Eyes of the Lord which run to and fro tho∣row the Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of those whose heart is perfect. 2 ch. 16. 9. 5. That this God who standeth as a Witnesse will sit down, as a Judge, the only Judge: And this is in futuro: This judge is so mercifull, that He giveth those Judges, yea all Men tyme to Judge themselves and fit them for Judgement. 6. That He Judgeth in medio, and that You all shall be gathered by His Angels on his Right
or Left Hand, and hear His sentence, whcih shall stand in force to all Eternity So that You may all say of Your selves of those Words as David saith of Himself, Ps. 102. 10. Thou hast lifted mee up and cast me down again. O how highly are Ye exalted be Him from whom promotion cometh! In the first, But O how low are Ye laid in the close of this verse, when brought to the bar before this Righteous Judge. 1. Doct. That this high and Honourable Title of being Gods is given, &c. To Judges and Magistats qua tales, and therefore in a higher Degree to him who is higher be the shoulders then You all. They are fist intituled so be the Prophet, v. 1. And least this should seem to drop from the pen of the Prophet without a warrand from him by whose Command they speak, the Lord is brought in, v. 6. speaking Emphatice, Ego dixi Dii estis, and this is not only verbum . But if I may call it so , even by the same Word whereby He created all things, and cal∣led those things which were not, as if they were his Word being his Work. Dixit, & facta sunt omnia, dixi & facti estis Reges, Qui Coelos verbi Reges verbo ille creavit, dicendo fecit quos jubet esse Deos. Gods calling, it is still that makes the difference betwixt pesons and things, surely the rod of Aaron laid up in the Tabernacle, Ex. 17. was not more precious in the matter of it, being of that same Wood, neither were the Characters fairer, but be Gods calling and confiming him in it be its budding and blossoming, as Moses and Aaron, are differenced, so is Aaron from the rest of the Princes and Competitors, Therefore Justinus sayes on this place, . And hee from whom they have their Name, from him also they have their Power sutable to this their name, per me Reges regnant By me there is great odds betwixt the giving of Names in the Person of One, and in the Person of Another, a Creature may give to its Fellow-creature Nomen rei, but onlie the Creator giveth it rm Nominis. Our fist Mother called her Son Cain, a Builder, but hee proved a Destroyer: The wisest of KINGS, His Son Rehoboam a gatherer of the People, be∣hold he scattered ten Tribes from him at one impudent answe; But when God giveth the name, so the thing futeable to it, as when he changeth Abrams Name to Abraham, He saith, For a Father of many Nations have I made Thee, Gen. 17. 5. So hath hee given the Kingly power and Divine stamp of Authoritie, by calling them Gods on Earth. I hear also that proud father of lies, promising the same to our first parents, when he tempted them to eat of the forbidden fruit, Gen. .5. though it be in futuro, you shall be as Gods, yet never inten∣ding to give what he promised, nor being able to perfom though he had intended it, for he lyed when he said, all these are mine, Mat. 4. And hath he not deceived many in these our last and worst dayes, propheiet of by Paul, wherein there should be many traitors, headie, and hie-minded, 2 Tim. 3. 45.  &c. by the ame proffer tempting them to eat of the forbidden fruit, Psal. 105.15. Touch not mine anointed. The lap of whose garment cannot be touched by godly Davids, but their heart will smite them, 1 Sam. 24.4. Surely if this lyar with this bait had not intised and prevailed with many, so many had not been found ready to rub reproaches, cast aspesions on, and root out so far as in them lay, Sacred and Royal Au∣thority, whom God hath now made to lick the dust as men, yea, as stinging, subtill, deceived, and deceiving serpents, yea not as base men only, but as devils, tepting many o sin with them, their memory as of devils to be dtestable to all posterity: So great difference there is betwixt him who saith in praesenti, dii stis, and him who promiseth in futuro dii critis, heaken never then hereafter to such a liar, surely thir Kingdoms have drunk deep of Pandora's Box, by heakening to this subtill and inchanting Serpent. And lest this should only seem to be Old Testament, as the Anabaptiss fondly dream, we have our Saviour asserting the same under the New Testament, and that s a Law to stand in vigor for e∣ver: Is it not writen in their Law, I said ye are Gods. Joh. 10. 34. If he called them Gods unto whom the word of God came and the Scripture cannot be boken, i. e. with the best expositors, the
warrand and commission to be Magistrats, who thus have their Commission and Designation to their Office from God, though this may be in an ordinary call, even by men; so he poves it law∣ful to give them this Title of Gods (with a due subordination to him alone by whom they are such) and to ow and bea all reveent regard, both to their Persons, Places, and Power, and to have an high esteem of such Assemblies as this, when so many Gods are gathered together by lawfull Authoritie So th KING is thus created as a God upon Earh by Him who saith, per me Reges regnant and this pr is not permission only as we say, per me licet, the Hebrew  nor the Greek , not admiing this, but it is a per creativum like that per ipsum facta sunt omnia, by Him all things wre made. Joh. 1. 3. Yea, it is per approbativum, God approving this Government above others, therfoe sayes tht Qeen of Sheba to Solomon; Because the Lord thy God loved Israel; therefore hth He given thee to be KING over them: 1 Kings 10. 9. Yea, per praeservativum like that Col. 3. 18. by Him all things consist, God in a speciall manner owning the Interest of KINGS, and taking them into his own proection. It is he that giveth deliverance to Kings, and preserveth David His Servant from the hurtfull sword. Ps. 144. 10. And this day is this fulfilled in Your ears and eyes: Yea, I may say it is per decretivum, or a per by a Decree and Comission from God, for the powers that are ordained of God, Rom. 13. 1. , even like that decree of our Election, for this same word is used by the Apostle, Acts 13.48. . As many as were ordained to Eternall life believed, so that if the decee of Election be Effectual for Salvation, this Decree for the Supream Powers is to stand in force for ever for establishing of KINGS on the Throne; and so we must not only obey for fear, but or conscience sake: He is not given ex importunitate populi, For though it be true that they did by their pecipitancie anticipat and hasten the pace of his purpose, in which respect it is said, dedi vobis Rgem in ira mea, Hos. 13. 11. yet that the Lord did purpose to govern his Israel by KINGS and Monarchie, not by Aristocracie, or Democracie. It well appears by Jacobs Testa∣ment, that he puposed I say, to govern them by KINGS, and that of one Tribe and lineall succes∣sion while he saith; The Scepter shal not depart from Judah, nor the Law-giver from between his sect until Shiloh come, Gen. 49. 10. And be that of Moses giving Laws for the King thus set over all his Bethren of Isael, Deut. 17. 14. And as he gave them one of the Tribe of Benjamin (which was not the right and Royal Tibe) to chasten them for their importunity: So when he gave them One of the right and Royal Tribe, it was a man according to his heat, a David of the Tribe of Judah; yea, he promised to build him an house, and that he should not want a light in Israel. 2 Sam. 21. 17. 1 Kings 11. 36. And surely the keeping up of this Royall Race of our KINGS, in one Line for so many Generations, without interruption: And when of late He had chastened them with the ods of men, not taking his loving kindnesse from them, but cutting off so speedily, those blinded, deluded, and malicious enemies of Monachy, speaks eminently in the Ears, and to the hearts of all Gods people, his purpose to make the Throne of Our Sacred Soveraign, as the Sunne before Him, and to establish it for ever as the Moon, and as that faithfull witnesse in Heaven, and the performance of that Pomie; Their will I make the horn of David to bud. Ps. 89. 36. Ps. 132. 17. 8. O that still it may be so, a David with a cornu feriens & penetrans inimicos, and a cor∣nu germinans, budding, nempe post Hiemem temporalis desertionis, I have ordained a Lamp for my Aointed, and this Lamp never to want oyl. Ps. 92. 10. Thou shall anoint Him with fresh oyl the Dy whereof approacheth to our great joy, and sad may all their heats bee, who blesseth not God for this budding, and this furniture and supply of fesh oyl, from that Olive Tree standing before the Ruer of the whole earth. Zach. 4. 11. 14. KINGS then are justly thus intiuled and Authorized by God, Is it fit saith Elihu in Job to say to  KING Thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are ungodly: Job 34. 18. If he that reproacheth the poor, repoacheth his Maker; surely hee that repoaceth Princes, reproacheth much more their
Maker: Therefore, Solomon saith, where the word of a King is, there is Power, and who may say to Him, what doest thou? Eccl. 8. 4. And he giveth or this, a wholsome advice, I counsel thee to keep the KINGS commandement, and that in regard of the oath of God. Eccl. 8. 2. which, makes me the more to admire that great County-men of ours nisi deliquisset in vno, & hoc uu est instar omnium, who asserens idem jus esse multiudini &c. Anweing that objection of Paul to the Rom. chap. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. Thus replyes, that it was but temporary: quasi inquit Doctor quidam Ecclesiae jam scriberet ad Christianos sub turcis dgentes, ad homines re tenus, animo demissos & inermes & paucos & ad omnem omnium injuriam expositos, quid quaeso aliud consuleret; As if obedience Active and Passive were not due to him,  or . Tit 3. not only for fear, but for conscience sake, O the hallucination of such a one, as an evill Divine, pace tanti viri dixerim, as if obedience were only for fear or want of Power, when they have not  who have never ; But observe, 1. That he cals the blessed Apostle Doctor Ecclesiae, surely Doctor is but a ordinary Office-bearer in the Church, and may erre; while an Apostle is a extraordinary and cannot erre, And such an one was Paul, not inferiour to any of the Apostles; theefore he ought not to be intitu∣led by anie so. 2. That he speaks of the Roman Empire as if it were idem with that of the Turcik, where quicquid libet, licet: Surely the best of our Divines do otherwise assert, that the Roman Empire now being so long established, with consent, and having a Senate above them, though some per∣sonally were monsters among men, yet saith, Acts 25. 16. It is not the custome of the Romans to condemne any man unheard; Did not Chist himself, (our dear Lord) pay Tibute to Cesar, even by a miracle, and command us and them both? date Caesaris quae Caesari, Matth. 22. 21. and not to defraud Him of his due under pretext of quae Dei, Deo. 3. That he saith those precepts were but for a time, when Chrisians were weak &c. while all Divines agree that these Precepts do ever oblige and hold out the rule both for Princs to rule (so that they may be a terrour for evill doers) and people to obey not only for fear but for Conscience sake, surely the Armies of Theodosius did otherwise, oramus Domine non pugnamus, though they had these thundering Legions and had  but wanting the  never dust attempt to make use of their potentia not having poestatem a Domino. 4. That he saith, tho he name others whose duties he pesciveth, as of husbands and wives, yet he mentions not the name o the Magistrate, while as it is evident he nameth them expesly be thei most Honouable and Favourable Tittles of  v. 1. of  v 3. of ) Gods Deacons they are then, having powe ove othes, and the blssed Apostle Petr more particularly, who was with his Lord in the Mount , expesly with his Royall Prerogative, as . And that with all Infeiour Magistrats as : not referring this to  bt  as the best Divines agree, for this would not quaat with the scope, istinguishing so ex∣presly betwixt the Supeam and Subordinat Magistrat. 5. Did he think that that promise was unknown to Paul, made to the Church under the New Testament, I will make Kings thy nursing-fathers. Isa. 49.23. Had not Paul a large measure of that spirit, which dictat that Prophecy, o that as the lawfull Mgistrate is Pater Patriae, the Ro∣man Title, so he is Pater & nutritius Ecclesiae, the Sciptural Title, and how evil will it fare with a child when he wants a Father to provide for him, and a Nurse to feed him, let the expe∣rience of all ages witnesse: Surely, when there is no King in Israel, Judg. 17. 10. we fnd a Levit wandering without a charge, and maintainance, glad to be hyed, even with an Idolatrous Mi∣cah for ten Shekels of silver, a small som forsooth, about twenty five shillings; and for a sute of apparel. And how black coats were hated by these cursed usurpers, our sad expeience may wit∣nesse in these dismall dayes, of their prevalency, wherein we might have complained with Jere∣miah
Lam. 2. 6. Thou hast despised in thy inignation the King and the Priest; never shall wee fin Kings changed and espised, but the Priest-hood shall be despised and derided also, as in that under Jeroboam, 1 King. 12. Where every vile man might become a Priest. Far better, and more agreeable to Divine Truth, he who said , Basilius Bono prin∣cipi tvnquam Deo, malo propter Deum obediendum, or as another learned man aith, If the Prince be evill, it is not , but , not to the person, but to him who made him such. Gods they are representative, s his Deputies and Vicegerents on earth, à quibus nulla nisi ad ipsum deorum Deum dtur appellatio, Paul may appeal to Festus, to Cesar, but here he resteh, sisteth, the Lord himself leaving no other remedy to his people, but then shall ye cry unto me, 1 Sam. 8. 18. and indeed this is he sorrest of all appellations, if just. Or, as that wittie man said, à Caesare irato, ad Caesarem placatum. Therefore I find Moses the Supream Magistrate, Exod. 4.16. 7. 1. by the Lord himself called a god to Aaron first, and then to Pharaoh, to de∣notat his power over Aaron himself, and the Tribe of Levi, who are to be directed by him in the way of going about outy, his power being supream both in Ecclesiasticos, Rom. 13.1. Every soul, si quis conatur excipere intendit decipere: And in Ecclesiasticis, ad extra, ad intra, as Uzi∣ah challenged, and Saul no Christian Prince will claim right, or ought to do so, but in convo∣canda, moderanda, confirmanda sinodo, power is given him, but of this, infra, therefore is there so great ifeence betwixt the Rod of Aaron, and the Rod of Moses, when God called Moses to the Magistacy, Exod. 4. 3. he turned his Rod into a Serpent, that stingeth unto death, but when Aaron his dry stick only became fruitfull. The Rod so laid in, brought forth buds, and blossomed blossoms, and brought forth ripe Almonds, Numb. 17.8. The power of the Church is for edification, not for destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10. So there is the Embleme of the Supreme Magi∣strates power in the one Rod, And the power of the Church in the other, which is to make the dead, dry, witheing stock or soul fruitfull in every good word and work. And a God he is to Pharaoh also to inflict be his authority sad and fatall judgements on the wicked, and oppressours of his people, and to denounce war against forraign Nations, infesting them, as the prerogative of these, to whom he said, dii est is. Gods they are also, because as it is not lawfull for any creature to search into the secrets which he hath not revealed, there is a foolish wisdom, saperc supra quod scriptum est, to be wise above what is written; so thee is a wise ignorance in not prying too much into the Ark, which the Bethshe∣mites payed dear for, as scrutator Majestatis opprimetur à gloria, so it is never well with a State when they begin to dispute the prerogatives of a Prince, or search them to the bottom, here is abyssus magna, thee is some arcanae imperii, not curiously to be searched into; as who knoweth the power of his wrath, Pal. 90. so, the wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lyon, Pov. 19.12. Cum numine ut igne, nec distes nimiumve procul nimiumve propinques. Be not righteous over much, (saith Solomon) neither make thy self over wise, why shouldest thou destroy thy self, Eccl. 7.17. Now because dignity is ever attended with duty, and the Lord never soweth liberally upon any soil but he expecteth a crop suteable: Much being required of them to whom much is given, Luk. 12.48. Let us see the Uses of this Doctrine, and these shall be in 3. things. 1. What these gods thus created by him, ow to this great JEHOVAH giving them this prerogative. 2. What we ow to God for them. 3. What we ow to them in the Lord. 1. Of these gods thus authorized, it is required that they be humble and thankfull to this their great and dreadfull Lord who hath thus exalted them, therefore David saith, 2. Sam. 7. 18, 20. Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? And, is this the
manner of men, O Lord God. 20. And what can David say more nto thec? And O how he bleseth the Lord as the Author of all his geatnesse, 1 Chron. 29. 10,14. Let that of the Apostle be oft meditat upon, quis te discrevit, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who differenced thee? And what hast thou which thou hast not received? For of him, and through him, and for him are all things, Rom. 11.36. 2. Of them is required that they be like God, having more lively characters of his Majestie, grace, goodnesse, power, justice and mercy gaven on them in great letters, He that rulth among men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: And he shall be as the light of the morning, &c. 2 Sam. 23.3 4. O what manner of persons ought they to be in all holy conversation and godlinesse 2 Pet. 3.11. As in their placs above others, so in their graces and gifts, beyond o∣thes, being changed from glory to glory into that same image, as by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. that they may come as near as possible to the rem nominis, as well as they have from him nomen rei. 3. That their Courts and attendants study to be like these blessed Seraphims that are about the Throne of the King of kings, and deorum Deum, holinesse becometh thy house, saith David, and holinesse is suteable to their house, therefoe David thus exalted, promiseth to walk uprightly in the midst of his house, and that his eyes shall be unto the faithfull of the Land, &c. It is expedient that not only their more immeiat attendants, but that all these who are nearer to him, and weigh the danger aright, to shun all show of impiety and prophanity. There is so nigh a relation be∣twixt these that are gods and the people over whom they are, so that the sin of the one reacheth to the judgement of the other, and the judgement of the one to the smart of both: The King is as the Head, the people as the Stomack, is the Head be sick, the Stomack is disaffected, David sins, the people die, 2. Sam. 24.15. if the stomack be sick, the head complains; For the transgrs∣sions of the people are many Princes, Prov. 28. 2. both at once and successively, and all evill. Yea, when the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, he moved Dauid against them to say, Go number Israel, 2 Sam. 24. 1. the very sins of the Princes have oft their rise from the sins of the people: the dayes were when the sufferings of the Nations were charged mainly on the Kings Family, but if we had viewed and weighed our selves aright, what Tribe of all our Israel could have exeemed our selves from being accessory to these sad judgements, wherewith we were nigh crushed. But let me speak it confidently, as every sin is a traitor to a mans own soul, so every wicked man is a traitor to his King, yea every one of his crying sins is powder and bimstone hid in his pocket, to blow up both his Soveraign and his State, even Matchiavel himself could say, that the giving of God his due is the cause of the prospering of any State whatsoever Philosophers in their politicks distinguish betwixt bonus vir & bonus cives, yet true Theologie ad Divinity from Scripure asserts, that as a good man, let be a good Christian, cannot be an evil subject, (the fear of God and of the King, Prov. 24.21. being so ineparably linked together) so a lewd man can∣not be a good subject to a Christian King. Are they any then ho rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, Isa. 5. 11. and continue untill night untill the wine inflame them, against whom the Prophet denounces so sad a wo, any here, who ae so far from fearing an Oath, that they strive to ou-swear one another. Let them remember that flying Roll, Zach. 5. 3, 4. which shall enter into the house of such a one, in the house of the Noble, as wel as the house of the poor, and consume the timber and stones thereof. These thee great sins (that cursed Tri∣nity) which too many adore, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life, pleasure pro∣fite and preferment have some bait to enice and deceive the poor sinner, but this sin of swearing, is the devils hook, without a bait, wheeby many yeeld themselves willingly to be drawn down to the place of torment, by that black leader, where the tongues of such blasphemers shall be bunt up with these flames, and not have one drop of water afforde them. For Gods sake then, for your own ouls sake, for your King (whom ye pretend to honou) his sake, fo bear these grosse wicked∣nesses: Let it not be said that so gracious a Prince hath such gracelesse and godlesse followers and
subjects. Let a wicked man swear, carrouse, drink as he will: these grosse sins are as so many treasons secretly contrived against his sacred Soveraign, Church and State where he liveth, for all ruine, Ezek. 18. is from iniquity. Let these words of Samuel sound alwayes in your ears, IF YE SHALL STILL DO WICKEDLY, 1 SAM. 12. 23. BOTH YE AND YOUR KING SHALL PERISH. As for the duties we ow to God in reference to these gods whether we shall repair for redresse, if we want Kings, or if they be unjustly deprived of that power due to them in the Lord, even to him who hath said, By me Kings Reign, and this was our sacred Anchor whether some of us did flee for refuge in these sad dayes of our late confusions, propounding that same question to the Son of God, which he did to the son of Man, Exek. 37. Can these dead bones live. Now the Almigh∣ty hath made the four winds to breath life into these slain ones, that they not only live, but reign with glory. And as to have our refuge to him by prayer, so to return unto him the praise due to his Name, when a gracious Prince reigneth over us, or is restored unto us. This late wonderfull Revolution and Restauration of our sacred Soveraign, hath so clear characters of Gods own finger graven on it, that he who runneth may read them. As, 1. That it was done so unexpectedly, When the Lord turned back the captivity of our Zion, Psal. 126. we were like these that dream, even these among the heathen say, The Lord hath done great things for them, and we say cordially, The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof our hearts are glad. 2. That it was done to us undeservedly, to a undeserving, yea, to an ill-deserving Nation. Were they not many of perverse spirits, who were saying with the wicked men, we will not have this man to reign over us, Luk. 19.27. Yea, some who with that cursed high Priest were prophe∣cying, It is expedient for us that one shuld die rather then the whole Nation perish, Joh. 11. 50. So that for the iniquity of our covetousnesse he was wroth, yet (saith the Lord) I have seen his wayes and I will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore comfort unto him and to his mourners, Isa. 57.17,18. The second Character of his hand. 3. By whom was this delivery first intended and wrought, by one who ruleth in chief among the very souldiers, our noble and renowned Jerubabel, the scatterer of our confusions. When Saul was among the Prophets, the wise among them said, but who is their father, even the Lord was their prime mover. 4. Char. Look to the assisters and carriers on of this great work, we may say of many of them on every hand as Ioseph said of his brethren, whom they had sold, Gen. 50.20. You did it unto me for evil, but the Lord turned it about to good, as at this day, to save many alive, and to breath life into a dying and languishing Nation. 5. Char. How was it effectuat, sine sudore sine sanguine, not by might, not by strength, no ax, no hammer heard in the erecting this wonderfull fabrick; may we not cry, Grace, grace unto it, Zech. 4.7, from the very Alpha to the Omega of it. This then is the Lords doing, and it is marve∣lous in our eyes, Psal. 118.91. Therefore since this is the Lords own work so eminently, I would advise all with that Ruler Gamaliel, Acts 5.39. let us not intend to overthrow it, lest we be found fighters against God. Have we not then cause to blesse this great JEHOVAH by whom Kings Reign. And that 1. That we have a King: the showt of a King is a joyfull shout, saith even Balaam himself, and that he is given to us renascendo, in that same day wherein he was given to the world nascendo, born again in that same day he was born. The first Pince he is that ever was born Prince of these three Kingdoms. That we have a King as god from God, surely any King, even a Nebuchadnezar, a Jeroboam better nor not one at all. Tyranny it self is better nor Anarchie;
Any one to be King is better no every one Tyranny is better nor Ataxie. Is it not for tbis (saith Hosea) that we have no King, because we feired not the Lord. Hos. 10.4. 2. We are to thank him that we have such a King as is from our selves, and proceedeth from the midst of us. A stranger to be King is a heavy judgement. The Assyrian shall be his King, Hos. 11.5. is a sad threatning: A King over: Israel de fontibus Israel, Psal. 68.26. Hath he not re∣stored our Iudges as at the first, and our Counsellours as at the beginning. 3. A King, not a Jroboam ill affected to Religion, but tryed as it were, and proved both by fire and water, in the tract of continued trouble, remained unconquerable by all, that whosoever doubts of his sincerity is . And such a King as is not a Rehoboam, that could not judge of the advises given, but one to whom God hath given wisdom in the secret of the heart, and is as is said of David, 2 Sam. 17.24. as an Angel of God. The breath of our nostrils, Lam. 4.20 a Jedidiah beloved of God, to whom God appeared twise, if ever to Solomon, 1 King. 11.9. in his oak of Mamre, his wonderfull preservation at Worcester, in his miraculous Restauration, without so much as the noise of an ax, yea, whatsoever was done for his Majestie be force of arms succeded not, discovered only and weakened his friends and real followers, which though it was interpreted as a signall token of his being rejected, yet speaks so lowd Gods wonderfull love, in aising him to glory and honour, even as the Lord did raise his own Son, Psal. 118.21. Christum Dominum, so hath he raised Christum Domini, behold he is our Samuel, 1 Sam. 1. 20 asked of God, many prayers and teas it cost some of us, he knoweth, who searcheth our hearts, one asked, obtained, devouted to God: A Beon, once to us a son of mourning, but a Benjamin to his father, Gen. 35.18. The man of his right hand, whom God hath made strong for himself Psal. 80.17. and so may he be till time be no more. O what cause have we to magnifie this God, thus creating and re∣viving our sacred Saveraign who was buried before under oblivion and obloquies. Let his Maje∣stie as another Noah preserved in the midst of the waves build an altar of rest unto the Lord. Thou wich hast shown him sore and grat troubles, quickened him again, and bought him up from the dpths of the earth, Psal. 71.20,21. O increase his greatnesse, and quicken him on every side. But we come to the duties we owe to these dignities thus entituled thus authoized by God, which are, 1. If by Gods own word and authority they be thus created gods, then whatsoever ye do for them, or in obedience to them, do all for conscience sake towards God, & arcessite rivum fideli talis de fonte pietatis, as Gregory saith, draw the streams of your loyalty to your Prince out of the fountain of piety towards God, no other obedience pleaseth God, no man can be constant in his duty of loyalty to his Soveraign, but he who obeyeth in the Lord, and for the Lord. 2 Are they thus Gods on earth, let none presume to dalie with them, or deal deceatfully in the work concredit by Gods Vicegeent on Earth, for as the Prophet Jer. 48.10. Cursed is he that doth Gods work deceitfully or negligently, so is it here, some have bene for Pinces, who have looked stil Janus like, with two faces. One , another ; one above the table, and another under it, And as rowlers of an Boat they never looked to that Aitto which they are rowling both with hearts and hands; But them that turn aside be their crooked ways will the Lord bring forth among workers of iniquity, Ps. 125. vlt. Let Your Hearts Hands, Facs go one way in tis great Wok befor You (Lo.) Our Gracious Soveraign now offeing the occasion as His blesed Fa∣ther of Eternall Memory said, when He did cast Himself over in the Scots protection, now saith He, will I read the Ridle of the Scots Loyaltie to give them oppotunity to lt the World know they mean not what they do, but what they sa; Let your Works and your words be one in the Lord, . Joh. 6. 5. Not with Ey-srvice as pleasing men but with singlenese of heart approving your heart to God as the Apostle to se∣vants, And be ye all Nathanaels Israelits indeed in whose heart their is no guile.
3. Are they Gods, then hath any Nation changed their Gods even which are no Gods Jer. 6. 10. 11. I may say that this complaint reacheth us well, It was the Glory of this Nation unparalelled by any other Kingdome under Heaven: Nobis invicta dedere centum octo proavi, an hundreth and eight KINGS of one Line, and Royal Race, but we may say we changed our Glory into the similitude of an Ox that eateth grasse; and a living Dog was preferred to a dead Lyon, I say supposed to be dead, But that Lion now liveth, and Longa Dics hominem docuit parere Leoni. A little length of time hath taught even those that were most active against His Sacred Ma∣jesty now to bow to Sacred Soveraignity: And O that as a Lion he may so roar, that hee may may make all the Beasts of the Foorest, his heart and hand foes, to tremble; yet Reign so, that He may have more of the Lion nor of the Lamb, least he be led like a Lamb to the horns of the Altar, as that unparalleld Martyr was by that cursed Crew who first began to cry him down as non Deum, not in his due Line of subordination to God, then as non Regem, He might not exercise his Royal power, and at last they made him not hominem, not a Man: And as Your Lordships have begun happily, so go on still to wipe away that sad reproach put upon us, even by a learned man in Print Salmasius 442. pag. which else I would not mention, Presbiterianos perdedisse Regem in Carolo, independentes trucidisse hominem Carolum; too many things were dona to prejudge him in his Royal Authority ere these cursed and wicked men robbed him of his Life. O my Lords vindicat now the Loyalty of this his Aneient and Native Kingdome, as Your Lordships have begun Laudably to do, so all Posterity shall call you blessed. 4. Are they Gods, then as the Name of God is Sacred and dreadful, Deut. 28. 58. So let all be tender of the Lords anointed. The Jews have a conceit that the sin of that blasphemer who was stoned by a command from the Lord was that he named that ineffable Name JEHOVAH. It hath been the antient policy of all subtile Undermyners of Royal Authority still to begin with pasquils and datraction, so began that cursed imp and unnaturall Son Absolon, who began to challenge his Father and Soveraign before the people, as not appointing any to hear the com∣plaints of his Subjects, 2 Sam. 15.3. And that subtile Jeroboam with his complices, in their addresses to Rehoboam to crave the easing them of his Fathers yoke, as too heavy 1 King. 12. 9. If it be lawfull for any to detract from, or sow disaffection betwixt Princes and people, what will follow, but when Shimeis tongue is not crubed Sheba's Trumpet shall soon blow lowd. Rebellion is the fruit of tollerated Sedition. Consider that of Solomon, My Son, fear thou God and the King, and medle not with them that are given to changes (Shonim) is the Word which cometh from (Shen) the tooth, changes and seditions begin at the tooth with detracting. The Antient Romans painted pride with three Crowns, on the first whereof was written transcendo, they go beyond the bounds of their station (Corah) like, they will speak evill of dignities, despise Do∣minions. On the second non obedio I will not obey, On the third perturbo, suteable to the car∣riage of some who troubled the peace of our Israel, If any have hatched a seditious Remonstrance against Soveraignity, if any have wickedly robbed our Prince of His Crown, Authority and Life, into their secret Let not my soul come, my glory, be not thou joyned to their Assembly. Gen. 49. Moses forbids all to curse and revile their Gods, Exod. 22. 28. And if we believe Paul that Interpreter one of a thousand, to speak evil of them, is to curse them Acts 23. 5. . Thou shall not speak evill of the Ruler of thy People; and by the Law you know what punishment is due to those that curse their Father or their Mother, Ex. 21. 17. Pro. 30. 17. And the King is Pater Patriae, the Father of His Countrey; Yea it is Registrat in Sa∣cred Scripture what the Lord did to Miriam, though the Sister of Moses the supream Magistrate because of the Ethiopian Woman whom he had married, no sooner is the Word come out of her mouth, but the Lord is seen at the door of the Tabernacle, in a cloud Nub. 12. 2 3. And as her Tongue swelled with proud aspersions against the lawfull and Supream Magistrat, so is she smitten
with a deforming and defiling Leprosie, and seven dayes was She shut out of the Camp, and not healed till Moses cryed unto the Lord for her, One man may kindle a re which all the World cannot quench, a plague sore may infect a whole Kingdome. Lastly, If they be thus Gods, then will not that God by whom they Reign, resent and revenge the injuries done to them, as done to Himself: Surely when the People began to flight Samuel, the Lord said, They have not rejected Thee, but Me. And David sayeth, Those that seek my soul to destroy it, will the Lord bring down to the lower parts of the earth, They shall be a portion to Foxes, but the King shal rejoice in God. 2 Sam. 1.7. Foxes they are, and such shall their portion bee. Hath any Nation delivered their own Gods with their own hands to burned, surely the verie Lycaonians honoured Paul and Barnabas much supposing him to be their Jupiter and Mrcurius Act. 14. The very Heathen man said when a Bird chaed, did flee to him for refuge, I will not deliver thee into thy enemies hand, since thou hast fled to mee for a Sanctuary. Two sad acts and sinfull in this kind, which are displeasing to this God by whom they Reign; I cannot but mention, the delivery of the Sucred Person of the one into his enemies hands, the denying of the interest of our dread Soveraign, the other: But in all those Acts, there is a great difference be∣twixt the Actors, the Theologs distinguish a threefold Ignorance, the first is natural to all men alienated from the Life of God through the Ignorance that is in them. Eph. 4. 18. The next is voluntar, this saith Peter willingly they know not, 2 Pet. 3.5. The third is judicial, while men receive not the truth with Love, but imprison their knowledge, they have of God he gives them Judicially over  to a mind that can not discern. Philosophers have a distinction betwixt ignorantia purae negationis and pravae dispositionis, I shall adde a third pravae tentationis, and so a little compare the denying, the delivering of our Lords Christ in these, Three Apostles were guilty of denying our dear Lord, Paul who perse∣cuted him, but was received to mercy because he did it ignorantly: Peter who denyed him throw a surprising tentation, and was pardoned by his threefold confession, daring to affim that he who betrayed him knew all things, knew his heart, loved him. And Judas who betrayed him for love of money, and in delivering our blessed Lord to Pilat, three Actors they were. 1. The people that did it ignorantly to please their leaders: or 2. The Pharisees who did it of envy, because he Ecclipsed his Glory And Judas again for 30 peeces of Silver. To some we may say as our Lord did, Father forgive them, they know not what they are doing: But if any through love to the wedge of Gold have done so to the Lords Anointed Ones, let it be Mithridat in their meat, Wormwood in their Cup, a gnawing Worm in their Conscience, a ded Flee in all their Oynt∣ment, a moth in their Estate and Garment. Josh. 7. And let it do them no more good nor the golden wedge did Ahan which brought the stones about his ears; or Naboths vineyard did to Achab, or the two Talents to Gehazi. 1 King. 21. 2 King. 5. 27. Who view Scripture aright shall ee that the Lord himself hath made such a distinction in that first insurrection against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 86.2. Corah kindled the fire, the 250 Princes added fewel to it, all Israel warmed them∣selves by it, yet only the Incendiaries perish, God and Moses know to make a distinction be∣twixt the head of a faction and the train, betwixt Absolon and those that follow him with a simple heart. 2 Sam. 15. 11. These that have been leaders have ever been plagued, the other lesse cen∣sured, forgiven, yea prayed for oft times. But against David the Father, the man according to Gods own heart, and Solomon the Sonne, the wisest of the sons of men, they were 3 great and Archenemies, Absolon in the State, Achito∣pel in the Counsel and Army, Abiathar in the Church conspyring with Adonijah, and against all those God write his indgnation in Characters of blood and contempt: Absolon as a paricide, was exemplarly lifted up as a spectacle of Gods wrath, and pierced with three Darts by Joab 2 Sam  4. The first for his sin against God, that when he me minded Rebellion, he pretendi ∣ligion,
he is become so religious forsooth he must go and pay his vowes at Hebron. 2 Sam. 15.7. The second Drt he gave him for his unnaural insurrection against his own Father to be a mo∣nument of his wrath, unto all generations to stubborn rebellious and irreligious children. The third, for his cursed and reacherous rebellion against the KING: Ahitophel, whose Wisdome was such, that he was looked on as an Oracle from God, yet dyed as a fool that he hanged him∣self, 2 Sam. 23. 17. Abiathar was deposed by Solomon, 1 Kings 2. 27. and though t be que∣stioned whether he did this as a Prophet or as King of Israel, yet is it needlesse to dispute this; Since we cannot deny this to Kings which is given to evey man by the law of Nature, to defend himself, and in so doing, to kill ere he be killed, if Solomon will not depose Abiathar, Abiathar will depose Solomon. Never was there a treasonable and treacherous plot against the Lords Anointed, but this Gd by whom they reign did signally avenge it when Corah Dathan and Abiram rose up against Moses, The very earth opens its mouth to devour them at once. Num. 16. 31. This Element was not used to devour such morsels, it devours the carcasses of men, but bodies informed with living souls never till now, but as the Heavens hated to give them breathing in their Air, so the Earth abhorred and hised to bear such a burthen as a Traitor to the Supream Magistrat, to have them stricken dead instantly on the earth had indeed been fearful, but to see the earth at once, both their executioner and their grave: O this is dreadull and horrible, who can but see how hateful seditious insurrections are to him who is the God of Order! and can have no hand as author or fau∣tor in any treacherous rising up, against the suppream Magistrate. He who hath said, By me Prin∣ces reign, hath said, By me all traitors shall perish: 1 Sam. 10.27. Doth not Scripture design those as the Sons of Belial, who slighted even Saul in his Government, & Cuchi say; The enemies of my Lord the King and all that rise up against Thee to do Thee hurt be as that young man is, 2 Sam 18. 32. When Absolon was exemplarly lifted up as a perk, to make all awarre let they should split themselves, and all on that same rock of Rebellion. Those Judges, Rulers, Magistrats, must be so convocat together that they make up a lawfull Congregation, and that in three. 1 Many they must be, of one mind so far as is possible, Jeru∣salem is not builded but as a citty that is compact together III Psal. v. 3. Many; where there is no counsel, the people perish, but in the multitude of Counselours there is safety Pro. 11 14. where there is no Counsel the People perish, but in the multitude of Counsellours, there is safety: Ps, 11. 14. Powers dispersed may do some good, but united much more, yea, these things which are of publict concernment can only be wel done by powers gathered together both for consultation and action, that Polititian Tacitus observed, it as the cause of the old Brittons ruine, Raro in communi onsultant, & dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur, The Lord is building up Israel, when he gathereth in one the out casts of Israel, then he healeth the broken in heart and bindeth up all their wounds, O that ye may be so this day, of one mind and Judge∣ment not knit together as Sampsons Foxes Jug. 15.4. as those cursed enemies of Sacred Mo∣nachy were quod dulcis odor lucri qualibet ex re, and that Odor was Faetor, even of Rebellion did keep together, but perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same Judgement 1 Cor 1.10. So the promise holds out where two or three : hearts & vows one, then what∣soever ye ask shal be given. In that first famous meeting of the Christian Church they were gathered together  Act. 2. 1. For the divisions of Reuben great sobs of heart, Jug. 5. 15. As the spirit natural is not infused into the body till it be justly oganiz'd, and al the members uni∣ted, So the Holy Spiit fitting you for Your stations, is not to be expected injoyed, by those who are sweetly dwelling together. Ps. 133. 1. There the Lord commandeth the blessing, whose Ta∣bernacle is in Salem, Ps 76.2 Be war lest that fire be kindled among you, which was betwixt A∣bimelech and the men of Shechem. Judg. 9.27.
2. They must be convoat together by the Authority of the Supream and lawfull Magistrat on∣ly, they may not alwayes conveen at their own pleasur, Parliamēts are the same to the politick body, which Physick is to the body natural: What more hastens Death then continued and dayly using of Physick, if this become our dayly food, the poor Patient lives miserably; There was a Parliament in these Nations which sat so long that they caused distempers and diseases in stead of curing them, But when lawfully thus called, they may not refuse to come. Numb. 16 2. 12. Corah refused to come when called by Moses, you know what come of it, and how Scripture speaks of it. , woe unto them, &c. inde 11. 3. They may not come together when not called, als dangerous, when Demetrius  tumultuously gathers his cafts-men together, no small trouble is in that conused meeting, a cry for two hours together, Great is Diana, &c. Yea, most, not knowing wherefore they come together, but the wise Clerk dissipats them with an , a hurly burly meeting it is, not a  as heir except gathered be Archi∣synagogues. Acts 19. 23. 41. And such was the meeting of the children of Isael against Moses, when they were eady to stone him Ex. 17. 2. 7. This is conjuratio not congregatio, who thus are Scripturally called childen of Meribah, contention for contending with Moses, and of Massah, because they thus tempted the Lord. The warand then for meeting must be from the supream Magistrat, whether it be Ecclesiastik or Civil in a Christian and constitute Church, in Ecclesia constituta & Christiana, because the Supream Magistrat is custos utriusque tabulae, God put both the Tables thus into Moses hand twise, Charles the Great had written on his sword, decem Preceptorum custos Carolus, Charles the keeper of the ten Commandements, and he who is, custos utriusque tabulae, is by that same Lord ap∣pointed to be custos utriusque tubae, the keeper o both the trumpets, therefore Numb. 10.1,2. The Lord spake to Moses, saying, Make thee two trumpets of silver, and they shall be to thee for the calling of the Assembly, and for the journeying of the Camp, both for peace and for war, for the sons of Aa∣ron, and for congregating the children of Israel Church and State, this was a statute in Israel for ever, if this be not his Royal Preregative, who is the Supream Magistrat, he beareth the Sword in vain, if any may meet for things of a publick concernment in reference to any of the Tables without him. Not Moses only, but Joshua his successor did both convocat and dissolve the meeting of the 12. Tribes, even for the renewing of the Covenant of God betwixt him and his people, Josh. 24.1.28. Thus in after ages even when Kingly power was established, David himself did both for the esta∣blishing a place for the Ark, and for setling the Offices of the Church, in their courses for the Ta∣bernacle, 1 Chron. 15.4. 16. 43. So it continued in Solomons dayes, 2 Chron. 5. 2. 5. So Asah 2 Chron. 15. 13. Jehoshaphat thus established Judges from City to City, throughout all Israel, see 2 Chr. 17.78. 19. 5, 8. And for a Fast, 2 Chr. 20.3. So in Hezekiahs dayes who expresly convocat them, the Levits came according to the Commandement of the King, for the businesse o the Lord, see the Margen, to cleanse the house of the Lord, 2 Chr. 29. 15. Yet were all thee Kings approven of God, no Prophet crying out against this, though Isaiah lifted up his voice like a Trumpet, to show Israel their sin, yet none of them protested aganist this, or appealed from it. After the captivity Nehemiah, Zernbbabel, did so also, Neh. 7.13. So were all these famous Counsels in the Primitive times convocat, that of Nice, wherein 318. Bishops did sit, totius orbis lumina, by Constantine the great, none for grace, vertue, holinesse, valour for Christ comparable to them, some whereof as Paphuntius, had lost one of his eyes for Christ, and some of them did suffer thereafter; So that of Constantinople, . So that at Ephesus, that at Chalcedon be Valentinian and Martian, vide Socr. lib. 1. c. 9.
3. The end of convocating must be considered, this is causa causarum, but I must be short, 1. Meet for the things of the Lord, to help the Lord, Judg. 5.23. Let him have the preheminence in all, Religion first secured by your Lordship in Doctrine, Discipline and Government, let him be your first and last. Beware of sacriledge, Mal. 3.8. if ye desire the Lord to delight in you, de∣light you also, as the great Lord doth, in the prosperity of his servants, Psa. 35.37. Be ye healers of the breaches of Zion, uniting the minds and hearts of all the sons of Levi in one, whose divisi∣ons hath caused sad thoughts of heart, thus the loyns shall blesse you as warmed with the fleece of your favour, and the hearts of many shall sing for joy. For securing the Government in our Sacred Soveraign in himself and his Posterity; And O what thanks deserve your Lordships for what is done herein; Go on in this till this be fully esta∣blished, and these loyall acts pasted by your Lordships in this be as the decrees of the Medes and Persians. Yea, thus it shall be said of the acts thus enacted by your Lordships, as being compa∣red with other acts in his prejudice: as that famous Poet comparing Venice and Rome together, Illa homines dicas, haec posuisse Deos. And as is said of Augustus in reference to Rome, so of your Lordships in reference to Scotland, invenistis latericiam O relinquite marmoream, you find it of Tyle, O build it of Marble. But I hasten to the third point, Gods presence with you thus congregat is necessary, consider the danger if he withdraw, Hos. 9.12. Wo also unto you when I depart frō you, and that Isa. 29.19. The wis∣dom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Necessary 1. for graces and gifts suitable to your high and honourable station: Every good gift is not only  but , not from above only but from heaven, Jam. 1. 17. Philoso∣phers call the eminent endewments of the mind  and habits: Theologie teacheth us to call them  gifts of free grace, he is the father of lights, if ye be deep Politicians, wise States-men, gracious Christians, who is your father, 1 Sam. 10. 12. There is a spi∣rit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty giveth understonding, Job 32.7,8. The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, Pro. 20.27. And as for gifts, so for the exercise of their gifts in actu execito, if not acted, assisted, the best of men is but a Dyall without the clear beams of the Sun, when the spirit departed from Sampson, he thought to have done as before, Judg. 16.20. but his wings were clipped. His presence keeps you in a lively frame for duties, Psal. 73.26. Luk. 24.32. 2. It maks your face to shine so, that none shall be able to withstand you, Josh. 1.5. 3. No businesse shall be in∣tricat to you, but with Paul ye shall be able to do all things, Phil. 4.13. 4. Freeth you from all fears, Isa. 43.3. Psal. 23.4. 5. You shall administrat Justice impartially, 2 Chr. 19.6. How to have it, and intertain it, I dar not insist on, see only that Psal.. 16.7, 1. 4. Point, Gods presence is evidenced in his two acts of standing and judging. 1. Of these joyntly: standing as it is opposed to falling, ver. 6. The greatest of Princes shall be brought down to the dust of death as well as the meanest of men, even ye who are gods on earth, saith Job, and he shall keep the field when the battel is fought, Job 19.25. Your wisdom and power, honour and pre∣ferment, yea graces and holinesse cannot exeem you from that first paenall Statute, Dust thou art, Gen. 3.19. Hence when that Minion complained to his Master, that he was envyed by many, and it was replyed, unus hic dum tibi sit propitius Jupiter, tu istos minutulos Deos flocci feceris, he re∣turned wittily, quasi tu nescias vir magne quam cito emoriantur humni Joves, how soon does hu∣mane gods die? 2. Act, He will judge, gods ye are, but such as must give an account as men and Christians, 2 Cor 5.10. much more as gods, ye are both dii caduei, and dii judicandi, two strong bits in the mouths of all to curb pride and abuse of power; your Lordships must be within a little time strip∣ped of all your earthly greatnesse, glory and power, all your Parliamentary and honourable Robs,
and make your bed in the earth, and if your bones be full of the sins of youth, they shall ly down with you in the dust, Job 20.11. and shall rise with you when ye come befoe the Lab on his Throne, Revel. 6. 16. Now of these two Acts severally, 1. He standeth, our great Jehovah is very attentive to all, his eyes are as a flame of fire, and reacheth even to the center of your hearts; he that planted the ear hears all yor words, voices, do all theefore as vigilantes servi coram vigilante Dousino, saying as to his slumbering Disciples, Can ye not watch with we one honr, Mat. 26. 9. 2. Stands waiing for your Inviation to come in unto you, let it not be your challege, Mat. 23.37. How oft would I, and ye would not. Say not to the Almighty, Depart from us Job 21.14. but rather as Gen. 24.31. Laban to Eleazar, Come in thou blessed of the Lord, the rooms are pre∣pared for thee, as thee, as the Ethiopians let empty seats in Judicatories for their gods to sit down with them: And with David say, Psal. 101. 2. O when wil thou come in unto me? Thus, The gates of Glory shall be cast open to you, if ye open your everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may come in, Psal. 24. 3. Stands as ready to confirm all your Acts, if done as before him, concerning the works of my hands command ye me, Isa. 45. 11. a strange word, Thou shalt also decree a thing and it shall be esta∣blished to thee, and his light shall shine on thy wayes, Job 22.26.7.8,9. 4. He stands pro vobis fi mereamini in vos, as Trajan said: Who dar oppose if he be for you? Korahs cup the dregs of it shall be for them. But if ye do evill, behold the Judge standeth before the door, Jam. 5.9. PSAL. 82. 1. He judgeth among the gods. 1. In our Translation it is in the present time, 1. Because all power of judging given to these gods on eath is derived from him, neither do they judge but as cloathed with authority from him itting in his stead, hence Abraham styles him the Judge of all the earth, Gen. 18. 25. 2 Chron. 19. 6. 2. Because he sometime judgeth even in this life, and judgement returneth unto righteousness, and all the upright in heart follow after it, Psal. 94 15. Psal. 58. 11. And this day this is verified in your eyes, when these cursed ones who usurped the power over these Nations are made spectacles of his wrath to men and Angels, before their pots wherein they inended to boil us, could feel the thorns, he took them away both living & in his wrath, Ps. 58.10,11. The wicked man shall no rost Pro. 12.27. God hath written in deep characters of blood his great indignation against these who rose up in rebellion against the Lords Anointed, to be a caveat to all, for the ages to come. 3. He judgeth because certainly it shall be so, as Solomon, Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence against an evill man is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set to vanity. Though some escape the sad stroak of his pusuing and revenging justice in this life, yet hath he appointed a day, Acts 17. 31. And they do but treasure up wrath to themselves, Rom. 2.4. And your Lordships shall be judged, 1. de bonis commissis, of all the good things committed to your trust, by God, or by his Anointed, graces, gifts, talents of wealth, honour, power, a∣thoriy, as that man Luk. 16.. Mat. 25.14. De bonis omissis, if ye be not eyes to the blind, ignorantem dirigendo, feet to the lame, impo∣tentem adjuvando, fathers to the poor of the land, indigenttm sublvando, and break the jaws of the wicked, and pull the prey out of his mouth; oppressores conterendo, de malis commissis if any guilty Achan go free, or an innocent Naboth be condemned: He that justifieth the wicked, Pov. 17.15. de malis permissis, if any evil fall out in the land, which it was in your power to have pre∣vented, as Eli was for his too great indulgence to his children, 1 Sam. 2.30. Yet Heb. it is in futuro jispt. God in his admirable patience gives gives all men time to
judge themselves, and that with a promise, 1 Cor. 11.31. Let it not be said of you  2.24. O let your Lordships beware of unrighteous judgement, justice is holden out, as blind, even with a just ballance and a sword: You shall have no respect of persons in Judgemen . 1. 27. Act. 10.33. no the poor in his cause, Exod. 23.2,3. Away with bribes from the rich, xod. 23.8. If golden pillules can cure the desperat and deadly disease of treason, no rich man needs heeafter fear to be treacherous to his King, or to his Countrey. That Pythian Oracle said to Philip , fight with silver Lances and you shall overcome all, thus you shall highly provoke God, For the iniquity of his covetousnesse I was wrot, Is. 57.17. and for this too much and too long he hath hid his face from us; thus you shal make your elves contemptible in their eyes from whom ye receive these bribes, as Jugurtha for all his fratricide, escaping looking back to Rome, said with disdain omnia Romae sunt vaenalia, urbis ipsa venalis, si emptorem invenerit: Let us not be double dyed with these scalet sins. O ie up with the zeal of Phineas, Psal. 106.30. for Numb. 35.33. Justice is two wayes wrested, 1. When the sweet wine of Justice hrough tedious delayes becomes sowr vinegar. 2. If it become womwood and Justice be perverted. O arise and breath life into the languishing Laws of this withering Ntion, now some years through want of administration of Justice, and establishing the Judica∣tories of the Land. In the midst he judgeth. The righteous Judge desireth as your Center to have you all united to him, in him, and among your selves, he thus came in after his Resurrection twise unto his Disciples, Joh. 20,19.26. By concord small things grow great, by discord great things grow small. 2. In the midst of every one of you God judgeth every day, he keeps a Court in your consci∣ences, if ye do wrest Judgement, this Deputy in your inward parts, the minds of you, shall rise up as a witnesse to give Testimony, as a Party to accuse, as a Judge to passe sentence, this one in whom ye now trust, shall judge you, there is no peace saith my God to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. A hell within them till they fall in a hell without them, and can make any man as Pashur. was, Magor∣missabib, terrour round about, Jer. 20 4. Let this be your brazen wall in all your wayes and acts, nil conscire sibi: otherwise caeco verbere tundit, it breaks it, bruises you as in a morter. 3. He judgeth in the midst imports his dominium plenum, full dominion, Psal. 110.3. over you all, in all your souls, bodies and estates, as when it is said media dominantur in Urbe, it is a full conquesse when the heart of the Town is possessed. 2. It imports a dominium securum, without all fear from any, as the Shunamite sayes, I dwell in the midst of my people, 2 King. 4.13. Luk. 4.30. So Gods judging is such that it is iresistible, Isai. 27.4. unconquerable. 3. A dominion aeternum, when this Judge hath his sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left hand. So I close with an exhortation to your Lordships. 1. To your Grace, Set this God as thus judging before you; be faithfull to the most hie God in this your trust, endeavour to have more and more his grace in you, , soul-sancti∣fying, soul-refreshing and saving grace, whereof Paul Rom. 1.5. grace and Apostleship, grace with your Commission, and , grace with you, assisting grace, 1 Cor. 15.9. So your Grace shall have a double guard peculiar to his own. The peace of God passing understanding which activê  shall guard your heart, Phil. 4.7. and the power of God or you passivê, ye shall be , guarded by the power of God, surer then any Life∣guard, 1 Pet. 1.5. 2. Study loyalty to your Saced Master, he an Nathaniel, a true Israelite, &c. and your Grace shall be a Gamaliel, God shall be to you as to Abraham, your great reward, and keep many from fighting against God in his Anointed, Acts 5.39. according to his counsel. And to Your Noble and Honourable Lordships: remember this, God will sit when You
shall all stand, be unpartiall in all Your actings, let not feed or favour, love or hatred byasse You in Judgement, You are as Gods, to Men be Ye Gods as God is holy, thrie holie. Is. 6. 2. In his Esence, Acts, Decrees, Attendants, so ought Ye to be. 1 Personally holie, For without ho∣lynesse Heb. 12. 14. in your actings. Ps. 101. 3. Set no wicked thing before you, in Your follow∣ers, the sins of Rulers are a rule for sinning to many: Regis ad exemplum &c. Let His Sacred Majesty read the riddle of Your Loyalty: The poor land the reality of Your piety and pittie: that of His Majesty it may be said, (by Your help) as of Solomon, he sate on the Throne of the Lord in stead of his Father. 1 Chr. 29. 23. Thus go on still in the course of Justice as the Sunne in the Zodiack, running your race with Joy, thus the Good shal blesse You, the poor pray for You Your own hear shall chear you, the great God of Heaven shall reward you, Your gracious and Sacred Soveraign shall call You a blessed and a healing Parliament, and all posterity shall speak t Your praise and blesse God for You. And all ye Religious and Judicious hearers, fear God and the King, as Solomon Pro. 24.21. he cannot fear God by whom he Reigneth, who feareth not the King given us of God in love, and he that is void of the invisible God, can neither love nor fear his Deputy on earth; if any wrong his Majesty, detracting, sowing sedition or disaffection betwixt him and his people, he but shor∣tens or embitters his own life, by stopping the breath of his nostrils the Anointed of the Lord, and he puts out his own cndle, who qnencheth the light of Israel, these titles being given him of the Lord, Lam. 4.20. 2 Sam. 21.17. Meddle not therefore with them that are given to changes, and blesse God for this wonderfull change and Revolution, praying heartily it may be without change till time shall be changed into Eternity, and this mortall put on immortality. To this God of all these gods, the King of kings, who remaineth the same for ever, be praise, honour and glory for ever, Amen. FINIS
