B4043 R30854 11670562 48051
SOME RECEIPTS OF Medicines. For the most part PARABLE and SIMPLE. Sent to a Friend in America. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1688.
The INTRODUCTION. THE following Prescripti∣ons being but part of a Collection of Receipts and Processes, that had from time to time been recommended to me, either by the Experience of the Imparters, or by my Own: I did not think it so Expedient to pre∣mise, to so small a Number of slight Receipts, the several Medi∣cinal Cautions and other Consi∣derations, wherewith it might be fit to usher in a larger Writing of this nature; as to reserve those Prolegomena for the whole Collec∣tion, whereof that which now appears makes but a Part, and that not the greatest. Which Intima∣tion will, I hope, Excuse my leaving unmention'd the Names of the Imparters of several of these Receipts: Since all of them are
transcrib'd from the Collection; And the Reason of the Omission is given in the Preamble, together with divers Advertisements about the Work it self, which dispense me from giving any Others at pre∣sent, than those very few which seem'd requisite to be sent about the following Paper, to the Inqui∣sitive Dr. W. A. practising Physick in New England: who earnestly desir'd of me some Receipts, that, being Parable or Cheap, might easily be made Serviceable, espe∣cially to the Poor, in that Coun∣try; where European Books of Physick are too great Rarities, and several Remedies here known are not in use. The Beginning of my Letter to Dr. A. consisting mainly of things that regarded his peculiar Circum∣stances, 'tis Needless, if not Im∣proper, to transcribe it hither, and
consequently it ought not to keep me from proceeding without delay, to the next part of the same Letter, which gives him the three follow∣ing Advertisements. I. 'T Would be a great Mistake of my Design in sending you the following Receipts, if you should think that I at all pretend them to be Infallible Ones; or at least of very Extraordinary Efficacy: Since all that I told you of them, was, That, for Medicines so Simple, and for the most part so Cheap, I have found several of them, and take all of them, to be good in their kind. And tho' I think most of them Safer than many other Medicines that are in great re∣quest, yet I do not pretend, that these should play the part both of Me∣dicines and Physicians too; but only that they may be Ʋsefully employ'd,
by One that, like You, knows how to administer them Discreetly. In short; I say not that these Medicines are the Best I have, but only some of the most Parable, or Simple: Both which I here mention together, as if the latter were referable to the for∣mer; not only because Medicines that are Simple or but very little Com∣pounded, are ceteris paribus more easie to be procur'd; but because I am willing that this short Collection should furnish you with divers In∣stances to confirm the Paper, to which I desire you would subjoyn it, of the Usefulness of Simple Me∣dicines. II IT may somewhat assist you, to make a Comparative Estimate of the following Receipts, if I distinguish them into three Classes or Orders, and annex to the Title, or Description, of almost each particular Medicine, one of the three first Letters of the
Alphabet. Whereof A signifies that the Remedy it belongs to, hath been, either by the Affirmation of the Phy∣sician, or other Credible Persons that imparted it to me, or by Tryals that I caus'd to be made of it; recom∣mended as very Considerable and Effi∣cacious in its kind. A therefore is the Mark of a Remedy of the highest Classis of these. B denotes, that That which it refers to, is of a Second or Inferior sort, but yet considerable for its good Operations. And the Letter C belongs to those Remedies that are of the Lowest Order, tho' good enough not to be despis'd. And because I presume it may be expected, that I should give you some short Character, of those whereof I have had some kind of Experience; whether by the Relations of such as have been Cur'd, or much Reliev'd by them; or by my own Exhibiting or Prescribing them; or by Reports re∣ceiv'd from those that engag'd to
try them, or that employ'd them upon my account: For this Reason, I say, and for Brevity's sake, and avoiding Repetitions, I thought fit to accompany almost each of the three foremention'd Alphabetical Letters, that refers to a Receipt, of which I can say any thing upon some kind of knowledge of my own, with one of the three following Marks: Whereof the First, which is the small Figure of One (1) denotes that I have known but a single Tryal made of it; the Other, which is a simple Cross (x) imports that the Tryals have been made two, or some few more times; and the Third, which is an Asterisk (consisting of several Lines crossing each other in one Point (*) signifies that the Tryals wherein it hath been found useful, were many, if not very many. III. THere will easily be observed a Disparity of Style in the following Papers. For those Receipts
that were my Own, were express'd in my Own Terms; and so usually were those that I receiv'd from Others but by word of Mouth: And These, I hope, will be found clearly enough deliver'd. But as to those Others, that were imparted to me by Empy∣ricks or Ʋnlearned Persons, in Writing; tho' I would not in divers places have worded them as they did that I had them from, yet I often∣times made a scruple to Correct or Alter their Expressions; tho' not suitable to the currant Style of the Formulary's of Receipts: Being more concern'd that the Meaning should be close kept to, than the Style rectify'd. And sometimes too, when I received things by word of Mouth, and committed them to Paper in the Authors presence, haste oblig'd me to make use of Expressions, (and made me afterwards forget to mend them,) that were rather the Shortest
than the Best: And sometimes forc'd me to employ words of the Latine, French, or some other Language: especially if I wrote after the In∣structions of Forreigners, being less careful to express things in the Fittest way I could, than in the most Com∣pendious. You will receive by this Ship but five Decads of Receipts of Parable Medicines, because I think that Num∣ber sufficient to be sent at once. But if, when you have Try'd them, the Success that God shall vouchsafe to give them, shall invite you to press for a Recruit, I shall thereby be encourag'd to draw some other Decads of Receipts (some of which will perhaps be preferable to most of These) out of a Collection, wherein they have long lain mingled with Receipts and Processes of Re∣medies of a less Simple Nature, or more difficult to be Procur'd.
DECAD I. I. For Coughs, especially such as proceed from thin Rheumes. B. REcipe of choice Olibanum finely powder'd from ℈j. to ʒss. and mix carefully with it, an equal weight of Sugar-candy (white or brown,) or, in want of that, of fine Sugar; and let the Patient take it at Bed-time in the Pap of an Apple, or some other proper Additament, for several nights together: If it be found needful, it may be taken at any other time, when the Stomach is empty.
II. To give Ease in the Pains of the Stone, even that of the Bladder. A ℞ the transparent Sparr that grows upon the Veins of Lead-ore, and having reduc'd it to fine Powder, give from ʒss. to ʒj. of it at a time, in a moderate draught of some conve∣nient Vehicle. N. B. Tho' there be (at least in most of our English Mines) two Teguments, as it were, of the Veins of Lead, that grow close to∣gether; yet that which the Diggers name Cawk, which is White and Opa∣cous, is not the Medicine I mean, but the Transparent, or at least Semi-Dia∣phanous; which easily breaks into smooth Fragments, and in the Fire cleaves into several pieces, that are wont to be smooth, and prettily shap'd. III. For Sharpness of Ʋrine. B ℞ of the dry stuff that divides the Lobes of the Kernerls of Walnuts, beat them to Powder, and of this give about
ʒss. at a time, in a draught of White∣wine, or Posset-drink made with it, or in any other convenient Liquor. IV. To Appease the Violent Pains of the Tooth ach. B. Make up ℈j. of Pillulae Masti∣chinae, and half a grain of Laudanum, into two or three Pills for the Patient to take at Bed-time. V. For Agues. A. ℞ Salt of Card. Benedict. and Salt of Worm-wood ana 15 grains, Tartar Vitriolate ℈ss. Mix them, and give them in a few spoonfuls of Rhenish∣wine, or of some other convenient Vehicle, either before the Fit, or at some other time when the Stomach is Empty. VI. For the Yellow-Jaundice. B. ℞ ʒj. of Castle-Soap (the Elder the better,) slice it thin, put it into a
pint of Small-beer cold, set it on the Fire, let it boil gently half away, after boiling some time, scum it once. Then strain it through a small Sieve, warm it, and drink it all in a Morning, fast∣ing; take a small lump of Sugar after it, and fast two or three hours. The Party may walk about his Business, and eat his accustomed Meals. If at any time he drink Wine, let it be White∣wine. N. B. If he be far gone in the Distemper; two or three days after, he may take it once or twice more, and no oftner. Refrain all other Medi∣cines; It will keep a Week or longer. VII. For the Jaundice. B. ℞ ij. or ℥iij. of Semen Cannabis (Hempseed) and boil them till the Seeds (some of them) begin to burst, and a little longer, in a sufficient quan∣tity of New Milk, to make one good draught; which the Patient is to take warm, renewing it, if need be, for some days together.
VIII. For the Dysentery. B. ℞ Pigs-dung, dry it and burn it to gray (not white) Ashes; of these give about ʒss. for a Dose, drinking after them about three Spoonfuls of Wine-Vinegar. IX. For the Kings-Evil. B. ℞ Cuttle-bone uncalcin'd, and having scrap'd off the out-side or co∣loured part, dry the white part; and of this, finely powder'd, give ʒss. for a Dose in Aqua Malvae. X. A Safe and easie Medicine in Fits of the Stone. B. ℞ Sack, or, in want of that, Claret∣wine, and by shaking or otherwise mix with it as well as you can, an equal quantity of Oyl of Walnuts; and of this Mixture give from 4 or 6 to 8 or 10 ounces at a time as a Gly∣ster.
DECAD II. I. For Convulsions, especially in Children. B. Recipe Earth-worms, wash them well in Whitewine to cleanse them, but so as that they may not die in the Wine. Then upon hollow Tiles, or between them, dry the Worms with a moderate heat, and no further than that they may be conveniently reduc'd to Powder; to ℥j. of which add a pretty number of grains of Ambergrise, both to Perfume the Powder, (whose scent of it self is rank) and to make the Medicine more Efficacious. The Dose is from ʒj. to ʒjss. in any con∣venient Vehicle. II. For the Pyles. B. ℞ the Powder of Earth-worms prepar'd as in the former Receipt, (but leaving out the Ambergrise,)
and incorporate it exactly with as much Hens-grease, as will serve to make it up into an Oyntment. Apply this to the Part affected, whose Pains it usually much and safely mitigates. III. To make Lime-water Ʋseful in divers Distempers. C. ℞ one pound of good Quick∣lime, and slake it in a gallon of warm Water, and let it stand till all that will subside be settled at the bottom, and (Separation being made) the Water swim clear at the top. (At which time it will often happen, that a kind of thin and brittle substance, almost like Ice, will cover the Surface of the Liquor;) As soon as the Water is thus sufficiently impregnated, delay not to pour it off warily, and keep it very well stopt for Use.
IV. A Lime-water for Obstructions and Consumptions. B. ℞ a Gallon of Lime-water made as above, and infuse in it cold, Sassafras, Liquorice, and Anyseeds, of each ℥iv. adding thereto lbss. of choice Currants, or the like quantity of slic'd Raysins of the Sun: The Dose of this compound Lime-water is ℥iv. or v. to be taken twice a day. V. An Amulet against Agues, especially Tertian. B. ℞ a handful of Groundsil, shred and cut it small, put it into a square Paper-bag of about four Inches every way, pricking that side that is to be next the Skin, full of large holes; and cover it with some Sarcenet or fine Linnen, that nothing may fall out. Let the Patient wear this upon the Pit of his Stomach, renewing it two hours before every Fit.
VI. For Women in Labour to bring away the Child. B. ℞ about ʒj. of choice Myrrh, and having reduc'd it to fine Powder, let the Patient take it in a draught of Rhenish-wine or Sack; or, if you would have the Liquor less active, White-wine, Posset-drink, or some other temperate Vehicle. VII. For Strengthning the Bowels. B. ℞ Cloves or Chives (not Bulbs) of Garlick, and let the Patient from time to time swallow one or two, with∣out chewing. VIII. An Amulet against the Cramp. A. ℞ the Root of Mechoacan, and having reduc'd it to Powder, fill with this Powder a little square Bag or Sacket of Sarcenet, or some such slight Stuff; which Bag is to be about three Inches square, and to be hung by a string about
the Patient's Neck, so as that it may reach to the Pit of the Stomach, and immediately touch the Skin. IX. For stanching of Blood, especially in Wounds. A. ℞ those round Mush-rooms that Botanists call Crepitus Lupi, (in English Puffe-balls,) when they are full ripe, (which is in Autumn;) and breaking them warily, save carefully the Powder that will fly up, and the rest that re∣mains in their Cavities: and strew this Powder all over the Part affected, bind∣ing it on, or proceeding further, if need be, according to Art. X. For the Tumours and Pains of the Hemorrhoides, not too much inflam'd. B. Let the Patient dip his Finger in Balsom of Sulphur made with Oyl of Turpentine, and with his Finger so besmear'd anoint the Tumours, whether External or Internal, once or twice a day.
DECAD. III. I. For the Dysentery and other sharp Fluxes. A. REcipe the Stalks and Leaves of the Herb call'd in Latin Co∣niza Media (in English Flea-bane) dry it gently, till it be reducible to Pow∣der; of this Powder give about ʒj. at a time, twice or thrice a day, in any convenient Vehicle; or else incorpo∣rate it in Conserve of red Roses. II. To Sweeten the Blood, and Cure divers Distempers caused by its Acidity. B. ℞ Coral, the clearest and reddest you can get; reduce it, (by exactly grinding it on a Porphiry, or Marble Stone,) to an impalpable Powder. Of this Magistery made without Acids, give the Patient once or twice a day
(as need shall require) a large Dose, viz. ordinarily about ʒj. at a time, or from ℈ij. to ℈v. N. B. Let him long continue the use of it. III. To clear the Eyes, even from Filmes. A. ℞ Paracelsus's Zibetum Occidentale (viz. human dung) of a good colour and consistence, dry it slowly till it be pulverable: Then reduce it into an impalpable Powder; which is to be blown once, twice, or thrice a day, as occasion shall require, into the Patients Eyes. IV. For Convulsions in Children. A. Give the Patient from 2, 3, or 4, to 5, 6, or 7 gr. according to the Child's Age, of the true Volatile Salt of Amber, in any proper Vehicle. N. B. 'Tis not near so Efficacious in full grown Persons.
V. To bring away the After-birth. B. Give about 30 drops, or any Number between 25. and 35. of good Essential (as Chymists call it) Oyl of Ju∣niper, in a good Draught of any con∣venient Vehicle. VI. To Strengthen the Stomach, and help the Want of Appetite. B. Make the Roots of Gentian (sound and not superannuated) pulverable, with no greater waste of their Moisture than is necessary. Reduce these to Powder; of which let the Patient take from 12 or 15 gr. to double that quan∣tity (or more if need be) twice or thrice a day. N. B. It may be taken on an empty Stomach, or, if that can∣not conveniently be done, at Meal∣times. To Correct the Bitterness, one may add to it power'd Sugar, or make it up with some fit Conserve, or mix it with a Syrup. It is very good not only for Want of Appetite, but for
Obstructions.: And I (R. B.) have use∣fully given it in Vertiginous Affections of the Brain, and to lessen, if not quite take away, the Fits of Agues, and even Quartans. But in this last Case the Dose must be considerably augmented. One may also, if one pleases, instead of the Powder, give the Extract drawn with fair Water, and, for those that like that form, made up into Pills with a s. q. of powder'd Tumeric, or the like proper Additament; to which I have sometimes added some grains of Salt of Worm-wood with very good success, in Fluxes that proceeded from Crudities and Indigestion. Where the Winter-Season or the Patients Cold Constitution invite, or the Medicine is to be long kept, I chuse rather to make the Extract with Wine moderately strong, than with Water. VII. For Ʋlcers in the Breast and elsewhere. A. ℞ Millepedes (in English by Some call'd Wood-Lice, by others Sows,) and
having wash't them clean with a little White-wine, and dry'd them with a Linnen Cloth, beat them very well in a Glass or Marble Mortar (for they ought not to be touch'd with any thing of Metal) and give the first time as much Juice, as you can by strong Ex∣pression obtain from five or six of them. This Juice may be given in Small-Ale or White-wine, in which the next time you may give as much as can be squeez'd out of eight or nine Millepedes; and so you may continue, increasing the number that you employ of them by two or three at a time, till it amount to twenty five or thirty; and if need be, to forty or more, for one taking. And Note, that if upon the Pounding of these Insects, you sind the Mass they afford too dry, as it now and then hap∣pens; you may dilute it with a little White-wine or Ale, to. be well agita∣ted with it, that being penetrated, and so softned, with the Liquor, the Mass may the better part with its Juice. VIII. For taking off the Fits of Agues. B. ℞ good common Brimstone (not
Flores Sulphuris) and having reduc'd them, by passing them through a very fine Sieve, to the subtilest Powder you can; give of this Powder ʒiss. or ʒij. either made up into a Bolus with a little good Honey, or else in any appropria∣ted Vehicle; let it be given at the usual times, and reiterated once or twice, if need be, especially if the Fits should return. IX. For Fluxes, especially accompanied with Gripings. A. ℞ of Crude Lapis Calaminaris sine∣ly powder'd ℈ij. of white Chalk ℈j. mix them exactly, and give them in a spoonful or two of New Milk twice, or, if the case be urgent, thrice a day. X. For the Pains of the Piles. B. ℞ of Myrrh, Olibanum, and com∣mon Frankincense, of each a like quan∣tity; having powder'd them, mix them very well, and let the Patient re∣ceive the Fume of this Mixture, cast up∣on a Chaffen-dish with Embers, in a Close-stool, for about a quarter of an hour, (less or more, as he needs it, and is able to bear it.)
DECAD. IV. I. For an Outward Contusion. C. APply to the Part affected, skim'd or purify'd Honey spread upon Cap-Paper, to be kept on with some convenient Plaister, or the like Bandage, and shifted once or twice a day. II. Another for the same. B. Beat Aloes Succotrina (or else Hepatica) to fine Powder; then pour on it as much Rose-water as you guess may dissolve a great part of it. This done, stir them well for a while, and when the Mixture is setled, pour off the Liquor, and in it dip Linnen Rags, which being applied to the Part affect∣ed, will soon stick to it, and seldom need be remov'd till the Patient be re∣liev'd; and then to get them off, the Rags must be well wetted with warm Water, which will soften and loosen the adhering Aloes.
III. For a slighter Excoriation. B. Melt Mutton-Suet taken from about the Kidneys, and freed from its superfluous Fibres or Strings, and to about ℥ij. of this add little by little about 16 or 18 drops (sometimes 8 or 10 may serve) of Oyl (not Aethereal Spirit) of Turpentine; spread this Mix∣ture on a Linnen Cloth, and by bind∣ing or otherwise, keep it upon the Part affected. IV. For an Excoriation, when the true Cutis is affected. B. ℞ Prunella (in English Self-heal) and having pounded it very well in a Marble or Glass Mortar, (not one of Metal,) apply it to the Part affected, renewing it but seldom, and not with∣out need. V. To take off the Pain and Inflammation of Ʋlcers in the Legs and elsewhere. B. In a quart of Water boil about so much White-bread, as in ordinary years may be found in a Halfpenny-Loaf; then add to it ℥ij. of good Sheeps Suet
cut very small; and when that is boil'd a little, add to it ℥j. of finely pow∣der'd Rosin, and a little well searc'd Brimstone: Of these make a Cataplasm, which is to be kept constantly on the Part affected, and shifted once or twice a day, as need shall require. VI. For a Cough, especially accompany'd with a Tickling Rheum. B. ℞ equal Parts of finely pow∣der'd Olibanum and Venice Treacle; in∣corporate them exactly, and of this Mass from Pills of what bigness you please. Of these let the Patient take about ʒss. at Bed-time, or, if need be, ℈j. (or more) twice a day. VII. To prevent the Tooth-ach, and keep the Teeth sound. B. Let the Patient frequently rub his Teeth moderately with the Ashes that remain in Tobacco-pipes, after the rest of the Body hath been consum'd in Smoak; sometimes after washing (if need be) his Mouth with fair Water not too cold.
VIII. For a Rupture, especially in a Child or Young Person. A. ℞ of that Geranium or Cranes∣bill that is commonly call'd Columbinum, reduce the Root and Leaves to fine Pow∣der, and of this let the Patient take about half a spoonful Night and Morn∣ing for three or four Weeks together, washing it down each time with some spoonfuls of red Wine. IX. For the Heart-burning, as they call it. B. ℞ from 15. or 20. to 30. or 40. grains of Crabs-Eyes (known common∣ly in the Shops by the name of Lapides Cancrorum) reduc'd to very fine Pow∣der, and either take it alone, or in any convenient Conserve or Syrup. 'Tis for the most part best to take this Me∣dicin, when the Stomach is empty. X. For a Strain. B. ℞ the strongest Vinegar you can get, and boil in it a convenient quan∣tity of Wheat-Bran, till you have brought it to the consistence of a Poul∣tess. Apply this as early as may be to the Part affected, and renew it when it begins to grow dry.
DECAD V. I. For a Recent Strain. B. REcipe Worm-wood and pound it very well in a Mortar of Stone or Glass; then put to it as much of the Whites of Eggs beaten to Water, as may serve to make it up into such a Consi∣stence, as may be applied like a Poultess to the Part affected. II. A Strengthning Plaister after a Strain, or when there is any Weakness in the Joynt. B. Melt down together, and in∣corporate very well, two parts of Dia∣palma, and one part of Emplastrum ad Herniam; spread this Mixture, but not very thick, upon Leather, and lay it to the Joynt to be strengthned. III. For Loosnesses. C. Boil a convenient quantity of Cork in Spring-water, till the Liquor taste strong thereof: Of this Decoc∣tion
let the Patient drink a moderate draught from time to time, till he find himself sufficiently reliev'd by it. IV. For Obstructions, and divers Diseases proceeding thence. B. Let the Patient drink every Morning fasting, a moderate draught of his own Ʋrine newly made, and (if it can conveniently be,) whilst 'tis yet warm; forbearing Food for an hour or two after it. V. For Difficulty of Hearing, from a Cold Cause. B. Out of a Bulbe or Root of Garlick, chuse a Chive of a convenient bigness; then having pass'd a fine piece of Thread or Silk through one end of it, that thereby it may be pull'd out at pleasure, crush it a little between your Fingers, and having anointed it all over with Oyl of Bitter (or in want of that, Sweet) Almonds, put it into the Cavity of the Patients Ear at Bed-time, and draw it out the next Morning, stopping the Ear afterwards with Black
Wool; but if need require, this Ope∣ration is to be reiterated with fresh Garlick for some days successively. VI. For Ruptures in the Belly, especially in Children. A. Having well cleans'd the Roots of Sigillum Salamonis, scrape ℥j. of them into a quart of Broth, and let the Patient take a Mess, or a Porringer full of it for his Break-fast; or else give ʒss. or ℈ij. of the Powder of it at a time, in any convenient Vehicle. VII. To give Check to Fits of the Gout, and in some measure to Prevent them. B. ℞ ℥iij. of Sarsaparilla slic'd and cut thin; to these add an equal weight of Raisins of the Sun, rubb'd very clean, but not broken. Put both these Ingre∣dients into three quarts of Spring∣water, and let the Vessel stand in a moderate heat, that the Liquor may simper for many hours, yet without bursting most part of the Raysons; keep this Decoction well stopt, and let
the Patient use it for his only Drink, till he need it no longer. VIII. A Water for Ʋleers and Sores. B. ℞ a Solution of Venetian Subli∣mate, and having made with very good Quick-lime as strong a Lime-water as you can (so that, if it be possible, it may bear an Egg) drop this upon the dis∣solv'd Sublimate, till it will precipitate no more reddish stuff at all; (which will not so soon be done as One that hath not try'd, will imagine:) As soon as you perceive that the Liquors act no longer visibly upon one another, pour the Mixture into a Filter of Cap-Paper, which retaining the Orange colour'd Precipitate, will transmit an indiffe∣rently clear Liquor: Which is to be in a Glass Viol kept stopt for its proper Use; namely, that the Part affected may be therewith washt from time to time, and, if need be, kept cover'd with double Linnen Cloths wetted in the same Liquor.
IX. A Plaister to Discuss Tumours, or Ripen them if it cannot Discuss them. B. ℞ of Yellow Wax, Frankincense and Rosin, of each ℥iv. (or q. s.) melt them together gently, and being strain'd, make up the Mass into a Roll for Use. X. For the Black-Jaundice it self. A. ℞ a spoonful of Honey, boil it gently, and scum it, till it come to a good Consistence; then add of Wheat∣flower and Saffron (reduc'd to a Powder) as much of each as you may take up upon the point of a Knife; and having mixt all well, put it over the Coals again, until it lose its Smell: After∣wards you may put it into a little Stone or Earthen Pot, and keep it for Use; which is, that the Patient take the quantity of a Pea, and anoint the Na∣vil, and fill the Cavity thereof with it; repeating the Application for some
days together, when the Stomach is empty, and abstaining from Meat and Drink about two hours after the Me∣dicine is us'd. The End of the Fifth Decad.
