B4520 R7588 11980462 51814
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Several PLOTS, CONSPIRACIES, and Hellish ATTEMPTS of the Bloody-minded PAPISTS, against the Princes and Kingdoms of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, from the Reformation to this present Year, 1678. AS ALSO Their Cruel Practices in France against the Prote∣stants in the Massacre of Paris, &c. WITH A more particular Account of their Plots in relation to the late Civil War, and their Contrivances of the Death of King CHARLES the First, of blessed Memory. LONDON, Printed for J. R. and W. A. 1679.
Plots, Conspiracies and Attempts of Do∣mestick, and Foraign Enemies, of the Romish Religion, against the Princes and Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, &c. THose which make descriptions of large Countries in small Tables, offend not against truth, though some∣what against quantity, so Pliny telleth us. Notwith∣standing with much convenience, ease to the beholder, and truth of observation, things are presented to our Eyes in those little Draughts, that the very places themselves being viewed with great Trouble and loss of Time, cannot yeeld more benefit to the most diligent, oftentimes not so much. Wherefore especially, because the Argument cannot be now unseasonable (for the abridgment of the Commentaries of large Histories, is not unlike Maps of Kingdoms) I have here collected out of divers Authors, which have severally handled parts of this subject, into one, The chief Conspiracies and Attempts against the Kingdoms alone, and immediately of great Britain and Ireland, or else mediately through the sides of the Princes of these Countries, by Traytors at home or abroad, of the Romish Religion, or foraign Enemies, by treache∣rous courses of those of the same bloody superstition. The beginning I make the first time of Reformation of Religion here in England under Queen Elizabeth, and the extent unto this present Year. I begin no higher than Queen Elizabeth, because the Reformation of Henry the eight was but in part, and the other of King Edward, was an inter∣rupted one, by the sudden succession of his Sister Queen Mary; the rather, because, for ought we know, there was no great matter plotted against this hopeful young Prince, that was not rather from Ambition, (if there was any such) than from a defire of subverting Religion. Not
but that the Enemies of our Religion and Kingdom, had us then in their Minds, but other ways there were, before bloody and desperate Pra∣ctises were to be taken in hand, to be first entred into, of less difficulty, and more hopeful success. And these are the steps the Adversaries of our Religion use to tread, who thirsting after England, labour first to bring us back to Rome, by striving to make our selves hate our own Religion, and leave that God which brought us out of the Land of Egypt, be∣witching us with glorious Idolatry of the golden Calves of Rome, in∣troducing Ignorance and Blindness, that we may when our Eyes are out, patiently grind in the Mill of Slavery. If this course fail, the next is by Poyson, Murder, and force of Arms, to draw us to Sodom and Egypt. The Reformation of England and Ireland fall under one time, and because that of Scotland also differeth not many years in age, they may all be brought in one account. With the Plots are jointly handled the Deliverances, which in some respect or other may very well be called great, either in regard of the Misery we had fallen into, (if God had not prevented them) of the slavery of Soul and Body, and this agreeth with all: Or else for the strangeness of the discoveries of their mischiefs, (sometime almost miraculous) before they have come to their birth, or disappointing them of their purposes, when the Authors have put them in practise; and these two respects, the one or the other, which may well denominate God's goodness to us, in disappointing them to be great, may be found in all likewife. So that for these Mercies received, we ought to ascribe to our Deliverer that which is due unto him, the praise of his own Work, and continual thanks for his Mercies, which even to this day, is from those Deliverances of the days of old, extended; we should have bin then betrayed, but we had now bin Slaves, both we, our selves and ours; one Plot, had it succeeded, had bin the betraying of England at once to them, who love themselves too well to have it lost easily, and are so wise, that they endure no Traitors, but for them∣selves, nor can endure any that loves his Country but a Spaniard. We may learn also to trust in him, even now particularly, who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, nor is his hand shortned that he cannot save, nor his Ear heavy that he cannot hear those that call upon him, lift∣ing up pure Hands in sincerity of Heart: although the Sins of our Nati∣on in general, may justly provoke our God to punish us by them that hate us, for that cause, that instead of extirpating Popery and Super∣stition (a thing not hard to be done in human Reason, if the Children of Papists were carefully educated under Protestant Tutors) we think their Religion tolerable, and nothing so dangerous to Soul or Body as
some Men seem to make it. Should we not detest and abhor the Religi∣on of such a Generation, as count they do God good service by killing us? witness the bloody Persecution under Queen Mary, and the dam∣nable Plot of the Gun-Powder Treason. Yet some there are that would seem Protestants, and yet deny that their cruelty was such, as the Au∣thor of the English Martyrology makes the Marian Persecution to be. Others of no small esteem in the Church of England, instead of acknow∣ledging Foxes History a Monument of Martyrs, call it a Book fraught with Traitors and Hereticks. And for the Gun-Pouder Conspiracy, some affirm it the deeds of a few Male-Contents, far from the approba∣tion of the Catholicks; others as falsly, that there was no such Treason intended, but that it was an invention of him, whom in reverence I forbear to name. But yet this may incourage us, that God will still preserve us, for their sakes that have now and heretofore stoutly defend∣ed God's true Religion, and that in very many places of this Land, we have had those that with all their power have opposed the very begin∣nings of Popery. But wonderful it is, and scarcely credible, that any should so much have forgotten the Gun-Powder Treason, as to say, that they would rather trust a Papist than a Puritan; as if they believed not there was any such Treason, or had forgotten it; or that they thought that those whom Men call Puritans, were traiterously minded, and bloody Persons. In the most Reverend and Judicious Assembly of this Kingdom, a Member of that Assembly, declared in particulars, how the best Men have bin branded with the name of Puritan, (it was where any Man might freely have spoken) yet no Man contradicted him. If it be given sometime to the best, without question those ordinarily cal∣led by that bie-name, are none of the worst; because from likeness at least divers Men have one Name. We will acknowledg Hypocrites a∣mong them, but because one is such, no Man will conclude they must be all so. No Man of us almost abhorreth the Name of Protestant to be given him, and yet of these, some will Lie, others will Steal, and a third sort will do worse. Since this Parliament (perhaps I imagine the time, and reason aright) the Jesuites and Jesuited have invented a strange Name for such Men, and let fall the reproach of Puritan. They call them by a figurative Name, which is ignorantly spoken by most, falsly by all; and as the roundest Figure is of the largest Capacity, so they have sha∣ped them a Name, which is larger than Precisian, Brownist, or the like, surroundeth every one, that thinketh it not a just thing to rail against the Parliament, to curse the Fathers of his Country. But I desire not to be called, but to be totus terres atque rotundus. So much by the way; to fall upon the business now.
The King of Spain offereth Marriage to the Queen. AT the beginning of the raign of Queen Elizabeth, Philip the second of Spain sought to win her to him by Marriage, not doubting to procure a Dispensation for the Incest, but was as wisely answered, as he wickedly and craftily intended, that the Queen could not so soon forget her Sisters death, she knowing it to be a part of discretion to keep in hope so potent an Adversary, if he should be incensed by a denial (her own Kingdom, by reason of the change of Religion, and the depriving of many Popish Bishops, which the blinded People had in some esteem, a∣mong many other alterations, being of doubtful Affections) till she could better provide for her own Security. The Spaniard in the mean time perceived that his suit was not like to succeed, when the thought of uniting England to Spain by the Marriage of Queen Elizabeth, if like her Sister Mary she proved not barren, was taken away, he took hold on the next occasion. The practice of the Guises with the Queen of Scots against England. MAry now Queen of Scots, Daughter and Heir apparent unto James the fifth, and Wife unto Francis, Dauphine of France, Daughter of Mary of Lorrain, who was Sister unto the Duke of Guise, She, after the death of Queen Mary of England, being incouraged there∣unto by the Guises her Uncles, usurpeth the Arms of England. uniting them to the Arms of Scotland, on her Plate, in the Windows of her House, and on her Servants Coats, declaring her self thereby Queen of England. Her meaning was well understood, and this (it is very pro∣bable) in the fourth year of Queen Elizabeth, made Arthur Poole and his Erethren, descended of George Duke of Clarence, Brother to Edward the fourth, and Anthony Fortescue their Brother-in-Law, with their Confederates, to conspire secretly to fly unto the Guises in France, and thence, and with their help, to come with an Army into Wales, and there to proclaim the Queen of Scots Queen of England, and Arthur Poole Duke of Clarence. God was pleased in a very good time to disco∣ver this Plot. For had they gone thither and discovered their intents, it had (if God had not powerfully opposed it) not only animated the Guises to have seconded them, and furnished them with Men and Money, but having returned into Wales, they would have gathered great For∣ces to augment their Numbers, and put the Queen to the incomparable Trouble and Danger of a Civil War. Beside all this, she had at this time
on every side, Enemies abroad, the French King, the King of Spain, the Guisian and Popish Faction in Scotland. The Loyal People of Scot∣land were so unable to help her, that they stood in need of her help. The Low-Countries were under Spanish Tyranny, and a convenient place from whence to annoy this Kingdom. The Conspirators confessed that they did not intend to put in practise this thing, during the Life of our Queen; for indeed they were made believe by Predictions of Popish Astrologians, that Queen Elizabeth could not live above one year. The good Queen notwithstanding pardoned their Lives, after Sentence of Death upon them, from their own Confession. And how zealously the Guises endeavoured to invade England, may appear by the inclination of Sebastian Martigius sent into Scotland, by the counsel of the Guises (for about those times their alone Counsels were principally followed) with Horse and Foot, to assist in the Civil War of Scotland, who could hardly be restrained from invading England presently, and first of all, presuming (no question) on the aid of Papists in England, from intelligence held with them here. For otherwise what could 1000 Horse, and not very many Foot do in respect of con∣quering all England? Now was the Queen of Scots in France, and al∣though the Regency of Scotland was put into the hands of the Marquiss of Hamilton, yet the power of the Queen Dowager with her French Fa∣ction did so increase, and on the other side the authority of the Marquiss Regent so abate, that after the promise from the French King of 12000 Crowns by the Year, and Dutchy of Castle-Herald, to which was added the preferment of all the Marquiss's chief kindred, the Marquiss resign∣ed his place into the hands of Mary of Lorrain Queen Dowager; a thing for a Woman to be Regent in Scotland but once before known. She had made many promises unto the Scots of the freedom of exercising the Protestant Religion, but being now setled in the Regency, she discove∣red her mind wholly bent to alter Religion. She told her Friends in plain terms, that though the Ministers whom she named should preach more honestly, or (as she called it) more sincerely than they had done, yet they should all be banished. She expressed at the death of a young Man, whom she seemed to bewail, being slain, for that his Father had not rather excused him, being a stout defender of the reformed Religi∣on, that she was cruelly minded towards the Professors thereof. Easter also was commanded to be celebrated after the Romish Custom. For these and divers other of her overtures, Messengers were sent unto her, to desire her to be good to the Protestants, and to remember the many Promises she had made unto them to that end. But all in vain. She told the Earl of Glencarn, and Sir John Campbel, who were sent unto
her; That performance of Promises was to be expected from Princes, no farther than stood with their profit. Upon this they told one another that they then renounced all Obedience and Duty toward her. Vio∣lence now with Art was to be used for effecting her Purpose touching Religion. Hereupon advice was given by Labrosse a French Commander in Scot∣land, to put to death all the Nobility of Scotland, for that the People being bereaved of their Heads, would after be easily brought to under∣go any Yoak; but that things might appear with a more pleasing Co∣lour, there was a shew, as if the Queen had laboured, and would en∣deavour to convince her Adversaries in Religion, by no other way, but by Arguments. Into Scotland were sent three Sorbon Doctors with the Bishop of Amiens. But with what safety might any Man dispute with them, when he that did so was in the midst of his armed Enemies, and there was greatest fear of violence from the Disputers themselves. For the Bishop of Amiens counselled the Queen Regent, that if any there were which should be found to dispute against the Romish Decrees, he should be put to death, yea even those who but seemed to be of another Mind only. We are notinformed that the Queen Regent put in practice the foregoing counsels, perhaps the time was not altogether seasonable, nor do we take every single action, which might conduce to the sub∣verting of Religion, to be a Conspiracy: but we may well esteem by the Queens Words, the Councellors and Commanders Intents and Pur∣poses, the placing of such a Regent, all this to be a continued Conspi∣racy, to strangle in the birth the Church of Scotland, having yet scarcely taken breath in the World. Not long after the Queen Regent dyeth, and although it will perhaps be said, there was no discovery of any Conspi∣racy which was in acting (as to put to death all the Nobility, or all that would dare dispute against the Bishop or Doctors, could be no easy rask to go about; the latter, because the death of their last Martyr Walter Mille did seem so grevious unto them, and if any more should suffer, how would such a thing be taken by French-men, People of another Nation?) It may be objected from the above named Arguments, that there wan∣ted no endeavour. After the death of the Mother, the Daughter re∣turning into Scotland, was married unto Henry Lord Darnley, who being of the same Religion with the Queen, and they both a Brothers and Sisters Children, did strongly maintain Popery, against the Prote∣stant Religion. We cannot imagine her that any thing should be con∣trived against the lives of those Princes by a Popish Party to overthrow Religion. For, to subvert Religion, no way could be fourd better, than by maintaining in life and honour such Princes as these two were, who
professed and maintained Popery; as contrarily to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties and the like, the best means are through the sides of such Kings and Queens as are Projectors and Maintainers of them. So the holy Scripture declareth by Word and Example, I will smite the Shep∣heard and the Sheep shall be scattered. For this Queen was so far from fur∣thering the establishment of Religion, nay from connivence at those who should go about any such matter, that she professed she would follow the example of her Cousin, Queen Mary of England, which was no other thing than maintaining in her Dominions the Pope and Popery, and pumshing the contrary minded as Hereticks. It will not be thought (I suppose) that either the Papists at home in Scotland, or those in France, or elsewhere, would go about to take away the lives of such Princes, whose lives secured their Religion. For what was attempted against the Life (and most unhappily succeeded) of the King, was not any way to subvert Popery; because the deed was committed, and the Plot chiefly laid by Papists. It rather was undertaken against the Life of this Prince, by some, to make way for their own Family to inherit the Crown of Scotland; by others, to get the Kingdom, and admit any Religion. But those that look farther into Matters, judg this act to be committed against a Professor of the Romish Religion, that he being taken out of the way, another might succeed, which had greater Power and Friends to bring to pass, what King Henry the Queens Husband, had a Mind, but not Power enough to do. And that made those who were no Enemies to the King in point of Religion, not dislike the Trea∣son, for the Ends sake. I cannot be of their Minds altogether, who judg that of the Queen of Scots, being now in restraint in England, not long before married to Earl Bothwell, and presently to desire a Devorce from him, and to require that he should be summoned within the space of a very few days, to return into the Kingdom, to make answer and defence to the Queens Suit of Divorce, to have proceeded from the changing Fancy of the Queen, not so much from Conscience. For it was as well known before her departure into England, as after, that Earl Bothwell, had a Wife living when he married the Queen; insomuch that at the publishing the banes of their Matrimony, one stood up in the Church and forbad them. It was generally thought that it was, that a way might be open for the Duke of Norfolk, who then made Suit unto her. He indeed was such a Man, as being of great Wealth, mighty in Friends, and singular Abilities of Mind, could better bring about what was de∣sired, than a Man of no great riches at any time, but was now in ex∣tream Poverty and Disgrace in the Dominions of the King of Denmark, and notoriously infamous for his Crimes in Sctoland.
The Rebellion of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland. AT this time the King of Spain wrote unto the Duke of Morfolk, to join with the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, to raise a Rebellion in England, and to the Earl of Ormond to do the like in Ireland, These Letters were shown unto Queen Elizabeth by the Duke and the Earl; that from hence at least might appear their Loyalty. Nevertheless, whether by the advice of the Bishop of Boss, who lay as Ambassador at London for the Queen of Scots, and one Rodolf a Flo∣rentine, going in the appearance of a Merchant Factor, or purposing of himself, whatsoever he might pretend, he privately sought to marry the Queen of Scots (she being next Heir to the Crown of England) con∣trary to his Promise made unto his Sovereign Queen Elizabeth. The Queen of Scots and the Duke participate of one anothers Mind, by Let∣ters written in hidden Characters. Neither was this a matter only sup∣posed; but the Dukes Secretary, one Higford, who was commanded by the Duke to burn such Letters as came from the Queen of Scots, but did it not, and hid them under a Mat in his Chamber, and being under examination, he caused them to be produced. This was when the two Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland had secretly complotted to raise Arms, and not long after the Dukes apprehension, they fell into open Rebellion. One of the Letters which was shewn at the Dukes arraignment was to this purpose: That the Queen was sorry that the said Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland were in Arms, before the Dukes Forces were ready. This was undertaken after that Pope Pius Quintus had in Bulls from Rome printed, and sent to Rodolf, absolved Queen Elizabeths Subjects from their Allegiance, The Pope perswaded the Spaniard to assist the Conspirators, that his affairs in the Netherlands might prosper the better: and the French did the like, that the Queen of England might be less able to send aid to the Protestants in France. Northumberland and Westmerland having thus taken Arms, Supplies and Moneys failing withdrew themselves into Scotland, Norfolk was thrown into Prison. Rodolf being in Custody, for whom the Pope had appointed 150000 (rowns to help the Conspirators, was for want of clear proof dismissed. Rodolf being got out of Prison, asterward distributeth the 150000 Crowns to the Partners in the Treason. He being with the Pope, is sent by him to the Spaniard, to press him to give assistance to the King of Portugal also for the same purpose. He wrote alse to the Duke of Norfolk, promising to send him aid. The Popes Letter to the Spaniard was, That he should send an Army out of the Low-Countries
to invade England. And this very thing the Spaniard endea∣voured. There was now a difference betwixt Queen Elizabeth and the Spani∣ard, about Money sent by him to the Duke of Alva, but was intercepted by the Queen, and that was one pretence that the Spaniard had, for his dealing against our Queen and Kingdom. But the Duke of Norfolk was put to death. Nor is this the Relation of an English Protestant, but of a Panist (a good part whereof had not been known but for him) one Hieronimus Calena. The Book was printed at Rome, by the priviledg of Pius Quintus, 1588. The Earls of Northumbrland and Westmerland, seduced by one Morton, a Priest, and at Duresme set up the Mass, thence they marched to Clifford-moore, where hearing that the Queen of Scots was removed to Coventry, that the Earl of Sussex was sent with strong Forces against them, and that Sir George Bowes was behind them, and had fortified Bernards Castle, that Scroupe and Cumberland had fortified Carlile, and had also an Army in readiness, that the Souldiers of Barwick and the power of Northumberland were in New-castle, besieged Bernards Castle, and took it on Conditions. Then for fear of the Earl of Sussex they fled to Hexam, thence by by-ways to Naworth Castle, from that place into Scotland and from thence was Northumberland sent, and here behcaded. Westmerland escaped into the Netherlands, where with a poor Pension under the Spaniard, he lived poorly all his Days. Dacres his endeavour to deliver the Scots Queen. IN the Year 1569, Leonard Dacres, second Son of William Lord Dacres of Gillesland, being grieved to see a very great Patrimony go from him to the Daughters of the Baron, whom the Duke of Norfolk their Father∣in-Law had joined in marriage with his Sons, grew revengeful, and joining with the Rebels, endeavoured to deliver the Queen of Scots; yet a little before being at the Court, promised to assist the Queen his Soveraign, against the Rebels, but treacherously he undertook to kill the Lord Scroup and Bishop of Carlisle, to whose custody the Scottish Queen was committed, but he failing in the performance, took Grastock Castle, holding it as his own, and gathered Soldiers. The Lord Hunsdon met him with the trained Souldiers of Barwick, and after a sharp conflict overcometh him, and Dacres fled into Scotland, from thence into the Netherlands, were at Lovaine he lived and died poorly.
Fitz-Morris raiseth Rebellion in Ireland. IN this Year Edmund and Peter Butler, Brethren to the Earl of Ormond, joining with James Fitz Morris, of the House of Desmond, entred into a Conspiracy against Queen Elizabeth; and to further it, came Joannes Mendsza, secretly out of Spain. The Earl of Ormond going into Ireland, caused them to submit; they were imprisoned, and for their Brother the Earls sake, not brought to Tryal. The Lord Deputy, and Sir Humphry Gilbert (through Gods assistance) appeased that rebel∣lion. It is clear enough that this Rebellion in Ireland arose from the Spaniard as the first mover, for to this end he sent Mendoza into Ireland, and had not long before written to the Earl, Brother to the two Rebels, to raise a Rebellion in Ireland. Stanleys Conspiracy. IN the Year 1570, under a colour of delivering the Queen of Scots, Thomas Stanly and Edward, younger Sons of the Earl of Darby, Tho∣mas Jerard, Rolston, Hall, with others in Durby shire, conspired; but the Son of Rolston, which was Pensioner to the Queen, disclosed the Conspiracy. All but Hall were imprisonce. Hall escaped into the Isle of Man, thence by the commendation of the Bishop of Ross, he was sent into Dunbritan; whence (the Castle being won) he was brought to London, and suffered Death. Dissimulation of Don John of Austria. IN the Year 1576, Don John of Austria coming into the Low-Countries as Governour, sent Gastelius to Queen Elizabeth, pretending a per∣petual Edict for Peace. Teh Queen, as if ignorant of any bad intent, sent Rogers to congratulate Don John's Edict; yet she knew that Don John had conceived a certain hope of marrying the Queen of Scots, and of enjoying Scotland and England, intending to invade the Isle of Man, that from thence he might out of Ireland, the North of England and Scot∣land also (where he knew were many Papists) invade England. This Man to help forward this great design, practised secretly with the Pope and with the King of Spain, for the Havens of Biscay. But the King of Spain neglected him in this desire, accounting England and Scotland, a Morsel sitter for his own Palate.
During this Treaty of perpetual Peace, this treacherous Don treateth secretly with the Scottish Queen about the Marriage: and the better to work his own ends, took divers Towns and Castles in the Low-Countries by treachery, and wrote into Spain, that for the invasion of the Nether∣lands, it would be best to seize on first the Towns of Zealand, before the more inland places; and that England might with the more ease be first invade. The Queen in the mean while prepareth for War: but God cut off this her Enemy very suddenly, before the fruits of his high thoughts were ripe. Stucley's design against Ireland. Not long before this time in Ireland, Thomas Stucley, a prodigal rio∣tous and needy English man, discontented for that he lost the Stewardship of Wexford, breaths out Contumelies against the Queen, and betaketh himself to the Pope, with whom he treateth, and boasteth that he will subdue Ireland with 3000 Men, and burn the Queen's Navy. Pope Pius Quintus, ahd a great opinion of him. After him Gregory the 13, and the King of Spain, consulted together to invade England and Ireland at once. The Pope aimed to get for his Son James Boncompayno, the Kingdom of Ireland, and the Spaniard chiefly to imitate the course of Queen Elizabeth (who to keep the Spaniard busy abroad, secretly sent aid to the Dutch) that he migth with-draw her help from the Low∣Countries. But because the strength of England consisteth chiefly in the Navy, the King of Spain setteth the Merchants of Italy, and the Nether∣lands a work, to hire the Merchants ships of England, and so to send them away in very long Voyages, that the Ships being from home, and Stucley joining with the Rebels of Ireland, the Queen's Navy might be over∣thrown by a greater. The Pope gave him very great Titles in Ireland, and sent under his command 800 Italians, the Spaniard paying the Sol∣diers. Stucley then went to Sebastian, King of Portugal, to intreat him to be chief Conductor, out was perswaded by the said King, and the King by Abdalla's Son Mahomet, to go first unto the African War, where both King Sebastian and himself lost their lives. And thus God over∣threw their wicked counsels for that time. Fitz-Morris his second attempt against Ireland. ANno Domini 1579, James Fitz-Morris formerly having fled into France, being pardoned for a former Rebellion in Ireland, goeth now to the Spaniard, and is by him sent unto the Pope, to consult
with him about his request, which was to reduce that Kingdom by force of Arms unto Popery. The Pope, at the earnest suit of Nicholas San∣ders and English, and Alan an Irish Priest, gave Fitz Morris some Money to that intent and sendeth him back to the Spaniard, from whence with his Priests, three Ships, and a few Soldiers, he arrived at Smerwick in Kerry in Ireland, and raiseth a Fort there. Thomas Courtney an English∣man, presently surpriseth the Ships. John and James, Brethren to the Earl of Desmond, join themselves to Fitz-Morris who was their Kins∣man. The Earl of Desmond (although he pretended the contrary) favour∣ed them, drew forces together, and by this pretence of Desmond, caused the Earl of Clanrickard, who came to oppose them, to withdraw himself. Fitz-Morris seeing few Irish come to his aid, under pretence of going in Pilgrimage to the holy Cross of Tipperary, went toward Conaught and Ʋlster, to draw Forces together: whose Horses being tired, he took some Horses from the Plough of William a Burgh his Kinsman, and being pur∣sued by the Sons of William a Burgh, Fitz-Morris perceiving that, told his Cousin Theobald a Burgh, that it was no time now to fall out about Horses, but to joi with him in the business of Rebellion, for which he was come into Iroland. These Brethren had bin in a sormer Rebellion, but now declared unto Fitz-Morris their sorrow for it, yet now fighting with Fitz-Morris to recover the Horses, both the Brethren, and some others were slain. Sor William Drury was then Lord Deputy, who sent for the Earl of Desmond, who made a promise by his Wife to the Depu∣ty, that he and his Men would fight against the Rebels. He dissembled long; but after that Malbey had defeated John his Brothers Forces, and had sent for Desmond to come unto him about Rekel a Town of Desmond, he plainly discovered his Rebellion. That Night the Rebels set upon Malbeys Tents, butwere disappointed. Afterward Desmond was sent for to come in person) by the Lord Deputy Pelham, who succeeded the deceased Sir William Drury: but excuseth himself by a Letter sent by his Wife. The Earl of Ormond was sent unto him, that he thould deliver Sanders the Priest, the Castles of Carigofoile and Asketton, and to submit himself absolutely. The prosecuting of him was committed to the Earl of Ormond, who ruined Conilo, the Rebels only refuae; he hanged the Bayliff of Youghall at his Door, for refusing to take an English Garrison into the Town, besieged the Spaniards in Strangical, but they withdrew themselves, and after were all killed; and so hard he pressed Desmond and his Brethren, that madly they intreated the chief Justice to take their parts. Afterward the Justice sent for the Nobility of Munster to come to him, and would not dismiss them, till they had given pledges that they would assist against the Rebels. They
made the Baron of Lixenaw yield himself, took Carigofoil Castle, killed and hanged all the Spaniards in it, and the Captain also an Italian. San Josephus with 700 Spaniards sent into Ireland. THe next Year, 1580, 700 Spaniards and Italians came to divert the Queens Forces, rather than to conquer Ireland, they landed at Smer∣wick, under the command of San Josephus an Italian, they fortified it, and called it Fort Delor; but being followed by the Earl of Ormond, they withdrew thence into a Valley called Glammingel. Some Prisoners of them were taken, who confest they were 700, and that Arms were brought for 5000, and that more were expected from Spain; that to conquer Ireland, the Spaniard and Pope had resolved and therefore sent into the hands of Sanders, Desmond and his Brother John, a vast sum of Money. That Night the Spaniards and Italians returned to their Frot, which so soon as Ordnance could be brought, and Winter was returned with the Ships of War from England, was on every side besieged, and after the five days taken. The common Soldiers Italians and Spaniards, were put to the Sword, the Irish hanged: only the Captains of the former were preserved. Three Years after, Desmond wandring like a Vagabond, had his Arm almost cut off by a common Soldier, before he was known; and after was slain Nicholas Sanders was almost famished in the Woods, and died stark mad. This Year 1580, Priests and Seminaries much in∣creasing in England, severe Laws were enacted against them. These were for the most part bred in the English Colledg of Doway, founded (by the procurement of Alan, somtimes a Student in Oxford, afterward Priestand Cardinal) in the Year 1568. Afterward under Requesenius's Government in the Low Countries, when the Wars were bet ween England and Spain, the Fugitives were thrust from thence, and two Colledges erected for them, one at Rhemes, the other at Rome, the first by the Guises, the se∣cond by Gregory the 13. From these places rose in England, Hanse, Nes∣son, Main, Sherward, Priests, whoreported Queen Elizabeth to the He∣retick, and so ought to be deposed, for which they suftered. In the afore∣said Year 1580, Robert Parsons, a Man of a turbulent Spirit and impu∣dent, Campian a more modest Man, both Jesuits; they to serve the Ca∣tholicks turns, obtained of Pope Gregory an interpretation of Pius his Bull against Queen Elizabeth, that it bound the Queen and Hereticks always, but not Catholicks, till a convenient season. Campian wrote a Book intituled, 10 Reasons in defence of Rome. Mr. Chark answered him soberly. Parsons wrote against Chark virulently: but Campian's 10 Reasons were thorowly answered by Dr. Whitaker.
Campian and others condemned. EDmund Campian, Ralf Sherwin, Luke Kerby, Alexander Briant, were ta∣ken in the year 1581, as Traitors to the Queen and State, and condem∣ned for coming into England to stir up Sedition. Still more and more Priests came into England, and for their dangerons Doctrine, That Princes excommunicated were to be thrown out of their Kingdoms; that Princes of any other than the Roman Religion had lost their Kingly Dignity; that those who had taken Orders were freed from Princes Jurisdiction, and not bound by their Laws, it was enacted 1582, That it thould be Treason to disswade any Subject from his Allegiance, and from the Re∣ligion established in England, &c. Somerviles attempt to kill the Queen. AN. Dom. 1583, divers Priests and Jesuits wrote dangerous Books a∣gainst Q. Eliz. and certain other Princes excommunicated: which prevailed so far, that one Somervile a Gentleman, breathing out nothing but Blood against the Protestants, secretly sought entrance into the Queens Presence, with a drawn Sword set upon one or two in his way; and being apprehended, confessed that he purposed to have killed the Queen. Ed. Ardern his Father-in-Law, a Gentleman of Warwick-shire, and Arderns Wife, and their Daughter, Somervil's Wife, and Hall a Priest, were condemned as guilty of Somervil's practice. After three days Somervile was found strangled in Prison (for fear of revealing it, as was thought) where he lay, and Ardern was hanged the next day. Mendoza the Spanish Amhassador, thrust out of England. IN 1584, some English Gentlemen began to practise the delivery of the Queen of Scots, Francis Throgmorton, was suspected by Letters written to the Queen of Scots, and intercepted, Presently Thomas Lord Paget, and Charles Arundel, a Courtler, left the Land secretly. Henry Earl of Northumberland, and Philip Earl of Arundel were commanded to their Houses. And there was great cause of circumspection; for the Papists by printed Books incited the Maids of Honour to do that against the Queen that Judith did against Holofernes. Yet was the Queens Mercy such, that she caused 70 Priests to be sent out of Eng∣land. The chief of them were Gasper Heywood, who of all the Jesuits  England, James Basgrave John Hare and Edward Rishton,
who presently after wrote a Book against the Queen. At this time Ber∣nardinus Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, was thrust out of England, for practising Treason against the State. He having dealt with Throg∣morton and others, to bring in strangers to invade the Land, as appear∣ed by Throgmorton's action, who being apprehended, sent one of his Packets to Mendoza: His other Packets being searched, there was found a Catalogue of all the Havens in England, fit to land in; and another of all the Noblemen in England, which favoured the Romish Religion. And he did not deny that he had promised his help to Mendoza, and the help of those Nobles it was fit he should deal with. A Popish practice against Q. Elizabeth discovered, not without a Miracle, by Creighton's torn Papers, a Scotish Jesuit. QUeen Elizabeth, that rare Paragon of her Sex, and that fairly flou∣rishing Flower, which Traitors (though oft attempted) could never nip nor crop up, being a Princess both Prudent, Pious, and Pi∣tiful; seeking (therefore) a fair opportunity and sutable means to set the Queen of Scots (at those Times tainted with some Treasonable Practices against her Crown and Person) at liberty: And for that pur∣pose sent Sir William Wade (who was then returned out of Spain) to confer with her of the means thereunto. And the good Queen was about to send Sir Walter Mildmay, to bring this aim of hers to further issue. But some further terrors and fears in the interim brake out be∣tween them, which disturbed that intention; especially by a notable discovery by certain Papers, which one Creighton a Jesuit, sailing into Scotland, did then tear in pieces when he was apprehended in the Ship by Dutch-Pirates at Sea, whose person being by them seised on, he took forth his Papers (wherein it seems the project of a Traiterous Plot against Queen Elizabeth at that time, was described) tore them into small pieces, and with all his force threw them into the Sea. But see how the Lord's good Providence ordered it; as they flew in the Air, the Wind blew stifly, by force whereof they were all blown back again in∣to the hip, even in a miraculous manner, as the Jesuit himself confes∣sed, when he saw it. Which Papers were all kept and gathered toge∣ther, sent to England to Sir William Wade aforesaid, and with much labour and singular skill, so joyned and set together again, that he found they contained a notable new Plot (among many other) of the Popes, the Spaniards, and the Guise's resolution to Invade Eng∣land. Whereupon, and by reason of many other rumours of dangers intended against the Queen and whole Kingdom of England, a great
number of all sorts of Men (out of common charity, and to shew their love and affectionate care of the welfere of the Queen and State) bound themselves by an Association (as then it was called) by mutual promises and subscriptions of Hands and Seals, to prosecute all such (by all their sorce and might, even unto death) that should attempt any thing against the Life of the Queen, or Welfare of the Kingdom. Now the Queen of Scots took this as a thing devised to bring her into danger, and she also was so continually set upon by seditious spirits, who if they may but have access, are able to draw the greatest Princes to de∣struction. And what have been their practices from time to time, but to bring great Persons, and greatest Families to ruin? Lamentable experience shews openly the fruit of their malice and mischevous plots of Trea∣son, which they impiously and audaciously call and count nothing else but advancing of their Catholick Cause. Now the Scots Queen (led on by her blind guides) dealt most importunely with the Pope and Spaniards, by Sir Francis Englefield, that by all means they would with speed undertake their intended Business, namely, the Invasion of our Realm. For the advancing whereof, the Pope and Spaniard had resolved on these points. 1. That Queen Elizabeth should be deprived of her Kingdom. 2. That the King of Scots, a manifest favourer of Heresie, should utterly be dis-inherited of the Kingdom of England. 3. That the Scots-Queen should Marry some Noble-Man of England that was a Catholick. 4. That this Man must be chosen King of England by the Catholicks of England. 5. That this choice so made, must be confirmed by the Pope. 6. That the Children of him, so chosen, begotten of the Scots-Queen, must be declared Successors in the Kingdom. All these things were confirmed to be true, by the testimony of one Hart, a Priest. Who was that noble English-man that should marry the Scots-Queen, was much enquired after by Sir Francis Walsingham, with all diligence, but not certainly found out, yet there was strong suspicion of Henry Howard Brother to the Duke of Norfolk, who was Noble by birth, unmarried, and a fast favourer of that Religion, and in great grace and favour with them. All these things were discovered by this Creighton, the Jesuite's torn Papers, as aforesaid. And all this their plotting and contriving of France, Spain, and the Pope, against Queen Elizabeth and King James, sor no other cause, but for their Religon, which they had now sairly begun to establish among their People.
Parry Executed for Treason. IN the year 1585, William Parry, a Welchman, and Doctor of Law, spake against that Law, which in the Parliament then held, was Ex∣hibited, and called it a Bloody Law. Presently after he was accused of practizing the Queen's death. He confessed voluntarily in the Tower, that having obtained the Queen's pardon for breaking into the Cham∣ber and wounding one Hare (for which he was Condemned) he being a sworn Servant to the Queen; from England he went into France, and was reconciled. Afterward at Venice, in consultation with Benedict Palmeus, he told him that he had found out a way to help the afflicted Catholicks in England, if the Pope, or some learned Divines, would ap∣prove it as lawful. The Jesuit Palmeus approved it. Next in France, one Morgan, drew him to consent to murder the Queen, if it should prove lawful. This Act the Pope's Nuncio, Ragazonius, commended. Parry afterward having access to the Queen, shewed her all, and not long after Cardinal Come his Letter approving the enterprize. Now he taketh a new resolution to perform it, encouraged especially by Do∣ctor Alen's Book, teaching that Princes Excommunicated are to be spcil∣ed of their Kingdoms and Lives. These with many other things, Parry confessed before the Lord Hunsdon, Sir Christopher Hatton, and Sir Fran∣cis Walsingham, in Westminster-Hall; the heads of his Accusation being read, he confessed himself guilty. He died in the Palace-yard before Westminster-Hall, not once calling upon the Name of God. At this time also Henry Earl of Northumberland, for entring into Traiterous Counsels with Paget and the Guises, to invade England, was cast into the Tower, where he was found dead, being shot with three Bullets un∣der the left Pap, the Chamber-door belted in the inside. A Pistol was found in his Chamber, and himself the author of his own death. Thus from time to time, the most noble Families of England have been Sedu∣ced and Ruined by the false and bewitching coundsels of Jesuits and Seminaries. Savage's attempt to kill the Queen. NOw again there was a most abominable Treason conspired, and voluntarily confessed by the Conspirators. One Gifford, a Do∣ctor in Divinity, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgeson, Priests, persuaded one John Savage, a bloody Fellow, to undertake to kill Queen Flizaheth: To hide their mischievous intents more conningly from the Queen's Council, who were very careful to foresee all Danger, they wrote a
Book, in which they advise the Papists in England, not to go about to hurt the Queen. For they were to use no other Weapons against their Prince, than the Christian Weapons of Tears, Fasting, Prayers, and the like: And most cunningly also these Foxes spread a Rumour, that George Gifford, one of the Queen's Pensioners, had sworn to kill the Queen, and for that cause had gotten from the Guises a very great sum of Money. The Easter following, John Ballard, an English Priest of the Colledg of Rhemes, was come into England, who had been trying the minds of Papists in England and Scotland. He had dealt with Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador in France, Charles Paget and others, for the Invasion of England. And although it seemed to be a very hard work, yet he had sworn to use his utmost endeavour in it, and also for the liberty of the Queen of Scots. At Whitsuntide, in a Soul∣diers habit, and under the name of Captain Fortescue, he had a confe∣rence in London with Anthony Babington, a young Gentleman of Dar∣by-shire, Romishly affected, who not long before in France, had con∣ference with Thomas Morgan, and the Bishop of Glasco, the Scotch Queen's Ambassador. He was drawn by them, shewing him most as∣sured hopes of Honour from her, to addict himself to them; and by their means had favourable Letters from her. Ballard and Babington, conferred together concerning the Invasion of England; but it was not deemed a thing could be done, Queen Elizabeth being alive. Then Ballard informed Babington, that Savage had undertaken to kill her. Babington's advice was, that it should not be committed to Savage a∣lone, lest perhaps he might be hindred, but to six resolute Men, of which number Savage should be one. Upon this, Babington took into his consideration the Ports, in which the Invaders should land the Con∣federates, that should joyn in the act of murdering Q. Elizabeth, and delivering the Scots-Queen. In the mean time a Letter was brought from the Imprisoned Queen to Babington, in a secret Character, bla∣ming Babington's long silence; but he excused it, because she was un∣der the custody of Sir Amice Paulet, a severe Keeper, declared unto her, that which Ballard and he had resolved before, and that himself with one hundred more would deliver her. The purpose by her Let∣ters unto Batington was commended: And it was advised that it should be undertaken considerately, and that nothing should be moved before they were sure of External Forces; that they should make an Associ∣ation, as if they feared the Puritans, that some Tumults might be raised in Ireland, while the thing should be done here: That Arundel and his Brethren, and Northumberland should be drawn to their side; Westmerland, Paget, and others called Home. The way to deliver the
Scots-Queen, was appointed, to overthrow a Coach in the Gate, or set the Stables on fire, or intercept her as she rode to take the air, be∣twixt Chartly and Stafford. Babington undertook for rewards, to all that should give their help. He had gotten unto him Edward Windsor, the Lord Windsor's Brother, Thomas Salisbury, Charles Tinley, the Queens Pensioner, Chidioc Tichbourn, Edward Abingdon, whose Father was the Queen's Cofferer, Robert Gage, John Travers, John Charnick, John Jones, Savage, Barnwel, an Irish Gentleman, Henry Dun, Clark of the First-fruits Office; and one Polly also joyned himself, who was thought to reveal all to Sir Francis Walsingham. Abingdon, Barnwel, Charnick, and Savage, took an Oath to kill her with their own hands. Babington enjoyned, that whosoever was admintted into the Conspiracy, should take an Oath of secrecy. They were so confident of the suc∣cess, that they did not fear to cause the undertakers of the Treason to be Pictured together, which Picture being seen of the Queen, she knew only Barnwel, and seeing him a good way off, she blamed the neglect of guarding her Person. This Fellow afterward gave it out, that if the Conspirators had been present, the deed might easily have been done. That the aid from France might not be wanting, leave was ob∣tained for Ballard to pass over thither for Money, under a false name, and Babington was to follow; who, that he might the more cunningly work his ends, pretended to Sir Francis Walfingham, that he had a de∣sire to go into France, to discover what the Fugitives plotted for the delivery of the Scots-Queen. Walsinghom seemed very much to like the matter, and to commend Babington's resolution, but upon pretences, delayed his going. This was known to Walsingham, either out of a fingular faculty he had to find out Treasons, or else by the means of Gilbert Gifford a Priest, who was sent out of France to incourage Sa∣vage in his wicked resolution, and that Letters might safely be transmit∣ted by him to the Queen of Scots. Gifford corrupted with Money, or for fear, revealed the Plot to Walsingham, and promised to communi∣cate unto him all his Letters. Walsingham kindly used him, sent him into Staffordshire to Sir Amice Paulet, in a Letter persuading Sir Amice to suffer some of his Servants to be corrupted by him. Gifford for some Gold prevailed with Sir Amice his Brewer, who conveyed the Letters to and from Gifford, which by Messengers for that end appointed, came ever to the hands of Sir Francis Walsingham, who coppied out the Let∣ters, and by the Art of Thomas Philips found out the Character, and by the help of one Gregory sealed them up, that none could suspect them opened, and then sent the Letters as they were directed. The Qu en hereupon commanded Ballard to be apprehended, which was done.
Babington advised presently to send Savage and Charnick, to kill the Queen. Babington intreateth leave of Walsingham to go into France, and sueth for Ballard's liberty, who would be of use to him for disco∣very, and to avoid suspition. Sir Francis keepeth him back with de∣lays, and draweth him to his own House. Skidmore, Sir Francis's Ser∣vant, was commanded to observe him strictly, and to go with him, pretending, lest he should be taken with Messengers. This Letter be∣ing read (for the Command was written) by Skidmore, was per∣ceived and read also by Babington sitting by him, who Supping with Sir Francis's Man in a Tavern, pretending to rise to go pay the Rec∣koning, left his Cloak and Rapier, and fled. Then Barnwel, Gage, Dun, Charnick, being in the mean time proclaimed Traitors, fled into the Woods, and after were concealed, fed, and clothed in a rustical habit, by one Bellamy at Harrow on the Hill. After ten days they were found and brought to London. Salisbury was taken in Stafford∣shire, and Traverse also, Jones in Wales, not privy to the Conspiracy, but he concealed them, and furnished Salisbury and his Man with a changed Cloak. Windsor was not found, Gilford was sent into France as an Exile, and there died. Sept. 13. Seven of the Conspirators being brought to Judgment, confest themselves guilty, and were condemned of Treason; other se∣ven the next day pleaded not guilty, but were guilty, and condemned. Polly though guilty, yet for confessing something to Sir Francis Walsing∣ham, was not brought to Judgment; on the 20th the first seven were hanged and quartered in St. Giles's Fields, where they used to meet. The French Ambassador's Plot to kill the Queen. IN the Year 1587, Obespineus, the Freuch Ambassador of the Guisian faction, conferred with William Stafford to kill Q. Elizabeth. Staf∣ford refused it, but commended one Moody, in Prison. Trappius, Secre∣tary to the said Ambassador, in the absence of Stafford conferred with Moody about the deed, Moody proposed Poison, or a bag of Gun-pow∣der, Trappius disliked it, and wished rather for such a Man as the Bur∣gundian, which killed the Prince of Orange; this thing Stafford revea∣led to the Council, Trappius was apprehended going into France, and afterward the Ambassador, Moody, Stafford, Trappius, all accused the Ambassador before the Lords, who sent for the Amoassador. Stafford beginning to speak, was interrupted by the Ambassador, saying, that Stafford first proposed it to him, who if he did not desist, threatned to send him bound Hand and Foot to the Queen; Stafford upon his Knees
with great protestations affirmed, that the Ambassador first moved it: The Ambassador was admonished to take heed of such Crimes, and dis∣mist by Burley, insinuating unto him, that it was more the Queen's Clemency, than that his Office claimed any such favour. The Spainsh Armada. IN the Year 1588, was set out by the King of Spain for the Conquest of England, the Invincible (as they called it) Navy. For this purpose the Duke of Parma had an Army in Flanders, of one hundred and three Companies of Foot, and three thousand Horse, among which were seven hundred English Fugitives, the Bull of Pius Quintus, for Excom∣municating Q. Elizabeth, is renewed by Sixtus Quintus, and a plenary Indulgence granted to all, who would joyn against England. The Queen prepared a Navy also, and makes the Lord Charles Howard Ad∣miral, and sends him into the West, to joyn with Sir Francis Drake, Vice-Admiral, Henry Seymor, second son to the Duke of Somerset, with 40 Ships, English and Dutch, is appointed to stop Parma's com∣ing forth; upon the Land Southward, were placed 20000 Men, ano∣ther Army of 22000 Foot, and a 1000 Horse at Tilbury, under Leice∣ster; another Army guarded the Person of the Queen, consisting of 34000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, under Henry Lord Hunsdon. The Council of War, decreed that all places commodious to land in, should be strengthened with Men and Ammunition, which places should be defended with the Trained-Bands in the Maritime Countries, to hinder the Enemies landing; if he should land, then they should waste the Country round about, that he might find no more relief than he brought, and that they should keep him in continual Alarms. To secure the Queen at Home from Papists, some were committed to Wisbitch Ca∣stle. There was in the mean time a Treaty of Peace from the Spaniards, even till the Fleet was almost come to the English Coast. The Spanish Fleet consisted of 130 Ships, 19290 Souldiers, Mariners 8350, chain∣ed Rowers 2080. Great Ordnance 2630. They loosed out of the River of Tagus; three of their Ships by the help of David Guin an English Ser∣vant, and the Turkish Rowers, were carried into France, the rest of this mighty Fleet, was by God's help overthrown and dispersed, with eight Fire-ships, made to cut their Cables, weigh their Anchors, and flie confusedly, and the Admiral Gallyasse was taken; when they began again to gather together, they were battered and torn, divers of them perishing in the Sea: So a Navy three years in preparing, was over∣thrown in a Month, many of their Men being slain and drowned, di∣vers
of their Ships sunk and taken (not 100 Englishmen lost, and but one Ship) driven about Scotland, Orcades, and Ireland, much in∣paired, and returned with shame, God's Name be honoured. Lopez his undertaking to poison the Queen. IN the Year 1593, one Stephen Ferrera de Gama, which came with Don Antonio, the expulsed King of Portugal into England, and af∣terwards sought to be reconciled to the King of Spain, being of inward familiarity with one Roger Lopez, a Portugues, the Queen's Physician, prevailed with him to promise to poison Q. Elizabeth. Ferrera wri∣teth to Ibarra, the King of Spain's Secretary at Wars, about the pro∣mise of Lopez, and his requiring for the undertaking 50000 Crowns. Ferrera promised him, that there should one come in the habit of a Mariner to him, who should bring him the value of 50000 Crowns in Rubies and Diamonds, this was Lopez's own confession; who added al∣so, that it could not be but that the King of Spain was acquainted with the matter, for the Money was to come from the King of Spain. He further confessed, that Stephen Feerera told him, that if he would of∣fer to the Count Fuentes this great service to poison her Majesty, he should want no Money; and hereupon he was content that Ferrera should write to the Count Fuentes, or Secretary Ibarra, to assure them that the Doctor would undertake to poison her. This secret was dis∣covered by Letters, which were intercepted (for all Letters to any Por∣tugues, and every Portugues coming from beyond Sea, was to be staied) superscribed to Diego Hernandes, from Francis Torres; Diego Hernan∣des, Ferrera confessed to be himself; Francis Torres, was one Manoel Lowys, who had served the King of Portugal, but remained now at tended Merchandise, as that the Merchants on the other side did com∣mend his Wares, &c. assuring him of good return, &c. and therefore desired him to continue there some time. They commended the Jewel he sent, and reported how the Amber and Musk was highly esteemed, and spake of Broad-Cloth, Scarlet, Threads of Pearl, Diamond, &c. which Letter was confessed to be in Answer to that was written by Lo∣pez, to take away the Queen's life; more Letters there were to the foresaid purpose from Secretary Ibarra to Stephen Ferrera, and from the Count Fuentes at Bruxels. Stephen Ferrera told Peter Ferrera his Keeper, that himself and Lopez had written into Spain, and made offer to give the Queen poison.
Squires Practice to poison the Queens Saddle. ANno Dom. 1596, one Edward Squire, sometimes a Scrivener at Greenwich, afterwards a deputy Purveyor for the Queens Stable, in Sir Francis Drake's last Voyage was taken Prisoner, and carried into Spain, and being set at liberty, one Walpole a Jesuite grew acquainted with him, and got him into the Inquisition, whence he return∣ed a resolved Papist: he perswaded Squire to undertake to poison the Pummel of the Queens Saddle, and to make him constant, made Squire receive the Sacrament upon it, he then gave him the Poison, shewing that he should take it in a double Bladder, and should prick the Bladder full of holes in the upper part when he should use it, (carrying it within a thick Glove for the safety of his Hand) should after turn it downward, pressing the Bladder upon the Pummel of the Queens Saddle. This Squire confest. Squire is now in Spain, and for his fafer dispatch into England, it was devised, that two Spanish Prisoners taken at Ca∣lice, should be exchanged for Squire, and one Rowles, that it might not be thought that Squire came over, but as a redeemed Captive. The Munday sevennight after Squire returned into England, he understand∣ing the Horses were in preparing for the Queens riding abroad, laid his hand, and crushed the poyson upon the Pummel of the Queens Saddle, saying, God save the Queen. The Queen rode abroad, and as it should seem laid not her hand upon the place, or else received no hurt (through God's goodness) by touching it. Walpole counting of it as of a thing done, imparted it to some principal Fugitives there, but being disap∣pointed of his hope, supposing Squire to have been false; to be revenged on him, sent one hither (who should pretend to have stoln from thence) with Letters, wherein the Plot of Squire was contained, this Letter was pretended to be stoln out of one of their Studies. Squire being ap∣prehended, confessed all without any rigour, but after denied that he put it in execution, although he acknowledged he consented to it in the Plot, at length he confessed the putting it in execution also. Earl of Tyrones Rebellion. ANno Dom. 1597, Hugh a Bastard, made Earl of Tyrone by Queen Elizabeth, pardoned also by her for a Murder, and usurping the Title of Oneal, set on by the Spaniard, with whom he had lived a Fugitive, assaulted the Fort of Blackwater, and at that very time when he wrote to Sir John Norris the English General, that he might be dealt
mildly withal, lest he should run on the Rocks of rebellion, wrote al∣so to Kildare to side with him: the Queen desiring to spare shedding of Blood, agreed unto a conference with him by her Commissioners; but the Rebel not liking the conditions proposed by the Commissioners, depar∣ted and spoiled the Country about Black-water, and pulled down the Town of Dunganon. The Country wasted, and no Victuals to be had, Tyrone presented to the General a Petition, craving pardon upon his Knees, at the Foot of the Queens Picture; and in the mean time dealt for aid out of Spain; the King of Spain promised him aid, requiring him to admit of no Articles of Peace with the English. Hereupon (though there was a cessation of Arms) he burneth and spoileth the Country, then he put on again his old habit of dissimulation and sues for Pardon. Presently by shuffling or neglect, Conaught and Ʋlster revolted, then he fell to Rebellion again, and about the Black-water overthrew 1500 En∣glish; then the Earl of Essex coming General into Ireland, he cleared Munster, thence went into Lemster against the O Conors, and O Neales, whom he vanquished. He sent thence Sir Conyers Clifford, against O Rork, himself going another way, to distract the Forces of Tyrone; but Sir Conyers was slain, and his Forces defeated. Tyrone coming near to the General, declared, he desired not to fight, but parley of Peace, which was denied; afterward he obtained conference with the Lord General, and then another conference, where it was concluded, that next day Commissioners should meet to treat of Peace. Then was the Lord General sent for into England, after whose departure Tyrone takes the Field again. In the time of cessation of Arms, the Spaniard sent him some Money and Ammunition, the Popes Indulgences, and a Plume of Peacock-Feathers. Anno 1600, the Lord Mountjoy came into Ireland, as Lieutenant General, and in divers small Skirmishes beat the Rebels. The Spaniard to further the Rebellion, sent Don John de Aquila, with 2000 old trai∣ned Soldiers, and some Irish Fugitives, who landed at Kingsale. There were also at that same time, 2000 Spaniards more arrived at Been-haven, Balimore and Castel-haven. The Lord Deputy encamped near Kingsale, Sir Richard Levison with two of the Queens Ships blockt up the Haven: and on both sides the Town was battered. Then Sir Richard Levison sunk five of their Ships. To these Spaniards, O Donel betook himself, and presently after Tyrone, O Rork, Raymund, Burk, Mac Mahon, Ran∣dal, Mac Surly, and Tyrrel, with the chief of the Nobility, in all 6000 Foot, and 500 Horse. Tyrone on a Hill, not far from the Camp, made a bravado two days together, as if he would give the English Bat∣tel. The Lord Deputy at the foot of the Hill, chose a convenient plot
to fight with him, but Tyrone soundeth a Retreat, whom the Lord Ge∣neral followed, and forced to make a stand in the midst of a Bog: where, by the Earl of Clanrikard, their Horse were routed and defeated. Alonso O Campo one of the Spanish Generals, and six Ensign-bearers, were ta∣ken Prisoners, and the Ensigns taken by the English, and 1200 Spani∣ards slain. Tyrone was forced to fly into Ʋlster, O Donel fled into Spain, the rest hid themselves. The Lord General returned to King-sale, and bat∣tered it for six days space, the Enemy attempted nothing against him. Then Don John offered conditions of surrendring the Town; which propounded, the Lord General (the English being wearied out with a Winters Siege) agreeth with the Spaniard on certain Articles, and ta∣keth possession of the Town, and sendeth away all the Spaniards, as well as those in the Town, into Spain. The next Spring the General pursueth Tyrone into Ʋlster, and spoileth the Country; upon which the Rebels make haste to come in unto the Deputy, and Tyrone beggeth par∣don upon his Knees. From Dublin, Tyrone should have been carried into England, but the Queens death hindred that, and King James par∣doned him. Afterward he entred into another Conspiracy with O Cane: but being sent for with a Process, to answer a suit which the Bishop of Derry had against him, and fearing he had bin sent for his Conspira∣cy, he fled out of Ireland. Garnet, Catesby and others, labour to invade England. IN the last Year of Queen Elizabeth, there was a Plot layed against her by Garnet, Catesby and others, that the Spaniard should join with the Papists here, in the Invasion of England. Winter was sent into Spain for that purpose, and Creswel the the Leger Jesuite in Spain, Don Pedro Francisco, second Secretary of State, and the Duke of Lerma, af∣sured Winter, that his Message would be very acceptable to the King of Spain. Then had Winter an answer by Count Miranda, that the King would bestow 100000 Crowns towards the expedition, and at the next Spring at farthest would set his Foot in England, Winter returneth, and acquainteth Garnet, Catesby and Tresham with all, and they others; but before the next Spring the Queen died. The Gun-Powder Treason. AT the Queens death, Christopher Wright was sent into Spain, and Guy Fauks also from Brussels by Sir William Stanley, to advertise them there, that King James was as violent against the Catholicks, as
Queen Elizabeth, and therefore urged the Spaniard to prosecute the old design. The Jesuits privately suggested that they should not admit him into England, as being an Heretick. Catesby held, that the King being an Heretick, forfeiteth his Kingdom before any sentence pronoun∣ced. The Parliament was dissolved the 7th of July, which the King held, and prorogued till the 7th of February. Catesby at Lambeth broke with Winter about blowing up the Parliament House. Winter told him that it struck at the root, but what if it should not take effect? Cates∣by won Winter to consent, but first (said he) go over and win the Consta∣ble, to obtain more favour for Catholicks; and if you may bring over some confident Gentlemen, as Mr. Faux. Winter went, met with the Constable at Bergen, and delivered his Message. The Constable answered, that his Master commanded him to do all good offices for the Catholicks; but he shewed the Constable nothing of the matter. Faux and Winter came both into England. This plot of blowing up the Parliament House, after an Oath of Secrecy. and the Sacrament received upon it, Catesby disclosed it to Percy and Winter, and Wright to Faux. Percy hired the House, Faux was pretended to be Percy's Man, and names himself Johnson, and kept the Keys of the House till the adjournment of the Parliament: at which time all the Conspira∣tors departed into the Country. A House was hired at Lambeth by Percy, to keep the Powder and Wood for the Mine, to which it was to be conveyed. When the Plot had taken effect, what should they do? Percy, with two or three of them, with a dozen more, would seize on the Duke, and carry him away. The Lady Flizabeth was to be surprized at a hunting near the Lord Harringtons. They would save from the Parliament, first Catholicks, then some particular Per∣sons. While they wrought in the Mine, they fed on baked Meats, that they might not go forth. At Candlemas the Powder is brought over, about which time working in the Mine, they came against a Stone-wall, when hearing a rushing noise of Coals, they feared they were discovered; But it was only the moving of Coals to be sold, which Celler Faux hired: 20 Barrels of Powder they had provided, which they hid with Billets and Fagots. Faux went into Flanders to acquaint therewith Stanley and Owen; Stanley was not there; Owen approved it. Percy and Catesby met at the Bath; and it was agreed, that Catesby should call in whom he thought best. The number being small, He called in Sir Everard Digby, and afterward Mr. Tresham. The Parliament was a-new prorogued till the 5th of November. Then the Conspirators all went into the Country, and re∣turned 10 days before the Parliament, and hearing that the Prince
would be absent from the Parliament, said they would then seize on the Prince, and let alone the Duke. Saturday before the Kings return (which was on Thursday) a Letter in the Street was delivered to the Lord Mounteagle's Man, to put it into his Masters Hand. It had neither Date nor Superscription, and by the Lord Mounteagle was that Night sent to the Earl of Salisbury, who made acquainted with it the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Worcester and Northampton. The Letter was this. My Lord, OƲt of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your preservation: Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise some Excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parlia∣ment: For God and Man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this Time. And think not slightly of this Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any storme, yet I say, they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurt them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no harm: for the danger is past so soon as you shall have hurned this Letter, and I hope God will give you the grace to make a good use of it; to whose holy protection I recommend you. Friday following the King read it, who considering the Sentence therein expressed [that they should receive a terrible blow this Patlia∣ment, and yet should not know who hurt them] and joining it to the Sentence [for the danger is past so soon as you shall have burn'd this Letter] did suspect the danger mentioned, to be some sudden danger of blowing up with Powder. Afterward it was determined the Lord Chamberlain should view both above and beneath the Parliament Hou∣ses. Which the Lord Chamberlain having done, found in a Vault un∣der the upper House, great store of Billers, Faggots and Coals, and casting his Eye aside, a Fellow standing by, which called himself Percy's Man, that had hired the Celler. The King supposing that Gun-Powder might be hid under that Wood and Coals, caused a further fearch to be made. Whereupon Sir Thomas Knevet went about the Parliament House with a small number, to search more narrowly, the Mid-night next after, where he found Faux standing without Doors, booted and spurr'd, and apprehended him; then in search under the Wood and Coals, 36 Barrels of Gun-Powder, and about the Traitor three Matches,
and other Instruments fit for that wicked purpose were found: which wicked intent of blowing up the House, he instantly confessed; affirm∣ing, that if he had been in the House, he would not have failed to blow up both himself and them. In this Mine wrought Catesby, Robert Winter, Esquires. Thomas Percy, Thomas Winter, John Wright, Chri∣stopher Wright, Guido Faux, Gentlemen; and Bates, Catesby's Man. Sir Everard Digby; Ambrose Rockwood, Francis Trisham, Esquires; John Grant, Gentlemen, and Robert Keys, were made acquainted with the Plot, but wrought not in the Mine. After Faux's apprehension, the Traitors post away, and pretending Religion they would fight for, ga∣thered in open Rebellion all they could, which number never exceeded 80. They wandred through Warwick-shire, to Worcester shire, and thence to the borders of Stafford-shire, and having gotten themselves into a House, they obstinately refused to yeild to the Sheriff; but (through God's Providence) a less quantity of Powder than 2 pounds, taking Fire, did so mangle some, disable others, that having begged pardon on their knees for their crime of God, they desperately expo∣sed themselves to the peoples fury: there of the chief joined Back to Back, and two of them were killed with one shot, Catesby and Percy; Winter was taken alive. So all of them were killed, beaten or taken. The Conspirary of Sir Griffin Mackham, and others. ANno Domini 1603, George Brook, Sir Griffin Markham, Watson and Clerk Priests, entred into a Conspiracy against King James (it was said) to surprise Prince Henry, to keep the King and Prince in the Tower, or to carry them to Dover Castle, and there to obtain their own Pardons, a toleration for Religion, and removal of some Councellors. Divers beside these were accused, and condemnd; but Brook confessed he did it, but by a Commission from the King, to try the faith∣fulness of the Kings Subjects; but he could produce no such Com∣mission. Sir Griffin Markham confessed that he intended forreign In∣vasion and Alteration of Religion, but not to destroy the King, as was in the Inditement. Watson and Clerk, confessed they drew the Gentlemen into the Plot, holding the King for no King till he was Crovned. Of them all only Watson, Clerk and Brook suffer∣ed Death.
The Massacre and Treason in Ineland, extracted out of Irish Remou∣strance, and Irelands Tears. UPon the 23d day of October, 1641, a most Prodigious and Nefa∣rious Viper, gnawing the Bowels of its Native-parent Ireland, burst out of the Womb thereof, and visibly appeared most epidemically destructive to that whole State and Kingdom. It had lien long (as some of the Rebels reported) undiscovered, but was all that while hatching by many hot and high-built hopes, both by Forraign and Domestick Encouragements. The accursed Midwives of this Bastard∣birth, were Popish Priests, Friars, and Jesuits, together with other Fire-brands and Incendiaries of that State and Kingdom. Their hide∣ous and hellish hopes were mightily supported and corroborated by strong assistance from Spain, France, and Flanders, together with deep∣ly engaged assurance of full correspondency in England, and an equi∣valent party in Scotland, besides their great encouragements by Popish Bulls from Rome, authorizing the speedy and immediate Surrender of all such places of strength as they had Beleaguered, promising free Par∣don of all Sins whatsoever before-hand committed by any of them, tending to the advancement of this great Work, Thundering (or ra∣ther Roaring) out Excommunications against any that should refuse so to joyn with them therein, terming themselves the Catholick Army, and the ground of their work (as all their abominable and bloody Plots are) the Catholick Cause. Their desperate and most devilish resolution was, therein, not to leave a drop of English Blood in Ireland, and so consequently not the least spark or glimpse of Gospel and pure Protestant Religion; giving out in words, and designing in their hearts, that the Tower of London, the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Castle of Dublin, were to be surprized by their Faction in all these places all upon one day. In all which time (this therefore might the more easily have been done, especially in Ireland) there was not the least fear or suspition of Treachery; yet there were (a little before the day of this Bloody-birth) secretly gathered together about 400 Irish Papists, elected out of most parts of Ireland, desperate and damnably bloody-minded persons, designed for this horrid and hellish Attempt, who had all privately conveyed and sheltered themselves in several places of the City and Suburbs of Dublin, waiting and expecting the time and Watch-word, when to give the on-set. In this Plot all the Popish Nobility and Men of quality in Ireland were interessed, and it was professed by that most impious and barbarous Arch Rebel, Sir
Philem O Neal, that what he and they did, was by the consent of the Parliament in Ireland. Yea, some of them have been so impiously audacious, as to profess and persuade others of their accursed Confede∣rates, to believe that they had Regal Authority for it, and were so bold as to term themselves the Queen's Army. And for the more violent prosecution of this their most exorbitant Villany, the Conspirators and Traitors entred into a most accursed Co∣venant (just as our Popish-Powder-Traitor did in their damnable Design) and bound themselves by an Oath of Confederation and Se∣crecy. Reily a prime Popish Priest, and others (like his Father the Devil) compassing the Earth far and near, to draw into their Conspi∣racy such as had not before been therewith acquainted, as also to sa∣tisfie all scruples (if any arose in any of their minds) about the law∣fulness of their Actions; just as Garnet, that old Romish Jesuitical Fox did with his Powder-Conspirators, 1605. And whereas they falsly have masked this their most inhumane Treason and Rebellion under the King's Name, pretending his authority, and all they did, or do, in obe∣dience to his Majesty, and tender respect to his Royal Prerogative; yet it hath been by some others of them professed, that they intended to have a King of their own, yea, that they had one already; some saying Tyrone was he, others Sir Philem O Neal, who hath been auda∣ciously and traiterously honoured woth the stile of his Majesty, and that they will (with the assistance of Spain and France) set footing in Eng∣land (having compleated their own devilish Irish work) and after that in Scotland, where all things being setled to their desires, the whole Forces in Ireland in way of Retribution, and acknowledgment of Gra∣titude were intended (as hath been confessed) for the King of Spain against the Hollanders. Such mighty and invincible Conquerors had they made themselves in their own conceits, and most bold and bloody imaginations. Unto which their horrid Disloyalty, and unparalleld Treachery and Rebellion, they added most execrable expressions of unheard of hatred and inhumane Barbarity to the Subjects of the Eng∣lish Nation; Banishment, or perpetual Slavery were the greatst favours that would have been afforded them, their general profession being for a general Extirpation, even to the last and least drop of English-blood from among them. Yea, and that which transcends all former extents of rage and unpattern'd wrath and malignity, not so much as an English Beast, or any of that Breed was to be left alive in that whole Kingdom. And as the Hearts and Tongues of these most base and abominable Traitors and Rebels, were boundlessly and extreamly cruel in Intention and Profession: So it pleased the Lord for the Sins of his
People there, to permit power unto these barbarous Rebels, to act with their Hands, the most accursed and prophane Perpetrations that ever Christian Eyes beheld, or Ears ever heard of, both for Impiety against God and his holy Gospel, and almost unexpressible Inhumanity toward the true Professors thereof among them, blaspheming our God, strip∣ping his Servants stark naked, and then bidding them go to their God to be clothed again; breaking into Churches, burning Pulpits, with extream hatred to our Religion, and exceedingly triumphing in all their Impieties. Dragging some Professors of the Gospel by the hair of their Heads through the Streets into the Churches, and there Strip∣ping and Whipping them, and with most cruel and taunting Terms abusing them; telling them if they came to Morrow, they should hear the like Sermon. Yea, so excessively impious was their hatred to the Gospel of Christ, that they took the Sacred Books of the holy Scriptures, and cast them into Kennels and Puddles of Dirt and Mire, treading them under foot, and Leaping and Skipping on them, and (O horrid Impiety!) causing a Bagpipe to play all the while, and bidding a Plague upon them; saying they were the cause of all Quar∣rels; and Burning some, and saying it was Hell. fire that was then flaming, and wishing they had all the Bibles in christendom that they might use them so. And as for the most Inhumane and more than Scythian Cruelties of those Irish Canibals, and most barbarous Blood-sucking Tygres, of whom we may most properly say, as Jacob did of his bloody Sons, Si∣meon and Levi, in their Massacre of the Shechemites, Gen. 49.7. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it was cruel. Yea, certainly more cruel than ever any Eye did see, or Ear did hear; yea, I say, past the most exquisite historical expressions of any Ancient or Modern Relations: Witness their stripping stark naked, Men, Women, and Children, even Children sucking their poor Mo∣thers Brests; whereby multitudes of all sorts, Ages, and Sexes, in the extremities of that cold season of Frost and Snow, have most lamen∣tably perished; Women being dragged up and down Naked; Women in Child-bed, drawn out thence and cast into Prison; one delivered of a Child, while she was hanging; one ripped up (horesco referens) and two Children taken out of her, and all cast and eaten up by Swine. One stabb'd in the Brest, her Child sucking. An Insant cruelly mur∣thered, whom they found sucking his dead Mother, slain by them the day before. A Child of fourteen years of Age taken from this Mother, in her sight cast into a Bog-pit, and held under-water while he was drowned. Together with many other yet more horrible, hideous, and
more than Savage or Beast-like Barbarities, too terrible for me any far∣ther to relate, but may be more fully found in that most lamentable Re∣monstrance of this Irish Rebellion, and all there proved by Testimonies on Oath, whereunto I refer the Reader. Which makes me call to mind that old Observation, proverbially spoken of Ireland, which is, That no poisonous Serpent will live on Irish ground; which how true in the Historical meaning, I know not; but now I am sure, 'tis most false in the mystical meaning of it: for here it seems that Satan's Serpentine seed, a brood of most poisonous Native Serpents, Adders and Snakes of Villany and Cruelty do live, yea, and thrive there also; but I trust, but for a season: for certainly, the Lord, the most righteous Judg of all Men, and severe Revenger of all Wrongs, will not suffer such hor∣rible Impieties and unpattern'd Cruelties to go unpunished, but will undoubtedly ruinate such a pestilent Generation of Romish Vipers, and Babylonish Blood-suckers as these are, which he hath already most blessed∣ly begun. First, By his most gracious and timely discovery of their main Plot, the taking of the City of Dublin, which was indeed the Master∣piece of their intended Epidemical Mischief, but prevented (I say) by the Lord's great Mercy and good Providence, in a most strange man∣ner, by a native Irish Gentleman, one Mr. Owen Mack-Connel, once Servant to that pious and most worthy Gentleman, Sir John Clotworthy, and this also by a most remarkable way and work of the Lord's special Providence, as is more particularly and punctually related in the Preamble of Irelands Tears, to which I refer the Reader. And secondly, By the Lord's most Glorious and Victorious over-power∣ing the out-ragious Power and Petulancy of those barbarous Miscreants, now in open Rebellion, by the hands of a very small rem∣nant of poor Protestants there among them, who (by reason of the most unhappy Distractions, unnatural Civil-discords raised up among us in England by the Popish Faction also, and their Pontifician Abet∣tors) cannot be by us so sufficiently supplied with Men and Arms, as is fit and much desired; therefore, I say, the Lord of Hosts abhorring and abominating such atrocious and hell-fomented Blasphemies, Mur∣thers, and merciless Cruelties, makes his just Indignation and Wrath to prosecute and pursue them at the heels, giving those small and in∣considerable Companies such admirable and even almost miraculous Vi∣ctories over them, as most evidently declare the Hand of the Lord to be against them, and his gracious Purpose utterly to supplant and ex∣terminate such devilishly desperate and intolerably barbarous and bloody Rebels and Traitors, the lively Limbs and Lineaments, of that bloody Strumpet of Rome.
The most bloody Massacre at Paris, Anno 1572. extracted out of the French History, truly and briefly related. ANd now (good Reader) give me leave a little to seem to digress (not so much from the Matter, as) from the Persons and Places at first propounded, and to look but a little into our Neighbour Kingdom of France, where, I say, I shall only vary from Personages, but the subject Matter the same with the former, setting forth the Bloody Plots and Conspiracies of the Popish Faction among them also, against those of the reformed Protestant Religion in France, and especially in that most butcherly and barbarous Massacre at Paris, where it primarily and chiefly began to be cruelly acted and executed on God's innocent Lambs, marked out to the slaughter before-hand. And thus it was in brief. In the years 1571, and 72, Charles the 9th then King of France; the said King, the then Duke of Guise, and others of the Romish Faction, bearing a most inveterate hatred (which was craftily concealed) against those of the Religion, and in especial against the then most renowned Admiral of France, whose Piety, Prudence, and Prowess was such, and in so high esteem of all, both Friends and Foes also, that whilst he sub∣sisted and survived, the Popish party (maugre their malice) could do nothing, to any purpose, to the prejudice of the Cause of Religion. At last a Plot was laid most craftily and cruelly, under the pretence of a Marriage between the Prince of Navarre, a Noble and Pious Prince of the Religion, and the King's Sister; by which snare to bring the said Prince, the Admiral, and the rest of the Heads of Religion, to the Court and City of Paris, that so these Heads being first smiten off, the inferiour Members thereof might the more easily be destroyed. Un∣der this colour, I say, the King invites the Admiral to the Court at Paris, pretends a fair Correspondence and Agreement of all matters in Difference betwixt his Majesty and those of the Religion, especially himself and the Admiral, and a Reconcilement also between this noble Admiral and the Duke of Guise. In which interim, one Lignerolles, a French Gentleman, was openly slain in the Court, for discovering some secrets concerning this Plot against those of the Religion, and the Cardinal of Chastillon (then in England, and ready to depart thence for France) Brother to the Admiral of France, was poisoned by one of the Chamberlains, and died thereof, to the great grief of all his Friends and Servants. The most Noble and Religious Admiral on the King's Invitation, comes to Paris, was (with extraordinary fair shows of love and re∣gal
respect) most welcomely entertained, both he and divers others of the Religion that came with him. The foresaid Marriage was not long after Solemnized in Paris, with great presences of joy and content on all sides expressed, in most sumptuous and liberal Feasts and Banquets, Masks and Dances (the sweet innocent Princes, little dreaming of such a Dance to be now a leading by the King, Queen-Mother, and Duke of Guise, with the rest of the Romish bloody Faction, as stain'd, nay steep'd all their dainties in streams of their Hearts-blood) in so much as 'twas admired to see such a seeming friendly mixtute of those of the Religion with the Romish Catholicks, just like so many Lambs among so many greedy Wolves. Now whilst every one imployed himself in such like Mirth and Jollity, divers that were sent for by the King, Queen-Mother, and Duke of Guise, that so they might be sure to be the stronger party, speedily arrived in Paris; the Catastrophe of all that follows having been made not long before among them, the Dukes of Guise and Anjou being the principal Actors openly seen in this wicked Work, who resolved not to let the Admiral depart out of Paris, but there to dispatch him, and all such as should endeavour to defend him. Now it so fell out, that one Morning the Admiral coming out of the Louvre, and going to Dine at his Lodging, being on foot, and (with∣out least suspicion of any Villany to be attempted against him) as he was reading a Petition, one shot at him with a Harquebuss, the Bullet whereof took away the Fore-singer of his Right-hand, and hurt him in the left Arm; the Villain that shot escaped by flight, a Horse stand∣ing ready to post him away after he had done the deed. The noble Admiral being thereupon brought to his Lodging, shewed most singu∣lar Piety, Constancy, and Patience, under his Surgeons hands, was visited by divers Lords and Gentlemen of the Religion, the King of Navarre (now the King of France his Brother-in-Law) and the Prince of Conde. The French King also, though a main Plotter in the work, craftily complained to these Princes, of the Mischief thus happened, protesting his sorrow, and swearing revenge and severe execution of sustice on the Offender, whosoever he were. The King himself also went to visit the Admiral, making many se∣rious and deep protestations of his high esteem of his loyalty and fide∣lity to his Person and Crown always, and that he held and esteemed him a most discret and valiant Commander in Arms, and that there∣fore he much respected him, with many such like French Complements, Immediately after the King's departure, the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, were certainly, but very secretly enformed of the intended Massacre on all of the Religion, and advised as speedly as
they could to get out of Paris, and to be assured that that blow given to the Admiral, was but the beginning of the Tragedy; but alas, good Princes, they so much confided on the King's Vows and Promises, that they reject this Advise and Counsel, and staied there still. About Sa∣turday-evening, being the 23d of August, 1572. certain Protestant Gentlemen, offered themselves to watch that Night with the good Ad∣miral, but Teligny his Son-in-Law would not suffer them, but dismis∣sed them with many thanks, little suspecting (still) any approaching or precipitating danger on his Father. Night being come on, the Duke of Guises Lieutenant in this Action, which now at this present was to be declared to the Duke of Anjou, sent for all the Captains of the Switzers, and companies of Strangers (which still increased) into the Town; shewing them his Commission to kill the Admiral, and all his partakers; exhorting them to be couragious in shedding of Blood, and making Spoil of them; and appointed their Troops to be placed where he thought meetst. About Midnight it was informed to all the Popish Assemblies in the Town, That the like to this Massacre should be done to all of the Religion throughout the whole Realm; and that the Watch-word of the general Massacre should be the great Bell of the Palace, which should be rung at the break of Day, and the badg of the Executioners should be a white Handkerchief tied upon their sleeves, and a white Cross in their Hats. The Duke of Guise with his bloody-minded Associates, had charge to begin at the Admiral's Lodgings. The mighty noise of Armour, and running up and down with very many lighted Torches, soon after Midnight, made many of those of the Religion, that were longed near the Admiral, to come out of their Lodgings and to go into the Street to enquire of their Acquaintances, what this noise meant at such an undue Hour, but being anxiously answered, they went on still toward the Louvre, where the Duke of Guise and his bloody Comrades were attending the deed, where those innocent Lambs of the Religion were first set upon, and assaulted by the Duke's guard. Then presently they rang St. Germaines Bell in the Palace, whereupon one Cosseins, a French Fury, perceiving the Duke of Guise coming with his Troops, knocks at the Admirals Gate, between two and three of the Clock in the Morning, being Sunday, the 24th of August, 1572. La∣honne, one of the Admiral's attendants, opens the Gate, and was in∣stantly stabb'd by Cosseins; the second Door going up the Stairs, being soon burst open, they came to the Admiral's Chamber, where his own Guard of Switzers were, one of them was slain with an Harquebuss. And while Cosseins was jumbling at the Chamber-door, one Cornatan ran up into the Chamber, and being asked by the Admiral (who had
caused his Men to lift him out of his Bed, and in his Night-gown, having assisted his Ministers in fervent Prayer, and most humbly com∣mended his Soul to his Saviour Christ Jesus) what all this hurly burly meant: Cornatan, his Servant, answered, My Lord, It is God that calls for us, the House is entred by force, and there is no means of Re∣sistance. The good Admiral, then, replied, It is not long since I dispo∣sed my self to Die; save you your selves, if it be pessible, for you cannot save my Life, and therefore I commit my Soul into the Hands and Mercy of God. Presently hereupon his Attendants began to shift for them∣selves, and to flie for their Lives, and some of them got up into the top of the House, and found a Window to issue out of the Roof and so into Gutters; but most of them were slain in the next Houses; but Cornatan, and Merlin, a godly Minister, escaped, and were miracu∣lously preserved. The Admiral's Chamber-door being now opened, seven or eight Armed Men with their Targets entred into it, and one Besmes, Servant to the Duke of Guise, with a naked Sword in his hand, offered him the point: Whereupon the good Admiral, said unto him, Young man, thou oughtst to respect my Age and Infirmity, yet shalt thou not shorten my life. With that, Besmes thrust his Sword into the Admiral's Body, and redoubling the blow upon the Admiral's Head, every one of the rest also gave him a blow, in such sort, that he sell upon the Ground, and so lay gasping. The Duke of Guise, and others, staying below in the Court and hearing the blows, asked if they had done, and commanded the Body to be thrown out of the Window; which was presently done by that villain Besmes, and his companions. Now the blows that he had on his Head, and the Blood covering his Face, had so disfigured him, that the Duke of Guise hardly knew him; whereupon stooping down and wiping his Face with his Hankerchief, he said, Now I know him, it is he indeed; and therewith gave him a kick with his foot on his Face being dead, whom all the Murtherers of France extreamly feared being alive. Which done, he left the Ad∣miral's House, accompanied with his most bloody Train, and began to cry about the Streets: Courage, fellow Souldiers, we have made a good beginning, let us now to the rest, for the King commandeth it. Repeating those words oft, with great majesty, For the King com∣mandeth it, it is his pleasure, it is his express commandment. (Just as our Romish Clergy in the Irssh Massacre in the Year 1641, pre∣tended the King's Authority for their Rebellion, laying all the Odium of their impious Villanies and Cruelties on the King's Majesty, saying still, 'twas his pleasure it should be so.) Now presently thereupon the Palace Clock struck, and then a Noise was heard all about the Streets of
Paris, saying that the Hugonots (for so the Romish Catholicks term the true Protestants in France) were in Arms (they being all, alas, in their Beds, fir from any such thoughts) and meant to kill the King; (just as our Powder-Traitors intended, had their Plot taken effect, to have slandered the Puritans in England, to have been the Authors of that hellish-Treason) to whom the Admirals Head was carried and presented,See here the Holiness of Rome, and Zeal of the Romanists. and to the Queen-Mo∣ther of France, and then imbalmed and sent to Rome to the Pope and Cardinal of Lorrain. The Common-people (like Priest, like People) ran to the Admirals Lodging, where they cut off his Hands and his privy Members, and drew his Body for the space of three days about the Town; which done, it was born to the Gibbet of Monifaucon and there hanged by the Feet. The Gentlemen Officers of the Chamber, Governours, Tutors and houshold Servants of the King of Navarre, the French King's Brother∣in Law, lately married to his Sister, and of the Prince of Conde, were driven out of their Chambers, where they slept in the Louvre, and forced into the Court, were there massicred in the Kings own presence. The like was done to the Lords and Gentlemen that lay round about the Admirals Lodgings, and then throughout the Town in such sort, that the number slain that Sunday at Night and the two next Days ensuing, within the City of Paris, and Suburbs thereof, was esteemed to be above ten thou∣sand Persons, Lords, Gentlemen, Pages, Servants, Justices of all sorts, Schollars, Lawyers, Merchants, Artificers, Women, Maids, and Boys, not sparing little Children in thier Cradles, no nor in their Mothers Bel∣lies. The Courtiers of the Kings Guard and Strangers that massacred these Gentlemen, said, that in one day, by Weapons and desorder they had ended those Processes, which Pen, Paper, Sentences of Justice nor open War could not find the means to do or execute in 12 years space. And thus these most honourable Protestant Lords and Gentlemen, falsly ac∣cused and slandered of Conspiracies and Practices against the King, being stark naked, thinking only upon their rest, scarce a wakened out of their Sleep, utterly unarmed, in the hands of infinite, cruel, crafty and most trea∣cherous Enemies, not having so much leasure as to breath, were barbarous∣ly slain, some in their Beds, others on the roofs of Houses, and in what∣soever other places, where they might be found. It would be too tedious to recite at large the Names and Sirnames of all the honourable Person∣ages of divers Qualities that were then slain and butchered, it sussiceth that their Names are written in Heaven, and that their Death (though shameful and despicable in the fight and presence of Men of this World.) is precious in the fight of the Lords most holy Majesty.
Now let the tender hearted Christian Reader, but consider and pon∣der in his Heart, how strange and horrible a thing it might be in a great Town or City, to see at the least 60000 Men with Pistols, Pikes, Courtlasses, Ponyards, Knives and other such bloody Instruments, run swearing and blaspheming the sacred Majesty of God throughout the Streets, and into Mens Houses, where most cruelly they massacred all whomsoever of the Religion they met, without regard of Estate, Con∣dition, Sex or Age, the Streets paved with Bodies cut and hewed in pieces, the Gates and Entries of Houses, Palaces and publick places died with Blood. A horrible Plague of shoutings and howlings of the Mur∣therers, mixed with continual noise of Pistols and Calivers, together with the pittiful cries of those that were murthered, the Bodies cast out at Windows upon the Stones, drawn through the Dirt with strange noise and Whistlings, the breaking open of Doors and Windows with Bils, Stones and other furious Instruments, the spoiling and plunder∣ing of Houses, Carts carrying away the spoils, and dead Bodies which were thrown into the River of Soame, all red with Blood, which ran in great Streams through the Town, and from the Kings Palace into the said River. As for the King of Navarre himself, and the Prince of Conde, they were called into the King's presence, who must himself speak with them, who with his own Mouth certified them, what had thus past all this while, ad∣ding that he had saved their Lives only upon Condition, that they should renounce their Religion, and follow his; otherwise that they must look for the like punishment that their Adherents had and should receive. The King of Navarre besought the King to remember his promise of Alliance newly contracted, and not to constrain him in his Religion. The Prince of Conde also more fervently answered, that the King had given his Faith unto him and to all those of the Religion, with so solemn a Protestation and Vow,Mark here the Vows of Romish Prin∣ces. that he could not be persuaded that his Majesty would falsify such an au∣thentick Oath, and that thereupon he had thus far yeild∣ed to his Majesties Demands, and faithfully performed what he had required of him on this Assurance: But as touching the Religion, whereof the King had granted him the free ex∣ercise, and God the true knowledg, to whom he was to make an ac∣count therein, for this his Religion, he said, he was fully resolved to remain most constant therein, and which he would always maintain to be true, although it were with the loss of his Life. This answer of the Prince, set the King into such a choller, that he began to call him Rebel, seditious, and Son of a seditious Person, with horrible threatnings to
cause them to lose their Heads, if within 3 days they took not better counsel: and indeed these threatnings, and other crafty carriages in this way, so wrought on both these Princes at last, that they forsook their Faith and first Love, and turned to Romish abominations. Now the King perceiving that this Massacre of Paris would not quench the Fire, but rather kindle it the more, fearing lest those of the Religion in his other Provinces and Towns might assemble and unite themselves together, and so give them new work; he with the speedy advice of his Counsellors, sent two Messengers with two several Messa∣ges, the one to the Governours and seditious Catholicks of his remoter Towns, wherein were many of the Religion, with express command to massacre them; the other containing certain Letters to the Governors of Provinces, by which he pretended this Massacre to be perpetated by the Duke of Guise, and the Admiral to be murthered on a particular and private quarrel betwixt them two, and that the King's honest mean∣ing and intention was utterly against these things, and seriously to main∣tain his former Edict of a general Pacification; and therefore that his care and vigilancy had ceased it the same day it began; and yet (as my Author recordeth in his History) on the Tuesday following, being the 26 of the same August, the King accompanied with his Brethren and the chiefest of his Court, went to the Court of Parliament, and there publick∣ly declared in express terms, That whatsoever had happed in Paris, was done, not only by his consent, but also by his Commandment, and of his own motion. And as for his other former mentioned Message and Letter to other Towns and Provinces, for the massacring of those of the Religion among them also; his bloody command herein was immedi∣ately put in execution at Lyons, and many other places, where the poor Protestants were murthered and massacred in most hideous and horrible manner, by those merciless and inhumane Butchers of bloody Rome, who knockt down the innocent Christians among them, as so many Dogs, cut their Throats, mangl'd their Bodies, slash'd off their Hands with great sharp Knives, as on their Knees they held them up to the Villains, praying for the sparing of their Lives; yea, and were known to rip up their Bellies and take out their Fat from their Bowels, and to sell it to the Apothecaries to make Medicines. Thus also in those remoter parts from Paris were very many thousands of the Religion murdered, without any difference or distinction either of Sex or Age. And so deeply enra∣ged was the King and his Adherents, and so desperately resolved to root out and extirpate the memory of those of the Religion, especially of any note or eminency, that the King having at last got into his custody one Briquemant a noble French Gentleman, of the age of seventy years, one
that had valiantly imployed himself in the Service of the Kings of France, having been found in the House of the Ambassador of England, then re∣sident in France, wherein he had hid himself, whilst the greatest fury of the Massacre was executed, was by the King's command put in close Prison, together with another vertuous Gentleman, Cavagnes, Master of the Requests, both which Gentlemen bare great affection both unto the Religion, and also unto the renowned Admiral, and were themselves of great esteem and reputation in France; but the King having them now fast in hold, threatned to tear them in pieces upon the Rack, if they would not write and sign with their Hands, that they had conspired with the Admiral to kill the King, his Brethren, the Queen, and the King of Navarre. But they having most constantly and justly refused to avouch so horrible a lye against their own and their godly Friends Innocencies, were racked and cruelly tormented, and by a most unjust sentence of the Court of Parliament in Paris, they were both declared guilty of Treason, and condemned to be hanged upon a Gibbet, which was accordingly executed. The Queen-Mother leading the King, her two Sons, and the King of Navarre her Brother-in-Law to see the Execution. Her Coun∣sellors thinking that at this last exploit, what they had wickedly proje∣cted, namely, the false transferring of the cause of this bloody Massacre on a treasonable Plot, intended by the Admiral and others of the Religion against the King, (as was fore-mentioned) would now be wrought out and effected, if Briquemant in presence of all the People, now at the time of his expected Death would ask pardon of the King, withal (to work it on the more) sending one to him to certifie and assure him, that so he might easily save his Life, for the King was merciful, and that he should have pardon, if he would desire it, confessing this fact wherewith he was charged. But Briquemant answered boldly and with a good courage; that it belonged not unto him, but to the King to ask pardon of God for such an heinious Offence: That he would never ask pardon for a fault, wherein he had not offended, but knew himself to be most innocent, whereof he called GOD to witness, desiring him to pardon the King's so great Disloyalty and Cruelty. Cavagnes also, the other noble Gentle∣man, did the like until he died. Insomuch that this execution (con∣trary to the King's expectation) served to no other end, but more to publish the iniquity of all those cruel Homicides, and of all their most pernicious Counsels.
The Papists Plots in reference to the late Troubles, and par∣ticularly about the Death of King CHARLES the First (of blessed Memory) as proved by Doctor Du Moulin. WHen the Businesses of the late bad Times are once ripe for an History, and Time, the bringer forth of Truth, hath discovered the Mysteries of Iniquity, and the depths of Satan, which hath wrought so much Crime and Mischief, it will be found, that the late Rebellion was raised and fostered by the Arts of the Court of Rome. That Jesuits professed themselves Independent, as not depending on the Church of England; and Fifth-Monarchy-Men, that they might pull down the English Mo∣narchy, and that in the Committees, for the destruction of the King and the Church, they had their Spies and their Agents. The Roman Priest and Confessor is known, who when he saw the fatal stroke given to our holy King and Martyr, flourished with his Sword, and said, Now the greatest Enemy that we have in the World, is gone. When the news of that horrible Execution came to Roan, a Pro∣testant Gentleman of good Credit, was present in a great Company of Jesuited Persons: Where after great expressions of Joy, the gravest of the Company, to whom all gave ear, spake much after this manner: The King of England at his Marriage, had promised us the Re-establishing of the Catholick Religion in England;Which is false. and when he delayed to fulfil his promise, we summoned him from time to time to perform it: We came so far as to tell him, that if he would not do it, we should be forced to take those Courses, which would bring him to his Destruction. We have given him lawful warning, and when no warning would serve, we have kept our word to him, since he would not keep his word to us. That grave Rabby's Sentence, agreeth with this certain Intelligence, which shall be justified whensoever Authority will require it: That the
year before the King's Death, a select number of English Jesuits were sent from their whole party in England; first to Paris, to consult with the Faculty of Sorbon, then altogether Jesuited; to whom they put this Question in writing: That seeing the state of England was in a likely posture to change Government, whether it was lawful for the Catholicks to work that Change, for the advancing and securing of the Ca∣tholick Cause in England, by making away the King, whom there was no hope to turn from his Heresie? Which was answered Affirmatively. After which the same Persons went to Rome, where the same Que∣stion being propounded and debated, it was concluded by the Pope and his Council, that it was both lawful and expedient for the Catholicks to promote that alteration of State. What followed that Consultation and Sentence, all the World knoweth, and how the Jesuits went to work, God knoweth; and Time (the bringer forth of Truth) will let us know. But when the horrible Paricide committed on the King's sacred Person, was so universally cried down, as the greatest Villany that had been committed in many Ages, the Pope commanded all the Papers about that Question to be gathered and burnt; in obedience to which Order, a Roman Catholick in Paris, was demanded a Copy which he had of those Papers; But the Gentleman who had had time to consider and detest the wickedness of that Project, refused to give it, and shewed them to a Protestant Friend of his; and related to him the whole carriage of this Negotiation, with great abhorrency of the practices of the Jesuits. In pursuance of that Order from Rome, for the pulling down both Monarch and the Monarchy of England, many Jesuits came over, who took several Shapes to go about their work, but most of them took party in the Army. About Thirty of them were met by a Protestant Gentleman between Roan and Diep, to whom they said (taking him for one of their Party) that they were going into England, and would take Arms in the Independent Army, and endeavour to be Agitators. A Protestant Lady living in Paris is the time of our late Calamities, was persuaded by a Jesuite going in Scarlet, to turn Roman Catholick: When the dismal news of the King's Murther came to Paris, this Lady,
(as all other good English Subjects) was most deeply afflicted with it. And when this Scarlet Divine came to see her, and found her melting in tears, about that heavy and common disaster; he told her with a smiling countenance, that she had no reason to lament, but rather to rejoyce, seeing that the Catholicks were rid of their greatest Enemy, and that the Catholick Cause was much furthered by his Death. Up∣on which, the Lady in great anger, put the man down Stairs, saying, If that be your Religion, I have done with you for ever. And God hath given her the Grace to make her word good hitherto. Many intelligent Travellers can tell of the great joy among the English Convents and Seminaries, about the King's Death, as having overcome their Enemy, and done their main work for their settle∣ment in England, of which they made themselves so sure, that the Benedictines were in great care that the Jesuits should not get their Land, and the English Nuns were contending who should be Abbesses in England. An understanding Gentleman visiting the Friars of Dunkirk, put them upon the discourse of the King's Death, and to pump out their sense about it, said that the Jesuits had laboured very much to com∣pass that great work: To which they answered, that the Jesuites would engross to themselves the glory of all great and good Works, and of this among other Works; whereas they had laboured as dili∣gently and effectually for it, as they. So there was striving for the glory of that Atchievement, and the Friars shewed themselves as much Jesuited as the Jesuites. In the height of Oliver's Tyranny, Thomas White, Gentleman, a Priest, and a right Jesuit in all his Principles about Obedience, set out a Book Entituled, the Grounds of Obedience and Government: Wherein he maintains that, If the People by any Circumstance, be devolved to the State of Anarchy,Dr. Moulin, pag. 122. their promise made [to their expelled Governour] binds no more. That the People are remitted, by the evil managing and insufficiency of their Governour, to the force of Nature to provide for themselves, and not bound by any promise made to their Governour. That the Magistrate by his miscarriages abdicateth him∣self from being a Magistrate, and proveth a Brigand,Pag. 123. & 124. or Robber, instead of a Defender. The word Defender, he writes with a greot D, that the Reader may take notice whom he means.
If the Magistrate (saith he) have truly deserved to be dispossessed; or if it be rationally doubted, that he hath deserved it, and he actually out of possession.Pag. 133. In the former case, it is certain the Subject hath no Obligation to hazard for his Restitution, but rather to hinder it: For since it is the Common Good that both the Magistrate and the Subject are to aim at, and clearly out of what is exprest, it is the common harm to admit again of such a Magistrate; every one to his power is bound to resist him. The next Case is, if he be Innocent, and wrongfully Deposed;Pag. 135. nay, let us add, One who had Governed well, and deserved much of the Commonwealth, yet he is totally Dispossessed: And so that it is plain in these Circum∣stances, It were better for the Common Good to stay as they are, than to venture the restoring him, because of the publick hazard. And now to set down all his words, and follow his stile, which is affectedly intricate and obscure, he maintaineth that a Dispossessed Prince, whether by right or wrong, is obliged absolutely to renounce all Right and Claim to Government; and if he does not,Pag. 136. he is worse than an Infidel. He tells us, That Pope Ʋrban the 8th. published a Decision, That after five Years quiet possession of an Estate, the Church was not bound to take notice whether the Title were lawful or no,Pag. 151. but acknowledg the Possessor in Ecclesia∣stical Business. That when the Peoples Good stands on the Possessors side, then clearly he begins to gain Right and Power. That when the People think themselves well, they manifestly consent to the present Go∣vernment. Besides (saith he) who can assure they shall be better by the return of the Dispossessed Party?Pag. 145. Surely by common presumption, the Gainer is like to defend them better than he who lost it. He comes so far as to con∣clude, That if the Old Magistrate offer to return, he must be re∣pulsed by force of Arms. His reasoning is this; What if an open Enemy should come; could, or ought the Subjects joyn against him with their New Magistrate?Pag. 157. If not, the whole Publick must perish: If they may, then their Case is the same against their Old Magistrate, since his Right stood
upon the Common Peace; and that transferred from him to his Rival, by the title of Quiet Possession. This was the Philosophy of that Contemplative Gentleman, when the King lived in Exile, and Oliver sate on the Throne. Having so well deserved of the King, he was not long since highly recommend∣ed to his Majesty, by a Man of great Note. But the King who hath a Royal insight in Persons and Businesses, stopt him with this short an∣swer, No more of that, I know what Man he is. Father Bret was of Mr. Whites Opinion: for the Castle of Jersey being surrendred, after that resistance, which for the length of standing out, and the height of Vallour shall be memorable in all Ages: When the Gentlemen who had defended it were prest to take the Engage∣ment, contrary to the Articles of their Rendition: That goodly Di∣vine was very earnest with them at St. Malo to take it; maintaining, That they were not to acknowledg any Supreme, but the prevailing Power. When his Majesty cast himself upon the Spaniard, the Jesuitical Party thought they had him sure enough from ever returning; but God disappointed their hopes, and deceived our fears by his Miracu∣lous Mercy; For it is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our Eyes, that he escaped out of those hands. I cannot leave un-observed, That in th height of the late Tyranny, two Heads of the Gun-powder Traitors that were set upon the House of Lords, were taken down; not by the high Winds, but by the same Zeal which had plotted that Treason, and with the leave of Traitors of another Feather. We may hear in time, that those holy Reliques are shrined up in Gold, and are working Miracles. The King's happy Restauration, did somewhat (as the Learned Bishop Ʋsher Prophesied) stop the Papists Carreer, so that they were constrained a while to demur and alter their Measures, yet the same restless and ambitious Spirits have acted all along, ever since the Re∣stauration, to this very Day. And this present year 1678, may be called a Year of Amazing and Stupendous Discovery: For the Parliament meeting in October, 1678, after some Intimations gi∣ven by his Majesty in his Speech, and after severe Examinations of Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow, (two active Persons in the Popish Cabal,
but now deserters of such notorious Villanies) has here declared that there has been, and still is, a most Hellish and Damnable Plot contri∣ved and carried on by the Popish Recusants, to Assassinate the King, destroy the Protestant Religion, and to subvert the Ancient Govern∣ment of the Kingdom. On which account several Lords are com∣mitted to the Tower on Suspicion, and several Persons of lower de∣gree to Newgate. Two of the latter sort, viz. Stayley, and Coleman, (late Secretary to the Dutchess of York, and one that assumed to be Prin∣cipal Secretary of State) have received their Rewards as notorious Traitors. This Plot, in the general Opinion, is thought to be the greatest and most Dangerous that ever was since the Reformation: For as it has been of long Continuance, so it is laid Universal; for no less than these three Northern Kingdoms were designed to be delivered from that which they call Pestilent Heresie (so Coleman in one of his Letters has told us): all the Power and Wealth of the Popish Party was laid out to carry on the Catholick Cause. Witness what the Burn∣ing of London in 1666. cost them, viz. 14000 l. and the Burning of Southwark, 2000 l. and what Doctor Wakeman was offered to poison the King, viz. 15000 l. besides other unknown Charges, which in time we hope will be Discovered, together with the depths of their Notorious Villanies. In the mean time by what we have seen, felt, and heard, the Reader may see that the Religion of the Papists is not from above (which is Pure, Peaceable, and Gentle, and easie to be Entreated;) but from the Devil, who was a Murtherer from the Begin∣ning, and like a Roaring Catholick Lion, goes up and down seeking whom he may devour. FINIS.
