C116 12004981 52291
THE Triumphant Weaver: OR, The ART of WEAVING Discuss'd and Handled. Plainly shewing the various Opinions of di∣vers Writers, concerning the first Original and Contriver of this ART, now so Excellent and Useful in all Habitable parts of the World; Divided into Three PARTS. The First contains, The ANTIQUITY of this said Art and Mistery. The Second contains, The great Use and unavoidable Necessity of the same. And the Third Treats of, The great and admired Excellency of this never-enough Esteemed Art of WEAVING. Written all in Verse for the Divertisement of all, either young or old, who are naturally inclin'd to the serious study or practice of the said Art, or practically concern∣ed to the same for a livelihood: hoping that it will not please those only, but also such gen∣tile Souls as delight in curiosity. Let all thy actions be just and upright, Then Heaven and Earth will both in bee delight; And Truth with Trust thou mayst together Weave, Who otherwise shall do, themselves deceive. Two men standing at weaving looms. Printed for J. Deacon, at the Rain-Bow in Holbourn, near St. Andrews Church, 1682.
TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, SHould this Work pass without the rash censure of some never-satisfied Judger, it would appear miraculous; but the Wise Man saith, it is not proper for that Man to dis∣commend, that cannot amend; I am partly sensible, that I shall meet with some who will scoff at my endeavors; but notwithstanding, it is possible, the more ingenious may ac∣cept of my good meaning; I do freely protest, that I do not undertake this task with any design to beget my self any good opinion amongst men; but as being a Weaver, and knowing by experience the excellency and worth of this matchless Trade, would as willingly free it from that brand of infamy which ignorants throw upon it, as I would ac∣quit my self (were it in my power) from the calumnity of those sordid persons, who think no men equal to themselves in vertue and merit. Apelles that Grecian-Painter, drew the Picture of Venus the more rare and excellent, haveing assembled the Beauties of his Country together; so I have∣ing inspection into several Arts and mysteries (by some accounted famous) finding them far short of this my inten∣ded subject, cannot reckon them fit to be equally ranked with that which more Trades depend on, than any one Trade whatever in the whole Universe; which I shall make appear to you in the following Treatise: also recounting to you, those many eminent and worthy persons, who in former Ages, frequently practised the same. He that seeks applause, may miss of his aim, but he that labours how to be oblidging according to his Ability, may in the conclusi∣on, meet with a Vale Domine, whilst I Subscribe my self yours, R. C.
THat Naamah Sister was to Tubal Cain, First us'd this Art, the Scripture doth make plain; Next one Araechne, born in Lidia, Did Weaving use, some antient Writers say: Then Pamphila, Daughter of Platis, she Practic'd the same, old Writers do agree; Some say that Attalus did first perceive, And first find out the ready way to Weave. The Babilonians and Egyptians too, Are said to be the first that this Art knew: Without all doubt, Women whose brains were bent To study, might this Art at first invent; And since their times some ripe ingenious Men To what they did, augmented more agen: So that at last 'tis finish'd and compleat, True, without fault; perfect, without deceit. Had not this Art by numbers so increast, It had been then the best of Arts; at least More flourishing by much, than what it is, Pardon me Sirs, if I do judge amiss, Many have err'd by too too fond believing, But doubtless this hath spoyl'd the Trade of Weaving; That in it self hath more Varieties Than all the Arts the World did e're devise; So to conclude, I think no Art can be More full of praise, for Ingenuity.
The First CANTO. The Writer briefly doth relate Mans making, Bliss, fall, wretched state: What his first Cloathing was, and then Who Weaving first devis'd, and When; So far as he can learn relates: Which done, the Prayses Celebrates Of Worthy Women, who thereby And otherwise deservedly Have purchas'd fame; which being done This Canto to an end doth Run. WHen God the World did make and every Creature That therein is, of every Form and Nature; Man, the perfection, Crown, Epitome Of all he did Create, reserved he As his last and best work; that so he might As in a lesser Frame present our sight With whatsoever he before had wrought; And this into so smal a Form he brought, That Man in him the whole doth Comprehend, Which were it not that I much time should spend Beside my purpose, I partly could show
Nay Man in's first estate was more then so; For he not onely Microcosmos was, But God in him did his own Image place; Which our Divines say was his innocence, (Till he by sinning raz'd it out from thence;) And well might be, for God no sin doth know, Nor Man did, till he fell, as Scriptures show: And had our Grand-sire Adam nere known sin The Art of Weaving need not to have been: For he before he did Commit offence, As I have said, was Cloath'd with innocence; But when through Satans wiles, he folly wrought, Sin brought forth shame, and shame a Covering sought And (wanting fitter,) they Figg leaves did take, Of which by shames constraint they Aprons make. Thus as the Proverb sayes, Man's quickly run Out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun: For he that even now all knowledge knew, And to whom all perfection did accrew, In whom all Sapience and all Science rested, Is now through disobedience so devested Of all his former knowledge, that he had Not understanding left him how to clad His naked body: O most haples fate! O alteration great! O wretched state! O great unhappy loss! How could it be When he thought what he late was, and now see A change so strange, and that so sodainly, But that he should forthwith despair and dye? Doubtles th' event had so been; had not he Who his ne'er failes at need, most graciously Upheld him by his Mercy, and likewise
Promis'd God should descend, that Man might rise: Nay more, when he in pitty did behold Mans naked body subject to the cold Of Winters blastes, and heat of Summers Sun, Also how ignorant he was become: God made them Coats of Skins, in which aray They thought themselves (poor wretches) very gay. See here how he that late was Lord of all That had a being on this Earthy Ball, Is of a suddain now become so poor That he must thrust his servant out of dore, And force his goods his great need to supply, Or he himself must cold and naked lye; The best Mans servant must be stript offs skin, That Man the Master might be wrap'd therein. This their first Cloathing was: but time that brings All things about, and from whose being springs Every invention, in time brought to pass The Art of Weaving: but when that time was It much uncertain is: report doth go Minerva did Invent it; but all know Who are but meanly read in History, That this report of her no truth can be: For Authors of best Credit do relate Minerva's life was of no elder date Then in or somewhat after Moses dayes: And let me tell you what this Moses sayes Concerning Weaving, for 'tis onely he That must herein our chiefest witness be: He being the first Historian that ere writ, And whose writing none can except 'gainst it: For he gives us to understand that when
The Tabernacle was erected, then The Curtains of fine twined Linnen were, And Blew, Purple, and Scarlet Silk was there; All which must needs be Weavers work, or how It could Imbroydred be I do not know; Also blew Riband to ty the Curtains were Appoynted, as the Text makes it appear. And to Minerva this could not belong, For shee was then not born or very yong Nay, if you backward look youl Weaving see, Above three hundred years elder to bee: For Abrahams Servant to Rebekah gave Rayments, which Rayments I would gladly crave Of any Man that can informe me whether It were not rather Weavers work, then leather? And that Esaus goodly Rayment Certainly Was Cloath; or Silk, (not Leather,) none deny: But here's as sure a proof, as can be had, Against which no exceptions can be made, That before this, when Lot was prisoner led, And presently by Abraham rescued, He tould the King He would not one thred take Of all the spoyl: And what can any make This thred to be, but Silk, Cloath, or apparrel That had been plundred in the former quarrel? More backward yet, when Noah did plant the Vine, And became drunk by drinking of the Wine, And so (not being himself,) uncover'd lay When his two modest Sons did make no stay To take a Garment, and going backward do Cover his nakedness; and who can show That this Garment was Leather? Rather I
Suppose it Cloath, and Weavings Antiquity A Thousand years more ancient then Noahs Floud, As probably it may be understood. Ile one degree therefore more run retrograde To enquire of what old Jabal's Tents were made? If any say of boughs; doubtles those they Had used before this time many a day; If others say of Leather, that I suppose (If Weaving were not) they wanted to make Cloathes. But why might not those Tents of Cloath be wrought, And Weaving ere that time into use brought? For the Worlds glass I ghess had then run out At least five hundred years, or thereabout: And might not the Weaver be as well then As the Smith, the Mason, and Musitian; And doubtles many other Trades, whose use That profit brings not which ours doth produce? And if (as sayth Josephus) Astronomie Invented was by Seth, unto which he Could not atain, but first he skill'd must bee In Arithmetick, and in Geometrie: So others might as their Genius inclin'd Imploy their Studies other Arts to find; And none could be more fit, nor was more needed Then Weaving, if they their own welfare heeded. But I must leave it doubtfull, because none Can certainly affirm when it begun. Now Ile return again, and as I go As far as my reading doth reach will show, Who, and what they were that are said to be The first Inventers of our Misterie. Here I must take my Rise, and to you show
What Lanquet or Cooper would have us know Out of their Chronicle, for they do say Weaving invented was by Naamah, Sister to Tubal-cain, and so might be, For shee noting her Brethrens industry, That each of them a several Art devised, Might shee not (also) thereby be surprised With emulation of their far spred fame? And perhaps hoping so to have her Name Enrolled among theirs, bent all her powers To bring to pass this worthy Art of ours? And that Her Brother Jabals Tents might be Of Cloath shee wrought, none knowes the contrarie But this may be a truth: for if we look Judiciously into the Sacred Book Among the Daughters born to Men before The universal floud the World run ore, You shall not read of any one but shee And Lamech's Wives, that nam'd are expresly; And for some special reason, (doubtless) shee Was mention'd above others, although we Know not the cause, nor I think ever hath Reavealed been, more then what that Text saith. But leaving her, as very probably To be th' Inventor of our Mistery: I doe intend here also to declare What others besides her recorded are To be the first Devisers of it, that What thereof written is, I may relate. Poliodorus in his History De Inventione Rerum doth specifie Three worthy Women, and of these three one
Minerva is; and he sayes shee alone Devised first to make Wool into Cloath, Which very likely is to be a troath: For I remember that I formerly Have read of Bacchus, who most Valiantly Did lead an Army into India, where He won much fame, as Histories declare: And that Minerva as Couragiously Being his Sister bore him Company; And many Countreys and great Citties he Conquer'd, being alwayes Crown'd with Victory, Until he siedge did to one Citty lay From before which he soon was driven away By Lightning and Thunder, that did proceed From off those Walls, as we do plainly read: And what can any Man judge this to be But Thundring Cannon shott? For certainly It then in use among them was, though we But late (yet much to soon) are come to be Accquainted with it, not being yet three hundred years, But they as many thousands, as appeares; For so long tis since Bacchus and Minerva did Conquer East-India, as of them we read. So Printing hath in Chyna and those parts Been no Man knows how long: and other Arts As Weaving, and such as did them concern, And there Minerva might her knowledge learn; Although 'tis very likely that they there (The Countrey being hot) all Silk did wear: But shee to Greece returning, where the Sun Being not so vehement, first begun To exercise her Silk in Wool; and so
It may be true, what Poliodore doth shew: And this is a good reason to produce To us that Silk-weaving was first in use; And those Garments of which we in Scripture read, Tis very like did all from Silk proceed. But let me mention Bacchus once agen, Who returning Victor back to Greece, did then From India bring Vines with him home, and so They Wine in Europe here first came to know: And for this great and good Commodity, They with a God-head did him dignify, Whose memory continueth to these times, We idely stiling Bacchus God of Wines; Who hath more followers then the greatest Sect Of all these many that us so infect. Minerva no less Honour (by our Trade, And other Arts shee taught) gain'd being made The Goddess of Arts and Armes: so I Shee being our Matron would shew her deitie: And this their Weaving and their Vines I ghess, They had from Noah, who did those parts possess After the floud, who there the Vine did plant, And being Drunk therewith did Covering want: And I suppose that Garment which was brought, Some kind of work was, by a Weaver wrought; And Weaving be (as I did lately say) Invented by, or before Naamah. But I have long digrest; now Ile proceed To shew more what from Poliodore I read. Linnen Cloath sayeth he, th' invention was Of one Arachne, being a Liddian Lass, But what shee was, or when liv'd, he doth not Name,
But Ovid sayes shee of mean Parents came. He further writes, that one Pamphila who The Daughter was of Platis, did first show, The way of Weaving Silk, whose dwelling Place As he relates, in th' Ile of Coos was: But in what Age shee liv'd he doth not show: Neither do I in my smal reading know: But that must be long since, otherwise shee Could not th' Inventor of Silk-weaving be: Further he goeth on, and doth relate That Cloath of Gold and rich Roabs of estate Th' Invention was of Attulus: Nay he In one place sayes the Babilonians be Th' Inventors of our Art; and in another Th' Egyptians: but how this can hang together Let others Censure, for some ingeniously Think, he hath herein dealt as faithfully As when our Eighth King Henry did imploy Him, to compile one entire History, Containing the Occurrences of our Nation, Since People in it first had Habitation, Unto those times, that the deeds of our Ile, He into one sole Vollumne might compile: And to that purpose our Chiefest Histories, Ancient Reccords, Books of Antiquities, Were to his Lodging, or his Study sent, (As I have said,) onely for that intent; But he either envying our Iles fame should surpass, The Italians praise, where he a Native was, Or, for he was not able that to do, Which by the King he was appointed to, Or, through his negligence, they all were fired;
Without a rescue and suddainly expired. Which work hath since by learned Cambden been Effected, as to his lasting praise is seen: For his Brittania doth Proclame his worth, And Englands Fame and Monuments set forth. But for the other if the Abridgement be Translated from his large Book faithfully, He hath dealt as careless with our Mistery; For three things do compleat a History: That's Persons, Time, and Place; two of which he Hath oft ommitted here, but chiefly Time, Which next to Persons is, herein the prime: For if we knew the time when they did live, We might a more exact conjecture give Of their devising of it: but how ere, We read Women th' Inventors of it were; And be it true, 'tis no disparagement, That worthy Women did it first Invent. For they in other things have famous been, As may in History be plainly seen. To instance in a few, Semiramis Who liv'd in Abrahams time, renowned is, Whose manly courage, and stout heart was such, That Babels Empire, she enlarged much: And India her high praise can testifie, Had shee not falne to sensuality. So likewise Tomaris, a Sythian Queen, By her brave vallour, no less fame did win, Who in the Field, durst th' Persian Monarch meet, Warlike Cyrus, though his Armies were great, Him shee ore came, and in a Tub of bloud, Did cast his Head, saying: if it be good
There drink thy fill, in bloud thou didst delight, And much bloud spilt: now bloud shall thee requite: So th' Amasonian Queen, Penthasitia, Stout Achilles could not her dismay; Though he ('tis said,) was seven Cubites high, His height nor strength, could not her terrifie; Neither did on his manly power stand, But durst encounter with him, hand for hand; Although, he Hector, and brave Troylus slew, Yet shee had hopes that shee might him subdue; And though shee fail'd, What Man could more adventer Then in the Lists, with such a Champion enter? So in Phylosophy, Hippacia, was Learned so well, shee many did surpass; For to her lasting praise 'tis write that shee, In th' open Schooles, oft read Phylosophy. So Sapho was an excellent Poet known As by those that have writ of her is shown: So an English Woman at Rome frequently, In mans apparrel read Divinity; Whose Learning, and whose Zeal was thought so great That shee thereby attain'd the Papall seat; And by the name of John the Eight, (tis true) Was Pope of Rome until she fell in two. So Mercia, a Noble Lady who A King of Britains Wife was, long ago; Here devisd Laws, which long after her name, Were Mercian Lawes call'd to her greater fame: To omit others, Queen Elizabeth, Even from her Crowning to her latest breath, No Man could her excell, in each degree; As tis known, to her famous memory.
So our Silk-weaving here in London was Wrought first by Women (may report take place;) Who did not only work it, but also Kept Shops themselves, and sold it, many know: And to the World the same to signifie, They Linnen Cloath about their Shops poasts ty: Which in their memory is used still By many that such sorts of Ware do sell. And to maintain this Weavings Credit I Did take this task in hand, and that thereby, I might take off reproach that lyes on it Was the Chief cause these lines by me were writ; Whose true worth to uphold, and blaze his praise, I will endeavour to my last of dayes. Thus a few worthy Women I have shown But many, many more are likewise known. Many several wayes as excellent As Men, and full as able to invent Rare workes, would they their studies bend thereto; As I for instance in a few here show. Then Weavers think it no disgrace to you, That Women found your Trade out. Be it true. Thus to my skill, who our Art did devise, I truely to you do Anatomize. Now something in its praise I mean to show, That the true worth of Weaving all may know, And also stop their mouths who villifie Our usefull Science undeservedly.
The Second Canto. He divers Noble Persons here Names that in Weaving frequent were. Then he declares its usefulness; And also sundry Trades express That do depend upon it: and What Multitudes of People stand Engaged to it. Then, its praise He amplifieth many wayes: And further, to that purpose he Shews the liberall Arts to be Therein included; and likewise Doth them with Weaving Sympathize. And divers other matters couch'd Are in this Canto; not here touch'd. WEaving Invented, as before is writ, Though much uncertain who devised it; Yet doth experience shew, 'tis of such use That a more needfull Trade none could produce: And in its infancy was found so rare, That personages of worth, known frequent were, To Spin and Weave: as Hercules for one Whose like, (if true) no time hath ever known; His Twelve great Labours makes the World admire That he such difficulties could acquire; Yet he laid by his Club, and Lyons skin, And for a Ladies love sate down to Spin. So likewise, Sardanapalus, although he,
Did sway th' Assirian first great Monarchy, Took much more pleasure with Women to Spin, And use the Weaving Trade, then he took in Such great Magnificence. Attulus likewise, Though King of Asia minor, did devise, First to Weave Gold and Silver with Silk, and So gain'd as much fame, as by his command. So famous Queens and Ladies frequent were To Spin and Weave, as Writers do declare: As Omphate and Yole, who Hercules lov'd dear, Though famous for their beauty, did not forbear To use our Trade. And Queen Penelope Vlisses chast and constant Wife, yet shee Was more delighted with the Weaving Trade, Then in those many Woers that shee had. And so chast Lucrece, wife to Collatine, A worthy Roman Prince, did not decline The Weaving Trade, for shee late in the night, Was with her maides found therein to delight; And though it after prov'd her overthrow, Yet shee renowned is, for being so. So great Augustus Caesars Queen, though he Were the head of the Worlds fourth Monarchy, And shee his Empress, the greatest Woman in Europe, Asia, and Affrica, yet was seen Oft to be frequent about Weaving, and Not on her husbands Stately titles stand. So Char-le-main, renowned King of France; Who the Pope, and his own worth did advance To be the Western Emperour; yet did His Daughter Weave, neither were they forbid By him for all his State, to use the same;
Nor did they in so doing impair their fame. And doubtless many worthy Persons moe That my smal reading, never came to know. And it is out of question many of these If 'twere not all of them, though Histories Do not reveale the same, did rather choose Both Gold and Silke, then courser stuf to use In their thus exercising Weaving; as We instance may in Attulus, who was More noble numbred, and as was his state, Most rich, more rich materials aimed at. And so we may imagine of the rest, But every one as to their mind seem'd best. But my aim is, Silk-weaving to prefer; And none can say concerning these, I err. How-ere, they are a Glory to our Trade, And grac'd it much, although it now be made Contemptible by some; Antiquity Were proud to use so rare a Mistery. Nor was our worthy Famous Science then, Better approv'd of, or esteemed with men, Then it deserved: and all may confess That to this day it doth deserve no less. For ere it was invented, all Men know The Begger Cloathed like the King must go; For neither had wherewith Rayment to make, Then what they from the backs of Beasts did take. And is't not far more decent to behold A Royal King araid in Cloath of Gold, Of Tissew, or of Silk garded with Lace, Or rare Invention, as becomes his place, Then see him Cover'd with a rough Bull hide,
Or Ravening Beares, or prancing Steeds, that died Full of diseases? or a delicious Queen, Clad in hard Leather, whose tenderness is seen To shrink at the least wind, although she's Clad In best and warmest Cloathing may be had? Or when they sit at meat, to see their board, To ly uncover'd, or at best affoard No better furniture then what is got From skins of Beasts? mee-thinks 't beseems them not. Or when they go to rest, to see Men bring A heap of hides, to be their Covering? Or see a babe new born, to be wrap'd in No softer swathing, then a hard rough skin, Deserveth pitty? yet they had no more Till Weaving furnish'd them with better store. Yet now, for them, and others, as their degree Requires, a fit supply of Cloath have we. How many Trades, may likewise Bless the day, When Weaving was devis'd? and yearly may In memory of it, as we did Kings Coronations, Keep one day Festival to all Generations? And Weavers much respect, without whose aide Their onely maintenance were quite decaide? A Philosopher did write, that if the Sun A moment should forbear his course to run, The World would ruin'd be: so, were our Trade A while left off, what ruines would be made Among a world of Trades? As I shall shew Before my work I further do pursue; And 'twill be requisite, for by the same They'l find their disrespect deserveth blame. The Merchant that ore all the World doth Trade,
By whom our Nation is so famous made, Weavers work is the chief Commoditie That he transporteth hence, and therefore he May much respect him, for if he were gone, That gainful Trade of his, would be orethrown: This is his lading as he's outward bound. And is not Linnen-Cloath, brought hither, found Likewise to be a great Commoditie, Gainful, and needful, unto each degree? So were Silk-stuffs, but we being skilful grown, To make them here, that Trade's well-nigh o'rthrown. And Flax and Tow that's brought in, were not we To make it Cloath, of little use would be: So Cotton-Wool, without the Weaver were As needless, as most plainly doth appear: Nay Silk, that great and rich Commoditie, Without our help, would like these, useless be, And almost fit for nothing: but being we Imploy it to profit, by our industrie; Whither would not the Merchant venture, for To gain so gainful a Commodity, or What dangers not adventure to run through, What unknown Seas, with his Ships keel to plough; What perilous Climates pass, and what strange Lands, Where he no word of their speech understands; Where peoples manners from his different are, Where other Customs (than among us) appear; Where other Stars shine, than with us give light, Where other Gods, other Religions, quite Contrary to ours be; other beginnings too, Of time, and Men, than we acknowledg do Take place; and more strange Rites they use? Yet he to run these hazards doth not refuse,
To bring in a far-fetcht Commoditie, Which without Weaving, of no use would be; But with our help, what numbers hereby do Gain great Estates, as doth experience show! The Merchant (as is said) hereby doth rise Unto great wealth, and as great dignities. The Mercer, not to him inferior is, But he the Weaver may respect for this; And both the Drapers may the Weaver love, For by him, in so high a Sphere they move. The Silk-man, that unto us silk doth sell, Beholding to the Weaver is as well As any of these, which he knows well enough, Oh that he would not wrong us with bad stuff! Th'other Silkman also, who doth buy Ware of the Weaver, may ingeniously Confess, that by our Trade his wealth doth rise, Then, wherefore should he us so much despise? Rather in Conscience, they might poor men give A better price, that they might better live. The Haberdasher too, with these may share, Who might want wealth, if he wanted our ware; And the Upholster lack his strong Bed-tike, Rug, and Curtains, with other things such like. Nor let the Printer ore the Weaver vapour, For without Cloath, what would he do for paper? The Stationer too would get but slender fees, If men did write on bark, or leaves of Trees As they have done: for if weaving were gone, Could skins be spar'd to write or Print upon? And many Handicrafts, as well as these, But for the Weaver, were brought on their knees,
As the Cloathworker, who us disrespects, For in his Motto, he, our Trade neglects; Naming a Ram, a Lamb, a Sheep, and Wool, From all which he'd but little profit cull, For what would Ram, Lamb, Sheep and wooll all gain'im, Without the Weaver? his Trade doth sustain'im. So the Cloath-drawer would want holes to stop, If in the Weaver were not his whole hope. So the Cloath-presser, and the Callender, Without the Weaver, quite dissolved were; And might (if possible) a new Trade learn, If any be, that ours doth not concern: The Dyer likewise of Silk, of Stuff, or Cloath, To want the Weaver, would be very loath, For on him they rely; but the last two I do not know, nor with them have to do: But for the first, if I might speak my mind, I'de say, he were not always honestly inclin'd; For if Silk were uprightly dy'd, it would When it doth come to using, better hold. Nor could the Throster so many imploy Without the help of Weavings mystery: For his gum'd ware would then lye on his hand, And all his Mills and Wheels might idle stand. So he that Gold and Silver Wyer draws, And those that spin it upon Silk, have cause To love the Weaver, for if he were not, There would but small gain by their Trades be got. You'd think the Taylor I did not respect, If I here in my lines should him neglect: He being so gentile, and one of fashion, Who to our Trade hath very great relation;
We weave, and pick, and dye, and dress, and trim, Our Cloath, Stuff, Ribond, Lace, and all for him; He's put in trust therewith; without his help, It were but like a formless young Bear-whelp, That hath no shape, until the kind dam do By painful labour, lick it thereinto; So is our Weaving, until he by Art, With it shapes Garments, fit for every part Of us, wherein I hope he hath the trick, As she her whelp, so he'll his fingers lick; And as the greedy Bear too well is known To be so cruel, that it will spare none Her paw lights on, so will not he likewise All that he can with safety, make his prize? What though he flaunt it out, and like a Knight Wear brave Apparel? all's not Gold that's bright; He may respect the Weaver for it, and Not on his sturdy Stilts so stately stand; For he must fetch a number of hard stitches, To flourish so with making Leather-Breeches. Where would the Week-Merchant get Cloth to sell To poor folks, to be weekly paid so well, But by the Weaver? six in Centum we May take for Use per Annum; but doth not he Tye tie unto the six, and sixty make it, Which if you like not (Sir) you may forsake it. I likewise might some other Trades set down, That do the Weaver need, as 'tis well known; As the Whitster, Bandseller, Painter, and Th'Imbroiderer, though these two last do stand Upon their points, and in their boasting say, Their Trades do surpass Weaving every way:
But put the case they do, which is not true, As presently I'll mak't appear to you; Yet weaving is their Basis; were it gone, What ground-work then had they to work upon? But in their Trades there's nothing they can do, But we the like can present to your view. Dost thou desire the shape of any Beast? That in our work, by us can be exprest: Or any Fowl, or any Fish to see? These also, easily can produced be. Or any Tree, or Herb, or Flower? likewise, We can present them all before your eyes: Do you desire a Tulip in your Hat? The Weavers skill can furnish you with that. Or would you wear a Rose or July-flower? To make you any lies in Weavings power; Or whatsoere you would have brought to sight, For 'tis the Cornucopia of delight. And can more be produc'd by theirs, than I Have writ, or might, if need, more amplifie? Mistake me not, for I ascribe unto Our God all power, for he doth all things do; Ours are but shadows, that resemblance bear Of substances, that he hath made appear. But if compared with these Trades, ours be, We do surpass them in a high degree; For where theirs for the most part are for show, Ours is for service likewise, all do know; And like to Amalthea's Horn, hath store Of all variety, no Trade hath more: And useful is to all: nay further yet, What several multitudes of people get
Their livelihood by Weaving, or some Trade Depending thereupon; that were it decaid, I am perswaded half the world would be, Wanting imployment, brought to misery. So that all may, like as th' Astronomer, Before each Star doth Jupiter prefer For magnitude; they also (in our praise, Above each Trade) the Weaver Crown with Bays: Or, as the Tyrians their God Hercules, (For fear they any time should him displease, And he depart) did with a Golden threed, To a pillar bind him, that so, at their need They might implore his aid; so may each one, With Cords of Love, our Trade; for were it gone, All the world its help would quickly want. Over the Weaver then, let no Trade vaunt. Yet further to its praise, I make it appear, The Liberal Arts in it included are; Or, as my skill doth serve, I will unfold, How it with them, doth nigh resemblance hold: That Weavings worth I may augment thereby, And its deserved praise more amplify. First for Arithmetick, (the numbring Art) We imitate (almost) in every part. We adde, substract, divide, and multiply, Our Warp and Woof, as we occasions see; And every sute we sute, Progression is From one to millions, goes on our degrees. The Rule of Three, of any Rule the best, By our Stuff, our Loom, and Workman is exprest; By these three known, and well imploy'd in time, We do produce a golden sum of Coyn;
The Rule of Loss and Gain, we often use; Sometime to Barter we do not refuse; Proportion is the form our work doth bear; Reduction is the order we keep there; And other Rules we use, some more, some less, As need requires, and I need not express. Fractions, too often, in our work are us'd, Most when the Dyer hath our Stuff abus'd. To Extract a Root by us, you think 'tis much, But you shall understand it is not such; For there no figure is that we espy, Though wrote most intricate, and cunningly, But we can draw it forth, and in our frame With much facility explain the same: And as Arithmetick doth dayly grow More perfect than the former times did know; As Logarithmes, or John Nepiers bones, And great Algebra, that not many owns; And several other Instruments in use, As time, by time, doth to the world produce: So is our Trade more ample many ways, Than unto men was known in former days. Geometry is next, to which we do In divers kinds agree, as I shall show: The beginning of our work compar'd may be To a point, the original of Geometry, Our threds to lines, our work on either side, To parallels which equally divide Themselves at distance, and so forward run, Ad infinitum, or till our work be done. Our Leeses, Perpendiculars, you see, Plattens, Triangles, or Semi-circles be;
Our Roul a Center is, each turn we commence Of work thereon, is a Circumference. And as by this Arts Instruments we may The length, breadth, height, of any thing survey, (Except that All in all) and by its skill, The true dimensions give; so 'tis known well, That of all forms under the imperial Heaven, The perfect Figure may in our work begiv'n. And as the word Geometry imports A measuring of the Earth, and that all sorts Of Nations need the same; so is our Trade To all the world by us, most useful made. Next for Astronomy; our Trade alludes To that, in every one of these similitudes: Cloath-weaving, to the Sun compar'd may be, Keeping one constant course continually; Silk-Stuffs, unto the Moon, never the same, But always change the Figure or the Name. Plain Ribond represents the fixed Stars, Regular in its course, no change, no jars; All other silk works, (may be compar'd) whatever, Unto the wandring Planets, who do never Keep any rule, but sometimes move direct, Then Retrograde, oft changing their Aspect: So those Silk-weavers that imployed be In such like works, we very seldom see At any constant stay, but always changing To this, to that, like Planets ever ranging, From good, to better, or from bad to worse, Sometimes to empty, sometimes fill the Purse. And as those Heavenly Lamps, in their Aspects, By sundry forms, produce sundry effects;
From a Conjunction that's benevolent, Astrologers affirm much good is sent; So Malevolent Aspects they likewise say, Much evil doth unto Mankind convey: So when the times fall cross, and opposite, Bad Trading doth upon the Weaver light; But when Conjunctions that bring peace are sent, That to our Calling proves benevolent. But all this doth not always fall out true, No more than what they predict shall ensue; For sometimes we in trouble most enjoy, So when they threat most, we have least annoy. This for Astronomy enough shall be, To shew how Weaving doth with it agree. Now Grammar shews it self, without whose aid, Who rightly can unfold what's writ or said? Thou on four feet as four sure props dost stand, By whom to aid each Art, thou art a hand: Orthography, and Etymologie; Syntaxis also, and last Prosodie: Thus are they nam'd: the first doth teach to spell Each word aright, and then you'd write it well: The second shews from whence they are deriv'd, So of the true sence, you'l not be depriv'd: The third to place them truly, gives you light; The last how to pronounce them all aright. In imitation whereof, we likewise, To spell, or frame our Figure first devise; And as our words, compos'd of letters are, Even so by threds, our figures do appear; Which if not rightly plac'd, is as much shame, As to write false Orthography is blame:
But when we thus far have proceeded true, We then produce our Figure to the view; And that resembles Etymologie, As words, so works, from whence deriv'd they be. As from infinite grounds, words sence doth grow, So from infinite forms our Figures flow: To spell true, and know the words derivation, Is here declar'd; so we in imitation, Have form'd our work, and drawn our Figures trace. Our next is like Syntaxis, how to place, As that each word, so we each Cord aright; They to place true, we, that ours so may light, Do pass each Cord with care, as Scholars, when They'd speak true Latine, or write with their pen, Lest Priscians head therein by them be broken. Or our work false, both which, were a dunces token: And as by Prosodia, they each accent weigh, So we with care, each Cord and Thred surveigh; They that their Verse may sweetly sound, and we That our work may in every part agree. And as he knows, who is in Grammar skill'd, Many subsequent Rules the Art doth yield; As needful explanations of each ground, And tryals to declare their knowledg sound; Through which young Students with much labour wander As in a Maze, or intricate Meander, Ere he attain to a proficiencie, Or perfect skill, in this Arts Mysterie; Which some (though very studious) hardly do With all their painful Study reach unto: So in Silk-weaving we have sorts of work, Wherein there doth great difficulty lurk;
That few attain to its profunditie, Though they be of a quick capacitie: But these days (more than ever) do present Quotidian proofs of its accomplishment. See here, how Grammar, and the Weaving Trade, To agree in most particulars is made. Next I'll place Logick, wherein I will shew How we do correspond with it also: Ten general Heads, named Predicaments, The Rules of this Art unto us presents; Which ten be these: Substance the first must be, Quantity second, the third Qualitie, The fourth Relation, Action the fifth, then Passion the sixth, Where the seventh, the eighth When, The ninth is Scituation or the place, The tenth is Habit, or the outward face: These are the ten which I'll Anatomize, By shewing how we with them do sympathize. Thus for the first, our Ware's a Substance wrought, In Quantity 'tis large, or narrow brought; In Quality 'tis useful, and hath Relation To all mankind; Active's the workmans fashion; Passive the Loom is, it being in use, Where, that's the place that we think fit to choose; When, that's the time the workman works in it; Scituation the manner how it is made fit; Habit is the form that it doth bear. And thus I briefly have made it appear, That our Trade these includes; the next must be, How it doth with a Syllogism agree. Those say that do well know the arguing Arts, A Syllogism consisteth of three parts;
The Major, Minor, and Conclusion are These three, which thus to you I will declare. The Proposition, or the Major, must The Master be; what he propounds in trust Unto the Minor, or the Servant, he Doth then assume, and by his industry, Brings it unto a right end or Conclusion; Admitting of no Fallacies intrusion; Of which I'll speak a word, it being a thing That ever with it doth some falshood bring; And it is my desire, that we have none, That either do, or have in that path gone: And adulterate Ware, that's fair to the eye, Praised for good, which is a fallacy. Thus I, as well as my skill could devise, The Art of Reasoning here, anatomize, And ours Consort therewith, that all may see, How full our Trade is of varietie. Now Rhetorick claims its place among these seven, Unto which, what Encomions may be given To express its worth, and yield to it due praise, Whose glorious lustre, bright resplendant rays, Through every learned Author shines as clear As at noon-tide Apollo in his Sphere, When he through burning Cancer guides his Car, And to our sight his Beams most glorious are: Thy Tropes are flowers, as some Writers say, And well may be so named, because they So numerous are, and like varietie With those, that do Dame Tellus beautifie: These flowers choice pick'd and plac'd delight the mind, Ours doth the Body garnish, which to mankind
Is much more needful; thine's an ornament To Learning in particular, but th'extent Of ours, doth reach to all; thine to the Schools A handmaid is, ours serveth wise and fools: Thine needful is, but ours is much more so, Yet who would not thee, rather than us forego? But pardon me dear Rhetorick this stile, And I'll endeavour now, to reconcile Thee and our Trade together, shewing how we In most particulars do both agree. Ther's not a Flower in thine Art, which I Have not orelook'd, and weighed seriously; (Although I have here, through my want of skill, Made use of few or none, with my dull quill:) But if as one should in a Garden walk, He doth not pluck a flower from every stalk; But picks one here, one there, as doth his eye Direct him to, to please his fantasie: So I, to shew how the Silk-weaving Trade, To consort with the Art of Rhetorick's made, Choose here and there one thence, as my Mind serves; and to avoid prolixity, First for Synecdoche, or quick conceit, On every workman that doth always wait, For whatsoever Figure he espies, By quick conceipt, he'll it anatomize; Or by Apostrophe turn it about, Producing thence another fashion out; As Gnome the director thinks it fit; Or Synonymia who hath store of wit. Or otherwise, he will by Metaphore, Change it into another form, that's more
Agreeing to his purpose; or by Allegory Enlarge it, to set forth its greater glory; Or by Brachiloga, he will contract it, And into so small form thereby compact it; Though Paradoxon, or Enigma there, A Wonder or a Riddle seem t'appear. Such hidden mysteries, no scruple shall To an ingenious workman be at all; Nay with Dilemma, though his Figure be But on one side, on both he'll presently Make it alike. Let none in any wise, Imagine I herein Hyperbolize. Then Envy may, and Ignorance forbear To spend their Ironie, their flout or jeer; And with humble Metanoea, repent that Their ignorance provok'd their tongue to prate Beyond their knowledge; for no Eclipsis here, Or fault committed is, as may appear. Sweet Rhetorick, I might go on, and more Flowers pluck from thine inexhausted store; An like a Gordian-knot, wove curiously, Them, to augment Silk-weavings praise, here tye: But Paranymia, or the Proverb says, Enough is as good as feasting; therefore to raise More similitudes, I thought it not fit, Or, to my skill, Ide have endeavour'd it. All hail sweet Musick, thou bringst up these reres, Delightful sounds, like Harmony of the Spheres. How shall I frame a fit propinquitie, Whereby with thee to gain affinitie? Thy Gamuth is the first step to thy Science, To which our pricking patterns have alliance.
No one in thee, can a proficient prove, That therein is not skill'd; nor can we move One degree forward, toward perfection, If this be not our ground to build upon. Nor a Musitian can his melody Make pleasing to himself, or standers by, Unless a Concord in his strings be found; Nor can our workmen any work make sound, Whose tools and tackling remain out of frame, But when by skill, both rectifie the same: Then thou and we, a Diapason strike; Thy Musick's sweet, our Wares our Chapmen like; And all thy Figures we do imitate, Thy Large, Long, Brief, Semi-Brief, Sharp, and Flat; All which I could demonstrate here, if so My Time would time permit me it to do; But I'll forbear, and briefly shew how we Do correspond with them in Melody. Thy pleasing sounds proceed from Instruments; Ours an Harmonious voice, whose rare accents Have often forc'd sweet Philomel forbear Her sugred notes, our sweeter tunes to hear; Nay great Apollo, the Musitians God, What time he here on earth made his aboad, Was so delighted, with the curious strains Of well-tun'd ditties, pen'd by pregnant brains, That had he not engaged been to keep The numerous flocks of King Admetus Sheep, Then, when rude Pan, with his Pipes rustick play, Durst to contend with his Harps lofty Lay; The Weavers Songs, with ravishing Melody, Did so delight the God of Harmony,
That with them he would here have sympathiz'd, And such rare Songs to their sweet notes devis'd; That like to Orpheus, their inchanting Ditties Should tame wild Beasts, & build up Towns & Cities. For this he did acknowledge, to their praise, They did for Song, from all Trades bear the Bayes. Thus 'twixt Apollo, and Minerva, I Though in rude sort, have wrought affinity; But wanting her Invention, and his Wit, My weak skill hath not fashion'd it so fit, As better Artists might, that better know, For my Pen here, my Ignorance doth show. Here I have shew'd you how our Mysterie, With the Seven Liberal Arts, doth nigh agree. And now I'll shew, that ours more useful is Than all of them; but pardon me in this: For let none think, 'tis in the least my thought, That those rare Arts should in contempt be brought, Of which the World hath so much use, and I As dearly love, as my own liberty, Or what is dearer to me; but to show Our Trades true worth, and likewise let such know Their ignorance, who do it so despise, Though of its usefulness, before their eyes, Nay on themselves, they every day partake, Without regard thereof: but as the Snake, Did (being nigh frozen dead) the man intreat To put him in a place where he some heat Might re-assume, to save his nigh lost life, Which being attain'd, he doth repay with strife, And foul ingratitude his love: even so, Those Peacocks now in their great bravery know
No want of Cloathing, (Nor of the supply Silk-weaving yields, the same to beautifie; If not all Silk,) therefore us they scorn: But should they go a while, as they were born, Naked, or Cloath'd in Leather, then they would Respect our Trade, and wish it ever should Flourish in fame, and reputation till Time the last minute of its course fulfill. But to my purpose: first for the numbring Art, What man is there that would not gladly part With it, and promise ne'er to use it more, Rather than be debar'd of that rich store, And Comfort, that our Trade doth yield? and so Geometry, who would not it forego, Before he'd loose the part he doth possess In our rich Trades most happy usefulness? Astronomy too, as useless is, compar'd To our Arts worth, as any thereof debar'd Would soon acknowledg; and Musick not at all May with us into Competition fall: For he other three, there need no more be sed, But us our Mother-Tongue would bring to bed: And I suppose, it a much lesser harm were To want them all, than Cloaths to keep us warm there. I do not mean, the plain part of each Art, Which I to Leather-Garments may consort, But the abstruse part of each one might be Much better spar'd than our rich Mystery: But to have both is best; for neither we Could want without great loss; and blest be he, By whose Assistance we do both possess, And dayly partake of their usefulness.
But now a word or two, to shew the cause That such contempt upon Silk-weaving draws: Then I herein have now no more to say; But wish our Trade in good fame flourish may. The end of the second Canto.
The third CANTO. Here its worth repeating, he Shewes what the chifest causes be Of its disparagement, and doth shew From what weak grounds the same doth flow; To redress which, useth declamations, With invective dehortations; Then he extolleth such by whom It Credit gaineth; and doth come To shew what worth not long ago It had in London, and also Doth now retain by means of some, Who are Silk-weavers: and so from One circumstance to another he Proceeds, till his task ended be. IF Weaving be of such Antiquity, So useful, nay, of such necessity, That all the world in general doth it need, And also standeth other Trades instead: And that Personages great and eminent, Did with delight and pleasure it frequent; What is the cause 'tis now despised so, Or by what means into such contempt grow? Being of most Trades, the Primum mobile, Or the first mover, Pole, or Axel-tree;
By which they are, and principally move, As the inferior Orbs, by that above; Or as Learn'd Record terms his Arithmetick The ground of Arts, so we, (justly) the like May stile our Trade the ground of Trades: or it May (truely) be compared very fit To the foundation of a house, for who Is he, that doth not by experience know, That without it, the Building soon would fall? So likewise many Trades, yea, almost all, Were brought to ruine, having no remedy, But by the help of our rare Mystery. Four Causes here, I'll principally name, That chiefly are the reasons of the same. The first, some shop-keepers, that buy our Ware, Who, when bad Trading is, so cruel are, So griping, and unconscionable, that When poor men come to sell, will bid a rate Of so small profit, knowing they perforce Must any money take, or do things worse; Thus by the low rate they in hard times give Poor Weavers, they constrained are to live Meanly, and sometimes ready to want Bread, While the other are both richly cloath'd and fed, And in their Shops, (like Lords) most stately are, With the profit they get by the Weavers Ware; And the poor Weaver, by his cruelty, Forc'd to spin out his Life in poverty; Which brings a scandal on our Trade, while he That is the cause, doth flourish gallantly. Of some this is the Custome; but there be Others among them, deal more Christianly,
By giving unto those, of whom they buy, A price that will maintain them decently: Let a blessing be upon such men, nay they Will blessings find, now or another day; But th'other their sear'd hearts are grown so hard, That they nor Curse nor Blessing do regard, For Griping gain, the god is they adore: But by this means poor Weavers are kept poor; For they having no way to raise a stock, And th'other no Conscience, hold them in this lock. But there's other Silk-Weavers, who live brave, And make those men pay well for what they have: I wish the rest like these, could hold them to it, And no way like good husbandry will do it. Three other sorts of men, I likewise here, Will, though unwillingly, to you declare; Who, if my judgment do me not deceive, Our Trade of much fame and repute bereave: Of which three, one is the hard-hearted man, Who hath no mercy, neither pity can Enter his brest, nor knows he Christianity, Nor is i'th'least acquainted with Humanitie; But poor Children abuse, and do not beat Only their backs, but bellies, by want of meat; Which makes them heartless that service to do, Which they by him are dayly set unto: Neither can he, without the same subsist, If it be not by their hard labour encreas'd, Which they not able at all times to do, His furious hot displeasure run into, And some his storming rigour to prevent, Too oft aside step, to scape punishment;
And many too many Dames, rather than they Will seek a means his chollar to allay, The more will agravate his fury, though It sometime proves to be their overthrow; Rather if Boys want wit, have thou a care, That want of patience fall not to thy share; Allure him by good Counsel, and fair words, Both which are known, to be more powerful cords, And sooner will him draw t'amendment, than The strictest course of the most cruel men: But if that fair means will not win him to That which is fitting, known for him to do; Then use the rod, or wand, but careful be Mercy to mix with thy severity: If thou too strict art, and he run away, Whither to seek him wilt thou take thy way? And he then wanting, his wants to supply, At best must beg, and in the streets oft lye. Whereby our Trade hath been much scandaliz'd, For want of both being better advis'd: Was not a Master and a Dame lately In danger of life, for their great cruelty? Let them a warning be to others, that they By such doings work not their own decay; But pitty 'tis the Trade in general Should censur'd be by ones unhappy fall. The other two, as shall to you be shown, Are known the Drunkard and the idle droan; The Drunkard doth such unfit carriage show, That we do now into a by-word grow; For if a man do any Drunkard meet, As daily ther's too many in the street,
There goes a drunken Weaver he doth cry; Thus our Trades brought to infamy thereby. But though the Trade thereby doth bear much blame, Himself is also scourged for the same; Witness his poverty, and poor array, Witness his health and strength both which decay; Witness his disrespect with honest men, Witness his antick, frantick carriage, when Drink hath him overcome, that he thereby Is jeer'd and scorn'd by the raskality; And is unfit for labour made, whereby He draws on him and his great poverty. Philip the King of Macedonia, when He against the Persians march'd with an host of men, Hearing they were inclin'd t'intemperancy, He did forbear the war, saying, shortly They would orethrow themselves: so, even so The Drunkard seeketh his own overthrow, And the overthrow of his whole family; And also on our Trade draws infamy. You young men Weavers, that do yet stand free From being acquainted with Ebriety If you a master have, or if there are Journy-men thus inclin'd, let it be far, Ever far from you, to follow their example, To take delight therein, no rather trample Under your feet the thought of that which doth Both spoil the wit and memory of youth, Wrongs their invention also, and doth make Them much uncapable to undertake What might them profit, and preferment bring, For drunkenness behind it leaves a sting
That doth the reputation wound of all, Both old and young that in love with it fall; And if a young mans Credit be once stain'd, Much labour it will ask, ere 'tis regain'd. Drink hath these three effects, as one doth say, And we find it to prove true, day by day. Pleasure, Drunkenness, and Sorrow be Beyond exception taken for the three. The first is (Pleasure, that is) when 'tis taken Moderately, but when that path's forsaken, And we do swallow it down in excess, That bringeth forth the second, (Drunkenness) And if the Drunkard do live till the morrow, He'll find the third effect, (which will be Sorrow) Unless he be past hope, and wholly incline Himself thereto, making himself a Swine: Another says it is a Monster that Hath many heads, and who startles not at So strange an Object? which heads are, saith he, Foul Talk, and Actions that much fouler be; With Railing, Swearing, Cursing, Quarrelling, and Wrath, Murder, which will then be all at hand. Oh such a Monster shun, whose poison foul Will overthrow both thy Body and Soul. And no less hateful is base Idleness, As every man tha'ts virtuous, will confess; For it, like Drunkenness, doth draw on need, And many evils more from it proceed: The idle man's unskill'd in any Art; The Idle Man in Virtue hath no part; The idle man th'industrious displeases; The idle man heaps on himself Diseases;
The idle man is unto no man friend; No not to himself, who time doth idly spend: For dilgence attains to that, which he Shall never do, for lack of industry. The doing man hath pleaty still in store, But idle negligence is always poor; Labour gains Love, Credit and Reputation; Negligence contempt and detestation. Be thou a Master, Servant, or who-ere These lines of mine doth either read or hear, Regard not who did write them, rather learn, Between the good and evil to discern: Fly drunkenness and sloath, both which all know (That do know any thing) lead unto woe; Strive to be temperate and industrious, so You shall not onely your wants overthrow, But bring your selves in credit; and our Trade, Which by such misdemeanours hath been made Contemptible, shall reputation gain, And hell-bred envies Calumny restrain: But I hope men of judgment are more wise, Than to give ear unto such Calumnies: For, as we say, One swallow doth not make A Summer, so, I hope no man will take Advantage from a few despised men, The Trade in general to disparage, when There is not any Handycraft I know In London, out of which there dayly grow Men of more wealth, or known abilities; Or few or none to higher places rise Than Weavers have and do: should I omit To speak of some time past, which is not yet
Five hundred years, for then it is well known, As truth by true relation hath it shown, The Weavers did in London bear great sway, Wherein they continued many a day: For those that have read ancient Records know, No Company in London can out-go The Weavers by Antiquity; for we The first Society in London be, That is confirm'd by Charter, it being known About five hundred years of age, and none, Not any Company so ancient is, Nor any Charter granted before this; Which though it be no broader, nor in length Exceeds a hand, it is known of that strength, Being but about ten lines, that there's not many Charters in this City, if there be any Puts down our Charter for validity, As many learned Clerks can testify. And I once heard Recorder Littleton Confess no less, when it he look'd upon, Who was much taken when he did it see, And reverence shew'd it for antiquity: And being 'tis truth, that we are known to be The first incorporated Company, That then in London was, Weavers might well As they then stood, all other Trades excel; And Candle-wick-Street, which is yet so nam'd For Weavers Looms there standing, is still fam'd. I further might have boasted, telling you how Our Master swaid here, as the Lord Mayor now, And after 'twas a Mayoralty, they did ride In Purple-Gowns oft by the Mayors side,
But that I was not certain it was true, And nothing on bare hearsay would I shew; But fame hath ever told us it was so, And from no cause no such report could flow. I wish this City Peace, Plenty, Health; may honour Be dayly more and more conferr'd upon her; Let her Societies flourish, let there be Union within her Walls perpetually; Let every several Corporation know Its place and dignity, though ours below Some others at this present doth appear, This I have writ, to shew what once we were; Not to detract from others, for some be Honourable by their Titles, so are we Expressed in our Charter, which hath been Confirm'd by Parliament, as may be seen: But the Proverb says, and all allow the same, Tell me not what I was, but what I am. What we have been my lines in part declare, Nor need I shame to write what now we are; For here is living at this present day, A worthy Alderman late Lord Mayor, and may I write without offence, although he be Free of an Honourable Company, I hope he will not blame me, nor deny That he hath us'd Silk-weaving formerly; And also more, his honour to augment, Hath been a Member of our Parliament. But of our own Members, of late had we Two worthy Gentlemen, both seen to be Aldermen of this City; also I Have known them Masters of our Company,
Being Silk-weavers, and likewise we have Common Council-men, who with other grave And ancient Citizens, are known to be Governors of Bride-well; besides have we Some chosen to be of the Corporation, Where poor mens children have good Education. Also in Naval conduct now have we Many brave Weavers, who Commanders be, Who for this Kingdom have good service done, And honour, fame, and Wealth gain'd; also run Through many difficulties, and been made Governors of strong holds, who by their Trade Are all Silk-weavers: thus by what's writ you see I'th' City and the Navy both have we Weavers of note and worth, and many more, Which would too long for me be to run ore; Who naturally are otherwise inclin'd, And unto several studies bend their mind. Many proficients in Divinity, And many studious in Philosophy: Some very curious the Natures to know Of natural things; one of which hath to show As many sorts of most strange rarities, As I think ever one man saw with eyes: Others in Physick, and Astrology, Very well seen are, one especially, Who I cannot pass over, nor omit To write Encomions of him that are fit. I formerly have read of an old Oak, Among the Poets, that in old time spoke, And gave forth doubtful Answers, and also Of Delphos Oracle, that long ago
Answer'd demands, with words of double sence; But here is plain and true intelligence: Many to resolve doubts oft to him come, Returning with great satisfaction home, For his knowledg in Physick, and herein Hath with successful proof approved been; And from Black-Fryers both Town and country can Testifie, he is a well deserving man. It would be here too much, too long, to me, Several men to name particularly, For their known worth; only I will show, That we have also many Silk-weavers who, In their respective dwellings, live as brave, And as good fame and reputation have, As any Trade about them, none disprais'd, And are as frequent in their Parishes rais'd, All Offices to bear, as others be; And not a few, but many such have we; And may their number still increase, that so, Weaving to be respected more might grow: But as the purest Lawn may stained be, And the sweet Rose hath pricking thorns we see, Or as among good Wheat some Darnel grows; So we among these Gentlemen have those, Who nor their own, nor the Trades fame regard, But shame, disgrace and poverty is their reward: Which I do name with grief; but for the rest, Be they with Heaven and Earthly blessings blest; For by their means, the Credit of our Trade Upheld is much, which but for such were made Contemptible with some, although its worth No pen is able fully to set forth;
Much less hath mine here, who the unfittest am Of (many) any to declare the same. But I have long desir'd to do what here You see is done; if well or mean, how-ere, I hope my friends with good acceptance will, Value my meaning, wave my want of skill: For my intent was Silk-weaving to raise One step out of disgrace, where many days It hath lyen struggling, as wanting a hand, To lift it on its former legs to stand; This on its knees may set it, an abler pen May if well order'd place it upright agen: Which being done, its glory than shall last, Until the last Trump soundeth its last blast; For what ever doth perish, Weaving will Continue until Time his Time fulfil; And Snow-Ball like, the further it doth pass, Gather fair fame to blot out foul disgrace. Nil ultra now I'll set unto my pen, And crave for favour of those Gentlemen, Those well deserving Weavers, who time hath made To be the praise and glory of our Trade; Hoping that they will no exceptions take For what's here done, being partly for their sake, And partly to admonish those that run Out of the way, I did what here is done; And also to take off that scandalous blot, Which the Trade if considered deserves not: And if I gain their loving favour, I Have the chief end that I desire hereby. Let Momus then jeer on, and flout his fill, Let the defaming Critick censure still,
Let traducing Zoilus my lines reprehend; Let them all their whole stock of malice spend, And from their tongues their envious poyson spit, My harmless lines will gain more fame by it: For Innocence the more it is deprest, Will like the Palm, gain a more flourishing Crest. And so relying on my friends good will, I remain their obliged servant still; And shall be ever willing them to serve, If so my weakness may their loves deserve. FINIS.
