C3225 12129368 54678
Royal coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Against the Resset of the Rebels, and for delivering them up to Justice. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To all and sundry our Leidges and Subjects, whom these presents do or may concern, Greeting: Foras∣much as upon the first notice given to our Privy-Council of the Rising and Gathering of these disloyal and seditious Persons in the West, who have of late appeared in Arms in a desperate and avowed Re∣bellion against Us, Our Government and Laws, We did declare them to be Traitors, and discharged all our Subjects to assist, resset, supply, or correspond with any of them, under the pain of Treason. And the saids Rebels and Traitors being now (by the blessing of God upon our Forces) subdued, dissipated and scattered; And such of them as were not either killed or taken in the Field, being either retired secretly to their own homes and Houses, expecting shelter and protection from the respective Heretors, in whose Lands they dwell, or lurking in the Countrey. And we being unwilling that any of Our good Subjects should be ensnared, or brought into trouble by them; Have therefore with advice of our Privy-Council, thought fit again to discharge and prohibit all our Subjects, Men or Women, that none of them offer or presume to harbour, resset, supply, correspond with, hide or conceal the Persons of Robert Hamilton, Brother German to the Laird of Prestoun, John Patoun in Meadow head, alias Captain Patoun, Joseph Lermont, alias Major Lermont, William Cleeland, John Balfour of Kinloch Whytfoord of Blaquhan younger, Medellan of Barstob, John Wilson, Son to Alexander Wilson Town-Clerk of Lanerk, Rosse, pretended Major, Thomas Weir, Brother to Kirkfield, Haxstoun of Rathillet, Carmichael, Son to the Earl of Wigtons Chamberlane, Connon of Mondrogau, Mr. William Fergu∣son of Ketloch, James Russel in Kinksketle, George Balfour in Gilstoun, Andrew and Alexander Hendersons, Sons to John Henderson in Kilbraichmont, Andro Guilon Weaver in Balmerino, George Fleeming younger of Balbuthy, Robert Dingwall, Son to Dingwall in Caldhame, Mr. Samuel Arnot, Mr. Gabriel Semple, Mr. John Wolsh, Mr. John King, Mr. Donald Cargil, Mr. George Barclay, Mr. John Rae, Mr. Thomas Dowglas, Mr. Forrester, Mr. Robert Muir, Mr. Lamb, Mr. Richard Cameron Mr. David Home Ʋre of Shirgarton, Forrester of Bankhead, John Haddoway Merchant in Dowglas, James White Writer there, Cuninghame of Mountgrenan, and Mr. John Cuninghame sometime of Bedland, James and William Cleillands, brethren-in Law to John Haddoway Merchant in Dow∣glas, Thomas Bogle of Boglehole, alias Nether Carmile, Gordons of Earlstoun elder and younger, Medow∣gall of French, the Laird of Remenstoun, brother to the Earl of Golloway, the Laird of Castle-stewart, brother to the said Earl, Gordon of Craichlay, Turnbul of Beuley, Thomas Turnbul of Standhill, Hendry Hall, George Home of Greddin, Macky of Cloncard, Mr. John Rae, Somervel of Ʋrats, Mr. Archibald Riddel, brother to the Laird of Riddel, Cathcarts, two Sons of the Lord Cathcart, Blair of Phinnick, Murdoch, alias Laird Murdoch; Rolland, Richisond Fewar in Gilmerton and his three Sons. Or any others who concurred or joyned in the late Rebellion, Or who upon the account thereof, have appeared in Arms in any part of this our Kingdom: But that they pursue them as the worst of Traitors, and present and deliver such of them as they shall have within their power, to the Lords of our Privy-Council, the Sheriff of the County, or the Magistrates of the next adjacent Burgh-Royal, to be by them made forth-coming to law: Certifying all persons, either Heretors, Tenents, or other Men or Women, as shall be found to fail in their duty herein, they shall be esteemed and punished as Favourers of the said Rebellion, and as persons accessory to, and guilty of the same. And to the end, all Our good Subjects may have timeous notice hereof, We do ordain these presents to be forthwith Printed, and Published at the Mercat-Crosses of Edenburgh, Linlithgow, Stirling, Lanerk, Air, Rutherglen, Glasgow, Irwing, Wigton, Kirckcudburgh, Dumsreice, Cowpar in Fife, Jedburgh, Perth, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires of the Kingdom, by Macers or Messengers at Arms: And we do recommend to the Right Reverend our Archbishop and Bishops, to give order that this Our Proclamation be, with all diligence, read on the Lords day in all the Churches within their se∣veral Diocesses, that none pretended ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edenburgh, the Twenty-sixth day of June, 1679. and of our Reign the thretty one Year. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the KING. Edenburgh Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1670. And now Re printed at London.
