C3440 15566439 103857
By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending of James Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armestrong Knight, and Robert Ferguson. CHARLES R. WHereas We have received Information upon Oath, That James Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armestrong Knight, and Robert Ferguson, have Traiterously Conspired together, and with divers other ill-affected and desperate Persons of this Our Kingdom, to compass the Death and Destruction of Our Royal Person, and of Our dearest Brother James Duke of York; And to effect the same, have held several Treasonable Consultations to Levy Men, and to make an Insurrection within this Our Kingdom; And being given to understand that the said Criminals are fled, and left their Habitations to avoid the Iustice of Our Laws: We have there∣fore thought fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Publish Our Royal Pleasure, And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command the said James Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armestrong, and Robert Ferguson, and every of them, forthwith to render themselves to some of Our Iudges or Iustices of the Peace, in order to their Prosecution according to Law. And We do hereby Require and Command as well all and singular Our Iudges, Iustices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables and Headboroughs, as also the Officers and Ministers of Our Ports, and all other Our Subjects whatsoever, within Our Realms of England, Scotland, Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, and all other Our Dominions and Territories, to be diligent in Enquiring and Searching for the said Of∣fenders in all Places whatsoever, as well within Liberties as without; And if they shall happen to take any of them, or that they shall render themselves, Our further Will and Pleasure is, That they cause him or them so Apprehended, to be safely carried before the next Iustice of the Peace to the Place where he or they shall be Arrested; whom we strictly Charge to commit to Prison, and presently inform Us or Our Privy Council of such Apprehension. And We do hereby further Declare and Publish, That if any Person or Persons, after this Our Proclamation, shall directly or indirectly, Conceal, Harbour, Keép, Retain or Maintain the said Offenders, or any of them, or shall Contrive or Connive at any Means whereby they or any of them may escape from being Taken or Arrested, or shall not use their best Endeavors for the Apprehension of them, as well by giving due Advertisement thereof to Our Officers, as by all other good Means, We will (as there is just cause) proceed against them that shall so neglect this Our Commandment with all Severity. And We do also Declare, That whosoever shall Discover the said Offenders, or any of them, either within Our Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, or in any other Our Dominions and Territories, or elsewhere beyond the Seas, and shall cause them, or any of them, to be Apprehended and brought in as aforesaid, shall have a Reward of Five hun∣dred pounds for each of the said Persons, to be paid unto him in Recompence of such his Service. Given at our Court at Whitehall this Twenty eighth day of June, 1683. In the Five and thirtieth Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.
