c4015 19328474 108633
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL, EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-men of every Parish within the Diocess of BATH and VVELLS, At the Triennial Visitation Of the Right Reverend Father in God PETER LOrd Bishop of the said DIOCESS. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, Anno Dom. 1676.
YOƲ shall Swear that you shall well and tru∣ly execute the Office of a Church-Warden. And that upon due consideration had of these Ar∣ticles given you in charge, you shall diligently En∣quire, & make true Presentment, so far as by Law you ought, of every person inhabiting or resident within your Parish, who hath commited any of∣fence, or omitted any duty therein mentioned en∣quirable into, or punishable by, the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Kingdom: And this you shall do as in the sight of God, uprightly and truly, without favour, or malice, hope of reward, or fear of dis∣pleasure: So help you God.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY within the Diocess of BATH and VVELLS. TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Or∣naments and furniture thereunto belonging. Canon 85 IS your Parish Church or Chappel kept in good and Sufficient Repair? Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile, or Slat; the Windows well glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastened, and conve∣niently placed; and all things so de∣cently ordered as becometh the house of God? II. Hath the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chappel, or any part thereof been pulled down, or any of the Lead, or Bells, for∣merly belonging thereunto, been imbezelled, sold, or made away? In whose hands or custody doth the same or any part thereof re∣main? Declare what you know or have heard herein.
Injunct, Eliz. III. Is there a Font of Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a convenient place towards the lower part of your Church, for the Administration of Baptism? Can. 81 And is there in your Chancel a decent Communion-Table for the Administration of the Lords Supper, Can. 82 with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine Woollen Cloth; And an other covering of white and pure Linnen to spread there∣upon? Rub. Com. Can. 20 And have you a fair Communion Cup or Chalice, with a cover of Silver; and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging? Can. 82 IV. Have you in your Church or Chappel a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read divine Service in, a Pulpit with a comely Cloth or Cushion for the same, Can. 83 a Bible of the last Transla∣tion in a large Volume, & two Books of Common Prayer establish∣ed by Act of Parliament Anno 1662. well and substantially bound? Can. 80 Have you likewise the Book of Homilyes set forth by Authority, a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiasticall, and a Printed Table of such Degrees wherein Marriage is prohibited? Can. 58 V. Have you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his publike Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the charge of the Parish? Can. 70 VI. Have you a Register Book of Parchment wherein to Register the Names, & Sirnames, of all such Persons as are Married, Christned or Buried within your Parish; together with the Names & Sirnames of both the Parents of the Children that are Christned, expressing the Day, Month, and Year of all such Christnings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly within one month next after the 25. of March brought into the Bishops Registry? Can. 52 VII. Have you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to re∣cord the Names & Licences of all such Strangers as are at any time admitted to Preach in your Church or Chappel? Can. 85 As also a third Book, wherein to write down the Church-Wardens Accounts; to∣gether with a strong Chest with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the aforesaid Books and all other the aforementioned Furniture in safe custody? Can. 89 And lastly, have you a Bier with a black Herse-Cloth for the burial of the dead?
TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebe and Tythes belonging to the Church. Can. 83 I. IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Railes, or Pales, and decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle, or any other abuse whatsoever? Hath any Person incroached upon the same, or made any door into it out of his own ground or habitation without allowance from the Ordinarie? Have any Trees there growing been cut down, how long since, by whom, to whose use and benefit? II. Is the house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate with all the Out-houses thereunto belonging kept in good and Sufficient repair, or have any of the said houses or Out-houses been defaced or pulled down without Licence from the Ordinary, and by whom? Hath any Person incroached upon any Garden, Yard or Close, belong∣ing to your Parsonage or Vicarage house, or cut up any Trees growing thereon, or changed or removed the ancient Marks and bounds of the same? declare what you know, or have credibly heard thereof. Can. 87 III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; as also a note of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, or portions of tithes or other yearly profits either within or with∣out your Parishes, as belong thereunto? Hath any of the same been with-held from your Minister, and by whom, as you know or have heard? IV. Have any of the Ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage been taken away or exchanged for other; without the free consent of the Incumbent, and Patron, and Li∣cence from the Ordinary?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. Act Unifor. Injunct. I. IS your Minister a Priest or a Deacon, Episcopally ordained according to the Laws of the Church of England? Eliz. 26 II. Is he defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Be∣nefice or Orders by any Simoniacal compact? 13. Eliz. cap. 12 III. Hath he been legally instituted and inducted into his Bene∣fice: and did he within two Months after his Induction publickly in the Church, upon some Sunday or Holyday, in the time of di∣vine Service, read the 39. Articles of the Church of England esta∣blished by Authority, and there Publickly declare his assent there∣unto? Act Unifor. And hath he likewise read the Declaration enjoin'd by the Act of Uniformity? 14. Caroli 2 IV. Hath he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prebend or Dig∣nity? Is he constantly resident upon his Benefice amongst you? How many weeks in one year hath he been absent from you with∣out urgent necessity? V. Hath your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Cu∣rate in Holy Orders, an able and discreet Person, and conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bishop to serve in your Church or Chappel? And doth he serve in any other Church besides? And what yearly Stipend doth your Minister allow him? Can. 14. 21. 68. VI. Doth your Parson, Vicar, or Curate in reading the Morn∣ing and evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Child-birth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, Rub. Matr. Visitat. Burial. Comminat. and Pronouncing Gods Commination against Impenitent Sinners, use the Form and words prescribed in the Book of Common-prayer, without any addition, o∣mission, or alteration of the same? And doth he use all such rites and ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said book, so far as you haue observed? Can. 58. Rub. VII. Doth your Minister at the reading or celebrating any di∣vine office wear the Surplice, together with such other Scholasti∣cal habit as is suitable to his Degree?
Can. 64 VIII. Doth he observe the Holy-daies and Fasting-daies, as also the Ember Weeks, Rub. Com. and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week, as in the Common-prayer-book, or by the Ecclesiastical Ca∣nons is appointed, Pr. Injunct. Eliz. 19 giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same, in the Church in the time of divine Service, upon the Sun∣day next before? Can. 48, 49. IX. Hath your Minister been Licenced to Preach by the Bishop or either of the two Universities? Rub. Com. If so, doth he then constantly (un∣less in case of Sickness, necessary absence, or other reasonable impe∣diment) Can. 45, 46. himself Preach in your Church or Chappel one Sermon e∣very Sunday? Or if he be not a licenced Preacher, or being so li∣cenced, be hindred by Sicknes, or otherwise as aforesaid, doth he procure a Sermon to be Preached by some other Minister, a Licen∣sed Preacher: or is one of the Homilies set forth by Authority, there read by a Priest or Deacon lawfully ordained? Can. 59.61. X. Doth your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Pa∣rish in the Church-Carechism, Can. 66 Injunct. E∣liz. 44 & doth he prepare and present them being so instructed to be confirmed by the Bishop? And doth he endeavour to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and other Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion e∣stablished in the Church of England, and to their bounden Duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Covernment thereof? Can. 67, 68, 69. XI. Doth he neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any Child in your Parish past Infancy, or other Person of more years through your Ministers default yet remaining unbaptized? Rub. Com. Pra. Doth he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, Can. 29 or admit either of the Pa∣rents to be God-father or God-mother to their own Children? 13. Eliz. 12. Injunct. XII. Doth he in his Sermons at any time (as you know or have heard) Preach any false, Heretical, Eliz. 31 Seditious or Schismatical Do∣ctrine, thereby to seduce the People into parties and factions, to the disturbance of the publick Peace, and Unity of the Church or State? Can. 16 XIII. Hath he presumed to Marry any Persons in private Houses, or such as being under age, Rub. Mat. have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banes first published on three Sundaies or Holy-daies in the Church, unless he had Licence or Dispensation so to do, or at any other hours then between Eight and Twelve in the
Morning, who are the Persons so Married, and when were they so married! Act Ʋni∣form. XIV. Doth any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Hath he allowance from the Bishop for so doing? Doth he before his Lecture read Divine Service according to the Book of Common Prayer, and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws and Or∣ders of the Church of England? Can. 72, 75. XV. Hath your Minister taken upon him to appoint any publick or private Fasts, Prophecyings or Exercises, not appointed by Au∣thority, or doth he, or any other, either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in private Houses within your Parish for people of several Families to resort unto, under the pretence of preaching, praying, thanksgiving or humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided. Can. 75 XVI. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer a man of sober, unblamable, and exemplary life? Doth he familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious, excommunicate persons, otherwise then to instruct or reform them? Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Ale-houses, a common Gamester, a prophane or obscene Iester, a swearer, a Rai∣ler, Scoffer or Quareller? Doth he set Neighbours at variance one with another, or encourage them to suits and contention? Is he no∣ted to be an intemperate Drinker, or vehemently suspected of In∣continence with any person either within your Parish or without? Is his Apparel grave and decent both for fashion and colour, as the Canons of the church require? Or is his carriage and conversa∣tion in any kind whatsoever disorderly or scandalous, and unbe∣seeming a Minister of Jesus Christ. Act. Vnifor. XVII. Hath any person presumed to execute the office of a Priest or a Deacon in your Parish Church, and to say, read or cele∣brate Divine Service there, or to serve the Cure of your Parish, not being a Deacon, or to do any other Ministerial Office in your Church belonging to a Priest or Deacon? If so, you are to present what his name is, where he dwelleth, and how oft he hath offended therein. Can. 55 XVIII. Doth your Minister use before his Sermon to Pray for the King's Majesty, King Charles, his Royal Consort Queen Ca∣tharine, James Duke of York, and the Royal Progeny, giving unto
his Majesty such stile and title of Supream Governour in all Cau∣ses, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal as are due unto his Majesty? Hath your Parson, Vicar, Curate, Act Ʋni∣form. or Lectu∣rer a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Archbishop, Bish∣op, or Ordinary, of his Subscription to the Declaration appointed by the Act of Uniformity, and hath he publickly and openly read the same together with the Declaration upon some Lords-day with∣in three moneths after the date of the said Certificate, in your Pa∣rish Church, in the presence of the Congregation in time of Di∣vine Service. TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. Can. 110 I. IS there in your Parish any person, reputed Here∣tick or Schismatick, any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that refuse to come into the publick As∣semblies, Prayers, Services of the Church, or that make profession of any other Religion then that is established in the Church of England? And if there be any such what are their Names? Can. 109 II. Is there any person in your Parish on whom there is a com∣mon fame, or vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or In∣cest committed by him or her? Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods name, or any that are noted to be unclean, lewd or obscene Talkers, or such who are Sowers of Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their Neighbours? Injunct. E∣liz. 34 III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundaies or Holy-daies follow their bodily and ordinary labour, or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open or wares sold? Or do any Vintners, Inn∣keepers, or other Victuallers and sellers of Beer, Ale, or Sider, suf∣fer any person to tipple or game in their Houses on those daies? Injunct. E∣liz. 33 IV. Doth every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Pa∣rish, duly resort unto your Church or Chappel, 1. Eliz. 2 upon every Sunday and Holy-day to Divine Service? Injunct. E∣liz. 46 Do they then and there abide quietly, with reverence, order and decency, during all the whole time of Common Prayer or Preaching? Injunct. E∣liz. 52 And are there any a∣mong
you that come only to the Sermon, and not to the Common Prayers of the Church? Rub. Bapt. V. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their In∣fant-Children to be baptized publickly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger, in which case the Child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the form and rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them to be baptized in any other Parishes, or after other form then is appointed? Or do they keep them unbaptized any longer time then the Church alloweth? And are there any Infants, or more aged persons in your Parish, as yet un∣baptized, or any that have been privately baptized that are not af∣terward brought to the Church as is appointed? Can. 59 VI. Do all Housholders in your Parish cause their Children and Servants to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in Church upon Sundaies and Holy-daies, as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed, that when they are well instructed in the same, they may be confirred by the Bishop? Can. 114. 21. VII. Is there any person in your Parish who being sixteen years of age, and well instructed in Religion, doth not receive the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper at least three times in the year, Rub. Com. of which Easter is alwaies to be one? Can. 57 Doth any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling, or from the hands of your own Mini∣ster, Rub. Com. Pra. repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there any Strangers not of your Parish, that Forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it? Can. 65 VIII. Have you any among you that be denounced and decla∣red excommunicated for any crime committed? How long have they been so excommunicated? And do any of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church and ab∣solved? Can. 99 IX. Are there any living in your Parish as man and wife who are within the degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully di∣vorced have married again? Or any that being lawfully married and not separated or divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit to∣gether.?
Rub. X. Are there any Married Women in your Parish, who after their Delivery from the peril of Child-birth refuse to make their publick Thanksgiving to God in the Church, in such manner, as by the Law and Book of Common-Prayer is requited? Rub. Com. Act Ʋnifor. XI. Are there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their duty for Easter Offerings to your Minister; or any that refuse to pay the Rate Assessed upon them for the Repair of your Church or Chappel, and for the providing of Bread and Wine for the Com∣munion, and such Books, Furniture and Ornaments as be requisite for the performance of all Divine Offices there? And what is each persons particular Rate who refuseth so to pay? Rub. Com. XII. Do any refuse to Bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish that be yet Unproved; or any Goods Administred, without a due Grant from the Ordinary? Did any Dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or Chappel, Can. 62 or to the use of the Poor, or to any other Pi∣ous and Charitable purposes; what were those Legacyes, and how have they been bestowed? XIII. Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in the body of your Church or Chappel, without leave from the Ordinary? XIV. Is the Fifth day of November observed and kept in your Parish; and also the Thirtieth of January, and the Nine and Twentieth day of May, every of them yearly according to the se∣veral Acts of Parliament, and in such form, as by publick Au∣thority is appointed for the same? Can. 4. 6. XV. Are there any in your Parish who have Depraved, Vilified or Spoken against the Book of Common-prayer now established in the Church of England, or any part thereof, or against the Govern∣ment of the Church under his Majesty, by Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers, or have spoken Disgracefully of the Courts Ecclesiastical?
XVI. Do you know of any that have abused the Church-War∣dens of your Parish, or given them evil words for executing their Office, or to dis-hearten and deterr them from executing it as by Oath and Duty they are bound? TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons. Can. 67 1. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappel a Parish Clerk, aged one and twenty years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation, and sufficient and able to perform his duty in reading, writing and singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, and doth he duly attend him in all Divine Offices? Are his due wa∣ges justly paid unto him? Or who withholdeth the same from him? Can. 91 II. Doth he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish) diligently look to the doors of your Church that they be locked and opened at due time? And doth he keep your Church or Chappel clean from dust, cobwebs, and other annoyance? Doth he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours before the be∣ginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the People may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of this life, doth he (upon notice given him thereof) toll a Bell as hath been accustomed, that the Neighbours may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favour of God? TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School-Masters, Physitians, Chyrurgions and Mid-wifes. I. Is there in your Parish any Hospital, Almes-house or Free-School, not of the Kings Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Governours or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every re∣spect as it ought to be; And are the Revenues thereof rightly em∣ployed, according to the intention of the Founder and of such Grants and ordinances as have been made concerning the same? II. Doth any Man keep a Publick or Private School in your
Parish, or is there any Tutor or School-master in any Private familie who is not allowed thereunto by the Ordinarie? Doth he teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion, set forth by Authority? Doth he himself repair, and also cause his Scholars upon Sundayes & Ho∣ly-dayes orderly to repair to your Church or Chappel, & see that they behave themselves quietly and reverently during the time of Divine Service and Sermon? III Doth any in your Parish practice Phisick or Chyrurgery? or any woman take upon her the Office of a Mid-wife, without Licence from the Ordinary? Queries to be put to the Ministers. TIT. VII. Concerning the Church Wardens and Side-Men. Can. 69 I. ARe the Church-Wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen? Can. 89 II. Have the former and last Church-wardens given up their due Accounts to the Parish, & delivered up to the succeeding Church-Wardens the Moneyes remaining in their hand, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? 1 Eliz. 2 III. Do the Church-Wardens and Side-Men take diligent care & see who of your Parishioners are absent from the Divine Service and Sermon in your Church or Chappel, upon Sundays and Holy-days? And if they find any to have absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do they by warrant from some of the Justices of the Peace Levy of them by way of Distress upon their Goods the Sum of Twelve Pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of Parliament in that case provided? And do they Distri∣bute the several Sums so levied among the Poor of your Parish, according to the Law? Can. 90, 19. IV. Do they note them, that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to stand Idle, or talk together in the Church-porch, or to walk in the Church or Church-yard, during the time of Prayers, Preaching and Sacred Offices? Can. 18 V. Do they suffer any Misbehaviour, or disorder to be done by
Men, Women, or Children in your Church or Chappel? Are they careful that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Com∣munion Table? Do they permit any Dogs, or Hawks, to be brought or come into your Church to the disturbance of the Con∣gregation? Rub. Can. 20 VI. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel, provide a sufficient quantity of fine White Bread, and good Wine, according to the Number of Communicants? Can. 52 VII. Do they cause all Strangers that Preach in your Church, or Chappel, to subscribe their names the same day in a Book pro∣vided for that Purpose, together with the name of the Bishop, that Licenced them to Preach in this Dioces? And do they permit no other to Preach? Can. 219 VIII. Have they (the Church-Wardens and Side-men) now Sworn to give in a true answer unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles, taken sufficient time to draw up their Pre∣sentments, and therein consulted with you their Minister for your faithful assistance? You the Church-Wardens are duly to consider these Articles and well and faithfully to Perform your duty in all the Premis∣ses, and to consult with your Minister (as the case requires) for his assistance to you in making your Presentments thereupon. For know you assuredly, that as the true discharging of your Office is the cheif means whereby Publick Disorders, Sins and Offences in your Parish may be reformed and punished: so if you willfully refuse to present such crimes and faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of by publick fame; that in such cases, the Ordinary and his Officers are to proceed against you in their Eccle∣siastical Courts, as in case of willfull Omission and Perjury. The Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of their younger sort in their several parishes as they judge fit to receive Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be Confirmed; especially such as, having competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the holy Communion. FINIS.
