C4791 08483401 41384
ὙΓΙΕ˜ΙΝΗ, OR, A Plain and Practical DISCOURSE Upon the First of the Six NON-NATURALS, viz. AIR: With Cautionary Rules and Directions for the PRESERVATION of People in this time of SICKNESS. Very Necessary for the Gentry, and Citizens that are now in the Country, to peruse before they come into LONDON. By THO. COCK. Poena praesens (si animum afflicti convertit) finis est Culpae prae∣cedentis; Si autem minime convertit, initium est poenae sequentis. Curandum est igitur nè de tormento ad tormenta transiamus. Grig. de Podagra. London, Printed by E. C. for Philem. Stephens Sen. at the Golden Lyon in Pauls Church-yard. Philem. Stephens Jun. at the Kings Arms in Chancery-Lane. Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultery. Joseph Leigh at the upper end of ing ll Street near the Nags-head Tavern▪ 1665.
To the Right Honourable Sir THOMAS BLUDWORTH KNIGHT, Lord Maior of the City of London ὙΓΙΑΊΝΕΙΝ. My LORD, IN all Dedications, there is something of Design, Self, or Interest,—Et omni∣um sunt stultissimi qui auriculas studi∣ose tegunt: Especially before one so quick∣sighted and descerning as your Lordship; and therefore I shall with very little Re∣serve, tell your Honour all the ends that in∣duc't me to make choice of your illu∣strious Patronage: One is to testifie that real Reverence and Veneration I have to your Person, Place, and Dignities: and upon this account, common Decency and good Manners would have upbraided me to have made choice of any others Protection; especially in such dangerous and deadly times we now live in; Detraction like Infection being almost in every ones mouth, ready to poyson the best and greatest endeavours that can be used for a Preservative; and therefore neither Art, nor Nature,
nor Self, nor Interest could in charity advise me otherwise, then to take such an effectual and soveraign Preservative as your Patro∣nage, before I ventured into the open and common Air. Nor could Policie direct me better then to borrow your Name; for if there be no other worth in the Treatise, yet, it will both in∣vite, and somewhat recompence the Reader to see so fair and stately a Frontispiece as your Honours Name place't before it: at least, they must like it much the better, and think it the more deserving for bearing so great a Sail. And though I cannot, without huge Arrogancy pretend it to be a Present sutable to your Greatness and Deserts; yet it may pass for an acknowledgement of that high opinion, or rather certain knowledge, I have of your Vertues and Merits. I have many other reasons to alledge in defence of the Dedica∣tion, as, your Lordships Power and Abilities to promote and re∣duce to practise, what others only can advise, discourse, think on, and wish for. But, my Porch (I see) grows wide; and a large Preface will not so well sute with that little knowledge you have of me, and acquain∣tance I have with your Honour: besides, long Apologies, have usu∣ally more of bud, blossom, and colour, then consequence; and most commonly are like May-Poles, long and fruitless. And therefore notwithstanding all the Alligations I have or can use, I shall intirely cast my self upon your Lordships goodness for Approbation and Acceptance, of what is due to you from Your Lorships most humble and affectionate Servant T. Cock.
A PERORATION to the Right Honourable the Lord Maior, with the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren in general; and all the worthy Members of it In Particular. My Lord; and Gentlemen, NOt only my own Resentments; but the desires of divers Deserving Persons, and Eminent Citizens have obliged me to proffer the subsequent Discourse to your Grave and Solemn considerations; least, (as to Physical and Natural Causes) the defect of a Praemunition, and Polemick Praecaution; the next Summer prove as formidable if not fatal as this If your Honours please to peruse the first Cau∣tion to∣wards the latter end of the fifth and the beginning of the sixth page of this fol∣lowing Treatise, you will find some∣thing re∣lating to this Para∣graph.. In complyance with your necessary Concern∣ments, and weighty Imployments, I have resolv'd against Prolixity; and to keep within the Circle, as much as the lines of its account will permit, and shall only therefore, as it were, prime the Cloth, and strain the Canvis, that I may chalk out a Design, intending some such able Masters
as your selves to finish and put life to it. At the beginning of this Contagion, I had (in favour of the inclosed Paper) the Honour to wait upon the Committee appointed for this Infecti∣on: I then in person made a proffer, and Transient Discourse on what I now more deliberately per∣form in Paper: But the misfortune then was, (and will be till a way be found out to Retrive the mat∣ter) that their Power was Limited, and they must proceed Legally, and by that means they could not take farther cognizance of the case. I was thereby justly silenc't, and saw no reason then to do in Person, what I now submissively hope I may in Paper; it being as significant in a time of Death and Sickness to cast about for life and health, as in a time of Peace to make provision for War. To come (my Lord) now a little nearer the business I aim at, and that is in the behalf of many deserving Citizens who are herein supplicants to your Lordship; That you would at the next Ses∣sions, and Sitting of Parliament, move their Ho∣nours to take into their Considerations the Penal Statute, Primo Jacobi 31. concerning shutting up Vi∣sited and Infected houses. Unless my Author mis-informs me, it
was then debated, Whether such Confine∣ment, or Removing the Sick and Well, into se∣veral and distinct places, and Out-parts of the City, (as the Artillery-Ground by Fins∣bery, &c.) were most expedient? But the state and exigencies of affairs then inclin'd them, (though with some Reluctancy) to determine the former under the Penalty of death, and being proceeded against according to the Statute against Vagabonds made the 39. of Eliz. 4. His Majesty, our Royal Soveraign, in Christian care and indulgence of his People at the beginning of this Infection also con∣stituted the Lords of his Privie-Council a Committee for Inspection, into what was most expedient and proper, for the prevent∣ing, spreading and increase of this Plague: Their Lordships accordingly required the Honorable and Learned Colledge of Physi∣tians to Add, alter, and ordain as they should find the present times and occasi∣on to require: But still with this Restri∣ction, viz. In pursuance of former Presidents in the Reign, &c. or else, surely it would have been thought on as a thing most eli∣gible
to have caus'd a Separation of the Well and Sick, (which cannot but be acknowledg'd as necessary as water to quench fire) but yet by such proper aids and helps as might best answer its end and Intention. And indeed (to speak candidly) it seems to me, as if the Colledge had some such thoughts in reserve, and in complyance with the Act, went as far as their line would let them, the words in their Sixth Section being these—That upon the discovery of the Infection in any house, there be pre∣sently means used to preserve the whole; or, if the whole be to be removed; no∣tice to be given to the Dverleers of their Remove, that care may be taken they shall not wander until they be sound. That by the whole is meant that part, or such persons as remained whole and well in Sick-houses, is evident by the Hypothesis—if the whole be to be removed: but I leave that Honourable and Learned Society to be their own Commentators, as the oc∣casion shall require: Errors in this nature, by the Wise mans words, being as stones cast upon the waters; , one circle raiseth
up another until the latter is bigger then the former. However, as to my self (others as yet keep∣ing silence) so far as my reason can insure me any thing, I cannot but think, that the medium 'twixt the two extreams of letting all infected persons loose, or * the shutting up all well persons with the infected, would be the only expedient to preserve the whole: the one when things grow to extremity, though never so much endeavoured, cannot be observed, nor the other prevented or avoided: neither can I by all that I have as yet heard in favour of the * latter, perswade my self but that it is as well as the former, rather a great promoter then preventer of the Plague: the Mortality being hereby greatly increased, and after such hard and se∣vere usuage, those that are left alive, having done their penance, and thereby absolved and released, become far more Infectious (un∣less the Longer, the Lesser they are tainted) then if they had been never been so shut up, or restrained. Neither is it any absurd Annota∣tion, That the greatest Plagues that ever were in England, were when it first was Instituted, and most observed▪
Something dissonant to this, An. 36. in as formidable a Plague in its beginning as ours, was with good success constituted by his late Sacred Majesty of ever blessed memory Charles the First: and I have by some persons of good Quality, now alive, then Visited, and so disposed of, been informed that not one of Twenty among the well persons so removed fell sick, nor one in Ten of the sick died; which next to Gods Goodness they imputed to their freedom of Airing, Walking, Recreating, and refreshing of themselves by an honest and free Conversation one with another: hereby also they had the voluntary, free and free∣quent Visits of the best and most able Physi∣tians, Chirurgeons, and Apothecaries, little hazard by this means attending their Cures: the dejection, horror, fear, and consternation of their Spirits (great Incendiaries and Pro∣moters of a Pest) were hereby also taken off, and much abated: Searchers, Bearers, Nurses, and other licensed Visitors (whose walks are far more perillous then divers that are occluded and shut up) would hereby also become almost void and useless.
(Would to God upon no less penalty then death, they were debarred the Society of all well peo∣ple; and not only have some visible and signal badge about them when they go abroad for per∣sons to avoid them, but they also severely en∣joyn'd to avoid others, especially Children and Fools that are not sensible of their danger: Four of each (if any) in every Parish would be requi∣site: Two of each to be assign'd only for such houses, where the diseased upon good grounds, may be thought not to die Infected; it being most unreasonable, that Families which are clear, should run the hazard of such Searchers and Bearers as are allotted for the Infected. This Paragraph, my Lord, I have added, only with the breath of a Transition, and large Paren∣thesis, to blow upon the feather of Custom and and Opinion, which often weighs down by (a kind of nonsense) its Levity, the most weighty, profound, and solid actions of our lives.) Hereby also the Publick Magistrate may with Courage, Confidence and Security, man∣age City affairs: Citizens and Tradesmen, safely keep their houses, and follow their imploy∣ments: many childing-women, and sucking children, fatherless, helpless, and friendless per∣sons supported and preserved. The Cunning and Craft of such as have Soars and dissemble
their Sickness to the ruine of those they con∣verse with (only to avoid shutting up) might be detected: The outrages, insolencies, num∣ber, and neglects of Nurses restrained, pre∣vented, and abated: Thousands of persons lives preserved; poor people cheaper and bet∣ter provided for and attended; and above all, God better pleased; and the well effectually kept from the Conversation of the Sick, where∣by the Contagion and Mortality, (as to Na∣tural Causes) is chiefly, (if not only) augmented and increased. I have given you, my Lord, herein a draught of my private thoughts, but no otherwise then Apelles painted his Pictures, with his Pencil ready to strike out, or put in, what ever may seem necessary and acceptable to Your Lordship.
RULES FOR Returning CITIZENS, AND Such as are already Returned. TO give a precise and ample account of the Nature, Causes, Signs, and Symptoms of the Disease; and of all that may or can be said in Phy∣siology, Pathology, the Semiotick, Hygine, and Thearepeuick parts of Physick relating to it, were like reading Lectures of Martial Dis∣cipline to a Souldier, when he should fight, stand upon his guard, and be on service: or teach the Art of Navigation in a storm and shipwrack; whereas the Maxmium urgens and only thing then to be thought on, is, how to escape drowning, and throw over∣board all things of less concernment then themselves.
To this end, I have avoided all the parts of Phy∣sick, unless the Hygeiastick; also all that concerns that but the First of the Six Non-Naturals, viz. Air: it being (in submission to better Judgments) the Unum Necessarium, or at least One of the most neces∣sariest things that concern the Subject I referr all un∣to, viz. the Preservation of such as are Returning, or are Returned out of a good, sound, wholsom and ge∣nerous Air, into one that is vitiated, infirm, crazy and sickly. As Meat and Drink is to the Body, so is Air to the Spirits; which are weakned and corrupted, pre∣served and supported, as much by a good or bad Air, as our Bodies by good or bad Diet: And hence it is, that all Physitians and Philosophers in all ages, have in their Institutions made as great provision for Air as Aliment, it being of as great force and power to alter our Bodies, as the very food we eat, in regard it communicates its qualities to the Spirits, and by the Spirits to all the parts of our Bodies; and there∣fore Physitians have in this Infection, been all along so important for the use of all such rational helps as might cleanse and rectifie the Air: as among many others, the making of large fires in every street; which had it been rightly managed, was as brave and as effectual an expedient for the ridding (quantum res humanae patiuntur) the City from this Infection, as ever was, or will be thought on; and if over God should give the City the like deplored occasion; if then instead of making Fires as formerly within the City, they were but to be made without it, (I mean the Suburbs also) and at the same time spe∣cial care be taken, that none but Infected persons might
come near those fires; I do assure my self (as to Na∣tural Causes) it would answer its desired effect. If this may seem too troublesome and chargeable, there is another way near allyed to it to be thought on, that hath very little of charge or trouble atten∣ding it; and that is to make at the four Quarters of the City, four vast huge fires of Coal, in some such fit and apt place as Tower-Hill, or Smith-Field, &c. and to let them be kept burning fiercely, and clear from smoak (it being though a sulphurous body of little or rather no worth in the case) for three or four dayes and nights. This being done every 12 or 24 hours at farthest, ought to be made near the said Coal Fires, (which are still to be kept burning) a large and brisk Wood-fire for an hour or two, of some light brushie and flamable substance, as Bab∣bings, Tarr-barrels and the like; and to exalt its flame, 'tis necessary to throw in now and then, Salt-Peter, Oil, or a bag of Gunpowder so big as may safely be permitted. The reasons of this preceding Paragraph is this: Fires and all hot bodies are very powerful attracters and drawers, and by this property it hath, the Infection will be drawn from the Center to the Circumference, as well as from the Circumference to the Center, as is apparent by the Cities being more, and the Suburbs less infected since this late unlucky experiment was made upon it. The ground of which I am apt to think was from former mistaken Presidents, or, the Observation of Aristotle's ridding the City of Athens in his time from that Contagion by Fires; not con∣sidering whether they were plac't within or without its Walls. In and out, though but little words, yet of
such great and vast import in the case that they are like Life and Death. I never yet by any principle of Philosophy could understand that cold was any cause of Contagion: an Intemperies of heat, moisture, or dryness, may; and if this Infection must proceed (quo ad hominem) from a Dyscracy of some of those three first Qualities, espe∣cially of Dryness (as upon good grounds I am apt to think it doth) it will be hard then to find out, how fire that assists it in its Causes should ease or help it in its Effects. We may safely conclude, whatever relief Fires can afford in the case, is, as 'tis an Element, and not from any Temperament, or Quality belonging to it: 'Tis its flame doth good; its heat without flame doth hurt; the one by somewhat attracting and philtra∣ting what it attracts; the other more powerfully attracting, and not at all rarifying what it hath attracted. These things I have purposely inserted for all persons indefinitely to consider of, because I would not willingly have a business of this consequence, ei∣ther now, or hereafter neglected, or misimproved; Oportet enim medicum esse Polyperistaticum. I shall now proceed to those familiar and necessary Cautions and Directions I intend, one of which is (1.) That all persons would be as careful at and after their return, and coming in, as they were prudent in their leaving and going out of the City, the danger as to them being still the same, or greater: for
though the Contagion be not, (God only be praised for it) so mortal to those Inhabitants that have con∣tinued in it, and have been used to it, (Custom be∣getting another Constitution in them) yet the Re∣mainders of it are of such vast concernment to such as have been used to a better and more benign Air, that they ought still to continue their care in pre∣venting the Casualties that may attend a rash run∣ing into and an unadvised living in, such a rotten, putrid and infected Air, as London, without contro∣versie, now is. Hippocrates was so great an Enemy to all sudden changes and violent mutations, that he would not al∣low it in things hurtful and prejudicial to Nature, where time and custom had gained so upon us as to make them familiar to us; and if a gradation is to be observed in passing from things bad and hurtful to things good and beneficial, much more ought it to be done , gradatìm, and by piece-meals when the mutation is from things beneficial in them∣selves, (as good Air) to things bad and Inimical. But the same reasons besides this that did oblige per∣sons to leave London, will serve with the addition of many more, to be as circumspect and cautious of com∣ing to it: as, the great increase of dead Corps super∣ficially buried, which undoubtedly, but that the Sun hath and will abate more and more of its power and energy in causing Exhalations, would produce else a greater Mortality then any yet hath been, from any precedent causes of Contagion and Putrefaction: And it highly concerns every respective Parish to raise their Church-yards with fresh Earth and new Mold, least the next Summer prove more fatal then
this. Some have reported, that Dogs have paw'd and scrap't up Graves, and preyed upon the dead bodies carelesly and undecently buried, and not long after disgorged fingers, eyes, noses and ears, as the Effects of their venemous Surfeits, and whole families have been swept away by the poyson and malignity of it. To this end it is absolutely necessary for all such as are to Return out of the Countries, before they come so near London as to breathe in it, or take any part or portion of its infected breath, strictly and carefully to observe for their Preservation the Di∣rection mentioned in the next Section, or Caution, and in the last sheet of this Treatise. And that all per∣sons may have timely notice thereof, it is left to the care of such as are now in London, and have their friends abroad. The second Caution. That those that come out of a serene, pure, whole∣som and sound Air, would procure some sound, wholesom and well person that hath been conversant and used to London, to enter first their Houses, whe∣ther they were or were not visited: Infection like Air, being of a very insinuating, subtil and search∣ing nature, and may possibly have crept out of the windows, sinks and passages of neighbouring houses, and adjacent places, and lie lurking all the while in their own beds, houses, garments, and hangings. This caution I thought, totally to have omitted, for fear of possessing people with dread and timorous fancies; but when I seriously considered, how many
have, and may miscarry by Presumption and Igno∣rance, and how easily they might secure themselves (favente Deo) from all fear and danger in the case, I resolved to let it go as 'tis. And that which I advise all persons to do, if they can∣not conveniently procure others to do it for them, is to enter then the houses themselves with a Link well lighted; (every one that goes in at first to take one in their hand) and to carry it just before them, no high∣er then their mouth and nosthrils: the flame by this means suppresseth and disperseth the Air, and keeps off the malignacy (if there should be any) from en∣tring their bodies; and by this means, I, or any man that hath a lawful call to it, might safely enter any In∣fected or Visited House. This being done, (still keeping the Links burning) let them make in every room good fires, especially those they intend to lie in, smoaking them well with Cloves, Cinamon, Benjamin, Storax, Cypress, Ce∣dar, or Juniper Wood: But the following Pastil may supply the defect of all domestick fumes upon all occasions whatever; neither is there yet any thing as yet thought on, more necessary and useful. Next, let them air well their beds, whether they were, or were not infected, with such things as are of a drying, mundifying, attenuating and clensing na∣ture; and withal, let them be appropriated to the Head, Heart, and Lungs. To this end at Mr. Wil∣kinson at the Pestle and Mortar in Finch-Lane over against the French Church, and Mr. Reeds, at the Queens Arms in Fan-Church-Street, I have appointed a Pastill, which is to be light at the small end, with a Candle, and to be placed in an
earthen Porringer, set under the Bed, (the matteress being taken off) that the fume may the better in∣sinuate it self into the Bed, all the while they are making, stirring, and throwing of it. These Rotulae Pestilentiales or Pastils, being often thus used as a fume for Beds, will be found not only beneficial, but convenient, in regard being lighted at one end, they burn like a match without any flame, which may prove hazardous under Beds. They do not only correct the malignacy of a Con∣tagious Air, but also refresh the Vital and Animal Spirits, and is of great use for Consumptive, Dropi∣cal, Astmatick persons, and such as are troubled with Catarrhs and Defluctions upon their Lungs, being used not only as above directed, but also to fume their night-Linnen when they go to bed. I cannot also but highly commend the use of them in Churches, not only upon this occasion, but at all times hereafter; and was it but once grown formal and customary (as an Hour-Glass,) it would (not with∣out cause) be contended for in future ages, for more than a ceremony and nicety in Physick. It is also at all times an excellent expedient in Courts of Judicature: also for Shop-keepers to keep them constantly burning by them, it would be found a very acceptable and rational Preservative; and in all places of common resort, where the corrupt, pu∣trid and tainted breaths of infirm and sickly persons, doth in process of time Intaminate others; which some do impute our frequent Consumptions in Eng∣land very much unto. Persons of worth and quality, when they have tryed them, and know the use and benefit of them,
I suppose, will keep to them, and therefore I have or∣dered them at very reasonable rates to be always in a readiness, that all people may be the more en∣couraged to use them. Those that are so extream poor, that they cannot go to the price of these, cannot (for Infected Beds only) do better then put a spoon∣ful or two of Salt-Petre amongst five or six spoonfuls of Brimstone to be used as aforesaid. Gunpowder also moistned with Vinegar, if it could be safely used, is good. This being done, they may securely, (having de∣voutly called upon God for protection) go into their Peds, eating (the last thing they take) one or two of the Lozanges hereafter mentioned: if they rub the inside of the Nostrils also with a little Dia∣scordium, it will be the better. And in the morning having thankfully worshipped their Maker, (à quo omnis salus & medicina) let them use some of the Preventives hereafter mentioned. The third Caution. That People would be very careful and cautious with whom they converse and deal, not only because for some considerable time, Infected persons will be frequent in all places with their running Sores, and venemous breaths, but because also the Goods, Move∣ables, Apparel, and Housholdstuff of such persons as are deceased, and places that have been infected, do usually retain the Infection for five or six months, or more, especially Bedding, Linnen and Woollen. Oxford was in former Sicknesses twice infected by Commodities carried thither from London.
Those that will not allow this for an undeniable truth, may inform themselves better, by many de∣plored instances too tedious to be here inserted; but above all, 'tis remarkable, as upon strict en∣quiry hath been by some observed, that the first occa∣sion excepting Sin) of this Pest in and about London, was by a parcel of Skins brought out of Holland into St. Giles, which by the contiguity and succession of second Causes mediate and immediate, hath been propagated to this extremity: neither is there any such Authentick Demonstration. that it is so much generated by Celestial Influences, as propagated by Infection taken and given, as is the Itch, Pox, and Small-Pox amongst Men and Children, the Rot and Murrain amongst Cattle; and as in Ho∣spitals, Prisons and common Gaols Diseases are of∣ten generated, continued and augmented; just so by the steams and breath of dying and infected per∣sons, unadvised community with Nurses, Bearers, and Searchers, &c. the fomes of this Plague hath been held up and increased: And that gross mistake the vulgar made in promiscuous community one with another, from the observation of the Plagues abatement in 65. hath occasioned without doubt the destruction of many Thousand persons; and had not an immediate Hand of Mercy from Heaven stopt the Execution of us, it would surely have run on to our utter ruine. If it be here asked, Why then were not all persons equally surpized with the Pestilence, that breathed in the same Air, and conversed daily with sick peo∣ple, received their breaths, attended their Cure, and drest their Soars, as Physitians, Chirurgeons, &c?
It may be answered, because all men had not the like Constitutions, and therefore suffered not the same effects: suppose for demonstration, (sic magna cum parvis) mans body to be like Tinder, but some more dispos'd to take fire then others; sometimes the Flint, sometimes the Steel, sometimes the Tinder it self, either too dry, or too moist, is the cause that twenty blows will not, when at another time a touch will serve to set all on fire: So, sometimes mens bo∣dies, with a thought, a look, a word, or sad story, shall quickly be overcome and vanquisht; whereas others like wet Tinder, shall not take withal the Con∣tingencies and Casualties that do attend them: So that one great cause (besides Gods Providence) is the various accidents, dispositions, forms, tempera∣tures, customs and inclinations of mens mindes and bodies; or else, all as well as one, that were wet at the same time in a showr of rain should take cold, fall sick, and die: all that were debaucht with Wine, should fall into Feavers, and have one and the same disease, which upon the former and divers others considerations we see dayly to the contrary. Multa enim conveniunt morbo, quae non conveniunt Indi∣viduo. There might be many more Cautions and Dire∣ctions added; but I intend no more then what are familiar, practical and necessary. Besides the chief bu∣siness I aim at, is the Preservatory part, which as it consists in avoiding those things 1. That occasion Infection; So, 2. In fortifying the Principal parts against Infection.
The former we have done with, and take it for granted, as it is agreed on all hands, that corrupt Air, whether from Coelestial, or Terrestrial Causes, being drawn into the body, is one principal cause of Infection, especially in Pestilential times: and be∣cause this Discourse is intended for People returning, and already returned out of a good Air into a bad, I shall only insist upon some farther means and Re∣medies as relates to the correcting Air infected, and the preserving (quo ad nos) both by inward and outward means, Persons from Infection. To the first sort, as general and more common, doth belong the ringing of Bells, firing and letting off great Guns: Fires and Bon-fires made severally both with Wood and Coal, as before directed; the cutting open the Pipes in great Streets for the run∣ning of clean and fresh Water: Allies, narrow Streets and Lanes, to be kept sweet and clean, and free from the annoyance of Dunghils, Jakes, and other nastery; the carkasses of Dogs, Cats and other Car∣rion to be deep buried, and not to lye rotting and poysoning the Air. Where the Air is thus corrupted, we commonly see people there die in greatest num∣bers: and where these greivances are not, nor can be reformed, 'tis good to stay within doors as much as possible may be, and to smoke the House well with Rosin, Tarre, Turpentine, and other materials directed in the Colledge Books, good large fires also in infected houses, rather then in those that are free, would be very advantageous to neighbours that dwell next to them. Lastly, leave no Window open to the South, to the North you may, in quiet, pleasant and clear dayes;
but keep them all constantly close shut after the Sun is down, in regard they only then draw (like Cupping∣glasses) bad air into the rooms unto which they do be∣long: neither go out too soon in a morning, especially fasting, or some Preventive taken (of which hereafter) nor be abroad too late at night, not only because the Sun then hath drawn off its beneficence and blessing from the Earth, but because people will make most bold then to be throwing out of doors and windows whatever infectious and noisom things incumber their houses. Thus far for Generals, and things more common against infected Air; next are things more peculiar and special, both inward and outward; of which sort are Antidotes, Issues, Amulets, and Odoraments, under which are comprehended Balls, Boxes, Nosegaies, Pomanders, and all manner of Nasals. The first of these we will reserve till the last; and as for Issues, they are, without controversie, of great value and worth, and inferiour to no Topical appli∣cation whatever. If I should write all that they may justly challenge, there would be no end of their consi∣deration; and I have, and do advise all my friends, Old and Young, Fat and Lean, Weak and Strong, without any exception to use them, this being the on∣ly  the world may boast of. Amulets have not as yet gained that universal and uncontrolled repute in the World. Galen saith, as Deleteries they are inimical to Nature, especially if the party that wears them be given to much labour, exercise, or motion; neither can I advise such, if any, with hope of good success to use them: but suppose they be made of Alexeteries, then Galen nor any ju∣dicious
person, doth, or ever did dispute or question them. And those that have written and argued (not without cause) against Deleterious and poysonous Amulets, made of Toads, Arsenick, Quicksilver, &c. yet do they highly allow of such as are Alexiterical and Cardiack. And such as shall deny their safe and effectual operation, with this distinction, deny for want of better understanding, a manifest truth in com∣mon practice. The next thing to be considered, is the vulgar use of Balls, Boxes, Nosegaies, Pomanders, &c. which (to speak impartially (and as I suppose most peoples experience by this time may tell them) are poor, im∣potent, foppish, and impertinent things, the very form, manner, and moderum of them being insignificant; people having them to seek and grope for when the oc∣casion may be at hand, or while it is past: all persons are not, nor indeed can any be so compleatly wise, as to know the , the unluckie minute, precise time and place, when, where, and wherefore he should ap∣ply his nasal; whereas this manner of application I now propound, viz. in rubbing the Nostrils with some con∣venient Alexiterion, is remedium perpetuum, alwayes doing good, sleeping and waking, eating and drink∣ing, at home and abroad; like a Watch wound up in the morning, whether you think of it or no, still goes on, and doth its work. The greatest consideration and provision ▪that can be made will be little enough to avoid the occasions of infection which may surprize you instanti, in a moment, the twinckling of an eye, ere you can say, What's this? and therefore there cannot be too much done to keep the passages at which the Enemy must enter to take us. And of To∣picks
and outward helps, there is none extant as yet, or ever will be thought on, more effectual (in stead of Balls, Boxes, and Nosegaies, &c.) than the rubbing the inside of the Nostrills with a little Venice Treacle, Mithridate, but above all Diascordium, as being more agreeable to the Tone and temperature of the brain: or take a piece of Sponge (or Wool) cut it fit for the occasion, dip it in Vinegar, and smear it with Venice or Common Turpentine, that it may stick, and put it up the Nostrills. And I do solemnly advise all persons that have any respect to their health and safety, when they come within a mile or two of London, to keep constantly a Lozange in their mouth, (how to use them is hereafter directed) and to put up into their Nostrills some Diascordium (if a little Bole Armenack be mixt with it, 'tis the better) The Mouth and Nostrils being secured, you are as safe as Natural helps can make you, these being the two passages at which Infe∣ction must enter. Continue doing this for three or four weeks at least; longer is necessary, but people grow weary of well∣doing: by this means there will be little or no danger in your coming to, and living in the City. And ha∣ving made this provision, I can confidently advise all persons, Cito & Tuto, speedily and safely according as their lawful and necessary affairs shall permit, to return to their former habitations. But here a grand Query and Objection of the Times is to be taken notice of, and that is, Whether sweet or foetid scents are best against Infection? That which oc∣casions the scruple by all that I can observe, is a suppo∣sition that sweet scents attract and draw, and stinks re∣pell and drive back; whereas the contrary may be
thought rather the truth. This the surmising Vulgar are very prone to call in question, from that common mistaken experiment they take from Hysterick distem∣pers; where they say sweet smells draw up the va∣pour, and stinks drive it down; and so taking non cau∣sa pro causa, the Controversie is occasioned. Where∣as the Hysterical vapours ascent nor descent is simply from the odoriferous or foetid fume, but because its (..) Receptacle being delighted and pleased with delicious and grateful odours, and as much offended by noisome and unpleasant savours, it greedily riseth up (though in its own wrong) to enjoy the one, and as ha∣stily flies as an Enemy the other; which is as great a proof as any need be produced, of natures detesting and abhorring, as prejudicial and hurtful to it self, all foetid, stinking, and unsavoury scents, and that is the common and received opinion of Physitians. Though I am in∣clined to think that the heart (the  of all mo∣tion and vital spirits) by its Systole and Diastole, is the efficient and material cause of those vapours assention and declination: the heart by the heat of the Arterial blood, dilates, lifts up, and moves the lungs, by which motion they attract Air, and suck in such thin, subtil, and aereal bodies, as scents and odours; which being communicated by the lungs to the heart, the heart (as in a Throne) by its Prerogative Royal, and Legislative Power, acts Rex, and truly examines and determines, approves and disallows whatever is Homogeneal and Heterogeneal to it self; and when it apprehends any inimical blood, scent, or vapour, contained and lodged in (its Kingdom) the Body, to approach its presence by the communication of inferiour parts, it speedily throws off, and expells it by the coercive power of its
Systole: for as is the motion of the Heart and Arteries, so is the Venal blood, Vapour, and Natural Spirit, which are fluxil parts, and in any part of the body: nei∣ther is it more absurd for perfect and imperfect blood to be mingled in this motion, then for the excrementi∣tious humours to be mingled with the pure Alimentary blood: and as the muscles of the Abdomen and the Peristatick motion of the Intestines expel the foeces, so the Heart by its transverse Fibres, labours to expel such homonymous blood, spirits, and noxious vapours, as are proffered to it, or may assault it in Circulation, or by the communication of parts. But this I leave as too Problematical and difficult to be made evident by a Transient discourse: and that the Question may not render the practice dubious or insecure, I shall have recourse to Authority (discentem enim credere oportet) and resolve all into the opinion and judgement of the most able and learnedst Physiti∣ans, who unanimously agree that fragrant, sweet, and pleasant fumes, and odoriferious exhalations tend much to the prolongation of life, and prevention of very ma∣ny great diseases and infirmities. The Jewish Doctours, if credible Historians are to be believed, used them frequently in their Syna∣gogues, and the Primitive Christians in their Chur∣ches; however, did they, or did they not, yet so far as the reasonableness of an act and custom, or Physical use may oblige, I think there is not a more necessary and useful thing to be thought on. And though I will not be so arrogant (nè agyrtarum vocibus uti videar) as to pronounce this Pastil or Fume I have appointed to be the only, and most absolute that can be thought on or produc'd, yet I may boldly say, that I never saw, or
was the Author of a more acceptable, safe, and pro∣fitable Topick, both for the preventing diseases, and preservation of health. Galen who lived 140 years, lib. 5. cap. 10. De sanit. Tuend▪ makes them his , the solace and sup∣port of his life; and one of the three Principles he left to Posterity for the prolongation of long life, was to be careful not only to avoid all noisom, stinking, and infectious smells, as things hurtful to nature; but also to be very mindful to remain among sweet savours, wholesom scents and odours that were agreeable to the temper and constitution of the body, and did con∣stantly keep to them himself, to prevent the mischief that might happen by the want of them. Limorleus also, an Author more obscure than que∣stionable, accounts them the , the a∣verters and drivers back of all Evils; and in his Trea∣tise De Odoramentis, hath these words, Partim ad vo∣luptatem, partim ad sanitatem, maximè ver à ad graves odores, fugandos, ad auram venenatam & pestilentem, ad cordis etiam vires & spiritus, vapore odorato per na∣res in fauces una cum acre deinde in cor effuso; the means is, that those things we now treat on, are not only sawce for the senses, but are also for the banish∣ing pestilent and venemous blasts, by a fragrant odour, received by the Nostrils, and from thence transmitted with air into the Heart aud Lungs. What an influence they have upon the principal parts of life, might (did I intend a Volume) be plain∣ly demonstrated by their great and manifest effects, per nates & fauces, in the cure of Consumptions, and most distempers incident to the Brain and Lungs; but I am mindful of my intended brevity, and shall only
advise all such as are troubled with bad Lungs, or would secure themselves from such distempers to ap∣ply themselves as much as may be to the use of these or such like specifick odours, not only now, but here∣after; the Lungs, Vital, Animal, and Natural Facul∣ties being much injured, and Consumptions much in∣creased by the noisom smells as are at the best of times in such populous places as this City. Thus far for outward Helps and Applications; the next thing to be considered and treated on, is, Inward Antidotes: and they consist of such things as do resist Malignancie, and strengthen the Heart and Vital parts inwardly, as the other things we have spoken of, do the animal and natural faculties outwardly. This vene∣mous vapour which breedeth the Pestilence, is con∣veyed together with the air or breath first to the Lungs, then to the heart; from thence it is dispersed by the Veins and Arteries into all parts of the body. And first it surpriseth the Spirits, next the Humours, and at length tota substantia, and firm substance of the body; and then commonly within three or four dayes it grows to extremity. Now the best armour against this Enemy, that I know of in all Art and Nature, for outward means, is what I have already advised; and for inward helps they are almost infinite, some are for one thing, some for another: never was more variety to cure Corns and the Tooth-ach, so that I may say with the Poet, —Inopem me Copia fecit. However, to make good and short work of it, I shall give you a practical draught of what I do my self, and advise my best Relations and Friends unto. And first and above all things, when I awake in the morn.
I humbly worship, and devoutly thank God for preserving me the night past; then I frequently gargle my throat, wash my Mouth, Hands Nostrils, Temples, Ears, and fore-head with Vinegar and Water; where∣in if Nutmegs, Orris, Angelica, Ruc, Rosemary, Balm, Lavender, Mint, Masterwort, Sage, Setival, Zedoary, Orange Pill, these or any of these are kept continually steept for use, 'tis the better. When in my Chamber and about the house, I burn the Pastil or Fume before mentioned. When I go abroad, outwardly I use Diascordium to my Nostrils, and inwardly I take two or three Lozanges, letting them dissolve in my mouth, and so swallow them as they melt, which by fixing humours, and contracting the orifice of the stomach, and passages that lead to it, hinder thereby malignant air from entring into the inward parts, and wonderfully strengthen the heart to resist sudden death. They are necessary upon this oc∣casion for all persons at all times and places, but chiefly in Churches, and all places of publick resort. This Lozange I have given an accompt of in a former prin∣ted paper, and it hath been used with as much success as any one Remedy about London, all along this sick∣ness: in the main I own Galen to be the Author of it, who with little variation made use of it himself in the great and dreadful Plague at Rome, and tells us that none miscarried that made use of it (peradventure he means none that ever he knew of) and yet for a Preven∣tive they have and will do as much as God and Nature will permit. And so far was I from concealing them for private ends and interest, that I then published the composition of them for publike use and benefit; and not only my own, but many Apothecaties about Lon∣don
prepared them, though not so exactly and truly as I could have wished, which hath made me since often repent their publishing. There is two or three Diseases more that this Lo∣zange is eminently good for, as well as this we have mentioned, viz. Worms, and Convulsions in children, two or three of them being beaten to powder, and gi∣ven in any convenient Vehicle: also Vertigo or giddi∣ness, Hysterical vapours, or Fits of the Mother, Con∣sumptive Coughs and Catarrhs, caused by a thin di∣stillation of hot, acid, and salt humours falling upon the Lungs from the head; if the Rhume be hot, 'tis sharp and thin, and in this case you will find them of excellent use and great worth, using also the outward helps of fumes and scents as formerly directed. By this means, or rather Gods Mercies, à quo omnis salus & medicina, I am still alive, though I dayly con∣versed with the dangers of the times, and refused none (that I might encourage all to use the means) which I were capable of serving; not that I do wish any so ab∣solutely to reply upon these, as to expose themselves by the use thereof, or any other means; to more dangers than are unavoidable; because Gods Protection is the best Preventive, which men justly forfeit in being too careless, or too confident; neither can a good event be expected, upon any bold, rash, and unreasonable adventures, or wilful contempt and neglect of the means; which hath occasioned the destruction of thousands in this Infection.
The Conclusion ANd summ of all reduc'd to practice, is that all such persons as are now in the Countries, and are to return to the City, would (in the fear of God) make use of such necessary and reasonable helps as are propounded for their preservation in the fore∣going Treatise. Unum è majoribus, or one of the chief of which indeed that first occasioned this discourse, is, that before they come so near London as to receive its infection, they would put up into their Nostrils a bit of Sponge dipt in Venice Tur∣pentine and Vinegar of Roses; as in pag. 15. and keep a Lozange constantly in their mouth, swallow∣ing it down as it dissolves; and before they enter their houses, either to get them well aired by others, or else to do it themselves, as is directed in the se∣cond Caution, and in the 6 page of this Trea∣tise. The Terebinth for their Nostrils may be had at any Apothecaries in every Country Town; the Lozange and Pastil requiring nine or ten dayes at least to prepare and compleat it, could not be other∣wise
or more conveniently ordered, and therefore I have taken care that they shall be in a readiness (at better and easier rates than people can provide them) at Mr. Reads an Apothecary, &c. and at those places where they are directed in the Title page for to have the Books. And to this end it is necessary, and concerns such as are in London, and have their friends in the Country, to give them timely notice of it, and to take care they may have one of the Books to peruse at their leisure, for their preservation and health, which undoubtedly God permits the sons of men, as the re∣ward and recompence of their prudence, care, and vertues.
The POST-SCRIPT To the READER. THis publike Calamity (like a great and common fire) hath occasioned all men, though more imme∣diately some Physitians, to bestir themselves, and cast about for water (as it were) to quench and put it out. But as this is one of Gods Jura Regalia, and not to be under∣taken but with great reverence, circumspection, awe, and subordination to his will, yet natural helps upon Gods terms; which (because not better to be improved) I choose in the very words of Sirach to his son Jesus, thus to express: In thy sickness be not negligent, but pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole: Leave off from sin, and order thy wayes aright, and cleanse thy heart from all wickedness: Then give place to the Physitian, for the Lord hath created him; let not him go from thee, for thou hast need of him: The hour may come that their endeavours may have good suc∣cess; for they also shall pray unto the Lord that he would prosper that which is given for the prolonging of life: for the Lord hath created Medicines out of the
Earth, and he that is wise will not abhorr them: and he hath given men skill, that he might be honoured in his marvellous works, for of the MOST HIGH cometh healing. Upon these considerations I have brought forth my two Water-pots, one formerly, relating to the Curative, this to the Preventive part of Physick: if any one drop of either hath, or shall do good▪ let God be glorified. This Treatise (and that only diminute) is in relation to the Preservative part of Physick, or Conservation of health which all people safely may, and ought to know and consider of to the utmost. The other parts of Phy∣sick, which I have omitted (like School-Divinity) is better let alone and concealed, than medled with; the difficulties of Physick being as dangerous as doubtful dis∣putations; and in both, nihil plus periculi quam imper∣fectâ scientiâ. And therefore (it not properly depend∣ing upon that part I have treated on, and also that people might have all helps that are necessary) I thought good to give notice that it will be requisite, so soon as time and opportunity will permit, to advise with some able Physi∣tian that may help and assist you in the Therapeutick and Pharmaleutick part of Physick; a work too difficult, and not to be ventured on, without personal and good advice, Curatur Socrates, non homo, and therefore though I can∣not but advise the use of some purging medicines, either before or after your return, (but rather before) yet the Remedii genus, or what Specifick purge (not knowing for whom) I leave the consideration of such judicious Practitioners you can best consult with; only take notice of these General Rules.
(1) If you find a decay of Appetite, an indisposedness to action, an unaccustomed dulness or drowsiness, horrid, troubled, and disquiet dreams, flushing in the face, pain in the shoulders or other parts, thick urine, obstructions, or shortness of breath; if these, or any of these grow up∣on you, then, in the Spring bleed, and at the fall (or a∣gainst this Infection at any time) purge. (2) Let them be gentle, easie, and familiar, and not chur∣lish or violent: also let them have a stiptick or adstrin∣gent quality in them, unless the humour be tough or vis∣cous, and then use Preparatives. (3) If you Purge produce vehement head-ach, dizziness, swoundings, convulsions, or excoriation of the guts, you may conclude it either works too violently, or was not proper for your Disease and constitution. (4) Take no sweet things that day you take your Purge, nor go abroad though it be but Pills, or gentle Physick (as they call it) infection being then, or when your body is loose and open, most apt to seize upon you.
(5) If your body be costive take a Glyster before your Purge, and if your Purge chance not to work at all, which may be known in five or six hours time, then take a Gly∣ster or Suppositor to fetch it away. (6) If you take Pills over night, then take a draught of warm Posset-drink or Broth in the morning; but if you take your Purge in the morning, take nothing for three hours after; eat a good dinner, but little or no supper, and when you go to rest, take a little Diascordium. (7) Lastly, keep the appointed Pastil or Fume burning in the Chamber while your Physick is working, which will support and chear the spirits, and make nature the more able and better to undergo Purging. FINIS.
This Treatise being printed in great haste for present use, occasioned the following ERRATA'S. Page 7. line 8. read their house. p. 7. l. 29, 30, 31. is to be left out Mr. Wilkinson at the Pestle and Mortar in Finch-lane over against the French Church, and; the party having since left his trade. p. 10. l. 24. for 65. . 25. p. 17. l. 8. r. peristaltick, p. 18. l. 23. r. meaning is. p. 19. l. 20. r. the tota, &c. p. 20. l. 6. r. Setwell. p. 21. l. 16, 17. dele a quo omnis, &c. p. 22. l. 7. dele indeed. p. 23. l. 4. r. at Mr. Reads an Apothecarie at the Queens Arms in Fanchurch street. p. 23. l ult. for  r.  in the second page of the Post-script l. 23. r. Pharmacutick.
