C579 11976772 51798
THE FAMOUS TRAGEDY OF OSMOND The great TURK, Otherwise called the NOBLE SERVANT. Written by LODOWICK CARLELL, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at his shop at the Princes Armes in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1657.
Drammatis Personae. Melcoshus, Emperour of Tartary. Orcanes, His Son. Osmond, The noble Servant. Calibeus, A jealous Cham. Odmer, Faithfull to the Emperour. Haly, An aspiring Traitour. Hosa, Servant to Orcanes. Eunuch. Prisoners. Souldiers. Captains. Mutes. Messenger.   Despina, A fair Christian Slave. Ozaca, Wife to Calibeus.
OSMOND the great TVRK, Or the NOBLE SERVANT. Actus Primus. After an Alarum, and people running over the Stage; Enter Osmond, a Tartar with his Sword bloody. Osm. THe City reekes with the warm blood of murder'd Christians whose avarice hath made them & their wealth our prey. Sword! thou hast shed much blood, and of the first and noblest: not added by this arme; for thou to it lentst vigour: a vertue thou retainst, since Melcoshus my great and royall Master buckled thee on my thigh, for which so unaccustomed favour and many other, when I forget still to adore him equall to our Prophet, may my death quickly follow; now if any thing (charge.) like dan∣ger's left, that dare appeare, Ile meet it. Exit. Enter two Souldiers, and Despina. 1. Sold. Villain hold off thy hands, shee's my prize; what though thou first seizedst on her, is she a prey for so base a slave? 2. Sold. How, slave! Ile prove my selfe thy better.
Desp. Unhappy maid, must I become the cause of bloodshed, tho even of Tartars our Enemies, heavens forbid; hear me, you wrathfull men, by your great Pro∣phets name, I charge you: we Christians pacifie our rage for our deare Masters; sake make a division of me and of my cloathes, he to whose lot I fall, Ile be his faith∣full slave. 1. Sold. I am content; so I who am a Janisarie may have the better share of her person. 2. Sold. No, Ile have that, take thou her cloaths and Jewels. 1. Sol. Then Ile have all. Desp. Alass, why strive you for this worthlesse per∣son, so far as lies in my ability ile serve you both. 2. Sold. A good kinde wench. 1. Sold. I am agreed; so I may first lie with her, to share her cloaths and jewels. Des. How, lie with me? 2. Sold. Wee'l cast lots. 1. Sold. Agreed. Des. Divinitie assist me, what meane these men? went I about to save their lives for this? 2. Sold. I am first. 1. Sold. You lie, shee's mine. Des. Oh I feare! Would that sword that peirc'd my Noble Fathers heart, had cut me from the world, e're this unhappie houre of my dishonour. 2. Sold. Leave her or thy life. (Exeunt striving for her.) Enter Melcoshus, Odmer, Haly, Captaines, and Prisoners. Mel. Thus Souldiers, though cold hunger, and all impediments of war seem to block up our way, we have made passage by our unwearied valour: the gods were forc't to give us victory, and such a victorie as makes your King an Emperour, and you in honour and
riches equall to Kings, I meane our Chams; each pri∣vate souldiers wealth equals some Christian Lords. Odm. Our riches, lives, and honour we hold from our magnificent Emperour great Melcous, and as his slaves, thus low prostrate, we kisse his happie feet. Mel. You see, doggs, it is not with us, as with your ruin'd Maister; who when he pleaded with his best elo∣quence, as I have heard, to make his greedy Subjects open their Cofers for their own safety, could not prevail with them: for they both base and foolish, rather chose to perish with their Idols, than to relieve the generall neces∣sity, and so have hazarded saving both life and honour, which makes me not restraine the Souldiers from any insolency, though I know a cittie taken by assault to be the only stage, where rape, murther, and sacriledge is acted to the life. Haly. Melcoshus is godlike-wise in all; those who forget their Emperour under whom they live, deserve no pitty from a conquering Enemie; our prophet hath appointed you his scourge; mercy unto his Enemies were cruelty to him. Cap. Haly, doe not incite to blood, he is nearest faultiness that way of any: should he grow thirsty by custome, we have not Christians enough alwaies ready to quench that thirst; or, glutted with these, our owne blood may be found perchance more sweet, if we grow rich or popular. Haly. Captaine, it is true; the fox would rather strive to abate than increase the Lyons feirceness, since forc'd to obey and serve him. Mel. Honest Odmer, thou carefull servant of thy Masters honour and safety, their taxes shall be lessened, though their revolt cannot fright us: let all the Greek Prisones of note be at our banquet that Osmond seems to whisper. we may glory in our triumph over them; some of their deaths wee'l honour with our presence.
These are base traitorus, betrayers of their country, selfe-murtherers by their owne avarice, away with them, and let the Souldier exercise his rage upon them. Enter Osmond and Despina: Pri. We are justly punished. Osm. Dread Lord, behold a present which the mea∣nest of your slaves intends to make you. Mel. Ist a boy or a woman, unvaile and shew me? Osm. Sir, a while your pardon, untill I let you know that ignorantly I part not with this jewell, for I so well do understand the value, that were the citty-spoiles laid in one ballance, the Empire too, and but this in the other, nay an assurance of a happy reigne added to that, and on the other side but to enjoy this creature (to whom no attribute of excellence can be given high e∣nough) one year, here were my choice. Mel. Osmond, tho I have lov'd thee of a child, yet doe not tempt that frown that's death: think not that state that I am now possest of, admitts any comparison of happiness, yet not content with this thou dost con∣temne my fortune; shew me that argument of thy pre∣sumption, though excellent, but if not worthy our longing expectation, perhaps the cause of thy destructi∣on: Majestie delights not to be plaid with. Osm. Pardon, dread sir, that man who shall affirme he hath an humbler soul towards great Melcoshus then Osmond, I dare him to the triall with this sword or faithfuller, which makes me sir assure you, you are in danger of your liberty, see not her face, for t'is a woman so farr Ile warne you, a weeping one, untill you doe withall consider shee's your slaves slave, I meane my prisoner: were she less worthy; she had been my Mistress, but being thus excellent who can deserve to look on her but you, let her be covered still, for if I draw this vaile, you then must yeeld, the thought of all your glo∣ries
laid asside, and in her heavenly eyes read your aptivity. Mel. Osmond, I see thou doatest thy selfe, and thinkst we must doe so: delay no longer. (he unvailes her.) Osm. Prepare then for a bondage which will bring delight above all freedome. Mel. More, more, by all my glories, than was delive∣red! Osmond so well I like, cover her gives him his hand to kisse. face lest I doe surfet with beholding, nor must the vulgar equall me in such a happiness, my envie makes me finde a torture for my selfe. Off with that vail, the meanest of creatures may behold the Sun: and as his beames in showry April breakes through the clouds, so does the lightening of her glorious eyes breake through their watery circle, and grow more powerfull by that opposition; so powerfull, that a con∣quering Prince descends his throne and beggs that hee may heare you, whom fortune hath made his slave, yet to command both him and fortune; for sure your tongue cannot be lesse powerfull then your eyes. Des. Ah me unhappie Despina. Mel. Divinest creature! rise and know thy happines, thou shalt command Melcoshus, King of the Tartars, who not content with that, intends to make all Asia the subject of his victories. Haly. Sir, feare and amazement have not yet forsook her, let her be kept by your Eunuchs, till time and they make her more capeable of your desires. Mel. Thou counsellest well, see it perform'd: but let entertainment be such as may most delight, and soo∣nest free her from her grief, I shall but languish till I may enjoy her. Osm. Lady, you may boldly promise to your selfe all joy the earth affords. Des. The Gods reward your piety in saving of my life and honour; but joy be ever far from me. Exeunt Haly, Despina.
Mel. Tell me thou noble youth, how didst thou finde this glorious creature, and what her name is? Osm. Shee calls her selfe Despin. I found her so neere being unworthy of me to give, or you to accept, that being saved it does encrease her value; Two Souldiers being fir'd with lust, strove which should first enjoy her, but seeing her a creature of such excellence, I thought my soveraigne only worthy her embraces, and she a fit present for me to offer, which made me to oppose them both; and my intention being nobler gave victory to my weake arme, aided by this your guift. Mel. Had they not perished so, they should have found a death with studied torments; name some Province thy reward. Osm. Other reward then your acceptance would marke me for the server of your pleasure, an Eunuches office, and soyle my act of dutie: when I shall overthrow an enemy in field, or in some doubtfull battaile guard your sacred person then Sir, advance me to some honor if you please, for so I shall become the powerfuller to serve you; but for Despina thinke not of any recom∣pence to me, for, by the Gods, the Empire were too lit∣tle, did not my love and adoration of your sacred per∣son force me to think she was created for You, not for a subject. Mel. This freedome in any other had bin death, in thee it but augments our love, be neere Us. From whence? Enter Messengers. Mes. From your Sonne Orcanes who is arrived. Mel. We have already appointed Callibeus for his hoast, to morrow he shall kisse Our hand. Exeunt. Enter Callibeus. Cal. Our Great Cham out of his love appoints his son Orcanes to be my guest; this were an honour I confess
to one that were not old and had a beautious wife, such as my Ozaca is: but when the Prince shall view her, and shee him, their very eyes shall speake to my dishonour, & conclude me a Cuckold in their desires, though they should nere converse. Ile let her know his comming hither, and from her behaviour gather how she approves of it: Ozaca. Enter Ozaca. Ozaca. Your will. Cal. Ozaca, the Prince Orcanes will strait bee here, he for whose sake 'tis thought nature wil turne a bankrupt, she hath in every part of him so plaid the prodigall; his face such as might make you take him for the beau∣tifullest of women; yet through that beauty shines his fathers spirit Great Melcoshus [how her blood boyles!] a personage equall to that; but then so courteous, though a Prince & eloquent with all, that every woman that but heares him speak, modestly throwne by, woes him to acts of love, in which he far outgoes belief [by all my hopes my feares are true, I see a lustfull languishing in her eyes] speak Ozaca, could you not be content (I being absent) to pass an hour in conference upon your couch with this young Prince, speake, could you not, ha? Oza. Oh sir, your needless jealousies doe make me mi∣serable, but your selfe more. Cal. I see thy heart, strumpet, and it writes a resolu∣tion to dishonour me, and so revenge that which thou call'st a needless jealousie in me, but, by our sacred Pro∣phet, if thou shalt see this Prince except by chance, Ile pull thy eyes out; if converse with him, thy tongue; or write, thy hand is forfeit; Oza. I finde I am a woman, I long extremely, A∣side. they say indeed hee's wondrous handsome, and I have heard, seeing by chance my picture, he did not contemne my beauty. Cal. It shall be so▪ goe walke in the back garden I
charge you, till I send for you. I would not have him see her, nor shee him, no not at a window: it may bee the Emperor will send him away ere long, but should he see Ozaca, I feare he would never leave my house: about this houre I expect him. Exit. Enter Orcanes and Hosa. Ho. My Lord, you see this back way, you are free from the multitude of people, by whom I would not have you seen, till you appeare to morrow like your selfe; I have sent to advertise your host Callibeus, that you are entred this way by the back-garden. Orc. Tis well; they say this Cham is most extreamely jealous of his wife, we shall not see her sure. Enter Ozaca. Ho. Shee's wondrous handsome, he hath reason— Oza. O that I might but see this Prince. Orc. Whose's that, sure 'tis the Lady of the house. Oza. My wish—'tis certainely the Prince, Ile seeme to goe away. Orc. Nay, fly not Lady: Oza. If y'are the Prince Orcanes which I beleeve, my duty is a warrant for my stay. Orc. Lady, I am Orcanes who come to be your guest. Shee unvailes. Oza. Sir, that assurance warrants me this further ex∣pression of my duty. Orc. The Painter was a niggard of his skill, or grosse∣ly ignorant that drew your picture, but Art must ever yeeld to Nature in a peice so excellent, and come far short, since 'tis but imitation. Rise beautious Lady, my father would not suffer this. Enter Callibeus. Cal. Hell and confusion, what's this I see; peace, hee's thy Soveraign's. Oza. My husband. Cal. Behold your humble servant, who yeelds up the
power both of himselfe and all that's his to your com∣mand. Or. Thanks, Callibeus. Cal. I am sorry your Highness came the worst way into the house. Orc. I did it to avoid the press of people, but trust me I found the passage very pleasant. Calli. He meanes his kissing you, but, whoore, thou hast a life to lose. Orc. I never saw a Garden where I received greater content, the Roses and the Lillies are so finely mixt, that I could stand a yeere onely to gaze on them. Cal. By Mahomet, he meanes the beauty of my wife, which is my curse, Oh that she were a Negro. Speake Negro alone. Orc. What's that you say, a Negro. Cal. I say my Lord, those flowers you like were planted by a Negro, a skilfull Gardiner. Orc. There are some other rarities, that I would praise, but that I want words to expresse them, they are so excellent, I wish I did possesse some such. Cal. Palpable, by all my feares! she conceaves his mea∣ning too, and with the joy of it, I see her lustfull heart leap in her bosome, but hush: wil't please your high∣nesse enter the house. Orc. The superstitious More, Callibeus, does not be∣hold the rising sun with greater reverence, than I his setting in a bright evening like to this: who knowes when we shall have the comfort of his glorious beames againe? either some envious clouds may interpose them∣selves betwixt us; that bright planet, jealous that we are not enough thankefull may withdraw his com∣fortable heat, without which I would not wish to live. Cal. 'Tis true indeed, the Sun gives life to all and the most witty and industrious men make great profit by him; those who prepare the soyle, & apt it for his beames receive greatest increase. Your highness, I feare, takes
occasion by the Evenings brightness to excuse your entring under so mean a roofe; but since the great Cham appointed you my guest to honour me; goe Ozaca, and let the diligence of Servants strive to supply every de∣fect, Ile send way the Sun he meanes. Or. Nay, Callibeus, I would not have you thinke that we misdoubted your lodging or entertainment, wee'l enter when you please, there is a cloud ready to oppose it selfe betwixt the Sun and us. Exit Orcanes. Cal. The Prince in his discourse makes the Sun his bawd, his father I think did intend to torture me, no house but mine, you must be walking, whoore, and en∣tertaine the Prince, but by our prophet thou shalt see no Sun. Exeunt Omnes. Finis Actus primi. Actus Secundus. Enter Despina and an Eunuch. Des. What shall I say, I finde I am a weake unconstant woman, sure I have lost my selfe, at least my grief; how pleasure and greatnesse gaines upon our natures! I who wept at first each time their Eunuchs did me reverence, thinking they mockt me, now take a great delight in their observance: sent you for Osmond? Eunuch. He waits without to know your pleasure, tho sildome hath been permitted by the great Cham that any should enter here, but he intends not to denie you any thing. Enter Osmond. Des. Bring him in and leave us. Osm. Thus low as to my Princes Mistress! what was it you intended? Des. That which civility tied me to, the offer of my lipps, and not my roabe to kiss, you sav'd my honour,
a modest kiss to you could not impaire it then. Osm. Should I have kist you & been seen, death was my sure reward, nor had the purchase been too deare, if so I had not been a traitor to my selfe and vertue in my disloyaltie unto my prince. Des. Thinke it no immodesty in me but ignorance of your strict customes: a salutation amongst Christians breeds no suspition of ill. Osm. Did ever any under the degree of a prince re∣ceave that honor? Des. They have if you call that an honor. Osm. Then it cannot bee in me presumption to kisse your hand, yet I in this too farre doe stretch my dutie. Des. You Tartars beare a greater reverence to your earthly Lords then Christians, though you neglect him that should bee most honor'd; but this is from the cause I sent for you: In all that you have done or said that did concerne me▪ if I be not an ill observer of mans pas∣sion you have exprest a love not to be equall'd, withall so great a spirit, that even in midst of all my griefs your merits found a passage to my heart, and tho I see I shall be able to command Melcoshus, and in him the world, yet if you dare applie your courage to the per∣formance of what I shall offer, and that effected become a Christian, I shall thinke my selfe happy, to be againe wholly at your disposing, as I was when you did un∣kindly to your selfe and mee, bestow me on another. Enter Melcoshus. Osm. The Great Cham. Exit Osmond. Mel. Despina, accuse thy owne excellence that makes me interrupt thy privacies, rather then me; for I so wholly am become thine, that but to live a minute from thee is a torment; Say beautie abstract, shall this day be more favourable then many that are past, may he who can command all, yet hope to obtaine his suite?
Des. Could you command all, you would command that passion in your selfe, which makes you strive to ruine my honor. Mel. Can it be ruine to your honor, to set you on the highest point of honor, to make you the possessour and disposer of all that your imagination can propose. Des. How can this be, when I cannot dispose of my poore unworthy self; give me my libertie. Mel. You should have libertie, were you what you alleadge, unworthy; but it is your inestimable value, makes you a prisoner; what all Poets have fain'd sweet or lovely in other women, is truth in you; these doe so tie you to my heart, that should I grant you li∣bertie, you would beare it a long, so all the empire should be govern'd by a heartless man: yet bribe me with one loving kisse and trie. With how much scorne you turne awaie. I wrong that power that's given me from above, it was ordain'd I should command, not sue to any. Woman, beautious woman, for more thou art not, what ere my dotage makes thee thinke thy selfe, con∣sider I who may command, entreate, but if refus'd the violence of my affection will compell me to use force. Des. I know you will not, you have too much prais'd Osmond for relieving me from rape, your selfe now to performe it; tho you now seem cruell, yet doe I hope you are just, for I have heard the world esteem you so. Mel. The act will not be wholly mine; your not to be-resisted beautie first made a rape on me, inforcing me to love you; that love made me desire to enjoy the hap∣pines of your embraces, which you denying reason steps into right my wrong'd affection, and bids me force you, assuring mee, that nature who does nought in vaine, had never taken such paines in framing you so sweet and lovely, but that shee meant some one or o∣ther should enjoy that sweetnes; and shall I so farre yield to any others merit, or wrong my fortune which
bestow'd you on me, as not to think I am the happie man appointed by wise nature to enjoy you; the Gods cannot in justice, after so great victories, appoint Mel∣coshus the office of a slave to be the keeper of such dain∣tie fruit for any other man, and hee him∣selfe Hee Offers violence. not taste it; no I have lost too many houres of pleasure, and will no longer suffer my selfe to bee tormented more then Tantalus, for he was forc't to fast, but foolishly I starve having my hands at libertie, and in my power that which will satisfie beyond ex∣pression. (aside.) Des. Oh Sir, consider er'e you goe about a deed of so much basenes, how will this ranke amongst your noble acts to be a murderer, for doe not thinke I will out live my fame; for your owne sake be wise then, if you love mee, and do not rob your selfe of the content you may hereafter finde, if you take noble waies and make my heart yours, then you may have a lasting pleasure A∣side. now the deed once done will bring repentance ever. Mel. Who would not threaten rape to heare such prettie arguments against it. No Despina I have no fa∣cultie which is not more obedient to thy will then to my owne, each threatening word I utter'd was to my selfe a torment: dry those bright eyes that never shall have use of tears againe, if not for their own crueltie a∣gainst Melchoshus; consider but my power, and thy owne beautie which would inflame old age, and from thy justice my temperance must needs find some re∣ward. Des. If thus you woe mee, I dare not say but time and womans weaknes may make me love you, and for your this daies temperance, this kisse be your reward. Mel. I am transported, force can bring no such plea∣sure, kisse mee againe and by our Prophet, it shall seal, your honors freedome by an oath: my blood is fir'd, one
such kisse more would make me breake that promise, for making which this kisse was given me. Des. Oh Sir. Mel. But fear not, base passion shall not overthrow my wise and nobler resolutions, for since I love you as you are altogether excellent, I must enjoy Despina, not Despina's person onely that's not halfe your selfe; I will not looke on you, your eies tho chaste may more encrease my lust, which my minds pure love makes me now know to be a crime; And hold our Prophet Mahomet unjust, That made no lawes against a Princes lust. Exeunt. Enter Orcanes and Hosa. Orc. Hosa: is Callibeas gone to court? Hos. Hee is my Lord. Orc. Is there no meanes thinkst thou to see his wife? Hos. It is impossible, his jealousie makes him set spies in every corner. Orc. I see thou art not read in tricks of love, I have made use of all that art and nature hath bestowed upon me; youth and beauty what woman can resist? or were these wanting, yet a Princes name is a powerfull advocate, I never yet laid siege to any femall Fort, but either by assault or policie I found a way to conquest yet am I carefull of their honors I enjoy, and so dissem∣ble my affection, that each Lady thinkes I onely am her servant; would my youth and beautie ever last, I would not wish to change the life I lead now, to en∣joy the Kingdome; altho my father possesse the greatest beautie of the world, yet is it not by stealth: securitie takes from the pleasure 'tis dull so to enjoy a beautie. Hos. You'l finde your present taske full of difficultie if you delight in that, I do not think you'l ever see her more, Callibeus having taken notice of your love. Orc. He sees, but will not say he sees, being my father's
slave, he dares not find the least fault: me thinkes shee should corrupt some Eunuch that attends her, or from her window drop a letter to expresse the love I am sure shee beares me. Hosa. How are you sure she loves you? Orc. Sure she loves me, as sure as if she had told me so, nay, surer; her eyes spoak plainly, which I will trust in women more then their tongue: but I am so experienced, I cannot well misse in either. Enter Eunuch. Eun. My Lady doth intreat your Highnesse, not to walk before her window for, if my Lord return, and see you, he'l be with her offended. Orc. Return, and tell your Lady, I shall be ready to obey any command of hers, though to my own tor∣ment. Eun. I shall. Hos. Sir, it appears, she loves you Callibeus above drops a Letter. not by this, else she would take de∣light to look on you. Orc. This letter lay not here, last turn we made; before I open it, to let thee see, I am the Master of my Art, though here's no superscription, I now tell you, this Letter is to me, and from Ozaca, full of affection too. Hos. I shall another time believe you, if't be; retire your selfe here out of sight, and read it. Orc. The Sun, though clouded by jealousie, The Letter. will shine again, not onely to warm, but inflame, if it have power, those who seem to take com∣fort in his beams. If a reciprocall fire be kindled ex∣presse it not in words— Here's wit, Hosa, besides beauty. No fair Ozaca, not in word, but thus I do ex∣presse my zeal. Hosa, shee's at the window, but dares not open it, for the Eunuch. I have a plot, which thou
must needs assist me in, and then shee's mine, spight of her husbands jealousie. Enter Callibeus, and Eunuch. Call. How in silence he wooed her, and thanks was given for her Letter, as he thought. Was't not a good device in me, to be assured of his intentions; he shall break through forty doores, ere he plant here. Now to Ozaca, which I removed into another Chamber, whilst I supplied her place. Exeunt. Enter Osmond with a Letter. Osm. It was a happy fate, that brought the Empe∣rour so to crosse my yielding; how could I have re∣sisted such a motion, comming from her that I adore. Let me consider, become a Christian, flie, and marry me: What a temptation's this? I gave this Beauty to Melcoshus, and shall I childishly recall my gift, nay, basely steal the jewell of his life, in whom the King∣domes weal consists? 'twere unexampled treason. Hence thou enticing charme, whose witchcraft almost does enforce me, to forsake my faith and vertue. Stay, be∣come a Christian, that's but to be as she is; and can the heavens be cruell to such, such, sweetnesse? shall not their providence preserve what they have fram'd so excellent, and me, for serving her? Say I forsake our Prophet, and trust upon that Power which she adores, then must I basely flie, forsake Melcoshus my dread Lord; and what can recompence that losse, or seem a plausible excuse for such a falshood? Oh yes, to marry fair Despina, which she offers, is to be happy in so high a nature, that it would stop the mouth of chur∣lish censure; all would excuse a fault, that brought so great contentment to the guilty, as her embraces must be.
Enter Melcoshus. Mel. Osmond, thou hast undone me in thy rich gift. Os. How, Sir? Mel. She does, and may, so justly glory in her own purity, that she disdains to mix in love with me; and yet, till her denyall taught me to know I was defe∣ctive, my very thoughts, much more desires, did never meet a check: Whose wife or daughter that I should covet, would not the husband or glad father bring me? or, if their honour mastered their love or duty, what could resist my power? Osm. Nought, but such another excellent creature as Despina, she can oppose your will against your power, and make, both wait her pleasure. Mel. Oh Osmond! could she be equal'd, my love and admiration would grow lesse; but as it is, I lan∣guish in desire, and must do ever: Should I use force, my royall word were broke to her, whose good opi∣nion I strive more to gain, than all the world's; and by those Christian vertues that she proposes too, Faith and Temperance. Osm. Sir, since you finde so much affliction, would I had never presented her. Mel. Osmond, thou art a traitor in thy wish, and nothing could preserve thee from my rage, but that thou didst what now thou wisht thou hadst not; should my beloved son Orcanes but say, he wish'd, that I had never seen Despina, by Mahomet, his life were forfeit: For, though I for the present finde some torment in her denyalls, yet, by one smile, she may advance me to a happinesse, above all earthly Mo∣narchs; what will her kisses do then, I mean, when she shall give them freely, uncompell'd, transport me from my selfe, the meer imagination does almost per∣form it; and see, amazement leave me, that I may ex∣presse
some part of the content I feel, in viewing this deer object, thus to approach me, smiling, nay, as if she meant to make me happy, by commanding som∣thing. Enter Despina. Ds. I am indeed a suitor, but cannot hope I shall prevail yet, piety commands me to make tryall, since 'tis for some of my religion, and your enemies. Mel. Though they had plotted against my life, I freely pardon them; you cannot ask me that I will not grant you; and in your servant, all that's mortall shall obey you; nay, Mahomet himselfe shall cease to be adored, if he be not assistant to your wishes. Des. I have no further suit, onely let Osmond see performed, what I shall now direct him. Mel. On thy allegiance, Osmond, that, and all she shall command thee else: with greater care, and more devotion, I should perform it than ere I offered yet at Mecha. Des. The Emperour speaks, dear Osmond, as if he knew what I intend to command you. Osm. Divinest Lady, what's the occasion, wherein your trembling Vassail may expresse his care and duty. Enter Haly. Des. Dear Osmond, look not pale, nor shake so, but mark those few words, which this short time will suf∣fer me to speak. I so much love thee, that again I offer to flie, now when opportunity presents it selfe: For, my suit unto Melcoshus, which you must see performed, is, to set free a Christian Merchant, with his ship and men, with whom, we being both disguised, may 'scape away; or should we be discovered, to die would not much grieve me. Your answer in a word. Osm. Could paradise be gained by crooked paths, I
would not tread them. I grant, to be your husband, were to enjoy a heaven upon earth; for the danger in attaining that, would but add unto the happinesse. I should a thousand times repent me of my gift, did not he prise you to your value, if it be possible; but since he does, and only can continue you in your full lustre, making you shine a wonder to the world, far be it from the thought of Osmond, to yield so far to passion, as to destroy his Masters happinesse, and his own faith. For you, if you shall but in thought continue this de∣signe, the Gods will punish you, for offering to oppose their sixt decrees, since 'tis apparent by your equall merits, you onely were appointed for Melcoshus, and he for you. Desp. Do you refuse me then? Mel. Ha dares Osmond expect to live, after refu∣sing what she shall command. Osm. I do not wish it, Sir. Desp. My passion made me to forget, Sir. Osmond is the noblest of your servants, and ready to obey me. Mel. To shew the power you have o're me, I freely pardon him, nor shall your commendations light in vain on any much lesse on Osmond; I here create thee Bassha of Aleppo. Osm. Sir, you will but in this, forestall my future ser∣vices, and rob me of desert to climb by a way I rather should have wish'd to tread. But when I do consider, Madam, 'tis your praise, no other womans, that ad∣vances me, it shewes, my merit was not small, since I attain'd your good opinion, which fully satisfies. Desp. 'Tis nobly said of Osmond; yet, since his de∣nyall, I look on him with other eyes. Melcoshus great∣nesse, and his love exceeding that, makes some impres∣sion in me. [Florish.] Mel. Say thou bright Angell is there ought wherein Melcoshus may expresse his love.
Desp. Your humble vassail's too much honour'd, who rather does deserve your frown for her pre∣sumption. [Masque.] Mel. There are some sports, which you perchance have heretofore deigned to behold. Exeunt. Enter Haly, two Captaines. (Florish.) Hal. You see the Emperour throwes by all care of Subjects, addicting himself wholly to pleasure; daies, weeks, and months he spends with Despina, that pain∣ted Sorceresse; and when he heares of any revolted Province, or of preparing enemies, he askes, how fair Despina slept that night, affirming, that in her alone, was losse or victory. Revolt of subjects! I oft have heard him wish, that all his subjects love were turned to hate, so that his goddesse would but favour him: Was't not a Kingly wish? 1. Cap. 'Tis strange, our Emperour should thus doat upon a captive, a Christian too. Hal. Aye, fellow souldiers; but consider to what a passe we now are grown, to be thus governed; we, who have power to make the world ours, all Kings obey us, thus to be led to ruine, nay, to a ruine that we see apparent: I dare not say, but I could wish, that we did not quite forget the power of Souldiers. We had power, when 'twas to raise Melcoshus for his vertues. Cap. 'Tis true, his vertues made him Emperour (ra∣ther his seeming vertues, more they were not) and they being counterfeit, if we be firm to him that's fallen in∣to vice and imbecillity, we forsake vertue and our own strength: Some in the Camp equall his former worth, then far outgo his present. Enter Messenger. Mess. Odmer, and some other of the Captains, will streight be here.
Hal. 'Tis well, I know you are friends to those that love the Souldier; for my part, I will not promise much, yet, if the gods shall breed a change, and think me wor∣thy of advancement, vertue shall steer me wholly. 1. Cap. We know it shall, most noble Haly; and when the time growes ripe, expect our utmost aid. 2. Cap. Wee'l not be found here, lest Odmer should suspect our friendship to you; wee'l rather seem to come by accident, hearing of his being here. Exeunt Cap. Hal. You shal do well: By seeming vertuous, I have the faith corrupted of many others in the Army; but these, though they perceive that I aspire, yet for their own ends, they'l assist my plots, pretending, as if A Table. we believ'd each other vertuous. Love to our Country moves us; yes, as much as it does the Croco∣dile, that laments that creature, which she means to make her prey. How e're, Melcoshus is careful of the soul∣diers good, and most ambitious of their love. I have so wrought upon them by flattery, that he not once suspects, how they distaste his easie pleasant life, their bane; nor shall he know't, untill the errour ruine him, in all opinion, and make me powerfull. I will observe and flatter him in smallest things, all must run smooth and eeven; he shall not see, at least not hear, a discon∣tented man, yet underhand, by injuries, I'le make the greatest so; then by my instruments so work them, that they shall fix their eyes on me as their sole reme∣dy, being the only man that loves his Country. True, the masque of vertue I put on, must be worn cunningly indeed. Odmer, that Fox too I must ruine, by his own honesty and faith unto his Prince; I cannot be secure of any plot whilst he hath breath; and here he comes.
Enter Odmer and Captains. Odmer. According to your desire I am come and pray Mahomet our present meeting may produce some happy issue for the good of our Soveraign. Ha. Amen, good Odmer, sit, sit, most noble friends, you the Pillars of the Empire, upon which the huge Colossus of our Princes same was rais'd: here is not at this Table (I to my comfort speake it to be so honour'd) a man that does not merit to lead him∣selfe an Army, I being exempted. What victory did our Melchohus get, that some brave Arme here did not act wonders, I dare not say equall to what he did? yet to continue doing bravely still, is fair for Souldi∣ers: for Kings sometimes slack in their worth. But Ours you'l say is gracious, carefull of the State and souldiers. Od. I know not what they'l say, but I must say so, and withall add if you think not so too, you are a flat∣terer: for have not I heard Haly with faire words smooth o're the errours of the King small in them∣selves at first, but by your conformation still con∣tinued not amended, as not thought wrongfull acti∣ons. Ha. I grant good Odmer when I have seene the Emperour inraged not to be contradicted but with dan∣ger, I have applied my selfe to serve his humour for the present, hoping my reason afterwards might bet∣ter overthrow his errour, when it should be forsaken by his passion, nor fail'd I of't; but were it not madness in any that should tell him, that this his dotage on Despina makes him neglect his office? how all the Soul∣diers that have any spirit or sense of their vast wrongs talke of electing them another Emperour who better shall distinguish betwixt their honour'd scarrs, and upstart Ignorants, who ne're shed drop of Enemies
blood, or had their own spilt to advance his glory? would you have me tell him this, though all yet know, this is truth. Od. Though I know this is false, how e're opinion sway the envious and ignorant; yet did you think it true; were you true subjects you would tell it him: but he that fears his losse of life more then his loss of faith and honour, thinks no reward can equall such a hazard. 2. Cap. Then Odmer, yo'u would seem as if your faith and love so far transport you, bove your reason that you durst tell the Emperour this. Ha. No Odmer, twere' follie. Od. Haly, to you it may appeare so; but may Odmer be as cold in duty as you, and find what it deserves, some heavy punishment: if he do not make known e're long, unto his Soveraigne how he dayly loses his Souldiers love, for that I grant is truth though unde∣serv'd from him; for he hath still desir'd to give them all their dues, nay bin more liberall then his Ancestors how ere false servants and corrupted ministers have deceiv'd his trust: the sweetest and most plentious springs passing through noysome and straight passages may lose their comfortable qualities; even you my Lord (I must be plaine) have wrought your selfe to such a power by the advantage of your birth and his imploying you that all depend on you more then on him: all that you think will please the Souldiers you make your Act, the Emperour by you induc'd to it, and by you perform'd; but what may give them cause of mur∣mur or discontent, that you give out that you perswade him from: thus doe you rob him of his greatest wealth the Souldiers love, and in the stead of it procure their hatred for him, which justly you deserve. But would that tyrant, Love, release him, that he might shew him∣selfe againe in Armes, and look about him, he soon
would know, that Haly his most trusted councellour hath abused his trust, whilst he hath bin fast lull'd asleep with pleasure. Ha. Zealous Odmer, what you have spoke might seeme an injurie not to be borne, to those that did not know us both: who would think I could suffer in my own house my loyaltie thus to be call'd in question nay condemn'd? for you have spoke no lesse then what might brand me for a Traitour. But know good Odmer your zeale thrice heated by your envy, to see me greater then your selfe not only in my place but in the soul∣diers love, can no way sindg my reputation, or make my faith mistrusted by my Prince; and since I know you cannot hurt, my own power garding me, but most that innocence which I have ever borne as the best shield a∣gainst all slanders; I am so farre from being angry, that I profess I love you, and will advise you for your honours sake, which else might suffer since you are ho∣nest Odmer To tell the Emperour all things are amiss; the greatest danger that can arise to you, he being of a gentle nature, will be but strangling; or, may be, for the kind office you shall take upon you to be his tutor, (for it was never known that any yet counsel'd him unask'd) his fauchion may be imployed that he may view your brains who would be wiser then your Lord. 1. Cap. Faith Odmer, tell him: my Lord counsel's well. Ha. First let him know (my faults) if you intend I should be punisht; you'l have no time when you have told him (his.) Os. Haly, you speak to me in scorne; but I perchance shall doe that which would fright thee even to death onely to think on't. Ha. Odmer, your blood is stir'd and you are angry. Os. If thou hadst given me any reall cause, this
place, nor these, should not protect thee; but since I know thy plotting brain to be thy only weapon, thou canst not move me, and so I leave you. Exit. 2. Cap. My Lord, will you endure this? Ha. Let him alone, the honest fool is running to his ruine. 1. Cap. As how, what danger? Hal. Danger enough, Melcoshus frown, for he'l in∣form him what he hath promised. 1. Cap. By Mahomet, he dares not. Ha. He will, I know his humour best, or if you please to call it simple honesty, you may, which I have wrought upon by opposing; so shall his faith serve my aspiring ends. Odmer once sacrificed for truth, who'l be Melco∣shus's friends? Exeunt. Enter Orcanes and Callibeus. Or. 'Tis strange, my Father should so doat. I thought in time, the force of his affection would have abated; but on the contrary, his love increa∣ses, never was such a change. What poor things are we, when our lust hath once overthrown our rea∣son! that any man of spirit should so far yield to pas∣sion, as to become his captives captive! and all this coyle onely for obtaining that, which in the enjoy∣ing does not yield a minutes pleasure: How happy am I, that have no such desires. Enter Hosa. Cal. Oh hypocrite! Orc. Have you done what I bad you? Hos. Yes, you shall see the effects on't immedi∣ately. Orc. The truth is; our Lawes gives us too great a liberty that way; how much better were it, might eve∣ry
man onely enjoy one woman? for, lust doth both corrupt the bodies and the souls of men. Cal. What means this seeming sanctity? it does in∣deed my Lord, it is a most ugly vice, though to the great ones tolerated. Orc. I do protest, my Father's errour doth so much lessen him from what he was, that I'le forswear the very company of women; bewitching Syrens, that con∣founds our judgments. Fire, fire, fire. [within.] Cal. What noise is that, ha, fire! Enter Orc. Hosa. Orc. My Lord, I'le to the Court this morning. Finis Actus secundi. Exeunt omnes. Actus tertius. Enter Orcanes and Ozaca. Oz. SIr, I beseech you think not meanly of me; for having won me thus, thus without parly, I free∣ly must confesse, the force you used did not displease me, whatsoe're I seem'd; for, I did something love you, before mine eyes were blest with viewing your perfections; yet, modesty or fear to be contemned, would have for ever closed my lips. Orc. Why, fair Ozaca, did not you by a Letter dropt from your window one day make me know my happinesse, in your requitall of affection, in the same phrase, to that I spoke at first in, to let you know, I was your servant, though your husband then were pre∣sent, I doubting a second opportunity. Oz. Alas, my Lord, I did not know your meaning, if you spoke to that effect; but it may be, my husband prompted by a just fear, did understand you; for you
are made up of sweetnesse, that might tempt an angell. Orc. My behaviour gave him no cause of suspicion sure. Oz. His jealousie proceeding from his excesse of love to me, made him believe, it seemes, I was an ob∣ject worthy of your eye, when indeed the god of love pittying my silent languishing, did rather wound you, to shew his power, than that my beauty could command affection from one, so far in all respects above me: And if you did receive any Letter to that effect, he writ it as from me, none else durst have presumed. Orc. 'Tis certain, and he himselfe hath been the un∣happy happy instrument, to make me now enjoy the miracle of nature; for, had I not been so encourag'd by that Letter, I should not have thus ventured on this rash attempt, of firing the house. Oz. Sweet Prince, I fear some jealous pang may take my husband, and he return before the fire be quenched, and finde you; at least the Eunuch may. Orc. Shall I then so soon leave you? Oz. Oh yes, you must; yet do not, except you every day could set a Garden-house on fire; for, without some such extraordinary means, we hardly shall again enjoy each others company, which how sweet it is to me, let this kisse witnesse, being more then ever yet I offered to my husband. Orc. Let us not part, what danger can be equall to this happinesse? By Mahomet, I ne're till now did find content with any woman. Why should a subject be thus blest. Let this make all my other conquests be forgot∣ten, over other women; for I am now what I have often seem'd, but never was in earnest, in Love, nay taken after the enjoying. knock within Oz. Oh me, we are undone, one knocks, I fear my husband's Confusion on them. Cal. Ho Ozaca, Ho Ozaca.
Oz. 'Tis he: what will become of me? Orc. Spare those tears, or rather let them fall to save your honour, by seeming, as if I had used vio∣lence. To say, that I at all have not injur'd you, were to no purpose, he'l ne're believe it: Put your selfe in such a posture, as may beget beliefe. My birth shall save me from all danger; or should I perish, so I save your honour, it matters not. Enter Callibeus. Cal. What, asleep Ozaca, and such a fire. I'le use my private key. The Prince! now, all the furies, had the house been burnt, ay, all the house, nay, all that's in't, my selfe, I had been far lesse miserable. For ever let all comfort cease, Ozaca is a strumpet, I am dishonour'd, the boyes will hoot at me as I passe the street. Sensibly I feel my selfe transformed from man to beast. Orc. Thou'rt too much honour'd slave: that I should take so much pains, and onely once enjoy that, which thou maist possesse at ease, and often! For her, she is so far from being a strumpet, that shee's chaster in thought then thou couldst wish her, how e're her per∣son suffered violence. Behold an object, if any thing could move me to repent so soon of that, wherein I lately took such pleasure, those lovely cheeks bath'd in her tears, my friends it seemes, who by their quan∣tity, would wash from off her face those bloody stains, the witnesses of my rude act. Oz. Hence from me, Serpent. Cal. Oh, leave my house, lest I forget you are Mel∣coshus son: but for thee, strumpet. Orc. Build not on my ill laid foundation, make not the rape I have committed, the cause of any future in∣juries to her, for so you shall on me lay greater weights of sin, which I'le revenge on thee. And Lady, though I know I do appear to you a devill, nay worse;
yet, when you shall consider your own beauty, you'l excuse me something.— What, spit at me spits at him. being your Prince; nay, then I know my crime was hainous; your eyes too, that may give life to others, like to the Basilisks, do strike me dead. Remember Callibeus. Exit. Cal. Abus'd and threatned! I am too tame, I'le af∣ter him; rather, revenge me on this whore that did al∣lure him. Oz. Do, you cannot add unto my misery: I am already made unworthy of your bed, dishonour'd, ravish'd; and you that should revenge the wrong, are cold in taking vengeance, though in hot blood: You that could let him part, having a sword so neer your hand, and such a cause to use it in, will shortly bring me to him, nay, be assistant, whilst he ravisht me again; but you would rather use it against me than him: if so, behold this breast, sometime the subject of your praise; imploy it then, and take away the cause of your dishonour; No? give it me she offers to pul out his sword. then, and you shall see— Cal. Hold▪ what wouldst thou do? Oz. Free my selfe from misery, since you refuse to do it. Cal. Ozaca, I confesse I was too cold in my re∣venge; indeed I doubted, whether thou hadst yielded willingly or not; but now that I do know thy ver∣tue, and am my self collected by my reason, I finde in∣deed, there was no cause of jealousie in thee at all, how e're my extream love made me suspitious: I shall forgive the offence, I hope, nay, 'twas none, since 'twas against thy will; and after some small time, receive thee to my bed: For my revenge I have a way, that with∣out blood I'le find my satisfaction. Oz. For that, Sir, as you please; but never will I come within your bed, I am not worthy: as a soyl'd
garment, throw me by, seeing another man hath us'd me. Cal, Not for the world, my Ozaca, thou art still worthy. Oz. Too worthy, since Orcanes loves, to be enjoy∣ed by thee. [Aside.] Exeunt. Enter Melcoshus and Osmond. Mel. Oh my dear Osmond, grant me but one re∣quest. Osm. you may command, Sir. Mel. Become my partner in the Empire, for thou hast given me more then the whole, in my most kinde Despina: for shee's no longer cruell, I have enjoyed her freely, by her own consent, which does expresse more happinesse, then all the tongues of men can utter. Osm. You owe me nought for this. When I pre∣sented her, then she was coy and cruell; if by your no∣ble usage you have won her to crown your wishes, the debt was due unto your sufferings, and you now are paid, which I rejoyce in. Mel. The joy, my Osmond, is so great, that if I do not by communicating delay it something, it will be dangerous. Osm. Sir, I believe there is none living, that sooner could conceive your happinesse than I, since none doth more admire and reverence Despina· For, were a love from me to her as warrantable, as 'tis from me to you, grounded on vertue, I sure should equall, if not ex∣ceed you in affection; nay, could she love again, be happier: for all the love that she can render you, is to your merits and your fortunes due; But if she that's above me shal descend, my happiness beyond yours must extend. This, Sir, I speak only, to let you know, I see the way, which the gods by chance had left open, to
my happines in Despina; but knowing that it was by chaunce, and that they did not intend to any subject such a beautie, I forbore, nay thought my selfe most happie in that they chose me for their instrument to salve the error by presenting you with what they had provided for you, and which it seemes they ment to crowne your conquests with. Enter Despina, Haly, Captains. Mel. Osmond, in all thy words and actions thou are perfect: next her that now appears, I do esteeme thee, for if there be one corner in my heart, that is not filld with her, thou dost possesse it, nay thou art mingled with each loving thought of her. Oh my Despina, how glorious thou appear'st! the Sunne is but a cold and obscure lampe compar'd with thy two heavenly eies, from whose sparkling fires all that behold except my selfe must perish, but I by their more gentle influence breath-in a temperate pleasant ayre, or should I be con∣sum'd with others, yet t'is permitted mee to kisse these lips which might restore me but should this more en∣flame me, which is possible, yet would those eies pro∣duce such pearly drops for their owne crueltie in have∣ing so consum'd their faithfullest adorer, that it would quench even their owne fire, and so preserve me still the happiest of men. Des. May I prove worthy of your favours, and in my future love and service make satisfaction for the time of ignorance, and disobedience that's past; my present happines, best makes me see my errour. Mel. No more, least I do surfet: had you kill'd my father, nay revild our Prophet the highest crime, this were too much. Haly. Our Prophet should have appeard unjust, if he had made Melcoshus so farre in worth above all other men, & not rewarded that unequall'd merit: which what
could so well do as this rare creature? The Prince Or∣canes. Enter Orcanes. Mel. Now my sonne Orcanes, are all things ready for our sports? Orc. Sir, all attend you. Mel. Orcanes, tell me hadst thou a beautie like to this, wouldst thou go hunt and leave her tho but for an hower, could all varietie of pleasures els be joynd, and in one minuts time their quintessentiall part enjoy'd, I would not lose her companie that minute: nor wouldst thou, hadst thou once tasted my delights; but as it is, hunt, my Orcanes, and in that enjoy the greatest de∣light of mortalls: but for me, I have pleasure in my di∣vine Despina, far above sense, tho sense convaie it to my understanding, and am immortalizd by my vast joyes? Exeunt. Haly. Was ever such dotage, is this a man to governe us? no, fellow soldiers, no. 1 Cap. Hee must not long, if we be men, and have but sense to see our miseries in him, and what a hap∣pie people we should be under some other. Haly. Farewell most trustie friends. Exit. 2. Cap. We shall rule the world, we that are sol∣diers. 1. Cap. Who can tell, Haly being advanc'd may grow as lazie. 2. Cap. Then downe with him, and choose another. 1. Cap. Is that the friendship you beare him? 2. Cap. My profit and my pleasure are those with whom I onely keep friendship, nor have you, on my knowledge, any other resolution; each man pursues his owne desires, there's no such thing as faith left in the world but amongst our Mufti. 1. Cap. Are they there? 2. Cap. Yes, in their bookes, and now and then up∣on occasion we heare on't.
1. Cap. Doe they no more? we speake of vertue too, and seem to showe our love too't, our present designes are to be sheltred under a pretence of love to our coun∣trie. 2. Cap. And so tis, man: come neere, examine these things. Haly hath power and will advance us with him∣selfe, let that satisfie: The Emperour and Callibeus: stand close, we may perhaunce heare some thing that will availe us the Emperour trusts him much. Enter Melcoshus and Callibeus. Mel. Now, Callibeus, what's the important cause that you thus presse upon my privacies, have you re∣ceav'd intelligence of any forraine Enimie, or that our person here at home's in danger; say, if not so, you have presum'd tho we esteeme you much, to rob us of Despinaes companie a minute. Cal. Dread Sir, your pardon then, I come for justice. Mel. Justice Callibeus? to whom is it denied within our kingdome? Cal. The person against whom I must complaine, Sir, is exempted from all punishment, excepting, that which your selfe shall lay upon him. Mel. Name him. Cal. The act, Sir, is so foule that I dare name him, it is your son Orcanes whom I accuse as a guiltie per∣son, I beseech you look on him, and do me justice; my wife by him is ravish'd, dishonor'd: the lawes of hospitalitie were of no other then onely to performe his wickednes: oh Sir, consider that you lodg'd him in my house and if you punish not, you shall appeare an accessarie. Mel. What proofe of this? Cal. Oh Sir, too much, I tooke him all most in the violent act; besides he glories in it too. Mel. Degenerate bastard, for could a sonne of mine
commit so base an act; had I usd force, where had my joyes in Despina bin? but yet I must not seeme as if did intend to punish, for the injurer is my sonne, the injur'd but my slave. Cal. Oh justice, Sir. Mel. Why Callibeus, art not thou my slave, and if my son have forc'd thy wife, is shee not more my slave whom thou commandest; twas disobedience, either in hr, or thee, that did not offer, what hee was pleas'd to like: he too much honor'd thee, and like a common guest fed of the same dish with thee; go, be gone, and hold thy self happie, that I do not inflict a punishment upon thee, both for the evill thou wisht upon my sonne, and for thy present troubling. Exit. Cali. You Gods! is this Melcoshus justice, for which he hath bin so renowned? but his fond love hath ruin'd all his vertue: farewell all faith and dutie which hither∣to hath bin by me inviolately kept. 1. Cap. Lose not this opportunitie, hee's disconten∣ted, let's strive to make him ours; my Lord, by acci∣dent we overheard your injuries, and grieve so much that we will assist you to redresse them, you know wee still have honor'd you. Calli. I know you are my friends, tis true that I am injurd, past sufferance. 1. Cap. We will give you ease. Exeunt omnes Finis Actûs Tertü
Actus. Quartus. Enter Osmond. Osm. I Was too scrupulous, my dutie did not bind: me to give that to another without the which I could not live my selfe; 'twas against reason & I was drunk with zeale, els I had never done it: I with the danger of my life did purchase her, and heaven did ratifie, it seem'd, the conquest, since they made, her love equallie: shee is not wanting in affection, yet, for ought I know, shee now sent for me to tell me; although her per∣son be the Emperours yet her heart is mine, nay both by stealth this, this corrupt flesh & blood would basely have me thinke, but vertue & honor which must rule my soul tells me these are ignoble thoughts, and ill befit the faith of Osmond, who allwaies hath applied himselfe to vertue, how ever weake in his performances; nay something noble bids me arme my selfe so strongly in my vertue, that tho she should become a suiter, yet not to grant and, by our Prophet if my flesh against my faith rebell and shee consent, He free my nobler soul, and send this trunck to hell—but all these feares are needles for so much goodnes shines in her face that sure her heart is far from being emptie rather a magazine from whose aboundance all that do want, might be supplied could they be sensible of their povertie: According to your command, behold your slave. Enter Despina. Des. Osmond how ere the Emperour, in my command ore him, makes all the empire subject to my will, yet if you kneele I must not be exempt: for well you know I love you. Osm. I feare. Des. Yet not so as heretofore, tis now a sisterlie affection.
Osm. Thanks heaven. Des. Which that I may witnes more then in words accept this from me, not as they in themselves are rich, but as they are made so to you in being my gift; and let them tell you when you look on them, that there is nothing in Despinas power, her faith kept sacred to Melcoshus, whom now I in my soul adore, but that you may command as freely, as you might a sister that entirely loves you. Osm. Vertue I see is ne're without reward: how far I am exalted in this joy above what sin could have produc'd: your pardon, madam, though my thanks come slow, yet they are sure, I am overjoyed and want words to expresse my selfe, not in the riches of what you have given but in your protestation that you love me so, as my owne soul desir'd. Des. The emperour knowes I love you more then any, and is pleas'd it should be so, nor need you keep that distance that all others doe, but freely visit me. I have a suit concerning the releasing some poore pri∣soners for which you from the Emperour must receave order, who strait will visit me. Osm. I am too happie to continue long so. Exeunt. Enter Melcoshus and Odmer. Od. Did not my love unto your sacred selfe make me preferr dutie before danger, I should as others do in silence onely mourn, the ruines of your state and murderd honor. Mel. Ha. Odm. But though I know that he which thus under∣mines you, hath power to give me death with studied torments, by turning that which loyaltie makes me utter, to rash presumption in your acceptation, yet i'le become a zealous priest and sacrifice my selfe to shew your danger; what though your passion will not
let you reade a faithfull warning writ in my bloody intralls, and so you'l thinke the sacrificer mad, I from the Gods shall finde a recompence; having discharged a faithfull Subjects part to heaven and you, th'end of my creation. Mel. Odmer, thou still hast found beleefe, nor have thy feares at any time bin idle: name what thou mean'st. Od. First draw your sword, then promise you will heare me out ere you make use of it, for I shall move you highly; the sore I come to launch is too much festerd to be cur'd with flatterie. Mel. Ti's strange, I promise thee, how? is my honour tainted, or my state in danger? Od. I should not neede to let you see the perill and dishonor that attends your too much Love (I dare not call it dotage) on Despina, if your owne judgment were at libertie that better could informe you. Mel. Traitor thou canst not speake eternally, then I shall be reveng'd for blasphemie and breake no oath: Can love to her be dotage? Od. Consider, Sir, what you have lost by loving her, oh could you see, but you are hood winck'd by your lust, from what a pitch of honour you are faln, you would finde that word too little to expresse it; consider what you were at taking of the city, to you accurst though gotten by a glorious victory; all neighbour Princes fear'd you so as does the lesser hawke the King∣ly Eagle when he takes his flight no one durst keep the skies to search a prey, but glad to flag their fearfull wings, and seeke the obscure earth for safetie: for your owne subjects they so honor'd you that daily they committed blasphemie, making you, equall to our Pro∣phet in all that could immortalize a man; now each Prince seemes to scorn you and your power, knowing your noble faculties are asleep nay murder'd by your lustfull passion. What need they care to do you injuries
that cannot leave your Mistresse to revenge them; your Souldiers that from your examples had their valours steel'd against their enemies onely seeing you under∣mine your selfe and them in your ill goverment, turne likewise traitors to themselves and you, swearing a captive shall not governe them, they must have one to lead them forth to war; nor is this only the common Souldier's saying, apt after ease to mutinie, but even the greatest Captaines hold this resolution. Mel. Peace, No more. Odm. If not for shame yet for the dangers sake bethink your selfe; in you the kingdome suffers; strug∣gle a little but for liberty; our Prayers shall untwist your bands; and, once free, your vertues soon will shine againe; so shall you make the world believe it was no fault of yours, rather the envy of the gods that kept you in obscurity so long; for had your vertues not bin thus eclipsed, you might have dark∣ned theirs: Now Sir if you mistrust the truth of what I have delivered, or that my zeale hath made me to deliver truth unreverently, behold my heart which may for both or either satisfie; and if you search each corner you shall find that envie moves me not, nor feare to lose my power by her ingrosing all your favours: no my soul beares witnesse with me, your safetie and the generall good did only prompt my tongue, in what I utter'd. Mel. Odmer, thou hast presum'd above that free∣dome that even dull Christians doe allow their ser∣vants, but thou borne my slave thus presumptuously to enter into my greatest secrets, to rip up my faults before my face, and as it were by force pull from out my armes my dearest Despina, what canst thou hope for but death by some unheard of torments? Od. Sir if you intend still to pursue your pleasure selling your honour and the kingdomes safety for a
few wanton kisses, I can expect no less; but if the spirit of great Melchoshus, strangled by sloath and wantonness, againe respire by a true servant's zealous conjurations making his body move to noble deeds such as may even out shine his bravest ancestors, then I may chance to die a gentler death, a nobler can I ne∣ver. I rather would be sacrifised for truth and loyaltie, then be rewarded for base flattery. Mel. Because thou wert brought up with me a child, and many wayes approv'dst thy selfe faithfull; I pardon thee this presumption, and ere long thou and those of thy opinion shall know that I am able to govern my passion, perhaps, to their amazement. Exeunt Enter Orcanes, and Hosa, severally. Hosa. So soon return'd from hunting Sir. Orc. What comfort can it be for me to follow beasts, having such a beauty in pursuite, for know, my friend, that my affection is more violent than it was before I did enjoy her. In that I imitate my father who now doats more upon Despina than ever. But, know you, what the Basha hath complain'd unto my father, that I have forc'd his wife; we so well did dissemble; but such an answer did my father give him, that thou shalt see hee'l bring Ozaca to me, nay be content to hold the door, whilst I againe enjoy her. Hosa. But do you think my Lord he will indure it, will he not by some private means seeke a re∣venge. Orc. He dares not, he is too tame: but stood my Father as strictly on the poynt of justice, as heretofore, ere love had soften'd him, I should feare his frown, but feeling dayly the force of beauty in Despina, he will looke upon my act with favourable eyes.
Enter Messenger. Mes. My Lord the Emperour seeing you returne desires your company. Orc. Ile waite upon him, Hosa, this night I have contrived a way, if 't be possible, at least to see Ozaca. Exeunt. Enter Melchoshus. Mel. My valour, vigilance, and justice made me Commander over this numerous people, with when I have acquired an Empire, and made the neighbour world stand amaz'd fearing my fierce invasion; but by my sloathfull life I am become hated; nay worse, con∣temn'd by my own subjects, as thought unfit to go∣verne, but since by the goodnesse of our blessed Pro∣phet my eyes are open'd, and I see my error, Ile tread those vertuous paths again that did advance me, and the first act that must incite to look with favourable eyes on my proceedings, shall be the justice Ile perform on my degenerate Son Orcanes. What though he were, next my Despina the comfort of my life, I can know no partiality to him, nor to my selfe, in prejudice of justice; yet it may falsely brand me with the name of cruell and unnaturall. My Son Orcanes, I hear you have a Mistresse, fair I confess and chaste most certain∣ly: for you did gaine her by a boistrous way. Enter Orcanes. Orc. Sir it were in vain for me to denie it, since Callibeus hath inform'd you, Sir 'tis true her beauty did compell me. Mel. It was impossible thou shouldst believe O∣zaca to be more beautifull then Despina in my tempe∣rance, then although my cause of passion far outwent thine, behold how far thou art from being the son of my vertues, to shew thy baseness I extoll my selfe. I being a Monarch free from the check of any but our
divinest Prophet, having a made within my power, a captive maid, whose only friend or aid was her own innocence, no husband to complain or seeke redress of any, she being wholy mine, given to me for my plea∣sure too, yet all these motives could not so far pre∣vaile as once to make me offer brutish violence, though even from her refusals my desires increast: but thou whose base desires hath kill'd all thoughts of vertue or humanity, imployedst that force lent thee for nobler ends against a silly woman: and when thou hadst en∣joy'd what couldst thou boast, but tasting of a fruit, wherewith her husband often had bin cloy'd? Orc. Sir, as affection cannot be created where we list, it cannot be remov'd where it is form'd: having at first sight tane possession of the heart, I did yet, faintly I confesse, check my fond passion, it being unlawfull to love anothers wife; but alas her eyes were much too powerfull to be so resisted; besides imbred corruption in my selfe told me, it was nothing to enjoy her, were she free, and at her own disposing, but having such a watch∣full dragon to orelook her as her jealous husband, his care made me believe the treasure was more rich, so better worth the stealing. Mel. It was to him indeed a treasure that possest it lawfully, though being gain'd by thee, it makes thee poor, to the condition of a slave: his honour suffers through thy violence, nay bleeds untill my justice makes thee bleed to cure it. Orc. I hope you will not be so cruell for an offence like this, committed through the heat of youth, since you your selfe even at these yeares adde to Love's tri∣umphs. Mel. Degenerate bastard, canst thou hope that an excuse like this, will passe with me for currant, who still hath bin a severe punisher of unjust acts? it seldome hath bin known that such a wrong was e're appeas'd
but with the offenders blood, or else the partiall judge within whose power it was to punish, he hath paid for't; or if they could escape the hands of men, yet sure the gods will find them out, and I that doe intend to be a punisher even of my selfe, for my least follies, dare not suffer, lest I offend against heaven thy heinous crimes to pass unscourg'd; and therefore marke thy sentence. Orc. O Sir, Remember who I am. Mel. Whilst thou wast what thou oughtst to be thou needst not bid me to remember that thou wert my son, but since thou art become a stranger to that noblenesse that should accompany thy birth, like a corrupted branch Ile cut thee from the stock, lest I for my injustice by the justice of the heavens should perish with thee, nor shall my subjects be a loser in it, one of more vertue shal succeed me, that wil not ravish women. Orc. Sir, I am miserable, and must implore your mercy; for in your eyes I read my death or something neere it, oh speak then, your tongue can∣not pronounce like crueltie. Mel. I find I am a father, and if I hear him long∣er, pittie will overthrow my justice, and therefore I pronounce. Orc. Oh hold, what Sir, my death or banishment I have bin all my life untill this present hour your hopefull son, for so you oft have call'd me, your heir, and shall I now inherit nought but death or else a thousand deaths, in being banisht from your presence: which of the two to wish, I know not. Mel. Oh that I might lay by the office of a judge, or else put off the nature of a father: for I in this di∣straction suffer more then he can doe in death; even injur'd Callibeus selfe would be content with a lesse punishment, and the severest powers of heaven will call me cruell in execution of what I intend, rather then partial, since he is my son.
Orc. Oh speak not Sir, if you intend my death; rather by signes make me know Melchoshus stamps with his foot. my doome, twill be lesse cruell Mel. In this behold it then. Enter Mutes. Orc. Nay then Ozaca, either thy honour or my life is forfeit, these tongue-lesse men do yet pronounce my death certain as fate: I see my end, Sir, but what the passage to it is I know not. Mel. A darke passage trust me thou must have, but longer much then thou expectest, thou shalt not die. Orc. Not die, her honor's safe, prison or banish∣ment I will endure. Mel. These eyes the causes of thy ill, least they againe betray thee shall for ever loose their light. Orc. Is that your mercy? rather take my life. Mel. If thou hadst bin a private man, thou should'st have died, but being a Prince and my son, this is more just, and naturall, however for the present thou think'st is greater crueltie, for thou shalt live by sor∣row to appease our Prophet. Orc. Oh Sir your mercy reaches to the highest poynt of crueltie, 'twere better not to be at all, then not have the comfort of the light: what can life profit me a Prince, if made uncapable of goverment? Mel. Dispatch, it is decreed. They put out one eye. Orc. Hold, heare me sir, I have indur'd enough to shew, I prise Ozaca's honour, one eye is lost. Sir I have belied my selfe; for know, Ozaca was more willing to meet my wisht imbraces, then I to offer them. Mel. Now I repent my pittie, thou wretch made up of basenesse wouldst thou to save that other wicked eye increase the villianies thou didst commit against
Ozaca: thou only didst before defile her person, now thou dost murther her, and her husband, both alive but I in their behalfe and justice pronounce thy death for shouldst thou live, thou wouldst infect the world with basenesse yet unheard of: bear him from my sight and strangle him, lest as I am a Father, Pittie confound my Justice. Orc. By Mahomet, Sir, father hear me. Mel. Away with him, the feare of death would make him heap more perjuries upon his soul. A Prince that for the losse of sight dares lie. Deserves death here, hereafter infamie. Exe∣unt. Finis Actûs quarti. Actus quintus. Enter Haly, Odmer, Hosa, and Captains. Hal. ODmer, you that have all the favours of the time can surely tell, if you will honour us so much, for what great cause it is, that we, and all the Captains are commanded to assemble here. Odm. Great Haly, who thinks all not done by him ill done, and who envies the smallest grace that any other shall receive, though their deserts perhaps may equall his, can even as well informe himselfe he thinks as Odmer can, and out of scorn does onely aske the question, but know, my Polititian, that ere long you'l find some alteration that you dreame not of. Hoboyes Enter Melchoshus and Despina▪ Haly. Odmer, is this your change you talke of? Odm. Why, Haly, in his eyes you may read some∣thing
if you'l observe not usuall, I have not seen him looke like himselfe since he forsooke Mars to become the slave of Venus. Mel. I hear that there are some amongst you that dare take upon them to maligne my pleasures, and taxe me for my easie life, alleadging that I have forgot the duty of the gods, paying all my devotions to this Saint; nay some have gone so far as to affirme, I have given ore to be a King, making my selfe my captives slave, and so deserve no longer to beare Rule. Although I need not make Apologies (for none can call me to account but heaven) yet Ile so far discend from that high pitch of Majesty whereon I am seated, as in fami∣liar termes to question with you, and by the honour of a King, which I have yet kept pure from stain, how∣ever some have by their divellish cunning striven to blot it, Ile give you liberty to answer, in what I shall aske you, with as much freedome as if you were all Kings, or I your fellow subject. 1. Cap. What can this meane? Haly. I know not what will follow, but well I understand what's past, and will prevent him since he hath found me out, I shall be caught in mine own snare else. Mel. Tell me and tell me truely, which of you that had a beauty like to this, but sometimes would to en∣joy her company neglect our greatest businesse, view her well for Ile make no description; onely let me ad∣vise you fix not your eyes at first upon her eyes if it be possible, least their brightnesse should strike you blind before you had observ'd her other beauties, and when you have beheld her outward forme, know that her mind as farr exceeds that, as the soul is more worthy then the body, which does indeed admit of no com∣parison. Haly. She is more excellent then can be spoke, and
all that should but taxe you, if you should even adore her, deserve death for their grosse ignorance. 1. Cap. Haly hath spoke what all confesse, and we have too unjustly murmur'd at your pleasures. 2 Cap. No man could go abroad to War, that might enjoy such happiness in peace. Haly. Who would not for her sake neglect even hea∣ven it selfe? Mel. Unto her excellence add the consideration of the difficulty I had in obtaining her, which ties mans nature faster to the object. 1 Cap. We all acknowledge that your joyes are infinite in her, and that it lyes not in the power of man to quit such happiness. Mel. To make you know the difference then twixt you and me, and that I value the good of you my sub∣jects and my honour far above fading pleasures, be this my witness, thus cut I from my selfe such a content, that Mortals nere enjoy'd. Des. Oh me, my fault lay in my blood, let that ex∣piate my sin against heaven, mercy, mercy. Om. Oh crueltie. Od. An act noble above example yet it moves my pitty, this was no end of mine, heaven knowes. Mel. Now by this act judge whether your Em∣perour be able to governe his passions or no, when they oppose themselves against his honour, and that you may know that pleasure hath not chang'd my nature, prepare for war, and what the neighbour Princes whilest we slept by stealth obtain'd. By force which interest back shall be regain'd. See the body noblie intumb'd, I dare not view it (Exit) Od. Now Haly was not this unlook'd for? Exit Haly. Yes Odmer, on the first opportunity we are lost else. Exit
1 Cap. It must be so, this act will gaine the people. 2 Cap. It must be so. Enter Osmond. Osm. What meant the Emperour to send me from this meeting on such a sleevless errand: ha what bloo∣dy object is this, I hope I dreame, if not, may I be blind for ever, 'tis she: which of the gods fearing to be transplanted by her greater excellence hath done this? no mortall man durst, or could have the heart to execute such mischief: lay down the sacred load and let me know the bloody villaine; art thou gon? say whose hand was it, that let out her pure soul at these grim wounds, and in the bloody act parted more excellence, then ere shall meet again. 1. Sol. One that dares justifie it. Osm. Villaine thou liest hee dares not, though thou and all thy generation should assist him who wast? 1. Sol. I am a soldier, take your lie againe, for know it was Melcoshus. Osm. Slave, dost thou mock my griefes? 2. Sol. Hold, noble Osmond, and know we manifest our love unto your virtues in forbearing to cut you all in peices for daring to offer this violence: for by the honor of soldiers he tells you truth, the Empe∣rour with his owne hands here perform'd it, before all chiefe commanders with an intent I thinke to get againe the soldiers love, which he had lost by her. Os. I do confesse my rashnes, let my cause of rage ex∣cuse it: the Emperour do it, say you? it is impossible▪ now, by Mahomet, you are all traitours, and by some bloody statesmen are subornd to do this wickednes, and being found to save your guilty selves from justice, you lay it on the Emperour, you might as well make me beleeve that he had pull'd his eies out, or his heart, for shee was far more deere, and therefore He deferre re∣venge no longer.
Enter a Captaine. 2. Sold. Wound him, not onely defend your selves, hees mad with passion. Cap. Hold noble friend, what meanes this? Osm. These villaines here have kill'd the Emperours Mistris and would escape by laying it on him; when he, when he shall know it once, will wish no longer life. Capt. Pacifie your rage and heare mee by Mahomet, what you have heard is truth, and never was there act gain'd more applause amongst the old souldiers, whose loss of blood hath quite extinguished the desire of wo∣men: but for my part me thought, though it be brave in the consideration▪ yet it was a horrid spectacle to see. Osm. Ist even so? then had he tane a surfet by being too happie? Capt. No sure he lov'd her, when he kill'd her. Osm. Shall I die with thee, my deer sister, for so it was thy will I should esteeme thee: oh looke upon this face and tell me, if there remain'd the least spark of hu∣manity in him, that could but once have said, that shee should thus be murderd; what was he then that could himselfe perform it! horrid, horrid deed: shee in whose armes he slept the night before, and had no doubt more joyes then tounges can utter: but if there be those Gods, which punish villainies, he may hereafter pay for't. Capt. Osmond, this ill becomes your dutie, which hitherto hath led the way even to the forwardest in zeale. Osm. Why friend, I speake not of Melcoshus, he could not do it, some furie enterd him. Capt. Sir I love you: so well, that I dare not stay to heare you: beare off the body. Exit. Osm. Oh stay, good souldiers, let me take my last leave: what shall I say, shee cannot answer, it may be her faire Soul hovers about to see how they will use
her deere Companion: if so, oh let it heare my vow by Mahomet and all the powers of heaven I swear with speed to be reveng'd upon thy cruell murderer, all his brave former acts are by thy innocent blood washt from my remembrance: for his love to me and paiment of my dutie they in it are cancelld, I was not more his slave then he was thine; confirm'd with many thousand oathes, and most unjustly he hath not onely broke those bands, but with thy deere blood died his villainie in grain, so that they cannot change their horrid colour in my memorie, till I take equall vengeance, but I must needes come short both that I am by his example taught, and that I shall but kill a murderer when thou diedst innocent. 1. Sol. Wee in this stay, hazzard our lives. Osm. I have done, now let me after death do that which love and duty to Melcoshus, whilst shee liv'd, would never suffer me: these pale cold lips have yet the power to make me burne in revenge, and these deere eies sometimes the maister peece of nature can yet command me to extinguish their extinguisher. Now soldiers take her hence, and I will beare you company to see her buried, the passion I have shewed, you may ex∣cuse, since all know I did first present her to Melcoshus; for which of you, that had but given a horse or dog, excellent in their kinde, and seeing it at first as it de∣serv'd lov'd and cherisht by him that did receave it, and after thus us'd without a cause, but would grieve something; deal freely, would it not move you, ha, if so, then thinke what I now suffer, who heaven knowes did love this Lady, as my sister. 2. Sol. Sir we grieve with you, and wish the Em∣perour had not bin so cruell. Osm. Thanks soldiers, but where wishes faile, we must apply our reason to ease our griefe. My ease alone consists in shedding his heart blood.
That gain'd, and then destroyd, earths cheefest good. Exeunt. Enter Ozaca. Oza. Shall I rejoyce, or shall I grieve my present for∣tune? rejoyce most certainly, though all difficultie and danger attend my love; for my Orcanes is a Prince so excellent in all, that though I ne'ere againe enjoy him, yet am  happy: but his affection sure which seem'd to equall mine will make him study some way how we a∣gaine may meet, but soft here comes my husband with a joyfull Countenance. Enter Callibeus. Calli. My deere Ozaca, I bring ease to thy vext soul, I had bin here long since, but that the Emperours ex∣presse command upon affaires with held me, and far too happy was the newes for any other but my selfe to bring: kneele down with me and pray the Gods to pros∣per long Melcohus. Oza. Why Sir, what's the occasion? speak I pray you. Calli. I knew his justice could not slacke what er'e he emd. Oza. What justice? speak, oh my feares! Calli. The Prince. Oza. Speake, what of him? Calli. The lustfull Prince, my deere Ozaca, hath by his blood washt cleane thy staine. Oza. Ha. [Shee Sownds] Calli. Ozaca, my Ozaca, oh speake; the joy of her re∣venge overcomes her know my deer wife the Prince Orcanes for his foule rape on thee is by his noble father justly put to death: oh praise Melcoshus in thy soul, who would not be unjust to save his son being a villaine. Oza.. Is the Prince dead then? Calli. I, my best love to my great comfort, now I
may kisse thee joyfully, the wound thy honour did re∣ceive is cur'd. Oz. Forbear, I must not kisse you, till I know by whom the cure was wrought, if any other then your selfe inform'd against Ocanes, and so provok'd the father to kill his son; nay, if you did not extoll ju∣stice, and cry down mercy quite, though it be the grea∣test attribute belonging to the gods, hope not that I should ever look on you with love, or come within your bed. Cal. Thinks my Ozaca, I so little love her, that I did sleep in my revenge: How often did I urge unto Melcoshus all arguments, that might incense him a∣gainst his son, nay, told him, as I well might do, Oca∣nes could not be his Offspring that had so basely given himselfe to vice: However, I alledg'd in putting him to death, he should perform a justice, that would make him famous through the world, since naturall affecti∣on, the gods appointing him to hold the ballance, could not yet weigh down justice. Oz. Did you alledge all this, and did this move him to put the Prince to death? Cal. It did. Me thinks thou lookst not kindly on me for all this. Oz. And shall I live after Orcanes? No. Cal. What saies Ozaca? Oz. Nothing, but is he dead, dead certainly, and by your means? Cal. He is. Oz. Umh, umh, gone, for ever gone. Cal. Ozaca, speak to me. Oz. He died to save my honour, and shall I live be∣hinde him, and live with him too, that triumphs in his death? It must not, it shall not be; I am too far in∣debted, I'l first make eeven with some. Oh husband, if you had kill'd Orcanes your selfe, then the revenge
had stood more noble. You should stabs her husband and her selfe. have struck him thus and thus. Cal. Ozaca. Oz. And then your selfe to escape shamefull death. Cal. What can this cruelty in thee, Ozaca, mean? Oz. Know, thou dull beast, I was so far from being forc'd, that I did burn in a more ardent flame then he: Yet, had thy jealous brain not taught thee, to frame that Letter for thine own dishonour, I had been inno∣cent in act perhaps, how ere my will had horn'd thee. But having once enjoyed a Prince so perfect, I never would admit thy loathed embraces, and so have rather chose death, with revenge on thee too boot, who wert the cause Orcanes suffered death. Being thus di∣vorc'd from thee, I hope I in Elizeum shall enjoy him Enter Servants. Cal. Help ho, help ho, I finde that this is truth, my wounds are witnesse, and that there is no trusting wo∣mens tears I durst have sworn thee more innocent, than now I see thee wicked; yet, however live, and repent thy sins, for I can forgive thee, nay, perchance never cease to love thee. Oz. Dll fool, canst thou believe my resolutions are so weak, as for the fear and pain of death, to give them over, lesse for the love of thee; wer't thou the Monarch of the whole world, I would not live after Orcanes, to be the partner of thy glories; but as it is, this knife is far more welcome to me; than thy sight▪ flie, my soul, flie, and leave this loathed prison to meet Orcanes. So, so, let this witnesse, I for thee die, Orca∣nes, and hope I have revenged thee. [dies.] Cal, My wound is far more dangerous than I thought, and I, for ought I know, may bear thee com∣pany; but we shall soon part waies, if there be any ju∣stice in the gods. I would live, bear me to my chamber;
and for that wicked woman, one my wife, let her be buried honourably. [Exeunt servant with him.] Enter Melcoshus. Mel Night, dark thoughts, and justly so, since by my cruelties, obscured that light, which was my only comfort. Oh Despina, pardon me most penitent and now no more afflict me in my dreams; if thou beest mercifull. I will erect an Altar in this obscure Walk, and in the dead of night offer thee sacrifice; nay, even at noon day would I perform it, and in the sight of all, but that I know it must appear too plainly, that I to thee performed all rites with greater reverence, than to our sacred prophet and so the people might rebell, for fear of which, and losse of my neere-fading honour, I did become thy cruell butcher. Bear me, cold earth, till I have some way reconciled my selfe to my dear saint. Enter Haly and Captains. Hal. Are they come over? 1. Cap. They are. How are we sure hee's here now? Hal. 'Tis not so dark, but we shall finde him; stand close a little, perchance he's not come down yet. Enter Osmond. Osm. You just powers, be this night auspicious in aiding my revenge; guide you this instrument as right unto his tyrant heart, as I will give it strength to pierce it: but soft, by the Moons light, I see some men before me, what can it mean? 'tis death for any but Melcoshus to enter here. 'Twould grieve my soul to die, and misse revenge too. Behinde this bush unseen, I shall observe. Mel. Oh my Despina. Hal. Hee's in the Arbour, I heard him groan; let's lose no time, but strike him dead, before he draw his sword, or call for help; if he see to morrow's Sun he'l
know too much of our designes ere night, for us to see it set Odmer suspects our conspiracy shrewdly, and suddainly will finde the truth. 2 Cap. Delay no time then. Osm. What's this I hear, how ere in me it is but ju∣stice to take Melcoshus life in them 'tis damn'd treason, which I'le prevent; nor shall they frustrate me of my revenge their hands are far too base. Hal. Draw, and dispatch him. They sight, Haly & be Captains slain. Osm. Sink down to hell, Haly, thou root of treason, with these thy cursed branches. Mel. Osmond, let me embrace thee in these wounded armes, I fear, to death. Thou wert ordained to be the lasting pattern of love and duty. Osm. Forbear this kindnesse, for know, how e'rel did preserve you from their swords, I come my selfe to kill you for Despina's sake, her innocent blood cries for revenge; and by those powers I am ordained to see their jstice satisfied, by taking life from him, who cruelly extinguished that pure light, which for a long time they intended should have been a comfort to the world, and a great witnesse of their power. Mel. Nay, if my Osmond be a traitour but in thought once, he shall not need to use his sword, I would not wish to live beyond his faith; for, can there be a love or truth left in a subject, when 'tis not to be found in him. Now I perceive the murder I committed was most horrid, since he that lov'd me more then her, she she being alive, would now rob me of life to revenge her. Osm. Know, Tyrant, I lov'd thee once, when thou wert worthy to be my Prince and Master, more than my selfe: But thou, when thou hadst satisfied thy beast∣ly lust, to please the ignorant multitude, thou mad'st a sacrifice of her to them, to whom thou rather shouldst have made them offer sacrifice, on perill of their lives.
Mel. Osmond, thou art here more cruell in thy ac∣cusation, then in thy intent to kill me: For, from the danger of thy sword, there's a divinity that waits up∣on the person of a Prince, that would pro∣tect me; but against the thoughts of thy unexpected treason, there is no armour; for thy unkindnesse so in∣vades my soul, that all that blood that should supply these nerves, flies to my heart to tell it, Osmond no longer does wish to have a being there, if so, to split it will be kindnesse, Osm. Me thinks I finde my resolution of revenge begin to bate its force. Mel. If the consideration of your faith and love to me, so far prevail above your own affection, that you dispens'd with it to make me happy; believe likewise, from the consideration of that care a King should have over his subjects, which wholly was, and ever should have been whilst she did live by me, neglected, I rather kill'd her, than that my love was ought diminished; for had I lov'd her lesse, she might have lived; but I believing her to be so excellent, could think of nothing whilst she lived, but her embraces. Osm. And therefore would you make her suffer for your sault, was that the justice of Melcoshus? Your Son offended, and you punished him; but here you spa∣red your selfe, striking an innocent. Mel. 'Tis true, I struck her being innocent, yet did not injure her or any, but my selfe: I broke no Lawes of Gods nor men: to prove which, I ask no more of heaven, but that the taper of my life, which now growes dim, may burn some minutes longer; then shall I shew my Osmond, by their light of reason, that my unhappy Starrs are rather guilty of Despina's death, than I; she was a Captive, and a Christian, which by our Lawes, we freely may dispose of as we please; her death then, had I been but a subject, was no breach of them.
Osm. She was a creature, for whose sake you would have once have broken all Lawes. Mel. I could break none, my power being uncon∣fin'd. But interrupt me not, lest I do faint, ere I can make an end. The Souldiers were so far from being displeased, that they acknowledged her death a Jubilee. Our prophet Mahomet might most rejoyce to see her breathlesse, whose perfections, being a Christian, so far out-went all those that honour'd him, that some in time might justly doubt our God to be lesse powerfull than theirs, and so the reverence we now pay, grow cold. Osm. All this I grant; but for your injuries to her, what art can salve them? Mel. She was the advocate of all those of her faith, and at my hands procured much mercy for them. The perfect Christian is so proud of nought as Martyrdom, and the more innocent from crime, the greater joy they take in death. Although Despina was not marty∣red for her faith, I grant, but by the force of her une∣quall'd beauty, made a sacrifice to save my honour; yet amongst those of her sect, she cannot misse the ado∣ration of a Saint: And so I only sent her to a greater happinesse. You may alledge it was a happinesse. Osm. Oh divine Despina. Mel. She did not yet desire, to dy but rather wisht to live with me, she lov'd. To this again I answered, that I so much did doat upon her excellence, that I should have forgot to rule; and she must then have liv'd, to see me miserably depriv'd of state and honour. Yet, as it now falls out, my fortune then had been more favourable; for, then had Osmond's love been left a pattern to posterity, and I should sure have found the comfort of his faith, when all men else were traitours. But now— Osm. He hath delivered this Apologie with so much griefe, majesty, and love, that my own reason
makes me know 'tis truth, and bids me justly turn that hatred, which I hither brought against him, upon my guilty selfe, for I have been a heinous traitor. Oh dread Sir, your pardon. But why should I once hope, I that have stood so strictly on my faith, and by a thousand obligations, been fast tyed in bands of duty, yet thus to break without a just cause, just cause, as if there could be any pretence for treason: Shall injuries make men cease to be vertuous? Mel. Let my soul part with joy, since Osmond sees his errour; thy love to me, to vertue, and Despina, have fought so nobly, that it still overcames; which was most vertuous? thy love made thee present her to me, thy faith made thee refuse to take again what thou hadst given, when she did offer it; and when thou thoughtest, that cruelly and most unjustly I had killed Despina, thy noble anger made thee pursue revenge; but now, that thou dost finde that anger was unjust, thy faith overthrowes it, nay, turns it on thy selfe, since 'twas my fate, not I, was guilty of her death, which let my pardon mitigate, so at my death thou shalt expresse obedience, for now I feel his messenger approach; nor does it grieve me now so much to die, as to have lived, and thou been false. If Lovers meet in Elizium, and enjoy each other, there will thy ver∣tues gain Despina from me. [he dies.] Osm. Stay, hee's gone, and shall I live, he and Des∣pina dead? 'twere madnesse; for what is in the world left that's worthy; or, if there be two such, it is not like, that I shall love the one, and serve the other. The fates ordain'd me onely for this end, he nurst and bred me, to wait upon him here, and in the other world. But should I stay, untill the Souldiers know hee's dead, some one of greater faith and courage may, by a volun∣tary death, seek to prevent me; besides, Despina, and the expiation of my intended treason, urges me to die
Come my dear friend, perform thy latest service, in sending me thy Master to Elizium. So, me thinks I see Despina stand ready to embrace me, but for Melcohus sake, even there again I will refuse her. Here at his ho∣noured feet I'le lay me down. You gods, let not the noble affection of our soul change after death, let us remain all three so linkt together in affection, as we were before this bloody separation. [he dies.] Enter Odmer, Hosa, Captain, and Souldiers. Od. Be favourable, you gods, and grant, that the clashing of swords we heard within Melcoshus's pri∣vate walk, have not prevented us; my heart misgives me that we come too late: Treason is swift in executi∣on, the devill thrusting on to mischiefe; and see a bloo∣dy witnesse, that my fears are true, 'tis Haly. Maho∣met, defend the Emperour. Cap. See, here are others dead, the Emperour I think. Odm. Ha! what sayest thou, screetch Owl? Hos. Alas, and noble Osmond too. Odm. Cold as earth. You gods, was this your ju∣stice? could you suffer this royall building, which you had rais'd unto a glorious heighth, to shew your power on mortalls, to fall to earth again in such obscurity, as none could be witnesse of his ruine. But pardon me, you powers, I have profan'd▪ we may conclude from these witnesses, he nobly fell, and died not un∣reveng'd. He ever walked alone, how then comes Os∣mond here; one to suspect him for a traitor, were a sin against Vertue, his very posture witnesses his love, kissing his Masters feet, but more his faithfull hand as∣sures me, that his wounds are from himselfe, as scor∣ning the world, since it no longer did contain Mel∣coshus, who gave it lustre. And shall so young years shew the way of love and duty, yet old Odmer fear to
follow him? No, Boy, thou shalt not so outstrip me. Hos. Hold, noble Odmer, will you forsake us too? then must the Tartar cease to be a people: Who shall command us? all will run to ruine. Accept the Empire rather. Om. Haile Odmer, King of the Tartars. Odm. Tempt not my faith so: shall hope of honours make me live after Melcoshus? Be this my witnesse to the contrary. Capt. Odmer till now did never shew, he was a greater lover of himselfe than vertue; he would sleep quiet in his grave, rather than by a little trouble in the world, preserve us all from ruine. But in the name of Mahomet, I charge you forsake death, and accept the Empire. Odm. Grant, that Melcoshus's son, the dead Orcanes brother, when hee's of age, may take my place, and I'le obey the gods, in yielding to your desires. Om. Long live Odmer, King of the Tartars. Odm. By whom you were inspir'd to teach me this more reasonable way of duty, take up this noble Coarse; for which I will erect a Tombe, shall make his name live to eternity, in which the faith and love of Osmond shall not be forgotten. FINIS.
