C5695 19524238 108949
The Conceited Lover, OR The enamoured young man, His Betty is in his conceit the rarest Just like the Crow whih thinks her own bird fairest, He deeply is enamoured you must know, Which makes him in her praise to overflow, He highly doth commend her she's so pritty, As if that none but he had uch a Betty. The Tune is prithee Love turn to me, &c. COme Betty why art thou so bashful come give me a kiss for a pledge, For why I have vow'd to be faithful y Love I will frée y ingage, Sit down whilst the Birds are a singing hy fame I will spread to the sky, That all ye whole world may se & behold what a pretty sweet Betty have I. Then do not thou blsh for the matter Whst I do hy praises set forth hy beauty ee no t fltter, Since thou ar a girl of great worth Whatever the world may imagine The same will I say till I dye, ever he be, he plainly may see Thy forehead is prittily raised And thy hair the Amber doth shine, Each f deserves to be praised Thy auty is almost Divine. hy sparkling eyes & thy cherry cheeks th lips of a crimson Dye Doth make me to say by night & by Day what a, &c. Thy boy so neat and so tender hy middle and every part, Thy fingers so small and so slender Hh stoln away my poor heart, For a Leg & a foot, & another thing toot Believe me I scorn for to lye Thou est ye day & I boldly may say what a, &c. THer's never a Girl in the City That can with my Betty compare, She is so compleat and so pretty So beautiful and so rare, Oh how it doth raish  sences To have her still in m ye It lightens my heart, and every part to think what a Betty have I. As thrugh the woods we are walking Abroad in the prime of the Spring Of love we are pleasantly talking Whilst pritty birds sweetly sing, And strain forth their note to please us And chirp it melodiously What pleasure it is, to take a , and to say what a Betty have I. The woods and the Groves do inv us Our pleasures abroad for to take The flowers in the meadows delight us Whil'st we pritty posies do make We sport away time for a fancy, Where no body can us espy My hony, my dear come sit thee down here, what a pretty sweet Betty have I. See where little Cupid is sporting Alone by that fair rivers side Where Lovers are often resorting His aroce he closely doth hide He pluckt out a dart & he wounded my heart Which made me aloud for to cry Now I am in love and I plainly will prove what a pretty sweet Betty have I. I'le have thée most richly attir'd I grén like Diana the fair By all men thou shalt be admir'd No Nmph ever séem'd so rare; I'l deck thée sweet Posies and Garlands hich shall he most fair to the eye, And all my ight shall be in thy sight what a pretty sweet Betty have I. What ever my Betty requires With speed I will quickly procure New fashions or what thou desirest Be it never so fine and so pure I'l strain m estate for to please thee Believe me I hate for to lie, So I have the bliss, for to take a sweet kiss, and to say what a Betty have I. Then prithe be merry and chearfull Let sorrow be banisht away For thou hast no cause to be fearful Thy will I will ever obey, If fortune befriend my intentions I care not a trip of a Dye Thy time will draw near when I need not to fear for to say what a Betty have I. And so my sweet Betty I'l leave thee Because we at present mst part, B I will never deceive tee Fo  thou enjoest my heart Th e will seem long till I see thee And have thee to lye by my side What joy and what bliss it will be for to kiss and have Betty to be my sweet bride, Printed for R. Burton at the Horse-shoe in Westsmith-field. With Allowance.
