D2138 12992503 96351
SIR VVILLIAM DRAKE HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT. Concerning the present Distem∣pers, and putting the Kingdome in a state of defence. November 10. 1641. LONDON, Printed for W. L. 1641.
SIR WILLIAM DRAKE, His Speech in PARLIAMENT: November 10th. 1641. Mr. Speaker, IF we consider those dangerous disturbances that this King∣dome hath of late yeares labou∣red under, 'tis certaine, that in a generall and originall con∣sideration, we cannot but im∣pute them to the wrath of God for the sinnes of this nation. But in a second and more par∣ticular consideration, we may properly assigne them unto the violent Councells of some late Ministers of State, who either for want of Counsell; or by mali∣tious practice, have brought this State, from a hap∣py, firme and strong constitution, to so weake and feeble a temper, that the great Physitian the Parlia∣ment, cannot, but with extreame difficulty, apply remedies fit and proportionable to the disease,
but they inevitably run some hazard of indangering the body it selfe; it being very perilous to apply stronger remedies then the strength and constitution of the patient can well beare. Mr. Speaker, You were truly told by a grave and worthy Member, at the beginning of this Parliament: that it must be some extreame necessity that would rectifie and recover this State; and that when that extremity did come, it would be a great hazard whe∣ther it might prove a remedy or a ruine. And this is occasioned, chiefely because violent diseases, doe most commonly require violent remedies, and, violent re∣medies are ordinarily pregnant of new mischiefes: which hath caused your States, best skilled in go∣vernement, alwayes to discerne evill a farre off in their causes, and by their wisedome and fore-sight, prevent them: and I am confident, had we had fre∣quent Parliaments, we should have given a timely stop to mischiefes, and never have suffered them to have broken in upon us with such an inundation of distempers, that without Divine prevention, may yet swallow and destroy us. Mr. Speaker, 'Tis observed of the Romane State, a patterne of best governement, so long as they held up their first vertue and valour, that after a great defeat by Hannibal,Polye their confederates began to forsake them. But Hero King of Siracusa, having so pier∣cing a judgement, that he could see through the pre∣sent to the future; and observing the Romanes so con∣siderate and constant in all their proceedings; even in this extreame exigent of their affaires, and that their Lawes were never more strictly observed by their Magistrates,Lin. nor their people more obedient to their Senate or Parliament, and how their Military Discipline was never likewise more severely obser∣ved: this wise Prince seeing their foundations stood thus firme, sent them Presents of great value, and
corresponded with them in a stricter league of friend∣ship then ever before. Not unlike a good Physitian, who seeing favourable simptomes, in the strongest fit of his patients disease, conceives firme hope of his per∣fect recovery. Now Mr. Speaker, if we set before us an Image or representation of those distempers we stand environed withall; there could not possibly be that extreame danger in them, but that there might be good hopes of a speedy recovery, had we kept close and constant to those grounds of Religion, Lawes and Military Discipline, which have bin noted by wisest Le∣gislators, to have bin the maine cause next under God, of the strength and duration of a State. But Sir, If we examine it, how have our very foun∣dations bin shaken? what Superstition and Innova∣tions have bin brought in upon our Religion of late times by ambitious heady and passionate men? And from this fountaine originally as I conceive, flowes most part of our present distractions. Queene Elizabeth, of sacred and pretious memory to this nation, kee∣ping stedfast and constant to this ground of Reli∣gion, kept this Kingdome peaceable and united at home, afforded a comfortable influence and assi∣stance to the Protestant parties abroad, and after a long and happy Raigne, went unto her eternall rest in glory. And truly Sir, I speake it with all humility, yet with some confidence, that I shall never expect, to see the quiet setled state of this Kingdome, till there be some course taken to settle Religion to some rule and uni∣formity, and not to be thus suffered in an uncertaine condition, betweene illegall Innovations and super∣stitions on the one side, and I know not what lawlesse and Irregular confusion on the other. And let us all I beseech you, calmely and seriously consider, how naturall a motion tis to most men,
not limited by some Law, when they are come out of one extreame, wherin they have bin held by feare, to run with a swift violent course into another extreame; from superstition and idolatry to irreverence and con∣tempt of Gods publike Worship and Ordinances. For our Laws (Mr. Speaker) how have they bin violated by illegall Taxations, Imprisonments, Mo∣nopolies, and other pressures, wherby the Subject hath bin prosecuted and grieved; but this is so obvious to every mans understanding and sence, that I shall not insist upon it. M. Speaker, I come next to our Military Discipline, and how hath this ground of strength bin shaken, partly by the losse of able and experienced Comman∣ders in fruitlesse, if not dangerous, attempts abroad; and partly by neglect, and not duly keeping up our mu∣sters at home. M. Speaker, Every man may lay it as lightly to heart as he please, but I shall be bold to tell you that all the Laws that we have or shall make for the defence of our Religion or Liberties without provident care in this particular will be but like to sumptuous and glorious structures without roofe or covering, sub∣ject to all weather and stormes that shall arise, and whatever Parliaments shall with great wisdome and providence plant for the good estate of future times, without due provisions for our Military defence, may be soon cut down again by the violence and malice of a stronger sword. Therfore (M. Speaker) as you have taken a provident care for the securing of the Havens and Port Towns, so I desire there may be timely consideration had of the Inland strength of the Kingdome, and that the Musters in all Counties of the Kingdome be carefully (especial∣ly in these perilous times) kept up; and that care be taken that every County may have a sufficient pro∣portion of pouder, and other provision for their neces∣sary
defence. And that all commands may rest in faithfull hands, and that certificates of the true state of all things how they stand for defence, may from time to time be sent either to the Councell of Warre you appoint for Ireland, or to any other whom the Parliament shall think meet, and therupon to take or∣der from time to time, to supply all defects, as well of Captains, as of Munition, Pouder, and other neces∣saries. M. Speaker, This point is more timely to be had in consideration, because our perils will increase, as for∣rain estates settle and compose their affairs to their best advantage: And therfore I shall desire that our qui∣etnesse may not rest any longer upon so tickle a ground, as the unquietnesse of our Neighbour Kingdoms; for no State stands firme and secure, but upon its owne foundations. There is one thing more with which I will con∣clude, and I shall humbly represent it as, in my weake opinion, a great cause of our growing distempers, which is the abundance of humours we have stirred, and not purged away, which are but fit fuell for fresh fires to take hold of, if it should burst forth; therefore as there be a great number of this State, Qui paena & calamitate publicae impunitatem sibi spondeus; I shall make it my humble motion and desire, that we make some severe examples of some few of the most capitall offenders, and either pardon the meaner delinquents, if Justice will admit therof, or at least to let them in some reasonable time know what they may trust too; o∣therwise you shall have as many as looke desperately upon their owne fortune be too ready to give their vote for troubles, and seek their owne peace in the publike disturbance, the number of whom, as I conceive, would be warily prevented, especially in these times of en∣creasing distraction. Sir, I have troubled you too long, and am not so in∣considerate,
but to object to my self, that some are of more instant present considerations than any thing I have touched upon. As your sending for Ireland, but I desire as those affairs are in some sure setled in a way we may timely apply our selves to the Root and causes of our distem∣pers, and to begin with those of most importance, and to proceed with them to effect. FINIS.
