F1436A R29524 11164769 46475
For the King, and His Councill at White-Hall. Being a Breif Relation of some of the Cruel, and Inhumane Usage, and great Persecution and Imprisonment of above Four Thousand Two Hundred and Thirty of the People of God, in Scorn called QUAKERS, for Worshipping of God, and Meeting together in the fear of the Lord; and for Obeying Christs Commands, who saith, Swear not at All; and for Testifying to the Truth, and keeping their Consciences clear towards God and Man. In Prison in LONDON, and the Subburbs 500. WHo are so Thronged in Prisons and Holes, (and many without Straw) that they can∣not lie down altogether, many not having a Foot square of room a piece allowed them; some are forced to stand, while others lie down, and some are carried out Sick; and one is carried out of the White-Lyon prison in Southwark Dead, being drove Twenty five Miles like Sheep, and over heat, and then put up in a close Prison: And in that prison the Theives tear off their Cloaths from their Backs, and robbed them of their Money and Goods, to the Value of Thirty pounds; in which Wickednesse the Goaler Tol∣lerated them; and the Meat hath been taken away which hath been brought to them. So consider, what men will bring upon themselves, if they go on in these wayes; and if they were not a Chaste people (in∣deed) it were enough to bring Sicknesses and Diseases among them: and many are sick in Newgate, and some carried out Sick, and one carried out Dead. HARTFORD-SHIRE 140. SOme lying in Dungeons, where there are Vaults or Pits to fall into; and one Woman bigg with Child Dead, by reason of the Abuses and Violence acted by them that took her Husband away, as her Neighbours certified; and they are so Thronged in Prison, they can hardly Stand or Lie; and fur∣ther threatned with Dungeons and Fetters. BERK-SHIRE 40. THere they did at first lie in Dungeons without Straw, being denyed Food for many dayes by the Goaler, and he denyed them the common Aire that he let Fellons have, though he confessed he was afraid, there being so many together, would breed Infection. KENT 100. IN the severall Prisons and Dungeons, and denyed Friends to Visit them; and have had Dirt, Stones, and pailes of Water thrown upon them in Prison; and denyed Straw to Lie on; and forced to Ease themselves in the place where they Lie and Eat; and not suffered to fetch Water, though it be in the Prison, to clean their Room. SƲSSEX 45. WHo are (many of them) poor Labouring Men, who were taken from their Houses and Employ∣ments, and their houses Rifled. HAMP-SHIRE 81. INnocent Men and Women, who lie, many of them in Dungeons, and Meat and other Necessaries de∣nyed them, and their Cloaths taken away from them; and one was Beaten by the Theives till he was al∣most Dead; and their Goods taken away, and Drunkards take possession of their Houses, and make great Fires with their Wood, and force the Servants and Children away; and carried away their Goods by Cart Loads, to the Value of Five or 600l. and Drink, and Rant, and Swear in their Houses. DORSET-SHIRE 73 TAken from their Meetings, Markets, and Shops, and some Beat and Struck with Swords, and cast into Nasty Holes and Dungeons, and Fellons suffered to take away their Cloaths, and Eleven of their Hats, and sold them for Drink, and said they had an Order from Col. Strangwayes. And at Pool they Haled out people that were Worshipping of God, and carried out a Weak Man be∣twixt Four of them; two taking him by his Leggs, and two by his Armes, and stiflled his Sences, and threw him on his Back before the Mayor, who cryed, Hang him Rogue: And so sent him to Prison, with Thirteen more. SOMMERSET-SHIRE 180. TAken from their Meetings, and some in the High Wayes, and some from the Plough, and some from their Houses; and some had their Blood shed, and were kickt and beat, and wonderfully abused, and not suffered to have provision brought them; and one Man had his Shirt taken from him to pay them that carried him to Prison, and many Friends Goods have been taken away to pay them that goe with them to Prison, and many Clothiers are taken away that set many Families to work, and some driven by Horse-Men into Ditches, and some into Pooles, to the endangering of their Lives, and their Provision taken from them, and burned in the fire by Souldiers; and some thrust into Holes on Tops of Houses, that they have hardly room to lie; And they have fettred six Friends to six Fellons in Irons, and the Goaler de∣nies their Wives and Children to visit them; and he demands more of them for a little Air and Ease in a Week, than the poor people could earn in a Week if they were at Liberty: And besides, the cruelty of the Goaler is such that it can hardly be uttered. And some being dragged out of their Houses (for wor∣shipping God) were brought before two Captaines, who fell upon them, bea, them, and wounded them. GLOCESTER-SHIRE 100. THere the People of God lie in Dungeons and Nasty Holes; and so many have been their abuses, that it is hard to number them. Many Widdowes, Girles, and some of 80. years of Age, and poor Men ESSEX 96 SOme of which are shut up in Holes like Ovens in an old Castle, having nothing but Straw to Lie on; and dragged up and down from place to place, and drawn like Sheep by Armed Men, and Horse-men, and then shut up in Holes again, with Straw, being Innocent. NORFOLK 75 MEn and Women taken out of their Beds, and out of their own Houses at Mid-night without War∣rant, and some out of their Meetings: And they that took them, said, They were for Slaying and Killing. And many were Fined fourty Shillings a peice for not taking the Oath of Allegiance, and Im∣prisoned till payment. And the Prisons are so Full, that they can hardly Sit or Lie one by another: And Men and Women separated from their Families and Children. SƲFFOLK 89. SOme taken from their labours, others from their Houses, and cast into nasty Holes, where Men in fulness, would hardly put their Dogs; and after the Officers had rifled many of them, and found them Innocent, yet they sent them to Prison. LINCOLN-SHIRE 85 DRoven up and down, and put into Prisons and Dungeons, and close Places, where they can hardly Lye or Sit; and though there be room enough in the Prison, yet the Goaler denies it them, except they would give a bigger rate then the poor Men could get by their Labours if they were at Liberty. YORK-SHIRE 400 TAken out of their Houses, and from their Employments, and Meetings, and knockt down, and their Blood shed by Armed Men, and thrust up into close Prisons, and Dungeons, and their own House Doores Nailed up, and their Houses kept from them, and Drives, and Forces Men and Women in∣to Prison, that the Prisons are so full, that if they go on thus persecuting, the Prisons will not hold the Prisoners, whom they thus shut up by Heaps and Hundreds. CHESHIRE 138 TAken out of their Meetings, and from their Employments, and put into Prisons, and almost all the Friends in two Hundreds were Fined one Shilling a Day, and their Goods streined to a great Value for not going to the Steeple-House, and Women seized upon in their Beds, and Drove all Night in the Dirt, and then put up a amongst Men, and 68. thrust up in a little Room, and others in a little narrow Room, and are not suffered to go forth to buy them a little bread, nor get a little water. LANCASHIRE 280 SOme whole Families, Men, Women and Children, and Servants taken from their Houses, and drove like Flocks of Sheep to Lancaster Castle, many being sent without Warrant or Mittimus, and Women of 60. or 70. years old drove fourty Miles, and put up in Lancaster Castle, and their very Houses and Estates laid waste; and their Sufferings are so many, in this County, and grievous, they can hardly be num∣bred. LEICESTER-SHIRE 25 TAken from their Houses, and from their Employments, and cast into Goale, where they are not suf∣fered to have necessary things brought to them as Men. WESTMERLAND 120 BEing taken from their Meetings, and some fetched from their Houses, others from their Shops, and other Employments; and many committed, and put together, and their own House made a Prison of, and afterwards carried to several Prisons: And some of this before the Proclamation was Proclaimed. CƲMBERLAND 35 TAken from their Houses, and out of their Meetings, and in Markets, both Men and Women, and sent to Carlile Dungeon, and Holes, Wives great with Child, and there lie under cruell Sufferings. DƲRHAM 100 TAken out of their Meetings, and some from their Employments, and cast into Nasty Holes and Dun∣geons; some taken from their beds, and this before the Proclamation. And the place is so Nasty, that the Goaler said, He would not put his Dog in it; where the Sheriff seeing their grievous Sufferings said, Woe is my Soul, I Suffer with you. WARWICK-SHIRE 240 TAken out of their Houses, and from their Employments, and in the High Wayes, and their Monies taken away as they were travelling, and they cast into Prison, and the Goaler would not let them have food brought to them, though they offered 2d. in the shilling Profit, and are kept in a streight Prison & Dungeon 20 steps deep in the Ground, and are forced to Ease themselves in the Room where they Lodg and Eat, and not suffered to cleane it, and are Chained and Fettered, and Friends denyed Visiting of them, and to bring them Necessaries, who Lye in Straw, and can scarce get that; and such as come to
taken from their Dwellings, and their Houses left Desolate; and one Friend through Cruelty and hard Usage, dyed in Prison; being driven by Drunken Men that could hardly fit on their Horses, and some were beat, bruised and knockt down, and their Cloathes taken from them, and not so much as a Mat al∣lowed them to lie on. And the Goaler encouraged the Theives and Fellons to take their Cloathes from them, and one was wounded; and the Constable threatned to take away a Cow, to pay for carrying some of them to Prison, and took five Shillings from one of the prisoners Wives: And a Justice smote one William Hibbs a Friend on the Head, and set him in the Stocks all night; and a Widdow had a Child lay sick, and they would not suffer her to take order with any to look after it. WILT-SHIRE 42 TAken out of their Shops, and other Places; and after they had sent them to Prison, took away their Goods to Ruine their Families; and some had their Cloathes taken away by the Constable for carry∣ing them to Prison, where they lie in Holes; some being suffered to have Straw, and some none. WORCESTER-SHIRE 197. THere the people of God are thrown into Holes and Dungeons, and denyed Straw to Aged Men, and denyed necessary food to be brought to them, and they can hardly stir, being so throng'd up, Men and Women, and are almost starved and smothered, and their Children left crying in the Streets, and Women 70. or 80. yeares of Age set in the Stocks severall houres together. OXFORD-SHIRE 88. MAny poor Labouring Men taken out of their Houses and Shops, others out of the High Wayes, and kept in Dungeons and close Places, so that many are sick; and some beat, so that their bodies are cruelly bruised; and had Irons put on them that are Innocent, who lift up a hand against none. SHROP-SHIRE 54 TAken from their Shops and Employments, and hrust into Dungeons, where they are like to be choak∣ed, and are denyed necessaries, and Pen and Ink taken from them, that they cannot make their case known, and Bills and Bonds taken from them; and if any come to visit them with necessaries, they cast them into Prison, and fire Muskets at them, and throw things at them if they look but out for a little air, and wounded one with a Pike, and run at another with a Sword. STAFFORD-SHIRE 35. TAken from their Houses, and Ploughs, and Shops, Men of 60. and 70. years of Age; many Families all the men taken away, by which they cannot follow their Callings, and two Boys whipt and stockt, being under Age, and could not take the Oath, and the rest kept in close Prisons. BƲCKINGHAM-SHIRE 61 PUT into a Noisome Prison, and Coale-hole, and denyed the Liberty that other Prisoners have. CAMBRIDG-SHIRE 156 MEn, Women, Widdows and Fatherless Children of 9. or 10. yeares Old, and People of 60. or 70. yeares of Age, cast into Holes and Noisome Places, and their Children left crying in the Streets, having none left to look after them, their Habitations left Desolate, and are like to perish, and the Goa∣ler took away their Cloathes and bedding from them. HƲNTINGTON-SHIRE 20 FEtched from their Houses and Habitations, and carryed into close Prisons, where necessaries were hindred from being brought to them as Men, one of which is Dead in Prison. BEDFORD-SHIRE 60 THrust into a close Prison, whereof Fifty are in a close streight Place where many are sick and weak and likely to perish. NORTHAMPTON-SHIRE 82 SOme taken out of their Houses, others Watched for untill they came into their Houses, and some Im∣prisoned for going to hear the Tryall of their Friends at Sessions, and some out of their peaceable Meetings, and put into Dungeons, a great way under ground, and kept a week without necessary food to be brought to them, and some kept by Officers in a Narrow Room, and yet the Officers took 30s. from them; and they are so thronged in the Dungeons, that some sit up all night, and with lying so thick and close many are weak, and the Goaler stops their Provision, and saith he will have a penny in the shilling for their bread, though their Friends bring it them, and those that bring it, the Goaler kicks and beats, and claps them into Prison: so what they get is through a little hole. Visit them are Imprisoned, and both Wife and Children denyed to bring them Necessaries, and a 100 were kept Prisoners in the Steeple-house in Long-Compton. DEVON-SHIRE 160 TAken out of their Houses, and from their Labours and Meetings, in which they Edified one another, and are kept up in streight and close Prisons, all the Men-Friends in Plymouth; and many of this County being Trades-men, who kept many people at Labour. CORNWALL 50 TAken out of their Houses and Meetings, and cast into Nasty Holes, and Dungeons. BRISTOLL 191 WEre Imprisoned, being taken out of their Meetings by much Violence, again and again, and Guards set at their Doores. CARDIFFE 33 TAken out of their Meetings and Houses, and put into a Cruell Goal, where they are much streight∣ned. MƲNMOƲTH 10 TAken out of their Houses, and put into a close Prison, and drag'd like Horses through the dirt in the Night Season. HEREFORD-SHIRE 35 TAken out of their Houses, and peaceable Meetings, and committed to Prison, and none suffered to come at them to bring them Provision, but as they drew it up by a Rope from the ground. NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE 37 TAken out of their Houses and peaceable Meetings, and cast into Nasty Prisons and Holes. RƲTLAND-SHIRE 4 TAken out of their Houses, and committed to Prison. ANd many People that have kept their Beds, & long been Sick & Lame with Sores upon them, have they carried before Magistrates, & cast into Prison, where they lie very Sick & Weak in Prison, not suffered to have Straw, many of them; and many of these, were taken up before the Proclamation. And Women great with Child have been haled and abused without pitty; no regard being shown to either Sex or Condition. And Women are shamefully abused, and their Husbands cast into Noisome Dungeons, and their Chil∣dren left Fatherless, and Motherless. Queen Maries Law was nothing like this Lingering Martyrdom, that puts Men and Women in Holes, and will not let them have Straw nor Meat; and they are fain to Ease themselves in the same Room where they Lodg, and Eat, enough to Poyson them; by which seve∣rall are Sick, and some Dead. And these are but a part which are come to our Hands from the Generall Prisons of the Counties; for in many other private Corporations, there are many that are not yet come to our Hands; and if you do not put a stop to these things, you will bring Innocent Blood upon your selves. And through the 30 Mens Rising in the City, have you brought this Persecution upon us Causelessly, who themselves cleared us when they were Condemned at the Sessions; therefore we are exceed∣ingly wronged. And this we would desire of you, To restore our Meetings, and to set all our Friends at Liberty: And as you have made us Transgressors by a Proclamation publickly to the Nations, That you would give forth another Proclamation to clear our Innocency before the Nations again, which we do believe you know we are Innocent, and do not deserve these Bonds and Afflictions. Oh the Hard-heartedness, and Unchristian State, to cause so many Men, Women and Widdows that are Innocent, and for Worshipping of God to be cast into Prisons and Dungeons, and their Trades and Hus∣bandry spoiled, their Families Ruined, and laid Waste, and their Children left Crying in the Streets! We whose Names are Subscribed, do in the Humility of Heart, and the Fear of the Lord, in behalf of our Suffering Brethen, Present this to your Serious Consideration, and do wait at your Door desiring your Answer. Robert Wastfeild William Travers John Dando William Stordy John Osgood Thomas Coveny Thomas Pits Giles Silvester Gobert Sikes Gilbert Latye William Simson READERS: THese things Foregoing (except some little Addition that came since) were delivered to the King and his Councell to be read amongst them, that they might Consider of the Inhumane, Ʋnnatural, and Ʋnchristian-like Practices that are acted in this Day on an Innocent People; that if there were any Tenderness in People, it were enough to break their Hearts: And the Councel, upon the View thereof, appointed the Deliverers to come again the next Councell Day. All which is but an Abstract of their Many and Cruel Sufferings, which are so great, that they cannot be conteined in a little Room; and so Cruelly and Ʋnmercifully are they used, as here∣after you may more fully see, which shortly are to be Published, of above 5000. Men and Women cast into Prisons, whose Trades and Husbandry lyes waste, some of which lyes in Straw, in Holes and Dungeons, and a full Account is not yet come to our Hands. And it may be taken notice of, that in the days of Oliver and Richard Cromwell, and in the Common-wealths days, we suffered for our Conscience Sake, and bearing Testimony to the Truth, as it is in Jesus; and because we could not swear in any Case. ANd for which we can make it appear, there have suffered Imprisonments, Stockings, Whippings, Loss of Goods, and other Abuses in their dayes aforesaid—3179—Persons And there lies yet in Prison that were committed in the Names of the Common-wealth, and Oliver and Richard Cromwell—79—Persons And there dyed (in their dayes) in Prison, through hard Usage—32—Persons And there have dyed Prisoners, one before this late Proclamation, and 5. since, through the cruell hard Usage in Prisons—6—Persons LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmil in Martins Le Grand.
