F1458 19537785 109057
Forced Divinity, OR Two Sermons Preached by the Compulsion of Two sorts of Sinners, Viz. Drunkards & Theives The first By Certaine Ale-Bibbers who ha∣ving heard A Minister teach much a∣gainst Drinking, Afterwards met with him, And Compelled him to make a Sermon upon one Word. The Second By A Crew of Theives, who after they had Robbed A Minister, fors't him to make A Sermon in Prayse of Their Pro∣fession; And when he had done, Re∣turned his Money, and Six Shillings Eight pence for his SERMON. LONDON, Printed for F. C. And are to be sold in the Old Bayly.
A Mault Lecture. rtaine Townesmen of the Towne of Frizall Returning from A cer∣taine Ale-house, met in the Fields A Preacher, who had made a bit∣ter Sermon against Drunkards, and amongst other opprobious spee∣ches had called them Maltwormes; Wherefore they agreed to take him, and by violence compell him to make A Sermon, And his Text should be MALT. The Prea∣cher thinking rather to yeeld, then to Contend with them, began his Text as followeth. THis Text cannot be de∣vided into many words, because it is but one, Nor into many Syllables, be∣cause it is but one, We must there∣fore
devide it into Letters, which we find to be foure, which we Di∣vines use thus. M. morrall, A. allegoricall, L. litterall, T. trop∣ologicall. 1. The Morrall sense is well, but first to teach you boysterous men some good Manners, at least-in procuring your attentions to the Sermon, I say: M. masters A. all. 2. L. listen, T. to the Text, An Allegory is when one thing is spo∣ken, and an nother thing is meant. The thing spoken of is MALT, the thing meant is the Oyle of Malt, commonly called Ale, which to you Drunkards is so Pretious, that ye account it M. meat, A. ale, L. liberty, T. treasure. 3. The Litterall sense is true, and according to my Text; M. much, A. ale, L. little, T. thirst. 4. The Tropologicall sense im∣plyeth
that which now is to some, And that which followeth hereaf∣er in the World to come. The effect which this MALT worketh in you, is M. murther, in others, A. adultery, in all, L. loose Living, in many, T. treason. And that which followeth hereafter ei∣ther in this World, or in the world to come, is M. misery, A. anguish, L. lamentation, T. trouble; there∣fore my Masters looke to it, For, As our Saviour was Reviled, so shall yee be, As he Rose the third day, so shall ye Rise at the latter day: But it is to be feared, he did one thing which ye shall never do; he assended into Heaven, where ye shall never come. I should now come to A Con∣clusion, and with all perswade you Boysterous men to amend your lives, that so yee may avoid the Dangers yee are like to fall into;
But I see plainly, and my Text telleth mee it is, M. to A. that is A thousand pounds to a Pot of Ale, yee will never M. mend, because, A. all Drunkards are, L. lewd, T. theeves. But now discharging my duty, first towards God, Secondly to∣wards you my Neighbours, I say once, more againe, concluding with my Text: M. masters, A. all, L. leave, T. tippling: orherwise M. Masters, A. all, L. looke for, T. Terror and Torment. The End of the first Sermon.
Parson Hobart being Robd by the High-way, was Compel'd by the Theeves to make a short sermon. in praise of their Profession, who after Restor'd his Money, and 6. s. 8. d for the sermon. Right Worshipfull, ANd well beloved amongst your selves only, and much more feared a∣mong all good men, I am here at this time to stand before you not well prepar'd, and in a place very strange, as my studiary is unexpe∣cted, yet since it is required of you, I will speak to you with feare and and trembling, and at this time being solitary, In my secredetall bene∣fice, and now in your jurisdiction,
I will briefely deliver to you In a patheticall forme, and in a plaine broad way. In which you delight, your Customes and resolutions with scornd Reformations. And first for your Calling and profes∣sion It may challenge great Anti∣quity, as witnesseth that which hap∣pen'd betweene Heierusalem, and Iericho, it seem'd they were neither ashamed nor afraid, but despising all feare, love and Iustice, did take to themselves a peculiar liberty, In so much [if it were possible] that they would be all Kings, and main∣taine a Soveraignty, Such is the greatnesse of your minds and lord∣ly spirits, for I see honour in your eyes, and liberality shine in your sweet faces, besides to your resolu∣tion you have a constancy and dai∣ly perseverance in your secret my∣stery. And in this I commend you, that like Gentlewomen for mode∣sty
sake, or for shame you hide your faces, and I may say to you as it was said to Simeon and Levi, they were brethren together, and of good Parents, and so may you be Gentlemen, and younger brethren, And as wise men put no confi∣dence in their Leggs, so you doe trust to your swift running horses to run into the bounds of libertie Time himselfe restraines me, no is feare a garment so loosely sha¦ken off, when just cause hangs hi on, from which if you can scap with running it is well. Now Be¦loved, there is divers kinds of run∣ning, and every running takes a start at the first, and stops at the end of the Gole, So doe you from little Children, you begin with a Pin, and run to a point, from a point to a penny, so mount in A∣rethmatick, till the race end, but a little patience. And I shall end as I
begun with fear and trembling this your calling so warranted by your selves, proceeds from love and de∣sire, the one being still pursuer of the other, till Law steps in, and with her Hue and Cry ore∣take you, but let that passe without love or desire, and proceed to the former, which is love, now love is himselfe a theife, and through the cunning picklock of the eye steales hearts and affections, now beloved affection being seated on the heart enflames the desire, which makes you go on with a good heart, and your loving societie, for love is good in society. For you may read of Didimus, whose beleife in his sufferings, Alter'd his bad to the title of good, he was cal'd the good Theife, which good will change that name of arrant, and you shall be called good Theeves, for it is al good you desire, good Iewels, good
Rings, good Plate, good Gold, good Silver, from which good doth pro∣ceed, good Garments, good Meate, good Drink, good Lodging, and withall good Horses to beare you from that bad ill that might pursue you, all you possesse to your selves is good, save your Names, which names, (Inhabiting other persons) cannot but be good to them, thogh ill to you, but still with feare and trembling I speake beloved, yet in this is to be understood, that feare Inhabits in the best of Courage, and so descends to beast as well as men, for as the Lyon feareth the crowing of the Cock, you feare the rumor and threatning out of War∣rants, and as the Nightingale com∣posed of feare sleepes with a pricle against her breast, so you stand up∣on thornes, and would be ever mo∣ving your society is Incompassed into small Clusters, which every
shadow separates, and asthe Iewes whose Tribe of Gad you sprung from, gives a dispersion till your whistle calls, but I perceive by your Motions and turning you expect a conclusion, to which I wil incline in making your faces houre glasses, as you have made this placcmy pulpit for I perceive you stand in some feare as well as I, you may ex∣pect great fortunes, for Fortune favours great spirits, as for brea∣king of Lawes, for violating of sacred rights, for profaning of Sa∣baths, let not these things trouble you, these be for weake and feeble Soules, doe you goe on in your broad way, for the narrow way is verry rough and troublesome, there is a Ladder spoken of in the Scrip∣ture which reachd up to Heaven, now if you have any mind to stay by the way and kisse the Crosse, which Crosse hath a vertue to open
your Eyes, and though you goe up by degrees, you shall slide downe very gently by such a strong stay that shall never deceive you, but let me againe speak to you with feare & trembling, for in many respects you come nere our Lord, who had neither House nor Home, and yet was ever at Home, as you are never out of your way, and it is with you as it was in Elder times, all things were in Common (as you have it or would have it) andit was spoken of the slothfull man, that he should be clothed in ragges, which you scorne, for you are up early and late, as men indulgent in their Cal∣ling, wayting all opportunities; and as I said of our Lord, he had no re∣sting place in this life, no more have you, he was more fear'd then belo∣ved, so are you: He was laid wait for in many places, so are you, Where Hee came Hee was de∣sired
to be gone, soe are you, Hee was at length taken and apprehen∣ded, and so shall you be, he was dispised and forsaken of all men, so shall you be, he was unjustly Condemned to death, so shall not you be, he was buried and rose a∣gaine the third day in Glory, and shall come to be our Judge, and give every man his due. To which End, the Lord pre∣pare you all, Amen. FINIS.
