F2185B R215126 99827097 31510
THE FRENCH KING PROVED A Bastard: OR THE AMOURS OF ANNE (Queen to Lewis XIII.) With the Chevalier de Roan. The Second Edition. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Mitre in Fleet-street near Temple-Bar, 1691. Price 4d.
To the Right Honourable John Lord Lovelace, &c. MY LORD, THis small Treatise, like a Travel in∣to the Mountains of the Moon, for the Bed of Nile, being a full Inquiry into the Little Birth of our GREAT LEWIS, Your Lordships Favour to the Subject of this History, has encouraged the fixing so No∣ble a Name before it: Nor let Our Mighty Monsieur's Idolizers themselves take Offence at the Theme, it being, perhaps, not the least of his Honour, that so Diminutive a Seed should give Root and Production to so Pro∣digious a Spreading Greatness: Nor can I do his Homagers, and Adorers a kinder piece of Justice, than making a Consecrated Relique of his very Swaddling-Clouts. I confess, in∣deed, I have taken the easier Work in hand; the Delineation of his minuter Original, be∣ing something a fezible Undertaking, when the Description of his fuller Growth, the Manhood of our Prodigious Hero, is almost Impossible: Impossible, indeed, when all the publick Declarations, the whole Neighbour∣ing World around him, have so justly, and so unanimously confess'd their Inability of matching his Lineaments, even amongst Hea∣thens and Turks; and truly if the least re∣sembling Feature of him can be found in the spacious Creation, we must look amongst the Remoter Indies for it; and consider Our
Great Lewis's Ambition, as only a more Hideous, Wild, Indian Delirium, running a Muck at all Mankind. But while I presume to commit this piece into your Lordships Protection, my Duty leads me to a just and awful Veneration of that Honour to which I Address. In all the Rapidity of our late Driving Jehu's, your Lordship carries this Triumph, that in their highest Exaltation, and most formidable Pre∣valence, you never bent a Knee. Your Spirit was too Masculine to flow with a Tide, and chose rather singly to stand the Indignation of Power, than herd amongst the Flatterers of it. And if so much true British Merit, as shines in your Lordship, so late a Royal Fa∣vourite, makes so new a Figure in Court, we are to consider, that in the former Sway, when French Counsels and French Gold reigned too Potent, Your Lordship thought Your self a very unqualified English Cour∣tier in a Court so little an English One, and 'tis perhaps Your Highest Glory, to have no sooner a Call to Glory. But, alas! Your Lordships Historian is not my Province; 'tis enough to have chosen a Patriot for a Patron, and to pride my self in this occasion of publishing my self, My Lord, Your Lordships most Devoted, Obedient Servant.
TO THE READER. AFter so many Years Vassalage to France, our too long and too Scandalous Dege∣neracy, Providence having at last raised us the fair Hopes of being English-men once more, I make my True British Reader no disacceptable Present in the Contents of this Hi∣story, unfolding the Great Mystery of Iniquity, the true Extract and Generation of our Great Disturber of the World, Lewis XIV. But though this Narrative may be somewhat Novel here, it has been the Universal Outcry of France. The known Frigidity of Lewis XIII. and the Birth of this Deodat, so called, after 23 years Child∣less Marriage, with all other attending Cir∣cumstances, so plainly convincing the Impossi∣bility of his being his Reputed Royal Father's Begetting, that nothing but the Forehead of a Legender must pretend it. The famous Barri∣cado of Paris, and so formidable a Revolt under such Great Leaders against him, at his first Accession to the Throne, too publickly proclaimed his Extraneous Birth, insomuch that all Tongues were full of it, Reason con∣firmed it, and scarce a Doubt or Scruple to question it. 'Tis true, indeed, His Canine Teeth and the French Slavery growing up to∣gether, so bold and so dangerous a Truth was a
little hush'd, and durst talk no louder than in the Whispers and Murmurs of Closets. And if any critical Reader should ask why this History ne∣ver saw Light in England till now, let him but think when he moves that Question, and he will soon answer himself, by considering, that in the two last French-pension Reigns, when Cole∣man told Le Chaise [The Interest of My Ma∣ster and Yours are inseparable] the very At∣tempt of so hideous a Profanation against our then adored Idol of France, our Grand Master Lewis had pull'd down that inevitable Thunder against so capital a Transgressor, as had undoubt∣edly raised both Publisher and Printer a higher Gibbet than Hamans. For Instance of which, a Paper but a little inclining this way, only in some Minute Reflections upon the Birth of Lewis, our present Theme, was about the latter end of King Charles's Reign burnt at Char∣ing-Cross by the common Hangman, and the Impression suppress'd. And if the Prosecution stop'd there, 'twas more for the politick hushing of the Subject of the Paper, than in any Mercy to the Author or Promoter. Now after this full and thorough Search into the Cradle of our Son of Thunder, Lewis, after examining the Nest, the Egg, the Brooding and the Hatching; though the whole Conduct of his Reign has been so much the Subject of Humane Amazement and Horror, I must do him this publick Right, as to own I am not so much star∣tled
as the rest of the foolish World may be. For example, to survey him round, what if, in the first place, History or Chronicle have rarely or never afforded his Match in Breach of Treaties a∣broad, or Oaths and Sacraments at home? For let us consider him as he is: Why should we ex∣pect His Honour any Stronger than his Mothers! Imposture was his Foundation, and Falshood and Treachery run in his Veins. What Wonder then that he should Reign in Perjury, when he was Begot in it? Infidelity govern'd the whole Ascendant at his Conception, and the continu∣ing of its Influence ever since, is only to make his Life of a piece with his Nativity; and the Wielding of his Scepter an Original like his Means of Gaining it. But then he takes De∣light in shamefully Falsifying and Faith∣breaking with Sovereign Heads—Yes; Royalty is no Kin to him; and therefore his Aversion. The Cannibal never devours a Can∣nibal, and Lewis preys upon Princes, because they are Aliens and Heterogenes to Himself. I confess however there is yet one Prince in the World at least, that our Lewis has some kind∣ness for. And strong cause why: For he was learning after his own Copy, to keep Faith as little as Himself, and as once so hopeful a Profi∣cient under so Great a Gamaliel, he loves him for some little Likeness-sake. But then what's more Monstrous, he Leagues with Mahomet-Yes, his Engagement with the Turk against
Christendom is a little Notorious, and the Alcoran is more in his Favour than the Bible. And good Reason. For That will never rise up in Judgment against him, though This shall. Though he has made bold to crack a small Oath, when he Swore to the Edict of Nants; and another Oath and Sacrament that he would never invade Flanders, &c. He was never For∣sworn upon the Alcoran, though he has been up∣on the Evangelists. 'Tis true the Clamours of Europe are justly loud against him for the Sanguinary Principles and unprecedented Cru∣elties of the hard-mouth'd Lewis—But for my part it is a less Subject of my Admiration, when my little Reading in Physicks leads me to consider that those Principles in him, and that Propensity to Blood lye only at Na∣ture's Door. Do we not daily see the very same natural Inclinations predominant even in In∣ferior Animals? What treacherous ill nature shall we find in a Mungril, compared with the Generosity of a True Begotten Mastiff? One Advertisement I must give my Reader, viz. That our young Monsieur Legrand, after∣wards dignified the Chevalier de Roan (whom in respect to his exalted Fortunes in his Royal Mistresses Favours, I rather mention by his Ti∣tle than his Name) has not here finish'd his Hi∣story: The fatal Catastrophe of that poor Gentle∣man, the Tragick Conclusion of his Dear bought Pleasures, being reserved for a second Volum.
The Amours of Anne (Queen to Lewis XIII.) with the Chevalier de Roan, true Father to the pre∣sent Lewis XIV. King of France, &c. HIstorians have but too loudly, and too infa∣mously recorded the long usurp'd Dominion and Ascendance of the Triple Diadem over the Scepters of Temporal Princes; an Ac∣quisition obtained only by the implicit Resignation of the too bigotted Disciples of Infallibility, whose strength of Romish Faith overpowring their weaker Royal Reason, has sometimes subjected their Thrones to a Vassalage almost as intire as that of their Souls. But this is not so much to be wondred at, since Eccle∣siasticks even of a lower station, and of inferiour Dignity to that of their mighty Lord the Pope, have sometimes been little less than sole Administrators Supreme; whilst not only the whole Helm of States has been guided by them, but also the whole Regalia of Power have been so totally lodged in their own Hands, till the subministring depending Monarchs, their kind Resigners, have been little more than Ti∣tular. An instance of which, perhaps, was never more famous, than in the French Administration of the Il∣lustrious Cardinal Richlieu under, or rather over Lewis XIII. That fatal [Ego, & Rex meus, I and my King] so vainly and so unhappily arrogated by the unfortunate English Woolsey, (that memorably glori∣ous
Butchers Son, who had kneeling Nobility for his Cup-beaters) was a truer and more conspicuous Jewel in the greater and happier Richlieu's Cardinals Cap; whilst no exalted Favourite possibly ever govern'd more absolute than himself. And to fix this glorious Blazon in his Scutcheon, perhaps it had a double Sup∣porter. First, The exorbitant Favour of Mary de Medicis, sometimes Queen Regent, during the Mino∣rity of Lewis XIII. that introduced and advanced him to all that Grandeur: And next, the poor spirited Weakness of Lewis himself, that even after his Arri∣val at Manhood, only changing the Regency from Mary to Richlieu, continued still under the Cardinal's Guardianship, either not willing, not daring, or not able (or all of them) to resume the unlimited Au∣thority that that great Minister had so long possest. And as true Greatness is only perfectly establish'd, where no Controul or Opposition can shake it, this Reigning Favourite had all the kindest Smiles of For∣tune to gild his Brow; for his Sovereignty over the Will of the King was not greater than the Dominion he held in the Favour of the Queen too, the Royal Consort, Anne of A. The Affections and pleasure of his generous Royal Mistris, were so much under the Guide and Government of Richlieu, that the Cardi∣nal was her most trusted Cabinet Counsellor. Thus, in fine, with no superiour Influence to malign him, nor Equal to rival him, with the Hearts of all with him or above him, and the Knees of all below him, his Power stood fixt, and his Foundation immovable. In this high station he grew so popular, and withal so aspiring, that together with the Exaltation of his personal Honours, his Soul was no less elevated too; Insomuch that he wanted not an over-large Taint of that common Contagion of Dignity, Pride. The Sanctity of his Spiritual Robe, alas! was no Fence against it, whilst Ambition, with all its attendant Vanities and Frailties so wholly possest our great Lord Cardinal, that the Church-man was entirely lost
in the Governing States-man, and his Ecclesiastical Scarlet wholly truckled to his sairer and all com∣manding Royal Purple, with which his propirious Fortune had so signally invested him. Under the Umbrage of our great Richlieu, the pre∣sent tallest Cedar of the Grove, sprung a fair Scion from so nourishing a Root, a beautiful Niece; who favour'd and cherish'd by so potent a Patron, and so near a Relation, made one of the brightest and most glittering Court Stars of France; a Lady in her Person, Mein, and Ayre so extraordinary charming, as could not sail of a whole train of Hearts. To match these outward dazling Charms, Nature had no less richly furnish'd her within, viz. with that sprightly Wit and refined Sense, as spoke her Mistress of a Soul no ways unworthy so fair a Lodging. 'Tis true, indeed, she had a natural Pride, and an unbounded Ambition; but those, as hereditary Qualifications, derived from Richlieu, and which (whatever Faults elsewhere) in the present Estimate of the World, are reputed Vertues in the fair Sex, were rather her Ornament than Blemish. This young Lady, the Darling of Richlieu, (under the Tutelage of his peculiar Care and Protection, you may imagin) had no splendor nor Pomp wanting to bear that Port, and render her that Figure in the Court of France, to the highest that either Beauty deserved, or almost Vanity could wish. And as if her Alliance to the Cardinal had entituled her to share a part of his Trophies, and Rule where he Reigned, she had gained so far upon the Favour of the kind Queen, so caress'd and so loved by her, that the Queen had scarce that Secret which she lodged not in the Bo∣som of this fair Favourite; so fond of her Company, and so wedded to her Conversation, that she could hardly relish a Pleasure without her. To style her the Queens Confident and Friend, is a Name of too narrow a comprehension: their endearments were so extravagant, that she treated her more like a Sister.
And that Court Ceremony and formal State might be no bar to their more particular Intimacy and Fa∣miliarity, the Queen was generously pleased to give her self the Romantick Name of Statira, and her fair Confident, Parisatis; (Titles borrowed from the fa∣med Daughters of the great Persian Darius) with an absolute Command laid upon her in all their private Entertainments and Converse to use no other Names between them; that the Title of Majesty, or the cu∣stomary respect, and more awful Distance to a Crowned Head might be no impediment to that nearer Liberty, and freer Ayre and Gayety she desired in the Friendship and Society of her dearest Parisatis. Our fair Parisatis (for since that Name had the honour of a Royal Donation, we cannot give her a better) had her natural Pride in no small measure heightned from her standing so fair in these extraordinary good Graces of so Royal a Patroness, as borrowing no small Additional Lustre from that station and sphere. For she could not think that the envious World could imagin her to receive such unaccountable Favours, without some extraordinary Mine of Vertue to de∣serve them. Thus, besides the Attraction of her own singular Merits, with such Crouds of Suitors, and daily Court made to her, so many of the Supplicati∣ons to the Queen being addrest to Parisatis, she looked upon her self as a small Saint to a Deity, enrich'd with no common Emanations of Glory (for Court Favourites shine by Reflection) from so Divine a Fountain of it. With all these caressing Smiles of Honour on her side, the fairest golden Lot of Fortune so prospe∣rously drawn, Love only has his last Game to play, which if a lucky one, must now give her the only re∣maining Consummation of Felicity. Adorers such Beauty cannot want, for Cupid might be proud to empty a whole Quiver in her Cause. But whatever silent Vows were paid her, in all the random shot she daily made among the Herd of unworthier Slaves, as
they are Objects all below her thoughts, so nothing but the highest and noblest Quality must dare to be Pre∣tenders to the Glory of wearing her Chains. The only wounded Heart she can vouchsafe to pity, must have no other Recommendation than the Highest Princely Veins to center in it. For as we told you, Ambition ruled her whole Ascendant; instead of Per∣son, Courage, Wit, Gallantry, Passion, Fidelity, Ser∣vices, those inside and outside Qualifications that usually prefer the Faithful Lover to the easier Ladies Favour; High Blood only answers all with the aspiring Parisatis; and no Oblation or Incense burns hallowed or fragrant without it. In short, Love must lead her to a Palace before he gets her into a Temple; for truly she takes her only prospect of Happiness from Turrets and Battlements, and her Bridal Pillow can only lye soft where the Bed is Imperial. Amongst her numerous Captives (not to mention any of her inferior Conquests, which, as not thought worthy her own Cognizance, shall be as little worthy ours) to gratifie the Ambition of our towring Pari∣satis, it fell out, that no less than the Monsieur, the King's own Brother, Gaston, Duke of Orleans, was be∣come her most passionate Admirer. The most ardent Devoirs, with a thousand Vows and Protestations, were daily laid at her Feet by this Royal Inamorato. His whole Orizons were paid to no other Saint, and the Praises of her Beauty, and the Effects of its Power, at all Opportunities studiously sought, were chanted in her Ears by so assiduous a Servant. The ped Parisatis, no doubt, wanted no listening Ear to so Illustrious a Lover, and though with all the re and distance, suitable even to the Character of a Clelia or a Cassandra, she received his Addresses under all the most rigid Laws and Obligations of Feminine Honour, and with all the formal Coldness of her Sex, she had nevertheless a private Satisfaction which gave her no little warmth within, from the Contempla∣tion of that courting Glory, which she saw bent
low before her, as so humble a Suppliant for her Ac¦ceptance. She look'd upon him not only as the Bro∣ther of the King, a Title of it self alone sufficient to build his fair hopes of Success, and her own fairer Foundation of Happiness upon; but also at present the Heir Presumptive (if not Apparent) of the Crown of France. For as his unperforming Brother, the King, (alas!) had now lain more than twenty long ineffectual years by the side of her charming Statira, and his Fair Anne of A—there was very little or no interposing Danger of a young Dauphin, from that Fair but uncultivated Field of Love, to bar the Monsieur's Inheritance of Empire: And con∣sequently the prospect of a Diadem glittering in her Fancy, and the possibility of her living to be Queen of France, infused no mean Inclinations in Favour of Orleans. And though, 'tis true, it lay only in the Breast of Providence, whether Orleans were destined to survive his Brother, and reach that Crown; how∣ever if she lived not to be Wife of a King, she might probably be the Mother of one. For as Gaston had given the World a more pregnant Testimony of his Manhood, than his imbeciler Flegmatick Brother, made already a happy Father, yet his fair Offspring being of the Female Sex, and therefore by the Salick Law excluded from Imperial Succession, it might possibly be ordained, she fancied (and even Virgin Fancy may sometimes rove to Motherly thoughts) her own peculiar Glory and Blessing (though she wore it not her self) to bear from her own Veins an Heir to a Diadem, and perhaps to see him wear it too. In conclusion, how long a Chain of thoughts on this fer∣tile Theme, and what pleasing Conceptions presented themselves to her Meditations upon her present gawdy Fortune in view, the Spirit of Parisatis, or at least a Soul of her own Dimension, can only imagine. The Address of our inamour'd Orleans, as an Affair so nearly relating to her Dear Parisatis, was kept no Secret to the Queen; and indeed there was no matter
of Privacy in it, the Queen being really an original Confident in so visible an Amour: for there was scarce that Access to be gotten to Parisatis, but what was in the presence of the Queen; so industriously she avoided all other Opportunities, as there was rarely a moments Interview between the passionate Orleans and her self, that had not her sacred Eye and Ear a Witness of all that pass'd between 'em; so cautiously had the wise Parisatis managed so important a Treaty of Love. But as neither the Queens presence, nor indeed any thing else could baulk our Monsieur's amorous Persuit of his Mistress, his emboldened Professions were under no Restraint, avowing before the Queen, his intire Devotion and Captivity to the conquering Eyes of her beloved Darling, and his own adored Parisatis. The Queen, whose Zeal for her Parisatis Advancement, had made her an inter∣ested Party, took the occasion very often to applaud the Monsieur's choice in the disposal of his Heart, assuring him that both her Wit and Charms were so highly deserving, that he could not sit down in a nobler Siege; and if his Heart were answerable to his Vows and Professions, he should not want her best friendly Offices to promote any Honourable Preten∣tions to a Lady, who besides her own ponderous Merits and Attractions, had Her Richest Royal Favour, an unalienable part of her Dowry, to fill up the Scale. The Monsieur, to express his high Satisfaction from her Majesties Gracious Inclinations towards him, always returned her his humble and most profound Acknowledgments, continuing still to launch out into all the most extravagant Praises and Raptures that Wit or Eloquence could furnish on so copious a Theme as the Beauties and Charms of his Parisatis, avowing himself her eternal Devote. The Cardinal, who had not yet publickly appeared in this Affair, was nevertheless all this while a most attentive Listner behind the Curtain, as no indiffe∣rent Zealot for his Nieces Preferment. And ac∣cordingly
being called to a private Consult with the Queen, after some General Reflections on the Glory of so Noble a Match for her dearest Parisatis, toge∣ther with not only her best Services, but also her promise of engaging the King too, if necessary, in her Cause (to which the Cardinal express'd his most dutiful Sense of so Royal an Obligation) the Queen began to make a full Repetition of all the Court the Monsieur had made to his Niece; but upon full Scrutiny and Descant upon the whole, she remarked, that Orleans, 'tis true, had all along been so exorbi∣tantly passionate in his Vows and Protestations, that if his Language spoke his Soul, there could not be a more captivated Lover than himself. But all this while he had never yet come to a particular Decla∣ration, his Courtship hitherto had only express'd it self in Generals, in Harangues upon her Beauty, and his Fetters, with all the Customary Love-Flourishes, the usual Preliminary Gallantries of an Amorous Suitor, and that was all. He had yet rather endea∣voured the rendring his own Love acceptable, than supplicated any particular Return of Hers, having never yet come to the Peremptory Question, Marriage. And though 'tis true, as far as Decency would permit, her zealous Friendship for his Niece had prompted the Generous Queen sometimes to hint to him the Merit of so Beautiful a Bride; and 'tis true, the Mon∣sieur had always made answer with that Transport as declared how grateful so pleasing a sound was to him, yet he had not made the least direct Application to Parisatis or the Queen (though offer'd her Intercession in it) tending that way. This Observation afforded matter of Debate: As first, That the Monsieur was a Person that had not only more innate Honour, but also more Years upon his Back, than to make so publick (for now the whole Court rung of it) and so serious a Suit to a Young Lady, and yet not really to be in earnest. For Rallery or Amusement to so notorious a Prejudice to a Virgin
Ladies Reputation, too Sacred to be jested withal in such a manner, was a thing the Monsieur neither would nor could be guilty of. So that the Truth and Reality of his Love was past all Doubt or Dispute. But then again, if so violent a Lover, as his repeated Oaths had sworn for him, what Bar lay in his way to hinder him coming to the finishing Interrogatory? His Courtship had now been the Business of consider∣able Time; and tedious Woings are only fit for Lovers of humble Merit, such who have possibly no other Re∣commendation than their Whining and Dying at a La∣dies Feet, and consequently through long Services and longer Penance, must make a Pilgrimage of it to a Ladies Heart: But the Monsieur's Case was quite diffe∣rent, he was Brother to a King, and visible Heir to a Crown. His very Character and Birth therefore com∣missioned his Bolder Advance, and made so strong a Plea for him, that his Approach lay fairer and nearer without all this idle Ceremony, and unnecessary For∣mality; a Vanity likewise generally unpractised by Persons of his Age and Experience, who having been a Husband before, if for no other reason, they thought might have launcht forward with more Confidence, and arrived at the deciding Conclusion, without all this lingering woing Pain and Toil. Nay, what was odder yet, and seemed a little unaccountable, though even prompted by the Queen to the determinating Period, his Answers still rambled wide from the pur∣pose, and always waved that Subject. Upon summing up the whole, the Queen came to this Advice, That as Matters stood, the Cardinal should take a favourable Opportunity, in the presence of some of the Nobles of France, after his Thanks for the Honour the Monsieur had done him in his kind Ircll∣nations towards his Niece, frankly to make a tender of Marriage to him; a part so becoming the Cardinal in paternal care of his Niece; and considering the high Extract of the Monsieur, no ways below him to be the first Aggressor; nay, and which perhaps might all
this while have been the only real occasion of the Monsieur's Hesitation, as expecting it from him; it being not impossible, his Pride, as a Prince of the Blood Royal, might look for that Gratification, nor was it unreasonable for the Cardinal to give it him. This Counsel, as it carried the Face of Reason, was heartily and thankfully embraced by the Cardinal; and for that favourable Opportunity, desired, he pro∣posed the making of a splendid Ball at his own Palace, to which inviting their Majesties, the Monsieur, and the whole Court, in the midst of all his Hospitality and Entertainment, he should lay hold of some kind Minute to make him the Tender proposed, under his own Roof. The Queen highly applanded the Pro∣jection of Richlieu, and the Consult terminating in this Resolve, the Fair Parisatis was called to give her Assent to it, who readily and dutifully submitting to the undisputed Pleasure and Will of the Queen and the Cardinal, intirely resigned the Disposal of her self, and the Ordination of her Fate, to their absolute Decretals. Accordingly a Ball is made at the Cardinal's, with all the Gallantry and Magnificence suitable to the Glo∣ry of an entertaining Prelate, where a full Constella∣tion of all the Court-stars, the whole lustre of France, shined together. But to recite what Faces amongst so many rivalling Ladies carried the preference, or how far our Parisatis was a leading Beauty amongst them, being not material to our History, we have on∣ly to remark, that a Noble young Gentleman, hither∣to a Stranger in Court, but afterwards known by the-Name of the Chevalier de Roan, appearing in this Il∣lustrious Assembly, made the most eminent Figure there, and drew the Eyes of both Sexes upon him His extraordinary Personage, his gallant Mein and De∣porment, and what added an Ornament to the rest, as being the peculiar Grace at this time and place, his excellent performance in Dancing, recommend∣ed him to the general admiration of the whole Com∣pany,
and conferr'd upon him beside, the particular Honour of being singled out to dance with the Queen, as due to his own singular merit; a favour at such a season, and in so gay a Court as that of France, not always given to pre-eminence in Title or Blood. In the height of their entertainment, whilst the youn∣ger and the gayer Revellers were taken up as Spectators or Performers in this Princely Scene of Delight, their Eyes, or their Heels, (or both) employed, it hap∣pened that Gaston, having had enough of that airier Treat, had selected out half a dozen of the Grandees of France, and resolving to see what more substantial Chear and Hospitality he could find within, was re∣tired into one of the with-drawing Rooms, where se∣veral sumptuous Banquets of Sweetmeats were pre∣pared, set forth in all the richest state imaginable. The Cardinal, whose Eye and Thought attended the Monsieur, was instantly one amongst them, and com∣plemented the Prince, and his few, but noble Com∣panions, with all the Civilities and Caresses that might be expected at all times from a Person of so much Address as Richlieu, more especially on this oc∣casion, where it was introductory to a Parley of such Importance. After a brisk Glass or two of Wine had gon about, enricht each round with a several Noble Health, it fell out at last in the Circle to one of the Noble-men's chance to begin Madam the Cardinal's Nieces Health, possibly more in complement to their generous Host, the Lord of the Feast, as being his Relation than in any Thought that concerned the Monsieur as her Ser∣vant. The Cardinal well pleased to have her Name first started by a second hand, laid hold of the opportu∣nity to apply himself to the Monsieur in a very elo∣quent Speech, acknowledging (in all the most obli∣ging ) the signal Glory that shined upon him, as a particular Donation of the Prince, in his gene∣rous  and Inclinations for what was so near to him both in Relation and Protection, as his Niece.
And that all his present return in part of Discharge of so vast an Obligation loaded upon him from so high an Honour, was only his own and his Niece's du∣teous Resignation to the pleasure of the Prince; and in farther gratification to his Honourable Pretensions, by vertue of his own Authority over her, (to which her Obedience must acquiesce) to tender her in Mar∣riage to him; which in all Humility he accordingly offered him. The Monsieur, who from the Cardinal's first entrance upon this Subject, began to glow extremely, his Face redning all the while at no small rate, attended (with what patience may be imagined by the sequel) the end of his Speech; when coming to the proposal of Marriage, all his return was in this short Answer, Mar∣riage, Proud Priest! seconded with a hearty Box of the Ear bestowed upon him with no little indignati∣on. The attending French Nobles were struck with no common astonishment and confusion at so amazing a Rupture. The Astront of a Blow given to the Prime Minister the great Superintendant of State in the Post and Power of Richleiu, being matter for suffi∣cient Surprize. But as the Greatness of both their Qualities stood too high for any particular Interpo∣sition of theirs, all their part was only to express their general Concern and Disorder, and to endeavour to withdraw the Monsieur. Accordingly they in∣stantly requested him to retire home by the Back∣stairs, without publickly disturbing of the Assembly within, by that certain Uproar which the least Breath from this Air would unavoidably raise amongst them. The Prince prevailed upon by that Consideration, accepted their Counsel, and retired, only with two or three hearty Oaths muttered at his drawing off, That his Niece and himself might have come to a right understanding without reading so hard a Chapter as Marriage, and honour enough too done his Reve∣renceships Church-blood, as High and as Proud as he was—Whether these last words of the Monsieurs
were heard or no, we are not informed; but truly it matters little, his Soul being full enough of those three hard Words that came before, and the harder Blow that came with them: And indeed the Sense of this last part of the Princes Declaration was too plainly contained in the foregoing short, but compre∣hensive Sentence. His disdainful Refusal of his Niece in Marriage, with the Storm that followed it, but too manifestly publishing what sort of Love the Monsieur drove at in his Courtship to that Young Lady. What Resentments, or rather what Agonies the Cardinal felt at this Affront, I shall not so much endeavour to describe, the whole Sequel of our History, being indeed only the violent Motions from this one Mortal Ferment. It is enough to tell you that Pre∣latick Honour, alias Spiritual Pride, was wounded in the tenderest Part, and bore all the Pangs of so pene∣trating a Stab. And as the highest Revenge is the natural Product of so provoking an Injury, you must expect from this one Minutes fertile Seeds, the Brood∣ing Work for Years of Mischief; and to find our Man of Heaven possess'd with half the Furies of Hell, with so much as every Snake and every Sting about them. But as deep a Mine of Sulphur as this Fire brand had lighted in the Cardinal's Breast, he was nevertheless so much Master of his Temper, as not to start out into too sudden or flashy a Rage, his Vengeance being reserved for more certain and therefore more deli∣berate Execution. And accordingly, returning to the Noble Company, he forced a Complaisance, which for the short remainder of the Entertainment, shrouded all his Discontent under the fairest Face he could put on. And the Witnesses of his Disgrace being all at present departed, it was a means to hush all, at least so long as till the Ball was over. But no sooner had this Accident taken Air (which was in few hours after) and the whole Court began to be loud with it, but the Cardinal, to be neither Idle
nor Ungrateful, for a small Earnest of better Payment, the first work he did, was to paint the short History of last nights Adventures in such Colours to the King, that the Monsieur's Banishment from Court was the next Mornings first Dispatch before his uprising. From the King's Bed-Chamber his next step was to his Nieces, who, poor Lady, partly through the Fatigue of last nights Dancing, and likewise some little Thoughtfulness after her waking, relating to the expected kind Answer of the Monsicur to the Cardinal, which detained her some time longer in Bed, (neither Dreaming last night, nor fancying on her Pillow this Morning, any less than an honourable Reply, suitable to the Violence of his Passion, and the Force of her own Charms,) was but newly risen, and Heaven knows, as yet, wholly Ignorant of the fatal Schriech-Owl Notes approaching her: For alas! though long before this, the meanest Attendant about her, nay, the poorest Servant in the Family, had the whole Dismal Tale almost old and stale amongst them; yet as ungrateful Sounds come generally last to the unhappy Ears that are most concerned in them, the sad Narrative is reserved for the Cardinal's first Delivery. The Cardinal accordingly entring her Chamber, took his Niece alone, and gave her the whole Story at large, aggravated by all the keenest Bitterness of Spirit, in the manner and Circumstances of the Rela∣tion. Our Parisatis, who attended the last Syllable of it, without interposing one word (her Soul indeed being too full for a hasty vent) after the Cardinal had compleatly finish'd the matter of Fact, together with some Additional Remarks of his own, dress'd up in that Language which the most poynant Gall and radi∣cated Spight could furnish him; she broke out at last into this following Reply. O Monster! Monster! Infi∣del! I have been woed then all this while only to make a Whore of! Traytor! Villain! A Toy reserved to play with at his idle Hours. Alas! the generous Monsieur designed
Honour for me. A little poor low despicable thing as I am, by his most Gracious condescending Favour, decreed the Glorious Exaltation of being the High and Mighty Orleans's private Divertisement. Goat! Satyr! Devil! Then musing a while she continued, What Shame and what Confusion is destined for poor miserable me? Had he but plaid the honest bare-fac'd Villain, and at his first Address frankly spoke out his Leud Lascivious Suit, and plainly told his execrable purpose, I could have met the Monster with that Look and Treatment he deserved; and at his very first Assault have thundered my Desi∣ance in his hardened Face, and made the Ecchoing World a Witness of my Scorn and Indignation. But the base Gozener, the Ʋnprincely Poor Impostor has worn the Golden Vizor and betray'd me, betray'd my credulous Ear; seduced my cheated Reason so egregiously, that I have heard him, heard him with Patience, suffered him my Presence, and bore the treacherous Sounds of his vile Love repeated o'er and o'er. And what will babbling Fame and the mis-judging World, to think that I have hearkened so long and loath'd no sooner, but Record me for a Listener, a downright Favourer of his lawless Suit pleased with the fultry Breath; whilst thus my injured Virgin-Innocence must stand the Blast of each pollutin Tongue, and all my Honour Canker into Infamy; when common Story, and every laughing Varlet shall jest upon my Shame—Here the Cardinal began to interrupt her, endeavouring to pacifie at least that part of her Resentment, by assuring her, that both her Conduct and his own in this matter, as senseless as popular Mistakes and Follies may be, should soon convince the World as to that Point, and remove all shadow of so mean an Imputation, and so sordid a Blemish upon the Virtue of his Niece; and that no danger of Reproach or Slander should threaten her then. Well then, replied Parifatis, suppose the World will  me the Right as to clear my Innocence and Virtue at le from that one Scandal, and as a special mark of the Justice, only give me my due, in publishing me that wea
that shallow, bubbled, cudden'd Fool (for that's the best of my Names) as could hear an insolent uninterrupted Villain, buzzing so long, so loud, and so often in my Ear, without either Wit or Sense enough to understand him all this while. Alas! Sir, what if I scape this Calumny, surmounting one Billow while another sinks me? Oh! do but think, but seriously consider what a Deluge and Inua∣dation of irresistible Shame will overwhelm me, when I must ever bear about me, and carry to my Grave a Name so little; pointed and hist at by reviling Tongues, as a poor course-born Creature sought only for a Harlot; a wretched thing, thought worthy of no higher than the loose Pleasures of the Monsieur. Oh! that accursed fixt eter∣nal stain! Which not the Blood of that ungrateful Man can ever wash away. The Beauty of a Subject has some∣times conquered Kings, and the Daughters of common Nobility have been often raised to the Beds and Thrones of the greatest of Monarchs. But the poor harder-fated little humble Niece of Richlieu has neither Beauty, Blood nor Merit, worth an honorable Thought from the Younger Bro∣ther of Lewis, that Lucifer Devil of Pride, Orleans. Nay, she so much undeserved so exalted a Favour, that the very Motion of it could be repulsed with no less a Contempt, than treating the Great Cardinal Richlieu with the Indignity of a Groom or Varlet, the Reward of an impudent vile Blow, a Buffet for a Vagabond. But, Sir, I hope such Injuries as mine, this Outrage of a rude Barbarian, acted upon a poor young Virgins bleeding Fame, so near to you in Blood (and I hope nearer to your Heart) this ruining blasting load of my Dishonour, cries loud for Vengeance from you. Yes, my poor Child, replied the Cardinal, doubt not but I shall be thine and my own Avenger. Alas! dear injured Sweet∣ness, my Fever burns as violently as thine, though I do not talk my pain so loud as thou dost: For this Barbarian (as thou justly callest him) has acted Outrage on my Honour too; and I have that long heavy Score of Justice  account and ballance with him, that if I shew him Mercy, may Heaven never shew me any.—Our
Parisatis, at the Cardinal's so hearty a Promise of Revenge, was ready to imbrace his very Knees in gratitude for so pleasing an Accent: Even the thought whereof was such an Alleviation to the Torments and Anguish of her Soul, as changed the very Air of her Face; insomuch that with all the gayest and sprite∣liest Raptures and Applauses as due to so glorious a Resolution; she call'd him the best of Friends, the kindest of Fathers, her Sacred Champion, her Tutelar Angel (no Name was too Good for him) Her Trans∣port could hardly forbear giving him more than Hu∣mane Attributes; such Divine Musick to her, was the very sound of Vengeance. Their private Conference was now interrupted by a Visit of the Queens, who having both heard and felt the Injuries of her dear Parifatis, was kindly come her own Embassadress, with the Compliments of Con∣dolance on so sad an Occasion. The Queen soon bore a part in the mournful Chorus, and express'd her self in so many just Reproaches to the Baseness of Orleans, and so much sensible pity to her dear Friend, as drew Tears from the Eyes of Parisatis; her Afflicti∣on hitherto having given it self a more Manly sort of vent, her Pride being indeed too high for so much weakness in her Eyes, as so Feminine a Distillation. But beside the Rudeness and Ingratitude of Orleans, in so publick and audacious a Slight of a Lady so much more deserving than himself (for such her kind∣ness and esteem of Parisatis was pleased to think her) she had another no less Hainous Accusation against him, for his Wickedness: That his base vile Lendness should dare to entertain a Thought of such Impiety, as to form Designs against the Virtue of her Parisatis. And her Reflection thereupon (so tender was the nice Virtue of the Queen) made her look back with Horror and Trembling, to think how often her own Ears (how Innocent or Ignorant soever) had been profaned with so many unhallowed Sounds directed to so wick∣ed an end, as remembring that all his leud Addresses
(as gilded as they were) were made in her own Pre∣sence—To Sum up the many and long Plaints the generous Queen was pleased to make, in exploding the Ingratitude of the guilty Monsieur, and the Wrongs of the unfortunate Parisatis, would be too tedious a Recital for our present Treatise. Let it suffice that Hours, Days and Nights were spent between them on that Melancholy Subject. And as low-prized as her Merit stood in Orleans's lighter Ballance, her Cha∣racter and Value was not lessened in the Esteem of A—who continued still rather the more passionate and faithful Statira; whilst the Wrongs of her Friend, like the Foil to the Diamond, had only renderd her more Lovely; there being no Tenderness nor Endear∣ment wanting, to shew she was a Jewel worn next her Heart; whilst our Parisatis at the same time daily pour'd her whole Bosom forth to her Gracious Royal Mistress, excepting only that she cautiously concealed the Cardinal's and her own sworn Revenge against him. For Malice is ever that Matchiavil Politician that Mines so low, that nothing but its own Dark∣lanthorn Light must peep into it. That only Secret was of Importance too weighty for the Trust even of the Highest Friendship; for she considered that in the intended Circle of her own and her Uncles Ven∣geance, possibly there might be those conjured Devils raised up, too frightful an Apparition for so tender a Constitution as the Queens. The Queen was so too much a Devote, so over-zealous her Principles and Practice of Religion and Piety, as would render her but an ill Confident in such an Intreague; Rancor and Envy being unsociable Companious for Rosaries and Prayer-books; and therefore for the Poyson and Gall now brewing, the Queens Breast was wisely thought too nice or too weak a Chrystal to hold them. Our Monsieur all this while under the Disgust of his Banishment from Court, was no inconsiderable Male-content. And amongst those of his Followers, that made their several Descants upon the Rencounter
between himself and the Cardinal, there were some of the Boldest of them, who in Pity or Affection for the Young Lady, were pleased to argue in her Favour, and tell him, That though it must be acknowledged his own High Birth entituled him to a more dignified Choice than the Niece of a Prelate for a Wife for the Royal Orleans: However, as Princes have often dispensed with meaner Deserts than her own; with Submission to the Monsieur, they thought, that at least after his former more Princely Choice of more Illustrious Quality, it were little or no Blemish in his Royal Scutcheon, to be once over-ruled more by pure Love than rigid Honour in this last Election: And therefore, what through the Considera∣tion of her Alliance to the High and Potent Richlieu, her Interest in the Friendship of the Queen; but above all, the Recommendation of so much Youth, Wit, Beauty and Virtue; they were of opinion, that the Monsieur's Dispen∣sation in this case, had been no such impardonable Con∣descention. Virtue! (replied the Monsieur a little smartly) Yes; ask the He Goat her Ʋncle Cardinal else, that old Pharisaick Letcher in his own Tribe. No, Gentle∣men (continued Gaston) if I had a small itching Fancy for my private Recreation, to come in as a fair Game∣ster at a little harmless Level-de-coyl, I think it had been kind enough in taking the unnatural Drudgery off of his sanctified Hands, without hanging a Church-Relique about my Neck in an Ecclesiastical Collar, and making a Noose for Life on't. No, my kind Counsellors, I durst not play so bold a piece of Knight-Errantry for her, as Dispensing a Power as you are pleased to give my Honour and Me. This ill-natur'd Rallery upon his own and his Niece's Vertue, deliver'd so hideous in the Original, and no∣thing lessened or lost in the carrying (as Malice is al∣ways fleet of wing) soon reacht the Cardinals Ear; and made an impression, if possible, deeper than the first affront, as heightned in some circumstances above it, that being an Act more of Heat and Passion, but this of Study and Premeditation, But when it came
to Parisatis, (the Cardinal being still the fatal Messen∣ger) her unbridled Rage was turned into down right raving and distraction; to wish her self the Eyes of a Basilisk, the Aspect of a Gorgon, the Tresses of a Fury, or that with her own hand she might but have the plea∣sure to root his impious Heart up, were her least ex∣travagant expressions. Such an infernal Spirit of De∣traction! Such a tremendous mass of Forgeries against her unspotted Vertue, as an execrable pollution with her own Uncle! The innocent fondness of the Car∣dinals (possibly) more than common Paternal Love, and her own assiduous Filial Duty so perverted! so blackned! so deformed! In fine, exasperated and incen∣sed into a perfect raging Libertine, she flew out into the most vehement inveteracy against the Be-divel'd Orle∣ans, that ungovern'd Female Passion, or Desperation it self could invent. Insomuch that the Cardinal was forced to use his best Rhetorick to disperse, at least, some part of the too outragious storm, by telling her, That if his own envyed Greatness in the World (for he could impute it to no other cause) had raised so monstrous an ex∣halation, so ridiculous a Calumny against him, he was sorry indeed (poor Innocence) that any part of it should touch her; but at the same time was something pleased at least in the Incredibleness of the Scandal, as being too fabulous to find Reputation with any thing but the grossest of Ignorance and Stupidity; in which List belike Mon∣sieur was one of the number. Matters thus standing, we must now lead our Rea∣der to the Cardinals thoughtful Pillow, and there examin the Minerals compounding, and the Bolts a forging, for the Execution of that vow'd Vengeance, which only waits for Strength and Power worthy the Cause that moves it, and the Hand that weilds it, to rowl down on the Head of Orleans. In his unsleeping Meditations on that Subject, the Cardinal consider'd the Monsieur's boundless Pride, founded chiefly on his standing the visible Heir of France. For as the King (as before mentioned) for above twenty tedious
years, that long reproachful Age had now slept, and perhaps only slept in the Arms of the fair A—and Lucina not so much as once called in all this time. No Fruit from that fair Tree; no, not so much as a promising Blossom or Bud towards it; so little pro∣spect of an Heir of Empire from this ill matcht Pair, that even the Physitians themselves in all their highest Court-Flattery, the common sin of their Profession, through all their Medicinal Prospectives, had not yet ever discover'd even a Symptom of one, and in truth, not so much as a Foundation laid, or an Essay made towards one. Thus after the whole Court and the whole Kingdoms worn-out-Hopes of the least Scion from the present Regal Root, the universal Despair of France had now fixt their Eyes on the Monsieur as their succeeding Sovereign; whilst the Devoirs, the Veneration, and the Knees on that only account were the greatest, if not the only Supporters of his proudest Greatness, and most insulting Vanity. This Consideration led his musing Thought to this Question with himself. What if yet late as it was, En∣gines might be set at work, Address, Art and Eloquence managed, and natural means at last used, that the Queen might yet bear a Son from her own Body to inherit the Crown of France, and thereby totally dash the Monsieur's aspiring Hopes, and crush his whole tot∣tering Pride at that one mortal shock? The very first start upon this darling thought spread so pleasing a Titillation through the whole Veins of the Cardinal, that he hug'd himself at the very conception, and look'd upon it even in the first Embrio as the sublimest Machination of the most exquisite reach of Revenge, and a Projection worth the Soul of Richlieu. Accord∣ingly his intire Study and the whole Faculties of his mind, are bent and intent upon no other Design. And for the promising Feasibleness of the Under∣taking, he presently revolves with himself, that the whole Default of Royal Issue lay only on the King's Part, and that no Deficience on the Female side, had
all this while obstructed the fairest Happiness of the Kingdom in an undoubted numerous Royal Progeny, that long e'er this had bless'd the Hopes of France, had the Abilities of the Unfortunate Lewis been but answerable to the Fair A—'s Merits, or his long∣ing Peoples Wishes. The compleat Accomplishment therefore of so good and so great a Work, in this ne∣cessitated case, lyes only in the artful Introducement of some charitable Assistant, to supply the Conjugal Indigence and Wants of the poor pitied King, and borrowing abroad what cannot be found at home; a Crutch not the first time made use of, for the timely Support of a failing Family. This Proposal, as reasonable as it appears, has ne∣vertheless this formidable Opposition lying in the way, viz. The Queens severe Virtue and inviolable Chastity, as almost (upon due Reflection) staggers the whole Enterprize. He very well remembers, to his no small Grief at present, that never was Life and Conversation more exemplary for Devotion and Piety than the Queens: A Lady whose constant Practise had held so unshaken a Conformity to the Strictness of her Education, that she startled at the very Shadow of a Sin: A Lady so Famous for the many and singular Christian Offices performed by her in the most conspicuous Acts of Charity, some of them of that Condescention, even below her Imperial Dignity: Her Conscience of that Nicety, as in all Humane Appearance must render her Honour altoge∣ther inaccessible. Insomuch, that upon a serious Re∣view, he meets with those apparent Difficulties, which to a Soul less resolved than Richlieu, would make him quit the Attempt as impracticable, and the Success impossible. Resolved then, as he is, he considers, like a true Engineer, which way the subtle Mine must work, and where the weakest side, to make the most advanta∣gious Approach. For this he can fancy no Movement so cunning, as first guining her Confessor to the Party,
engaging him in the Plot, and so making use of Ghostly Influence, and Ecclesiastical Policy in the Operation. Under that Shelter what Golden Pre∣tences can he want! Necessity of State, the Glory of a Kingdom (and what not? as may be managed) nay, the very Safety of the King her Husband, and even the Service of Heaven it self shall be Interested in her Consent; that the very Transgression sweetened and softned into Virtue and Piety, even Innocence shall Combat Innocence, and Honour Battle Honour, till Love and Pleasure bear away the Trophy and the Triumph: The Rhetorick of a Conscience Guide, especially where Flesh and Blood is the Argument, possibly carrying that perswasive Eloquence over im∣plicit Believers, that nothing like Church-Musick to tune her into Love. The Cardinal, for moving of this Machine, presently considers he has one of the best Tools for his purpose, that his own Heart could wish, or rather the whole Sanctified Robe could yield him, viz. Father Joseph, a Capuchine, his own intire and absolute Creature, and at present the Queens Confessor; one whose very inside he knows so well, as that the undisputed Will of his Patron the Cardinal is his guiding Oracle, and that there cannot be that Design of what Stamp soever, that (he is well assured) Father Joseph will not readi∣ly and joyfully embarque in, with all Fidelity and Secrecy; and without Hesitation Scruple or Reserve, either to serve his Interest, or gratifie his Pleasure. The very Person of the World too; who besides his being not only the properest Instrument, and hope∣fullest Coadjutor in this Affair, as a Man principled for such a Design; but who also in his present Emi∣nence in the Court and Kingdom, as standing fair for a Cardinals Cap (a Promotion which the special Favour of Richlieu had been so strenuously endea∣vouring for him, and thereby a Chain that more firmly link'd his Heart to him) had consequently a Power equal to his Inclinations of serving him. For
this Trusty Joseph therefore is an immediate Dispatch sent, and a close Conference held; where the Car∣dinal at large recounts his Grievances (which indeed were no Secret to Joseph before) and after the most pathetick Remonstrance of the unpardonable Indig∣nities put upon him by Orleans, together with his own resolved Justice in revenging himself, he comes to the particular determined Means and Artifice for executing it, and thereupon desires his kindest and best Assistance in it. Father Joseph proud of the Glory of so high a Trust, and glad of all Occasions of testifying his in∣violable Bonds of Gratitude to so Illustrious a Bene∣factor, as thinking his ablest Services at best but a Tributary Acknowledgment of his own ALL received and held from Richlieu, presently assures him of his steddiest and most vigorous Performance of his Emi∣nencies Sacred Commands, telling him (with a Transport in his very Countenance) that Fortune in all the Lottery of an Age, could never have pre∣sented such an opportunity, so lucky an offer'd Minute for Accomplishing such a Design upon the Queen as now. For, Sir, continued Joseph, to make bold to crack a Seal of Confession, I must tell you, that the Queen at her last Shrift, has confess'd her self passio∣nately fallen in Love. And though your Eminence knows our Ecclesiastical Key of Consciences unlocks almost all the Secrets of Courts and Kingdoms, however our Spiri∣tual Commission in cases of this nature, out of a tenderness for Personal Reputation, extends not to an Inquiry into Names. 'Tis enough that the Female Penitent, under more heavy Circumstances, more mortal Dilemma's than the poor Innocent Queen, is obliged to the Penance of a Blush, in exposing her shamefullest Frailty to her Confessors Ear, without specifying the Per∣son, or declaring the name of her Seducer, though the In∣vader of her Virgin Chastity, or the Violator of her con∣jugal Sacrament. Nevertheless the Queen, poor harmless Creature, who, God knows, I believe, had scarce a thought
that ever went astray that way before (at least I can answer for those years she has continued under my Ghostly Tuition) came yesterday to Confession, and with a Con∣trition as great as some Sinners would have felt for robbing an Altar or burning a Church, without mincing Circumstances, or Particulars, and with an innocent open∣ness both of place and time, confess'd she had unhappily cast a look and a wandring thought (not to mention the hard names she gave 'em) upon a young Stranger, that danced with her the other night at your Eminencies Ball, expressing in so mortifying an Accent, that hainous Sense of her Transgression in so guilty a Breach of her Conjugal Duty (though God wot but in a look and thought) as if she had broken the whole Ten Commandments; that I dare Swear I might have enjoyn'd her the walking bare∣foot through the longest Street in Paris, and the poor thing thought it but reasonable, had I had so little Christianity as to have inflicted so cruel a Penance for so venial a Sin. 'Tis true, I must own she did not utter his name (for I believe she hardly knew it) however my Curiosity upon so novel a Confession from the Queen, giving me some inqui∣sitive Thoughtfulness upon so surprizing a Subject, has since plainly pointed out the Man to me, who must undoubtedly be the same gallant young Gentleman, an unknown Face in Court, whose Figure at your last Ball drew so many Eyes upon him; and whose Title (which I have likewise since discovered) is the Chevalier de Roan, a sprightly young Gentleman of noble Extraction, who educated abroad in his tenderer Youth, has brought home the Accomplish∣ments of a Gentleman and a Traveller to grace his native Country. The finding of a Golden Mine could not have been half so welcom to the Cardinal, as this Intelligence of Father Joseph's, so infinite a Treasure he now thought himself Master of, in so prosperous a Disco∣very. And looking back upon the Extraordinariness of past Circumstances, viz. That the very Minute that Orleans's bold Hand, and bolder Arrogance durst so impudently lift it self up against him at his own Ball,
the Queen should so fortunately at the same time play the amorous Rover, twining so lucky a Snare about her Heart; as if the same over-ruling Destiny that suffered so loud-tongued an Affront given to his Per∣son and Honour, was in Justice to himself so studious for the Reparation, as that at the same moment it permitted the Guilt, it was also knotting the very Whip for the Punishment. Reflecting I say in this manner, his Fancy plaid so much the Self-flatterer, that he could not look upon the whole Adventure as matter of Accident, the meer blind cast of Chance; but that no less than the Hand of Heaven it self was in it, and consequently his intended purpose carried both Honour and Honesty along with it from so po∣tent a Justification. But however his Cause did not want any of this beautiful Varnish to set it off; for Revenge so naturally dear to the Constitution and Kidneys of Richlieu even in the blackest Face was always lovely. But to lose no time, but lay hold of the Forelock, and fall upon Business, his immediate Determination is to send for the Chevalier, and to take him into his own Protection; and the first mark of his Favour shall be to introduce him into Court, and plant him in some honorable Office near the Person of the Queen, a Stand very necessary for the Game in hand. And for that, his own uncontroled Disposal of all Honours in Court (and, in truth, in the whole Kingdom) paved his way so fair for him, that the Cardinal's least word was a perfect Patent Royal for any Grant of that kind. And considering farther, that Loves best Arrow is Golden-headed, and the gayest Shaft strikes deepest, he resolves that if the Chevalier's private Fortunes (whatever they are) shall be any thing too narrow to furnish out an Equi∣page for this Expedition, his own kind Purse shall be open to support that highest Court Grandeur as may dress him up the fairest Mark for a Royal Eye: So far will he be from starving so glorious a Cause, for the Crowning of whose Success, he cannot think the
Exhausting a whole Exchequer a profuseness too Lavish or ill Spent. And therefore the whole Result at this time between them is, that this Initiation of the Chevalier to the Queen; Conversation, shall be first managed, before himself and Father Joseph come to a closer Attack of the Queen, reserving their far∣ther Measures to new Counsels, as occasion shall arise, or necessity require. Means therefore is presently used for bringing the Chevalier to the Cardinal's presence, who no sooner saw, and entertained him, but he descryed all those Manly Charms both in his Person and Conversation, as rendred the shaking of the Queens Heart from so powerful an Assailant, a less subject of the Cardinal's Wonder. For though he had partly taken notice of him at the Ball, and remembred he had seen him Dance with the Queen; yet the Cardinal's Thoughts being then otherwise taken up, he had not leasure for that Observation which his present more critical Survey of so deserving an Object affords him. The Cardinal, whose penetrating Judgment possibly could read a Man through at as quick a sight as any Person of the Age, received that instant Satisfaction, and that enlightening of his hopes from an Aspect so pro∣mising, as carried him to the most vigorous pushing on of the present smiling Fortune before him. After several Questions relating to his Birth, Education and Travels (the chief Subject of the present Interview) to all which, the Chevalier answered with that grace∣ful Assurance, in an account so pertinently delivered, and likewise with all that Sweetness, as added a far∣ther Illustration to that Worth which each Minute appeared but more conspicuous: The Cardinal, in return, addressing to the Chevalier, told him, That as the Advancement of Virtue and Merit had been always his Study, he had received that Character of him, which supported by so many fair Credentials now before him had recommended him to his Favour; and therefore he required his attendance to morrow Morning to receive some
Pledge of it, and in the mean time to be assured that his Fortune should be his own Dependant. The transported Chevalier, who desired no greater good Fortune than Court-Smiles could build him, and no greater a Foun∣der of such a Fortune than Richlieu; Power, Honor or Trust in the Court of France, being really the Work of no other Creation than his own; made the Cardinal a return of that most sensible Duty for so dazling a Grace as his Eminence in this surprizing manner was pleased should shine down upon him, taking his leave with that profound Obeysance, that he carried home with him such pleasing Idea's from so elevating a Meditation, as sweetned his whole Thoughts all day, and gilded his very Dreams all night. The Cardinal has no sooner dispatch'd the Cheva∣lier, but strait he posts to the Queen, where the busi∣ness of his Visit was to tell her Majesty, That he came a Suitor to her in the behalf of Merit. Merit, my Lord, answered the Queen, and such an Intercessor for it, are very prevailing Orators in any reasonable Suit. The Rea∣sonableness of my Suit, replied the Cardinal, I'll refer to your fair Self, when telling you I have occasions of State to remove an Officer now in Service under your Majesty to another post, I would intreat your gracious Acceptance of a supply to fill his vacancy in the Person of a Gentleman, who besides noble Friends, has nobler Vir∣tues his Advocates. 'Tis true, he is something a Stranger in Court, and I suppose unknown to your Majesty, though I confess your Majesty has seen him once at least; and if amongst your numerous Denations of the like Favour at that time, your Majesty might chance to take notice of him, I could recall him to your remembrance by reminding you, that your Majesty did him the Honour to Dance with him at the Ball the other night: And though as young a Courtier as he is, yet being a Person of that remarkable Appearance, that not only the Approbation of the Court in that fair Assembly gave him some Respect, but my own Testimonials of his compleat Worth can more fully answer
for him, I am emboldened to present him to you as one of your Menials in the Capacity of your Majesties Knight of Honour your Gentleman Ʋsher. At the Cardinal's first mention of the Stranger that Danced with her, the Queen in spight of her best Endeavours to bide it, could not hinder the rising of a little extraordinary Vermilion in her Cheeks, which the Cardinal with a Secret Delight perceiving, nevertheless in tenderness to the blushing Queen, he as industriously managed his Looks to take no notice of it, as the Queen could do her own for giving him no occasion for it. And by that time the Cardinal had finish'd his Address, the Queen, with much ado, had pretty well recovered her natural Complexion, and suppress'd the guilty Bloom, the lawless Rebel Blush that had made so bold an Invasion so much against her Will; and at first Thought, out of a Secret Check of Honour, and a Religious Guard of her Virtue, she had almost resolved to have denied the Cardinal her Acceptance of so dangerous a Servant; only upon a sudden Recollection she was not provided with any reasonable Objection against him, for her just Refusal of so qualified a Person, unless she would plainly, or at least tacitly have confess'd the true cause of her Denial, and thereby have discovered her guilty Weakness to the Cardinal, a Frailty so shame∣ful, as she could sooner pass an Ordeal, than but once think of exposing. Enforced therefore to a consent, she made the Cardinal a short Answer, telling him, He needed not to have given himself all this Trouble, but have used his own pleasure; for the Choice of her Ser∣vants being always the least of her care, he best knew who were the Persons fittest for her. And so with an affected Indifference, and by way of Prevention to all Danger of any new Insurrection of a second Inso∣lent Blush, she diverted the Subject by falling into Discourse of other Matters, with no little pleasure to her self at so prudent a conduct herein, though Heaven knows to a quite contrary Effect; for little
thinking what Hands, Poor Lady, she is now fallen into, the Artfulness of her affected Innocence, is only a plainer Indication of what she most labours to conceal. The next Morning at the appointed hour of Atten∣dance, the Chevalier waits the Cardinal's Uprising, when the generous Richlieu taking him alone with him into his Closet, he told him, As an Earnest of his Favour, and an Introduction to his future good Fortune, he design'd to place him near the Person of the Queen, in the Quality and Post of Her Majesties Gentleman∣Ʋsher. And that he might make his Entrance not un∣worthy himself, he desired his Acceptance of thirty thou∣sand Crowns for some little present help: Giving him far∣ther to understand that his pleasure was, That no Person should appear in more Splendor at Court than himself: And to encourage him to be no ways sparing in any Equipage necessary thereunto, He assured him his own Hand should never be shut to him, but a constant Assistance should daily flow from the same kind Fountain to support that Figure he intended he should make; only one Injunction he must lay upon him, which was, that, as his Favours were never sullied with the Affectation of Vanity; for that reason, and some other private ones of his own, he conjured him to make at least this part of his Kindness an inviolable Secret. The Chevalier utterly confounded (as well he might) at so pouring a Tor∣rent of Bounty, fell instantly upon his Knees to thank his generous Patron, in a Language and Posture suit∣able to the Reception of such accumulated Graces in so astonishing a manner heap'd upon him. For as the Season was not yet thought ripe to unseal the Chevalier's Commission in the Post to which he was entring, the Cardinal's Favours appeared so much the more magnified, as that the Chevalier was at present wholly ignorant, that there was concealed Vengeance as well as open Love in so extravagant a Benefactor, and that a descending Thunderer lay hid in the Golden Shower. The Cardinal was pleased likewise
to question the Chevalier, if he were married or no; to which the Chevalier modestly answering in the Negative, the Cardinal told him, That as he had made him his own Adoption, his whole Preferment should be en∣tirely his own Care; and therefore he enjoyned him not to engage himself in any Amour without his Pri∣vacy; for with the Disposal of himself, the Disposal of his Heart too he intended should be his own par∣ticular Care. The Chevalier, whose natural Ambition and Vani∣ty (to give him his right) perhaps the World could hardly match, in persuance of the Cardinals Will and Pleasure, the extraordinary Splendor and Gallantry order'd him to appear in, resolved rather to out-do, than fall short in his Obedience to that part of his Command. For not only the Cardinal's Bounty (shower as often and as much as it kindly please) but his whole Patrimony, rather than want, should be all ventured on the same Bottom. Our gay Chevalier thus pompously enstated, has not shin'd many days in his Office, before the Cardi∣nal thinks fit to send for him, to closet him once more, and there open the great Arcanum to him, with all the necessary Documents for the Conduct and man∣age of it. After several other Caresses, the Cardinal for feeling his Pulse, asks the Chevalier his Opinion of the Queen, and how he likes his Royal Mistriss. To which the Chevalier, Like her! and please your Eminence! 'tis impossible but every thing that is humane must kneel to such Divine Goodness; nay, her very mini∣string Angels, her Guardians themselves, must certainly be in Love with her. Nay, my Chevalier, reply'd the Car∣dinal, now you speak like a passimate Servant indeed: But I perceive you are rightly qualified for a Courtier, you can play the Flatterer so expertly. No, my Lord, reply'd the Chevalier, Whatever other Qualifications of a Courti∣er I may justly mourn the want of, I am no ways desirous of that common Court-trapping, Flattery, as fashionable as 'tis now worn. Besides, I believe, your Eminence is sen∣sible
of that Royal Merit in the Person of the Queen that deserves a better and abler Panegyrist than my self; the highest Character I can give such sublime Excellency, be∣ing only the universal Duty of all that have the Honour to be blest with the Ʋmbrage of it, and that I am no more than one of the Croud that pay it her. Well, my Chevalier, answered the Cardinal, smiling, the Queen is not ungrate∣ful for the kind Character you give her, for she is pleased to return the Chevalier as a kind one. But to put one Question to you; Could you love the Queen? Love her! my Lord! answered the Chevalier something surpi∣zed. Yes, says the Cardinal, Love her! Love that Divine Goodness you have painted so beautiful. Examin your Heart, and faithfully answer me that serious Question. My Lord, answered the Chevalier, there's something so amazing in the Question demanded, that I am unprovided with sense enough to understand you: But since your Emi∣nence's absolute Command repaires my Answer, and I dare not be so insolent to ask an explication, I can only reply, That had Providence, the great Disposer, debased the Qua∣lity of the fair A—level to the poor Chevalier de Roan, or advanced mine up to hers; and the Divine Dispenser so ordain'd to lodge such Beauty in my Arms, I could out-pride my self in such a Prize above the famous Alexander with his conquered Ʋniverse, Lord of a fairer World than his Sword ever conquered, or his Ambition wept for. The Cardinal rouch'd with a pleasure to find the Wax so soft and so fair for the Impression, began at large to unfold from the whole beginning (without the least conceal'd particular) the Queens favour for the Chevalier; and in fine, the whole Structure to be rai∣sed on that Basis. Only he a little minced the pri∣vate revenge engaged in it, and laid the more weigh∣ty stress on that more popular Argument, the safety and the glory of the Nation so zealously labour'd for, in raising an Heir from the Body of the Queen; con∣cluding the charming Subject (for such the ravish'd Soul of the Chevalier began to feel it) with this clo∣sing point, Well, my Chevalier, if the Royal Grace of
the Queen, and the Interest of your assisting Friends are planting so fair a Grove of Lawrels for you in the stoln pleasure of so sweet a Paradice, I hope you are not of too strait-saced a Conscience, but so fair a Lady—Conscience, my Lord! (replied the Chevalier, interrupting him) No; there's that higher Divinity in the fair A—'s Charms, that truckling Conscience moves a Sphear below it. The en∣joyment of such Bliss carries its own Consecration; and I could mix my Orisons to such Beauty, even with my Prayers to Heaven. This amorous Rapture of the Chevalier's had a little tang of Profaneness in it, being some∣thing of a bold Launch before so high a Church-pillar; however the Cardinal's Sanctity relish'd it never the worse on this occasion; and finding so hopeful a Knight-Errant of him for marching under a Lady's Banner, he told him what obstacles lay in the way, in the rigid Vertue and Chastity they had to combat. However, not to let that dishearten him, the sur∣mounting of those Bars for him, shall be his own and Father Joseph's Work. For as thick a mass of Ice as Honour had hardned about her Heart, they had In∣cense and Altar Coles ready to thaw it; and Reli∣gion it self should be the ministring Instrument made use of for softning her most obdurate Scruples of Conscience. And therefore the Chevalier's business was only to be very assiduous and officious about the Person of the Queen, his silent Services being all the Address he must dare to make; for the distance of a Crown'd Head would admit of no bolder an approach, his Pro∣vince being no more than to attend the consummation of his destined Felicity; and waiting for the golden Fruit, till they had ripen'd it for gathering. But above all things he was to remember, (and that with a most religious observance) that he was pushing for that Conquest which would admit of no Triumph. For there was more than Fairy Treasure in the Bles∣sing designed him; a Secret to be sealed up in eternal silence, and prized as valuable as his Life. This private Conference of the Chevalier and the
Cardinal was now interrupted by a Visit of his Niece's; and the Chevalier dismiss'd with that entire satisfacti∣on, and those Raptures about him, that he could scarcely think he trod on common Ground, but look'd upon himself as already translated to some more than humane Elysium, from the Aspect of so many gaudy Visions that now danced before him. Our Parisatis, who being hitherto not called to the Consult, and thereby ignorant of the great Work of Projection, and the present forwardness of it, thought the Cardi∣nal's Bolts a little slow a forging; and in truth was making this Visit for lending her help to the Bellows, or (rather than fail) to the Hammer to hasten them. But Fortune at this time spares her the needless trou∣ble; for the Cardinal prevents her the Question, by voluntarily making her the Partner of his own Joys, in a Relation at large, containing the whole Progress of their Plot, and the full prospect of their Success. Our Parisatis lent an Ear to the Narration with as much Attention as to a deliver'd Oracle; and though it plainly terminated in down-right betraying the Ho∣nour, and rifling the Chastity of her dearest and kind∣est Statira; yet whether all the most sacred and bind∣ing Ties of Friendship were swallowed in the insati∣ate and undistinguishing Thirst of Vengeance; or that perhaps her Feminine Pity to the Queen for her twenty long abstinential years, might think a Love∣plot no unfriendly design against her, she could not forbear giving the Cardinal the highest Applause, as due for this Masterpiece of Invention. The Cardi∣nal finding his Niece's Pulse beat so even with his own, was pleased to tell her, that her Faculties too must be exercised, as well as Father Joseph's and his own, viz. in seeking all occasions before the Queen, of extolling the Wit, Person and Gallantry of the Che∣valier; there being no whet to Love like Praise, nor can the Queens Fancy be better edged. Parisatis, whose too zealous revenge against Orleans was ashamed to stand an idle Spectator in a Cause so much her own,
readily assented to joyn in the Triple League, and heartily make one amonst them, promising her ablest helping Hand for the turning of any Wheel in her power to setting of the great Machine a moving. Parisatis was not admitted into the Consult in vain: for there was scarce a day pass'd that she did not art∣fully insinuate into the Queen a good Thought, and a kind Eye for the Chevalier. If the Chevalier had any Access more than ordinary to the Queen, 'twas through Parisatis. His Services and Assiduity were magnified with all the little Arts of her best Manage and Applause. Nor only this, but she cunningly en∣gaged him in those pleasing Narrations before the Queen of his Travels, Observations, and Adventures in Italy, Germany, and several other parts of the World, as infinitely contributed to the Queens Divert∣isement; and which so ingeniously related, discovered a Treasury of that rich Wit and Sense in the accom∣plish'd Chevalîer, as could not but plume new Darts from this new Quiver, and heighten the impending Fatality of those more and more dangerous Charms, which were before but too mortal. The Cardinal in the mean while considering how re∣quisite it would be for himself to act in conjunction with Father Joseph in the Religious Attack upon the Queen, the great Church-battery to be planted against her; not doubting his own Ability in furnishing a great many sinewy and forcible Arguments, the necessary Artillery towards it; and yet on the other side re∣flecting on his own known Rancour and Revenge against Orleans, he finds himself a very unqualified Orator on that Theme. For in spight of all the pretended fair Face of Zeal and Religion designed for their pur∣pose, he is but too sensible that the Queens piercing Judgment will discover the Vizer, and detect the rooted and gangreen'd malice at the bottom. But for wise prevention of all this, he instantly resolves upon this Expedient, viz. by Father Joseph and other private A∣gents, to have the Monsieur recalled to Court, and him∣self
to appear so cool, so easie, and indeed so gall-less in the remission of so heinous an Affront, as shall ut∣terly stifle all suspicion of the least remaining Dreg of Spight or Resentment against him. Accordingly the next News we hear, is the Return of the Monsieur. His Banishment so gently repeal'd without either Par∣don ask'd, or the least Atonement or Submission made; that the hushing up of so noisie a Storm in so sudden and unexpected a Calm, is the Subject of universal wonder; insomuch that the whole Conduct of the tame-forgiving Cardinal herein, much to their asto∣nishment, appeared more agreeable to the meekness of a cloistered Saint, than the Spirit of a State Church-man; and so publickly resounded his more than Christian Moderation and Lenity, as his Revenge could not well have its Cloven Foot better covered. All things carried on thus plausibly, the indefatiga∣ble Engineer Parisatis has so often gain'd the Cheva∣lier those near and familiar Accesses to the Queen, that new Fewel is added to the old Fire; and the poor Quen comes big with a sad and lamentable Ac∣count of her Female Weakness to her Confessor. Her Confession makes a Relation of that dismal Violence committed upon her Heart, by the more and more prevailing Influence of her bold and formidable In∣croacher, as requires no small expiatiory Contrition. Our well-pleased Joseph, who (had it been yet time to speak) would have told her, it had been more her Vertue than her Sin; however takes a very gentle cog∣nizance of her Frailty, and gives her so easie an Ab∣solution, that by the cheapness of her present Balm in Gilead, the Queen had good reason to believe, that her Offence (if his Ghostly Spectacles saw true) was not altogether so frightful as her own over-prying Terrors of Conscience had presented it. The Capuchin immediately posts to the Cardinal, and gives him at large the whole pain of the Queen, and the full Dimensions of her opening Wound, her whole Confession having disclosed that radicated and
invincible Passion for the Chevalier, that to lose no time, they think the Iron full hot for striking; and if if she be ever malleable, 'tis now. 'Tis resolved therefore that the Cardinal and his trusty Joseph shall presently desire a private Audience of the Queen, and prepare for a general Storm. Such a private Conference by Persons so high in her esteem, is no sooner ask'd but obtain'd: where the Cardinal, with a Gravity suitable to the occasi∣on, very eloquently, (by way of Introduction) makes a long Harangue upon the Happiness of those King∣doms, where the Smiles of Providence have blest the Royal Bed with Heirs to Empire; recounting several Instances from History in divers parts of the World of the establishment of the Peace and Glory of Nations, founded and secured upon that only Basis of their Fe∣licity; hinting several unfortunate examples of Crowns devolving upon Collateral Lines, and the publick Feuds and fatal Troubles arising from that unhappy Cause. From this Topick he begins very artfully to condole the like unhappiness of Lewis in Defect of Issue from the Illustrious A—'s Veins; insinuating al∣so the like impending misfortune of France from that National Calamity, the present Childless Bed of Lewis; telling her how much the whole Kingdom groaned under that Affliction, and what inexpressible Delight and Transport they would receive, if Heaven even yet would hear the Prayers of an Age, and re∣lieve the Distresses of a People, in opening that Gate to their Bliss (as late as it was, and as long shut as it had been) by raising them a Branch from so Divine and so dear a Sovereign Stock. The Queen, who yet fathom'd not their Depth, was pleased modestly to reply, That she was highly obliged both to his and her Peoples kind wishes. But as the immutable Will had otherwise ordained, they must all acquiesce in the Divine Pleasure, and cease those fruitless Prayers, which Hea∣ven had now too manifestly decreed should be in vain. Decreed, Madam! replyed the Capuchin very passio∣onately,
Kind Heaven forbid! No, Madam, if the Di∣vine A—a would look down with an Eye of Mercy upon a mourning Kingdom, we have no reason to distrust but Providence would pity where you pityed. And since the Almighty Dispensation, as high and as great a First-mover as it is, has not so wholly assum'd the entire care of Man∣kind to it self, but in a high measure has remitted the At∣tainment of some Blessings to inferiour and second-moving Causes: And though our Worldly Felicities are truly all formed for us above; however there must be that humane co-operating Study and Industry, the effective Means of receiving them. And since (as we have too long and too just Reason with anguish of Soul, and fulness of sorrow to lament) we your nearest and faithfullest Servants are but too sensible of a drooping Kingdoms Loss, and the true and only defective cause of their long Infelicity; my Lord Cardinal, that zealous and pious good Man, and learned Prelate, with my unworthy self, are sent to you, commis∣sion'd from the Divine Authority, to open your Ears to the Cries of a Nation; and in the everlasting Name, to soften your Compassion into that Maternal Care of France, as may raise up her languishing Head, and establish her Wel∣fare, Tranquility and Honour to endless Generations. Yes, Royal Madam, proceeded the Cardinal, With that Divine Authority, and for that great purpose we are come your Suppliants, beseeching your Attention to those cordial and faithful Admonitions, which, as Ambassadors of Truth, we are emboldned to lay down before you, under the War∣rant and Credentials of that Heavenly Command that sends us. Ah, Madam, if the languishing Flower-de-Lisses, a wailing Kingdoms Tears, and an Empires wa∣ning Glory could move you to Commiseration, propitious Heaven might yet raise that blest Fruit from these Illu∣strious Veins, as one day shall adorn the Gallick Throne; an Heir that my Prophetick Soul foretels shall Reign a Hero upon Earth, and shine a Saint in Heaven. But oh! the misery! the incomprehensible misery that the Royal Cha∣nel in the unhappy Lewis should be so totally block'd up, that our kneeling Vows must look up to some new Sourse of Pro∣vidence
for so Divine a Blessing. Consider, Gracious Lady, how the natural Orb of Glory is totally shaded; and let your pitying Goodness supply some borrowed Luminary, or all the Light of France must set for ever. Nor let any sud∣den Fantom, (for 'tis only Fantom) from this shocking sound assame a shape to fright you. For I assure you I come a Minister of Light, and not an Imp of Darkness; and bear a shining Lamp of Heaven, and not a sooty Brand of Hell before you. No, Madam, to answer even to your most ghastly Fears, and dispel the Gorgon; for I cannot make too plain a Scrutiny into so nice a point of Conscience: Con∣sider, Madam, that the terriblest of Sins Adultry, be∣ing a Command within the second Table of the Law, is on∣ly so far a Violation of the Divine Ordinance, as it is a Breach of our Duty, or a wrong to our Neighbour. The true Adultress is the Defiler of her Nuptial Bed in the In∣vasion of her Husbands Right. But, alas, that horrid Blemish will no ways touch the Innocence of A—a: For a Right cannot be invaded, before a Right possess'd. As hallowed as the Matrimonial Bond, and as inviolable as the Conjugal Bed should be; it is not the Sacred Words alone before the Altar that tie that Bond, and make that Conjugal Knot so uninfringible, but the stronger consumma∣ting Seal of Matrimony. If any personal Defect renders that Consummation impossible, (and indeed Marriage it self under any such personal known defect, is rather a Privarication with God, than an Holy Sacrament) the Matrimonial Obligation is of it self so invalid, that the Law lies open to null it with a Breath, and every days common Process can dissolve it. I confess, could any Vows, Oblations, Prayers or Sacrifices prevail to obtain this in∣estimable Bliss to the up-raising a despairing Kingdom by an Heir from Lewis; my Soul would tremble at so unhal∣lowed a Motion, as this then would be, and sink my blushing Face in dust at the horror of so tremendous an Imagination. But since the fatal Wants of the lamented Lewis have barricadoed even the least Glimps of Light out, and ex∣cluded all our Hopes from thence; what Injury, what In∣justice
to Lewis can the Fair A—a commit? What private Violation of her Shackles and Fetters (for such rather than her Hymeneal Tyes I must call 'em) can she make; especially under so urgent a call: when even those Shackles she may publickly in the Face of the World, by the Laws of God and Man, utterly unbind, cancel and throw off; if foolish worldly Honour, that by long pre∣vailing Custom has laid a popular Stain on such a pre∣ceeding, would permit so reproachful though so highly legal a Separation? Besides, Madam, were there a shadow of a Fault, or any remaining unsatisfied Scruple against the Sacred Counsel I have given you; consider, that when Extraordinary Occasions call, Heaven has permitted the use of Extraordinary Instruments; and so warrantable have those Extraordinary Instruments been, that the Divi∣nity it self has laid down Patterns and Precedents even of its own exemplar Conduct under the same Dispensation. Look back, Madam, but to the Creation of the World, and you will see the first Original of Mankind raised even by incestuous Beds, a Generation betwixt Brother and Sister. And though at the same time we must own that the unlimited Almighty Power (had the inscrutable Wisdom so thought fit) could have otherwise Peopled the World; yet such was his Decree, that even that which his first delivered Law proscribed, and condemned as so black and deformed, was nevertheless by Himself under his own dispencing Pleasure (for Necessity with Omnipotence is incompatible) made the very corner Stone to that fair Fabrick, the Race of Men, the Image of Himself. And if, Madam, so universal a dispencing Power was exer∣cised for the Benefit of Mankind; shall one singular Dis∣tencing Act for the Benefit of a whole Nation be Capital: especially where that Dispensation infringes no Law, Vio∣lates no Right, and breaks no Command, as has so fully been proved to your Majesty? Alas! Madam, 'tis the Intention makes the Sin; the Gratification of a Lust may be Criminal, whilst the Preservation of a Kingdom shall be righteous and unblameable. But perhaps, Madam, you may have some little Tenderness to the Pretensions of the
present Expectant Heirs of France, and nicely think the Diverting of Succession a Trespass upon their Birthright. No, Royal Madam, stagger not your Royal Reason there. Examine but the Conduct and Practice of Imperial Policy in imumerable Examples. How many of the Great Ro∣man Cesars have Adopted Sons to Inherit, I may say, even the Empire of the World (for such was then the Roman Greatness) And if Adopted Heirs, utter Aliens and Strangers to the Blood, were so publickly let in to rise up in Bar of all the nearest Imperial Demandants, and so notorious an Exclusion of Lineal Right justified by those strict and critical Observers of Meral Justice the Roman Administrators; how much more Righteous will an Adoption to the Crown of France appear, when so far from an Alien, it shall challenge at least half the Royal Title, the Rich Veins of the fair Partner of the Throne, the Sacred A—a; And the other Additional borrowed part, only a charitable Supply of Indigence, and support of Weakness. Alas! Madam, (cryed the interposing Joseph) let me do the noble Cardinal this right, as to avow, that not a prophecying Martyr could have delivered more oraculous Truths, than the Profound and Divine Reason he has uttered. Yes, Madam, replied the Cardinal, what I have uttered has been delivered in the Spirit of Truth and Fidelity, without a Taint or Sully of the least malicious or sinister Thought. I confess, indeed, I have received Wrongs from Orleans, and perhaps crying ones; But so forgive me Heaven, as I have forgiven him: and that I speak the Sincerity of my Soul, the Eternal Witness can bear Record for me. Forgiven him! answered Joseph very passionately, Yes, and so exemplar a Forgiveness, as the admiring World resounds it even to your Reproach. That meek forgiving Goodness to that great bad Man, so much above a Christian Love, and Fraternal Amity, even to a Humane Weakness. Believe me, Royal Madam, con∣tinued the Cardinal, I have given you Counsel, and per∣haps may have surprized you in it; but to answer before the everlasting Tribunal, for the Integrity of my Thoughts to∣wards the Sacred Majesty of France, in the Person of the
Royal Anne of A—a, the Righteous Judge that knows the hidden Secrets, knows, that your Guardian Angel cannot bear his Charge over you more Faithfully, and would more tenderly guide your least unerring Step than Richlieu. Better a Thousand sinking Kingdoms Mourn, than the fair Soul of A—a should but trip even in a Criminal Thought, by the misleading Counsels of Richlieu. Betray my Royal Mistris! No! far be that abhorred detested Thought. And though in this weak Vale of Mortality, each Minute has its Faults and Frailties to account for; I would not have so black a Sin to answer at my last Audit of Eternity, as the betraying of my Royal Mistris, for twice that Kingdoms Price, for whose Glory I am so Solicitous. No, Madam, I have given you honest and faithful Counsel; and to conjure you to embrace it, my Souls Eternity answer for yours. The Queen who all this while had never interpo∣sed one syllable, but resolved (patiently I dare not say) to give a full run to these assailing Church. Mili∣tants, could now hold no longer, but falling into the most pathetical Exclamation, she cryed, Good God! where shall I hide my blushing Head, and how shall I be able to look Day in the Face, to think that two such Re∣verend Professors of Christianity durst ask me such a Question? No, my Lord Cardinal, I will not enter into Dispute with you, nor quarrel your Religious Jargon up∣on this strange amazing Theme; for I am too weak to play the Castiist against such Learning. But to answer you in my own Province; had you been a sensible Judge of that Worldly Honour you mentioned, you would have sooner bit that Tongue out than have dared but motion such profaration to A—a. The Cardinal was going to reply, when the Queen interrupted him, For shame, for shame, no more. Flatter me not, mistaken Guides, with an easie forgiving God, to what I could ne're for∣give my self, and cease this fruitless suit; for when you can move the Globe, hope to shake Me: for the Attempt is equally impossible. The Cardinal and the Capuchine were endeavouring to speak again; when the Queen
absolutely commanded their silense, and with an An∣sterity in her very Look, an Aspect that the sweetness of her Temper was never ruffled into before, Bid them eternally forbear the Ropetition of this days Folly, or see her Face no more; and so bolted from them out of the Closet, as if she meant to tell them that she dis∣dained even to converse upon so loathed a Subject, and would not bear the very Air 'twas breath'd in. The Cardinal and Capuchin very mournfully with∣draw, and could not forbear, between themselves, a great many hard words upon the Queens incorrigible obstinacy and perverseness. But as shamefully defeat∣ed as they have been, however 'tis resolved they'll ral∣ly again; only that new Mines and Trenches must be managed to carry on the Approach. The Capuchine he advises, That some Love-potion or amorous Philter should be given her, and in the height of the operation the Chevalier boldly loosed upon her; and that Engine could never fail success. But the Cardinal utterly dis∣liked this project, giving these Objections, viz. That if there were any such Arts to be practis'd, their Effects were only to be wrought by Poyson; and undoubtedly the Queens overheat, under any such unnatural Ferment, would be as prejudicial as her Husbands over coldness had been before; and so their whole Design fall to the Ground. No, he had not Read all Divinity, but he thank'd God he was a little piece of a Naturalist too; and very well knew that the Current of Generation must keep the easie channel of Nature; for in all forced Torrents and violent Rapidities, the Inundation would be destructive. Be∣sides all such Arts at best would lay but a crazy Founda∣tion; for compulsive Love would quickly turn into Hate and Aversion; and the Charm dissolving and stupyfied Reason awaking, a work so ill begun would be in danger of tottering before any perfection accomplisht. Then replies the Capuchine, What think you, Sir, if the Queen by some stratagem or other, at some unguarded Minute, should be snared into the Chevaliers Arms? Con∣sider poor liarmloss Creature, a meer Virgen as she is; she
is insensible of the unexperienced Felicity, and her Igno∣rance is the only Rock against us. But oh you cannot imagine, upon such a surprize, how presently her Ice would melt before him; the offender with his short lived Guilt would quickly play that ample Peacemaker, that after the Relish of such a riotous Feast of sweets, un∣doubtedly the Tast wou'd soon create the Appetite; and I assure you you need not doubt fixing him the intire Lord of her Ascendant, and expecting a prosperous Revolution of your utmost Designs. The Cardinal intirely pleased could not but applaud the Capuchines depth of Know∣ledge and Confidence in a matter so extraordinary, so profound a humane reach being so much more wondrous as from a Cloysterer, and a vow'd Recluse; assuring him, He likes it so well, that he will steer to the Golden Coast of all his Hopes by no other Chart. Our Parisatis (for our History must now take a small walk with her) who has now an Extraordinary piece of Work cut out, one Morning finds the Queen alone; and with a melancholy Look, and a deep Sigh, she accosts her in these few sad Accents, Ah Madam, I am the unhappiest of my Sex! How my Parisatis, an∣swered the Queen, what new Cloud dares shade that Brow? Has Fortune any more invenomed shafts against that envyed Beauty, after so many extravagant Bolts of her Malice in the Insolencies of the ungrateful Orleans? Yes, Madam, (replied Parisatis) she has new Venge∣ance, and the same Orleans to pour it down upon me. For after all my Load of Injuries from that Vile Man, to compleat his Villanies, he has this Morning bribed one of my Women, this night when I am in Bed to admit him into my Chamber. The Queen was almost thunder∣struck at this Relation, and replied, How, my Parisatis, after all his impious Barbarities, has he a new Reserve of Execrations? Is his Mine of mischief inexhaustible? But above all after so wondrous a condescending Mercy of the forgiving Cardinal, is this his kind Return? Yes Madam [cryed Parisatis] to so generous, I might ra∣ther say, shameful a Remission of so many notorious Inso∣lencies
this is his Gratitude. The Queen was strange∣ly alarm'd at so amazing a Discovery, and exprest her concern in the most sensible and obliging Terms, as∣suring her dear Parisatis, That rather than such Wick∣edness should go unpunisht, she her self would be her Champion, and not only all her Interest with the King, but her whole power in the World should be arm'd against him. Parisatis (who indeed expected no less from her kind Statiry,) fell upon her Knees to thank her for her Royal Goodness. When the Queen raising her up, advised her to have her Woman appear pub∣lickly against him, (nor need she fear the Monsieur, for her self would be her Guard) and confront him with it to the open Face of the World; and if he were past all shame, and the Disgrace of so unprince∣ly a Design so loudly detected would not be punish∣ment sufficient, then to leave his farther prosecution to her self. Alas Madam, replied Parisatis, pardon me when I tell you that such a proceeding against him would be the most ill managed policy imaginable; for as the Mensieur had harden'd guilt enough to hatch such a piece of Treachery, he has no less harden'd Confidence (no doubt) to deny it too: and what would the single Breath of a creature of her low Quality signifie in so hainous a charge against a Prince of the Blood; and how much would the Reputation of the Mounsieur, in the popular Ballance, out-weigh the credit of so poor an Accuser: and so the whole Impeachment irstead of punishing the guilty Monsieur, rather retort and wound the innocent Parisatis; when the misjudging World, upon such a Defeat, might be too apt to lay the original Malice of the Accusation not at the Servant but the Mistrises Door? No, Madam, If I would wake some able Justice in my Cause, the only means of gaining that point would be, by having the Monsieur caught at the guilty Hour in my Chamber, with some more Authentick Witness planted there to confront his intended Wickedness; some Witness (if such a one could be obtain'd) whose not only Credit but Power also should be able both to publish and avenge my Wrongs.
The Queen as if inspired with a suddain Thought from this Hint, of doing some extraordinary Act of Friendship to serve her Parisatis, told her, That since not only the Train was laid against the Honour of her dear Parisatis, but the very Scene of his Treachery was most audaciously laid too under her own Roof [for the Reader is to understand that by the Favour of the Queen, Parisatis lay in an Apartment belonging to the Queens Lodgings, their Beds not many part∣ing Walls between 'em] she her self would be that con∣fronting Testimony against him, for she intended this night to change Beds with her Parisatis. In short she would have Candles lighted up in the Room to receive him; and the Monsieur at the hour admitted. By this means the unexpected Appearance of the Queen, she was well assured, would not only sufficiently stagger her Wicked Brother, and load him with Confusion; but likewise the Reprimand she would entertain him with should prepare him to expect no common Vengeance in her own Royal Vindication of her Perisatis. Nor did she doubt to do her this more im∣portant service, from the management of this discover∣ed Villany, as to enforce him to make her no less a Re∣paration, for that and all other his loud Abuses, by no meaner an Atonement, then marrying of her; whilst the Gratitude of Parisatis threw her immediately at her Feet to embrace her Knees for so astonishing a Fa∣vour. To put this lively project in Execution, the Night approaches, and the generous Queen is privately stoln into her Parisatis Bed; where ruminating with a thousand various thoughts, and all the preparing Thunder for the approaching Orleance; when her long waiting for the expected Traytor had almost de∣luded her into a slumber, instead of the criminal Monsieur, the more guilty Chevalier, in only a Night∣gown, bolts in upon her. The Queen had hardly fully open'd her Eyes to see the Idol of her Soul so near her, when the Ardence of his Burning Lips and
twining Arms around her, (a Circle that soon con∣jured up those strange bewitching Demons that husht all other interposing Powers,) so totally enchanted all the Reason and Resolution about her, that she had not scarce a Hand, a Look, a Breath, or a Murmur to re∣sist him. Whilst the poor betrayed Queen thus lost, for ever lost, the uncheckt Riffler plays the lawless Rioter, and the yielding Sacrifice is all his own. But here let Modesty draw the Vail, and lead the blushing Reader to the Cardinal, who hugs his darling Niece for this pregnant and prosperous Mischief; where the poor Parisatis could not forbear some very sharp Re∣flections upon the Undertaking the Cardinals com∣mand had put her upon; when besides the betraying of her Royal Friend, a Consideration of it self alone too poynant, she had so poorly debased her self to the acting even of the vilest and most despicable Office of the most Sordid of her Sex. But the Cardinal en∣deavoured to smooth this little Roughness, by guild∣ing the Meanness of the office, with the Glory of the Revenge, and the National Benefit from so kind and so Meritorious a Treason. But to raise the blooming blushing Queen from the Arms of her now too dear Chevalier, no sooner did she set her first Eye upon the Cardinal (for the Ab∣sconding Parisatis for some few days avoided her sight) but she whispered in his Ear. Well Cardinal, Cardinal, you have gained your wicked End; but look to it, Church-man, look to it, and see there be that Mercy, that forgiving Goodness in Heaven for the unhappy A—a, that your Religious Sophistry has flattered me with: Have a care of my Soul, I charge you, for I have given my self away. The Cardinal immediately gave her so many tender and healing Ghostly Comforts, which in truth he applied fresh and warm every day to her, till the Queen at last grew almost an Enthusiast in Love, so artfully the Cardinal distilled and infused Religion into the Philter, till her Zeal even warm'd with her Kisses, and she play'd the very Bigot in Pleasure. And
for the seducing Parisatis, though she gave her at first some small Rebuke, her Anger was but plumed with Down; so much the sweetness of the Treason had ato∣ned for the Traytor. This unrestrain'd Loose of Life continuing, the King∣dom is very quickly blest with the resounding Fame of the Queens being with Child, whilst such Bonfires and Illuminations are set a blazing, that universal Joy ecchoes through all France. And really even Lewis himself was the leading Master of the Ceremonies, whilst by his own special Mandat a Solemn Thanks∣giving was commanded through the whole Nation. But when the happy day, the crowning Felicity came, that a young Dauphin was born, the Celebrati∣on of his Nativity was a perfect Jubilee; and such so∣lemn and magnificent Processions were made, that he was almost carest with Hosannahs and Haslelujahs. Nay, the very Poets of the Age were busied on that only Theme, and all the Nine Sisters labour'd with no other Birth. Thus after Twenty Three Years worn out Patience was Lewis XIV. the Transubstanti∣ated Son of Lewis XIII Miracled into the Royal Heir of France, and justly honour'd with the famous Title of Dieu-Donne, Given of God. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. THere is lately Published the Life and Reign of Innocent XI. late Pope of Rome, whereunto is prefixed his Essigies: Written by an Impartial Hand.
