H2386 11833484 49742
ELEMENTS OF SPEECH: AN ESSAY of INQUIRY INTO The Natural Production OF LETTERS: WITH An APPENDIX Concerning Persons Deaf & Dumb BY WILLIAM HOLDER D. D. Fellow of the R. Society. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for J. Martyn Printer to the R. Society, at the Bell without Temple-Barr 1669.
March 4. 1668/9. At a meeting of the Council of the R. Society. Ordered, THat a Discourse presented to the R. Society, Entituled, Elements of Speech; or, An Essay of Inquiry into the Natural Pro∣duction of Letters, with an Ap∣pendix concerning Persons Deaf and Dumb, be Printed by John Martyn, Printer to the said Society. BROUNCKER Pres.
THE PREFACE. IT hath been to me a matter of Wonder, that in the Alphabets of all Languages whereof I have any knowledge; there is not to be found either Order or Perfecti∣on. The Characters (or written Letters) neither being adjusted to the sounds of Let∣ters pronounced; nor disposed in the Alpha∣bet according to any rational or Natural Order. The Consequences whereof have been, to render Languages more difficult to be learnt, and needlesly to advance Ortho∣graphy into a troublesome and laborious Art; and to hide the Nature of Letters in obscu∣rity, so as not to be found without much searching; nor perhaps to be sufficiently searched, by such as are moved to it onely by Philosophical Curiosity, and are not by
any necessity engaged to a pertinacious di∣ligence. Though in this kind it must be ac∣knowledged, that some excellent Persons amongst us, who are above my Approbation or Elogy, have considered this Subject with great Care and Felicity. And it having hap∣pened to me some years past, to have been deeply engaged in this same consideration of the Alphabet, by a Worthy Designe of giving Relief to a Deaf and Dumb Person, in the year 1659. recommended to my Care: and being at last prevailed with by divers Per∣sons, who remember the success of that En∣terprize, to Communicate the way and me∣thod I then used; I have adventured to publish my thoughts concerning the Nature of Letters; more in respect of the Appen∣dix, or Application of them to that excel∣lent purpose, than that I esteem them wor∣thy to trouble the World, or able to produce any considerable addition to the discourses of this Subject already extant: onely in re∣gard of the obscurity and subtilty of the difference of Letters, by reason of which, several Persons are apt to make different
guesses and observations, and to be often un∣fixed, and change their thoughts upon better Consideration, as I have experienced, and believe the same must have happened to others; it were to be wished, that all who have considered this Subject would Com∣municate their thoughts and ways of find∣ing out those differences, which being done, every Hypothesis would contribute some Light, as I hope this of mine may do; wherein I have endeavoured to abstract my self from prepossession of Fancy, either by the Idea's of faulty Alphabets, or the Notions of other Authors. And here I must intreat the Reader to do the like for me; and withal, to read the Treatise of Letters once over, without staying to dis∣pute or examine particulars, which he will often find more plainly expressed after∣wards; and then, if he shall think it worth his trouble, to go over it again, and at his pleasure, stay to make trials and examinations. The Obscurity of the Subject, and the Prejudice and Prepossession of most Read∣ers,
may plead excuse for any Ampliati∣ons or Repetitions that may be found, whilst I labour to express my self so plain and full, that the Nature of Speech and Letters, so far as these present thoughts of mine reach to it, may be understood by all. ERRATA. PAge 3, line 10. tion. l. 12. either, both to. p. 10. l. 2. designed to be. p. 11. l. 9. have their. p. 12. l. 18. bets of. p. 17. l. 7. the most apt. p, 19, l. 11. and. p. 29. l. 1 which is. l. 4. of one Organ. p. 30. l. 1. of Motion. p. 34. l. 9. Spirital, Ore-Vocal. p. 41. l 10. ed Original Letters. p. 42. l. 9. then the same. p. 49. l. 13. and Myle∣ogloss. p. 53. l. 12. Ng Naso-Vocal. [Obs. there was in∣tended a Character for Ng, viz. n with a tail like that of g. which must be understood where the Printer has imitated it by n or y.] p. 63. l. 20. Characters. p. 73. l. 7. Larynx, cannot. p. 74. l. 15. improperly. p. 81. l. 5. [Obs. the short Vowels should have been ranked thus; Folly under o, Fat under a, Sell under e, Ill under i, Full under oo, the other spaces left blank] p. 81. l. penult. Whispering, be. p. 93. l. 8. their subtle and. p. 97. l. 12. 36 Vowels. p. 101. l. 19. Letter. the. p. 104. l. 7. of the same. p. 107. l. 16. as they speak. p. 110. l. 7. to that. p. 123. l. 21. nearer. p. 129. l. 7. these Persons. p. 130. l. 17. respectively Letter spoken or written; p. 135. l. 19. out by being. p. 136. l. 1. Lips. Make him. p. 144. l. 7. shew him a. p. 152. l. 21. Pourtraitures. p. 154. l. 15. ckt. p, 157. l. 19. (not to be thought on otherwise.)
ELEMENTS OF SPEECH: An Essay of Enquiry into the Natural Production of Letters. OF the Five Senses, Two are usually, and most properly called the Senses of Learning, as being most capable of receiving communication of Thoughts and Notions by se∣lected Signes; And these are Hearing and Seeing.
The Object of Hearing is Sound, whose variety is so great, and con∣veighance so easie, that it brings in admirable store of intelligence and information to the common sense. And like to it in the same respects is the Object of Seeing. Either of these learned Senses have their peculiar Priviledges: whereas Seeing requires Light, and a free Medium, and a right Line to the objects; we can hear in the dark, Immured, and by curve Lines, that is, Sound can pass to the Ears, where visual Rayes cannot to the Eye. But then, Sight takes in at a greater distance, and more variety at once, comprehending also Quiescent objects, which Hearing does not: and especially injoying the de∣lightful variety of formes, and
figures, which come not to the Hearing. As to the present pur∣pose, both these Senses embrace their Objects at greater distance, with more variety, and with a more curious discrimination, than the other Senses, so that they are most fitted to receive and di∣stinguish Signes for Communica∣tion, and by their proper ad∣vantages mutually supplying the defects of either. And both to∣gether serve completely for the Reception and Communication of Learned Knowledge. Now Signes for Communica∣tion may be contrived at plea∣sure from any variety of Objects (especially of one kind) apper∣taining to either Sense. For ex∣ample, Four Bells admit Twenty four changes in Ringing, and
Five Bells One hundred and twenty: each change may, by a∣greement and consent, have a cer∣tain signification imposed upon it, and so Communication may be performed at a distance by Hear∣ing. And for the Sight, Four or Five Torches held up at a Distance in the Night, 1 or 2, or 3, or 4, and any, or more of them eleva∣ted, or depressed out of their Or∣der, either in Breadth, or Long∣ways, may by agreement give great variety of Notifications. And thus, Thousands of Signes may be invented and agreed up∣on, and learnt, and practised. Thus the Drum and Trumpet by their several Sounds, serve for many kinds of Advertisements in Mili∣tary affairs: and Bells serve to proclaim a scare-fire, and (in
some places) Water-Breaches; The departure of a Man, Wo∣man, or Child; time of Divine Service; The hour of the day; day of the Moneth, &c. Com∣mon life is full of this kind of significant Expressions, by Knock∣ing, Beckoning, Frowning, Point∣ing and the like; and Dumb persons are sagacious in the use of them. And even Brute Ani∣mals make use of this artificial way of making divers motions to have several significations, to Call, Warne, Chide, Cherish, Threaten, &c. especially within their own kinds. But of all other, there is none for this use compa∣rable to the variety of instruct∣ive Expressions by Speech, where∣with Man alone is endowed, as with an Instrument suitable to
the Excellency of his Soul, for the most easie, speedy, certain, full communication of the Infi∣nite variety of his Thoughts, by the ready Commerce between the Tongue and the Ear. And if some Animals, as Parrots, Magpies, &c. may seem to be capable of the same discriminations, yet we see, that their souls are too narrow to use so great an Engine. The chief, I say, of all signes, and which the Almighty's Providence, in the Creation of Man, indued him withall, and destin'd to that use, is Humane voice and the seve∣ral modifications thereof by the Organs of Speech, viz. the Let∣ters of the Alphabet, formed by the several Motions of the Mouth; and the great variety of Syllables composed of Letters, and form'd
with almost equal velocity; and the endless number of words capa∣ble of being framed out of the Alphabet, either of more sylla∣bles, or of one; or sometimes of a single Letter, according as, by consent and institution, they are ordered to signifie the several parts of Speech or Language. And (which answers to the same end) the Characters or Symbols of these Letters expressed by Writing, or Printing, or Graving, &c. so as to remain visible, and discernable by the Eye; viz. to each Letter a proper Character designed to signifie the Power or Sound of the Letter, that when I see Letters joyned, I under∣stand the sound, and am ready to pronounce it. And this is Lan∣guage in Counterfeit. Whereas
Language, originally and pro∣perly (as the Word imports) is that of the Tongue, directed to the Ear by Speaking. Written Language is tralatitiously so cal∣led, because it is made to repre∣sent to the Eye the same Letters and Words, which are pronounc∣ed. And by these the Tongue and Pen doe mutually correspond, and assist one another, Writing what we speak, and Speaking what we write. And (as was said of the Senses, to which they serve) they supply the defects of each other by the peculiar priviledges of ei∣ther. Swift, and ready, and famili∣ar Communication is made by Speech, and when animated by Elocution, it acquires a greater life, and energie, ravishing and
captivating the Hearers. But then, Speech is confined to the Living, and imparted to onely those, that are in presence, and is transient and gone. Written Language, as it is more Operous, so it is more digested, and is permanent, and it reacheth the absent, and poste∣rity, and by it we speak after we are dead. Now, as I said, the Original of these Signes for Communication is found in Viva voce, in spoken Language, and therefore 'tis Speech we now chiefly consider, I mean the Principles thereof, which are Letters. Now these Letters consi∣dered, as to their Genesis, i. e. as they are made and fram'd by seve∣ral Motions of the parts of the Mouth, are the natural Elements of Speech, but the use of them is Ar∣tificial,
viz. when they are compo∣sed, and designed by several Signs of Respective Notions: And hence Languages arise, when by institution and agreement, such a composure of Letters, i. e. such a Word is intended to signifie such a certain thing. And the Learning of a Language is (or at least needs be) nothing else, but the inform∣ing our selves, and remembring what Composures of Letters are, by consent and Institution, to signifie such certain Notions of things, with their Modalities and Accidents: I say, the Motions of the Mouth (speaking largely) by which the voice is discriminated, and the Sound thereof in distinct formes received by the Ear, ac∣cording to the number of their variety, are the Natural Elements
of Speech; and the Application of them in their several compo∣sitions, or Words made of them, to signifie things or the Moda∣lities of things, and so serve for communication of Notions, is Ar∣tificial. And the former of these, the Letters, as they have the natural Production by the several checks or stops, or (as they are usually called) Articulations of the Breath or Voice in their passage from the Larynx through the Mouth or Nose, made by the instruments of Speech, are the subject of this present Essay. Worthy indeed of better consideration, as being the first Elements of all Humane Learn∣ing, (to say nothing of the Propa∣gation and Conservation there∣of;) and by which having once
surveyed the true and proper na∣tural Alphabet, we may easily dis∣cover the Deviations from it in the Characters thereof, in all the Al∣phabets in use: Either by Defect of single Characters of Letters; or by Confusion of them; or by expressing the Power of single Letters by unapt Compositions; or by an absurd reception of dou∣ble Letters, into the number of the Elements, which ought to be onely single and original; or last∣ly by the incongruous pronun∣ciations of several Letters, as they lie described to the Eye by Sym∣bols or Characters of the Alpha∣bet of several Languages, which indeed ought to be only one, or at least all to be perfectly corre∣spondent each to other, accord∣ing to their Origine in nature,
though expressed by several Cha∣racters, after the humour and fan∣cy of several Nations. Though it were much to be wished, that, as there is but one single way (where∣of we are now treating) of the na∣tural production of Letters, where∣by to convey our thoughts by the sound of Speech to the Ears of them that hear us; so there were throughout the world but one sort of Character for each Let∣ter, to express it to the Eye, and that exactly proportioned to the Natural Alphabet formed in the Mouth. This, though diversity of Languages continue, yet would render them much more easie to be learned, as to reading and pro∣nouncing of them, and especially as to the Writing of them, which now, as they stand, we find to be
troublesome and difficult, and it is no small part of Grammar, which treats of Orthography and right pronunciation. And truly the Disorder, into which the Alphabet is put, by the several ways fore-mentioned, seems to me of the same kind, though not so great, as if seve∣ral Nations, using the same Cha∣racters, should apply them differ∣ently, and that Sound, which one describes by B, another should do the same by C. &c. which by private consent hath been some∣times used in dangerous times, onely to obscure their writing, and make it hard to be read by others not acquainted with the in∣trigue, but is quite contrary to a∣ny intention of advancing the fa∣cility of Learning.
But the chief design here in∣tended by this accompt of the Natural Alphabet, is, to prepare a more easie and expedite way to instruct such as are Deaf and Dumb, and Dumb onely by con∣sequence of their want of Hear∣ing, (by shewing them the pro∣per figures of the motions of the Organs, whereby Letters are fra∣med) to be able to pronounce all Letters, and Syllables, and Words, and in a good measure to discern them by the Eye, when pro∣nounced by another. And although this cannot be directly and immediately taught, and learnt, as to every particular Letter of the Alphabet (as will be sufficiently manifest in the en∣sueing discourse) yet He, who has this exact knowledge of the
Nature and Difference of Let∣ters, by knowing withal, what can be readily done, and what cannot be immediately perform∣ed; will be able to pursue such an attempt with steadiness; and having made his first progress in what is obvious and fesible; will then (without expence of fruit∣less labour) proceed to seek out and invent other ways to com∣pass about and accomplish his de∣signed effect. And by these wayes (as I my self have made some experiment) it is not impossible, no nor very difficult to be done, even in those who were born Deaf and Dumb. By what has bin premised, we may define Language (if we con∣sider it more materially) to be An apt Connexion of Letters,
forming and producing Words and Sentences. But if we consider it more according to the Reason and Design thereof, then Lan∣guage is the most excellent Instru∣ment for Communication. Or, a connexion of the apt signes for Communication of our Thoughts and Notions. And Speaking is no∣thing else, than A sensible Expres∣sion and Communication of the Notions of the Mind by several Discriminations of utterance of voice, used as Signes i. e. having, by Consent, several determinate significancies. The Matter or Store, out of which these signes are framed, is the Alphabet, that is, the variety of single different Letters, which Letters arise from the first ori∣ginal discriminations of voice, by
way of Articulation, whereby the Ear is able to judge and ob∣serve the differences of vocal Sounds. And as many such diffe∣rent sounds as can be made by sin∣gle Articulations, so many Letters there are in the store-house of Nature, out of which to frame Signes for Communication by way of Speech or Language. I said, Articulation, because there may be other ways of dis∣criminating the voice, E. G. by Acuteness and Gravity, the several degrees of rising and falling from one Tone or Note to another; and the several Kinds of Mea∣sures, Passions, Moods, Ayre, &c. out of which it were easie to frame a kind of Language, with∣out Words, though not so Ex∣pedite nor Comprehensive as the other.
Now to describe accurately the differences, by which the Formal Reason of every letter is constituted, however it seem at the first apprehension familiar and ea∣sie, and no one but can say some∣thing towards it; yet upon better consideration will be found very difficult: Because the Motions and Figures within the mouth are abstruse, annd not easie to be di∣stinguished, especially those of the Tongue, and several parts of it, which is moved, through the help of many Muscles, so easily, and Habitually, and variously, that we are scarce able to give a judgement and description of divers Motions and Figures thereby framed in the Mouth: And also because most are apt to seek all the Differences of Let∣ters
in those Articulating Moti∣ons, whereas several Combinati∣ons of Letters are framed by the very same Motions of those Or∣gans, which are commonly ob∣served, and are differenced (as shall be shewn) by other con∣current causes. And lastly, by reason of the Prepossession of the Judgement of most men from their Infant-breeding, of which I have met with much Experi∣ence; and it may be seen in the writings of some Learned men, who coming to treat of the Na∣ture of Letters, speak of them by Tradition, as of some remote exotick thing, whereof we had no knowledge, but by uncertain fabulous relations. And although I have bin told of some more accurate Authors, who take not
the vulgar Alphabets and Rudi∣ments of Grammar for their Ca∣non; yet I have refrained to look into them, for fear of being led away by other men's fancies; whereas I rather chose to con∣sult Nature at Hand. And here∣in I cannot hope to have escaped all prejudicies of fancy, but do willingly submit those mistakes, into which I may have fallen, to the better consideration of o∣thers, who shall have made re∣search into this business with more felicity. And certainly the free thoughts of many separate persons using diligence herein, compared together, select choice being made of the most happy adventures in each of their seve∣ral Hypotheses, is the surest way to advance this kind of Essay to a
good perfection. To which, if any thing be contributed by this that I have done, I shall not wholly have missed my end. Of Letters the Material part is Breath and Voice; the Formal part is constituted by the Motions and Figures of the Organs of Speech, affecting the Breath or Voice with a peculiar sound, by which each Letter is discriminated. For either of these there are proper Organs. For the Former, the Lungs, Aspera Arteria, Larynx, Ʋvula, Nose, and the whole Arch of the Palate or Roof of the Mouth. The Lungs are as Bel∣lows, which supply a force of Breath: the Asphera Arteria is as the nose of Bellows, or as a chan∣nel in the sound Board of an Organ, to collect and conveigh the
Breath, and somewhat more, by a power of contracting and dila∣ting it self, which those have not. The Larynx both gives passage to the Breath, and also, as often as we please, by the force of Muscles, to bear the sides of the Larynx stiffe and near toge∣ther, as the Breath passeth through the Rimula, makes a vibration of those Cartilaginous Bodies which forms that Breath, into a Vocal sound or Voice, which by the Palate, as a Chelis or shell of a Lute, is sweetened and augment∣ed. The Ʋvula, as a Valve, o∣pens and shuts the passage of Breath or Voice through the Nose. The Nose, sometimes gi∣ving passage to Breath or Voice, in speaking alters their sound,
and gives a Material discrimina∣tion, by which the general sound of Breath or Voice may be di∣stinguished into Oral, or Nasall, or, (to speak more accurately) Ore-Nasal. And thus also the Whole mouth, as it gives passage to Breath and Voyce, and a di∣stinct sound, from that of the Nose, ought to be accompted one of the Organs of the Material part of Letters. By the way observe, that Let∣ters may be framed by Articu∣lation of onely Breath, for secret communication near at hand, as in whispering. But the most useful way of easie and free communi∣cation, being by the Voyce, and the Motions being the same in whispering and in speaking, it is in∣tended here, to consider vocal
Speech alone, as that to which this Discourse refers. Though it be true (and ought to be well heeded) that divers letters have no Vocal sound, if pronounced alone, but do immediately affect the vocal sound of other Letters, to which they are joyned in Spech, by affecting first the Breath in their own proper Motions and Figures, such are F. S, and some others. The Organs of the Later, the Formal part of Letters, are the Tongue, Palate, Goums, Jaw, Teeth, Lips. Of which the Tongue and under-Lip, and nether-jaw are moveable. The rest are immovea∣ble, viz. as to their use in speech. Articulations are made by the Mo∣tions of the moveable Organs to, or towards the Immoveable. As, the Tongue, (which is the
chief instrument of Speech) is eve∣ry way moved in its parts to and from all parts of the Palate, and Goums, and upper Teeth, except the very cavity or Arch of the Pa∣late, which is always kept open to help the sound. The under lip is moved to the upper lip, or upper Teeth. And these motions are attended by the motions of the nether-jaw. Of Letters The Mate∣rial Cause is Breath and Voice whole Organs are the Oral. Nasal. Lungs. Aspera Arteria. Larynx. Palat's Arch, or Roofe. Uvula. Nose. Whole mouth. The Formal Cause is Atticulation of Breath and Voice whose Organs are Moveable. Tongue. Under Lip. Nether Jaw. Immoveable. Palat. Goums. Upper-Lip. Upper Teeth, In the framing of every Letter, there is an Articulation (though
not to every Letter a several Ar∣ticulation; for sometimes two or three have the same, and are differenced onely by their mate∣rial causes.) By Articulation I mean a peculiar Motion and Fi∣gure of some parts belonging to the Mouth between the Throat and Lips, whereof some are more easie to be discerned and describ∣ed; as those made with the Lips, P. B. M: with the Lip and Teeth, F.V: with the Tongue and Teeth,  i. e. th. dh. and those with the Tongue and Goums, and Tongue and Palate, which are close stop∣ped, as T. D. N; KG. NG. The rest are more difficult, and most of all the Vowels, where there are peculiar Figures of the Cavi∣ty of the Mouth, between the Tongue and the Arch of the
Palate, whilst the Tongue moves into a Posture required to each Vowel, which is made without the Lips. That I may be the easier un∣derstood, I do comply with the Antients, in distinguishing Letters into Vowels and Consonants; yet not wholly upon their reason, viz. That a Vowel may be sound∣ed alone, a Consonant not with∣out a Vowel; which if examined will not be found all true, for many of the Consonants may be sounded alone, and some joyned together, without a Vowel, as Bl, St; and as we pronounce the later Syllable of People, Rifle, &c. though it be true of some Con∣sonants, as the Mutes, P. T. K. that they can make no sound a∣lone: But from another differ∣ence,
which is, That in all Vow∣els the passage of the mouth is open and free, without any ap∣pulse of an Organ of Speech to another: But in all Consonants, there is an Appulse of the Or∣gans, sometimes (if you abstract the Consonants from the Vowels) wholly precluding all sound; and in all of them, more or less, check∣ing and abating it. Now from hence ariseth the facility of joyning a Consonant to a Vowel, because from an Ap∣pulse to no Appulse (or an Ap∣perture) is easier, (because the Motion is not half so much,) than from one Appulse to ano∣ther. And we find in the Moti∣ons from one Appulse to another, in joyning of Consonants, some (according to their easier aptness
of Notion, or nearness of Nature or situation) to be readyer and easier joyned in one syllable, than others: Which made that obser∣vation of the Grammarians, of the easie pronunciation of a Mute be∣fore a Liquid, which do not there∣fore necessarily make the Prece∣ding Vowel, by position, long in Quantity, as Patrem. The Distinction of Articulation of Breath and the Articulation of Voice must be well heeded, be∣cause in it consists the onely dif∣ference of many Letters, as shall be shewn. For it is one thing, to Breath, or give an Impulse to breath alone; another thing, to vocalize that breath, i. e. in its passage through the Larynx to give it the sound of Humane Voyce. As through a Horne or
Cornet, or Trumpet, you may, if you please, emit onely Breath without any other sound than of wind; or you may with the same Breath, regularly blown, raise the proper voice or sound of those Instruments. Breath then must be understood distinctly from Breath vocalized, or Hu∣mane voice, and either of them in their distinct Beings and Sounds may be, and are Articulated by the Motions of the Organs. Now, though several single Let∣ters nakedly considered, are found to be Articulations onely of Spi∣rit or Breath, and not of Breath vocalized (as appears if you pronounce S. F. &c. abstract∣ed from all vowels) yet there is that property in all Letters, of Aptness to be conjoyned in Syl∣lables
and Words, through the vo∣luble motions of the Organs from one stop or figure to another, that they modify and discriminate the Voice without appearing to discontinue it. And so Letters may well enough be termed Ar∣ticulations of Voice in respect of Speech, which yet in their own simple abstracted Nature are but Articulations of Breath. To come now nearer to our Inquiry into the Production of Letters, we are first to in∣vestigate the variety of Moti∣ons, and Figures, made by the Organs, which serve for Articu∣lation. And then the Variety of Matter, to which those Articu∣lations are severally applyed. For it will be found, that the same Articulation makes Impressions
of different sounds, or (which is the same) Letters, according as the subject matter, which is to be Articulated, is different: as one and the same Seal, imprinted up∣on several pieces of wax of dif∣ferent colours, as Yellow, Red, Green, Black, will make so ma∣ny distinct signs (if significati∣ons be imposed upon them) to the Eye, as there are different Colours in the Matter, or Wax, which receive the same Impres∣sion. Thus the same Articulation; if of Breath, makes one letter; if of Breath vocalized, or voice, another; If of voice Nasall (i.e. when the Ʋvula is opened, and the voice passeth into the Mouth, and is there Articulated, and at the same time hath a free pas∣sage through the Nose) then it
makes another; and lastly, if of Breath Nasal, then another. Thus the Matter of Sound, which is to be discriminated by Articulation, if it be of four kinds, Spirital, Vocal, Naso-spirital, Naso-vocal, (it is for shortness-sake, that I do not stile them more accurately, viz. Ore-Spirital, Ore-Nasal, Ore-Naso-Spiri∣tal, Ore-Naso-Vocal;) then every Ar∣ticulation may produce four Let∣ters. But the design of Speaking, being to Communicate our Thoughts, by ready, easie, and graceful Pronunci-ation, all kind of Letters have been searched out, that were serviceable for the pur∣pose, as Commodious Elements of Speech, and such discriminations as were not so, whereof many may be found, (all Articulations not suiting with all matter) they were left out and laid aside.
All Articulation is made with∣in the mouth, from the Throat to the Lips inclusively, and is dif∣ferenced partly by the Organs and several parts of Organs (al∣ready described) used in it; and partly by the manner and de∣gree of Articulating: which later is, either by Appulse, i. e. when one of the moveable Organs toucheth, and rests upon some of those, that are Immoveable; Or else onely by inclination of the moveable Organ to the immovea∣ble, without Appulse, the passage through the mouth remaining free and open. If there be no Appulse of one Organ to another, the Letters by other several postures and inclinations of the Organs are vowels. But when there is an Appulse of one Organ to ano∣ther,
the Letters, which are so framed, are Consonants. Again, the Appulse is either plenary and occluse, so as wholly to preclude all passage of Breath or Voice through the mouth; or else parti∣al and pervious, so as to give them some passage out of the mouth: and this later affects the Sound di∣vers ways, giving it a Lisping, or Hissing, or else emitting it smooth, or else jarring. The nature of Consonants be∣ing framed by Appulse, is (as was said before) much easier to be discerned, than that of the Vowels. I shall therefore indeavour, first to describe their differences, and how they are framed; taking the number of Consonants, not from the Grammatical Alphabets of any Language, but from the diversity
of Sounds framed by single Arti∣culations with Appulse, which I find in any usage; especially in our, and neighbouring Nations, such as are most needful for any among us, that are Deaf and Dumb, to learn. And thus they ordinarily amount to 19. besides 2 or 3 more (to be spoken of in their place) which will be found among the Vowels: omitting some other uneasie Letters, which I shall after describe, and possi∣bly may be in use with some Nations. If a close Appulse be made by the Lips, viz. by the Under-Lip, to the Upper-Lip, then is framed P, or B, or M; if it be made by the end of the Tongue to the Goums, T. or. D. or N. If by the Bosse of the Tongue to the
Palate, near the Throat, then K. or G. or Nĝ. so there are 9 Con∣sonants made by close Appulse, and they evidently answer one an∣other in their Properties; whe∣ther you compare them in re∣spect of the Organs, the 3 Labial B. P. M. are Parallel to the 3 Gingival T. D. N, and to the 3 Palatick K. G. Nĝ; or whether in respect of Sound; P. T. K. are Ar∣ticulations of Breath; B. D. G. (if you compare B to P; D to T; and G to K;) are made with the very same Appulse and Motion of the Organ; and are differenc∣ed onely by being Articulations of Voice, or Breath vocalized: which is easily discerned, if you strive to pronounce P. abstracted without a Vowel, then it will be wholly Mute, because it is no∣thing
but Breath stopt: but if you in the same manner go to pronounce B, there will be a murmuring sound of the Voice, formed in the Larynx, and passing till it be stopt by the Appulse of the Lips. And so of the rest. M.is an Articulation of voice, by close Appulse of the Lips; so far perfectly the same with B: but there is this difference added, that at the same time, passage is open∣ed for the Voice through the Nose. And the like is N. in the Goums, and Nĝ in the Palat. Thus in respect of Appulse of Or∣gan P. B. M. are the same; and T. D. N. and K. G. Nĝ. In respect of matter of sound P. T. K. do perfectly agree, and likewise B. D. G. and M. N. Ng'. And in re∣spect of the manner, viz. Close∣ness
of the Appulse, they all agree. And these 3 properties sufficient∣ly discover the Nature of these 9 Consonants, and therewithal, how properly Nĝ is ranged amongst Original letters. See in a Scheme.   Mute Murmur∣mute Naso∣vocal.   Letters framed by Ap∣pulse. Occluse, Labial P B M     Gingival. T D N   Pervious. Palatick K G Nĝ   The other sort of Appulse is partial and pervious, giving some passage to Breath and Voice: of which kind, Two are made to the upper Teeth, and cause a Lisp∣ing sound, the Breath being strein∣ed through the Teeth. One whereof is of the under Lip to the upper Teeth, which, if Breath onely pass, makes F. but if the
Breath be vocalized, the same Appulse makes V. Another is of the Tongue to the upper Teeth, and in like manner with the form∣er, makes Th, and Dh. or θ. ϑ, which so justly correspond with F. and V. and are made by single pro∣per motions of the Organ, that they must needs be acknowledg∣ed Letters, and not to be com∣pounded of T and H, or D and H, but require to be described by single proper Characters, as well as other Letters. I would de∣scribe them by θ and ϑ. And thus far the nature of these 13 Consonants lies fair to be per∣ceived, because the Appulse is so manifest, being either close, as in the former 9; or Bold and forward to the Teeth, as the other 4. Next, there is a Partial Pervi∣ous
Appulse of the End of the Tongue to the Goums, giving the Breath a streight pasiage there, by which a hissing sound is made; the sides of the Tongue at the same time resting firmly on the side-Teeth. And by this, if Breath alone pass, is made the Letter S; but if Breath vocalized, then the posture and motion makes Z. Again, the end of the Tongue born more downwards, and the middle of it born up nearer the Palate, the sides resting on the Teeth, makes, if the Breath pass, Sh, or, if Breath vocalized, Zh. which is properly that, which is designed by J consonant, as For∣reiners pronounce it. The Figures in the mouth of Zh. and the vowel I, are much alike, which might give occasion of supplying Zh. by
the character of J Consonant: And the vowel I, partaking also of the nature of a Consonant, added to Z, comes very near to the sound of Zh, as Zya; but this hath some∣thing more of Gingival Figure in it. Thus we have 17 Consonants, which bear a certain Analogie; out of which, if you take M. N. Ng, there remain seven pairs, of which each Letter hath the very same motion and Appulse of the Organs, with his compeer, and differ onely in relation to sound, one being an Articulation of Breath, the other of Voice, and they stand thus And these p t k f th s sh b d g v dh z zh in Whispering, cannot be distin∣guished, except by prejudice of Fancy; but every pair will be the same without any difference, and
consequently but one Letter. So that the Language of Whispering is perform'd with 7 Consonants fewer, than the Language of Speak∣ing. And I might digresse to tell, how some of the Antients may be thought sometime to have u∣sed a less number of Letters in their Languages; as may be pro∣ved by the celebration of those, who added to their Alphabet, by inventing or bringing other Letters, than they used. And for the other 3 Letters M. N. Ng. though they make not such pairs as the other 14, yet they are within the observation of not differing by Motion or Po∣sture from the other close Letters of the same Organs, but onely by Sound; the Voice passing through the Nose, as hath been said. And
it were easie to add a Nasal Let∣ter to each of the other pair of Lisping and Sibilant Letters, but they are found not to be so grace∣fully pronounced, nor sufficient∣ly discriminated in Pervious Ap∣pulses, where the Breath hath pas∣sage through the Mouth and Nose both at once; but onely in the Appulses, which are Oc∣cluse; where the voice is stopt, and onely murmures within the Mouth, and passeth freely by the Nose. And this is the reason, there are but 3 Nasal Letters common∣ly in use, because there are but 3 occluse Appulses. And here it is remarkable, that in the framing of these 17 Consonants, there are but 7 different Motions or Po∣stures of the Organs; and con∣sequently but 7 Discriminations
arising from thence, which are be∣tween the 7 pairs before spoken of, each pair from the other, in such order as they are there set down. I shall adde one Remark more concerning these Consonants, That, whereas I have sometimes in discourse, put many several persons to consider what the dif∣ference might be in any Pair of them, as between P, and B; T, and D, &c. And upon tryal they have been ready to fancy, (and I have met with it in the Writings of some) that the difference lies in the manner of Appulse, one being made by a Fuller or Ranker Ap∣pulse than the other, or, some such thing, which they thought they perceived, but could not well express. The Truth is, There may
be some such little difference, but from another cause consequenti∣al to that which is already assign∣ed, which is this: All Tuneable Sounds, whereof Humane voice is one, are made by a regular vibration of the sonorous body, and Undulation of the Air, pro∣portionable to the Acuteness or Gravity of the Tone. Now Breath flowing in a smooth stream from the Lungs through the Mouth; and Voice from the Larynx in a curled vibrated Figure, it may very well be, that Breath voca∣lized, i. e. vibrated or undulated, may in a different manner affect the Lips, or Tongue, or Palate (while they stop or check it) and impress a swift tremulous moti∣on, which Breath alone passing smooth, does not. And so we may
feel within our Mouth, some dif∣ference between P and B. which yet is not sufficient to distinguish them to the Ear of another per∣son; nor of it self to constitute them distinct Letters of the Al∣phabet; but they are distinguish∣ed by the Sound made by that Vibration. There remain two odd Con∣sonants, which have no fellows, nor stand in pairs, and those are L and R; both of them Gingival in respect of the Appulse of the Organs. L is made by the same Appulse of the end of the Tongue to the Goums, as are T and D; but then the Sides or edges of the Tongue are drawn in, and leave smooth and free lateral passage for the voice, i. e. by the sides of the mouth, or one of them at
least. You may easily perceive it, if you pronounce L. after, or before T. Lt. Tl. where you keep the end of the Tongue still in the very same posture in both Let∣ters, and onely move the sides of it. R is made by a Pervious Ap∣pulse of the end of the Tongue, with its edge to the Goums, the Tongue being held in that po∣sture, onely by the force of the Geneoglosse, or Myleoglosse Muscles, and not resting any where up∣on the Teeth; except onely touching them loosely, so as to close the passage of Breath every where by the sides, and conduct it to the end of the Tongue, And this with a strong Impulse of Breath vocalized, so as to cause a trembling and vibration of the
whole Tongue; which vibration being slow, does not tune the voice, but make it jarre; the Tongue not resting, but making a light Appulse in parts of the end of it, and being born stiffely, as with a Spring, by the Muscles, (especial∣ly by the Geneoglosse) and agi∣tated by strong impulse of Breath. And it is observable, that in all the other Consonants, the Moveable Organ rests and bears somewhat strongly upon the Immoveable; as is evident in all the 9 Letters made by close Appulse, and in the Four Dental Letters, and in L, and lastly in the Four Sibi∣lants; some of which last being of nearest Appulse to R, will shew this better by being compared together; e. g. Z. and R. In Z. the Tongue bears firme upon the
upper side-Teeth, and so the end of it being a little flatted, is born steadily near the Goums, making a Rimula, by which the hissing sound is produced, the steadiness of the posture of the Tongue resisting that tremulous vibration, which it suffers in pro∣nouncing R. But in R. the Tongue does not rest or bear as aforesaid, but is held stifly in its whole length by the force of the Muscles, so as when the impulse of Breath strikes upon the end of the Tongue, where it finds passage, it shakes and agitates the whole Tongue, whereby the sound is affected with a trembling jarre. And this is the cause, why they, whose Muscles are weak or flac∣cid, are unapt to pronounce this Letter R.
Now, as before I gave a Scheme of the Occluse Consonants with their differences, so I shall here add one of those, which are Pervious, and then all together.     Blaese. Murmure Blaese Sibilant Murmure Semi-vocal Semi-vocal Letters fra∣med by Ap∣pulse Per∣vious. Labiodental F. V.   Sibi Smcoth jart Letters fra∣med by Ap∣pulse Per∣vious. Lingua-dental Th Dh   lant Or free ing Letters fra∣med by Ap∣pulse Per∣vious. Gingival     S Z L R Letters fra∣med by Ap∣pulse Per∣vious. Palatic.     Sh Zh    
APPULSE   SOUND ORGAN   Or thus more pro∣perly by Sound or MATTER. Close P. Mute Labial p. Spirital. Close B. Murmure-mute Labial b. Vocator Murmurant Close M. Naso-vocal Labial m. Naso-vocal. Close T. Mute Gingival t. Spirital. Close D. Murm-mute Gingival d. Vocal. Close N. Naso-vocal Gingival n. Naso-vocal. Close K. Mute Palatic k. Spirital. Close G. Murm-mute Palatic g. Vocal. Close Nĝ. Naso-vocal Palatic y. Naso-vocal. Pervious F. Blaese Labiodental f. Spirital. Pervious V. Murm-Blaese. Labiodental v. Vocal. Pervious Th. Blaese Lingua-dental θ. Spirital. Pervious Dh. Murmut-Blaese Lingua-dental ϑ. Vocal. Pervious S. Sibilant Gingival s. Spirital. Pervious Z. Murm-Sibilant Gingival z. Vocal. Pervious Sh. Sibilant. Palatic sh. Spirital. Pervious Sh. Murm-Sibilant Palatic j. zh. Vocal. Pervious L. Semi-voc. smooth Gingival l. Vocal-lateral. Pervious R Semi-voc. jarring. Gingival r. Vocal-jarring. Thus every of these Conso∣nants may be differenced and de∣fined by these three respects, 1. Sound or Matter. 2. Appulse of Organ. 3. Manner of Appulse. e. g. B. is Vocal, Labial, Occluse; T. is Spirital, Gingival, Occluse; F. is Spirital, Labiodental, Pervi∣ous;
ous; and the rest in like man∣ner. It will give much light to what hath hitherto been spoken concern∣ing Consonants, to take a better view of what has been already hint∣ed, and to lay this Hypothesis; viz. That the number of Letters in Nature, is equal to the number of Articulations, severally apply∣ed to every distinct matter of Sound. The Articulations of Con∣sonants, i. e. the different motions and postures of the Organs of Speech, by which they are form∣ed (though possibly more may be found) I suppose to be 9, where∣of I have described 7 in 17 Con∣sonants, and added those of L and R. Now let Breath alone, in the Mouth, be first Articulated by these, there will be 9 Consonants,
P. T. K. F. Th. S. Sh. L'. R'. Se∣condly, vocalize the Breath, and make the same Articulations, there will again be 9 more differences of sound, and will make the Con∣sonants B.D.G.V.Dh.Z.Zh.L.R. Thirdly, make the same Articu∣lations again, and let the voice pass through the Nose, and there will be 9 differences more, which will make M. N. Ng. V. Dh. Z. Zh. L. R, if the last six be spo∣ken through the Nose, in such manner as we hear it done by those, who (through an ill habit, or by an ill constitution or corro∣sion of the Ʋvula or Valve, which opens and shuts the passage of Breath to the Nose) are said to speak in the Head, or Snoch. Last∣ly let Breath onely in like manner pass through the Nose, and have
the same Articulations, and there will be nine more different sound∣ed Letters, which I cannot di∣scribe, but with Characters be∣fore used, viz. M'. N'. Ng'. F'. Th'. S'. Sh'. L'. R'. Thus there will be by one Primary, joyn'd severally with Four Secondary differences, four times Nine Consonants, viz. 9. Spirital, 9. Vocal, 9 Naso-Spirit∣al, and 9. Naso-Vocal; in all, 36. But finding no necessity of so many, (since Languages are va∣rious enough, and copious with those in use;) and withal, that the 6 Naso-Vocal Letters, which are made by pervious Appulse, are not easie nor graceful to pro∣nounce, we reject them, and re∣tein onely the Use of the other 3. which are by close Appulse,
and are facile and graceful, viz. M. N. Nĝ. And for the same rea∣son we much more exclude 6 of the Naso-Spiritals, viz. those made by pervious Appulse. And for the other 3. though some Na∣tions possibly may take the pains to pronounce them, (especially the last of them, formed in the Pa∣late, Nĝ. which perhaps may be the Genuin sound of the Hebrew ע) yet being found harsh and trou∣blesome, they are more general∣ly disused, whilst most Nations rather study to sweeten and soft∣en their Pronunciation, and to that end are more ready to change or leave out in their Compositi∣ons of words, and Conjugations, and words, borrowed from other Languages, such Letters, as less suit with easie Pronunciation.
Again, it falls out, that L. and R. being in extreams, one of Roughtness, the other of Smooth∣ness and freeness of Vocality, are not easie, in tract of Vocal speech, to be pronounced spiritally, as are P. T. F. S. &c. but are apt to get a tincture of Vocal sound, (which you will perceive, if you try to pronounce L'a, or R'a, with L and R spirital;) or else with striving to avoid it to become too Guttural; and therefore obtain not a distinct Character, and place in the Al∣phabet, as Articulations of Breath: Though we meet possibly with something of this nature in the Welch pronunciation of L, and the Greek of R. And when amongst them we find LL as in LLoyd, &c. or ῤῥ ἐῤῥενον we may conceive one of each pronounced Spirital∣ly,
the other Vocally. But in at∣tempting to pronounce these two Consonants, as likewise the Nasals, and some of the vowels Spiritally, the Throat is brought to labour, and it makes that which we call a Guttural pronunciation. Thus out of 4 times 9. i. e. 36. casting out as useless (or at best, inconvenient and needless) 9 Na∣so-Spiritals, 6 Naso-Vocals, and 2 Spiritals, there remain, as proper Elements of Language, 19 Con∣sonants such as are before de∣scribed. And if they do not all go in equal and parallel Combi∣nations, you see the reason of it. And where some Nations may be found to have a peculiar Gut∣tural or Nasal smatch in their Lan∣guage, it will be found also, that they labour to retain in their
pronunciation (though perhaps not expressed in their Alphabets) some of those Letters, whose use is more generally rejected. And I, not being able to know the di∣stinct usages in all Languages, do not hold my self obliged by the design of this Essay, to accomo∣date an Alphabet to them all, but think it sufficient in this fol∣lowing Scheme, to lay down all possible Consonants, that we know of in nature; (not to speak now of one stop, whichmay be made in the Larynx, of Breath, be∣fore it comes to the Tongue and Palat;) leaving it to every ones pleasure, upon their experience of forrein usages, to select out of this common stock more Letters than I do, and remove the Obelisks, which are intended for marks of
rejection of those Letters, to which they are prefixed. I have not in this Scheme of these 9 Quaterni∣ons of Consonants, Distinct known Characters, whereby to express them, but must repeat the same, presupposing those differ∣ences of Pronunciation already described.
    Articulations Spirital Vocal Naso∣Spirital Naso∣vocal   Appulse Close. Labial P B +-M' M 3 Appulse Close. Gingival T D +-N N 3 Appulse Close. Palatick K G +-Ng' Ng 3 Appulse               Appulse Pervious. Labiadental F V +-F +-V 2 Appulse Pervious. Lingua∣dental Th Dh +-Th +-Dh 2 Appulse Pervious. Gingival-Sibilant S Z +-S +-Z 2 Appulse Pervious. Palatick-Sibilant Sh Zh +-Sh' +-Zh 2 Appulse Pervious. Gingival-Free +-L' L +-L' ¦L 1 Appulse Pervious. Gingival∣jarring +-R' R +-R' +-R' 1 Appulse Pervious.   7 9 0 3 19 In this minute devious subject, I have been necessitated to ex∣plain my self in more words, than to some Few may seem needful: For their sakes therefore, I will in
a short review, sum up what has hitherto been said. Language is a Connexion of Audible signes, the most apt and excellent in whole nature for Communication of our Thoughts and Notions by Speaking. Written Language is a description of the said Audible Signes, by Signes Visible. The Elements of Lan∣guage are Letters, viz. Simple discriminations of Breath or Voice, Articulated by the Organs of Speech. The Alphabet consists of so ma∣ny Letters, as there are to be found such simple Discriminati∣ons. And the written Alphabet ought to be just so many single proper Charactes, designed to sig∣nifie the Sound or Power of each Letter. And these are the store∣house
of nature; the Elements, and Materials, out of which all Languages are made. These Let∣ters have their Material and their Formal causes, and Organs pro∣per to each. Their Matter is va∣rious; viz. Breath, or voice, i. e. Breath vocalized by the operati∣on of the Larynx. Their Form is constituted by the Motions and Figures of the Organs of speech, affecting the Breath or Voice with a peculiar sound, by which each Letter is discriminated. Now to find out their just num∣ber, first find out the different kinds of Matter, of which Let∣ters are made; and these are in ge∣neral, Breath when onely Spirit or Breath is Articulated; and Voice, when Articulation is of Breath vocalized. And these a∣gain
more particularly, are either (after they have passed the La∣rynx) onely in the Mouth, or else have passage at the same time through the Nose. So there are 4 kinds of matter: Breath-Oral; Voice-Oral; Breath Ore-nasal, and Voice Ore-nasal. Next, examine how many dif∣ferent Articulations can be made by several Motions and Postures of the Organs in the parts of the Mouth, which applyed severally to the kinds of Matter, may make several Discriminations of sound to the Ear, i. e. several Letters. And of these (as to Con∣sonants, viz. Letters made by Appulse) I find and have de∣scribed 9. And if possibly any more may be found out, it is most likely, they will not recompence
the Discoverers pains, by being of ready and graceful use, but will be sitter to be cast out a∣mongst those, to which in the pre∣ceding Scheme, an obelisk is pre∣fixed. Now by these 9 Articu∣lations with Appulse, there will be framed, Consonants Spirital 9; Vocal 9; Naso-Spirital 9; Naso-Vocal 9; in all 36. Then reject∣ing those that prove not grace∣ful, nor easie to be pronounced, viz. 2 Spiritals, 9 Naso-Spiritals, and 6 Naso-Vocals, in all 17; there will remain 19 Consonants, proper for use according to the de∣sign of Letters. And if those, to whom only these 19 Consonants, (or about that number) appear∣ed, and stood in such confused order, some in Ternary's, some in Pairs, and some single, were
themselves put into so much con∣fusion, and so puzled to give a methodical and natural accompt of them, it is no matter of won∣der. But now looking upon them, as they lie in their origi∣nal Differences and Combinations, and as they are selected out of a Natural stock of 9 Quaternions, or 4 Novenaries: I think (if I flatter not my self) their Nature and Differences lye most plain and obvious to be understood. In describing Letters framed by Articulation, and more par∣ticularly, by Appulse, I have hi∣therto had no occasion to speak of H, since that H is onely a Guttu∣ral Aspiration, i. e. a more forci∣ble impulse of Breath from the Lungs, applyed when we please, before or after other Letters. And
if we will ascribe any Articula∣tion by Motion or Figure to it, it is onely a more sodain and for∣cible contraction of the Lungs, and collecting the Breath in the Pipe of the Aspera Arteria, and possibly somewhat streitning it in the mouth of it, which is the La∣rynx; and all the formation of it ends there: and thus applyed to a Vowel, or to some of the Con∣sonants, it does indeed affect them with a different sound, and there∣fore deserves to be considered in this place; though not as a Con∣sonant, having no Appulse; nor as a Vowel, being never Vocal, but affecting onely the Breath, and that by an addition onely of force, but not by any new Fi∣gure in the Mouth; and so can∣not properly be called a Letter,
according to that description we have made of Letters; yet in that it causes a sensible, and not in∣commodious Discrimination of Sound, it ought to be annexed to the Alphabet, and to be ex∣pressed in the written Alphabet, by some appropriate Character, or else (as in the Greek) mark of Aspiration. The Use of it before and af∣ter Vowels, is familiarly known; but applyed to Consonants it needs to be more diligently con∣sidered, because to some of them we find it very unfitly joyned in our Alphabets and Writing; as when we express the powers of F. V. θ. ϑ. &c. by Ph, Bh, Th, Dh, in which Letters there is not any such Guttural Aspiration as H, nor any proper sound of it, neither
any mixture of the Natural sounds of P. B. T. or D. But the other are Genuine simple Letters formed, by different Fi∣gures of the Organs, from those of these last, and ought to be al∣together expressed by single pro∣per Characters. The mistake, I guess, lies in this, that Ph and those other, being made by Per∣vious Appulse, there is some pas∣sage of Breath through the Mouth, which by addition of H, (through prejudice taken in with our first A B C,) is thought to difference them from P, and those other Close Letters of near resemblance. But if better examined, there will be found another difference besides that of Perviousness of Appulse, or passage of Breath; and that consists in the Figure of
their Articulation; P. and B. are Labial: Ph and Bh, (or F and V) are Labio-dental; T. and D. are Gingival; Th. and Dh. are Lingua-dental. And for their be∣ing Pervious, you may call them (if you please,) Perspirate; but yet they are not Aspirate. i. e. with such an Aspiration as H. Nor can you well joyn H. either before or after any of the 6 Oral Occluse Consonants, without an Hiatus, if you retein the true fi∣gure of those Letters. As for Sh, which also is an Original sim∣ple Letter, because our Alpha∣bet wanted a more proper cha∣racter for it, and the figure of it gives a rounder passage of Breath than S, (this hissing in the Goums; that, in a larger space, in the Palat,) it was unaptly sup∣plyed
by adding H; and the same is Zh to Z: Gh. (as in Through) is onely an Aspirate, and G. ought to be left out. And Ch (as we pronounce it) is a compound of T. and Sh. or at least T. and Y. As also J Consonant with us, or G semblably pronounced, is com∣pounded of D and Zh, or D and Y. In WHAT, WHICH, and the like, H is pronounced be∣fore W. and so of right ought to be written. Besides the 9 several Articula∣tions by Appulse before descri∣bed, I hinted and passed by one, of which yet something may be said, viz. the Stop made by clo∣sing the Larynx; though I thought it not worthy to be inserted a∣mongst the Letters, in that it is applyed to Breath immediately as
it passeth through the Aspera Ar∣teria, and not to Breath or Voice Oral or Nasal, being stopt be∣fore it arrives there, or at the Tong; and, being a stop of that Instrument of Vocal Sound, the Larynx cannot be vocalized: so that, if it should pass for an Ar∣ticulation, it could frame but one Letter, and that uneasie and un∣ready to be joyn'd with the mo∣tions of other Letters in Speech. It is of some Affinity to K, of a middle nature between K. and H. And this being relaxed may make by a Pervions Appulse there, a sha∣king of the Larynx, as when we Gargarize: like as snorting in∣wards doth by shaking the Ʋvula, and as may be done with the Lips. And this coming still nearer to an Aspiration, a
Touch of it may perhaps be an Ingredient in the rough Guttural pronunciation of the Welch and Irish: And I have heard some Cri∣ticks pronounce the Greek x after that manner, but somewhat softer, and our gh (as in Through) has something of it, being more than a bare Aspiration, if strongly pro∣nounced; and the describing it by a Composition of g and h shews, that our Ancestors had that No∣tion of it, as a middle sound be∣tween G and H, though G was properly put instead of K; for it can have nothing of Vocal sound; Voice being raised by stiffe tensi∣on of the Larynx, and on the contrary this sound by a relaxed posture of the Muscles there∣of. There are other differences of
Sound in Speaking, by which the Tone of several Nations, and oft of several persons in the same Na∣tion, is rendred distinct, which are partly to be referred to their Al∣phabets, and partly to their Words and manner of Pronunciation, and Accent. As to their Alphabets, some may be found to take in some Letters, as the Ore spirital L' R' and Naso-spirital M' N' Ng'; which others use not, and which (as hath been observed) give a Gut∣tural and Nasal smatch to their speaking. And in several Lan∣guages, sundry of the more grace∣ful Letters in the natural Alpha∣bet, are wholly omitted and dif∣used. Again some being unapt to pronounce some Letters even in their own Language, get a dif∣ferent Tone in speaking. They
who have great and long Tongs, cannot so well make that Pervious Appulse of the Tongue to the Goums, which S. requires; but are apt to touch their Teeth, and pronounce Th instead of S, which is called Lisping. On the contra∣ry they, who have short Tongs, or are Tongue-tyed, are apt to fall short of the Appulse of the Tongue to the Teeth, and oftner place it on the Goums, and say T. and D. instead of Th and Dh, as Moder for Mother. They whose Palat is ill formed, (such as are said to want the Roof or Palat of the Mouth) or the Muscles of their Tongue are weak and Flaccid, cannot pronounce R. The former for want of sit sur∣face of the Palat to conduct the Breath even and strong to the
Goums; the later, for want of strength of the Tongue to su∣stain the jarre. As to their Words, a great dif∣ference in the Sound of several Languages ariseth from the sorting of Letters, whereof the Words are framed: some affecting one sort of Letters, some another, to be the most frequent Ingredients in their Words. Some Languages are sull of Consonants, as the Po∣lasque: some, as the Italian and French, avoid them: though the French write some Consonants, which they do not pronounce, to be Indices of the Derivations of their words: and generally more Emphasis and Accent is given to the vowels by our neighboring Nations, than by us English. I have observed a pretty affecta∣ation
in the Alleman and some others, which gives their Speech a different Tang from ours: to soften the Occluse Gingival Con∣sonants, by a kind of Mixture or soft addition of a Spirital in the same Articulation, to a Vocal pro∣ducing the Vowel, and making the Consonant end Spirital, which began Vocal, as D T. N N'. Stâdt', Bâdt̂, Mânn', &c. And whilst the Italians strive, as it were, to cut a thread in their Pronunciation between D and T, so to sweeten it; the Florentine comes nearer to T, the Venetian to D. And generally, they make the Occluse Appulse, especially the Gingival, softer than we do, giving a little of perviousness. Many more Observations of these kinds might easily be made,
and are to be found in different Languages, all over the habitable world. And in general, the Free∣dom or Apertness and vigour of pronuncing (as is particularly ob∣served in the Bocca Romana) and giving somewhat more of Aspira∣tion; And on the other side, the closeness and Mufling, and (as I may say) Laziness of speaking (which varieties are found in se∣veral Nations comparatively, and by the different natural shapes of the Mouth, and several con∣formations of the Organs of speech in those of the same Lan∣guage) render the sound of their Speech considerably different, though they all should use the same Alphabet. I come now to consider Letters made without Appulse, i. e. Vowels,
among which will be found two or three more to be added to the before described number of Con∣sonants. The Vewels are made by a free passage of Breath Vocalized through the cavity of the Mouth, without any appulse of the Or∣gans; the said cavity's being dif∣ferently shaped by the postures of the Throat, Tongue and Lips, some or more of them, but chiefly of the Tongue. As to the Number of Vowels, they, being differenced by the shape of the cavity of the mouth, may be reckon'd very many, if small differences be allowed. But those which are remarkably di∣stinguished, and reasonably suffice to express the pronunciations in use, that we know of, may be
reduced to these Eight; α. a. e. i. o. oo. u. {ou}; the sounds whereof, ac∣cording to the vulgar pronunciati∣on, are thus. Long, or accented in the Vowel. α a e i o oo u {ou} Fall. Fate. Seal. Eel. Cole. Fool. Rule. Two. Short, or accented in the Consonant. Folly. Fat. Sell. Ill. Full. There is so much space between a and e, that there may be a vowel inserted between them, and a fit character for it may be æ, and perhaps some Languages may have a distinct use of such a vowel. Whereas I make the Material part of Vowels in their Definition to be Breath vocalized, or voice Oral, I am to be understood, as I treat of Vocal Speech; otherwise the same Vowels may be whisper∣ed that is, in use of whispering by Articulations of Breath; and, if
there were any use of it, they may be pronounced Nasal, both Spirital and Vocal; but in Vocal Speech they are all Ore-vocals, as to common and ready use, and are to be accompted just so many, as there are several Articulations, by which they are made. The Articulations, that is, the Motions and Postures of the Or∣gans in framing the Vowels, are more difficultly discerned, than those of the Consonants; because in the Consonants, the Appulse is more manifest to the sense of Touching, but in the Vowels it is so hard to discern the Figures made by the Motions of the Tongue, (inclining onely toward the Palat, and not touching it) especially about the more inward Bosse or convex of it, that it is ren∣dred
no less difficult to define the Articulations of the Vowels; and he that can describe them accu∣rately, erit mihi magnus Apollo. Onely he who shall adventure, has this advantage, that it is easier to affirm, than to disprove. Neither are we obliged to seek, nor can expect to find any exact method of nature in the Articulations of Vowels, (as e. g. to find them equally sorted into Gutturals, Pa∣latick, or Gingivals, and Labials) no more than were found in those of the Consonants; where, of 9 Articulations, there are Labial 1; Labiodental 1; Linguadental 1; Gingival 4; Palatic 2; and some of these irregularly differing from the rest. I shall therefore take upon me no more, than to set down, what I think may be per∣ceived
in examining those Ar∣ticulations. But first, to discover how much the middle and inward Bosse of the upper surface of the Tongue is used here, and how little the end of it (except onely to con∣duct and give way,) you will upon tryal find your self able to pronounce all the Vowels, holding the end of your Tong, all the while steady against your Teeth. And you may come very near, doing the same without altering the posture of your Lips: which evinceth, that all vowels are formed by the Tong, though in some the Lips concurre, and in some, the Throat. And whilst you make this tryal, the Motions of the Tongue by Contraction, Dilatation, &c. are so easie and
so subtil, that you can hardly conceive or distinguish them aright. But we may imagine the Vow∣el (α) to be made by the freest and openest passage of the Throat through the Mouth, and so to have a kind of natural Articula∣tion without Art, onely by open∣ing the Mouth: (a) to be a lit∣tle streitned by the Bosse of the Tongue near the Throat; and therefore if you try to pass from (α) to (a) you will find that you thrust the end of your Tong something forward to raise the Boss of the Tong towards the Palat to streiten the passage. In (e) the middle of the Palat is streitned, by the breadth of the Tong, and therefore the end of the Tong carried yet forwarder.
And in (i) still more after the same manner, but with a stronger and firmer Tension of the Muscles of the Tong bearing it stisly very near the Palat, and resting the sides of the Tong a∣gainst the side-Teeth. In (o) the Larynx is depres∣sed, or rather drawn back by con∣traction of the Aspera Arteria. And the Tong likewise is drawn back and Curved; and the Throat more open to make a round pas∣sage: and though the Lips be not of necessity, yet the drawing them a little rounder, helps to accom∣plish the pronunciation of it, which is not enough to denomi∣nate it a Labial Vowel, because it receives not its Articulation from the Lips. (oo) seems to be made by a like posture of the
Tong and Throat with (o) but the Larynx somewhat more de∣pressed. And if the Lips at the same time be contracted, and born stifly near together, then is made {ou}. (u) with the Tong in the posture of (i) but not so stiffe, and the Lip born near the upper Lip by a strong Tension of the Muscles, and bearing upon it at either corner of the mouth. Thus, it seems, in oo and (o) the Throat; in (α) the Mouth is more opened: in a. e. i. the streitnings of the cavity of the mouth between the Tong and Pa∣lat, are gradually both forwarder and nearer the Roof. ({ou}) is made by the Throat, and Tong, and Lip. (u) by the Tong and Lip; in {ou} the Tong be∣ing in the posture, which makes
(oo;) and in (u) in the same posture, which makes (i.) And in this, {ou} and u are peculiar, that they are framed by a double mo∣tion of Organs, that of the Lip, added to that of the Tong; and yet either of them is a single Let∣ter, and not two, because the mo∣tions are at the same time, and not successive, as are eu. pla. &c. Yet for this reason they seem not to be absolutely so simple Vow∣els as the rest, because the voice passeth successively from the Throat to the Lips in {ou}, and from the Palat to the Lips in u, being there first moulded into the sigures of oo and i, before it be fully Arti∣culated by the Lips. And yet, ei ther these two, {ou} and u, are to be admitted for single Vowels, or else we must exclude the Lips from
being the Organs of any single Vowel since that the Mouth be∣ing necessary to conduct the Voice to the Lips, will, according to the shape of its cavity, necessarily give the Voice some particular affecti∣on of sound in its passage, before it come to the Lips; which will seem to make some such compo∣sition in any Vowel which is La∣bial. I have been inclin'd to think, there is no Labial Vowel, but that the same affection from the Lips may, somewhat in the na∣ture of a Consonant, be added to every of the Vowels, but most subtely, and aptly to two of them, whose Figures are in the ex∣treams in respect of Aperture and Situation, one being the closest and forwardest, which is i, and the other being most open and
backward; there being reason to allow a Vowel of like sound in the Throat with {ou}, but distinct from it as not being Labial; which will be more familiar to our Eye if it be written oo; as in Cut, Coot, Full, Fool, Tut, Toot, in which the Lip does not concur; and this is that other. Thus u will be onely i Labial, and {ou} will be oo Labial, that is, by adding that motion of the under-Lip, i will become u, and oo will become {ou}; and then the Series of the Vowels accord∣ing to their degrees of aperture, and recess towards the Larynx, will be thus, i, e, æ, a, α, o, oo; to which may be added u and {ou}, be∣cause of their general use, as be∣ing Labially affected more sub∣tlely than the rest. Taking these then for Vowels, it
is next observable, that i. u. {ou}. have another peculiar property above the other Vowels, being made by a strong Tension and firme po∣sture of the Organ; the first, of the Tongue, the two later, of the Lip, making almost an Appulse, that by reason thereof they serve indifferently for Vowels in respect of the Aperture, and for Conso∣nants in respect of the pene-ap∣pulse, and so much the more verg∣ing either way, by the liberty of managing the Organs, according to the respective Occasions. And it is here observable, how excellently Nature has provided for the Readiness and Easiness of Speech. For if Speech were to be made onely by Vowels, there would be an hiatus; we could not speak distinct enough, and the
Breath would spend too fast; therefore it is checked by the Ap∣pulses made in Consonants; and if it should be all Consonants, the Voice would be too much abated, and the passage would not be easie from one Syllable or collection of Letters to another; but being both mixed together, one Vowel in e∣very Syllable, for varieties sake, sometimes preceding, sometimes following, and sometimes inter∣posed between the Consonants (by checking and reserving the Breath, and letting it pass with a quick impulse at the Aperture of the Organs for the Vowel) give a vigor and emphasis to the Sound: And the motions of the Organs become more facile and ready by the mixture of Apertures with Appulses.
But in these three Vowels, of which I am now treating, there seems to be a kind of Lusus Na∣turae; these are of a middle con∣stitution between Vowels and Consonants, partaking of both: and we see, how many disputes, their simple and ambiguous na∣ture hath created among the Grammarians, and how it has be∣got the mistake concerning Diph∣thongs; they being all, that are accompted properly such, com∣pounded either with i. u. or {ou}, and are, as I conceive, Syllables and not Diphthongs (as it is intended to be signified by that word:) i. {ou}. and u. then supplying the place and nature of Consonants by streitning the passage of Breath, so as to check it not much less, than is done by some of the Pervious
Consonants, and by making a smart stroke at the Aperture in passage to another Vowel, Vid. Ap∣pend. answer∣able to the Collision, or rather Divulsion of the Organs made by other Consonants, as is evident in pronouncing ia, {ou}a. id est ya. wa. For the same reason, of the im∣proper Diphthongs the most pass∣able are those compounded with e or o, as ea, oa, because of the nearness, that o has to {ou}, and e to i, and having either of them a little of that Spring in the Muscles, which I have last described. Concerning {ou} and u, this may be observed, that in subjoyning them to another vowel, {ou} is apter to follow α and o, because of their resemblance in the posture of the Tong, as hath been said; and for the like reason u is apter to fol∣low
a and e, as {ou}a{ou}l, wawl. euge, &c. But generally if the Vowels follow, then it is {ou} precedes, and not u. Our vulgar (i.) as in (stile) seems to be such a Dipthong (or rather syllable or part of a sylla∣ble) composed of a. i. or e. i. and not a simple Original Vowel.
I may now give you a Scheme of the whole Alphabet. Letters, i. e. such simple Dis∣criminations of Sound as may be Elements of Signes for commu∣nication by Speech, are differen∣ced by Matter of Sound, prepared by the Lungs, Larynx, Mouth, Nose. Breath Oral (and may be stiled) Ore-spirital. Ore-Nasal. (and may be stiled) Naso-spirital. Voice. Oral (and may be stiled) Ore-vocal. Ore-Nasal. (and may be stiled) Naso-vocal. Forme, Ar∣ticulation by Appulse of one Organ to another, Consonants by degree Plenary Close Lip to Lip. Labial, as B. Tong to Gums. Gingival, D. Tong to Palat, Palatic, G. Partial Pervious Lip to Teeth. Labiodental V. Tong to Teeth, Lingua∣dental Dh. Tong to Gums, Gingival Sibilant. Z. Jarring. R. Lateral. L. Tong to Palat, Palatic, Zh. or J. Inclination of one Organ to another without Appulse. Vowels—α. a. ae. e. i. o. oo. u. {ou}.
Thus there are 9 Articulations with Appulse, which applied seve∣rally to four sorts of matter, viz. Breath-Oral, Breath Ore-nasal, Voice-Oral, Voice-Ore-nasal, may make 36 Consonants; whereof I have in∣stanced in one to each Articula∣tion, having before described o∣ther three to each Articulation. And likewise nine Articulations without Appulse so applied, may make 39 vowels.
Of these some are Commodious Consonants Ore-spirital, 7. p. t. k. f. th. s. sh. Ore-vocal, 9. b. d. g. v. dh. z. zh. l. r. Naso-vocal, 3. M. N. Ng. Vowels, Orevocal—9. α. a. ae. e. i. o. oo. u. {ou}. Uneasie and unplea∣sant, or not suffici∣ently distinct. Consonants Ore-spirital 2. L• Rc Naso-spirital 9. Naso-vocal 6. Vowels Ore-spirital 9. viz. in vocal speech, (of which I am treating) but in whispering they are commodious. Naso-spirital 9. viz. in vocal speech, (of which I am treating) but in whispering they are commodious. Naso-vocal 9. viz. in vocal speech, (of which I am treating) but in whispering they are commodious. Of intermediare Figures without deter∣minate number. The Vowels, in respect of their Articulations, may seem not unfitly to be sorted into Guttural—oo. o.α. Palatic—a. ae. e. i. Labio-Guttural—{ou}. Labio-Palatic—u. There are some other Accidents besides those spoken of before, which have an Influence in vary∣ing the Sound of Languages, as Accent and Emphasis; which though now much confounded, seem to have been formerly more
distinguished. Accent, as in the Greek names and usage, seems to have regarded the Tune of the voice; the Acute accent raising the Voice in some certain Sylla∣bles, to a higher, i. e. more acute Pitch or Tone, and the Grave de∣pressing it lower, and both ha∣ving some Emphasis, i. e. more vigorous pronunciation. The Cir∣cumflex keeps the voice in a mid∣dle Tune, and therefore in the Latine is compounded of both the other, but withal adding an Em∣phasis and longer stay upon that Syllable, expressed in Greek by a suitable character [῀] And therefore the Syllable, which is circumflexed, is always accompt∣ed long. This Tuning of the Voice by Accent, is of great concern to the gracefulness of pronunciation.
And although our Languages have not such accurate Rules for it as the Greek had, yet it is much consi∣dered, and submitted to the judgement of more Critical Ears, to direct and determine what is graceful, and what is not; and here arises a difference in the Sound of Languages, by the different Use of Accent. For example, the French and Greek run contrary one to the other: Whereas the Greek in the end of a word chan∣geth the Acute accent to a Grave, and most Languages have some∣what like (which is therefore cal∣led Cadence of their voice;) the French conclude with an acute Ac∣cent, raising the Tune of their Voice in the last Syllable. Emphasis is of a larger conside∣ration and extent, and not so much
regards the Tune (leaving that to Accent) as a certain Gran∣deur, whereby some Letter, Sylla∣ble, Word, or Sentence is rendred more remarkable than the rest, by a more vigorous pronunciation, and a longer stay upon it: As, in a Speech some Sentences are made more remarkable, in a Sentence some one or two words; in a Word, some one Syllable; and in a Sylla∣ble, some one Letter. And of these Two last I am chiefly here concern∣ed to take notice. In a Poly-syllable word, it is first to be considered, to which Sylla∣ble the Emphasis is to be given, and in each Syllable, to which Letter the former of these is usu∣ally confounded with Accent; but in the later lies the greatest difference of Pronunciation, the
Consonants coming in for a share of Emphasis, and making a Sylla∣ble long, where the Vowel is short: E. g. Altera, in respect of the whole word, the Emphasis and Accent lies in the first Syllable, but then that Syllable is again ca∣pable of a two-fold Emphasis, viz. either in the Vowel or in the Con∣sonant. Most Foreigners pro∣nounce their Vowels soft, as this they pronounce Aaltera, or Aul∣tera, staying upon the Vowel, and making a soft gentle Appulse in the Consonant; We are apt to pronounce it Altera, making the Vowel short and giving the Em∣phasis to the Consonant. And this kind of Emphasis, viz. of the Consonant, is apt to gain too much place in our Speech, and I take it to be a general vicious habit in our
pronunciation, as they, who learn to sing, will find; for their first at∣tempt must be, to unlearn that ha∣bit. So also We say Forma, they, Fôrma, or (as we would write it, if it were English) Forema. We say, Mórtem; they Moretem or Moortem. We say, Cońsonańt, they Cônsonánt, or, Conesonaunt. We say, Catt, they, Caut. Yet some∣thing may be said on our behalf, that giving an Emphatical Sound to the Consonants, makes our Pro∣nunciation more distinct, and cer∣tain to the Ear. And here it may be proper to assert, that there is no such thing in nature as a double Letter, either Conso∣nant or Vowel, in one and the same Syllable, and it is incongru∣ous, to write them so. For where∣as every Letter written should
have one and but one determi∣nate signification, to express the power of some one certain Sound made by the Mouth; with more than Poetical Licence one signe is set for another, and the same Letters in the same Alphabet in several words, are made to have several powers. Thus in our En∣glish, ee, and ie, and e, for i, (as Feel, Field, English:) oo for {ou}, &c. And frequently the Emphasis is incongruously supplied by adding quiescent Letters (the Phrase confessing the absurdity) as Bate Batt, Base Basse, Bare Barre. But I do not intend to pursue the many Pseudography's in use, which are too numerous; but to shew of how great concern the Em∣phasis were, if rightly used; and how most of those Anoma∣lies
in writing might be avoided, and better supply'd by noting our Words or Syllables, that need it, with some mark of Emphasis. This will shew, when a Vowel is to be pronounced long or short, and cut off superfluous Quiescent Letters, and double Consonants: for, when there is a double Con∣sonant written, though sometimes it changeth the Vowel, Ale, All, Cale, Call; yet generally it serves to transfer the Emphasis from the Vowel to the Consonant. This kind of Emphasis then, I mean not the Emphasis of a Sylla∣ble in reference to a word, but the Emphasis of a Letter in respect of Syllables, as it is to belong either to the Vowel, or to the later Con∣sonant (if there be any) in the same syllable, if it were better
heeded, and noted by some mark, would conduce much to Ortho∣graphy; as for example, if an Ac∣cent were placed over the Vow∣el, or else over the Consonant, as the case requires, ál, al, or rather, leaving the Accent to mark out the Syllable in a word, to which Emphasis is due, where need is; make use of long and short Cha∣racters set over the Vowel, and to make the least work, suppose eve∣ry Vowel to be long, which is not marked, and mark onely those Vowels, which are to be pronounc∣ed short, and the Emphasis trans∣ferred to the following Conso∣nant. Thus instead of Ball Boll, Bale, Ballad; Beal, Bell; Biele, or Beel, Bil; write Bαl, Băl; Bal, Bălad; Bel, Bĕl; Bil, Bĭl: I say, if our pronunciation were written in
proper Letters, and with marks of Emphasis, it would restore Or∣thography, and cut off many su∣perfluous Letters that are written, not to be pronounced, but onely to make an incongruous supply of Emphasis, or to alter the pow∣er of some other Letters in the same word; whereof in some Lan∣guages so many examples are found, that it would be tedious to recount them. In the mean time we are apt very unjustly to laugh at the uncouth Spelling in the wri∣tings of unlearned persons, who writing as they please, that is, using such Letters, as justly express the power or Sound of their Speech; yet, forsooth, we say write not true English, or true French, &c. Whereas the Gram∣marians themselves, ought rather
to be blamed, and derided for accommodating Words so ill with Letters, and Letters with so faulty Alphabets, that it requires almost as much pains to learn how to pro∣nounce what is written, and to write what is spoken, as would serve to learn the Language it self, if Characters or Signs written were exactly accommodated to Speech. But, though it be true, that this so needless and unprofi∣table incumbrance of Learning might wholly be removed by rectified Alphabets, and setling a just correspondence between the Signs Audible, and the Signs Visi∣ble, if such Alphabets and a regu∣lar usage of them could take place; yet it is not to be ho∣ped or imagined, that the incon∣gruous Alphabets, and Abuses of
writing can ever be justled out of their Possession of all Libraries and Books, and universal habit and practice of Mankind. This were to imply, that all Books in being should be destroyed and a∣bolished, being first new Printed after such rectified Alphabets; and that all the Age should be pre∣vailed with, to take new pains to unlearn those habits, which have cost them so much labour. Nei∣ther did any such Hopes or Am∣bition set my thoughts on work, but partly the worthiness and cu∣riosity of this Subject in it self, and chiefly the great use of an accurate knowledge of the Nature of Let∣ters and Speech, in directing to a steady and effectual way of In∣structing Deaf and Dumb persons, to obtain a reasonable perfection
of utterance of Speech; and to discern (in some measure) with their Eye, by observing the mo∣tions of their Mouth, what others speak. And to that end I have added to this Essay an Appendix, relating that designe; both which I hope and promise my self, will find a Candid reception from those, who shall consider these poor and slight Papers, as a work of Charity and Compassion; and may be acceptable to them, as it is pleasing to my self, to have stu∣died some relief for the Calami∣tous and Deplorable Condition of persons Deaf and Dumb.
APPENDIX Concerning Persons DEAF AND DUMB. AMongst Dumb Per∣sons, there are very sew, who are such through defect in the Organs of Speech; but most commonly that Imperfection is the effect, or rather consequence of want of Hearing, by some disorder or defect in the Organs appertain∣ing to that Sense. The Organs of
Speech are many and large, and managed by so great a number of Muscles, that Speech is not ea∣sily destroy'd, though often some∣what vitiated, as to some particu∣lar Letters, and as to ready pro∣nunciation in general; but they, who have such Imperfections, are not thereby utterly deprived of the Ʋse of Speech: whereas the Or∣gans of Hearing are few and small, and a little disorder or defect who∣ly overthrows the use of that Sence. There are three very lit∣tle Bones in the Ear, upon whose right constitution, depends the due Tension of the Tympanum; and if the action of one little Muscle, which serves to draw one of these Ossicles, fixt to the Tym∣panum, be lost or abated, the ten∣sion of that Membrane ceasing,
Sound is hindred from coming in∣to the Ear: And I am of opinion, that the most frequent cause of Deafness is to be attributed to the Laxness of the Tympanum, when it has lost its Brace or Tension by some irregularity in the Figure of those Bones, or defect in that Muscle: Some instance whereof, I have formerly given in a Paper presented to the Royal Society, See the end of this Discourse. whereby Sound is, as it were, shut out of doors by the interventi∣on of that Laxe Membrane, and not suffer'd to pass into the in∣ward Ear, and arrive at the Audi∣tory Nerve: Like as the Voice is sometimes intercluded by a hoars∣ness, or viscous phlegme, cleav∣ing to the Aspera Arteria, Larynx and Ʋvula; so that, allhough there be no fault in the Organs of
Articulation, yet there is no voice to be Articulated. Now as to the most general case of those who are Deaf and Dumb; I say, they are Dumb by conse∣quence from their Deasness, one∣ly because they are not taught to speak. The Natural part of Speech, viz. Words made of Letters, by such exquisite various Articulati∣ons, is learnt by much practile and imitation. And much more the Artificial part, viz. Institution of Significancy of Language, cannot be acquired without great help of Instruction. And to that end the Tong and the Ear, Speaking and Hearing, hold a correspondence, by which we learn to imitate the Sound of Speech, and understand the meaning of it. But he that never hears a word spoken, nor
can be told what it signifies, it is no wonder if such an one remain speechless: as out of question any one must do (though of integral principles) who from an Infant should be bred up amongst Mutes, and have no teaching. Such then is the case in hand, that they who want that Sence of Discipline (Hearing) are also by conse∣quence deprived of Speech, not by any immediate Organical In∣disposition, but for want of Disci∣pline. Finding then a Person in this condition, not capable of Hear∣ing; if we would endeavour to make use of the Organs of Speech (supposed to be of sufficient con∣stitution) there is no way, but to have recourse to the other Learn∣ed Sense, which is Seeing; and
to find out some means (though farther about and more labori∣ous) of instructing him by his Eyes, and shewing him the visible motions and figures of the Mouth, by which Speech is Articulated. And to apply the Doctrine of Letters to this use and purpose, is the Design of this Appendix. Where our first business had need be, to Animate the Ʋndertaker, and consider, whether it be possi∣ble or no: For it must be confes∣sed, that there lie in the way great Objections and Difficulties, which seem to discourage, and portend such a design unfesible. But I doubt not to shew you, how to overcome those seeming demon∣strable Impossibilities, and shew, how truly it is said, Venit miseris solertia rebus.
The First difficulty which oc∣curs, is, that it will be painful and irksome to a deaf Person to exercise his Voice, as even those, who have no defect, are apt to be tired and spent with much speak∣ing, and find a hoarsness in their Voice, and weariness in the Lungs and Muscles of the Larynx; and it will be very hard to prevail with him to submit himself to so troublesome a course of Learn∣ing, being Deaf to all perswa∣sions and arguments, by which we might excite him to it. I con∣fess, this Objection stands upon the threshold, as a great discourage∣ment. And except a great regard be had to it, who ever goes a∣bout this designe, will attempt it in vain, especially in the first progress in it. Therefore the
Deaf Person must be gently and discreetly treated, and by all kind of pleasant usage wrought upon, to take some pains at it; watching your seasons, and taking great care, that he may not hate his task, but do it cheerfully. He must be allured by much sweetness, and encouraged, as oft as you have the least occasion, by applause and admiration; and must exercise of∣ten, and a little at a time, so as not to vex and weary him; and in some time, habit and custom, and the pleasure he will take in it, will make it easier to him. 2. Some of the Consonants, and most of the Vowels, being Articulated by so obscure Motions and Figures, that the most Learn∣ed can hardly agree to describe them, it may well be doubted how
they can be described to the Eye of Deaf Persons. And further, if all the 9 Articulations of the 19 Consonants were understood and imitated by him; yet how can he discern the Material Dif∣ferences, which make up the num∣ber of Consonants, and consist onely in Sound, and cannot be represented to the Eye. The former part of this ob∣jected difficulty is casily answer∣ed by saying, that in Ascents, e∣very step gained is a footing and help to the next: and in the Ele∣ments of Geometry, the Definiti∣ons, and Axioms, and Postulata, and easier propositions, serve to elucidate, and demonstrate hard∣er Theorems and Problems. Thus you will find, that when you have conducted him through the plainer
part of the Alphabet, he will be∣gin so far to understand his task, that more imperfect descriptions will serve to carry him on to the end of it. As to the second part of this objection, it must be confessed a thing not fesible to represent the Material Difference of Consonants to the Eye; Sound being onely the object of Hearing: Yet the Nasal Differences may be point∣ed at; but those Seven pairs, be∣fore discoursed of, cannot be di∣stinguished by Sight. And in this case it is chiefly that I said, the designe must be compassed by a way further about; and such a way I shall direct in its proper place, which shall easily and cer∣tainly effect it. 3. Supposing a Deaf person to
have gained a perfect pronuncia∣tion of all Letters and Words, and that all the Articulations were to be discerned by his Eye, in the Mouth of one who speaks to him; yet this, as to Consonants, could discover but 9 differences, and must leave 10 Letters and in∣deed all undistinguished: so that it is impossible to discern certainly what Letter is pronounced. And then it must likewise seem impos∣sible (what is so frequently spo∣ken of and attested) for a Deaf Person, by observing the Moti∣ons of another mans Mouth, to know what he says, and to uphold a current communication of dis∣course with him. This objection seems unanswer∣able, and the difficulty not to be conquered; and it must be grant∣ed,
that it is impossible to know infallibly by the Eye, what ano∣ther speaks. But yet there is an equity and relief in this Case, as I shall make appear in cases not much different. As First, Any Equivocal word spoken alone, can∣not be determined to any one cer∣tain Sense and Signification by him that hears it; of which there are numerous examples in every Language: Yet the same word in Connexion of Speech, as part of a sentence, is understood as easi∣ly as any other; ex. gr. But: if I ask you, what I mean by that word, you will answer, I may mean this or that thing, or some∣thing else, you cannot tell which: you can distinguish, but you must leave me to determine; but if I joyn it with other words in Con∣struction
and Sense, as (But I will not. (a But of Wine.) But and Boundary) the Ramme will But) (Shoot at a But); the meaning of it will be as ready to you, as any other word. In like manner if the Deaf Person discern with his Eye one single Articulation, suppose by the Appulse of the Lips, he cannot distinguish whe∣ther it be p. b. or m. But this same Articulation joyned with others, in Words and Sense, he having a general perception of the sub∣ject, whereof you discourse, and a greater than ordinary measure of Sagacity, will not be to seek, which of these three Labial Con∣sonants you used. There is a common experi∣ment, which will come still near to the case in hand; in Whisper∣ing,
we Articulate onely Ore-spi∣rital, and Naso-spirital Sounds, and yet use words, which consist much of Ore-vocal, and Naso-vocal Con∣sonants, and have no other differ∣ence from other Consonants of the same Articulation, but that they are Vocal. And these Vo∣cal Letters in Whispering we make Spirital, and so they come to be the very same, each with his com∣pere, which is Ore-spirital; of which I have given 7 pairs in the discourse foregoing. Now, though b and p, t and d, k and g, f and v, th and dh, s and z, sh and zh, are but in effect 7 Letters, and have no distinction at all, each from his Compere, in Whispering, neither in respect of Organ, nor Articulation, nor Sound: and there∣fore being singly pronounced, can∣not
be distinguish'd neither by the Eye nor Ear; yet we are not at all perplext with the confusion of these Letters in whispering, but by our habit and knowledge of Lan∣guage, can as readily understand one another, when we whisper, as when we speak aloud: & yet these Consonants are not much less con∣fused to the Ear in Whispering, than in Speaking they are to the Eye. It is observable, that the Histo∣ries of those, who could discern Speech by their Eye, are most of such, as having had knowledge of Language, and a readiness in Speaking, falling afterwards into Deafness, have lost the use of Speech, but still retein the me∣mory of it. Now if we can by Industry, make our Deaf and Dumb Persons reasonably perfect
in the Language and Pronuncia∣tion, he may be also capable of the same priviledge of understand∣ing by the Eye what is spoken, though the Letters singly pro∣nounced are ambiguous and may deceive him. In short, though it be impossible for a Deaf Person, by his Eye accurately and cer∣tainly to distinguish Letters singly spoken, (as it is likewise in words equivocal spoken, and Letters whispered, to those that hear;) Yet in tract of Speech, as a du∣bious word is easily known by the Coherence with the rest; and a dubious Letter by the whole Word; so may a Deaf Person, ha∣ving attained a competent know∣ledge of Language, and assisted by an acute Sagacity, by some more evident word discerned by
his Eye, know the Sence, and by the Sence other Words, and by the Words the obscurer Letters; and so, notwithstanding this diffi∣culty objected, make good use of this Institution, not onely to speak, but, in a good measure (so far as to serve for converse) know what others say to him: And the ra∣ther, because having learnt by his Eye, and being inured to that kind of observation, he is quicker to perceive the Motions of Articu∣lation, and Conjunctures of Let∣ters in Words, than we can easily imagine. Having thus surmounted the difficulties, I shall mention some such things as give encourage∣ment to this enterprize. And First that, which was before hinted, that in Deaf and Dumb Persons,
their Necessity excites a great ob∣servation and sagacity to supply their defects, and to bear up and maintain Converse with others, who enjoy the benefit of all their Senses. And being denyed Com∣munication by the Ear, their Eyes are the more vigilant, attent and heedful, which renders them much more capable of being im∣proved by directions and instru∣ctions applyed to that Sense, and gives a delight and encourage∣ment to those, who teach such ap∣prehensive Scholars. 2. The onely moveable Or∣gans belonging to the Sence of Hearing, being Two of those Three little Bones before menti∣oned, viz. the Incus and Malleus; and so much depending upon the adequate motion of those
Two Ossicles to give due Tension to the Tympanum, their Motions being small, are easily subverted, and from thence most frequently comes loss of Hearing. Now that which I would infer, is, That in those generally the Auditory Nerve, is sound, and by a branch of the same Nerve, that goes between the Ear and the Palat of the Mouth, they can make a shift to hear them∣selves, though their outward Ear be stopt by the Laxe Membrane to all Sounds, that come that way; and so they have some little plea∣sure in speaking, and guide them∣selves by that little Hearing, to retein, and improve a habit of Speaking whatsoever they have once been taught. 3. The Figures of some Arti∣culations are most easie to be
shewed to the Eye, as the Con∣sonants Labial, Labiodental, Lin∣guadental, and Gingival, and Pa∣latic, Occluse, and the Gingival-Lateral; so that who soever makes trial, shall begin to make some progress with great success and encouragement, and gain ground to make the remaining part of the Alphabet more casie, by the habit and method of prevailing so far onwards. 4. Language being defined, a Connexion of the best Signes for Communication, and Written Lan∣guage, Visible signes of the signes Audible; And the Elements of each respectively, and the corre∣spondence and mutual assistance of each to other, being such, as in the foregoing discourse is more fully shewn; You have a great
help, by shewing Letters and Words written, to conduct a Deaf person on, in exercising him to express the same by pronuncia∣tion; and what soever you gain upon him this way, will be re∣teined, and made use of in the other. Add to all this the admi∣rable Curiosity and singular Ex∣cellency of this designe, the con∣sideration wherof will sustein the Patience and animate the Industry of him who shall undertake it. Having thus considered what ground and incouragement there may be for such an undertaking; I shall now in the plainest manner I can, lay down such Directions and Rules, as I my self have made trial of, to instruct a Deaf person to make use of his Organs of Speech, and cease to be Dumb,
enjoying the great felicity of that most expedite way of Commu∣nication: Which may serve, till some more able Person shall be excited, by Improvements and Additions, to give a greater Per∣fection to this designe. First make your own Alphabet ac∣cording to the Number of Letters and their Natural order. In respect of easiness, Consonants first (be∣cause their Appulses are manifest) and then Vowels; and in ordering Consonants respect chiefly, either Their Sound— p. t. k. f. θ. s. sh. b. d. g. v. ϑ. z. j. m. n. r. l. r. Their Organ— p. b. m. f. v. θ. ϑ. t. d. n. s. z. l. r. sh. j. k. g. r. Their Degree of Appulse.— p. b. t. d. k. g. m. n. n. f. v. θ. ϑ. s. z. sh. j. l. r. The last of these I take to be much the best order, in which to teach a Deaf Person. Then, add the Vowels, α. a. æ e. i. o. oo. u. {ou}: but so accurate a distinction will
not be necessary. The through-un∣derstanding of the nature of this Alphabet, will direct you, what and how many are the Articulations of Letters, which may be repre∣sented to the Eye; and what are the other differences of Letters, that you may invent some other Artifices, besides visible represen∣tation, to make a Deaf Person learn and apprehend them. This Alphabet must be your own Clew to guide you; but the Deaf per∣son is not to be troubled with it, because he is also to learn to write and read as others do; and there∣fore must be taught the common Alphabet of that Language, which he is to learn, and must use those incongruous compositions, and o∣ther Anomalies of vulgar writing; in which you must understand
how to manage him, by Reducti∣on of them to the true Alphabet of Nature; in which practise, you will (to your cost) discover the inconvenience of faulty Al∣phabets and Usages of writing. Let him first learn to write af∣ter a Copy of all the Letters in the vulgar Alphabet, till his Eye be well acquainted with their Fi∣gures, and he be able to write them pretty well. When you be∣gin to teach him to speak, you may use this method.  Write down in a paper p. and b; and make signes to him to endeavour to pronounce, and guide him by shewing him the motion of your own Lips, to offer at one of those Letters: which being the easiest of all, he will with a little endea∣vour stumble upon one of them.
Shew him upon the Paper the Letter, which he hits upon, and much applauding and encoura∣ging him, make him repeat it of∣ten, till he be very perfect both in the pronunciation and in the written Character of that Letter: suppose it was P. Then next point at B. and direct him with the same motion of his Lips to pronounce it. With long trying he percei∣ving, that you require him to make a different Letter with the same Figure of the Mouth, will at last find out how to do it, and utter something different from p. which will be B, though he un∣derstand not, wherein the differ∣ence lies, but finds it out; and being excluded from p, and la∣bouring to pronounce another Letter with the same Figure of
his Lips, make him perfect in B. And let him diligently practise these two Letters, pointing some∣times at one, sometimes at the o∣ther in the paper, till he be per∣fect in both. Next shew him the posture of the end of the Tongue close to the Goums, and he will without much difficulty be brought to pro∣nounce either T, or else D. Use the same method as before, and which soever he speaks, shew it him written, and having the other also written in the paper, shew him that, after he has con'd the First, and require it of him, still keeping the same posture of the Mouth: which having obtained of him, make him perfect in them both, before you carry him further.  Next teach him in like
manner K and G calling them Ka and Ga; but to shew him the posture of these, you had need provide a Palat with the upper jaw, of Plaster, and the shape of a Tong of stuffed Leather, which will be useful to you to describe to him, how the Bosse of the Tong in these Letters is born close in the inner part of the Palat near the Throat; and more useful, when you would describe the Vowels: but yet both may be done without it. If you find him stick at this Letter, put your fin∣ger to the out-side of his Throat, whilst he is offring to pronounce, and check his Breath there, and he will soon perceive what he is to do, and can scarce choose but speak K. When he has got one of these Letters perfect, gain the o∣ther
by the same way of Exclu∣sion, as before. Having thus gained of the Oc∣cluse Consonants, three Ore-spi∣rital, p. t. k. and three Ore-vocal, b. d. g; there remain the three Na∣so-vocal, m. n. ng. which will be most easily learnt by the same way of exclusion, requiring him to pronounce a Labial Let∣ter, that is, neither p. nor b. and pointing to his Nose, to breath that way, he will soon pro∣nounce m. and in like manner n and ng. The Dental Consonants are ve∣ry easie, therefore let them be the next, and first the Labiodentals, f, v, which, as also the Linguaden∣tals, th, dh, he will soon learn by the method before directed; though dh may be let alone, being
never written so in our Language. But since a Consonant, or at least some of the Consonants, cannot well be pronounced alone, with∣out a Vowel joyned to them, it may be considered here, whe∣ther in naming the Consonants, it is better that the Vowel go be∣fore, or follow it? and what Vow∣el? In our vulgar Alphabet, it is observable, that in all occluse Con∣sonants, except the Nasals, the Vowel follows, as be, ce, de, ge, ka, pe, qu, te; but in the pervious Consonants, and the Nasals, be∣cause they have passage through the Nose, the Vowel precedes; as, ef, el, em, en, er, es: onely z. hath something peculiar; and in that it is accounted a double Let∣ter (which it is not in the Natu∣ral Alphabet, any more than S,)
we may imagine it to have been anciently pronounced, as it is now by the Italians, Ds or Ts; and so to be called Zad from the Hebrew Tsadi: but yet to make out my observation, we, who pronounce it as a single Letter, do as often call it Yzard. Now, as to our present purpose, we need not be curious, How, nor which Vowels we joyn to the Consonants, since every way they serve to express the power of the Consonant audibly, which is all that is intended: but onely our regard must be to choose the way, that may seem more easie; to which end, such a pronunciation, as this that follows, may be suita∣ble: be, ce, de, fa, ga, be, ja, [zha] ka, la, ma, na, pe, qu, ra, sa, te, va, wa, eks, ya, za. The reason why
I place the Vowels after the Con∣sonants, is, Because the opening of an Appulse before a Vowel has a smart Spring and force of the Muscle, the motion being assisted by the Impulse of Breath, and so is more sensible, and consequently more easie to be observed and learnt, than the shutting of the Organs to make an Appulse (i. e. a Consonant) after a Vowel, be∣cause in this the Motion is resisted and hindred by the force of Breath, as much as it was assisted in the other. This is eminently seen in the Vowel Consonants, Y, W. For when they precede, as Ya, Wa, there is none but is easily perswaded, that they are as Consonants, but when they follow, as Ay, Aw, their force is so abated, that they are mista∣ken
for meer Vowels. And so, as I conceive (but with submission to better Judgements) came in the Notion of Diphthongs into the world; in all which, that are accounted properly such, ei∣ther Y or W, or (which is the same in effect) i or u, follow the other Vowel, as ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou: onely the Greek hath ui, which if it is to be pronounced in one Syllable, and that pronunciation be Genuine; it is no other than our Why, as ὑιος, Whios; where i is the Vowel, and u in the nature of a Consonant. But to return, we need not be tyed to either way of naming the Consonants, whether with the Vowel before or after; but in practising to teach, try both ways, especially in sonorous Consonants,
l. m. n. r. s. z. and accept of that, which is hit on first, with whatso∣ever Vowel, and whether before or after the Consonant, because it equally serves our purpose to ex∣press the power of the Consonant. But when you have brought him to pronounce all Syllables for∣ward and backward; you may then at pleasure bring him near∣er to the vulgar pronunciation of the Alphabet, by writing it again, as you would have him setled in pronouncing it after this manner, a, be, ce, de, e, ef, ga, he, i, ka, el, em, en, o, pe, qu, ar, es, te, u, va, we, ex, ya, zad, adding dha, tha, sha, zha. This being premised, let the next Letters he learns, be s and z. Your Schollar by this time will be pretty perfect at finding out an
Ore-voeal to an Ore-spirital, or con∣trary, in the same posture of Or∣gans, as he shall happen first to hit, and you will have need of something of the same kind of Art, though in another way, to teach him s or z. Shew a Gin∣gival Appulse, and withal by holding your Mouth near to the back of his hand, bare, whilst you pronounce one of these Letters before him, make him perceive that it is a pervious Letter, i. e. that breath passeth out of your Mouth to your Tongs end, whilst you speak it: and shew him that T. is close, but this lets breath pass; and with often trial he will hit on it (though at first it may be lispingly or imperfectly;) there be∣ing onely L or R remaining, which are made by that kind of posture
and L so different, and R so diffi∣cult, that he will most likely by this kind of exclusion find out S, and having gained that, he will soon have Z. Then shew him the posture of Sh. with the Artificial Tong and Palat, and guiding him from S to Sh, and making him under∣stand by Signs, that they resem∣ble in manner of Sound, and dif∣fer in posture, he will perceive and learn it; and consequently Zh. And if you please now, or after he be more perfect in the rest of the Letters, and entred upon Syllables; teach him  J. i. e. dzha, and cha. i.e. tsha. He will soon learn L. by be∣ing shewed to make a stop with the end of his Tong against his Goums, as in t on d. and let the Breath pass by the Cheeks or
sides of the Tong; and if you write down tl, and put him to pro∣nounce it, he will perceive it the easier; and he can hardly chuse but make it Vocal, if he pro∣nounce it with a Vowel either be∣fore or after. For R, shew him the Gingival posture of the Tong, and putting your Mouth close to his Hand or Cheek, while you pronounce it, make him sensible of the jarre; which with often trial he will be brought to imitate, though for a while it will be trou∣blesome to him, by reason of its roughness. When you have thus made him Master of all the Consonants, and taught him also to breath out H, and with patience, and often re∣petition (but with all sweetness and pleasantness, and great care
that you do not tire nor vex him) setled him perfect in the pro∣nunciation of them, and in the knowledge of their Characters; then proceed to the Vowels. And first, carefully observe, what Vow∣els he chanced to joyn with the Consonants in naming them, which might be more than one, as a, and e, at least. Write that Vowel af∣ter the same Consonant, and let him speak it, as he did before; after write the Vowel alone, and shew him the open Figure of the Vowel, and make him pronounce it, which he will readily do, ha∣ving the sound of it already fa∣miliar to him, in naming the Con∣sonants as aforesaid: and thus 'tis likely you will have a. and e. to teach him, if not more, and bring him into some acquaintance with
Vowels. Then shew him the po∣sture of i by bearing your Arti∣ficial Tongue near the Palat, and make him perceive, that the Breath is squeezed out at a narrow pas∣sage, and he will easily learn it; and when that is done, shew him to add the Motion and Figure of the Lip to it, and that will teach him u. For o, shew him, as well as you can, the figure of the Mouth, and make him round his Lips and sound in his Throat. And in like manner teach him {ou} by his Mouth and Lips bearing at the corners, representing it by oo. And when you come to Syllables, let him understand some words, wherein u has the like sound, but without the Lips, as But, Full, &c. Lastly, teach him wa, ya, de∣scribing them both wa, ya, and ooa,
ia; and  au (which is the natural α;) and then he will be sufficient∣ly, for the present, instructed in Vowels. And now he being ac∣quainted with some Character of every sound, you may at plea∣sure make him understand Ano∣malous pronunciations, by shew∣ing him such other known Letters, or Compositions of Letters, which have those sounds, as has already been done in che, tshe, j, dzhe, &c. Whereas the Vowels are much more difficult to be taught; you will find, in this method of falling upon them last, great help by the Apprehensiveness, he will have al∣ready gained in learning the Con∣sonants, and more forwardness in attempting to pronounce; by which, when you require one
Vowel of him, he will sometimes stumble upon another, which you are presently to lay hold of, and keep him to shew him the Charact∣er of it, and it will be equal gain to you; and still the more he has learnt the remainder will be so much easier, as there remain few∣er differences of pronunciation for him to wander in. Now besides these directions already given, you will find when you come to practise, that your own earnestness and contention to effect what you are about, will continually, whilst you are at work with him, suggest to you several Artifices, whereby to make him better apprehend, what you would have him pronounce; which cannot so well be thought of be∣fore hand, nor Rules for it set
down in writing. Now when the labour and patience of getting the Alphabet is over, the main difficulty is overcome. Having thus made him learn the Alphabet and the Characters of it, next (or together with the other) teach him an Alphabet upon his fingers, or leveral parts of his hand, by placing the Letters there, which you may devise at pleasure: for example; making the joynts of his fingers of his left hand, both on the inside, and al∣so on the outside, to signify some Letter, when any of them is pointed at by the fore-finger of the right hand, or by any kind of Fescue. Particularly, let the ex∣tremity of the Thumb and four fingers of the Left hand, signify a. e. i. o. u. The middle of the insides
of them, beginning at the Thumb, b, c, d, f, g. The bending of the Fingers on the inside next the Hand, h, k, l, m, n. The back∣side joynts below the Nails, p, q, r, s, t. The middle joynts, v, w, j, y, z; any where towards the Wrist, or crossing the two fore∣fingers, x. And for those simple Letters, which are used in writing to be expressed by Compositions, as th, sh, ug, &c. there is no help for it, but he must be taught ac∣cordingly, to comply with that faulty way of writing, which they call Orthography, and be directed to describe them so, and write them so too, both that he may un∣derstand what others write, and they, what he. You may draw two Portaitures, one of the inside, the other of the backside of the
and describe the Letters upon the places respectively, this way, or some other, that you shall think better, and make him perfect in this Finger-language. And then you will find a great pleasure and ease, by practising with him that way, readily at all times to pro∣nounce what words you describe with your fingers, and often ex∣ercise his Pen to write down what you dictate to him; letting him know, when a word is finished, to leave some space between that and the next word. And when you would gratify the Curiosity of others, who shall desire to hear him speak, this way will be most useful and ready. And you may, when you please, have the recre∣ation of surprizing those with ad∣miration, who shall hear the Deaf
person pronounce whatsoever they (though with privacy) shall desire, without your seeming at all to guide him with your Eye or Mouth, otherwise than by beckoning to him to speak, whilst you secretly describe it with your fingers. The next thing you are to do, is to write down (and it would do well, in a pocket-paper-book, to be ready at hand) all kinds of Syllables, and practise him to pro∣nounce them. First syllables of two Letters, ba, be, bi, bo, bu, boo; kka, cse, csi, oko, cku; da, de, di, do, du, doo; ad, ed, id, &c. And then of more Letters, bla, bra, cla, kna, cra, dla, dna, fla, tra, gla, gna, gra, pla, pra, qua, sca, sha, ska, sla, sma, sna, spa, squa, sta, sua, tla, tra, &c. scra, sdna, sdra, spla, stra, &c. and all these back∣wards
as, alb, arb, alk, ank, ark, ald, &c. And when you have made him perfect at Syllables, then you may reckon, that you have taught him all pronunciati∣on of Language, since all words are onely some of these Syllables, or else Syllables compounded of these, as strand, stra, and; or else being poly-syllables, are but a joyn∣ing of more of these Syllables, which is nothing else but pro∣nouncing these Syllables one af∣ter another, making a distinction between every word. Next, you are to teach him the knowledge of Words, (but it would do well in the mean time, to make him speak and write some Sentences, to inure him to Con∣nexion of Speech.) And here you may easily shew him Visible Bo∣dies
and Colours, and tell him the names of them, and you may by signes make him understand local Adverbs, and some others of Qualities, well, ill, &c. as also such Adjectives, as represent sen∣sible qualities, as bitter, sweet, &c. and many other kinds. Every pas∣sage will give some occasion to make him understand more of the Particles and Bands of Speech. I had once in my thoughts to con∣trive a Method of Grammar, and Dictionary for this use. Of Gram∣mar, more than I can now com∣prize in short hints. And the la∣ter, Alphabetically containing the words of the Language, which the Deaf person is to learn; as suppose, English. And the Expo∣sition, being a representation of the Figure of so many words, as
can be described, and of the rest by such other signes, as might be thought of, referring the Synony∣ma's to those, which have Expo∣sitions; by which he might help himself to know the meaning of such Words as he should meet with, and by often looking on it, gain the knowledge of Words: But the occasion of exciting and exercising my thoughts being un∣happily removed, I went no fur∣ther; but hope to see them per∣fected by those, who shall meet with such like occasions. And in∣deed, such a Work, as this, is not to be perfected by study alone; but must and will receive many hints and helps, and to be thought on otherwise, whilst the endea∣vour is excited, being under ex∣periment and practice. But so far
as I had occasion to study, and practise with happy success, I have faithfully imparted, and wish, it may be useful to those who stand in need of it.
An Experiment concerning Deaf∣ness caused by want of due Ten∣sion of the Membrane in the Ear call'd the Tympanum; see p. 113. A Young Gentleman known to divers of the R. Society, was born Deaf, and continued Dumb till his age of 10. or 11 years. His Mother when she was great with him, received a sudden fright; by occasion whereof, the Childs head and face were a little distorted, the whole right side (as I remember) being somewhat e∣levated, and the left depressed; so that the passage of his left Ear was quite shut up, and that of the right Ear proportionally distended, and too open. This Gentleman being for some time recommended to
my Care, amongst other things, I spent some thoughts in searching the cause of his Deafness in the Ear, whose passage was open. And having found, that the Audi∣tory Nerve was not perished, but that he could hear the sound of a Lute-string, holding one end thereof in his Teeth; and had some perception of any very ve∣hement sound, I supposed the de∣fect to lie in the want of due Ten∣sion of the Tympanum of his Ear; whose use I took to be, onely to preserve the Auditory Nerve, and Brain, and inward parts of the Ear from outward injury by Cold, Dust, &c. and to be no more to Hearing, than glass in the win∣dow is in a Room to Seeing, i. e. as the one intromits Light without Cold or offence to those in the
room: so the other permits sound to pass, and shuts out what else might offend the Organ; as ap∣pears in the experiment of break∣ing the Tympanum of a Dog, who hears never the worse for some few weeks, till other causes, as Cold, &c. vitiate the Organ. But for the free passage of the sound into the Ear, it is requisite, that the Tympanum be tense and hard stretched; otherwise the lax∣ness of that Membrane will cer∣tainly dead and damp the sound, And because the Tympanum is fix∣ed in the circumference thereof to the Annulus Osseus, and so is not capable of Tension that way, in such manner as a Drum is braced; there remains another way, by drawing it at the Center into a Conoid form. And that is the prin∣cipal
Office of the three Ossicles, viz. the Malleus, Incus, and Sta∣pes, of which the Stapes is fixed to the Inner-bone in the Foramen Ovale; the Malleus in the extre∣mity of that Process thereof, which is more direct (though somewhat bowing) lies along fixed to the Tympanum; and on the other end is joyned to the Incus by a double or Gingly moid joynt; such as in which the upper and lower dou∣ble Teeth meet one another. The Incus, scituate between the two former, is one way joyned to the Malleus, by such a joynt as last mentioned: the other end, be∣ing a Process, is fixed with a liga∣ment to the Stapes. In the Os Pe∣trosum is scituate a Muscle from which a Tendon is fixed to the end of another more perpendi∣cula
process of the Malleus, (some describe two Tendons from the same Muscle, one fastened to the aforesaid Process, the other to the neck of the Malleus) which drawing the Malleus inwards, the joyned ends of that Bone, and the Incus receding, make a more acute Angle at that joynt, and give a greater Curvity to the po∣sture of the said three Ossicles; the ligament which fastens the Incus to the Stapes (which is fix∣ed to an immoveable Bone) com∣plying with the recess of the o∣ther end, side-ways at the joynt; and the Malleus being fixed to an extensible Membrane, follows the Traction of the Muscle, and is drawn inwards to bring the Terms of that line (which the new posture of the bones
makes) nearer, in proportion as it is Curved, and so gives a Tensi∣on to the Tympanum, by drawing after it the Center of the Tympa∣num, and so stretching the surface of it, from a Plain to a Conoid Figure within the same Circumfe∣rence. And I conceive, the action of this Muscle does ordinarily and constantly draw the Tympanum to a moderate Tension; but when we have occasion to listen, and give a more particular attention to some sound, the action of that Muscle is then more intense, and the Tympanum is drawn to a more then ordinary tension, so to faci∣litate the passage of the sound. Now as to the case of the young Gentleman before menti∣oned, I supposed either the Muscle
by that convulsive starting Moti∣on in the Womb to be overstrain∣ed, and to have lost its Action; or the Membrane by that greater a∣perture of the Organ to be over∣stretched, and afterwards to re∣main so flaccid, that it was beyond the activity of the Muscle and Curviture of the Ossicles to give it a due Tension; or peradventure there was a concurrence of both Causes. Which due Tension, if by any remedy it might be restored, I assum'd that he might recover his hearing in that Ear: to which end I advised that excellent La∣dy his Mother, to consult with Learned Physitians, if by some ad∣stringement Fumes, or otherwise he might find help. And for Experiment, I thought of a Temporary way, by the im∣pulse
of any vehement sound; as of a Drum beaten near him: which sound, during its continu∣ance, must needs give the Tympa∣num a Tension, by driving and swelling it inwards, as a fresh gale of wind fills the sails of a ship; and the Experiment succeeded ac∣cording to my expectation: for so long as I beat a Drum fast and loud by him, he could hear those who stood behind him, calling him gently by his Name (which he understood, having learned to speak and pronounce it among o∣other words;) and wen the Drum ceased, he did not hear the same Persons, when they again very loud called him by his Name. And by this we tryed several times, by beating of the Drum again, and ceasing it; and he stil heard them,
when the Drum beat, and heard them not, when it stopt. Since that time, a Gentleman about Oxford-shire, sometimes Stu∣dent in Christ-Church, being in a great degree of Deafness, after I had told him of this experiment, call'd to mind, that he never heard so well and easily, as when he was discoursing with company in a Coach, whilst it went fast, and made a great rumbling noise in London-streets: by which he was induced to believe, that the Im∣pediment of his Hearing was of the like nature with the other. At the same time when this was read before the R. Society, a Per∣son of Quality of the Society re∣membred
to have found in him∣self, (being at sometimes subject to thicknes of Hearing) the like effect with this last mentioned, though he had not before consi∣dered the reason of it; his acquaint∣ance having often observed to him, that at such times of his Deafness, he heard them very well, whilst they talked together in a Coach in the paved Streets. FINIS.
