H3767 99825286 29664
JVDAH'S RESTITUTION. A Sermon preached before the Reverend Judges, Sir Christopher Turner Baron of the Ex∣chequer, and Sir Richard Bernard Serjeant at Law. At the Assizes begun at Yorke the 29 of July, 1661. By Jos: Hunter Master of Arts and Minister in Yorke. YORKE, Printed by Alice Broade, 1661.
To the right Worshipfull Sir THOMAS SLINGSBEY, High-Sheriffe of the Countie of YORKE. SIR, YOu was pleased to command me out to an Honoura∣ble but hard Worke, which though slenderly per∣formed by me) yet hath been kindly accepted by you, and earnestly desired by others to be made publique: and I am the rather induced to do it, that I might give unto the world a testimony and acknowledgement of that esteem and gratitude, which I owe you for your abundant and un∣deserved Respects to me. I confesse, you ran a very great hazard, when you made choice of me for such a service: and I might at once both have something lessened your Credit, and quite lost mine owne; which perhaps was the expectation of some, who (though they differed in other things) agreed in this: but whether they were disappointed of their expectation or no, your Worshipp is able to give the fullest account and an∣swer. I have formerly upon the intreaty, and advice of freinds, exposed a Sermon of two unto common censure, and if any will be at the pains to compare them with this, they shall find no contradiction, which made me the more willing to adventure this.
And now that it is put out, if it were worth the owning, there is none hath more right to it than your Selfe. I desire no more, and I hope you will grant no lesse than this, that as this Sermon had your Command for its production, so it may have have your Patronage for its preservation. I know it is usuall to fill Epistles Dedicatorie with the praises of the Person, unto whom the Dedication is di∣rected; but his Majesty hath so much honoured you in preferring you to such a place of Trust & Credit in your Country, and you have so farre honoured your Selfe in the discharge of it, beyond the expectation of your years, that I need say nothing. I will rather turne my Commen∣dation into Counsell, that you would studie so to improve your time, your Abilities, and your experience (ever having before you for your patterne, the Sobrietie and reservednesse of your honoured Father) that you may still deserve the Royall Favour, be more fit to do God & your Country service, and live long (I do not say to be envied) but if envied, for nothing else, but deserved Honour and Happinesse. So prayes SIR, Your Worships most humble servant, Josiah Hunter.
Isaiah 1 chap: 26 verse. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counsellours as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called the Citie of Righteousnesse, the faithfull Citie. MY Text deserves your more seri∣ous attention, because taken out of the Prophecy of Isaiah, which (for the divine matter thereof,see Robert's key of the Bible. v. Hieron. sup. Jesch. mixed with so many flourishes of humane learning) hath ever been of high esteem in the Church. Christ (who might be said to preach all Text) yet sometime in his preaching, tooke a Text out of this Prophet, as you may see Luke 4.17, 18. and this prophecy is quoted oftner in the new Testament, than any other book of the old Testament except the psalmes:Alsted., in praecog. Theol. lib: 2. c. 122 whether Alstedius himselfe was at the paines of the observation or no, I know not, but he tells us, that Isaiah is alledged sixtie times & the
Psalmes but sixtie four times in the new Testament Amongst the very Ethiopians this Book was in such repute, that the Queens Evnuch made it (his vade mecum) his companion in his journey, and read the prophet Isaiah in his charion, though he understood him not, Act. 27, 28. and St. Ambrose so highly esteemed & valued this prophecy, that when Au∣gustine wrote to him for his advice, what part of Scripture he should especially read, he advised him to read the prophet Isaiah, as Augustine himselfe tels us. Lib: confes: 9. ca. 5. For the dependence of the words, Hyperius his note upon the Text is of good use. It is familiar with the Prophets (saith he) first to declare unto the people their sins, then to threaten punishment, and last of all to let fall some promises of mercy; the first to convince them and beget sorrow; the second, to humble them and work fear; the third, to com∣fort them & erect hope. This method our prophet observes exactly. For, first he discovers their sins to them from the 2. unto the 24. verse. 2: He denounces judgment against them, 24, 25. ver. 3: He scatters some promises of mercy, 26, 27. verses. The state of the Jewes (you may conceive) was very much declining & tending to ruine: the gracious God, who alwayes in judgment remembers mercy, promises unto them the provision of a remedie,
every way suitable to their maladie, a restistution according to their defection, Their defection is noted to be generall, in the whole body of the people, ver. 21. How is the faithfull City become an harlot, it was full of judgment, righteousnesse lodged in it, but now murtherers: the particular cause of this generall defection is noted to be the corruption of their Governours, ver. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious & companions of theeves, every one loveth gifts & fol∣loweth after rewards, they judge not the fatherles, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. Now ob∣serve, how sutable the remedie in the Text, is to the maladie in the context. They were declined, God promiseth, I will restore: the cause of their defection was the infection or corruption of their Rulers; accordingly God promiseth to remove that, by restoring their Judges as at the first, and thir Counselours as at the begining; and now (sublatâ causa tolletur effectus) the faithfull Citie shall be no more called an Harlot or a Sanctuarie for murtherers, but it shall be called, (as it was wont to be,) the Citie of righteousnesse, the faithfull Citie. I will a little open the words, and when the shell is broken, it is easier to take out the meat and dresse it. And I will restore thy &c. And) that is the Copula, which joynes the Text and the precedent verse together, I will turne mine hand upon thee &
purely purge away thy drosse, and take away all thy tinne, and I will restore thy Judges as at the first: you may take notice, how evill Governours are like impure, corrupt and drossie mettalls, these God would purge away: but because this was in it selfe but a privative mercie, therefore he adds a positive in the Text, And I will restore thy Judges as at the first. I will restore) there is a double restitution; one ex debito, another ex dono. One due, another free. Due restitution is, when having taken away any thing unjustly,non remitti∣tur peccatum, nisi resti na∣tur ablaum. we returne it again either in quali or in quanto: and this restitution is very necesearie, for as Augustine saith, without this restitution to men, we can expect no remission from God, for this restitution, Zacheus is famous, Luke 19.8. Free restitution is, when a man hath forfeited his in∣terest in a thing, and he, to whom it is forfeited, is willing out of clemencie and bountie, to release the forfeiture & re-enstate him againe. Such is this restitution promised in the Text, not a Due, but a Free restitution. The Jews had forfeited all their priviledges and immunities, and deserved ruine rather than restauration; yet God promised to restore them, and now indeed, that he hath promised, he is become a debtor to his own word, but he was not bound before. I will restore thy Judges,) Judges may be taken
here, either more largely, or more strictly: more largely, for all sorts of Magistrates. For all Ma∣gistrates are in some sense Judges, and frequently so termed in Scripture, (ad denotandam facultatem) to note their Abilitie, they should be able to judge, or else they are not qualified to be Magistrates; and (ad denotandam potestatem) to note their authoritie: they have power by their Office to judge (inter deum & reum) between God and the guilty, in matters of sacriledge & blasphemie: (inter Regem & reum) between the King & the guilty, in matters crimi∣nall and contrary to the Law of the land: and last∣ly, (inter meum & tuum) in matters of right & wrong, between partie & partie, when they are in contro∣versie about any Claime or Title. or 2: Judges may be taken here more strictly, for such as are lawfullie deputed, not only to execute, but also to expound & interpret the Law, and ac∣cording to that to give sentence. And that there was such an honourable office, wherewith some were especially intrusted among the Jews, is plain enough out of the Scripture. The Arche-type, or first draught of the office of Judges under the su∣pream Magistrate, you have. Exod. 18:25. where it is said that Moses (following the advice of Iethro) chose men out of all Israel, and they judged the people at all seasons: and now this office being once
invented & erected, and by experience found to be of great advantage; we read frequently afterwards in scripture of Judges taken in this strict sense. Particularly, it is said of Jehosaphat 2. Chro. 19.5. He set Judges in the land throughout all the fenced Cities of Judah, Citie by Citie. And the Scripture tels us, how Samuel (judge in Israel) used to ride the Circuit every yeare, 1. Sam. 7.15. Samuel judged Israel all the dayes of his life, and he went from year to year in Cir∣cuit, to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judg∣ed Israel in all those places, and his return was to Ramah. I will restore thy Judges & thy Counsellours) who are meant by Counsellors in the Text? Rem eandem bis dicit,in commen: sup: cap. 1. Jesch. namijdem sunt Consiliarij, qui Judices: Thus Marlorate. Non denotat duos separatos status, sed tan∣tum geminum officuim. so Ursin & musculus. All Ex∣positors, that I had by me to consult with, do run this way, and conclude that Judges and Counsellors are both the same persons; only here is (duplex no∣men) because there is (duplex officium) they have a double Title given them, to note a double dutie required of them, which is not only to give judge∣ment (in rebus litigiosis) but also to give Counsell (in rebus arduis) Judges & Counsellours are both one here in the text, though not so amongst us: yet this we may safely say, though every Counsellour be not a Judge, yet every judge ought to be a Counsel∣lour,
nor is he fit to give judgment, that cannot give Counsell. They do greatly dote, and are deceived (saith Musculus) who think that Common∣wealth: can be well govern'd by simple, good men. As much goodnesse, and as little guile as you will,admodum de∣sipiunt, qui potant Res∣publicas posse gubernari per viros sim∣plices & bo∣nos. in loc: supr∣cit: in Governers; But to the due qualification of a Governour, especially a Judge, it is not sufficient that he be an honest good man, but he must also be a wise & prudent: such were the judges God promised unto Judah, judges that should be Coun∣sellours too. I will restore thy judges as at the first, & thy Counsel∣lours as at the beginning,] there is some smal difference amongst Commentators, how farre to extend this, ab initio & in principio. Some are of opinion, that it is to be referred as farre as Moses, Joshua and so along to the time of the judges, whilst, as yet,Museul. & Ʋrsin in com. ut supra. they had no King. God would restore them such judges as they were, not only for qualities but also for forme: and they that are of this opinion, do hold that God here speaks (de rejectione regum & reductione judicum) as though (when he restored Judah) they should no longer be governed by Kings, but by judges, as they were before they had a King: and so indeed it fell out after the Babilonian captivity, and therefore Lyranus thinks the judges, the Text speaks of, were Zerobabel, Nehemiah, Ezra, the Macca bees, and such like.
But others there are that say (melius referuntur haec ad tempora Davidis) this,Marlorase at the first and in the be∣ginning, is better referred to the times of David, for in his time Ierusalem first became famous, both because it was the Seat of the King, and also the Seat of Gods Worship: and so God promiseth that he would restore unto the Kingdome of judah, Governours and judges that should be like unto David, Men after his own heart. If I might cast in mine owne conjecture amongst such learned men, it should be this. We need not much to trouble our selves in enquiring to what times this should have reference, seing the simple & genuine meaning of the place is this: I will give unto thee Judges, that shall be able & upright, pious & prudent, that shall helpe to reduce the state of Judah unto order & establishment, as much as the corrupt judges have brought it neer unto ruine & confusion: and the reason why it is said, as at the first, and in the beginning, is to note how very good those Judges (which God would restore them) should be or every thing it is thought to be best in primordiis, in its orignall, at first, corruptions creep in with time. This therefore, I conceive, may be the sense of the place. I will restore thy judges as at the first, that is, I will restore unto thee very good Judges, Judges of the first impression, judges according to the ori∣ginall,
before personall abuses had crept into and mingled themselves with the Office. Afterward thou shalt be called, &c. Afterward] not before this restitution: things & persons are to be called, as they are. If Jerusalem be fallen off and degenerated, though she was called before the faith∣full Citie, yet now she deserves no better name then harlot: if she be return'd & restor'd again to her primitive integrity, though she was for a time called Harlot, yet now she shall be called again, the Citie of rihgteousnesse, the faithfull Citie. We must not call darknes light, nor light darknes. Thou shalt be called] of God, of the King,Isa. 5:20. of the people. The Citie of righteousnes] because of the due & impartiall administration of justice in thee. The faithfull Citie] Jerusalem was called the faithfull Citie for two reasons; first with reference to God, because they observed and upheld the true worship of God, a great deale more than Samaria or any Citie of Israel did, who worshipped the Calves that Jero∣boam had set up. Secondly, the faithfull Citie with reference to the King, because they kept their Loyalty & Allegiance to the successors of David, whom God had set up, whereas the Cities of Israel revolted from him & rebelled against him under Jeroboam. The text thus explained, I will trouble you with
no other division than this: it is a gracious promise; of what? of restitution: I will restore. Of whom? of Judges and Counsellours: I will restore thy judges and thy Counsellours. In what manner? as at the first and as in the beginning. With what successe? after∣ward thou shalt be called, the Citie of Righteousnesse, the faithfull Citie. Before I enter upon these particulars, I shall speak this by way of introduction. Be not offended, if I do as it is likely I shall this day deceive many of you, in your expectation of two things; and they are Rhetorique and Reflection. For Rhetorique, I know indeed, that modus orationis est auditor: and eloquence should fall from this place, like Sions silver drops, upon the lower ground: but as Moses said once, so do I now, my Lords I am not eloquent, neither have I the tongue of the learned. For reflexi∣on perhaps some expect I should handle the Text so; but I am more mindfull of his Majesties Act of Oblivion, which if I should in this place and at this time,Job 31.28. in the least violate, it would be an iniquitie (as Iob speaks in another case) an iniquitie to be pu∣nished by the judges. This being premised I begin with the first. What it is that is promised? it is a restitution, I will restore. Restitution is of a middle nature, between Crea∣tion & preservation: it is not so much as Creation,
yet it is more than ordinary preservation. The state of Iudah was not wholly destroyed, therefore there needed not a Creation: yet it was much decayed, therefore there was great need of a Restauration. First, Restitution is not so much as Creation. The Iews, though much relapsed, yet were not quite ruined, therefore they needed not a creation: their state was like an house, much ruined, yet the the foundation remaining. The Psalmist in one place complains,Psal: 82.5. that all the foundations of the earth were out of course: so it was now with the Jewes, all their foundations were unsetled, yet not quite eradicated. There was something to build on, therefore no necessitie of a Creation, or a making all things new. 1. They had their fundamentall Governement un-interupted; continued under Kings and in the right Line. For Isaiah prophecyed in the dayes of Uzziah, Iotham, Ahaz & Hezekiah Kings of Judah, chap: 1. verse 1. All Kings and lawfull Heirs to the Crown. Uzziah the lawfull Son and heire to Ama∣ziah: Iotham Son and heir to Uzziah: Ahaz Son and heir to Iotham; and Hezekiah Son and heir to Ahaz.Epiph. in vit. prophet. It is thought indeed, that he prophesied also in the dayes of Manasseh, and was by his commandment sawne asunder: grant it, yet Manasseh was still the Son and heir of Hezekiah. All this while the Go∣vernment
was not changed, nor the succession inter∣rupted. Here might need a restitution of some such Kings, as David, Solomon, Iehosaphat, but none of the Government, for it was not altered. 2. They retained their fundamentall Lawes, which God prescribed them by Moses for their Go∣vernement, as they were a Civill state, that is, those which we call (by way of distinction) Iudiciall Lawes. However they did not observe them, yet we read not, that they obliterated them, or made any others contrary to them. defects in the execu∣tion of Lawes, and perverting of judgment, is a thing so ordinarie, that the wise man bids us, we should not wonder at it, 5. Eccles 8. However therefore they might be corrupt in the execution of their Lawes, yet they did not subvert them, but still in profession retained them, and had them in reverence, as their MAGNA CHARTA, from the King of heaven. 3. They still retained the Foundation of their Religion. It cannot be denied, but they borrowed many corrupt mixtures, both from Forreign Nati∣ons, and from their next Neighbours & Brethren the idolatrous Israelites, which did very much stain the purity, and darken the lustre of their Religion: but still God owned them for a true Church, and his own Spowse. Though he gave a bill of divorce to
Israel, Ier. 3:8. yet we read not of any Bill of divorce he gave to Iudah. Secondly, Restitution is more than ordinary preservation. It requires more skill and power in the Agent, because it supposeth more unfitness and indisposition in the Patient. It is with bodies po∣litique, as it is with Bodies naturall; it is easier to preserve them in health and harmony, than it is to restore them, when once a decay or disorder hath fallen upon them. That the jewish State was much decayed, is plain enough. Their Princes and Go∣vernours very corrupt, so farr disloyall, that they were rebellious, and so far degenerate, that they were companions of Theeves. Their Lawes in being, but not in force, notoriously violated by the people, and perverted by the judges, insomuch that our Prophet saith, chap 59. v: 14. Iudgment was turned back ward, and justice stood afar off; Truth was fallen in the street and equitie could not enter. Their Religion also was horiblie defiled, by a cor∣rupt mixture of idolatrous inventions with it, espe∣cially in their divine worship: not only Israel played the Harlot, but Judah also, so much, as if she would out-strip Israel in spirituall whoredome, as you may see Jer: 3.9, 10. Here was very great necessitie of a Restitution therefore, or else this de∣cay would soone have brought them to destruction.
But will some say, it is true, Restitution is a greater worke than preservation: but the Lord, if he so pleased, might save himselfe this labour, if he would (as we know he can) preserve a Church or Nation from decaies, then he needed not to be at the paines of a Restitution. Why then doth God suffer such decaies, consumptions & over-turnings to be∣fall a people, when he can prevent them? There are two reasons for it, the one is taken from his justice, the other is taken from his Wise∣dome. The first is taken from his justice: thus it pleaseth him many times to punish the sins of a wanton, unthankfull, secure, proud & contentious people. They first break with God, & then God sends breaches upon them. You must consider, that God will not ordinarily worke miracles for the preserva∣tion of any Nation, but in his common providence lets every thing work in it's course, and according to the disposition of second causes. Its no wonder to see an unsound body fall into decay, its true God could preserve it if he would, but he will not worke a miracle in crossing natures course: So usually States are unsound and diseased, full of distempers and corrupt humours, before they fall into decay, God could, if he would, heal all; but he will not step out of the way of his ordinarie providence: things shall work as they are disposed. He will not work
a miracle to preserve a sinfull people, but is rather resolved for their many provocations, to send upon them a consunption, and a languishment. The second reason is drawne from Gods wisdome. He suffers these decaies to befall a people. First that they may see and be sensible of their own im∣prudence. Every wise woman buildeth her house, but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands. Prov: 14. 1. Some such foolish people there are too (though they thinke themselves wise) who because they dis∣like something in the building and presume they can easily reare up and reforme all againe, pluck downe a whole Nation. God lets them alone, he knowes they will soone be warped in their owne folly; and at last they learne that it had been better to have suffered some things, which they conceived amisse, than to have endangered the destruction of the Whole. How doth the foolish woman pluck down her house? she either plucks it downe, because she is fickle, and would have her house changed too: or else because she is foolish, and knows not how to governe her house: and thus it falls out often, that because Governours are imprudent, and the people desirous of change, they pluck downe a Nation be∣tween them. And the wise God suffers it, that at last they may see their own follie. 2. God in wisdome suffers such decaies, to
make people more, thankfull for their restitution. It is the epidemicall disease of Man-kind, to take notice of the price of any good, caremdo magis quàm fruendo. Contraries are the best Commentaries one upon another, and their mutuall opposition the best exposition. The thunder of the Cannon (the language of war) is the best Rhetorique to com∣mend peace: the horror of darknes, proves the benefit of light to be heavenly: health is then pre∣ferred amongst us, when it brings letters of Com∣mendation from sicknes: Anarchie is the best foile unto a well-temperd government, whether in Church or State. When a people have found by experience how dangerous defection is, then they wish for, and rejoyce in the hopes of a restitution. 3. God in wisedome suffers such decaies, that he may get unto himselfe a great Name, and more glory, in exercising his divine power & skill, for the recovering of a ruinous Nation. Preservation is bonum optabile, but restitution is bonum mirabile. This it was that magnifyed Christs cure of the wo∣man, which had the bloody issue, that he healed her suddenly, when she had spent all her estate upon the Physicions,Mark 5.25. and was never the better. Now the observation I shall raise from hence, is this, That Restitution is a great mercy to Church or Nation. I will prove it very breifly from the notion
importance of the word. Restitution is cordiall, it is healing, it is joynting, it is setling, therefore a great blessing. It is Cordiall. That which is restau∣rative, is cordiall, and that which is cordiall, is restaurative. The whole heart of this Kingdome of Judah, our Prophet tels us, (at the fift verse of this chapter,) The whole heart was faint. great need they had therefore of a Cordiall or a Restaurative. The greater their necessitie was, the more gracious is the promise. 2: Restitution is healing. When a man is heal'd of a Sicknes or distemper, then is he said to be re∣stored: so this people were at present in a very Sick and distempered condition: The whole head sick, from the sole of the foot even unto the head, there was no soundnesse, but wounds, and bruises, and putrified sores;verse 5.6. they had not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with oyntment. Great need they had therefore of hea∣ling and restoring: and still the greater their need, the more gracious the promise. 3: Restitution is joynting. 6. Gala. 1. If a man be overtaken in a fault, yee which are spirituall, restore such an one in the spirit of meeknes: the word is () set in joynt, or set the bone that is broken of such an one. The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dis∣solved: (saith the Psalmist) I beare up the Pillars of it: Dissolved, that is, discompacted, disjoynted.Psalm 75.2.
Now when God is pleased to bear up a Nation thus disjoynted, it is a great mercie; but much more, when he shall restore it, and joynt it again, that it is able in some measure to support in selfe. Lastly, Restitution is setling. Mat: 17:11. Elias shall first come and restore all things: () shall settle or establish all things, and the word signifies properly, to establish, (per collocationem in proprio loco) by restoring things and persons to their proper pla∣ces. Now aske a man, whose spirits were wel-nigh spent, how good a restaurative Cordiall is? aske a man, that hath been long sick, it health be not a great mercie? aske a man, that hath broken a leg or an Arme, how good it is to have them safely set? aske one, that hath been banished from his Relati∣ons, his habitation, his inheritance, how com∣fortable it is to be restored to them, and setled in the possession of them again? such a mercy is restitu∣tion unto a people, it is Cordiall, healing, joint∣ing, setling. I will apply this in a few words. 1: For infor∣mation. What God promised to Judah, he hath in a great measure performed to us. He hath after much fainting, distemper, disjoynting and disloca∣tion, granted us a Restitution. He hath restored us our Native and undoubted Soveraigne, our ancient Governement, both in Church and State,
our fundamentall Lawes, our Liberties, our peace, and (I hope) his own gracious favour with them all. I need not say much of this: a man that hath felt the fire, need not to be told that it is hot; and seeing the advantages which arise from this restitution unto the whole Nation, are so sensible, I need not tell you, how great a mercy it is. Perhaps there are some that think this restitution but a relapse: I intend not to trouble my selfe to convince them; I pray God restore them also to their right judgements in his due time. 2: For excitation. One restitution deserves ano∣ther. Gods (Restituam) should stir us up to thinke of a (quid retribuam,) what shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? Gods Restitution was free, but ours is due, and so much the more due, because his was free. Hezekiah is blamed for not rendring according to the benefit that he had received, and wrath was threatned to all Judah & Jerusalem for it. 2. Chro: 32.25. Let us therefore (as the Apostle exhorts) 13. Hebr: 15. Offer unto God the sacrifice of praise continually, that is the fruit of our lipps, giv∣ing thankes to his name. Let us take heed, lest as Philip branded his souldier (that beg'd the lands of one that had entertaind him kindly) with ingratus hospes on his fore-head; so God brand not us with the ignominious note of the unthankefull Nation.
3: For Caution, in the words of our Saviour, Ioh: 5.14. Behold, thou art made whole, goe thy way and sin no more. Sin is a forfeiture of all. Let none be offended, if I bespeake this honourable Audience in the language of Samuel 1. Sam. 12.24. Fear the Lord & serve him in truth, and with all your hearts; for consider how great things he hath done for you; but if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your King. So much of the first particular, what it is, that is promised, Restitution; I will restore. I come to the second: a restitution, of whom? of Judges and Counsellours. Who are meant by Judges & Counsellours, I have shewed you before. I shall choose now to speak of them, as taken in the stricter sense, and give you this Conclusion; That good Judges are a great blessing to a Nation. Now there are severall Qualifications required to the Constitution of a good Judge: 1. The good judge is carefull, that he act nothing but by Com∣mission from a lawfull Power: or else, I know not how he can answer that question,Exod. 2 14. (quis constituit te judicem) who made thee a judge and a Ruler? In our Nation all lawfull Authority is derivatively frō the King; the potestas judiciaria, the power of jud∣ging doth primarily belong to him, it is one of his jura Regalia: a Man therefore must have his Depu∣tation to the Office of judge from him, or else he is
an intruder. Submit your selves to the King as supream, and to Governours as to them that are sent by him. 1 Pet: 2:13: if they have not their Mission from him, there is no submission due to them. 2 The good judge is just and impartiall in the distribution of justice. When he puts on his Robes he puts off his relations to any: This is indeed one of the primae qualitates, that constitute a good judge to be no respecter of persons, nor taker of gifts. I have read of a notable story of Canusus,Caussin in his holy Court. who having examined twelve Theeves, and condemned them, one of them pleaded, that he was extracted from roy∣all bloud; it is reason (said the King) some grace should be done to him, let him have the highest gib∣bet. And Caussin tels us, that in Justinian's times, judges used to take an Oath with a solemn execra∣tion; an Oath to maintain Religion and justice ac∣cording to their power; with this execration, that if they did corruptly, The horrour of Cain,Gen 4 13.14. 2 King 5.27. Mat. 27.5. the le∣prosie of Gehazi, and the portion of Judas might fall upon them. You know what are the things that corrupt men in Office, thy are bribes, every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards,Prov: 29.4. is our Pro∣phets complaint, concerning the corrupt Judges of Judah: and although men keep touch stones to try gold, yet gold certainly is a notable touch stone,Mr. Fuller. whereby to try men. But now as the honest Wo∣man
preserves her chastity, so doth the good Judge preserve his integrity, and that is, by giving no encouragement unto any to corrupt him. He despi∣seth the gain of oppression, and shaketh his hands from holding of bribes. Isa. 33:15: He will take no bribes himselfe, and he detests that hypocrisie of the Men∣dicant Friers, who will touch no money themselves, but have a Boy with a bagge to receive it for them. 3: We will conceive the good Judge (when in the execution of his office) divested of passion, and his mind so clear, that there is nothing to disturbe his judgement: and having this command of his affections, he can hear a simple witnesse speak im∣pertinencies, without impatience; which if duely considered, doth argue a great () or strength of mind: the good Judge hath so much judgement, as to consider the Rusticity and homelinesse of com∣mon people in giving of evidence, that they must be impertinent, before they can be pertinent. But however he exercise thus much patience towards a simple Witnesse, yet he hath so much prudence, as not to bear it in a professed Pleader: he will not suffer a Lawyer, with multitude of words & questi∣ons, in a plaine case, to darken the cause, consound the Jurie, or puzzle the Witnesses. 4: The good Judge is Couragious. What need he to fear? when he hath God, and the King,
and the Lawes, and the testimony of a good Con∣science to bear him out, if he do uprightly. It is said of Cato and Fabricius, that the Sun might soon∣er be stayed or altered in his Race, than they in the course of Justice; it requires a stout spirit, to be thus steddie. He had need to be a man of spirit, that must neglect the displeasure and frownes; re∣ject the Letters and Suits of great men; as Judges must doe, if they would be as Cato and Fabricius. Had not he need to be a man of courage, that must (as it often falls out with Judges) maintain right against might? had not he need to be of an undaun∣ted spirit, that must turne the wheel over the wicked, withstand the inundation of prophaness, and suppresse the Roaring Ladds, that fear neither God, nor man? what was it that made Pilate yeild to the condemnation of Christ, but his fear?John 19.12 if thou let this man goe (say they) thou art not Coesars freind: whereas a Coesar indeed (such an one as our Coesar) accounts it an abomination, either to condemne the Innocent, or to Justifie the wicked for a Re∣ward. 5: The good judge is not delatory. He makes not a Trojan Seige of a suite, but doth what he can to bring it to a speedie issue. He thinkes it enough for one partie to lose the cause, and therefore endeavours, what he can, to lessen the charges.
Lewis the 12th used to say, delatory Justiciaries stretched the leather with their teeth.Caussin con∣cerning the practice of justice. I have read a notable story taken (as my Authour saith) out of the Chronicles of Alexandria, concerning one Theo∣doricke King of the Romans. Juvenalis a widow (having a suit depending in the Court three years, which might have been dispatched in a few dayes) makes her complaint to the King: he demanded who were her Judges, and sent to them to expedite her Cause, which they did in two dayes. After they had done, Theodoricke sends for them again (as they thought, to applaud them for their expe∣dition) being come, he asked them what was the reason, they defer'd that for three years, which they could dispatch in two dayes? they made no Apologie (that I read of) for their deferring, for it is likely they had none to make: but they said, they had made such speedy dispatch upon his speciall re∣commendation. How (said the King) when I put you into Office, did I not consigne all Pleas and proceedings to you, and particularly those of wi∣dows? you deserve death, for spinning out a bu∣sinesse three years, which might be drawne to a period in two dayes: and so commanded both their heads to be smitten off. I cannot stand to adde colours to every lineament of a good judge. Let it suffice, that I only point
at the rest. 6: The good Judge is a special Patron of Widowes and Orphans; and therefore takes spe∣ciall cognizance of their actions, for fear there should be any corruption in their Advocates. This is God's high Style, psalme 68:5: A Father of the fatherless, and a judge of the Widow is God in his holy habitation. For this it was that God was so much incensed against the judges of Judah They judge not the fatherlesse, neither doth the Cause of the Widow come before them. 7: Mercy is a necessary qualification of a good Judge. They say a Butcher may not be of the jury for Life & Death, much lesse should such an one sit as judge. The good judge therefore (so far as he may with safety to his Conscience) remits of the ri∣gour of the Law, especially where indulgence may work amendment. He insults not over Malefac∣tours, with opprobrious and taunting language, be their crimes never so foule: but takes occasion from thence to pity the depraved nature of man, which is subject to such Exorbitances. He pro∣nounces not the sentence of condemnation without great commiseration; and is careful, that they (who are not worthy to live) may by the instruction of some able Minister, be the better fitted to dye, that however the flesh be destroyed, the spirit may be sa∣ved in the day of the Lord Jesus.1 Cor. 5.5. 8: The good judge is not Gallio-like,Acts 18.14. carelesse
in things that do concern Religion. He considers that his Majestie is Custos utrius{que} tabulae, and hath by Deputation made him so too. Lastly, The good judge is a good Man; One that feareth God, and escheweth evill; of such up∣rightnesse & integrity, that his Conversation is ex∣emplary to all inferiour Magistrates. One that keeps a judicature within his own breast, and daily tryes all his actions in the Court of Conscience. One that makes consciene of his duty towards God, as well as the King, remembring that account he hath to give, ere long, to the judge of all the earth. One that is devout in his Closet, strict in his Family, and thinks himselfe as honourable, with his Train wait∣ing on him to the Church, as to the Court. In a word one so pious, just, charitable, temperate, and free from vice, that he doth as much good by his ex∣ample as by his Authority Thus I have shown you who is a good judge: and let none think, that I have extracted this out of Sir Thomas Moore's Utopia, and given you the description of a man, that never was nor ever will be; you may take Iob for a proof & pre∣sident of all that I have said, Iob 29:11: Now that judges, that are thus good, must needs be a great blessing to a Nation, is not very necessary to be proved. I know, you have in your owne thoughts prevented me, that I need say nothing
Both the time and the matter do now require, that I should direct my speech unto you (my Lords & Gen∣tlemen) for whose honour as well as instruction this Exercise is observed: I beseech you therefore, as Paul once did Agrippa, Acts 26:3: that you would hear me patiently. I confess, I am every way one of the least of the Sons of my Mother, and should scarce have seen your Lordships for the Crowd, had I not been set up in this Sycamore Tree: but now I have the honour not only to be your Spectatour, but your Monitour. I will only premise two things to that, which I have to say. The first is this, that I speak any thing in this kind, is more because it is become customary, than because I think it necessary. The second is, that determination of the School-Men, who say, that an Angel of an inferiour Order may inflame, but can∣not illuminate an Angell of a superiour Order: this is the utmost, that I aime at, to erect your Zeal, I presume not to add to your knowledge. This be∣ing premised, I shall dispatch what I have to say, in three Words. 1 My Lords and Gentlemen, you know what a strict Proclamation his Majesty (out of his Princely piety, not policy) hath set out, against Vicious, De∣bauched, and Prophane Persons: and yet iniquity seems to abound; this calls aloud for your obser∣vation
and regulation. As I would not have them who have been accounted the King's foes, to sleight his promises; so nor those, that are desirous to be reputed his friends, to neglect his precepts. Piety and Loyalty are as consistent, as God and the King; Cursed be he that goes about to set them at variance. I acknowledge indeed, that you see most what with other mens eyes, and cannot punish abuses (unlesse you see them) without complaint and information from others: yet verily, the prophanenesse of some men is such, that they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not;Isa. 3.9. and what men do not seek to hide, you may see if you will. To passe by drunkennesse, swearing and such like, how common is the propha∣nation of the Lords-Day: however God may seem to winke at it, yet he takes notice of it, and will not suffer it, that we should so far entrench upon his Royaltie, as to make his Day either a day of busi∣nesse,see Trap: on John 21 1. or a day of pleasure. Very strict were they in the observation of this day, in the primitive times: for when the question was put (annon observâsti diem dominicum) hast thou observed the Lords day?vid. Ignat. Epist 3. ad Magns: the answer was returned, (Christianus sum intermittere non possum) I am a Christian I may not do otherwise. But now nothing more ordinary, than for those that call themselves Christians, to neglect the observation of it. It concerns you that are in Authority, both by
your examples and injunctions, to suppresse this inundation of impiety; or else it will endanger to bring upon the Nation great wrath. It is true, God hath mercifully, and miraculously restored us, but remember what Ezra once said, Ezra 9.13. After thou hast given us such deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandements, wouldst thou not be angry with us, till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? 2: My Lords & Gentlemen, you know, what strict Laws we have against Recusants, which the wisedome of his Majesties Royall Predecessors, and Progenitors, with their Counsels, thought fit to Enact against them; looking on them only as Sub∣jects, because Natives, but otherwise accounting them the most dangerous enemies both to Church and State. And yet it is reported, that some of them are soe confident, as to promise unto them∣selves a toleration; which they could not doe, if those Lawes were put in execution. My Lords, you know, that such a toleration is contrary to the Lawes of the Land: and the reverend Bishops will soon satisfie you, that it is contrary to the Lawes of God and this Church. If any of them have done service to his Majesty, or those that were in exile with him, they are sure to be well rewarded; who wisheth that they may not? but we pay them too
deare for their Courtesies, if we lay them our Reli∣gion in pawne for them; and if their Religion be tolerated, it is to be feared lest in time it may justle out ours. I have read of a prophecy indeed, That Anti-christ should never overcome Venice, nor Paris, nor London; I say Amen to it: yet I should much fear the last, if Recusancy should have a Toleration. 3: My Lords, you know, what an enemy Schisme hath been to the welfare of this Church & Nation, and is still like to be. It concernes your Honours, as you are Counsellours, to give your advice in this doubtfull and difficult matter. Some, it may be, are of opinion, that as the times produced this dis∣temper, so time must cure it againe. I do not say, but this remedie may prove effectuall, but I cannot say, that it will: the hazard we run by such pro∣traction is certain, but what the issue of it may be, is uncertain. I do not conceive, that the conside∣ration of this subject, is out of your Lord-ships Cognizance: for it is true, if these contentions about Church-matters were only agitated in the Schooles and had no influence upon the State, the matter were lesse, but we see frequently, that Tumults and distractions in the State, arise from hence. It is a good way to remove schisme, to consider first what indeed Schisme is: that is the very subject of the question, and if we erre in this we doe stumble
in limine. Schisme seems to me to be, a groundlesse rending of the Churches Communion, joyned with a contempt of the Churches Authoritie. And therefore I suppose, though a man be in some things dissatisfied (so he give but all due respect and reverence to Ecclesi∣asticall authority) he may be said to be scrupulous or at the most erronious, but not Schismaticall. All I will say more is this, the disease is intricate, it may be superficially, but it will never be soundly healed, till a narrow search be made into the nature of it. Thus I have made bold to point out to your Lord∣shipps, the three great Troublers of our Israel, Prophanenesse, Poperie, and Schisme; which so far as they fall upon the state, require the observation and inspection of you, who are by your Office, Physicians and Ministers of State. My Lords: I have no more to adde, but to con∣gratulate this Honourable Assembly, and to pray that the Lord of Lords would be a sheild to protect you, a Sunne to guide you, an exceeding great Reward to honour, comfort and blesse you, in all your Counsells, Judgements, Journeys, and Re∣turnes. Unto this God, who is one Essence, and three Persons, the King immortall, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS.
