L1052 12591202 63944
THE HISTORY OF Father La Chaise, Iesuite, and Confessor TO LEWIS XIV. Present King of France. Discovering, The Secret Intreagues by him carri∣ed on, as well in the Court of England, as in all the Courts of Europe, to advance the Great De∣signs of the King his Master. Made English from the French Original. LONDON, Printed by J. Wilde, for H. Rhodes, at the Star the corner of Bride-lane, Fleet-street, 1693.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. I Will not trouble my self, kind Rea∣der, to make a Bustle for your Suf∣frage, in favour of my Book: It will speak for it self; and if the Reasons which it offers are not of suffici∣ent Force, 'twould be in vain for me to alledge mine. Excuse me therefore, for producing any more then only this, That there is great Reason the World should know, what a Saint the King of France has got to teach him the Way to Heaven.
However, I cannot forbear to tell you, That you ought, in some measure, to re∣turn me Thanks for the Present that I make you; not so much for the value of it, as for the danger to which I expose my self for your sake. I attack not on∣ly the most revengeful Man that ever the Sun shone upon, but a whole Society, that never pardons any Injury, and from whose remorseless Hatred there is no Asylum can secure me. For suppose that I had drawn upon me the displea∣sure of my native Sovereign the King of France, and should retire to Lon∣don under the declar'd Protection of King William, which one would think were sufficient to guard me from the Me∣naces of the most puissant Monarch in Europe, yet early or late, this cabaling Society would find a way to sacrifice me to the Resentment of my offended Prince: Nor should I be the first who had fallen into their Snares. Have they not whirlwinded several out of
Amsterdam that at this very Day lie Rotting in the Dungeons of Mount St. Michel? Others have been assassi∣nated in the very Court of Hanouer. And the same Father La Chaise, that illustrious Impostor, against whom I write, did he not enforce the Gene∣veses to deliver into his hands an un∣fortunate Person that had written something against him, tho' he had not made out any thing that was very Essen∣tial, and was extreamly mistaken in some of his Conjectures. What would become of me then, should he come to discover who I am, and who I may be. Nothing could save me from his Fury. But as good Luck would have it, tho' I have had the Opportunity to know him Intus & in cute, yet I be∣lieve he has no reason to be more suspi∣cious of me then another. He sees, and is seen by so many People of all Sorts, and Conditions, of which the greatest Number curse his Infidelities, and Treacheries, experienc'd by them
selves, that his Suspitions would be lst in the Throng. Besides, it may be well imagin'd, that 'twas not from himself that I learnt the following Particulars of his Life. He is not a Man to trust every body with his Secrets. Yet in regard no man can be Vicious alone, and that there must be the passive, as well as the active Part, in all manner of Luxury, 'tis no less certain that Father La Chaise must all a-long have had his Intimates, and Socios Volup∣tatum, among whom it was impossible for Father La Chaise to choose so well, but that there might be now and then a Judas. Never ask me then through what Chan∣nel these Curosities were convey'd to my Knowledge. For 'tis a Question to which it becomes me not to give a posi∣tive Answer, and that upon good grounds. All that I can say to it is this, That I was none of those who had the fewest In∣triegues with the Society for several Years
together; besides that I had sundry par∣ticular Friends who were perfectly ac∣quainted with this Metropolitan Jesuit, from the time that he was first admitted into the Order, by whose means I had the Opportunity, not only to hear several Stories confirm'd by Tradition, but also in Private, and as it were by Stealth, to read his Memoirs themselves. Now in regard the following Relati∣on comprehends as well the Incontinen∣cies, and Gallantries of his Youth, as the ungodly Practices, the Treacheries and Villanies of his riper Years, and more crafty Age, As to the First, there's no body can have any reason to deny, but that Tradition might be a ve∣ry faithful Assistant to me. For there is no cause to believe him more a Saint when he was a young Man, then now he is the King of France's Confessor. The Fox has only chang'd his Skin, but not his Conditions. And I should take him to be very incredulous, that should give
Credit to the Frailties of St. Augustin's Youth, and yet scruple to believe the Fol∣lies of La Chaise's. As for the deep Ex∣ploits of his riper Years, and the veno∣mous Effects of his more mature Medi∣tation, there needs no more then the Com∣plaints of Two Popes, the Bishop of Pamiers, Cardinal Camus, and others, to convince yee of a great deal, in re∣gard that all his Actions, of which they complain, are no other then what is pure∣ly natual and consonant to the Humour, the Genius, and Morals of that Society, of which he is the Head, and Directour; and for many of the rest, the dire Pro∣ceedings of his Penitent, the French Monarch, so much guided by his Coun∣sels, are such Evidences to the World, of his being the Man I mean, that no one can well question the truth of my Re∣lations. 'Tis true, I cannot expect that this poor Book of mine, should be approv'd of in all places; for how is it possible
it should be so? for I can neither dis∣guise, nor betray my Sentiments. I utter things sincerely as I think; and this is not the Mode at this time: Per∣haps it may be read, and that is all that I desire. However, should it ne'er be lookt upon, this would be my Conso∣lation, that I make no trade of writing; and if I have lash'd out a little, 'twas meerly the Instigation of my Zeal for the Publick, which I could not suffer to be so long impos'd upon, while the Im∣postor triumph'd without some kind of Punishment. Reader, If you stand too nice upon the Punctilioes of a History, mine will not please yee. I know, that to present a History drest up in form, 'tis requisite the Author should tye himself solely to his subjct, and never lose sight of it, by wandring, and throwing himself im∣pertinently into Contemporary Affairs. I confess ingeniously, you will not find that strictness in mine. In that respect
I have given my self a great Liber∣ty. For in regard the Person, whose Actions I trace, is a kind of an Ubi∣quitarian, here and there, and every where, I was forc'd to follow him where∣ever his Projects lead me, and as he chang'd his Scenes to vary mine: which caus'd a Division of the Continuum, that could not be avoided.
The French Bookseller to the READER. I Would willingly, Reader, that it lay in my power to let ye know who the Author of this Book is; but in truth it does not. All that I can tell yee is this, That it was sent to me from Paris by the Post, seal'd up in a Cover: which when I open'd, I found among the Sheets a little Note, of which I here give you a Copy, tho' I believe you will belie the Wiser for it. Could I have found any Bookseller in Paris that would have ventur'd to print my Book, I would not have put you to the trouble. I design'd it for our own France, and not for Foreign Countries, to which I knew not whether it would be of any great use. Nevertheless, be∣cause it could not be done here, I freely give it you, desiring no other Reward, but that you would convey to me hither, One or Two hundred Copies. I knew, Reader, the Subject would please you, and therefore printed the Book, and grati∣fy'd the Gentleman according to his Directions. Now then, seeing I was so Generous for your sake, I make no question but you will re-im∣burse me, by buying the rest.
THE HISTORY OF Father La CHAISE, Jesuite and Confessor TO LEWIS XIV. Discovering The Secret Intrigues by him carry'd on, as well in the Court of France, as in all the Courts of Europe, for the Advancement of the King his Master's Great Designs. IF Hero's, and all Great Personages in general, after they have finish'd an Illustrious and Glorious Life, merit that Magnificent Mausoleum's should be erected to perpetuate their Me∣mories, and that the Pens of the Learned should
celebrate their Story, by deriving to Po∣sterity the Remembrance and Admira∣tion of their Vertues; one would think, that in Opposition to this Argument, we ought to bury in the Shades of eternal Oblivion the Memory of the Impious. And doubtless, this was the Opinion of those who prohibited, under very severe Penalties, the very naming the Name of that famous Villain, who in One Day de∣stroy'd the most magnificent Temple in the World, which had been rearing so many Years. And the same Thought might have hinder'd me from publishing this Piece, had I not been induc'd by quite contrary Reasons which are of great weight. I consider'd, That among all the Disorders so rife in the World, there is none more offensive then Outward-Shew, which confounds Hypocrites with sincere and honest People; and which is such, that without a long and very dili∣gent Observation, 'tis impossible, oft-times, to distinguish the one from the other: so that a Man is forc'd to pay the same Honour and Respect to Imposture, as to Real Truth. 'Tis a Mischief so general, and so inevitable, that I do not believe there is any Person in the World who has not several times been deluded by it. But
after that, when he comes to be better in∣form'd, there cannot be a greater Vexa∣tion to a Man, then to have been the Cully of a Villain who sports, unpunish'd, with Heav'n and all Mankind. I therefore thought it would be no small piece of good Service done the Publick, to make an open Discovery of those that have been lately found out for such. And this is the only Motive that induc'd me to set Pen to Paper. All the Jesuites in general may be said to be of this number. Their wicked Morals, and the horrid Crimes which have been the Productions of those Mo∣rals, are convincing Proofs of what I as∣sert. But among all the whole Gang, of necessity it must be agreed, That Father La Chaise, at this day the King's Confes∣sor, is one that challenges to be rank'd among the Topping Hypocrites, as being a Tartuff in a soveraign degree, and one that has found the way to impose, for so many Years together, upon one of the most quick-sighted and penetrating Prin∣ces in the World: for to think that he willingly shuts his Eyes, in Consideration of the Usefulness of his Counsels, and the Services done him by the Society through his means, is never to be imagin'd. There
are a thousand substantial Reasons against it: and not to insist upon Reports, I shall say no more, then that our Monarch is a Prince that loves Vertue, and hates Vice where-ever he meets it; that is to say, with reference to the general Converse of Men, and gaining to himself an out∣ward Applause; and therefore it is not probable, that if he knew it, he would tolerate down-right Knavery in his Con∣fessor. I do not therefore believe I shall draw the King's Indignation upon me, by un∣masking this Hypocrite, as I am about to do in this History. To which purpose I cannot begin better, then with giving the Reader an Exact Portraiture of the Person who is to be the Subject of my Discourse. By which means I shall pre∣pare him for every thing which after∣wards he is to expect, so that he will be the less surpriz'd when he shall see so many things that so little correspond with his Character. Father La Chaise is Middle-siz'd, Slen∣der enough, and who now goes some∣what Stooping. His Nose Compact, but Large, and somewhat like a Hawk's Beak. His Complexion Fresh and Ruddy, the
Marks of a Healthy Constitution: His Mouth a little too much apt to gape and shew his Teeth, which are none of the handsomest, though sound enough: His Eyes, which are the most agreeable part of his Face, are Blew, and well enchas'd. They are usually call'd the Mirrors of the Soul: but certainly they are not so in him; unless you'll say, That she never shews any more then one Side there, which is Flattery and Complacency. We must confess, he does with his Eyes what he he pleases; but usually he will have 'em to be Milde, Engaging, and full of Friend∣ship. Nor is he less skilful to compose his Meen and Garb, then his Looks. You would swear, did you but see his modest Air, and his affable Behaviour, that he were the best Natur'd, the most Down-right Person, and most easily wrought upon in the World. To Great Personages he is Hum∣ble, creeps and cringes; and nothing drops from his Lips but Protestations of Fidelity, Services, and a most entire and absolute Devotion. And as for Ordinary Persons, he hears 'em patiently and cour∣teously to the end; and then always gives 'em good Words, and amuses 'em with Hopes. This is perfectly to be observ'd in the Audiences that he gives upon Tues∣days
and Fridays. Upon those Days you shall always find above Two hundred People in his Anti-Chamber, of all Ranks and Conditions, Citizens, Learned Men, Lawyers; and among them, a great num∣ber of your Diminutive Bands, whose Eyes are never off from the Door, and who never hear it open, but they see two or three Benefices coming out. Never∣theless, he hears all these People, without shewing the least Disturbance, and has the knack to please 'em all with sweet Sugar-Plumb Words. His Habit very well agrees with his Outward Shew of Humility; the Stuff is little different from what the rest of the Society makes use of; and he wears his Gown Two Years, like the Meanest among the Jesuits. 'Tis true, these petty Mortifications are amply allay'd and soften'd by the Pleasure which he has to see Princes, Dukes, Arch∣bishops, and in a word, all sorts of Per∣sons of the Highest Rank and Quality, come to kiss the Hemm of his Garment, and beg his Protection. Thus much in general for his Out-side. But his In-side is quite another thing: No∣thing in the World more close and hid∣den; so that unless you are extremely Familiar with him, 'tis a hard matter to
Know him. The foul Concealments of his Breast are impenetrable: He is Knave and Wicked beyond Imagination; does Good to Few, Mischief to Thousands; unless it be to the Ecclesiasticks, to whom he is oblig'd to distribute Benifices, be∣cause that otherwise they would lye va∣cant. But the Man is unborn for whom he did a Kindness of his own Inclination; or if ever he does one, be confident, 'tis out of some Prospect of Interest. There are two sorts of Persons with whom he is never to be reconcil'd; Honest Men, and those that are in Favour. The First, because he in nothing resembles 'em; the Second, by reason he is jealous of 'em, and for that he would fain possess the Prince's Ear alone by himself. He loves his Pleasures and his Ease more then any Courtier; and his Inclination leads him to Luxury and Expence. But in regard he knows this would not be the shortest way to maintain himself in the Credit to which he has attain'd, he keeps himself within Bounds as much as he can. How∣ever, he cannot forbear allowing himself a Lacquey, and a very neat Coach, with Four the best Horses in Paris. As for his Table, he finds it always spread in the King's Palace; and when he returns to
the House of St. Lewis, he fares ne'er a whit the worse for that. But 'tis not there that he makes his most delicate Re∣pasts; for they that would know how this blessed Father governs himself, must go to the fine House which he has built at the end of the Faubourg St. Anthony, which affords a most delightful Prospect to those that walk upon the Bulwark. That's the Place where all the sumptuous Colla∣tions and Merry-Meetings are appointed; but they must be his intimate Friends that are invited thither. Many Courtly Adven∣tures happen there, which I shall not recite in this place, because there are several Particulars of which I am yet ignorant, and which I shall take care to inform my self of more at large; and if I find that this little Manual meets with a favourable Recep∣tion, I shall impart my further Know∣ledge another time. Whatever Liberty he allows himself in that Place, when he returns from thence, he resumes his Air and Meen of Devotion without the least Trouble in the World. For my part, I cannot apprehend how he is able to strain his Dissimulation so high; but you may give a Guess by this little Draught. One day that he was ex∣tremely tyr'd with an Audience of above
Five Hours, and that he was already re∣tir'd to repose himself in his Cabinet, Fryer Benedict came to tell him, That the Bishop of Angiers, who was return'd from his Province, desir'd to kiss his Hand. What would that Jansenist have with me? (reply'd La Chaise, in a great Passion,) I am so plagu'd with his Visits: Why does he not keep at home? I'll assure him, I'll never run after him—But 'tis my misfortune to be thus perpetually besieg'd by such kind of Persons. So saying, away he flung out of his Cabinet; and returning to the Bishop, so soon as he perceiv'd him, with open Arms, and with a Countenance wherein Joy and Satisfaction were serenely pain∣ted, Oh, Sir! (said he) what an Obligation have you laid upon me, to prevent me with so much Goodness! What a Contentment to my Soul is this Visit of yours! Truly, seeing I have not had the Honour to see you a long time, I have been labouring under most cruel disquiet to know what place I possess in your Heart — I beseech yee, Sir, let me know, Have I the least share of your Affection? — Do me the Favour to list me in the number of your most Humble Servants. In this Tone he continu'd his Famila∣rity all the time of the Visit, with such an Outward Shew of Sincerity, that I
knew not whether I was asleep or awake: for you must know, that this Prelate was Mr. Arnauld, his mortal Enemy's own Brother. Having given this Portraiture of this Religious Saint. I should think it Imperti∣nent to add any thing farther; and I am also apt to believe, that a Man cannot well know more. I proceed therefore to the Relation. Were it my Intention rather to Please my Reader, then to speak Truth, I should follow the Example of a great number of Authors, who would think it a Transgres∣sion against the Laws of History, should they write the Life of any Person, with∣out ascribing to him some extraordinary Birth, or signaliz'd by some surprising Events, which in truth very much pre∣possess and awaken the Attention; but in regard it is not my Design to frame a Ro∣mance, I shall only relate things nakedly as they are. La Chaise was born at Lion, and des∣cended from a Family that made some Figure among the Burgesses. His Father also had serv'd some time in the Wars; had seen the World, and under∣stood
the Manners of it; so that he wan∣ted only an Estate to write Gentleman, as he had a great desire to do. He had seve∣ral Children, and among the rest, the Per∣son here mention'd; who putting forth early Blossoms of a pregnant Wit, and giving great Hopes, was sent to School; where he made great Progresses in a short time, though he were very debauch'd, which is a way of living that does not well agree with studious Application. He perform'd his Philosophical Exercises under Father de Vaux, who was afterwards advanc'd to the Highest Employments in the Or∣der; and to him it was that he owes all his Fortune, in regard that Father protected and supported him with his Credit upon all Occasions; and while he liv'd, their Interests were inseparable. Some good honest simple Soul may imagine, perhaps, that the Foundation of so firm a Friendship was nothing else but Neighbourly Love and Charity. 'Tis true, that Neighbourly Love had a great share in it; but it was not that Love of our Neighbour which is recommended to us in Scripture. Our Scholar, who kept a Daughter of Joy, having promis'd one of his Friends that liv'd at Mascon to
bring her to his House, during the Vaca∣tion in Vintage-time, set forth from Lion along with his Love; but Night over∣taking 'em, they were constrain'd to lie in a Village, where there was but one poor Inn. La Chaise call'd for a Chamber, and order'd Supper and a Bed to be got ready for his Wife and himself, and then went out to take a walk. He was not gone far, be∣fore a certain Knight came to the same inn and desir'd a Lodging also. The Inn-keeper told him, he had but one Chamber, which a Gentleman and his Wife had already bespoke; but that he could make him another Bed in the same Chamber, if he pleas'd to lie there. The Knight, who had some particular Reasons to be shie of Company, was a little scrupulous at first; but in regard he had a great way to the next Village, he resolv'd to stay. There∣upon he alighted, and after he had set up his Horse in the Stable, went up stairs to the pretended Wife of the pretended Hus∣band, to whom he made very great Com∣plements, and a thousand Excuses upon the Inconveniences to which he was for∣ced to put so charming a Lady, and for whom he felt the sudden Motions of so high a Respect. The Lady, who was not accustom'd to such Sublimities and
Raptures of Language, was almost En∣tranc'd to hear 'em; and reply'd to his Civilities in so obliging a manner, that the Knight began to be smitten: besides, he found her very acceptable to his Palate, a curious White Neck, and well turn'd lovely Arms, and of which she did not seem to be niggardly. All this so inflam'd the Knight's Concupiscence, that from Complements he proceeded to Demon∣strations of Affection, and from tender Expressions to Dalliance, and so to the Act it self. The mischief was, that in the heat of their Amours, Fore-cast was want∣ing, and they forgot to barr the Door; so that in the fury of the Venereal Com∣bat, they never heard the pretended Hus∣band come up Stairs, who for that reason surpriz'd 'em in illegal Conjunction. Pre∣sently La Chaise's Choler appear'd all in his Face; out went the Instrument of his Wrath, with which he gave the naked Knight several cooling Slaps of equal Vertue to a Bason of Water; who, in∣stead of defending himself, would fain have been beholding to his Heels. But La Chaise, resolving to give him sowre Sawce to his sweet Meat, took him by the Collar; and as the other struggl'd to get rid of a troublesom Adversary, off fell
his Perriwig, and discover'd a Shaven Crown Alamode de Virorum Sanctorum. La Chaise was not a little surpriz'd to find that the Person he had so well curry'd was a Priest; but he was almost astonish'd when he knew him to be Father de Vaux, his Preceptor in Philosophy. How! (said he,) Father, is it you! or do I see a Vision? With that he survey'd him from Head to Foot: And then, 'Tis He; the very in∣dividual He, in his own proper Person, (added Signor Cornudo.) In good faith, most Reverend Father, I beg your Pardon for this rude Usage of your Sacred Per∣son; but how was it possible for any Man to have known yee in this Disguise? I would have allow'd fifteen Days to all the Fathers of your Convent to have found it out. The Jesuite was ready to hang him∣self for Shame and Vexation; but seeing there was no remedy, he made a Vertue of Necessity. 'Tis very true, La Chaise, 'tis I; and since you have discover'd me, 'tis in vain to make a Mystery of the Business. You are a Person of Worth, and I hope you will use me like a Gentle∣man. La Chaise assur'd him, That he had all the reason i' the world to believe so, and that he might sleep in quiet without ever being afraid of suffering by his Indi∣scretion.
Afterwards, he told him how he had brought the Girl from Lion; and that he was carrying her to one of his Friends, to pass away a little time with her, during the Vintage: That he might well thereby perceive that he was no jea∣lous Person; and that if his Anger had transported him a little too far, when he found 'em together, 'twas rather to assert his Honour, then otherwise, and because he look'd upon him as an unknown Per∣son that came to rob him of his Mistress upon the King's High-way. But as for you, Sir, (continu'd he,) I am over-joy'd that she pleases ye; and if you think her a Hand-maid fit for your farther Delight, you may take her along with you where you judge convenient. Civilities of this nature were not to be refus'd; so that the good Father accepted his Kindness, and testify'd his Acknowledgment to La Chaise, by Embraces and Offers of his Service, which you would have thought would never have been at an end. From that time forward they ty'd themselves to∣gether in a most strict Bond of Friend∣ship. And the better to fasten the Knot, they agreed to stay Eight Days together in the same place, and that the Woman should be in Common between 'em.
After this, La Chaise, being very curious to know the cause of his Disguisement, besought him that he would be pleas'd to unfold the Truth. Which the good Fa∣ther granted him with a wonderfull deal of frankness; well understanding that the best way to secure the Discretion of a Per∣son that is privy to our Secrets in spite of our Teeths, is to put an entire Confidence in him He declar'd then, that at the time that he lay at Chaalons, he had insinu∣ated himself into the Favour of a Rich Merchants Daughter, by whom he had had Two Children; that she was marry'd about two or three years since, and liv'd in the Country near Bellegarde, where he had given her several Visits already, in Secular Habit, and going for her Kinsman: that her Husband, who was a very good Man, had kindly entertain'd him; and that the same Occasion had mov'd him to take another Journey in the Disguise where∣in he saw him; having made his Rector believe, that he was gone to see a Gentle∣man of Dijon, his intimate Friend, and from whom he had counterfeited two or three Letters, importing earnest Business. In short, they conceal'd nothing one from the other; and their mutual Reliance one upon another produc'd such a world of
Stories as would suffice to make a Volume. But in regard I have too many things of serious Consequence to relate, I shall as slightly as I can, pass over these Fooleries, and only touch upon 'em, when they are of absolute necessity to display the Hypo∣crisie of my Tartuff, and his Brethren in Iniquity. During their stay at the Inn, La Chaise, who tho' leud and debauch'd enough, however was not as yet accustom'd to Sin without some Scruple of Conscience, could not forbear asking the Father some∣times, how he could reconcile his loose way of Living, with his Obligations that were so opposite. For (said he) you are oblig'd to Coelibacy by such solemn Vows, the Breaches of which are attended by such Terrible Penalties, that I wonder how you can so easily dispence with 'em. They are not so Opposite as you think for, or as many People imagine (reply'd the Fa∣ther) there is a certain Moral which you understand not as yet, and which we ne∣ver publickly teach in the Schools, because indeed it is not expedient that all the World should know it: we reserve it for strong Stomachs, and such as are able to relish it; but be you careful, and I may in time impart it to your Knowledge,
and then you will hear Mysteries that will ravish you with Admiration. I am apt to believe (reply'd La Chaise) that you will not conceal from me any part of your profound Learning; 'twas for that rea∣son that I submitted my self to your Dis∣cipline; and you are oblig'd to it afresh, by the Friendship which we have renew'd by mutual Oaths on both sides; and there∣fore, Dear Father, vouchsafe to satisfie my Curiosity; and since we are here at Liberty together, why should you deferr your Instructions till another time? I have Discretion and Wit enough now both to hear and learn. That's the thing of which I am not well convinc'd, (answer'd the Fa∣ther) for I assure ye, it requires a great deal of Wit and Discretion to understand our Morals. Suppose to your self at first, that it ranverses all other Morality, and that it leads ye through new and uncouth Ways, but yet more pleasant, and less in∣cumber'd; when you have once unshac∣kl'd your Heels from the Fetters of old and painfull Morality, and are become an easie Captive to our new and inviting Mo∣rals, you will find those sweet Acquiescen∣cies, that Repose of Mind that were un∣known before. For Example: Would not you be glad to have it made out to
ye, past all Contradiction, that it is law∣full for ye to recreate your self with Mrs. Magdalen (for that was the Female Sinners Name) without committing a Sin, or any Snubbs of Conscience. With∣out question, (replyld La Chaise) you could not do me a greater Kindness. Well then (quoth the Devout Father) set your Heart at rest— take it from me, 'tis not a Sin that's worth the asking Pardon for. And this is according to the Decision of our greatest Doctors, whom we call, and that justly too, The Guides to Salvation, and The Lights of the Church. Hear what the great Escobar, our Master says. When a Man is so excessively provok'd by the Concupiscence of the Flesh, that ha∣ving an Opportunity at hand to Commit Adultery, he distrusts his Weakness, and fears his Inability to defend himself from falling into the Transgression; if such a Man sneaks into a House of De∣bauchery, and there extinguishes the Fire of his burning Lust in the Bosome of a Punk, do's he commit a Sin? No, Because he was afraid of committing Adultery, and he had no other way to shun it. And in another Place, A Man that finds himself quite overcome, and just ready to yield to a Temptation
that sollicites him to abuse the good Nature of a young Virgin that loves him, and would venture a Crack in her Honour for his sake, commits no Sin, if to avoid this Mischief he goes to a common Strumpet; to the end that ha∣ving allay'd the Violence of his Passion, he may be the more Master of himself and the more enabl'd to resist the Charms of such a strong Temptation. This is express enough: but here is yet a clearer Decision of the same Doctor. Of Two Evils, the least is to be chosen; if it be impossible, but that you must commit either Adultery or Whoredom, avoid the Adultery; You have no other Course to take. The Learned Suarez was of the same Opinion. 'Tis never to be disputed, (says he) but that when a Man has not Strength enough to tame his Passions, he may have to do with debauch'd Women, once or more times, rather then do worse. And in the same place, observe this well, I say farther, That if a Man be of so hot a Constitution, that he cannot live without a Woman, and that he cannot marry without some invincible Obstacle, he shall not com∣mit a Sin in keeping Company with
an unmarried Woman, till that Obstacle be remov'd. This is positive, and decisive and makes as much for me, as it does for you. Then again, Diana, the most subtil of all our Casuists, discourses to a wonder upon this Subject, not leaving the slightest Que∣stion un-resolv'd. A Man, (says he) who is constrain'd by the Strength of his Temptations, and the Temper of his Constitution, commits no Sin when he goes for his Satisfaction to the pub∣lick Stews, provided he pay the Strum∣pets; because it is, at that time, their Trade, and the Calling which they live by, and they have no more Honour to lose, nor any Reputation to be sparing of: Not but that if the same Man, fearing to draw a Scandal upon himself, had rather keep a Whore in private, and lie with her as his Wife, 'twould be his better way. But (says he farther) it may be asked, Whether a Man may be constrain'd to it after a manner not to be dispenc'd with. To this I an∣swer, That the Lust of the Flesh acts upon some Men, as Hunger upon the Stomach; if then it be agreed, That a Man who is extreamly press'd by Hun∣ger, and not able to buy, nor beg Bread, commits no Sin, if he steal no more
then will suffice to support Nature, Why should a Man be condemn'd, who being enforc'd by the violent Impulses of Nature, lies with a Harlot to whom he gives Money? There can be no∣thing desir'd more convincing; this leaves not the minutest Difficulty undeter∣min'd. In the mean time, there are a Thousand Paragraphs in our Authors, as clear, and as positive as these, with which my Memory does not furnish me at pre∣sent; but which I will let you see when you please. I must confess, (reply'd La Chaise) that this is most wonderful Doctrine to quiet the wambling Consci∣ence of a Sinner, and which will free me from a great many Scruples that often interrupted my Pleasures. I know not how to return you Thanks (dear Father) answerable to the Obligation. I am not sorry (answered the Father) for having gi∣ven you these Instructions; though I must tell ye, you are not a little oblig'd to me for it, in regard these Secrets are not re∣veal'd Indifferently to all; nay even in our Order, unless it be the the Professors of Four Vows, very few others know these Things. How! (reply'd La Chaise) Do not all the Father Jesuites know these Things? No,— not by a great many,
and though I should say (reply'd the Fa∣ther) hardly not a sixth part, I should not lye. In our House, for Example, there is only the Father Rector, the Pro∣fessors in Theology, the Father-Master, my Colleague, and my self, that are of the Secret Doctrine. How! (answer'd La Chaise,) What! not Father Le Champs, that Man of Wit and Parts, who pretends there is ne'er a Philosopher in the World but himself? No — (reply'd the Fa∣ther,) nor never shall be. He has a Head-piece but ill-furnish'd, and abounds too much in his own Sence: our Secrets are not safe in the Hands of such Men; we take care how we trust 'em. But (said La Chaise, interrupting him) there's Fa∣ther De Vernueil, he's no Sieve; he's such a deserving Man, so Wise, so Learned, and besides he stands so highly upon Pun∣ctilio's of Honour, and the Interests of the Order, that he would be crucify'd, or bite his Tongue in two and spit it out of his Mouth, before he would blabb. 'Tis very true; but notwithstanding all these extraordinary Qualities, he is ex∣cluded for ever out of the Society call'd the Directrix. He has yoak'd himself under the old Thread-bare Principles. with which he is inexcusably intoxicated.
Though a New Suarez should drop from the Sky to dispute with and confute him, the head-strong Fool would never recant. We have no need of such wilful Fanta∣sticks: we must have docible, pliable, supple Wits, withy-Conscienc'd People▪ that will twine and bend to any Doctrine; not stubborn; flinty-breasted Self-conceits, that must be canonado'd before they wil yield and surrender to our Reasons and Instructions. I apprehend by this (said La Chaise) that so many Learned Men a you have from time expell'd your Society under some pretence or other of Irregula¦rity, were not of the Directing-Society For otherwise you would not have pre¦sum'd to put such an Affront upon 'em besides that, you would have been afrai to have expos'd your selves to their Re¦sentment. You may be sure (reply'd th Father) they never were: for they wh are once admitted, are no longer subjec to such usage, nor to any manner o Correction; unless of their own ac¦cords, and out of pure Affection to th Society, they will submit themselves. An them we look upon as Sacred Victims that sacrifice themselves for the Honou and Glory of the Order. We have ha some, not very long since, that were ver
zealous in that respect. Father Alvar, among others, who was so highly in Fa∣vour with the King of Spain, having had the misfortune to be surpriz'd by the Duke de Sidonia a-bed with his Wife, was run through the Body in several places; and the Duke, not content with that, was so malicious as to revenge himself upon all the Jesuites in general. To which purpose he sent the wounded Body to the House of the Profession at Noon-day: which brought such a Scandal upon 'em, both at the Court, and in the City, that our Fathers durst not peep out of their Boroughs. However, Father Alvar did not die; he was carefully look'd to, cur'd, and liv'd a long time after. When he was fully re∣cover'd, there was a Consultation, What was to be done upon such an Important Occasion as this. The greater part were not for letting the World know he was alive; by that means to free themselves from being blam'd for not punishing him according to his Deserts. But He gene∣rously offer'd himself of his own accord; and told 'em, That since his bad Fortune had caus'd so great a Dishonour to the Illustrious Order of which he had the Advantage to be a Member, and for the Glory of which he would sacrifice a thou∣sand
Lives, he would beg no Favour to be shew'd his Crime; and besought the Fathers to Expell him their Body in the most authentick and ignominious manner that might be; to the end he might re∣main the Scape-Goat of all the Disgrace and Infamy, and that the Society might be cleans'd with Hysop from it. Which was done with a wonderful deal of sorrow for being forc'd by a fatal Necessity to deal so severely by so good a Man. But however, where-e'er he retir'd, there was nothing omitted for his Consolation. They allow'd him forthwith an Annual Pension of Two thousand Crowns; and after that, they procur'd him a Consul∣ship at Barcelona, which was worth above Two thousand Livres more. By this you may perceive (added the Father) that that there is great Respect shewn, and a more then usual Care taken for those that are once privy to the Secret. But my dear Father (reply'd La Chaise) if I forget not, you told me, That to fa∣cilitate leave to go and see your old Mi∣stress, you counterfeited Letters to the Father-Rector: What necessity for that? since he being one of the Cabinet-Secret▪ would undoubtedly have given his Con∣sent without such a piece of Fourbery. I'l
tell yee the reason (answer'd the Father) We rarely make our Superiors privy to our Adventures or Intrigues, for Two Causes. The First, For that naturally every Man is willing to carry his own Business secretly; and because infallibly they would never give us Permission, not for any Scruple of Conscience, as St. Paul says very well; for their Consciences are no way engag'd in the matter. In that respect, says the Apostle, Unus quisque in suo sensu abundet: Let every man a∣bound in his own sence. But for the sake of my Brother's Conscience; Fit au∣tem propter conscientiam fratris mei, in con∣sideration of the People, to whom we are to give no scandalous Examples. For it is said, Mat. 18. Vae illi per quem scan∣dalum venit. Now in regard that an amorous Intrigue with a Maid or a Wo∣man is very subject to Discovery, unless you proceed with all the Precautions imaginable; which many times miscarry too, as you see by what has happen'd so lately to my self; therefore it is, that our Superiors have resolv'd to suffer none at all, to prevent the great Disorders which otherwise would fall out by their connivance. However, this does not hinder but that every particular Member
may take his measures to divert himself the best he can, without any fear of Of∣fending God, provided he carry his Busi∣ness closely and secretly. For then 'tis no Scandal to any Body but those that think it so themselves. Scio & confido in Domino, (says St. Paul,) quod nihil commune est per ipsum, nisi ei qui existimat quod com∣mune est. You interpret the Text so di∣stinctly, (reply'd La Chaise,) that he must be a very dull Soul indeed, that does not understand your meaning. But with Submission, I must needs tell yee, That the Passages alledged out of St. Paul, by no means prove it lawful for a Priest to hold a carnal Familiarity with a Wo∣man; for that the Apostle makes not the Distinction upon any Question about Continence, but upon that about Meats sacrificed to Idols. I find (reply'd the Father) that you have not much con∣vers'd with St. Paul, otherwise you would have observ'd the same Indifferency in him in one respect as in the other; and therefore I did him no wrong to apply his Decision as to Abstinence to my Con∣troversie about Continency. St. Pau writes a whole Chapter to prove tha Priests might lawfully Marry and appro∣priating the same Permission to himself
Nunquid non habemus potestatem (says he) mulierem sororem circumducendi sicut & caeteri Apostoli, &c. He also in another place taxes of Anti-Christianism a certain Sect that would not suffer their Priests to Marry. And when he speaks of the Qua∣lities requisite in a Bishop, he says in ex∣press terms, That he would have him to be the Husband of One Wife; and the Greeks, who without Question have preserv'd the Ceremonies of the Church in their great∣est Purity, suffer their Priests to Marry to this day. These would be very proper Argu∣ments, (answer'd La Chaise,) were the Dispute about Lawful Marriage. You are much in the right o'nt, (reply'd the Jesuite) but since it pleas'd our Lords assembl'd in Council to forbid us Matri∣mony, it behoves us to provide for our selves some other way: Necessity has no Law, you know it well enough; and it is so ancient a Truth, that we find it con∣firm'd by several Examples of the Old Testament. Thamar, the fair Daughter of Judah, seeing that her Father-in-Law did not provide her a Second Husband, according to his Promise, and not being able to live without a Man, did she not sit waiting for him upon the High-way, in
the Dress of a Harlot, on purpose to allure her Father to get her with Child? and who knows but in that Disguize she might prostitute her self to several others? However, when he rightly understood the matter, he was so far from condemn∣ing her, that he ingenuously confess'd himself in an Error, and cry'd out to his Daughter, Me Justiores. Ruth, the Daugh∣ter of Naomi, was she not encourag'd and set on by her own Mother to go to bed to Boaz, after she found that all the dumb Shews and Artifices that she had made use of to put the good Man in mind of his Duty, had prov'd fruitless? And to deal freely with yee, In my Opinion, she had a great deal of Reason for what she did; for there is nothning so effectual to make a Man yield to Temptation, as a Pretty Woman a-bed with him. Would you have a more convincing Example then this, read in Genesis how the Daughters of Lot behav'd themselves. After they and their Father had made their Escapes from the Fire of Sodom, they found themselves as good as Widows in the flower of their Age, when they had most need of Hus∣bands, and out of hopes of ever having any, because the Old Man would not let 'em marry to any but those of his own
Religion; and whither to go for one of those, they knew not. In the mean time, Desire of Issue press'd 'em, and would not let 'em be at rest; thereupon, without any Hesitation or Scruple of Conscience, they so order'd it, as to make their own Father quench their Fires. Nor does the Scripture blame 'em for it in the least. What d'yee say to all this? (added he)— If you have any Objections to make, why don't yee make 'em? What should I say? (answer'd La Chaise) You have stopt my Mouth; and I find your Reasons so apposite and convincing, that I submit with the greatest Pleasure i' the world; ravish'd with Joy that I have found so short and so commodious a Way to Salva∣tion: for I make no question, but that you are able to remove all my other lesser Scruples, who have thus dextrously rid me of my greater Doubts. Ay, Ay, we'll remove 'em at any time, I warrant thee, (reply'd the Father, grasping him hard by the Hand) Alas, it would be great pity to leave a poor Conscience to be prey'd upon by the Stings and Worms that infest it. Do but you submit your self to Instruction, and never trouble your self any farther. You have no more to do but to come to me regularly every day in
private, and I will discover to yee the bottom and Marrow of true Theology and Mora∣lity, of which others only know the out∣ward Rind and Shell. La Chaise gave him a thousand▪ Thanks, and promis'd him an en∣tire Devotion of his Fortune and Person to the Society, and to him in particular. Thus you see how furiously and despe∣rately Men give themselves up to what∣ever flatters their Passion and Irregularity. La Chaise was of this number; his Incli∣nation carry'd him to Vice and Debau∣chery, and made him slight all the Warn∣ings and Admonitions of his Conscience. No wonder then, that he so greedily em∣brac'd a Doctrine that annihilates all man∣ner of Sin by authorising it, and sooths up the Wicked with an Insensibility and a Lethargy so dear to 'em. This was the Foundation and Original of that constant Amity which continu'd be∣tween these two Persons, as you shall hear by the Sequel. But before they parted, they bethought themselves which way to continue the Commerce between Father de Vaux and the Damsel. For in regard she was Common and Publick, he could not go to her Lodging without great prejudice to his Reputation, upon any Pretence whatsoever. Thereupon it was conclu∣ded,
That she should put herself into Man's Apparel, and go two or three times a Week to the Father's Chamber, under the Name of Sieur Le Brun, of the pretended Reformed Religion, who ha∣ving a mind to quit his Profession, desir'd first to be satisfy'd in some Scruples: and they gave her a Part which she acted ex∣tremely well for some time. But there happen'd an Adventure which had like to have spoil'd all. The Father-Master, who was an Italian, and one of those that are more addicted to the most infamous of Pleasures, observing the great Zeal of this Young Man in pursuance of his Conver∣sion, and his Assiduity to be instructed in order to it, mistrusted that there was some Mystery at the bottom which all the World did not understand; and be∣ing confirm'd every day more then other of his Suspicions, resolv'd to watch 'em so narrowly, that they should not escape his better Satisfaction. To which purpose he left nothing omitted, and had often try'd to find out some Hole to peep into his Chamber. But Father De Vaux had so diligently stop'd up all the Chinks, that all his Attempts to discover any thing that way, prov'd in vain. However, that af∣fected Precaution confirm'd him more
and more that he lay under no Mistake; besides that, he saw the fair Novitiate come every day, which wonderfully augmented his Desires. At length he found a way to see with his own Eyes what he had such a mind to know; and that too, much better then he could have done through the Chinks of the Door. One day, that happen'd to be a conside∣rable Holy-day, he fain'd himself sick; which was a lawful Excuse for his not going to the Quire; and at the same time that the rest were at their Devotions, up he got, with a Wimble in his Hand, and went to Father De Vaux's Chamber-Door, where he made a sloping Hole, from whence he could see directly to his Bed: after which he stop'd it up with a Peg of the same Colour, and so exactly, that it was as much as he could doe to pick it out again, when he had occasion, with the Point of a Pen-knife. This done, he returned to his Bed, very well satisfy'd with his Day's Work. All that Day he lay perdue. At length the handsom Lad, who had so much disturb'd his Rest, en∣ter'd the Father's Chamber, and away went he to his Post; where, in a little time, he observ'd how the good Father Catechi'd his Pupil. He let 'em alone
till the Father was just ready to enter the Port; but then he bounc'd with so much Impatience, that Father De Vaux, who had hardly time to put on his Cloaths, was in a peck of Troubles. Well, in short, he open'd the Door, and the Ma∣ster of the Novices entring, and shutting it after him, In truth, Father (said he) you take a most pleasant Course to Con∣vert Hereticks: your Zeal is extremely to be commended, and ought to be made known; and therefore I shall not fail to inform the whole Fellowship, to the end they may consider of a Way to Reward yee according to your Merit. What d'yee mean? (reply'd Father De Vaux,) Pray explain your self more clearly; for I profess, I understand ye not. I mean (answer'd the Father-Master) That if you did not desire to be seen, you should have taken better Measures. You had exactly well stopp'd up all the Chinks and Cran∣nies in the Door, but by misfortune you did not heed the biggest, shewing him that which he had made the day before. Oh! — (cry'd Father De Vaux,) you have betray'd me — but for all that, you will not be believ'd. — Good God! (quo' the Father-Master,) Not be believ'd▪ How simply you talk; — But
let us take the wisest Course — Give me a share of the Cake, and there shall not a word be said more—You are a ratio∣nal Man, and know the common Practise upon such Occasions as these — I have as much Zeal as you, and should be glad to give some Instructions also to this well-meaning Youth. Father De Vaux ac∣cepted the Proposal, and the Bargain was concuded upon the spot. There∣upon the Father address'd himself to the young Spark; but in the mid'st of his Caresses found him to be a Girl; which did not a little vex him, in regard that Males were more pleasing to his Palate then Females; but for want of better Ac∣commodation, he made use of what he had. Much about the same time La Chaise had finish'd his studies in Philosophy; and one day as he was walking with the Fa∣ther De Vaux, Well, (said he to his Scho∣lar,) and what Course of Life or Profes∣sion do you intend to follow? for it is now high-time to bethink your self — You are very near Twenty Years of Age, and those Years require that you should begin to look about yee. In truth, Father, (answer'd La Chaise) the more I think of it, the less I know
my own Mind — 'Tis a Business of great Consequence— Pray Father, give me your Advice. — With all my heart, (reply'd the Father) but it be∣hoves me to know your Inclinations, and how your Parents stand affected. My Parents (answer'd La Chaise) would have me betake my self to the Barr; more-especially my Mother has a strange Fancy for that Employment. But for my part, when I consider how little I have to trust to at home, I mind but little their Directions. I am a Person of Cou∣rage, and very Ambitious withal; and I am for making my Fortune, I care not how, nor which way. What should I do with a long Gown, that have no Money to buy Offices? I should rather chuse to be a Soldier; for so I might hope to be a Marshal of France, Besides that, we find many who were but mise∣rable Corporals, that now ride in their lacker'd Coaches: What think you, Fa∣ther? If you would take my Advice, (answer'd the Father) you shall neither be Lawyer nor Soldier. As for the first, you have very well observ'd, That there is no Advancement to be got by it with∣out Money; and I say the same of Phy∣sic, which you have not mention'd: and
as for being a Soldier, that's less your Bu∣siness then either of the other two. We live not now in those Times when the Bravery of a Soldier was sufficient to make him a Captain, and to advance him to be a General. 'Tis in the Army, as every where else, if your Money does not make the Distinction first of all, were you a Caesar in Valour, you may carry a Snap-sack as long as you live, and the Generals never know whether ever there were any such Man living i' the World. How many Soldiers have perform'd sur∣prising Actions, that in Twenty four Hours were utterly forgot. I confess, there are some who attain to Preferment, but they are very rare; and if you can name Ten, there are Fifty thousand to be oppos'd against every one that have perish'd through Hunger and Misery. Add to this, That it is a Trade whereby nothing is to be got but by dry Blows. An Iron Arm, or a Woodd'n Leg, are the chiefest Reward of your Services, and happy he too that scapes so. Then again, Are you able to endure all the Fatigues inseparable from War, as Heat, Cold, Hunger, Lying upon the Ground, and sometimes in the Water, the Wind and Rain, and all the Injuries of the Wea∣ther;
Marching at all Hours, and all Seasons; want of Sleep, and a thousand more. For my part, I am of Opinion, That Rest and Ease are two the chiefest Blessings we enjoy; and that none but Mad-men preferr Tumult, Blood and Slaughter before 'em. You ravish me with your Discourse (reply'd La Chaise) the main thing is, how to come at this Rest and Ease. For I must confess ingenuously, That had I Ten thousand Livres a Year, I would never seek for 'em other-where then at home; but in regard I have not where∣withal to live, I must be forc'd to take some course or other. Very good (re∣ply'd the Father) — What think yee of being a Jesuite? — You cannot take a better Course — Let it Blow, let it Thunder, you shall be always sure of good Bread, good Cloaths, a soft Bed, and to be honour'd and respected by all Men — What would yee have more? I do not believe 'twill suit with my Genius reply'd La Chaise) I love my Pleasures, and am afraid of every thing that re∣sembles Restraint and Subjection, or any other Torment of the Mind. Is it pos∣sible (quo' the Father, interrupting him) that you should remember so little of all
that which I entrusted to your Breast— Good now, who told you that Pleasures were banish'd from our Society? Did you ever see the contrary with your own Eyes? Or do you find me to be a Man that is irreconcilable to all Mankind? All the rest are like my self; that is to say, all those that may be truly call'd Jesuits. We love good Chear, the Fair Sex, Ho∣nours and Preferments; and we have got the knack to enjoy all these things, with∣out giving any Scandal to any body, or wounding our own Consciences. Name me, if you can, any other Body or So∣ciety of Men, any Condition of People in the World, where you shall find the same Advantages. What you say, Father, is very true, (reply'd La Chaise) and enough to make a deep Impression in my Mind; but I cannot away with a Life so level and smooth, without any change or variety, as yours: such as the first day is, such is the second; they neither Ascend nor Descend, which in my Opinion is a very melancholy and irksom manner of living. For my part, I should like a little Motion, a little Intrigue; not to lie still i' the World immoveable like a Stone, without having any share in the Bustle of it.
This was that which I expected from yee, (reply'd the Father,) but if this be all that withholds yee, I find I shall fix your Resolutions before you go out of this Garden. You must know then, that there is no Society of Men in the World that plunge themselves into Business more then we do, or where Men of Wit and Merit more easily advance themselves: such Men as these are sought after with all the care imaginable; and you would wonder, at the end of five or six Years, to see 'em Heads of a Party. Good Luck and Preferment, are so frequent among us, and so Prodigious as passes Imagination. Peter Gerard, our Assistant-General, is the Son of a Cobler of Reims; and Father Creps, the present Emperor's Confessor, is the Son of a Hat-maker: and as for our present Provincial, as great a Lord as he is, I knew my self, that when he came first to the College, he had not Shoes to his Feet; yet now he is grown a Conside∣rable Man, takes State upon him, and gives all the World occasion to talk of him. Were you one of the Ordinary, one of those Petty Genius's that are to be won by Reasons that carry a General Vogue, I could tell ye, That there is no Society in the World more Holy then the
Society of Jesus, which every day sacri∣fices her dearest Children for the Con∣version of Turks and Pagans, among whom they are continually sent; and that 'tis a sign that God accepts the Blood of his Martyrs, since he permits so many Millions of Souls, even whole King∣doms, to be Converted to the Faith by this Means. I could give you a List of all the famous Doctors that our Order has produc'd; of several Kings and Princes that have desir'd Admittance into it; and of the Favours that God has bestow'd upon us through the Intercession of our Saints and blessed Members. But in re∣gard you are my Friend, and a Man of Sence, I shall tickle your Fancy another way, and bait my Hook to catch such Dolphins as you with your own Worldly Interest, which ought upon all Occasions to be your principal Aim. For as for your Salvation, you may look after that as well in a King's Palace, as in an Anchoret's Cell. And to this purpose I shall give you a True and Natural Idea of the Congregation in general. Set before your Eyes a Little, but Po∣tent Republick, from whence Poverty and Misery are absolutely banish'd; where the least Happy and the least Considerable
have enough to stop their Mouths from complaining of Fortune, and largely to supply all the Necessities of Humane Life, without being oblig'd to work and tyre themselves. A State wherein you never hear any Discourse of Wars, Torments, Taxes or Imposts; where for want of Payment, you are never expos'd to the Taunts and Threats of a Creditor, or to the Affronts of Bailiffs; a Country where you may live in Peace and Gladness, without fearing lest a Knave of a Debtor should Break in your Debt; or that an Enemy should set fire to your Barns, without being disturb'd in Mind, because the last Harvest was not so good as the former. But imagine, That in these For∣tunate Islands you have your Corn ready Thrash'd in your Barns, your Wine ready Tunn'd up in your Cellars, and your Ta∣ble regularly spread without taking any Care, and carking where you shall Dine. Nor is this all; the Government of this State is purely Democratical; every par∣ticular Person has a share in it, more or less; and that which is the chiefest thing of all, there is no Injustice done to any Body. The most considerable Employ∣ments are distributed and proportion'd according to Merit, without any Respect
to precedency of Birth; so that Wit and Ability are sufficient to entitle a Man to the Highest Dignities; to which, when a Man has once attain'd, he enjoys 'em for Life; he knows no such Thing as Ran∣versement of Fortune. Now tell me se∣riously, do's not this faithful Description move yee? and would not you be glad to be admitted into such a Government? However what I have told ye already, is but a Trifle to what I am going to tell ye; and yet as true as the rest. This Petty Republick by her wise Laws and prudent Constitutions, is arriv'd at the Universal Monarchy, to which so many Kings and Emperors have in vain aspir'd; and all this too, without draw∣ing a Sword, or shedding so much as one drop of Blood, or making use of any o¦ther means but only Perswasion. Bu in regard it would signifie little to hav attain'd to so high a Degree of Glory and not be able to support it; for that rea¦son she has divided her self into severa particular Communities, which she ha dispers'd over all the Kingdoms and Pro¦vinces of the World, to the end she may be every where at one and the same time and always within reach to prevent th doing of any thing to her Prejudice.
it not to be admir'd that she has so success∣fully accomplish'd all this, without Armies and Soldiers, and that she has so easily up∣held her self? True it is, that this Wise and wonderfull Government has not been al∣ways exempted from Misfortunes: we have seen that certain People have revol∣ted from her, and with Ignominy have expell'd some of her Communities. But these were Tempests that have been soon allay'd by the prudent Conduct of those that steer the Helm of Affairs; so that they have return'd Victorious into those Places from whence they have been ejected with Disgrace. You laugh (continu'd the Father, looking upon La Chaise;) however I tell ye no Fables; and if you do but consider, you will find that I have told yee nothing but what is certain, and that I have given yee a True Emblem of our Order. For in short, it must be a∣greed, that it is at this Day the Primum Mobile of all the Potentates of Europe; we form not only a State in a State, but a State in several States, and a Regnant Republick, in the Universal Republick; and therein consists our great Advantage: for if by Misfortune we lose on the one side, we are always certain to gain on the other. And how indeed is it possible we
should miscarry, since we play sure. There is not any Secret in the Cabinets of Kings or Princes but we can fish it out. We have People every where that inform us of every Thing; and who suffer not any Resolutions to be taken contrary to our Interests. Which being so, do you not see that we are the Persons that Reign and Govern, tho' indirectly? 'Tis something that cannot but choose to be very tickling to a Jesuit to be em∣ploy'd in great Affairs, and to see himself caress'd by a Prince who thinks him a con∣venient Instrument to carry on his De∣signs. You have then a fair Field to ex∣patiate in, and if you do but never so lit∣tle know how to manage Fortune, there are no Grandeurs, to which you may not aspire. But (said La Chaise) 'tis a Thing would be known, whether I may be so happy to be admitted of the Number. Never doubt it (reply'd the Father) you have a smooth, insinuating, flattering Wit, and a little Knavish withall; nor do you want a quick and fiery Imagination, which however destroys not the Solidity of your Judgment. These are the People that we want, and with such Talents as these you can never fail of Success. Believe
me then; be one of Us, and you will find your self no loser by the Bargain: Never∣theless, I would not have you take up this Resolution before you understand us right∣ly; and therefore come and see me every day, and I will discover to yee the most Hidden Maxims of our Secret Doctrine. After this, he carry'd him into the Libra∣ry, and gave him Escobar, Diana, Matchi∣vel, &c. Here (said he) are Books worth Gold, read 'em, and pick what you can out of 'em; to morrow you shall give me an Account of what you have observ'd, and we will discourse together. After this, they took their Leaves, and La Chaise went home. The next day he return'd to the Con∣vent, at what time Father de Vaux, no sooner saw him, but he ask'd him whether he had read any Thing. Yes, (said La Chaise,) I began with Matchiavel, because he treats of Politicks, which is a Study that I relish very well; 'tis a very good Book, and I assure yee I read on with a great deal of Pleasure. Oh — (said Fa∣ther de Vaux, interrupting him,) he is a most wonderfull Man, and one whose Decisions we admit in Matter of Proba∣bility, with as much satisfaction as those of Escobar himself. Truly (said La Chaise)
to speak in general, they are very excel∣lent, but there are some that are also very bold: as for Example, he asserts, That one or more Persons, tho' People of Worth and Probity, tho' they have done the State important Services, may be sa∣crific'd, when the Publick Good is con∣cern'd; and that upon such an occasion: Prince ought not to scruple the violating of his Word and Promise, nor the most sacred Treaties. This is a little too Ran. How! (cry'd the Father,) what do you find there contrary to Reason and right Equity? is not the Publick Welfare infi∣nitely to be preferr'd before the Conside∣ration of any Private Person? and would it be just, that for the Preservation of some few Persons, who at most have done no more then their Duty, a Hunderd others no less worthy should perish. Thus yo see the Absurdity of this Proposition; and it is the same in respect of the Faith of Treaties, which, as you pretend, should be inviolably preserv'd: for you must con∣sider, my Dear, that a Prince is to have no other Prospect in his Eye then the Wellfare of his Kingdom; that is to be the Center of all his Actions and  Politicks, from which he is not to stir  Inch, for the sake of his Conscience. An
as it is only for the Good of his Kingdom that he makes Treaties, they are to be look'd upon no otherwise then as the Means to attain that End. But so soon as through the Revolution of things here below, and the Conjuncture of Times, those Means become Obstacles, 'tis evi∣dent, That from that very time, those Treaties are dissolv'd, because they no longer concurr to the End for which they were made. I know this very well (reply'd La Chaise) but after all, of necessity, this Doctrine trails after it very evil Consequences, and gives a very fair and large Liberty to Prin∣ces to break all manner of Allyances, the most solemnly sworn, and to invade their Neighbours when they think themselves the most secure. No question of it (reply'd the Father) and it is one of the most Noble Prerogatives of Sove∣reigns. Certainly a Prince would be a very miserable Creature, if he were so ty'd to his Word, that he could ne∣ver unloose himself from it. Every time you argue upon this Subject, never wag from the Principle, which is the only Foundation upon which you are to build; viz. A Prince is to have no
other Prospect in his Eye, then the Good and Glory of his Kingdom. So then he may do any thing to procure it, pro∣vided he be a Catholick; and if he has a sufficient Strength to Conquer all the World, we give him free Liberty to do it. 'Tis true, that in so doing, he will Dethrone several Kings and Princes that for several Ages enjoy'd the Inhe∣ritance of the Sovereignty; he will strike Dread and Terrour where-ever h marches; he will shed Rivers of Blood▪ and he will reduce infinite numbers o Widows and Orphans to Despair. Bu all these Calamities are but slight and in considerable, in Comparison of the Goo that will accrue thereby. For first of all the Victor will ascertain Peace to all the Earth; which without Contradiction in this Mortal Life, is the greatest of a Blessings, in regard that no body will b in a Condition to raise Combustion, o withstand the Conqueror; he will ma wise and just Laws, which will contribu¦on the one side to Universal Felici and Tranquillity; he will procure, with out any Obstruction, the Advanceme of the Catholick Faith and the Churc of God; he will take care th
Arts, Sciences and Trade shall flourish among his Subjects: And lastly, we shall see another Golden Age upon Earth. If this be the only way to bring it back, (reply'd La Chaise, interrupting him) we are not very like to see it again. That's my fear too (reply'd the Father) how∣ever, I speak this at present only by way of Supposition, to make yee sen∣sible, and to shew yee, as with a Fescue, That when the Mischief is less then the Good which is propos'd, there never ought any scruple to be made of committing the Lesser Mischief to attain the Greater Good. This is our grand Maxim, and the Founda∣tion of the Secret Doctrine, which we re∣ceiv'd from the Divine Escobar, our Master, and of which we shall give him a good Account. Did you never observe that Noble and Magnificent Sentence which is set up in Capital Letters in most of our Churches and Colleges, AD MA∣JOREM GLORIAM DEI? Few People understand the mysterious Sence of those words; they are put up for an Eternal Admonition to the Faithful to have only that same GLORY ∣ore their Eyes; to procure it at any ate; and to that end, boldly to sacri∣fice
Parents, Friends, Duty, Honour, nay, and Prince himself too, if there be a necessity. Every thing is to be thought Just and Reasonable at the Mo∣ment that you propose it to your self. Let Heaven and Earth, and all the Creatures therein perish, provided that God be Glorify'd thereby. This is the Spirit of our Society, wherewith Garnet, Orcoln, and so many other Great Men of our Order were inspir'd, when they out-dar'd both Fires and Wheels, to as∣sassinate those Heretick Princes that op∣press'd the Church of God. Reverend Father (reply'd La Chaise methinks you run a little too far in th Transports of your Zeal: but to spea sincerely, this Doctrine is so extraordinary that a Man must have a Faith as extraordi∣nary to jump with it. At least, a Man would be satisfy'd first, whether the Doctors of th Church approv'd it, and whether it be au¦thoriz'd by any Example of Holy Scrip∣ture. A very pleasant Scruple indeed (re¦ply'd the Father, in a great heat) — Goo now, who d'yee take me to be? a Ma that broaches Heretical or Absurd Opi¦nions? I'd have yee to know, that when ever I assert a Proposition, I have alway
a Proof at hand. And as for this, I'll shew it yee all along in the Writings of above Fifty of the most Illustrious Au∣thors that ever the Church produc'd; the Learned Suarez, Diana the Subtle, Sancius, Descaltilius, Escobar the Divine, Trufenk, Sanches, Bellarmin, Beccanus, Layman, Baronius, Bauni, Reginald, Tolet, Amicius, Tilitius, Lessius, Molina, Cotton, Le Moine, together with a great many others, which I would have yee to read twenty times over, from one end to the other, and get 'em by heart. All these Doctors will tell yee, That Mischief ceases to be Mischief from the very mo∣ment that any Good accrues by it. Now if you want Examples out of Scripture, I'l undertake to cite yee Ten pro, for Ten con. Judith, that Famous Heroess who sav'd her Country from Assyrian Bondage, never scrupl'd to assassinate a Great General who lov'd her tenderly, and from whom she had receiv'd a thou∣sand Favours; and many People believe, that the better to bring about her De∣sign, she had not spar'd to sacrifice her Honour to him: and for my part, I am of that Opinion; for what Pretence could he have otherwise to lie in his Tent.
Jael, upon whom the Scripture makes so Noble a Panegyrick, did she not put a Great Man to Death that fled to her House for Sanctuary, without any regard to the Laws of Hospitality, so highly in request among the People of Israel? And Lot, the only good Man that God thought worthy to be exempted from the De∣struction of Sodom, did he not offer to prostitute his two Daughters to the Mobile of the City, provided they would go home and let the two Young Men that were in his House alone? And at ano∣ther time, the Levite that liv'd in the Mountain of Ephraim, did he not surren∣der up his own Wife to the Beastliness of the Inhabitants of Guilha, who teaz'd her to that degree, that she dy'd the same Night? There are a Hundred Stories in the Holy Scripture as corroborating which it would be needless here to re∣peat, since what I have said already is enough to clear your Doubts. I shal only desire yee to reflect upon the Con∣duct of the Holy See, in the like case▪ Time out of mind it has tolerated and protected Courtesans in Rome, for no other Reason then to prevent a Disor∣der otherwise inevitable. But that whic
will surprize yee much more, is this, That there was a Pope about Two hun∣der'd and fifty Years ago, who out of his meer Pity upon Humane Frailty, (an Example rarely to be parallell'd) made a Present to the Venetians of Three hundred of those Ladies of Plea∣sure. Since his Zeal was so profuse that way (reply'd La Chaise) he would have done better to have bestow'd 'em upon the Monks; perhaps he might have prevented a great many foul Enormi∣ties. You think I Jest (reply'd the Father) but certain it is, that it would be very well done of the Pope to al∣low 'em Wives; and if the Huguenots desir'd no other Reformation of the Church, I would be of their Religion. I believe it, i' my Soul (reply'd La Chaise, aughing) and for my part, I swear to yee, were that Liberty allow'd in your Houses, it should be one of the first things I did to take your Advice. How∣ever, I find that I must resolve upon something; and you are almost within a hair's breadth of persuading me with your bewitching Tongue. I had thought Religion had preach'd nothing but Auste∣rity,
Continence, Abstinence, and uch like emaciating Vertues: but since you assure me, That the Laws, and Religi∣on of your Order, allows a Man to satisfie his Love, and Ambition, which are my darling Passions, I'll never seek any farther for what I find here, and so I resign my self wholly into your Hands. How glad am I, (cry'd the Father, em∣bracing him, to see your Inclinations so vertuously bent; for I love yee ten∣derly, and I should have been extream∣ly sorry, should we have been oblig'd to separate at the beginning of our Friend∣ship. I shall not trouble my self to make a long Relation of the manner how he was receiv'd; 'tis sufficient to let yet know, that he took the Habit at Lyon and there spent the Years of his Novi∣tiateship, which were not very harsh, a you may well conjecture, in regard the Father-Master, Father de Vaux, and He were all of a Club toward the main∣tenance of the Girl before-mention'd Afterwards he went to Dijon to perfect himself in Theology, under Father d'Au∣brai, reputed one of the most able Me of the Order. Besides, Father de Va
wrote to him in the behalf of Father la Chaise, with all the Earnestness imagi∣nable: and because there was something singular in the Letter, I thought fit to in∣sert it. Most Reverend Father, OUR Father Rector has resolv'd, by my Advice, to send You this New Coad-jutor, to study Theology under the Direction of Your Reverence. He had a Design to have sent him to Father Le Goust, at Chaalon; however I disswaded him, though with much adoe; my perfect Devotion to your Interests, not permitting me to suffer, that a Person so hopeful, and promising, should be preferr'd to any other but your self. For I must do him that Justice, that I never saw any one ad∣mitted, that was ever stock'd with proner In∣clinations for our purpose. He has an admi∣rable Memory, a quick Imagination, a smooth, and flattering Wit, is a Master in the Art of Dissimulation, and never did Man know bet∣ter how to keep a Secret. Under the outward shew of a singular open-heartedness, he accom∣modates himself, with so much ease, to all sorts of Humours, and Genius's, as if he ne∣ver had any Inclinations, but theirs. In a word, he is a Proteus, that can change him∣self
into all Forms, and carries 'em so well, that they seem to be natural to him. Now, Reverend Father, judge what may be expected from such a hopeful young Man of so much Merit: He has enough in him to make one of the greatest Men of the Order. I re∣commend him therefore, with all the Affections of my Heart to your Reverence, and beg of yee not to deny him the Knowledge of the Se∣cret Doctrine: for though he be but Young, his Wit, and his rare Talants ought to be pre∣ferr'd before all other Considerations. It is but Just, that they who are so signally distin∣guish'd should enjoy some Privilege above others. If your Reverence vouchsafes me this Favour, as I dare presume you will, I shall be no less sensible of it, then if I had receiv'd it my self. Honour me with Your Commands, and never question the Sincerity, with which I profess my self to be Yours, &c. Lyon, March 24th. 1646. This Letter from Father de Vaux, prov'd as effectual as could be desir'd. Fa∣ther d'Aubrai made it his Business profound∣ly to instruct his Disciple in all the Myste∣ries
necessary for the Knowledge of a Je∣suite of the first Magnitude. Being arriv'd at proper years, he was ordain'd a Priest, and some time after preach'd with general Applause. Soon after he was sent to Paris, where he remain'd several years in the House in St. James's-street; and in regard that vast and populous City is the most proper Place in the World for Intreagues and Caballs, La Chaise in a short time became one of the most forward and active upon those Occasions; so that within the space of Five years that he tarry'd there, he knew and was known to a great Number of Eminent Persons. Nor did his easie Ac∣cess to Persons of Quality, beget in him a Neglect of Men of Learning, whose Company he much frequented, and be∣came intimate with some of 'em. Among others M. de Benserade, and M. de Scarron, were of his familiar Acquaintance; and the latter had enter'd into so strict a Friendship with him, that there was ne∣ver a day went over their Heads but they were together. And indeed, I am ob∣lig'd to say this in praise of Father la Chaise, that he had always a great Esteem for
Learned Men; whether it were, that by that means he would perswade the World that he were so himself, or that it were the Effect of his own Inclination, I will not determine. Besides, he was very con∣stant in his Friendships contracted; as for Example, with Father de Vaux, Mr. Spen, as much a Huguenot as he was, and seve∣ral others. 'Tis true that his Interest had always a share in his Friendship; for he had receiv'd a Thousand Kindnesses from all those Persons; whereas, whenever he did them any, 'twas always to be believ'd that he consider'd himself in the first place. Under this Hypothesis, I com∣prehend whatever he did for Madam de Maintenon, the Widow of his good Friend. For what could he do more for his own Interest, then to set up for a Favourite, a Woman of whom he had been so well assur'd for so long a time. However it were, that little Good which glimmers in him is clouded with a Wit∣ness, by the abounding Crimes of his Life. But let us return to our History. From the time that he left Lyon, Fa∣ther de Vaux, with whom he had all along held a very regular intercourse by Let∣ters, had had Fortune so favourable to
im, that having pass'd through all the everal Degrees of the Order, he was at ength come to be Provincial, and kept is Station at Dijon. So soon as he found imself advanc'd to that Dignity, he sent or his dearly and well-beloved la Chaise, s well for the enjoyment of his good Company, and to take his Advice, as that e might be ready at hand for any prefer∣ment, which it lay in his power to pro∣ure him. Moreover, he stood in need of his As∣stance in an Amorous Voyage, wherein e had embark'd himself with a Lady that was one of the Prettiest Women in the City, and wherein there was nothing of greater Importance then Secrecy. So much the rather because she was his own Niece, and the Wife of an aged Presi∣ent of the Parliament, who was look'd pon to be one of the most jealous Cinque and Quaters i' the Province. It may be wonder'd, perhaps, that seeing there are o many Women i' the World whose Hearts are none of the most obdurate, why the pious Father did not address his Vows and his Orisons to some one of Them, rather then engage himself in a etestable Commerce of this nature.
But to that I answer, That when a M has once arriv'd to a certain Degree o Corruption, not only the most eno∣mous Crimes cost no more then you Peccadillo's, but there is also a greate Titillation and chuckling Delight in com¦mitting 'em; according to the Notion  an Italian Lady, who drinking Snow  the Heat of Summer, cry'd out, Why  it not as well a Sin to drink fresh and fresh? 'Tis very probable, that the Provinci De Vaux was of the same Opinion: fo 'twas neither hap-hazard, nor any pro¦fer'd Opportunity, that made him  easily surrender to Temptation. Rath it might be said, That the subject of  Amours was remote from him; and th he had a Hundred Obstacles to surmo before he could accomplish his Desig not only in respect of the Lady who w not easily overcome, but in respect  the Husband, who had the Treasure  his conjugal Sheets always vigilant watch'd by a Daughter by his first Wi and an old Governante that never woul let her stir out of her sight. Neverth¦less, our godly Provincial was so incha¦ted with his Niece, that he could not  Night nor Day. He took a Resolutio
several times, to make her sensible of his Love; but in regard he was not sure she would heark'n to his Protestations, and no less afraid of a Hurricane about his Ears, he was a long time before he durst make any Attempt; contenting himself only to make her a Thousand Protestations of his Service, and Fidelity, which being only in general Terms, at first were lookt on no otherwise then the Effects of an extraordinary Friendship. But 'twas not ong before she understood the meaning of his zealous Applications, without the Help of Divination. For happening one Day to find her alone, he explain'd him∣self in Terms so plain, and easie, that was no difficult thing for her to under∣stand his meaning without a Comment. At first she put on her serious Looks, and seem'd to be extraordinary surpriz'd at uch an unfolding of his Thoughts, so Extraordinary, and so little expected rom a Person of his Coat, and her own Uncle. But in regard he was not a Man o be so easily put off, and for that he was well acquainted with the Person he had o deal with, he stood his ground, and eturn'd to the Charge several times. Forgive me, Reader, for not repeating all
the Discourses that past between 'em, nor all the Expostulations that the Pro∣vincial us'd, which I fear me, would be too tedious. 'Tis enough to tell yee the Lady surren∣der'd, and that in less then a Month the Provincial had gain'd the full Accomplish∣ment of all his Wishes. The Lady also seem'd to be very well pleas'd with her new Alliance; and there were those Rea∣sons for frequent Society in this, that she could not have met with in any other. The Quality of Uncle stifl'd all the Cla∣mours of Suspition. However this Uncle was a Jesuite, and that was sufficient to make those People that were con∣cern'd to be the more diligent upon the Watch. They had by this time tasted the Plea∣sures of their criminal Love, with all the Freedom that could be expected for abov Six Months together. But so much amo∣rous Pastime would not satisfie 'em; and and therefore, as People that are never contented with Pleasures, when confin'd to Limits, they seem'd to be in torment both, because they could not consumma their Delights between Two Sheets▪
which was impossible. For though the old President had lain from his Wife for some time, she was ne'er a whit the more at liberty for that, because the Daughter-in-Law lay constantly with her in her Father's Room. The Lady did all she could to win her to her Party, by Civi∣ities, by Complacencies, and little Pre∣sents; but no likelyhood of Success. We shall never compass our Design, (said she to the Provincial) unless we can find a way to provide a Sweet-heart for my Hus∣band's Daughter, that may be at our De∣votion, and who acting by concert with Us, may procure us the means to spend some Nights together. Say yee so, (an∣swer'd the Father) d'yee think her In∣clinations are such that she may be caught in a Love-Trap. There is nothing so certain (reply'd the Lady) I know, and am as sure of it, as if I were in her Belly, that she is no less sensible of Love then my self, and is vex'd to the very Soul that no body Courts her: 'Tis not the first time she has had a Sweet heart; she understands as much, in that particular, as You, or I: The only business is to find out a Man that we may confide in; one
that will not betray us to please his Mistress who desires nothing more then my Ruin, and this is that which I believe to be im∣possible. If that be all, and that a Jesuit will please her, who is no Cormudge neither, we'll find her out one that shal do her Business — How! a Jesuite (reply'd the Lady) — she'd be gla of a Capuchin, rather then fail; — sen for him I beseech yee, — the sooner the better.— He's not i'th' City, (re¦ply'd the Father) but I'll give order tha he shall be here very speedily; and so soo as he comes, we'll put our Irons i' the Fire my Life for yours it shall be none of hi Fault if we miscarry. All this while the Provincial meant Father La Chais and it was upon this Account that h wrote to him, with all the Earnestne that might be, to leave Paris, and giv his Attendance upon him. So soon as he arriv'd, he told hi whole Story immediately, and extollin the Beauty of his Mistress which he ha design'd him, made his Teeth water Never trouble your self, (said La Chaise) she must be a Rebel-indeed, if we ca reduce her to Obedience — We ha
brought several others to Reason — and let me tell yee, without Vanity, our Departure from Paris has occasion'd he shedding of some Tears. The next Morning he went to the Barbers, wash'd his Hands with Past of Almonds, comb'd and powder'd his Locks, put on clean Linnen, and in short, made himself very pruce and neat, resolving to bestir the Balls of his Eyes, and his Tongue, if he could do no more. 'Tis true, he found he young Lady a little Coy at first; but hat was no wonder: for Maids do not hrow themselves into their Lovers Arms at first dash; there must be some Ceremo∣nies and Formalities observ'd: nor would La Chaise be easily repuls'd. In short, He so manag'd his Business, that in Seven or Eight Days he brought her to his Bow. Presently he inform'd the Provincial, and his Mistress, who made Bonfires For his prosperous Success. In truth, Sir, said the Lady to him, y'are a wonder∣ful Gentleman — How! — besiege and take a Coy Mistress upon Composition in so short a time! You may well be said to come, see, and vanquish without a Hyperbole. What is impossible Madam, (reply'd La Chaise,) when it is
to do you Service: All things become easie from the very Moment that you are concern'd; and I am persuaded  owe my good Fortune to your good Wishes in my behalf. Oh Sir, (cry' the Lady) you are so great a Courtier▪ that I no longer wonder how you came to speed so well: A little thing would persuade me to hear yee talk to me too▪ But Father, I'm afraid that Constancy is none of your Vertues. As for my Constancy, Madam, (reply'd the Fa∣ther) it lies in your Power to fix it;  will not set it any other Bounds the what your Orders prescribe. Very good (cry'd the Lady) I take yee at your word we shall see whether you are a Man  your Promise. Morbleu, (cry'd the Provincial, finding his Mistress ru Riot,) this is a great piece of Impudence indeed, thus to make a Bargain before my Face. But (said he to the Lady)  you had a mind to betray me, and to admit of his perfidious Offers, methink you might have stay'd till I had been dead. And as for you, Mr. Under-Priest that pretend here to mow the Grass under my Feet, I shall find a way to teach you better manners, assure your self. Upon
this, the Lady who resented the offensive Language of the Provincial, rising up n great Fury, You sputter out your Threats (said she) very lavishly me∣thinks, if any body car'd for 'em: And o saying, away she flew out of the Chamber. Father La Chaise, unwilling he Quarrel should grow too high, run fter her to stop her— Whi∣her so fast, Madam, (said he)— s it fit that such a Trifle as this should but yee thus out of Humour? Stay, Madam, I beseech yee. In the mean ime, the Provincial, who was then in  manner Horn-mad, took this Action or a greater Affront then the first. 'Tis true, (said he) that I do ill to in∣errupt your Sport; I know a Third Person cannot choose but be very trou∣blesome to your Amours, and therefore I'll quit the Room; and so saying, away e flung. Upon that, Father La Chaise eft the Lady, and ran after the Provin∣cial, thinking to hold him by the Cloak. At which the Provincial turning about, n a foaming Rage, and lifting up his Fist, Mor — (said he) let me go, or I'll dash out thy Teeth.— The Father seeing him in that Passion,
and finding no Persuasions would wo upon him, but that he would have do as he said, left him, and return'd to ¦cifie the Lady, who was no less ince He's a Mad-man, fitter for Bedlam, the a Lady's Chamber, (said she) This the Tenth Trick he has play'd me up the same Account: I hate a jealous L¦ver: but he has done me a Kindness  make me weary of his Company, and hope I shall never be troubl'd with hi more. The Father gave her to ¦derstand, That such Capricio's as the proceeded from the Excess of his Lo that too much Equality, and Tranqui of Humour was no good Sign in a ¦ver, and provided his Jealousie did  continue, that it was always excusab However, these Reasons wrought not  effectually at first, as he could have d¦sir'd: but at last, being of a Compass¦nate Nature, she yielded to his impo¦tunate Intreaties, and promis'd hi That she would not cast any so Looks upon the Provincial if he ¦turn'd. After this, the Father went to  new Mistress's Chamber; who, dur this Skirmish, had been i'the City.
told her of the Quarrel that happen'd etween her Mother-in-Law and Fa∣her De Vaux, in regard he could not void her being inform'd of it by the servants of the House; but he did not cquaint her with the real Occasion. n the Evening he return'd to the Con∣ent, and retir'd to his Chamber, with∣ut so much as speaking to the Provin∣ial, whom he thought it convenient to et alone all that Night, that he might ave leisure to reflect upon his Rash∣ess. The next Morning he went to ee him, and found him more Discreet en the Day before. He made him sham'd of his Folly, and in lively Co∣ours lay'd before him the Misfortunes to which his Transports might have expos'd im, had the Husband been at home, or hat he that spoke had not had more Moderation. He told him further, That he Lady was very much offended at his Proceeding, and that he had taken a world of Pains to appease her; That she oudly complain'd of his Fantastical Humours and his Capricio's, and that  was the only way to lose the good ortune he had met with. The Provin∣ial agreed to all this, and testify'd his
Sorrow for being in such a Passion He inform'd himself also with great dili¦gence of what the Lady had said  done, even to the slightest Circumstance and whether any body that belong to the House had taken notice of the Falling-out. The Father answer'd, Th a good part of the Servants had hea it, but that they did not in the le suspect the Reason of it; and that  had taken care to turn the Business qui another way, when the Presiden Daughter ask'd him what the Matt was: which did not a little calm th uproars of his unquiet Mind. Some fe days after he saw her again, and begg'd he Pardon in such submissive and Passiona Terms, that she could not chuse but obser that his Irregularities had proceeded on from too much Love. On the oth side, she gave him some tender Rep¦mands, that only serv'd to inflame hi the more, and to render their R¦conciliation more firm. As for Fath La Chaise, he was got into his Mistres Chamber, who you may be sure did n waste her time in threading of Pear This Gypsie did so doat upon the Fa¦ther, that she could not live out of h
sight. By which you may guess whe∣ther or no she refus'd his Proposal to come and spend the Nights in her Bed. The Bargain was soon made, the Vir∣gin pretending a great Pain in her Head, that she might lie no more with her Mother-in-Law; and desiring her withal not to speak a word of it to her Father. Which the Lady agreed to, yet giving her to understand that she was to take t for a great Favour. Upon these bles∣ed Tydings the Provincial's Joy redoubl'd. He embrac'd Father La Chaise a hundred times, and could not forbear Thanking him for a Kindness from which he reap'd as much Benefit as himself. The main Business now, was, to find a way to be admitted into the House in the Night, and where to remain conceal'd all the Day till the next Evening. There was no likelyhood of having the Doors open'd o 'em; nor was it safe to get in at the Windows; so much the less, because they look'd into the Street. At length, the best Expedient they could find, was o hire the next House to the President's, where no body liv'd, and where the Gut∣ers of both Houses falling one into the o∣ther, they might get into the Garret of their
Elysium, and so descend into the Apar¦ments of their Earthly Felicity. Th being concluded, was brought to p the next Day; and the same Night, be¦tween Twelve and One a Clock, bo the Reverendissimo's stole out of the Co¦vent through a false Door of which th Provincial had the Key, and happi met at their appointed Rendevou where they were receiv'd with op Arms. These Nocturnal Visits were to the as so many Charms, which they co¦tinu'd three or four times a Week, for  space of a Year, without any Trou or Disgrace. But at last there came  fatal Night that pay'd for all the r And then it was, that our two Amon Fathers, according to their usual wo were no sooner got fast lock'd in  Embraces of their Adorable Mistres when Father De Vaux heard some bo come and knock very imperiously the Door. Seeing himself therefore such apparent Danger, his Blood ¦geal'd in his Veins for fear, and there  ne'er a Saint in Paradise, though  Credit were never so little, to whom  did not promise a Wax-Candle. A
indeed, he had great reason to Tremble; for it was the President, a Man no less vere then Minos himself, and who had een upbraided never for having giv'n any ther Sentence but that of Death upon he most Petty Criminal that ever ap∣ear'd before him. I leave the Reader o judge what Resolutions the Jesuit had o take, more-especially in a Business hat so nearly concern'd his Life and his onour. But the Tempest did not fall pon him; so that for this time he was nly punish'd with a most dreadful Fright. or the President, who only came upon formation giv'n him, That his Daugh∣r did not lie with his Wife; hearing o Body answer, believ'd his Informers ere deceiv'd, and that in all likelyhood ey had only shifted their Chamber. ith these Surmizes he forbore to knock  call any more, and proceeded on to rry Terror and Alarum to his Daugh∣r's Apartiment. In the mean time, ather De Vaux, taking his Advantage of at Moment of the President's Absence, ap'd out of the Bed, took his Cloaths in s Hand, and made his Escape the same ay he came, abandoning the unfortu∣ate Father La Chaise to his Evil Destiny.
The old President was more obstina at that Door then the other; and seei they would not let him in, threaten to break open the Door. The poor sup¦pos'd Virgin was so astonish'd with Fe that she knew not where she was,  what Resolution to take. If she open the Door, she visibly expos'd her self  Ruine; and if she did not open it,  was in as bad or worse Condition. T Father was no less at his Wit's end;  without any Hesitation, he took a Re¦lution to leap out at the Window.  that purpose, he put on his Cloaths w all the speed he could, being loth  leave any thing behind him that mi give Evidence against him, or his dea Beloved. After that, he fasten'd one the Sheets to the Window, thinking have slid down like an Angel in a Thea But as the Proverb says, Haste ma Waste; and his Precipitation prov'd fa to him: for his Gown hitching in  pointed Barrs of the Windows be he was forc'd to hang there with  being able to disingage himself: h ever, he made some vain Efforts, t did but hasten his Misfortune; for  Servants that lay in the Hall hearing
Noise and Bustle at the Window, and the Hurly-burly above Stairs, thought the House had been Broke-open; and getting out of their Beds, cry'd, Thieves! Thieves! as loud as they could yaul. In the mean time the President ha∣ving broken-open the Door, and finding his Daughter like one in a Trance, and the Sheet ty'd to the Window, thought as the rest did, that there had been Thieves i' the House, and fell to crying-out, Thieves! Thieves! himself. Upon this the Neighbours got together, and searching about every-where, at length they perceiv'd his unfortunate Reverence, who certainly was now in the mid'st of one of the most saddest Quarters of an Hour that ever befell him in this Life. At first they could hardly distinguish who he was; but at length the Lackeys and Foot-men, after they had bestow'd a thousand Thumps, and Cuffs, and Whirrits upon him, brought him to their Master in the most miserable Condition i' the world; which did not hinder 'em however, but that they knew him again to be the same Person who had so often frequented the House. Thereupon the President rightly judg'd, that such a Thief
as he came not to rob him of his Mo¦ney, and found too late that it woul have been more Prudence to have  him have escap'd with the Theft, the to make the thing so publick. But seein there was no Remedy, he order'd t Father to be kept in a Chamber, wi a Design to have sent him to Goal t next Morning, in order to a due Pro¦cution. Which without doubt wou have been done effectually, had  the Provincial, who seem'd not to ha the least share in the Adventure, ra betimes in the Morning to beg, wi Tears in his Eyes, that his Member  the Order might be restor'd him. Wh I desire of you (said he to the President is not only for the Glory of our Goo God, in whose sight you will do an A both Acceptable and Meritorious, b greatly to your own Honour. I desire  for your Own sake, for your Daughter sake, for your Wife's sake, and for th sake of all your Relations, whom you a going to defame in the World. Th President's Wife, who after her Galla was got safe out of harm's way, wa come out of her Chamber to know wha was the matter, joyn'd her Intreaties an
Prayers with those of her Uncle, and gave him to understand, that since the shortest Follies were always the best, would not be his wisest course to pro∣secute the Offender: besides that, the eat of his Anger would be over in two Days. Upon which the President, who was by this time very much come to him∣self, and began to be of the same mind with his Wife and the Provincial, let go his Prisoner, after he had call'd him all the Rogues and Rascals in nature, and threaten'd him with what strange things e would do him. Presently the Pro∣incial sent for a Chair, and had him rivately carry'd to the College, more ke a Dead then a Living Creature; here, God knows how he was received. All the Jesuits, upon whom the Affront f the Scandal fell, and who for that Reason durst not shew their Faces, gave im a world of coarse Language, and eated him like the worst of Men, ccounting it as a great Happiness if they ould so discharge themselves. But the ncens'd Fathers declar'd to the Provin∣ial, That they would have Justice done pon that infamous Fellow, to the end e might be an Example to Others.
Father De Vaux, as you may well believe, had no Maw to grant their Desires, but the thing was so foul, that he durst not openly oppose their Demands. He was therefore constrain'd to give way to the crowd of those that cry'd out for Ju∣stice, so that he was forc'd to call a Chapter, to consider what Punishment should be inflicted upon him. The poor Criminal was call'd to receive his Sen¦tence, and after he had been formerly in∣terrogated upon the Circumstances o Matter of Fact, and that his Answers had been duly weigh'd, the Rector, af¦ter he had desir'd the Benedictio of his Superior, began a long Speech wherein he set forth at large, The Obligation that lay upon all Men i general to live well, and to confort themselves in all things to God, an the Church, but more-especially they who were in Holy Orders who had renounc'd the World, an the Vanities thereof, to devote them¦selves to God after a more parti∣cular manner; and who were engag'd to a Devout Life by such Authentic Vows, so frequently re-iterated  Therefore that they were to take into
their Consideration, all these bold In∣vaders of divine Institution, and to look upon 'em as Perjur'd, and Sacri∣legious Villains, deserving the severest of Punishments, who ought to have no Mercy shew'd 'em. To these Consi∣derations, he added, That of an Illu∣strious, and Godly Society, without Relaxation toiling for the Destruction of Heresie, and the Conversion of Sinners, which they endeavour'd to pro∣cure by continual Prayers, and Sacri∣fices, and the Labour, and Sweat of their Brows. Afterwards he set forth the great Sorrow of their Holy Mother, who saw her self dishonour'd by per∣fidious Children, that expos'd her to the Scorn and Contempt, not only of particular Kingdoms, but of the whole World, who was always duly inform'd of their Excesses which were still thrown upon her. Is it Just then, (continu'd he) That Millions of Religious Saints, and Purify'd Souls, should bear the disgraceful Marks which these miserable Wretches would imprint upon 'em? And shall it ever be said, That in the Holy Society of Jesus, that Men may may be scot-free
scandalous Adulterers, and Whore∣mongers? Most Reverend Fathers, I know your Zeal, and how piously Jealous you are of the Glory, and Honour of your Order; I see it in your Eyes, and in your Countenan∣ces. Courage then, Fathers, let us cut off from among Us this corrupt and rotten Member; and let us make appear, by such a pious Resolution, our Detestation of his Impious Course of Life. There needed not such a far fetch'd Harangue to animate People already suf∣ficiently incens'd. So that after they had order'd the unfortunate Father to retire, they proceeded to give their Opi∣nions, while poor La Chaise withdrew, casting a doleful Look upon Father De Vaux, as much as to say, That all his Hopes were in him. Their Opinions were various, tho' all equally terrible: Some were for ha∣ving him ignominiously expell'd out of the Order; and that he should moreover be degraded; and some, that he should be mew'd up all the remainder of his Days between Four Walls, in Pane Do∣loris,
& aqua Angustiae. But the Provin∣cial, who presided in the Assembly, and whose Right it was to pronounce the Definitive Sentence, made use of this variety of Sentiments, to help his Friend out of the Mire, and therefore addres∣sing himself in his turn to the Society, he told 'em, That he could not blame the pious Zeal of the whole Society; nevertheless, that he was oblig'd to put 'em in mind, That when there was an incumbent Necessity to condemn any Person, they could not act with too much Moderation, because it ma∣ny times fell out, That our proper Passions disguising themselves under the plausible Appearance of Zeal for God, transported us to utmost Severity a∣gainst our Brother, who, by that means, became a Victim: but that then, not considering what we did, we sacrific'd to the Devil, travesty'd into an Angel of Light; which cautious, and evil Spirit, not caring how he brought Men to Perdition, provided they were destroy'd, had made too great a use of this same fatal Means to Damn an infinite number of Souls, which but for that, would be in a happy Condi∣tion.
That it behov'd us to have this Fear before our Eyes, and after the Example of all the most eminent Saints, always to lean toward Charity, which was the Soul of all Vertues, without which, they are no more then a dread∣ful Chaos, according to the Doctrine of St. Paul: To whatever Extremity we encline on this side, we can never Sin, whereas, on the other side, we cannot be too cautious, as the same Apostle shews us. That he did not take upon him to palliate, or lessen the Crime committed by the guilty Per∣son, which to say the Truth was very Enormous, but that Christ himself had taught us, That there was Mercy to be shew'd upon all Sins, more especially when it was merited by Repentance; and that after all, altho' this poor Fa∣ther had had the Misfortune to be van∣quish'd by Temptation, and an oppor∣tunity at hand, the effect of humane Frailty, yet for all that, he might come to be a worthy Man, and a great Saint: That St. Peter fell into a Crime much more heinous then His; nevertheless, we do not find in Scripture, that ever the rest of the Apostles call'd him to
an Account for it: He only wept, and they believ'd his Tears sincere; he pro∣tested his Repentance, and their Cha∣rity would not permit 'em for a Mo∣ment to doubt the Truth of his Words. Wherefore then Brethren, should you now be of an Opinion so opposite to theirs? Why should you estrange your selves so far from the Example which they set before you? or, Do you re∣quire a greater? Read then what our Saviour said to Judas, though he knew him to be a Traytor, and impi∣ous Person, and worthy of Death. He was so far from severe Usage, or Excluding him from the Holy Society, or forbidding the Disciples from Com∣municating with him, that he admit∣ted him to his Table without Distin∣ction. As for my part, Brethren, (pursu'd he) that which I have here to say, as already I have given you to understand, is not in order to take part with Vice. The whole Society, and all the Order in general, will bear witness for me, that I have never gi∣ven any occasion of Scandal to any Person; I am neither Ravisher, nor Un∣just, nor Whore-monger, nor Adulte∣rer,
nor Covetous, as many among our Religious Orders are; I Fast twice a Week, I observe with a particular Regularity my Vows, and the Consti∣tutions of my Order, and as an Accu∣mulation to all the rest, I am ready to give all that the Vow of Poverty leaves me, to the Glory of God. As for you▪ my Brethren be not offended, if  re-call to the Consciences of every one of yee, the past Conduct of his Life. How many are there in this illustrious Order of Jesus, as also in this parti∣cular Society, who have not slipp'd into Crimes more dangerous then this which is now lay'd to the Charge o our poor Brother, and perhaps, wh never so truly repented of 'em as he does? And I may be bold to add thi farther, How many are there who are actually engag'd in infamous Corres∣pondencies, and which, perhaps, are within an Inch of being brought i Evidence against themselves. Wha shall we then say against such Persons as those, who pretend to be so ridgid∣ly Austere, and Interested for the Cause of God. God preserve my Brethren
from such Accidents as these; but who knows how soon he may fall into Temptation. I declare therefore, that I shall never consent to the inflicting of any other Punishment upon our Brother, then to stand Bare-foot, and Bare-headed before the Crucifix, con∣fess his Fault, beg Pardon of the Par∣ty, and then be sent into another Pro∣vince. 'Tis your Business now to debate the Cause, and give your Opinions over again; but before you go about it, permit me to say to yee, what Christ said formerly upon the like occasion; Let him that is without Sin cast the first Stone. After so roguish a Speech, I cannot forbear crying out, O Popelings, and Hy∣pocrites, how are poor People deluded with your Mock-shews. But as roguish as it was, it wrought the same Effect which he de∣sir'd. The Process was re-view'd; at what time every Man reflecting upon his own Conscience, or rather upon the Punishment to which he should be lyable upon a slip of the same Nature, the Provincial's Sentence was ratify'd by general Consent, and Father La Chaise
was acquitted for declaring before the great Crucifix upon his Knees, that he begg'd Pardon of God for the Sin he had committed. For as to his being sent to another place, that was so much to his Advantage, that it was not look upon as a Punishment. Some few Days before, Father Barbin had been appointed Assistant-General of France, at Rome: and in regard that Father De Vaux had contributed most to his Election, he could not refuse, upon his Recommendation, to entertain Fa∣ther La Chaise for his Secretary; so much the less, because his Friend as∣sur'd him, That he knew no body more capable of an Employment that requir'd so much Activity, Ability, and supple∣ness of Wit; and that he should find all those Qualities in him to Perfection. Thus he departed in the sight of his Enemies, to go and possess a Post, which several among 'em had in vain contended for. He govern'd himself very well; and in regard the late Mis∣fortune which had befall'n him, had ren∣der'd him more Circumspect, he never expos'd himself for the future to the like disgraces.
Not but that he would be still carrying on some Intriegues, because his amorous Complexion would never permit him to lye Idle; but he had learnt to manage 'em so well, that they never came to make any Noise. Among the rest, there was one particularly to be taken notice of with Donna Mar∣gareta del Caniglio,1657: the Cardinal Padron's near Kinswoman, who fail'd but very narrowly of procuring him a Bishop's Crosier, had not the Ho∣ly Father, out of a peculiar Discontent, refus'd it but a little before to the Cardi∣nal, who begg'd it for Father Davila, at that time Assistant-General of Spain. Which ruin'd all Father La Chaise's Hopes, and disappointed all the Canvassings that were made use of in his behalf. But for all this, he was well esteem'd in the Court of Rome; and Alexander VII. then Pope, lent him a willing Ear, and employ'd him in several Negotiations, wherein he acquitted himself with good Success. And well it was for the Bishop of Bayeux, that the Father was so much in the Pope's Favour, for otherwise he might have had but an ill time of it.
This Prelate was one of those whom nothing will serve but to be Petty Sove∣raigns in Spirituals, and who refuse to acknowledge the Holy See, but only ad Honores. He had already play'd several Pranks of a Petty Lord and Master, by permitting People in his Diocess to work on Holy-days, only some few excepted; by granting Indulgences, and giving Dis∣pensations beyond the Limits of his Pri∣vileges, which had very much incens'd the Pope against him. But that which was the Complement of all the rest, and contributed to make him a perfect Re∣bel, was an Action that made a great Noise, no way to be endur'd by the Pope. There was in his Diocess a lit∣tle Abby, belonging to the Benedictines not reform'd, call'd the Abby of St. Cle∣ment, which depended solely upon the Pope, and which, till then, had pre∣serv'd that Privilege to themselves; but he not enduring those Dependencies un∣der his Nose, pretended to a Right of Visitation of their House, and to that purpose went to the Convent. The Monks refus'd to admit him; However, having open'd their Door out of Civi∣lity, and that they might not provoke
him to be their Enemy, shew'd him their Grants, and their Patents for the Pos∣session of that Immunity; of which the Bishop not only took the least notice, but taking the Benefit of the Entrance that had been given him, made a verbal Report upon the Spot. Upon which, the Monks finding him to be in Earnest, stood upon their Terms, and sent away both their Complaints, and their Privi∣leges to Rome; whereupon the Pope gran∣ted 'em a Bull, prohibiting the Bishop, under pain of Apostolick Censures not to impose any Innovations upon 'em. The Fathers, so soon as they had re∣ceiv'd this Bull, caus'd it to be fix'd up upon the Doors of the Cathedral, which so provok'd the Bishop, that as he went out from High Mass he pull'd it down, and tore it in pieces with his own Hands; and within a few Days after, in despite of the Monks, he made his Visitation in the Convent, after he had caus'd the Doors to be broke open. Such an Act of Violence so incens'd the Holy Father against him, that he threaten'd him with nothing less then Excommunication; and then it was, that Father La Chaise, who be∣came the Bishop's Friend while he resided
in Paris, was employ'd to attone the Pope; but it cost him a great deal of trouble to bring it to pass; and a small Accident happen'd at the same time, which had like to have let flye the Thun∣der, that grumbl'd so terribly. For the Monks sent to Rome an Ordinance of that Bishop, at the top of which the Bishop styl'd himself Bishop Miseratione Dei, without making any mention of the Holy-See. The Pope saw it, and foaming with Anger, Ecco (said He) Un Ridicu∣loso Barone, con il suo Miseratione di dio; voglio bene che Sappia, che non e Vescovo che per la mia; e che quando vorrò non serà piu ni∣ente: Look here, (said he) a ridicu∣lous Scoundrel of a Bishop with his Matione Dei; I'll have him to know  no Bishop, but by my Mercy, and when I please I'll make him nothing at all. 'Twas well this fiery Pope liv'd at that time; for had he liv'd till now; he must have been forc'd to have swal∣low'd many a Miseratione Dei; the Bi∣shops at this Day not using any other Ad∣dition. Now, in regard this Bishop was one of Mazarine's Creatures, his Eminency wrote to Rinaldo d' Este, Protector of
the Affairs of France, and enjoin'd him to wait upon his Holiness about this Affair. And indeed, he made a great number of Jaunts to and fro, without making any Progress: for the Pope, who had already thunder'd out a Bull of Excommunication against him, would not yield a hair's breadth, unless the Bishop came himself in Person to acknowledge his Fault, and beg his Mercy. Thus the Affair was spun out for above a Twelve-month, and in all likelyhood would have lasted a great while longer, had not La Chaise found out an Expedient, that the Excommunicated Bishop should make an Acknowledgment at Paris, before the Nuncio, and write to his Holiness a submissive and respectful Letter; wherein he was to beg Pardon for his Disobedience, and set forth his Repentance in most significant Expres∣sions. After which, his Holiness should take off the Excommunication; which was to be read in the Body of the High-Mass in the Cathedral Church of Bayeux. Father La Chaise did a considerable piece of Service also for his own Or∣der, which did not a little contribute to advance his Reputation. There ar∣riv'd
at Rome, toward the end of the Pontificate of Innocent X. an ancient Je∣suit of a Venerable Presence, who wore Long Hair, with his Locks flowing over his Shoulders, and a Beard down to his Belly. This Jesuit took upon him the Title of Embassador from the King of China to his Holiness, whom he came to assure of the barbarous Monarch's Respect and Filial Obedience to the Holy See, and to desire a new Supply of Missio∣naries to labour the Conversion of a numerous People who waited for the Succour of his Charity. The only Son of that King was also come in Person to kiss his Holiness's Feet, and render the Embassie the more Authentick. The Pope was over-joy'd beyond Imagination to hear of such a happy Progress of Reli∣gion in those far distant Regions: and not being able to testifie his Satisfaction to the Prince of China, whose Zeal had engag'd him to cross so many vast and dangerous Seas, he lodg'd him magnifi∣cently, and gave Order, That both He and the Embassador of the King his Father, should be entertain'd at his Ex∣pence, during their stay in Rome; and moreover, he pay'd him all the Honours
that are usually pay'd to the Sons of Sove∣reign Princes. But the Dominicans, who are no Friends to Jesuits, and less in the Coun∣tries where Missionaries are employ'd, then otherwhere, utterly destroy'd all this fine Story. They wrote to the Pope, That understanding the Jesuits had counterfeited an Embassie from the King of China, and had also Personated the Son of that Monarch, which was a per∣nicious Imposture, They could not for∣bear to give his Holiness Advice of it, for fear he should fall into the Snare, that only tended to advance the Jesuits Reputation, and to procure him to part with considerable Summs of Mo∣ney for the Support of the Mission; whereas the King of China, who was then at War with the Tartars, had no thoughts of turning Catholick, much ess of sending his only Son to the other end of the World, to make a fond Sub∣mission to his Holiness. To this they added heavy Accusations of the Jesuits, for having so far disfigur'd Christianism in the Indies, that it was hardly to be known: That they never preach'd the Crucifying of Christ, nor his Poverty;
but that out of a Rascally Compliant with the Genius of the People, they a¦ways represented him a Glorious an Triumphant King. And that they ha kept the People under these Notions an Elements of the Christian Religion, ev since Matthew Ricci, the first of the Missionaries, went thither; that is  say, for near a hundred Years ago: Th they permitted their Proselytes, for th Preservation of their Estates, to comm Idolatry, and kneel before the Idol  Chimboam; and that they were so sa from forbidding 'em to swear by the False Gods, that they did it themselve by giving the Name of Wing, which s¦nifies Holy, to Kun-su-zu, making use  the same Title which they give to Go To all these Accusations they added othe also no less heinous, and which are to long to be here inserted. I shall only sa this, That they were so many, and  rank, that they redounded greatly to th Disgrace of the whole Body of the Jesuits And if the Holy Father were so much over∣joy'd upon the Arrival of the Embassado his Displeasure was much greater to  such a Cheat put upon him. He refus'd to admit the General of the Order, wh
came to speak to his Holiness concern∣ing this Affair; and caus'd him to be cited, together with the Assistant of France, to come and Answer the Matter charg'd upon the Society, before the Congrega∣tion of Foreign Missions which he caus'd to be assembl'd on purpose, and every body expected to see some great Altera∣tions in that Order. He caus'd the sup∣pos'd Embassador to be Arrested, and expell'd all the Jesuits out of the Vatican. Neither was Father La Chaise at that time exempted. You might have seen the Jesuits then running from one end of Rome to the other, to beg the Protection of the Car∣dinals and Embassadors, and that they would help 'em out of the Misfortune which so terribly threaten'd 'em. How∣ever, they escap'd much better then Peo∣ple thought they would have done, by the Mediation of the Cardinal Padron, who was the only Person that durst solli∣cite for 'em; the Pope having forbid all Persons whatever to speak to him in their Behalf, being resolv'd to take cognizance of this Affair in the Congregation, and to shew 'em no Favour. And therefore it was that the Cardinal, though he possess'd entirely the Confidence and Affection of
his Holiness, yet boggl'd a long tim afraid to lose, all at once, the Enjoymen of such a Benefit by one dangerous fa Step. But at length, o'ercome by th Sollicitations of La Signora del Caniglio, an by the importunate Prayers and Tears  Father La Chaise, who threw himself a his Feet, embracing his Knees, he pro¦mis'd to do his utmost, and perform'd  so successfully, that he appeas'd the Pope¦fiery Indignation, who consented to he in private the Reasons which La Cha could offer to him, by no means being  yet to be entreated to admit any othe To this purpose he was introduc'd i his Holiness's Cabinet, who talk'd to hi with an extraordinary Heat of Passio concerning the wicked Morals of his O¦der, the horrible Abuses which they co¦mitted in the Indies, where they prof¦ted Religion, and all Things Sacred: ¦ding to this, That their Impudence  not asham'd to act their Farces at R by introducing Fantomes of a Prince a Embassador, without respect to the H See, nor the Holy Church, which th expos'd to Laughter, and the Contem of the Hereticks. What can you say to this: (said the Pope) Nothing, ma
Holy Father (reply'd La Chaise, all bath'd in Tears, and prostrating himself upon the Ground) I must confess, that all these Irregularities are inexcusable, and there∣fore I do not go about to lessen 'em be∣fore your Holiness, who would always penetrate to the bottom of my Heart, and from whom it lyes not in my Power to con∣ceal my own Thoughts. I have nothing to say, but only to implore your Paternal Clemency toward an Order, that beg it upon their Knees, and which absolutely condemns, and disapproves the Conduct of their Missionaries in China. They have heard of it, most Holy Father, with that Sorrow which is not to be equall'd out by that of your Holiness, and tho' they should justifie themselves upon the Purity of their Intentions, which were never other then to win some Souls to Jesus Christ, and should cite in favour of themselves the Example of St. Paul, who was a Jew to the Jews, a Greek to the Greeks, yet we should never be persua∣ded to defend 'em, but would abandon 'em, without speaking so much as one word to attone the just Severity of your Holiness, if the Interest of the Church, Religion, and the Holy See, did not ob∣lige
us to speak. May your Holiness b pleas'd to consider, that in punishing these Malefactors with that Rigour which they deserve, you will make publick to a the World, what is now only known  a few, and declare that to be a certain Truth, of which as yet the World is n convinc'd by certain Proof. Judge, mo Holy Father, what a general Scand such a Certainty would cause; and wha a hindrance it would be to the Propaga¦tion of the Faith. The Hereticks wo laugh us to Scorn, as your Holiness ha well observ'd, and take an occasion  Insult over our Mother, the Holy Church upon all occasions. He continu'd howling a long time, pe¦cieving that the Pope lent him a favo¦rable Ear, with that apparent Submission of Piety and Tenderness, that the Po suffer'd himself to be mollify'd, and to him in raising him up, (for he had sp¦ken all this while upon his Knees,) 'Twas ill luck, my Son, that thou wert a Jesuit then returning to the Cardinal, who he took to the Window, I love this Ma (said he) because there is no Guile  him. This Courteous Answer put La Chi in great Hopes, who laying hold up
the Conjuncture, strook while the Iron was hot. He never stirr'd from the Car∣dinal's House, and press'd him so hard, that at length he obtain'd an absolute Pardon, got the Embassador releas'd, who was only sent to the House of the Profession, like another Jesuit, without doing him any other Harm. The Prince was also set at Liberty, who betook him∣self to serve a Dutch Lord as his Lackey. This happy Success, for which the Or∣der was solely beholding to his Dexteri∣ty, considerably signaliz'd him; so that from that time forward, he was em∣ploy'd in more secret, and more impor∣tant Negotiations, which made him known in several Courts, and more par∣ticularly in that of France; this very Fa∣ther having prov'd very Serviceable to perswade the Pope to what the King de∣sir'd of him, in order to the Satisfaction which he demanded for the Assault which the Corsi made upon his Embassador the Duke of Crequi. So that after the Death of the Assistant General Barbin, he re∣solv'd to return into France, in hopes to meet with Advancement sooner there then other-where.
At his return, the Bishop of Bayeux carry'd him to Cardinal Maza∣rine, who shew'd him a thousand Kind∣nesses, and told him, he would be his Friend. And indeed, he was very much in his Favour. He it was that presented him to the King,1665. as a Person whose Ability he un∣derstood to the very bottom. He also go him admitted, in his life-time, into the Council of Conscience, which indeed was no more then to make him Co-adjutor to the Confessor. Nor did the Father in any thing belye the Testimony which his Eminency had given of him He govern'd himself in this Post with all the Dexterity of a Man grown old in Business; and understood so well to study the King's Humour and Genius, that when the Cardinal dy'd, he found him∣self able to stand upon his own Legs Nay, more then that, he supplanted his Competitor, who though he had been longer in the World, had nothing near the Wit or Knowledge that La Chaise had. By this time the King was become enamour'd of La Valliere; and in regard
his Passion was strong and violent, he but a hunder'd Slights upon the Queen for her sake; which many times came to hard Words, though that Princess had a great Love for him, at least, as much as his Mistress; nor was she much inferior o her in the Allurements of Beauty. But I found the King was of the Humour of those that never love their Wives, be∣cause they are ty'd to 'em. His Con∣fessor was always harping upon this String, and would not let him be at est; which was a great Vexation to him, the King enduring no Lectures upon any Subject whatever. Father La Chaise, who knew this pretty well, took the quite contrary course; he carefully avoided all manner of Disputes upon this Subject; nd if at any time he were oblig'd to speak his Thoughts, he never fail'd to bring in Humane Frailty to excuse the King. La Valliere, who had notice of t, order'd Thanks to be return'd him by Monsieur de Montausier, who desir'd him in her Name to give her a Visit. But La Chaise excus'd himself, as being loth to incurr the Queen's Displeasure. After that, she would needs have him for her Confessor; and the same Person gave him notice of her Intentions. This put
our Reverendissimo to a little stand; for hi Ambition soar'd higher: nevertheless, h durst not refuse her, for fear of incen∣sing her. He therefore return'd fo Answer, That the Dutchess of Vauj did him a great deal of Honour; an that he look'd upon it as a special Favour of Christ himself, that offer'd him Occa∣sions to serve her, and to be any way contributing to the saving of her Soul but in regard he had no desire that the thing should spread any further, he went to attend her that Night. So soon as s perceiv'd him, What, good Father (sai she) brought you hither? You do me a Favour that I could never expect at you Hands. What will Their Majesties say when they hear that you bestow'd a Vis upon a poor Girl whose Soul they woul never value the Loss of. I come, Ma∣dam (answer'd he) to repeat those Pr∣testations which I made to the Marquis o Montausier, when he did me the Honour to speak to me in your Name. He told me, Madam, that you had so good a Opinion of me, as to entrust me with th Direction and Guidance of your Soul Yes, Reverend Father (reply'd La Val∣liere) and I should be highly engag'd to yee, if you would take Charge of it▪
'Tis too great a Favour, Madam, that you vouchsafe me (answer'd the Father) But, Madam, permit me to speak to yee with all the freedom of a sincere Heart. I have an infinite Value for the Good and piritual Repose of your Soul, and should be glad to assist yee with that little Know∣ledge which the Lord has been pleas'd to impart to me. However, Madam, 'tis true, that my Zeal for your Service does not permit me to stop there; I would, if it were possible, contribute something to the Establishment of a Fortune and a Fa∣vour which you so duly merit. I dare be bold to say, Madam, That hitherto I have labour'd out of a pure Inclination, without pretending to deserve any thing t your hands; but as yet it has not been in my Power to do any thing conside∣rable. But if you will consent that I may cast my Designs, and watch Occasions to do you Service, then you may reck'n upon me as a Person wholly at your De∣votion. You may perhaps wonder, Ma∣dam, that a Man of my Profession should alk to yee after this rate; those of my Robe being accustom'd to preach Mor∣tification and Penitence; and I must needs confess, that this would be the best way when all's done. But when fatal
Experience teaches us, That Youth, Great Engagements in the World, Beauty, Extraodinary Merit, and Birth, are things absolutely incompatible with an entire Self-denial, I cannot but agree with those that believe there are some Grains to be allow'd to Humane Frailty; and since the King cannot bridle his Amorous Passion, I cannot chuse but ap∣plaud the Choice that he has made. I do not see any Lady in the Court, that me∣rits his Heart and Esteem so much as yo do; and as for your part, Madam, I shall never condemn yee, for having hearken'd to the Vows of the Greatest Monarch in the World. Nor do I believe that any Lady in the Kingdom would have refus'd 'em. Your Affection for him has had an extraordinary good Effect. For it has drawn him off from his Engagements begun with Madam his Sister-in-Law; which made me tremble a thousand times, out of that Zeal which I have for his Ho∣nour and Salvation. So that it may be said, That your Charms have rescu'd his Royal Soul from a greater Danger, into which it was falling. — La Val∣liere, who desir'd no more, then that he would prove by substantial Reasons, that she might Love the King with a safe
Conscience, listen'd very attentively till he had made an end of speaking. After which (said she, fetching a deep Sigh) How happy should I be, if the Father-Confessor were but in some measure of your Opinion. But he continually tor∣ments the King upon this Occasion; and moreover, incenses the Queen against me, and urges her to persecute me with all the Vexations imaginable. There's more Truth in that then you can well believe (reply'd La Chaise) for I have left the Queen's Chamber twenty times, not being able to hear how bitterly she inveighs against you, Madam, who, with∣out Contradiction, are the Person in the World who most naturally deserves her Kindness and Respect. In a word, What shall I say to yee, Madam, but that that same Old Fool has got a certain Notion of Morality in his Brain, which he takes to be pure Devotion, and ima∣gines there is no Salvation without Hypo∣crisie and Dissimulation. You have hit his true Character (answer'd La Valliere) and therefore it is that the King begins to disgust him, and only retains him out of meer Respect: but I intend to speak to the King concerning him this Even∣ing; and if he believes what I say, we
shall shift him off to say his Prayers by himself. After that, Reverend Father, you shall have a good share in the next Nomination, or else say I can do nothing. I would as willingly have you the King's Confessor as my own, and therefore relye upon my Word. The Father return'd her a thousand Thanks, and assur'd her that she should never have any cause to repent of her procuring him that Advan∣tage. After which, in regard it was late, and for that she expected the King, he took his leave of her, and retir'd with Thoughts full freighted with the Idea's of his future Grandeur. He slept not all that Night, and per∣haps but little the Nights following. For he is a Man whom Ambition suffers the least to take his Rest of any Man that I know, as one that is always indefatigable in the pursuit of his Ends. There is not any Conjuncture which he does not un∣derstand how to make use of to a Won∣der. Of which his Visit to La Valliere is a palpable Demonstration. 'Twas a thing that requir'd great Judgment, and a quick Resolution: for had he absolutely refus'd what she demanded of him, and not thrown himself wholly upon her prof∣fer'd Kindness, 'tis evident she would
have prov'd his irreconcileable Enemy, and would have utterly excluded him from the King's Conscience: and had he accepted the Confessorship as she prof∣fer'd it for her self, he had shut the Door against the Preferment he aim'd at; there being no likelyhood that the King would have chosen his Mistress's Confessor for his own. Therefore he could not act more politickly, then to open his heart to her, and by that means win her Con∣fidence; at least, we see that this way succeeded to his Wish. La Valliere, who would having given any thing to have had the King's Confessor her Friend, thought it no Prudence to refuse one that came to offer his Service, and from whom she might promise her self all the Advantages she could expect. And there∣fore this Female Favourite left nothing omitted to engage the King to dismiss his old Confessor, and in his room to make Choice of the Person whose Worth and Parts she extoll'd to the utmost of her In∣vention. This is a Man (said she) that will never sit domineering over your Conscience like a Pdagogue; and as he has a hunder'd times more Ability then the other, so he knows the World better: he keeps himself reserv'd within the
Bounds of an Exemplary Regularity without troubling himself to Comme upon the Actions of other Men. This was just assailing the King upon the weak side, who was wont to say, That he hated nothing so much as Reprimands Besides all this, he had a great Esteem for Father La Chaise, and was quite weary of the other: so that finding no Re∣luctancy against the Person recommen∣ded, he promis'd La Valliere to dismiss his own Confessor upon the first oppor∣tunity. Nor was it long before he met with one as favourable as he could desire For the Old Man observing that the King one day, so soon as he came from the Communion, would hardly allow him∣self time to Dine▪ but posted away immediately to La Valliere, was so en∣rag'd at it, that never considering what would follow he waited till the King came to his Chamber, which was not till Four a Clock in the Morning. The King seeing him at such an unseaso∣nable hour, with a surly Countenance, ask'd him, whom he look'd for? The Confessor answer'd. That he came to de∣nounce God's Judgments against him, just ready to fall upon his Head; and re∣proach'd him with his Manner of Living
in the most thund'ring Language imagi∣nable, talking of nothing but Impiety, Sacrilege, Forsaking God, and Eternal Torments; concluding his Discourse with telling him, That he was no longer able to see such Irregularities; and therefore if he resolv'd to continue his Debauche∣ries, he desir'd, for his part, that he might be dismiss'd. The King, who only waited for such a Harangue as this, told him very smoothly, but withal very cold∣ly, That he gave him leave to retire when he pleas'd, and that he would take care to provide himself a Confessor. At the same time he bid him Good-night, and commanded his Valet de Chambre to draw the Curtains. The next Morning be∣times, because he would not give the good Father time to repent, and get the Queen to mediate for him, which was the thing he most fear'd, the King sent for La Chaise, and told him before Monsieur and Ma∣dam de Guise, That his Confessor had begg'd leave to be dismiss'd; which he could not refuse him,1667. because indeed he was fitter for Contemplation, then to live in the Tumult and Hurry of a Court; and therefore finding no Ecclesiastick so wor∣thy as himself, he would become his Pe∣nitent,
and submit the Conduct of his Conscience to his Guidance. An Hour after, the King mighty jocund that his Game had play'd so well, went to La Val∣liere's Chamber, to tell her the News, so afraid he was lest any body else should pre∣vent him — Oh, Par-bleau! — (said he) As for the Priest, I took him at his Word; he did his own business himself, and there∣fore God knows, I only took the Ball at the Rebound. La Valliere made answer, That 'twas the best way i' the world, provided the Queen did not marr all again: and this is that (added she) which I very much fear. How! (said the King) D'yee take me then to be a Man that is lead by the Nose? Never deceive thy self, my dear Girl, — 'Twas my Pleasure; I have done it, and I will stand to it. Nothing pleases me more, then to make those that are jealous of us, mad; and therefore to vex 'em worse then I have done, I intend to keep Holy-day and Confess to Morrow. In a word, without any Preparation at all, he re∣commenc'd his Devotions the Day fol∣lowing, the whole Court admiring the Violence of his Passion, and the Ex∣cesses to which it transported him. In the mean time, the New-Confessor
triumph'd, and every body began to make their Addresses to him; only Mon∣sieur the Prince refrain'd, who naturally abominated Hypocrites. And indeed he told him one Day in the Queen's Cham∣ber, that strange things were to be expe∣cted from his Confessorship, who could prevail with the King to confess two Days together, that hardly went to Confession twice in a Year before. The Father re∣turn'd no answer, because that was no place for him to make Retorts in; but from that time forward he hated the Prince with such a mortal Hatred, that he never ceas'd to work his Ruin, and ren∣der him odious to the King. So soon as he saw himself install'd, he made it his Business to secure himself against all unlucky Back-blows, which he had just Reason to fear; for he wan∣ted no Enemies: and to bring this to pass he sought to strengthen himself by uni∣ting Interests with those that were in Favour. At that time the Count of Lausun was the Man that shin'd in greatest Lustre at the Court. He was a Gentleman of that sort, that there are not Ten thousand such in the Kingdom, who had not above Six thousand a Year, paternal Estate. But
Fortune was so favourable to him, the from so small a Pittance, he rose in a little time to the Pinacle of Honour. He was Captain of the Guards of the Body, Collonel-General of Dragoons, and a Favourite exclusive. He has a great deal of Wit, and speaks with the greatest Grace in the World: Moreover, He is a Person of Worth, and fit for great Enterprizes, which he goes through with an extraordinary Prowess. The History of Him, and Mademoiselle whom he marry'd privately in despite of the King and several other Passages, are Testimo∣nials of this; and if we would one Day afford the World the Memorials of his Life, they would find therein many thing rare and singular. But his chiefest Excel∣lency lay in Courtship, wherein he gave way neither to Bassompierre, nor St. Aignan. All the Ladies of the Court lov'd him, and some in a very particular manner. How∣ever, La Valliere was not of that Num∣ber; and in regard she lov'd the King to the Heighth of Delicacy, and Niceness, the least Kindness which he shew'd to any other Person whatever was a great Vexation to her. The Love which he had for the Count of Lausun among o∣thers, made her Mad. You love him a
Hundred times better then you do me said she) You hardly allow me your Company above Three or Four Hours in  Day; whereas you cannot live a Mo∣ment without him. He never stirs from your side; he is your Shadow. Prithee my little lovely Creature, reply'd the King, what would'st thou have me to do? Would'st have me drive him out of my Company, when he comes to wait upon me. Not so (said La Valliere) I would only have yee not be always leaning upon his Shoulder; that he should not be per∣petually whispering in your Ear; and that Lausun should not be the only Person that always never said, or did any thing but what was curious and brave. One Day the King having lay'd himself upon the Bed n her Chamber, and the Count dis∣coursing to him by the Bed-side, his Majesty had a mind to say something privately to him, and to that purpose pull'd the Count by the Perriwig to bring his Head closer to his own, that he might whisper in his Ear; but the Discourse asted so long, that the Count was con∣strain'd to fall all along upon the Bed by the King. La Valliere coming in that ick of time to shew the Countess of Grancey a very curious Chrystal Looking-Glass,
Glass, and finding Lausun in that famili Posture with the King, was so terribly mad at it, that she could not forbear  shew it. Truly Sir (said she) you a wonderful bold — Who gave y leave to lye upon my Bed? These  very strange pieces of Impertinencies and therefore, without any Comple¦ments pray withdraw. On the othe¦side, the Count, instead of giving h any Answer, only smil'd; and turning toward the King, Your Majesty (said he softly in his Ear) must needs be very much pleas'd to see the full Extent of her Jea∣lousie; and so looking upon La Valli with an insulting Air, and something  Contempt in his Face, he put her qui beside all Patience; so that she fell upon him like a Mad-woman, pull'd him  the Perriwig, tore his Cravat, and ga him several Cornubs with her Fist. The Count who never expected such a Tem∣pest, endeavour'd to get clear of it  But I know not whether he would have found it so easie a thing, had not the King, and Madam De Grancey re∣liev'd him. After that, she fell a weep∣ing, and upbraiding the King with the little Love he had for her. You take my Enemy's part, (said she) and I find too
well, that I am unfortunate; who after  have sacrific'd all to your Majesty, m to expect no other, then to be he May-game of the Court. But I shall take a care to prevent that (continued he) and since you have betray'd me in  manner so unworthy of a great Mo∣narch, I will betake my self to a Nun∣ery, there to bewail, all the remainder of my Life; a Love from whence I pro∣mis'd my self so many sweet Satisfactions, which now, however, renders me most mi∣serable. In a word she press'd her Grief so home, that the King was forc'd to give Lausun a smart Reprimand, and make him ask her Pardon; and all that was little enough too, to appease her. This Falling-out did not a little per∣plex Father La Chaise, who knew not well how to manage these Two Spirits so opposite one to the other. Chiefly La Valliere, who would admit of no Friends that took both sides, and to whom he was particularly bound for his Prefer∣ment; so that he could not in Policy de∣sert her, for fear of making known his Ingratitude to the King. Thereupon, he took her part altogether; and having over-rul'd his own Judgment to join with Leuvois, all Three united their Interests,
and agreed unanimously together to  move from all Offices, and managem of publick Affairs, all Persons that sho be suspected in common, or whoever  were, that either of 'em hated. La V¦liere requir'd, That Madame might  sacrific'd to her; Louvois, and La Ch resolv'd the ruin of the Prince;  all Three join'd together against Lau whose Favour was an Eye-sore both  the one, and the other; and for  more security of the Triumvirate, the resolv'd to keep it Secret with all the  imaginable. The Prince who knew nothing of  League, and besides was none of the m politick Flatterers, or Dissemblers, ma times vex'd La Chaise with some pe Mortifications, which incens'd him  much the more. But that which ma him absolutely irreconcilable, was th same bloody Piece, call'd The Impost which Moliere brought upon the Stag The Prince order'd him to make a C¦medy, wherein he represented the C¦fessor so naturally to the Life, that y could not fail to know him; for which the Prince promis'd him a Reward  Two thousand Pistoles. Nevertheless that famous Comedian who foresaw th
Consequence of the Thing, altho' he set forth his Morals, and his Genius to he Life, yet forbore to personate his Figure. The Prince therefore was not so fully satisfi'd with the Piece; he would have had it spoken out more clearly, and complain'd of it to Moliere, who justi∣fy'd himself, by giving the Prince to understand, That besides that he should have expos'd himself to manifest Dan∣ger, he could not find Players that would undertake to act it, and so he should have ost the Play without being able to give his Highness that Satisfaction which he requir'd of him. Thereupon the Prince resuming calmer Thoughts, and having again perus'd it, found that Moliere spoke nothing but Reason; and that the Copy sufficiently resembl'd the Original, with∣out any necessity of adding new bold Strokes. So that at length the Play was acted before the King; and the Impostor appear'd the first time, tho' not in the Habit of a Jesuit, yet in a long loose Cas∣sock, and a Hat with broad Brims. The success of it answer'd Expectation; it was generally applauded, and in regard there was no body but knew the Person, it kept awake the Attention of the Spectators to that degree, that there was never known so
profound a Silence upon the Stage. T next Day it was over all the Court, T Father La Chaise had been acted upon  Publick Theatre. Neither did the Prin take any care to conceal the Part whi he had in it: So that when the noise  it began to be spread abroad in the City,  Croud that came to see it was so great, th they were forc'd to shut up the Door and send away above a Thousand Person I leave the Reader to Conjecture in wh a Rage the Father was. He belch'd fo Fire, and Flame against those that in su a manner derided God, and Religion for he would not seem to agree, That  Comedy was made upon him. 'Tw only his Zeal for the Glory of God th made him speak. Under that Preten he engag'd the first President in the Q¦rel, who forbid the publick acting of th Piece upon his Request. The Curate  St. Eustachius also, whom he had w to his side, and a great many others wh he had made of his Party, out of a de to please him, preach'd against it;  that for a Year together, the Pulpits th ¦der'd out nothing else but Anathem against the Author, and his Adherent However, the King gave Moliere th Permission, which disanull'd the Pre¦dent's
Prohibition, and the Comedy was acted with as numerous a Concourse as before. He also afterwards granted him a Benefice in the Chappel-Royal of Vin∣cennes, for one of his Friends: which made many People believe, That the Confessor had but a short time to Reign. But the Event shew'd, That they were deceiv'd in their Conjectures; and that if the King consented to put those little Mortifications upon him, 'twas only to blind the Eyes of the Queen, and such as had no kindness for him. In a word, from that time forward he was very much guided by his Directions; and if he did not always punctually follow 'em, at least he hearken'd to his Advice in many Affairs of highest Importance. In the mean time, the Triumvirate be∣gan to fall to pieces. Louvois, and the Father consider'd, that notwithstanding ll their Efforts, Lausun would keep his Post, that he grew in favour more, and more every Day, and that in the end it might prove fatal to 'em, if they did not close with him betimes. Besides they aw that La Valiere got her self many Enemies out of an affected Resolution, ot to beg any Favours for any body;
that her Beauty began to wither; and that most certainly the King would su¦denly quit her, so soon as he met with more potent Charms: so that they shou be Victims to the new Mistress, and Lausun, who would be sure to link him∣self with her. And thus you see our T Politicians, the nearer they appro her Enemy, the farther removing them∣selves at a distance from La Valli But the Count, whose presumption wa very great, lookt upon their returni to him, with as much Indifferency,  he had beheld their slighting him be¦fore. Nevertheless he accepted the Friendship, and acted sincerely wi 'em. Nor was it long before what the foresaw came to pass. The King ¦held Montespan, who was generally a¦knowledg'd to be the most celebrated L¦dy of the Court; and therefore su¦ring himself to fall in Love with her W and Soul, he was willing to make so Tryal of the Substance. Lausun had a great mind to h Courted her; but perceiving the Ki Inclination, he was glad of the Oppo¦nity to offer him a Sacrifice; he infla his Passion; extoll'd and magnify'd
Merit and Charms of his Goddess; ad∣ding withal, That he understood the Grandeur of the Conquest, but that he had not a Heart that durst presume to Love in the same place with his Prince. The King Thank'd him; and was so well pleas'd with him for this Surrender, that to repair his Loss, he gave him leave to make Choise of any Mistress that pleas'd him in the Court; and that he would persuade her to have him. He also entrusted him to speak to the Lady in his Favour; so that he had an Op∣portunity to make her sensible how much more she was beholding to him for quit∣ting his Affection to her. In short, The King lov'd her, and she receiv'd his Love with all the Joy of a Woman that breath'd nothing but Ambition. The difficulty was, to work the Confessor to a Liking of this new Commerce between two Marry'd Persons, whose Husbands grew Horn-mad to that degree, that the King was forc'd to Banish the Marquis of of Montespan, by reason of the hideous coyle he kept at Court for the taking his Wife from him. Now though this Story was something like to that of David and Bathsheba, the Fa∣ther thought it not so proper to be Nathan.
There was no such necessity for him to trouble himself much about the Business That Holy Man had always a Moral ready at a dead-lift, and Pistol-proof against the most crying Adulteries. So that he submitted with an Exemplary Resignation to the Pleasure of his King. More then that, he caus'd Lausun to let Montespan know, and afterwards went himself to assure her of his invio∣lable Devotion to her Interests. She, on the other side, promis'd him recipro∣cal Adherency, and that he might be cer∣tain she would serve him to the utmost of her Power, both for and against all In short, Although till then they were but very little Acquainted, they became Intimate Friends before they parted. Poor La Valliere, who saw these things transacted before her Face, wept Day and Night, and made such mournful Complaints, as would have mollify'd Stones. She went ten times, like a Mad woman, to Father La Chaise, on purpose to upbraid him with his Infidelity; b he was always invisible when she came One day among the rest, that her Fury had transported her to seek him out a far as Paris, in the Profess'd House, whi∣ther he goes two or three Days in a Week,
and that Answer was made her, That he was gone: she not being so satisfy'd, alighted out of her Coach, and would be let into the Convent. The Porter op∣pos'd her; and the Noise that she made, fetch'd out several of the Jesuits that stop'd her from going any farther. Then melt∣ing into Tears, and abandoning her self to all her Sorrows, she thunder'd out a thousand Exclamations against that Knave, who had been the first who confirm'd her in her Tenderness for the King; who had promis'd her a Thousand times, that he should never engage himself to any other; and yet notwithstanding all his Promises, and his Fear of God, had basely betray'd her, and had authoriz'd the King to commit an infamous Adul∣tery, and take another Man's Wife from him. In short, In less then a Quarter of an Hour she inform'd all those that were present of all the secret Transactions that had pass'd between her and him. The Jesuits were ready to hang them∣selves at this unlucky Accident, for which there was no Remedy. For she was a Fury not to be approach'd but at the Peril of him that came within her reach. And if Mareshal de Bellefonds had not ar∣riv'd in the interim, and carry'd her away,
she had most certainly reveal'd a great deal more, so much she was beside her self. I know not whether Night brought her to her self, and caus'd her to see that extreme Folly that she had committed, and made her asham'd of what she had done; or whether her Despair to see her Love despis'd, were the only Mo∣tive. However it were, she betook her self into a Carmelite Nunnery, where she has continu'd ever since. Her Retirement deliver'd Father La Chaise from an extraordinary Di∣sturbance that extremely tormented him: for he made no question but that in her Fury she would have affronted him even in the King's Chamber. Montespan could not moderate her Joy, that now she had no longer any Rivaless that could dispute with her the Prince's Heart, and keep her from being sole Predominant. Lausun rid victorious over all his Enemies; and Louvois, content with his share of her Favour, little re∣garded La Valliere. So that she, a poor unfortunate Mistress to a King, abandon'd and betray'd, saw her self constrain'd to fly to a dreary Retirement, there to be∣wail, all the rest of her days, those tran∣sient Pleasures which she had hardly had
time to taste; together with a Surplusage of Grief, not to be lamented or pity'd but by very few. 'Tis true, that Lausun did not over-long enjoy the Pleasure of Rejoycing at her Disgrace. For in a little time after, he had the ill Luck to be crush'd by a Fall no less desperate then her's. Every body knows how he had enthrall'd the Heart of Mademoiselle de Montpensier, who de∣manded him for her Husband; and how the King, who thought himself engag'd by his Word to let him have whatever Mistress he should make Choice of, con∣sented to the Match; which had been solemniz'd in the sight of all the World, but that the Prince of Condè, in Conjun∣ction with several other Princes of the Blood, so well represented the Stain which that Marriage would imprint upon the Royal Family, that maugre the Importunities of La Chaise, and the Inte∣rest of the Nobility who sided with Lau∣sun, he retracted his Word, and forbad 'em to think any more of it. But all the Prohibitions in the World were never able to with-hold two Per∣sons, of which the one was possess'd with a violent Love, the other by an inordi∣nate Ambition; and He more-especially,
since by the Match he became Related to one of the Greatest Monarchs in Europe. He therefore Marry'd her Privately, without the King's Knowledge; flatter∣ing himself, perhaps, That when the Thing was done, and that the King came to understand it, he would only look a little Gruff upon 'em for two or three Days. But he took a quite different Course: for though he lov'd 'em both very well, yet he would never consent to let the Marriage be made Publick; and in regard there was some Reason t fear lest the Princess should be with Child he sent the Count to Bastille; and thence remov'd him to Pignerol, where he re∣main'd Sixteen Years; that is to say, t there was no longer any Danger of thei Interviews: at the end of which time, Mademoiselle purchas'd her Liberty, with the Loss of the Sovereignty of Dombes. Louvois was not very sorry for  Misfortune. He was always a Favourite at least, and not a little formidable: fo tho' they were all Three leagu'd together as I said before, to exclude all others from the King's Favour, and particularly th Princes of the Blood; nevertheless, the was no depending upon Lausun. But the King, who had been lon
hatching the Design of Universal Mo∣narchy, hearken'd very much to the Councils of Father La Chaise; with whom Cardinal Mazarine had left excellent Me∣moirs upon that Subject, and who of himself prov'd greatly serviceable toward it, by means of the Jesuits, People prepar'd for any Undertaking, and of whom he had always a hunder'd in his sleeve ready to Obey all manner of Commands. The Draught of this Design which he had drawn up, look'd with as fair a Prospect as any in the World. The King of England was to be lull'd a-sleep, what∣ever it cost; which appear'd to be no difficult thing to do, provided you fed him with Money. Then was the King to fall upon Holland, and make himself Master of it. Which done, the Spanish Low Countries, the Bishopricks of Liege, Munster, and Cologne, could not have made any long Resistance. Then an Alliance was to be made with the Turk, to fall upon the Emperor on both sides, and then divide the Spoils. Thus you see the Design was laid; and if it has not had that good Luck which was expected, it has not been for want of Conduct; for all the secret Tricks, and scandalous Artifiees of Knavish Policy, have been
made use of to bring it to pass; except of latter Years, wherein I must confess they committed some Capital Faults which are never to be recover'd: Of which I shall speak in due place. Now in regard the first step they were to make in this great Enterprize, was, to make sure of the King of England,1670. the King resolv'd to send thither his Sister-in-Law, against the Advice of Father La Chaise, who had no Kindness at all for her; and who, as he said, was not good Catholick enough to be entrusted with such a Negotiation. However, she set forward, and arriv'd at Dover; where she was met by the King her Brother, to whom she made those Proposals with which she was entrusted; which were, To have an Alliance Offensive and De∣fensive against all Princes; To break the Triple League; and, To make War upon Holland in particular. But whether it were that the King had no Inclination to the Propositions of him∣self; or that the Princess not thinking they would be of any Advantage to him, disswaded him from medling, she re∣turn'd without doing any thing. Nor did Father La Chaise fail to lay hold of the
Opportunity, to render her suspected to the King, by putting him in mind, that he had told him what would come of it, before she went. But whether it were that the King bore her any Grudge, or any other Person, she dy'd at St. Clou, with∣in Three, or Four Days after her Re∣turn. God knows how, for we could never hear of any thing else, but that she was very well in the Morning; only af∣ter she had supt up a Mess of Broth, she cry'd out I am Poyson'd. So dy'd that poor Princess in the Twenty sixth Year of her Age, and Fifteen Days over. Now, though they were not so Suc∣cessful the first time to involve the King of England wholly in their Interests, yet the Design was not given over. To which purpose Father La Chaise propos'd to the King to make use of the Jesuits. 'Tis certain, Sir, (said he) that they are the fittest Persons in the World to manage both King Charles, and his Brother the Duke of York. For not to reck'n upon their being both Catholicks at the bottom of their Hearts, in regar'd they have been bred up in our Religion, Your Majesty knows that they are deeply oblig'd to the Society. Had it not been for the Sup∣plies of Money which they furnish'd 'em
withal, they had been in danger of ma∣king but a small Figure in the World. Our Fathers of France, alone by them∣selves, allow'd him Twenty thousand Crowns a Year, which there is little like∣lyhood will be ever re-pay'd 'em. I speak this, (added he) to let your Majesty know, that a Jesuit will be no ominous sight to that Prince. I believe it (reply'd the King) nor am I ignorant of the Kindnesses he has receiv'd from your Society: So that there is good Reason to hope, that he will do much upon their Sollicitations. But with what an Eye d'you think will your Fathers be look'd upon in England? Do you believe they will be safe there? Never think it; and if they should once come to be known there, the Character of Agent, or Envoy will never protect 'em from the Fury of the People. I should rather choose to employ the Dutchess of Portsmouth, who has hitherto serv'd me faithfully in seve∣ral little Affairs, that I have entrusted to her Management; and I am persuaded, she will be no less useful to me in great Ones. She is very nimble, and dexterous in Business, and possesses altogether the very Heart and Soul of the King; and frankly to tell you a Mistress has a Hun∣der'd
Opportunities, and Tricks, to im∣prove Perswasion, which the most cun∣ning Ministers can never meet with. Sir, (reply'd La Chaise with a Smile) your Majesty may speak knowingly in that particular: I have nothing to object a∣gainst it. I am also convinc'd, That the Dutchess of Portsmouth is now the only Person that can undertake this Affair with Success. There needs no more then to instruct her well in your Maje∣sty's Intentions, and 'tis only to that pur∣pose, that I have propos'd to send some of our People into that Country. Ve∣ry good, (reply'd the King) I consent to it, but whom shall we send? Your Majesty, (answer'd La Chaise) cannot make choice of a better Man then Fa∣ther De Carnè. He is near of Kin to the Dutchess, and well-belov'd by the Duke of York; and besides that, he is one of the most Politick Head-pieces in our Or∣der. The King agreed to it, and sent him away Fifteen Days after, furnish'd with Three or Four Suits of Modish Ap∣parel, by way of Disguise. So soon as he arriv'd at London, he went to wait upon the Dutchess of Portsmouth, who entertain'd him in a very courtly manner, for above a Quarter of an Hour,
not knowing who he was. However, she bethought her self that she knew  Face, tho' after long tormenting her Brain, she could not call to mind where she ha seen him, or how she came acquainted with him; so that at length she was con∣strain'd to ask his Name. I find (said the Father) that Fortune, and Grandeur have made you forget you old Friends, else you could never have banish'd poor Father Carnè so utterly from your Thoughts. Is it possible (cry'd the Dutchess) that it should be you, dear Cousin, (embracing him) i truth I beg your Pardon. But, good God, what Business brings you hither? D'you know the Danger you are in? Should you once be discover'd by the Mobile, there would be no way to save you. Is your Zeal so warm as to embol∣den yee to come hither, in search of Death, with so much Gayety, and Brisk∣ness? I knew the time when you were more sparing of your Life. The time past is not the present, Madam, (answer'd he.) 'Tis true, that in my Youth, I lov'd my Pleasures, perhaps a little more than became a Person of my Coat; but now I am become a Man that only seeks to serve God, and his Prince; and 'tis up∣on
that account only, that I come hither. 'Tis from the King, (continu'd he) that I come. He expects from you an Im∣portant piece of Service; and as I know you will be over-joy'd to have the Oppor∣tunity, I shall not trouble you with long Remonstrances, but only deliver his Letter into your Hands, together with another from the Reverend Father La Chaise, who has written to yee like∣wise: and I am to give yee notice, that you are beholding to him for the best part of the King's Resolutions to make choice of your self to serve him before his Embassador M. de Croissy, the Lord Treasurer, who is wholly at his Devoti∣on, and Twenty others, who would have been glad to have given his Ma∣jesty Proofs of their Fidelity to him. And so saying, he presented the Letters to the Dutchess, who open'd 'em im∣mediately with a great deal of Earnest∣ness. The First of which from the King, was as follows.
Madam, Dutchess of Portsmouth, THE sincere and true Affection which I bear the King of England, my Brother, and good Friend, which I have endeavour'd to make known to him upon all Occasion, having made me passionately desirous a long time since, to join with him in a strict and lasting Alliance, which uniting both our Em∣pires in the Bond of Peace and Amity, migh enable us not only to repell the Assaults of our Enemies, but also to repress their Boldness, I sent to him Madam Henrietta Stuart, our dear Sister of happy Memory, to propound a Treaty which could not have been but very Advantageous to him. But she found him so pre-possess'd by the Councils of certain Person about him, who minding nothing but then voluptuous Pleasures, would be at their W end to see him undertake any thing to his Honour, that it was impossible to obtain any thing of him. Nevertheless, in regard I cannot, without great Grief of Mind, behold him under such a Lethargy so contrary to his Interest, especially when the Hollanders out brave him to the high∣est Degree, I thought it fit to write to your self, requesting you to represent to him, in my name, how prejudicial such an exces∣sive
Love of his Repose will be to him a last the apparent Aim of the Hollanders being to establish their Commerce, upon the Ruin of the Trade of England, and to make themselves Masters of the Sea, from which they do not think themselves far off, since they already refuse to lore Sail to his Men of War, and have violated the Laws of Na∣tions, in driving his Merchants from their settled Factories, and Places of Trade. Be∣sides, I cannot believe, that he has altoge∣ther forgot these zealous Sentiments which I have formerly observ'd in him for the Catho∣lick Religion, and the Re-establishment of it in England, which would be one of the most Glorious, and Christian-like Designs that ever were set on Foot. In the first place therefore, the Pride of the Hollanders must be humbl'd, and they themselves disabld from being in a Condition to embroil their Neigh∣bour Kingdoms. I see nothing of Difficulty in it; that Republick has more of Pride, then Strength: So that if the King my Brother will but join with me, I make no question of Conquest, by God's Assist∣ance. I flatter my self that he will do me so much Justice, as to believe that 'tis not my own Interest which makes me thus Impor∣tunate. He is concern'd at least, as much
as I to bring 'em down; it being certain, that while that Commonwealth subsists,  will never suffer any Alteration in England, either as to the Government, or in Religion; and that the Parliament who are well assur'd of it, will take all opportunities to set their Feet upon his Neck; so that if he does not betimes prevent the Effects of their Indepen∣dant, and Republican Humour, he will f himself reduc'd to be no more then the first Gentleman in his Parliament. 'Tis with a great deal of Sorrow that  foretell the King my Brother, a Misfort of this Nature: However, I shall have  least, this Satisfaction within my self, th I have neglected nothing to let him know it, and hinder it from falling upon him. As to what remains, in regard his Parlia∣ment, whose Aims are far remote from whe they ought to be, will never consent to a We that will be so ruinous to it, and therefore wil never give him Subsidies to maintain it, I of∣fer to supply him with all the Money, and Ammunition which he shall stand in need of for the setting out of his Fleet. Besides all this that I have said to you▪ Father Carnè will more fully inform you of our Intentions. I make no question but you will make use of all the Credit which your Deserts have acquir'd in the good Thoughts
of the King my Brother, so that I never stopp'd in my Considerations about the choice which it behov'd me to make of the Person fit for this Negotiation. Do me then, if it lies in your power, this Service which I promise my self from your Friendship, and leave to me the Care of Acknowledgment. God have you in his Keeping, Madam, Dutchess of Portsmouth. Fontainbleau, Novem∣ber the 18th. 1670. La Chaise's Letter ran thus: Madam, YOU will understand by the King's Letter the Glorious Distinction which he makes between Your Self, and so many Persons, whose Devotion, and Fidelity for him are Inviolable. He relies upon you for a Nego∣tiation, upon the Success of which depends the Destiny of Europe. A Great Princess was entrusted with the same before you, and tho' the Pains she took prov'd Unsuccessful, His Majesty has better Hopes in Yours. He knows, Madam, how difficult a thing it will be, to refrain from yielding to the Per∣suasions of a Person, whose particular Pri∣vilege it is to prevail over all Hearts. Be∣sides,
We are easily enclin'd to believe, Th a Wit so piercing, so solid, so insinuating  Yours, will easily find a way to accomply what you undertake; and so much the rather, because, upon this occasion, His Majesty pro∣poses nothing to the King of England,  what is for his great Advantage. However it be, Madam, the King expect from you the most important Piece of Service that can be done him by a Subject, since  concerns the most dazling and most magnifi∣cent Act of conspicuously glittering Honour, that a mighty Prince could ever aim at;  mean the universal Monarchy, which it i in your power to facilitate him, or rath which you will assure him, if you prosper  the Affair which he entrusts in your Hands Judge, Madam, what Blessings, and wh Honours are reserv'd for You. Make i therefore of all the Power which your Beauty and your rare Endowments have given y over the Heart of a Monarch that loves a doats upon you. You can never do it upon  juster occasion, since it concerns the Honour of your Prince, the extirpation of Heresie, and the exaltation of our Mother the Holy Church, I dare be bold to say, That whatever Courses you take, of what Nature soever they be, will be extreamly meritorious before God, provided you direct your Intentions right,
and will, infallibly, procure yee eternal Bliss. You see, Madam, that all manner of Reasons, both spiritual and temporal, ob∣lige yee to leave nothing unomitted: and I engage to make the King take notice of the Zeal and Affection wherewith you shall be pleas'd to serve him in this Affair. Moreover, Madam, be convinc'd of my most humble Respects, and of the real desire I have to give you Proofs of my profound Esteem, by all manner of Services: Grant me the Favour to accept my unworthy Offers; and by that means rid me of the Trouble which it would be to me, to think that I am in vain, and unprofitably Yours, &c. Fontainbleau, Novem∣ber the 18th. 1670. When this Letter came to my Hands, could not forbear laughing at the plea∣sant Method which Father La Chaise pre∣crib'd the Dutchess to gain Paradise:  know no body but would easily pur∣ue it, could they confide in the Father's Assurances, or could they believe that the Morals of this worthy Casuist were true. The Dutchess who has a world of Wit, ould not choose but be sensible of it;
but in regard that every body loves  flatter themselves, she took but little no¦tice of it. Certain it is, that withou making the least semblance of it to Fa∣ther Carnè, who would by no means have relish'd the least Jesting upon this parti¦cular, she testify'd an extraordinary Sa¦tisfaction for the Honour which the King had done her, and promis'd him largely whether the thing were feasible, or whe∣ther it would be to her Honour or no. This Dutchess of Portsmouth was th Daughter of the Marquiss of Kerouel,  of the most considerable Gentlemen  the Province of Bretaigne, whose An¦stors possess'd a large Estate in Lan▪ But as there are few Families that sta for many Ages together, this was also  much sunk in Reputation and Authority▪ But for all that, the Marquis had 1500 good Livres a Year, when he present his Daughter to serve the Princess He¦rietta Stuart. 'Tis true, he ow'd as  as he was worth, but he liv'd ne'er a wi the less at his Ease for all that; it being  natural to the Bretaigne Gentlemen, n to pay what they owe, that 'tis a comm Proverb among the People of the Cou¦trey, What, a Gentleman of Bretaigne, a Pay his Debts?
But to return to the Dutchess of Ports∣mouth. She was put to wait upon Ma∣dame, as I said before; where the King of England first saw her, and lov'd her ever after. So that when he came to be restor'd to his Crown, he begg'd her of the King of France and his Sister, who could not deny him so small a Favour. Presently the King sent a Yatch and a Frigate to Brest, to bring her from thence into England. Where her Wit, and her Beauty, and her medling with State-Affairs, rais'd her a great number of Ene∣mies, some in the Parliament, some among the People, and others among the Court-Ladies, among whom there were few that equall'd her in Beauty. But for all this, the Love which she had for the King, or her own Good For∣tune, which was the most likely, enabl'd her to surmount all these Difficulties with an extraordinary Courage. The chief Maxim of her Politicks, was to keep in with the Duke of York, and side with France; and by that means she so well or∣der'd her Business, that she held on a Ruling Favourite till the Death of King Charles II, and should I say, till the Advancement of King WILLIAM, I should not tell an Untruth.
She is moderately Tall, well-Shap'd, hav∣ing the Air & Gate of a Queen. She has the loveliest Mouth and Teeth in the world, and her Smiles penetrate to the bottom of the Heart. When she has a mind to be Complaisant, she is altogether lovely; but the mischief is, that she will not be Complaisant to All. And this is that which has procur'd her such a world of Envy and Ill-will. She has a Wit so piercing, that 'tis impossible to disguize any thing from her. Her prevailing Pas∣sion, or rather her Idol, is Ambition; to which she sacrifices her Repose, her Pleasures, her Honour, and all things in the World. Now in regard she pants after nothing but Honour, and that for several Years she has made a Considerable Figure in the World, she has assum'd such an Air of Grandeur and Business, which she will never leave off as long as she lives. There is no Woman living so Proud as this Woman: but the last Revolution in England, by which she lost above Fifty thousand Crowns a Year, caus'd a great Alteration in her Affairs. However, she put a good Face upon the Matter, in hopes the Times would change again, or else that the King of France would give her a Considerable Pension
for the Service she did him. But that sort of Gratitude is no longer in Fashion: the Partridge must be plum'd while you have her in your Hands; for if once you let her go, 'tis in vain to expect she will ever return. The Dutchess of Portsmouth is a fair Example of this. She defy'd all England, to serve her French King and Countrey; and for that reason was thrown out of all. Since that, she has been re∣duc'd to that necessity, as to sell her Coaches, Horses, Moveables, and to turn off three fourth Parts of her Ser∣vants, no body offering her so much as a Pension of a Thousand Pistoles. So that when all her Hopes fail'd her, and that there was no likelihood of King James's Return, she sent her Son into England; where he became a Protestant, and marry'd the Lord Bellasis's Widow, with whom he had a great Fortune. By which means he is upon as sure Grounds as before; and I think he has done very well. But leaving this Digression, the Dutchess of Portsmouth was so over-joy'd that she was become so necessarily Instrumental to the Designs of a Great Monarch, that in the Evening she return'd this Answer to the King.
SIR, THE Honour which Your Majesty do's me, surpasses far my Hopes and my Am∣bition. I shall have henceforward some good Opinion of my self, since my King has not thought me unworthy to do him the utmost of my most humble Services upon an Occasion of so high Importance. But I dare be bold to say, That Your Majesty did me ample Justice, when you thought that my Zeal and my F∣delity would be inviolable. Though I am re∣mov'd into a Foreign Countrey, yet I have not forgot the Advantage I enjoy, to be b your Subject; nor that my Mother, my Bro∣ther, and all my Relations, are still in your Kingdom. And lastly, That I am beholding to you for my good Fortune, since it was your Majesty your self that gave me to the King by whom I have the Honour to be belov'd. Th Love, Sir, however it may Charm me, dis never as yet render me so Glorious as now, that it has procur'd me the Means to be ser∣viceable to your Majesty; and that you w find by my extraordinary Diligence in perform∣ing your Commands. But in regard the King has not hitherto appear'd to me so we inclin'd, I beg your Majesty to give me a little Time, and to afford me Leisure to take my
Opportunities. 'Tis certain, That many good Designs are ruin'd by too much Precipitation, that might have been brought to a good Con∣clusion by Temporising a little. And I am apt to think, Sir, that this is a Design of the same nature. Should I open the Business to the King at an unseasonable minute, and he should absolutely forbid me never to speak of it more to him, should I not fall into a Mis∣fortune to be unprofitable to your Majesty? Which would be a Grief past Consolation to me. Not but that I believe he will be brought to Reason. But your Majesty your self ac∣knowledges, That the deceas'd Madam, of Glorious Memory, fail'd in her Attempt. And therefore, if you please to give me leave, I will proceed gently in this Affair; which by the Blessing of God will have a happy Issue; at least, I will not be sparing of my Endea∣vours to bring it about. I am with a most profound Respect, SIR, Your Majesty's most humble, &c. London, Decemb. 14. 1670. Afterwards she wrote the following Letter to Father La Chaise.
Most Reverend Father, NEver complain more of the slender Occa∣sions which have made me take the li∣berty to beg Favours of you. That which you have now done me, in perswading his Majesty to honour me with his Commands, is so great, that I shall be oblig'd to you as long as I live. And it would be a violent Trouble to me, not to be able to discharge the Obligations you have laid upon me, did I not know that 'tis alway, your desire I should be beholding to you upon that account. I consent then, since it must be so; but know, Most Reverend Father, That if it were in my power to repay you as great Services as that which you have now done me, by an extreme Acknowledgment, or an earnest Desire to do my Utmost for them from whe I have receiv'd 'em, I should owe you nothing. There is no need, Most Reverend Father, of proposing me magnificent Rewards, to engage me to do my Duty in the Negotiation where∣with you have entrusted me. You will fa by the exact Account which I shall give you of all my Proceedings, that I shall leave no∣thing omitted to bring it to a good Issue, upon no other Motive then my Obedience to the King and to do him faithful Service. But in regard this Affair requires a great deal of Precaution
I think it the best way to proceed slowly; and dexterously to lay hold of Time and Opportu∣nity. This is the Course that I have resolv'd to take till I receive new Orders. London, Decemb. 14. 1670. I am, &c. These Dispatches finish'd, she sent away a Courier immediately, giving him other Letters for the Pretence of his Journey; but sow'd up her Answers with her own Hand, within the Lining of his Coat, under his Badge. In the mean time she sounded every day the King's Inclinations to the Proposal she had made him; and not finding him so averse as she thought he would have been, she expected with Impatience an Opportunity to speak to him in plain English. Nor was it long before she met with one: for the King having demanded a Summ of Money of the Parlament, which they would not grant him, the King complain'd of this Refusal, and told the Duke of Buckingham, That they us'd him like a Boy, whose Parents de∣ny'd
to give him Money, for fear he should mis-spend it. But this was nothing to an Affront which he receiv'd a few Days after. There is a Custom at London, which has been time out of mind, and which, tho' abusive and insolent, is very much in use among the Vulgar Sort. This is a cer∣tain Liberty the People take to abuse all those that go by Water, let their Condi∣tion or Quality be what it will, not ex∣cepting the King and Queen themselves who are often forc'd to hear themselves miscall'd and abus'd, without being able to help themselves. But this is only in Sport, and lasts no longer then they are upon the Water: for as soon as they land, those Injuries cease, and every body has that Respect given 'em which belongs to 'em. This is a thing so delightful to the English, that many times the Court Ladies and Lords will go by Water in an Eve∣ing, to provoke the Water-men and Basket-people to call 'em all to naught, and so return back again as content as Queens. Now it happen'd one Evening, that the King went in his Barge with the Dutchess of Portsmouth. Presently the Canaille having espy'd her, cry'd out, A Whore! A Whore! — and ask'd 'em
whether they were coming from a Bawdy-house, or going to one? and whether they were not the Persons that they saw Dressing at such a Surgeons. All this the King lik'd well enough. But when they came to ask the King how much Money the Parlament had given him to build his Palace? and where he intended to erect it? whether at London, or at Windsor? with a thou∣sand other Impertinencies of the same nature, he could no longer contain his Passion. Par-bleu (said he) Would any but an unhappy King, as I am, endure these Insolencies? I could find in my heart to put 'em all to the Sword. Then the Dutchess put in seasonably, and told him, That he was not to exert his An∣ger against those pitiful Scoundrels, but against the Parlament, that were the Occasion of all this, and who visibly went about to keep him under Pupillage. She repeated the same thing to him when she came home. At what time the King answer'd her, That 'twas true; and that he began to be sensible of it, and that he would take another Course. He told her farther, That he intended to Dis∣solve the Parlament, and Call another that should better understand their Duty.
Sir, (said the Dutchess) Your Majesty seems not to have rightly consider'd the Greatness of the Evil, since you go about to apply such Feeble Remedies. All England; of which the Parlament makes but one part, is animated with the same Spirit, that will prevail no less in another Parlament, when you have Call'd it, then in this. But you must go to the Bottom of the Mischief, and pull it up by the Root, otherwise you do nothing. Afterwards, she laid it before him, That so long as the Parlament found them∣selves supported by the Hollanders, they would be still playing the Masters more and more, till they had confin'd his Au∣thority within such narrow Bounds, that when he would, it should not be in his power to help himself. The King, who was then in the lucky Minute of Per∣swasion, jump'd with the Dutchess in her Sentiments, and told her, He was very much afraid it would come to that at length, and that he was very sorry he did not heark'n to the Proposals that were made him by the King of France. Certain it is (answer'd the Dutchess) that he is the Prince of the World whose Alliance would be most advantagious for your Majesty. He loves you, and is much concern'd for your Honour. He is Potent, and the
only Prince in a Condition to bring down and sink the Hollanders into Perdi∣tion, upon whom you are to look as the only Obstacles of your Majesty's Gran∣deur. The King gave ear to the Dutchess in such a manner, as to make her think that he was no way displeas'd with her Discourse. So that the Dutchess, after a great deal more to the same Tune, and still finding he took all patiently, told him at length, That Father De Carnè, who was arriv'd in the Kingdom in the Quality of a Missionary, had declar'd to her, That the King his Master was extreme sorry that his Majesty would not (accept of his Alliance; That he foresaw, to his great Grief, the unavoidable Mis∣chiefs which this Refusal would draw upon him; and that the said Father had Orders to engage her to speak of it to his Majesty; but that for fear of Displea∣sing him she had always kept her self upon the Reserve, though with a great deal of Reluctancy, because she knew the thing to be of great Importance. Upon that, the King, interrupting her, ask'd her where the Father was? telling her withal, That he should be glad to see him. The next day she sent for him, and the King discours'd with him
a long while. She also presented him to the Duke of York; who made very much of him, and promis'd to do his Utmost with the King. So that in short, the Dutchess of Portsmouth had leave to write to the King, That his Majesty was en∣clin'd to negotiate with him a firm and good Alliance, so soon as he should send any Person to that purpose. And the Treaty was concluded in the Lodgings belonging to the Dutchess of Portsmouth, who had the greatest share in it. The Conditions were, That the King of France should defray the Expences of the Fleet, of which an Accompt should be drawn up, and pay down Four mil∣lions before-hand. That for defraying the other Expences, the King of Eng∣land should begin the War, by setting upon the Smyrna Fleet Homeward-bound, by which he would be a Gainer several Millions; and that at the same time the King of France should enter Holland at the Head of 100000 Men. The Pro∣ject was put in Execution Point by Point; and the Hollanders seeing the King was making great Preparations for the Sea, and not doubting but it would be against them, for that in all likelihood it could not be against France, yet could not fully
perswade themselves of the truth, till they sensibly felt the Blow. They always thought that it tended either to get some Money out of 'em, or else to the re-esta∣blishment of the Prince of Orange, a thing which at that time was in Agitation among themselves; so that without ever so much as stirring, they quietly expected the whole Force of their Enemies, which had like to have utterly over-whelm'd 'em. They then found it too true, That it is not sufficient for a Prince to think himself safe, because he has given no just occasion of a War; and that he ought never to repose so profoundly upon the Faith of Treaties, as not to have Forces always ready to oppose his Ene∣my upon any sudden breach of Peace; or according to the common Proverb, Not to relye so much upon a Neighbour, as not to keep a vigilant Eye over him. But go and preach these Politicks to Peo∣ple, that love their Ease better then their Lives, and because they have renounc'd enlar∣ging their Territories, think all others of their mind, and you may aswell preach to so ma∣ny Statues. In short, this Confidence cost 'em dear: For the King of England had no sooner fallen upon the Smyrna Fleet, but the King of France fill'd all Holland
with Terror, and Dismay. He took Maestricht, Graves, Nimeghen, and pierc'd as far as Utretcht, from whence he beheld but one little spot more to Subjugate.1672. In that City he exercis'd all the Prerogatives of a Sove∣reign Conqueror: He chang'd the Ma∣gistrates, coin'd Money, and there re∣ceiv'd a stately Embassie from England; at what time the Duke of Buckingham, and the Lords Arlington, and Halifax, were sent from the King of England. These things tickl'd La Chaise even to Triumph, and Exultation, insomuch that he could not forbear asking the King, with an Air of Joy, and Content, whi∣ther he would take his Counsel another time. He had also Emissaries in all the Ca∣tholick Courts, more-especially with the Emperor, and the King of Spain, into whose Ears they continually peal'd, That the King had no other Aim in this War, but the Extirpation of Heresie, which he was going to Attack and Combat even in the Trenches, and in the very Arms of her most formidable Champions, the English, and Hollanders; that by a visi∣ble Favour of God, there was a Way found to dis-unite 'em, and that they
would themselves destroy one another: and that the Finger of God, and that Celestial Frenzy which constrain'd the Enemies of the People of God to fall upon one another was herein to be ob∣serv'd. The Emperor, who is a good Prince, and a zealous Catholick, seriously believ'd the Tales which the Jesuits told him, and making it a Case of Conscience to op∣pose such Holy Arms, remain'd in a Le∣thargy that surpriz'd all the World, and warm'd himself at the Fire which de∣vour'd his Nighbours House, never mind∣ing the Danger of his own. At length the Elector of Brandenburgh, a wise, and couragious Prince, could no longer be a Spectator in a Quarrel that so nearly concern'd him. He was the first that drew his Sword to succour poor Holland, then at the last Gasp; and so lively laid before the Emperor the terrible Consequences of the King's Vi∣ctories, that he oblig'd him to declare open War, and to send a good Army to the Rhine, under the Conduct of Montecu∣culi, with Orders to join the Elector of Brandenburg, and fight Turenne, after he had well tyr'd his Army; which would have extreamly weak'nd the King's For∣ces,
and reduc'd him to a Necessity of quitting his Conquests to defend his own Country. This unexpected Resolution of the Emperor, extreamly incumber'd him; for La Chaise had always promis'd the contrary; nor was it a small Vexati∣on, and Disappointment to the King. But La Chaise bid him be of good Com∣fort, for that he had an infallible Secret to make him break up the Campaign without fighting a stroak; as he did, by Counterfeiting a private Order from the Emperor to Montecuculi, which forbid him positively to join the Elector, what∣ever Commands he had receiv'd to the contrary, unless they imported an Ex∣press, and particular Revocation of the Order he had sent him. And thus the Business was carried on. During the time that La Chaise resided at Rome, he had for his Companion a cer∣tain Italian Fryer, whose Name was Francisco Pironni, a Graver once, and an Ingenious Artist in his Trade, but withal, the greatest Cheat, and Rogue, that ever the Earth bore. La Chaise had made use of this Fellow upon sundry Occasi∣ons; wherein he shew'd such Proofs of his Ability, and Industry, that he thought him able to gain him many Creatures
among the Jesuits in Germany, whether he sent him only upon that Design. Pironni discharg'd his Trust so effectually, that by means of his Intriegues, La Chaise had settl'd his best Correspondencies at Vienna, and it was to himself that they had re∣course to counterfeit the Order which I have mention'd. They had found a way to put into his Hands some old Pattent, where was both his Imperial Ma∣jesty's Sign Manual, and his Seal af∣fix'd; and both the one and the other were counterfeited so exactly well, that the Emperor himself would have been de∣ceiv'd. So that Montecuculi, who had in∣curr'd his Indignation by his repeated Refusals to join the Electoral Army, was absolutely justified by shewing his counterfeit Orders. This Villain had grav'd the Seal upon a Steel of the same Bigness, and cut the Sign Manual upon a Copper-Plate; which being apply'd to the Paper, made the Impression so exact, that it was impossible to discover the Cheat, though it had been known before-hand. This being done, and the Order written above the Sign Manual, a Courier's Habit was procur'd for Pironni, and he carry'd it himself to the General, and then return'd to his Convent, where
it was not to be thought that any body would look for him. And this was the Reason that the Imperial Arms had so lit∣tle Success that Year: And had not the Prince of Orange been so prudent, as young as he was, instead of ceasing to besiege Twenty Towns one after ano∣ther, to march directly to Bon, which he took, and open'd the Pass of Flanders to the Germans, whom he put into a con∣dition to make a powerful Diversion, we had the greatest Reason to expect, that all the Remainder of the Seven Provinces would have fallen into the Hands of the French. But this Course which the Prince took, broke all their Measures in such a manner, that they were forc'd to abandon all, except Maestricht, and Graves. And as it seldom happens that one Mis∣fortune comes alone, it so fell out, that the Parlament of England, beholding this turn of Fortune, took courage, and presented so many several Addresses to the King, that he was forc'd to make a Peace with the Dutch whether he would or no. However, he wrote first of all to the King of France, to let him know, that he could not avoid concluding the Peace, by reason of the Importunitie of
his Subjects. I could produce several Copies of the Letters written upon this occasion; but because I would not be Prolix, this shall suffice from the Dut∣chess of Portsmouth, to Father La Chaise. Reverend Father, 'TIS but some few Days agoe, That the King of England was constrain'd to Sign a Peace full sore against his Will. I cannot tell what his Majesty of France may think of it, but I cannot forbear telling you, That in truth, he has no Reason to take it Ill, considering how long it was before he came to a final Resolution. He stav'd it off to the very last; and without doubt, had ne∣ver consented, had he not had certain Intelli∣gence, that the Prince of Orange, finding Holland free and quitted, began to listen to the Proposals of the Parlament, who, as your Reverence knows, had invited him into the Kingdom. We were perswaded till now, That his youthful Years, which seem'd not to be ripe for great Enterprizes, together with his natural moderation, and averseness to Broils, and Quarrels, would not have permitted him to give ear on that side; but since we under∣stand, That if he were not fully resolv'd, yet his Wavering was enough to continue the King's
Jealousies, and that the States did no way disapprove his making a Descent, which in∣deed would be the most advantagious Course they could take. The News therefore of his Hesitation, put the King of England upon coming to an ab∣solute Determination, who could not in pru∣dence venture the Invading of his Kingdom by the only Enemy that he had most reason to fear. A Revolution like that, would have engag'd the King to a Diversion that must have been much to his Prejudice, whereas now he may interpose, as a Mediator, and procure his Majesty an advantagious Peace if he thinks it convenient; or if not, he may be in a condition to do him all possible Services under-hand; and of this your Reverence may assure his Majesty. His Britannick Majesty having order'd me to send you word, that notwithstanding the forc'd Peace which he has made, he will never depart from that Alli∣ance which he has contracted with him, n from his Interests which he looks upon as his own. He has given a convincing Proof of his Constancy, in rejecting the Addresses that were made him, to repeal the Act which was made sometime since at your Request, in fa∣vour of the Nonconformists; under which Pretence, he also protects the Catholicks, and their Meetings. He will do it for the future
as much as he can; of which your Reverence may be confidently assur'd, I am, &c. The King who could not have had a more favourable Mediator then his Britannick Majesty, willingly consen∣ted to referr his Interests to him, and Sir William Temple was sent to the States to propose his Mediation, which they presently accepted. Spain, and the Em∣pire, were more Nice, and the Prince of Orange who had no kindness for a Treacherous Peace, started all the Diffi∣culties that could be thought of, which was the Reason, that the Thing was pro∣crastinated for some time. Afterwards he fought that famous Battel of Seneff, against the Prince of Condè whom he had challeng'd to a fair Field for Fifteen Days together; while Condè, somewhat Inferi∣our in number, kept himself within his Trenches, till at length the Prince of Orange, seeing it was impossible to follow him, Decamp'd. Condè, who well knew that the ways were very narrow through which he was to pass, let him go till he thought his Van-guard, and main Body were out of reach, and then came out of his Hole, fell upon the Rear-guard, and
utterly defeated it; and had he been so much Master of himself to have stopt there, the Honour of the Victory had been solely his. But he had too long with∣stood that martial Heat that importun'd him to be doing; and as a Torrent stopt for a few Days by some certain Mound, becomes more terrible, and violent when once it makes way; so Condè's Warlike Ardour, that had been bounded by his Prudence for Fifteen Days, was no sooner at Liberty, but bearing now predomi∣nant Sway, it made him lose the greatest part of the Advantage which he had won before: For having pass'd the narrow Lanes, and being got into the Plain, he found the whole Dutch Army drawn up in good order, which receiv'd him so co∣ragiously that he lost about 15000 Men, and was constrain'd to retire, in great Danger to have been pursu'd, but that Night coming on, secur'd him. The next Year Turenne was kill'd at a time that he thought he had had Montecuculi so fast that he could not have escap'd him. Condè left the Army in Flanders to supply his room, leaving the Command of the Army to Luxem∣burgh, who so well order'd his Business,
that the Prince of Orange could not force him to a Battel; only he took Binch, and demolish'd it. Toward the end of the Year 1676. the Commissioners met at Nimeg∣hen, to negotiate the Treaty of Peace. Thither came the Plenipotentiaries from the Emperor, from the Electors, from the Duke of Lorrain, from Hanover, from Sweden, from Danemark, from France, and Holland, and England was Mediatrix, which made one of the most noble As∣semblies that had been known. Never∣theless, whole Years were spent in regu∣lating the Preliminaries, all which time the War was carry'd on vigorously, and always to the King's Advantage. For he took Condè, Bouchain, Valenciennes, Cam∣brai, and won the Battel of Cassel, which was attended with the Taking of St. O∣mer. This prosperous Success alarm'd the Parlament of England, and forc'd 'em to desire his Brittanick Majesty to enter into a War; and that with so much Importu∣nity as gave him to understand that he must resolve upon it. To that purpose they presented Two Addresses to him, laying before him the Necessity of oppo∣sing
such a Torrent of Victory, more especially in Flanders; beseech∣ing him to make an offensive League with the Hollanders.1677. These Importunities very much displeas'd the King, who fear'd nothing so much as that he should be constrain'd to it. But at last, the Marriage of the Prince of Orange with his Niece being consumma∣ted, there was a Necessity for him to make a fair shew, the best he could; so that after long Conferences with him concer∣ning the Peace, he consented to the Ad∣dresses of his Parlament and promis'd to declare War against France, if she stood too high upon her Terms. Thereupon, Commissions were given out for the rai∣sing of 20000 Men; and Soldiers came in so fast, that in Six Weeks the Levies were compleat: so eager were the Eng∣lish for a War with France. In the mean time, the Dutchess of Portsmouth gave a punctual Account of all things to Father La Chaise, who not knowing what other Remedy to apply, told the King, That now was the time if ever, to set his Exchequer at work,1678. in regard his dazling Louidores had a strange O∣peration upon the King of England. The
Dutchess therefore had her part given her, smartly to lay before the King the Reasons that with-held him from declaring War against the King of France his good Friend, and his only Friend that could stand by him in a case of Necessity: That it was but a bad piece of Policy to break absolutely with him, notwith∣standing his repeated Promises, meerly to comply with his Parliament that was in no condition to hurt him: That he was going the way to ruin all that he had been labouring with so much Trouble, for so many Years, for his own, and the Inte∣rest of Religion, not considering the Honour he would lose of being a Medi∣ator, and Umpire of one of the most Important Wars that had been known of a long time, and leave that Advan∣tage to some petty Prince, whose Fa∣vour he would be afterwards oblig'd to sue for under-hand. The Dutchess also had Orders, when she had said as much as she could say, to offer him Twelve Millions, to give the more weight, and Force to her Ar∣guments. Now in regard this Contrivance was well lay'd, it had its Effect: The King suffer'd himself to be perswaded, and
told the Dutchess withal, that she was the only Woman of the World that had the right Notion of things, and spoke the most to the purpose in whatever she discours'd upon. And now the Design of the War was to be quite broken off whatever it cost; and the way to bring it about was to gain some Members of the Lower-House, who, when the King desir'd Money for the Payment of his Men, propos'd that there might be none granted him, till he had given 'em Satis∣faction about the Affairs of Religion. The King made a shew of being very much incens'd at this Resolution, then which there could be nothing more welcome to his Soul, in regard it was the fairest Pretence in the World that he could make use of, to put off his making Wa with France. Add to this, That the King of France, who was afraid, least the King should be constrain'd to enter into a War against him whether he would or no, as it was very probable,1679. considering that he could not avoid making an au∣thentick Treaty with the Dutch resolv'd to conclude a particular Peace with Holland, not questioning but that when Holland was once separated from
the League, the rest would be easily brought to Reason. By this Treaty the King oblig'd him∣self to restore Six Places in Flanders to the Spaniards, and to quit 'em within Fourteen Days after it was Sign'd. The Emperor and the Confederates loudly complain'd of Holland, for quitting 'em in that manner, they who had enter'd into the War, meerly in Respect to her, and for her sake. Which oblig'd the King of France to send Luxemberg before Mons to frighten the States, and hinder 'em from altering their Resolutions. And at the same time he gave 'em to under∣stand, That he would not quit the Pla∣ces, before they had engag'd the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburgh to give Satisfaction to the King of Sweden his Confederate. But that was no more then a false foin to procure the Peace with more Security. For when the Day came that he was to abandon the Places, the King's Embas∣sadors told those of the States, that they would consent to it. So that the Embassadors not having time to write, either to the Provinces, or the States for new Instructions, preferr'd Peace in that pressing Conjuncture, be-, fore War. For the King's Ministers
gave 'em no more then a Days time to determine. After which, they declar'd, They would retire, and enter no farther into any Negotiation. The Peace, then, was concluded, and the Six Places in pursuance of it, were quitted, according to Agreement. The League being thus divided, all the Con∣federates were oblig'd to come to a Trea∣ty by themselves, and every body made the best of their Market which was pas∣sably cheap. Only the poor Elector of Brandenburgh, who had so generously thrust himself into the War, was the last, and left alone to bear the whole weight of the King's Arms. But in regard there was no equality between the Parties, he was glad to treat likewise, and to surren∣der to the Swede all that he had taken from him. Thus ended the War that had been kindl'd, and fomented by the Instigati∣ons of Father La Chaise; who no soon∣er saw Europe in Tranquility on that side, but he labour'd to the utmost of his Pow∣er, to disturb the Repose of it in another part. So true it is, that this busie Bone∣feu finds no rest, but in the ruin of other Mens Quiet; no Pleasures, but in their Calamities. Never was he so jocund,
and blithe, as when he had kindl'd a Flame in all the Four Corners of the World, and could say to himself, Hoc est Opus Meum: "This is my Work. This being then the Humour of the Man, we must not wonder at the Misfortunes, and Divisions that have hitherto Reign'd in the several States of Europe, and which we must expect will never be at an end so long as he lives. Till the Year 1673. he confin'd his Disturbances of Soveraign States to the Persecutions of the Huguenots, the Jan∣senists, and several other Persons of Worth, and Honour. But these petty Crimes not appearing Glorious enough for an ungracious Wretch so signally di∣stinguish'd as himself, he resolv'd to at∣tack the Holy Father, and the Church it self: as being resolv'd to make 'em sen∣sible, That he was destin'd to be the Plague of Mankind. I omit for this time, the black Attempts, and Tragical Revolutions which he medi∣cated in his mind, from that time forward, and which blaz'd out a little after: I shall speak of 'em in their Order. At pre∣sent, the Series of time engages me to say something of the Regale, which he erected at length upon the Ruine of so
many fair and ancient Churches, with∣out being mov'd in the least at the deplo∣rable Misfortunes which it trail'd after it. But how should such things move him, who made those Misfortunes the only Mark at which he aim'd. The Regale is the Right which the Kings of France have of nominating to vacant Benefices, and to enjoy the Reve∣nues of 'em, during their vacancy. 'Tis pretended, That this Right is grounded upon Custome; and that in the first Ages of Christianity, the Kings of France made choice of their Bishops at their own Pleasure. But however it were, this is certain, That the Councils of Constance, and Basle, from whence the Pragmatic Sanction was drawn, otherwise ordain'd the manner of providing for 'em, and decreed, That for the time to come, the Clergy, and the People should elect their Pastors, and their Bishops, and that they should be also Consecrated and Or∣dain'd by the Metropolitan, and the rest of the Bishops of the Ecclesiastical Pro∣vince, without having any need of go∣ing to Rome: after which they should dis∣pose of the Inferiour Benefices within the Extent of their Diocess, or Parish.
Now in regard this Pragmatic was equally burdensome, as well to the Popes, as Kings, Pope Leo X. and Francis I. made an Agreement together, That the No∣mination to Benefices, and the disposal of the Revenues during their Vacancy, should belong to the Crown; and that all Lapses, Anticipations, and the Right of Admitting Resignations should be in the Power of the Pope: so that to speak the naked. Truth, they shar'd between 'em the Spoils of the poor Church of God. This, in short, is the Original and Extent of this Prerogative; which went no farther then the Lands, and Provin∣ces that were under the French Domi∣nion, at the time of the Agreement. For since that time, several have fall'n to the Crown that were not subject to it, no more then are certain Congregations, as that of St. Maur, St. Francis, St. Domi∣nic, &c. The General Council of Lion also, has made a Decision upon this Point; and being desirous to prevent Abuses that might follow, forbad the In∣troducing the Regale into such Churches where it was not in use. And the Liber∣ties of those Churches have been since acknowledg'd, and confirm'd by several Ordinances, Decrees, and Declarations
of Philip the Fair, Philip de Valeis, Lew∣is XII. Henry IV. and Lewis XIII. which are preserv'd in the Chamber of Ac∣compts in Paris. However, in regard it is one of the most beautiful Flowers of the Crown, Cardinal Richlieu, who was the First who laid the Foundation of that Grandeur to which it is now ar∣riv'd, comprehended, among the rest of his Projects, the Extending it over all the Monarchy. In short, in the Year 1637. he began to set a-foot, by the King's Counsel, the general Contest a∣bout the Regale; at what time there was a Decree of the 6th. of October, Ordain∣ing all Bishops, and Archbishops that pretended to be exempt from the Right of the Regale, to send to the Registry of the Council, the Titles upon which they claim'd their Privilege; and which gran∣ted a surceasing of Processes, su'd out, or to be su'd forth upon that Occasion. The Syndics of the Provinces of Langue∣doc, Guienne, Provence, and Dauphinate, presently obey'd the Order: Protesting, Nevertheless, That by that Proceeding they did not go about to prejudice the Liberties of those Provinces, which were not oblig'd to produce any Evidences, provided they were not the Eviden∣ces
of Privileges, or Immunities gran∣ted by their Kings, but of Liberties, and Franchises more ancient then the Monar∣chy it self, in Possession of which, their Ancestors came under the French Do∣minion, only that what they did was to shew their ready Obedience, and Re∣spect to his Majesty. This Affair, tho' it was not altogether neglected, yet lay in a manner dormant, till the Year 1673. that Father La Chaise, the Author of all the Misfortunes of Christendom, put it in∣to the King's Head to move this Stone, under which there lay a most venemous Serpent. But in regard this Matchiavi∣list understands, that the most certain way to please Princes, is to procure 'em tem∣poral Advantages, he never minds at what rate they are to be purchas'd. Besides, he was afraid least the War wherein he had engag'd his Majesty should Miscarry, and therefore sought which way to render himself necessary to the King, upon some other Score, thereby to prevent the Dis∣grace that threaten'd him. At this time it was then, that the King finish'd the general Claim by a Decree in Fbruary, Importing, That the King de∣clar'd the Right of the Regale to be Ina∣lienable, and without the compass of Pre∣scription,
and to belong universally to him, in all the Bishopricks, and Arch∣bishopricks of his Kingdom, Territories, and Countries under his Obedience, those only excepted which are exempt by Titre Onereux; that is to say, by being lyable to particular Duties, and charges of Fines, Annuities, &c. In pursuance of which, His Majesty Ordains, That the Bishops, and Archbishops, shall be Bound in Two Months, from the Day that they take their Oaths of Fidelity, to take out Let∣ters, Pattents of Discharge, and to Regi∣ster 'em in the Chamber of Accompts of Paris, and that they who have taken their Oaths of Fidelity before, and have not obtain'd their Letters Pattents of Dis∣charge, shall be bound to take 'em out, and Register 'em within Two Months in the said Chamber of Accompts; after which, and for defect of yielding Obedi∣ence within that time, their Benefices sub∣ject to the Right of the Regale, and de∣pendant upon Royal Collations shall be de∣clar'd void, and subject to a new Grant by virtue of the Regale. And by another Declaration in the same Month of February, the King in order to the Execution of the preceding Decree, Authorises a Roll, containing a
Regulation of the Fees which shall be pay'd into the Chamber of Accompts by the Archbishops, and Bishops of the Provinces of Languedoc, Dauphinate, Guienne, and Province, for the Registring the Letters of Discharge, which they shall be bound to take forth. This Declaration, which was procur'd by the pernicious Counsells of the Con∣fessor, was the Apple of Discord which divided all the Clergy of France, and the Pandora's Box, out of which have flown all the Mischiefs that have over-whelm'd in a manner, all Europe, for near these Twenty Years A Work truly worthy the Author of it, and which he looks up∣on without question, with the same Eye as Nero formerly beheld the Flame which he himself had kindl'd to consume the City of Rome. The greatest part of the Court-Pre∣lates, and Bishops, People devoted to Ambition, and their Pleasures, obey'd without Murmuring; and having ob∣tain'd their Pattents of Release, which they were order'd to take out, caus'd 'em to be Register'd with their Oaths of Fi∣delity. But others, and among the rest, the Bishops of Cahors, Aleth, and Pamiers, greatly signaliz'd themselves in refusing
to submit, considering that their Submis∣sion would be a tacit Consent to the King's Pretensions, or rather of his Mi∣nisters, who were altogether unjust. Thereupon, the Court sent to every one of those Bishops certain Ecclesiasticks, preferr'd, by virtue of the Regale, to some Benefices in their Cathedrals, which were possess'd by others in Canoni∣cal Possession for several Years by lawful Titles, and upon the refusal of the Chap∣ters to admit 'em, order'd 'em to be in∣stall'd by force. These manifest Intru∣sions oblig'd those worthy Prelates, the Latter of which Two was 70 Years of Age, and had been Bishops, the one 38, the other 34 Years, during which time they had render'd themselves vene∣rable for their Exemplary Piety, and a Residence in their Diocesses so assiduous, that they were never seen to appear at Court; these Intrusions, I say, enforc'd those Prelates to issue forth Ordinances against the newly preserr'd; and after that, to write several reitterated Letters to the King, Cardinal Bonsi, and the Arch∣bishop of Paris. They also wrote to the Assembly of the Clergy, which met in 1675. but there was no Favour to be shewn 'em, and the Clergy rejected their
Complaints, not vouchsafing so much as to take Cognizance of the Affair: Nor was it possible they should expect any o∣ther, in regard the Archbishop of Paris, whose Interests, and Father La Chaise's, were inseparably link'd together, presi∣ded in that Assembly, and for that Cardi∣nal Bonsi, Archbishop of Narbonne, and by Consequence, the principal Person concern'd, was gain'd to all Intents and Purposes, and the Bishops of Montpellier, and Beziers, were Commissioners from that Province. So that word was sent to the Dissenting Prelates, that the Affair having been decided in the King's Coun∣cil, where the Clergy's Agents were pre∣sent, and consenting, it was in vain to make any Opposition. As if the Agents had had sufficient Power to disannull by their Authority, the sacred Rights of so many ancient Churches. Toward the end of the same Year, the Bishop of Pamiers was forc'd to make a Journey to Court, for the dispatch of some Business which he could not dis∣pence withal,1675. and the Dignity of Archdeacon of the Cathe∣dral Church being vacant by the Death of the last Incumbent: Father La Chaise who had notice of it, having a De∣sign
to surprize the Bishop, propos'd to him to procure him Letters of Dispatch▪ in favour of a Priest, whom he lov'd very well, and upon whom he made no que∣stion but the choice would fall. He of∣fer'd likewise to expedite the same Grants for other Beneficiaries of the same Chap∣ter, who had not as yet obtain'd 'em, to which the good Bishop immediately con∣sented; but afterwards considering the Consequences that would ensue, and the Engagement which he laid upon his Church, he fearlesly retracted his word, and sent the Father word, That he could not comply with his Desires. This was cause sufficient for that Hypocrite to per∣secute the Bishop even to Rage, and Fu∣ry. He peal'd it in the King's Ears, That he was a Rebel, a Seditious Incendiary, who aim'd at nothing but to stir up the Clergy, and all his Subjects to Revolt: So that notwithstanding all his Oaths of Allegiance, all his Protestations, and Sub∣missions to the King, he always look'd upon him as a disaffected Person. But whatever Credit La Chaise had in the Assembly of the Clergy, when the King's Prerogatives were in Dispute, for the upholding of which he spoke with great freedom, nevertheless he could not pre∣vent
their unanimous Resolution to write a ong and learned Letter to the new Pope Inno∣ent XI. to lay before him the horrid Impie∣ies of the Casuists Morals, and the Doctrine of Improbability; wherein they are set forth after a manner equally Strenuous, and Elo∣quent. The Archbishop of Paris, who is of that Religion more then the Jesuits themselves, oppos'd it very much, as well for his own particular Interests, as out of Respect to the Society:1678. but that signify'd no∣thing to the purpose, so that a Draught of the Letter was sent to all the Prelates for them to sign it. The Bishop of Aleth was one of the first that receiv'd it; who having throughly examin'd it, found something in it, which he thought burthensome to the Episcopal Autho∣rity, which he alter'd before he sign'd it, and sent it to the rest of the Bishops. La Chase, over-joy'd at this Accident, inform'd his Ma∣esty of it, painting out the Thing in the black∣est Colours he could invent; and giving him o understand, That it was no more then a Cabal that tended meerly to the Disturbance of the State, and to revive the past Disputes, nd Contests. So that the Intendants of Ju∣stice had Orders to write to the Bishops not to sign it, if it were sent 'em; which broke all the Measures of the Assembly, and left La Chaise Triumphant, tho' his Triumphs stopt ot there. For he caus'd all the Canons that ook the Bishops part to be banish'd, and sup∣ly'd their rooms with others, put in by Force,
notwithstanding all their Ecclesiastical Orders: and in regard he had a particular Spite at the Bishop of Panniers, he caus'd the Revenue of his Church, which he chiefly made use of for the Relief of the Poor, to be taken from him: So that the poor Man fell into great Necessity; and tho' he wrote to the King to let him know his Condition, it signi∣fy'd nothing,1679. in regard the King was pre-possess'd. Now because La Chaise continu'd still to give out Grants of the Ca∣nonships in the Chapter of his Cathedral which was regular, but would nevertheless become secular by those Intrusions (all which was a great Grief to the good old Man) he resolv'd to write him the following Letter. Dear Father, I Have been designing for some time to write to yee; but on the one side I thought it would be to little purpose; besides, that Peo∣ple might think I complain'd of your Conduct in my regard, rather by the Inducement of some particular Interest, or some peculiar Dis∣content, then out of any Zeal to justifie the Rights of the Church. Nevertheless, that God may not lay it to my Charge, that I have omitted any Means that may contribute to the good Success of the Affair, wherein I  by Providence engag'd, for the Liberty of his Spouse, I submitted to the Counsel of my
Friends who advis'd me to write this Letter, leaving it to God to bless it with that Success as may be most suitable to the Designs of his Providence. Certainly if I had any reason of Distast, either against you, or your Socie∣ty, I have met with occasions enough, where∣in, methought, the Love of Truth, Justice, and the publick Good, enforc'd me to com∣plain, and my Complaints appear'd Just to all moderate Persons; but 'twas my Opinion, That Christian Humility, and Charity re∣quir'd, that I should keep silence, till some Necessity, not to be dispenc'd with, oblig'd me to speak. Not only my Profession of a Chri∣stian, but the Vow of my Order, are sufficient Engagements, tho' you, or your Order had any cause of Offence against me, to restrain your Revenge, to the prejudice of the Glory of God, and the Interest of his Church. You may be pleas'd to call to mind, Dear Father, that when I had the Happiness to see you at Paris, you told me, discoursing in reference to that Ecclesiastical Croud that bow'd and ing'd to yee for Preferment, that they were gaping Wolves. With what Conscience can you then bestow upon such Wolves what is provided for the Flock of innocent Sheep. Nor have you stay'd till those Wolves open'd their Mouths, to demand the Prey which you have caus'd to be thrown into their Chops;
for as the Canonships of my Cathedral bind to a regular Life, which God had given me the Grace to re-establish in my Chapter, by the Authority of the Holy See, and the King's together, they who never desire Benefices but for the Revenues sake, would never have minded the looking after those, that oblige to Vows of Poverty, and Community of Li∣ving, had not you pre-possess'd, sollicited, and drawn 'em on in hopes of procuring the Secu∣larization of that Church. I know well, That Father Ferier had the same Design of Secularization upon this, and other Churches▪ but the Difficulty he met with at Rome, and the Opposition of the Parties Interested, and legal∣ly possess'd, ought to inform yee sufficiently of the Will of God in this particular. So that I cannot apprehend upon what grounds, you set your self to be an Instrument for the Destru∣ction of a Work, which your own Brethren, whose Testimony cannot be suspected in this, have been oblig'd to approve and commend it upon several Occasions, by reason of that Glo∣ry which is done thereby to God, and the Edi∣fication which redounds to the Church. Much less can I apprehend upon what score you could publickly say, That God would be more glori∣fy'd if the Doors of my Church were shut up. Dear Father, What is become of that profound Respect, that Submission with which you for∣merly
reverenc'd the Holy Church, and the Holy See, that now you go about to destroy what both have establish'd; and if it be true, as some give cut, not only without Authority, but against the King's Consent. For 'tis observ'd, That in the last Brevets which you have got dispatch'd for the Canonships of my Cathedral, that the Clause formerly inserted at the beginning, which binds the Persons preferr'd, to take upon 'em the Ha∣bit, or to admit themselves Noviciates, is left out, and that Expedients are also found out to exempt those who were bound to those Ceremo∣nies by their Brevets. There are also several Intelligent Persons, and your good Friends, who attribute this Conduct of yours to a De∣sign to securalize my Church, notwithstanding Mine, and the Opposition of my Chapter, and without any Authority from the Pope. Is this the acquittal of the Promise you made me, as well for those whom you have engag'd in those Benefices, as to some Ecclesiasticks of my Diocess? Think you the Publick does not ob∣serve how you abuse that Belief which your Quality of Confessor fixes in the King's Mind; not only in causing him unknowingly to violate the Rights of the Church, but also to Autho∣rize in his Name, those pieces of Injustice, which would hardly be believ'd, did they not appear in open Acts of Violence. 'Tis impossi∣ble, Reverend Father, that you should have
solidly study'd the Business of the Regale, and not understand, That the King has not that Prerogative in my Diocess, no more then in se∣veral others, so that you do an extraordinary prejudice to my Church, in perswading his Ma∣jesty to assume it to himself. Now if you are not fully acquainted with this Matter, How is it possi∣ble for yee to be so confidently Instrumental to our being handled upon this Occasion with the same Rigour, as if we were Enemies of the Church, and State. Nay tho' it were true, that the King had this Privilege, which it is certain he has not, Can you have the Conscience to deal is such a rugged, and irregular manner, so con∣trary to all the Laws of God, and Man, and a Bishop, and a Chapter, whose only Crime was their Zeal a little too ardent in defending the Rights of the Church, and their Obedi∣ence to a general Council. The shortness of this Letter permits me not to set down a Thousand Reasons that prove invinceably the Justice of my Cause, and the ill Usage we have suffer'd for so long time under this Pretence. Besides that, I find you have not so much need of being well inform'd, as well inclin'd, in reference to  Which lies not in any Earthly Power, but in God alone to do. For your fear of incurring the King's Indignation, should he come to un∣derstand how he has been Flatter'd by him who had a greater Obligation then any other
Man, to tell him Truths so necessary for his Salvation, and his real Honour; your Re∣luctancy to confess that you have done amiss; your Desire to Disgrace a Bishop, who cannot but disapprove your Maxims, because he does not find 'em conformable to those of Jesus Christ, and his blessed Saints, are Difficulties not to be surmounted by any other, then by him who is the Lord of all Hearts. Believe me, Dear Father, for as I have the Honour to be a Bishop, I have the Privilege to give yee good Advice; You have reason to fear incurring not only the Indignation of God, in violating the Indignation of his Spouse, but also the An∣ger of the King, who is too quick-sighted not to come to the Knowledge one Day of these Things; and too just, not to condemn the per∣nicious Actions to which your Counsels have bow'd him contrary to his Inclinations. And instead of God, and the King's being well pleas'd with your performing the Office of a Con∣fessor, and solidly labouring the Salvation of his Soul, whose Conscience you have in Charge, They whom you unfortunately expose to Cen∣sures would be more engag'd to yee, if you would exhort 'em to make themselves worthy of Benefices, and not to possess themselves of 'em, in defiance of the Ecclesiastical Canons. And all good Men would bless God for seeing you employ your Credit for the Good of the
Church, by perswading his Majesty to content himself with enjoying the Prerogative as his Predecessors did, according to the limitation of the Council of Lion. I conclude, Dear Fa∣ther, with laying before yee, That it would become your Charity to let a poor Bishop, now 70 Years of Age, and by whose labouring 34 Years in the Function of his Episcopacy, you may well guess him not to be far from his end, to dye in Peace; and not suffer an As∣sembly of Persons who have consecrated them∣selves to God, not without the extraordinary Edification of many, to be dissipated by Peo∣ple the visible Enemies of a regular Life. I hope that God will give you the Grace to be Faithful till Death; and for my part, Dear Father, however you deal by me, I shall never cease to be your Servant, Francis Bishop of Pamiers. This Letter wrought no other Effect, then only that it more incens'd La Chaise against him, who persever'd in his Hatred to that de∣gree, that after his Death, he revengd himself upon him in the Person of his Grand Vicar, whom he caus'd to be condemn'd to death by a Decree of the Parlament of Tholos as guilty of High-Treason, because he oppos'd the Violences of those that were preferr'd by virtue of the Regale, and caus'd him to be Ex∣ecuted in Effigie, clad in his sacerdotal Habit.
The famous M. Anthony Arnault, Doctor of the Sorbonne, was one of those who could not approve the Regale. All the world knows what a terrible War he maintain'd a∣gainst the Jesuits,1680. for above 30 Years together, in defence of Jansenism, of which he was the Chieftain. However, he was still supported against their Efforts, by the means of his Nephew, M. de Pompone, Secreta∣ry of State But in the Year 1680. La Chaise having render'd him a suspicious Person to the King who was made believe, that he was the stiffest Antiregalist in France, and to be the very Person that had Poyson'd, in such a man∣ner, the Bishop of Aleth, and Pamiers, he fell into utter Dsgrace, together with his Ne∣phew, who had disclos'd to him, at the time that the King put forth his Declarations for the Regale, That M. Boucherat, Counsellor of State, had given his Advice in Council, That the Churches should be left free in the Possessi∣on of their Immunities, and Privileges, with∣out any farther Disturbance. Arnault gave Intelligence of this to the Pope, who could not forbear to insert this Circumstance in a Brief which he wrote some Years after to the King. The King was much surpriz'd at it, and endeavour'd to sift out through what Channel this Secret was convey'd. But Father La Chaise soon unfolded the Riddle, assuring him that it was his Secretary Pompone's Dis∣covery, who was confin'd to his own House; and Arnault his Uncle, was order'd to quit St. James's Street where he liv'd, with a Prohi∣bition
to have any Assemblies in his Ho Upon which, misdoubting the Consequence of such a harsh beginning, and fearing to be put into the Bastille, he retir'd into Holland for good and all, where he compos'd his Apolo∣gy for the Politicks of the Clergy; which the very well done, and to the King's Advantage was however condemn'd, and a poor Prie committed to the Bastille, at the prosecution of La Chaise, for endeavouring to publish some few Copies in France. And the Reason that oblig'd him to it, was not only be∣cause the Book justify'd the Proceedings of the Antiregalists, and particularly of the Bishops of Aleth, and Pamiers, but because M. Arnault was the Author of it. This is  Quality peculiar to Father La Chaise, that he would condemn any Book i'th' World, tho' written never so much to the Advantage of Him, and his Party, if he had an Antipathy against the Author. And this was visibly to be seen at the same time: For the famous Mi∣nister M. de la Rocque, compos'd an excellent Treatise of the Right of the Regale, and which is one of the most strenuous Pieces that have been seen upon that Subject, nevertheless the Confessor forbid him to publish it, that it might not be said of him, That he made use of a Heretick Pen, to support the King's Pre∣rogatives against the Church: and perhaps i that he did not do so much amiss. The same could not be said of M. Chastai, who was a good Catholick. He had compos'd a very excellent Piece, entitl'd, The true Er∣plication
of the Concordat: Wherein he made out a very specious Right of Nomination to several Benefices. The King had also appoin∣ted Commissioners to examine it; but what avail'd all this to a Person whom La Chaise hated. He was forbid to print his Book, and that was all the Reward he had for his Pains, to have labour'd a long time to no purpose, and perhaps against his Conscience. Nor were they the Churches only endow'd with Benefices which La Chaise resolv'd to Subjugate under the Yoak of the Regale, but the Monasteries of the Urbanist Monks of the Order of St. Francis, who ever since their In∣stitution, had been Priories Elective only from Three Years, to Three Years. The whole Congregation of St. Maur, among the Bene∣dictines, under-went the same Fate. The Abbot of Clugni, who had been Canonically elected, was expell'd, and the Monks en∣forc'd to receive the Cardinal of Bouillon, who took possession of it. By virtue of the same Prerogative, the Abbies of Chezal-Benoist, which had been united to that Congregation by the Authority of the Holy See, and the Grants of several Kings, had every one a se∣cular Abbot impos'd upon 'em, as had also a Thousand others, too tedious here to be inser∣ted. All these Intrusions were enforc'd, where Residence was absolutely necessary; for Ex∣ample, upon Nunneries, and all this by Force of Arms, and the Ministry of a 100 Dragoons, who after they had broke open the Gates of the Nunneries, committed a 1000 Disorders,
and many times most horrid Violences, and Sacrileges. These Exorbitances, at length, reach'd the Holy Father's Ears, by the Complaints of the Monks and Nuns, at the same time that the Bi∣shops of Pamiers, and Aleth, made the same Lamentations. And it griev'd him beyond Ex∣pression to see, That a most Christian King pre-possess'd by an impious Varlet of the Socie∣ty of Jesus, as he stiles himself, should yet the Church with Persecutions so cruel, and till then unheard of under the Reign of a Ca∣tholick Prince. He wrote therefore to the King several Briefs, and laid before him with an Affection altogether cordial and paternal, the Injustice wherein he had unwarily engag'd himself by the Counsells of his Ministers, and particularly of Father La Chaise, who had giv'n him an Idea of Things contrary to Rea∣son, and Equity. Beseeching him, for God's sake, to surcease a Proceeding so unbecoming those great Actions, which had otherwise ex∣toll'd his Fame; and no longer to permit the Sighs, and Groans of so many pious People, consecrated to God, to ascend to Heaven, and implore Assistance against the Violences, and Profanations which they suffer'd under his Authority. He also wrote to the Cardinals Bonzi, and D'Estrees, to the Arch-bishop of Paris, and Father La Chaise, which wrought no other Effect, but only that it procur'd the sending of D'Estrees to Rome. Who to per∣swade his Holiness to swallow patiently this bitter Cup, set forward in August 1680.
The Clergy, who were then assembl'd, had receiv'd a large Brief from his Holi∣ness upon the same Subject, to which all the answer they gave was this, that they wrote a Letter to the King, wherein they told him, that the Pope took upon him to concern himself in a business which they could by no means approve, in regard that instead of submitting to the common good of the Church, he only gave people an opportunity to ca∣bal together, to encrease Confusion and Schism, and to encourage and embolden seditious spirits, the consequences of which would be very pernitious. The next year the Assembly had several debates upon the Regale. The Archbishops of Reimes, Ambrun, and Albe, the Bishops of Rochelle, Autun, and Toye being Commissioners, it was pro∣nounc'd that the Regale was a Right an∣nex'd to the Crown not to be alicnated, without the compass of prescription, and against which no opposition could be made directly or indirectly, without palpable injustice. The poor Bishop of Pamiers, well un∣derstanding the unworthiness of these Prelates who had sold themselves to Court Favour, and had so perfidiously
betray'd the Rights of the Church en∣trusted in their Hands, and finding him∣self alone, poor, feeble, dispossess'd, and no way able to support 'em, was seiz'd with such a lively sorrow, that he soon follow'd his Brother, the Bishop of Aleth, who dy'd some months before. During his sickness, he wrote three Letters; one to the Pope, desiring his Prayers and his Protection of the Church, which most assuredly after his death would be subje∣cted to the Regale; another to the King, to ascertain him, that he had ne∣ver taken the liberty to oppose his Or∣dinances and Decrees, but to satisfie the duty of his Function, and the Character he wore, which oblig'd him indispensi∣bly to defend the interests of the Church, which had been deposited i his hands: otherwise that he had been always careful to preserve that affecti∣on and respect which he ow'd his Maje∣sty: and at last concluding, besought his Majesty to be perswaded of his good intentions, and that he dy'd his most humble Servant and Subject. His third Letter was to Father La Chaise, which I thought fit to insert in this place, in regard that I am not otherwise concern'd to speak of the Regale, the
as it relates to him who was the first promoter of it, as also of that great difference between the Courts of Rome and France that afterwards ensu'd, and which are events of his Life of too great importance to be omitted, tho with all the brevity that may be, for fear of ty∣ring the Reader. The Bishop of Pa∣miers Letter ran thus. Dear Father, BEing now just about to surrender my soul to God, and to answer before his So∣veraign Tribunal for all my Actions, Words and Thoughts, I have employ'd these last minutes of my life, to attempt the obtain∣ing from your Charity a perfect reconcilia∣tion with me, and a more gentle usage of my Church. You know dear Father, in your Conscience, that she was never subject to the Yoke which you would impose upon Her; she is exempted from it, not by any privi∣ledges granted by Kings, but by Immunitys with which she was born. Recover your self, then, dear Father, and let not your desire to please a great King, whose Confes∣sor you have the honour to be, transport you to Combat the Cause of God, by repre∣senting
things to the King in a false mirror. God is now calling me to give an account of my Administration; but remember, Dear Father, that the time will come, which may not be, perhaps, far off, that you must do the same. Think seriously what you will have to say for your justification at that great day. I cannot conceal from you, Dear Fa∣ther (for now what signifies dissimulation to me?) you undertake not only for your own soul but for the Kings, which you have fal∣laciously becalm'd, by saying to it Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace. Take not amiss, I beseech you, these admonitions of mine. I may pretend to ad∣vise you as a Bishop, but the point of Dea gives me a new priviledge. As to what re∣mains, if I have done any thing to offend you, I beg your Pardon with all my Heart, with this protestation, that I never did it willingly or on purpose: farewell, Dear Father; as∣sist me with your Prayers; I am, &c. Father La Chaise was as little mov'd at this Letter, as he was with an∣other before it; nor was it any obstru∣ction, but that he caus'd Father Cercle, the Bishops grand Vicar, to be hang'd up in Effigie, as I have already related, after La Chaise had him expell'd, from
his Benefice, and intruded one Fortassim into it. The year 1682, began with an Assem∣bly of the Clergy, who deputed the Archbishop of Paris to the King, to re∣turn him thanks for upholding the Rights of the Regale, protesting with all, that they would be ready to support 'em to the utmost of their Power, and mena∣cing the Pope himself, to take stedfast re∣solutions as becoming great Prelates, in case he persever'd in his precautions, and pray'd his Majesty that he would enjoyn his Embassador the D. d' Estrces to signifie their determinations to his Ho∣liness. But these were only Roses and Flowers in comparison of the famous Decree of the same Assembly dated the 19. of March, which is now the grand occasi∣on of all the present difference between the two Courts, and which contain'd the four ensuing Propositions. I. That neither the Pope nor the Church had any Right of Jurisdiction over the Kings Temporalities; and that their Subjects can∣not be absolv'd from their Oaths of Fidelity upon any pretence whatsoever.
II. That a General Council is above the Pope. III. That the Popes power ought to be li∣mited by Canons, and that he cannot deter∣min or establish any thing contrary to the Antient Canons and Liberties of the Gallican Church. IV. And lastly, that the Pope is not infal∣lible, neither in Fact, nor of Right, unless he preside at the Head of a Ʋniversal and Oecumenic Council, which decides and ren∣ders the Pope infallible, by authorizing that infallibility which otherwise would never be. After this the Clergy sent other De∣puties to the King, beseeching him to order that this Doctrine should be taught in all Colleges and Universities, and that the Decree might be register'd in Parliament, which was granted by an Authentick Declaration of the Kings, importing very severe prohibitions to all Professors, Doctors, Readers in Theo∣logy, and Preachers to teach any Do∣ctrine opposite to it, and it was also re∣gister'd in the Universities. There were many worthy Ecclesiasticks that would not admit of this new Do∣ctrine; who for that reason were impri∣son'd,
banish'd and dispoil'd of their Benefices and Estates. So that there were two great persecutions in France at one time; one against the Huguenots, and the other against the Popelings the one against Hereticks, the other against the Orthodox. The way to live at liber∣ty, was then to be as a man my say, nei∣ther Flesh nor Fish; the rigid Catho∣licks being then equally odious and cri∣minal. Thus was the poor Church op∣press'd by the Jesuits, the real Tyrants over France; and so much the more cru∣elly, because she was not permitted the liberty to complain: the Persecutors boasting all this while of the mighty things which they did for her. But what signifi'd all their zeal for the ex∣tirpation of Heresie, seeing they set up another Heresie at the same time? Was not this to bind up the Wounds of the Church with one hand, and Stabb a Dag∣ger to her Heart with the other? The Holy Father, having perus'd this Determination of the Clergy, was griev'd to the Soul, and sent several Briefs to the assembled Clergy, to per∣suade 'em to recant, of which they took very little or no notice. He also order'd Cardinal Sluza his Secretary, to
write in his name to Father la Chaise; which he did in the following Terms. FATHER, I Write you these Lines, by the Order of his Holiness, who is highly offended at the audacious and hairbrain'd Propositions, advanc'd and upheld in the Assembly of your Clergy upon the 19th. of March last: and in regard he is absolutely perswaded that your self has as much a hand in 'em, as they themselves who decreed 'em, he exhorts you out of his paternal Charity to acknowledge your Egregious swerving from the Truth, and the Erroneous sins whith you commit a∣gainst God and his Church; by destroying, as you do, to the utmost of your power, the Authority of the visible Head of it upon Earth, whom you are oblig'd to uphold with the expence of your Blood; first as a Christian and a Catholick, and more particularly, by the fourth and most strict of your Vows, which you have so treacherously broken, you and all your French brethren, who have admitted the Decrees of that Assembly, and loudly teach 'em in your Schools, as the Decrees of
an Oecumenic Council. Among you, the Holy Father is no longer the Vicar of Jesus Christ, assisted by his particular Graces and enlighten'd with Divine Illuminations, but a man of the vulgar sort, subject to all manner of Errors and Failings, to whose de∣cisions there is no credit to be given. What new Doctrine is this? and how is it possible that a Jesuit should be the Author of it? Have you forgot the Thesis's maintain'd in the College of Clermont, in the Month of Decem. 1661, which upheld that the Pope had the same Infallibility in Fact and Right as Christ himself, and therefore it was a matter of Divine Faith to believe that Jansenius's five Propositions were rightly condemn'd. Since that time you have strangely chang'd your note, but I know the reason. Lewis is become Potent, and you expect only from him vast Wealth, high Dignities and Ho∣nours. Now speak your Conscience Father, and tell me, do you fear God or no? and that same specious Title which you bear of being a companion of Jesus, does it not some∣times put you in mind of the duty which you owe him? If you have forgot it, Father, trem∣ble, and dread his judgments that will fall upon your head. These are the Apostolick ex∣hortations and Admonitions which his Holi∣ness was willing to give you; make use of 'em
Father, and do not enforce him to a necessary of acting severely with you. I am, &c. Rome August 25. 1632. Monsieur Arnault also wrote him the following Letter upon the same Sub∣ject. Reverend Father, I Began to hope something favourably of you, after my having so long suffer your Persecutions, since you begin to retract so publickly some things which you have acted against me. Formerly I was a Heretick  for nothing but Fire and Fagot; not because I justifid the five condemn'd Propositions, but because that having read Jansenius from one end to the other, I could not find any such things there: Which was the same thing, said you, as to deny the Papal Infallibility directly in fact, and consequently a Heresie equal to that of Calvin. This is that which you maintain'd in your Thesis's, and which you order'd to be decided against me in the Sor∣bonne; but now thanks be to the Regale, I am pronounc'd to be Orthodox, by a solemn
decree of all the assembl'd Clergy, which it cost you as little trouble to obtain as the censure of the Sorbonne. I flatter my self, most Reverend Father, that after this restor∣ing of me to my former abilities, which you your self have sollicited for me, you will no longer be my Enemy, nor of M. de Pom∣pone my Nephew; who both of us suffer in cruel Exilement all the effects of your unjust Malice: You may put an end to 'em when you please, Most Reverend Father, and you will find me always ready to stile my self and be, &c. Father la Chaise, however was not so taken up with the Affairs of the Regale, but that he had a hand in several other concerns. More especially, that of the Huguenots he made his business, and ever since his being Confessor, he has bent all his endeavours to destroy 'em without mercy. However in this respect, I can∣not believe that he was truly mov'd by the Kings interests; for it is visible, that he impoverish'd the Kingdom, fur∣nish'd his Enemies with Soldiers, fomen∣ted an intestine War; and lastly, rais'd an obstruction not to be surmounted, to impede the great design of the King up∣on the liberty of Europe. I should there∣fore
be rather inclin'd to think, that the Huguenots being without question the most formidable Enemies the Jesuits have, they would fain, at any rate, be rid of these troublesome Overseers, who pry so narrowly into 'em, and never let 'em be at rest, either as to their Morals or their other Irregularities. However it be, this is most certain, that those most unfortunate people are to look upon him as the Author of all their miseries. It was he, who together with the Archbi∣shop of Paris, the Marquis of Louvois, and others of the same Gang, set forth those terrible Declarations that appeard from the year 1679, to 1685, and which were the Preliminaries to their total ruin: for all this ended in that fatal blow which they so much fear'd, that is to say, the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, which was annull'd the 18th of October 1685. 'Tis true, that la Chaise, two years before, had found a much shorter way to exterminate 'em; and to which, by an Enchantment not to be imagin'd, he had obtain'd the King's consent; from whom he had extorted an express Order for the Massacre of all those of that Religion: and thus the thing was to have been put
in execution. There was an Order for the marching of four or five Regiments, and dispersing 'em into those places where the Huguenots liv'd, under pre∣tence of keeping them within the bounds of their duty. After which, Orders for the Massacre were to be sent to all the Bishops, who were to have caus'd the Soldiers to have been drawn toge∣ther upon a certain day appointed, which was to have been the same over all parts of France, and after they had made a Speech to 'em, to encourage 'em against Hereticks, they were to have signifi'd the Kings pleasure to 'em, and at the same time to have deliver'd the King's Letters seal'd with his Signet in∣to their hands. But Monsieur the Prince, who was a man of Honour, and besides, had a greater love for the Soldiers then to suffer 'em to embrue their hands in so detestable an Action, prevented the ex∣ecution of that Enterprise. I have already set forth, how la Chaise had always oppos'd him ever since his be∣ing made Confessor, and of the League that M. de Louvois and the Father had enter'd into, to remove him from the publick management of Affairs. They had left nothing unattempted during
the Life of the Prince, and they beheld with an extraordinary jealousie the Ho∣nour which he had acquir'd in the year 1668, by the Conquest of Franche-Contè, which he subdu'd in less than two Months. During the War of 1672, he had sig∣naliz'd himself at the Battle of Seneff, and the next he perform'd as much as could be expected from so great a Cap∣tain. The King also judg'd no body so fit to supply the Roome of Mareschal Turenne, who was slain in Germany. All this extremely perplex'd the Confessor, who was afraid of nothing so much, as that the Prince should be again admit∣ted into Favour: From which he had always found the knack to debar him till then. Therefore to prevent it he redoubl'd his Efforts; and prepossess'd the King in such a manner, that after that Campain he never was any more entrusted with any Command. He laid before the King without Intermission, that the Prince being extremely Ambiti∣ous, it concern'd his Majesty not to put such opportunities into his hands for the aquisition of Glory; nor to permit him by that means to become more con∣siderable in the Kingdom than he was
already: that it behov'd him to remem∣ber the trouble he had put him to du∣ring his Minority, when his designs made such a noise that the Queen Mo∣ther was constrain'd to seize his Per∣son; and with what Animosity, from his Enlargment in 1651, to 1659, he had made War against his Majesty, who was forc'd by Treaty to receive him, tho without advancing him to those high Places and Dignities which he had before: that if at that time he thought it good Policy to keep him in a midling Condition, to prevent him from at∣tempting any thing to his prejudice, the same reasons obliged his Majesty to look more narrowly after him: That the Prince's Vexation and Discontents were visible, and that maugre all the care which he took to conceal it, he could not forbear to display his dissa∣tisfactions upon several occasions, by comparing his present condition with what he had been formerly. So that his Majesty had all the reason in the world to be assur'd, that his Great Heart and his Ambition importun'd him without ceasing to extraordinary Attempts; and that all things being well consider'd, he was the only Prince
in a condition to oppose if not to stop the Career of his Majesties Glorious Designs: that he ought to consider seriously the incumbrances he would meet with, if the Prince should go a∣bout to Head the Huguenots of his King∣dom, and at the same time make an Alliance with Holland: that would not only be able to stop his Progress, but also to introduce the Enemy into the Heart of his Kingdom; and then the least mischief that could befall him would be to make an ignominious Peace, and restore the Huguenots their Antient Privileges. All these Reasons being urg'd by la Chaise, and seconded by Louvois, made the King resolve to confer no more Employments upon the Prince, who on the other side perceiving the suspitions which the Court had of him, and how he was lookt upon with an evil Eye, retir'd to his Palace of Chantilli, where he was in hopes to live and dye quietly, without pretending any more to pub∣lick business. But it was ordain'd that his Generosity and his great Heart should always be the cause of his mis∣fortune. For about the end of the year 1683, being inform'd by M. Montauzier
of a Cruel Order which la Chaise had obtain'd of the King, and which he was preparing to put in excution, he could not endure such Barbarities without de∣claring his Mind. Thereupon he went to the Court, and throwing himself at the Kings Fleet, laid before him how great a stain such a foul Action would be to his Honour: that he himself had several times oblig'd himself by pro∣mise never to make use of Violent Courses and sanguinary Ways; but tho he had never engag'd his Royal Word, yet that the Interest of his Honour and his Fame were sufficient to divert him from so black an Eterprize, and so mis∣becoming a most Christian King as that was; that there were other ways for his Majesty to reduce the Protestants: that they were already in so low a con∣dition, that they were not able to make Head against him: and if the worst came to the worst, he might banish 'em out of his Kingdom. These Remonstrances of the Prince wrought so effectually upon the King, that he revok'd his Order, and la Chaise was disappointed.
But his Animosity upon this redoub∣ling, he made use of this occasion to let the King understand, that the reason why the Prince of Conde oppos'd with so much heat the destruction of the Huguenots, was only because it would utterly ruin those designs, which he was meditating to put into their Heads: and the Cunning Priest made use of several kindnesses which afterwards the Prince desir'd in favour of the Huguenots, to ren∣der him odious to the King, and cast him absolutely but of his Favour; where∣in he succeeded but too well; it being certain that after that, the King could hardly endure to see him. 1686. At length this Great Prince dy'd the 16th of December 1686, at Fon∣tain Bleau, whither he went to see his Grandaughter, the Dutchess of Bourbon, who lay sick of the Small Pox; and many People were of Opinion that the Jesuits did not a little contribute to hasten his Death. He wrote a very Pathetick Letter to the King, wherein he exprest his sor∣row for having born Arms against his Majesty, protesting withal, that since his return, he had never had any other than Sentiments of Respect and Affecti∣on
for his Person, and Fidelity to his Service, whatever suspitions had been infus'd into him to the contrary: as in regard he had been in part the cause of the Prince of Conti's misfortune, he begg'd his pardon with an extraordina∣ry submission in that Letter, assuring the King, that the Prince was as good and faithful a Subject as his Majesty could wish or desire; adding withal that Father la Chaisè knew well what he said to be truth, if he would vouchsafe to testifie the Truth. Cardinal Camus also had incurr'd the Confessors displeasure, much upon the same account, and for the same Reason as the Prince. He wrote to the King a Letter wherein he lai'd it before him, that it was neither for his Honour, nor did it become his Justice to use violent means; that for his part he could not approve of 'em, and therefore besought his Majesty, not to take it amiss, if within his own Diocess, he qualifi'd and soften'd such boistrous proceedings as much as lay in his Power. At which the King being provok'd, wrote a threat∣ning Letter to the Intendant of the Diocess, against the Cardinal, with or∣ders to shew it him. There upon the
Cardinal wrote to the Intendant that Famous Letter, wherein he proves, that Rigorous and Bloody means are not to be made use of to reduce People to the Religion they have forsaken, and that there is no other way to deal with the Conscience but by perswasion. Our Jesuit therefore, who is a sworn Enemy to all those who concur not blindly with his designs, incens'd the King against him withal his might, and obtain'd a Warrant also to send him to the Bastile, which was revok'd soon af∣ter, at the intercession of the Duke of Montauzier. However afterwards this worthy Prelate was haunted with a thousand vexations, tho the only person that we have in France that lives a life so exemplary and so like a true Bishop. He was formerly a Courtier and one that had very far engag'd himself in va∣nity and a luxurious Life; but at length retiring from the world, leading a very Vertuous and Pious Life, the King made him Bishop of Grenoble. For which when he went to return thanks to his Majesty, he took his leave of him for all his Life after: where upon the King de∣manding the Reason why he bid him so long a farwell, he answer'd that residence
was of Divine Right, and that he thought himself oblig'd to reside in his Diocess, as he had resolv'd to do, till death. After he came to be a Bishop, he liv'd altogether upon Pulse, and gave himself entirely up to all the care & Functions of a Charitable Pastor, Preaching him∣self to his people, visiting the Poor, the Widows and the Orphans whom he always reliev'd to the utmost of his power: Such eminent Vertues and so rate a Piety, produc'd him the Cardi∣nals Cap, and the particular affection of Innocent XI. And this was that which rendred la Chaise so irreconcileable to him, that he could not expect from him for the future any other then the utmost of mischief that he could do him. 'Tis impossible to speak of all things at once; so that I had like to have omit∣ted one of the blackest Circumstances of la Chaise's Life, which was very injuri∣ous to Christendom; and therefore I must be forcd to run backward for some years. All the world knows, how the King fell upon Strasburgh, by means of the Correspondence which he held with the new Burgomasters, under pretence that that City was the Capital City of Alsatia,
and belong'd to him as a Dependance of that Province which was surrendred to him by the Peace of Munster. The Emperor and all the Princes of Germany highly complain'd of this Breach, which together with the Blocking up of Lux∣emburgh, and detaining the Castle of Dinant, which was to have been re∣stor'd to the Prince of Liege, were causes more than sufficient to renew the War, with which they threaten'd him in Conjunction with Spain. Expedients were propos'd in Council to prevent all this, and it was de Louvois's advice, to make an Alliance with the Turk, the Truce between whom and the Em∣peror was ready to expire, and who would be able to make a Powerful Di∣version with never so little Assistance. With all, that it was necessary to engage the K. of Poland in the same League, who had been beholding to France for his Crown; to which purpose he should be tempted with the Conquest of Silesu that lay so convenient for him. M. de Boncherat and M. Montausier were of a Contrary Opinion, and laid before his Majesty that besides the stain it would be to his Honour, it would be to call in an Enemy that would not be so easie
to be driven out again, whereas it was easie to dissipate this appearance of a League by raising the Blockade of Lux∣emburgh, and letting his pretentions to the County of Alost sleep a while. Which would suffice without doubt to oblige those Princes patiently to suffer the taking of Strasburgh. But the Marquis of Louvois still insisted that an Alliance with the Turk was the only way to keep all the Princes of Germany in in awe, who would be glad that his Majesty would grant 'em Peace, which he might or might not do as he saw his Advantages. But that he had great probability of a much better Progress; it being certain that if the Turks got the upper hand, and that the King of Poland acted his part, the Princes of the Empire would of their own accord be forc'd to call his Majesty to their assi∣stance, and perhaps would be easily per∣suaded to declare him Emperor, or at least, the Crown of the King of the Romans could not fail the Dauphin. Upon this there was at that time no∣thing concluded; the King delaying the matter, till he had consulted his Council of Conscience, or rather his Confessor, with whom he is infatuated;
for he hearkens to him as an Oracle▪ The Father assur'd him that he might not only do it with a safe Conscience, b promis'd to set so many Engins at work that the thing should be success∣fully brought about. And indeed it was by his instigation that the Jesuits of Vienna perswaded the Emperor to tor∣ment the Protestants of Hungary more then ever, that so they might be pro∣vok'd to revolt; and furnish'd Court Tekeli with means to support himself; who unless that Persecution had been redoubl'd, would have run the hazard of being abandon'd by his own Party. He was also suppli'd from France with what money he wanted. And Father la Chaise it was that recommended to the K. the person, who was most of all em∣ploy'd by him in that Negotiation; one Rouvrai of Normandy, a new Catholick, and allurd with a good Pension. He was a Man of Wit, and bold even to daringness. And as he had occasion several times to pass to and fro through Vienna, he perform'd the Office of a Spie, to observe what past in that Court, not at all terrifi'd with the accident at that time newly befallen the Secreta∣ry of M. Seppeville the French Agent.
That Secretary was another Spie, who convey'd many a French Letter to Count Tekeli, and gave an account to both Par∣ties of what past in Vienna, by the assi∣stance of one Bohan, a French Officer in the Service of the Count, and who for a long time drove the same trade with Rouvrai. But the Secretary was surpiz'd in this dangerous Calling, and put in Prison, from whence he had never got out again safe and sound, had not the King, so soon as he heard of it, seiz'd upon Count Mansfield the Emperors Ambas∣sador at Paris, by way of Reprisal. When this Secretary was taken, there was found in his Pocket a Letter which la Chaise had written to Rouvrai, and which was seen by all that were then at the Court of Vienna, of which that which follows is a Copy. SIR, I Have spoken to the King very earnest∣ly about what you wrote in your last, that Count Tekeli wants Money for the payment of his Men; and moreover that he desires to be well supported from Turky, without which he cannot long subsist. As to the first, you may assure his Excellency,
that the difficulty of finding a way to re∣turn the Money has been the only reason that the King's Promises have been hi∣therto delay'd. But I spoke to an Arme∣nian about two days since, who has promis'd to pay him a hundred thousand Livres in two Months, and M. Colbert has orders the said sum to be paid him within a Week▪ As to the other point; the Kings Ambas∣sador at the Port, makes us believe 'twill not be long now before he comes to a con∣clusion. He has wrote to his Majesty, that there only are wanting two Millions of ready Money, three thousand Muskets, and a du∣ty of five per Cent. upon all Merchandise that shall be Exported or Imported under French Colours. Which are obstruction which will not be insisted upon. As to what remains, his Excellency may be sure of all the Service that M. de Nointel can do him, who has the Kings order for so doing; and besides that, was an intimate friend of Count Tekeli's Father deceas'd, and Count Serini: this he told me positively in one of his Letters. I have also thus much more good Ne to tell you, that the King of Poland he requir'd time to give an Answer to wh the Marquis of Vitry propos'd to hi in his Majesties Name; but that the
Queen told him in private, that when the King her Husband came to his Ʋltimate determinations, whether in favour of the Emperor or the King of France, he should always be mindful of his Obligations to our great Monarch. You may impart to Count Tekeli what I have wrote to you, and present him my humble Respects. This Letter discover'd some part of the Fathers Plots and underhand Practices, and tho he stiffly deny'd that ever he wrote it, which he might the more easily do, because it was not sign'd, neverthe∣less the Secretary imprudently confessd that it came from him. His importuni∣tys in Poland were also understood; and the knowledge of 'em contributed not a little to prevent the Effect. For M. Zierowsky the Emperors Ambassador at that Court, so lively represented to the King the injury it would be to his Honour and his Interest, to assist the Conquests of the Infidels in Christen∣dom, which would indeed be no more then a preparing of Shackles for himself (since it was very evident the most dangerous Neighbour he had in the World was the Turk) that he enter'd in∣to
a strict Alliance with his Imperial Majesty. He also hearken'd to the complaints of M. Zierowsky against the Sieur Vernay Baucault, calling himself ex∣traordinary Embassador at the Court of Poland, and against several others who held intelligence with Tekeli, and the Male-Contents, and fomented the Re∣bellion in Hungary; so that Vernay was Expelld out of Poland, after the Em∣perors Ambassador had shew'd the King and the Senate his Letters written to Count Tekeli, and Fagel Governor of Cassovia, with their Answers, which were intercepted by the Castellane of Presmslia. In the Mean time the Infidels having forc'd the Pass of Raab, which they ne∣ver stay'd to besiege no more then they did Comorra, advanc'd with a formida∣ble Army as far a Vienna; which they besieg'd, and strook terror into all the Countries round about. At the same time also, the King of France, who was very much tempted to lay hold upon the occasion, brought four Armies into the Field, one in Flanders, another in Alsatia, a third upon the Saone, and another upon the Saonr, Which alarm'd no less this part of Europe, then the
Ottamons did the other. And certain∣ly these were no frivolous fears, for to speak the Truth, the King had laid aside all Scruples, and had made a most terrible Invasion, if la Chaise had not stop'd him. And this was the only time that his Councils were favourable to Europe. But we owe him no thanks for this Obligation; for if he had thought he had done well, he would never have done it. He advis'd the King not to enter by force of Arms into a Country which he might subdue when he pleas'd by bare perswasion. That all the Princes of the Empire were generally in such a Con∣sternation, that if he did but send any person of Wit and Reputation to act among 'em, 'twas certain they would call him in themselves of their own ac∣cord, and that he might reckon himself sure of the Elector of Cologne, who with∣out question possess'd the fairest Coun∣tries upon the Rhine: And as for the rest, it would be no hard matter to gain 'em. But Sir, said he, should not this way succeed, your Majesty will be always in a Condition to make use of your Power. The King believ'd him and recall'd his Armies. Presently the
Furstembergs were written to, in order to this Affair, who faild not to do their utmost; more especially William Bishop of Strasburgh, a Creature so devoted to the King, that he had not a person in all his Kingdom so much his purchas'd Slave as he. A person who will afford us ample matter of discourse in the following Sheets, and therefore it will not be amiss that the Reader should have a little taste of his character before hand. He is a German by Birth of a Noble and Antient Family which has done the Emperors great Services at several dif∣ferent times, for which they have re∣ceiv'd considerable advantages, and were advanc'd to the Highest Digni∣ties in the Empire. The Emperor now Reigning rais'd this very Person to be a Prince of the Empire in his Youth, and besides that, bestow'd upon him and his Brothers several fair Fiefs of the Empire, as well in the Circles of Au∣stria, as elsewhere. But the Accumulati∣on of so many Favours could not make him ere the more Greatful to his Be∣nefactors; he quitted his Party, and went into France, where the King, who had his desire, receiv'd him very nobly,
gave him a Pension of six thousand Crowns a Year, and made him Collonel of a Regiment which he commanded several Years. All this while his Bro∣ther was in the Service of the Elector of Cologne, whose Prime Minister he was, and whom Prince William gain'd over to the King in such a manner, that while he liv'd, he was no ill wisher to his side. The War of 72, being broke out, they began to talk of Peace as soon as it was begun, and the next Year there was a Congress at Cologne of Ple∣nipotentiaries from all the Princes of Europe. Prince William was nominated for the Elector of Cologne, but the Im∣perialists would not acknowledge him; and which was worse, he was seiz'd and carri'd to Vienna as a Rebel to his Prince, and guilty of High Treason against him. This mannner of proceeding, which the King pretended was against the Law of Nations, put an end to all the Nego∣tiations, and broke up the Assembly. Tho the Court of France were very much afraid least the Prince of Fursten∣burgh would have been very severely pro∣ceeded against, whether it were that the Emperor fear'd thereby to render
the King irreconcileable, or that he thought he had a pledge in his hands that would facilitate a Peace when he pleasd himself I shall not dispute; but however it were, he only kept him Pri∣soner. When the War was at an end, he was releas'd, and the King observ∣ing that as great a Bustler and as much a Boutefeu as he was, he was no Sol∣dier, caus'd him to exchange his Sword for a Breviary, and made him Bishop of Strasburgh. Nor did his kindness for him bound it self there, for he nominated him to a Cardinalship, and put the Bon∣net himself upon his Head in Jan. 87, and the next year causd him to be ele∣cted Coadjutor to the Archbishop of Co∣logne, which was done the 7th of Jan. by eight a Clock in the Morning. But to return to the matter in hand, he was employ'd during the Conjuncture of the Siege of Vienna, to perswade the Princes of the Empire to have recourse to the King; but his employing a suspected person was not the way to succeed: he was too well known, and it was e∣nough for a proposition to come from him, to render it suspitious. So that all his jaunting to and fro signifi'd nothing, but only to give the King of
Poland leisure to joyn the Duke of Lorrain, and Relieve Vienna, into which they enter'd triumphant after the de∣feat of the Infidels, of whom they made a most terrible Slaughter, and put the rest to the most dreadful Flight that ever was known. This Glorious Victo∣ry revivd the Courage of the droop∣ing Empire, and every body coming again to themselves, consider'd which way to make their best advantage of it. So that Heaven continuing the blessing of success upon the Christian Arms, they prosper'd to their own Wishes. The King, having beheld this Great Deliverance, alterd his Sentiments, but not enduring to let his Neighbours be at rest, he teizd the Spaniards about the County of Alost, considerable for the Extent and Revenue of it, which he claim'd as a Dependance upon his Conquests; and upon the King of Spains refusing it, he Besiegd Luxenburgh, and took it in lieu of an Equivalent. All people thought that then the War would have broke out again more fu∣riously then ever. But the weakness of the Emperors Forces, and the Empe∣rors desire to prosecute his Victorys in Hungary, were the reason that all their
differences were put an end to, and laid a sleep by a General Truce concluded in the Year 1685. While these things thus pass'd on, Charles the II. King of England dy'd, and left the Crown to his Brother the Duke of York, who tho generally ill belov'd by the People and a declard Roman Catholick was nevertheless proclaim'd without any Opposition. So happy a Success, and perhaps so little expected, spread an Universal joy among all the Je∣suits, who promis'd themselves no less then the entire reducing that Kingdom under their Dominion, in three or four Years at most: and they had already devour'd in imagination all the Noble Bishopricks and Considerable Benefices in the Realm: nor indeed were their hopes so Chimerical, but that they might have reason to have some assurance of it: they were absolutely Masters of the new Kings Heart and Soul, who was wholly govern'd by them; as being to speak properly, no more then their Prime Minister of State in his own Kingdom. Besides, they were protected by France, extremely Potent, and near at hand to pour in thirty thousand men into Eng∣land when ever he pleas'd. 'Tis true this
could not have been done without a pre∣judice to the King, whose Authority would have been not a little diminish'd thereby; but what card they, provid∣ed they had got their ends. Now as the whole company in gene∣ral had great reason to be over joy'd at such a promising Event, Father la Chaise, in particular had more engaging motives of Exultation and Triumph. The de∣ceas'd King Charles had willingly li∣sten'd to his Councils, and had done several things in complacence to his ad∣vice; but at the bottom he was a pru∣dent Prince, and one who, otherwise loving his Pleasures and his Ease, did not always do that which was desir'd of him; nor was he of a humour to hazard the whole for nothing, like his Brother, who not having all the foresight imaginable, but perswading himself, in imitation of Lewis the Great, that there needed no more for him to do but to attempt and Prosper, blindly and erroniously deliver'd himself up to Evil Counsels. Upon which Founda∣tion la Chaise erected his project to set all Europe in a Conflagration of War, the most violent that ere was known, and hugg'd himself in his design, which he lookt upon then as infallible.
Some prosperous successes, as the de∣feat of the Duke of Monmouth and his Death, renderd K. James so vain, that he never thought England able to with∣stand him. So that from that time for∣ward, he began hardly to observe any Measures; wherefore in a short time, the Kingdom was full of Monks of all Orders, and particularly Jesuits, who were become such favourites at Court, that there was nothing to be there ob∣tain'd but by application made to them. And upon theirs and Father Peterss re∣commendation it was, that Tyrconnel was made Deputy of Ireland, where he com∣mitted extremities of Cruelty against the Protestants, of whom he put a great number to Death. This Tyrconnel was an Irish-man by Birth, and low in Fortune; he came young into England, where he serv'd as a kind of Page for above ten Years at the end of which time, he met with a Catholick who prefer'd him to the Duke of York, in the quality of a better sort of Gentle man. This was the Rise of his For∣tune. But to return to King James. He receiv'd a Nuncio from the Pope into London; which had not been known
for above an Age before: this was the Abbot Dada, since made a Cardinal. Some few days after his arrival he was consecrated Bishop of Amasia in St. James's Chapel, by the titular Archbishop of Ar∣magh, and two other Bishops; and in the Afternoon coming to pay his Respects to their Majesties, they fell upon their Knees before him, to receive his Bene∣diction. Hitherto the Nuncio had only appear'd incognito; which not satisfy∣ing the King, who pretended to do no∣thing in Hugger Mugger, he resolv'd that he should make his publick Entry, and chose Windsor for the Place. To this purpose, he orderd the Duke of Somerset first Gentleman of his Chamber to go the next day to waite upon the Prelate at his Lodgings, and conduct him to his Audience. The Duke would fain have shifted off the Employment, by telling the King, that it was absolute∣ly contrary to all the Acts of Parlia∣ment that had been made upon that Sub∣ject: but then the King casting an An∣gry look upon him, Do, said he, as you are commanded, I ask not your Advice. Ne∣vertheless, the Duke continu'd his Ex∣cuses, declaring to the King that there were several others who would obey his
Orders with less Reluctancy, and there∣fore besought his Majesty to lay his Commands upon them, rather then up∣on him; Very Good, reply'd the King, I shall do it, but it shall cost you your Employ∣ment of First Gentleman; and so turning to the Duke of Grafton who was then in the Chamber. Duke of Grafton, said he, go to morrow and fetch Monsieur the Nun∣cio in my own Coaches of State, and be you henceforward first Gentleman instead of the Duke of Somerset. Nor did the Kings Wrath against the Duke of So∣merset end there; he took from him his Regiment of Dragoons, and cast him quite out of his Fa∣vour. The next day the Nuncio made his Entrance, in the view of all the People, in a Violet Habit, his Rochet andHabit of a Purple Colour, resembling a Captains Gorget, worn by a Pontifical Bishop above his Rochet, and reaching down to the bending of his Arms. Ca∣mail. All this was done at the instigation of Father Peters, who was something more in England, then la Chaise was in France. And this latter seeing to his great satisfaction King James's weak side, is reference to Peters, resolv'd to make him serviceable to advance his own Grandeur.
That ambitious Jesuit la Chaise had been a long time aspiring to a Cardinals Cap; but in regard that since the Pontificate of Innocent XI. the Holy See had never had a more implacable Enemy then him∣self, he justly question'd whether the Pope would grant that favour to the K. of France, tho he should demand it, un∣less some other should level the way before-hand, and that upon his Holiness's having granted the same Honour to some other of his Character, he might claim a Priviledge to pretend to it. Not that he hop'd to attain his Ends while the Reigning Pope liv'd, who had no kindness at all for him, but after his Death. Therefore he put it into the King of Englands Head to demand the Purple for his own Confessor, and at the same time to make him a Bishop, giving him to understand, that it would be the easiest thing in the world to obtain it, and that the Pope would be glad of the opportunity to oblige him. But it fell out quite otherwise: for when the Earl of Castlemain was about to have pro∣pounded it to the Pope, he impos'd si∣lence upon him with a Benediction; which in the Vatican is a Language
that all men understand. And as for the Dispensations which he demanded for the Archbishoprick of York, to which Peters was promoted, the Pope return'd for answer, that the Jesuits, having by their institutions renounc'd all manner of Ecclesiastical Dignities, they could not so much as think of those things with∣out a Crime, in regard it is a very hai∣nous Crime for a Religious person to vi∣olate the Constitutions of his Order. 'Twas in vain for the Ambassador to tell him a Story, that the Rules of their Order did not bind em so indis∣solubly but that they might have a Dispensation when the good of the Church requir'd it: that his Predeces∣sors had made no scruple to advance se∣veral Jesuits to the Episcopacy, and some to the Purple: besides that, these In∣stitutions had now no more the same force then formerly, as consisting only in the free will of the Pope: in regard that Paul and Julius the Third, had per∣mitted by express Bulls, that the form of 'em might be alter'd in one or more Cases, according to the nature of the business. But the Pope remain'd in exora∣ble for all these plausible reasons, and Castlemain was forc'd to desist his sollici∣tations.
The greatest vexation for the miscarriage of this Affair was la Chaises, who had blink'd a long time upon the Archbishoprick of Lyon, as a Benefice to which he had a kind of claim to su∣ply the defect of the Red Cap. For as to what concern'd Father Peters, the King found a way to comfort him for the loss of what he never had, by appoint∣ing him his Grand Almoner, and by ma∣king his Kinsman the Lord Peters Lord Lieutenant of Essex. Father la Chaise no longer questioning that there was any favour to be expe∣cted from the Holy See, laid aside all reservedness, and hearkning only to his Revenge, spurr'd on the King to all those extremities that afterwards brake forth. The Bull which the Pope in a little time after thunderd out, to abolish the pri∣viledges of Embassadors Quarters, im∣porting Excommunication, ipso facto, a∣gainst all those that should go about to uphold 'em directly or indirectly, ser∣ved him for a good occasion. And tho the King of Spain and the Queen of Sweden submitted voluntarily to it, yet the Confes∣sor gave the King to understand that it was a diminution of his Honour to fol∣low their example, and that the Fran∣chises
being a Prerogative belonging to his Crown, establish'd in Rome, not by a bare Connivance of the Popes, as they might perhaps in respect of other Princes, but by Custom and special Priviledge, of which he had been in Possession ever since Charlemain, and lately acknowledg'd by the Treaty of Pisa, he was not to give an Inch of Ground upon that point. 'Tis no difficult thing to perswade Princes to those things which they deem for their advantage; more especially, when they have the Power in their own hands. The King was convinc'd the ve∣ry first time, that the Father spoke no∣thing but reason, and finding him so well skill'd in a matter that he had study'd, he gave him order to draw up Instructions himself for the Marquis of Lavardin, whom he had made choice of for his Ambassador, in the room of the Duke d' Estrees, and to discourse him particularly upon the Subject, that he might not be ignorant of the least Cir∣cumstance. So that it was the Confes∣sors spirit that animated and enliven'd the Marquis, and by which he acted al∣together after that.
The Pope who was faithfully adver∣tis'd by Cardinal Ranunci, his Nuncio at Paris, of all these Proceedings; and to whom the King himself had refus'd Audience, because he would have deli∣ver'd him the Bull revocatory, offer'd Cardinal d' Etree, that if he would sub∣mit to the Bull which he had set forth, which was a very just one, and which he could not revoke without extreme detriment to the Church, that the Sbirri or Officers of Justice, should forbear making any Assaults upon the Quarters, and that nothing should be done to the pre∣judice of the Kings interest. The Car∣dinal who found himself at a loss in this Negotiation, approv'd the Expedi∣ent, and advis'd the K. to it in a Letter, which being imparted to Father la Chaise, he oppos'd it, and said that the Bull being an abuse, there was a necessity of Appealing and referring the matter to the Parlia∣ment. Which the Pope understanding, wrote to him very smartly, complaining, that since he was become his Confessor, instead of perswading the King to senti∣ments of Piety and Goodness, he had always incens'd him against the Holy See, as in the business of the Regale, and now upon this occasion, where the
most just Rights of the Church were concern'd, which he incited his Maje∣sty to violate; and which would be at∣tended with very evil Consequences, which would all light heavy upon him, and for which he must answer before God. The Resolutions of the Holy Father to uphold his Pious design, put a stop for some Months to Lavardins departure. But at length he setforward in November 87. and made his publick Entry in despite of the Pope, who would not acknowledge him for an Embassador. It was also de∣bated in Council, whether they should shut the Gates of Rome against him. But the Plurality of voices not being for carrying things to that extremity, the Pope thought it sufficient to forbid the Cardinals and all the Princes and Lords to send their Coaches to meet him; he also forbid the discharging of any Great Guns, and all other publick marks of rejoycing. But for all these Inhibitions there were a∣bove a hundred Foreigners Coaches, be∣sides those of the several Ambassadors. The Cardinals d' Estree, and Maldachi, went also in Person to meet Lavardin, three Miles from Rome, and went into the same Coach with him. They accom∣panyed
him likewise to the Vatican, where the Ambassador having demand∣ed Audience, it was refus'd him; after which he went to the Palace of the Farnesi. He was attended by three hun∣dred French Gentlemen, who staid in Rome, as long as he did; not reckoning in a considerable number of the Officers of the Gallys, who arriv'd in a short time after; and I know not how many Lords that resorted to him from all parts of Italy. More then this he kept five hundred Men in Pay, to whom he gave a Julio a day, and these Soldiers guarded his Palace a Foot and a Horse∣back, and went the Patroll every Night in his Quarter. Upon the day of his Entrance, the Pope caus'd the Bull which he had set forth before against the Franchises, to be fix'd up a new, forbidding all People to acknowledge Lavardin for Ambassa∣dor; who had no sooner notice of it, but in opposition and to be even with the pope he caus'd Placarts to be pasted up in all the Corners of the Streets, forbidding the Sbirri to presume to ap∣proach within five hundred Paces of his Quarter, threatning to put all to the Sword that should be met within that
compass. The next day he sent again to demand Audience of the Pope, who re∣turn'd him for answer by Cardinal Colo That it was a vanity for him to demand Audience as Ambassador from the Most Christian King; that he never would acknowledge him under that Character; so far from that, that if he continud to act with the same rashness and indis∣cretion, he should look upon him as no other then an Enemy of Jesus Christ and his Vicar upon Earth; whom he was come to Affront and Persecute even in the Sacred Chair, and that he should find a way to tame his audaci∣ousness and his impiety, by those Ar which God had put into his hands, i he did not prevent him by a filial an Christian Submission. But Lavardin laugh'd at all these threats and within an hour after dispatchd a∣way a Courrier to the King his Master to give him an account of all these pas∣sages. He also wrote to Father la Chaise observing to him all along what ha been said to him by Cardinal Colo To which the Father answer'd him wit a Congratulation for having so punct∣ally acquitted himself in the discharge o his duty, and exhorting him to conti∣nue
stedfast, without fearing the Arms of his Holiness, which could do him no harm, In regard that the King having given him his Letters of Credence, had invested him with a Cuirace proof against all the Cuts and Slashes of Apostolical Weapons. A noble Sentence and be∣coming the Author of it. In the mean time, when the Queen of Sweden, and the Marquis of Cogolludo, the Spanish Ambassador saw, that Lavar∣din made good the Right of the Fran∣chises by dint of ample Authority, they began to repent of their having so easily submitted, and represented to his Holi∣ness that so long as they believ'd that the French would have surrendr'd to his Paternal Remonstrances, they were wil∣ling to contribute toward an accommo∣dation, and to be the first that should quit their Rights of Soveraigns, to the end the Most Christian King might have no pretence to alledge from their Exam∣ple; but since it was visible by the pro∣ceeding of his Ambassad, that he would not abate the least Tittle of his Claim, they besought his Holiness to give way that they might resume their Rights, since it was not to be thought that the King of France had any Privi∣ledge
above them; protesting that they would ever be ready to give his Holines any satisfaction, when ever they sa France willing to comply. Things stood at this stay, till the ne month; at what time, Lavardin going one Christmas night to perform his De∣votions at St. Lewis's Church, the Pope lookt upon that action as a new affro to his Bull, by which he had Excommu∣nicated all those who abetted the Privi∣ledge of the Franchises; so that the ne day there appeard a Brief of Excommu∣nication fix'd upon the Church of Saint Lewis, under the name of the Cardinal Vicar. Which, because it is very short I shall here insert. By vertue of the Apostolical Autho∣rity, and by the special Command  our most Holy Lord, the Pope,  pronounce, that the Parish Church o St. Lewis is subjected to Ecclesiastica Interdiction, because the Rector, th Official and the Ministers of the sai Church have presum'd upon the la night of the Nativity of our Lord, to admit to Divine Offices, and the Parti∣cipation of the Sacrament Henry de Be∣manoir, Marquis of Lavardin, who
notoriously Excommunicated. Given at Rome, in our Palace, December 26. 1687. The Cardinal Vicar. And below the Brief was written, The present Sentence is forbid to be pull'd down under the Penalty of Ex∣communication, reserv'd to our Holy Lord. De Rubris, Notarie. The Marquis of Lavardin on the o∣ther side, delay'd no longer then the next day, before he publish'd a large Protesta∣tion against the said Breef; wherein after he had muster'd together a great number of reasons to prove that the Pope did very much amiss to proceed in that manner, and that the Franchises of Rome were a Right that belongd to the King not to becontested or con∣trould, he concluded his Protestation with these words, that without sum∣ming up so many reasons as had already been alledg'd against the Bull, in Caena do∣mini, against which the whole Assembl'd Gallican Church had always exclaim'd, as being of no efficacy in respect of France, and publish'd by a Pope that had declar'd him∣self a Capital Enemy of that Crown, without entring, said he, either into those reasons, or such as might be objected a∣gainst
the other Bulls, that serv'd for a foundation for that which is now pretended to be set forth by his Holiness, which ca never be publish'd in the Kingdom for the reasons before receited, 'tis sufficient to say that he the said of Marquiss Lavardin is the Most Christian Kings Ambassador, and by consequence exempted from all Ecclesia∣stical Censures, so long as he is invested with that Character, and that he will exe∣cute the Orders of the King his Master. Therefore the said of Marquiss Lavardin deems it not necessary to appeal from this pre∣tended Excommunication, not well examined by his Holiness, when he shall be disabus'd, s soon as he shall grant an Audience for the re∣moving those false impressions, that restless and turbulent people, the Enemies of France have imprinted in his mind, such as labour to break off the good intelligence between the Holy Father and his Majesty. He believes it also needless to appeal to a future Lawful Council; nevertheless at present, as much as is or shall be requisite, he protests the Nullity of all that is done or shall be done for the future; declaring that if any one of any Quality whatever fails of that respect and due regard which ought to be paid to his Character, he shall be responsible before God and Man for all the mischiefs he may
draw upon himself, through the offence com∣mitted against his Majesty, in violating the Law of Nations, in the Person of his Am∣bassadors. Given at Rome, December 27. 1687. Lavardin, sent a Copy of this Prote∣station to the King, who approvd it, and order'd M. Harlay, the Proctor Ge∣neral in the Parliament at Paris to put in an Appeal to a future Council in reference to what the Pope had acted; and this was done Jan. 22. 1688. But this Appeal, how injurious soever it were to the Holy See, was nothing in com∣parison of the Decree that was given ou the next day, and the famous Plea that accompanid it, to which I refer the Reader, being too long to be here inserted, tho it were a piece that was hammerd in la Chaises Shop, to whom the King gave order to consult the drawing it up with M. Talon, under whose name it appear'd. Tis true that Talon drew up the first draught of it, and shew'd it to the King, but Father la Chase who was present and read it to his Majesty, told him that the Writing was excellently well penn'd, but that it was not smart enough, neither did it sufficiently set forth his Majesties causes
of complaint against the Pope; and that it was of great Importance to shew to all the World and to Posterity, the Partialy and Passion of the Ho∣ly Father upon that occasion. There∣upon the King bid 'em meet both to∣gether in the afternoon, and to add or alter what they thought proper. This order very much displeas'd M. Talon, who could not digest it, that a Priest should be put upon him to teach him his Trade; and two days after he te∣stifi'd his resentment to Villeroy, to whom he said in express terms, that tho eve∣ry body should meddle with his Trade, the Cows would be never a whit the better kept for all that. However, he obey'd without saying a word, and all that day they labour'd about that famous declamation which has made such a noise, and which is only stuft with threats of a National Coun∣cil, which would impower the Bishops to Consecrate one another, if the Pope refus'd to do it, and to Excommunicate his Holiness himself, if he went about to thunder out his Excommunications. Si Excommunicatus veniret, Excommuica∣tus abiret.
There was nothing discours'd of, but Passion, desire of Domineering, Ʋsurpations of the Court of Rome. The Holy Father was contemn'd and slighted, as a man of a weak and shallow Pate, not able to bear the burthen of Affairs, and sometimes they call'd him declar'd favorour and Protector of the Quietists and Jansenists. In short they Curst and Anathamatiz'd him in express terms. A Curse and Anathema, says the Writing, on all those, who either through Interest or Ca∣pricio trouble the correspondency that is to be between the Priesthood and the Royalty, who seem to have no other Prospect but to raise Schism in the Church, and with fa∣tal Divisions to disturb the Peace of all Europe, which has been procur'd by the Wisdom of our Invincible Monarch. That which was more to be wonder'd at was, that Lavardin caus'd both the Plea and the Decree to be fix'd upon the Doors of the Vatican. The Pope surpriz'd at such an act of daring pre∣sumption as that, forbid all the Churches to admit the Priests who had officiated in the Parish of St. Lewis: And one poor Almoner, belonging to the Am∣bassador, having taken a walk impru∣dently toward the Vatican, was seiz'd
upon and clapt into the Inquisition, for having audaciously adventur'd to say Mass in the Ambassadors Chapel. In the mean time, in France, the King or∣der'd the Bishops to send for the Su∣periors of the Convents, in their Dio∣sses, and to forbid em under rigorous Penalties to suffer any one of their Monks to write or teach any thing con∣trary to the Rights of his Majesty, or the differences between him and the Pope. The Archbishop of Paris among the Rest, zealous as he always uses to be, for the Kings Interest, put this Or∣der exactly in execution. He chose to that purpose for his Official one Cheron, a man learned and fit for business, whom he sent to all the Conventual Houses, to let 'em know the Kings intentions. And indeed the Generality of the Ecclesi∣asticks, as well Monks as others, sur∣render'd themselves, to that blind obe∣dience that was expected. Only some three or four Doctors of the Sorbonne, and some Capuchins and Dominicans took the Popes part: but they were reduc'd to reason by a Privy Signet Let∣ter, that sent 'em to make a noise above a hunderd Leagues off: upon which all the rest lay'd their Fingers upon their Mouths.
The Pope, inform'd of all this, would not make use of his Ecclesiasti∣cal Thunders, for fear of exposing 'em to the derision of a Prince that little regarded 'em; but rather desiring to find out some expedient for an accommo∣dation, he order'd Cardinal de Estree to be acquainted, that he would willing∣ly hearken to him, in reference to the Differences which he had with the Most Christian King. The Cardinal answer'd the Pope, that he was infinitely oblig'd to his Holiness for his particular goodness to∣ward him, and that he was at his wits end to see that he could not correspon'd with it, the King his Master having ty'd up his hands in this Affair, and forbid him to meddle with it so long as his Ambassador was at Rome. An answer so dry and sapless, did not however extinguish his Holinesse's de∣sire to contribute all that lay in his power toward an Amicable conclusion of this Contest, and touch'd with the misfor∣tunes which his Excommunication would bring upon Christendom, through the King of Frances obstinacy, which he had made appear by so many publick
Acts, he resolv'd to take it off. By this means St. Lewis's Church became fee to all the world, and as well Ita∣lians as French resorted to it. This manner of procedure was lookt upon as a great Weakness in the Holy Father, and a most inexcusable want of Courage, after such a Stiffness as the Pope had shew'd: but if we rightly consider things, we shall find that the Pope never did a more prudent Act, nor more charitable, or more becoming the Vicar of Christ. He knew those spiritual Weapons, so terrible to all the truly faithful, were not put into his hands but only to reduce under obedience such as obstinately stray'd from the Truth; and to pre∣vent others through a holy fear from fol∣lowing their Example. For these rea∣sons therefore he thought it behov'd him to make use of 'em upon this oc∣casion, piously perswaded, that Corrup∣tion and Error were not got up to that high degree in France, as to be in sen∣sible of such Celestial Chastisements. But when he saw they had not that success which he expected, rather quite the Contrary, that his proceeding in that manner, how just so ever it were, had exasperated the minds of men a∣gainst
him; that all the Clergy was ready to revolt, and that he had all the reason in the world to be afraid of a Schism in the Church, he relented on a sudden, to stop the Torrent of Perdi∣tion. He never consulted Flesh or Blood, but without any regard to what all the World could say of him upon such a Relaxation, he thought it his duty to sacrifice a vain point of Honour to the Glory of God. During these Transactions the Ele∣ctor of Cologne dy'd, leaving three fair Episcopal Principalities vacant, and se∣veral pretenders to 'em. The Cardi∣nal of Furstenburgh was one of the first that appear'd upon the Stage. He was al∣ready Coadjutor in the chiefest of these Principalities, but he had not been con∣firm'd by the Pope; and so all things were to begin again. And indeed 'twas he who lost the most by the quarrels between France and Rome. For the Pope who perfectly well knew which way that Prelate was devoted, never minded the doing any thing for him at such a time as that. So that the Cardinal, who was not ignorant of his condition, wrote several times to Father la Chaise, and endeavour'd to make him
sensible that the Affair of the Franchises could not be of that importance to the K. as a concern, which indeed was the con∣cern of all the Lower Rhine, and of some∣thing more then that; and therefore that it would be convenient to release it to the Pope, at least for some time till the King might be more at leisure to reassume his Challenges. The same things were likewise several times repre∣sented to the King by Prince Ferdinand of Furstenburgh; and certain it is, that the King had given way, if la Chaise, who mortally hated the Pope, out of a desire of revenge, had not diverted him, telling him, that he might if he pleas'd himself procure the Election of Cardi∣nal Furstenburgh, without having recourse to such a burdensome expedient: That there needed no more for that purpose, ten to let the Chapters understand his pleasure; or to make the business more sure, he might order some of his Forces to advance that way: which the King did, under pretence of securing to the Capitulars the Freedom of their suffra∣ges; but in reallity to deprive 'em of it, and force 'em to comply with his good Will and Pleasure.
His Ambassador d' Avaux declar'd at the same time to the Sates of Holland, that his Master understood that the Three Chapters were to be left to their free choice; and that no Prince was to med∣dle in their Affairs; and therefore he threaten'd that if any Prince should pre∣tend to busie himself in what concern'd him not, he would be ready to side with the Chapters that were interrupted and injur'd in their Rights. But nothing was so pleasant, as the compliment which his Envoy made to those of Liege. He told 'em, that the King his Master out of that Affection and Friendship he had for 'em, had sent ten thousand men to quarter near their City, at a vast charge, to support 'em in their freedom of Election; which however, he hop'd would be in favour of Prince William, Cardinal of Furstenburgh; other∣wise that he could not forbear to put 'em in mind, that the half of their City depended upon the County of Chini, which belong'd to him. These menaces, how terrible soever they were, how ever wrought little o∣ther effect, then to make the Chapter encline, not to Cardinal Furstenburgh, for they lookt upon him as an Enemy of
their Country; but in favour of Cardi∣nal de Bouillon, whom they offer'd the King several times, to Elect. But Father la Chaise put a spoke in his Wheel. He was Bouillon's Enemy; and therefore without ceasing laid before the King, that if once that Cardinal should arrive to that degree of Soveraignty, he would infallibly call to mind all the acts of Injustice that, as he pretends, have been done his Family, and his late Im∣prisonment in the Bastille. He suppor∣ted all this with the secret causes of that Prelates disgrace, which made a deep impression in the Kings mind, and put him in fear in earnest, that if he should once come to be Prince of Liege, he would presently side with his Ene∣mies. However it were, we know not, but we have since found that la Chaise was no Conjurer, in regard we have seen by what that Cardinal did at Rome, how faithful and Affectionate he was to the King. I have formerly said that Father la Chaise did a great deal of Mischief, but no body any good; which, to speak ge∣nerally is very true; but as there is no general Rule without Exceptions, there may be found an Exception in this, as
well as in others; and the Count of Marce, Nephew to Madam Maintenon af∣fords us one. He sought in Marriage the Daughter of M. de Boisfrane, Superin∣tendant of Monsieur's House; but turn'd out of his Place by reason of his Rapines and Extortions. Father la Chaise was very much his Friend, and therefore Madam Maintenon desir'd him to assist her toward the concluding of that Match, which otherwise they durst not propose, in regard the young Lady had refus'd the Duke of Roquelaure, when the Duke his Father was at the highest of his Gandeur. However she had a great Por∣tion to the value of eight hundred thousand Livres, which was a Sum suf∣ficient to tempt a more considerable Nobleman, then the Count of Marce. He therefore lookt upon the Lady as one that might be the making of him; and thought he could never make the Confessor amends for the great pains he had taken to bring about the Match: tho he did nothing but what he was bound in gratitude to do. For Madam Maintenon had done him greater services then that, and he stood in need of her assistance every day.
But we cannot say the same in reference to the Marquiss of Richlieu, a person of as little Reputation as ever any at Court; ill shap'd, and very slender witted; yet marri'd about two years before to one of the Loveliest and the Richest Heiresses of the Kingdom, Mademoiselle de Ma∣zarin, Daughter of the Duke of Ma∣zarin, who married one of the Cardi∣nals Neeces, upon condition that he should assume the name and Arms; for, as for this man, he was the Son of Mar∣shall de Meilleraye, Governor of Brittany. Every body knows how he livd with his Wife, by the report of several Stories, and therefore we shall say no more, but only this, that by that Marriage he had two Children, a Son who is cal∣led the Duke of Meillaraye, and a Daugh∣ter, the Lady we are now speaking of. In regard she was very much like her Mother, both in the Features of her Face, as in her Humour, and that the usual Proverb in the Duke of Mazrins Mouth was, That good Doggs hunt by Kind, he was very much afraid that she would likewise no less resemble her in her Life and Behaviour. To prevent this, he resolv'd to keep her so short, and to bestow such a vertuous Education upon
her in her Infancy, as might vanquish the proneness of his Daughter to evil. To this purpose he always kept her in Nun∣neries; in the custody of Good and Re∣ligious Governesses, who discours'd to her of nothing but God and his Saints; and for recreation, read to her nothing but the Lives of St. Reine, or St. Catherin of Siena, who had deserv'd so much by her Devotion as to be marri'd to Christ himself, who descended from Heaven on purpose to espouse her. Now tho all this bigotry did no way a∣gree with her Genius, she was forc'd to be contented with it, till she came to be Seventeen or Eighteen years of Age. At what time the Bent of her Wit and disposition beginning to fix, she grew wily and cunning, and began to converse with the young Nuns that were less re∣serv'd, who discover'd to her many things of which she was ignorant be∣fore, procur'd her Romances and No∣vels, and many times the Courtship of Young Gallants. Of which the Duke being inform'd, he resolv'd frequently to shift her from one place to another, to the end she might not have time to en∣ter into familiarities: besides, he never ntrusted her but to the custody of cer∣tain
old Nuns, of whom he was secure. But what signifi'd all these precautions to force back the nature of an Amorous young Girle, that glori'd in deceiving her Overseers, and thought it no less necessary to boot. I saw her at Henne∣bout which is a Government in Bretagne belonging to her Father. He had plac'd her in the Abby de la Joye, under the Tu∣ition of an Antient and vertuous Matron, calld Madam de Pleve, who was own Aunt to the Dutches of Portsmouth. There for some Months the Orders of the Duke of Mazarin were exactly obey'd, and she was kept very close. But in a little time she had so well learnt to win the heart of her Governess, and the other. Nuns by her Flatteries and Complacen∣cies, that they thought it not so rea∣sonable to be so rigorous and so severe, to so amiable a young Girle. But he that contributed most to her liberty was one Father Cronier, Director of the Con∣vent, and Confessor to Madam de Pleve, in whom she had as great a Faith as in St. Bernard himself, the Founder of the Order. This Monk was fallen in Love with Mademoiselle de Mazarin, and left nothing omitted to please her. He put himself into red habit, carefully
cleans'd his Teeth, and cast as many smirking looks upon her as a young Gal∣lant in a white Perriwig could have done. The young Lady who the very first time took pleasure in hearing the Gayities of his wanton Addresses, nere gave him so much as a frown, but mau∣gre the greasie Fatt, which is insepera∣ble from Monks, she thought 'twas bet∣ter to have a greasie swaggbelly'd Lover then none at all. 'Twas observ'd also that she went drest more then she was wont to do, when she was to see him, and that their Cheek-by-jowles lasted a long while. This half-Inclination last∣ed till she had got her Arms at Liber∣ty, and that it was permitted her to be visited by Sparks and Gallants of this World. But then she found such a dif∣ference between them and Monks, that she utterly and without compassion a∣bandon'd the poor and unfortunate Bernardin, who was ready to dye for Madness. I never saw a young Girle so wild. She would come sometimes into the speaking-room, in the Habit of a Nun, with her vaile over her face, and tell those that stay'd for her, that Ma∣demoiselle de Mazarin was very ill, and could not come to 'em. At other times
she would appear in Man's Apparel with a huge Perriwig and a Hat and Plume of Feathers; and in that disguise would play a thousand apish Tricks, and what ever habit she had on, her wild Humours were still the same. She frankly confest that the sight of a Hat rejoyc'd her, and that nothing was so Melancholly to her as Company without a Hat. But she told me one day a thing that was much more pleasant then that. We were tal∣king one day of the excessive Devotion of her Father, at which time she never scrupld to call him Fool and Visiona∣ry, and recounted to me, that while the Duke and the Dutchess liv'd together, he would never lye with her, before she had repeated a whole Rosary in his presence, and had been at Prayers with him every Evening upon her Knees, which together with the Litanies of the Virgin, lasted at least an Hour: So that, said she, the poor Lady my Mother, for want of Patience, was often forc'd to go without her Husbands kindness. This was the Character of Mademi∣selle de Mazarin's Genius, who seeking all manner of ways to free her self from the flavery wherein she was con∣fin'd, took a passionate fancy to a young
Gentleman who had no other good qua∣lities to recommend him, but only that he was the Son of the President of the Par∣liament of that Province: and that was no great matter. For there are some of those Presidents that make no great Fi∣gure: nevertheless the business was gone so far that measures were taken to mar∣ry her privately, and get her out of the Convent, over the Walls that joyn to the River, where there was a Bark ready to conveigh the two Lovers to a Bark that was hir'd on purpose to car∣ry 'em into England, where the Dutchess of Mazarin, protected by the Queen her Kinswoman had promisd to receive her. This hairbrain'd project was just ready to be put in execution, when Providence that takes care of Madfolks and Children, disappointed the contri∣vance, by means of the confidence which they put in the Seneschal of the City, from whom they expected assistance. He promis'd to lend 'em two thousand Crowns, and by that means delay'd 'em fifteen days, while he in the mean time gave notice to the Duke, who came Post to Hennebond, and took his Daugh∣ter from thence, not without letting her taste of his displeasure in the terrible
Reprimands that he gave her. After∣wards he carry'd her to Paris, where he lockt her up among the Capuchins; hoping she would be there more strictly kept, as being a House that observ'd an exact Austerity, and where there would be always a watchful Eye over her. He also most devoutly recommend∣ed her to the custody of the Bless'd St. Clement, who arriv'd there a little before, and who in all the usual forms accustom'd among the Saints, was to signalize his coming by some authentick favour. But all these precautions prov'd fruitless: for the Female Capuchins be∣ing in a hurry upon the change of their House, could not so diligently look af∣ter their Prisoner but that she ran away with the Marquiss of Richlieu; at least the Monks told the dispairing D. of Ma∣zarin so, who went to throw himself at the Kings feet, & baule out his misfor∣tune all over the Court: which servd to make sport for those unlucky waggs that lye in wait for such opportunities. But perhaps he would not have made so loud a noise had he known the truth of the story, for you must know that his good Friend Father la Chaise was the occasion and contriver of it. He is re∣lated
to the Abbess of the Convent, and spar'd for no pains at this time to per∣swade her that the Duke of Mazarin was a Churle or Cynic, that would make his Daughter run mad, if he had her much longer in his keeping. That a Young Lady of her condition was not to be so rudely dealt with; and that assuredly the least mischief that could befall her House would be this, that she would dishonour the Convent by some Foppish Trick or other: to prevent which, the best way would be to marry her privately, and send her to her Mother, till the Duke could be brought to hear reason, which he would undertake himself to do. After which he propos'd the Mar∣quiss of Richlieu, which the Abbes at first did not think a suitable match; never∣theless, she submitted to his Reasons. What do you find a miss in the Mar∣quiss, said he, is he not descended from a Wedlock equal to that of the Duke of Mazarin? It may be he is not so rich; but good Cousin, be pleas'd to consider, that the Riches of this World are but Vanities; nd when the eternal salvation of a oul is the thing in question, as it is ow the case of Mademoiselle de Mazarin,
we are not in the least to insist upon Wealth. Thus the business was concluded be∣tween the Father and the Abbes, and the Bishop of St. Malo's was in the Plot. For that Bishop, who has actually a Wife and Children living, many times busies himself with other matters besides say∣ing his Breviary, and was one of the Principal Actors in that Comedy Therepon the Marquiss of Richlie was presened to the fair Lady, and the marriage discours'd of at the same time. 'Tis true likewise, at first his Mee and his want of Wit did somewhat dis∣relish her, but at length she rather chose to accept him than to live all her days in a Cloyster. Presently she was marrid in the Convent it self, and the Prelate before mention'd perform'd the Ceremony. Which done, they procur'd a Man's Habit for the new Marchioness and in that dress she went into her Hus∣bands Coach. They drove directly to Cours la Rheme, where they found one of the Bishops travalling Coache ready, which carry'd 'em to St De where they took laid Horses, rode Po to Callies, and thence got over int England.
But some scrupulous persons, that would have an Author give 'em an account of every thing he sees, will ask me per∣haps, how Father la Chaise came to in∣trigue himself so far in this Affair? I can say nothing as to that, unless it were perchance out of his Affection for Ma∣dam de Mazarin, who was his Patron and his Benefactors Neice. It might be also that the fifty thousand Livres which the Marquis of Richlieu charg'd upon the Banker Grusle, for his Brother M. la Chaise, might contribute something toward the matter. For he knew not well other wise how to raise the mo∣ney which he was to pay for Captain of the Guards of the Gate, which he had purchas'd of the Marquiss of St. Va∣ier for four hundred thousand Livers; which was a cheap penny worth, con∣sidering it had been sold for five hun∣der'd. However 'twas too much for a Begger as he was to raise: and if beside the fifty thousand Livres, the Confes∣sor had not made a shift to sell some Benefices in hugger mugger, he had ne∣ver had, as now he has, the Keys of the Louvre in his Custody.
But let us leave these trifles, and proceed to Affairs of greater conse∣quence. About this time Monsieur Sebret, Envoy Extraordinary to Siam, return'd home, and with him came Father Tachart, a Jesuit, Ambassador from the New Convert, to his Holi∣ness, and his Most Christian Majesty. He was accompani'd by eight Mandarins, who attended him as his Gentlemen. This Father brought to the King the Ratifi∣cation of the Treaty of Alliance made with the King of Siam, by virtue of which that Prince surrender'd into his hands several Places of great Impor∣tance. The Chevalier Fourbin return'd also in the same Vessel: whose too great favour had render'd him odious to M. Constance, who was afraid of being thrown out of the Saddle by him, and therefore could no longer suffer him in Place. So that Fourbin was forc'd to give way to the strongest, and be gone. But this giving way did not satisfie the others Ambitious and Re∣vengeful spirit. He wrote therefore to Father la Chaise upon this Subject, com∣plaining highly of Fourbin, calling him Braggadochio and Boutefeu, who setting a high value upon himself, yet having
a very small Fortune, was more like to spoyle then accomodate Affairs. How∣ever fearing he should not be believ'd upon his word, and that his Majesty should resent the ill usage of the Che∣valier, he engag'd Father de Fontenay, Superiour of the House of Siam, to write in the same stile, wherein he serv'd Constance so well, that the poor Che∣valier, tho Nepew to the Bishop of Beau∣vais, was glad of a Fregate of twelve Guns, after he had been Admiral of the Siam Seas. More then this, they seizd all his Baggage in Britagn under pretence of goods that were lyable to pay Cu∣stom; nor could he get 'em again with∣out a great deal of trouble, after they had been search'd and detain'd above six month. But 'twas no wonder they were so kind to the Sieur Constance, in regard he was the Man to whom the King was beholding for all the Power which he has in Siam. This Man was a Grecian by Birth, born at Cephalonia, an Island belonging to the Venetians, of very mean extracti∣on, tho Father Trachart will have him to be the Son of the Governour; where∣in he is much deceivd; for I have been at Cephalonia my self, and know his Fa∣mily.
His name is Constance Queralcky, and not Phancon, as the same Father as∣serts: or if he assum'd that name, it was only the better to conceal himself. Now in regard he was reduc'd so low as to beg Alms, his Mother got him to be a Ship-Boy in an English Vessel, where he was instructed in the Protestant Religion. Afterwards he came to be a common Sea∣man, and as such a one went to the East In∣dies, where it was no difficult thing for a young fellow that had wit to get money, with which he traded for himself, and in process of time was Consul for the English. By that means he became known at Court, and particularly at that of the Baccalon, or Prime Minister of Siam, who at the end of his Consulship took him for his Secretary. In that Employment he won the very heart of the Boccalon, and he the Affection of the King by his Secretaries management; so that offer∣ing to undertake an Ambassy at half the expence which the Moors requir'd, he was sent, and upon his return, the Boc∣calon being dead, he was preferr'd in his Room. At that time it was, that the Jesuits perceiving how useful he might be to 'em, ceas'd not to haunt him, till they had over rul'd him to
quit the Protestant Religion, which he abjur'd before Father Thomas, and Father Maldonnar; who immediately wrote to la Chaise, joyntly with Father Verbiest, and then propos'd to him the Project of settling the French in that Kingdom, and by consequence the ruin of the Dutch Trade in that Country. This design pleas'd the King, and Father la haise was order'd to write a Letter to Con∣ance, congratulating his Conversion, and withall to send him a Prayer Book ichly bound. Good God! how was Constance over joyd when he saw him∣self prevented, and sought to by a Great King. He answer'd the Kings kindness with all the marks of Protection that he was able to afford the French; and be∣sides that, he wrote to his Majesty to ffer him his most humble Service, pro∣esting withall that he should be always ady to undertake any thing in order hereunto. He did the same to M. la Chaise, with whom he engad himself om that time forward to hold a most timate Correspondence: and to shew im that he intended to be as good as is word, he insinuated the Jesuits into e Kings favour, by means of the Ma∣ematicks, which won him to that de∣gree,
that he suffer'd 'em to Convert his Subjects in his very Court; and more then that, he bid 'em not be out of hopes of Converting himself. And upon these hopes it was, that Father Couplet, a Dutchman born, was sent into France with two men, who styl'd them∣selves Mandarins, to hear what was be∣come of their Ambassadors, tho the King of Siam never dreamt of any such thing. This was so concerted, to tempt his Majesty to send an Embassy thither, which no body could take an oceasion to comment upon, or tax him from thence for having beg'd the Friendship and Alliance of the Indian Prince. Father Couplet had long and frequent Conferences with la Chaise concerning this Enterprize, and shew'd him the great advantages that would redound to the Society, which could hope no less then to engross the greatest part of the Immense Wealth which lies in the Pagods of those Countries. And as for his Majesty, not to speak of the great Ho∣nour it would be to him, to have procur'd the Conversion of a Kingdom so far distant, he had all the probabili∣ties imaginable to make himself Master of it in time, if the King of Siam could
be once perswaded to admit French Forces into his Country, upon pretence of defending him against the Hollanders, after they had once perswaded him that they were his mortal Enemies, who only sought an occasion to poure themselves into his Country and compleat the Con∣quest of it; the business of Bantam very much assisting 'em to make him give credit to their Story. The Father ad∣ded, that this design would be so much the more easie to the King, in regard the Indians being nothing near so well train'd in War as the Europians, they could not make any formidable resi∣stance, unless they were first instructed and exerciz'd by the French who were perfectly skill'd in military Discipline. But in regard the King was a Prince ex∣tremely Generous, and who made re∣nown the only mark of all his great de∣signs, it might be readily believd that he would not be sparing of Commanders and Officers. This, said Father Coup∣let, is the Posture of Affairs which seem to me to be in such a very good condition as not to be neglected. For in short, altho there be no great likelihood of subduing this Empire so soon, yet the King will have always one great
advantage by this means, viz. to be a per∣petual Thorn in the Hollanders sides, and so settle a good Trade for his own Subiects. However certain it is, that if the King undertakes this business, he will prove more successful then. I dare promise to my self. M. Constance may be safely rely'd upon; for he is a man who is already at our beck: and a few more Caesses and Marks of Distinction from he King will bring him entirely to his Devotion. ther la Chaise being thus convinc'd, himself, easily overrul'd the King, who appointed the Chevalier de Chaumont for is Ambassador, and gave him six Jesuits learned in the Mathematicks to accom∣pany him. Father la Chaise wrote also to Father Verbiest, at Pquin, to recom∣mend 'em to him, and that Letter was made publick: however there is no cre∣dit to be given to it; for it was a coun∣terfeit Peice, to hide from the Eyes of the World their old Practises and de∣signs. In the mean time the Hollanders, who suspected the worst, engag'd Sultan Agni, King of Bantam to refuse the French Am∣bassador all manner of Audience, Re∣lief or Harbour in his Ports, and to send
him Orders to depart his Roads, so that he was constrain'd to continue his Voy∣age for Siam, where he was well receiv'd: and when he went away he left the fore∣mention'd Chevalier de Fourbin, whom the King desir'd to have for his Lord High Admiral, and in the Presence of the Ambassador gave him a Magnificent Scimitar, which is the Present which he makes to all his Generals. At the same time, he sent Ambassadors to our Monarch, who were receiv'd with ex∣traordinary Magnificence, and who were carrid over all the Conquer'd Countries to imprint in 'em a high Idea of France. They concluded a Treaty of Alliance with his Majesty, and carry'd away with 'em a great number of Officers and Souldiers of the Kings Guards for the King their Master, who had but a very ill time of it. For the then King of Siam coming to dye, and his Successor not enduring to be a King only in sha∣dow, while the French who were Masters of all his most considerable places were the real and substantial Kings, caus'd his Subjects to fall upon 'em pell mell and put em all to the Sword, especially the Jesuits. 'Tis true some few of the French escap'd and fled to the Hollanders
who were so generous as to Protect 'em, tho but a little before they had been with their Men of War to attack Para∣maribo, with a design to have made themselves Masters of Surinam, from whence however they were repulsd and forc'd to retire with loss. Thus unfortunately ended the business of Siam, which had been carrid on by the Jesuits, and undertaken by the Counsel and Advice of la Chaise, which cost the King above three Millions, and the Lives of above two thousand Men. Now then let us return to Europe again. The King of England being resolv'd to abolish the Test and Penal Laws, set forth a Declaration for Liberty of Con∣sience, and order'd the Archbishop of Canterbury and the rest of the Bishops, to cause the said Declaration to be read in all Churches of their Diocesses at the end of Divine Service▪ but the Bishops refusing to give obedience to the Kings Commands, several of 'em who alleadgd that it was contrary to the Laws of the Land and their own Consciences, were sent to the Tower; and orders given to proceed against 'em according to Law. The King therefore finding he could not compass his ends this way, took another
course; which was to send Commissio∣ners all over England in order to per∣swade the people and Magistrates to ad∣mit of this new Imposition. But they returning and declaring to the King the little inclination which they found in the People to so great a Change, and that they did not believe that any of the Justices of the Peace would consent to it, the King enter'd into a design of laying aside all the Magistrates in the Kingdom, that refus'd to yield him O∣bedience in this particlar. As bold a Project, as ever was; but in my opinion not to be compar'd with the rashness of the means which he went about to make use of, to bring it to pass. He knew he could not do this unless he had a good Army on Foot, ready, and in a condition to second his commands, and in which he might confide. This was a Gordian Knot: but he thought to have cut it easily, by forcing all the Officers to change their Religion, espe∣cially those of the Fleet, which he thought would be of more use to him. There∣upon he began to send his Monks and Priests on board the Men of War, with orders to say Mass: which they went roundly about to have done: but the
Seamen all in an uproar, presently seiz'd upon their persons and would have thrown 'em over board, had not their Officers interpos'd their authority to save those miserable Creatures, who were sent packing out of the danger. The King of England judging advanta∣giously of the defference and respect of the Officers upon this occasion, re∣solvd to make the best of it. To that purpose he went aboard the Admiral, and orderd all the Officers to bring their Commissions thither. After which he declar'd to 'em all, that it was his pleasure that they should quit their old Heresie and embrace the Roman Catholick Religion. To which the Officers made this resolute answer; that they were ready to obey him in all those things that were just and re∣sonable, but that they would never be∣tray their Consciences. The King would fain have perswaded 'em that what he requir'd of 'em was nei∣ther contrary to Justice nor Religion, and that he had no other aim then to procure the salvation of their Souls. But finding he could not bring his de∣sign about, he declar'd to 'em that he would give 'em no longer than twenty
four hours to consider of it; after which, he would take away the Com∣missions of all such as would not obey his orders, and so away he went. However finding 'em as resolute as be∣fore after the time expir'd, he told em 'twas an Affair of two great importance to be resolv'd in so short a time, and therefore he granted a longer respit. I must confess I cannot comprehend what King James thought of himself to under∣take an Affair of this nature in so short a time, and with so much huffing Haugh∣tiness. How! — in six Months to stuff his Capital City with Monks and Fryars; to take away the Colleges of Oxford from the Protestants; to settle the Ca∣tholicks in their Churches! Give Li∣berty of Conscience, abolish the Test and Penal Laws, which the English look up∣on as the Touchstone of their Religion! Imprison their Bishops, for whom they have so high a Reverence! Threaten the Magistrates to turn 'em out of their Places! and lastly to order all the Na∣val Officers to change their Religion in 24 hours upon pain of loosing their Commissions; and himself to go aboard the Men of War, in the midst of 'em, to give his commands, in Person, at a
time when he was hatching to impose a suspected Prince upon em, is that which Posterity will hardly believe. He must needs be a great Enemy to his Repose and his Grandeur, who labourd after this manner to ruin both. Who ever drove the Chariot of Arbitrary Power thus Jehu-like? The Most Christi∣an King, who perhaps has done as much as any other before him, durst never carry it so high. But King James thought himself to be a Hercules, a Mars, who was able of himself to subdue a whole Nation. Now if he had continu'd to make good this character of Authority and Undauntedness, we should have said that all this had proceeded from a Courage truly Heroick; but he flaggd, when adversity befell him, and all that can be thought or said the most in ho∣nour of him is this, that all that while he was seeking for a Crown of Mar∣tyrdom. While these things were thus trans∣acted in England, they were preparing for War in France. For the Pope had granted a Bull to dispence with Prince Clement of Barvaria's Age; and in re∣gard he was the most formidable Com∣petitor with Cardinal Furstenburgh, 'twas
greatly to be fear'd that he would be pre∣ferd in the Chapter of Cologne; more es∣pecially because the Pope oppos'd the lat∣ter. Thus the Business of the Franchises, that signify'd nothing in the Main, was at length very prejudicial to the King: for he drave it on with that Passion, that he forgot the Cardinals Interests which were more substantially his own. And tho the Cardinal had often enough im∣plor'd his aid, and frequently written to la Chaise about it, he never thought it worth his time to hearken to him, till the Pope had granted Prince Cle∣ment a Dispensation. But then the King reflecting severely what a con∣siderable advantage the advancement of the Cardinal would be to him, began to think of it in good Earnest, and to that purpose wrote a submissive Letter to the Pope, which he order'd the Car∣dinal d' Estree to deliver to him. He also made very advantageous offers to Ranonci, the Popes Nuncio upon conditi∣on that his Holiness would give his confir∣mation to Cardinal Furstenburgh, and take no notice of Prince Clement. But the Pope, who could not rely upon the King, considering the affrontive usage which he had receiv'd at his hands, remain'd
inexorable, and had the satisfaction to see himself sought to with as much respect, as before he had been treated with disdain and contempt. In short, whithin a few days after he gave out a Bull of Eligibility for the young Prince, not having vouchsaf'd so much as to see or to hear the Agents for Cardinal Furstenburgd. He also forbid his Envoy to stile himself from that time forward Agent for the Elector of Cologne. Who finding that he could not be admitted to Audience, caus'd Placarts to be set up in all the Corners of the Streets, containing an Appeal to a future Council, in the name of his Master, against the Abusive Proceedings of the Pope. But the Cardinal knew that if he stay'd for justice to be done him by the future Council, he might wait long enough for that which would come too late. At the same time news was brought to Rome of the election of the Baron d Elderen to the Bishoprick & Principality of Liege, of the Baron of Plettenburgh to that of Munster; who both sent to the Pope, to desire their confirmations, which were forthwith granted 'em accor∣dingly.
All this ill success vext the King of France to the Soul; who then too late to his cost acknowledg'd the irrepable errors which he had committed. The first in spending so much time to sup∣port with that heate as he had done the Right of the Franchises, and loosing the opportunity of having an Elector at his Devotion. The second, in ob∣stinately insisting to have Furstenburgh made Bishop of Liege, and refusing the Election of the Cardinal Bouillon, to which the Chapter had so many times endeavourd to gain his consent. So that he could not forbear manifesting his displeasure against la Chaise, by whose advice he had been guided more then by any other mans. In so much that he told him in very harsh language, that never any business that was manag'd by a Jesuit came to good: And that it would be better for em to mind their Paedagoging in their Schools, then to med∣dle with State Affairs. After which he was above a month before he would so much as speak to him again; so that the Father thought himself lost forever. He came to Madam Maintenon all in an Alarum, importunately beseeching her to speak to the King in his behalf,
who went about to make him answe∣rable for the ill success of his Affiairs: And yet, Madam, said he, you can bear me witness, that there is no man more purely zealous for his Majesty then my self, and that for these twenty years I have labour'd day and night in his Service without taking any rest. You know it Madam, you have seen with your eyes the greatest part of what I have done; Nevertheless, as the re∣ward of all my labours, the King for∣sakes me quite forlorn, and treats me as if I had betrayd him and his King∣dom; and all this, because the business of Cardinal Furstenburgh, wherein God knows, I took a world of pains, has not succeeded to his wish. Tell me, reply'd Madam Maintenon, whats the reason you have thus engag'd him in a War, the consequences of which are enough to be fear'd? could you be ignorant that the advancement of Cardinal Fur∣stenburgh to the Bishoprick of the De∣ceas'd Elector of Cologne might have se∣cur'd us against the League of Auspurg, which is now pouring down upon Us, like a flight of Vultures. For in short, when once the Hollanders Arm, it is a signal to all the rest. Oh! Madam, re∣ply'd
the Father, they were well bea∣ten in the preceding War, tho England did not take our side; what may we not then assure our selves now England and we are joyn'd together. The King of England, reply'd Madam de Maintenon, has need of his Forces at home; and be∣lieve me he is in no condition to suc∣cour his Neighbours. Let it be never so little reply'd the Father, it will be always something. After all, the King is in a condition to prevent his Enemies by a strong Invasion of the Rhine, and by renewing his Alliance with the Turks will find 'em work enough. But sup∣pose nothing of all this were true or probable, must I bear the blame of a misfortune, which in good Policy could not be prevented? I do not say so, re∣plyd Madam Maintenon, interupting him, but that his Majesty ought to have regard to the integrity of your inten∣tions, and the services which you have done him, and should restore you to his favour. I promise you to do my utmost, and I make no question but easily to bring it to pass: for the King is a person of too much reason, not to consider the Fatality of the Thing. Never then torment your self so much, but assure your
self this storm will soon blow over: You are not accustom'd to Disgraces. No indeed Madam, answerd the Father, and I must confess, 'tis a very hard case, to see my self thus ill treated by a Prince, to whose Interestd have without the least scruple of Conscience sacrific'd the Church, the Holy See my own Order, and my self to ot: and so saying the Tears dropt fro his Eyes, as big as Pearls, such was his Greif and Anguish of mind. But Madam de Mi spoke to the King in his behalf, and within a few days he was admitted, and his Oracular Counsel as much consulted as ever. The K. sent to Rome the Sieur de Chauh to deliver a Letter to his Holiness, touch∣ing the differences that were between 'em, but the Pope refus'd to receive it, so that Cardinal d' Estree was constraind to Print it. In the mean while the King seizd Avignon, and threaten'd to enter Italy. He also forbid Cardinal Ranonci to stir out of Paris; and told him he should have the same usage as his Am∣bassador met with. And in regard the King was afraid least the Pope should come to excommunicate him together with all the rest of his Subjects, to pre∣vent
that blow, he appeal'd to a future Council, in reference to all whatever the Pope might do against him, and con∣firm'd his Appeal by a Decree of Parla∣ment. In the mean time great Preparations were made for the War on every side. The Hollanders more especially set forth a potent Fleet; which gave great jealou∣sie to the Kings of France and England, who were both perswaded that these preparations concern'd Them. Their Ambassadors therefore presented Memoirs to the States, to represent their just suspitions, upon their setting forth such a Fleet, and at a season when others began to lay up their Ships, and therefore they desir'd their High and Mightinesses to let 'em know to what end all these preparations tended. The French Ambassador added, that he made no question but that their Fleet was design'd against England; but if it were, his Master declard that the strict Alli∣ance and Obligations that were between that Prince and Him, would not permit him to suffer such an Innovation, with∣out succouring him with all his Forces; of which he was willing to give 'em no∣tice, before it came to open War, to
the end they might not plead ignrance. He told 'em more over that the King was resolvd to uphold the Cardinal of Fur∣stenburgh and the Chapter of Cologne in the full and free enjoyment of their Rights and Priviledges, against all that should give 'em any disturbance. And in regard he was inform'd of new mo∣tions and new Cabals to their prejudice, he was no less desirous to let 'em un∣derstand his Sentiments in that parti∣cular. This was the Declaration of the French Ambassador, by which it may be seen, that the King was not absolutely igno∣rant of the Hollanders design; at least that his suspitions were conformable to the truth. Nevertheless, through a Fa∣tality, which I apprehend so much the less, because it is not usual for that Prince to be guilty of such failings, he heard the Thunder grumble, and saw the Arm just lifted up to strike, without taking any just measures to ward off the Blow: and upon this occasion where there was no need of any more then fol∣lowing the Light of common Sence, to guard himself from the danger that threaten'd him, it seem'd as if he had been well pleasd to have it fall upon
him. In short, if instead of sending the Dauphin with an Army to the Rhine, had he march'd directly to Mastricht; or had enterd Holland by the way of Bon, of which the Cardinal of Fursten∣burgh was then Master, as he did in the year 72, or had got ready his own Fleet, as the Hollanders advanc'd in their Mari∣sine Preparations, is it not true that the Hollanders being obligd to look af∣ter their own defence would never have permitted the sending away their Army by Sea? For tis in vain to object that the King of Sweden had lent 'em Men; and that the Elector of Brandenburgh had a considerable force ready to march. Fifteen or Twenty thousand Men would never have been sufficient to stop the Ar∣my of France; the sole approach of which would have utterly disappointed the great and brave design which they had upon England, and which was so for∣tunately accomplish'd. But instead of this, the King allurd by the certain hopes of taking two or three Places, not able to make any re∣sistance, snapt at that Bait, and sent away the Dauphin with a mighty Preparati∣on to conquer a pitiful Nook of Land, while on the other side the Prince of
Orange call'd in by the English, and assi∣sted by the Hollanders, made sure of three powerful Kingdoms, the preser∣vation of which was of such vast impor∣tance to his Majesty, and King James his Confederate. In the name of God, was ever such a sottish clumsie mistake com∣mitted; or was the like ever seen or heard of since Kings first reign'd and wagd War one upon another? For my my part I must, in this, acknowledge the effects of an unknown and superiour Pro∣vidence. By what I have said 'tis apparent, that the end of that year was fatal to two Kings: nevertheless, when the Dauphin return'd to Court he was overwhelm'd with Congratulations. All men cry'd out Victory, Victory: the Soveraign Courts, The Magistracy of the City harangu'd him; the Poets squeezd their Braines for Panegyricks, and the King himself spoke his Elogy several times in pub∣lick before all the World, and he mist but little of having a Tryumph design'd him. For my own part who was an eye∣witness of all this, and knew what it behov'd me to think of it, I sighd in private to behold the weakness of men, that oftimes Laugh, and Feast, and Daunce,
when they have much more cause to Weep. I could not think they had so much reason to be merry for winning three Towns the on side, and loos∣ing three Kingdoms on the other. But the French are of this Humour; they look upon all things through prospective Glasses; and those things that are to their disadvantage they behold with that end which lessens the Objects, but those things that please 'em they view through the other end that magnifies whatever they see and brings it close to the sight. However it were the Prince of O∣range embark'd his men and set Sail. 'Tis true he was a little delay'd by a Tempest that did him some damage; but that being soon repaird he set sail again, and fortunately continu'd his voyage. The news of it arriv'd in France, and according to custom, the general re∣port was, that the greatest part  the Ships were cast away, and tha the Prince of Orange was drown'd; and this rumour was supported by the following Staa of Nostredamus, which then made a great noise.
En mil, six cent, Octante huit Albion sera deliveree, D'une Emprise mal digeree Qui ne produira aucun fruit; Et par un Accident estrange Poissons se nourriro'nt d' Orange. In thousand one, six hunder'd eighty Eight Endangerd Albion shall deliverd be From a Contrivance layd but sillilee, The fruit of which shall blasted be by Fate. And through an accident by Heav'n decreed. The hungry Fishes shall on an Orange feed. This was shewn me by an Advocate in a most Triumphant manner, who told me that I was no longer to com∣plain of the Fortune of France, for whose prosperity all the Elements fought. I knew not what answer to give him, for I had never studyd Nostredamus: but the next day I went to visit my old Friend Cousinet, a Counseller in the Par∣liament of Bretagne, a person of Learn∣ing and good Sence, to whom I shewd
my Prophesie. In answer to which, my worthy friend, said he, I have read the Centuries of this Astrologer several times from one end to the other, and I assure you this Stanza is not there: 'tis a piece made at random; and with that he told me a Story; how that in the time of Mazarin's troubles, he being engagd in the contrary Party, and the Cardinal doing all he could to ruin him, he made a Stanza, which he inserted among the rest, and had 'em reprinted on purpose. He repeated it to me, but I have for∣got all but the last Line, which I re∣member concluded thus. Les Rouges Rouges le Rouge assommeront. The Red Red, the Red shall knock oth Head. By the Red Red he meant the Parlia∣ment, and by the Red the Cardinal. Nevertheless, it prov'd as false as that of the Prince of Orange. After which, I suspected all the Centuries that were produc'd upon the present Affairs. So soon as the Prince was ready to set Sail, he put forth a Declaration where∣in he declar'd that being several times
earnestly solicited by a great many Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen of the English Nation to deliver 'em from a Despotick Power, under which they were ready to be subjected, to the destruction of their Priviledges and the Laws of the Realm, and at the same time to free the Church of England from the Persecution which it suffer'd; mov'd therefore with the misfortunes and the seve Captivity which both Religion and the State were likely to fall under, he could not refuse 'em the Succour which they de∣sir'd. That his intentions were not to inv the Crown, as his Enemies gave out,  to make any alteration in the Legitim order of the Succession; but on the other side, that he came to facilitate and procure the Meeting of a Free Parliament, wherin every Member might speak his own Senti∣ments without Constraint, and all together la∣bour the restoration of the Laws and Libertie of the Kingdom to their Primitive vigor, and the nesetling Religion in a flourishing condition, as it was before the Kings un∣just Attempts, which tended only to the en∣tire Destruction of it. That the King of Englands Designs were sufficiently visi by his strict Alliance with the Most Chri∣stian King, and the intimate Ʋnion the
was between 'em, tho the King of France had long profest himself the declar'd Ene∣my of the Kingdom England, the United Provinces, and particularly of the Prote∣stant Religion, which he persecuted even to Rage and Frenzie. That it was clear that King James was govern'd wholly by his Counsels, that his Politicks were regula∣ted by his, and that he aim'd at the same ends. And therefore seeing it was the in∣terest of the People of England not to en∣dure any longer such terrible Innovations he hop'd they would receive him as a Friend, who only came to succour and protect 'em and concur with 'em in restoring Peace to the Church, and Repose and Freedom to every Private Person. This Manifesto no sooner appoar'd in England, but he undid in one day all that he had done before. He restor'd the Bishops to their Diocesses, vacated his High-Commission Court, shut up the Col∣lege of Jesuits and all the Chapels where Mass was publickly said, restor'd the expell'd Fellows in Oxford and Cam∣bridge, and surrender'd back to the City their Charter and their Franchises. Which done, he put himself at the Head of his Army, where he stay'd not long, his heart failing him; and
tho he had promis'd the King of France that he would either beat the Prince of Orange or dye upon the Spot, yet he forsook his Men and retir'd to London, where he said and did many things so unworthy a great and Couragious Prince, such as till then he was thought to be, as surpasses imagination; and when he was alone wept and lamented himself like a man in a kind of desperation. At last, for an accumulation to all the rest, he poorly betook himself to flight and retir'd into France, and so verifi'd the Proverb, He that quits his Country, loses it. As for the Prince of Orange, 'tis evi∣dent, that he never ambition'd the Crown: and I believe that his intenti∣ons were really the same as he declar'd in his Manifesto. For first, it is certain he is a Prince the most stedfast to his Religion of any Prince in the World, and that Religion was the Primum Mo∣bile that caus'd him first to act. Besides, 'tis notoriously known, that in the War of 72, he constantly refus'd the offers that were made him both by France and England to make him Soveraign of the Low Countries; and that in his answer to those that made the proposal, he us'd
these noble expressions, that will re∣main a Glorious Testimony, to future Ages, of his Moderation and Justice. God forbid, said he, that I should ever think of raising my Fortune and my Gran∣deur upon the ruin of my dear Country. The same thing also appeard at Ʋrecht in the year 75, at what time the Pro∣vince of Guelders being quite broken and overlay'd by the excessive expences they had been at, and not knowing which way to raise new supplyes, willing∣ly offer'd to obey him as her Soveraign. But the Generous Prince who saw that what the People did was out of pure necessity, returnd 'em thanks and told 'em withall, that he would be always their Friend, but never their Master. These are stroaks that will appear lovely in the History of this Prince: nor do I well remember where we may meet the like. In the mean time King James, the Queen his Wife, and the suppos'd Prince of Wales arriv'd in France, where there reception was as great as if they had come the raigning King and Queen upon a Visit. The King gave 'em the Castle of St. Germains magnificently furnish'd, and order'd 'em to be serv'd by the Officers of his Household. He assign'd
'em also a hunder'd thousand Crowns a Month for their expences, and ap∣ointed the Guards of his own Body to attend 'em; besides that, his Court was no less throngd than that of Ve∣illes. In short, he was almost as much K. at St. Germains as he had been at White-Hall: and had it lasted, I should have thought him very happy in his misfor∣tunes. But I know not how, the Cour∣tiers, who saw there was nothing to be got there, slunk away by degrees; the Exche∣quer was not so flush as it was before; so that the Castle became at length such a forlorn Desert, that the King and Queen have been often constrain'd for want of Company to play by themselves at Chess, for three or four hours together to pass away their tie. Nor did the misfortunes of this Prince render the Pope a jot the more tra∣ctable. He denyd his Ambassador twice the Cardinals Cap which he requested for Father Peters, and thought he did him a great favour in promising to af∣ford him a place of shelter. The little in∣dulgence which his Holiness had for King James proceeded from his intimate Union with the King of France; for the Quarrel between the two Courts began to fester
every day more and more; and it was come to that, that the King fearing least his Holiness should take up some sini∣ster resolutions against Lavardin, had causd Cardinal Ranonci to be seiz'd in the Convent of St. Lazarus, caus'd him to be guarded in sight by the Sieur de St. Olon, Gentleman of the Cham∣ber in Ordinary, who was put upon him under pretence of keeping him Compa∣ny: and he stay'd with him, till the Kings Ambassador was got safe out of the Territories of the Church. He left Rome in April, after he had given notice of his departure to his Holiness by Cardinal d' Estree, who declar'd to him, that since his Holiness had con∣strain'd his Majesty to recall his Ambas∣sador, he could no longer hope for any accommodation, or of entring into any farther Negotiation, his Majesty having revoak'd all the Power which he had given him till that time. However he departed with the same Pomp that he enter'd, be∣ing accompany'd by the Cardinal d' Dstree, and Maldachini, and attended by above five hunder'd Gentlemen. Some few days after the Marquiss of Cogolludo, the Spanish Embassador, made his publick En∣try, never standing upon his priviledge of Franchises.
The next Month, there happend great contentions and scufflings among the Jesuits at Rome. For Father Goswin Nichel, their tenth General being dead, hot can∣vasings ensu'd about election of his Succes∣sor. The French, who had never had a Gene∣ral of their Nation, stood all for Father la Chaise, and alledgd in favour of him, not only his great merit, his long ex∣perience in Affairs, and his credit with the King, but the important services he had done the Church, both against the Calvinists and the Jansenists, and by the infinite number of Conversions which he had procur'd as well in France, as in England, and even as far as Siam. Others objected, that what ever he had done upon those occasions, was not out of any kindness for Religion, but meerly out of self love, or else because his own or the Princes interest, to which he was entirely devoted, enclin'd him to it. All which was visible by his having so violently supported, and by his still supporting the interest of the Regale, and by his connivence, or to say more truly, by the share which he had in the the injurious and rash proceedings of France against the Holy See: which if nothing else, was sufficient to exclude
him forever from the Dignity of Gene∣ral. These contests lasted above two years, during which time both Parties did all they could to strengthen their own interests. La Chaise us'd all his ut∣most endeavours to engage the Prelates that adher'd to France. For tho he did not look upon this Preferment as the bounds of his ambitious desires, he con∣sider'd however, that it was always one step to the Purple; and that tho he should miss of a Cardinalship, the Dignity of General being for Life, it would be no bad Post for a Jesuit. But for obtaining it, there was a necessity of the Popes Favour, and he had justly provok'd him to be his Enemy: and by that means he ruind all his Pretensions: for otherwise, I am apt to belieee, he might at length have provd successful in his attempt, He being therefore re∣jected, Father John Paul d' Oliva was ele∣cted, in despight of the French, who protested against him, and gave advice of it to Father la Chaise, promising withal to do whatever he could desire of 'em upon this occasion. Thereupon the King sent an Order to all the French Jesuits to return into France, to the end they might there unanimously joyn
with others in the choice of a General of their own Nation, which had no depen∣dance upon the General elected. Which Order was signifi'd to Father d' Oliva, with a Protestation of the French Jesuits before they departed, not to acknow∣ledge, for the future, either themselves or their brethren of France any other superior than the Vicar General whom the King should appoint to govern the Company. This division happening in the Socie∣ty of Jesus made a great noise; and no body question'd but there would be very suddainly two great Schisms in the Church: the one General, by a separa∣tion of the Gallican Church, which threaten'd a National Council; and other particular of the French Jesuits, who were about to make a Body by themselves. Nevertheless, nothing of this fell out; for as to the first, every body knows the reason; the Pope dy'd, and his Successor proving a very good French man, the French never scrupl'd to acknowlegde him. And as to the second, 'tis an Af∣fair that has something more of mistery in it. Father la Chaise, who was very near being nominated, considering that this Preferment would signifie no great matter, and would oblige him to quit
his Place of Confessor to the King, which was of more moment to him, be∣sides that he could not enjoy it without the Popes approbation, who would ne∣ver allow it, but rather excommunicate 'em all; that then he should be con∣strain'd to have recourse to Indulgence, in quitting the Generalship, and so be∣tween two Stools he should quite fall to the Ground, These Reasons, well weigh'd, caus'd him to change his Battery: and there∣fore resolv'd to make the honour of a forc'd acquital of his Interest redown'd to himself, he told the King, after he had prepossessd him by thousand returns of submissive thanks, and acknowledgments of his goodness in this Particular, that having seriously consider'd the thing, he found it would prove prejudicial to his Majesties Service, because this Schism in the Order would divide his most considerable interests; and for that they, from whom his Majesty might expect considerable Services, would no longer be engag'd. Which he had already ex∣perienc'd in Father Vaudorn, who sent him no more intelligence from Vienna, and in Father Ferres in Spain, who had written frankly to him, that he would
no longer have any Commerce with him. So that your Majesty, said he, will loose your best Correspondencies, and your most faithful Servants. I will not be the cause of so much mischief, and therefore beseech your Majesty to forbear carrying the business any higher for my sake. Afterwards he gave the King to un∣derstand, that he had sure expedients to set all things right again, without engaging the Kings Honour. That there needed no more then to propose under hand to General Oliva the writing a submissive Letter to his Majesty, wherein he should assure him of his ex∣traordinary respect; with a Protestati∣on that he never thought his Majesty concern'd in the oppositions that were made against his Election, and that if he had known it, he would never have accepted the Preferment; to which he was to add, that if it pleas'd his Majesty to vouchsafe him his consent, he would endeavour upon all occasions to make known his inviolable Zeal and Devoti∣on for his Service: upon which his Majesty might relax his Pretentions. The King had much ado to yield, fore∣seeing it would be a feeble condeensi∣on in a matter begun with so much noise
and heat. But at last he suffer'd him∣self to be over-rul'd, and great applause was given to la Chaise, who in his opi∣nion had offer'd the King a very fair Sacrifice. Paul d' Ervaux, Auditor of the Rota, was employ'd to manage this accommodation, which was soon brought to a conclusion; the Party that sought it standing upon their terms; and so the French Jesuits return'd to Rome, to∣gether with Fontaine, who was appointed Assistant General. But this advantagious return, could not preserve 'em from a very great mortifi∣cation that befell 'em, a little after their arrival under the new Pontificate of Alexander the VII. This was the con∣demnation of their two Thesis's main∣tain'd in their Colleges, the one at Pont a Mousson, in Lorrain, Jan. 14. 1689. the other at Dijon three years before, in 1686, which were declard Rash, Scandalous and Heretical, by a Decree of the Inquisition at Rome, the Pope then Present, bearing date Au∣gust 24. 1690. 'Twas the Archbishop of Reims who was the occasion that this misfortune befell 'em, as being the Scourge of the Society: and tho his Bro∣ther were la Chaises intimate Friend, ¦nere
a whitt the less their Enemy for all that. He is always lying perdue to examine the Conduct of those worthy Fathers, and when he finds any thing go a miss, he never pardons 'em: for he is inexorable as to Them. So soon therefore as these two Thesis's came to his hand, he faild not to send 'em to the Pope. In the first is to be discover'd that fundamental opinion of the Society, which is the Source of all their irregu∣larities. It dispences with the Command of loving God, in the course of a moral Life; and maintains, that it is sufficient to render our actions good, if they tend to the su∣pream end, which is the glory of God, interpretatively and indirectly. Which is just the Doctrine unfolded before in the conversations of Father de Vaux with Father la Chaise. The second contain'd a Doctrine as damnable as the former. Philosophick sin, according to this Do∣ctrine, is a Humane action, contrary to that which agrees with rational nature, and right reason. This is their defini∣tion of Philosophical or Moral Sin: Now hear their Proposition.
Philosophical Sin, how grevious soever, being committed by him who has no know∣ledge of God, or who does not actually think of God, is a grievous sin, but it is no of∣fence to God, nor any Mortal Sin which breaks off the Amity of God with man, nor which merits eternal Pains. This foundation being allow'd, there needs no more than for a man never to think of God, to the end he may never be guilty of sin during the whole course of a moral Life. Innocent XI. dy'd upon the 12. of Au∣gust 1689. of the same faction with In∣nocent the XI. The French give out that he was a Collonel of Horse, and that playing one day at Picquet with a near Kinswoman of the Popes, of whom he won considerable sums of Money, he found the Lady had three Aces in her hand, and that he had three Kings be∣sides a fourth that came in to him: up∣on which both ventur'd roundly, till it run up to a very considerable sum which the Lady lost upon Honour; and not being able to pay him without great inconvenience to her self, she perswad∣ed the Collonel to lay aside his Sword and put on a Cassock, and that she would pay him the Money she ow'd
him in Benefices. They farther add that it 'twas by this means that he obtaind the Cardinalship, and that he had not been elected Pope in 1676. but only because 'twas thought he would not live long by reason of certain wounds he had re∣ceiv'd in his Youth. I cannot say whi∣ther this be true or no, he was chosen Clerk of the Chamber under Ʋrban VIII. which was 20 years before the Pontificate of Innocent XI. and he could not be a Collonel at that time. He was born at Cosmo, in Milanois, and was calld Benedict Odescalchi The Jesuits rejoyc'd very much at his death, for they accounted him their mortal Adversary, and loudly accus'd him of Jansenism. But that was not a thing to be wonder'd at; since that in those days, as now, it was not requir'd to make a man a Jansenist, that he should only pro∣fess the five propositions, but if he were no friend of the Holy Society, that was sufficient. Now as for the Holy Father, he had held correspondence with M. Arnauld, and had refusd his appro∣bation of Father la Chaise for the Gene∣ralship; and that was a thousand times much more then needed to make him a Jansenist.
When the Father first receiv'd the news, he was then with the King, and as Po∣litick as he was, he could not moderate the excess of his joy. Yet fearing to display it too apparently before the King, he withdrew a little to recover himself, and at the same instant met the Archbishop of Paris. But then it was im∣possible for him to contain himself any longer. A thousand Pistoles, said he, accoasting him, and your Benediction, for the news which I have to tell you. As for my Benediction, reply'd the Archbishop, there it is, and as for the thousand Pistoles, they are always ready at your service: but then keep me no longer in suspence; let me know what your news is. News, reply'd the overjoy'd Father, that will make you a Cardinal, or Ile turn Jansenist: the old Lubber of the Vatican is dead, and has left ten Caps unbestow'd: one of 'em will never let you catch cold of your Head. Do you tell me true, quoth the Prelate interrupting him. I tell you nothing but truth, reply'd the Father. They held on this conversation the same tone above a quarter of an hour, in the Guard Chamber, and con∣gratulated each other a thousand times over, upon their approaching promoti∣on to the Cardinalship, never minding
all this while the Guards of the Body and about fifty other Persons that heard every word they said; such were the transports of their exultation. At length perceiving their error, they re∣tir'd into the Kings Chamber. Presently the King appointed another Ambassador for Rome, who was the Duke of Chaulnes, and who departed forth∣with, together with the Cardinals of Furstenburgh, Bonzi and Bouillon, to be in time at the Conclave. As for Cardi∣nal Cainus, he had orders to stay at Gre∣noble. He was fallen again into new dis∣grace. For Father la Chaise had given ad∣vice to the King, that he held correspon∣dence with the Pope, and particularly with the Bishop of Vaison hated by the King, because he had offer'd his Holiness to go to Versailles and Excommunicate him. Upon which the Cardinal wrote to la Chaise, complaining that he had viola∣ted the Laws of Nations, and the Church in the person of that Prelate whose Bi∣shoprick was not in France. The Father shew'd the Letter to the King, who was highly insens'd at it; and that was the reason that he had not the Order of the Holy Ghost bestow'd upon him, at the Promotion which the King made fif∣teen
days after, tho he had design'd him Commander of the Order, as in∣deed he well deserves to be. So soon as the Conclave began to sit, the Cardinals enterd their Protests, for that their In∣telligence assur'd 'em that the Clergy of France had not recanted the five Propo∣sitions which they maintain'd, and that the Most Christian King had not made restitution of the County of Avignon, nor renounc'd his Pretentions to the Franchises. Eight days after that, the Duke of Chaulnes arriv'd at Rome with the French Cardinals, and upon his gi∣ving the Cardinals advice of his arrival, he was visited, admitted to Audience, and acknowledg'd Ambassador, in de∣spite of their Protestations. The three French Cradinals so be∣stirr'd themselves in the Conclave, espe∣cially Bouillon, who to regain the Kings favours did impossibilities, that at last Cardinal Ottoboni was chosen the sixth of Octob. 1689. This Election was not made by way of Scrutiny, but by a tumultu∣ous Adoration, the like to which was never seen. For the Cardinal de Bouillon having made his Party as numerous as he could, tho it was hardly sufficient to have voted the Exclusion of any other,
sally'd out of his Chamber, and ran about the Conclave, crying ou, Ottoboni is Pope: upon which signal the rest of the Faction coming out of their Cells, flew about, crying out in like manner, Ottoboni is Pope. Upon that they all hasten'd to his Cell, took him upon their Shoul∣ders and set him upon the Altar. All the rest of the Cardinals surpriz'd at so suddain and unexpected an Election, and not having leisure either to consider, nor to count the Number of those of their Party, follow'd the rest, every body believing the thing done, and no body being willing to draw upon himself singly the ill will and future Revenge of the Holy Father, by a fruitless and rashly un∣dertaken Exclusion. In the first Congregation which this new Pope held, he releas'd to the Cardi∣nal of Bouillon, in acknowledgement of the service he had done him, the sum of 30000 Livres which he ow'd the Apostolik Chamber, and gave him the Bishoprick of Albno, by that means advancing him from the rank of Cardinal Priest to the degree of Cardinal Bishop. The Prince of Turune, his Nephew, soon after ar∣riv'd at Rome, and the Pope order'd him to sit down, and put on his Hat; an
Honour allow'd to none but soveraign Princes. 1690. And upon his importanate Sol∣licitations it was that he granted a Car∣dinals Cap to the Bishop of Beauvais. Tis true, he had a great deal of trouble to obtain it, and that he despair'd of it above four times. For I my self have seen se∣veral Letters which he wrote to the Bi∣shop of Marseilles upon that subject, wherein he had still these Expressions, I do what I can, but know not whither I shall succeed or no: However I promise ye not to give over, till his Holiness absolutely forbids me to speak no more of it. He also took a world of Pains to make him grant his Bulls, and was the first that had one. So many favours granted for his sake by his Holiness, deservedly requir'd that he should do something a fresh for the Holy See. To that purpose he perswaded the King to satisfie the Pope upon the Affairs of the Franchises, and to surrender his pretentions freely; of which Tydings he was the Messenger himself from the Duke of Chaulnes. At which his Holi∣ness was so overjoy'd, that he promis'd the Cardinal at the same instant, power∣fully to succour King James with Money, and in short, seem'd to be altogether en∣clin'd
to take part with France. Car∣dinal Furstenbergh also, making the best of his Opportunity, demanded a Review of the Affairs of Cologne, and in a word the Pope order'd an Assembly of Law∣yers to meet at Sieur di Ervaux's, the Auditor of the Rota's House; but not with that success as was desir'd. For the Bulls granted to Prince Clement of Bava∣ria, by Innocent XI. were confirm'd. Which the Cardinal took so hainously, that fearing withal, lest the Austrians should put some scurvy trick upon him in a place where he thought himself not very secure, he decamp'd by the Advice of La Chaise, who sent him a Letter to re∣turn to Paris, and accept of the Abby of St. Germans de Prez, which the King bestow'd upon him at his arrival. But the Capitulars of Cologne, that were of his Party, would not desist for all this: they took a journey to Rome, to suppli∣cate the Pope to restore 'em to their Ca∣nonships and Benefices. The Pope lent 'em a favourable Ear, and us'd his En∣deavours very strenuously with the Em∣perour and Elector of Cologne to that effect. But all to no purpose; for they wrote so effectually to the Cardinal de Medicis Protector of the Affairs of Ger∣many,
beseeching his Holiness not to trouble 'em any more about that Affair, that he was forc'd to give it over. Ne∣vertheless, in April following, he took off all the Interdictions and Excommu∣nications that had been thunder'd out a∣gainst those outed Priests, and admitted all their Appeals in reference to every thing that had been acted against them to their prejudice. These things asto∣nish'd many People, and much more the Nomination of the Archbishop of Paris to the dignity of Cardinal, to which the Pope gave his Consent. For till then, that Prelate was thought a person for∣ever excluded from that preferment; and Pasquin had said a long time before, That the Archbishop of Paris had sufficiently pro∣secuted the Holy See, but he would never blush for it. The Archbishop of Reims had not the same advantage, and tho he had been nothing near so obstinate in opposing the Pope, nevertheless he had the vexatious misfortune to see his rival and hated Competitour preferr'd before him. Besides all this, the Pope was not con∣tented with the Right of the Franchises, which was conceded to him; he vehement∣ly insisted for satisfaction in reference to
the Assembly in 82. and the Proceedings that ensu'd upon it. On the other side, the King, who was unwilling to give him a Repulse, in hopes to gain the Bulls for his Bishops, and some other Favours more, made a shew of acquiescing willing∣ly, and summon'd an Assembly of the Clergy; but this was only to amuse the Old Gentleman. Nay, he enter'd in∣to a more particular Negotiation, and receiv'd a Project of an Accommoda∣tion, which was brought him in his Holinesses Name by the Abbot of Polig∣nac; and appoined Father La Chaise, the Archbishop's of Paris and Reims, and the Bishops of Orleans and Meaux to ex∣amin it, who rejected it, alleadging that it tended to dishonour and blast the Bi∣shops and Prelates that had been present in that Assembly; to which they could not consent, and that there were other ways anow to satisfie his Holiness in that particular. This was as much as to say, that they meant not to come to any Accommoda∣tion; for what Expedient could they ever think of unless it were a Recanta∣tion. Twas not to be imagin'd that the Holy See would ever be satisfi'd with less; and that's a Thing, which I am apt to
believe the King will never endure so long as he lives. And it is apparent that the Pope understood him in that sence; seeing that finding himself surpriz'd by Death before he could bring this Affair to a conclusion; he thunder'd out, upon his very death-bed, a Bull, that cancells, disannuls and condemns as bold and Er∣roneous the Decisions of that Assembly about the Regale, and the four Propo∣sitions maintain'd against the Authori∣ty of the Holy See. This was a Thun∣derclap to the King, which he never ex∣pected. Father la Chaise therefore, who had no more kindness for this Pope then for his Predecessour, was plain with the K. in these words, I have foretold it more then once, that Your Majesty was not to expect any good from this Knave of a Pope. I knew him at Rome, when he was no more then a bare Priest, and one that bedaggl'd his Cassock with trotting from morning till night to the Houses of the Prelates of Rome, in∣to whose favour he insinuated himself by carrying 'em the News of the Town. He was a kind of familiar Spie, who was no sooner gone out of one House, but he went to another to tell what he had seen and heard. I never knew a Person of such a double heart, or of such a Treacherous Soul. The Fa∣ther
still continuing his discourse, endea∣vour'd after that, to render the Cardi∣nal suspected to the King, by putting it into his Head, that he had not done him so great a piece of service as he ima∣gin'd by raising that Man to the Holy See: and talking of the extraordinary ho∣nour which he had paid to the Prince of Turrenne, and of the 10000 Crowns he had given him, he sought to infuse into him, that the Pope and the Cardinal un∣derstood one another. But that Hook did not take with the King; nor was he known to look upon the Cardinal with a less favourable Eye for la Chaises Story. At the same time the Father lost a good Friend, with whom there had been al∣ways  nd Understanding. I mean M. Louvois, who dy'd so suddainly, that he had no time to settle his private Affairs. Some people suspected him to have been poyson'd: nevertheless, when he was open'd, there was not the least symptom of any such thing. True it is, that it was an End which he very much dread∣ed in his Life-time; whether it were out of a natural Weakness, or that having made use of that means, per∣haps, to send some body else into the other World, he was afraid of be∣ing
paid in his own Coyn, I will not de∣termin. However it were, this is cer∣tain, that he omitted no precaution against Poyson: and because he knew that Lac∣queys were the most formidable Instru∣ments for administring those deadly pre∣parations, it was his rule to oblige his own by all manner of Favours, while they serv'd him; and never to part with 'em, without giving 'em some Employment, to the end that the hopes of raising their Fortune by him might retain 'em in that Fidelity, which the fear of God, or love of Vertue would never have done. So that in his House the Lacqueys came to be Valets de Chambre, and thence rose to be Commissaries of the Provisions, Receivers and Controllers in the Farmes, and many of 'em Commissaries at War; not to mention the credit which they had with their Master, who never deny'd 'em such Employments they begg'd for their Kindred and Friends. So that it was a com∣mon saying at Pariis, when the Lacqueys of this Minister had lost their Money, they sported away 3 Ensigns upon a Knave of Diamonds, or two Lieutenants upon a Queen of Hearts: But these were stories made at pleasure. This is certain, that if you gave twenty Louidores to a Valet de
Chambre, you very much shorten'd your way. But in regard that Cooks were the most dangerous of all, they were the best us'd. I know one that left his Service about five Years ago, after he had got vast sums of Money. When he desired of M. Louvois that he might have leave to quit his Service, he told his Master, that having the Honour to serve him ten or a dozen Years, he had gain'd an E∣state sufficient to maintain him, and therefore he would be glad to take his ease, if he might have his permission to retire, and that he would resign his place to some poor honest Fellow that was in necessity. M. Louvois return'd him answer, That he was very glad he had done his busi∣ness, and gave him leave; promising him withal his Protection as long as he liv'd. This man was no sooner out of his Ser∣vice, but nothing would serve him but to set up for a Lord, even in Paris it self, without seeking to go any further. And the beautiful House of the deceased M. de Bizeul, being to be sold, he out-bid the Count d' Estampes ten thousand Livres, who offer'd sixty thousand Crowns for it. The Count being offended at such a disappointment, complain'd to the King, who severely rebuk'd M. de Louvois, and told him 'twas a crying shame that Peo∣ple
should go out of his House so rich, as to bid for Purchases that few Dukes and Peers were in a condition to cope with. Upon which, the Marquis of Louvois sent for his Cook the next day, and gave him such a rattle as he deserv'd. But this Mi∣nister is dead, and M. de Pompone re∣call'd and put in his Place, which made F. la Chaise ready to eat his Fingers for madnes. 'Twas in vain for him to re∣monstrate, that the man who had once be∣trayed his Secrets, would never serve him faithfully, but that he was every way to be suspected; for the King knowing up∣on what grounds he spoke, gave little or no heed to what he said. Besides, he begins to understand the revengeful hu∣mour of the Man, and since the Affair of the Franchises and the Bishoprick of Leige better instructed him, he hearkens not so much to him as he was wont to do, where any one is concern'd for whom he has no kindness. More then this, he has had the misfortune to fail in several Enterprises, which the King never natu∣rally lov'd. (1690.) Lately he miscar∣ry'd in one of his own contriving; which was a Conspiracy at Turin; which was to have had that City betray'd to the French, and which was carry'd on by the Jesuits
of that Place, who had receiv'd a great part of the Money to gain the Traytors: but the Treason being discover'd, all came to nothing. When I say it was of la Chaise's contrivance, I do not assert it for a truth, but upon the Report which was then spread abroad in Paris, and they nam'd one Father Campo, an Italian, who made several journeys from Paris to Turin for that purpose. However if it be not true, 'tis very probable; for there is nothing more agreeable to the Genius of those Good Fathers, then such sorts of Enterprises. All this while the War was carry'd on with the utmost eat imaginable on both ie. The year 1689. was signaliz'd with the Reduction of Mayence, Bon, Keyzer∣waret, Rhineberg and other Places, taken by the Imperialists from the French, who not having Forces sufficient to make op∣position, contented themselves with lay∣ing the Palatine and Wistemberg in Ashes without undertaking any thing more war∣like upon the Terra Ferma. Nor were they more Fortunate in Ireland, whither King James had carry'd two Millions in new coyn'd Lovidores, before which he thought the Walls of the Cities would have fallen, like those of Jericho; for I do not believe
he depended much upon the Courage of the Irish; but he was amaz'd that Lon∣donderry should force him to stop short in his Career. Thither he return'd a second time, resolving to swallow up that place, wherein there were only some of the Country People and Inhabitants, with one Walker, a Minister for their Gover∣nor; but he was constrain'd to retreat a second time with considerable loss. This bad Introduction to Conquest, discourag'd those of his Party very much, which o∣therwise would have been very numerous; for besides the Irish, part Catholics, part purchas'd, he had many Friends in Scot∣land, who held things in a kind of Poize for some time, and a greater number in England then were thought to have been, and who were discover'd every day by scattring seditious Pamphlets, and hold∣ing Correspondence with the Abdica∣ted King. The famous William Penn, who had made himself Chief of the Quakers, under King James's Raign, that he might with more ease destroy the Protestant Religion, not caring by what Contrivances or Means, so he brought about his Ends, was one of those who became suspected for a Jesuit. He was thereupon committed to Prison; and
being ask'd whether he were a Jesuit or no, he stoutly denyd it. God preserve me, said he, I have ever hated to Excess, that cursed Gang; I am a Protestant, and a Pro∣testant will dye. He ought to be believ'd, because he said it; but if his ill Fortune should so order it, that he should fall into the Clutches of the Inquisition, either in Spain, or otherwhere, and then, like the Flittermouse in the Fable, should change his Note: Who, I a Protestant! should he say, I swear to you, Gentlemen, you do me wrong, Abrenuntio Protestantes, vadite retro, I know not those sort of People, if they were to be hang'd all, I'de find a Rope. I have one here in my Bonnet. I am a Jesuit, at the Service of the Holy See, and the Inqui∣sition, and a Jesuit for my Life. Long live the Triple-Horn'd People. If this should not be then the Jargonrie of the Quaker, I must acknowledge my self to be de∣ceivd. The next Year, the King of France, who had discover'd the secret Treaty which the Duke of Savoy had concluded with the Emperor and the King of Spain, earnestly prest that Prince to declare himself, or if he would continue still a Neuter, (1690.) to put into his hands, for the assurance of his Word, the Citadel of
Turin, Verue, and Verceil: To which the Duke had no mind to consent; because he knew it would have visibly subjected him under the power of a Master, who has not the Reputation of being very tractable. Constrain'd therefore to re∣solve one thing or other, he chose the best course, I mean, the least evil of the two. For in that Conjuncture, he had no choice to make that was positively good. And in the short time of his entring into the War, he had experimentally found, by the loss of Savoy, how unfortunate a weak Prince is, whose Territories serve as a Barrier between two potent Mo∣narchs. Till then, all things succeeded the best that could be for the King. He had been victorious at Sea against the Hollanders, who were reduc'd to such an unhappy Condition, that hardly a Ship had escap'd, had not the Night favor'd their Retreat. 'Tis true, that tho' in that Engagement the French Pleet had all the Advantage, the Dutch won all the Ho∣nour. For I believe 'twas never known, that Two and twenty Men of War should fight so long, and so furiously, against a Fleet of above Fourscore Sail, while the English Fleet, under the Lord Torrington, lookt on all the while, and did no∣thing.
In Flanders, the Duke of Luxemburgh had defeated Prince Waldeck; at which time the Confederates lost above 5000 Men, not counting in the Prisoners, of which there were a great Number. But, in the Conclusion, what use did the French make of these Victories? Did they take one Town in Flanders? Did they make any Attempt upon England? Nothing of all this: only the Chevalier Tourville burnt two or three Fishermens Cottages, and then, as proud as an Ass of a new Packsaddle, return'd for Brest, to be Complimented for it. King William taught 'em another Lesson. He knew better how to make His Advantage of His Victory over K. James, or rather, over Tyrcennel and Lauzun. For as for K. James, he had packt up his Baggage, so soon as he saw the Combat grow warm. He's not so improvident to thrust him∣self into an Army in the heat of a Fight: 'tis a little too much for common Nature to endure. However it were, King Wil∣liam having pass'd the Boyne, in despite of His Enemies; and, which was worse, having put 'em to the Rout, made Him∣self Master of Drogheda, Dundalk, Dub∣lin, Waterford, &c. And had not foul weather come on too fast, had taken Li∣merick,
their last Retreat. But the Conquest of that City was reserv'd till the next Year; for the Earl of Athlone, who took it Octob. 3. 1691. and granted the Gover∣nor Mr. Boesselot very honourable Con∣ditions. This last Misfortune threw K. James into utmost Consternation, so that he knew not what measures to take. He often bewail'd himself to Father la Chaise, whom he could not chuse but look upon as one of the principal Artificers of his Misfortune, tho' he would not seem to take notice of it. What shall I do, and what will become of me, said he to him one day, transported with grief, unfortu∣nate Prince as I am? Chac'd from my Kingdoms, hated by my Subjects, abandon'd by all the World, and pity'd by No Body. Oh! how dear has my Easiness cost me! added he, casting a wistful Look upon the Father, wherein there was much to be read: It has cost me my Crown, my Ho∣nour, and the Repose of my Life. The com∣passionate Father, who shar'd in his grief as much as his Nature would give him leave, promis'd him to set all the most hidden Springs of the Jesuitical Engine at work, and that the whole Society should burn their Books, or restore him to his
Throne. Only, said he, 'tis your Majesties business to be willing to be serv'd; do but concur never so little with us, and you shall see a sudden Turn of your Affairs. We have more then one String to our Bow: And if hitherto the Lyon's Skin has not been sufficient to cover us, we must sowe the Fox's Skin to it. And indeed, he kept so effectually to his word, that if Providence, that watches over things below, had not disappointed the pernicious designs of his Cabal, we had seen another Revolution, at least as strange as the former. The Jesuits therefore were order'd to take the Field, and furnish'd with good Letters of Exchange, away they hurry'd into Eng∣land, where joining with those that still lay lurking in that Kingdom, and who intreagu'd them with the principal Jaco∣bites, they hatch'd that terrible Conspi∣racy, wherein 'twas said so many Lords and Persons of all Conditions were deep∣ly concern'd, and which tended only to introduce the French into England, and in∣to London, and so restore K. James to his Throne: which had that been all, per∣haps it had been excusable in such as thought they ow'd their Allegiance to no other Soveraign; but they had suborn'd a Company of Hell-born Ruffians, who were
to have assassinated King WILLIAM, while others at the same time were to have seiz'd the Person of the QƲEEN; to whom perhaps they would have given no better Quarter. When this Conspiracy was brought to perfection, and that the Jesuits were as∣sur'd of their People, Father la Chaise gave advice to K James, and told him, That now it was his time to act. I woud be willing to believe, that the King at first had an utter Abhorrency of so black an Enterprize, and that he had as great an Aversion as could be to engage himself in it; and it is to me the greatest Astonish∣ment imaginable, that he should be ca∣pable of closing with it. Nevertheless 'tis too true, that he did consent at last, and that he persuaded the King of France to consent also, notwithstanding his de∣clar'd abomination of Parricides. But, perhaps, they might conceal that Cir∣cumstance from him, tho' it renderd the Success most probable: for 'twas after∣wards known, that they had much ado to over-rule him, to grant K. James that new Succor which he demanded. He told 'em, There was nothing more uncertain then the Success of their Design, and that he had Employment enough for his Men to guard
his own Dominions. But F. la Chaise and Lausun giving him to understand, that it was the surest way to stop King WILLIAM, and hinder the Descent, with which he threaten'd France, he submitted to their Importunities; and af∣ter that, there was nothing discours'd of in France, but of the great Fleet that was setting out for K. James. True it is, it was considerable enough to have giv'n King WILLIAM some trouble, and to have let the Confederates have known that France was not in so low a condition as many People believ'd she was. Four hunder'd Transport Ships were taken up for the embarking of 20000 Men, as well Horse as Foot, to∣gether with all sorts of warlike Ammu∣nition, as Powder, Bullets, Cannon, Mor∣tars, Bombs, Pickaxes, Ladders, &c. This Fleet was to have been guarded by twelve great Men of War, commanded by the Duke d'Estree, who had fitted 'em out at Toulon. In the mean time, to favor the Descent, and hinder any Succor that could come from Holland, Monsieur Tour∣ville had Orders to cruise in the Channel with a Fleet of above a hunder'd Sail; and all this was ready in less then two
months time. So that upon the 29th of April, K. James, who was arriv'd at la Hogue, began to embark his Men, after he had carefully visited all the Ships of Burden; and three days after they were ready to set Sail, only they stay'd for d'Estree's Squadron, and a favourable Wind. But he being surpriz'd by violent Storms, that threw two of his great Men of War upon the Coasts of Africa, and very much shatter'd others, could not possibly observe his time. Some Weeks before, K. James had pub∣lishd a Manifesto, which he call'd, A De∣claration of the King of Great Britain, to all his faithful Subjects.. The substance of which, imported an Exhortation to the English, to join with him against the Prince of Orange, as he there call'd him; promising to maintain their Liberties and Priviledges, and the Religion of the Church of England: And telling 'em withal, that there would never be any Peace in Europe till his Restoration; for that then he should, by his mediation and good Offices with the most Christian King, be able to procure it. He also wrote a Letter to the Officers and Seamen aboard the Fleet, promising 'em the full payment of their Arrears,
and to continue 'em in their employment. Together with another to the English Lords, inviting 'em to Paris, to be pre∣sent at the Queen his Wife's Labour: for the removing all the Suspitions, and de∣stroying all the false reports which his Enemies had rais'd touching the Birth of his Son, whom he call'd, Prince of Wales. However this Letter wrought upon very few, and in all probability they that went lost their labour too; for the Queen was brought to Bed so sud∣denly, that the Dutchess of Orleance, who was order'd by the King to be at her Delivery, could not come time enough, tho she drove with all speed from St. Clou, so soon as she had notice of it; which put some jealousies into that Princesse's Head. Thus all King James's Hopes were blasted in the bud, and at a time when they promised so fair. For his Fleet was in the best condition in the world: his men lusty and bonny; he wanted no∣thing of Necessary Ammunition, even to the Spade and Mattock. But notwith∣standing all this, overwhelm'd with de∣spair, he was forc'd to stay at la Hoge, not being able to set sail by reason of con∣trary Winds, that continud a long time,
attended with Storms and Tempests so furious, as wrack'd a good part of his Vessels upon the Coasts. Which gave the Queen of England time so discover the Conspiracy: who immediately with an extraordinary prudence gave out all ne∣cessary Orders for preventing the ill Con∣sequences of it, as well by imprisoning the chief Conspirators here, as by dis∣arming all suspected Persons. Moreover she set forth two Proclamations, the one for calling the Parliament together, the other commanding all Catholicks to de∣part the Cities of London and Westminster, and not to come within ten Mles of either. She also sent considerable Forces toward the Coasts where the Descent was most to be fear'd, and reinforc'd the Garrisons in the Islands of Guernsey and Jersey: So that in a little time the Kingdom was quite out of all danger. The Jesuits were astonish'd when the News arriv'd in France. They had ta∣ken their measures so exactly, that they thought it impossible they could ever mis∣carry; yet saw the terrible disappoint∣ment of all their lewd Contrivances, to the eternal shame and ignominy of the Complotters.
But in regard the ignominy more nearly concern'd the two Kings, then the Society, their vexation was much the greater. They had weary'd their men, expended vast sums, lost several Vessels, and after all, were enforc'd o land their men again, and to mind their own de∣fence against a powerful Navy which the English and Dutch had set to Sea. Thereupon the men were disimbark'd, and King James remain'd at Cherburg, loaden with his own Misfortunes; so far from being abated, that they were more ponderously augmented by the loss sustain'd in the Engagement between Admiral Russell and Tourvile, the success of which was such as all the world knows. And then it was, that K. James began to be lookt upon there with an evil Eve, eve∣ry Body beholding him as the Principal cause of the misfortunes of Christendom, and throwing upon him and his fatal Star the ill success of the War against the English. More then this, all people of worth, that had before lamented him in his Misfor∣tune, could no longer retain the same kind sentiments for him, since he had so wickedly enbarqu'd himself in such an Infamous Conspiracy. Nevertheless in∣stead of acknowledging the Foulness of
it, he engag'd himself soon after in another as bad, if not worse then the former, with Barbesieux, and Ma∣dam de Maintenon, as may be seen at large in the Try∣al of Grandvalt, who undertook to assinate King William in Flanders, and in those Reflections that came out afterwards upon that Horrid Conspi∣racy. 'Tis a sad thing that in France, where there is so good a Government, there should be such Monsters to be found. They are not so common in our Countrys, and least of all among the Hugue∣nots. Quite the contrary, they are the declar'd E∣nemies of such Assassinations, so far from laying hold upon the base Assistances of Subornaion and Parri∣cide, that they have always rejected 'em with scorn and horror, when they have been offer'd. That which happen'd upon this occasion at Rot∣terdam in Holland is very remarkable. There arriv'd in that City out of France a certain Benedictin Monk, with a design, as he said, to turn Protestant. The first man to whom he addrest himself was M. Ju∣rieux, a Minister well known to all the world, to whom he made known a desire of embracing his Religion. Jurieux, who presently suspected him to be some fickle-headed Fellow, that had quitted his Order, only to withdraw himself from the Austerities to which it obliges him, in hopes to get some Pension from the States, as it frequent∣ly happens, made him answer, That he could not be too much commended; but that it be∣hov'd him to be careful of doing any thing unadviseably in a Business wherein he could not deceive God, without miserably deceiving himself. The Monk reply'd That it was not a thing which he had but lately consider'd of; That, God be thanked, he had knowledge and discretion enough,
to distinguish Truth from Falshood; And that at last, after he made Religion his Study for many Years, he was convinc'd, that the Roman Catholick Re∣ligion signifi'd nothing, but the Reformed was the only Prosession of Faith wherein a man could be sav'd: And to shew that he spoke not without Book, he presently alledg'd to him several solid Arguments. In this Posture things continu'd for some days, till Monsieur Jurieux, desirous to sound the bot∣tom of his heart, touch'd him in the most sensible part, and ask'd him what course of Life he intend∣ed to live, when he had made a publick Cenfession of his Faith? For in short, said the Minister to him, there is nothing more commonly done in this Country by People of your Coat, and the State is so burthen'd with the vast number of Refugees, that they have much a do to relieve 'em, so that you must advise with your self how to provide for an honest Livelihood, either by the labour of your hands, or by some other way. The Monk reply'd, That that Consideration never needed to trouble him, for he came not to be a Burthen to the Church; for that he had wherewithal to maintain himself. Which very much startl'd Monsieur Jurieux, who could not apprehend how a Monk that quitted his Convent to change his Religion, could have where∣withal to subsist, with out begging; and began to suspect him for a Spy. Which the other per∣ceiving, confess'd ingeniously, to undeceive him, That before he fled the Convent, he had found out a way to rob the Community of a considerable. Sum of Money, and to bring it along with him. My Father, said he, gave 'em a great deal of Money when I took the Habit upon me against my Will, and I thought I might with a safe Conscience make my self Master of what was my own. This free Confession surpriz'd
M. Jurieux much mre, who after that, had never any good opinion of him. But he had far worse sentiments of him some few days after, when the Minister put it a little too close upon him: It behoves me, Sir said he, to tell you all; nor could I think to whom better to make my addresses then your self. I have a design to deliver the Church of God from the greatest Tyrant that ever was upon the Earth. Jurieux, astonish'd, ask'd him what deliverance and what Tyrant he meant? The King of France, reply'd the Monk, whom I will kill with my own hands, provided I may have that incouragement in this Country which I expect. M. Jurieux trembl'd at the Proposal, and repuls'd him with indignati∣on, asking him where he learnt that the Protestant Religion ever authoriz'd Assassinates? telling him with all it was the Doctrine of the Schools from whence he came, but that the Reformed had al∣ways abhor'd, as Traytors and Villains, those that taught or practis'd it, and so saying thrust him out a Dores. He was no sooner gone, but in came a friend of M. Jurieux's, who perceiving him in some disorder ask'd him the reason of so much unwonted disturbance in his Countenance: He thereupon told him in short the story, as it lay. Upon which his friend put him in mind of the error he had committed in not stopping the Fellow, admonishing him, that it was a matter of great consequence. So that M. Jurieux, upon second thoughts, acquainted the Sheriffs with it, who committed the wretch to Prison the same Evening. After that, the States wrote to the King of France and gave him information of the tragical design which the infamous Ruffian had projected; assuring him with all, that tho they were at Wars with his Majesty, yet they were so far from approving any
thing so wicked and Treacherous, that they were ready to inflict the utmost severity of Justice up∣on the proposer. To which purpose they thought it their duty, to detain the Traytor, till they knew his Majesties farther pleasure. This was altogether Generous, Great and No∣ble, and merits Immortality among men of worth and Virtue: but the Advice was not receiv'd as it ought to have been. So fr from that, that M. de Montauzier, to whom the Letter was directed, return'd an answer, as harsh and surly, as it ought to have been obliging. For he sent 'em word, That the King so little minded Parricides, and those that disclos'd 'em, that he knew very well, that if they could have attempted any thing against his Per∣son, they would have done it long ago; but that, thanks be to God, he had a good Guard that secur'd him from that danger. I am at my wits end, when I consider that such an Answer should come from a King so Great and Generous, and for whom I have so much love and respect. Should it have been sent from the King of the Wild Arabs, or the Kan of the Tartars, I should not have wondr'd; but from a Most Christian King! It vexes me to the Soul. This is doing Virtue little ustice: and ancient Pagan Princes, as much Heathens as they were, had more of Honour in 'em. I have stay'd somewhat long upon this Point; to shew that England and Holland quite disgrace and shame France, which at all times has produc'd these Monsters, and Courtiers that sollicit and en∣courage 'em, as we have lately seen in the business of Granval. That which is the greatest wonder as to that Conspiracy, is, that the Jesuits appear not to have
any hand in it. That the Criminal, who charg'd several considerable Persons, in his Interrogato∣ries, says not one word against them, which makes many People believe, that they were no way concern'd in it. But I that know the humour and the morals of those Fathers, know what I have reason to think. There is a French Proverb that says, a Workman is known by his Workman∣ship: and it can never be better appli'd then to this occasion. That piece of Villany came infallibly out of their Shop. And indeed to whom can it be bet∣ter attributed then to people who have render'd themselves famous by several attempts of the same Nature; and have compos'd whole Books to justi∣fie the Legality of Assassinating Heretick Kings. Add to this, M. de Maintenon is la Chaises intimate, and she good Woman would hardly have consented to such a peice of Treachery, without the Fathers privity and advice. Beside the furious desire that he and his Society have to reinthrone a Prince, who only lost himself by adhearing so much to their Counses. The Jesuit la Chaise, adove all, is the most capable of such a design, and I shall never forget an interlocutary discourse between him and the Duke of Coaslin, with which I will conclude my Book. 'Twas a little after the Duke of Savoy had declar'd against the French. The Duke was remonstrating to him, how much the Confederates were superiour in Number, the losses sustain'd in Ireland, and the little likelihood of long maintaining the War with such an inequality of Forces. For in short said he Reverend Father, the King makes his last Efforts at the beginning of the War, he has laid Tax upon Tax, Impost up∣on Impost; he has created an infinite number of Offices never heard of before. The Communities
and Corporations, as well Ecclesiastick as Secular, have contributed several times beyond their strength: in short, they have pillag'd the Altars, and dispoil'd 'em of all their Ornaments. Tell me seriously Father do you believe, that France is an inexhaustible Mine of Money? No, without doubt, the bottom will disclose it self sooner then you think for; and then it will come to pass, that the King being no longer able to pay his men, nor to defray the prodigious expence he is forc'd to be at, as well by Sea as by Land, we may ex∣pect to see the Germans come and press the Vinta∣ges of our Campagne Grapes, while the English on the other side invading our Coasts, despoil and ransack all our lovely Provinces, that for so many years have not known what War means. We are not come to that yet, reply'd the Father, in∣terrupting him, and before that come to pass, there are a great many Engins that will be set at work. I believe it, reply'd the Duke, but our mischiefs, it may be, will befall us, before they have done working; in that case, Father, What secret will you find out, to expel 'em from our Territories? What secret? an∣swer'd the Father in a heat, you are too hasty, hold a little, there is still a remedy for all things, good Mon∣sieur le Duke; and let one word suffice for all, that if the King of Spain were dead, 'twould be no difficult thing to divide this formidable Ʋnion, which you stand so much in dread of. I leave it to the judgment of o∣others, what he meant by this: For, for my part, I tremble to unfold my conjecture. Nevertheless I was willing to repeat his own words, to shew that there is nothing which we ought not to be a∣fraid of from that abominable Society, which God Almighty seems to tolerate to be the Scourge of his Church. FINIS.
