M3058B 99826144 30536
Symplegades Antrum, OR THE Rumpant Story; Impartially relating their Tyrannical dealings, and Clymacterical Downfall. TOGETHER With a Congratulation of his most Sacred Majesty in his most Happy REIGN. By John Mullinax Dr. in Physick. et, Straw, Wat-Tiler, Cromwell prognatus eodem On, incastarunt funeribus Patriam. DON,
To the Illustrious and Victorious George Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Thorington, Ba∣ron of Teese, Beauchampe, &c. General of his Majesties Forces, Master of the Horse, Privy Counsellor, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, &c. MAy it please your Grace, to vouch∣safe your benign and serene As∣pect upon these my rude & bold Addresses, because Almighty God hath made your gracious Excellency a wonderful Instrument in his hand for this most happy and blessed Change, which  mercy, the settlement of his  restoring of Parli¦  ∣berty
and Property of the Subject, and the Reformation of the Protestant Religion, for which blessing the Almighty God be for ever glorified; Your Grace receive your just Honour, and Praise, and the three King∣domes bee for ever happy, under his most Excellent and most Gracious Majesties Reign and Government. So praies in all humble acknowledgment Your Graces most humble and faithful Servant J.M.D. Mae.
Symplegadis antrum, suppositum caudae, OR, The Rumpant Story. BRave Albion white, when ruled by a King And Parlament, a stately glorious thing: Triumphs at home, Conquers abroad, a sting To Rebels, but to Subjects true, a spring Of Peace, and Justice, Mercy, Truth & Bes∣sing; Belov'd, enjoy'd, obey'd, beyond expressing. These three Estates in Love and Justice, being All in their Order, and all in one agreeing, Did make us happy, then wee gladly sing, Grace to our Parlament, Glory to our King. Sole Monarchy proves Tyranny, Sans Law, Sole Aristocracy by force doth draw: And sole Democracy which the people choose, Proves Oligarchy, which all good men refuse. These three being justly ballanc'd was our glory, The best of Governments. In every story The King hath his Prerogative and Rights, The Lords their Honours, Powers and Delights, The People Priviledge by Parlament, God long had blest us with this Government.
When these divided, then our sins did bring A dismal Judgement on us and our King, Black, bloody Civil war, with every string Of Treasons trouble; Viper-like wee sting Our Mothers bowels, the foot, and breast, aspiring To rule the head, and power so desiring. Then Priviledge Prerogative out drive, The Royal Head, with Breast and Foot did strive. Religion, Law, and Libertie's pretended By both, 'twixt these our blessed Peace is ended. England like Jeshuron, fat and full, was kicking, Gods best and blest of Governments despising: Unruly murmuring, Changes affecting, Provoke Gods Justice to our sins correcting. Our sins were ripe for Judgement, few repenting, In Court, in City, in Country, few relenting. State, Church-men proud, Sabbath profannesse suffering, And Superstition made God abhor the offering, Like Eli's sons; the Scots the War begining, Our Church is punisht for our Nations sining. Some weary of a good and blessed King, Would see a change in that Republick thing. Plots laid before, I'th' House they'r undermining, New seeming Saints cry out for new refining. They cry'd the Church had need of great reforming, When under-hand 'gainst King & Church they'r storming. Hd they been Papists, then their Pope declaring Ou King an Heretique, might have made them daring. But Protestants, a purer knick to bring Seditions strange, i'th' Church, i'th' State, toth' King.
The War's begun, those sores are tender things, Sharp, Deep and Dangerous, 'twixt Parlaments & Kings. Brave men on both sides, and successe attending, Now this, then that, God did expect our mending. Militia and Aray, these two contest, A seven years Civil war doth us molest. In these three Kingdoms some on both sides fighting, Bellona bringeth War, Thunder and Lightning. Blame neither side, but lay it on our sins, The which all trouble, war, and ruine brings. How many years without dividing wee Were happy in this Civil Trinity? This three in one, and one in three, did make England of all Gods blessings to partake. Let's never more by Factions sad divide This one from three, our God bee still their guide. Let's never take our sweet and blessed King From our great Parlament him counselling. Let's never set two Houses up more high Against our King, his Crown and Dignity. The Cursed'st Act that e'r were done before, These Black Divisions brought unto our Door. Blood, Murder, Treason, Rapine, and the Rest, In Kingdoms three, and in the Churches brest: No tongue can tell, fit only for Oblivion. Let's live, and love, obey, hate new Division. Muse weep the rest, only pray God for healing, For by this worst of War, and cursed dealing, The Foot's dismemberd, and the Head out driving, The Breasts go forth, the monstrous Rumps us riding.
Some Things of Forty Eight I shall declare, The Yeares before doe pass my Ferry Fare. Brave Prentises of London they Petition In Forty Eight, the Rump call's this Sedition. And they'r abus'd, Imprison'd, some i'th' Tower, To Terrify the rest, by Rumpish power. Brave Marmaduke Sir Langdale doth surprize Barwick, Sir Philip Musgrave Son's Disguise Doth take Carlile, some stirre at Edmond's Bury, A brave Petition then doth come from Surrey. Brave Kent doth joy the King, but then is slain Sir Nicholas Kemish, and some Loyal Train. The Navy, some Revolt, and Maidstone fight, Pomfret surpriz'd by Morris, doth them fright. Brave Earl of Norwich is at Bow with's Forces, The Rump had basely voted no Addresses. These now were null'd, Francis Lord Villers slain, Prince Charles upon the Sea, doth Sail again. Scotch Hamilton's Army at Preston beaten is, Treaty i'th' Ile of Wight, our hope of bliss. But O brave Colchester stands out till all Valor's orecome, by famin's sadning Fall. Brave Lucas good Sir Charles is shot to Death, And Sir George Lisle doth also lose his breath 'Gainst promis'd Life, though Fairfax was abus'd, Nol oft this breach of faith had sadly us'd. Army Remonstrance comes from Winsor Castle, Nol now for power most cunningly doth wrastle. Rebellious Army Traiterously advance To London, their own Interest to inhance.
The King's Concessions gave some satisfaction, So Voted in that time of sad Distraction. Thank Prinne for that, the People are deluded, Those Honest Members now they are Secluded, Imprison'd against Law, Religion, Reason, And then the Rump doth Vote the Highest Treason. From Wight to Hurst, to Windzor the King is brought, How much deceiv'd by Nol, when sold for nought. Now by their Army doth the Rumpish stream Vote in themselves all Power to be Supream. Though Few i'th' House, the major part did vote An ordinance, to cut. King Charles his Throat. No writs must longer run in the King's name, The Term's adjourn'd, they care not now for shame. The Scotch Commissioners declare dissent, The Agreement of the People some present. That tearm they give, although throughout the land Thousands for one did scorn to set their hand. The Rump thinks All their own, are basely proud, Yet sure Kings bloud toth' Heavens cryes aloud. Seven Things like Heads, and Hornes, this Rumpish thing, No Head, All Tayl, unto three Kingdomes bring. Their own House first, like Serpents Vipering, The Rumpish part the Major part out fling, The Ile of Wight's Concessions Ravelling, By their proud Army all things levelling. About four hundred of their house protesting, With many Lords, and all good men detesting Their black designes, then Holiness professing, They Cheat the City next, and so progressing,
They Cheat the Presbyterians, who not perceiving, Their dark deep Plots, are caught in their deceiving. Vote the King's Trial, and then set up a Court Of Lawless Bloudy men, them to support. Base Rhadamantus, Bradshaw's Preists are praying, With Jezabel Fast, whiles they their King betraying. The Scotch Commissioners from their Parlament, Now Charge the Rump, with breach of Covenant. Embassadors come from Holland, full of Grief, The States desire to save King Charles his life. But they that now are heightned in Rebellion, Change Lawes, and Oathes, and so must change Religion. The Lamb's brought forth, the Charge is drawn, producing False Witnesses, the Sects are all Rejoycing. The King's at Bar, Traitors o'th' Bench, him Greeting In his own Courts, Injustice makes the meeting. The Law's arraign'd, a Juncto base is sitting, The Jesuites Designes, them alwayes fitting. Before they hear him, his death subscribe, and seal, Persians, Jewes, Turks, come shew a parallel. The power of that Court the King denying, He must not speak, they Sentence pass for dying. Our Pilate washt in's own King's bloud, Murdering Blest Charles, who like his Saviour suffering. Like to the Lamb of God, this Lamb is pardoning His Foes, so dyes the Rump, their hearts are hard'ning. Thy Palace was thy Calvary, blest King, There thou our Martyr, Thy Royal Head a Spring Of Wisdom's Goodness, for pure Conscience dying, Untill Reveng'd, Kings bloud's a sin still crying.
Black Forty eights Ter deno Jani sadning All Christians hearts, the Rumpish Sects are bathing Themselves in our dear Princes bloud, flattering Their false proud Hopes, never to see a scattering. The Scaffold Charles his Olivet ascending, Where Saints and Angels Glory sing, Transcending. They Traiterously thus murder Charles our King, At his own House, the House of Banqueting. At one sad blow, three Kingdomes Murdering, All that was sacred, Laws and Faith disordering. They never thought of Justice, for to bring Themselves to Judgment, & make this Charles our King. But God's the God of Kings, his righteous Judging, Made us submit, and mourn, and leave our Grudging. How can my Subjects live, Justice expecting, So our Blest Charles Their King, they thus rejecting? No Law made these a Court, to Try our King, Of all Injustice now the Rump's the Spring. The Law of Thieves, the Sword that lawless Thing, All our black Miseries to pass did bring. Those Courts of Justice were of their own making, His Life, his Lands, his Laws, his Power Taking. Good God, wher's Justice now? Thine own Anointed, Our Hopes, our Hearts, our Head, our Law's disjoynted. The well built Pillars, of three Kingdom's down, They Cull and take, the power and the Crown. King, Nobles, Commons, and the Clergy then, Become a Sacrifice, to these bloudy Men. That God, Heavens, Earth, and Men, should see this thing, All silent be, my Muse he's silencing.
Priests of th' Ignatian brood this Rump stir up, Others deluded doe also fill the Cup. Catilines and Scylla's, and base Marius plots, Are nothing to these Demogorgons knots. Such Saints of base and mean extraction doe That's fit for Villaines, and for Divels too. England Repent and Mourn, A woful Thing 'S committed in thee, Murdering Charls thy King. Religion is pretended for this Act, And God's Grand Justice for this cursed Fact. God will be Just, Great Charles his Royal Suffering 'S a Sacrifice, three Kingdomes Royal Offering. We pray'd for Justice True, this Charles to see, Their Common Wealth's our Common Misery. O God forgive thy People truly Mourning For this Grand sin, though some were hardned spurning At thy Grand patience, Thy Act of Mercy Great, And Full Oblivion, we humbly Lord Intreat. Thousands were Innocent of this Grand dissembling, Whose Souls in humbling sorrow have been trembleing. These Men the worst of Murderers Fame doth Sing, The Best of Kings, Blest Charles our Royal King. All those that in this sin are still persisting, And so thy Gracious Mercy still Resisting. Bring them to Justice Lord, their Soules yet save, For none but Devils Damnation of them Crave. In Man's Grand Justice give them mercy Great, And for that Cursed Fact, Repentance meet. Wee doe believe, that thou art God forgiving, If wee Repent, and change our wicked living.
The Rump then Vote their Lords an useless thing, It's just with God they suffer with their King: Some Lords most coldly out from their House going, Whilst Rump and Armed Sects are us undoing. They Vote the House of Lords a dangerous thing, And burdensome the Office of a King. When they were then more burdensome than both, Customes, Excize, and Taxes, made us loathe Their Government; they new Delinquents made, For to keep up their stinking Rumpish trade. Brave Reinoldson Lord Mayor, would not proclaim Their Act 'gainst Kingly Government and Name. Sequestred and Imprison'd in the Tower, This was the Justice of that Rumpish power; They do the greatest Treason, yet make Laws, That all's high treason done against their Cause. The Crown, the Jewels, Hangings, and the rest Of the Kings Goods are sold, not to the best. Both they themselves, and eke their Army buy And City friends, King Charls his Treasury. They kisse, betray, and kill, and yet are praising Their own base Acts, all Subjects true upbraiding. Three Kingdoms, Justice, Law, & Power rending, And yet Lay-Priests, Lay-Prelats, them commending, The people never chose them such a thing, A Common-wealth 'gainst Law, and 'gainst their King. High Courts of cruel, foul injustice making, Who by proud Tyrants power, share partaking. Both Witness, Judge, and Jury too, did buy Themselves th' Estates of those they doom'd to dye.
Flusht with Kings bloud, then Lords & Priests they slay, All but themselves, they alwayes did betray. How many suffer Death, none Death deserving, The Rumpish stinking power for preserving? Duke Hamilton, Earle Holland next condemning, And brave Lord Capel dyes, His King Commending. The Earle of Norwich getteth a Reprieve, And Sir John Owen's voted for to Live. And Dorislaus is in Holland slain, Vengeance begins, for blood their cause did stain. The Royal Issue, stately and Princely things, Are still preserv'd by God the King of Kings, Gracious and blest Elizabeth, God up taking, With Charls his soul, the heavenly Quire up making. Great York he scapes, God carries him away; Brave Glocester young, God findes for him a day To get from their base terms, before this time Prince Charls was safe abroad, God hath the prime Care, Rule, and Government of Princes Royal, Which kept our hearts still up, and kept us loyal. Of what extract or Gentry were these men? That such stupendious acts performed then. Of what Religion were these bloody minded? Although Religion is in all things pretended, The worst of Treason's acted by new Saints, For true ones hated all those jugling paints. Such medley, made ingredients were, i'th' Rump, As if from Phlegeton Designs they pump. Now that my Muse some service due hath done To blessed Charls, their acts she will o're run.
Twelve years these Traitors keep out Charls their King, A Common-wealth they out of Kingdoms bring, And Churches out of Churches gathering, Their sins on Providence still fathering. Perjur'd Hypocrisie pretends the things Agree, to fear God and to kill their Kings. Their wild Religious zeal, all bordering On Schism, Faction, Falshood, all disordering. All but themselves from heaven banishing, And now themselves below are vanishing. Kingdoms confounders, who by Tub-prating, And Jerobohams Calves were alwayes stating Their own base interest, by Taxes rating The sadned people, and all their states partaking. Lay-Prelats and Lay-Priests, a worser thing Than those of Rome, the Gospel now did sting. Religion's mangled, and the Sects are mingling Their false opinions, and with some truths are jingling, The lowest of the people Priests becomming, Tinkers and Taylors, the Pulpits Coblers thumming. Weavers and Bakers, Brewers and Draymens fling, Base upstart Lords, base new-found Gentry spring. Base Counsellors, Projectors, and Committees, Like Pharaohs Frogs i'th' Church, i'th' Towns, in Cities. Base Sequestrators, and base deciming, Old Theeving, newly called Plundering. Base Rumpant Dragons, that were still a tearing Our states and souls, and all our Laws outwearing. Not one good Law they made, but all made running Their own base byasse, by their power and cunning.
Base turn coat Priests, base Lawyers Laws abusing For their most unjust Fees, base powers chusing; Pleading, defending, all's done by Law, all's just, When as they knew all done by will and lust. Kings blood-suckers, to raise themselves and bring All theirs on high, the wheel is now turning. Prophane Church-robbers, base buyers, and base sellers, All unjust getters, and mony-changing tellers. Such creatures did make up this Rumpish power; Instead of whips, with scorpions they devour. One peece of Justice of the Rumps Committee, The which was brought to passe in a grand City. A Trunk of Plate and Mony there was found, The which was worth about two thousand pound. This was good provender, by th' Arms the Plate Was known, a pretious booty for the State. The Knight was dead some years before the War Began, this Trunk gave to his Daughter fair, His only childe, there put for to be kept From those to whom all's fish that comes to net. The Committee often meet, the case is pleaded, Some honest men among them interceded, The childe was not at age, the Lady good That hid it no Malignant, her husband stood For Parlament, how then can this bee plunder? Yet if some men do lose the Gold, it's wonder. Two chief ones plead (the gold was sure their aim) No matter whose it is, to us it came By Providence, now we will surely pay Our Souldiers, and will then make others pray.
Wee'l finger some, spend some in Feasts, and then The rest wee'l pay the State, and they our men. What colour must wee use? it's not pretence But Justice wee will shew 'fore it go hence. Though that the Knight was dead some years before The war began, that will not quit this score. For had the Courtier Knight lived till now, Hee would have been Malignant wee avow. Shall wee lose so much gold, and so much plate? This feeling Providence will please the State. This Knight was oft at Court, a Servant just Toth' King, and would be faithfull to that trust: Was of great power in this same Country, let us Sequester Gold and Plate, God will forget us. The fewer honest men out. Voted are, The State gets some, two fat ones get their share, Hee that discovered it gets none: it's just, These cheat the Ladies, keep the gold from rust. Some friends did buy the condemn'd plate again, Sure such Committees ne'r rid Charls his Wain. In every City and in every Town, Such self-Committee men were oft sent down: Unto account the Rump durst not them call, Cause guilty of the same, and fear a fall; For Theeves by the accusing one another, Doe break their own necks, and do lose their power. The Reason, Justice, and the state o'th' Cause, The Money, Gold, and Plate, how strong it draws? Full many such Examples wee can tell, But none like this, of all, it bears the Bell.
One cryes Ka me to day, and Ile to morrow Ka thee, come hang up carking care and sorrow. Let Conscience never wake; some Office on This Knave, that Fool a gift confer upon. This place for one, that mony, and this Mannor, The land they gave, but could not give the Honor. Be sure prefer our Chaplain Priests they cry, They preach our Cause, defend our Piety. No statute now Mortmain, the Rump's the giver, What is the stomach, when so bad's the Liver? In many Garrisons men of no Religion, Prating and speaking, approv'd by every Wigeon. What women then were those that made the men To make the House of God, of Theeves a Den? And Scripture for this wickednesse to bring, Which Satan certainly did now bring in. No man could find the true Religion pure Scarce in the land, new Saints made it obscure. So was their Charity and Justice too, By false opinions Religion to undo. Their Scotch grand Covenant they justly brook, Some Ignorant, some Innocent, it took, Good God forgive them all that cannot keep Those snaring bonds, but do repent and weep. Allegiance, Supremacy, nor Protestation, No Oaths, nor Covenants for Reformation Did bind this lawlesse Rump, so sweet is power, Though false, usurpt, yet fals in Gods just hour. Just Oathes are sacred unto sacred men, But nought bindes Changelings who are now and then.
That Covenant's put out by th' new Ingagement, As Purgatory puts out Hels inragement. As one Grand story of a Safe Committee My Muse hath told, so of th' Ingagements pitty. Two godly Ministers that durst not ingage With divers others, did the Rump inrage. God brings the Plague, th'Ingaging Minister's gone, The other two are left i'th' Town alone. God brings the Plague, these two good Ministers then The Censers take, and Incense burn, like men Of God, both fast, and preach, and pray to God, To sanctify his just and heavy rod. Lackworth for non-Ingaging turns them out, And all their Families for to rove about. Most of the Country dare not take them in, Thanks therefore unto those that help did bring. The Town's without a Priest, the plague's oppressing, This worse than Prelacy the Priests suppressing. Oh tell it not in Romish Gath, 'tis well That by no Protestants but Sects this fell. How many Towns and Cities sadly loose Their faithful Angels, 'cause they this refuse? Most holy men, that Pill they durst not take, But must their people, and their friends forsake. All godly ones, that vain Inchantment hate, Oathes against Oathes, but now what cares the State? Yet for their Livings, many after in Did come and take it, sure it was their sin. Though some were couzen'd, and others did for fear, Yet peace of Conscience sure is very dear.
In all three Kingdoms some they did repent, And for their own Kings bloud they did relent. Study revenge, and venture all again In England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Main. King Charls proclaim'd in Scotland, there first own'd, And then in Ireland, most long'd to see him Crown'd. Ormond and Inchequin doe both appear, But yet successe doth not attend them there. The fault not theirs, the time it was not come, To reckon for King Charls his Martyrdome. Cromwel is sent to use his jugling there, By Money, or Deceit, so every where He conquers all, and then again returns By blood, revenge, for power his spirit burns; Pleads Providence and Mercy, God's in all, Rides on successfull to his deadly fall. The powder blast in Tower-street did tell, The Act of new Ingagement came from hell. Gallant Montrosse he sadly is defeated, And of his life, not Honour, sadly cheated. Against all Oathes, and Covenants, Nol enters Then Kingly Scotland, where his blood he venters. Gods Justice by this Rod them punishing For brave Montresse, and yeelding up their King. Gods ways are just, though secret; he's more filthy Yet he must punish them that are lesse guilty. His hand's in all the Treasons and the blood, And yet pretends his heart is holy, good. Thus by Gods hand, the wicked they are made To punish wickednesse, that cursed trade.
As Tamberlain did Bajazet, so hee For blood by blood paies home their treachery, For after quarter, at Dunbar hee slayes Thousands, and then lifts up his hands and prayes. When Papists conquer Papists, then they sing Te Deum; bad cause when prosper'd is a thing Too high for men to dive into; admire Those things in which it's dangerous to aspire. An enemy in straights turns desperate mad To dye or conquer, ventures all hee had. The Scots leave Edenbourgh, Noll buyes the Castle, Money's a bait, more cursed was that Rascle; Some men are good at buying and at selling, No conscience speaks when they are money telling, With courage and with valour some are brave For war, as any Royal Prince can have; Some for Religion also zealous are, Cromwel out-vyes them all, that's very rare; The other Garrisons do mercy cry To Cromwel, though they curse his victory. King Charls most solemnly was crown'd at Schoon In Scotland, enters England August Moon, Comes in with his, like Lambs, doing no harm, Not for provision; then the Rump doth storm; Nolls Gold's in Leaselyes heart. To Woster comes King Charls, and's Scots, and there beats up his Drums, Some Welch-men fear their fortunes for to try, Base Mackworth doth deny him Shrewsbury. Now Love and Gibbons dye, the Heavens thundring The Rump is harder than Rocks, men are wondring.
Oh that thy love had temper'd more thy zeal, Blest Christopher, thy parts they did reveal Great gifts of Grace, thy Ministry was sound, Sweet, powerful, plain, and yet in all profound. Thou art betray'd by those that Fast with thee, And humbly seek the Lord pretendingly. And by some of thine own coat art betray'd, And yet of their injustice not afraid. The Court, th'Atturney, Death doth not thee fright, Thy Faith and Covenant to deny, that's right. Gibbons is trapt to bee thy grand Compeer, To dye with thee, to go to Heaven dear. Loves dearest friends, some smal reprieves did get, This his temptation, his wife and children yet Often Petition, the Babe unborn did cry Pitty my Father, do not let him dye. Thy Ministry and life was very dear, Thou dyest i'th' Rumps terrorem, not in fear. Thanks learned Hales that did o'rethrow the Charge, Though that thy time to study it was not large. Thou stood condemned by those cruel men, Though not by God, nor thy own conscience, then Th' High Court thou didst not fear, nor the long Sword. Scaffold nor Axe, supported by Gods Word, Only for writing to brave Massey, gone To Scotland, for to fetch King Charls to's home. Some Priests were bold and stout, yet some did turn. Some Preached worse than Love, yet would not burn. God did provide for Loves posterity, Though some are slackned with timidity.
Noll comes from Scotland with his Red-coats Tyrod; Whom Satan drives, let him not be admired; The King is kept in play, doth not advance, By Scotish cheats, but not by ignorance; The Rump now scorn the Kings Just Rights to yeeld; At fatal Woster Noll hee wins the Field, And yet Great Charls our King hee hath the Honour That's braver than success, God was his Banner; The Kings preserv'd by Gods most sacred hand, The King of Kings conveyes him out o'th' Land. So great a Miracle sure was never seen, Since Christ; the Rump they had such envious spleen, Malice, and power, successes, and what not, Blest God thou sav'dst the King, though not the Scot; My Muse is here amaz'd, what had hee done, Young Crowned Charls, such hazards for to run? But that our God makes him a Saint most fit To rule for God, when on our Throne hee's set. How strict was their curst search? the Mercy more, In thy escape, Great King thy God adore. Noll up to London comes, the sects him praise, Such blood can never True Just Honour raise. Septembers third doth twice give Noll the day, And yet Septembers third takes Noll away, To reckon for Kings blood, Rebellion, Treason, Though Needam's Interest lye, it's Gods best season, As yet Noll serves the Rump, but also sees His time to pay them justly all their Fees. God's just, when hee in justice home doth pay Traitors with Treason, Rebels Rebels slay.
Such men to prosper both by Sea and Land, In all three Kingdomes severe was Gods just hand, They do behead brave Earl of Derby true, Who died a Christian, though some liv'd the Jew, Sir Tim. Fetherston Haugh at Chester eke Beheaded is, and Bembo stout and meek At Shrewsbury; more of the Royal Train At Woster, and besides murdered and slain, Brought up like Hogs in droves, starv'd, beaten, then Beyond Sea sent, like slaves, and not like men. The Hollander's twice beaten by the Rump, And eke the French, now both no more are Trump. Dunkirk is also by the Spaniard taken, By the help of th' Rump, though after that forsaken, Blake worsted by the Dutch, yet after worsted, Some think that they should not of all be trusted; For in the Levant Seas our English Fleet Destroyed by the Dutch, for them it was most meet, The Dutch are Protestants, and should bee kinde, But that in this great Art they were purblinde. Spain first did own the Rump for their own ends, But Spain to King and Princes made amends, In France Prince Cny, Cardinal and King. At wars, the Cardinal owns the Rumpish thing, 'Gainst Calling and Religion of Rome, What policy is there wee cannot doom? They here make peace, forsake their Princely friends Mazarine's back Game, yet God hath secret ends, To make our Charls the Protestants Protector, And of Romes fallacy the Grand Rejector.
How many seals were broke Treason committing? Each one the others knavery out witting; The Rumps Grand breeches were of Nols devising, By them set up hee sees himself uprising; Nol fasts and prayes whiles they to pass did bring His black designs 'gainst Gospel, Law, and King. God hates the Traitor, and the Treason too, Consulted wickedness will it self undo. Those Task-masters exacted Brick and Straw, Pretend Religion, and yet break the Law. The Armies Agitators still did mock At three Grand Pees the which they said did lock England in slavery, against which they cry, Popery, Praelacy, and Presbytery, But three Grand l's have far a worser sting, Jannisaries the Great Turk strangling, Jesuites by Popish Figs Kings poysoning, Independents their own Kings Head off chopping, From such, Good Lord deliver us, wee pray, And Charls our Soveraign King both night and day. Kings-Arms i'th' Churches made the people pray For Charles, whose Father they did lately stay, I'th' Courts, i'th' Ships, Exchange, his Picture down, His power and state they take and sell the Crown What hurt's i'th' Armes? but that by them remembring Wee pray'd for Blessed Charls his Sons returning; Both Root, and Branch, and Name, this Rump out flings, And war's proclaim'd 'gainst Charls the best of Kings, The higher that they soar, the lower falling, Tyrants at last God to account is calling.
How many for their own base Interest Did serve this Rump for gain, others opprest? Some suffered, still waiting this blessed day, For which all loyal hearts did sing and pray. Beggars to Lordships came, serving this Rump, But into Raggs they'l change their Velvet Jump. Set such on horse-back, proudly will they ride, Till Power, and Law, and States, they all bestride, But now they stink, it's just this Rumpish State In twelve sad years stould have a Rumpish fate. Those lewd pretences that the Rump did bring, The people cry, they said, go kill your King, All's done by Providence, they still did say, Are now prov'd lyes; God save the King wee pray, Wee bless Just Providence, that in wisdome Ruling To th'best of blessings chang'd these Changlings doing. Let's ever bless our Gracious God most wise, That hath brought home the just light of our eyes. God's just in all, Traitors by Treason judging, The Rumpish Army 'gainst the Rump still grudging. Of such base Compounds were this Rumpish Power, Which made themselves themselves for to devour; Nothing contents that Army proud, success Did make them bold, they scorn'd for to address, They never thought of change, dream'd here to dwell, Sure made a Covenant with Death and Hell. Widdows and Fatherless pray'd, that they might sing, A Welcome-home to Charls, our Lord, the King. Such were the keepers of our Liberties, Knaves still invisible grounds of miseries.
Sans mercy and 'gainst Law they Tried our King, His Queen they banisht, and that Princely thing, And all the rest by Treason still kept from us, 'Gainst Oaths and Covenant, and Great Nolls Grand Promise; The Army still did change all Government, Their souls did still to Judgement them present, But Noll hee cheats them all, chief Rule intending, And still Religion, Law, in his pretending; Traitors turn'd out, God's just, his Judgements rare, Of the next Change, my Muse will now declare. First Noll that jugling Saint them out did fling A brave Grand Rebel, an Hypocrite mocking, Souldier enough successful, bold and daring, A politick Nose, ambitious, no man fearing, Sans Legal Writs hee pricks a Parliament, Call'd Bare-bones Juncto, these must represent The people, who never did them call, Or Power give, by these Noll seeks for all; They vote themselves a Parlament, because Under that title they might break the Laws. Sects bad enough, Compounds of all together, Spoil Marriage-Rites, some went they knew not whither The Marriage-knot to tye, yet these not fitting Nolls secret ends, hee takes them off from sitting. Noll and his Cubs do cry, they're false, pretending That they, when hee, our property was rending, Then lifts up hands and eyes, and by lay preaching, And falser prayers, his Saints and Souldiers cheating. But something else did in the bottome lye, That Juncto's wisdome could not this descry.
A single person, something like a King, Nolls craft, and crew, and power, to pass did bring, Protector, or Projector rather, levelling All to his lusts, a while sits proudly revelling The Feather in his Cap, the Title King Hee calls, and yet the Power still usurping; Five years hee rul'd, not reign'd, himself protecting By Power and Sword, all lust men else rejecting; In his own craft God still was him defeating, Hee would and would not, so hee liv'd by cheating. Calls three Mock-Parlaments, breaks up the thing Of his own mking, cause hee would bee King; A pack of knaves were some, some could not give Up our Grand Laws, whiles Charls his Son did live. Nolls fit to rule, but no just Title having, Makes him unjust, and made him alwaies craving Of all Religions that made for his supporting, Made all opinions stirrup his usurping; A Coach-box favour God him once was giving, On Michaelmas day, to change his wicked living. State Secretary in the Coach doth sit, Protector in the Coach box, where's his wit? Sometimes such frollicks mad into his brain Were whymsied by his spirit, or his Train; But this one Act was like their Actions all, One draws another, now Noll gets the fall, Yet God had mercy, though that Noll had none, Noll had some virtues, mercy hee lackt alone; One of his three Mock-Parlaments was sitting When as their Head at the horse heels was flitting.
Some part o'th' Army Nol abroad doth send, For Gold, to Hispaniola, keeps to mend The rest, worms Lambert out, and others trembling Obey, yet most do hate his base dissembling. His Major Generals, Semi-dragons sting The Land, Nols Bashaws then deserv'd the string. For moneys sake the Jews he in would bring, Cause they fore him had murder'd Christ their King. He then pleads for the Jews the Scripture Text For their Conversion, though with his own he's vext. He doth Divines call up from severall places, To colour that design, his Chaplains faces Are not so braz'd as his, he turns the Jew, He gets the Gold, and then forsakes that crew. Still mony lacks, for that his conscience bends His power and sword, and valor thereto tends, It must be had, if that the Gods deny, The Acheron hee'l force, and Devils try, Makes Churches stables, a Sacrilegious thing, This was the Reformation Nol did bring. Brave man, where doth thy spirit sadly rumble? How in this world did thy aspirings tumble Things upside down? Valour with Counsel swayd Is good, grand Nol makes all the world afraid. How many seem to bless when as they curse? Nol cares not, so that hee have power and purse. How did his Parlaments and himself agree? How did his several speeches made to three Concur? and with his Recognition more, Prayes, and protests, and swears, makes up the score.
Hee prospers every where, by Sea and Land, Makes Holland's Trump to gravel in the Sand, Although at St. Domingo there's a losse, Yet at Jamaica doth the Spaniard crosse, Success at home, and eke success abroad, Makes his Aspirings not to fear the Rod, At Sancta Cruze the Spanish Fleet's attempted Silver's brought home, at Eriff they're borned. What shall wee say? count not Success a God, It is some times Gods just and heavy Rod Some Levellers before were of Nols breeding, Burford Breakfast, Nol Doctors them with bleeding; Stout Lilbourn John opposed all, and stands For Law, and pleads 'gainst all these mens commands, Hee suffers much, still discontented that Hee's not set up, and doth hee cares not what; Lilbourn lyes here, whom many thought was mad, Hee dyed a Quaker, buried at Bedlam sad, This Mock-King Noll of new found Lords a House Sets up, some scarce fore this, not worth a Louse. The Royal Ministers Noll out did fling From Means and Office, both prohibiting From teaching School, and eke from Chaplains being, So buries them alive, these acts God seeing Some Obadiah's in a Cave them feed, Preserv'd from Ahab though the Church did bleed. Who for the Churches good no seed is sowing, The Churches God takes him away with blowing Thus Civil Prelates silence Priests; a thing Prodigious, strange, an Antichristian string.
With Kings and states, abroad by force or cunning Noll makes his peace most men by Craft out runing, In most Agreements Noll was still disgracing Our Royal Princes, Traitors still are placing Themselves in others Rights, hee domineers And Trophies of our slavery up rears, Without Divinity, Divines up setting, That worshipped his Calves, and prais'd his getting, Abroad a Devil, most men so him thinking, At home worse then a Machavil hee's stinking. Into a black base Instrument Noll Changes Our Lawes, and over Kingdomes three Noll Ranges, Upon Intelligence abroad, much spends, At home hee Rackt us almost to our ends; A Saint in show, grand Holiness pretending Great outward parts and Gifts, but never mending, By which hee cosens good men, by power and threats Inslaves the rest, and both sides sweetly cheates, Never did Machavil bring to passe such things, By seeming Holiness gainst the best of Kings. The Brewer makes the Dray-man Knight, a thing Prodigious, proud, low men made Lords to string Noll to the Crown, here's seen a fiery nos'd King And fat a Queen, the Levellers did sing. Hangs a great Room, as badges of his Ruling, That strangers they might see his hold & footing; What Justice, Goodness, or what religious thing Could wee expect, from him that kill'd his King? But God doth Justice, and his power shewes, How hee in time dissemblers overthrowes.
Once Sworn, Proclaim'd, again sworn at's Installing, Base Herods Conscience alwayes fears a falling. Plots and makes Treason, and thereby others killing, Nol and his Officers their Coffers filling, A damned Toleration hee admitting, Thinks that the way to make him faster fitting. After blest Hewets death, Nol no way thriving, Septembers third the wind away him driving. Good people cry'd God's just, this dismal thing, And stormy wind, makes way for Charls our King. I cannot passe blest Hewits martyrdome, Without some service offerd at his Tomb. O he within! Anagram most clear, For this our blessed, holy Martyr dear: Without is sorrow, for without is sin, He's above both, for O he is within! The O is ours, but the within is his, The losse is ours, but his within is blisse. While we are out forgive us Lord our sin, With Saints and Martyrs, that wee may get in. Within the Temple of eternal rest, Within with Christ, Kings, Priests, and with the best Of Prophets too, of Martyrs, Saints, and those With whom the world's not worthy for to close. Within the highest Court of Righteousnesse, Where Christ hath cloath'd him with his faithfulnesse. Where he shall never dye again, because. He pleaded not at Summum Jus his laws. It was his honour that he thus should dye, His Master-like, by Judge and Jury high.
He mounts the Scaffold, claspes the block, and smiles At the keen Axe, 'cause free from Satans wiles, His conscience clear, his face most bright did shine, Fitted for Angels was this blest Divine. A Doctor here, for Learning, Grace, and Love, A Martyr there receiv'd in Heaven above. Preaching, and praying, his last acts of Grace Are chang'd to praising 'fore Gods blessed face. Since Christ till Charls, such justice hath not bin King, Priests, and Saints, thus murtherd ne'r was seen. Thanks base O. P. H. C. B. Hangman, Axe, Although i'th' Church you make a Parallax. Our stars of highest magnitude are gone, And still you daringly keep out the Son. God of his Grace hath chang'd his Scene to joy, Above the Court, th' Atturney, and the annoy Of lawlesse, high injustice, spectators all Might see his glory when you made him fall. Let us repent, for why within he is, There let him rest safe in eternal blisse. His dearest Lady, and his children dear Have lost a Husband, and Father here; His Church their Pastor, humble, meek, and holy, Who dyed for Truth, and not for Treasons folly. But see how God injustice doth repay, Nol ne'r had rest from that great Martyrs day. He now rejoyces safe within in glory, Let after Ages still record his story. So let him rest, till God reveal, of men, Counsels & hearts, both how they die, & when.
For that pretended Treason more do dye, To make up Nols account of cruelty. Cheap-side, Tower-Hill, and the Exchange, do show That Nol he had no mercy here below. Drawn Hang'd and Quarter'd, is the English Law For Traitors, God will these men by Justice draw, For why, he's Just, to dire account will bring For blood of Nobles, Priests, and of their King. Repentance may prevent the curse of Hell, If God have mercy on their souls, it's well. My Muse ne'r heard of Olivers repenting, Nor any of those Rump suters relenting. Kings blood, and Princes, Nobles and Priests blood crying Might raise those winds that storm'd it at his dying. The Protestants abroad Nol still was couzening, With Protestants at home Nol still was jugling. We fast and pray for poor Waldenses suffering, Who cheats those Saints of Englands pious offering? Nol and his crew, which made us daily sing, God send us home just Charls our gracious King. Whilst Nol Protector thus did lye a dying, Non-lustrious Joan doth mourn & keeps a crying How shall I rule this grand unruly thing? My Lord is dead, they did betray the King Not so, good Dame, Nol's Sects and Army did, That which both Gods and mans Laws did forbid. A sad Catastrophe, the people scorning, From throne to kitchin, who payes for all the mourning? White-hall had many Masters, yet not the right, At last God turns black Traytors in sad plight.
Nol thought all sure, but see the Serpents lurking, Where fraud and power keeps Tyrants up usurping. For good Queen Dick, that honest uselesse thing, By Nols kin and his crew, (just is the King Of Kings, alive is buryed) though Grace is pardoning, Mushromes, repent, and keep your hearts from hardning. Lest stormy winds roaring, and trees up blowing, Do send you where the Styx is ever flowing. God gives us just examples to take heed Of treason, traytors shall have traytors meed. The people weary of Nols grand oppressing, To Dick proclaim'd, do make their low addressing, Some flatter, some design, some hope th'amending Of burdens great, before their fatall ending. But Dick's turn'd out, and Hal from Ireland comming, Both want their Fathers valour, and his cunning. Dicks honest Parlament good things were doing, The title's naught, the Army's them out-throwing, Thus Agitators, armed Priests, do bring Confusion, for of all they were the spring. Those Agitators were of Nols devising, Backt all his projects, still themselves up rising. Grand-Satans Jesuits by their Popes false dealing, Brew'd all our miseries, kept us still from healing. Gainst true Religion, and settlement still burning: Content with none, all Governments out-turning. These rise 'gainst Dick, and all their wayes reproving, Gainst God, and King, and Laws, the Army moving. Confusion brings confusion, God is just, The wickeds honour sin layes in the dust.
The Rump before their time again now rising, Though six years buryed, stink, yet still devising New Treasons, troubles, by the Army call'd in, The Army cast them out before, great is their sin. They now resolve, the Nation once more muzling, But yet brave Cheshire threats their cruel nuzling, Brown, Booth, & Middletons Welsh-men cry the King Something too late, Lambert them all is conquering. Though some men faild, yet thousands good men pray, And gladly wisht St. George an happy day. Now new Sequestring, some that 'fore did stand For the long Parlament, just is Gods blessed hand. Brave, stout, and valiant Massey scapes the Tower, Comes in again, and scorns this Rumpish power, And is preserv'd by God, that he might bring Our blessed Charls, our Soveraign Lord the King. Gods time is best, he's faithful to his trust. Though for his sake blest Love is laid i'th' dust, Kings Rights are still preserved by our God, God sanctify that twelve years heavy Rod. Lambert receives his token from the Rump, And's Captains Orderd thanks, now he is Trump, But little blood was shed, then new Committees. Chester's dis-franchiz'd, spoyl'd amongst the Cities. Both Ministers and others are suspected, Imprison'd, and Estates are new sequestred, But they that call'd them in, do turn their faces, And now resolve to occupy their places. Lambert his time comes to return in play, God shortens this, for his true Saints did pray.
The Rumpish rage and fury nine out turn, Lambert and's Captains vow the Rump to burn, They armed come to th' House, to stop their meeting, Like to their souldiers, Rumpish souldiers greeting. Lental of several Parlaments was the Speaker, Of all our Laws and Statutes the great breaker; Hee's once again sent back, for to consider, Or else to count his money, judge you whether. The Army set them up, and pulls them down, And help them to destroy the Royal Crown. Lambert and Fleetwood, and the Officers praying, Both fast and feast, and still intend betraying; Now all consult, and in amaze, and cry, What Counsel's best? resolve to live or dye. The Head is gone, and eke the politick Nose, Six things like Parlaments wee stab'd, and rose Against the present power; what, shall wee have A single person, who shall bee the knave? Coxcombs of safety let us settle now, Heark, rouze your spirits, the Northern winds do blow. Now London fasts and praies, in one prostrating Their humbled souls, and bold by now declaring For a Free Parlament, out-vy the cheating Of Wallingford-house-saints, though Vanes repeating This new Committee of slavery, down would have Our Colledges and Churches, so inslave Us worse, the bottome of the headless Rump Worse than the rest, onely fit for the stump. Against these Saints, whoever dare to clash In his hearts blood, their hands they swear to wash.
Proclaim for peace, and yet more blood devising, All still resolve 'gainst Charls a constant rising; The grand blind Cobler guilty of former blood, Begins new broyles i'th' City, amaz'd wee stood; Brave Prentises petition'd 'gainst this might, Stand up for King, for Laws, for Cities Right, Some pinion'd are, others are sadly slain, Cobler kills Cobler, this blood sure cryes amain; Brave Common Council stand for Cities cause, Coblers indited for murdering the Laws. Patience abus'd, returns to rage and fury, God will bee Judge, whoever is the Jury. How did blest Londons God preserve us then From mutinies, confusion, even when The knife was at the throat? our hands did itch To give blind halting Cobler one true stitch. Now more Committees, and more Sequestrators, And more curst raking who should be our Stators. Thus one destroies another, as unjust, A guilty conscience will not a brother trust. God uses Instruments of his own appointing, And makes his way for Blessed Charls Anointing. Wee Protestants are, and Popish Monks wee hate, Yet one brave Monk preserves both King and State; Forgive him all the rest, for this is more Than all the Monks could ever do before; Great George the best of Monks sees all their raking Of Church and State, resolves to stop their taking. God said Amen, bids George march on and bring Justice, Peace, Truth and Mercy, with our King.
The Game was hard, the stakes were great, the sting Of safety vows Monk on his back to fling. This Northern blast out-blows the Fasts and Prayers Of Fleetwood's, Lambertonians Kings betrayers; They now resolve, Lamberts flusht Army sing Before their time Victoria, conquering; In their proud lust and Arm of flesh boasting All's their, and then into the North they're posting; But hee that sits in Heaven laughs to see Their pride, Now stops their twelve years tyranny. Fifty brave Troops of Horse, and desperate Foot, Experienc'd valour, and brave General too't; And all our Sects in's March they bravely cry Triumph unto your Lordship Victory; Rakers, Quakers, Shakers, all come in, And help to fill the measure of their sin, From Monks, Priests, Fryers, Scotch Presbyters they cry Deliverance is sure, wee'l fight or dye. This man of no Religion, like Noll, hath all, That do pretend, this hastens much his fall. Poor Monk hath Horse more fitter for to run Than fight, say they, wee will the Scots orecome; Hang Tything Priests, wee'l pray our selves, and preach, Thy brandisht sword, Lord Lambert, that us teach, Wee'l Colledge Lands, and Churches take, Priests all, Instead of Tythes, to us for bread shall call; Wee'l make the City bow, and take their Treasure, Their Wives and Widdows, Orphans at our pleasure. This Monk had fought at Land, conquered at Sea, Leads a new dance, and thus begins the plea.
Soft fire makes sweet Malt, saith George, still having God on his side, and his protection craving. Shall now the Common-wealth be bafled thus? Must every knave sit Majesty in Pus? Will nothing them content, King nor Protector, Nor Parlament, Committees nor Projector? Committee of Dangers must they now us rule, These Gallimaufrees worse than Rumpish stool. Monk sends Commissioners to that short Committee, Letters and Messengers to brave London City. Brave Scots assist and lend him money too, What then was in the dark is open now. My muse amaz'd, doth hear the Kirk are praying For Monk, the Sects for Lambert now are saying Their Mattens, the Rumpish Wealthsmen they are calling. On God, to keep their power now from falling. The Presbyterians they the Lord are seeking The King abroad, our God humbly beseeching. The King and Kirk their prayers Heaven hearing, Monk's blest, and now begins our hopes and chearing. God hears at last, and his own time is best, They're Gods own Instruments that bring us rest; The Monk keeps on his hood, and by fair treating Preventeth blood, though they intended cheating. At Portsmouth now the Rump doth rise, a thing Stupendious, great, but sure no more Rising, Except to Judgement, George marches on, he's wise, Revives three Kingdomes hopes, and doth devise Our good; our God from Heaven now protecting Zerubbabel, and all his waies directing.
'Twixt hopes and fears wee cry'd this Monk's a blessing To bring Grand Charls, and free us from oppressing; Destroy this Rump, they cry'd, this monstrous thing, As George did once the Dragon and the sting; Hee sav'd one Virgin once, but thou art saving Three Kingdomes George; now this brave Monk still having God on his side, Charls in his heart, hee's Trump, By time and wisdomes patience starves the Rump; Hee marches on, to London's City comming, Joyns Scottish Bag-pipes with the English drumming. Welcome to th' City George, the power being, Whilst in Commission, Monk is still obeying; To th' House hee goes, and begs the House up filling, Protesting that all Countries so were willing; The Rump forsworn, had forc'd an oath, abjuring The Royal Race, no oaths them fore-conjuring, Grow proud and high, guilt, fear, and sad despairing, Doubts and black Jealousies do make them dating; They vow the Cits shall pay for their declaring, The Gates shall down by George, the walls defacing. The Gates pull'd down, the City cryes, amazing What Monk is this, the people all are gazing; What ayls thee George? the Popish Monks did never Pull down our City Gates, and thus dissever Great London; but sure wee must a little smart, London in all these times hath had a part; Our sins were great, but blessed bee our God, That in this hurly burly stopped blood, If this bee all, great London stir no more, Honour thy King, thy God fear and adore.
Still George is honest, for mercy interposing, Preserv'd from blood, next night there comes a closing; What would you have brave Citizens, saith hee? What shall I do for your grand Liberty? Free Parliament, said they, my Lord wee crave, That you the Kingdome and the City save; Free Parliament, saith George, all Guild-Hall shouting, The City-bonfires, shew'd, the Rump was routing. Some Quakers oft fore-told the Cities burning, Cry now, into sad Ashes London's turning. Free us, saith London, from this gross deluding, Bring in those members which the Rump secluding, Eleven years kept out, Great George takes off The force, the Members sit, the Rump doth scoff, Some guilty souls stay from the House, these make Brave Monk our General, now the Rump doth quake, Monk's bravely feasted, but hee still doth work How to prevent the Rumpish Serpents lurk. The guilty Sectaries, now they sadly cry, Monk cheats us all with Scotch Presbytery. In one months time th' secluded Members bring More good to th' Nation, than the Rump sitting Twelve years; the House of Lords were lacking To settle Law, but now the Rump is packing. Middleton and Brown, and Chester's Booth restore, Free Parliament procure, so that the door Upon necessity this hinge they move, Our hopes begin to settle, our hearts to love. How gladly did the people all rejoyce For King and Laws to God lift up their voice?
In all these times some Church-men still were acting Above their sphear, Church-power still contracting. Thus Noll had Triers, Nyes Prelates, worser things Than Bishops far, having both pride and stings, Dub'd Lay-men-Priests, State humour thereby fitting Great Noll's grand Hierarchy, the powers flitting; These much cry'd out by others, often said, Noll was chief Magistrate, hee must bee obeyed; Yet in that little sudden change, some men Who spake against the rest, get power then. Into Church-Livings Presbyters admit Judges of Titles make themselves, and sit Archbishop-like, others i'th' Country make Just thirty one, of their Clerks Fees partake. Thus all get power, the Churches Right invade, Most drive their own designs, and get a Trade; The House of Commons alone, they could not make A Law, yet these from them this power take. True Church-men prayed that they again might see Church-power fixt by Law and Majesty. The Bishops settled were by several Kings And Parlaments, and Antient Laws, the Springs Of Government, these voted down, for Reasons Which to their adverse party seemed Treasons. Nolls Independents cheated us each hour, The Presbyterians now have got short power, Sit by no Law, but of necessity; I will not blame in this their Piety. Who would think this, but that the Churches power Is very sweet, since all men it devour?
Is it not just that God unsettle all Again, and make us sensible of our fall, Since it is true that Civil Rule doth come From Monarchy, as beams come from the Sun? Church Government from Christ, the Churches King, And Primitive Bishops down from him they bring, Constant in preaching, faithful in governing. Their great laborious works their praises sing. But Prelacy, as Lords the King did make, And did again their power from them take. Bishops and Presbyters Christs true Ministry, Councils and Synods his Authority, Lord Priest, Lord Cardinal, Lord Pope a string Of Antichrist, when set above the King, Let Scripture and the first times History Declare, God will take off the Romish Mystery, Set pride and Interest aside, and cry, Sol in occasu, love knits in piety. Rome laughs at all, the Sects do daily cry, It's Pride and Covetousness rules our Ministry. Those better Members then they did present A Council of State, until the Parliament Did meet, who do with prudence rule; the Rump By Lamberts scape again thought to bee Trump; But Ingoldsby and's souldiers take them napping, And so preserve us from the Sects entrapping; Some fly and get away, 'cause Guilt was seizing Upon their souls, but some lye hid, still fearing. Thus God works for us, and prevents those men, Whose Arms and lust still chang'd, and chang'd agen.
Some bite their nails, some scratch their heads, and sing A Palinode, recanting every thing. Some their oppressed stomacks up would bring, Cause now's the time, God's judging for the King Whose blood they shed, Lands bought, & broke the hedg Of Government, God give them mercy on the Sledge. His friends triumph, his foes their hands do wring, The Papists mourn, the Sects are sad, trembling. Rebels & Regicides now may have their swing. True Subjects cry, we hate proud Levelling. The people, they their Parlaments are chusing, Most Rumpish men, the people still refusing. The bent, and strength, & voyce oth' Nation sing, Chuse such a Parlament that may bring our King. God orders Providence for the self-same thing. Monke with the Parlament our Charls doth bring. Foul poysonous Serpents, and that Rumpish sting, That pickt our purse, and suckt our blood, forcing Subjection by that proud and bloody thing, Are all afraid oth' Parlaments sitting. Why should Free Parlament such terrour bring? But Conscience guilt into their souls did fling. State-cheaters base, and all base Treasurers cry, We must cast up account before we dye. We Houses bought and built, and purchast Land, Then for a cipher, now they'l a figure stand. God's just at last, though some years suffering sin, The wickeds reck'ning day it will come in. The Rump's thrice roasted, if we can repent, Our sad and black account we may prevent.
Gods time is best, to which we all subscribe, All faithfull Subjects, and true Levies Tribe. We often pray'd, and sigh'd, and groan'd to see Our God take off Egyptian misery. When shall our Moses come, and Aarons too, To judge these Traitors, and our snares undo? Was ever people thus opprest? blest God Wee murmure not at thy Divine blest Rod, But pray'd for justice, and for King and Laws, That might throw down this stinking sinking cause. Grudge not at Pharaohs, or th' Egyptians Plush, God did preserve us in the burning bush. As all the plagues in that Grand Rump did share, So all our blessings in this settling are, Bless God that did our Princes all preserve From dangers great, at home, abroad, to serve Him in their Generations, holy, just, To rule by Law, and not by will and must. Gods blessed Providence ruling here and there, Protects the just and innocent every where. Say no man did it, but the King of Kings, To fit them for most glorious blessed things. The Rump is burnt, the Tragedy is ending, God bless King Charls for stil his Faiths defending; So let his enemies perish all, wee sing, God hath brought home our Soveraign Lord the King. Religion's come, with Laws and Liberty, Peace, plenty, Justice, and Prosperity; King Charls his glory now doth fully shine In this our Charls, and in the blessed Trine.
Our Rampant Lion's come, whom but to name 'S joy to his friends, and to his foes their shame; And with him those two Royal Gracious Springs Of Mercy, Truth and Peace, and all blessings. My Muse is weary of this Rumpish story, Only refresht to sing King Charls his glory. If any take offence, it is because They're guilty of the wrong to King and Laws. To sing King Charls his welcome, Heaven inspire My chearful Muse, and kindle all her fire. Amen and Amen.
AN HUMBLE ELOGIƲM, and Joyfull Acclamation, FOR The Welcome home of our Soveraign Lord the KING, CHARLS By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France & Ireland: Defender of the Antient, Catholick, Apo∣stolick, Protestant Faith, which was professed by the Antient, Primitive Church, Sealed with the blood of many Kings and Princes, Nobles and Bishops, and other Faithful Saints, Crowned with the glory of Martyr∣dome. And who is in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, next and immediatly un∣der Christ, supreme Governour, in these his Majesties Realms and Dominions. Nunquam libertas Gratior extat Quam sub Rege pio. Regis ad exemplum. . PYerian Sisters, sacred, three times three: Olympick Joves most Royal Progeny, You that frequent the Heliconian Spring, And on Parnassus Hill, do sit and sing, Send down a quil from Angel Gabriels wing, To write the welcome home of Charls our King, Assist me now with your Seraphick skill, Englands most joyfull Triumph to fulfill. How all things did concur from Heavens high, To wait upon great Charls his Majesty.
I'th' Heavens above the glorious Angels sing, I'th' air the birds with joy exalt the wing, The winds blew fair, the seas were calm, each thing Joy'd here below ith'earths most peacefull spring. Blest May King Charls his month, hence flourishing Then born, then own'd, and then proclaimed King. Thus Heavens, air, seas, and earth, ships, loyalling All strive to kisse the hand now royalling. All in their order and in their nature bring, A joyfull welcome home to Charls our King. The Lords and Commons sit, our gracious King Prevents them all, his mercy offering A gracious pardon, like God himself forgiving The greatest sinners, that were ever living, If they repent, return, his Goodness leading The Parlament to think on waies of healing, Most blessed letters and blest Proclamation That ever came unto a troubled nation, Mercy, it from the God of mercy springs, It makes men like unto the King of Kings. That wondrous star that at his birth did shine One thousand six hundred thirty, Mays twenty nine Gods Sabbaths eve, did then unite in bloud All Europes princely families great and good In this blest Prince, great British Majesty And also the great Saxon royalty, Both Danes and Normans race, that German Prince Elector Palatine increast his glory hence, Swede, Pole, and most of Christian Princes doe Acknowledge their Alliance him unto.
This on the Fathers side is wondrous glory, For this Great Charls, who now's the whole worlds story, The Spanish Austrian, on the Mothers side, Burbones of France, they herein sweetly glide; The Medices of Florence they come in, And now the Prime of Aurange more than bin; These with our Roses, Lillies do entwine, Which make King Charls his welcome more Divine. Englands great splendor, that frees us from oppressing, Christs Faith's defender, and so Gods gracious blessing. One thousand six hundred and thirtieth year Mayes twenty nine, the stars type doth appear. Last Tuesday in each month hee fasts, retiring, Consults with God, and all his waies admiring. First Tuesday in this May hee's own'd as King By th' Parlament, a blessed happy thing; Next Tuesday in this May proclaim'd our King, Both Parlament and City flourishing; Last Tuesday, nine and twentieth of this May, Our glorious King appears, his own Birth-day. For one black Tuesday, three are very clear, All welcoming King Charls his coming here. The Winds thought it their Honour, for to come And blow King Charls, and his Royal Brothers home, From Hollands Hague, the Seas rejoyc'd much more, To bring our King and Princes to our shore. Brave Mountagues great Ships are now turn'd Royal, For why, King Charls hath made them truly loyal. He's come, he's come, the doubling ecchoes cry, Dovers white Rocks receive his Majesty.
Brave Monck receives him first, conducts & brings Charls to his Courts where's Ancestors sate Kings. The seat of Kings Arch-Bishops Canterbury Sing Sabbath praises, make his soul most merry; Then Rochester, from thence to London comes With Princes, Nobles, Gentry, Souldiers, Drums, Fair Virgins all in white sweet flowers strowing, And all the people, old and young, God praising. He mounts the steed upon Black-Heath to see His people Joy in this prosperity. Our God the humble soul, is recompencing, On's own birth-Day his Triumphs here commencing. On's own birth-Day the Lord Mayer banqueting Princes, and Nobles, with Joy refresh the King. On's own birth-Day the Ministers presenting Gods Sacred Book, the King with Joy accepting; Like to his stately Princely brothers royal Oth' right hand stands St. Paul, Religion, loyal; Learning oth' left, the blew caps Psalms did sing. Religion, Learning, Mercy, blesse our King. Gods word, Gods Providence, books fit for Kings, And's Fathers Solitudes, and sufferings , and experience Books fit for Princes, full of excellence. These teach the greatest Princes God to fear, To Rule the Church for Christ, and to appear For Justice, Truth, and Peace, and for the Laws, The which makes God appear for Princes cause. God doth expect return of Mercy lent, God blesse King Charls, Law, Church, and Parlament.
Quite through the City rides our gracious King, And's Princely Brothers, God blesse them, all did sing. All men were gallant, and the Conduits running, Our waters turnd to wine by Charls his coming. Up to White Hall the Parlament him greeting, Three Kingdoms joyfull, happy, blessed meeting, The view of Nations, Councels, states, and things Abroad, makes him the best of Europes Kings, Charls will protect us with his wings, and eke His sword and scepter will true Subjects keep. The House of Lords his name eternizing, The House of Commons their allegiance bring, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, Barons sing, All true born Gentry kneel unto their King. Great George shall Joseph be, and have the ring, And second Chariot of our gracious King, We'l Abrech cry, and bow the knee, and sing Brave Monk hath brought Lords, Commons, & the King. We joy'd in Monk his morning star to be, Much more in him to whom George bowes the knee. The City makes triumphant flourishing, Allen Lord Mayor's Chain purple Glorying, The Aldermens Gold Chains and scarlet bring, Their due obedience unto Charls our King. Brown leads the Horse, gallant in Marshalling, Robinson the foot, all to proclaim the King. Brave Londons Companies in order sitting, To tender their allegiance just and fitting. Sweet little babes Hosanna cry that day, De King, de King, God blesse King Charls they pray.
The Merchants brave, the Trades-men praises sing, The Virgins dance, young men their Caps up fling, Old men and Matrons gravely pray and sing, 'Cause they before they dye might see their King; The Trumpets sound, the Musick tunes each string, The Canons roar, the Bonfires blaze, Bells ring, The Wine's drawn forth, feasting and banqueting, Belconies, streets and shops, all cry the King, If such a Diapason for the King At his proclaiming, what will his presence bring? Now Charls is come, beyond expression wee Rejoyce in this our Royal Trinity; We're all orecome with joy, and cannot shew, But with obedience in Allegiance bow. Depths of Affection makes us truly loyal, Mounts all our hearts to joy in him, most Royal, We're all Seraphickly inflam'd to see The Angels bring our King, and Liberty. Now God himself preserve our Gracious King, Christ keep his soul, Angels protection bring. Now Charls is come, all Englands Bells did ring; England's all voices, which did bravely sing; England's all flaming Bonfires, for her King; England's all Musick, striking every string; England's all Joy, no true man murmuring; England's all Peace, good men it furthering; England's all Happiness, England's all flourishing; England's all glory, King Charls them nourishing. Thus England's London, and her Parliament, Their faithful Joy unto King Charls present.
Least witches, wizards, sects, or divelish thing, Jugling Astrologers, blast his blest setling; Our tears as waves, our prayers as winds did bring, Our hearts as ships and sails to Charls our King, For his return, and now our Lands we cry, Our goods, and lives, are his, that he thereby May settle Church, and state, all in Gods fear; God is the author of his happiness here. Maugre fanatick rage, the Heavens bring Our Prince a Saint, our Charls a Soveraign King. How are the Pulpits turn'd the City round? How do they now King Charls his praise refound? Sure too much fire was in them heretofore, But now Gods Providence, they do adore. Thy Kingdome come, was Treason for to pray, Yea for to think in that black Rumpish day. Twas Treason, to be Honest, Just, and True, To keep our Oaths, and Covenants most due. No more Sedition, let any man now teach But truly, purely, gravely Gods Word preach. The Heads of Israels Tribes and Princes bring At thirty years old, good David, Judahs King, To Israels Throne, and then all covenanting, Before the Lord they there anoint him King. The Jebusites him scorn, most basely railing, The Philistims him threat, most basely raging; Hee conquers all by righteous valour, reigning Full forty years Judahs and Israels King. Wee'l make the Parallel blest Charls in thee Three Kingdomes glory to posterity.
Our Tribes and Princes, Lords and Commons bring At thirty years old, Allegiance to our King; Jebusites and Philistims do shew their sting, But Charls in Gods Name all is conquering, By brave Monks conduct, and our covenanting; Before the Lord God will anoint him King; Since David's gone, and Solomon's Reigning, Twice forty years let's pray God bless our King; Our Gospel, true Allegiance we will bring To Charls the Second our Soveraign Lord the King. God fitted David by humble suffering, In a strange Nation, under a strange King, Betray'd at home, abroad hee's travelling, The mysteries of other States unravelling; When Gods time's come, hee's then brought home, made King, Rules much for God, settles each holy thing. As Moses Law commands, no Worship new Sets up, but what the Lord injoyns that's true. In this, Great Charls, thou art the Parallel, Rule much for God and Christ, all shall be well. The Law's reform'd, the Gospels glad tiding Of Truth and Peace here settled by our King, Prerogative and Priviledge agreeing, Just Liberty and Property all seeing, The Paroxisms of Church and State compiling, Both Paul and Barnabas, Charls is reconciling, Like Moses, from the Mount of God descends Our blessed Charls, and all true Saints makes friends, Confirms the Tables, Gospel and the Law, And by his good Examples doth us draw.
Oppress no conscience, Fundamentals holding, Oblige just Interests, mercy them infolding; Impose no Ceremonies that are found oppressing, All new Religions stop Gods sacred blessing, Make Service most Divine, the Rule's Gods Word, So saies our Articles, and so the Lord; It is most fit and glorious for Kings Of Haeresie and Faction, to break the springs, T' Reform the Church, proud Antichrist dispelling, Then Christ in Grace will in our Church be dwelling. Prophaneness punish'd, and false worshipping, Religion advanc'd, and each holy thing That's truly Protestant, here flourishing, No Romish Serpents Relicks nourishing, All Popelings banish'd, Gospel Bishops sing Glory to God, and Grace unto our King. Thus good Kings do for God, his sacred Word 'S their Rule for Life, and reign they would Gods Sword. Peace, Mercy, Truth and Justice this will bring, And then three Kingdomes joy in Charls our King. No Power but the Power Omnipotent Could extricate us from that cursed Rent The Rump here made, and from that grand confusion, Both in the State, and in the Church delusion, Their Blood and Treason pillars of black smoak, To drive from hence, our God wee did invoke, God heard, and without any precious blood Hath chang'd the cruel sword for all our good; In Kingly Power and Authority, Doth shine th' eternal Gods blest Majesty.
In these sad times our Church was rent, dividing Sect against Sect, each one the other sleighting; Of Discipline were divers names declaring Division, and worser Sects all these out daring; Report doth tell, that all these Christ are preaching, And yet their own Thoughts and Opinions teaching; Some Truth may bee in most, by Truths composing, King Charls, like God, with Gospel Saints is clozing. Satan sow'd Tares when as the Priests were sleeping, But now King Charls will keep the Church from weep∣ing. A King of Providence, and of Prayers a King, A King of Mercy, a great experienc'd King, A King of Promise, God him alwaies making, The Churches Nursing Father, of Grace partaking, A King of valour, Christ's true Faith's Defendor, Both just and merciful, our glorious splendour, A King of wonders, preserved for this thing, Both Church and State in Gods Name governing; For this all Providences did him bring, For this God bless our Soveraign Lord the King. Worsters Deliverance, that wonderful thing, Mercies Deliverance, from Popery's sting, Beyond the Seas God still preserv'd our King, At home, Sects, Army, gone sans blood or string, From Heaven sanctified by suffering, Whilst hee in Gods fear still is governing. True Priests, true Saints, their Hallelujah sing, Blessed bee God, that blessed hath our King; The Lord make Charls his love and true delight, No man to wrong, and every man to right
Exceeding great's the Example of a King, It doth on his a powerful influence bring. Blest Constantine first Christian Emperour King, With Orthodox Divines his Court did spring. Augustus Court is stor'd with men of learning, Hee's learn'd himself, and therefore those preferring; But drunk Tiberius Court with sots is filling, Debauching Healths Tricongius knighted swilling. Religious Court Religious men will sing, Constantine and Augustus Charls our King. Wee sadly read of Amaziahs halting, And also of wise Solomon's revolting, Of Rehoboams rashness, by respecting Young States-mens Counsels, Sages grave rejecting; Of Jeroboams Calves the Tribes dividing Pretends Religion for his wicked siding; Of Uzzahs mis-lead Zeal, and of Uzziah Becoming Priest, the blood of Zachariah, Son of Jehoiada High-Priest, most Royal, From these God bless our King, and keep us loyal. God give Great Charls King Davids perfect heart, King Solomons wisdome, God to him impart, Josiahs Holiness, in each Religious thing, And Hezekiahs comforts to our King. Blest King Jehosaphats success and honour, Blest Moses meekness, and blest Joshuahs valour. Edward the sixth, most glorious Piety, Elizabeths most blest Prosperity. King James his Learning, and King Charls his Grace, God give to Charls, and to the Royal Race.
A blessed, holy, glorious Martyr'd King At's death a private oath Remembering Shewd excellent grace, an oaths a sacred thing Where Gods call'd in, and God expects performing Of serious Vowes, and sacred Oaths, once made In time of trouble performance must be had, The just, and holy God he hates the breaking Of oaths and vowes, true saints their oaths are keeping, If th' oath, were false for shame let ne're be spoken If th' oath were true, why should it ere be broken. Brave London feasts both King, and Parlament And both the royal Princes, and do present A Cupboard of Plate, in that great City lye Best Subjects hearts and greatest Treasury; Thy great Imperial Chamber Charls it is, Whilest thou grantst them their royal liberties, The feast was great, their hearts are far more royal, Their Love, their Faith, their Duty, now is loyal. Time, Truth, and Fame, their several speeches make Pardon great sir, for there was some mistake. In England born, the Scots first crown'd him King Brave Ireland also their allegiance bring. Great Monarch live, we humbly waite and pray To see thy happy, blessed, Crowning day. When Charles shall leave this mortal Crown, Lord bring Him that immortal Crown, where Angels sing. Of Charls the Martyrs Race in Heaven now glorying, Let England never want a gracious King. Thus all true Subjects pray for Charls our King, Pardon great Sir my Muses warbleing. FINIS.
