N1000 R41548 31355552 110525
Newes from SEA, CONCERNING Prince Rupert, Capt. Pluncket, Capt. Munckel, And others: WITH SOME TRANSACTIONS BETWIXT THE King of Portingal, AND Them. Together with the taking of certain Ships; and a Relation touching the strange Newes of the BARBADOES. ALSO, The discovery of a Plot in the Isle of Silly, for de∣stroying of the English; and the principall Actors tryed by a Councell of Warre. LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold at the Royall Ex∣change in Cornhill, and in the Old-Bayley. 1650.
A LETTER FROM PLYMOƲTH, Dated the 10th day of May 1650. HE that by himself or by any other, begin∣neth any dangerous enterprise without foreseeing the end and Issue thereof, brin∣geth himself and others into peril; This hath been a received maxim, and newly verified by the late overthrow given to the forces lately landed in Scotland, (reported to be of Montrosses party, con∣sisting chiefly of Sweads and Danes) of which their is intelligence come hither this day, that they have re∣ceived a great overthrow, by a party of Lieut. Gen. David Lestlies, who (saith some Letters) have rou∣ted, killed and taken at least three thousand, amongst whom Hurry himself, is reported to be one of the Prisoners taken, and others of great quality; which comming from such hands, as we have no cause to question the truth thereof, puts me in mind of an old Proverb, viz. That they which take upon them more then of right belongeth, commiteth a great error, and sel∣dom escape unpunished.
Foure Straights Ships are come into this Harbor, (besides two East-India Ships hereafter mentioned) the Seamen report that many Pyrats infest the narrow Seas: the clearing of the Coasts of such implacable E∣nemies, would be a great incouragement to Merchants, and therefore we are very joyful to hear that there is a gallant Fleet prepared by the Parliament, and as we are informed, is already fallen into the Downes, the knowledge whereof, strikes a terror into the Enemy, who having persisted in their obstinacy, deserve not the least favour; for how can it be safe for the Com∣monwealth not to revenge such injuries done to the State: A Master of one of these Ships saith, that he heard that there was with Prince Rupert at Lisborne, Capt. Pluncket, Gapt. Muckell, and several others e∣minent for their Rebellious actings against the Com∣mon-wealth of England; but what hath been done since the King of Portingall refused to protect them, he knoweth not for that it is some weeks since he had this Intelligence. Truly Sir, it is not onely my opinion, but the judg∣ment of many others, well wishers to the peace and tranquility of this Nation, that if men would consider how much it gives advantage to the common Enemy, which study nothing so much, as to find an advantage to bring us into new miseries, there would not be such divisions amongst men; but every one should rather joyn together as one for defence of the whole body, and lay aside back-bitings, and reproachful speeches which are oftentimes the cause of much evill, and draweth others to do some things which may be thought unreasonable. These kinds of distempers are commonly moved first in disquiet spirits, who ordi∣narily
crave more then is fit to be granted, looking rather on what they fancy to be good, or in their own private judgments imagine to be evil, then to inform themselves, that the first degree to attain vertue and honesty, is to obey the Lawes, and reverence those that are in Authority over us, and for want of a due obser∣vation hereof, many have plunged themselves into e∣minent dangers, and cause feares and jealousies where needeth not any; for as all men ought to be governed by Lawes and certain Rules, so ought there to be some persons that shall put those Lawes in execution, and thereby govern the people: Scipio saith, it is the Say∣lors endeavour to get a faire passage, the travel of the Phisician tendeth to health, and a Captains labor is for victory: so should it be the glory and vertue of e∣very privat man, to be dilligent in his Calling, and not to meddle with those things that are too high for him. This advice I have thought good to remember you of, yet it is not because you have occasion to make use thereof in your own particular; but to the end you may as oppertunity is ministred, perswade with o∣thers whom you find averse and obstinate, and would stir up such Coales which should not onely set their Neighbors, but their own house on fire. I shall re∣turn again to our Intelligence. Two gallant Ships are arrived in this Harbor, ap∣pertaining to London Marchants, they are richly la∣den, and intend by the next fair wind, to hoist sail for the port of London, to which place, we make not a∣ny question but they may come with safety. The Sea-men in the said Ships, express a very good affe∣ction
to the Parliament of England, and say that they will willingly sacrifice their lives upon occasion for defence of this Common-Wealth, under the present Government, without King or House of Lords, which is the more remarkable, in respect the said words were uttered before they heard of the Engage∣ment, or had it tendered unto any of them. These Seamen are come home very rich, and do much la∣ment the loss of some of their Country men, whom they hear to be lately taked by the French, yet if any such thing hath been done, the Parliaments and cheif Governors of that Nation, are said to be no abetters or countinancers thereof, pressing rather a desire of a continuance of a League and friendship, then to grant Letters of Mart. The last Ship taken, was of a con∣siderable value, and was not taken without a hot fight, and the loss of many men; and although in the com∣bate the French, as such as were with them (men of War and of greater force then their competitors) might get the better at first, yet be it known unto the whole world, that the enterprises of Pirats and ba∣nished persons are dangerous, and seldom come to a good end. About three days since here arrived a man of War, which bringeth intelligence, that as they stroke into harbor on the Coast of Holland, they heard it related, that the King of Portingal had given P. Rupert a day certain to put forth to Sea, not permiting him to stay beyond the time limited in any of his Harbors; and the time being expired, it is reported that there hath been a great fight betwixt him, and Collonel Blake, in which conflict the victory is given to the said Collonel Blake, and 5: of P. Ruperts Ships, are said to be sunk
and taken, without the loss of one of ours; but of this, I suppose you have better intelligence at London then any with us. Having taken liberty thus freely to discourse of such things, which either hapen here or are credibly infor∣med by good hands, give me leave to enlarge my self a little further, in acquainting you what we hear con∣cerning a plantation belonging to the Common-wealth of England: called the Barbadoes, about which I recei∣ved a Letter the last night, what your intelligence was at LONDON, which came onely from a privat hand, and renders no reason but Com∣mon fame; yet for that, I have heard that vulgar reports are not always so much to be slighted, as that no answer at all were necessary to be returned, I shall make bold to inform you, in breif what is related here by the Sea-men, touching that business, which (say they) is only thus; An unskilful Pilot missing his compass, and thereby failing of the intended harbor, to vindicate his own reputation perswaded the Marri∣ners, that the Island was removed out of the place in which it formerly stood: And how far his Rheto∣rick might sway their beleif in this kind I know not, but of this I am sure, that it gains little credit of any others that hear thereof.
POSTSCRJPT. SInce the writing of these lines, newes is come hither, that there is a great difference betwixt the English and the Irish, in the Isle of Silly, and that Noy could hardly appease the same without blowes. A Collonel and some others were tryed by a Councel of Warre, for ha∣ving a hand in a plot to cut off the English, who are fewer in number then the Irish. This broyle is like to take some further rooting there, and probably will work such division, that will not quickly be reconciled, if that young Preston carry not the Irish back into their own Countrey: The Souldiers there are reported to be generally very poor, the Island affording little accomodation, either for back or belly, and they that go abroad in vessels, to fish or theeve for the rest will, be sure to have the best share. Vale.
