N983 R29243 11054052 46168
NEWS FROM New-England, BEING A True and last Account of the present Bloody Wars carried on betwixt the Infidels, Natives, and the English Christians, and Converted Indians of New-England, declaring the many Dreadful Battles Fought betwixt them: As also the many Towns and Villages burnt by the merciless Hea∣thens. And also the true Number of all the Chri∣stians slain since the beginning of that War, as it was sent over by a Factor of New-England to a Merchant in London. Licensed by Roger L' Estrange. LONDON, Printed for J. Coniers at the Sign of the Black Raven in Duck-Lane, 1676.
A True and Last Accompt of the Present Bloody Wars carried on betwixt the Infidel Natives and the English Christians and converted Indians of New England, &c. THOSE Coals of Discention which had a long time lain hid under the ashes of a secret envy; contracted by the Heathen ndians of New-England, against the En∣glish; and Christian Natives of that Country brake out in June 1675. both Armies being at a distance without doing any thing remarkable till the 13 of December following; at which time the Siathses and lymouth Company marching from Scok, sent out a cons derable number of Scouts, who kill'd and took 55. of the Enemy, returning with no other loss but two of our Men dis∣abled, about three days after came a perfidious Inda to our Army pretending he was sent by the Sachems to treat of Peace, who was indeed no other but a Spy and was no sooner conducted out of our Camp but we had news brought us that 22 of our Strag∣ling Souldiers were Slain and divers barn and out houses, with Mr. er. ulls dwelling house burnt by him and his Trecherous confederates which waied for him. The next day as the on eick Army under the Condut of Major  was Marching to Joyn with the Mauset, and lymouth Company; they were assaulted by the nians, but without any los, they taking eleaven of the Assailants Prisoners. The 8. of Deember, our whole Army being united under the Conduct of Major,  W. s, wnt to seek out the Ene∣my whom we found (there then hapening a great fall of Snow) secur∣ing themselves in a dismal Swam, so hard of access that there was but one wa for enterance which was well lin'd with Heathen In ans, who presently went out to assault us▪ but we falling in Pel-mell with them; with much difficulty gained the Swamp where we found above 1500 Wigwams and by night, had pos∣session
of the fort; of which we were dispossest soon after by an unexpected recruit of fresh ndian, out of an adjoyning Swamp, but our Noble Generals insatiable desire of victory prompted him to such brave actions, that we following his example to the enemies cost, made our selves absolute Masters of the fort again, Although we purchased our success at so dear a rate that we have small cause to rjoyce at the victory; yet when we consider the vast disadvantage they had of us in number, whom we collected to have 4000 fighting men, and we no much more than half so many, we have great reason to bless God we came of so well, our dead and wounded not a Mounting to above 220, and the enemies by their own Confession to no less then 600. the chief officers kild on our side were Capt. Dav nport, Capt. Johnsn, Capt. Marshl, Capt. Gardne. Capt. Gallop. Captains Wounded were 4 vit, Sealey, Major Wats, and Badod, Leiutenants wounded were 4 vz. Savage, Tn, Ʋpham and Wa. In this bloody Battle we gave so bitter a Relish of our English valour and our converted Indians resolutions, that they dreaded our neighbourhood and thought themselves unsafe til secur'd by six or seaven miles distance from our remaining Army, where they remain'd near a month not attempting any thing consider∣able till the first of Feb. at which time a certain Number of them made desperate through hungar came to Falke, a Little Town near Providence, and attempted the house of one Mr. Crpene, from whom they took 20 horses 50 head of Cattle and 180 sheep And set fire on a house at South-bury wherein were two Men, one Woman and seaven Children, on t e 41. of Fe ruary the Christians received private intelligenc from the nda who had Sculked ever since the last Battle in certain woods scituate aout 30 miles from Malu, that they were drawn up into a body and encamped in a well fortified Swamp, where, notwithstand∣ing the Indin a saulted the Rear, wounded four of our men, and we killing so many of theirs that they thought fit to forsake their r fuge and leave both it and their Wigwams to our disposal, who lodging in their Rooms that night set fire to a 150 of their Wigwams next morning, and by this light pursued them so lose that we ill'd divers of them whom age or Wounds rendred inca∣pable
of keeping up with their Companions, and resolving to con¦tinue the quest with all the celerity immaginable, they led us to another Swamp whose Rocky ascent propounded so great  difficulty to attain it, as would have Staggar'd the resolution of any but a resolved Mind; but we attempted it with the like resolu∣tion and success as we did the Last; the enemy by a speedy flight leaving us in full possession of all they left behind them. We Persued them two dayes after this encounter, but then (which was on the 18th Febr.) finding our men wearied with speedy marches, our provision scarce through continual expence and no recruit, our horses tir'd, and our selves hopeless of overtaking them who had great advantage of us in passing over Rocks and through Thickets, which our Foot not without much difficulty could, and our horse were altogether incapable to do; our Commanders after a Councel of warr, resolved to fend the Massathusers and Plymouth Company to Malur and the Con∣nectcks Army to their own homes which was accordingly done. And Major Genr. Winsow, only with two Troops to Boston leaving the foot at Malbury and Sutbury, who came home on Munday following and were all dismist to their several habitations except Capt. Wadworth who was left at Mubury in persuit of the E∣nemy, of whom he destroyed about 70 Old Men Womn and Children who wanted strength to follow the fugitive Army. The Desperate heathens takeing advantage of the dismission of three Disbanded Companies, studied nothing but Massacres out∣rages, and trecherous hostillitie, which within two days after those said Companies were dispers't they found opportunity to commit in a Town called Nasaway which they set fire to and burnt to t e Ground taking no less than 55 Persons into their Merciless captivity, and because the reader shall understand the Damnable antipathy they have to Religion and Piety, I would have him take notice how they endeavour to Signallize their Cruelty and gratiie their enraged Spleen chiefly on the promoters of it; for of these 55 Captives the Minister of the Towns relations made no less then 19 of them viz. Mrs. Roloson the Ministers wife and three of his Children, her sister and seaen hildren, and her sister Drw and four Children. The Minister himself with his sisters husbands returning from Boton a little after the engage∣ment
to their infinite grief found their houses burnt to the ground, and their Wives and Children taken Captive, nor was this cruel∣tie commited, as the extent or Npolus Ʋltra of their vengance, but rather as an earnest of their future Bearbaity For no longer than the next day after three men Going out, with the Cart were seiz'd on by these Indians, one of them killed, and the other two not to befound, the day following at Coxord, they burnt one house and murder'd three persons. In short, their outrages are so many and different, that I must intreat the reader since they will not be brought into afluent Narration, to accept them plainly and dyurnully according to the time, place, and manner as they were committed, which is the only way to avoid omissions, and consequently to Satisfie the in∣quisitive, who I suppose would willingly hear of all the extremi∣ties have happened to the suffering Christians in this New En∣gland War. On the 17 of Febr. therefore ye must know that the Town of Medfei'd was begirt with a regiment of resoleut Indian, who assail'd it so briskly, that maugred all the resistance made by Capt a∣cobbs who was then Ingarrison'd there with a hundred Souldiers for its security, the enraged Heathens never desisted their des∣perate attemps, Battering the Walls, and powering showers of Ar∣rows into the bosome of the Town, they had distroyed above 50 of her inhabitants and burnt 30 of her houses. The 7th. of March following these bloody Indians march't to a considerable Twon called Croaon where first they set fire to Major Willards house, and afterwards burnt 65 more there be∣ing Seaventy two houses at first so that there was left standing but six houses of the whole Town, the next day after two men coming from Mabury to Southlury were slain: nd the Sabboth day ensuing, these destroying Ind an came to Plymuh where fixing only on a house of one Mr. Clarks they burnt, and mur∣thered his wife and all his Children, himself Narrowly escapeing their crueltie by happily at that Juncture being at a meeting. On the second of pr l 1676. Major Svage, Capain Mosele, Captain Wlam Tror, and Captain Vb pal, with 300. men marching from Malbrow to Qbury, where they had ordered the Connee Army to remain in readiness against their oming, whih being effected, accordingly they joyned forces, and began
their march towards Northampton, but by the way were assaulted by the Indians, whom they repelled without any other damage, then only Mr. uely wounded, killing about 20 of the Enemies in a hot persuit after them. The tenth Ditto, about 700 Indians encompast Northampon on all sides where they fought very resolutly for the space of an hour, and then fled, leaving about 25 persons dead upon the place, the Christians loosing only 4. men and 1. woman, and had some barnes burnt, on the 12th instant they assaulted VVarwick with so unhap∣py a success that they burnt all the Town except four Garison houses which were left standing, six days after Captain Peirce Bro∣ther to Captain Pe rce of London, with 55 men and 20 Christian In∣dians went to seek out their Enemies, the Indians whom accord∣ing to their Intelligence they sound rambling in an obscure Wood, upon his approach they drew into order, and received his onset with much difficulty, being in the end forced to retreat, but it was so slowly that it scarcely deserved that Name, when a fesh com∣pany of Indians came into their assistance, beset the Christians round, Killed Captain Pierce. and 48. of his men, besides 8. of the Christian Indians. The Fight continued about 5 hours, the Enemy bying the Victory very dearly, but at last obtained it so absolutly that they deprived us of all means of hearing of their loss. At Malrow on the 12th Ditto, were several houses burnt whilst the miserable inhabitants were at a meeting, and at Spring∣field the same Lords day, these devillish Enemies of Religion see∣ing a man, woman, and their Children, going but towards a meet∣ing-house, Slew them (as they said) because they thought they In∣tended to go thither. The 28th, of the same instant April last, Captain Denison col∣lecting a Regiment of 500 and 200 English Paquet Nimerass Indians marcht out of New London in search of that Grand somenter of this Rebellion. Anthony the Se ham whom at last near the Town call d Providence he recovered, and ater a hot dispute wherein he kill'd 45 of the Sechems men, Took him their Com∣mander Prisoner with several of his Captaines, whom they im∣mediately put to death but were at strong debate whether they should send him to Boston, but at length they carried him to
New London and began to examine him why he did foment that war which would certainly be the distruction of him and all the Heathen Indians in the Country, to which and many other inte∣rogatories he made no other reply but that [he was born a Prince, and if Princes came to speak with him, he would answer them, But none of those present being Princes, he thought himself ob∣lig'd on honour to hold his Tongue] This Answer though it might Challenge their admiration, was not so prevalent as to obtain their pitty. Notwithstanding the Surviveing Sechems were not long in re∣venging his death, for on the Sixth of May, they burnt all al∣borw except three Garrison houses, kil'd Capt. Jacobson and Leiutennt Prat, and two dayes after burnt 24 houses in outh∣ury, kill d several of the inhabitants who vainly expected Capt. Hdworth and Capt. Brokwel to their Relief; for these unfor∣tunate Gentlemen were intercepted by 700 Moo with whom they fought for the space of 4 houres till not only they two but Capt. Sharp, and 51 Christians more lay dead upon the place. At Woodcock 10 miles from Scoch on the 16th M y was a little Sirmage betwixt the Moos and Christians, wherein there was of the later three slain and two wounded, and only two Indians Kild. May 28. 1676. Capt. Denison and Capt. Evr with 50 English and about 150 Paquet Indians Scouting among the Woods in 8 days space kill'd 25 Indians and took 51 prisoners, one whereof was Grand-child to Dunham who was kill'd by Capt. Peirce in the engaement on the 26 May. The number of Christians slain since the be inning of the late Wars in New England, are 444. Taken Prisoner, 55 The number of Indins Slain in this war is uncertain because they burn their Dead, keepin their Death as a Secret from the Christi∣ans knowledge, but the number mentioned herein is 910. We have Received very late news that the Christians in New Engl nd have had very great Victory over the Infidel Natives. FINIS.
