o59 9570912 43679
portrait of Titus Oates TITUS OATES D. D. the first discoverer of the Popish Plott.
A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE Horrid PLOT AND CONSPIRACY OF THE POPISH PARTY Against the LIFE of His Sacred Majesty, THE GOVERNMENT, AND THE Protestant Religion: With a LIST of such NOBLEMEN, GENTLEMEN, and others, as were the CONSPIRATORS: And the HEAD-OFFICERS both Civil and Military, that were to Effect it. Published by the Order of the Right Honourable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in PARLIAMENT Assembled. Humbly Presented to His Most Excellent MAJESTY. By TITƲS OTES, D. D. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and Thomas Cockerill, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chappel, and at the Three Legs in the Poultrey. MDCLXXIX.
Die Mercurii 9o Aprilis, 1679. UPon Report made by the Earl of Clarendon from the Lords Committees for Examining Matters relating to the Discovery of the late Horrid Conspiracy, That Mr. Titus Oates complains, That Mr. Basset hath not given him satisfaction for the Printing and Publish∣ing his Narrative of the said Conspiracy imperfectly, and desires that he may Reprint his own Narrative thereof; which the said Lords Committees judg to be Reasonable: It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the said Titus Oates be, and is hereby Authorized to Print a Perfect Copy of his own Narrative of the said Conspiracy. Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentor. BY virtue of this Order I appoint Thomas Parkhurst and Thomas Cockerill, Citizens and Stationers of London, to Print this Narrative, containing Eighty one Paragraphs. TITUS OTES. April 10. 1679.
TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES the II. By the Grace of God Of Great-Britain, France and Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith. GREAT SIR, THIS Narrative of the present Horrid Plot against Your Majesty and Government, which was first heard, and narrowly discussed before Your Sacred Majesty and Council, and afterwards by Both Houses of Parlia∣ment, with universal assent to the power of Truth herein, is at last to appear abroad, for the satis∣faction of these Nations, and Europe perhaps, touching the mystery and consequence of such Designs. I hope I have good equity on my side, to presume to dedicate the same to Your Royal Name and Patro∣nage, and to no other; because I am well assured, both the rise and progress thereof, hath wholly sprung from an inbred indelible love and loyalty to Your Majesty and Kingdoms, as its support and success to be owing (under Gods extraordinary and miraculous appearance for his people in its defence) to Your Majesties Gracious pardon of several human frailties in the management. Great and many are the Arts and Hoverings that have been, and may yet be used in vain both at home and abroad, to suppress and traduce the Evidence, by those who are more zealous and industri∣ous not to be thought or suspected, rather than really not to be ve∣ry Traytors and Rebels against their King and Country; whose many past Treasons and Encroachments upon several Princes, for these last Thousand years in the World, will prove their inclinations for fu∣ture,
whereof there are as many tragical instances against Your Ma∣jesties own Family and Person, within fresh memory (and to be made out by new proofs out of their own mouths and Records, if need) as against any other of Gods Anointing and Appointment. Your Grandfather King James, though he escaped their Powder, is well known not to have escaped their Poyson. Your other Grandfa∣ther, Henry the Fourth of France, was basely and villainously stabbed in the Heart, which he had designed and bequeathed after his death unto them, notwithstanding all the Indulgences and Immunities that the heart of man could wish or desire, which he had granted them in his life. Who besides these, were the first Authors and contrivers of the late unnatural War, by their known diabolical art of inflaming Parties and Passions against each other, and of Your Royal Fathers unspeakable Sufferings and barbarous Usage? It was these that brought Him to His end, and fourished Swords, and triumphed over his dead Body, whom they durst not approach when living. What shall I say of Him who then cryed out, Now is the Enemy of God and of his Church fallen? I believe Your Majesty hath been well-informed of the Trayterous Executioners, but hardly at all of the Putney-Projectors, who were in most, if not all the Councels that contrived his ruine. What broke the Ʋxbridge-Treaty, but the Romish Interest and Policy? Who continued to baffle all designs of peace and settlement to this Nation, and prosperity to Your Majesties Family, but those Incendia∣ries? It may not be inconvenient to remind with what zeal and in∣terest they did perswade the Scots in 1650, to impose that upon Your Majesty which Your Royal Law hath forbidden others; for the ef∣fecting whereof, some Thousands of pounds were spent and given by them. After Your Majesties escape at Worcester, how did they, above all men, endeavour to betray and sacrifice Your Majesty into the hands of Your Enemies? And who was it that was to pay the Thou∣sand pound promised for Your being discovered and taken, but Father Joseph Simmonds, and Father Carleton Compton, both Jesuits? It's true, that one or two of the Komish perswasion, amongst many loyal and faithful Protestants, male and female, might then have contributed to Your Majesties deliverance: But have not such been well lessened and reproached, and called Fools by their own party for this grain of Loyalty, more owing to their English Blood than Romish Prin∣ciples? The Popish Lord is not forgotten, or unknown, who brought a Petition to the late Regicides and Usurpers, signed by about Five hundred principal Papists in England; wherein was promised upon condition of a Toleration of the Popish Religion here by a Law, their joint resolution to abjure and exclude the Family of the Stu∣arts
for ever, from their, undoubted right to the Crown. Who more disheartned the Loyalty and patience of your best Subjects, than their confident Scriblers, White and others? And Milton was a known frequenter of a Popish Club. Who more forward to set up Crom∣well, and to put the Crown of our Kings upon his head, than they? Give me leave to tell Your Majesty, that his new fangled Government was contrived by a Popish Priest, and Lambert, a Papist for above these Thirty years. Who betrayed Your Majesties Secrets and Coun∣cels during your Exile, but they, even the Benedictine Monks, where∣of a whole Convent was maintained with a large Annuity by the late Usurper for such use and purpose? And heManning. that was caught and executed by Your Majesties Justice for such treachery, was of the same Red-Letter, and had Masses sung for him after his death, as an usual Reward and Plaister. After Your Majesties escape from Eng∣land, what promises did they make to Cromwell, to perswade the French King for Your banishment out of France? and what interest they made use of in order thereunto, can be made appear to their disgrace. I shall leave it to Your Majesty to call to mind their usage of your Royal Person when in Flanders: And a Noble Peer surviving, is able to speak aloud what was there intended against You, to pre∣vent Your Majesty from Your right to Reign over us. The present Relation upon Oath, and most true to a tittle, and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's usage, is sufficient to convince all unbyassed Judges, how lit∣tle they have flagged or degenerated from their wonted hellish Princi∣ples and Natures. How little therefore the Criminals concerned in this Plot deserve from Your Majesty, the World will better judg, if they will but consider how graciously Your Majesty hath dealt with them, and con∣nived at them, while the rigour of the Law was let loose upon Your other dissenting Subjects, who yet continued more quiet and loyal under their Pressures and Provocations, than these under Favours and Caresses. Hath not Your Majesty hazarded the hearts and affections of Your best Subjects, and much of Royal Honour, in appearing for the late Indulgence with frustration, to win and oblige, if possible, these everlasting holy Cut-throats? But what Arguments of Clemency and Grace can perswade them to be true to their Natural, who profess Allegiance out of Consci∣ence to a Foreign contrary Soveraign? Or how can Your Majesty ex∣pect Truth and Sincerity, where Treasons and Lyes are virtues and merits? They are by an orderly Conspiracy wholly governed by Priests, their Priests by their Bishops, and their Bishops by their Popes; the sum of whose Religion, or ungodly Ambition rather,
or that which we call Popery, consists, in a word, in an Antichristian pretence of a Fifth Monarchical Soveraignty over all the Kings and Princes of Christendom, as is of late irrefragably demonstrated by the Right Reverend and Learned Bishop of Lincoln; yea in an higher Usurpation upon Christs eternal and peculiar Soveraignty over mens hearts and judgments, as is likewise evinced by another worthy Pen and Sufferer, in his Treatise of the right Soveraign of the heart. They therefore that brutishly and traiterously surrender their Souls over into implicit slavery to an Impostor, what Allegiance can they reserve inviolable with all sober and true Christians, either to King, or Christ, or Conscience? I question not, Great Sir, but that he in whose hands are the hearts of Princes, will in time fully convince Your Majesty of all their un∣worthy principles and practises, and of my integrity too, how strange soever some open or secret Papists, whom time also may discover, have endeavoured to represent me. Till that time I commit my Cause to the most Righteous and All-seeing Judg, with a resolution to persevere through his assistance in my truth and testimony, against all discouragements or terrors, or blandishments either, to the last gasp. And next to Christ and the Truth, I shall with the utmost of breath and power, according to my Oath and Duty, in what place and sta∣tion soever I am, endeavour to be found ever loyal and true to Your Majesty in all Your Rights and Honours, as all good Subjects and Christians ought, and as I find this Noble and Loyal Parliament are resolved to be to an hair, or an expression; and therefore cannot for∣bear to pray to God out of my sincerity and zeal for publick Peace and Concord between King and People, That seeing Your Majesty must highly trust some or other for Your necessary ease and help, that God would put it into Your Majesties heart more to trust and rely upon Your Two Houses of Parliament (who will be most true to Your Laws, and consequently both to You and Your people) than to any single Minister or Ministers whatsoever, unaccountably, who may pretend to more Loyalty, or more comply with any humour, or human frailty of Your Majesties, but are not true friends either to Your Majesty, or their Countrey, or themselves therein; but erect and prefer an Imperial Paramount self-end, or lust, before all; which Your Majesty by their Art must be brought unworthily to serve and pro∣mote, to publick disturbance always, and the confusion of them∣selves and their posterity, most an end, by Gods just venge∣ance.
It's a false suggestion which such Tempters use, That a King that rules by Will, is more Great, or Glorious, or Strong, than a King that rules by Law. The quality of the Retinue best proves the State of the Lord; the one being but a King of Slaves, while the other, like God, is a King of kings and hearts. No Prince was ever more absolute to have what he wished, than Queen Elizabeth, who wished for nothing more than the Subjects Rights and Welfare. Your Majesty being so often marked out for destruction by these Conspirators, is, and ought to be as great a proof and demonstration to Your people, That the Papists themselves hold You not their friend, as any Act of Parliament against Tongues; but especially Your ge∣nerous Resentment and proportionable Royal Indignation against these Assasinates of Your Person, and Destroyers of our Cities, Mur∣derers of Your Subjects, Corrupters of Christianity, and Disturbers of Mankind. But nothing will make Your Majesty so amiable and acceptable in the eyes of God and man, and Your Name and Memory blessed and glorious for ever, as the Copying of the Laws of our Saviour in your Life, by a decent paternal Example before the Sons and Daugh∣ters of Your people, to increase the Fear of God and its consequences amongst us: it being the chief End and Work of all Supreme Pow∣ers, To suppress Vice, and encourage Virtue amongst their Charge, ac∣cording to St. Paul, Romans 13, which is best done Abroad, when first and effectually begun at Home in Your own House and Family, according to the same Apostle, 1 Tim. 3, by Banishing all Vicious li∣vers from Your presence and converse, and advancing the Virtuous in their stead: By the neglect of which principal part of their Royal Trust and Office, Princes depose themselves, as useless before God and their own Consciences, whatever may be their State or Glory in fact, and by human Laws and Power before men. That Your Majesty therefore may long live to be a great Asserter of Laws, of the Laws of Christ in Your own Soul, to Your eternal, of the good Laws of this Land, to the temporal high Peace and Feli∣city of Your Majesty and People, and abound in all the blessings of this and the other Life, Health, Grace, Wisdom, Wealth, Power, and Victory over all your Enemies and Temptations, shall be ever the study and Prayers of Your Majesties Most Humble and most Loyal Subject and Servant, TITUS OATES.
Courteous Reader, I Here present thee with a short Narrative, or Minutes, till I may find an opportunity to put forth my larger Account and Journal; in which, the whole mystery of this Hellish Plot shall be more fully laid open. It is true, I did not absolutely design this for the Press, had not the daily clamours of these exe∣crable votaries for the Romish Interest stirred me up thereunto, by charging the Protestants with the horrid Design; and the indirect course of a Bookseller, who falsely and imperfectly presumed to Print the same, to my great wrong and detriment. It was presented to His Majesty the Thirteenth of August last, by the means and introduction of that worthy and honest Gentleman Mr. Christopher Kirkby; as likewise sworn upon Oath on the sixth of September following; before Sir Edmondbury Godfrey by my self; and the Twenty eighth of the same Month, before the Lords and others of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council: and the proceedings afterwards made upon the same, being sufficiently known, I shall not trouble thee with at present; but leave the whole to thy Candid consideration, taking my leave of thee at present, and will ever appear April the 15th. 1679. Thy hearty Well-wisher and Servant in Jesus Christ, TITƲS OATES.
A True and Exact Narrative OF THE Horrid Plot and Conspiracy OF THE POPISH PARTY Against the LIFE of His Sacred Majesty, THE GOVERNMENT, AND THE Protestant Religion. Imprimis. RIchard Strange, Provincial, John Keins, Basil Lang∣worth, John Fenwick, and Mr. Harcourt, Jesuits, did write a Treasonable Letter to one Father Suiman, an Irish Jesuit at Madrid, in the Kingdom of Spain, in which was contained their Plotting and Contriving a Rebellion in Scotland, of the Presbyterians against the Episcopal Government: In order to which they had employed one Matthew Wright, and William Morgan, and one Mr. Ireland to go and Preach, under the notion of Presbyterians, and give the disaffected Scots, a true understanding of their sad state and condition, in which they were, by reason of the Episcopal Tyranny, exer∣cised over them: and withall to tell them, they had now a fair opportunity to vindicate their Liberty and Religion; and that it could be done by no other way but by the Sword;
and that now the King was so addicted to his pleasures, that he would, and could take but little care in that concern. And in the said Letter it was expressed, that they had gotten an in∣terest in His Royal Highness, but they would deal with him as they thought fit; and that they were resolved to use all means to weaken the King of England's Interest, by informing his friends of his own intent to betray them into the hands of a Forein Power, to wit, to send them to fall by the Sword in the French King's Wars, against the Confederate Princes, which Letter bore date of April 19th. Old Style, 1677. and 29th. New Style. Item II. That the persons abovementioned gave the Deponent ten pounds to carry the said Letters to the said Father Suiman into the Kingdom of Spain to Madrid; the said Father Suiman being their Procurator general for the Kingdom of England and Ire∣land; and in order to which message, the Deponent embark∣ed himself in the Ship called the Biscay Merchant, whereof Luke Roch was then Master to go for Bilbao, and there took Mules for Valladolyd, but staving a day at Burgos in Spain, the Deponent broke up the said Letters, and found these Con∣tents in the same. Item III. That they of the Society of Jesus, in the English Seminary at St. Omers, sent a mission of twelve Students into the King∣dom of Spain, viz. eight to Valladolyd, and four to Madrid, (there being English Colledges in both places) in order to study Philosophy and Divinity; which Missioners were sent by Richard Ashby, Richard Peters, Nicholas Blundell, and Charles Peters, as appeared by the Patents of the several Missioners, by which they had power to demand admission in the respective Col∣ledges to which they were sent, which Missioners were obliged by the Jesuits of the Colledges, to renounce their Allegiance
to His Majesty of Great Britain, in the hearing of the Depo∣nent; and those of Valladolyd were taught by Daniel Armstrong, Jesuit, Minister of the English Colledge at Valladolyd, that the said Oath of Allegiance is Heretical, Antichristian and Devilish; and that Charles Stuart the King of England is no lawful King, but comes of a spurious Race, and that his Father was a Black Scotch-man, and not King Charles the first; this was delivered in a Sermon, Septemb. 29. 1677. to the Stu∣dents there, which Sermon the Deponent did hear, and in this Sermon the said Daniel Armstrong in plain words did say, that the King of England was a Bastard; now this Daniel Arm∣strong goeth in Spain by the name of Joseph Mundford, in Spa∣nish P. Joseph Montefortio. Item IV. That the said Daniel Armstrong, alias Joseph Mundford, did bring Letters from St. Omers to the English Colledge at Valla∣dolyd to the Fathers of that Colledge, written in Latine (they being Spaniards) in which it was expressed and related from the Fathers of St. Omers, that the Fathers of the Society in London had procured one Father Beddingfield to be Confessor to His Roy∣al Highness, but if they law His Royal Highness did not an∣swer their expectations, they would dispose of him as they did intend to dispose of his Brother the King, which they hoped to effect within a year: Which Letters bore date June the 10th. 1677. and subscribed by Richard Ashby, alias Thimbleby, Rector of the English Seminary of the Society of Jesus at St. Omers, Richard Peters, Minister, Edward Nevill, Prefect of the Studies, Charles Peters, Prefect of the Sodality, Thomas Fermor, Prefect of Manners: Which Letters the Deponent saw and read in the month of September at Valladolyd in the Kingdom of Spain. Item V. That Father Suiman above-mentioned wrote to the English Colledge, to the Fathers there, that the King of England was
poisoned, to the great joy of the English Fathers, and that they would serve King, James so, if he did not give them good assu∣surance of bringing in of the Catholick Religion, and of root∣ing out Protestant Religion; this Letter bore date July the first, 1677. and was seen and read by the Deponent at Valladolyd, in the month of July, near the latter end. Item VI. That one Father John Blake, alias Cross, who went with the four Students to Madrid, did bring Letters from Richard Strange, Provincial of the Jesuits, and one Father Gray a Jesuit, and John Keines, to Father Suiman above-mentioned, in which was specified, that all diligence was used by the said Richard Strange, Father Gray, and John Keines, to procure some persons to dispatch the King, and to put a period to his daies, which Letter bore date June the 10th. 1677. Stylo novo. And now the Deponent being sent to Madrid in the month of August, read it in Father Suiman's Chamber, he shewing it also at the same time to James Archbishop of Tuam, in the Kingdom of Ire∣land. Item VII. That the said Father Suiman received another Letter bear∣ing date July the 20th. 1677. Stylo novo, from Richard Strange, Father Gray, John Keines, Basil Langworth, John Fenwick, Fa∣ther Ireland, and Father Harcourt, in which they did mani∣fest, that they were very sorry for informing him, that he might assure himself that the business was done, their man William being faint-hearted, could not then do it, though he had fifteen hundred pounds promised him for his pains; of which Letters the English Missionaries were one by one in∣formed; those at Madrid by John Cross, alias Blake, and those at Valladolyd, by Daniel Armstrong, Jesuits: which Letter of the 20th. of July, the Deponent saw in the Chamber of the said Suiman at Madrid, at the same time when he saw the Let∣ters
of the tenth of July, mentioned in the sixth paragraph or number. Item VIII. That on the third of Novemb. Stylo novo, Father Pedro Jero∣nymo de Corduba, Provincial of the Jesuits in New-Castile, did write to Richard Strange, and John Keines, that if the business of dispatching the King of England could be effected, they should have ten thousand pound for their pains, which Letter the Deponent brought from Valladolyd to Bilbao, and embarqued in a Ship within five daies after his arrival thither, and in five daies more arrived at a little Town near Exeter, and in six daies more came to London, and delivered the Letter to Richard Strange, and when opened, it was written in Latin, and read by the said Strange; and he said, that all means should be used to answer Father Pedro's expectation. And in the Letter to Strange, was one enclosed to this Keines, by the name of Juan de Neoporto de la Compania de Jesu; which Letter the said Keines offered the Deponent to read, but being written in Spa∣nish, the Deponent did not well understand the Letter, and could make but little of it by reason of the Spanish abbrevia∣tions; therefore the said Strange did give the Deponent the Letter directed to himself, saying, he thought the Deponent did understand Latin better than Spanish; so that the Depo∣nent read the said Letter, and in it the Contents above-men∣tioned; and the said Strange being then ill upon Keines his bed, said, that he hoped God would strengthen honest William's heart to do his work. Now this honest William is a Servant to the Society in London. This Strange did then lye at one Mrs. Saunders house, a part of Wildhouse in Wildstreet, where the Deponent heard this discourse from the said Strange and Keines. Item IX. That the said Richard Strange and John Keines, Basil Lang∣worth, Father Harcourt, John Fenwick, Father Ireland, Father Gray, Father Jennison, Father Saunders, and Father Ecclesdon, did write
a Letter, and subscribed it, and sent it to St. Omers, to Richard Ashby, Rector of the English Seminary there; in which he and the rest of the Fathers were given to understand that the King was altogether given to his pleasures, and that they had an intent to procure one to stab him at his Court of Whitehall; and if that could not be conveniently done, they would em∣ploy one of his Physicians to poison him; for which work they had ten thousand pounds in the hands of one Worsly, a Goldsmith in London; which mony was procured for them by one Father Leshee, a French Jesuit, and Confessor to the French King; which Letter the Deponent saw and read, and saw it subscribed by the persons above-mentioned, and carried it to St. Omers. He went to Dover by Coach, a place in which was taken up for him by the said William their servant, whose name indeed is John Groves. The Letter that the Depo∣nent carried bore date the beginning of December, old Style. Item X. That Letters were enclosed in this Letter aforementioned to the said Leshee, in which thanks was given him by the said Fathers that had subscribed the said Letter to Richard Ashby, for his great Charity to them, and his Care for the propagating the Catholick Religion; and that all means should be used to destroy the opposers of it, both root and branch; which Let∣ters bore date either the sixth or seventh of Decemb. and the De∣ponent carried them inclosed in those of Richard Ashby to St. Omers, and from St. Omers to Paris, and delivered them in∣to the hands of the said Father Leshee, about the 18th. of De∣cember, as near as the Deponent can remember. Item XI. That other Letters bearing date December the 12th. 1677. were sent from Richard Strange, and others of the Society in London, to those of the Society in the English Seminary at St. Omers, and in them Letters were enclosed to Father Leshee,
in which they told him, that they had stirred up the Presbyte∣rians in Scotland to a Rebellion; and that twenty thousand would be in Arms, if that His Majesty of France would break with the King of England; and that a way also was made for the French King's landing an Army in Ireland: And further, that the Irsh Catholicks were ready to rise; in order to which there were forty thousand black Bills provided to furnish the Irish souldiers withal: Which Letters were subscribed by Rich. Strange, John Keines, and John Fenwick, and the out-side Letter directed to Richard Ashby, Rector; which Letter was shewed to the Deponent at his return from Paris to St. Omers, by the said Richard Ashby; and told the Deponent that the Letters to Leshee, for which the said Messenger had ten Patacoons or Roy∣als of eight, as the said Ashby informed the Deponent: And the said Messenger was a Drummer, in the Town of St. Omers. Item XII. That in another Packet bearing date Decemb. the 18th. 1677. in which was specified that the Father General of the Society of Jesus had written from Rome, and had removed Richard Strange from being Provincial, and had conferred the Provin∣cialship upon Thomas White, alias Whitebread; and the said Thomas Whitebread ordered, that one Father George Coniers should Preach on St. Thomas of Canterbury's day, in the Sodality-Church, in the English Seminary, against the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and that he should exhort the Fathers to stand by the new Provincial, who would be as zealous to promote the bringing in of Catholick Religion into England, as ever his Predecessor was and would not leave one stone unturned to promote the same: Which said Letter was directed to, and received by Richard Ashby, and communicated by him to the Deponent about the 24th. day of December. Item XIII. That in another Packet bearing date December the 26th. it was ordered by Thomas Whitebread, Richard Strange, John
Keines, Basil Langworth, John Fenwick, Father Gray, Father Harcourt Senior, Father Harcourt Junior, Father Micho, Father Bennifield, Father Ireland, Father Blundell, Father Jemison, and some others of the Society, that Father Leshee should be written unto by Rich. Ashby, and the Fathers of St. Omers, and informed that the Fathers before-mentioned had met together to contrive the Advancement of the Design of the happy disposal of His Majesty of Great Britain, and of His Royal Highness, if he should not appear to answer their expectations. But the former giving no hopes at all, they would endeavour his dispatch with all speed that might be, that he might not hinder their Designs in bringing in Catholick Religion. And if they could not find an opportunity to take him from his Kingdom, they would soon take his Kingdom from him; which Letter the Deponent saw in the hands of Richard Ashby, and desired to read it, but the said Richard would read it to him in his Chamber on Ja∣nuary 2. Item XIV. That in the said Letters of December the 26th. it was specified, that Richard Nicholas Blundell, was constituted by Pattent from the Provincial, to be Ordinary at Newgate, to go and visit the Condemned Prisoners, and to reduce them to the Catholick Faith and Religion; and to Cate∣chize some Youth in the City of London; and every day in the week he hath his several places where he Teacheth the Youth Treasonable and Mutinous Doctrines against the Interest and Person of His Sacred Majesty, and giveth certain summs of mony to their Parents (if poor) to in∣courage them to send their Children to be thus instructed; which passage was contained in the aforesaid Letters, and afterwards practised in London.
ITEM XV. That another Packet came to Richard Ashby to Saint O∣mers, from Thomas White, John Keines, and others of the So∣ciety of Jesus in London; in which Letters, from them and others, were inclosed Letters to Father Thomas Stapleton Pro∣curator at Brussels, to perswade the Father Confessor of Duke de Villa Hermosa, to inform, that his Majesty of Great Bri∣tain did not intend to assist his Majesty of Spain, but to stand a looker on till he was ruined by the French King, which Letter, being not sealed, was seen and heard read by Richard Ashby then Rector of Saint Omers; in which it was further ordered, that if the said Father Confessor should not be ready to comply with the said Stapleton, that mes∣sengers should be forthwith sent to Father Swiman at Ma∣drid to inform his Majesty of Spain of the said concern, and to make the same relation of the business to the Arch-Bi∣shop of Tuam in the Kingdome of Ireland, now at the Court at Madrid, that he the said Swiman, and he the said Arch-Bishop might jointly give an account to the King of Spain of the motion made or to be made, to the said Father Confessor of Duke de Villa Hermosa, and also to advise the Spa∣nish King to seize the estates of the English merchants in the several Factories in his Dominions; for that they had endea∣voured to transport their Estates, and did transport them to England, which would tend highly to the prejudice of the Kingdome of Spain, and for the confirmation thereof they procured Letters from one Fonseca, sometimes an Agent in London, to attest the same, to which the said Fonseca willingly condescended, and sent his Letter to Saint Omers, to be sent to the Court of Spain, that the Fathers might give their approbation; which Letter was long, and large attesta∣tions therein made against the merchants resident in their several Factories, concerning the matter of Fact before-mentioned, and also other Letters to Daniel Armstrong at Valledolid, and to John Cross at Madrid, in the which they
were ordered to confirm this affirmation made or to be made by the Fathers in England, and of the English Semi∣nary at Saint Omers, and of the said Stappleton, together with that of the said Fonseca, the abovementioned Spanish Agent, who now liveth at Bruges in Flanders. All which Letters bore date the first or second of January 1678. Stilo No∣vo, and all of them the Deponent saw at Saint Omers; and in the two Letters to those two Fathers in Spain, viz. Daniel Armstrong and John Cross, was contained an especial order, that the former, if he could not go to Madrid, should send his attestations to Don Juan of Austria, for the carry∣ing on of which two hundred pounds sterling was trans∣mitted by bills of Exchange to the said father Swiman and the said English Fathers. ITEM XVI. That when the Letters came from England about the bu∣siness afore-mentioned to Saint Omers, Edward Nevil and Thomas Fermor, did say, that they would not let this black Ba∣stard go to his grave in peace (meaning the King of England) for that he had cheated them so often, and that now they were resolved to be served so no more. But the Deponent stand∣ing by, said, what if the Duke should prove slippery! They both replyed, his pasport was ready when ever he should ap∣pear to fail them, These words were heard by the Deponent on the third of January in the afternoon, in the Library of the Jesuits of Saint Omers. ITEM XVII. That on the fourth of January, 1678. Stylo novo, Letters were sent by Richard Ashby, Edward Hall, Edward Nevil, Charles Peters, Michael Constable, William Busby, James Jan∣on, and Thomas Fermor, Jesuits of the English Seminary at Saint Omers, as also Francis Williams Rector of Watton, and Master
of the Novices there, Sir John Warner Baronet alias Clare, Father Sanches alias Ditchling, to the Father Confessor of the Empe∣rours Majesty, to advise the Emperours Majesty, that his Ma∣jesty of Great Brittain had treacherously ploted the ruine of the Confederates, especially of the German Empire, and of his Catholick Princes under him, and had under hand stirred up the Hungarian Rebels against his Imperial Majesty, and found them money to go on with their rebellion, and that his de∣sign was not to keep any alliance, with his Imperial Ma∣jesty, but onely in shew, that he might advance his Nephew the Prince of Orange and make him absolute, and therefore prayed that the States of Holland might be acquainted with it. Which Letter was seen and perused by the Depo∣nent, it being written in Latine, all which Letters were sent a∣way by a Lay-Brother that was a Dutch-man, and when these Letters were sending away, one of the Lay-brothers, whose name was George, did say, That the Prince of O∣range, was more fit to rob an Orchard than to be General of an Army. ITEM XVIII. That Letters bearing date January the first, 1678. Spylo no∣vo, arrived at Saint Omers, January the twentieth, from Tal∣bot Arch-bishop of Dublin, wherein it was expressed, that the Fathers of the Society in Ireland, were very vigilant to prepare the people to arise, for the defence of their Liberty and Religion, and to recover their Estates, and that if the Parliament that was to fit in England, should joyn with the King in declaring War against France, that a place should be open to receive the French Kings Army in Ireland, when his most Christian Majesty should think fit to land one there: And in the Letter head advised the Fathers of Saint Omers to advertise Father Leshee of the same, and other Jesuits that had an interest in the French King: And that his Majesty of Great Brittain, was brought to that pass that if any Male content amongst them should not prove true
to their design his Majestie would never give ear to their information, and therefore prayed them to be dilligent, for now was the time or never: which Letter the Deponent saw and read, and in order to the Fathers compliance with the Letter of the said Arch Bishop, they dispatched away Letters to Father Leshee to Paris; and appointed Ed∣ward Nevil and William Busby, to carry and deliver them to the said Leshee, which Letters were answered with all speed by the aforesaid messengers, Jesuits, as above, the one of them being the Prefect of Studies, and the other Pro∣curator for the Seminary, and by them wrote Letters to Thomas White Provincial, and to the Rector of Saint Omers, viz. Richard Ashby: Of that to the Provincial the Deponent can give no account; but of that to Ashby the Deponent saith, that there was in it expressed, that the Father Gene∣ral of the Society of Jesus, would contribute eight hundred thousand Crowns to be paid in the moneth of June next ensuing, and that his Holinesse, the Pope, would not be wanting to supply them, when they had made some pro∣gresse in that glorious attempt, ITEM XIX. That another Packet arrived at Saint Omers directed to Richard Ashby, Rector of the English Seminary there: The Date of which is not well remembred by the Deponent, but as near as he doth remember, it was about the begin∣ning of the Parliament, for there came the Speeches of the King and Lord Chancellour, and the Votes of the Parlia∣ment, which were put into ridiculous phrases, in contempt of the King and both Houses of Parliament, for the Fathers and Scholers to laugh at, and then translated into the French Tongue, and presented to the Governor of Saint Omers, who sendeth them to the French King his Master: and in the Pack∣et was contained an account of the attempt of one Picker∣ing, a lay Brother, that waits upon the Jesuits lying at Somer∣set house, to shoot the King as he was was walking in Saint
James park, when he was at some distance from his No∣bles and Attendants, but the Flint of his Pistol being some∣what loose, he did defer the action till another opportu∣nity, and if he had done it and had suffered, he should have had thirty thousand Masses said for the health of his soul▪ Which Letters were signed by Thomas White alias White∣bread Provincial, which Letters, when read, the Fathers in the English Seminary were in great trouble, for the negligence of the said Pickering, and the Deponent saw and read them in the latter part of January, and the Votes put into such mock Phrases, as also the Speeches of the King and Lord Chancellor in the moneth of Fe∣bruary. ITEM XX. That the Deponent, went on the nine and twentieth of January to know of his Confessarius, whether he might keep the thirtieth of January as a fast, the Confessor re∣plyed, that the account with them was on the ninth of February, because the account of England did differ from the account on that side the Water: The Deponent ask∣ed him, whether then he might keep the ninth of Februa∣ry as a day of Fasting? The Confessor asked him, why? The Deponent replyed, because of the Martyrdome of the late King, the Confessarius answered, that the late King was no Martyr but an Heretick, and withal added, that he was none of King James Son, but a Bastard begotten upon the body of Anne of Denmark by her Taylor. This Con∣fessarius is a Jesuit, and his name Charles Peters, Prefect of the Sodality. ITEM XXI. That Letters bearing date, February the first. Stylo no∣vo, from Thomas Whitebread, John Keines, John Fenwick,
Father Ireland, and Father Micho to Richard Ashby Rector of Saint Omers, (then ill of the Gout) and to the English Fathers there, did let them understand, that they had sent Wil∣liam Morgan into Ireland to see how affairs stood in that Kingdome, and expected his return by the end of March next, and that he set out the six and twentieth of January, and that they had given him instructions to order the affairs in hand, and to encourage the Irish Natives to de∣fend their Religion and Liberty: And his Companion was one Father Lovel, who was to go into the North of Ire∣land to see the Fathers of the Society there; and carried two thousand pound to supply their present wants, and to promise them four thousand pound more in case there should be any action. ITEM XXII. That another Pacquet came from Thomas White alias Whitebread, Father Micho, Father Ireland, Father Harcourt and others of the Society in London, bearing date February the seventh, 1678. Stylo novo: In which was contained an account of the Fathers progress in Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Essex; in perswading the Catholicks that were Vota∣ries for the order of Saint Ignatius to contribute for the Irish rebellion, and maintaining a Civil War in that King∣dome, in case the French King should break with the King of England: And also that they had received Letters from Scotland, in which they were informed that the people would rise to oppose Duke Lauderdale, and the Royal party in that Kingdome, and also that they would endeavour by them∣selves, their Agents, and their Purse to provoke the Scots against the English, and withal told the Fathers of Saint Omers to whom this Pacquet was directed, and by whom it was received, that they should be glad to effect such a design. Which Pacquet the Deponent saw and read, Letter by Letter.
ITEM XXIII. That the Fathers of Saint Omers, viz. Richard Ashby Re∣ctor, Edward Hall, Edward Nevill, and others of the Eng∣lish Seminary, did write to Thomas Whitebread and other Fathers, in which was expressed that it was now appa∣rent, that the Catholick Religion was to be brought in the same way, that they had used for the destruction of the Father of this King, and as that could not be effected till much blood was spilt on both sides, so this must be effected by effusion of blood: And withal prayed them to prosecute their design in taking away the King; and if his Royal Highness should not comply with them, to dispatch him too: for they did fear that never any of the Stuarts were men for the effecting of their ends and purposes. And in this Letter, instructions were given to the Fathers to feel how his Royal Highness stood affected. Which Le∣ter bore date, February the tenth, Stylo novo, and was sign∣ed by the persons abovenamed in the presence of the De∣ponent, who did compose these Letters for them, accord∣ing to direction given him by them: Which Letter was, to the Deponents knowledge, carried into Eng∣land by one Father Every, who then went for Eng∣land. ITEM XXIV. That an answer of the aforesaid Letters of February the tenth, Stylo novo, dated February the twentieth Old style, came from Thomas White, John Keines and Basil Langworth, Richard Peters, John Fenwick, Father Ireland, Father Harcourt, Father Blundel, Father Matthew VVright, and Father Thomas VVright, Father Jennison, and one Father Sim∣mons, who some time belonged to Somerset House, who al∣so signed with the rest, the said answer, which told the Fathers at Saint Omers (viz. Richard Ashby to whom the
Letter was directed and the rest) that they had found, that although the Duke was a good Catholique, yet he had a tender affection to the King, and would scarcely be engag∣ed in that concern, and if they should once intimate their designs and purposes unto him, they might not only be fru∣strated of their design but also might lose his favour. Which Letter the Deponent saw and read in the month of February. ITEM XXV. That the Fathers of the English Seminary at Saint Omers did oblige one brother George a Day-brother in the said Seminary to go for Ghent in Flanders to the English Jesuits there with a Letter from Saint Omers dated February, 26. Stylo veteri: In which they had an account of that letter of February, 20 Stylo veteri; and the said brother George ar∣rived there February 28 Stylo veteri: and the Jesuits there ad∣vised the Fathers in one of March the first Stylo veteri, that the secular Clergy should be treated withal about the busi∣ness, but they finding them then at that time to be men in∣clined to live in peace and obedience to their Prince, the Fa∣thers viz. Thomas VVhite &c. answered them in one of March 10 Stylo veteri That the Clergy were a sort of rascally fellows that had neither wit nor courage to manage such a great de∣signe; and did pray them of Ghent and them of Saint Omers to be of good Cheer, for their designes went on well both in Scotland and Ireland, and the fatal blow should be given to the black boy at Whitehal with all the speed that might be. Which letters to them at Ghent, and from them at Ghent to the Provincial (they being brought back to Saint Omers be∣fore they went to the Provincial) and also these of March 10. the Deponent saw and read. ITEM XXVI. That there was an attempt to make an assassina∣tion upon the person of his sacred MAJESTY in the month of March several days as he was walking in the Park, and once as he was going to the Parlia∣ment-house,
by this honest William and Pickering, but op∣portunity did not offer it self, for the which the former, viz. honest William, was chidden, and the latter had a Penance of twenty strokes with a Discipline on his Shoul∣ders, it being judged by the Fathers the effect of his neg∣ligence: Which Passage the Deponent saw mentioned in a Letter from Thomas White to Rich. Ashby, bearing Date March the 26th. 1678. Item XXVII. That of the 5th of April Letters came from Thomas White, and the Fathers in London, to Rich. Ashby and those of the English Seminary at S. Omers; in which the Fathers at London did give them of S. Omers an account that Will. Morgan and Father Lovell were returned out of Ireland, who gave them to understand, That the Irish were ready to rise at ten day warning, with 20000 foot and 5000 horse, and would let the French King into that Kingdom if he should come to land an Army there, and that Father Lovell did give an account that 15000 horse and foot would rise in the North of Ireland, and that the people were very patient but very resolute; and that the Duke of Ormond, now Lord Lieutenant, is in a great perplexity to see Catholick Religion thrive so well in Ireland, and that there are persons that have secretly taken Commissions from the General of the Society of Jesus, by vertue of a Breve from the Pope, dated Octob. 1. 1673. and that they resolve to cut the Throats of the Protestants again, when once they rise. And in the said Letters the Provincial sum∣moned a General Consult to be held in London, and there∣fore commanded the Fathers on the other side of the Wa∣ter to be present. In which Letter the Deponent did see himself summoned to assist at that Consult, as a Messen∣ger from Father to Father. This Letter the Deponent saw in the Month of April.
Item XXVIII. That in order to this Command, on April 24. 1678. Stylo Novo, Father Warren, Rector of Leige, Sir Thomas Pre∣ston, Baronet, Father Marsh, Rector of Ghent, Father Willi∣ams, Rector of Watton, and Master of the Novices, Sir John Warner Baronet, (Rich. Ashby, Rector of the English Semi∣nary at S. Omers, being sick of the Gout could not go) but out of the said Seminary went Sir Robert Brett, Baro∣net, Father Poole, Edward Nevill; there were in all with the Deponent about 9 or 10 who met in London in Consult with Tho. Whitebread, Father Harcourt, senior, and Father Har∣court, junior, John Fenwick, Basil Langworth, Willam Mor∣gan, John Keines, Father Lovell, Father Ireland, Father Blundell, Rich. Strange, Father Mico, Father Gray, and others, to the number of Fifty Jesuits, met at the White∣horse Tavern, in the Strand, where they plotted their De∣signs for the Society, and ordered Father John Cary, who was also there, to go Procurator for Rome: At which Consult, thus held in the Month of May, the Deponent was present to attend the Consulters, and delivered their Concerns from Company to Company; and then a little after they left the White-horse Tavern, and divided them∣selves into several Clubs or Companies. Some met at Mrs. Saunders house, in Wild-street; others at Mrs. Fenwicks, at Ayre's House, in Drury-lane; others at Mr. Ireland's, in Rus∣sel-street near Covent-Garden, and in other places; all which, though in several Companies, 5 or 6 in a Compa∣ny, did contrive the death of the King: In order to which there were Papers sent from Company to Company, which the Deponent carried, containing the Opinions of the timeing their business, and the manner how it was to be done: And within 3 or 4 days after, the Deponent went to S. Omers with the Fathers that came from the other side of the Water.
Item XXIX. That on the 10th of June, Stylo Novo, came Thomas White to S. Omers, in order to visit his Colledges in Flanders and Germany; and in his Chamber the 11th day, where the Deponent was present, together with Rich. Ashby, Re∣ctor, he there told the Deponent and the said Ashby, That he hoped to see the Fool at White-hall laid fast enough; and that the Society need not fear, for he (that is the King) was grown secure, and would hear no complaints against them, and if the Duke should set his Face in the least measure to follow his Brothers Foot-steps, his passport was made to lay him to sleep. Item XXX. That the said Thomas Whitebread, on the 13th of June, did tell the Rector of S. Omers, That a Minister of the Church of England had scandalously and basely put out the Jusuits Morals in English, and had endeavoured villanously to render them odious to the people, and asked the said Rector whether he thought the Deponent might possibly know him? and the Rector not knowing, called the Deponent, who heard these words as he stood at the Chamber door of the said Provincial, and when the Deponent went into the Chamber of the said Provincial, he asked him, If he knew the Author of the Jesuits Morals? the Deponent an∣swered, his Person, but not his Name. The said Thomas Whitebread demanded then, Whether he would undertake to poyson to assassinate the Author? which the Deponent under∣took to do, having 50 l. reward promised him by the said Provincial, and appointed to return to England. And the Deponent doth farther testifie, that at the same time the said Provincial did in his Chamber say, That he and the Society in London would procure Dr. Stillingfleet to be knockt on the head, and also Poole, the Author of Synopsis Criti∣corum, for writing some things against them.
Item XXXI. That Rich. Ashby, Rector of S. Omers, being ill that Evening with the Gout and Stone, viz. June 13. de∣sired the company of the Deponent, and did tell the Deponent, That Father Warren, who is now Rector of the Colledge of Jesuits at Leigh, did, when he was Pro∣curator at Paris, reconcile the late Lord Chancellour Hyde to the Church of Rome upon his death bed; which words were occasioned by the Deponent's taking notice of the Duchess of York (Daughter of the said Lord Chancellour) dying a Papist. And the Deponent, when he heard the said Ashby speak these words, replyed, That he never heard any thing of the return of the said Lord Chancellour: Answer was made, That he, the said Asahby, was certain that the said Lord Chancellour was reconciled by the said Warren. Item XXXII. That on the 23. day of June, in the morning, New Style, the Deponent, had express orders presently to go for Calice, and then to take the Packquet-Boat and so away for Eng∣land, to attend the motions of the Fathers in London, and to remain in London till he had orders from the Provincial to the contrary, and gave the Deponent four pounds for his Charges, and promised him 80 l. for Services already done for the Society in Spain and elsewhere. And the Deponent saith, That he obeyed the Orders, and that night got to Calice, and there met with four Jesuits that were or∣dered for London; and on Fryday the 24th new Style, the Deponent saith, they took the Packquet-Boat together, and arrived safely to Dover on Saturday morning, where the De∣ponent met with John Fenwick, who had brought 8 Students to Dover to transport them to S. Omers: And the Deponent further saith, That the four Jesuits and Fenwick who were at Dover by name of Thomson, and he the Deponent took Coach about 11 or 12 of the Clock at Noon; and at Borton, six Miles on this side Canterbury,
the Coach was stopt, and a Box was seized of the said John Fenwick's by the Searchers of that place, and when by them opened, in it they found Beads, Pictures, Images, and Agnus Dei's, which were to be given by Blundel the Catechist to young Children, to encourage them to come to his Catechising Schools, and to be Catechised by him. Accordingly there was a Direction on the said Box fixed, as, To the honourable Rich. Blundel, Esquire, London: Which Box remaineth so seized by the said Searchers; and if they had searched the Pockets of the said Fenwick, they had found such Letters upon him, as the said Fenwick, con∣fessed to the Deponent, might have cost him his life; they being saith he, the Concern in hand; but the said Letters the Deponent did not see. Item XXXIII. That in the Month of July, Rich. Ashby came to Lon∣don with Instructions from the said Thomas Whitebread or White, that the 10000 l. procured by Father Leshee, and then in the hands of the Society in London, should be put into the hands of one Worsly, their Banker; and that the said Rich. Ashby, with other Fathers, should treat and agree with Sir George Wakeman about the concern of poysoning the King; and that if he would undertake it he should have the 10000 l. which the said Rich. Ashby told the De∣ponent, shewing him the said Instructions by way of Me∣morandum in Writing. In which Memorandum was con∣tained an Item given by the said Thomas Whitebread for the procuring the Assassination of the Right Reverend Father in God Herbert, Lord Bishop of Hereford; for the said Bi∣shop had been educated in the Popish Religion, and was fallen, and they were resolved not to pity nor spare any Apostate from the Roman Faith. The said Rich. Ashby asked the Deponent, whether the said Bishop were not a forward Man against Catholicks? and the Deponent not knowing the said Bishop, told the said Ashby he could not tell; and the said Ashby did say, That times now being ready
to change, they would be ready to give not only Aposiates, but also those Hereticks that had obstinately opposed the pro∣ceedings of the Society, and their Agents, in propagating the Faith and Interest of the Church of Rome, a just Re∣ward for their Apostacy and infamous obstinacy; and though the Parliament have taken away the Act for burning Here∣ticks, they should not escape the Vengeance of Catholicks. Item XXXIV. That in the Month of July, 1678. Rich. Strange, the last Provincial of the Jesuits, came to the Lodgings of Mr. Rich. Ashby, who, before he went down to the Bath, lay in the new Provincial's Lodgings, at Mrs. Saunders house, a part of Wild-house in Wild-street, and finding the Deponent with the said Ashby, did desire the Deponent to meet him at his Chamber, at Mr. John Groves in York-street near Covent-Garden, and after a short stay at Ashbies Lodg∣ings, took his leave of the said Ashby, and presently after the Deponent took his leave also of the said Ashby, and followed Strange, and got to his Chamber presently after him; where the said Strange did encourage the Deponent to go on in assisting the Society in carrying on the Design; And thereupon told the Deponent that they got 14000 l. in the Fire of London, in the year 1666. The Deponent asked the said Strange how they came to effect that great and famous business? The said Strange replyed, That himself, and one Gray, and Pennington, and Barton, Jesuits, with some others, together with one Keimash, a Dominican Fryar, joyned with one Green, and met at one William Wests house, who kept de Green-Dragon in Puddle-dock: The said West was by Trade a Taylor, whom they employ∣ed to make them some Cloaths, and there they did debate about the manner of firing the City, and where they should begin, and did attempt it in February 1664/5. But not be∣ing provided of assistance enough, and the Thames being frozen over, and the Sickness coming on a-pace, they then altered their purpose: And in January 1665/6. they
met with this Green again, who closed in with them in this Design. And that they might ingratiate themselves with this Green, furnished him with 30 l. (he being poor) yet they found him an active man, and fit for their purpose. And the more to engage him the said Green, they pretend∣ed to hold many of the Fifth-Monarchy Principles; which when Green perceived, (judging them to be real) brought them acquainted with eight others, who were zealous in the business. The aforesaid Jesuits were earnest to have the business done in February, before the return of the Inha∣bitants to London; but Green did pray these persons, viz. the Jesuits, to suspend that resolution, because that then they should be sooner discovered, and such a Design must have an Uproar; and besides all this, the King would not be much in Town, if at all, till the Plague was more abated, whom Green did say must be cut off too, when the people were in a hurry by reason of the fire: And this motion pleased the Jesuits and Dominican well, and so it was put off. In a very little time after the said Green, and the rest of those Fifth-Monarchy men, together with the four Je∣suits and Dominican above-named, were suspected by the said West that kept the said house in Puddle-dock, and were forewarned his house. And presently after Green and his eight acquaintance were clapt up in Prison, (but for what the said Strange did not tell the Deponent.) And upon the Imprisonment of these nine persons, the said Je∣suits and Dominican did go to S. Omers, and there remain∣ed till the May after the Execution of eight of these persons thus imprisoned. (Green dying in Newgate.) But one Fitz Gerard, an Irish Jesuit, and one Neale of White-Chappel, did write to Strange (as the said Strange inform∣ed the Deponent) that none of the Fathers names was men∣tioned in the business of these men, and thought they might safely return. So in the latter part of May they set forth for England, and got to London in the beginning of June; and then, concealing their Names and Lodgings, they began afresh to consult about this Fire, which was still carried on by the Society in the absence of these per∣sons, and determined by them in the Fire-time to cut off
the King, that the number of the Beast might be accom∣plished. In the uttering of which words the said Strange broke out into a great Laughter. But, said the said Strange, to be short, we got fifty or sixty Irish to plye the work, and one Edw. Everard was very diligent to pre∣serve their Fire-works which they had made, and put into Granado-shels: And the more to palliate this their design, they procured this Everard a place in the Kings Service, to look after the Ammunition that was to be carried down to the Fleet, it being in the time of the first Dutch Wars. And the said Strange told the Deponent, That great At∣tempts were made on the Tower, but without effect. But (saith Strange) to return to our ordering our Affairs, we were in Fee also with several French-men, who were faithful in the business: And all things being ready, and the place pitch'd upon, Strange removes his Quarters, and got to lye at a house in Fanchurch-street, and went by the name of Walker; and this he did in the Month of August, 1666. and with him he took Keimash, the Dominican, and lodged together. And Pennington and Barton lay at an Apothecaries Shop in Shoo-Lane; and Gray and Fitz Gerard lay at Neales house in White-Chappel; which Neale was one to see the Fire carried on through Thames-street, and so to the Tower. In a word the said Strange told the Deponent, that they spent 700 Fire-Balls, and when, the Fire-Mer∣chants were at work, then others (Men and Women) were employed to plunder what they could; and they had a Ware-house in Wild-street, where somethings so plundered were laid; and other things they concealed in Somerset-house, as Hollands, Cambricks, fine Cloth, and some con∣siderable quantities of Plate, and a Box of Jewels: The Owner gave the Box to these Men to carry away, and or∣dered his Servant to go along with them, but they having encreased their number, ordered the Servant to be knockt down; but the Servant being afraid he should be killed, ran away. This was the greatest Plunder of one sort they got; for (as the said Strange informed the De∣ponent) there were one thousand Carracts of Diamonds
lapt up in several Papers for several Goldsmiths, and the Dia∣monds were conveyed away to St. Omers, the first opportunity they met withall: But the Deponent asked the said Strange how one Man should trust him with so much Goods, for never any Jeweller had so many Jewels at one time. The said Strange replied, that he could not tell, but it was certain they met with them, and sold them for 3500 l. sterling in Flanders, and had a fish-dinner into the bargain at the Salutation Tavern in Holborn at the Return of the Money. The Deponent asked Strange, how the Fire began? and he told him, that Neal came and knockt him up at 12 of the Clock in the Night, and before he was drest the Fire was begun. The Deponent further asked the said Strange, how many Servants the Society employed? He said about 80 or 86, he could not tell well which. The Deponent asked how the King came to escape? The said Strange replied, indeed they were resolved to have cut him off, when at work in person about the Fire, but then they were not secure of the Duke, who then was but a well-wisher to them, and besides, they seeing the King so in∣dustrious could not find in their hearts to do it. Whilst this Discourse was in hand a Gentleman knockt at the door, and so we broke off, beginning at Nine of the Clock in the Morning, and ending at almost Eleven that Forenoon. And the Deponent went to his Lodging, which was then in Drury Lane. XXXV. Item. That Richard Ashby, the day before he went down to the Bath, which was in the Month of July, had conference with Father Harcourt, Father Fenwick, Father Ireland, Father Keines, Father Strange, Mr. Jennison, Father Blundell, and others of the Society, by Order from the Pro∣vincial, to send new Messengers into Scotland, to promote the Commotions there, and to inform the People of the great Tyranny they did lay under, by reason of their being denyed then Liberty of their Conscience, and that not being to be
procured but by the Sword, they must take that course to purchase their Liberty. By which means (said the Fathers thus assembled) we shall weaken both the Presbyterian and Episcopal Faction. At which Conference the Deponent was present, and heard these words. XXXVI. Item. That in the Month of July, the said Richard Ashby, went down to the Bath, in order to be cured of his Gout, and on the Morning he went away, the Deponent being then in the Chamber of the said Ashby to take his leave of him; Father Harcourt, Rector of London, came to him, and told him, that if after he left the Bath, he could make a Progress into Somerset-shire, to inform those of the Society of the intended Design, it would do well, and with all desired the said Ashby to hasten to Town after he had finished the said Information. All which the Deponent did hear. XXXVII. Item. That on the first of August came Letters from Thomas Whitebread bearing Date July the 22, to John Fenwick, in which was, that he would that 15000 l. should be proposed to Sir George Wakeman, if he refused 10000 l. But whether Sir George hath been treated with about with about that Concern, the Deponent cannot inform here in this Article; but Sir George Wakeman hath been divers times in the Company of the said Ashby; and he saw the Letters to John Fewick on Fourth of August, 1678.
XXXVIII. Item. That Letters arrived to London bearing date August 5, 1678, from Thomas White or Whitebread, Provincial, to John Fenwick from St. Omers, in which he did inform the Fathers, that he had made his Visit within his Province, and that he had ordered Twelve Jesuits to go for Holland, and to inform the Dutch that the Prince of Orange did intend to assume the Crown of a King, and that he resolved to bring them under another Government. Which Missioners took their leaves of the said Thomas White on St. Ignatius's day, July 31, but got no farther than Watton, by reason of a mischance they met withall upon the way. By which mission the said Thomas White did design to beget in the Dutch an evil Opinion of the Prince of Orange, and to cause a Commotion there amongst the Dutch, against the said Prince and his Party. Which Letter the Deponent saw and read in Mr. Fenwick's Chamber on the Eleventh of August. XXXIX. Item. That another Letter of the Tenth of August, came to Blundel and the Fathers in London, from Thomas Whitebread, in which he blamed the Fathers in London for not giving him an account of what progress they had made in their proposal, made or to be made unto Sir George Wakeman; And if made, how he resented it; If hot made, to make it quickly, for it would not be convenient to defer it; and told them, Ireland was safely arrived to him at St. Omers, who only told him, That the King was very secure; and therefore, he, the said Provincial, admonished the Fathers to be very vigilant. Which Letter Blundel shewed the Deponent on the Nineteenth of August.
XL. Item. That another Packet of the 15th of August came from St. Omers, from Thomas White Provincial, to Father John Fenwick, in the which were Letters inclosed to Father Harcourt, Jennison and others, which the Deponent did not see; but that to John Fenwick the Deponent did see and read it. Therein the said Thomas White did say, that the Figure 365 should lie as low as ever 666 did; and if Poyson would not take the King away, Fire should, for Catholique Religion would never Flourish unless IHS took this Course. Now the Deponent saith that 365 is to be understood Westminister, and the Figure 666 London, they being the Ciphers for both those places, and the letters IHS Jesuits, they using it always. XLI. Item. That the Deponent was informed by the said John Fenwick and others of the Society, then in his Chamber, that the Jesuits have 60000 l. per annum good Rents, and 100000 l. in Bank, and that he and the rest of the Society have in the name of their Trustees Lent out Mony at 50 l. per Cent. the improvement of which Money in Bank is used about these practices; and that it costeth them 4000 l. per annum in intelligence, besides their daily special Messengers, on which vast Sums of Mony are spent, and besides another part is transported beyond the Seas by Bills of Exchange, which the Deponent himself knoweth in a great part to be true, and of the rest they themselves have informed him at several times: All which tends highly to the damage of the Kingdom.
XLII. Item That on Monday the 5th of August, Father Har∣court, Father Keines, John Fenwick, and another of the Society, whose name the Deponent doth not remember, did say, that they did intend to raise a Commotion in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales which also did appear to the Deponent by several Letters which the Deponent did see and read: The date of which Letters the Deponent doth not well remember, but saw them in August 1678. XLIII. Item. That two new Messengers were sent into Scotland, on the said 5th of August; one by the name of Father Moore, and the other by the name of Father Saunders aliàs Brown, with instructions to carry themselves like Nonconformist Ministers, and to Preach to the disaffected Scots, the necessity of taking up the Sword for the defence of Liberty of Conscience. These the Deponent saw dispatch'd and or∣der'd to go by Father Harcourt in the name of Thomas White Provincial. XLIV. Item That they have several times communicated, and do still communicate what secrets they can have revealed to them of the King, which they purchase by giving Mony, and then send them over to Leshee the French Kings Confessor. And the Deponent hath seen several particulars (as they pretend) bow the King standeth affected, for War or Peace: And this they do by one Smith, who daily lurketh about White-Hall, and in Parliament time about Westminster-Hall and the Lobby. And the said Smith did say, that he
was in fee with the Clerks of the Parliament, who give him the Intelligence, and with the Clerks Officers of the Privy Council and Cabinet Council. The Deponent saith further, that one Coleman formerly Secretary to her R. Highness doth assist this Smith, with private intelligence, as John Keines, Jesuit, and this Smith have told the Deponent several times in the Months of July and August. XLV. Item. That these Jesuits drive several Trades in Town, as Mer∣chants, Tobacconists, Goldsmiths, Scriveners, and by means of their Scriveners they come to the knowledge of several Estates of several Persons of Quality; and by other Scriveners, of their Religion and Practices: By which means they take an estimate of the strength of the Nation, their Scriveners having great practice in the City of London, as John Keines informed the Deponent in the Month of August. XLVI. Item. That on Friday the 9th of August, came Letters of the 16th Stylo novo, by an especial Messenger from Thomas White Provincial, and subscribed by the Fathers at St. Omers; in which they did rejoyce very much that Sir George Wakeman had taken the business into his hand, and if he did it, the 15000 l. should be paid: But ordered, that Pickering and his Companion viz. Honest William, should not desist their en∣devouring to Assassinate the King's Person: Which Letters the Deponent read, and asked Fenwick, how the Provincial came to understand that Sir George Wakeman had undertaken the business? He the said Fenwick told the Deponent, that they had dispatched away a special Messenger, and that the said Messenger brought this answer, and withal the said Fenwick did tell the Deponent, that it cost Ten pound to send him word of it.
XLVII. Item. That because one William Berry, now a Secular Priest, who had formerly been a Jesuit, had written and was about to print some sheets of Paper in Vindication of the Oaths of Alle∣giance and Supremacy, and in it perswaded Roman Catho∣liques to a more charitable Compliance with Protestants, Basil Langworth, and others of the Society, did offer 10 l. to the Deponent to kill the said Berry; and if the Deponent dared not to do it himself, to procure some other to do it, assuring the Deponent, that whosoever did it, and were questioned for it, should have a Pardon. This was pro∣posed August 9th 1678. XLVIII. Item. That on the 9th of August in the evening in the Chamber of John Keines, Jesuit, in Warwick-street, where John Fenwick and the Deponent were together, there came one Rich. Heath, a Lay-Brother of the Society, who after some Discourse about the Design of Killing the King, did say, that he was a Bastard, and did endeavour to rule by the Sword. Which Words the Deponent did hear, and so did Keines and Fenwick, who after one another replied, the Bastard should not trouble the World long. XLIX. Item. That on the Tenth of August, styl. vet. the Deponent did meet with John Groves in Wild-street in the Afternoon, and as near as the Deponent can remember, it was about Five of the Clock, and he having made several promises to the Deponent, to give him an account of the Fire of South∣wark in the Year 1676, the said Groves took the Deponent into Wild-house Garden, and thus began. He said that he had certain Fire-works made for that very purpose, and he with Three Irishmen, that were his Assistants, went
into the Borough, and not finding an opportunity nor a fit place, went to St. Margarets-Hill, where they found an Oyl-shop, which the said Groves bragg'd he sir'd. The Deponent asked the said Groves, how he came acquainted with the said Irishmen? He said his acquaintance with them was not much, but they were procured by Dr. Fogarthy, the Irish Doctor, for which the Society (Richard Strange then Provincial) gave them 1000 l. viz. 400 l. to Groves, and 200 l. a piece to the Three Irishmen. And the said Groves told the Deponent, that the Society got at least 2000 l. by that fire, which was also told the Deponent at another time by Richard Strange. L. Item. That on the Eleventh of August being Sunday, the De∣ponent saw Letters from St. Omers, bearing date August 17th New style, written by Father Ireland, in the Name of the Provincial Thomas White aliàs Whitebread, to John Fenwick; in which Letter, by the Contents thereof, there were Letters to John Keines, Mr. Jennison, and Mr. Blundel, and others, which the Deponent did not see, but in this to John Fenwick it was specified what diligence was used for the destruction of the Duke of Ormond, and for the procuring another demonstration of zeal for the promoting the Catholick Religion and Interest in that Kingdom, and that which Arguments could not effect the Sword should, to the great vexation of the Protestants there; and he intimated the great joy that he had, that there was yet great hopes, that the disaffected Scots would not lay aside their endeavours for and after the Defence of their Liberty and Religion, and that the Catholicks of Scotland had promised to use the utmost of their Interest to keep up the Commotions there; and the said Father Ireland bad the said Fenwick exhort the Fathers to be earnest in their Designs, for now was the time that the English Nation was to be reduced. And furthermore ordered, in the Name of the Provincial, that Letters should be written to all the Society in England, that they made it their business to encourage the Friends to braveness of mind, for that
God had hitherto given them such a hopeful Prospect of things, and that no Opportunity on his part was or should be lost, and that they in London (if they thought it fit to communicate these things) should have a care that they did it to no more than to one at a time, lest they should be baffled in their Enterprise. Which Letter, when read by the Deponent, the said Fenwick, to whom the Letter was di∣rected, told the Deponent, that it was his Duty to offer up a Mass or two, that God would prosper those Holy Endea∣vours of the Fathers of the Society, in promoting Catholick Religion and Faith; and told him further, That if he, the Deponent lived till Christmas, he should see a good Change of things, either that Forty Eight should be taken from the World, or the World (especially the little he was concern∣ed in) should be taken from him; And one that was a Catholick should play such a Game, as never was plaid since the Conquest. All which the said Fenwick told the Deponent in his Chamber; and the Deponent asked the said Fenwick, Who this Catholick was? And Fenwick said it was the Duke of York. And the Deponent saith, the Ciphers 48 are put for the King. LI. Item. That on the said 11th. of August in the Evening, the De∣ponent went to the Lodgings of John Keines, where he found another Jesuit with him, whose Name the Deponent doth not remember, in whose presence the said John Keines told the Deponent that the Provincial had taken great care of Keeping Alive the Difference betwixt the Disaffected Scots and Duke Lauderdale, and that the Affairs in Ireland went on with great Expedition, and that all Means were now used to beget a Difference betwixt the Dutch md the Prince of Orange, and if that could be effected, there was no question to be made, but that the Protestant Interest would fail in Holland, and that Forty Eight would not last long in England, for it was high time to hinder Forty Nine from being effected: That Barly-Broth-Trade should grow dead, and Twelve would be Cut off,
and that Mum and Chocolate should be put down, and the Order of Mag-Pies should be turned into their Primitive Insti∣tution and Habit. Now the Deponent saith, that the words [hinder Forty Nine from being effected] is an Odd Expres∣sion, that is amongst them used for the Cutting off the King, that he may not live to be compleat Forty Nine Years of Age. And by Barley-Broth, is meant the House of Commons, which shall be turned out and Sit no more. And by Mum and Cho∣colate, is meant the Protestant Peers; which, if not destroy∣ed, shall never have any Vote in the House of Peers more, after the Death of this King. And by Mag-Pies, they un∣derstand the Bishops, whose Habit in Parliament is Black and White, which shall be changed into Purple. And by Twelve, is meant the Duke of Monmouth. Whilst the said Keines with the other Jesuit entertained the Deponent with these Treasonable Expressions, Mr. Jonni∣son came to the said Keines, and told him, that he had lost a Letter which he had received from Tho-white, the Provincial at St. Omers, in a Walk he took to Islington, and would give ten pounds to any friend that would give it him, and was afraid that some Inconvenience might follow; if found by some Heretick: Which words put the said Keines into such a Consternation, that he asked him, Whether he had a mind to ruine them all: But Jennison bad the said Keines be quiet, for none could understand it; which words the Deponent did likewise hear. LII. Item. That Mr. Keines on the 12th. of August, determined to go for Windsor, in order to settle some business there in and towards the dispatching Forty Eight (which the Deponent saith is by them understood the King) at Windsor, if the King should go down thither. And it was judged that the said Forty Eight would go to Windsor, to make his abode there for some weeks, but the said John Keines told the Deponent, that he might chance to fall short of his Return again. These words were spoken by John Keines to the Deponent in his own
Chamber: But the said Keines did not go down to Windsor so soon, as afterwards it appeared to the Deponent. LIII. Item. That Smith, within mentioned, lieth in Drury Lane, at one Mr. Lowds a Taylor, in Cock-pit Alley in the aforesaid Lane, and is also imployed to go from house to house to see how the Catholicks stand affected: And Jennison said, That if the Catholicks had Courage enough, they might Rise and Cut the Throats of a hundred thousand Protestants in London; which Expression of the said Jennison's, the said Smith did tell the Deponent, asking the Deponent's Opinion of the same: To which the Deponent did say, That Mr. Jennison talked like a Person that had more Heat than Light. The said Smith did at the same time tell the Deponent, that the Society did give him fifty pound per annum for his Intelligence that he getteth of the Affairs of the Court, and of the King's Actions, Words and Counsels, and transmitteth the same to John Fenwick, which the said Fenwick transmitteth to St. Omers, and there it is trans∣lated into the French Tongue, and sent to Father L' Chaise, the the French King's Confessor: Which daily Intelligence the Deponent did daily see from the said Smith, he lodging in the same house with the Deponent. And the said Smith, did at the same time tell the Deponent, that he was a Lay-brother, of the Society of Jesus, and was of the Order of the Politians, as they term it, and attended Father Blundel to New-gate, in order to convert the Prisoners. All which the said Smith did tell the Deponent on August the 12th, 1678. And likewise the said Blundel did say as much to the Deponent, who hath seen the said Blundel and Smith go together to Newgate. LIV. Item. That one Matthew Medburn, a Player in the Duke's Theater, and Mr. Penny, Mr. Mannock, Mr. Sharp, Mr. Seddon, Will. Smith School-Master at Islington, and Mr. Edw. Everard, meet∣ing
in a Club on Thursday Nights, and Sunday Nights, with one Jones a Priest, and Kemash within mentioned, and all these are employed by the Jesuits to villify the House of Com∣mons, and go about the City of London to incense the Peo∣ple against them and against the Bishops of the Nation; And they deliver this Treasonable Position; That the Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament are the Devil's Representatives and not the Nation's. Which Treasonable and detestable words, the Deponent did hear in the said Club (which is kept at the Phea∣sant in Fullers Rents near Grays Inne) in the Month of August. And the Deponent was ordered by the Jesuits in London, to give the said Persons great Respects, and in their Names to thank the Club for their faithfulness to them in that par∣ticular. LV. Item. That Mr. Jennison did on the 12th August say and boast, that he had put several out of Love to the King's Interest, and would so continue, if that the King did not turn a Roman Catholick, and if the King did not become R. C. he should not be C. R. long. LVI. Item. That a Pacquet on Aug. 20th, New Style, arrived in Lon∣don from Thomas White, Provincial, Mr. Stapleton, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Peters. Mr. Busby Procurator, together with the Ma∣sters of the Humanity-Schools, to John Fenwick, in which it was specified, That the twelve Jesuits were gotten into Holland, and would use all their Skill and Interest to make a Commotion there: and that Apple-tree Will. (which the Depo∣nent saith is meant the Prince of Orange) should not be great, and that they hoped that the Fathers in London would follow their Business closely there. Which Letter the Deponent saw and Read.
LVII. Item. That a. Pacquet went from London, dated August 12, in which the Provincial was informed by John Fenwick, and the rest, that the King was gone or going for Winsor, and that the Fathers and honest William were ready to attend the Court there, as the Deponent was informed by John Fenwick above-named. LVIII. Item. That on August 13 in the afternoon, about six of the Clock, a Sermon was preached by John Keines to twelve persons, Men in poor Habits, yet men of quality, as the De∣ponent doth suppose by the whiteness of their hands; in which Sermon he delivered, That Protestant and other Heretical Prin∣ces were ipso facto deposed, because such; and that it was as law∣ful to Destroy them as an Oliver Cromwel, or any other Usurper. At which Sermon the Deponent was present, not designedly, but by accident. LIX. Item. That on the 15th of August John Keines and John Fenwick, went to a Gentleman in or about Westminster, and perswa∣ded him to remove from his quarters, lest God should de∣stroy him with the Sinners of that City; for God had raised him and others of that Society to do such things against that City, as should make a man's Ears ring that should hear it. The same day towards the Evening the said John Keines and John Fenwick told the Deponet the said story, and laughed to think what a fright the said Gentleman was put into. And they told the Deponent the Name of the said Gentleman, but he hath forgot it.
LX. Item. That John Keines came to the Lodgings of the Deponent, on Saturday August 17, and said it was endeavoured to dis∣patch Forty Eight at Windsor, if possible (by which number the Deponent saith, they mean the King) and withal told the Deponent, That Mr. Howard, Prior of the Benedictines, and Mr. Hitchcock Subprior, and Mr. Skinner, Mr. Corker, and other Benedictines, had promised to assist them with 6000 l. in order to the design. The said Monks did then lye at or near the VVardrobe behind the Savoy; which report the De∣ponent did believe, because the said Mr. Howard, Prior of the Benedictines, and Mr. Hitchcock Sub-prior, told the Deponent in the morning, August 17, that they had promised such a summe, and withall that the securing of his Majesties person in his Flight from Worcester was the worst days work that ever simple, Jack Huddlestone did in all his Life. But now it was their business to get the Stuarts out of the way: which the Deponent related to John Keines, and then Keines did tell the Deponent, that if he would undertake to assist in the dispatch∣ing of the King, he should be well rewarded, if not here, in Heaven: and the Deponent replyed that he never shot off a Gun in his Life, and withal told Keines that he could not be guilty of such a thing for the World. And then the said Keines did further inform the Deponent, that Mr. Coniers a Be∣nedictine Monk was resolved to pursue the Design of dispatch∣ing the King, which did appear to be evidently true to the Deponent, because he did hear the said Coniers on the 14th of August lay a Wager of a 100 l. with a Gentleman not known to the Deponent, in the Benedictine Convent in the Savoy: ten Guinies were deposited in the hands of Hitchcock Subprior of the Benedictines▪ Now the wager which Coniers did lay was, That the Villain, the KING, should not live to eat any more Christmas Pies; and the other Gentleman did lay that he would: So that the Deponent saith, That Keines told him no more of the Concern of Coniers, than the Deponent had heard of the said Coniers before, on the 14th of August.
But the Deponent before he parted from Keines, asked him, What news about the Town? Keines replyed, That all the news about the Town was, War with the French: and Keines did say, that if that held true, then Have at the Rogues of the House of Commons, they should be remembred for all their Long Bills against the Catholicks. The Deponent replyed, that (with submission) he thought the Revenge proposed against them would not do the business, and therefore not a Resolution consistent with a Catholick Spirit, for the En∣terprise must be more Noble: And withal the Deponent urged, that he feared the Death of the King would scarcely do the business and effect the Design, unless his R. Highness would pardon those that did the business, and stand by them in it. To which the said Keines reply'd, that the Duke was not the strength of their Trust, for they had another way to effect the setting up the Catholick Religion: For when they had destroyed the King, they had a List of 20000 Catholicks in London, that were substantial persons and fit for Arms, that would Rise in twenty four hours time and less: And if James did not comply with them, to Pot he must go also. It being late in the Night, the said John Kienes prayed the Deponent to come to him the next morning, and he would have one hours discourse with him before he went to Mass, and being about to take leave of the Deponent, asked him, What he meant by those Words [He could not be guilty of any such thing, as to assist in dispatching the King] there being no guilt in the Case; the Deponent smiled and said, He could not be guilty of so much Courage. Besides the Deponent saith, That he told the said Keines, that it was his opinion, that it would be more safe to let Sir George Wakeman try his skill, and then the People would not apprehend it so much.
LXI. Item. That the Deponent went to the Chamber of the said Keines about eight or nine in the morning, on the 18th of August, but he was gone abroad, and ordered the Deponent to call upon him about four in the afternoon, and then he would have some discourse with him: And the Deponent according∣ly went, but met with the said Keines in the: Mews, who told the Deponent that he was to meet with some Fathers in Covent Garden, and there would meet them, some Dominicans, and would have the Deponent go along with him, and at the House where they were appointed to meet, the Dominicans were already met, viz. Mr. Vincent, Provincial of the Domi∣minicans in England, Joseph David Keimash, Mr. Dominick, Mr. Collins, Mr. Fedding, Mr. Mansel, and Mr. Lumsdale (as they said) in the Name of all the rest of the Order in England, to consult and comply with the Fathers; of the Society to propa∣gate the Catholick Faith; and when John Keines was set, with the Fathers of the Society by him, all of a side, viz. John Keines, Father Harcourt, Fa. Fenwick, Fa. Wright, Fa. Blundel, the said John Keins propounded to the Dominicans to contri∣bute to the design of killing the King, and carrying on the business of England and Scotland: The Dominicans repli∣ed by their Provincial, that they were poor and not able to do much, for they had but little or no money, but they would let them have their personal assistance and counsel, and would procure what Interest they could, but as for Mony they could not part with any at all, for they were in debt, and had scarce 400 l. in stock, and the most they could make per annum of their, Estate, was not above 360 l. At which Consult the Deponent was to and fro, and what was more said he cannot tell, for he was sent with the Proposals to the Carmelites, viz. Dr. Handson, Mr. Kim∣bal, Mr. Trevers, and they said that they had not one penny in stock, nor any In-come besides what the Spanish Embassador allowed them for assisting in his Chappel.
But they by the Deponent did present their Service to the Fathers met together, and bad the Deponent tell them, that their Prayers to God and our Blessed Lady should not be wanting: All this was acted by Order from the Provin∣cial of the Society. LXII. Item. That the Deponent went to see John Fenwick on August Nineteenth in the afternoon; and whilst he was with him, in came John Keines, and presently after him Mr. Blundel; and after a Salutation was passed, they asked the Deponent, What Newes? The Deponent told them, he heard none but what was in the Gazett: And Blundel said, he had been with his Workmen, and they wanted Oyle: What the meaning of this was, the Deponent can∣not tell, but believes it was Sheeps Fat; and the said Blundel would not tell the Deponent his meaning when asked by him. The Deponent asked Keines, When he was for Windsor? He replied, The Court was scarcely setled as yet; but said, that Mr. Conyers and one Anderson was to go down on the morrow Aug. 20. in the morning; and if they did any thing as to the business in hand, it would hasten his going down; and therefore as yet, could not be certain when. The Deponent asked further, How honest VVilliam did? Keines replyed that he was troubled with a sore Throat, and was very bad with it; and so indispos'd, that he could not Ride down to VVindsor; and that it would be dangerous for him to go by water, lest a Cold being by that means Contracted, he should be unfit for Service. And then the Deponent took his leave of them, it being near six of the Clock in the afternoon, and went to the Monkes Convent, and inquired of one Rumly a Lay-brother of that Order, for Mr. Conyers; he said, he was not within, but not far off; however, not to be spoken withal, for he was with some of the Benedictine Fathers about business, and would go out of Town to morrow betimes hi the mor∣ning: And so the Deponent left him, and being but a little way from the place met the said Conyers; who laugh∣ing
upon the Deponent, told him, That the Hill People were Fools, to set upon 48. at Windsor, because he was seldome in a posture to receive their kindness: But he would see his Worship, and talk with him in some other Language than in Tormentilio: The Deponent asked, How? He Replied, that if the shirt on his back should know, he would burn it. But if that should not take ef∣fect, no opportunity should be neglected in order to the dispatch of 48. He further told the Deponent, he was in hast, and his time was short, and his business great; but told him also, that honest William and Pickering should stay in Town, seeing the party concern'd was Hic & ubi∣que, never long in one place. LXIII. Item. That on Wednesday twenty first of August, a Consult was held by the Jesuits then in London, with certain Be∣nedictine Monkes, about three of the Clock in the after∣noon, concerning a Pacquet that came from Talbot, Arch∣bishop of Dublin, to the fathers of the Society: In which they were given to understand, that Four Irish Jesuits had undertaken the death of the Duke of Ormond; and that up∣on his death, the Irish were ready to rise. In this Letter he told them, that a Legate was arrived in Ireland, and had asserted the Popes right in that Kingdom; and that the Kings of England being no longer Catholiques, they did cease from being concerned there; it being given to them during the good pleasure of his Holiness; and therefore did incourage the said Arch-Bishop to contrive and use all means for the recovery of the said Kingdom out of the hands of the Eng∣lish. And in the said Letter it was mentioned, That if op∣portunity did not permit the said Jesuits to do their business, that then they should send one Doctor Fogarthy, now lodg∣ing at Mrs. Simmonds, the Widow of one Simmonds an Apo∣thecary in Drury-Lane, and that he and the Fathers in Ireland, together with the said Fogarthy, would find out an expedi∣ent way for the death of the said Duke. And further∣more
he did specify, that they had procured several Irish to be made Commission-Officers in the Garrisons in Ireland; and that he and the rest had dispenced with them to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. And that the Irish, who had gotten Commissions by means of the Arch-Bishop, had promised to betray their interest into their hands, when the business should be ripe; and desired the Fathers to be as diligent in England, as he and the rest of the Clergy were in Ireland: which Letter John Keines did shew the De∣ponent, and was read by the Deponent: And Kenies and Blundel gave him an account of the Consult; and the said Fogarthy did himself tell the Deponent the same, and on the said Twenty first of August, did say, That he had a great in∣terest in the Court of Ireland. LXIV. Item. That the said Fogarthy is a main Agent in this Hellish-Plot, and hath promised, That if this Bishop Talbot will make use of him, he will do all the service he can: which the Deponent is ready to justify to the face of the said Fo∣garthy; who did tell the Deponent, that he and Coleman were in the Consult, when Wakeman was contracted withal in or∣der to Poyson the KING; and said, That if he had the interest in the KING, as Wakeman had, he would have un∣dertaken it himself. And all this was told the Deponent on the Twenty first of August, in die Chamber of the said Fogarthy. And furthermore, the said Fogarthy then and there did tell the Deponent, That he had hired Four Irish Russi∣ans, whose Names he did neither tell the Consulters that met on the Twenty first of August, nor the Deponent, and these Irish Russians were to mind the KING's Postures at Windsor: But the Deponent telling the said Fogarthy, that he heard the KING was going to Portsmouth, he was won∣derfully troubled at it, and said, It did very much im∣pede their Design, and nothing would be Attempted so long as he was absent from Windsor.
LXV. Item. That the Lord Embassador, Sr. William Godolphin at the Court of Spain, holdeth great Correspondence with Hierom Swiman the Irish-Jesuit (who as beforementioned, was Procurator for the Jesuits of the Kingdom of England and Ireland) and with the Irish Arch-Bishop of Tuam now at Madrid; and is a friend in this business, as the said Swiman did inform the Society in one of July the thirtyeth New-style; and likewise in one to the Deponent, wherein he did spe∣cify, that Sir William was as industrious as any Man could be, to answer the expectation of the Society; and that he had but one Protestant-servant then in his House, viz. the Cook, and the Parson (when there) made up a goodly Couple: And the Deponent knows, that Godolphin is a Papist, and hath perverted a Kinsman of his own; and the Deponent knoweth, that the said Em∣bassador is very familier to the said persons, the Irish Je∣suit at Madrid, and the Irish-Arch-Bishop of Tuam. And the Deponent doth verily believe, that Mr. Hodges, some∣times Chaplain to the said Lord Embassador, can, if re∣quired, Testify as much; and the Deponent doth fur∣they say, That when he was at Madrid, the said Chap∣lain of the Embassador left the employ, because of the Embassador's being a Papist; and the Deponent hath seen the said Embassador at Mass; and he hath a Jesuit that comes to his House, who hath Read both Philoso∣phy and Divinity to the said Embassador; of which the Deponent was personally informed by the said Hierome Swiman an Irish Jesuit, and by the said Irish Arch-Bishop when at Madrid: but the Letters of which the Depo∣nent speaks, he saw and Read them at Mrs. Saunders House in Wild street the Twenty second of August.
LXVI Item. That on the 22th of August, Money was sent from the Society, by a Servant of theirs, to supply the Expences of the four Irish Russians above-mentioned, who were gotten to Windsor on the 21th at night; and the sum so sent was Eighty pound, which the Deponent saw told: And they were written to, and informed, that if more were wanting, they should have it. And they were bidden not to be frequent in one anothers Company, and always to profess but small Acquaintance one with another. Which Order and Money was dispatcht away by Harcourt, Rector of London, in the name of the Provincial and whole So∣ciety. LXVII Item. That the Deponent went to the Chamber of the said John Fenwick, who told him, that he was to go to St. O∣mers with some Students thither, (about ten or eleven, as near as the Deponent can remember:) and the said Fenwick was to attend the Provincial, and was to return, as he said, within tenor twelve days, together with Mico and the rest. And whilst the Deponent was with the said Fenwick, a Messenger came in, viz. John Grove, with order from Harcourt Rector of London, John Keines, Richard Blundell, Mr. Jennison, Mr. Wright, Basill Lang∣worth, and four other Jesuits that lay at Somerset house, to pray the Provincial that he would write to Leshee the French King's Confessarius, and give him to understand how well the business in Ireland stood: and that in his Letters to Leshee, he should pray him to certifie the French King thereof. The Deponent asked Grove where those Fathers were met? Who said, they met again at
Mrs. Sanders house. And the Deponent, after he had read the Order or Memorial, (as indeed the Title was) and saw their Names, about two in the Afternoon, went to the house of Mrs. Sanders, where the Deponent saw those Fa∣thers, who told him of the said Order, and after a short stay, took his leave of them; and by them was ordered to meet them at four of the Clock at Mr. Keines his Cham∣ber. And at four of the Clock the Deponent met; where he saw Dr. Fogarty, who shewed him a Letter written to Mr. Bedingfield by his own hand. And likewise the De∣ponent saw Letters from Blundell and John Fenwick, with one from Father Ireland, at St. Omers. That of Dr. Fogarty to Mr. Bedingfield, did contain in it an account of Eighty Letters that were written to the Jesuits in Eng∣land; some of which were delivered to the Post-office in Russel-street; others to the Post-office General; others were sent by private Messengers; and one to Mr. Peters a Jesuit, that liveth now with Sir Charles Shelly in Sussex, that married the Relict of the Baron of Abergaveny: In which the said Peters was ordered to meet the Provincial at London, about the Designe in hand: which if it took not effect at Windsor speedily, then John Keines was to go to Windsor to meet with Coniers, who was designed to go out of Town on the 20th of August with Mr. Ander∣ton to 440, (which number is by them put for Windsor:) And after their business was done in Keines his Chamber, the Deponent left them.
LXVIII Item. That the Deponent being to meet with Dr. Tonge on the 22th of August, at the Kings head in Grays-Inne-lane, about six of the Clock at night, accordingly went; and fin∣ding that the said Doctor was not there, he walked in Grays-Inne-walks, and there he met with Coniers, who was supposed to be gone to Windsor. The Deponent asked him, how it happened that he did not go his Journey? he replied, that his horse fell so lame, that he could scarce carry him five miles on the way, and so was forced to re∣turn; and that he himself was taken ill with the Sciatica, which had given him great trouble for all the night be∣fore. The Deponent was then urgent with him to tell him how he would kill the King, seeing he did laugh at the means the Fathers intended to use, viz. by shooting him. Then the said Coniers, by reason of the Deponents importunity, shewed him a Dagger or Knife two edged, with a very sharp point; and it was broader and broader towards the haft, which was of Buckhorn, and was a foot long in the blade, and neer half a foot in the haft. With this (said he) the Villain shall fall to the ground, if pos∣sible. Coniers demanded of the Deponent, what he thought it might cost him? the Deponent said, he could not tell: Coniers replied, Ten shillings, or thereabouts. The De∣ponent told him it was too dear: he replied, Nothing could be too dear for the King. The Deponent asked him where he bought it? Coniers replied, Of the old Cutler in Russel-street. The Deponent asked him why he would have it so long? he replied, That the Villain might fall by it. The Deponent asked, How? he replied, Through my Cloak will I stab him. The Deponent asked him, how he thought to escape? Coniers answered, that he doubted not but to obtain a Pardon, if he were not knockt on the head upon the place. The Deponent, after some discourse, went to the Kings head, where he met with Dr. Tonge between six and seven of the Clock.
LXIX Item. That the Deponent did on the 22th of August, about nine of the Clock, meet with Blundell; and seeing him have a Bag, asked him what he had? and he replied, Tewxbury Mustard-balls, a notable biting Sawce, and would furnish Westminster when he had enough of them. The Depo∣nent saith, that by Tewxbury Mustard-balls, we are to un∣derstand, Fire-balls. LXX Item. That on the 24th of August, Blundell told the Deponent in Fenwick's Chamber, that it would be so ordered by the Society, that the Catholicks of England would advance the designe of shortning the Kings days; and bad the Depo∣nent be of good Cheer, for Protestant Religion was on its last legs. LXXI Item. That the Deponent met with Blundell on August the thirtieth, who told him, that he must shew him what West∣minster, and the houses on both sides the Water, were to be done withal; and carried him to Fenwick's Cham∣ber, and there drew out of a Paper-Case a Paper, in which was the manner of Firing Westminster and Wapping, Toolies-street, Barnaby-street, and St. Thomas Apostle. First for Westminster, if the wind blew nothernly, then they were to begin at the next house to the Palsgraves-head Tavern, where the Jesuits and their Agents were to carry on the Fire to the Savoy; and then the Benedictines and they, to carry it on both sides to Charing-Cross;
and then the Fire was by them and their Agents to be car∣ried to Whitehall: and neer the end of the Stone-gallery another Company is to begin and carry it on to Kings-street and Channel-Row; which was first designed to be acted in the time of the great Frost, in the year 1676; but then they were not assured of the French Kings assistance, of which they are now assured by Leshee, the French Kings Confessor. At the same time Wapping, and the Ships in the River, were to be burnt: and the said Fire (in case the Wind blow up the River) is to begin at a place neer Bugbies-hole or Limehouse-hole, and is to be carried on by four men (of whom they had made choice) to Wapping middle-stairs, and then four or five more were to carry it up higher. And the Deponent found himself, with seven more, ordered to ply about the Armitage; and his busi∣ness was to encourage the seven men committed to his care; and for his reward One thousand pound was therein promised him, besides Eighty pound for his former servi∣ces. But the Deponent saith, if the Wind stood contrary, they were to change the Commencement of the Fire. At the same time others were to have the Charge in Barnaby-street, Toolies-street, and St. Thomas Apostles on the other side of the Water, committed to them; and the Fire was to begin at Redriff when it was begun on Wapping-side: And this is to be done when the Water is low, that the Ships might not get off from the Keys. In order to the Deponents managing that part of the Fire that was to be begun about the Armitage, he was ordered to remove his Lodging into Wapping as soon as order was given him, and he should have a Priest come and say Mass unto him in his Chamber every day for a good success on the Designe. But the Deponent saith, he did not know he was to be an Agent in the business, till he saw that Paper; which Paper was signed by the Provincial Tho. White, in the name of the whole Society.
LXXII Item. That the Deponent saith, the Pope hath issued out a Bull, a Copy of which Blundell shewed the Deponent on the said 30th of August; and as neer as the Deponent doth remember, it bears date either the month of November or December last; in which the Pope hath been pleased to or∣der and dispose of Bishopricks of England, and other Digni∣ties of the same, as followeth. ARCHBISHOPS. Canterbury. Cardinal Howard, with an Augmentation of 40000 crowns per annum, for the maintenance of his Legantine Authority. York. Perrott, Superiour of the Secular Priests: he hath power of Probats of Wills, Licenses for Marriage, and all Episcopal Jurisdiction; Ordination and Confirma∣tion onely excepted. BISHOPS. London. Corker, President of the Benedictines. Winchester. White, Provincial of the Jesuits. Durham Strange, last Provincial of the Jesuits. Salisbury. Dr. Godden. Norwich. Napper, a Franciscan Fryar. Ely. Vincent, Provincial of the Dominicans. Exceter. Wolfe, one of the Sorbon. Peterborough. Gifford, a Dominican.
Lincoln. Sir John Warner Baronet, a Jesuit, and Confes∣sor to Lord Powis. Chichester. Morgan, a Jesuit. Bath and Wells. Dr. Armstrong, a Franciscan Fryar. Carlisle. Wilmot, alias Quarterman, a Secular Priest. Chester. Thimbleby, a Secular Priest, now Canon of Cambray. Hereford. Sir Thomas Preston Baronet, a Jesuit. Bristol. Mundson, a Dominican. Oxon. Williams, Rector of Watton, and Master of the Novices, a Jesuit: He is also to have the Deanery of Christ-Church, and is to preside over the Professors of Divinity in that University, and peruse their Let∣ters before they read them publickly. St. Davids. Belson, a Secular Priest. St. Asaph. Jones, a Secular. Bangor. Joseph David Keimash, a Dominican Fryar. ABBOTS. Westminster. Dr. Sheldon, a Benedictine Monk. Sion-house. Skinner, a Benedictine Monk. DEANS. Canterbury. Betton, a Sorbonist. St. Pauls. Leybourn a Secular, and Secretary to the Cardinal. Windsor. Howard, with twelve Benedictine Canons. Chichester. Morgan, a Secular. Winchesten Dr. Watkinson, President of the English Colledge at Lisbon.
Many Dignities of the Church, not here mentioned, are to be supplied with Spaniards and other Foreigners, because they have not Clergy enough to be Professors: Nor are there any Prebendaries or other places undisposed. And in the same Bull it was ordered, That the Jesuits should read Philosophy and Divinity in all great Towns and places where they had Colledges; but not give Degrees. And whilst the English Jesuits were employed in instructing Youth in Humanity and Philosophy, and others reading Di∣vinity, and preaching and catechising, they should be sup∣plied with Spanish Jesuits and other Foreigners, to assist them at the Altar, and in the care of the Colledges. LXXIII Item. That the Deponent on the second of September, saw a Pacquet out of Scotland, directed to John Grove, dated August 10. 1678, in which the Fathers, met at Edinburgh, from thence did tell the Fathers here, That they had not much to write, but that Eight thousand Catholicks were ready to rise and assist, when the business should grow hot; and would joyn with the disaffected Scots, when required by the Scotch Jesuits there. And in the said Letter was mentioned, That one Westby was destroyed by one that was Servant to Lovel the Jesuit, for endeavouring to de∣tect the Rebellion, with its Authors and Contrivers, to the Council in Scotland.
LXXIV. Item. That the Deponent saw on the said Second of September Old Stile, Letters of the forth New Stile from St. Omers, Writ∣ten and Subscribed by Thomas White Provincial; in which, Notice was given to Rirchard Blundel, to whom they were directed; that Twelve Scotch Jesuites were sent into Scotland by order from the General of the Society, and have One Thousand pound given them by Lashee the French Kings Confessor, to keep up the Commotions in Scotland, that the French King might Land an Army: And that the said Jesuits had Instructions given them to carry them∣selves like Nonconformist-Ministers amongst the Presbyterian-Scots. LXXV. Item. That on the Third of September, the Deponent saw a Letter from the Provincial at St. Omers, Dated December First, by which the Deponent did perceive, that though the Let∣ter were Dated from thence, yet it came not from thence, because it was Old Stile; and did believe, that the said Pro∣vincial was then in England. And in this Letter directed to Blundel, it was specified, that the Provincial was infor∣med of some Discovery that was made, at which he was somwhat surprised. But upon second Thoughts, he orde∣red the said Blundel, not to desist the business in hand, but to write to Bedingfield not to take notice of what Keines said; it being but a Conjecture of his own. And the said Blundel did on the third day write to Bedingfield, and did advise him of the Provincialls thoughts concerning what had passed about that Concern. And in the Letter of the Pro∣vincial to Blundel, it was ordered by the said Provincial, That thanks should be given to Doctor Fogarthy for his Care in the business of Forty Fight (which is the KING) and for his for∣wardness to assist those in Ireland: and ordered Letters to be
written with all speed into Ireland to give them his thanks, and to tell them, That he would not cease to pray for their good success. LXXVI. Item. That the Provincial came to London the third day at night; and the Deponent went to the Provincialls Lodgings, and was ordered to wait on him the next day in the mor∣ning. LXXVII Item. That the Deponent went on the Fourth of September in the morning, according to the aforesaid Order given him o∣ver Night; and when the Provincial saw the Deponent, he asked him, With what face he could look on him, since he had played such a treacherous trick with them? And struck the Depo∣nent three blows with his stick, and a box on the Ear; and charged him with being with the KING, and a Mi∣nister with him, whom he suspected to have informed the KING of those things; because that Bedingfield had Rela∣ted in a Letter to Blundel, that the Duke of York had re∣lated some such thing to him; and did therefore judg that it must be the Deponent that must have been drawn in by some persons to the same. But at last the Provin∣cial told the Deponent, that he was willing to be re∣conciled to him, if he would discover what the Parson was, his Name and place of Abode, to the end they might be secure of him; and were resolved to kill him. And in the mean time the Deponent was ordered to make himself ready to go beyond the Seas within fourteen days, as he the Provincial said. And that the Deponent might not Cheat them, they were to pay for his Coach∣hire, and ordered his Entertainment at Sittingburn, and in other places upon the Road to Dover, and there Mr. Con∣yers, Master of the Kings-Head, was to pay for his passage to
Callice; and the Master of the Feathers in Callice to pay for his Passage to St. Omers, where the Deponent was to Re∣main till further Order from the Provincial. And Richard Blundel was to take care of carrying on the Fire in Wapping in the Deponents room. LXXVIII. Item. That on the Sixth of September, Mr. Pickering told the Deponent, that Conyers was gone for Windsor; and he said, that after Ten Days stay there, he would go to the Lord Brudenals House. LXXIX. Item. That at night the Deponent attending at the door of the Provincial, and about to go in, heard White, and some o∣thers (whom the Deponent supposed by their Voices to be Mr. Mico, and one Mr. Poole) consulting about the dispo∣sing of a Person, whom the Deponent supposes to be him∣self. Their Words were these: This Man hath Betrayed us, and therefore we will give a Coach-man Twenty Pound to take him up, and Carry him directly to Rochester to Esquire Lees House, who lives near the Town; and from thence to Dover, by some By-way, be∣cause he is acquainted at Sittingburn; and said, that if they could but get him on the other Side of the Water, they would tor∣ment him till he had confessed to them, who it was that had been with the KING, and Informed Him of the business. When the Deponent heard these Words, he went down the Stairs with all the speed he could make, and durst not return to his lodgings that night, but lay in another place.
LXXX. Item. That the Deponent, on the Seventh of September at night, returned to his lodging, where he intended not to lye; but only to take some Necessaries for his use the next day; but meeting with one Grigson a Papist, at whose house he had formerly lodged, near the Red-Lyon in Drury-Lane, who told him, the Jesuits were displeased with him, because he had not answered their Expectations, in being true to them; and that the Je∣suits were dangerous persons, and would ruin him (the Deponent) if they could. And the said Grigson said further, That he had known their Roguery these Twelve or Fourteen Years. And the Deponent being, through Discourse, detain∣ed by the said Grigson, was forced to lye in his lodg∣ing in Drury-Lane; and when he was lain down in his bed, one Stratford (a Person utterly unknown to the Deponent, and whom he never discoursed or any way provoked) endea∣voured to break open the house where the Deponent lay; and did break down a door to get into his lodging, but was forced to Retreat, because he law himself observed by some of the servants of the house. And when he saw he could not come to Assassinate him (as the Deponent verily believes) he Reviled him, and broke several Quarries of Glass in a Window, un∣der the lodgings of the Deponent. And therefore being verily perswaded, that the said Stratford was Imployed by the said Jesuits to do him a mis∣chief, made his escape thence early on Sunday Morning; and did not return thither again, because the said Strat∣ford threatned to Kill him. Now, the house in which the Deponent lay, Was a School, where the within-men∣tioned Blundel used to Catechize every Sunday in the Af∣ternoon.
LXXXI. Item. The Eighth day, being Sunday, whilst that the Depo∣nent was going to attend the publique Worship of God in the City, a Papist, who goes by the Name of Nevil, as the Deponent remembers, met him in the Strand, and told him: That there was a very great Murmuring amongst the Jesuits against him, because of a Complaint that was made against them by some Persons, of whom they suspected him to be one. And said further; That the Deponent must either destroy the Jesuits, or the Jesuits destroy the Deponent. And told him Moreover; That the Bishop of Rochester was made acquainted with the Complaint, and would lead them such a dance as they never followed since the Fool their Founder ap∣peared in the World. To which the Deponent made no Reply, suspecting this Person to be a Trappan; and when at parting, he asked the Deponent Where he Lodged? the Deponent gave him not that account as he desired.
A List of such Noble-men and Gentry, as are in this Conspiracy, whose Names occur at present. LOrd Arundel of Wardour Lord Chancellor. Lord Powis Lord high Treasurer of England. Sr. William Godolphin Lord privy Seal. Coleman Secretary of State. Stafford. The Sea-Officers were named to the Deponent, but their Names being most French and some Irish, occur not. Militia. Lord Bellasis Lord General. Lord Peters Lieutenant General. Sr. Francis Radcliff Major General. John Lambert Adjutant General. Langhorn, Advocate General. Mr. Arundel of Wardour Commissary General. All these had their Commissions or Patents stamped by the General of the Jesuits Johannes Paulus d' Oliva, and sent from Rome to Langhorn; and were delivered to them with pleniary Indulgences sent also from Rome, and additional Patents stamped by the Provincials, Strange or VVhite: VVhite and his Seal are taken. Collonels, Who have their Commissions from the Provincial. Lord Baltimore, Collonel of Horse; at whose Lodgings
Five Hundred Case of Pistols, &c. were found, as is re∣ported. Collonel Thomas Howard, deceased, confessed he had re∣ceived and accepted his Commission. Lassels, Roper, VVinter or VVitter, received their Commis∣sions from the Deponent, and accepted them. Captains. Roper, Son to the Collonel afore-named; Radciff Esq Medburn, the Player; Penny, Caryl Junior, Townly, did also receive their Commissions from the Informant, and accept∣ed them. Sir George VVakeman, Physitian to the Army. Irish Officers. Lord Legate, Bishop of Cassal in Italy. Peter Talbot, Lord Chancellor. Richard Talbot, Esq Lord General. Viscount Mountgarret, Lieutenant-General; His Office to be Executed by Mr. Butler his Son. John Pipard, Esq Collonel. Note, That the Major Part of the Collonels appointed for the English-Army, are also Irish. Note also, That Mr. Pierson, Secretary to the Lord Powis. did in the Informant's Presence, promise on the Behalf of his Lord, that he should raise and furnish Three Hundred Horse, and had Three Hundred Armed Men, ready to rise in less than Twenty Four Hours. These Words were spo∣ken a little aster the Consult, to White the Provincial, at Wild-House. The said Lord Powis hath also Contributed Three Hundred Pound, towards the Jesuits Design. Note, That Lord Stafford is a principal Officer of State, and a chief Conspirator; having Contributed several Sums of Money, not remembred by the Deponent.
The Names of the Conspirators. Benedictines. Mr. Howard, at Doway. Mr. Hitchcock, at Doway. Mr Reaves, at Doway. Mr. Anderton, in England. Mr. Conyers, in England. Mr. Rumly, in England. Mr. Corker, in England. Mr. Skinner, in England. Mr. Crosby, in England. Carmelites. Dr. Handson, in England. Mr. Trevers, in England. Mr. Kimball, in England. Franciscans. Dr. Armstrong, Mr. Napper, Dominicans. David Joseph Keimash, in Eng∣land. Mr. Dominick, in Eng∣land. Mr. Collins, in Eng∣land. Mr. Vincent, in Eng∣land. Mr. Fidding, in Eng∣land. Mr. Mansell, in Eng∣land. Mr. Lumsdale, in Eng∣land. Mr. Bingly, in Eng∣land. Mr. Cooper at Rome. Mr. Munson in England. Jesuits. Eng∣land. Tho. White Provincial. Eng∣land. Rich. Strange late Provincial. Eng∣land. Rich. Ashby alias Thimbleby. Eng∣land. Mr. Harcourt Eng∣land. Mr. Jennison Eng∣land. Mr. Keines Eng∣land. Mr. Wright Eng∣land. Mr. Blundel Mr. Pennington in Eng∣land. Mr. Gray Mr. Pool in Eng∣land. Mr. Mico in Eng∣land. Mr. Bennyfield in Eng∣land. Mr. Simmons in Eng∣land. Mr. Langworth in Eng∣land. Mr. Morgan in Eng∣land. Mr. Rich. Peters in Eng∣land. Mr. Dorrington in Eng∣land. Mr. Lacy in Eng∣land. Mr. Vanghan in Eng∣land. Mr. Ewry in Eng∣land. Mr. Conyers in Eng∣land. Jo. Peters in Eng∣land. Mr. Wilkinson in Eng∣land. Mr. VVolf in Eng∣land. Sir Tho Preston at Leige. Mr. Saunders at Leige. Sir Jo. Warner at Watton. Mr. Williams at Watton. Mr. Eggleston at Watton. Mr. Janion at Watton. Mr. Crane at Watton. Sir Pob. Bret at St. Omers. Tho. Stapleton at St. Omers. Tho. Fermour at St. Omers. Tho. Ditchling at St. Omers. Edw. Hall at St. Omers. Mr. Cannel at St. Omers. Charles Peters at St. Omers. Mr. Nevile at St. Omers. Mr. Constable at St. Omers. Mr. Sabrand at St. Omers. Mr. Walter at St. Omers. Mr. Roper at St. Omers.
JESUITS. Mr Marsh at Ghent. Mr Blake, alias Gross in Spain. Mr Mundford Vore▪ in Spain. Armstrong, Mr Cary at Rome. English JESUITS in SCOTLAND. Mr Lovel. Mr Saunders. Mr Moore. Twelve Scotch JESUITS lately gone into Scotland, whose names I know not, but I know their persons. Secular Persons. Dr Fogarthy, Sir George Wakeman, Mr Coleman, John Groves. Four Irish Ruffians. Lay-Brothers. Pickering, Smith. These Fourteen Secular Priests I have only by In∣formation from Thomas Whitebread. Mr Perrot, In England. Mr Morgan, In England. Mr Wilmot, In England. Dr Godden, In England. Mr Jones Senior, In England. Mr Jones Junior, In England. Mr Gerard, In England. Mr Henrique, In England. Mr Fisher, In England. Mr Jackson. In England. Mr Pinchard, In England. Mr Sharp, In England. Dr Bettam In England. Mr Wolf in France at the Sorbon. Other Persons. Archbishop Talbot, Archbishop Lynce, Hierom Swiman, Sir William Godosphin Lord Ambassador in Spain.
Titus Oates Clerk maketh Oath, That the In∣formation set down in these Papers, containing Eighty One Articles, all Written and subscribed by his own Hand, are true in the whole, and e∣very particular thereof, that is to say, that such Particulars as he hath set down, to be seen, heard, done, or known by him, he knows to be true, and what he hath set down only to be heard by him, and related to him, were so heard and re∣lated as he hath set them down, and he believes to be true: Witness his hand, the 27th day of Sept. 1678. TITUS OATES. SEPTEMBER 27. 1678. Sworn before me Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, one of His Maje∣sties Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex. Edm. B. Godfrey. Witnessed, Ez. Tonge, Chr. Kirby.
The General Design of the POPE, Society of JESƲS, and their Confederates in this PLOT, is, the REFORMATION, that is, (in their sense) the Reduction of GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, and all His Majesties Dominions by the Sword (all other wayes and means being judged by them ineffectual) to the Romish Religion and Obedience. To effect this Design; 1. THe Pope hath Entitled himself to the King∣domes of England and Ireland. 2. Sent his Legate the Bishop of Cassal in Italy into Ireland to declare his Title, and take possession of that Kingdom. 3. He hath appointed Cardinal Howard his Legat for England to the same purpose. 4. He hath given Commission to the General of the Jesuites, and by him to White their Provincial in Eng∣land to issue, and they have issued out, and given Com∣missions to Captain Generals, Lieutenant Generals, &c. namely, the General of the Jesuites hath sent Commis∣sions from Rome to Langhorn their Advocate-General for the Superiour Officers: And White hath given Com∣missions here in England to Colonels, and inferiout Of∣ficers. 5. He hath by a Consult of the Jesuits of this Pro∣vince Assembled at London, condemned His Majesty, and ordered Him to be assassinated, &c.
6. He hath Ordered, That in case the Duke of York will not accept these Crowns as forfeited by his Brother unto the Pope, as of his Gift, and settle such Prelates and Dignitaries in the Church, and such Officers in Commands and places Civil, Naval and Military, as he hath Commissioned as above, extirpate the Protestant Religion, and in order thereunto ex post facto, consent to the assassination of the KING his Brother, Massacre of His Protestant Subjects, firing of his Towns, &c. by pardoning the Assassins, Murderers and Incendiaries, that then he be also poysoned or destroyed, after they have for some time abused His Name and Title to strengthen their Plot, weakned and divided the King∣doms of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRE∣LAND thereby in Civil Wars and Rebellions as in His Fathers Time, to make way for the French to seize these Kingdoms, and totally ruine their Infantry and Naval Force. Besides this Papal, there appears also another French Plot or Correspondence carried on by Sir Ellis Layon, Mr Coleman and others. More particularly, 1. The Royal Family of the STUARTS are condemned to be Cut off Root and Branch, and namely the KING, Duke of YORK and Prince of Orange, because that Family hath not answered their expectati∣ons, nor have they any hopes that any of them will com∣ply fully with this, their bloody design, when fully dis∣covered to them. 1. The King person which stands in their way they more especially, and in the first place design to re∣move with all possible speed, by Dagger, Pistol or Poyson. To Stabb Him, Conyers and Anderton Benedictine Monks, and Four Irish Ruffians are employed. To Shoot Him, Groves and Pickering are furnish∣ed with joynted Carabines.
To Poyson him, Five Thousand pound hath been told out, entred in their Books, and affirmed to be paid to Sir George Wakeman, in part of Fifteen Thou∣sand pound, upon a Contract made with him in presence of Doctor Fogarthy and Mr. Coleman. 2. The Duke of York, notwithstanding they acknow∣ledge his sincerity and affection to their Religion, and the Society, and his demonstration thereof by his ta∣king Bedingfield a Jesuit for his Confessor, they design to dispose of him as is abovesaid. 3. The Prince of Orange is also condemned and designed against by Name, and Twelve Missioners sent into Holland have in charge to put that Peo∣ple in Mutiny against his Person and Govern∣ment. 4. The Conquest and subduing of his Majesties Do∣minions is designed and contrived in this manner. I. The Conquest of Ireland and subduing it to the Tyranny of the Pope and French. 1. By a general Rebellion and Massacre of the Pro∣testants as formerly, which they term another Demon∣stration of Zeal for the Catholick Faith: This to be done immediately upon the Assassination of the Duke of Ormond, as the Watch-word, for which four Jesuits are employed. 2. By the Popes Nuntio sent thither, and Com∣missions there given out by the Provincial of the Irish Jesuits, &c. to a General, Lieutenant-General, &c. 3. By Arms and Money already sent, whereof Eight hundred Thousand Crowns by the Pope.
4. By Traiterous Officers who are dispensed with by the Archbishop of Dublin and the Clergy there, to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, upon promise to betray their Garrisons and other Trusts. 5. By the Assistance of the French Forces to be landed there, and received by Twenty five thousand Irish ready to joyn with them. II. England and Scotland are to be divided, weak∣ned, wasted and exhausted of their Infantry, Naval Force and Wealth, by Civil War, Rebellion, &c. and finally exposed to forreign Force of French, &c. To attain to this Design, they apply themselves and Agents: 1. By impudently Questioning and Denying the Kings Legitimation, and consequently his present Right and Title to his Crown, and so exposing him as a Ty∣rant without Title. 2. By Confuting and Weakening as much as possibly they can the Obligation of the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, causing them to be Renounced, rendring them very Odious, as Blasphemous and Heretical, and terrifying all of their Communion from Writing for them, offering Money to have Berry the Priest mur∣dered for writing in favour of them.
III. By Disaffecting the Kings best Friends at home and abroad, and Subjects, against his Person and Government. 1. Charging him with Tyranny and Designs of Op∣pressing, Governing by the Sword, and without Par∣liaments, and exposing his mod faithful and valiant Sub∣jects to be wasted and slain in foreign service. 2. By aspersing, deriding, exposing and declaiming against his Person, Counsels and Actions in Parliament and elsewhere; and particularly scoffing at his Securi∣ty and Confidence in them, and by this means ani∣mating and encouraging their Party and Assassins, espe∣cially to attempt upon his Life, and to hasten his Ruine. 3. By disclosing the Kings Counsels to France, by Coleman, Smith, and others. 4. By mis-reporting and raising false Newes of his Affairs, &c. 5. By disaffecting his Majesties Allies, Holland, Spain, the German Emperour and Princes, by false Intelli∣gence, &c. 6. By disturbing Trade. 7. By seditious Preachers and Catechists set up, sent out, maintained, and directed what to Preach in their own or other private or publick Conventicles and Field-meetings. 8. By setting up pretended false Titles to the Suc∣cession of the Crown, and animating different Parties
one against another on this or such like false pretences to Arm, and put the People in Blood upon the Kings Death. 9. By Firing and Plundering our best Cities and Towns, by Irish, French, Lay-Brethren and others, disguised in Frocks and otherwise, directed by Order under the Provincials hand how to carry on these Designs. 10. By Poysoning and Assassinating by pickt Quarrels or otherwise, those whom they suppose to be ready or able to detect or otherwise obstruct their Designs; of whom they keep Catalogues in their Books. 11. By horrid, worse than Jewish Interest, Trans∣portation of Trading, People, Stock and Money, adulterating Money and Plate. To which ends they have Bankers, Brokers, Merchants, Goldsmiths and other Traders, whom they stock and set up with Money of their Society, of which they boast to have a Hundred thousand pound Cash, &c. 12. By suborning Felons condemned, by Blundell their Newgate Ordinary, through hopes of Pardon or Transportation, to turn Papists, and then putting such as they find fit and desperate, on Firing Houses, Plun∣dering, and other wicked and mischievous Designs. FINIS.
