P1697 12624030 64614
Lo heere! the Dictates of a Dying: man! Marke well his note! who like th'expiring Swan Wisely praesaging hir approaching Doomb Sings in soft charmes hir Epicaedium. Such Such are His; who was a shining Lamp Which though Extinguisht by a fatall Damp Yet his Last-Breathings shall like Incense hurld On sacred Altars, soe perfume the world, That the Next, will admire, and out of doubt Reuere that Torchlight, which this age, put out
A Dying Fathers LAST LEGACY TO AN Onely Child: OR, Mr. HUGH PETER'S ADVICE TO HIS DAUGHTER: Written by his own Hand, during hi late Imprisonment in the Tower of London; And given her a little before his Death. LONDON, Printed for G. Calvert, an T. Brewster, and are to be sold at the Black spread-Eagle, and at the Three Bibles, at th West-End of Pauls, 1660.
To the Impartial READER BE not Discoura∣ged from rea∣ding this small Treatise, be∣cause of the unhappy End of a wearisom pilgrimage, which the Author met with in this world; If we get a Fall in a journey, or meet with a great showre of rain
so it be in the close of the day, when we are near our Inn, where we meet with accommodation and refreshment, we are the less trou∣bled; Yet such was his Care (who for many years was very Instru∣mental in the Church of God, and a means of bringing many Souls to Christ; and for the Good of o∣thers, came into this Kingdom when it was in a flame of Civil War, which hath signed him also, that he might escape everlasting flames) in this Discourse he be∣wails the vanity of his own Spi∣rit; And we will not Exause him: he finds himself too busie in Aliena Republica, and we will not justifie him; But if that
precious Gold should be cast away because there is some Dross, or the Children of God cast out of the Family for every fault though heinous, we should condemne the Generation of the Iust: You will find in this Legacy, to his only Child, that he had a Root of Grace, and that the Fountain was clear from which ran so savoury a stream; And that at the last when he had no hope to save a frail Body, yet he minded his own and others Souls; And that he was a Master Workman in that Mysterie, wherein he had labour∣ed succesfully so many years; And we hope, that notwithstanding the prejudicasie of some against him,
and the words of others, and his sad shameface Catastrophy, we may charitably judge, that God hath wiped away all Tears from his Eyes, that he is entered into Rest, his Works following him; and that he is made per∣fect by his great Sufferings; And wish the same to you, except these Bonds. G.F. N.B.
Mr. HUGH PETERS LAST LEGACY TO HIS DAUGHTER. For Elizabeth Peters. My Dear Child, I Have thought to leave you the Extract of all my Experiences, so far as may Concern your elf; and because thre are so any Books Printed, looking to l Cases, which I have often Commended to you; my Labour
will be the less, though your Pains the greater, in searching and stu∣dying them, which next to the Scriptures, I conjure you to ac∣quaint your self withal; for never Age was so pregnant that way since our Saviour came in the flesh, which Light I wish may grow to greater Glory. But to thy self, 1. Above all things know, That nothing can do you any good without Union with Christ the Head; which can never be, till your Understanding be enlightned with the want of Christ and his worth, and then that your Will be so subdued to that Light, that it draw forth choice, and consent of, and to that only good, with an Emvire or Resolution to close with him against Sin, World, Hell, Death, &c. And know this, Tha the necessity of a Christ (which the
understanding discovers) will set the Will on work to all duty, and (the worth in Christ it makes manifest) will make the Will de∣light; unless these two Faculties be thus wrought upon by the Word and Spirit, you will be at a constant loss, and all the mis∣carriages in Religion have the Ignorance of this for the Foun∣tain. Read Shephards Convert, Daniel Rogers Practical Catechism, and Hooker, to this end, with such other helps as you may get; And herein I am the more earnest with you, because in this my Conditi∣on, I find that Union with Christ, and the Satisfaction Christ hath made to his Fathers Justice, by his Active and Passive Obedience, are the only Two Pillars that must Sup∣port a Soul leaving a mortal Body: For, as I profess my self Ortho∣dox in all Points of Religion,
according to the Assemblies Con∣fession, Explained by Others at the Savoy also; so I have desired in nothing to be more Clear, than in the Two Doctrines aforesaid: I have wished you to be perfect in Rom. 8. and mind vers. 1. and vers. 28. well, with what follows to the end of that Chapter; this hath been my Experience, That the Preaching of these Truths have been my greatest Advan∣tage, and of most benefit to O∣thers; though in this I have e∣nough to bewail also. 2. To this purpose, Hear the best Men, Keep the best Compa∣ny, Read the best Books, especi∣ally make the Grounds of Reli∣gion your own; Balls and the Assemblies Catechism, with the like you have from me Commended to you: And though there are near an Hundred several Cate∣chisms
in the Nation; yet (if sound) they must speak one thing, viz. Man lost in himself, Redeemed only by Christ, and holy Walking, or Thankfulness; you have my Experience so often re∣peated to you, That an unbroken Heart, and an uncatechised Head, will keep distance enough betwixt God and a poor sinful Creature: Oh! that Parents and Ministers would think of it, what a heap of Mischiefs this Neglect hath pro∣duced. The Waldenses and Germans had never been so famous for Suffer∣ing, had they been uncatechized: This is a large Field, in which I could Walk long, Preach long, yea, lose my self in this sweet Wilderness; For this is life eter∣nal to know thee and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.23. But take this for a Caution, That many may be well
Taught also, who never took forth Christs first Three Lessons, never denying themselves, nor taking up the Cross, nor following him, Matth. 16.24. We know no more than we Practise, yet we shall never practise without Knowledge; How many Scriptures give Evi∣dence to this? which I forbear to quote; only remember how So∣lomon extols Wisdom and Know∣ledge. I take my share in Mourning, that I see in the Afternoon of this Age, the Shadow longer than the Substance, Profession than Pra∣ctise; though the Trade may not be Condemned, when it falls into ill hands that manage it. He that sets up Religion, to get any thing by it more than the glo∣ry of God, and the saving his own Soul, will make a bad Bargain of it in the close. (My dear only
Child) be rooted in the Truth, and thou shalt be fruitfull, & thriving. 3. Be constant in Reading the Scriptures, and that with a fervent Meditation, I mean, as to pray in praying, fast in fasting, so to read in Reading: Many doutbless take up a cursory trade, to read out the Cries of a defiled or rackt Conscience: I say Read with delight, not as under a load, or as a Labourer, who waits for the shadow of the Evening, which you shall never do, unless your Heart be connatural with the Word; and therefore remember as Justification takes away Guilt, and Punishment; Sanctification takes away the Power and Filth; Glorification takes away the pre∣sence of Sin: So Effectual Calling takes away that jarre that is be∣twixt the Soul and the Law of God, by reason of Sin; the Called
of God read but their Fathers bles∣sed Will in reading his Word, his Testament, his Legacies, his Precepts, his Threatnings against Sin, &c. all which his Childe dilights to hear, and read. This one Book, well read, will answer any Question, or Case; and you'l finde Solomons Proverbs the best Politicks, and Christ crucified the best Divinity. But in reading the Scriptures let me reach out this Experience, When you have prayed over your purpose that way, then in every Chapter, first minde the Method then note the hard things you understand not, and get helps to clear them to you. And Lastly▪ gather out the chief Doctrines, o Lessons, then in reading on Chapter, you may understan many: And if you read th Bible with the Annotations o some Divines, or the Dutc
translated, it will not be amiss. I have formerly commended to you a Little English Library, in this kinde, which I now fear, your so much altered Condition will not give you time to be vers'd in: However, Remember David, Psal. 119. how every Vers. almost shews Love to the Word. And truly you may be assured, you shall upon mine and your own Experience finde, that you shall have no more Christ, nay God, Spirit, Faith, Peace, Comfort, than you have Scripture: Nor will you have any Christ, a Saviour, that is not a Scripture Christ. Oh that the Word may dwell plentifully in you, my poor Child. 4. Pray continually, is the Apostles Counsel to the Thessalonians: And for this you may have far better helps, then from my unworthy un∣able self. There are many helps to
Devotien, Mr. Baxter, Burrows, Gur∣nal, Bridg, &c. Yet you shall have what I promised, even my Expe∣rience: I hope you know, That Prayer is the breathing forth of holy Desires, or, lifting up the Soul upon God, or asking the Things we need from God, in and by Christ, according to his Holy Will, not without Confessions, and Thanksgiving. This Work must have Time, Seriousnesse, Composure: And this take undoubtedly, That Prayers can never fly high, where the Person is not accepted; can have no strength without Faith: About this Duty, I must let you know, There are Three Miscarriages usually; First, before the Duty, Unpre∣parednesse, Unsuteablenesse, reaking hot out of the World, Self, sin, into that service; as if men could leap into Gods bosome, out of the
Devils lap: Before Prayer you need to study God, your self, and the way to him, John 6. You need to take a time when he is most like to hear, even when he is inditing for you, and puts Words into your mouth, Hos. 14. The Second Failer in Prayer is, When you do not watch to Prayer. O the Hurreys of our Hearts; the Thorowfare that carries crook∣ed Thoughts through us, the Vanity, Folly, Obliquities of our Spirit: As the Heart must be whipt to the Duty, so it must be bound fast to it. How few pray! how many say words? Oh, How many say their Prayers backwards, call him Father, who is not their Father, would not have his Name hollowed, nor his Kingdome come? &c. 3. And Lastly, After this duty there is either an aptness to be
proud, And adde another Note; as if the Lord was in our Debt; or upon miscarriage in point of Inlargement, we grow weary and peevish, and call for our Prayers again, if we succeed not, as Lovers for the Portion, not the Person, call for their Love-Tokens back: Look on Th. Goodwin, on Isa. 55.6, 7, 8. Be plain and honest with God, shew your Sores, and his Love to you: You cannot be so bad as he is good. With the old Martyr I cry, Pray, pray, pray (My dearest Child) Regard no injury in thy heart. 5. Keep a constant Watch, upon your whole man, for which much hath been written, as Mr. Reyners Rule for the new Creature, Mr. Brinsleys Watch; and many others, from the Thonghts, and affections to all cases almost. But since I promised the Ad∣dition of my Experience to your
Self, I have held that very True, noted by David; yea, by some Heathens, That our Life is seventy Years; half of which time spends its self in Eating, Drinking, and Sleeping; the Remainder is Thir∣ty Five; and of that you may al∣low the first Fifteen, even for Child-hood, till when ordinarily little is minded that is solid: then Twenty only are left of the Num∣ber, and of them even half spent in by-business; and then tell me how little do we live? How needful is it then that you be up∣on your Watch continually, when so many Silver Brooks run by many Doors unregarded. It is hard to Watch, most are very Drowsie; The Disciples themselves could not Watch one Hour. My Advice is, That mainly you Watch your self in what you are,
And where you are: These Two go far in your Watch; to see your self in a good Estate; And to be where you should be in your Du∣ty and Employment, argues a cu∣rious Eye, and a careful Head: But to be very accurate in your Watch, and to keep off from troublesome Anneares, keep a Book by you (I mean it litteral∣ly) in which, every Night be∣fore you sleep, you set down on the one side, the Lords gracious Providence and Dealings with you; and your dealings with him on the other side: This Watch well kept, fits for Prayer, Fast∣ings, Sabbaths, Sacraments, and Death; upon which, Judgment follows. I pray Watch so, That Thoughts, Affections, Head, Heart, Hand, Foot, and all have a share in, and benefit by the Work.
The Flesh, and the World, in all the Pleasures and Profits of them, send up fumes to the Head, occasioning sleep: Therefore the Lord is forced to keep us waking by Affliction, as the Thorn to the singing Bird. David sought God early: The Three Women early looking after Christ. Remember thy Creator betimes. And this Wat∣ching, is the Circumspect Walking, Ephes. 5.16. Look round about you continually, as if you walked with God, as Enoch; before God, as Abraham; or, after God, as Da∣vid: he walked in God's wayes. If you do not Watch, you will be Tempted, I say, Tempted. The Lord watch over thee, that thou mayest watch (my dearest Child.) 6. For thy growth in grace; I am the more zealous, because (2 Pet. 3.18.) the Apostle propounds it as a Cure against all the Errors of the
wicked. For this also there are di∣vers helps, as M. Symmons his Cure to Distressed Consciences, (a Choice Piece) and many others. But this you must know, that all labour tends not to growth; no more than Ants grow in bulk, though very much in labour; Every great Hea∣rer is not a great Grower: Nay, a tree may grow in parts, though not in all. Grow soundly in the Root, Jesus Christ, and the Freeness of his Grace, and then you wil not grow as Weeds do, but as good Grain. To which purpose I advise you, observe what you gain against Corruption, and so much you may hope, you may thrive in Grace; as the House of David, and the House of Saul. Do not therefore keep the Devils counsel; but let some able Friend watch you, to whom communicate your Decays or Growth. When a Ship is ob∣served
by a Land-mark, her way is easily observed. Therfore mind much this one thing, in all make much of a Rule, and keep to it; as few under the warm Gospel but know whether they be hypocrites or otherwise: Even so you shall feel your Growth. An old stock will not serve turn (which hath been the delusion of many) when every day needs new Incomes of the Spirit, and so advancement to Heaven. Long to grow, strive to grow; bewail decayes: grow in both the Tables Duties. The Apostle tells us of growth from Vertue; yea, at last, to pa∣tience by affliction, if we hear the Rod, &c. Christ's method is, He hath all Grace, He giveth out what he pleaseth; He maintains what he gives; He perfects what he main∣tains;
He crowns what he per∣fects; And thus Christ loves you, more than ever you could hate him, without whose watering by his Blood you can never grow. The best Evidence of Growth, is to grow more humble, more holy, attend that well; and see how it is from Meal to Meal, from one Sab∣bath to another, one Sermon to a∣nother; are you fed or surfeited? A very very little Grace (if true) is saving; a little Growth (if right) is comforting; Believe and live, Be∣lieve and grow; all decays comes through want of Faith; to fetch blood from the life vein, the Lord Christ. The South & North blow upon thee for Growth (my Child.) 7. In all things as you will have use; so you need to study Consci∣ence well, for it eats, drinks, walks, sleeps, buyes, sells, accom∣panies you to every duty, service,
work, doing, or suffering; for which you have Ames his Cases, and some others. It is a judging your self accord∣ing to the judgment of God. I write none of these Heads to you, as intending any common place, which this and others would make; but only to leave with you a few practical thoughts upon each. Our Saviour made the Jews to buy a Knife to cut their own throats, when he told them the Parable of the Servants, and Son, sent and killed; and so the Spirit by the Jews, Isa. 5. when he made them impannel a Jury among themselves, and by Conscience their Judge; So Nathan by David, it is a witness with a witness, and Judge Paramount; therefore I wish you to observe it narrowly, if you suffer it to be defiled with the
least sin, whilst it hath life you may hear of it; and therefore Samuel and Paul in all, kept all clear there, the least filth must be washt out by the Blood of Christ: David paid dear for it; Cains Building, and Sauls Harping, will do but little to cure it; it may be quiet and good, unquiet and good, and so on the other hand; but this I have noted, that false Lights or dim ones, have helpt much to the violation of it; present things and the out-sides of things, have also broke in upon it; and in sinning, whether the wound be in the Head or Conscience first, is a que∣stion, but not hardly resolved. Your wisdom will be to live up∣on a directing word; and then Conscience will make a soft bed for you in your greatest sorrow;. A wounded Conscience who can bear? Go to our first Parent, and he will
tell you so, who might have ga∣thered fruit to eat, rather than leaves to cover himself. Do not grieve Conscience twice, it must be your best friend, yea, when friends, and world, and all leave you to sollitariness. If it whimper a little, do not make it roar out; and yet do not stifle it, but attend it, and carry it up to Mount Calvary for peace. Remember good Conscience and Sin cannot live together; Let but this Bird sing sweetly within, and let Heaven and Earth come together, thou shalt be safe (my poor Child.) 8. Next I am to remember you, that you have much work to do in a little time; which calls you up to labour, as the Day the Lark, and the Lark the Husbandman, Eccles. 12. the whole Chapter; I hope you have it.
About Redemption of time, you have many Treatises. The great∣est of your work in your short time, is to get Christ, and live up∣on him, and to him; And this is the life of Faith, which you can never live, unless Faith have to live upon it self, which will digest nothing but word, and promises: Therefore now you are young, lay in a good Stock for Faith to live on; but you must do it seasona∣bly; you are young I say, and may have a little time before you, which certainly hath Eternity hanging upon it, called a Race, a Day, or Hour; the old World had their Day, Jerusalem a Day, the Gospel is called the Day of Grace: Therefore lay in seasona∣bly; and not only so, but abun∣dantly, for your market may be at the highest; foolish Virgins had Oyl in their Lamps; none in their
Vessels, Store is no Sore; for you know not what Promises you may need, for Want, for Reproach, for Sickness and Death. The Kingdom of Heaven must suffer Violence; Violent Faith, Love, Prayer, must storm it. The time will come when wishes will not help; your own Works and Righteousness will fail. Lastly, Lay up your stock for Faith conveniently, that you may reach a word when you need it most. Ah that you would be wise! Ask your heart at night, what you have done that day in this point, because every night may be your last. Therefore secure your Princi∣ples, walk up to the compass of every duty, clear your Evidences, keep close Communion with God, Look out to growing Evils, and fit for them; And these is the
work of your Generation. I say, it is your work, you may easier make barrs to the Sea, and or∣der the Influences of Heaven, than call back yesterday. Therefore work and pray, re∣pent, believe, get assurances of Heaven to day, I say, to day, and be happy for ever (Dear Child.) 9. I must also invite you to Content in a Low Condition, for which you have great furtherance as Mr. Burroughs for Contentment (whose Writings are all savory) But for my own thoughts they are these, That though many write and speak of the Contempt of the World, some cloyster up them∣selves from it; yet very few are Masters of this Art, which the Apostle himself had been long learning. Constitution, Age, Experience, Parts, Afflictions, Fulness, Honor,
Glory, will all say, We have it not; Crowns have it not; and Beggars want it: I was about to say, it is only in Heaven. This Herb grows in very few Gardens. But Oh that you might be truly content! You will find a But upon all your Comforts; and therefore you cannot be contented: You may find a fulness in Christ, Col. 1.19. and therefore you should be contented. Mind the Disease, and the Cure in this Case. First, All your under-moon Re∣freshings, or Comforts, are too short, and too narrow beds for Content to lye in. And, secondly, They are but partial in their help, and cannot answer all Cases. Thirdly, They are short-live'd. Riches have Eagles wings, and Beauty but skin-deep; Honour in anothers keeping; Friends and
all, are but waking dreams. Content must have something to answer all the defects of the Creature; and it onely dwells where all Questions are fully an∣swered, springing from thence. A Naked Soul meeting with a Naked Christ, can only be quieted in spirituals, and the same Christ improved also for temporals; Sin is pardoned, Iniquities and Corrup∣tion done away; the Favour of God gained, the Spirit bearing witness to Adoption, answers all; for to this you must roul at length. Though I know (as others) so we our selves, adde to our Discon∣tents, and often quarrel for a Feather in our Cap. Paul sayes nothing befalls us; but what is common to man, and upon that would stay us, but when Eternity will pay for all; And Christ hath satisfied for all
sin, and cut the score, and will make all work to the Great End. The Saints make their Challenge a∣gainst all, Rom. 8. & last. The good Lord grant you may groundedly say, Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; and that is Content, My Child. 10. I commend unto you meek∣ness of spirit, Zep. 2.3. be loving to all; envy none, though they thrive by evil, & are evil, Psal. 37.1. You know what a Promise the Meek have, Matth. 5.5. As inordinate Passion bears the name of all sin in Scripture; So Meekness carries many good things with it, as Love, Pity, Patience, &c. Nor do I op∣pose Meekness to Zeal, but would have you allow both their perfect work. Meekness wil make smooth all your wayes, disappoint Ene∣mies of the advantage they may take against you; And your love
will not only cover many sins, but help many out of them: Indeed these will be a strong guard unto you, and Grief will hardly get footing long, where Meeknesse and her Concommitants dwel. When you lose a poor Father, or a rich Friend, you will be able to say you knew them mortal, and will be quiet, though not sensless. It will fit you for Meditation, a duty even out of doors, and very hardly practised: I know the sad experience of Passion, how it barrs the door against Prayer and other duties: Oh! how can we lift up wrathful hands to Heaven? They say Anger is the boyling of the Blood about the Heart; I am sure it cools the Heart in Spiritu∣tuals: God took this to himself, when he discovered his Name to Moses, a pitiful, pardoning, long-suffering God. Oh that you might
be God-like, Christ-like, Moses-like; Michael contestng with the Dragon, maintained his meek∣ness; and Paul sayes it is the wo∣mans Ornament. To get to his Meekness, Gen∣tleness, Long-suffering, Patience, and Love; Lonely advise, to get all when they may be had, as James for Wisdom, Ja. 1.5. Stu∣dy Examples, for with the froward you shall learn Frowardness; Prize it as a Jewel. And because all the good or evil we have, we act through our Complexions and Skins, (and great are the advanta∣ges sometimes that way. Know there are tears of constitution, as well as of contrition, and joyes al∣so; so Meekness and other gra∣ces will be hardly discern'd by some, from Naturals and Morrals. The Lord make you Meek from the true Root, (my dear Child.)
11. Beware of a trifling loose heart, which hath been the guise, & the bane of many in these last daies of Liberty, and the decay of that old solemn, serious spirit, and sober, that was among, and upon the ancient Professors of Religi∣on, was very visible, and broke out to the common vanity of the World in Dyet, Clothes, Recrea∣tions, condemn'd and threatned, Isa. 3. But so loose in holy things, that who almost did not make Re∣ligion an indifferent thing, and all duties concerning it accordingly, (though the like Reformation was never known in any age) But new temptations drew forth old corruptions, made good by the changes the Israelites were under, and their trifling with God under all his bounty to them, till they scorn Manna and ease, and would have Garlick and oppression. It
much appear'd in this, that it grew common to dispute Principles, even the highest, and most con∣sented to; as also in slighting Pro∣mises, Vows, Ingagements, Oaths, Incoustancy in duty, undervalu∣ing Authority; shaken men were with every wind, like to every company; Ministers many words, and frothy, Shells, and Out-sides, most men playing fast and loose with God. Do but minde in your reading, what a sober, plain, un∣affected, holy strain, is in Dod, Sibs, Preston, Hooker, Burrows, and many other good men, to what you find in some others; though it may be good men too. Ah (my Childe,) a frothy wit, and a vitious life carry directly to Athisme, which is the Master∣mischief of this Age, yea in pro∣fessing England. This trifling, springs either
from a heart and head never kindly wrought upon, or never wel way'd; where sin hath been, or is an easie burden, there men trifle with their spirits; and where men are not guided by a Rule, they will prove the children of Chan∣ges; it grows as other evils, gradu∣ally, and soon conspicuous in some Constitutions, like Davids Waters, from the Ancle, soon o∣ver the Head. I must tell you, Thoughts are not free, nor words wind, they will judge us one day, and from thence this Trifling comes. The best cure I know by experience, I say by woful ex∣perience of this evil, will be to look within the Vail, to the Mer∣cy-seat, made of pure Gold, for free grace to help against so great a mischief; and then to be much in Prayer, communion of Saints, fasting, and holy duties, to lay
some more weight upon this spi∣rit, and often to mingle the sense of sin, to take away this Froth and Lightness. Every Morning down to Golgotha, and from thence go up to Mount Calvary. Believe me, If sin made our Saviour cry My God, my God, &c. What is the weight of sin? Look to a day of Reckoning. Christs Spirit was e∣ver serious, never known to laugh. Be Sober and Watch; (dear Child.) 12. In like manner against that spreading evil of being a Busie-bo∣dy, and Pragmatical, which is the Plague of Man-kind, 1 Thess. 4.11. The words are very full and plain, Study to be quiet, Do your own Business, Work with your own Hands. The last two will cure the former danger. Read and know, That whilest you look too much into others Gardens, you will neg∣lect
your own. Be not like the Squiril, leaping from Tree to Tree, and Bough to Bough. Be much at Home, and you will find work enough; as long as you keep Christ and sin before you, you will have work enough for your Thoughts; and if your Fancy be not well fed, your Thoughts (like Milstones) will grinde themselves, Spirits rais'd, and not imploy'd, will torment the Witch that rais'd them. And if you set not your self on work, the Devil will mark but the several Trees of fruit or o∣thers, they grow in their own roots and change not. Be content to be a shrub, Cedars will shake; and never desire to be near Greatness. Honour often dies grinning and ghastly. Our business must be our own, as well as our Crosses. To meddle with other mens work will be thankless, as to take other
mens Physick will be useless, if not dangerous. An hours Idle∣ness is a sin, as well as an hours Drunkenness. Few mens feet stand before Princes, because few mens hands are diligent. The Maid was possest, because the Devil found her in his own house, viz. a Play-house. The Busie-body is but a Pedler to carry up and down, and vend the Devils Wares. How few lose any thing by quietness, and doing their own work? Their sweet sleep commends it. David got his great wound up∣on this neglect, and Peter his, by warming his Hands, when he should have been breaking his heart in secret. Oh keep home, keep home; I speak experience to you, who never found good hour but in mine own work: Nor doth this
cut off works of Love, or Chari∣ty, which must be attended in their seasons, and by their Rules. The cure of this evil lies much in Studying duty, the end of your Creation & being, the practice of Saints; that though you work here, ease is in Heaven; all your labour is little enough for your own business; be alwayes ready to say, I am where the Lord would have me to be. How bitter is the remembrance of good hours ill spent? How cut∣ing of time lost? Death knows no distance; whether King, or Bishop, or Pawn, all at the end of the Game is put into one Bag, the Grave. Be doing your own work, what ever your condition be; Tell me what our blessed Lord did, but the work he was sent about? Be like him in this, as in all things else, and that Spirit of
the Lord Jesus be with thee, (My dear Heart.) 13. Through your whole course let Truth have its way, and do not make Lyes your Refuge, they will mock you in the end. Mr Reynor, and others have written largely about the words and the Tongue, but none to James the Apostle. You see I do not load you in any thing with Heathens, Fathers, Poets, and their Apothegms, which are many in these Cases; which I purposely avoid as tickling the ear, when often they reach not the heart: A Schollar, yea a School-boy may gather them, but the Truth of God, set on by his Spirit, must make you consistent. All the World is hung with lyes, and all of man Proclaims so much; Cloaths, Meats, Trades, Salutations, yea our Profession of
Religion: All men are Lyers, and all things on this side Christ a Lie▪ The Prince of the Ayre makes it his work, who was the Father of Lies. Christ calls for Yea, and Nay onely. I wish in Christianity we could find this Christianity; Heathen and Turks shame us; it is the blot of the Nation, as if we were Lyars in the Womb; the sin even lives and dyes with us; you may not tell a Lye for God. The Prophet Zechary put Peace and Truth together, as if they could not be asunder, Zech▪ 8.15, 16, 19. The Root is the Heart, from whose abundance the Tongue speak∣eth. Oh the falsness and deceit of this little thing! Not a Break∣fast for a Kite! Away with that distinction of Jocous, or Friendly Lyes. Psal. 101. David will have
no Lyer with him. Truth takes in all good Religion; God ownes none where it is not. Hypocri∣sie is a Lye; Friend, Name, Cre∣dit, Estate, Beauty, Honour, &c. are full of Lyes. John 6. Christ the Truth, as well as Life and Way. Though every untruth be not a Lye, where it is not spoken with a purpose to deceive, (so men di∣stinguish;) your care must be to trade with your heart: Nathani∣els heart was honest, and so with∣out guile; good feed fell into an honest heart. Truth is naked; beware of base Coverings. Let your conversation be with∣out Guile, without a Lie, the Lord is the Heart-searcher. Sow up your Mouth, but let it be with Honestie; not Policie. As you never hurt your self by speaking little, so will you never gain any thing by telling a Lie.
Let others call this sin a Virtue, but do you call it by its own name, and hate it as Poison. Let Truth be thy Portion, it will preserve you; and ever say, I can do nothing against the Truth; (dear Child.) 14. And what I said last, ur∣geth me to commend Wisdom to you, which is a very comprehen∣sive word, and is justified of her Children▪ But I mean not the Wis∣dom of this world, whether natu∣ral or artificial: I intend Scrip∣ture Wisdom, which is from a∣bove. And this is a Light that God sets up in the Soul, to direct us, and affect us, in our whole course, Joh 28. last. The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil, that is Understan∣ding: If you be wise, be wise for your self: To have all Books in ones Head, and want this Cate∣chism
in the Heart, will never a∣mount to it. Many great Clerks, not wise; many a Statist falls short. But this will make you hear, Prov. 1.5. It will make you lay a sure Foundation, Matth. 7. the Wise Builder. This will make you pro∣vide for Changes, Luke 16.8. This will make you lay in abundantly, Matth. 25. the Virgins were wise. This will make you bear sorrow, Eccles. 7.4. And truly this is Wis∣dom, and the Helps hereunto are, to become a Fool, 1 Cor. 3.18. To number your dayes, that so you may apply your heart to Wisdom, To beg it of God, Jam. 1.5. But above all, to make Christ your Wis∣dom, 1 Cor. 1. last. Oh that you were thus wise! Much of Wit must be pared off before it will be usefull. I have seen the wayes of it, though never could pretend much to it: But this I know, that
being unsanctified, it is a sword in a mad-mans hand, spends it self in vanity, foolish jesting, abuse of those who are weaker than our selves; yea, often to play with the blessed Word of God. But this Wisdom will guide, preserve, ho∣nour you: How doth Solomon ad∣mire it in the Proverbs! bids you seek it, love it, follow after it, and this is Christ himself. You shall never have comfort in suffer∣ing for Folly, therefore see the plague, and hide, which hath in∣vited some so to do often. Expe∣rience (which is the observation of many Events) will help you much in this study: be much in the Word, which will make you wise to Salvation: Let your Com∣panions be the Children of Wis∣dom; Judge of all things by this Wisdom, which will make you look upon them by Eternity. To
the only wise God I commend you; dear Child. 15. There are two very great Turns in mans Life; the one is a lawful Calling; the other is Marri∣age: and miscarriages in either are almost irrecoverable. For the for∣mer, I must say the lesse, because of your sex, though your present condition may lead you to the ser∣vice of others; and then know, Fidelity and Diligence are your duties; your time and parts will then be anothers, not your own; Eye-service will not be accepta∣ble to God or man, much lesse comfortable to your self. Many have written upon this subject, as Dr. Gouge, and others. For Marriage, though your pre∣sent estate (according to the world) renders you many wayes hopeless; yet your times are in Gods hands, and daily Experience
(with my own) will let you know, that as it is the joyning together of one Man and one Woman law∣fully, in an indissolvable bond, ei∣ther for an help, procreation of Children (which were before the Fall) or a remedy against Sin since that; so it hath many Concern∣ments in it, where Goodness and Sutableness are the primary ingre∣dients; And as the Husbands du∣ty is, Love, Teaching, Providing, Honouring, &c. So the Wifes must be Subjection, suitable to that Love in all the parts of it: And these dnties need mutual supports. And this Conjugateness (like a yoke) must still be lin'd with more Love, to make the draught easie. Against this Love, the Devil and Temptations will be striving. Peo∣ple so engaged, need a Standard (even the Word) to be set up, to guide all by: They need to
observe each others spirits; They need to pray out, not quarrel out their first brablings; They need at first to dwell much in their own duties, before they step into each others: When Repentance comes too late, the best is to be made of the present condition. Read Pro. 31. Oh the bitterness of unequal Matches! Oh their ruine and mi∣sery! I ever left you free, and do; only marry in, and for the Lord; The sensual part of that conditi∣on, can never answer the incum∣brances may attend it. Let Christ be your Husband, and he will provide you one to his own liking: do nothing herein without Prayer, Scripture, and Counsel. The Lord love you, My dear Child. 16. For the World (I mean the People in it) and that part of it the Lord hath set you in; I have very much to say, because my days
in it are not a few (as we account) Believe our Saviour and the Word (Joh. 16. last.) and you will find that in the World you shall have Tribulation; and your passage out of it must be through many Tribula∣tions, and Persecutions too, if you will live godly. The World loves her own: You must look upon it as your Enemy, and use it so; take what you may lawfully from it, and imbrace not this present World; It will kisse you, and kill you; like a Sea of Glasse, it soon cracks, though it glisters; and when you have Iron shooes that tread upon it, how soon may you drop in? The World will give you no more credit than you have of the World to maintain it: and therfore whilst you are in the World, though you may know many, yet be acquain∣ted with few, and even trust none. Be sure you get nothing unlaw∣fully,
it hath fire in it to destroy: Sweat is our portion here below, and whatsoever is gained by your own labour will be sweetest, dea∣rest, and of longest continuance with you; And do not borrow. You may wonder why the World is generally imbittered to God's Children, and why the way to Ca∣naan was paved with so many dif∣ficulties. Oh know it is to keep us humble, to draw forth the exer∣cise of his Attributes, viz. Power, Wisdom & Mercy; and the exer∣cise of our gifts & graces, Prayer, Faith, Patience, &c. he will have the use of what he hath given; yea, hereby Heaven is made dear and sweet to us; the storm com∣mends the haven; prison, liberty; sickness, health; and sin and sor∣row, Heaven; where the double vail of Corruption and Affliction shall be taken off, and we shall
be with the Lord for ever. Many dying men speak much about the Vanity of the World: But truly, as I would not die in a pet, so I would not quarrel with, or leave the World, because I could be no greater in it, but be∣cause I not do, nor be better in it; and that God is pleased I should leave it for a better: I wish I had never been vain in a vain World, but I appeal to, and plead with, Christ for my peace. So use the World, as if you used it not: for the World hath a principle of de∣cay in all the glory of it: Dote not on it, my poor Child. 17. And whilest I am in the World, and advising about it, there is a great Raritie in the World, if you could reach it, and that is a Friend; which is a Com∣moditie so very scarce, that it will be your wisdom so to look upon
a Friend this day, as likely to be an Enemy to morrow. How ma∣nie sad Experiences can I witness to of this kind, yea in these times and changes? Fair Dove-coats have most Pigeons; Lost Estates know no Friends: Joh and all the Saints complain, David sadly, Paul had none to stand by him; You see most men now are either up∣on their own securitie or prefer∣ments; one cries, My Friend be∣trayed me; another, My Friend failed me: and some cry, All flesh is false; and much I could say, but that other causes are to be atten∣ded above instrumental. They say, Two may keep counsel, if one be away; So hard it is to get a Friend; and if you have many, you have hard∣ly any. The Friend I commend, is a Soul-friend, which you will never find among Children, Fools or Prophane. An Experienced
Christian Friend I intend, who must have three qualifications; he or she must have the art and skill of a Friend, few know it; must have the bowels and mercie of a Friend, which most want; and lastly, must have Faithfulness, the great ingredient: if such an one you can find, you shall enjoy their Experiences freely, you shall con∣stantly be carried to God in their Prayers, you shall have sympathie and help in your troubles: The Spirit of Christ is a healing saving Spirit, and such is theirs: To such open your heart clearly, who will never upbraid you for Confessi∣ons; and know when Foundati∣ons shake, you will need a Master∣builder or Workman, such is a good Friend and wise. To get such an one, must be your care; and to keep, must be your dili∣gence: Walk not unworthy of
the mercy if you gain it. Kinsman will not make it, no nor a Bro∣ther, though born for adversitie. Your hopes may be these, if the Lord promise; When your wayes please him, your Enemies shall be at peace with you: He can raise a Friend, and Himself be your best Friend: To whom I commend You, dear Child. 18. And because sin will be creeping into all your conditions, waies and works, something I must advise you about it from Ex∣perience, though many Books are written about it; as Mr. Goodwyns Sinfulnesse of Sin, &c. Yet Two things take from me: Be marvel∣lous careful it break not in: Se∣condly, as diligent to drive it out speedily. And for the former, Gouge and Gurnal I commend, a∣bout the putting on the whole Ar∣mour, Ephes. 6. Sin is a breach of
the Law, and the strength of Sin is the Law from that breach; the soul being as well left to Sin the Keeper, as to Satan the Jaylor, by the Fall, and nothing but the Sa∣tisfaction of Christ put in to Di∣vine Justice, can remit the Autho∣rity of it; yea, though the power and filth in part be taken away by Sanctification, yet it will break in again, as an inmate, and will at least get some out-room, as pride in cloathes, cozenage in dealings, lust in the eye, passion, &c. and bad work it makes, where-ever it is; Oh keep it at staves length: Peter, David, Heman and others ever crack under it: As you can∣not build your Reformation upon unrepented sin; So you should not make daily work for repen∣tance, by admitting sin, which must be reformed. Therefore to prevent this mischief, you must
exercise hatred against it, as against an Enemy that cut the throat, or would, of your best Friends, and yours also, and pursue it with a deadly feud; hate it in all the stock and linage of it, my Child. A little sin is sin, down with it, keep your guard, and hate it in all the forrage that may maintain such an Enemy; I mean, in the occasions leading to it; in which I might be large. On with all your Armour speedily: and when you find it hath bespotted you, do as a good houswife with her linnen, get a Washing-day, I mean a Fast∣ing-day, out with it by hand, la∣ver, bucking; if it be a stain that gets through and through, it will ut the next spring for bleaking, I mean, a sin premeditated as Da∣vids; a few common tears will not help there, but extraordinary, and the Blood of Christ above all.
Ask the Damned what they aile? Sin, sin, they cry. Ask the distres∣sed Conscience? Sin too. Ask the Afflicted? Sin. For the Bulrush will not grow without mire. That which crosseth the Law of God, make thy greatest crosse; that which divides you from the best Good, call your worst Evil. It made Christ to bleed, to groan, to die. The Lord sprinkle thy Conscience with the Bloud of the Everlasting Covenant, that you may not sin to death, My dear Child. 19. And next (because border∣ing upon what went before) I would add a case, which so often even choice Christians are incum∣bred with, and that is, Their que∣stioning all their works after ma∣nie years Experience and Profes∣sion; and their Objections, many against themselves; as from sin
before Conversion, in Conversi∣on, after it; repeated sins, against Judgment, Mercie, Light, Means; yea, even cutting Purses under the Gallows; against all Examples, and what not? Nay, it cannot stand with Gods honour to save, &c. though Isa. 55.8. answers all. This therefore I would have you know, that though it be not safe to dig at Foundations often, lest we shake the Building; so our great care is to have sound Foun∣dations to build upon, which in the general is Christ, and other none can lay: Make quick work, and see you be in Christ, and offer your Evidences to a discerning Friend, or more; and know, that God hath limited his tenders of Grace to a day of this Life, of the Gospel, and of Conscience awa∣kened; therefore look out whilst it is To day.
Put by Spiritual sloth, Cares of this World, bosom Corruptions, or what ever may hinder; God is not bound to your limitings: Were it not from his Mercy, and and to leave every soul inexcusa∣ble, why should the Lord give any time of Grace? Remember, this day ends suddenly; How un∣worthy to put the Lord off till to¦morrow, and how retaliated? See Prov. 1. 29, &c. Your delayes rob your soul long of Comfort, and you keep your self the longer out of Christ's ser∣vice. The nature of sin is poison, do not stay till to morrow for an Antidote; What got Lots Wife by lingring in Sodom? the Lord must pull us out. Nor can you plead any thing for hereafter which you may not now. Oh to work, to work; and if you find it will not amount to Grace, then cry migh∣tily;
Ply the Lord with all the Promises of his Free-grace, Isa. 55.1. Matth. 11. last. Revel. 22.17. Isa. 53. the whole Chapter: Jer. 3.1. and many more. Tell the Lord none so vile as you, none so good as Himself: Tell him, his Nature is Mercy, he may be a gainer by his Grace: However, hang upon him living and dying in the use of all means, Hos. 14.3, 4, 5. But if you have your share in Christ, though hardly discerned, make much of it, you need walk very humbly, very holily; do not question continually, as some do, Psal. 18.1. Love the Lord who hath been your strength, and will answer all thy hard questions, dear Child. 20. I add hereunto your Case, under crosse Providences; yea, such as where Promises seem to
speak one thing, and Providence another; Under which the best Saints have had great and strange sinkings of spirit; For which you have Sibbs, Burroughs, and others to help. My poor thoughts also are these for Case and Cure; When Joh faints, Joh 4.5. When David chides his soul, Psal. 42. When Heman is even distracted, Psal. 88.15. Jacob will not be comforted, Gen. 37.35. and so divers. This great Dissertion springs from ei∣ther the overweening some Com∣forts we enjoy, our overvaluing them breeds much trouble in the losse of them: So David with his Absolom; or from the surprizall being sudden and unexpected; a prison at first uncouth, in time easie and sweet; where a morti∣fied heart grows suited to it: (to this I could speak much) or else
it may spring from some secret weight God may put into this Change of Providence, which we are not aware of; and so the scale grows heavie with some Lead hanging at the bottom unseen: a small thing troubles more than a greater: the former we apply to our own strength in it, but for the other to Gods. Or, lastly, it may spring from the Dispensation it self; As when the Crosse is heavie, or multiplied, or of long continuance, or toucheth some noble part; as wounds that touch the Liver, Heart, Brain, &c. Nay, I must tell you, when we make our Case worse than God doth, as by our refusing the Lords Com∣forts, which Jacob did Gen. 37. or where we let loose the Reins of Passion, as David, Oh my son, my son! &c. Or when we drown all our present Enjoyments in that
one crosse Providence, which is too near the spirit of Haman, who crost by Mordecai, slights all his Favours at Court, and dies upon the other. Your Cure in all this will be, To be willing to want, what God is not willing to give, and to know he is wise, to give what he will, how he will, and when he will; for the godly heart for temporals cries, Lord, what thou wilt; and in spirituals, When thou wilt; and in both, How thou wilt: Beggars must be no chusers, and any thing is good from the hand of such a Father. Your Interest in Christ, supplies all, and sweetens all; but with the Doves Innocency, use the Ser∣pents Wisdom; live in daily wait∣ing and expectation of Changes, even in your best and holiest con∣dition here: Deaths-heads, and
Hour-glasses will be but ordinary significant Ceremonies: it is with∣in you that cruciats, or comforts: He that made the World, can change it when he will: Your Comfort will be, that in the grea∣test storm, your heavenly Father is at the Helm; though Sin and Satan bussle: that Hand keep you, My dear Child. 21. And if you ask me (after all) what you shall do with your fears to which your sex and con∣dition prompt you? you shall have what I know, though the Lord Jesus answers all to his little Flock when he sayes, Fear not; yea, more particularly, Fear not them that can only kill the body, and de∣stroy that. You must know that your question wil mainly lie about base & unwarrantable fears, which have these roots; Either (when out of this fear) you are loth to
part with that the Lord would have you let go, or would part with that the Lord would have you keep; as when you wrangle about some Corruption, especial∣ly which is dear unto you, and hath some great disadvantage at∣tending your throwing it away. These kinds of fear are accompa∣nied with these mischiefs. As you will be unwilling to know your duty, so you will be unwilling to practise it when you know it; yea, not only so, but (through fear) be as unable, as unwilling; like that trembling King at the hand∣writing he saw. The inconveni∣ences are very many, and the sins not few that follow it. The cure in general, even for Peter, who (by it) denied his Master, is this, That whoever fears to sin, never sins by fear; and more particularly, The absence of some good you desire, or the
coming on of some evil, draws out this fear: Therefore make much of this Rule; Be ever possest of some good, that may answer the taking away of what you may lose, which is the presence and favour of God in Christ: In the night the waking Child in the Cradle is quiet at the Nurses coming to it, because there is more of comfort in the Nurse, than fear in the Dark. And then be perswaded to set a right value upon all earthly, pe∣rishing, dying things; do not call a Pebble a Pearl. But above all, keep your fear in his proper chan∣nel: Oh fear God, fear God. It is not only the beginning of Wis∣dom, but the perfection of your joys, which kept Joseph, and others of the Saints from sin. My earnest desire for you is, That the Lord would give you an even and equal spirit, and the root
of it, Integrity; That (as the Righ∣teous) you may be bold as a Lion, and yet rejoyce with trembling. In this good fear I leave you, My dear Child. 22. And if the Evil you fear, and a day of Affliction come up∣on you, then my counsel is, (bear vvith the feebleness of it in all) take that Rule, Eccles. 7.14. In that evil day, or day of your di∣stresses, you must Consider; which is (as the word bears) by solemn and diligent thoughtfulnesse to take things assunder, especially sorrows and sins; For the little Needle vvill draw a long tail of Thread after it; little sins may be follovved vvith great sorrovvs, to set you at your vvork. First, You must see the evil of Adversity in the nature of it, such a plague, and such a visitation; and in the causes of it: As in the
principal, none of that evil in the City, but from the Lord. In the Meritorious Cause, there look at sin, and search closely, and then the Final Cause; God will either be glorified by your Hu∣miliation or Ruine; He will ei∣ther bend you, or break you; and thus he doth with Nations, Chur∣ches, and every Individual. But for the Instrumental Cause, travel not much there. Though Pharaoh were the occasion of the Plagues, yet the Aegyptians sins, the Cause. Secondly, In such an evil time you must live by faith (so Habbak∣kuk) and walk with God; for this must be your Rule, That no condi∣tion supercedes Duty that may be, must be performed: And in these you may not dally, it is your life. Thirdly, To get out of such a
day and case, you may not act un∣lawfully; nor did Paul in going out in a Basket. Take these Rules. First, See what the word saies, if you can find a Paralel case and help. Secondly, If that be dark, see what Providence suggests; but that you must neither Slight nor Cross, nor out-run. Lastly, If here you want Light, then live and die upon the coun∣sel of Impartial friends, that you may trust Gods way in doubtful and hard cases. And be assured that in distress (I know not) if Enemies bring your Release, it will be too late; and if some friends bring it, it may be too soon; but if God do bring it, it will be seasonable. I will hear what the Lord will say, cries the Prophet: So
do you (My dear Heart.) 23. Though in part I have hint∣ed something about Errors, yet in this age and juncture, I need let you know what I know, since the importunity of Errour hath brougt forth so many Obliquities, and occasioned so much scandal to Religion the World thorow. And because many have touch'd hereupon (as you see in their Wri∣tings,) and many more Polimicks and Disputes are Printed than pro∣fitable, every Partie striving their own advancement; this I have said, this I must say, That whoso departs from those Fundamentals profest, and died upon by the Saints and Martyrs since the refor∣mation and departure from Pope∣ry, need to have his Opinion writ∣ten in Stars: for If an Angel bring another Gospel, he or it may not be received, that shall contradict what
we have received already from the Lord Jesus. It is a continuing word, Oh that it might abide in us, and with us! Two things in such a danger I commend unto you: First, Observe, or ask your self or others what frame of spirit or heart you are in, when you receive this noveltie; and if I mistake not, When the heart is Proud, Lazie, or Frothie, neglects communion with God, dutie, and exactness, then a cover-Cup for such cor∣ruption is sought after; then Preachers understand nothing; then men can live without God, Ordinances, &c. You must know that this work is gradual: The Ship sails through the Channel, where she may have Land on both sides, before she come to the Main, and loseth sight of all Land.
But this you will certainly find, That if these People would speak out, they have changed their Opi∣nions about God, before they change about his Waies. I could be very large in this, accounting it my very great Mercie, that tem∣ptation never led me from that Honest, Old, Godly, Puritane Pro∣fession of the everlasting truths of the Gospel. Secondly, Inquire whether they have been carried more to God and Holiness since their change. For that which comes from God, will carry us to God; but if onely to Pride, Censuring, Li∣bertinisme, &c. you know what to make of it. Beware of Leaven of the Phari∣ses, (Christ saies) for Leaven will sowre the Dough; will swell it, will harden it, and these you meet with in mens spirits leavened with
Error. Where men once leave the Rule, there will be no end of their running, till they come to Atheism. Therfore stand in awe of God, and fear him alwaies; Hold to the Word as to Life; Question not Truths; Look to your Com∣pany; Value the meanest Ordi∣nance; You will need all. Be very low and humble before the Lord, and Grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3, 18. (My dear Child.) 24. And because the first Child that appears in view of this Jesabel, the Mother of Mischief (Errour) so called by John, Rev. 2.20. is about the Sabbath; either wholly slighting it, or counting it Jewish; or our day not the right day, not the Seventh; yea that every day is a Sabbath, with the like: I mean besides all such as profanely look upon it as a day of
Sport, Pleasure, and Vanity: I think it my duty to Charge you, (as ever you mean or hope to en∣joy that everlasting Rest hereaf∣ter) that you would value the Sab∣bath. Read Dod and others a∣bout it. I do not remember that I have ever met with a truly Godly gra∣cious soul, that lived above or be∣yond this. The first Commandment sets up the true God, The second his Worship according to his own will, The third his Reverence and Honour, and The fourth Time, the seventh part of Time for him, is holy Time, Works of Necessity and Charity not crossing that Ho∣liness. I say the seventh part of Time, because it is Night in one place, when Day in another; which Time begins at the Evening, as Time is
distinguished into Daies, Gen. 1. And though the Questions about the Sabbath and Baptism breed much Dispute in the World, yet we must Study to know Gods Will in both. I must say more to you: Where the Sabbath is at an undervallue in any Country, say it be France, Holland, Germany, &c. there you shall find Religion low, and at best wasting it self into Disputes. But know that England (which is most famous for Religion) got it from the Sabbaths, upon which day the Lord is pleased (as Prin∣ces by their Almoners) to give out his Gifts and Craces to the sons of men. I was a witness that Middle∣burgh in Zealand grew famous for Religion, by Teeling their Preacher fetching the keeping of the Sabbath from England.
Certainly the Fourth Command∣ment is the Key to all the rest; for how shall the rest be practised if not taught? and how taught, if not time allowed? and what time more likely to carry a Blessing, than Gods Appointment? It were as good to take down Ministry, and all Ordinances, as to take down the Sabbath. The wonders of God have born witness (as Burton and others write) against the Breakers of it. Wherefore look well about you, Isa. 58.13. Love the Lord in his Sabbaths, as you would have rest hereafter. Look to this Rest here, and remember the Sabbath; that is, Prepare for it all the week long, especially the Evening be∣fore. The Jewes had two Preparati∣ons to the Sabbath, at Three, and Six.
Do you keep on, and gather home all Affections to wait upon the Work, and let the day be dear to you. The God of Sabbath be yours, (dear Child.) 25. The Premises considered, I should a little open what I mean by Free Grace, to which I send you so often for succour in Cases; and truly it hath been much spo∣ken of, and as much abused, as if men from thence might take leave for any evil; and on the o∣ther hand also, filth cast upon men that have labour'd to hold it forth; for which Dr. Crisp suffered also, and some of that mind, who meant faithfully to the Church of Christ, and have written much for the abasement of the Creature, and lifting up Grace. I wish we may judge right judgement of all men, and things. But a little Practically to cast in
something to profit you: The Grace so spoken of, should mainly be minded as the Root and Fruits of the New Cove∣nant, Jer. 31. and that in Hos. 2. 19, 20, &c. Which you will find lie upon two-Parties, Christ, and the poor Believer; and Christ to be considered in a double Act of his: First, In his loving, or rather manifesting his love in time to the soul. And, Secondly, In passing over that Right he hath in himself to the believing soul. Answerable whereunto, the soul first from Christs love is warm'd to love again; and from his bounty in his second Act, turns over all the soul hath to the Lord Jesus Christ; whether Name, Estate, Wit, Parts, yea all its Inte∣rests.
Now Christ thus loving the soul, and giving himself upon no Meritorious or procuring Cause on the souls side, is called Free Grace indeed; when the Father shall freely give his Son, and the Son freely his Heart-blood, and the Spirit freely all its operations, and make a free Covenant of grace and mercy to pardon all sin, to receive a sinner into his bosom, without money or price; nay not to offer any thing of his own, either Duty, or Righteousness, Isa. 55.1. this call Free Grace; though when Christ comes to manifest this, he (by the Law) gets Parly with the sinner he means to save, by some uncouth waies, and often very cross to flesh and blood, which makes the work hard to judge of at first; yet be assured that the whole work will be Free, in the Whole Frame of it.
But because this point is of such singular concernment, and that I have formerly delighted to speak to others touching the same, and would have the com∣fort of it my self, I shall let you know what I know about the or∣der of the working hereof, that you mistake not. 26. And in the letting you in this Light, to give you the summe of true practical Divinity: and therefore observe with diligence, That when a discovery is made of this Love to the sinner, the Lord Jesus makes a double approach to the soul; the first is by the Law, where he takes three steps: And first, by the Law he stops the sin∣ner in his course, and makes him to see sin in the very nature of it, not in the Hell onely, and conse∣quence; but in that it separates the soul from the greatest good,
Romans 7.7. And, Secondly, makes the soul bear the burden, and weight of it, which makes Da∣vid himself cry out often, and so others: It pincheth hard where sin hath got time and strength, &c. Thirdly, it lets the soul to know, that he is not able to satisfie Di∣vine justice, and so the Law may be called a School-master to Christ, though the Text leads to the Cere∣monial; the Ceremonies being the Gospel of the Jewes. These three steps of Love Christ takes in the Law by his first approach. Secondly, In his Gospel ap∣proach he takes these steps: First, He holds forth himself to the sinner, a Mediator of the New Covenant, and a free par∣doner of sin; this keeps the soul from despair. Secondly, He lets you know, that he is as able, and as willing
as ever to do it, Colos. 1.19. &c. This keeps the soul in heart and hope. Thirdly, By that which they call the Reflex Act, he brings home a particular Promise of grace to the soul, as Revel. 3.17. and the Spirit of Christ thus ar∣gues: He that is athirst must freely come. But (saies the Spirit) Thou art thirstie, Therefore come freely. Thus I use to say: A pitiful, nasty, ragged, father∣less, friendless Child, is lying dy∣ing in a ditch: A noble bountiful hand means to save him, and adopt him; first sends a servant to awa∣ken him, and bring him to his Court-gate; then bids another let him in, a third to wash him, and put him on clean clothes; another
to read him the Order of his House; another to set him at Ta∣ble with his Children; another to shew him his present, and future estate. Thus the Spirit of Humiliation first wakens a miserable lost sin∣ner, and that by the Law, and can onely bring him to the Gate: Then Vocation opens the Door: Then Justification puts on Christs Righteousness: Sanctification tea∣cheth him how to walk, taking away the Power of sin: Adopti∣on makes him a Brother, and gives him his Priviledges: And Glory begun here in part, by sanctifying, shewes him his estate. And all this hath its rise from Free Grace, Ezekiel 16. for God found us in our Blood. The Lord open your eyes, and make this a time of Love to you, dear Child.
27. But whilst I speak to you of Free-grace, I must let you know that in the next place I must commend unto you, accurate wal∣king, as the fruits thereof; and for your better understanding, I commend unto you divers of the aforesaid Books; so my own thoughts are, that it consists in all manner of Christian Circumspe∣ction, Ephes. 5.15. to look with∣in you, without you, about you, beneath you, to all and every du∣ty; and the rather, because God's eye is ever, and every where up∣on you; Oh that you could so walk, so think: and not only so, but you have bad men observing, who, by your negligence, may either infest your Liberties, or in∣fect you with their Evils, or at best be harder drawn-on to the wayes of God by your carelesse example: Adde hereunto, that
you have the eyes of good men upon you; and if they be young Christians, you may make the Wayes of God like Giants and Brazen Walls unto them, carry much difficulty and discourage∣ment with them; or, if ancient Christians, you may send them with grief to their graves by your miscarriages; and not only so, but the very way of Religion is like a narrow Bridge, you need step ad∣visedly, that you may keep upon it, or, if fall, you may recover with much trouble: there is great cause you should be wise, for Free∣grace will never teach sin, nor folly; which that you may have help in, consider what is said from the above-said Arguments, and weigh them well; and not only so, but study the Lives of all the Saints in Scripture, and do but see what trophees of their failings
sin hath hung up, and Satan: Da∣vid's sins of Adultery and Murder, Peter's Denial of his Master, He∣zekiah's Pride and Vanity in shew∣ing his Treasury, Jonah's Impa∣tience and Folly, with the like: And see Paul's and Samuel's Inte∣grity, Phineas his Zeal, Natha∣niel's Truth, &c. On the other hand, Oh walk in this Gallery a∣mong these Pictures; and for your security, rest not without Assurance of God's Love, which will make you wary; Who would endanger it? much lesse forfeit it. The empty Purse fears not the Thief, but the full, looks to every Danger, every Temptation: And really nothing is a greater safe∣guard, than the freeness of this Love communicated to the Soul; stay you no-where on this side of it, it will keep you steady in a trembling world. Thus may you
walk, and from this blessed Prin∣ciple, dear Child. 28. And that all this may be carried-on, and is property the life of Faith; remember, That the hardest thing in the world is, To believe in Jesus Christ to these and all other good ends: Faith is a short word and easily spoken; but Oh how hard is it in the nature of it! when if ever the Lord works it in us, he findes nothing, not a spark of it, till he comes; nay, he finds us opposit to the work of it; nay, he finds us unwilling to be made willing to close with the offer of Christ, though made so freely; Hypocrisie and all evil hath its fountain here: we believe not: all the other graces sink when this fails; all must have its cure: we bind the lame arm, we anoint it, we warmit, and yet nothing helps, because it is out of joynt.
Oh we believe not! Anger ra∣geth, Lust provokes, Covetousness cozens, &c. and all is, We believe not: Nature cannot reach this, Art cannot compasse it: to look near 1700 years back upon the Son of Mary (who was the Son of God) lived not forty years, preached but three years and half, reproached home to his grave; and to believe in him for a Savior: I say, this must be the work of an∣other world, and the outstretched Arm of God. See Ephes. 1.18, 19, 20, &c. To believe that another will pay all my debts, and become poor to make me rich, to dye to make me live; Oh Miracle of Mercy! My Child, to believe things in∣credible, to hope things delayed, and to love God when he seems angry, are Luthers wonders, and mine, and thine. It is unbelief
is that death in the pot, that lifts up sense, that brings an ill report of God, that overhastens our mer∣cies, and sets God a time for our deliverances. Faith is the gift of God, and the greatest, which o∣vercomes difficulties, sets Mercy to work against Justice, fetcheth the work done either by, without, or against Means, throws Moun∣tains into the Sea. A little little grain like Mustard-seed will do Wonders; enliven a dead heart, save even a damned soul; for such we are: This will not be had without the Word and Spirit, Rom. 10.17. and the Glory of it, See Heb. 11. for this, hear, beg, pray, weep, fast, seek, labour, strive, use violence, read, ask, wish, sigh; and if you do believe, the Lord help your unbelief, dear Child. 29. In the next, (which looks like the last) indeed, I must give
you my thoughts about Death; which certainly must be your por∣tion (though young) and I must tell you, it is a great word to say, I dare dye: many Books and Fu∣neral Sermons you may reade a∣bout it. I say, Life is sweet, and Death terrible: many in several distempers may call for it, neither minding what it is, nor whither it leads: Job describes it in his Ago∣ny; and Heathens could say, The first good was, not to be born, and the next, to dye quickly: Paul (a∣bove any) desires it upon right grounds: Yea, the last words in the Canticles, and the last in the Bible are, for the Lord Jesus to come quickly; yea, to come to judg∣ment: as if it were the breathings of the spirits of the Just in the last times; of which spirit if you be, these will be your Reasons, as theirs.
First, That you may see Him of whom you have heard so much, who hath done and suffered so much for you. Secondly, That you may have full draughts of what you now tast only. Thirdly, That your Beloved may come to you, or you to Him; for whose sake, and love, you may un∣dergo here many frowns, brow∣beatings, if not worse: thus the absent Spouse waits for her Be∣loved. Fourthly, When the San∣ctuary is troden upon, Isa. 64.1. Fifthly, That the double Vail of Corruption and Affliction may be taken off from you: Thus to wish for Death is to wish for Life. These things I pray study; and to help you further, remember, Balaam would fain die the Death of the Righteous, which you can never do, unless you live the Life of the Godly; to which I have
written so much before: Only let me adde, That you must live in daily Expectation of this great Change; for though there be but one way into the World, there are many out. I know nothing to sweeten it but the Death of Christ, who suckt out the poison of it, and saves to the uttermost. Ro∣mans and Fools can dye bravely, write their own Elegies. I am sure a well-led life is the best Monu∣ment. If one at your door should cry every morning, You must dye, it would not reach far; but Christ dyed for you, My Child. 30. They say, and truly, Where Death leaves you, there Judgment finds you; Nothing flies so swiftly than as the soul out of the body: and you know Eternity hangs up∣on a moment; and such is our Life; and especially such is the last groan and pang, and thither
it leads. It is a vast Ocean, hath neither bound nor bottom; where you are to come before an impar∣tial Judge, with a naked and open breast; it is unavoidable, and the miscarriage there intolerable. Many Books are written by many about these last things, and Apo∣thegmes not a few: the World and the Flesh will not appear for you; the former can lend you but a few Ceremonies and Complements; the other dare go no further than the Judges door; but a good Conscience, sprinkled by the Blood of Christ, will enter with boldness, and plead, and hear the voice of, Come ye blessed. Your wisdome will be, to carry your Pardon in your bosome, there Wit, and Learning, Parts, and Wealth will get no hearing; there the Eloquent Orator is dumb; no Coin is currant but the Blood of
a loving Saviour; No man can appear there by any other Proxy: there Greatness must give way to Goodness; there Hypocrisie is unmask'd, Truth naked; there your fellow Saints shall sit Judges, though dispised amongst men; there the Son of man shall appear, because despised as the Son of man; there Preaching, Miracles, Casting out Devils will not pro∣fit, but a Name written in the Book of the Lamb. Oh that you would consider betimes what a nothing a thousand years are to Eternity, yea, where you shall be an hundred years hence: if the Grave make no distance betwixt the Scepter and the Mattock; what will Eternity do when that shall make the difference? Wher∣fore I pray measure all your works by Eternity, eat, drink, sleep, work by Eternity; the cry of
a damned soule is, I never minded Eternity; how many are every day carrying faggots to burn them to Eternity? Call that good that holds for ever: Let but the Judge be your Husband, and fear nothing. The ever-living God love you, and keep you to all Eternity, My Child. 31. And because I have brought you so far as the Great Day, give me leave to awaken you with the condition of the place, Heaven, and to let you know it in the par∣ticulars, which are the presence of all good, and the absence of all evil; the former commends it self unto you in these: First, in the universality of it: whereas all things here below are but partial; so in the suitableness of, it they are there spiritual, and suitable to the Spirit. Secondly, for their Continance:
the good things are not like Cher∣ries drawn by the lips, or Com∣forts tasted, and gone; but they stay and are good for ever. Thirdly, Evil knows no place, there Sin cannot dwell with that Holiness, Sorrow cannot mingle it self with that Joy: no more fading Riches, dying Friends, changing Honors, perishing Beau∣ty; no more aking heads, nor languishing diseases; no more hearing the chain of the Prisoner, nor anger of the Oppressor; no cry of what do you lack? every Bottle is full, and every Bed easie, being of never-blasting Roses and Sweets; where every Room is paved with Love; where Wis∣dom, Power, Mercy, and Grace have combined, to make all glo∣rious and pleasant. Then never be troubled about a dunghil-world; when the Apostle to the Thessalo∣nians,
sayes all in a few words, We shall be with the Lord for ever; and that includes all, answers all hard Questions, all hard Labours under the Sun. Remember the Swagge∣rer that met the poor man ever mourning over his sins, (quoth he) What, still mourning? &c. But what if there be no Heaven? Ah Sir, quoth the other, what if there be a Hell? The Doctrine of Hell was never enough preach'd (some thinks) and there on the contrary is the presence of all evil, and the absence of all good; you may study it by the former, where the Tormented never die, and the Tormentor is never weary; where thought and fear, despair, punish∣ment, extremity meet altogether in Eternity. The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve you to his Heavenly Kingdom, My poor Child.
Union with Christ, and Knowledge sound, The Scriptures reade, in Pray'r be found; A constant Watch, and growth in Grace, Good Conscience, Time short, Work apace: Contentment in Condition Low, No Trifling Spirit in you grow, Nor Busie, nor Pragmatical, Truth still appearing in your All, Wisdom directing soon and late, In Calling, and in Marriage-state; The World describ'd in its bad wayes, A Friend indeed beyond all praise;
And Sin the Mother of all Grief, Grace often question'd for relief, With Providences running crosse, Fears sinfull, causing Doubts and Losse; Dayes of Adversity and Evil, Errors that spring from Self and Devil; Sabbath for Rest and Worshipping, And Free-grace pitying, pardoning; With accurate, and holy walking, Hard to believe, though easie talking; Death ghastly looking, and Sins daughter, With Judgment that will follow after:
Heav'n in its great Magnificence, Hell's punishment in Losse and Sense, Are the great things charg'd on thee here, To reade, and minde, and minde (my Dear.) From him, who grieves he hath no more, But Words to leave. Christ be thy Store. 33. And because I know not how the door of Oportunity may stand open or shut, (the Day drawing near of Tryal) I shall give you an account of my Self and dealings, that (if possible) you may wipe off some Dirt, or be the more con∣tent to carry it; in which I shall mainly apply my self to these late troubles I was the Son of considerable
Parents, from Foy in Cornwall; my Father a Merchant, his Ancestors driven thither from Antwerp for Religion, I mean the Reformed; my Mother of the same Town, of a very ancient Family, the Name Treffey of Place, or the Place in that Town, of which I would not boast. These lived in very great abun∣dance, their Losses at Sea grew very great; in the midst of which Losses, my elder Brother being at Oxford, I was sent to Cambridge, and that Estate I had by an Uncle, I left with my Mother, and lived at the University; and a little from thence, about eight years, took my Degree of Master of Arts, where I spent some years vainly enough, being but 14 years old when thither I came, my Tutor died, & I was expos'd to my shifts. Coming from thence, at London
God struck me with the sense of my sinful estate, by a Sermon I heard under Pauls, which was a∣bout 40 years since; which Text was The burden of Dumah, or Idu∣mea, and stuck fast. This made me to go into Essex: And after being quieted by another Sermon in that Country, and the Love and Labours of Mr. Thomas Hooker: I there Preacht, there married with a good Gentlewoman, till I went to London to ripen my Studies, not intending to preach at all; where I attended Dr Gouge Sibs, and Da∣venports Ministry, with others; and I hope, with some profit. But in short time was forced to preach by importunity of Friends, having had a Licence from Dr. Moun∣tain B. of London before, and to Sepulchers I was brought by a ve∣ry strange providence; for preach∣ing before at another place; and a
young man receiving some good, would not be satisfied, but I must preach at Sepulchers once month∣ly for the good of his Friends; in which he got his end (if I might not shew vanity) and he allowed Thirty pounds per Annum to that Lecture, but his person unknown to me: he was a Chandler, and dyed a good man, and Member of Parliament. At this Lecture the Resort grew so great that it con∣tracted envie and anger: Though I believe above an hundred every week were perswaded from sin to Christ. I wish I may not be judged for saying so: There was six or seven thousand Hearers, and the Cir∣cumstances fit for such good work: But I am tender; there I had some trouble, who could not con∣form to all: and went to Holland, where I was five or six years, not
without the presence of God in my Work; But many of my Ac∣quaintance going for New-Eng∣land, had engaged me to come to them when they sent, which ac∣cordingly I did: And truly, my reason for my self and others to go, was meerly, not to offend Au∣thority in that difference of Judg∣ment; and had not the Book for Encouragement of Sports on the Sabbath come forth, many had staid. That good man, my dear firm Friend, Mr. White of Dor∣chester, and Bishop Lake, occasi∣oned, yea, founded, that Work, and much in reference to the In∣dians, of which we did not fail to attempt, with good success to ma∣ny of their souls (through God's blessing) See Bishop Lake's Ser∣mon, 1 King. 8.37. who profest to Mr. White of Dorchester, he would go himself with us, but for his age,
for which we had the late Kings gracious Patent, Licence and En∣couragement. There I continued seven years, till sent hither by the Plantation to mediate for ease in Customes and Excise; the Country being poor, and a tender Plant, of their own setting and manuring. But coming hither, found the Nation imbroiled in those Civil Discontents, Jars and Wars, and here was forced to stay, though I had nothing to support me but the Parliaments Promises; And not being able in a short time to compass my Errand, studied with a constant purpose of Re∣turning, and went with the first to Ireland, most of your London Godly Ministers being engaged in Person, Purse, and Preaching in this Trouble: I thought Ireland the clearest Work, and had the Pay of a Preacher then and after∣ward,
as I could get it; I was not here at Edge-hill, nor the Bishop of Canterburies troubles or death. Upon my Return, was staid again from going home, by the Earl of Warwick my Patron; then by the Earl of Essex, afterwards by the Parliament, who at last gave me an Estate, now taken away. I had access to the King about my New-England business: he used me ci∣villy; I, in requital, offered my poor thoughts three times for his safety; I never had hand in con∣triving or acting his Death, as I am scandalized, but the contrary (to my mean power:) I was never in any Councils or Cabal at any time, I hated it, and had no stow∣ge for Counsel, thinking all Go∣vernment should lie open to all; nor had penny from any General, but lived in debt, as now I am; nor had means for my Expences,
what I had, others shared in. I confesse I did what I did strenu∣ously, though with a weak head being over-laid with my own and others troubles; never was angry with any of the King's Party, no any of them for being so; though the Parliament-Authority lawfull and never studied it much; have not had my hand in any man bloud, but saved many in Lif and Estate. The Parliament i 1644, gave me the Bishops Book valued at 140 l. which I intende for New England, being a part  his private Library, which (wi all mine own) I have often offere for 150 l. the mistake about the was, and is great, for they nev were so considerable: And the were my gettings, who never ai∣ed to be rich, nor ever had mea to reach it. The Changes gr (as you see) a Commonwealth
found, but thus altered; I staid so long at White-hall, contented with any good Government that would keep things together; till the breach of that they call Ri∣chards Parliament, and then I re∣moved, and never returned more, but fell sick long, and in trouble ever since; never was summoned but once by the Council, which was in April, about Books; of which (lying sick) I craved of the President of the Council to ex∣cuse me, who sent unto me he had, and I gave him an account of the Books: but hearing that my E∣state was gone, and I indebted, was private, and did purpose so to live, and so to die, having a resolution (which I kept) never to meddle with State-matters, but either here, or in New-England, to spend my old age, in looking into my Grave and Eternity: and never
had to do with any Transactions, with Souldiers or others; nor ne∣ver would, had I a longer life, my head and heart be tired, as well as my body craz'd: I thought the Act of Indempnity would have in∣cluded me, but the hard Cha∣racter upon me, excluded me, which I was so sensible of, that Nature (in its own preservati∣on) carried me to privacy; but free from that report of the man∣ner which is suggested, of which you may be assured: By my Zeal (it seems) I have exposed my self to all manner of reproach: but wish you to know, that (besides your Mother) I have had no fel∣lowship (that way) with any Wo∣man since first I knew her, having a godly Wife before also, I blesse God. But because what is before written, may seem my white side
only, I shall deal in all plainness with you, That though for Reli∣gion I am and have been really sound and Orthodox to my best apprehension, according to the blessed Word of God, and the generality of the Protestant Con∣fessions; yea, though I travell'd through Protestant Churches for Order, to espy the best, and have joyned with the Churches of Christ, and took in with that I call a Tender Presbytery, for such was ours in New-England, and yet so, as I never unchurcht any Parish where a godly Minister was, and godly People joyned together, though not all so; and do know God may have a People under all Forms, and would withdraw to the furthest Judges, rather than give offence to what I cannot close with: yet so unworthy have my thoughts been of my self to be
a meet Preacher of the Gospel, that more than twice I had given it over, had not Friends prevailed; yea, my profession of the Gospel hath been with much folly, weak∣ness, and vanity: I crave pardon of any that have taken offence, though in a Christian way I have not had the reproofs of Three ei∣ther for Preaching or Conversa∣tion. I am heartily sorry I was Popular, and known better to o∣thers than my self; It hath much lain to my heart above any thing almost, That I left that People I was engaged to in New-England, it cuts deeply, I look upon it as a Root-evil: and though I was never Parson nor Vicar, never took Ecclesiastical promotion, ne∣ver preach'd upon any agreement for money in my life, though not without offers, and great ones; yet I had a Flock, I say I had a Flock,
to whom I was ordained, who were worthy of my Life and La∣bours; but I could never think my self fit to be their Pastor, so un∣accomplisht for such a work, for which, who is sufficient (cryes the Apostle?) This is my sore trouble; and a private life would have be∣come me best, and my poor gift have had its vent also: But here I was overpowered to stay. For Errors in judgment I have pittied, never closed with any that I know; when I was a Tryer of others, I went to hear and gain Experience rather than to judge; When I was called about mend∣ing Laws, I rather was there to pray, than mend Laws; When to judge in Wills, I only went some∣times to learn, and help the Poor, than to judge: but in all these I confesse I might well have been spared.
Nor do I take pleasure in re∣membring any my least activity in State-matters, though this I can say, I no where minded who ru∣led fewer or more, so the good ends of Government be given out, in which men may live in Godliness and Honesty. I have of∣ten said, That is a good Govern∣ment, where men may be as good as they can, not so bad as they would; where good men and things are uppermost; and have thought if good Magistrates cannot bring all to their Judgments, the Dissenters may have liberty, being kept out of Office, and want some other publick Characters. That which a Friend of mine, and my self writ by Letters about Magistrates, was very little, and the Records of the Tower were only named, as giving way to all other Records, to cut off dissentions, or marks of Ty∣ranny,
which no good Prince will exercise; I am sorry if any of∣fended, it was Zeal for Quiet∣nesse. I honour Laws, and good Lawyers heartily, and know their use; only ease, expedition, and cheapness, what good man doth not call for? Sedition is the heat∣ing mens minds against the pre∣sent Authority, in that I never was, yet sorry, Authority should have any hard thoughts of me, or know so inconsiderable a creature as my self: I never could be fit for a Court, many wayes not fit, and am therefore grieved, that I was either constrained, or content to live, where I could do so little good; for I would dye without a secret in my bosom, unless Cases of Conscience in the way of Prea∣ching, which are secret indeed; and for reading them to the World I had appointed a Portion,
if it had been continued to me. Upon all this you may ask what design I drove, being look'd up∣on that way? Truly these three. First, That Goodness, that which is really so, and such Religion, might be highly advanced. Secondly, That good Learning might have all Countenance. Thirdly, That there may not be a Beggar in Israel, in England. And for all these I have pro∣jected or laboured, and I have no other. And these I pray his pre∣sent Majesty may look to, and that God would blesse him every way. If in the prosecution of these I have used any of my wonted rude∣nesse, or unguided zeal, I am heartily as sorry. So begging par∣don from God and Man, Consti∣tution or Custom, I conclude in these particulars, though the aim be good.
I conclude the former thus; I think, That as bad men care not who rule, or what is uppermost, so they may have their lusts; so good men, if they may enjoy God and his Truth, with good Consci∣ence. For my whole course you know and feel where my wound hath been these Twenty years, which hath occasioned not only my Head and Heart breaking, but travelling from mine own Nest in∣to businesse. Blesse God, if ever you meet with suitablenesse in Marriage. For my spirit it wanted weight, through many tossings, my head that composure others have, cre∣dulous, and too careless, but ne∣ver mischievous nor malicious: I thought my work was to serve others, and so mine own Garden not so well culticated; only this I say, I aimed at a good mark,
and trust the Lord in Jesus Christ hath accepted it. My Faith in the Everlasting Covenant was and is, though feeble, yet Faith. I could thus continue, ripping my whole heart to you, who have ve∣ry often had great success, even to the last hour of my last Preach∣ing, and am preaching the life of Faith to my self, to which call in all prayers to the Father in Jesus Christ his dearest Son, to whom let us look, as the Author and Fi∣nisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Crosse, despised the Shame, and now sits at the right hand of Majestie, making Intercession for Transgres∣sors, Heb. 12.12. To whom be Glo∣ry and Praise, and Thanks for ever. For he is worthy, who hath washed us from our sins by his own Bloud, and made us Kings and Priests un∣to God the Father; To him be Glory and Dominion for ever.
For that part of my Lord Cra∣ven's Estate which I have, took no small place in my trouble. You may know that I was not in the City when that Act was made, nor urged my Lord Grey to buy; nor ever advised the said Lord (as I had time) but to good and just things and company, against that Spirit of Levelling then stirring: and do heartily wish, that taken offence might dye; for it was not intended by me, who could and can be as well contented with∣out Land, as with it; never being ambitious to be great or rich since I knew better things. 34. And now I must return to your self again, and to give you my thoughts about your own Condition,. I do first commend you to the Lord, and then to the care of a Faithfull Friend, whom I shall name unto you, if a Friend
may be found in this Juncture, that dare own your Name (though there be more of your Name) and if such a Friend advise it, that you serve in some Godly Family, to which you seem to incline, and must (it seems;) but truly if not a good Family, what will your Condition be? Dwell where God dwells, and be in such Company, as you must be with in Heaven, and then you do but change your place, not your company; though it be unexpected and uncouth, yet remember the best of men have been servants; Moses kept his fa∣thers sheep; so Jacob, and the Pa∣triarchs; David to Saul, and ma∣ny more; I have before given thee Rules for it: and be sure to be steady to Family and Private-Duties, your life will be dead without them; call your Condi∣tion, Gods Ordinance, and he can
blesse it to you. But if you would go home to New-England (which you have much reason to do) go with good Company, and trust God there: the Church are a Ten∣der Company; a little will carry us through the world, yea very little: Oh Godliness with Con∣tent! Your faithfulness to me and your Mother will find accep∣tance in Heaven, I trust. My dear Child, tell me, how couldst thou be without God's Rod? remem∣ber he hath a Staffe also. For your Mother (considering her di∣stemper) I have and shall say more unto you. To his Grace who is able to do above all we can ask or think, I commend you both. And if I go shortly where time shall be no more, where Cock nor Clock distinguish hours, sink not; but lay thy head in his Bo∣som who can keep thee: for he
sits upon the Waves. Farewel. 35. And since we must part, must part; take my Wishes, Sighs and Groans to follow thee, and pitty the feebleness of what I have sent, being writ under much, yea very much discomposure of spirit. My WISHES. I Wish your Lamp and Vessel full of Oyl, Like the Wise Virgins, (which all Fools neglect) And the Rich Pearl, for which the Merchants toyl, Yea, how to purchase are so circumspect: I wish you that White Stone, with the New Name, Which none can reade but who possess the same. I wish you neither Poverty, nor Riches,
But Godlinesse, so gainful, with Content; No painted Pomp, nor Glory that bewitches; A blamelesse Life is the best Monument: And such a Soul that soars above the Skie, Well pleas'd to live, but better pleas'd to die. I wish you such a Heart as Mary had, Minding the Main, open'd as Lydea's was: A Hand like Dorcas, who the Naked clad; Feet like Joanna's, posting to Christ apace. And above all, to live your self to see Marryed to Him, who must your Saviour be.
For ENGLAND, &c. I Wish that Prince and Rulers, all that guide, May be good, and do good; which is God-like: And that their care appear, so to provide, That those of Strength do not the Weaker strike; The End of Rule's from Christian Policy, To live in Godlinesse, and Honesty. I wish Religion truly pure may grow, Above Prophanenesse, and Idolatry, Which strive to nip it, and to keep it low Throughout the World, from the Seeds Enmity:
I wish this present Government surmount All went before, and that in Gods Account. I wish Religion, Learning, and the Poor May find sound Patrons, and that Holy Life Make the distinction still, and that no Door Be stopt, where Christ would enter to his Wife; And that the Saints would learn to suffer, where Nothing can help, more than a Groan, or Tear. Amen, Amen.
Whosoever would Live long and Blessedly, let him observe these Following Rules, by which he shall attain to that which he desireth. Let thy Thoughts Be Divine, Aw∣ful, Godly. Let thy Talk Be Little, Honest, True. Let thy Works Be Profitable, Holy, Charitable. Let thy Manners Be Grave, Courte∣ous, Cheerful. Let thy Dyet Be Temporate, Con∣venient, Frugal. Let thy Apparil Be Sober, Neat, Comely. Let thy Will Be Confiant, Obedi∣ent, Ready. Let thy Sleep Be Moderate, quiet, Seasonable. Let thy Prayers Be Short, Devout, Often, Fervent. Let thy Recreation Be Lawful, Brief, Seldom. Let thy Memory Be Of Death, Pun∣nishment, Glory. FINIS.
