P2285 13471083 99693
PISO'S CONSPIRACY, A Tragedy Acted at the DUKE's THEATRE. LONDON, Printed by T. M. for W. Cademan, at the Popes-Head, in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, in the Strand, 1676.
PROLOGUE. IN Plays, it has been a long Practis'd Cheat, To make large Bills of Fare, t'aslender Treat. So have You seen, a Huge Large Sheet appear In Praise o'th' Beauty of Miss-Non-so-Fair: But We more Modestly intend t' abuse You; Wee'l tell You before-hand how ill Wee'l use You. Expect to see a Wond'rous Sight, as rare As Indian Elephant, or Norwich-Bear. Expect grave Strut, big Looks, and thund'ring Speeches, From Hero, made up by the Force of Breeches. Aye, and a good Sbift too: For, under the Rose, Whil'st we look big by Vertue of Our Cloaths, And, Hero like, talk what We cannot do, We're much such Blusterers as some of You. Besides Our Men Players are out of Heart Of being seen in an Heroick Part: What, with Prince Nick, and t'other House Gallants, They have run Hero's out of Countenance? We for Heroick's then. 'Tis Our last Plot; And Gentlemen, like Us, or like Us not; All's one; For Gallants, We have tryed all Arts, From a Sir Martin to a Man of Parts, And all won't do; therefore We are so hardn'd By the Critiques Rage, that past all hopes of Pardon. Do well or ill, We are resolved to tease You, And 'tis high time when all Our Tricks can't please You.
Actors Names. Nero, Emperour of Rome. Nimphidius, A Noble Man of Rome, and Favourite to Poppea. Tigellinus, Nero's Creditour. Neophilus, Epophiriditus, Petronius. Courtiers. Antonius, in Love with Poppea. Flavius, A Commander in the Army. Piso, Seneca, Lucan, Scevinus, Senators, and Noble Men of Rome. Memicus, Scevinus's Free-Man. Three Romans.   Poppea, The Empresse. Pages, Guards, and Attendants. SCENE ROME.
Piso's CONSPIRACY. ACTUS PRIMUS. Enter Petronius, and Antonius. Petronius. TAke the Wench I shew'd thee now, or else go seek some other. What, can your Choller no way be allay'd, But with Imperial Titles: Anto. Great are thy Fortunes Nero, great thy Power: Thy Empire Limited with Natures bounds; Upon thy Ground the Sun doth Set, and Rise: The Day, and Night are thine: Nor can the Planets wander where they will: See that Proud Earth, that fears not Casars Name;
Yet nothing of all this I envy thee; But her to whom the World unforc't Obeys; Whose Eye's more Worth, than all it looks upon, That are through the Wide Earth, or Heaven dispos'd. Pet. Indeed, she steals and robs each part oth'World, With borrow'd Beauties, to enflame the Eye; The Sea, to fetch her Pearl, is div'd into; The Diamond Rocks are cut to make her shine: To Plume her Pride, the Birds do naked sing, When my Euanthe, in a Homely Gown— Ant. Homely, I Faith. Pet. I, Homely, in her Gown; But look upon her Face, and that's set out With no small Grace, no vailed Shadow's there. Enter Poppea, Royally Attended, who Passes over the Stage in State. Ant. Great Queen, whom Nature made to be her Glory, Fortune got Eyes, and came to be thy Servant. Honour is Proud to be thy Title, though Thy Beauties do draw up my Soul; Yet still, So Bright, so Glorious is thy Majesty, That it beats down again my Climbing Thoughts. Pet. That's true; But give me a Wench, that will be easily had, Not Woed with Cost; And being sent for, comes: And when I have her folded in my Arms, Then Cleoptra she, or Lucrecis: I'le give her any Title. Ant. Yet not so much her Greatness and Estate. My Hopes dishearten, as her Chastity. Pet. Chastity! Fool, a word not known in Courts: Well may it lodge in Mean, and Country Homes, Where Poverty, short Sleep, and Labour keeps'em down, But never comes to Great Men's Palaces, Where Ease, and Riches, stirring Thoughts beget; Provoking Meats, and Surseit VVines, inflame:
Where all their setting forth's, but to be Weed; And Woed they would not be, but to be won. Will one Man serve Poppea? Nay, thou shalt Make her as soon Contented with an Eye. Enter Nimphidius. Nim. Whilst Nero, in the Streets his Pageants shews, I am sent for to his Fair Wife's Chamber: You Gracious Stars that smil'd upon my Birth; And thou Bright Star, more Powerful than them all, Whose Favouring Smiles have made me what I am, [Exit Nim. Ant. How Sawcily you Fellow Enters the Empresse Chamber 1 Pet. I, and her too. Antonius, knowest thou him: Ant. What! know the only Favorite of the Court! Indeed, not many dayes ago, thou mightest Have not unlawfully Ask'd that Question. Pet. Why: Is he Rais'd; Ant. That I have sought in him; But never Piece of Good Desert could find: He is Nimphidia's Son, the Free'd Woman, Which baseness to shake off he nothing has, But his own Pride. Pet. You remember, when Gallus, Celsus, And others too, though now forgotten, were Great in Poppea's Eyes. Ant. I do, and did interpret it in them An Honourable Favour she bore to Vertue, Or Parts like Vertue. Pet. Faith, 'Tis my Opinion then the Fault was their's, That their better Qualities were ne'r understood: I once was great in wavering Smiles of Court; I fell, because I knew: since I have given My time to my own Pleasures, and would now Advise thee too to mean and safe Delight's.
The Skin's as soft which the Sheep's Back covers, As that with Crimson, and with Gold Adorn'd: Yet 'cause I see, that thy Restrain'd Desires, Cannot their own Way chuse; along with me, And by my President, Converted be. [Exeunt. Enter Three Romans. 3. Rom. Whither go You? all's done I'th'Capitol; And Nero, having there his Tables hung, And Garlands up, is to the Palace gon. 'Twas beyond Wonder! I shall never see, Nay, I never Look to see the like again; Eighteen Hund'red and Eight Crowns, For several Victories, and the Place set down, Where, and in What, and Whom he Over came. 2 Ro. That was set down I'th'Tables, that were born Upon the Souldiers Spear's. 1 Ro. The Romans were once used for other Ends. But did he Win them all with Singing? 3 Ro. Faith, all with Singing, and with Stage-Playing. 1 Ro. So many Crowns got with a Song! 3 Ro. Had you been there, you had seen the Greek Musicians▪ Behind the Chariot, Hanging down their Heads; Sham'd, and o're-come in their Professions: O! Rome was never Honour'd so before! 2 Ro. But what was he that Rode I'th'Chariot with him? 3 Ro. That was Diodorus the Minstrel, that he favours. 1 Ro. Was there ever such a Prince? 2. Ro. O Nero Augustus, the true Augustus! 3. Ro. Nay, had you seen him as he Rode along, With an Olympick Crown upon his Head, And with a Pythian on his Arm; You would have thought, Looking on one, he had Apollo seem'd: On th'other, Hercules, 1 Ro. I have heard my Father ost repeat the Triumphs, Which in Augustus Caesar's tlmes were shown Upon his Victory o're the Illirians;
But it seems it was not like to this. 3 Ro. Push, it could nor be like this. 2 Ro. O Nero Apollo, Nero Hercules! [Exeunt, the 2. and 3. Rom. 1 Ro. Whether Augustus Triumph Greater was I cannot tell; his Triumph's Cause I know Was Greater far, and sar more Honourable. What are we People, or our Flattering Voices, That always Shame and Foolish things Applau'd, Having no Spark of Soul? all Ears and Eyes, Pleas'd with Vain Showes, Deluded by our Senses. [Exit SCENE. the Second. Enter Nero, Poppea, Nimphidius, Tigellinus, Epaproditus, Neophylus, and Guards and Attendants. Ner. Now Fair Poppea, see thy Nero shine In Bright Achaias Spoyls, and Rome in him. The Capitol hath other Trophies seen, Than it was wont; not Spoyls with Blood bedew'd, Or the Unhappy Obsequies of Death. Tig. And in this Strise, the Glory's all your own; Your Tribunes cannot share this Praise with you; Here your Centurions have no part at all. Bootless your Armies, and your Eagles were: No Navies helpt to bring away this Conquest. Nim. Even Fortunes self, Fortune the Queen of Kingdoms. (That Wars Grim Valour graceth with her Deeds) Will claim no Portion in this Victory. Ner. Not Bacchus drawn from Nisa down with Tygers So strook the amaz'd Indian's with wonder, As Nero's Glories did the Greekish Towns Elis and Pisa; and the Rich Micaena, Argos, and Corinth, Proud of her too Sea's; All which o're come, did yield to me their Praise, And Prises of their Games.
Pop. Yet, in your Greekish Journey, we do hear Sparla, and Athens, the two Eyes of Greece, Neither beheld your Person, nor your Skill: Whether, because they did afford no Games, Or for their too much Gravity. Ner. Why? what, Should I have seen in them? but in the One Hunger and Poverty? And what in the other, but Old Fools, Long Beards; Much Wrangling in things Needless to be known: Wisdom in Words, and only Austere faces? Nero was there, where he might Honour Winn. And Honour he has Won, and brought from Greece Those Spoyls, which never Roman could obtain: Spoyls won by Wit, and Trophys of his Skill. Nim. What a thing he makes it to be a Minstril [aside Pop. I praise your Wit, my Lord, that Chose such safe Honours, safe Spoyls, won without Dust or Blood. Ner. What, do you Mock us Poppea? Pop. No, my good Lord, I speak in earnest, I hate that hardy, and Adventurous Crew, That go to Lose their own, to Purchase but The Breath of others, and the Common Voyce; Them that will Lose their hearing for a Sound; That by Death only seek to get a Living, Make Skarrs their Beauty, and count Loss of Limbs The Commendation of a proper man; And so go Halting to Immortality: Such Fools I Love worse than they do their Lives. Ner. But now, Poppea, having lay'd apart Our boasted Spoyls, and Ornaments of Triumph, Come we like Jove to Court thee, But thou (then wrangling Juno) far more fair, Staining the Evening Beauty of the Sky, Or the Days Brightness; shalt make glad thy Casar, Shalt make him Proud such Beauties to enjoy. But Nimph. Exeunt all. Nim. Such Beauties to injy were Happiness,
And a Reward sufficient in it self, Although no other End, or Hopes were aim'd at: But I have other; 'Tis not Poppea's Arms, Nor the short Pleasures of a Wanton Bed, That can Extinguish my Aspiring Thirst To Nero's Crown; by her Love I must Climb; Her Bed is but a step unto his Throne. Already, Wise men Laugh at him, and Hate him; The People, though his Musick Pleases 'em, They fear his Cruelty, Hate his Exactions, Which his Need, still, must force him to Encrease: The Multitude, which cannot one thing long Like, or Dislike, being cloy'd with Vanity, Will Hate their own Delights: though Wisdom do not; Even Weariness, at Length, will give them Eyes. Thus I; by Nero's and Poppea's Favour Rais'd to the Envious Height of Second Place, May gain the First: Hate must strike Nero down. Love make Nimphidius Way unto a Crown. [Exit. SCENE the Third. Enter Seneca, Scevinus, and Lucan. Sce. His First beginning was his Father's Death, His Brother's Poysoning; and his Wife's Bloody End Came next; his Mother's Murder clos'd up all: Yet hitherto he was but Wicked, when The Guilt of Greater Evils took away the Shame Of Lesser, and did Head-long thrust him forth To be the Scorne, and Laughter to the World: Then first an Emperour came upon the Stage, And Sung to please the Mean and Sensless Rabble; And Learn't to Act, to Dance, to be a Fencer. And in Despight o'th' Majesty of Princes, He fell to Wrestling, and was soyl'd with Dust, And tumbled on the Earth with Servise Hands.
Sen. He sometimes was trayn'd up in better Studies, And had a Child-Hood promis'd other hopes; High Fortunes, like Strong VVinds, do try their Vessels▪ VVas not the Race, and Theatre big enough To have inclos'd thy Follies here at Home? O! Could not Rome, and Italy contain Thy Shame, But thou must Cross the Sea's to shew it? Sce. And make them, that had wont to see our Consuls With Conqu'ring Eagles waving in the Field, Instead of that, behold an Emperour Dancing, Playing on the Stage; and what else but to Name VVere Infamy. Luc. O Mummius, O Flaminius; You, whom your Vertues have not made more Famous, Than Nero's Vices; You went to Greece, But to other Wars, and brought Home other Conquests. You, Corinth and Micana overthrew; And Perseus self, the Great Achilles Race O'e-came; having Minérvas stain'd Temples, And your Slain Ancestor's of Troy Reveng'd. Sen. They strove with Kings, and kind-like Adversaries, Were even in their Enemies made happy. The Macedonian Courage tryed of Old, And the New Greatness of the Syrian Power: But he for Philip and Antiochus Hath found more Easy Enemies to deal with, Turpuus, Pammenes, and a Rout of Fidlers. Sce. Why all the begging Minstrills by the way He took along with him, and forc'd to Play, That he might over come; Imagining Himself Immortal by such Victories. Luc. The Men he carryed over were enough T'have put the Parthian to his Second Flight: Or the Proud Indian taught the Roman Yoke. Sce. But they were Nero's Men, like Nero Arm'd With Lutes, and Harps, and Pipes, and Fiddle-Cases; Souldiers to th' Shadow train'd, and not the Field. Sen. Therefore they brought home Spoyls fit for such Soldiers.
Luc. But to throw down the Walls and Gates of Rome, To make an Entrance for an Hobby-Horse; To vaunt to th'People his Ridiculous Spoyles; To come with Lawrel, and with Olives Crown'd, For having been the Worst of all the Singers, Is beyond Patience! Sce. I, and Anger too; Had you but seen him in his Chariot ride. That Chariot in which Augustus late His Triumphs o're so many Nations shew'd, And with him in the same a Minstrell play'd; The whil'st the People running by his side, Haile thou Olympick Conquerour did cry, O haile thou Pythian, and so fill'd the Sky With Shame, and Voices, Heaven would not have heard. Sen. I saw't, but turn'd away my Eyes and Ears, Angry they should be privy to such Objects: Why do I stand relating of the Story, Which in the doing had enough to grieve me? Tell on, and end the Tale, you whom it pleaseth; Me, my own Sorrow stops from further speaking. Nero, my Love doth make thy Fault, and my Grief greater. Sce. I do Commend thy Passion, Seneca; And yet methinks our Countrie's Miseries, Do at our Hands crave some what more than Tears. Luc. Let Children Weep, and Men seek Remedy. Sce. Stoutly spoke, and like a Souldier, Lucn. Yet to seek Remedy t'a Princes ill, Seldom, but it doth the Physitian kill. Luc. And if it do, Scevinus, it shall take But a Devoted Soul from Lucan; VVhich to my Country, and the Gods of Rome, Already sacred is, and given away: Death is no Stranger to me, I have The doubtful hazard in Twelve Battels thrown, My Chance was Life. Sce. Nothing is hard to them that dare to dy. This Noble Resolution in you, Lords,
Heartens me to disclose some Thoughts that I— The Matter is of Weight and Dangerous. Luc. I see you fear us Scevinus. Sce. No, no, although the thing be full of Fear.— Sen. Tell it to Faithful Ears, what e'r it be. Sce. Faith, let it go, it will but trouble us, Be hurtful to the Speaker, and the Hearer. Luc. If our Long Friendship, or the Opinion— Sce. Why should I fear to tell them? Why, is he not a Parricide, a Player? Nay, Lucan, is he not thine Enemy? And You, O Righteous God's, Whithersoe'r you now are fled, and will No more look down upon th'Oppressed Earth: O Severe Anger of the Highest God's; And you Stern Powers, to whom the Greek's assigne Scourges, and Swords to punish Proud Men's Wrongs, If you be more than Names found out to Awe us; And that we do not vainly build you Altars: Aid that just Arm that's bent to Execute What you should do. Luc. Stay, you are carrried too much away, Scevinus. Sce. Why, Lucan, what will you say for him? has he not Sought to surpress your Poem? to bereave That Honour, Every Tongue in Duty pay'd it? Nay, has he not— Stab'd his own Wife's (a Chast Wife's) Brest, and torn With Scythian Hands his Mother's Bowels up? The Inhospitable Caucasus is milde: The Moor, that in the boyling Desart seeks With Blood of Strangers to Imbrue his Jawes, Upbraids the Roman now with barbarousness. Luc. You are too Earnest, I neither can, nor will I speak for him: And though he sought to wrong my Learned Pains, I hate him not for that: my Verse shall live, When Nero's Body shall be thrown in Tiber; I hate him that he is Rome's Enemy,
An Enemy to Vertue; sits on high To shame the Seat: And in that hate, my Life And Blood I'le mingle on the Earth with yours. Sen. My Deeds Scevinus shall speak my Consent. Sce. 'Tis answer'd, as I look'd for, Noble Poet, Worthy the double Lawrel, Lucan. Good Luck, I see, does Vertuous Meanings aid: And therefore have the Heav'ns for-born their Duty, To Grace our Swords with Glorious Blood of Tyrants. [Exeunt. Finis Actus Primi. ACTUS SECUNDUS. Scene the First. Enter Petronius. Pet. HEre waites Poppea he Nimphidius coming, And hath this Garden, and these VValls chose out, To bless her with more Pleasures than their own: Not only Arras Hangings, and Silk-Beds Are guilty of the Faults we blame them for; Some-what these Arbots, and these Trees do know, VVhil'st their kind shades you to these Night-Sports show. Night-Sports, Faith, they are done in open Day, And the Sun see'th, and envies at their Play. Hither have I Love sick Antonius brought: And thrust him on Occasion so long sought: Shew'd him the Empresse in a thicket by, Her Love's approach waiting with greedy Ey; And told him, If he ever meant to prove The Doubtful issue of his Hopeless Love This is the place: but see they're coming; How they agree, here will I stand and hearken. [Abscondit.
Enter Poppea, and Antonius. Ant. Seek not to grieve that Heart which is thy own In Love's sweet Fires let Heat of Rage burn out. These Browes could never yet to wrinkle Learn, Nor Anger out of such Fair Eyes proceed. Pop. You may sollicit your presumptuous Suits You Duty may and Shame too lay aside, Disturb my Privacies, and I, good Sir, Must be afear'd even to be angry at you. Ant. What Shame is't to be mast'red by such Beauties? Who but to serve you comes, how wants he Duty? Or if it be a Shame, the Shame is yours, The Fault is only in your Eyes, they drew me: Cause you were Lovely, therefore did I Love. Oh! if to love you anger you so much, You should not have such Cheeks, nor Lips to touch; You should not have your Snow nor : If you but look on us, in vain you chide: We must not see your Face, nor hear your Speech: Now Whil'st you love forbid; you Love do teach. Pet. He do's better, than I thought he would. Pop. I will not learn my Beauties-worth of you; I know you neither are the First, nor Greatest, Whom it hath mov'd: He, whom the World obeyes, Is fear'd with anger of my Threatning Eyes: It is sor you a far off to adore it, And not to reach at it with sawcy Hands: Fear is the Love that's due to Gods and Princes. Pet. All this is but to Edge his Appetite. Ant. O do not see thy Face in that False Glasse Os outward Difference: Look into my Heart, There shalt thou see thy self sitting Inthron'd In greater Majesty, than all the Pompe of Rome, or Nero; 'Tis not the Crouching Awe, And Ceremony, with which we flatter Pinces, That can to Love's true Duties be compar'd. Pop. Sir, let me go, or I'le make known your Love To them that shall requite it.
Pet. On, on thou hast the Goale, the Fot is beaten. Women are won, when they begin to threaten. Ant. Your Nobleness do's warrant me for that; Nor need you others help to punish me: For by your Frowns I am condemn'd, or freed. They, that to be reveng'd do bend their mind, Seek always Recompence in that same kind The wrong was done em: Love was my Offence, In that Revenge; in that seek Recompence. Pop. To answer further, will still cause Replies, And those as ill do please me as your self: If you'l an Answer take, that's brief and true, I hate my self for being lov'd by you. [Exit: Pet. What gone! but she will come again sure: No; It passes clean my Cunning, all my Rules; For Women's Wantonness there is no Rule, To take her in the Height of her Desires: A Young and Brisk and Impudent Gallant too, To miss the Mark! hard Fates, 'tis very Cruel. Ant. O Unhappy Man! What Comfort have I now Petronius? Pet. Counsel your self, I'le Teach no more, but Learn. Ant. This Comfort yet, he shall not so escape, Who causeth this contempt, Nimphidius; VVhom had I here,—well, 'tis for his sake, I see, she hates me; and shall I love one That hates me, and bestowes what I deserve. Upon my Rival? no, fare-well, Poppea, Fare-well, and fare-well to all Love: Yet, thus much shall it still prevaile in me, That I will hate Nimphidius for thee. Pet. Fare-well to her, to my Euanthe well-come, VVho, now, will to my burning Kisses stoop; Now, with an Easie Cruelty deny, That, which she, rather than the Asker, would Have forced from her, then begins her self. Their Loves, that list, upon great Ladies set; I still will love the Cheapest I can get. [Exeunt.
SCENE the Second, Nero's Palace. Enter Nero, Tigellinus, Epaphroditus, and Nimphidius. Ner. Tigellinus, say'd the Villain Proculus I was thrown down in running? Tig. My Lord, he say'd, that you were Crown'd for that You could not do. Ner. For that I could not do? VVhy? Elis saw me do't, and do't with VVonder Of all the Judges and the Lookers on; And yet to see a Villain; Could not do't! VVho did it better? I warrant you he say'd, I from the Chariot fell against my will. Tig. He said my Lord, you were thrown out of it, All crush't and maim'd, and almost bruis'd to Death. Ner. Malicious Rogue, when I fell willingly, To show of Purpose, with what little Hurt Might a Good Rider bear a forced Fall: How sayest thou, Tigellinus? I am sure Thou hast in Driving as much skill as he? Tig. My Lord, you greater Cunning shew'd in falling, Than had you sate. Ner. I know I'did; Bruis'd in my Fall? Hurt! I protest, I felt it not. Go, Tigellinus, fetch me the Villain's Head; This makes me see his Heart in other things. Fetch me his Head, he ne'r shall speak again: [Exit Tig. What do we Princes differ srom the Dust, And baseness of the Common Multitude, If we are subject to the Scorn Of each Malicious Tongue? say, That I had no skil! When all that saw me gaz'd with Admiration: The People follow'd with their Eyes and Voice. And now the Wind do's see it self out-run, And the Clouds wonder to be left behind;
Whil'st the Void Air is fill'd with noyse, And Nero's Name sounds to the Sky: Jupiter envying, loth to hear my Praise: Then their Green Bows, and Crowns of Olive. VVreath's The Conquerout's Praise, they give me as my due, And Yet this Rogue say's, no, we have no skill. Enter Neophilus. Neop. My Lord, the Stage and all the Furniture— Ner. I have no skill to drive a Chariot: Had he but rob'd me, broke my Treasury: The Red-Sea's mine, mine are the Indian Stones, The World's mine own, then cannot I be rob'd: But spightfully to undermine my Fame, To take away my Art: He would my Life As well, no doubt, could he told how. Enter Tigellinus, and Executioner, with Proculus's Head. Neop. My Lord, Tigellinus is come with Proculus Head. Ner. Give him Five Hund'red Sesterces for amends. Hast 'brought him, Tigellinus? Tig. Here's his Head, my Lord. Ner. His Tongue had been enough. Tig. I did as you commanded me, my Lord. Ner. Now are you quiet? This 'tis to be Commander of the World: Let them extoll weak Pity that do need it. Let Men cry to have Law and Justice done, And tell their Griefs to Heaven, that hear's them not. Kings must upon their headless Peoples Graves Walk to Security, and Ease of Mind. VVhy, what have we to do with the Airy Names (That Old Age, and Philosophers found out) Of Justice and of Equity?
The God's Revenge themselves, and so will we. VVhere Right is scand, Authority is over-thrown: VVe have a High Prerogative above it. Slaves may do what is Just, VVe what we please. The People will repine, and think it ill; But they must bear, and praise too what we will. Enter Cornutus. Neop. My Lord, Cornutus, whom you sent for's, come. Ner. Well-come good Cornutus, Are all things ready for the Stage, As I gave Order? Cor. They only stay your Coming. Ner. Cornutus, I must Act to day Orestes. Cor. You have done that already; and too truly. [Aside. Ner. And when our Scene is done, I mean besides, To Read some Compositions of my own: Which for the Great Opinion of my self, And Rome in General, of my Judgment has, Before I publish them I'le shew'em thee. Cor. My Lord, my Disabilities— Ner. I know thy Modesty; I'le only show thee now my Workes beginning: Go see, Epaphroditus, Th' Musick be ready, I will Sing to Day. Cornutus, I pray thee come near, And let me hear thy Judgment in my Pains: I would have thee more familiar, good Cornutus: Nero do's prize Desert, and more esteems Them, that in Knowledge second him, than Power. Mark, with what Stile, and State, my VVork begin's? Cor. Might not my Interruption offend, What's your Work's name, my Lord? what write you of? Ner. I mean to write the Deed's of all the Romans. Cor. Of all the Romans? a huge Argument! Ner. I have not yet bethought me of a Title.
You Aethereal Power's, which the wide Fortunes doom [Reads. Of Empire Crown'd, Seven. Mountain-seated Rome, Full blown Inspire me with Machilaean Rage, That I may bellow out Romes Prentisage. And when the Menades do fill their Drums, And Crooked Hornes with Mimalonean Humms, And Ennion do Ingeminate a round, Which Reparable Eccho do resound. How dost'thou like our Muse's pains, Ctus Cor. The Verses have more in'em, than I see: Your Work, my Lord, I fear will be too long. Ner. Too long? Tig. Too long? Cor. I, if you write the Deeds of all the Roman's How many Books think you t'include it in? Ner. I think to write about Four Hund'red Books. Cor. Four Hund'red! why, my Lord, they'l ne'r be read. Ner. Ha! Tig. Why, he whom you esteem so much, Crisippus, Wrote many more. Cor. But they were profitable to Common Life, And taught Men Honesty, and Wisdom. Ner. Tigellinus. [Exit, Nero, and his Train. Cor. See with what Earnestness he crav'd my Judgment, And now he freely has it, how it likes him. Neop. The Prince is angry, and his Fall is near: I'le begon, least I partake his Ruines. [Exit Neoph. Cor. What should I do at Court? I cannot ly. Why did'st thou call me, Nero, from my Book? Did'st thou for Flattery of Cornutus look? No, let those Purple Fellows that stand by thee (That admire Shew, and things that thou can'st give,) Leave to please Truth, and Vertue, to please thee. Nero, there's nothing in thy Power Cornutus Do's wish or fear. Enter Tigellinus. Tig. 'Tis Nero's Pleasure, that you straight depart
To Giara, and there remain Confin'd: Thus he, out of his Princely Clemency, Hath Death, your due, turn'd but to Banishment. Cor. Why Tigellinus? Tig. I have done, upon you Peril go, or stay. [Exit Tig. Cor. And why should Death, or Banishment be due For speaking Truth, or that which was requir'd, my Thought? O why do Princes love to be deceiv'd? And do even force Abuses on themselves? Their Eares are so with pleasing Speech beguil'd, That Truth they Malice, Flattery Truth account; And their own Soul, and Understanding's lost. Alas, weak Prince, how hast thou punish't me, To Banish me from thee? O let me go And dwell in Taurus, dwell in Ethiope, So that I do not dwell at Rome with thee. The further still I go from hence, I know Thee farther I leave shall, and Vice behind. Where can I go, but I shall see the Sun? And Heaven will be as near me still as here. Can they so far a Knowing Soul Exile, That her own Roof, she see not o're her Head? [Exit. SCENE the Third. Enter Piso, Scevinus, and Lucan. Piso. Noble Gentlemen, what Thanks, what Recompence Shall he give you, that gives to him the World? One Life to them, that must so many venture; And that, the worst of all, is too Mean Pay: Yet can I give no more: Take that, bestow it Upon your Service. Luc. O Piso, that vouchsafest To grace our Headless Party with thy Name, Whom having our Conductor, we need not Fear to go against the wel-try'd Vallour
Of Julius, or Stayedness of Augustus; Much less the Shame, and Woman-hood of Nero. Sce. We are contented with the Galling Yoke, If he will only leave us Necks to bear it. We seek no longer Freedom, we seek Life; At least not to be Murder'd: Let us dy On Enemies Swords. Shall We, whom neither The Median Bow, nor Macedonian Spear, Nor the Fierce Gaule nor Painted Briton could Subdue, lay down our Necks to Tyrant's Axe? Why do we talk of Vertue, that obey Weakness, and Vice? Pis. Have Patience, good Scevinus. Luc. Weakness and Servile, Government we've hithert Obey'd: which that we may no longer, We have our Lives and Fortunes now set up, And have our Cause with Piso's Credit strengthened; Which makes it doubtfull, whether Love to him, Or Nero's Hatred hath drawn more to us. Pis. I see the Good Thoughts you have of me, Lords; Let's now proceed to th' purpose of our Meeting: I pray you take your Places. Let's have some Paper brought. Sce. Who's within there? Mil. My Lord. [Enter Milichus. Sce. Some Ink and Paper. Exit Mili. and En∣ters again with Ink and Paper. Luc. Who's that, Scevinus? Sce. It is my Freed-Man Milichus. Luc. Is he trusty? Sce. I for greater Matters, than we are about Pis. And those are great Ones. Luc. I ask not that we mean to need his Trust: Gain hath great Soveraignty o're Servile Minds. Sce. O but my Benefits have bound him to me. I from a Bond-man have his State not only Advanc't to Freedom, but to Wealth and Credit. Pis. Melichus, wait i'th' next Chamber till we call. The thing Determin'd on our Meeting now
Is of the Means and Place due Circumstance; So done it names the Action. Mel. I wonder, What makes this New Resort to haunt our House. When wonted Seneca, Piso to come hither? Or Lucan when so ost, as now of late? [Aside. Pis. And since the Field and open shew of Arms Dislike you; and that for the General Good You mean to end all Stirs in end of him: That, as the Ground, must first be thought upon. Mel. Besides, this coming cannot be for Form, Or Visitation; they go aside— [Aside. And have long Conferences by themselves. Luc. Riso, his coming to your House at Baia, To Bath, and Banquet, will fit meanes afford Amid'st his Cups to end his Hated Life. Let him dy Drunk, that ne'r liv'd soberly. Pis. O be it far, that I should stain my Table, And Gods of Hospitality with Blood: Let not our Cause (now Innocent) be soyl'd With such a Blot, nor Piso's Name made hatefull. What Place can better fit our Action, Than his own House, That boundless envy'd heap, Built with the Spoyls and Blood of Citizens: Luc. But 'twill be hard to do it in his House, And hard to escape, being done. Pis. Not so, Rufus, the Captain of his Guard's with us; And divers others of the Pretorian Band Already's our's: Many, though unacquainted With our intents, have had Disgrace and Wrongs, Which grieve them still: Most will be glad of, And even they that lov'd him best, when once chang'd They see him gone, will smile o'th' Coming Times, Let go things past, and look to their own Safety. Besides the Astonishment and Fear will be So great, so suddain, that 'twill hinder them from doing any thing.
Mel. No Private Business can concern them All. [Aside Their Countenances are troubled, and look sad; Doubt and Importance in their Face is read. Luc. Yet still I think it were Safer t'attempt him Private and alone. Pis. But 'twill not carry that Opinion with it; 'Twill seem more soul, and come from Private Malice. Brutus and his Confederates to right the Common Cause Did chuse a publick Place. Sce. Our Deed is honest; why should it seek Corners? 'Tis for the People done, let them behold it: Let me have them a Witness of my Truth; 'Tis love to the Common-Wealth: the Danger's great; So is the Glory. Why should our Pale Counsels Tend whither Fear, rather than Vertue call's 'em? I do not like these cold Considerings. First let our Thought lookup to what is honest; Next what is safe: If Danger may deter us; Nothing that's great or good shall e'r be done. And when we first gave hands upon this Deed To th' Commons Safety, we our own gave up. Let no Man venture on a Prince's Death, How bad soever, with belief to escape: Despair must be our Hope, Fame our Reward: To make the general Liking to concur With others, were even to strike him in his Shame, Or (as he thinks) his Glory on the Stage; And so too truly make't a Tragedy; When all the People cannot chuse but clap So sweet a Close: and 'twill not Casar be, That shall be kill'd, a Roman Prince: 'Twill be , or blind Oedipus. Mel. And if it be of Publick Matters, 'tis not Like to be talk, or idle Fault-finding, On which the Coward only spends his Wisdome: These are all Men of Action, and of Spirit, [Aside. And dare perform, what they determine on.
Luc. What think you of Poppea, Tigellinus, And the other odious Instruments of Court? Were it not best at once to rid them all? Sce. I, Casars Ruine, Anthony was spar'd. Let's not our Cause with Needless Blood distain; One only mov'd, the Change will not appear, When too much License given to the Sword, Though against ill, will make even good men fear: Besides, things settled, you at pleasure may By Law and Publick Judgment have'em try'd. Mel. And if it be but talk of State, 'tis Treason; Like it they cannot, that they cannot do: If seek to mend it, and remove the Prince, That's highest Treason: Change his Counsellors, That's Alteration of the Government, The Common Cloak that Treason's muffled in: If laying Force aside, to seek by Sute And fair Petition to have the State Reform'd, That's Tutoring of the Prince, and takes away Th'one his Person, the other his Soveraignty: Barely to talk in Private shew's Dislike [aside. Of what is done; therefore the Action Mislikes you, 'cause the Doer likes you not. Men are not fit to live i'th' State they hate. Pis. Though we would all have that employment, Yet since your worthy Forwardness, Scevinus, Prevent's us, and so nobly begs for Danger: Be yours the Chosen Hand to do the Deed; The Fortune of the Empire speed your Sword. Sce. Vertue, and Heaven speed it. O you Home-born Of our Country, Romulus, and Vesta, That Thuscan, Tiber, and Rome's Tower defend, Forbid not yet at length a happy End To Former Evils: Let this Hand Revenge The Injur'd World: Enough we now have suffered. Mel. Tush, all this long Consulting's more [Exit all but Melichus. Than words, It ends not there; they've some Attempt, some Plot,
Against the State. Well, I'le observe it farther, And, if I find it, mke my Profit of it. [Exit. Finis Actus Secundi. ACTUS TERTIUS. Enter Poppea. Pop. I Look't Nimphidius would have come ere this: Makes he no greater haste to our Embraces? Or does the Easiness abate his Edge? Or seem we not as Fair still as we did? Or is he so with Nero's Playing won, That he before Poppea does preser it? Or does he think to have Occasion still? To have time to wait on our stoln Meetings? [Enter Nimphidius. But ee, his Presence now does end those Doubts. What is't Nimphidius has so long detain'd you? Nim. Faith Madam, Causes strong enough; High Wall's, bard Doors, and Guards of armed Men. Pop. Were you Imprison'd then as you were going To the Theatre? Nim. Not in my going, Madam, But, in the Theatre I was Imprison'd: For, after he was once upon the Stage, The Gates were more severely look't unto, Then at a Town besieg'd: No Man, no Cause Was Currant; no, nor passant; at other Sights The Strife is only to get in, but here The Strife was all in getting out again: Had we not been kept to it so, I think, 'Twould not have been so tedious; though I know,
Twas hard to judg, whether his doing of it were more absur'd, than 'twas for time to do it. But when we once were forc't to be Spectators, Compel'd to that which should have been a Pleasure, We could no longer bear the Wearisomness. No Pain so irksome, as a forc't Delight: Some fell down Dead, or seem'd at least to do so, Under that Colour to be carryed forth. Pop. If 'twere so straitly kept, how got you forth? Nim. Faith Madam, I came pretending Haste In Face and Countenance; told'em I was sent For things by th'Prince forgot about the Scene; Which both my Credit made'em to believe, And Nero newly whisper'd me before. Thus did I pass the Gates; the danger, Madam, I have not yet escap't. Pop. What Danger mean you? Nim. The Danger of his Anger, when he knows How I thus shrunk away; for there stood Knaves, That put down in their Tables all that stir'd, And mark't in each their Chearfulness, or Sadness. Pop. I warrant, I'le excuse you: but I Pray, Let's be a little better for your Sight: How did our Princely Husband act Orestes? Did he not wish again his Mother living? Her Death would add great Life unto his part. But come I pray, the Story of your Sight. Nim. O do not drive me to those hateful Pains: Madam; I was too much in seeing vext: Let it not be redoubled with the telling: I now am well, and hear, my Ears set free: O be mercisul, do not bring me back Unto my Prison, at least free your self; It will not pass away, but stay the time, Rack out the Hours in length: Oh, give me leave, As one that wearied with the toil at Sea, And now on wish'd sor Shore hath fixt his Foot: He looks about, pleases his Thoughts, and Eyes,
With sight o'th' Green-Cloath'd Ground, and Leavy Trees, Of Flowers, that beg more than the looking on; And likes these Narrow Shores much better: So let me lay my weariness in these Arms; My Thoughts be compast in those Circl'd Eyes; And bless my hands with touch of those round Brests, Whiter and softer than the Down of Swans. Let me of thee, and of thy Glorious Beauty, Tell endless Stories; but never wearied be, [Exet. Enter Nero, Epaphroditus, and Neophilus. Ner. Come Sirs, I Faith, how did you like my Acting? What? was't not as you look't for? Epap. Yes, my Lord, and much beyond. Ner. Did not I do it to the Life? Epap. The very doing never was so lively, As now this Counterfeiting. Ner. And when I came To th' Point of Agrippa Clitemnestra's Death, Did it not move the feeling Auditory? Epap. They had been Stones, whom that could not have mov'd, Ner. Did not my Voice hold out well to the end? And serv'd me afterwards afresh to Sing with? Neop. We know Apollo cannot match your Voice. Epap. By Iove, I think you are the God himself Come from above to shew your hidden Arts, And fill us men with wonder of your skill. Ner. Nay, Faith, speak truly, do not flatter me; I know you need not: Flattery's but where Desert is mean. Epap. I swear by thee, O Csar, Than whom no Power of Heaven I honour more, No Mortal Voice can pass, or equal thine. Ner. They tell of Orpheus, when he took his Lute, Hebrus stood still, Pangea bow'd his Head; Ofsa then first shook off his Snow, and came To listen to the movings of his Song:
The Gentle Popler took the Oak along, And call'd the Pine down from his mountain-Seat; The Virgin Bay, although the Arts she hates O'th' Delphick God, was with his Voice o'r-come: He his twice-dead Euridice bewailes; His lost Love's name then Water, Air, and Ground, Euridice, Euridice resound. These are bold Tales, of which the Greeks have store: But if he could from Hell once more return, And would compare his Hand and Voice with mine; I, though himself were Judg, he then should see, How much the Latin stains the Thracian Lyre. I oft have walk't by Tyber's flowing Banks, And heard the Swan sing her own Epitaph, When she heard me, she held her peace and dyed. Let others raise from Earthly things their Praise. Heaven has stood still to hear my happy Airs, And ceast th'Eternal Musick of the Spheres To mark my Voice, and mend their Tunes by mine. Neop. O Divine Voice! Epap. Happy are they that hear it. Enter Tigellinus. Ner. But here comes Tigellinus, come, thy Bill. Are there so many? I see we have Enemies, Tigellinus. Epap. Have you put Cajus in? I saw him frown. Neop. And in the midst o'th' Emperor's Action Gallus Laught out, and, as I think, in Scorn. Ner. Vespatian too asleep▪ was he so drowsie? Well, he shall sleep the Iron Sleep of Death. And did Thrasea look so sourly on us? Tig. He never smil'd, my Lord, nor would vouchsafe With one Applause to grace your Action. Ner. Our Action needed not be grac'd by him; He's our Old Enemy, and still hates us: 'Twill have an end, nay, it shall have an end. Why, I have been too pitiful, too remiss,
My Easiness is laught at and contemn'd; But I will change it; not as heretofore, By singling out 'em one by one to death. Each common Man can such Revenges have: A Prince's Anger must lay desolate Cities, Kingdoms consume, root up Mankind. O could I live to see the General end, Behold the World wrap't in one Funeral Flame; When as the Sun shall lend his Beams to burn What he before brought forth, and Water serve Not to extinguish, but to nurse the Fire: Then, like the Salamander, bathing me In the last Ashes of all Mortal things, Let me give up this Breath: Prium was happy, Happy indeed: he saw his Troy burnt, And Ilion ly on heaps; wst' thy Streams (Divine Scamander) did run Rhrygian Blood; And heard the pleasant Cries of Trojan Mothers. Could I see Rome so! Tig. Your Majesty may easily Without this Trouble to your acred Mind Ner. What may I easily do? kill thee, or him? How may I rid you all? where is the man, That will all others end, and last himself? O that I had thy Thunder in my Hand, Thou idle Rover, I'le non shoot at Trees, And spend in Woods my unregarded Vengeance? I'le shiver them down upon their guilty Rooss, And fill the Streets with Bloody Funerals, But 'tis not Heaven can give me what I seek, To you, you hated Kingdoms of the Night, You Severe Powers, that no like those above, Will with fair words, or Children's cries be won, But in Destruction, Power, and Terror shew, To you I fly for succour: You, whose Dwellings For Torments are bely'd, must give me Ease: Furies, lend me your Fires; no, they are here; They must be other Fires, Material Brands,
That must the burning of my Heat allay. I bring to you no rude unpractis'd Hands, Already do they reek with Mothers Blood: Tush, that's but Innocent, to what now I mean; Alas, what evil could these Years commit? The World in this shall see my setled Wit. [Exeunt. Enter Piso, and Seneca. Sen. Piso, were you at the Theatre? Pis. Seneca, I was, and saw your Kingly Pupil In Minstrel's Habit stand before the Judges, Bowing those Hands, which the World's Scepter hold, And with great Awe and Reverence beseeching Indifferent Hearing, and an equal Doom: Mean time, how would he eye his Adversaries; How he would seek t'have all they did disgrac't, Traduce'em privatly, openly railat'em: And them he could not conquer so, he would Corrupt with Money, to do worse than he. This was his Singing Part: His Acting now. Sen. Nay even end here, for I have heard enough; Let me not See him a Player, nor the fearful Voice Of Rome's great Monarch now Command in jest, Our Prince be Agamemnon in a Play. Pis. Why Seneca? 'tis better in a Play Be Agamemnon, than himself indeed: How does it stir this Airy part of us, To hear our Poets tell Imagin'd Fights, And the strange Blows, that fain'd Courage gives? When on the Stage I Heard Achilles Speak Honour, and the Greatness of his Soul; Methinks we too could on a Phrygian Spear Run bolly, and make Tales for after times: But when we come to Act it in the Deed, Death mat's this Bravery, and the ugly Fears Osth'other VVorld sit on the Proudest Brow,
Enter two Romans. 1 Rom. Fire, Fire, help, we burn. 2 Ro. Fire, fire, help, fire. Sen. Fire, where? Pis. Where? What Fire? 1 Ro. O round about, here, there, on every side Compass the City. Pis. How came this Fre? by whom? Sen. Was't Chance, or Purpose? Pis. Why is't not quench't? 2 Ro. Alas there are many there with Weapons; And whether it be for Prey, or by Command, They hinder: Nay, they throw on Fire-brands. Enter Antonius Ant. The Fire encreaseth, and will not be staid, But like a Stream that tumbling from a Hill, O'r-whelms the Fields, o'r-whelms the hopeful Toil O'th'Husband-man, and headlong bears the Woods; The weary Shepheard on a Rock a far, Amaz'd hears the fearfull Noyse, so here Danger and Terror strive which shall exceed: some cry, and yet are well, some are kill'd silent, Some kindly run to help their Neighbour's House, The whil'st their own's a fire: Some save their Goods, And leave their dearer Pledges in the Flame. Pis. What, are the Gauls return'd? Does  brandish Fire-brands once again? Sen. What can Heaven now unto our Sufferings add? Enter 3 Roman. 3 Ro. O all goes down, Rome falleth from the Roofe. The Wind's aloft, the Conquering Flame turns all Into it's self; nor do the Gods escape; Pleiades burns, Jupiter, Saturn burns.
The Altar now is made a Sacrifice: And Vesta mourns to see her Virgin Fires Mingle with Profane Ashes. Sen. Heaven, hast thou set this end to Roman greatness? Were the World's Spoils for this to Rome divided, To make but our Fires bigger? You Gods, whose Anger made us great, grant yet Some Change in Misery; we beg not now, To have our Consuls tread on Asian Kings, Or spurn the quiver'd Susa at their Feet: This we have had before: we beg to live, At least not thus to dy: Let Cannons come: Let Allius Water turn again to Blood. To these will any Miseries be light. Pis. VVhy with false Auguries have we bin deceiv'd? VVhy was our Empire told us should endure VVith Sun and Moon in time? in Brightness pass'em? And that our End should be o'th'VVorld and it? VVhat, can Celestial God-heads speak doubly too? Sen. O Rome, the Envy late, But now the Pity of the VVorld: The Men of Cholcos at thy Sufferings grieve; The Shaggy Dweller in the Scythian Rocks, The most Condemn'd to Perpetual Snow, That never wept at Kindreds Funerals, Suffers with thee, and feels his Heart to soften. O should the Parthian hear these Miseries, He would (his low and native Hate apart) Sit down with us, and lend an Enemie's tear, To grace the Funeral Fires of ending Rome. [Exeunt.
SCENE ROME, a Fire. Enter Nero above. Ner. I, now my Troy looks beauteous in her Flames; The Tyrrhene Seas are bright with Roman Fires, Whilst the amaz'd Mariner afar, Gazing on th'unknown Light, wonders what Star Heaven hath begot to ease the Aged Moon. VVhen Pirrhus, striding o're the Cinders, stood On Ground, where Troy late was, and with his Eye Measur'd the height of what he had thrown down, A City great in People, and in Power, VValls built with th'Hands of Gods, he now forgave The Ten Years Wars, and thinks his wounds well heal'd, Bath'd in the Blood of Priam's fifty Sons. Yet am not I appeas'd, I must see more Than Towers, and Columns tumble to the Ground: 'Twas not the High built Walls, and Guiltless Stones, That Nero did provoke: Themselves must be the Wood To feed this Fire, or quench it with their Blood. Within. Fire, Fire, Fire. Within. Gods, if you be not fled from Heaven, help us. Ner. I like this Musick well, they like not mine. Let Heaven do what it will, this have I done Already: Do you feel my Furies weight? Rome is become a Grave of her late Greatness: Her Clouds of Smoak have ta'n away the Day; Her Flames the Night. Now unbelieving Eyes, what would you more? Enter Neophilus. Neop. O save your self (my Lord) your Palace burns. Ner. My Palace? How? what Traiterous Hand?
Enter Tigellinus. Tig. O fly my Lord, and save your self betimes, The Wind does beat the Fire upon your house, The Eating Flame devoures your Double Gates, Your Pillars sall, your Golden Rooss do melt, Your Antick Tables, and Greek Imagery The Fire besets, and the Smoak you see Does choak my Speech: O fly and save your Life. Ner. Heaven, thou dost strive I see for Victory. [Exeut Enter Nimphidius, Nim. See how Fates work unto their purpos'd end; And without all Self-Industry will raise, Whom they determine to make great and happy. Nero throws down himself, I stir him not: He runs unto Destruction, studies ways To compass Danger, and attain the Hate Of all: Be his own Wishes on his Head, Nor Rome with Fire, more than Revenges, burn. Let me stand still, or ly, or sleep; I rise. Poppea a some new Favour will seek our, My wakings to salute; I cannot stir, But Messengers of new Preferment meet me. Now she has made me Captain of the Guard; So well I bear me in these Night-Alarms, That she imagin'd I was made for Arms: I now command the Castle, he the City. If any Chance do turn the Prince aside, l (As many Hat'reds, Mischiess threaten him:) Our's is his Wise; his Seat and Throne is ours: He's next in right that has the strongest Powers. [Exit. Enter Scevinus, and Mellichus. Sce. O Tray, and O ye Souls of our Fore-Fathers, Which in your Countries Fires were offered up,
How near your Nephes to your Fortunes come: Yet they were Greclau Hands began your Flame: Not Pirrhus, nor Hannibal, art Author. Sad Rome is ruin'd by a Roman Hand. Mel. My Master has Seal'd up his Testament; Those Bond-Men, which he liketh best, set free, Given money, and more liberally than he us'd: And now, as if a Fare-well to the World Were meant, a sumptuous Banquet has he made; Yet not with Countenance that Feasters use; But Chears his Friends, the whil'st himself looks Sad. Aside. Sce. I have from Fortune's Temple ta'n this Sword. may it be Fortunate, and now at least, Since it could not prevent, punish the Evil: To Rome it had been better done before; but though less helping now, they'l praise it more: Great Soveraign of all Mortal Actions, Whom only Wretched Men, and Poets blame, Speed thou the Weapon, which I have from thee; 'Twas not amidst thy Temple Monuments In vain repos'd, somewhat I know't has done: O with new Honours let it be laid up. Strike boldly Arm; so many powerful Prayers Of Dead and Living hover over thee. Mel. And though sometimes with talk Impertinent, And Idle Fancies, he would feign a Mirth; Yet it is easie seen, some-what is here, The which he dares not let his Face make shew of. Aside. Sce. See, Melichus, this Weapon's better Edg'd: Long want of use has made it dull and blunt. Mel. Sharpening of Swords, when must we then have Or means my Master Cato-like to exempt (blows: Himself from Power of Fates, and cloy'd with Life, Give the Gods back their unregarded Gist: But he hath neither Cato's Mind, nor Cause: A Man given o're to Pleasures, and Soft Ease; Aside Which makes me still to doubt how in Affairs,
Of Princes he dares meddle or desire. Sce. We shall have Blows on both sides, Melichus: What and't be Heart for Heart: Death is the worst. Provide me store of Cloaths to bind up Wounds: This World I see has no Felicity; I'le try the other. Mel. Nero's Life is sought, The Sword's prepar'd against another's Breast, The help for this. It can be no Private Foe; For then 'twere best to make it known, and call Troupes of Bond, and Freed-Men to his Aid: Besides his Counsellors, Seneca, And Lucan, are no Managers of Quarrels. Aside Sce. Me-thinks, I see him struggling on the ground, Hear his unmanly out-Crles, and lost Prayers Made to the Gods, which turn their Heads away. Nero, this Day must end the World's Desires, And Headlong send thee down to Endless Fires. [Exit. Mel. Why do I further idly stand debating? My Proofs are but too many, and too pregnant, And Princes Ears still to Suspitions open: For States are wise, and cut of Ills that may be: Mean Men must dy, that others may sleep sound. [Exeunt Finis Actus Tertij.
ACTUS QUARTUS. Enter Nero, Poppea, Nimphidius, Tigellinus, Neophilus, and Epaphroditus. Nero. THis Kiss, sweet Love, le sorce from thee, and this▪ And of such Spoyls, and Victories be Prouder▪ Than if I had the Fierce , Or Valiant German, Ten times over-come. Let Juli go and Fightat the end o'th'World. And Conquer from the Wild Inhabitants Their Cold and Poverty; whilst Nero here Makes other Wars, Wars where the Conquer'd Gains. Where to o'r-come, is to be Prisoner▪ O willingly I give up my Freedome, And put on my own Chains, And am in Love with my Captivity: Such Ven is, when on the Sandy Shore Of Xanth, or on Ida's Pleasant Gree, She leads the Dance. If Bacchus could his Stragling Minion Grace with a Glorious Wreath of Shining St▪ Why should not Heaven my Poppea Crown: The Northern Teem shall move into a round: New Constellations rise to honour thee: The Earth shall woe thy Favors, and the Sea Lay his Rich Shells, and Tresures  thy Fee: For thee Hidaspis shall throw up his Gold: Panchaia breath the Rich Delightful Smells; The Seres, and the Feather'd Man of India, Shall their Fine Arts and  Labours bring▪
And where the Sun's not known, Poppea's Name Shall mid'st their Feasts and Barbarous Pomp Be sung. What's he? [Enter Melichus. Nim. One that it seems, my Lord, does come in haste. Ner. Yet in his Face he sends his Tale before him. Bad News thou tellest. Mel. Tis bad I tell, but good that I can tell it; Therefore your Majesty will pardon me, If I offend your Ears to save your Life. Ner. Why, is my Life indanger'd? How ends this Circumstance? thou rack'st My Thoughts. Mel. My Lord, your Life is conspir'd against. Ner. By whom? Mel. I must be of the World excus'd in this, If the great Duty to your Majesty Makes me all other lesser to neglect. Ner. Thou art a tedious Fellow, speak, by whom? Mel. By my Master. Ner. who's thy Master? Mel. Scevinus. Pop. Scevinus? why should he Conspire? Unless he think that Likeness in Conditions May make him too worthy o'th'Empire thought. Ner. Who are else in it? Mel. I think, Natalia, Subius, Flavius, Lucan, Seneca, and Lucius, Piso, Asper, and Qui. Ner. Ha done, Thou'lt reckon all Rome anon, and so thou may'st; They're Villains all, I'le not trust one of'em. O that the Romans had but all one Neck. Pop. Piso's sly creeping into Mens Affections, And Popular Arts, have given long Cause of Doubt: And the other's late observ'd Discontents, Risen from Misinterpreted Disgraces,
May make us credit this Relation. Ner. Where are they? come they not upon us yet? See the Guard doubled, see the Gates shut up: Why, they'l surprize us in our Court anon. Mel. Not so, my Lord, they are at Piso's House, And think themselves safe, and undescry'd. Ner. Let's thither then, And take'em in this False Security. Tig. 'Twere better first publish'em Traytors. Nim. That were to make'em so; And force'em all upon their Enemies: Now without stir, or hazard they'l be a'n, And boldly Tryal dare, and Law demand: Besides this Accusation may be forg'd By malice or mistaking. Pop. What likes you, do Nimphidius out of hand; Two may distract, when either would prevail: If they suspecting but this Fellow's absence, Should try the City, and attempt their Friends, How dangerous might Piso's Favour be? Nim. I to himself would make the matter clear, Which now upon one Servant's Credit stands. The City's Favour keeps within the Bounds Of Profit, they'l love none to hurt themselves: Honour and Friendship they hear others name, Themselves do neither feel; nor know the same. To put'em yet (though needless) insome fear, We'l keep their Streets with Arm'd Companies; Then if they stir, they see their Wives and Houses Prepar'd a Prey to the Greedy Souldier. Pop. Let's be quick then, you to Piso's House, While I, and Tigellins further sift This Fellow's Knowledg. [Exeunt all but Ner. Look to the Gates and Walls o'th'City, look The River be well kept; have Watches set In every Passage, and in every Way: But who shall watch these Watches? what if They
Begin to play the Traitors first? O where shall I Seek Faith, or them that I may wisely trust? The City favours the Conspirators: The Senate in disgrace, and fear has liv'd: The Camp, why, most are Souldiers that he Nam'd. Besides, he knowes not all, and like a Fool I interupted him, else had he nam'd Those that stood by me. O Security! Which we so much seek after, yet are still To court, like a Stranger, and dost rather choose The Smoaky Reeds, and Sedgy Cottages, Than the Proud Roofes, and wanton cost of Kings. O sweet despis'd Joys of Poverty! A Happiness unknown unto the Gods: Would I had been a Ragged Magistrate, Sate as a Judge of Measures, and of Corn, Than the Adored Monarch of the World. Mother, thou dy'dst deservedly for this, That from a Private and Sure State did'st Raise My Fortunes to this Slippery Hill of Greatness, Where I can neither Stand, nor Fall with Life. [Exit Nero. SCENE the Second Piso's House. Emer Piso, Lucan, and Scevinus. Luc. But since we are discover'd, what remains, But put our Lives upon our Hands? our Swords Shall try us Traitors or true Romans. And what should make this Hazard doubt success? It is not now Augustus Gravity, nor Tiberius Craft, But Tigellinus and Crisogerus, Eunuches, and Women that we go against.
Sce. Why should we keep so many vow'd Swords From such a Hated Throat? Or shall we fear To trust unto the Gods so good a Cause? Luc. By this we may our selves Heaven's Favour promise; Because all Nobleness, and VVorth on Earth, We see's on our side; here's the Faby's Son; Here the Corvini are take's our Parts: And so their Noble Fathers would, if now they Liv'd. There's not a Soul that claims Nobility Either by his, or his Fore-Father's merit, But is with us: with us the Gallant Youth, Whom passed Dangers, or hot Blood makes bold. Stay'd Men suspect their Wisdom, or their Faith, To whom our Counsels we have not reveal'd; And while (our Party seeking to disgrace) They Traitors calls us, each man Treason praise, And hate that thing call'd Faith, when Piso Is a Traitor. Sce. O Piso, Think on that day, when in the Parthian Fields Thou cryedst to the Flying Legions, turn, And look't Death in the Face, he was not Grim But Fair and Lovely: when he came in Arms, O why there dy'd we not on Syrian Swords? Were we reserv'd to Prison's, and to Chains? Must Piso's Head be fixt upon a Tower? Those Members torn, rather than Roman-like, VVith VVeapon in our Hands Fighting in Throngs of Enemies to dy? Pis. You see the Court and City's Arm'd, Why should we move desperate and hopeless Courses, And vainly spill that Noble Blood, that should The Median Fields, Not Tiber Colour? And the more you shew
Your readiness to lose your Lives, The unwillinger I am to adventure'em: Yet I am proud you would have dy'd for me: But live and keep your selves to worthier Ends; No Mother but my own shall weep my Death. Disgrace my Roman Courage cannot bear, Nor have I the Vanity to think we can Subdue With so few Swords. O Friends, I would not dy When I can live no longer; 'tis my Glory, That free and willingly I give up this Breath, Leaving such Courages as your's untry'd. But, to be long in talk of Dying would Shew a Relenting, and a Doubtful Mind; Since Fate would not with Fame our Cause reward: This is from Infamy a Roman's Guard. Falls on his Sword, and Dyes. Luc. O that this Nóble Courage had been shown Rather on Enemies Brests, than on thy own. Enter Nimphidius with Nero's Guard; Scevinus and Lucan offer to Fight with the Guard, but they are Surrounded by'em, and taken Prisoners Nim. Nay, other end your grievous Crimes await, Ends which the Law and your Deserts exact. Sce. What have we deserv'd? Nim. That Punishment, that Traitors unto Princes, And Enemies unto the State they live in, merit. Sce. If by the State this Government you mean, I justly am an Enemy unto it; That's but to Nero, You, and Tigellinus: That Glorious World, that even beguiles the Wise Being look't into, includes but Three or Four Corrupted Men, which were they all remov'd,
'Twould please the State, and ease the Groaning World. Nim. Away with'em, be carried before the Emperour. [Exeunt. The 3d. Scene Changes to Nero's Throne, Where he appears sitting, and Poppea, with Tigellinus, Neophilus, Guards, and Flavius a Prisoner Ner. What could cause thee Forgetful of my Benefits, and thy Oath, To seek my Life? Flav. Ner, I hated thee; Nor was there any of thy Souldiers More Faithful, whil'st thou Faith deserv'dst, Than I; Together did I leave to be a Subject, And thou a Prince: Casar was now become A Player on the Stage, A Burner of our Houses, and of us; A Paricide of Wife and Mother. Tig. Villain, dost'know Where and of Whom Thou speakest? Ner. Have you but one Death for him? Let it be A Feeling one (Tigellinus) Be't Thy Charge, and let me see thee witty In't. Tig. Come Sirrah, We'l see how stoutly you'l stretch out your Neck. Flav. Would thou durst strike as boldly. [Exit Tigellinus, Flavius, and 2. or 3. f the Guard. Enter Epaphroditus, and a Boy Ner. And what's He there?
Epap.. One that in whispering was o'r heard to say, What pity 'twas, my Lord, that Piso dy'd? Ner. And why was't pity, Sirrah, Piso dy'd? Boy. My Lord, 'twas pity he deserv'd to dy. Pop. How much this Youth my Oth does resemble? Otho, my first, my best Love, who is now (Undér pretext of Governing) Exll'd To Lusitania, Honourably Banish't. Ner. VVell, if you be so Passionate, I'le make you spend your Pity on your Prince, And good Men, not on Traitors. Boy. The God's forbid my Prince should pity need: Some-what the sad Remembrance did me stir Of frail and weak Condition of our Kind: Some-what his Greatness, than whom Yesterday The VVorld, but Caesar, could shew nothing Higher. Besides, some Vertues, and some VVorth he had, That might excuse my Pity to an End so Cruel, and Unripe. Pop. I know not, but this Youth does strangely move My mind; His Face, me-thinks, is more Angelical, Than Earthly. Oh! his words invade My weak'ned Senses, and o'r-come my Heart. Ner. Your Pity shews your favour, and your will, VVhich side you are enclin'd to, had you Power: Your Ill Affection then shall punish'd be. Take him to Execution, he shall dy. Boy. This Benefit at least Sad Death shall give, to free me from the Power Of such a Government; and if I dy For pitying Humane Chance, and Piso's End, There will be some too, that will pity me. Pop. O what a Dauntless Look! what sparkling Eyes, Threatning his Suffering! sure some Noble Blood Is hid in Raggs; Fear argues a base Spirit:
In him what Courage, and Contempt of Death▪ And shall I suffer ohe I Love to dye? He shall not dy: Take off your hands; away Nero, thou shalt not kill this Guiltless Youth. Ner. He Guilless? By Heaven, she is in love with this smooth-fac'd Boy: Take him away. Pop. I beg, my Lord, to spare his Lise; Alas, what Treason can such tender Years commit? Ner. How dare you with your Fate, and God Contend? But the Bold Impiey shall end. [Stabs er. How impotent wou'd Nero's God-head be, Cou'd Mortal stand betwixt my Rage and thee? Neoph. Alas, my Lord, you have kil'd her. Epap. Help, help, she dyes. Ner. Poppea, Poppea, speak, I am not angry, I did not mean to hurt thee; speak, sweet Love. Neoph. She's dead, my Lord. Ner. Fetch her again, she shall not dy. I'le open the Iron Gates of Hell, And break the Imprison'd Shadows of the Deep, And force from Death this far too worthy Prey. She is not dead; The Crimson Red for-sakes not yet her Cheeks: Her Breath Yet moves her Lips; those quick and piercing Eyes, That did in Beauty challenge Heaven, Yet shine, as they were wont: O no, they do not; See how they grow Obscure: O see they close, And cease to take or give light to the World. What Stars soe'r you are, assur'd to grace The Firmament (sor how the Twinkling Fires Together throng, and that clear Milky space, Prepares your Room!) do not with wry aspect Look on your Nero, who in Blood shall mourn Your Luckless Fate: and many a Breathing Soul Send after you, to wait upon their Queen.
SCENE the Fourth. Enter Seneca, and two Friends. Sen. What means your Mourning, this ungful Sorrow? Where are your Precepts of Philosophy? Where are your Prepar'd Resolutions, So many Years fore-studied against Dangers? To whom is Nero's Cruelty unknown? Or what remain'd after his Mother's Blood, But his Instructer's Death: Leave, leave these Tears. Death from me nothing takes, but what's a Burthen, A Clog to that free Spark of Heavenly Fire: But that in Seneca, the which you lov'd, Which you admir'd, does, and shall still remain Secure of Death, untouch't of the Grave. 1 Frie. We'l not bely our Tears, we waile not thee; It is our selves, and our own Loss we grieve: To thee what loss in such a Change can be? Vertue is paid her due by Death alone. To our own Losses do we give these Tears, That lose thy Love, thy boundless Knowledge Lose, Lose the unpattern'd Sample of thy Vertue, Lose whatsoe'r may Praise, or Sorrow Move; In all these Losses yet of this we Glory, That 'tis thy Hppiness that makes us sorry. 2 Frie. If there be any Place for Ghosts of Good Men; If (as we have bin told) Great Mens Souls Consume not with their Bodies, thou shalt see, Looking from out the Dwellings of Air, True Duties to thy Memory perform'd, Not in the outward Pompe of Fneral,
But in Remembrance of thy Deeds and Words, The oft Recalling of thy many Vertues; The Tomb, that shall the Eternal Relicks keep Of Seneca, shall be his Hearers Hearts. [Exeunt 2. Rom. Sen. Be not afraid, my Soul, go chearfully To thy own Heaven, from whence it Had its Being. Now lifted up thou ravish't shalt behold The Truth of things, at which we wonder here, And Foolishly do wrangle on beneath; And like a God shalt walk the Spacious Air, And see what even to Conceit's deny'd. Great Soul o'th'World, that through the Parts Diffus'd of this Vast-all guid'st what thou do'st Informe; You Blessed Minds, that from the Spheres You move Look on Mens Actions not with Idle Eyes, And Gods we go to, Aid me in this Strise, And Combat of my Flesh, that ending I May still shew Seneca, and my self dy. [Stabs himself. Finis Actus Quarti.
ACTUS QUINTUS. Enter Nero, Nimphidius, Tigellinus, Neophilu, Epaphroditus and. Attendants. Nero. Enough is wept, Poppea, for thy Death, Enough is Bled; so many Tears of others Wailing their Losses have wip'd mine away. VVho in the Common Funeral of the world Can mourn one Death? Tig. Besides, your Majesty this Benefit In their deserv'd Punishment shall reap, From all Attempts hereafter to be freed: Conspiracy is now for ever dash'd; Tumult supprest, Rebeion out of heart: In Piso's Death Danger it self did dy. Nimp. Piso, that thought to climb by bowing down, By giving a way to Thrive, and Raising others, To become great himself, hath now by Death Given quiet to your Thoughts, and Fear to theirs, That shall from Treason their Advancement plot: Those Dangerous Heads, that his Ambition lean'd on, And they by it crept up, and from their meanness Thought in this Stir to rise aloft, are off. Now Peace, and Safety wait upon your Throne: Security hath wall'd your Seat about: There is no place for Fear lest. Ner. VVhy, I never sear'd'em. Nim. That was your Fault. Your Majesty must give us leave to blame Your Dangerous Courage, and that noble Soul
Too Prodigal of it self. Ner. A Prince's Mind knows neither Fear nor Hope: The Beams of Royal Majesty are such, As all Eyes are with it amaz'd nd weakned, But it with nothing. I at first contemn'd Their weak Devices, and saint Enterprize. Why, thought they against him to have prevail'd, Whose Child-hood was from Messallina's Spite, By Dragons (that the Earth gave up) preserv'd? Such Guard my Cradle had, for Fate had then Pointed me out to be what now I am. Should all the Legions, and the Provinces, In one united, against me Conspire, I could disperse 'em with one Angry Eye. My Brow's an Host of Men. Come, Tigellinus, Let's turn this Bloody Banquet, Piso meant us, Unto a Merry Feast: we'l Drink and challenge Fortune. Who's that, Neophilus? [Enter a Roman. Neop. A Currier from beyond the Alps, my Lord. Ner. News of some German Victory belike, Or Britton overthrow. Neop. The Letters come from France. Nimp. Why smiles your Majesty? Ner. So I smile, I should be afraid, there's one In Arms, Neophilus. Nim. What Arm'd against your Majesty? Ner. Our Lievtenant of the Province, Julius Vindex. Tig. Who? that Giddy French man? Nim. His Province is disarm'd, my Lord, he hath No Legion, not a Souldier under him. Epap. One that by Blood, and Rapine would repair His State consum'd in Vnities, and Lust, Enter a Second Roman. Tig. He would not find out three to follow him, 2 Ro. More News, my Lord.
Ner. Is it of Vindex, that thou hast to say: 2 Ro. Videx is up, and with him Fce in Arms; The Noble Men and People throng to th'Cause; Mny and Armour Cityes do conser; The Country does send in Provision; Young Men bring Bodies, Old Men lead 'em forth; Ladies do Coyne their Jewels into Pay; The Sickle now is fram'd into a Sword; France nothing does, but War and Fury breath. Ner. All this Fierce Talk's but Vindex does Rebel, And I will hang him. Tig. How long came you forth after the Former Messenger? 2 Ro. Four days, but by the Benefit of Sea, And Weather, am ariv'd with him. Neop. How strong was Vindex at your coming forth? 2 Ro. He was esteem'd a Hund'red Thousand Strong. Tig. Men enough. Neop. And Souldiers few enough. Tumultuary Troops, Undisciplin'd, Untrain'd in Service, to waste Good Victuals: But when they come to look on Wa's black Wounds, And but afar off see the Face of Death. Ner. It falls out for my Empty Coffers well, The Spoyl of such a Large and Goodly Province, Enich'd with Trade, and long enjoy'd Peace. Tig. What Order will your Majesty have taken, For Levying Forces to Suppress this Stir? Ner. What Order should we take? We'l Laugh and Drink; Think'st thou it fits my Pleasures to be disturb'd, When any French-Man list to break his Neck? They have not heard of Pïso's Fortun yet; Let that Tale fight'em. Nim. What Order needs? Your Majesty shall find Ths French heat quickly of it self grow Cold. Ner. Come away, Nothing shall come, that this Night's Sport
Shall stay. Ex all b Neopilus▪  Epaphrodius Neop. I wonder what makes him so confident, In this Revolt, now grown unto a War, And Ensignes in the Field; when in the other, Being but a Plot of a Conspiracy, He shew'd himself so wretchedly dismi'd! Epap. Faith, the right Nature of a Coward, to set light, Dangers, that seem far off: Piso was here, Ready to enter at the Presence Door, And drag him out of his Abus'd Chair; And then he Trembled. Vindex, is in France, And many Woods, and Seas, and Hill's between. Neop. 'Twas strange, that Piso was so soon supprest. Epap. Strange! strange indeed, for had he but come up, And taken the Court in that strange Fright, and Stirre, While unresolv'd, for whom or what to do, And each had Jealousy on the other, He would have hazarded the Royal Seat. Neop. Nay had it without Hazard: All the Court Had been sot him, and those disclos'd their Love, And Favour in the Cause which now to hide, And colour, the Good Meaning's ready were, To shew their Forwardness against it most. Epap. But for a Stranger, with a Naed Povince, Without Allies, or Friends ith' State, to Challenge A Prince, upheld with Thirty Legions, Rooted in Four Descents of Ancestors; And Fourteen Yeats Continuance of Reign: Why it is— Enter Nero, Nimphidius, and Tigellinu Ner. Galba, and Spain? What, Spain and Galba too? [Ex Neo, Nimphidius. Epap. I pray thee, Tigllinus, What Fury's this? What strange Event? what Accident, hath thus
O'r-cast you Countenances? Tig. Down we were sate at Table, and began With Sparkling Bowls to chase our Fear away, And Mirth and Pleasure look'd out of our Eyes, VVhen straight a Breathless Messenger comes in, And tells how Vindex, and the Power of France, Have Chosen Sergius Galba Emperour: VVith what Applause the Legions him Receive; That Spain's revolted, Portugal hath joyn'd; As much suspected is of Germany: But Nero, not abiding out the end, O'r-threw the Tables, dsh'd against the Ground, The Cup which h so much, you know, esteem'd: Tearing his Hair, and with incens'd Rage Curseth false me, and Gods, the Lookers on. Neop. His Rage we saw was VVild and Desperate. Epap. O you unsearch'd VVisdoms, which do Laugh At our Security, and Feats, alike! And plain, to shew our VVeakness, and your Power, Make us Contemn the Harms which surest strike: VVhen you  Gloie's, and our Pride ndo, Our Overthrow, you make Ridiculous too. [Exeunt all. Enter Nimphidius. Nim. Slow, making Counsels, and the Sliding Year, Have brought me to the Long fore-seen Destruction Of this mis-led Young Man: His State is shaken, And I will push it on. Revolted France, Nor the Conjured Provinces of Spain, Nor his own Guilt, shall like to me, oppress him: I to his Easie yielding Fears proclaim New Germ Mutinies, and all the VVorld Rowzing it self in hate of Nero's Name. I his Distracted Counsels do disperse, VVith Fresh Despairs: I animate the Senate, And the People, to ngage them past Recall, In Prejudice of Nero: and in brief,
Perish he must; the Fates, and I, resolve it; VVhich to effect, I presently will go Proclaim a Donative in Glba's Name. Enter Antonius. Ant. Yonder, Nimphidius, our Commander: now I with Respect must speak, and smooth my Brow. Captain, All Hail. Nim. Antonius, well met; Your Place of Tribune in this Anarchy. Ant. This Anarchy, my Lord? is Nero dead? Nim. This Anarchy, this unstyl'd time, VVhile Galba is unceas'd of the Empire, VVhich Nero has forsook? Ant. Has Nero then Resign'd the Empire? Nim. In Effect he has, for he's fled to Egypt. Ant. My Lord, you tell strange News to me. Nim. But nothing strange to me, Who every moment knew of his Despairs: The Curriers came so fast with Fresh Alarms Of New Revolts, that he unable quite To bear his Fears, which he had long Conceal'd, Is now Revolted from himself, and ed. Ant. Thrust with Reports and Rumours, from his Seat. My Lord, you know the Camp depends on you, As you Determine. Nim. There it lies nius; What should we do  it boot's not to rely On Nero's sinking Fortunes, and to sit Securely looking on, were to receive An Emperour from Spain; which how disgraceful It were to us, who, if we weigh our selves, The most Material Accessions are Of all the Roman Empire; which Disgrace To Cover, we must joyn our selves betimes, And thereby seem to have Created Galba; Therefore I'le straight Proclaim a Donative
Of Thirty Thousand Sisterses a Man. Ant. I think so great a Gift was never heard of, Galba, they say, is frugally inclin'd; Will he avow so great a Gift as this: Nim. Howe'r he like of it, he must avow it, If by our Promise he be once ingag'd. And since the Souldiers Care belongs to me, I will have care of them, and of their Good. Let 'em thank me, if I, Through this Occasion, Procure for them so great a Donative. [Ex Nimph. Ant. So you be thank'd, it Skill's who prevails: Galba, or Nero, Traitor to'em both. You give it out that Nero's fled to Egypt, Who with the Frights of your Reports, amaz'd, By our Device, does lurk for better News. Whil'st you inevitably do betray him. Works he all this for Galba then  Not so, I have long seen his Climbing to the Empire, By Secret Practises of Gracious Women, And other Instruments of the Late Court, That was his Love to her that me resus'd; And now by this he would give the Souldiers Favour. Now is the time to quit Poppea's Scorn, And Revenge my self upon my Rival: I'le straight Reveal His Treacheries, to Galba's Agents here. [Exit, Enter Tigellinus, and Guards. Tig. You see what Issue things are come too; Yet may we hope not only Impunity, But with our Fellows, part o'th' Guilt proclaim'd. Enter Nero alone. Ner. Whither go you? Stay my Friends. 'Tis Caesar calls; stay my Loving Friends. Tig. We were his Slaves, his Foot-stool, and must Couch,
But now with such Observance to his Feet: It is his Misery that he calls us Friends. Ner. And moves you not the Misery of a Prince? O stay my Friends! stay and hearken to the Voice Which once you knew. Tig. Hark to the People's Cries; Hark to the Streets, that Galba, Galba, rings! Ner. The People may sorsake me without Blame; I did 'em wrong to make you Rich and Great; I took their Houses to bestow on you. Treason in them has name of Liberty. Your Fault has no Excuse, you are my Fault, And the Excuse of other's Treachery. Tig. Shall we with staying seem to uphold his Tyrannies, As if we were in Love with them? Come let's away. [Exeunt Tigellinus, and Guards Ner. O now I see the Vizard from my Face, So lovely and so fearful is fall'n off. That Vizard, Shaddow, nothing (Majesty) Which like a Child acquainted with his Fears. But now Men tremble at, and now contemn. Nero forsaken is of all the World; The World of truth: O sall some Vengeance Down, Equal unto their Falsh-hoods, and my Wrongs, Might I accept the Chariot of the Sun, And like another Phaeton Consume In Flames of all the World: a Pile of Death, Worthy the State and Greatness I have lost. Or were I now but Lord of my own Fires, Where in False Rome, yet once again might Smoak, And Perish all unpityed of the Gods: That all things in their Last Destruction Might Perform a Funeral Honour to their Lord. O Jove, Dissolve with Caesar, Caesar's World.
Enter Neophilus and Epaphroditus Neop. Though other's bound with greater Benefits, Have left your Altered Fortunes, and do run Whither new Hopes do call'em; yet come we.— Ner. O welcom! Come you to Adversity? Welcom true Friends; why, there is Faith on Earth; Of Thousand Servants, Friends, and Followers, Yet two are left: Your Countenance, me-thinks, Gives Comfort, and new Hopes. pap. Do not deceive your Thoughts, My Lord, we bring no Comfort. Would we could. But the Last Duty to perform, and best We ever shall, a free Death to perswade, To cut off Hopes of Fiercer Cruelty, And Scorn more Cruel, to a Worthy Soul. Neop. The Senate has decreed your Punishment, After the Fashion of our Ancestors; Which is, your Neck being locked in a Fork, You must be Whipt, and Scourg'd to Death. Ner. The Senate thus decreed? They that so oft My Vertues flatter'd have, and Gifts of mine; My Government prefer'd to Ancient Times, And challeng Numa to compare with me: Have they so Horrible an End sought out? No, here I bear— That which shall prevent such Shame: [Draws a Dagger This hand shall yet from that deliver me: And Faithful be alone unto it's Lord. Alas, how sharp, and terrible is Death: O must I dy, must now my Senses close? For ever dy, and ne'r return again? Never more see the Sun, nor Heaven, nor Earth? Whither go I? What shall I be anon? What Horrid Journey wand'rest thou, my Soul, Under the Earth, in Dark, Damp, Dusky Vaults? Or shall I now to nothing be dissolv'd?
My Fear's become my Hopes; O would I might. Me thinks I see the Boyling Phlegeton, The Dread and Terrour of the Gods themselves, The Furies arm'd with Lincks, with Whips, with Snakes, And my own Furies, far more mad than they: My Mother, and those Troops of Slaughter'd Friends; And now the Judge is brought unto the Throne, That will not lean unto Authority, Nor favour the Oppressions of the Great. Stabs himself Epap. They are at hand: Hark you may hear the Noise.— [A Shout, of Long live Galba, Emperour of Rome. Ner. O Rome, fare-well; Fare-well you Theaters, Where I so oft with Popular Applause, Have won that Glory, which must shine no more. [Dies Enter Romans, with Nimphidius bound. Ro. Thus dy all Tyrants. Let the News be Carried To my Great Master: And the Tyrant's Body Thrown into Tyber; Let th'Aspiring Traitor, Nimphidius, straight to Galba be convey'd, To undergo the Vengeance due to Rebels. Nero, the Nobler Criminal, has the Nobler Destiny. Tyrants by Conquest have their Fall Decreed; But Traitours should by Execution Bleed. [Exeunt. FINIS.
EPILOGUE. IT is a Trick of late grown much in Vogue, When all are Kill'd, to raise an Epilogue. This, some Pert Rymer wittily contriv'd For a Surprize, whil'st the Arch Wag believ'd; 'Twould please You to see Pretty Miss reviv'd. But, Gentlemen, the Case is alter'd new, We may be Dead,—and Damn'd too for all You: And therefore, just as my Poor Ghost came down, All the Elizian Shades began to frown; Told me, that I must there expect no Grace, Till I return'd to You, and made my Peace. Faith, it is very hard, you cannot be Content to vex our frail Mortality: Damne all Our Plays, call Us Dull Jades, and Fools. That might content You:—Would You Damne Our Souls? I Gad, we'l ne'r endur't, I'le tell You that; To be thus us'd at this ill natur'd Rate. Nay, ne'r begin to bite your Lips and Fume; Not one of Us, but may be found at Home. If You'l have Satisfaction, when We're there, We are Ready for You; and come, faith, if You dare,
