p3379 15265307 103320
A New merry Dialogue betweene John and Bessee The two lusty brave Lovers of the Country. Or, a couragious way of VVooing. The Young man very willing was to marry, The Maid was loath a longer time to tarrie, But when this couple were agreed They married were with all the speed, Then list and I will plainly tell How every thing in order fell. The tune is, sweet George I love thee, I Am a Batchelour bold and brave, sweet Besse now I come to thee, Thy love is the thing that I doe crave, which makes me thus for to wooe thee: My heart is inflamed with Cupids hot fire, One drop of thy mercy to coole I desire, If thou wilt but grant unto what I require, I vow no harme to doe thee. Ever since the first time that I did thee see, faire Besse now I come to thee, My heart and affection was linked to thee, which makes me thus for to wooe thee: And now I am come for to tell thee my mind, As true loves strong fettered chains doth me bind, If thou unto me wilt be courteous and kind, I vow no harme for to doe thee. Ile buy thee silk Ribbons, ile buy the gold Rings sweet Besse now I come to thee, Black-bag and silk Apron and other rare things, see now how I doe wooe thee: New gown and new petticoat, new hose & shooes, A new beaver Hat the best that I can chuse, Prethre Love doe not my proffers refuse, all this good will I doe thee. Thou shalt have thy servants on thee to att sweet Besse now I come to thee, My purse and my person thy life shall defend, my suit is still for to wooe thee, My goods & my substance my house and my land, My mind and my sence & my heart and my hand, Thou shalt every houre have at thy command. all this good I will doe to thee, Thou shalt have varieties what thou wilt wish, swéet Besse now I come to thee, Served in at thy Table of Flesh and of Fish, my suit is still for to wooe theer Thou shalt have larks, chickens hens capon or coney, And any fine fare that can be bought for money If thoul't be my True-love, my Joy & my Honey, all this I will doe for thee. More over a faithfull promise I make, swéet Besse now I come to thee, Whilst breath's in my body ile not thee forsake, as suro as now I doe wooe thee: Then prethee faire Besse ease me of my paine, And doe not repay my true love with disdain, But as I have lov'd thee so love me againe, and Ile be faithfull unto thee. The second Part, to the same tune KInd Iohn I protest thou art welcome to me, since thou art come for to wooe me; Ten thousand to one but wée two shall agrée, now thou com'st lovingly to me, Thy love and thy labour is not lost in vaine, For thus in few words I will tell thee here plain, If thou com'st at midnight ile thee entertaine, I know no harme thoul't doe me. I have kept my maiden-head twenty long yeare, before you come to wooe me, And many a brave gallant that loved me deare. made suite often unto me: But I for my own part could love never a man, Let them use the chiefest of skill that they can, Untill the time came that I met with my Iohn, I know no harme thoul't doe me. You promisd me gold and you promis'd me fée, when you came first for to wooe me, Because that I your true Lover should be, these knacks you proffered unto me: You promis'd me scarffs & you promis'd mr rings, Silk gown and silk apron and many brave things, The which to my presence much comfort it brings, I know much good you will doe me. Gay garments are good sir of which I except, now you so lovingly wooe me, Your Silver is better I doe it respect, both those are welcome unto me, But your proper person excéeds all the rest, For you are the creature that I doe love best I had rather have you then have gold in my chest, for I know no harme youl doe me. To bind up the bargaine and finish the strife, séeing you came hither to wooe me, I prethee come quickly and make me thy wife, I know no harme you'l doe me, And when wée art married thou shalt have thy will To clip and to kisse and to use thine own will, I am thine own true love and so will be still, now I come merrily to thee. This lusty young couple being joyntly agréed, when he came for to wooe her, To Church then they went and were married with speed, then he bravely came to her: Together they went as True lovers should, He gave her gay garments & rings of rich Gold, And when they their tales had so pleasantly told, he did no harme unto her. L, P. London Printed for William Gilbertson Gil-pur-street
