r1911 13133864 97891
His Excellency the Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND's Speech; with the Lord Chancellours, to both Houses of Parliament in Dublin, at the Prorogation on Thurs∣day the third of November, 1692. to Thursday the Sixth of April, 1693. My Lords and Gentlemen, UPon the opening of this Session I did acquaint you with the Motives which Induced Their Majesties to call this Parliament, which were no o∣ther than what entirely regarded a happy settlement of this Kingdom upon such Foundations as might not only secure the Peace, but bring you into a Prosperous and Flourishing Condition. I am sorry I cannot say there hath been such a Progress made by you Gentle∣men of the House of Commons towards those ends, as Their Majesties had just reason to expect; And I am the more troubled, that you who have so many and so great Obligations to be Loyal and Dutifully affected to Their Majesties, should so far mistake your selves, as to intrench upon Their Majesties Preroga∣tive, and the Rights of the Crown of England, as you did on the 27th. of October last, when by a Declaratory Vote you affirmed, That it is the sole and undoubt∣ed Right of the Commons of Ireland, to prepare heads of Bills for raising of Mo∣ney; and also again on the 28th. of the same Month, when you rejected a Bill sent over in the usual form, Entituled, an Act for granting to Their Majesties certain Du∣ties for one year; you Voted that it should be entered in your Journals, that the reason why the said Bill was rejected, was, That the same had not its rise in your House These Votes of yours being contrary to the Statutes of the 10th. of Henry the 7th. and the 3d. and 4th. of Philip and Mary, and the continued practice ever since: I find my self obliged to assert Their Majesties Prerogative, and the Rights of the Crown of England, in these particulars, in such a manner as may be most Publick and Permanent; and therefore I do here in full Parliament, make my Publick Pro∣test against these Votes, and the Entries of them in the Journals of the House of Commons, which Protest I require the Clerk of this House to Read, and afterwards to enter it in the Journals of this House, that it may remain as a Vindication of Their Majesties Prerogative, and the Right of the Crown of England, in these particulars, to future Ages. After which his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant delivered the Protestation to the Lord Chancellor, who delivered it to the Clerk of the House, and he Read it; then the Lord Chancellor upon his knee conferring with his Excellency, said as followeth, My Lords and Gentlemen, HIs Excellency having been acquainted, that both Houses intended severally to present some Heads upon which they desired Bills to be prepared of such as his Excellency and the Council should approve of, Commands me to aquaint you, that he will take them into his Consideration, and that against the meeting of the Parliament, after this intended Prorogation, such of them as shall be found requisite, shall be in readiness to be brought into Parliament. That which I have further in Command from his Excellency is, to let you know that it is his Pleasure that this Parliament be Prorogued till Thursday the Sixth day of April next, and this Parliament is prorogued to Thursday the Sixth day of April next. Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, 1692.
