r99a 12644438 65090
No Parliament but the Old: OR, A NEVV-YEARS GIFT For the late Interrupted PARLIAMENT, Now Restored to the Exercise of their Trust: Ovvned by the Army, Expected by the People, and performed by God. Wherein is shewed by divers Reasons, That the Common∣wealth can receive at present no good, but much detriment in the Fundamenral Liberties of the Nation, and the Good Old Cause, if any other PARLIAMENT sit but the late interrupted PARLIAMENT. 1. NO men in the Nation are equally engaged, or so higly concerned to carry on the Good Old Cause as the present Parliament, who were violently hindered from sitting. They only are thoroughly engaged against Kingship, and the Stewarts Family: and it is extream weaknesse to think they can do ortherwise then establish the Govern∣ment so as to keep out the one and the other for ever, as much as in them shall lye. Whereas we see the pretended Parlia∣ments, formerly called by these Officers of the Army were so little concerned in the Good Old Cause, that they Voted a Single Person and House of Lords, and would have made Mr. Oliver Crumwell King, if he had thought sit to accept of their kindness that time. 2. This late interrupted Parliament, being the only true Parliament, and the only true Authority of the Nation, no other Parliament can be called or chosen, and if it be, it is de facto nul and void, and all that they shall do is invallid; for there can be but one Parliament in England: And the present Parliament is that Parliament of England, which cannot be dissol∣ved, but by its own consent or Act. 3. This present Parliament, having been Legally called, and not by the Sword-men, is only Legally above their reach, and which they cannot disturbe without high presumption; whereas a Parliament called by their lusts and pleasures, will be ne∣cessarily subject to be turned out by their Lusts. 4. o choose a Parliament at the revolted Officers appointment, and to own such a Parliament, is destructive to our Li∣berti; for in so doing, we acknowledge the Sword-men to be Supream, and to have Regal Authority to Call, and conse∣quently to dissolve Parliaments, which they will do King-like, as soon as they have raised them Money, and served their am∣bitious ends, or refuse so to do. 5. The sacred and to all Generations Venerable Authority of Parliaments, is so weakened by the force put upon the pre∣sent Parliament to hinder their sitting, that Parliamentary Authority will be for ever invallid, and unable to secure the In∣terest of the Nations; unlesse it be vindicated by Readmission of this present Parliament to Exercise of their just Au∣thority; For these or any other strong party will be upon all occasions encouraged to endeavour to do the like. 6. All Legal and just Authority, being to be conveighed in a Legal way from persons in Authority, there is no other way way to set any future Authority on foot in this Nation, but by the present Parliament, which was Legally called, and can le∣gally give Order for the calling of future Parliaments. If the revolted Officers should be allowed to call Parliaments the Nation falls from the Government of the Laws, to be governed by the Sword, which how sad a condition that must needs prove, let all sober men judge. Yea, let the present ambitious Sword-men consider, what will become of their Posterity in such a condition; for they have no assurance, that their Children and Childrens Children, shall be Sword-men; but ra∣ther they are like to be vassals to the Arbitrary Wills and Laws of Souldiers. 7. Let the revolted Officers, and all their adherents, lay their hands upon their hearrs and seriously consider, that if they shall at last see their errour, and before they are compelled (which will be no thanks to them) permit the Parliament to re∣turn to the exercise of their just Authority; thus accident all and great good will redound to the Nation by their Miscarriages (as the saving of Jacobs Family did arise from the selling of Joseph) that Parliamentary Authority, will be there∣by exceedingly established and strengthened. For the Generaticusto come | will the more admire, and honour the sacred Dig∣nity and Majesty of Parliamentary Assemblies; and all ambitious persons how powerful soever, will fear and dread to vio∣late their Authority, when it shall be recorded and reported that a King of England, otherwise a virtuous person, being seduced by evil Councel to make War against a Parliament, was vanquished with all his great Forces, and a General of their Conquering Army, having through ambition, offered violence to the said Parliament, he had no happiness after, it but shor∣tened his daies with cares, fears, and sorrows; and his Son could not stand after him; and the Officers of his Army were fain to recall the same Parliament; and when, being seduced, they had again interrupted them, there was no way to satis∣fie the English Nation, but to readmit them again to the exercie of their Authority, and to transmit the same to succeeding Parliaments. This I say will be a great establishment of Parlianentary Authority, and consequently a great good, acciden∣tally flowing from their Miscarriages, if they will be yet so wise before it be too late, to lay it to heart, which God grant they may. And let all true Englishmen that love the Libertie of this Common-wealth, themselves and Posterity; take heed how they neddle to choose Parliament men to sit by power of the Sword & consequently to be subject to the Lust of Sword-men; and how they contribute to the weakening of all Parliamentary Authority for the time to come, by hindring any waies the Restau∣ration of this present Parliament, without which, we must for ever be Governed by the Sword, or reduced again under the Fimily of the Stewarts: and which will be the better condition of the two, God all Wise only can tell- By W. R. Doctor in Physick. The Printer to the Reader. CGurteous Reader, I thought it convenient to inform thee, that this Paper should have been published the 22. of Decemb. last, but was amongst other Papers taken out of my hands when ready for the Presse. This Paper was pen'd upon the di∣vulging that Paper for choosing a Mock-Parliament by Order of the revolted Officers, LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, 1659.
