S4600 99830303 34753
Some REMARKS on Captain Dor∣rill's Answer to Mr. Littleton's Letter, concerning a Debt Owing to one Mut∣tredas in India, by the East-India Company. MƲttredas's Procuration and Letter to Mr. Littleton, is Dated the 15th and 19th days of January, 169, and the Bill for the Fifty Thousand Rupees, with 12 l. per Cent, per Annum, is dated in December, 1685. To the Copy of which Bill (sent over to Mr. Littleton,) Captain Dor∣ril, Doctor Evance, and Captain Bromhill, are Witnesses. That the Company gave Muttredas a full and ample Release (the Original whereof is ready to be produced to the Honourable House of Commons) in October 1685. being two Months before the borrowing of this Fifty Thou∣sand Rupees: So that if there were such Demands by the East-India Company upon the said Muttredas, as Sir John Goldsborough was pleased to pretend; yet the same are thereby discharged. That Muttredas sent such a Procuration to Sir Josiah Child, and that Sir Josiah Child made such an Award, and hath now ordered such, Goods to be sent to Muttredas, as Captain Dorrill in his Answer asserts, is modestly sup∣posed to be what that Generous Captain hath been informed; and that may be all he intends, when he offers to make Affidavit thereto, if required; for the Company to talk big, and to vouch Hear-says for Truth, and believe it, is no new nor strange thing. Their Confidence in laying such an Account before the Honourable House of Commons, wherein they reckon the Cost of all their fifteen Ships (when they had Advice that the Thomas her Cargo was Invested, and sent Home from Surratt) is singular, and it is no less, in their endeavouring to Conceal this Debt of Muttredas in Bengall, where they pretended to owe nothing, yet are now forced to own it with this pretty Evasion. But if Muttredas his Letter is to be believed, he hath not only this, but great∣er Demands upon the Company; and so have abundance of People more. And it will be well for all that have any thing to do with the Company, if the Martha's Cargo Arrived in the Bay and the London Frigat's Cargo, Ar∣rived at the Fort St. George (two of the aforesaid fifteen Ships) have not been Invested and sent home from those places, as was the Thomas's from Surratt. For it's notoriously known, that the Company are in such bad Circumstances in In∣dia, as that they have very little either Stock or Credit there; which a Worthy Member of the Honourable House of Commons, lately Arrived from thence, can Testifie if he pleaseth. Note, The Debt of Muttredas, stands in the Company's Books, of the 30th of April, 1686. Signed by Francis Ellis, for which he is Credited in the Name of Colli∣angee, Fifty Thousand Rupees at Interest. In the Books of 1687. This Debt by Virtue of a Consultation there, is brought from Colliangee to Muttredas his Credit, and from thence it's carried to a, gene∣ral Account of Hugley Merchants; and so remains there, as so many obsolete Debts which the Company would discharge by such like Pretences against those Merchants, if the same might so pass: But whoever Ingrafts upon them, will be necessitated (in all probability) to have the Fatiegue, Loss, and Charge, of making up and satisfy∣ing, not only the said Debt to Muttredas, but all other their embroiled Debts and Accounts, in the several Places they have Traded unto in India.
