S5380 99833153 37628
Short Writing, Begun by Nature Compliated by Art Manifesting the Irregu∣larity of placeing the Artificial be∣fore the Natural or Symbolical Contractions: And Proposing a Method more suited to Sense and more fully answering ye Requisites of a Compleat Character in the shortning both of Words and Sentences. Invented, Taught & Published with Plaine Directions Examples and a Specimen of the Writing By Laurence Steel Sold in Bristoll by the Author: & also by Charles Allen. Bookseller in Broad-street of the same Citty: And in London by Benja∣min Clark Stationer in George Court Lumbard Street And others Printed in the Yeare 1678. Joseph: Browne: Sculpsit
The Explanation of the Title and Method viz. Shortwriting begun by Nature &c. The Common Methods teach to write first by the Letters and Vowels Places. This is Irregular for the Reasons premised in the Four first Arches of the Book and is apparently prejudicial to the Learners progress by dissaffecting him at the first Entrance with the longest way of Writing, whereas he should haue that to begin with which might take with his sense, and encourage him with alacrity to proceed. The onely way I know of to effect this, is, First to instruct the Learner in the ready expressing of Words by their Natural and Proper Emblems, which ought to be ranked Alphabetically, and the Charac∣ter for each letter prefixed. This is the Method that I haue taken to Initiate and fasten Beginners. Of these Emblems I haue set down the following Instances by which the Learner being put in the way, will more readily apprehend and get the rest. For The Character for A: About a tittle above A About A. brought about Christ went about He went about For The Character for B: Belong B. is made long Below a little below B Between a little between Break break the B Bow down B. is bowed down For The Character for D: Divide. D: is divided Christ divided Church divided Discover. D: is covered For The Character for E: Establish, E: is Establish't Church Establish't Enter: into a stroak Enters Even, heaven Enter: into heaven &c. By this Method those yt. have learnt others Hands may greatly im∣prove themselves. In short, The Book containes Three Parts, of which the Emblems are the First. The Second shews how Words not Expressible by Emblems may be Regularly and Concisely written. The Third teacheth a new Invention for the more effec∣tual Contracting of Sentences like Words. In all which I have aimed at Brevity. Perspicuity, and relief to the memory by af∣fecting the Sense and Reason. These Three Parts are inclu∣ded in 36 Columns In the Arches and Heads of which are Observation for the Learner first to peruse and then get the Characters in the order they are placed till the whole be fin∣ished, which may be dispatched in about a weeks time, but must afterwards be improved by daily and constant writing The Psalmes of the Bible are fit to begin with. And in the writing let the letters be kept fair and distinct, and no long hand mingled with it. If any desire to be instructed in this Art, or to haue further direction in it, they may hear of me at the Widdow Heli.'s upon the Wair in Bristol.
The First Part. Shewing how words and Sentences are exprest by significant Emblems, concerning which observe: If all words could be written by significant Emblems it were more pertinent and compendious then any other way of Writing. Alphabeti∣call writing is only usefull to supply what cannot be writ¦ten by a shorter method: Therefore that sort of Charac¦tery is best reserved until yt wch is more compendious & de∣lightfull be past through This Table needs not much direction, where ye Learner is only to observe, how the sence of ye word is represent∣ed by the Character. Note where any Em∣blem depends upon a Letter of the Alpha¦bet I have set it in the Front to Ill us∣trate it. This Stroak  when it stands through a character, signifie some hurt: a: in (a) it is afflict  in (b) burthen (c) corrupt  & As for these Clauses (of) God of Christ of Man, of the World, see them more fully explained in Column 13. 14 The Marks for about, down, up, to, and fro. &c. do stand for Go a∣bout, went about, go down or come down, &c. Where any single mark is put for two or more words, they are such as the sence will easily distinguish in the reading. For the Plural num∣ber write a tittle underneath: Doctrine () mercies () masters () Kingdoms () The Learner must beware of adding any Emblems that will not square with the whole body of ye Characters. The Table of Emblems. A Above about round about on every side aboundance as many as according advance ascend afflict anoint apostle asunder B Backward backslide baptise baptisim believe beloved believe in God babilon belong belong to Christ below beneath between break or breach
break the first breake the Second bow down bow down to Christ bring burthen C Certain child child of God christ antichrist christ went about church church of Christ circum or convert commandment break the command∣ment of God compas about condemn congregation continue contrary contradict corrupt cover covetous cros cros of Christ
crucifie crucifie to the world D Dark deliver des dis descend difference distinguish distinct divide, depart is Christ divided church of Christ divided discover disgrace docter doctrine down, come downe Christ ment down break down drunkard E Enter into come into establish believer established church established
from one end to the other even heaven enter into heaven uneven, unequal unequally yok't eternal everlasting eye eye of the Lord of Christ of man of the soul of the world shut the eye lift up the eye F Fal, false fal of Adam fal of antichrist fal of babilon down fal fals Church fals Doctrine family familiar fellowship follow foundation fulfil as far as
G Give gospel gospel of Christ govern great great breach great command through great breake through great H Hand right hand left hand hand in hand hands that hang downe heart enter into the heart of men and women break ye heart broken heart bottom of ye heart Search ye heart hipocrite hipocrisy honour house
houshold house and Land breake though the house compas the house about husband husband & wife husband wife and Children holy holy Ghost I Idol jerusalem jesus jesus Christ ignorance through ignorance illuminate, illustrate image image of God in, im, un, increase infinite as much as instrument joyn, together judg judgment bring down the judgment of God.
K Keepe king kingdom enter into the kingdom of God a kingdom divi∣ded against it selfe cannot stand anointed King L Land Labour through labour large like lip, lips long as long as M Magistrate majestie majestie of God magnifie magnifie ye Lord make made malefactor maintain master man, min, mon, sal of man
mankind manifest mark memorandum memory. remem∣ber mercy great mercy of God to man through ye mercy of Jesus Christ minister mistake through mistake mouth; mother multiply, multitud in the midst N Neglect negligence through neglect O Open, opinion open the doctrin the eye the hand the heart the lips the mouth in the opening oppose, opposite
oppress over upon break over original P Part, port particular peculiar patience prolong perceive persecute persevere perpetual pestilence point appoint perogative priviledge Q Quantity quarrel quarrel about R Reconcile recover returne religion, reveal reverence righteous unrighteous
S Sacrifice sathan separate separate man sin son, sun beloved son of God sons & daughters serpent break ye serpents head speak or say unto T Take take up take up ye Cross overtake undertake through break through break through ye heart of man break through the dark to or come to Christ went to together ioyn or gather together to and fro or went to and fro
the Eye of ye Lord runs to and fro turn turn about overturn from top to bottom trouble through trouble V Vers vert uncover under or understand undersanding under value unite unite the heart of man to God up upright Christ went up break up lift up, exalt lift up the Eye to the Lord lift up ye hand lift up holy up and down Christ ment up and down W Wander wonder wander about wicked
wilderness world through ye world christ came into the world foundation of the world the whole world lies in wickedness the world is set in the heart the heart is set on the world he is bent upon the world worship false worship X Execute exercise experience extraordinary extream, express Y Yeild yeild up Z Zeale
The Improve∣ment of the former Table by usefull end∣ings for the contracting of Sentences. The Learner may observe in the former Table how several Clauses of Sentences are contracted by marks set either on the top or under the Character where note the marks set on top are as follow For of God or ye Lord a tittle for of Christ this of man this of mankind the of men & women of the Soul of the world this mark () placed un¦derneath which are fully exemplified in the Table particularly in the Letter E The same marks do stand for in God or with or to God or the Lord and with Christ as the foregoing word shal dictate
Proper Endings for the enlarging of any word of the Table as occasion is. Marks for the compleating of words For the Negatives im, m, ir, un, make a tittle in the beginn¦ing Impatient indifferent irreverence ub-beliefe uncertain Thus write Circumvert dislike impart Marks set on the top for ye ending of words for ation a tittle. Conversation ministration tribulation Thus write these Fashion Passion fashion of ye world The same for otion motion () notion () For able, ible, this () Corruptible infattible imaginable remarkable
How other words not insert∣ed in the Table may be contracted by the same endings. How the marks for words and Sentences doe consist, when they meet in one Clause. Thus write these Able cable sable table the same for ible oble iple or ople Bible noble couple double disciple people disciple of Christ people of God For ity this Contraricty samiliarity individuality Thus write these City () pitty () The same for ighty uty, duly () mighty () For meant. this () Aduancement government inlargment Thus write these Paiment raiment The same for oment moment indument For Son, sion, a tittle within as Afflictions ascentions
Corruption destruction distinction contradiction Thus write Version Circumcision thousand When the Endings for words and Sen∣tences meet write them thus Advancement of Christ Manifestation of God to man Establishment of the Soul Government of the World Other endings of words which are written in a direct Line For ance write () for ed for est for eth for ing for ful for ness mercifullness What more Example do occur of this kind Words or Sentences let them be written in a Book.
The Second Part, shewing how words may be regularly written, containes the Alphabet, the Conson∣ants and Vowels The Alphabet with the words signe∣fied by each Letter A  Away B  be but D  did, didst E  evil F  for ful G  god good H  how I  just K  keen L  lord M  much N  now nature O  of P  peace Q  question R  ra. re. are S  as is his T  il that V  your W  which word X  excellent Y  you Z  zion For the Letter C) write (K) or (S) according to the Sound of the word S is often turned over with a head thus
Places For the furtherance of speed, some Conso∣nants are this shortned which are called Contacts. The Contracts ch  Christian el  carnal, conelius nd  and end ndl  handle ng  thing ngl  angle ne ns  ance, ence sc  scarce sl  stand stance th  them Examples of words written by the joyning of other Letters with the Contracts Bth  Both del  declare fnd  find found frth  fourth fth  faith fathers kth  catholick nsr  answer nth  nothing rth  earth ser  scribe scripture sgn  signify trth  truth wth  with Thus write Endeth () Ending () Heaven & earth Nothing in ye world kl or cl Kr or cr
The rest of the Consonants are two or more Letters of the Alpha∣bet regularly joyned together. First observe, what Letters are joyned in the Cha∣racter, then learne the words signified by them. Some marks stand only for the parts of words: as car cor, mes, mis, per, rec, sah, sol, whose use see Column 23 The Table of Consonants where note this mark (r) stands for com or con bl bless bld bold behold blf blasphem bn beginn beginning br bread bs beside conf comfort comsh complish conks concupiescence conl counsel conq consequence conr consider conrn concern conf confess const consist cont covenant df def dif dl devil diligent dgr decree degree dm demonstrate dmion dominion dn din den don dr drink dt difficult div divell fl flesh fr from ference frg forgive frst first frt fruit gl glory
gn gon gr grace grt grant hm him jy joy kr car, cor, cur krt create krtr creator lf life lk look lt let light lo love mb member mr mor mur ms mes mis mischiefe nbr neighbour nk thank think nl knowledge nmbr number nr nor ns necessary nt not ntr enter interpret pl please place pr par, per, pur. prs praise ps pas, pos pt pet, put rb reprobate rd read rdm redeem rgr regard rp repent rq require rs rias, res respect
rson resurrection ro resolve rw reward ry rejoyce sb u sub Sabbath sd similitude sf suf sg suggest sl sal, sol soul sm som, sum sn salvation snt Saint sent sp sup spr spirit sr serve, soever str strength stsf sattisfie sy say tm time tem tmp temp tr tans transgres tr ter ture trespas tr tribute trm triumph trst rust tv tive us us use wh who whom wk walk wr work wsm wisdom yt yet xkt expect xt except accept
The Contracti∣on of useful clause of Sentences belonging to the Table of Consonants. Clauses of Sentences shortned In ye beginning between both break bread broken Spirit bring forth fruit break Covenant with God the Devil goes about the Grace of God glory of ye world knowledg of Christ drink up enter into transgression look round about break ye Sabbath sundamental truth of God a long time times are turned through repentance himselfe or themselves them that or they that them that are from them thatare of them thatare to them that are some of them that are to them that haue
The usefulness of the parts of words inserted in both Tables, Exemplified Explained Words Contracted by the joyning together of Parts As to write Substance joyn the mark for Sub & stance together thus () Circumstance compare consume distribute contempt forwardness purpose reforme subvert transcribe perform remain Where the joyning of the Parts brings the words out of Square write them asunder Deserve pasture misrepresent superscribe Long Words Impardonable indissoluble incompatible condesecution transubstantiation
Additional parts of words, both for the beginning & end, with Examples of words written by them For pra, pre, in the beginning of a word write this () for pro pru this () Prepare present preserve preseribe promise propose procure improve reprove For ject in the end make this () Project reject subject For fication Iustification Sanctification glorification For prehend apprehend corruprehend reprehension For Sence Insence insensible conscience conscientions presence of God
The five Vowels are not to be exprest by their own Characters, unlesse when they begin a won but are understood by Places. The Vowels places a e i o u a e i o u When a word ends with a Vowel pur a tittle in the place of it ba, be,  ra re bi,  ri bo, bu  ro, ru When a word ends with a Consonant set it in the Vowels place Thus bad, bed  ran ren bid  rin bod, bud  ron, run Note so many Conso∣nants as come togetehr without a Vowel betweē them are to be written without taking of the Pen Clinch  France strang  scrape dandl  chang crumbl  thu blunt  seald sword  plung cramp  spurn Glattering supremacy stubborn plaiflered botstering
Examples of long words written by the Alphabet alone, and also in conjunction with other parts of Words Thus write Alexander Jonathan Jeconiah Garnaliel\ Methusela Solomon Barnabas Sometimes a word is begun with a part and concluded by the Alphabet as Compelling desired discipline disoblige discourage mercenry perplexing misapplie suboraed suffering Sometimes a word is begun with the Alpha∣bet & concluded by some part Defendeth defending fraternity derinative molestation raseallition
Note, no more Letters, Vowels or Consonants are to be exprest in this Art, then what will suffice to sound the word. When two like Con∣sonants meet in a word, let the first only be exprest. Dinner () Folly () The same for Vowels meeting in one Syllable as Frail () Suit () Unlike vowels meeting in distinct Syllables are thus written Diet () Viol () Leave out as follows b. after m Lamb c before k back d before g lodg g before n knock u after g guide u after q quick w. before r wrong w after a saw w after o lom y. after a day Pharo () Philip () H may be left out in these & such like Help  Hope the  thy humble  inhabit X contracts words as Flocks  Action facts  Succes
Examples of words contracted by ye moission of Vowels & parts of words in the beginning, without hurt to the Sound The expert Learner may omit Single Vowels in the begin∣ing of words: as Abomination adversary endeavour enemy israel omnipotent ornament ultimate usurp Except when two Vowels come together then ye first is to be written as Aim  Oil our  out Likewise when two like Consonants imme∣diately follow a Vowel Adder  Error arrow  utler Or when a word is drawn long as Ope. () Ale. () Ac, ad & ap, are to be omitted in these words. Acquaint advantage appropriate And such like
The Third Part, teaching a New & more expedite may for the Contract∣ing of Sentences by ye Prefixes, the Tenses & the Persons with their Places. Note, the Rarity of these Contractions is, that they doe not burthen ye Memory with any other Marks or Rides then what are used for words. The Table of Prefixes, which are in Sen∣tances like ye Consonants to begin words After again all allwaies among and as al before because beside better beyond else especially either ever except first further future here and if but if if so be likewise neither another never nevertheless notwithstanding often otherwise soon such then thence one, one there therefore this though thus til, until what what if when whence where where∣fore while except yet yet if How (as) is to be written then il is redoubled As great as as much as as often as as soon
The Tenses or Times, which do resemble ye Ending Consonants Active do dost doth did didst have hast hath had hadst shal shalt wil wilt may maist can would wouldst could couldst should shouldst might mightst must ought Passive am is art are was wert were have been hast b. hath b. had b. hadst b. shal b. shalt b wil b. wilt b. may b. maist b. can b. would b. wouldst b. could b. couldst b. should b. shouldst b. might b. mightst b. st b. ought to b. The Six Persons which are in Sentences as Vowels were in words. I  we thou  ye you he  they
Contractions. made by the joyning of the persons & Tenses, together with the Nega∣tive (Not) and such Verbs as usually follow them In the beginning of a Sentence ye Persons & Tenses may be united thus: I do  we do thou dost  you do he doth  tha do &c: For (not) place a tittle within or upon ye tense I was not  we must I can not  ye shal nt tha are not  thou dst you must not be he hath not been So write all ye Persons and Tenses in order. Likewise the Tenses will unite with these Particles. It that such, there, this, those, thus, where, wch, whether as, it doth  there did such hath  that will He ought not there will not Contractions of Verbs For (give) this () I will not give for (make) this () I cannot make for (say) this () He did not say for (take) this () I will not take that cannot be taken he could not be made
The Places of the Persons and manner of expressing Interrogatives, and placeing of the Tenses in Order The places of ye Persons are according to the sound of their Vowels. tha he, we j thou, you. tha he we j thou, you Note the place for we & you is somwhat more distant from ye Letter then he, and thou Thus write these Interogatives: do tha  doth he do we  do I do thou  do you Note, as in words the Consonants were set in the Vowels places: So in Sentences the Tenses are to be put in the Persons places about ye Presixes thus: After tha do After he do After we do After I do After thou do After you do In like manner may all ye other Tenses be placed, about this & other Prefixes After Tha did After he did After we did
The manner of placeing the Tenses after many compleat Verbs Like∣wise a Rule for Verbs of Motion In like manner may the Tenses be written after these Verbs. Believe, condude, conside∣er. declare, grant finde, expect, hope, acknowledge perceive, suppose, thin, understand. As for instance: Belie tha do he doth we do I do thou dost you do The rest the Learner may write out in order: as, I believe tha did () &c All verbs of Motion are understood by their Particle, as in the ninth Arch: After tha went away After he went away After we went away After I went away After thou went away After you went away If tha go not down If he go not down If we go not down If I go not down If thou go not down If go not down If you go not down
The use of this Third Part may be seen in the underwritten Contrac∣tions, by which ye Lear∣ner may frame all others of ye like nature If a man have not ye Spirit of Christ he is none of his () Through much tribula∣tion you must enter in∣to ye kingdom of heaven I understand he hath not been with you a longtime acknowoledgeth he could not come from the place where he was Better you had not been born, then that you should continue as you are this is a breach of ye commandment of God Marks for the Books of the Bible, in order as they stand Old Test: New Test:
A · BRIEF · SPECIMEN · OF · T̄E · WRITING ❀ Ioseph. .Browne Sculp. .sit. The Matter compri∣sed in the foregoing Circle in words at Length. Great is the goodness of the Lord, the Crea∣tour of Heaven a Earth, to the sone and dghters of men wha¦ the beginning ¦fore man entred transgression) made him in his Image holy and righteous, and not withstanding the fall of man, and his break¦ing his command¦ments, and neglecting of his dutie to him yet doth he wait to be gratious by his Light and spirit in man which through the mercy of Iesus Christ is sent, to convince the world of Sin, of Righ∣teouses, and of judg∣ment, that so they may come to take up the Cross of Christ, and to hear him who said, except a man be converted he can not enter in∣to the kingdom of God, where there are those joyes, that it cannot enter into the heart of fallen man to conceive.
A summary Collection of the Characters of this Book into Coherent matter, which is to be the Learners first Exercise to read and write out.
HODGSON's Short Hand Contractions, WITH A COMPARATIVE TABLE OF Short Hand Alphabets. AND Two Copper Plates. [PRICE HALF A CROWN.]
