S5262 11924084 51000
THE TRAGEDIE OF Hero and Leander. Written by Sr. ROBERT STAPYLTON Kt. One of the Gentlemen Ushers of his Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Chamber. Licenced August 25. 1668. Roger L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring the Younger, at the White Lyon next Chancery-Lane in Fleet-street, 1669.
TO THE Illustrious Princess The Dutchess of MONMOUTH. Madam, THough Talkers are so Ma∣licious against Writers, that few dare Print their Works, unless protected by great Persons: Yet Hope of Patronage is not theCause of my pre∣sumption. For if Men had no malice, or such, as could not poyson Books, This should be dedicated to the Divine
and Princely Virtues, which make Your Grace an Ornament to the Court, and a Glory to Your Sex. If your Grace be pleased to accept my Duty, and pardon the Errors of my Poem, no Author can be Happier then Your Grace's Most obedient Servant R. Stapylton.
The Prologue. BAnkers with Ginnyes may their purses fill, And travel safer over Shooter's Hill, Then Poets with their Stock can pass this Road; To rob them of Applause is now the Mode: He's scarce esteem'd a Gallant, in our dayes, Who has not Hector'd two or three new Playes. Ioyn'd with this Party, as the Author's told, Are some, who neither spare new Playes, nor old. Censurers, that, like Picklocks of the Law, In any thing that's penn'd, will find a flaw; And have a Peck to him, because he chuses A Subject, which new-modell'd Rhyme abuses: For Love and Honour (Theams of former Ages) Are turn'd into Bourlesque, on modern Stages: Where a Iack-Pudding acts great Alexander, And Puppets play mock-Hero and Leander. That Hero and Leander (further fam'd Then any Land which Alexander claim'd) Should be disparag'd; Mimick, scorn, not Wit, Deriding what the noblest Poet writ. Blame not our Poet, if he be inrag'd, Ladyes, You and your Servants are ingag'd; For, Heo's Injury concerns the Faire; Leander's, all those Men, who bravely dare.
The Persons. Tiresias Supreme Magistrate of Sestos. Samertes His Son. Leander A Prince of the House of Troy. Orosis His Younger Brother. Mentor Admiral of Athens. Musaeus His Vice-Admiral. Castor Master of Leander's Ship. Stredon Master's Mate. Aphila Wife to Tiresias. Hero and Theamne Daughters to Tiresias and Aphila. Celena Sister to Leander and Orosis. Nurse To Hero and Theamne. Boyes and Girles; Servants, Sea-men and Souldiers. The Scene. The Towers and Towns of Sestos and Abydos, the Hellespont flowing between them.
Hero and Leander. The First Act. When the Curtain is drawn up, there's discover'd at Sestos, a Throng of People, from them Enter Castor and Stredon, puffing and blowing. Cast. MAte, O for a fresh Gale, to give me breath. Stre. Master, this Feast of Venus and Adenis Is hotter then a dog-Day: how I sweat? But Castor, 'twas good uck, our jeering Friends (In Asia) could not ee how thou and I Were stranded here (in Europe) run a ground Upon a multitude of staring Greeks. Cast. Send me abord my ship; In these Land-Crowds There's more confusion then in Storms at Sea▪ Tack about, Stredon, we have lost the Princes. Enter Leander. Lean. Castor? Stredon? Stre. Hark? Our great Master calls. Lean. Is the Show comming yet?
Enter Orosis. Oros. Leander, Stand. The Chariot moves; and in it, such a Venus As stirs up my Devotion, a young Lady In a Youth's arms; what would I give for's Place? Lean. His Wife she may be, or perhaps his Wench, Oros. Ladas (who knows this Town of Setos) sayes, These Rites admit no Wench, nor Married-Woman; Venus to day is a Terestrial Maid, But I adore her, Lean. ye, Orosis, now, When Pera, Syr▪ and Arabi, meet t the Great Feast o Venu an Adonis; When Malta, Cyprus, Rhodes, and Siily, Land their whole Islands on this Continent, To pay th' Immortal Gods religious duties, Can'st thou think of adoring mortal Beautyes? Oros. Leander of our Trojan Family You are the Chief; I, your poor younger-Brother: You, by your Birth-right, may claim Hector's Valour, A second Paris I: no marvail then, If I court Women, whilst you conquer Men. Lean. Thou court'st all Women, Oros. To chuse out the best; This Beauty must be nobly born, and Chast: She's like Celena, our now-equall'd Sister. The Show. Theamne and Samertes, habited like Venus and Adonis, ap∣pear in a Chariot, drawn by Girls and Boys, wearing white Vests and Garlands of Roses. Theamne and Samertes kiss. 1 Boy. Venus and Adonis kiss; Pretty Maids, how like you this? 1 Girl. We like all, that Love's Queen esteems. 2 Boy. And she likes Kissing well, it seems: Our smiling Goddess, this Feast-Day, Will grant all Suits: pray Virgins, pray.
2 Girl. When you grow Men, that you prove true, Sweet Boyes, we pray: for what pray You? 2 Boy. We pray to Venus, that she'l please To make us all Adonises. Song. When Sons of Mars quarrel For Fame and the Laurel, They dye, nipt like Buds in the Spring: VVe Children of Venus, When our Nurses weau us, Play, Laugh, Kiss, and merrily Sing. Yet VVe get Renown, VVhich Cupid proposes; And VVe wear a Crown, Not Laurel, but Roses. Our Goddess, Softer then our Flowers, VVill make no resistance. Malignant and Infernal Powers St Hearts at a distance. Chorus. Fair Venus dwells above The Moon, young Adonis under: But Youth and Beauty will love, The Stars cannot keep them asunder. Samertes and Theamne come down, they dance; the Show goes off, after it the People. Lean. Let the Crowd follow her, thou shalt not stir, She's young, and fair, but She's I know not Who. Oros. Who e're she be, so much Divinity She has, that for it I'l exchange my Honour. Lean. After Troy's ruine, on the Royal House Of Priam and Assarracus, wilt thou Bring more destruction by a shameful Match? I charge thee, stay. Oros. Command your Gally-Slaves. Lean. If reason can persuade, thou wilt not go. Oros. You'l let me send? Lean. None that belongs to me: Take Captives and thou shalt have all my Fleet.
But not a man to make thy self a Slave. Oros. Though I have here no Servant, I scorn thine, And thee; I'l Act alone. Lean. Act, like a Prince▪ Act with thy Brother, come in for a share In the Dominion of the Euxine Sea: I'l joyne with thee in the pursuit of Glory, But where there's nothing to be got, but shame, I leave thee. Oros. Oh, your Servant, you are call'd To the releife of some poor fighting Ships; I'm called-on too. Lean. But 'tis to Court, not Fight. Oros. I would increase, and not destroy, Mankind. Lean. Thou wilt be lost to Honour, and add none To Nature, but a Race, thou'lt blush to own: Could'st thou indure a Son that would like thee, Marry the Pageant, which he came to see; A Son that (when the Warr he should espouse And with triumphant Laurel Wreath his brows) Worse then a Coward, should seek to hide his head In the soft Pillow of a Wanton's bed? Oros. You have alarm'd me, I'm now for Arms▪ Lean. And now let us embrace as Fellow-Souldiers. Oros. But in great Souldiers hearts, Mistresses have The second Place. Lean. Dost thou prefer the War, Before the Mistress? Oros. Yes; and to be serious, Do not you fear, my Spirit is so low, To match with Beauty of a mean extraction. Lean. Then, follow thy Amour▪ I'l follow thee Oros. Let's now embrace as Brothers: I presume, The sacred Chariot's going to the Temple. There my Young Venus once more we'l behold, To Her I'l pray: the Goddess is grown Old. Exeunt. Enter Tiresias, Aphila and Arcas. Tire. Thou know'st I love thee. Aphi. So't appears; for, you, Kind Husband, rob me of the Right of Nature, You take my Child out of her Mother's Power. Hero's a Priestess, for a whole year Cloister'd: Was this an Act of Love to her, or me? Tire. Aphila, 'twas an Act of Piety,
Aphi. Tiresias, 'twas an Act of Policy. Tire. This only clears the Account to Venus; she Lent her to us, I pay her to the Goddess. Aphi. You mock me and the Goddess; for to both Great Zeal you do pretend, but value neither. These are the Prophet's Tricks, Legerdemains, That come to you from your Progenitors, The Delphick Priests: and since you came to Thrace, Your Pride, is, like your Gold, pil'd-up so high That you look down, with Scorn, upon my Kindred. Tire. Whom, of your Kindred, have I ever Scorn'd? Aphi. My Nephew Arcas; because he lov'd Hero, She was committed Priestess, to the Tower. Tire. This is great news; Arcas, do you love Hero? Arcas. Above the World, for she's worth many Worlds; The Maid's Divine, Aphi. That's by the Mother's side; The Father's grown inhumane to his own. Tire. In my indulgent care, I have express'd My Fatherly affection to our Children. I made Samertes Governour of Sestos; His Chin's still smooth, yet is the Sword in's hand: And if Great Mentor Admiral of Athens, Were not yet kept from us by a storm at Sea, This day, Theamne should have been his Bride. Aphi. But Hero is a Priestess. Tire. Dear, you know, One of my Family's Prerogatives, Her Priesthood is, and lasts but for a Year, Then, noble Arcas, you may Court her freely, Mean time, you haue my Wife's consent, and mine. Arcas. Gifts, dearer then the life my Parents gave. Aphi. Now I adore your holy Ceremonies, Which Crown our Children, in the Town, and Temple. Enter Samertes and Theamne. Here comes our Venus and Adonis; Son, Thy Sacred Father to my Nephew Arcas Has promis'd Hero: give the Bride-groom joy. Samer. First, Madam, with your leave, I'l joy my self, That I have such a Brother. Arcas. Who admires Only two Miracles of Nature; Hero, For Beauty: and for Gallantry, Samertes. Same. Y' have reason.
Thea. What a Peacock is my Brother. Same. heamne, this should be thy Wedding-day, But thy Great Bride-groome's rivall'd by a Storm: Dost thou not pray devoutly for a Calm? Thea. I love a Sea, in which the Dolphin playes. Same. Thou lovest a Man. Thea. Known only by his Fame. Same. Yes, by his Picture. Thea. That's not fac'd like you; For I perceive, that Mentor's no Adonis. Same. But he's a Mars, which Venus likes as well; There's in a Souldier's roughness a strange Spell; Then Maids love Title, and he's styl'd the Great. Tire. A Title merited, when he destroy'd The Persian Fleet, and with his own hand slew The Great King's Vice-roy. Same. Nay Sir, he has yet A higher Title, he's my Fathers Friend. Sister, ingeniously confess; before Thou see'st Great Mentor, fear'st thou not this loss? Thea. I feare his stern looks] Pitty such a Man Should perish— Same. And thou live a Maid. Thea. That's pleasant: Tire. Son, thy Unusual mirth presages well. Same. Sir, you derive your self from Delphian Prophets, Do y' not fore-see, that I'l be merrier? My Veins shall swell with your best Wines; this Ev'ning. I mean to feast those Friends, who at the show Made-up our Traine. Aphi. I'l order you a Treat, And make't as Noble, as my Joyes are Great. Exeunt. Enter Hero and Nurse, In the Temple. On the Altar, between two Tapers burning, stand the Statues of Venus and Cupid. Nurse. You Maids, that in your slowry Youth scorn Men, Are met withal; for in your wither'd Age, Men laugh at you. Hero. As I do, at thy Precepts.
Nurse. Do y' laugh? Hero. Nurse I should frown, but that I know The Difference between thee and other Nurses. In Smooth discourses they hint Wanton thoughts, Thy Natur's modest; though thy Humour be Too Gay, for one so Old. Nurse. Well, Hero, Well; Your Humour's froward; will you never Marry? Hero. Pray hear my Reasons. Nurse. I dare stay no longer; My Lady will frown, if she want my Service At such a Feast. Hero. My duty to my Parents, Nurse, you'l not fail to say you left me well? Nurse. In body; but, I'faith, I'l tell your Mother, How peevishly you mortifie your Mind. Diana loves to have her Priestess strict; But Venus favours not a single Life, She hates a Maid, that would not be a Wife. Hero. Free I was born, why should I not live Free? Nurse. What think you Marriage is? Hero. Perpetual Bondage. Hero kneels to Venus. O Venus, if the Service I have done, Here in thy Temple, please thee; Chide thy Son, When he shoots at me any thing, but Lead; Save me, dear Goddess, from the Nuptial bed: Nor to Posrity let Time record, That She, who was thy Servant, had a Lord. Nurse. Child, dare you pray to Venus, against Love? Take heed, some Judgment do not fall upon you: Never young Virgin made a Prayer so wicked. Hero. Never Old-woman was so Superstitious: Nay, sweet Nurse, stay; thou shalt not part in fury; Stay, that I may convert thee to my Faith. Hero and Nurse talk with their faces to the Altar. Enter Leander and Orosis. Lean. That talking old Priest made us come too late, The Chariot's gone. Oros. We met him luckily, Now I may own my Love to fair Theamne. Lean. But sure her Sister Hero is deform'd, And therefore, by her Parents, the poor soul Was made a Priestess and plac'd here, to Pray. Oros. They are great Ladies.
Lean. Yes, the Priest told us, Their Father is chief Magistrate of Sestos. Oros. But under him their Brother has the Sword, He's Governour. Lean. Who, he that was Adonis? Oros. O Sir, to a young Souldier, bred in Sparta, The Sword may be intrusted. Lean. It sutes worse, With their old Father's Attribute of Prophet, To make his Son Adonis in a show; But Greece is wanton. Oros. Leaving your Grave thoughts, Advise me, shall I move Theamne's Father? Or with me at the Altar will You kneel, And try, if we can pray Theamne hither? Lean. We may pray here, or there, but to no purpose, Tiresias is too rich. Oros. Rust eate his coine; The poorest Prince deserves— Lean. Triumphal Arches, When he's Victorious. Oros. Brother, I'l Fight well, And Love well too. Lean. I am a Man, I scorn Hero and Nurse turn from the Altar. Love's Childish Toys—VVhat miracle of Nature Draws Cupid's Bow, to wound me, who so oft have slighted his Divinity? Oros. He's blasted! Sure, Love has struck him with a flash of Lightning, Leander. VVhat deprives thee of thy Senses? Lean. Wonder, Fear, Modesty; and Impudence▪ Oros. Before thImmortal Gods, could you be bold? Lean. Profanely rude; I hardly can forbear: Yet, silently I'l sound her inclination. Oros. She steals a look; hang me, but she'l prove kind. Hero. Oh, I have been too busy with my eyes, They have betray'd their Mistress: Shall I yield Before the Souldier summons me? Help Nurse. Nurse▪ No, I'm a Superstitious old Woman: VVhat think you of strict Resolutions now? Ben't you in Love? Hero▪ I am, I know not what. Lean. 'Tis happy, that my Love's not made the sport Of her Disdain; for Favour now I'l sue.
Priestess, a Temple you your self deserve, For y'are as great a Pow'r, as she you serve: Here reign two Queens of Love divinely Fair; And both, I hope, will hear a Stranger's Pray'r. Hero. Not strangers, but deserving Friends I hear. Lean. Though I am not related yet so near, I love you, more then Friend or Brother can. Hero. I never did, nor ever will love Man. Lean. If you'l not love, then cruel-Faire, I'l dye. Hero. I cannot love, nor hate: for 'tis not I That am mine own Disposer; in my choice My Father, and my Mother, has a Voice: Stranger, your Suit depends upon their Wills; But I must to the Tow'r, the Temple fills. How needful your advice is, Nurse, you see? Nurs. Child, when the Banquet's serv'd, I'l come again. Exeunt Hero and Nurse, severally. Lean. Who shall treat with their Parents? Oros. That will I; For I first lov'd, and therefore I'l first speak. Lean. With all the Art thou did'st at Athens learn, Move both our Suits. Oros. Only my own Concern; For, you are sure to speed, if I prevail: And you'l be undiscover'd, if I fail. Exeun. The Second Act. Enter Theamne, and Nurse with a Picture, In a Garden. Thea. Nurse, how's the Wind? Nurs. As the Trees blow, 'tis VVest. Thea. Then, Mentor comes. Nurs. Poor heart, I give the Pity, Instead of Joy; VVhat a sad Bride-groom's here! If this Face be his best, he has the worst That ever eyes beheld: An Admiral! A Sea-coale-man; from such an Aethiop VVell might the Persians fly; I shake and tremble To see his very Picture. Thea. Then, O Nurse! How must I be confounded, when I fear,
He may be landing? Nurs. Now the Devil sink him; Before my Father should dispose of me, To one I never saw but in a Shadow; Which frights me, like a Goblin, I would fly As far as Asia has a foot of ground. Thea. Rather then I'l stay here, till He arrive, I'l fly to Persia; least he Conquer that, To India: but alas, I know no friend, VVho will conceal me here. Nurs. You know my Sister, Step to her House, there You may lye as safe, As Hero in her Tow'r; and when the Town Is searched, my life on't, she'l discover nothing; I'th ev'ning, when the Saylors, that came over To our Feast from Abydos, shall return; Go, in my Sisters cloaths, and hire your passage; The Sea from Sestos, is not a Mile-broad, You'l Sail it, in a quarter of an hour. Thea. Kiss me, dear Nurse, and lets take leave for ever; I'l follow thy advice, lend me thy Veile, Theamne puts on Nurse's Veil. Enter Orosis, Castor and Stredon. Unbolt the garden-door VVhose here? a Stranger; But one worth all th'Inhabitants of Greece: with such a Husband I could live and dye. Oros. Theamne here? Fortune's a gracious Queen; Love, be not then a Tyrant: Athens now Inspire me, with thy Vein of Poetry. Fairest and sweetest of the matchless Greeks, These Damask-Roses blowing in your Cheeks. Make all those Garden-Roses look as pale, As Beauties struck when they see You unveil. Thea. Nay if you speak Verse, I am for you there; Verse is the Dialect of Prophets Children. Aside. Foreiner (for you are no Greek, I see) Your Country and your Quality to me, Are Strangers too Oros. Wonder of Europe, know, That, till your Countrymen did overthrow My Family, Troy was our Royal Seat; But what are Princes after a Defeat! From all the Lesser Asia, and a Crown, Or Empire is reduc'd to one Sea-Town:
I, cross the Channel, at Abydos born; Sestos my Neighbour-City, You adorn: Here, from the VVorld, in my own Right I claim Theamne— Thea. How come you to know my name? Oros. It concerns him, who moves for a Decree▪ To know his Judge. Thea. Your Judge I cannot be, For to Theamne you pretend a Right. Oros. My Title's Love, at first and second Sight. Thea. But how can I a wandring Stranger trust? Oros. My Claim's put in; and I hope, You'l be just: But if the Judge will take the Party's Oath, I give you my inviolable Troath. Orosis offers his hand, Theamne accepts it. Thea. More Forme, in my Ingagement, should be us'd, But where Need presses, Modesty's excus'd; Oros. The Kno is ty'd, untye it He that can. Thea. VVhether he be a Monster, or a Man; See (whom I never saw, but in this Piece) My Father's choice. Oros. 'Tis He that fought for Greece: I know his Persian Trophie, and his Face; VVe match'd our Chariots, in th' Olympick Race: Ith' Isthmian VVrastling-ground, his strength I try'd. Thea. You now must wrastle with him, for a Bride. Oros. How? Shall I bear you hence? or prosecute My first Designe, and boldly move my Suit To your rich Friends? Thea. Do this, but ere you go, 'Tis fit, you should their Dispositions know. My Father's Mentor's Friend, but govern'd by My Mother; She loves nothing, but what's High, That Kings were your Fore-Fathers, may please Her: My Brother's of a strange mixt Character, He's Valiant, but his Valour's drown'd in Rage; And though a Tutor might befit his Age, Yet He's by this strong Garrison obey'd, But grown so deadly proud, since He was made Governour of the Town, that He expects, All Men should do, what ever He directs; VVhere He does love, He flatter'd like a Child: And where He hates, He's never reconcil'd.
My Cosen Arcas lyes so near my Brother, Like Apples touching, they corrupt each other. Oros. These tempers are not to be wrought-on. Thea. Try; If they, like mortal Enemies, deny The offer of a Treaty; then, Use Force, To which you Princes have your last recourse: I'l take the air, this Ev'ning, on the Strand. Oros. A few, but daring Sea-men, I command. Thea. If they can beat the Souldiers of my Guard. Oros. A Gally, at the Port, shall lye prepar'd, To row us off. Thea. I'l back the Garden-way, Go you to the great Gates; this Holiday, You'll find them open; and you could not chuse A softer time, Festival VVines infuse Courtship into my Friends, but look to find My eyes strange to you, though my heart be kind. Oros. Before that borrow'd strangeness you put-on, I kiss your hand. Thea. Bold Foreiner, be gon. Exeunt all but Castor and Stredon. Stre. Castor, VVhat sadness lies upon thy heart? Cast. VVould I had never seen these Sisters eyes. Stre. Sure thou'rt in love with neither? Cast. I hate both. They make us Fast, when all the Town is Feasting. Stre. VVe should not grudge the loss of a meal's Meat. Leander Fasts Cast. And prayes, but all in vain; For Hero, like her Goddess, is a Statue, No Prayer can move her. Stre. Yes, if one could Say Pigmalion's Pray'r to Venus, for that made A Statue flesh and blood. Cast. To soften Hero, I know a Naturall Expedient, VVorth forty such Greek Lies; let's fire the Temple, And march off with the Priestess. Stre. O damn'd Master Rather then I would Commit Sacrilege; I would eat thee. Cast. Religious Master's Mate: but we wait well, (the Prince who makes no Halts) Is march'd into the Court of Sestos, follow;
Nay keep your VVay. Stre. If it be my VVay, 'tis yours. Cast. Do you think me so barbarously rude, That I'll take 't from you. Stre. Oh, oblige me, Sir. Cast. You'r next the door. Stre. I'll open it for you. Cast. I beg, you'll go. Stre. Only to be your Usher Cast. Thus we Barbarians, of the civil Greeks, Learn how to make our selves ridiculous. Exeunt. Tiresias, Aphila, Theamne, Samertes, and Arcas discover'd, sitting at a Banquet, Nurse waiting, A Page whispers Samertes, who strikes him. Aphi. VVhat? Strike your Boy for bringing of a Message? Same. But Madam, the knave smil'd, which made me think, Mentor was landed, and 'tis one of Asia, Come from Abydos, send the man away. Page. He should be, by his bravery, some great man. Same. All sober Spies upon my Cups, I hate. Page. Sir, the Youth looks, as though he would do reason: Same. If he'll drink, bring him: Arcas, Hero's Health. Exit Page. Arcas. That has gone round. Same. VVhy does Theae sigh? But such a grief as thine, who can resist? I'll now carouse thy Joy from Sea to Land, Mentor's Health, Mother. Aphi. Husband, to your Friend, And Son-in-Law. Enter Page and Orosis. Tire. That Stranger shall pledge me. Same. The House to all gives publick Entertainment, But Sir, if you'll be welcom to this Board, Sit down and drink as we do. Tire. Here's a Health To the preserver of the State of Greece, And Terrour of the Persian Kingdom, Mentor. Oros. To him I'l drink a Hllespnt of VVine; May I presume to offer this to you, Illustrious Virgin? Aphi. Yes. Thea. No; he's too bold.
Aphi. A Noble stranger has the Priviledge, Of drinking to the Bride. Oros. Is she a Bride? To whom? Aphi. To Mentor, Admiral of Athens. Oros. Have they seen one another? Aphi. In their Pictures. Oros. Twice have I seen Her; here, and at the Show; Love has not yet peirc'd Mentor's breast, mine bleeds, And for the first Cure, the first VVounded moves. Same. She is my Sister; Stranger, do you know, VVhat the word (Sister) means? Oros. Not very well. Same. That Greek may easily be understood, No Forein Mixture must corrupt our Blood. Oros. Your Blood, and mine, from Sacred Fountains springs: From Delphick Priests Yours, mine from Trojan Kings. Aphi. Though I love Kings, She cannot be your Queen; For she's oblig'd to Mentor. Oros. VVhat? to one She never saw, but as it pleas'd the Painter, VVho, if he were a Master, drew a Face, Will break no Lady's Heart. Same. Draw; in thy blood Samertes and Arcas draw. I'l wash away the Scorn thou throw'st on Mentor, Oros. Come all; Number's no odds, when Lovers fight. Tire. Samertes! Arcas! Will you Violate The Law of Hospitality? Thea. Why, Brother, Will you ingage, before I have declar'd? Tire. Son, hear thy Sister. Same. You tye up my arm; And let loose her tongue, which may do more mischief. Thea. No, I'l discharge him, with a formal Speech. Stranger, we question not your Trojan Race, For, one may see bold Paris in your Face. I am no Helen, which (it seems) you find, Therefore you ask not me, how I'm inclin'd: My Friends are courted; they deny your Suit, Straight You, like Hector, with your Sword dispute; But Asian Hector, Smooth your angry brow, For every Greek is an Achilles now.
My Brother, in Obedience, holds his hand; Take heed, Victorious Mentor do not land: Fly to your Ship betimes, and scape his Fleet, [Arm all your Sea-Men, at the Port we'l meet.] I speak not this, my Enemy to save; But least our House should be a Stranger's Grave. Oros. Am I your Enemy? Thea. My Hate to You, Equals my Love to Mentor. Oros. Then I go; To every Lover I wish better Fortune. Exit Orosis, Same. Sister, the whole World has but two great Souls, That's Mine and Thine. What wilt thou do, this Ev'ning? Thea. Get a fresh Breeze, to fan me, on the Strand. Same. where (I hope) thou'lt discover Mentor's Fleet. Thea. You'l go with me? Same. Thou knowe'st, I am ingag'd To feast our Friends; but Arcas, with a Guard Shall wait upon thy Chair. Arcas. Immediatly. Exeunt Samertes and Arcas. Aphi. My Lord, we'l walk a little i'the Garden. Exeunt Tiresias and Aphila▪ Thea. I hope, Nurse, I shall have your company. Nurse. No, Child; I'l see an end of the great Set, Between your Sister Hero, and Leander. Dear Hearts, they have the harder Game to play: You'r grown a cunning Cheat, shift as you may. Thea. I'l play my Cards as subtly as I can, To get a Prince, and scape an ugly Man. Exeunt. Enter Castor and Stredon. In the Temple. Stre. Master, Joy; Joy; our Men are weighing Anchors, Orosis will to sweet Abydos Sail, With fair Theamne. Cast. If we rout her Guards, Stre. Like Lightning, in a moment, we'l dispatch Her Pikes and Bows; and she her self consents. Cast. I know that, Stredon; canst thou tell me News? Will Hero to Leander be as kind? Stre. No, Castor, no; she neither will nor can. Cast. Nay, if she were but willing; we have those,
Dancers oth'ropes, that would run up her Tower, Nimbler then Ladas ran to them with Orders. Stre. I'm sent to watch their landing. Cast. 'Tis high time; The Lamp of Heaven burns out so fast, I fear 'T will leave us in the Dark: To the Port, run, Make all imaginable hast; bring word Theamne's there, and we'l cp Her aboard. Exit Stredon. Enter Orosis and Nurse; after them Hero and Leander Oros. Hold Nurse, 'ti Gold. Nurse. This needs no; I should be Your Brother's Advocae, without a Fee. Hero. Why do you press so much for my reply? How can I grant, that which my Friends deny? No Forein Mixture must corrupt our Blood: Nurse, 'twas my Brother's Answer, was't not good? Nurse. Better your Sister's, to Orosis, is; She sayes that if He can get her, She's his. Hero. Were I so minded (which will never be) Out of this Tow'r, what Army could get me? They who to scale these Battlements aspire, May attacque Heav'n, that's but a little higher. Nurse. Higher, or lower, be but You content, He'l neither ask your Towr's, nor Friends consent, Hero. Nurse, hold your peace, Nurse. Child, if I should obey, You would repent; mark therefore what I say. The Temple will be shut, within this hour; And Custom then confines You to the Tow'r: For a whole Twelve-moneth; and within that Year, Leander will be dead with grief, I fear; Perhaps You hope, that Time, who flies from all, Will come, like your tame Pidgeon, at Your call: No; You have, like this day, but one hour's Light, And then, bid Opportunity good night. Hero. Since Time is precious, and or time so short, Leander, you shall make no further Court: I but obey my Goddesse's Command, Where Veus gives my heart, I give my hand. Lean. For this, your more then Princely Donative, Receive a Faith, pre as the Hand You give.
Venus, our Marriage-Rites are doubly thine, Thy Star shines yonder, here thy Tapers shine: O make the sadder Planets smile upon Two Souls, bless'd, at thy Altar, into one. Nurse. Where will you meet, to consummate your bliss? Lean. Hold your Peace now; Nurse, let me speak to this▪ To come to a Maid's bed, from which I'm barr'd By Sea and Land, must needs be very hard: But Cupid, into a cross'd Lover's heart, Shoots twice, his Arrow first, and then his Art; The harder Pass I'l open, with much ease: For to thy Bed I'l swim these narrow Seas. Hero. How! Swim the Hellespont? You are not able. Lean. Yes, if it were a Sea Innavigable; When all my Ships scarce safe at Anchor ride, These Arms shall row me, against Wind and Tide: Tempests and watry billows fright not me, Billows of wild-fire I dare swim, to thee. Hero. Since You will needs swim-ore to Europe-side, A gentle Fire shall be Leander's guide; That envions Clouds, may not my Love benight, Upon the Turret I will set a Light, A Torch, which may a Star hereafter prove, Seen from all Seas, and call'd the Star of Love. Enter Stredon, he whispers Orosis. Oros. Leander, Heo will give audience To you at Midnight; I must now desire Th' assistance of your Courage and your Conduct: Theam  Chair; Arcas Commands Her Gards; or Men are ready for the Charge. Hero. Yo'l Fight? Oros. Bt  the danger's in delay, Soldiers, like Chymists, must watch time precisely; A minute's stay may ruine y Designe; Yet to your Sister send one kiss by him. Lean. For the next kiss, the Hellespont I'l swim. Exeunt.
The Third Act. Enter Castor and Stredon At Abydos. Cast. Stredon, Have you got Oile? Stre. Pure, as Rock-water. Cast. Why, then all's ready; when Leander comes, He'l soon be bath'd and noynted; then he'l swim: I told Celena of her Brother's purpose. Stre. Did it not startle her? Cast. No more then us: I do not think, that in so soft a Beauty, The World has ever known a braver Spirit: She said, a Man, might almost shoot an Arrow Over the Hellespont, and he that fear'd To swim that Sea, deserv'd not a fair Bride. Stre. What said she, to our beating of the Greeks? Cast. Look here, boy; with this Gold she greets us well▪ Stre. A gracious Princess, let me kiss her Bounty. they share. Did she not question thee about Theamne? Enter Celena. Cast. Yes, here she's coming to examine thee. Cele. Stredon, your Master tels me, that Orosis From Sestos brings a Beauty. Stre. But your Highness, I never saw a sweeter, I have done My Duty in my Answer, give me leave, To pay it, in my Thanks, for your great Bounty Cele. Stredon, from Sestos you bring handsom Language: How long are they in landing, call for Lights, I'l walk and meet'em. Cact. Here's that trouble sav'd. Enter Leader, Theamne and Orosis; Sea-men attending with Torches. Lean. Celena, a new Sister I present. Cele. Madam, we Asians cannot complement;
But I wish you, fair Greeke, more Happiness; Then Greece her self hath Language to express. Thea. Sister, your Ancestors did once enjoy, A Crown in Asia; then, Greece Conquer'd Troy; But to you Trojans now We Grecians yield; The Court is Yours: Your Brothers have the Field. Cele. I hear, they fought your Guards. Thea. Our Pikes, (that strove To close, and had your Sea-men in their Grove) Leander with so brave a courage Charg'd, That by their flight the Pris'ners were inlarg'd: Thorough our Bows Orosis made his way, And wounding Arcas, won me, and the Day: For th' Archers of my Guard, which Arcas led, Fought whilst he stood; but when he fell, they fled. Lean. We exerciz'd our men in that Land-Skirmish, But 'tis at Sea; the Battail must be fought: Send out a Pinnace to call-in our Fleet, For, Brother, if the Wind should chop about, Mentor will land at Sestos; of himself He's not inclin'd to fury, but when there He finds his Friends Inflam'd, his Mistress Lost; Sure 'twill inrge him so, as to declare A Naval War against us: All's at stake. Oros. Swim you to Sestos, when you land again, Your Fleet shall ride before the Fort: 'Tis late, The Starry Wain now wheels about the Pole, And drowsy Midnight steals upon our eyes. Lean. I see, Orosis, you would be a Bed, And time it is that I should bathe and noyn. To put my self into a swimming posture: Rest to you all. Thea. A Calm Sea to Leander. Lean. You Sea-gods, that still swim th' Hellespot, If you take my Attempt for an Affront, That merits death; Yet make me not a Wrack As I go, drown me at my comming back. Exeunt. Enter Tiresias, Aphila, Nurse, and attendant At Sestos. Nurse. Now Arcas and Samertes are aboard, Sure Mentor will not listen to a Treaty? Aphi. That was not in debate, his Servant said,
'Twas thought, the Admiral would spare Abydos. Nurse. But the Vice-Admiral, that damn'd old Poet, (Who has with Poetry infected Mentor) Musaeus▪ Voted for a Peace. Tire. Fie, no; He did not move for mercy to the Princes, Bt to their City. Trumpets sound. Nurse. These are Mentor's Trumpets. Aphi. My Lord, let's meet your Friend, the Admiral. Exeunt. Enter Mentor, Musaeus, Arcas, Samertes, and Souldiers with Torches. Ment. Enough, Musaeus. Musae. Mentor, I conclude: Punish not, for a Few, a Multitude. The guilty Brothers only have conspir'd, Why should a Town that's Innocent, be fir'd? Ment. In publick Ruines, who must be involv'd, Let Fate determine; but the War's resolv'd. Arcas. My Wound will then be heal'd: No Balm so good For a hurt-man, as the Assailant's blood. Same. Sestos, for thy Affront, Abydos shall, In Ashes mourn at her Lord's Funeral. Ment. The Brothers are not to be slighted so, By Us, who their Undaunted Spirits know; Orosis in the Isthmian Games foil'd me, And Arcas, at this Feast, he wounded thee, Leander did your Sestian Gallies beat, And from my Fleet he made a brave Retreat. Same. Yet, you have conquer'd braver Men by far. Ment. Ere th' Hour-glass run, I hope to end this War. Enter Tiresias, Aphila, and attendants. Tire. Great Mentor's Pow'r is equal to his Will. Ment. Friend; Father: Mother, so I'l call you still, Though of your Daughter I am robb'd by one, The Hellespont and the Winds fawn'd upon, Using me worse then Zerxes, when they broke His bridge of Boats; but this shall not provoke Mentor to his proud Rage; he chain'd your Waves, And whipt your Winds as if they'd been his Slaves. I'l make them help to play my After-game, And pay these Princes the just Debt of shame.
Aphi. And Death, great Mentor, Death; my Lord and I Live but in hope to see those Pirates dy. Ment. The Storm was tedious; Yet I'l not repose, Nor rest my Men, till I attacque our Foes: Friend sleep secure, Madam, do you so too▪ And when our Enemies believe, they do: We'l pou'r in to Abydos; and bear down, Like a wild Sea-breach, both the Tow'r and Town. Exunt. Enter Hero and Nurse. The Torch Flaming upon Hero's Tow'r. Nurse. 'Tis midnight, but noon day looks not more clear, What, in the name of Venus, should you fear? Hero. That 't will grow dark, and then, dear Nurse, I doubt, That some ill Fortune may the Torch put out. Nurse. Put out the Torch? You may suspect as soon, That some ill Fortune should put out the Moon: See, the Torch, sparkling, does good luck betide, There's a great Stranger coming to the Bride. Hero. Where? Nurse. Yonder; where these glittering Billows heave, Leader's neck and arm you may perceive. Hero. That? That's a Dolphin, but she does not bear Leander on her back. Nurse. But look you there, She Ushers to your bed the Man of Men, Hero. Nurse, I'm afraid, that you are wrong agen. Nurse. Child, take my Spectacles, to help your sight. Hero. Now, now I see him. Nurse. Now who's i'the right? Hero. I look'd to Sea-ward, and he's near the Shoar: See, see; Leander's Pilot, Ship, and Oar. Nurse. The Sail, his Vest, is Brail'd: anon 'twill spread, But now it makes a Turbant for his head. Hero. How I did long to see him! Is't not strange, Wishes, like Winds, should in a moment change? He comes, and now I long to have him gone: O Nurse! a Man I dread to think upon: My trembling heart-strings are upon the rack: Go, and make some Excuse, to turn him back. Nurse. No need of an Excuse; I'l carry word That Mentor's Landed, and with Fire and Sword, Means to destroy Abydos, before day,
Unless Leander save it. Hero. Pry thee stay: Think'st thou, Leander (under whose command Abydos prospers both by Sea and Land) Would leave his Brother; his own Sister, mine, The Town too, unsecur'd? Nurse. 'Tis very Fine; You know not your own mind: Say, I, or No: What shall I do? Will y' have me stay, or go? Hero. G, by all means, and tell Leander— Nurse. What? Hero. Give me a little time, to think of that. Nurse. Ha ha; to stop him you have no more power, Then I have strength, Child, to remove your Tower, Whose very Stones will not obstruct his way. Enter Leander, in his Vest and Night-Cap. Go, let me hear, what you your self will say. Hero. If I could go, as fast as You have Swum, At that rate to Leander I would come. Lean. Come not too near; to touch my Sacred Bride, Would be Profane, till I am Purify'd; Of Oyle I smell. Nurse. That smell will be consum'd In my Rose-Bath; go, bathe, and be perfum'd, Hero. Step nto that warm Bath; the Cold, I fear Has pier'd you. Lean. No; it met a Furnace here:he points to his Breast. The water was but Fuel to my Fire; Still as I lower div'd, my Flame grew higher. Nurse. Neither cold-Water, nor cold Fear, can daunt Leander's heart; yet swimming makes it pant. Hero. My Love, you are sore toil'd; I did mistake, Your blood inflam'd, does that high Colour make; Bathe, put your self into a kindly heat, And then, into my Bosome drop your Sweat. Exeunt. Enter Orosis, and Theane, making her self ready At Abydos. the Drums beat. Thea. Why beat the Drums? Oros. Our Fleet, sail'd into Port, Salute our Souldiers in the Cittadel.
Thea. Then might not You have rested for one hour? Oros. Dear, every minute (now the Wind serves) Mentor May Land; I go to Sea, to stop him there: But pray, go You to Bed again; preserve Your pretious Health, with your accustom'd Sleep. Thea. No, my Orosis, when I Marry'd You, My Fortune Marry'd Yours, if you must fight, I must not sleep; Celena's making ready, Your Sister goes, What ought Your Wife to do? Fate's not more fixt then my Resolve: We'l live Happily, or else nobly dye, together; Oros. Incomparable— What's this noise? Who's there? Stredon? the Newes? Stre. Death: Mentor's at your Gates: Struck with the terrour of his dreadfull Name, The Garrison, basely to save their Lives, Threw down their Arms, the safe-Guard of Your Life: Castor is still a Pris'ner, I escap'd, By Virtue of some Gold: that brib'd my keeper; To Mentor I heard fierce Samertes say, Upon the sleeping Bride-groom let us steal; This Slave shall be our Guide (pointing to Castor;) And in the hot blood of the Ravisher VVe'l purify my Sister. Exit Stredon. Oros. Then it seems They think, I sleep, but they shall find, I wake. Thea. Draw not your Sword, but follow my advice:Theamne whispers with Orosis. They come, play but Your Part, as I'l act Mine; And with our Plot we'l counter theirs: Kneel down. Enter Mentor, Msaeus, Samertes, Arcas, Castor, and Souldiers; Orosis Kneels to Theamne. Same. The Villain kneels to her. Ment. Let's hear his Prayer, He would not kneel, were not her Fame unblemish'd. Oros. Humbly I beg, that which I may command: At Your feet, I confess, my fault was great, To rob Your Parents of You, but I Use No other Violence; You see, my End Is Fair and Chast, as she, at whom I aim. Ment. An Enemy so generous I forgive. Same. But You'l revenge me? Oros. VVill you not Vouchsafe Some Love, Some Pitty, to a tortur'd Heart?
Thea. Love? Pitty? What? To one that durst invade, My Sacred Father's Promise; and steal me Out of a Town, which my dear Brother Governs? Oros. Your Brother has so great a Souldier's name; That 't will be no dishonour to a Souldier, Who asks his Pardon, for the Crime of Love, Which Men commit, forc'd by the Powers above. Same. Submission wins me. Arcas. I'l have Blood, for Blood. Oros. As for the Blood, I drew from noble Arcas, I'l pay him twice as much, when he'l command, The Service of my Sword. Arcas. Thou shalt not bleed. Oros. Arcas! Samertes here! and Mighty Mentor! Can Mentor pitch his Toil'es to take a Man? Ment. You are a Beast of Prey; Resist, and dye; Yield your Arms, and epect a legal Trial. Oros. Before what Judge? Ment. The Civil Magistrate. Oros. No, I'l dye here. Ment. Sentence, shall neither pass From him, nor us; Thamne only knows Yor Crim's extent, and she shall sentence you, Upon the place, where you assalted her. Oros. Fatall necessity must be obey'd. Madam, I am your Pris'ner. Thea. Souldiers, keep Tat Prate safe, till I pronounce his doom. Same. Great Mentor, from my hand accept this Virgin, Ment. Nature did never make a fairer Jewel, What Value I have for her — Thea. You express'd By giving me that Slave; add, if you please His Sister. Ment. She's yours; What else do y' desire? The. A little Sleep, after my frightful Watching. Me. Retire into my Cabin. ha▪ Sir, no Rest Can close my eyes, till they behold my Parents. She loves not Mentor; if I take rigt measures. . Capai, at Sestos Land my Love, I'l follow, Exeunt Captain and Theamne. When we have finish'd here: Slave, Where's Leander. Cs. He's at Sea. Sa. ere's his Sister?
Cast. You'l find her In her Bed-chamber, the next Room. Same. Go in. Exeunt al but Castor. Cast. They mind not me; in some blind hole I'l mourn; But you Greek-Dogs, Leander will return. Exit Enter Mentor, Musaeus, Samertes, Arcas and Souldiers, Celena upon her bed the Curtaines drawn close. Ment. Celena's in her Bed? Same. I'l draw the Curtains. Ment. Hold, hold Samertes; she may be a sleep. Same▪ And would you wait the waking of a Slave? he draws the Curtaines open. Just heav'n▪ I see the Goddess, I blasphem'd. Aras. What Goddess? let me see her, for I know All Goddesses, Cast, Graven, Carv'd, and Painted: Save your self, Admiral, Your flight's no shame, VVhen I fly, VVho come arm'd with Hero's Love. Ment. So, a rash Charge ends in a Panick Fear; When Conduct (slow, but safe) brings up the Reer, Arcas. The little Archer may surprize great Mentor. Cele. Great Mentor! Is there any here so stly'd? Ment. Yes, Madam; I am Mentor. Cele, The Plate-Graver? Ment. The Admiral of Athens. Cele. Other Thieves Rob Towns, and Houses, but thou steal'st a Title. Musae. She'l talk you out of your own name, reply. Ment. Her Eyes, like Remoras, have stopt my Tongue, VVhen it was under Sail: Musaeus, speak. Musae. Madam, the— the— Arcas. I Vow the Poet's out. Musae. Th' Admiral suffers an abortive Scorn, The Mother's shame, which dyes, as soon as born: As Clouds the Sun, that Name you darken here, VVhich over all th'unclouded VVorld shines clear: Mentor's Sea-Victory, the naked things Of India, and the painted Briton Sings; Only sad Persia, the Memorial keeps, Of her Defeat, and at his Triumph weeps. Cele. How will the Persian's Spleen break through his Tears, Into a flux of Laughter, when he hears,
That Fleet, that Admiral from whom he fled, Sail'd to surprize a Lady in her Bed? Ment. Silence, and seize her. Arcas. Do not, on your Lives. Sae. Touch her, and I'l cut off the sawy hand. Ment. Disarm them. Cele. Civill Gentlemen I beg, Before you take th' use of my hands away▪ That I may drink this Cordial, Ment. Break the Glass, 'Tis Poyson, carry her and them aboard: Exeunt Souldiers with Same. Arcas and Celena. Musae. To Mentr may I speak! Ment. Not for the Pris'ners. Musae. Not for Celena? (come Sir, you'l not find, Though I have hood-winkt them, that I am blind:) I know you love Her. Ment. Oh, you think but so? All Poets have one Fault; they think they know. Musae. You do not Love Theamne, I'm assur'd, Or else her Brother had not been secur'd. Ment. Vice-Admiral, You must have deeper Line, To sink the Plummet, that sounds my Design. Musae. Farewell, for I perceive, that you intend At once to change your Mistress, and your Friend. Ment. Friend, dearest Friend, Divine Musaeus, Stay: Thou know'st my breast; VVould thy Sword knew the way Into my Heart; My base false heart 'tis now; 'Twas faithful: O Musaeus, VVilt not thou Remember all that's Good, and nothing Ill, VVhen thou dost write my Epitaph? Musae. I VVill, Mentor offers to fall on his own Sword. If I out—live you— but dye fairly then; VVho takes his own Life, merits not my Pen: How can I write Conquerour, on his Grave, VVho staines his Laurel, and dyes Passion's Slave? Ment. Justice condemns me: He that lives to wron His Mistress, and his Friends, has liv'd too long. Musae. But our Lives have determin'd Periods? And he that's his own Murd'rer, wrongs the Gods: The Friends, whom you disarm'd, are injur'd Men▪ Restore their Arms, and they'l be friends agen. Ment. How can Theamne be repair'd? Musae. If She Love you (but sath, that's more then I can see)
You wrong her: But if she your Person slight, To love another, is, to do her right. Ment. Celena will so false a man abhor. Musae. Yet a great Man, and a great Conquerour; And if you cannot a soft Maid subdue, I'l ay, that Art fails me; and Fortune You. Exeunt. The Fourth Act. Enter Castor and Stredon. Stre. The cowrdize of our Men, preserv'd the Town. Cast. Nay, if the Souldiers had stood to their Arms, VVithout all peradventure, Mentor's Men Had fir'd Abydos; thou and I shall now Live to burn Sestos. Stre. VVhat begets this Hope. Cast. Now that Leander's come, and this night past, VVhich prov'd so dismal to his Family: He and the Sun, who rise from Sea together, Promise as well faire Fortune, as fair VVeather. Stre. I fear; the Fate, upon his House, will break Leander's Heart, mine bleeds for brave Orosis. Cast. For fair Celena I have wept so much, Leander might have swum in my Salt-water. Enter Leander. Stre. 'Twas well, the Greek Fleet miss'd him: Some Design He hammers, by the sparkling of his Eyes. Cast. VVhat a strange active Spirit has our Prince, He swims the Sea; Yet, landing takes no rest. Lean. I see, to Fury Honour is no Bar: From Mentor I expected a fair VVar, VVhich unconcern'd Spectatours might applaud: In his own Coin I'l pay him, Fraud for Fraud, That th'Enemy may think our Courage fails, Take down your Shrouds and put-up Mourning Sailes, Then will the Greeks proud of their Conquest, boast, VVe fly to people some unplanted Coast. At our sad Emblems of Despair they'l laugh, And all this Day, like true Greeks, dance and quaffe:
But when the Conquerours have drunk so deep, That some lye drown'd in VVine, and some in sleep: The Sestian Garrison wee'l over-power, And with our Sea-men take the Town and Tower: For to my VVife, at Night I'l swim the Sea, And open Europe's Portall, wih her Key. VVhat cheere, my Hearts after this fatal Night? Stre. Sir I hope for a Day of Victory, Cast. For my part, to the Grecians I would loose One Eye; so with the other I might see The Conqurours Captive, and the Captives Free. Lean. I ask not questions, as unsatisfy'd VVith either's Courage; I know you can fight, Like Valiant Men: But tell me which of you VVill be a VVoman, to advantage▪ me? Cast. I look too grim. Lean. For Men there's no access To Hero's Tow'r; I'l send my VVife a Letter, Stredon, Thou'lt carry 't? Stre. Sow'd up in my Apron: And if my Project please you, I'l paint Black; My nimblest ship-boyes shall be Negroes too, At Sestos they'l be very serviceable. Lean. VVill the Guards pass you? Stre. Into their dull Souls, I'l strike a pious reverence; telling them I'm th' Aethopian Sibyl, come to visit, Sibyl of Europe, who now Prophesyes In Hero's Temple. Lean. Very good; from Hero Receive the Postern-Key, and wait you there, Till your Boys bring you word, my Fleet's arriv'd▪ Then let-in Castor and the Mariners. Get me a Pen; and look your Swords be good; Love shall be writ in Ink: Revenge, in blood. Exeunt. Enter Tiresias, Aphila, Theamne, Samertes, Arcas, and Waiters. Aphi. Thy Freedom, dear Theamne, did not more Joy me, when I brought thee into the VVorld. Tire. Sons, Daughter, VVelcom home, from base Abydos. Same. I confess 't was no honorable place For any of us three; Arcas and I VVere Pris'ners there, disarm'd by your great Friend.
ire. We heard it. Thea. How my Brother frowns? I see, He means not to st down with his Affront. Tire. How long were you two under a restraint? Arcas. We were just brought aboard the Admiral. When Orders came, for our Transportance hither. Tire. In your Discharge Mentor express'd himself Your Father's Friend; Some; that Command in chief, Have punish'd such an Insolence with Death. Same. Some will not see a fault, in their young Friends, That serve as Voluntiers, and take no Pay. Tire. No more reflexions, he's severe, but Prudent. Same. And just, I wish he were; but he detains Orosis and Celena, though he gave Them (as a Bride-groom's Present) to Theamne▪ Then, Mentor has a Feavour, and who knows, When 'twill please his sick Greatness to be well? Must our Revenge wait his Recovery? Thea. to Vindicate our Honour, I will write A Letter for my Slaves. Aphi. They shall be drown'd, Thea. The Gift's condition'd; I must be their Judge: What think you, If we had them flead alive? Tire. No death can be more proper for a Pirate; When Merchants (burn'd, and frozen, by both Zone▪) Bring, for their Country, Purple, Gold, and Jewells, 'Tis fit; That he who strips them of that Wealth, Should have his Skin stript off. Aphi. And She, that shar'd The Prizes, let her share the Punishment: To th' Execution I'l nvite our Kindred: Daughter, come-in, let's see, how well you write. Exeunt Samertes puls back Theamne. Same. One word; Do'st mean the Pris'ners shall be flead? Thea. Would not you, for Celena, intercede? Same. I Love her. Thea. More (it seems) then you love me: VVas I imprison'd, and shall I not be Reveng'd, for an Indignity so base, Both of Orosis, and of his whole Race? Same. VVhat Fury has possest thee? VVho am I? Hast thou forgot Samertes? Shall He dye Because thou wert imprison'd by another? VVhere's thy old Love, thy Kindness, for thy Brother?
Thea. Brother, for You how great a Tenderness My Heart has, let my melting Eyes express? She seems to weep. Same. Express it, to Celena. Thea. She shall live. Same. Now but a Pardon to Orosis give; I'l say, thou art of all thy Sex the best. Thea. A tender Nature should not be thus prest▪ To prejudice it Self; besides, I know Your temper such; as he, that's once your Foe, Can never be your Friend▪ Why then should I Pardon a Man, You hate? Same. If he should dye. Celena would hate me. Thea. Consider, pray; His Pardon sign'd, What will the People say? Theamne by Orosis was enjoy'd; So, to preserve his Life, my Fame's destroy'd Same. I'l stop the People's Mouth. Thea. But I shall sink, Under great Censure, VVhat will Mentor think? Him I shall loose. Same. Undoubtedly; and then, The best of Maids, will loose the worst of Men. Thea. To him my Father promis'd me, Same. He did: But let thy Brother the curs'd Banes forbid: Thou should'st not call my Enemy thy Friend, Much less thy Husband. Thea. But I shall offend, Our Parents, if I break. Some. Do but acquit Orosis; Metor will not have the VVit, To think thee Honest; and then He'l break first. Thea. If I would do it, Do you think I durst? Same. Dar'st thou not, for thy Brother? Thea. You'l ingage, To stand between me and my Father's rage? Same. And Mentor's Fuy too; though he command At Sea, I'l make him know, I rue at Land, And that m Sister shall be free to chuse. Thea. For my self, Brother, I should not refuse; For You I will—advantage my own ends:Aside. So flatt'ring Politicians use their Friends. Exeunt.
Enter Musaeus, and Celena, Aboord Mentor. Cele. His Pray'rs move me, no more then do his Threats; I will not go. Musae. The Admiral intreats. Cele. VVhy to his Cabbin, Am I not safe here? Musae. You are, but He'l be safer, when y'are there: For, you may bring him Health, I know, you will; Then make hast, Mentor's dangerously ill. Cele. If any danger of his life you see, Pray, send for his Physician, and spare me. Musae. My Friend's not sick in Body, but in Mind; And yet that's curable, if you'l be kind. Cele. Kind, to my Enemy? Musae. Your kindness may Make him your Friend. Cele. VVho has made me his Prey: No, when the cruel Vulture gripes the Dove, She cannot hate, but sure she will not love. Musae. But when the Hart the flying Hind pursues, By yielding, she the Conquerour subdues. Cele. Musaeus, my Ambition is not high: Let Mentor be Victorious; let me fly. Musae. To him? Cele. To Heav'n; if you will but afford, My hand the timely favour of your Sword. Musae. My Sword for noble uses was ordain'd. Cele. VVhat's nobler, then to keep a Maid unstain'd? Musae. If that be all the danger you suspect: I will ingage, your Honour He'l protect. Cele. But yet his Passion may deceive your trust. Musae. To Honour Mentor never was unjust, If he be now, upon my Sword depend; I am your Guard, and Mentor's not my Friend. Cele. Let's go; but still remember, You are He I trust, as Guide both to your Friend, and Me. Exeunt. Enter Mentor, Reading a Letter. Ment. Theamne is deriv'd from Delphick Prophets, And like a Prophetess she ends her Letter:
Send me the Pris'ners quickly, you had need, For, you'l not loose your Favour, till They bleed. VVhat Answer to this Letter can I make, But that her just Commands must be obey'd? The Pris'ners to heamne were my Gift, VVhich 'tis not in my Pow'r now to revoke. Heaven! Must I send Celena▪ to be Slaughter'd? Yes, Honour sayes: Diviner Love sayes, No: And should not I offend the Deityes, To worship Honour by profaning Love? VVhat shall I do? if I consent they dye; And my Ingagement's broke, if I refuse. Enter Musaeus and Celena. Musae. Celena' come Ment. The fairest of her Sex Comes to be sacrific'd. Cele. I am betray'd, Musae. Suspend your Fear, till I awake his Virtue: From great to Base, VVill Mentor change his Style? Ment. Against my VVill; what I do, I abhor, And what she'l suffer, is, the fact of Heaven. Musae. Horrid! Upon the Gods You charge your Crime. Ment. VVhich is so great, no God will pardon it. Musae. And can a Man so wicked, hope to live? Draw your Sword. Musaeus draws. Ment. No; the Guilty, if he fight, May by misfortune kill the Innocent. Musae. VVhy then would you be guilty of a Rape, And make me accessary to your Lust? Ment. That slanderous Lye will justify thy death:Mentor draws. VVho poys'ned thy foul tongue? VVhat Villain? Musae. Thou: Didst thou not say, the fairest of her Sex, Comes to be sacrific'd? Ment. I own the words; But thy Mistake shall not ingage our Lives▪ Peruse Theamne's Letter, and then bid Farewell, to fair unfortunate Celena. Musae. Release her, and She'l then be Fortunate. Ment. I have resign'd my right, she's not my Pris'ner. Musae. Make her your VVife; None upon earth but You, Can claim an Intrest in your VVife.
Cele. His Wife? Had I a thousand Lives, He should not be My Husband, if he could preserve 'em all: Render Celena to her Enemies; Better at once dye, then to be dying ever. Ment. Since to your Bed I must not be admitted▪ In one cold Urn, our Ashes shall embrace: Sail-off my Ship, for Sestos. Musae. Then I see, The Persian War did but adjourn our Fate; To both our Lives Her Death will put an end: You'l not out-live Your Love; nor I, my Friend. Exeunt. Enter Hero, and Nurse, In the Tower-Garden by a Fountain. Hero. Nurse, I could Vye Tears with that weeping Fountaine; Leander has forgot me. Nurse. Do You think, He can forget his Wife, and such a Beauty? Hero. Ah; Where's the Beauty of a Wife? What Flower Looks lovely, when 'tis gather'd, but one Day? No since I lost the happy name of Virgin, Hero is alter'd, so's Leander too, The Sea has taught the Swimmer how to change: His Mistress lives in Asia, he shuns Europe, And can dispense with his rash Vow to me: Leander's false. Nurse. I'l answer for his Truth. Hero. If he be true, VVhy does he not come hither? VVhat answer can you make for his Delay? Nurse. Good lack: You long? Can you not stay till Night? By day he may not Swim. Hero. But he may send, And so may I; Good sweet Nurse (whilst I write) Go to the Port and get a Messenger. Nurse. My old eyes hardly can find out the way, Hero sits, draws out a Tablet and writes. Such dark Clouds fly, before the setting Sun: But, to serve you I'l do my weak endeavour. Nurse goes out and prtly comes back. Hero. Nurse, VVhat's the business? Nurse. Child it poses me; I'th' Air this Ev'ning, we have flying Clouds And walking Clouds below: there is without,
AS great black femal Shadow nd her Spawn: She sayes, that she's Leander's Messenger. Hero. She's a black Angel, if she came from him▪ Call her in. Nurse. Mistress, Maam-Devil, Enter. Musique, Stredon and his Ship-Bye's like lac's enter, ad dance; first one, then another washing at the Fontain, t last all appear White. Nurse. As I'm alive, 'tis Stredon and his Ship-boyes, VVas't not well? Hero. Very well; but is this all Leander Sends? Stre. No, Madam, here's a Letter. Hero. VVelcome Sweet Image of Leander's thoughts. She reads. My Hero, Before I could swim back to Abydos; my Brother and Sister were surpriz'd by Mentor, who pretends to Theamne, and means to Sacrifice them to the Revenge of her Relations. But Fortune, like the Helespont, has Storms and Calmes, bad Hours and good: Hope the best. I'l swim to you at midnight; give Streon the Poster Key, he has orders to wait there, till the arrival of my Fleet at three: then in the head of my Sea-men I'l rout your Souldiers, release the Prisoners, and Sail-off with Hero and Theamne: This I may safe promise to those Spirits, which you will infuse into, Your Leander. Twas sadly fortun'd, but 'its well design'd; And yet I fear Leader's want of fear, Why will he swim now, whe the North-East Wind Blows-up the watry Glasses with one Gust, And with another breaks them? Tell me Nurse, (But tell me true) Dost thou believe, that I Shal ever see my Lord? Nurse. Yes, in your arms; Stre. And Sestian Souldiers kneeling at his feet. Hero. You later like Physicians, when they tell A dying Patient, th there's hope of Life. But for Leander's cing, let's prepare:
Give him the Key; the Torch shall be our Charge This Mantle (held before it, with these hands) From all the Winds shall Screen that flaming Guide, Which lights the Swimmer to his clouded Bride. Exeunt. The Fifth Act. Enter Leander and Castor. At Abydos. Lean. Sit at Helm, Master, in my Admiral, But hope not, to Steer me: Sail thou to Sess. I'l swim. Cast. You'l meet a Tempest and be lost: I am in fear, your Ships may be dispers'd Lean. Ships thou dost understand, not Men. Cst. I know, That if you Swim this Sea, You'l ne'r make Land. Lean. Dar'st thou dispute with me? Cast. When you thwart Heaven: Do y' hear how the tumultuous billows roar, Threatning to overwhelm you on the Shoar? Lean. Thou raisest an imaginary Storm; I see no danger. Cast. I, no hope of safety: You must not swim in such a boyling Flood. Lean. Villain, I'l swim to Hero in thy blood. Cast. Do, kill me; and that madness I'l forgive: But shorten not, the Dayes you have to live. Lean. For all those Dayes the Sun shall ever light, I would not lose the pleasure of this Night. Cast. Enjoy it safely, go with us aboard. Lean. No; I have writ and I'l not break my Word Cast. You writ, but no Storm was discover'd then: Now only Death and Horrour's within Ken: O Sir, if you regard not your own life, Pity your Sister, Brother, and your Wife. Castr ktes. Lean. The folly of thy childish Pray'r I scorn; I, to command the Hellespnt was born; And thou to fear it. Cast. For your sake, I fear This hideous night, in which no Stars appear.
Lean. This dark night Hero's Torch shall be my Star; The Houres divided, between Peace and War. Till Two, I'l solace; bring the Fleet at Three: Gelena and Orosis then I'l free. Cast. You promise, as if you could calm a storm. Lean. That which I promise, Fortune will perform. Cast. To Fortune will you trust your self? She's blind. Lean. Blind Fortune to blind Love was ever kind. Exeunt. Enter Mentor, and Masaeus, At Sestos. Ment. Celena is delivered to Theamne, And she's as cruel as my Love is fair: Do Piety and Honour bind a Man To the performance of a rash Ingagement?Thunder and Lightning. All my great Actions this one Act defames. Musae. Thunder against such Piety exclaims, Ment. I hear it, Friend; and do not you admire, That I'm not struck, when Heaven shoots midnight-Fire? Musae. No but I wonder, you'l not take the Alar'm, When to your drowsy Valour, Heav'n cryes, arme: No, rash Ingagement now lyes in your way; You're free to fight. Ment. But sure to loose the Day. For though the Sestian Governour be young, His Garrison's well-disciplin'd, and strong: By making of a Vain Attempt; all those, Whom I have taught to Conquer, shall I lose? First let me perish. Musae. Rather first let's try, The means to live; at last we can but dye: With our dark Lanterns, Hero's Tow'r we'l View; We may discover some blind Avenue, At which our men may enter: if the Tower And the fair Priestess once be in our Power, The Town we'l force; or such Conditions make, As they'l not stick to give, nor you to take: They shall present Celena to your arms. Ment. Her Name, like thy soft Verse, my Senses charmes; My Reason's over-rul'd, not to contemne, The weak proposal of this Stratagem: For, Lovers hopes vain Expectation feeds▪ Like drowning Men, we catch at broken Reeds. Exeunt.
Enter Hero with her hair loose, Nurse following. Hero. The Torch is out; Blow, till the Turre fall, Malicious Winds, now I defy you all; The Torch is out, which we again may light; But with Leander 'tis eternal night: Yet there I'l find him. Nurse. I must say, he lives; Aside. Or else, I fear, she'l cast her self away: Have patience, Child, Leander may do well. Hero. No, no; he's drown'd; the Thunder rung his Knell. Nurse. Too sure:] Why do ye forspeak Leander ths? Thunder hurts him no more, then it hurts us. Hero. He's past hurt, and past help, before this time. Adventros Youth, thy Courage was thy Crime, And hasty Love thy Ruine: a short Stay, had with thy Navy brought thee safe away: Didst thou not hear the scoulding billows rage? With moving Mountains Why wouldst thou ingage? And rashly, when we might have fix'd our Joy, For gaining of one Hourthy self destroy? Why would Heaven suffer this, and slight my Prayers! How unconcern'd are Gods in Mens Affairs? Why in the Temple did I pray and fast, And on the coals Arabian Incense cast? Serve Venus? I might bow my knees as well To Proserpine: For Heaven's less kind then Hell. Nurse. She'l run distracted?] Child, 'tis sadly strange, That you, a Priestess should devotion change; To Profanation: What? can you distrust The care of Heaven, and think the Gods unjust? Will they deprive a sweet young Prince of Life, Because he swims to bed to his own Wife? No, they love Man more, then he loves himself: And in this Sea there's neither Rock nor shelf, Oly some troubled Waves; and they'l soon rest, If you'l ut calm the Tempest in your Breast. Hero. Nurse, thou hast laid the VVind: VVho would have thought, Thou hadt been so religious? I am naught, An impious wretch, for when I was devout, And pray'd, and igh'd and pray'd, the Torh went out. But dost thou think, that I shall ever see
Leander living? Nurse. Do you now see me? Do y' see this fair calm Morning? Hero. Both inspire My heart, that was pale ashes, with new fire. Into his arms I'l fly, with swifter wings, Then into th' East that blushing Day-light springs— O Horrour! horrour! Floating by the Shoar: His Body swims: Leander, speak once more? Oh, Whither is that mighty Spirit fled? What Notgs are the bodies of the dead! See at their pleasure the proud Billows roul: Those Active Nerves, which did the Sea controu. No Heat, no Motion, now that Bosome warms, Which lately was encompass'd with these arms. A long, long Farewell to Love's Bitter-sweet; Death has divorc'd us, yet in death we'l meet. She flings her self into the Sea. Nurse. She'l drown her self? Some Plank, ome lucky Fish Or Fisher, save her: 'tis too late to Wish. But hark, our Guards upon the Strand I hear; They'l silence me if I stand crying here; Life's sweet, though by young Lovers 'tis despis'd, By us Old-folks, that know the World, 'tis priz'd. Exit. Enter Mentor, Musaeus, and Souldiers. Ment. No Use of these dark-Lanterns, the Sun shines; We see our Follie, Madness 'twere to stay, For Hero's Tow'r is, like Celena's Heart, Impregnable. Musae. From both 'tis time You part; Now when our mighty Lords, the People, write That you must traight return, and shortly fight The Persian King, whose Navy will transport, A dreadful Army, and a glorious Court, And (to revenge his Vice-Roy whom You slew) A Gallows, to be set-up here, for You: So vast a Gallows, as it lades two Ships, With Iron-Chains ballasted, and Steel-Whips, Prepar'd for his Greek Slaves; either redeem Your Country now; or forfeit Your Esteem: Here stands Celena, fairer Athes there; Think which of these deserves to be most dear.
Ment. Love to my Country's Safety must give place, Before the Sestian Drunkards rise, draw off— Hold, there's a Postern open. Musae. And the Guards Are marching in, they see not us, stand close. Stre. Who would have thought, he that had stem'd the Tide, When cross-Winds fought for th' Empire of the Sea, Leander should be drown'd? Ment. Leander Drown'd! Cast. This I foretold, and begg'd of him to Sail; Yet he would swim; and woe on woe, we see Hero his matchless Wife (who cast her self Upon his body, from her Tow'r) partakes His Destiny, drown'd with her dearest Lord. Musae. Hero a Wife? Thorough the Sea and Shade, To Hero was Leander's Voyage made, And hers to him, when floating by the Shoar? I'l make all Mankind their sad Fate deplore, The wildest Savage when my Verse he ears, Shall oce more drown them in a Sea of Tears. Cast. Follow the Bearers; whilst their Bodies burn, We'l take the Brands, and fire this cursed Town. Ment. These were Leander's Men, fall in with them; And friend, when we have Master'd this strong Piece, I'l fight, first for Celena then for Greece. Exeunt A Bar hung with▪ Blacks. Enter Tiresias, Aphila, Arcas, and Attendants. Aphi. Our Friends are plac'd; Where's the Executioner? Arcas. Setting his Razers; here's the Governour, Pris'ners and Judge. Enter Samertes, Theamne, Orosis, Celena, and a Guard of Souldiers. Same. Bring the Slaves to the Bar, Theamne take thy place. Aphi. Revenge ty selfe. Theamne Sits on a Throne Thea. This is the Seat where equal Jstice Sits, To doom the Guilty and save Innocents: All crooked Wayes and Ends tis place abhors— Ha! From the dust, my pious Ancestors.
The Delphick Prophets, to inspire me, rise; Pris'ners, your Case they'l open, and my Eyes: Bless'd Spirits, make, O make me Such a Judge, As You were, without favour, without grudge. Aphi. She's mad? Tire. No, Love; she's doing of her duty, Listning to our Fore-fathers. Aphi. He's mad too. Same. Thou Act'st it, rarely. to Theamne, in her ear. Thea. Brother, I'l not hear, My Father, nor my Mother, in this Cause: The Gods forbid, that I should Sentence give, But as their Prophets dictate; Pris'ners, live. Aphi. I faint; Son, Husband, lead me to my bed. Same. Prepare Celena, against my return. To Theamne. Aphi. Theamne, Thou hast sentenc'd me to dye. Thea. I but declar'd that which the Gods decreed. Tire. And in their Sentence, we must acquiesce. Tiresias, and Samertes, lead-out Aphila, followed by Arcas and their Servants. Thea. I cannot yet conceive, how this will end, My Brother loves your Sister, and leaves me, To court her for him; she's inflexible; He, violent. Oros. Into my Hand, Leander Will put a Sword, to prevent Violence: Did you not see the little Skipper-boy? Thea. That fell down from the Scaffolds, on your neck? Oros. He said, our Sea-men are in Hero's Tower. Enter Nurse. The. This News sounds pleasantly—Nurse? Why so pale? How does my Mother? Nurse. Well; She's well again, But your poor Sister— Thea. What of her? Nurse. Dead, dead; Civilly dead, I mean: for she's a Pris'ner. Oros. Aboard our ships? Nurse. Your Ships and Men are Pris'ners To Mentor, he has taken Hero's Tower.
Enter Samertes, and Souldiers. Thea. My Brother, then, would Shine in Steel, not Silks He looks more like a Bride-groom, then a Souldier; Celena, Will you please to be his Bride? Cele. My nature cannot brook his Insolence. Thea. But Love's a Fire that softens proudest Souls. Same. Celena, at your feet I cast a heart, Us'd to command, by Love taught to obey. Thea. How Love has humbled him! Cele. My first command, Is, that you give Theamne to Orosis. Same. How? Give my Sister to my Enemy? I will not do't for all which Love calls Pleasure. Cele. Then you may take your Heart up, from my feet▪ And give that, where you please; for I will never Love him who hates my Brother. Same. Is the Rule Your VVill or Mine? Yield, or I'l force you to't. Cele. How Love has humbled him! My Soul is free, No Tyranny can over-pow'r the VVill. Same. The Pow'r you brave, I'l make you feel, and marry The Man you scorn; Guard, Bear her to the Priest. Thea. Celena is my Pris'ner. Same. By what right? Pris'ners of War Yours? Bear her to the Altar. Thea. Forc'd Love, is— Same. Sweeter, then Love uncompell'd; Sweet-meats, that drop into my mouth, I loath: Enter Mentor, Musaeus, and Souldiers. VVhy stare you? Rogues, Carry her to the Temple; The Joyes of Marriage shall torment her Pride. Ment. Disarm that barb'rous youth, I'l tame his fury: Sestos, with such a Governour, should fall: But conquer'd Sestians know, that I resolve, To change your Governour, not Government. I took up Arms now, only to release, Or to revenge Celena: yet if she Should have been Sentenc'd to have lost her life; I doubted nothing sadder then her death.
Here's Cruelty beyond the Butcher's Skill, A Marriage to be made, against her Will. VVhen Drac penn'd our sanguinary Laws; To punish such, he did insert no Clause, Crimes of this nature not being understood: I'l take his Paper and write this in blood, Thea. Great Mentor, pardon him. Ment. VVill fair Theamne, For my Inconstancy give me a Pardon? Thea. 'Tis seal'd; this Prince and I, are, Man and VVife; My noble Usage, when I was his Slave, VVhen he was Mine, made him Theamne's Lord. Enter Tiresias, Aphila, Arcas, and Attendants. Tire. Not for our selves— Tiresias, and Aphia, kneels to Mentor. Aphi. For our Son's life we kneel. Ment. You, that petition for a life to me; Must first grant me a Suit. Tire. and Aphi. Command your servants. Ment. Accept of this Prince, for your Son-in-Law. Tire. Is Mentor pleas'd, that he shall have Theamne? Ment. I am. Aphi. Daughter, Is he your choice? Thea. Yes Madam. Aphi. Then we'l not cross thee; for too late, we find The crossing of thy Sister, was her death. Tire. If we had left her to dispose her self; The Hellespont, so nam'd for drowning Helle, Hero's fate had not made more infamous. Ment. I come now to Love's Infamy, Samertes, For whom his Friends, more then for Hero, mourn: Tiresias, I oblige you, for three years, To banish this rash youth, 't wil cool his rage: And Forein Schools will make him Understand, That Love's gain'd by Obedience, not Command. Cele. Wisdom and Valour adorn Mentor's Mind; VVhy, to his Form, was Nature so unkind? Ment. The Garrison (of Sestos, that Guards Europe) From their old Governour shall take the VVord; The Sestians shout. So, Friend, farewel: I'l steer my course for Athens. My Fleet there reinforc'd; I'l sail to Fight The Persian Navy.
Arcas. If great Mentor please, I'l serve my Country in the Persian VVar. Ment. Aboard me, You shall fight. Tire. Extend that Favour To sad Samertes, that with his own blood, (Or th' Enemies) he may wash-out his stain, Ment. To my Friend I must not deny this Suit. Same. Then on the Persian I'l discharge my Fury. Me. Lastly ('tis more then you will say to me) Celena (twice my Pris'ner) you are Free. Cele. Victorious Mentor, Freedom make me more, Your Captive now, than Bondage did before: I yield my Heart a Pris'ner to your Merit; And that's no lessning to the greatest Spirit. Ment. I stand amaz'd, at my own Happiness, To see my Love crown'd with this bless'd success. Musae. The Stars give Bliss, or Bane, to all beneath; Last night Mars quarter'd in the House of Death: This Morning, Venus, from his arms releast, Invites us to her Temple and her Feast. Arcas. Joy to the Brides and Bridegrooms. All kiss the Brides, and Bride-Groome's hands. Oros. Dear Theamne, My Soveraign at Abydos you shall reign. Tire. At Sestos. the drown'd Lovers' carv'd by Art That rivals Nature, shall For ever stand In breathing Marble. Ment. Friend, though few, love Poets As I do, yet all must confess, no Art But theirs gives Nature Immortality; Our Statues, like our selves, old-age decayes; Time cannot ruine what Muaeus builds; He to the VVorld a Poem will present For Hero and Leander's MONUMENT.
EPILOGUE. IF The Original had not restrain'd The Copy; if our Poet might have feign'd: The Sea should have consented to restore, His Hero and Leander safe to Shoar. But what a Poet cannot do, You may; They'l live to Morrow, if You like the Play. FINIS.
