S53A 13523602 99947
AN ELEGIE ON THE DEATH Of that Worthy DIVINE Mr. JAMES JANEWAY, Who Departed this Life, MARCH the 16th 1673/4. I. FOr Caryl's Death scarce had I dry'd mine Eyes, Loder, then Venning crav'd some fresh supplies: Pierc'd at this Newes, I straight began to muse, And scarce for them an Elegie had bred, But I'm inform'd, that Janeway's likewise Dead. II. Startled at this, like one that's Planet-struck, All Signs of Joy forthwith my Face forsook: The Characters Of doleful Grief, and Fears Were so engraven on my Heart, that I Could not efface their Stamp, unless I'de dye. III. Th' eight parts of Speech, that alwayes send Relief Unto the Grammar, of a lawful Grief, Breaking their hold Pass'd free, and uncontroul'd Thorough my Mouth block't up almost with Sighs, And barricado'd with dis-joynted Cryes. IV. The Tears brought forth from my big-belly'd Eyes Pickl'd my Face; yet this could not suffice. Suffice? For what? Guess you your selves at that: For I Prognostick, If such Stars should fall, Darkness would soon be Epidemical. V. No, he's not fall'n, but is ascended higher, And warbles out sweet Anthems in a Quire Of Saints, that are Joyful beyond compare; Where stript of 's fleshly part, his Soul's alive, His Fame with us for ever shall survive. VI. Soaring aloft, he quite left th' Earth, wherein The Chequer-work of Sorrow and of Sin Could not excite His nobler Appetite To taste this World, this bitter-sweet, once more, Knowing 'twas rotten to the very Core. VII. Who ever saw him, and did not admire To see that outward Harmony conspire With such rare Art In each agreeing part, As if Dame Nature in's formation had, To see her self out-do her self, been glad? VIII. Who ever heard him Preach, and did not wonder To hear his threats 'gainst Sinners, which like Thunder (The contrary To Saints he would apply) Struck a Convulsion through the Hearts of those; That (Balaam-like) would still Gods wayes oppose? IX. In fine, all those that knew him must commend That Virtue, which did alwayes him attend, And so appears In the redoubled Sphere Of Mind and Body, that, if you Vertue love, Of him you must (for Vertues sake) approve. X. He was—but hold, I cannot tell you what; Sum all Perfections up, and he was that: Whatever 'tis That good, and worthy is Of the most lasting and resplendent Praise, Surely in him deserv'd a Crown of Bayes. XI. 'Tis well for thee, but ill for us, blest Soul, That Death does 'mong her Captives thee enroll: Fain wee'd rejoyce In Heart as well as Voice For thee; but for our selves we needs must mourn, And drop a Tear at thy Religious Urn. XII. Our Faces are afloat, our Cheeks do swim In briny Tears, wept for our selves, not him: At some ones Hearse I've whilome wept a Verse For fashion-sake, but now the Tears I shed Flow from my Heart; Grief makes me likewise Dead. J. S. LONDON, Printed, AN. DOM. 1674. 77.
