S5817 99832960 37435
A Strange and Horrible MURTHER Committed in WHITE-FRYERS Ʋpon Mr. John Blackston, who was found Murthered over against the Suger-Loafe, on the 7th of April, 1684. Mr. JOhn Blackston, the unfortunate Subject of this Relation was a Gentleman of a good Family in the North of England, and Cozen to Capt. Blackston of the Temple, who dyed about three years ago. His great and familiar Acquaintance, with most Gentle∣men of the Town rendered him publickly known, and e∣qually respected for a person of known Worth and un∣questionable Courage. The Watch going their Rounds in White-Fryers at one of the Clock on Tuesday Morning, found his Body lying in the Kennel near the Suger-Loafe in White-Fryers; Bleeding and lately Killed; upon which Notice being given to the Constable, he imediately or∣dered it should be removed, which was accordingly done, and carried into the Queens-Head Tavern where it lay till Wednesday Night, and was then put into a Mourning Cof∣fen and carried to his own Lodgings, several Persons Gentle∣men and others, who were late out in publick Houses, were secured and carriad to Bridewell, upon Suspicion of being privy to the Murther; but the next day each person giving a fair Account of his Behaviour and Course of Life, They were all discharged by Sr. William Turner. The Gentleman by the freshness of his Wounds, appeared to be lately killed, tho there was no person by, to give a parti∣cular Account of it, only a Gentleman of the Temple, who was up at his Study, hearing a Noise in the Street, and
the clashing of Swords, look'd out of his Window, and saw three persons fighting, of which the Gentleman now deceased was one. He had several Wounds in his left hand, through a Bust Fringed Glove, and one mortal Wound on his right Side under the Ribs up into his Bo∣dy and through his heart: the Orifice was very wide, and upon all Circumstances, 'tis believed was foully done, & that two persons at the same time set upon him. The Coroner sat upon the Body, and the Inquest found it wilfull Murther, for upon searching the Body▪ they found he had another Wound on his Back, which was a Stab after he fell. Several persons were apprehended upon Suspicion: but more particularly a Gentleman, who is sup∣posed one of the persons who Killed him, is now taken & committed to Newgate. The Discovery of this person was thus; that coming to a Chyrurgeon to be drest of a Wound he had upon his Beast, he told him he had been lately in a Quarrel, had run his Adversary through the Body, and closing with him short∣ned his Sword, and stab'd him in the Back. The Chyrurgeon making this discovery upon the Report of Mr. Blackstons murther, the Gentleman was secured. The Gentleman of the Temple who look'd out his of Window called out to the Watch, but being late and no persons in the Street, the mur∣derers got off before they could be apprended. The Oc∣casion of the Quarrel was about a Woman, whose Repu∣tation has been blotted in the Eye of the World, which Mr. Blackston taking Notice of she vow'd a Revenge, which she thus contrived and effected as may be most reasonably imagined. For Mr. Blackston being at a Tavern and en∣quiring for some Gentlemen of his Acquaintance was di∣rected up Stairs, where he found a Gentlewoman in com∣pany with his Friends, and blaming them for admitting per∣son so infamous in her Reputation turned her down Stair, whereupon she said he should Repent that affront, and she would have her satisfaction before many days past, which accordingly was done, by those Ruffians, who thus Barbar∣ously murthered him. LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1684.
