S60 99833351 37827
The Famous History of the Valiant London Prentice. Printed for I. Back, at the Black-Boy on the mid∣dle of London-Bridge, 1693.
THE Famous History OF The VALIANT London-Prentice, SHEWING His Noble EXPLOITS at Home and Abroad: His LOVE and great SUCCESS. Very Pleasant and Delightful. Written for Encouragement of Youth. By J. S. This may be Printed, R. P. Printed for I. Back, at the Black-Boy on the mid∣dle of London-Bridge, 1693.
The HISTORY of the London-'Prentice, &c. CHAP. I. An Account of his Birth, Education and early Valour, &c. IN times past, there was Born in the Famous County of Chester, a young Man of excellent Beauty, promising ve∣ry great things, even in his Infancy; to promote which, his Parents being weal∣thy, spaxed not to educate or bring him up in the best manner the Country would afford, nor did he as he grew up fail in a∣ny thing their expectation. In Learning he was well seen, and in many other mat∣ters, but nothing so enflamed his mind as the desire of exercising himself in feats of Arms, and was the more incited there∣to by Reading the Famous Adventures of Knight-Errants, how successful they were in overcoming Gyants and
Monsters, and rescuing beauteous La∣dies from death and misery; and as these Heroick thoughts encreased, so he found his strength abound. Nature not sparing to give him many Limbs and an able Bo∣dy, so that in his Childish Encounters those that far surpassed him in years, were not able to resist his force, nor come near him in Wrestling, Iumping, Run∣ning, cutting the Bar, Stone or Dart; which made not his Parents but a little proud of such a blessing, whom they had named Aurelius, as one that promised great things. CHAP. II. An Account of his first Adventures and Enterprizes, where he won the Vir∣gins Hearts, &c. WHen Aurelius was at the Age of four∣teen, he went to a Wake or Merry-meeing, to recreate himself with other Youths of the Country; where he so well behaved himself, that his courage, acti∣vity, strength and beauty, gained great applause, and took so mainly with the Virgins, that some of them began to feel
a Fever in their Minds, which Cupid, who at such Merry-meetings is seldom wanting in promoting the Business of Love, failed not to increase: but he as yet not capable of feeling the Flame of Passion that way, regarded not their amo∣rous glances, nor understood the silent Language of enflamed Hearts, though it notwithstanding, created him those Ene∣mies that were causelessly jealous of him, as a most dangerous Rival, and who ga∣thered their Reason for it, from the many praises their Mistresses bestowed on him in his absence. CHAP. III. How the fair Lucinda fell in Love with him; how those she despised for his sake, conspired against him. OVr Youth increasing his Strength and Beauty with his years, and con∣tinuing, as occasion offered, to appear in publick amongst those admiring Virgins, that in a manner doated on him, and often wished to be Mistriss of his Affections; Lucinda the fair Daughter of a Wealthy Shepherd was the chief, who sought by
many ways to oblige him, and to let him understand her Passion; but Modesty seal∣ing her Lips, he did not, nor would not Interpret her Dumb Signs, but kept on his Merriment, without any regard of her Passion; which made her sigh and grow melancholy, refusing to entertain the Address of those that adored her, and doated on her Beauties, more than she did on those that adorned our Heroick Youth. This suddain alteration made them restless till they knew the Cause of it, which was not long e'er they did from her Virgin Companions, to whom she had dropped some words of her Passion, as likewise by a Letter she had written in order to send to him, by a trusty hand, but had accidentally dropped it, in which were these words: Dear Aurelius, seeing you do not under∣stand the language of a Love-sick Virgins Eyes, pardon my boldness if with Blushes I have taken the liberty to let you know Lucinda doats on you, and begs you would requite her Love with Love, who for your sake renounces the rest of mankind: then have compassion, or Lucinda must be mi∣serable. Subscribed Lucinda.
This giving the Amorists a full know∣ledge, upon whose account they found such cold entertainment from their be∣loved Mistriss, whom every one of them feared to lose, they bent their study how to remove that Screen that stood be∣tween them and their much desired hap∣piness: some were of Opinion, that no∣thing but the death of Aurelius could ef∣fect it; but others of a milder dispositi∣on, declared, That it would not only be too much Cruelty, but bring their own Lives in question; therefore considering Woman-kind was generally more taken with the Beauty of the Body, than with that of the Soul, they thought it fit to Deform him with Poyson; but where to get it they knew not, and so came to a result, that to disfigure his Face with Wounds might work the same effect, and put an end to the passion of their Dear Lucinda, which they knew not any other ways to extinguish.
CHAP. IV. How they attempted to destroy Aurelius, but were overcome and left naked in the Wood. THe Plot thus lay'd against our Va∣liant Youth many ways were sought for an opportunity to put it in practice, till at last they understood he was gone to pay a visit to an Aunt of his, who lived at a Village about two Miles from his Father's House, and that he must re∣turn by a Wood: This lucky opportu∣nity, as they imagined it, made them all leap for Ioy, there being four in number, they armed them with mischie∣vous Weapons, and in disguise, pla∣ced themselves in Ambush under a Thicket of Trees, in the way he must pass, each Swearing to the other to keep the thing secret; though they kept not their Oaths, as you will hear. Long they had not stayed, but as they wished, our valiant Youth not dreaming of such Treachery came on; but hear∣ing the Bushes russle he made a halt to see what it meant, when out leaped the  and incompassing him, after
they had uttered many his words, and reviled him at an unseemly rate, they made in to grapple with him; who ig∣norant of their intent, and scorning to stoop to fear, took the two foremost in either hand, and by main force brought their Heads together, that they rung like a Barber's Bason: so that stunn'd with the valiant knocks, after staggering some paces down they fell; and ha∣ving, by this time wrested a Weapon from one of them, he set upon the other two with such fury, that giving them several Wounds, they, when they found the blood run about their Ears, fell on their Knees, and cried for mercy, as did the other, who by this time were re∣covered from their Trance; yet could not they obtain their Wish till he had Thrashed them into a Confession of the whole matter, and thereby became sensi∣ble of the Love Lucinda bore him; and that she might come to the knowledge of what had happened on this occasion, and that their treachery might be re∣warded with disgrace, he caused them to unstrip, and with such tackling as their Garments afforded, he bound them to four several Trees stark naked, where
these hot-brain'd Lovers took a fit of Tooling till the morning, which disco∣vering the whole Intriegue, their rash Valour became for some time after the mirth of the Country; but most of all, it pleased the fair Lucinda, whose favour they lost thereby. CHAP. V. How his Father put him an Apprentice to a Merchant, and the leave he took of Lucinda. THe Father of Young Aurelius having received an exact account of all that had happened, and fearing these Lovers might study a further Revenge to repair their Disgrace, as also to prevent any amours that might happen between him and Lucinda, to whom he was not wil∣ling he should be married; he took an opportunity to discourse him about put∣ting himself in a way that might ven∣der him capable of living in Credit in the World: When finding him pliable and ready to submit to what he should propose, he told him it was his pleasure he should go to London, and there be put an Apprentice to some Honourable Cal∣ling
that he might be a comfort to him in his old days; and that it should be in his power to chuse him a Master of any profession. He had not long considered e're he reply'd, That seeing it was his plea∣sure, he was contented; and for the desire he had to travel and see strange Countries he could fancy none better than a Mer∣chant: To this the old Man agrees, and shortly after he was sent up to London, and placed to a Turkey-Merchant upon Lon∣don-Bridge, and upon his departure direct∣ed these Lines to Lucinda. Pardon me Beauteous Maid, if Love as yet No power a Conquest o'er me has to get; That you deserve what e'er Love can be∣stow, I must confess, but I alas! must go And wander o'er the world e're I can love, Then be contented & for me ne'er grieve. Subscribed Aurelius. This flat denial made the fair Lucin∣da shed many tears, and bewail her hard fortune, in loving where she was not re∣payed with an equal passion; but soon after a Rich Farmers Son offering Ser∣vice to her, she having with much strug∣ling overcome her former affections, she
changed her Passion, and sacrificed her Virginity to the pleasure of this new∣come Lover, where Revelling in excess of joy, we will leave them, and follow Au∣relius to his new preferment. CHAP. VI. How he gained the Love of his Master, and became enamoured of Dorinda his sair Daughter. OUr Youth upon his Tryal, proved so diligent and respectful, that it was not long e're he was Bound, according to the custom of the City, and then dou∣bling his Diligence, he won the love of the whole Family, not doubting any thing that might please or be for his Master's Interest, and what time he had to spare, he imployed in Manly Exercise of recre∣ating himself in the Fencing-School, and in Martial Exploits, gaining every where the name of a bold and and hardy Youth, and one that promised great things. In this happy State he lived near three years; when Fortune (who is as unconstant as the wind) conspired to give him some di∣bance, for Dorinda his Master's daugh∣ter
a beautiful Virgin, of about 14 Years of Age, returning from the School where she had been brought up at Board, her Mo∣desty, winning Behaviour, and Charm∣ing Graces, by his often gazing on her, prompted him to admire her, and by de∣grees, to conceive such a Passion for that excellent Creature, that he was no longer Master of his Heart, which his Eyes had given away: A while he smo∣thered the Flame, but in the end it broke out the fiercer, and then he knew experi∣mentally what Lucinda had suffered of∣ten; he attempted to discover his Passion, and as often fear'd to offend, stayed the words at his Tongues end, and all he could do, was to sigh and stand confoun∣ded in her presence; whilst the Innocent Lady would frequently ask the Reason, but had no answer, but what his Eyes delivered in burning glances. Thus he continued for a Month or more; at the end of which, he resolved one way or other to make his Passion known, and soon found an opportunity to drop a Letter in the way of the lovely Dorinda, containing these words: Beauteous Dorinda, after many sighs and eager looks, I have presumed to let you
know, if this come to your fair Hand, that I love you dearer than my own life, and to be requited with your love, there is not any thing so hazardous that I would not undertake for your sake; the inequality I must confess, is great, yet Love is a Power obedient to no law but his own: pity me then as a Lover, that love you above all Earthly things, and look not on me as your Father's Servant, but as your Devo∣ted Slave, by whose Smiles I live, and with∣out which, my life must needs be miserable. Subscribed Aurelius. This did not a little surprize the beau∣teous Maid, who considered, that altho' he being as then a Servant, she might for all that have cause to love him, yet highly vispleasing to her Parents, if she should countenance his affections; where∣fore preferring her Duty and Obedience be∣fore her Fancy, or the Passion of Aurelius, the next time she met him, her words were, That she could not but wonder, he should presume to make Love to her, who was his Master's Daughter, e're half his time was expired, and wished him not to make mention of it any more by Letter or word, least her Father were made acquainted with
it, to his prejudice; and so with a kind of a scornful frown, left him as one in a maze of Grief. CHAP. VII. How he got leave to go for Turkey, and what ensued. Aurelius being thus repulsed in his first Love, found himself altogether rest∣less, and that as often as he beheld his beautiful Mistress, his Flame encreased, and his Torture was more and more aug∣mented; and though he tryed many ways to give way to his labouring mind, he found them in vain, and therefore con∣cluded, unless he were removed from the lovely Object, he must be always misera∣ble; and perceiving her looks and carri∣age every day more and more scornful towards him, he resolved to request his Master that he might go for Turkey as his Factor in the next Fleet: which Re∣quest of his, was granted whthout much difficulty, and in a gallant Equipage took leave; though not without some tears of his scornful Mistress, who by this time, began somewhat to relent, that she
had so unkindly repulsed his Address, but being young and beautiful, and conside∣ring, that to those advantages her indul∣gent Father would add in large Portion, her thoughts of a higher advancement, hushed that care and so they parted; the valiant Aurelius to the Ship, and he La∣dy to her Chamber; where we must leave her (who shortly after Married a Rich Merchant) and follow him into Turkey. CHAP. VIII. How he arrived in Turkey, and of his Re∣ception: How he overthrew the Turks and killed a Turkish Prince. THe gallant Aurelius having passed the danger of the Seas, and a while con∣tended with the Storms of Winds and Love, Landed at Constantinople, where he was received with much respect, by the English Merchants and Factors residing there, and behaved himself so well, in the management of his Affairs, that he gained a general Esteem; and in all this he forget not to exercise his Valour, as occasion requir'd; and being by this tim grown to his full strength, he found not∣able
to encounter him, though he was too modest to boast of his own Abilities: Now it so fell out, that upon the Mar∣riage of one of the Turk's Daughters, great Sports and Shows were prepa∣red, and all the valiant Knights sum∣moned to exercise at Tilt and Turna∣ment, in honour of the Ladies and their Countries. This News pleased Aureli∣us so well that he resolved to make one amongst them, and shew his Prowess for the Honour of the English Nation, a∣gainst the proud Infidels, and thereupon provided Armour, a Horse, Sword and Launce, bearing in his Shield a Golden Phoenix, to signifie he was in Subject to a Virgin Queen; and under it Neptune Brideling the Ocean; shewing, that the Seas Soveraignty depended on her Will: s for his Armour it was White, signifi∣ng Innocence. Thus bravely Accred, he hasted to he List, to await the Trumpets sound, where all the Nobles and Ladies were eated in their Degrees, clad in Gold and Gems, when on a sudden, three Turks ell mounted, and richly armed, advan∣ed with their Mooned Shields, and with loud voice, did Defiance as the Bride∣groom's
Champions, to all the Knights of Christendom; which made Aurelius mad to let them know what English Valour was; but perceiving the Champions of other Nations preparing for the Encoun∣ter, he forbear till he might be a witness, of their Fortune, and that his Honour might be the greater, in overcoming their overcomers: nor did he miss, for the Turks being of a Monstrous size, and well mana∣ged to such Fears of Arms, at the first encounter cast them from their Saddles, and so passed on, and did the like to three others, which made the bold Aurelius be∣lieve it was time for him to advance, and thereupon, setting Spurs to his Horse, he met the foremost with a full stroke on his Breast, that he tumbled him with his Heels upward, quite over the Crup, and passing on, struck the second on the Crest, with such forre that he broke it, and the Launce entring his Brain, he fell breath∣less to the ground, which the thrid per∣ceiving, who was of a Giant like Sta∣tuce, came upon him with his Sword, and with a full blow, cut through his Shield and much bruised him, but he charging furiously upon the Infidel, soon made him give ground, and after divers Wounds
obliged him to kiss the Earth, and beg quarter for his Life. To revenge this disgrace of his Cham∣pions, the Turkish Prince, with the leave of his Father in-Law, entred the List in great rage, and defied the bold Aurelius, Swearing by Mahomet, he would Chastise the great Affront, and with many re∣proachful words, bid him to come on, upon which they set Spurs to their Hor∣ses, and met with such fury, that their Launces hurst, and shivered in the Air, when the Turkish Prince drew his Sword: but Aurelius neglecting to do the like, made at him with the Truncheon of his Spear, with which he gave him such a weighty blow on the top of his Helmet, that broke his Neck in sunder, and down he fell in a mortal Trance, after which the Turks strained Complement, and none durst un∣dertake the valiant English Champion.
CHAP. IX. How he destroyed two Lyons prepared to devour him, and had the King's Daugh∣ter in Marriage. THe Great Turk upon notice that Prince Grodam his Son-in-law, whom he thought had only been stunn'd, was dead, vowed that Aurelius, whom he called English Boy, should dye the cruel∣lest Death that ever Man dyed, and there∣upon sent a strong Guard to sieze him, and convey him to Prison, till he consul∣ted what manner of Teach to put him to; which in the end was concluded, that he should be cast alive to two Lyons, who (to be the greedier in devouring) were kept fasting many days. The day of his death, as by appoint∣ment being come, and the King his No∣bles, and all his Ladies, seated to behold the Execution, the brave Aurelius was brought forth in a Shirt of Cambrick, and Drawers of white Sattin, Imbroidered with Gold and a Crimson Cap on his Head, but had scarce time to vow respect∣fully to the Ladies, who greatly prais∣ed his manly Beauty, and began highly
to pity his misfortune, e're the Lyons were let loose, who at the sight of their Prey, casting their Eyes upon him, be∣gan to rore horridly, insomuch that the Spectators trembled; and behold Aure∣lius, whom Death could not daunt laying aside all fear as they came fiercely to him with open Mouth, charged his Hands in∣to their Throats, and e're they had pow∣er to get from his strong Arms, forc'd out their Hearts, and lay'd them dead at his feet, demanding of the King what o∣ther dangerous Enterprizes they had to put him on, and he would gladly do it for the Honour of his Queen and Countries sake; when immediately the Emperor descending from his Throne, tenderly Embracing him, swearing he was some Angel; withal Pardoning him, and gave him Beauteous Teoraza his Daugh∣ter in Marriage, with great Riches, who for his sake, became a Christian: and af∣ter spending some time in that place, they both returned to England with great joy, where they lived many Years very Loving and Happy. FINIS:
BOOKS Printed for j. Back, at the Black-Boy on the middle of Lon∣don-Bridge; Where any Chap∣man may be furnished with all sorts of Books and Ballads at reasonable Rates. 1. THe Protestant Guide in Prayer, &c. 2. School of Piety. 3. Life and Death of Thomas Savage. 4. Righteous Man's reward. 5. Saints everlasting Rest, by R. B. 6. England's delightful new Songs. 7. Simple Simon. 8. Gentlewomans delight in Cookery. 9. Crown Garland. 10. Twice Lovers Garland. 11.  of Courtship. 12.  Jests. 13. History of the London 'Prentice. 14. Canterbury Tales. 15. A Discourse between a Mother and a Daughter, concerning Marriage. 16. A Book of merry Riddlès. 17. The true Egyptian Fortune-Teller. Broad-sheets. The Romish Massacre: Or, An Account of the Irish Rebellion. A Prospect of the Seven reigning Sins. A Tribute of tears, or the house of mourn∣ing.
