S668 12433872 62001
THE DECLARATION OF COL: EDWYN SANDYS, In Vindication of himself from those calumnious Aspersions cast upon him by the Lord Falkland and Secretary Nicholas: Published and subscribed with his own hand at the Randevouze at Worcester, Octob. 11. 1642. in the presence OF Sergeant Major Berry: Thomas Cox, Doctor of Physick: Captain Walter Long: Captain Robert Long: Lyonell Copeley, Mustermaster Generall: John Rushworth Clerk, Assistant to the Commons House of Parliament. Die Sabbathi, 15. Octob. 1642. IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parlia∣ment, That this Declaration of Colonell Sandys, to vin∣dicate himself from the Imputation laid upon him by the Letters of the Lord Falkland and Secretary Nicholas, shall be forthwith Printed and published: H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for E. Husbands and I. Franck. Octob. 17. 1642.
The Declaration of Col Edwyn Sandys, in Vindication of himself from those calum∣nious Aspersions cast upon him by the Lord Falkland and Secretary Nicholas. IT pleaseth God yet to de∣tain me in that conditi∣on, that my pen, and not my sword must vin∣dicate me from the asper∣sions, which the Letters of the Lord Falkland and Secretary Nicholas, have cast on my Reputation, and fidelity in that cause in which I was lately, & still stand engaged. Both these persons charge me that I should say, That death did not so much trouble me, as that I had endeavoured to defend so bad a Cause, which I was drawn unto, as well by my own Ambition, as by per∣swasion of other men; and that I
wished that all the Actions of the Parliaments Forces might hereafter be unsuccessefull; and especially that I should desire God and the King to forgive me this great sin of Rebelli∣on, &c. They that know me well, know that I have not so much vani∣ty, as to think any discourse neces∣sary for my defence in this case; yet that I may stand cleer, aswell in the thoughts of strangers as of my friends, I thought fit to render this account to the world. The apprehension of death never hitherto so neerly toucht me, but that if God shall once re∣store me to my former strength, I shall by his help with as much ala∣critie, and I hope courage, endeavour to defend and maintain with my dea∣rest bloud, this so good a cause, as e∣ver I was at first engaged in it. Not
my Ambition prompted me unto it, but a legitimate and ardent desire of advancing that cause, which I con∣ceive honours the meanest of them that are imployed therein; nor was I drawn into this businesse by any Perswasions, but such as were bac∣ked by the best of Arguments, the maintaining of the true Religion, the honour and security of my Prince, the Rights and Priviledges of the Parliament, and the whole Kingdom; Such a successe I pray for to the de∣signes of the Parliament, and in par∣ticular to this Army under the Com∣mand of his Exellency the Earl of Essex, as by the best of men can possi∣bly be desired, both on His Majesties Person, and this whole Kingdom. And lastly, I professe to the whole World, that my conscience did when
I was in the greatest danger of death, and doth still clear me from the guilt of rebellious or tumultuous thoughts and that the most puissant motive which carryed me on to this Action, was, loyalty to my Soveraign, and love to my Religion and Countrey: They certainly thought me dead when they writ these Letters, and by this meanes hoped to have served their ends, upon some feeble un∣resolved spirits. But I wonder they should write there are so many hun∣dreds of our men slain, when it is most apparent, that the number both of them that dyed in the place, and since, never amounted to thirty per∣sons; and their losse no way inferior to ours, considering their great advan∣tage of place, and that they were at least double for number. There was
indeed a Divine, who I thinke was the Dean of Worcester, who came to me to the house where I was first ta∣ken up, and accompanied me to the place where I now lye, he continual∣ly urged and pressed my conscience, how great a sin I was guilty of in ta∣king up Arms against my Soveraign, I was not then in case to entertain him in discourse, only at last answered him, I never had, nor ever would take up Arms against my Soveraign, but ever should be ready to lay my life and whatsoever was dear unto me at His feet: of this judgement and reso∣lution I still am, and solemnly make this Protestation in the same sence I have here already declared, & accord∣ing to the sense of the Parliament in all their Declarations, of which I hope with Gods blessing upon my recove∣ry,
to give further testimony to the World, by the continued ingage∣ment of my life and fortune, in this so just and honourable a cause. Edwyn Sandys. At the Rendevouze at Worcester, the 11 of October, 1642. Subscribed and published in the presence of Sergeant Major Berry: Thomas Cox, Doctor of Physick, Captain Walter Long: Captain Robert Long: Lyonell Copley Mustermaster Generall. Iohn Rushworth Clerk, Assistant to the Commons House of Parliament. FINIS.
