T1896 99832285 36757
THE EAGLE-TRUSSERS ELEGIE. A Tract Bewailing the Losse of that Incompa∣rable Generalissimo. Gustavus Adolphus, The great King of Sweden, Who after manifold and Glorious Victories, left his life also Triumphantly and Laureated at the Famous Battle of LTZEN▪ the Sixth of November, Anno 1632. By G. T. Eq; LONDON, Printed for Charls Webb at the Boare's Head in St Paul's Church-yard 1660.
Fame mounted on her nimble inge as hygh As well shee mought without impeachment by Celestiall heate, and ayded with a tackle Of seuerall engins, euen to miracle▪ Aduertising the senses; here imployes Her Trumpetts, her innumerous ares & eyes, Throughout our generall hemisphere, to tell The strife of tongu's▪ the oe the joye befell, When our supramest Egle-trussing cheife, The great GUSTAVUS, of his massi life, Exanimated was▪ Shee nere has flow'n Soe high a pitch before, has never blow'n So discrepant a medley, with soe cleare A candor forthe; soe yt Benvolio, heere But listninge well, thou hast ye distant, prime, Lowde, severall, clashinge passions of ye tyme.
To the Reader. SIR, AFter a sad attraction by the per passionate dictates of Fame, to become her A∣manuensis; and an En∣deavour in dilating the Stenographie▪ to garnish it with fitting height and colours; the collection was intentionally presented an Honourable Personage, who had very long and sig∣nally, obliged my services; but since the Project became a Posthumus, the Pen and Presse also but slubbering up what should have been done in Print, it has necessarily put me upon this farther revise; wherein if either the style e quarrell'd for high and difficult, or the method as singular and over-fancied, yet the concernment of that incompara∣ble
The Teuto∣ck for ero's. Held Gustavus Adolphus, may justly challenge a note beyond Ela; for so was Godfrey of Bulloign's mettle upon mettle, such an elegant Soelechism, as said him able to refine the most staynand to the most honourable bearing: Thus with his transcendent influence could our Ed∣ward the black Prince, irradiate that praeposterous attribute, to set him super∣superlatively off, and with aretorick far above the common rate of Conquerors: Nor is it improbable, that a fame excel∣sly culminating, and as briskly sensible, should with her swift extravagancy com∣plicate the distant contrarieties ensewing, since our Books will witnesse, that she could of yore observe (notwithstanding a vast tract of Land and Sea between) the great Battels of Plataeae in Boe∣tia, and Micale in Jonia, both deci∣ded the same day; Nay, thus in the
reign of Domitian, was the defeate of Lucius Antonius in Germany, brought to Rome by her the same day, though above two thousand miles distant▪ so that the severall premises considered, I have fittingly presented this volatile dis∣covery, by the Latitude and Plenipotence of her relation; and rather preferr'd a de∣vious method and an epick-stile, where the common road was disproportionable, Nei∣ther is that Shop to be valued, which has not Cloath for Croesus as well as Co∣drus, and then again for Cyrus above Croesus; after which account presented the benevolent and knowing Reader (without resenting any bolted breath of others) I subscribe my self His affectionate Servant G. T.
Persius redivivus. EN post limini redivivus Persius extat, Romano-mastix qui fuit egregius At non ut quondam Romanus: Persius, Anglus Jam fit, & Angligenas isequitur satyris. Mira : Vis & ardor, spiritus idem: Conveniunt ambo carmine, voce, stylo. Rideat hìc Momus quae non intelligit, atque Invideat Zotlus quae superare nequit. R. L.
THE Eagle-trussers ELEGIE. Fame in Person. CAn Hamath then the great, and populousOr Alexan∣dria. No, Turn into rubble thus? must Eurus so With scatter'd nets of Caterpillers, sup The flower of Libanon, and Bashan up? Is all our pomp, but straw and stubble, blown Before the wind? Ye sons of men take down Your swelling sayls, call laughter mad, reply To joy, What dost thou? Howl, o howl, ye high And mighty Cedars, knowing that your breath, Is likewise in your nostrils: meager Death Implacably the fairest Eden turns A desolate wildernesse, to powder churns The most anointed Cherub: even our great Gustavus, how invictly whilome set
On his high places, now again goes less, Acknowledging the worm his brother. This Victorious Machabeus, (had he been But aIta quasi lon∣gaevus. Macrobius, even a Constantine, It might have trophe'd him,) this chosen shaft, In his illustrious range, surmounting oft The highest Eagle; he that measur'd hath The bridle of our bondage, tyrannous Gath, And all her susters, with a line of woo, To plunder and demolish; payning so The bitter rage, the famine, fire, slaught, Of Heydleberg, and others; this devout DreadIn eight mo∣neths he took in 80 Citties, Castles, and Sconce in Pomerland, and Mechlen∣boug. Polyorcetes, this high extoll'd, And eldest son of thunder, now is roll'd Up in his leaden sheet. But out alas! How am I here surpriz'd? and such a crosse Impetuous conclamation now alarm's My multiplicite eare, as almost storms It into deafnesse; even alasse so lowd Oppugning and tempestuous noyses crowd And clash together, such a farce of passions, Such worlds ofPleadings, or orations. Harangs, broken ejulations, Ignatian shoutings,A kind of threatning clamour used by the Romans, when joyning battel. Barrits, burning vows, Even such a Chorus in combustion plowes The Welkin, I can hardly keep my wing To paraphrase the which, running this string A little desant.— Fame in Chorus. Hark how Futio cryes Victoria. Horne is broken, Arnheym flyes, The Saxonies comply not: nay this fond Obstreperous blurt will boast not having don'd
His armour, yet as loud, as if about To put it off; and then with many a shout At our disaster, irreligious Gotz, His nest ofSouldiers so taking after plunder, that the word became by it in disgrace, & to be taken for a theife. Brigands, hisA Brigade is a body more numerous then a Regi∣ment, some∣time as big as two. Brigado, whets Againe to blood and rapine; at whose din, BothTwo towns in Pomerland, which after the Citizens had first been tortured and ravished, were plundered and burnt by the mperialists. Vckermound and Pasewalk, piecing in, Sollicit vengeance; this the Butcher, this The rigid Arab, sleep'st thou Nemesis? These are the leaches daughters; then they shed Innumerous teares, with Out Alas our dread Alas our dead Adolphus! yet the while Are these again so Shuffel'd, with a shrill And crackling laughter, as some wildernesse Of thorns were burning;Monacum, or Cambdunum, one of the neatest Cities of Germany, & appertain∣ing to the Ba∣varian. Munchen crying thus, Thus would we have it. I, quothAngelostadi∣um▪ or Aurea∣polis, one of strongest pie∣ces of Germany, where the Jesuits have an Academy. Ingolstadt, Now for your copper King. And hear'st thou not How furious aThe boysterous noyse of Armies when in battail. Vacarm is joyntly made, By the fierce Saxon, the victorious Swede, The Frank, the Finlander? even how they drown The world with clamor, make the champion groan Beneath their prauncings? hear'st thou not, I say, What thundring Canonades, promiscuous bray Of ratling drums? or how theA word of art used by the French for the sound of Trumpets. Fanfars rage? Or how the Fifes? and then what store of fledge, And whistling lead, with On again, and charge, And justice, and Adolphus? or how large A throat pragmatical Ignatius sets Wide open at it? or howThe chief Commander of the Boores, opposing the Evangelicals. Shwendy beats The livid ayre with hubbubs?—
Fame in Person. I might stile The lumber almost deafing like to Nile Amongst his Catadupes, still adding that Of Scelestadt or Schlestadt,Perhaps the correption of civitas-scelesta, since accor∣dingly situate upon a River named Ill. situate With such a bitter brand; of Sainté-ville, Eusebia Vrijburge now so dreading ill To her municip laws; ofColonel Ge∣nerall of the Crabats, or Croats men of Croatia, the b being added for the fuller sound. Isolaine With his Crabats, (or call them else unclean Devouring Harpyes,) and a passionate rabble Of clamorous others, disproportionable To my discourse: besides if weighing well The dreadfull medley, what nefarious toil, May find a perfect, and a continued Passion, Amongst these broken ends, with fit relation Claiming the Muses? so that I should here Be silencing abruptly, yet, my dear Panaretus, must then thy bitter moan, Passe as a serpent over-glides a stone, And with no tract behind? why, maugre all This strife of tongues, some lucid intervall May now and then, perhaps, advantage us, With thee upon his estimate; and thus, (The noise even now relenting,) now thou cryest, Fame in Proxie. Panaretus. Come death, advance thee boldly, wherefore fleest Thou such a precious wretch? I, now thy plaints Are luculent enough, imposing rents, Sackcloth and dust, for beauty, dernings up, Scarlet, and balm. Nay, with a tedious troop Of prodigies, thou bid'st the terrene rocks Weepe into fens and meers with inter-shocks,
The marine cliffes be rudely tumbled o're, Removing Sea-marks, puzling all the shore With creeks and Chersoneses; dost enjoyn TheA hill in O∣ver-pfaltz, out of which, the Egar, the Menus, the Sala, and the Nabus, run four dif∣ferent waies. Feichtelbourge, augument his weeping eyne To Poes and Danubies; the Pyramid So valuingThis Tower is said to be 578 paces high. Straesburgh, his aethereal head Be now shrunk in with anguish;A Lake in Gothia, recei∣ving into it 24 Rivers, & em∣ptying them al at one mouth, with such a horrid noise, that tis named The Devils-head. Weret rore, As disimboguing even an hundred more Than twenty rivers; bid'st unrip the tyles Of sumptuousA hill in the Citty of Prague, built with many Noble mens houses. Rachine, thatch it now with quils Of wrathfull Porpentines, or pinions rather By Dragons moulted, or with many a feather Of rigorousAlienm tol∣lens, one of the Harpyes. Aello; doest condemn Her golden fretted rooms to Ohim, Jim, Iackals, and Satyrs; blendest all the stars With flamingProperly such swords as have indented edges. Virolets, with fiery spears, InjoyningXiphii, bla∣zing and bearded stars. Xiphius, that his burning brand A new he raging, further still portend To Diadems, and Scepters; and that Sol Or doffe his golden hair, or in a caule Of sad and ruty vapours, wind it up, As relatives appertient to the cup Of trembling given us; and with such a grosse Of dismall symptomes to bewail the losse Of our Adolphus: then with hideous passion At the disaster, and in contemplation Of what may thence ensue, he bellows out, He still proceeds, with O what resolute Bonarges left us now, to counterpoise The fierce Gran-torto? he that so destroyes Our Lambs, and Turtles, nay the very Kid While in his Mother's milk; nay children hid
Even in their tenderThe skin in which the child at his birth is wrap∣ped. Seconds. (O my soul, Oppose, abhorre his secret.) Look when all A tedious Barnaby, the Wolfe has lyen In holts, and hollowes, as the shades begin To lengthen out, to russet every light Dis-colour'd object, throughly hunger-bit, He waxes gant and grim; and Sol, once gone To the sea-shingle hence for pearl, upon His morrow-grasse to melt, rages, and raves, Barking at Cynthia, tearing open graves, And sheep-coats, and with many a horrid prank Frighting the Champion: such, and far more rank His rage has been; and among mountains rude, Of ashes, rubble, shatter'd spars, imbrewd With Rivolets of gore. Loe where the broyl'd And crumpled geniusses, of poor despoyl'd Cities burnt by the Imperi∣alists. New-Brandenburg, of miserable Gartz, Infer as much. And thou regret of hearts, DearAliàs Mag∣denburg the City of Mai∣dens. Parthenopolis, imbroder'd late With high and bossie work of Temples great, Of aquaducts, of guilds, of bulwarks dread, Burses, andPlaces ap∣pointed for tryall of Ma∣steries, especi∣ally shooting: the word it self signifying ag∣ger, a But. Doels, and even as turreted As Berecynthia; how art thou become An empty peece in plano, but a roome For moles, and worms to cast in? where alas Thy ruddy virgins now? where all the grosse Of thy couragious youth, and those thy heads, So hatch'd with reverend silver? nay, which breeds Excessive horror, even the sepulchers Of veryThe Mar∣quesse of On∣spach and his Ancestors Tombes rifled by the Impe∣rialists; who had done the like also to the Duke of Saxo∣nies Ancestors, if not diverted by a ransome of 80000 Dollars. Princes, girt with iron bars, And Palisado's, built of massie, tough, And boysterous marble, yet are pettie proof,
Against his hungry clutches. O let all Such impious pillage, rankle into gall; Be like the gold of Tholouse, or the theft Of theSuch a Bird, as snatching meat from the Altar, carries a Coal with it to her Nest. Spinternix. But alass, who left To serve this execution? our elate, Unparallel'd Adolphus, knew to meat Him with the bread of tears, to hamper him, Sometime by force, anon by stratagem, In some disert unextricable net: Where like a savage Bull, he full of sweat, Of swarthy foame, of dirt, and ordure base, Lay stomachfully plunging; when alasse, Who now I say?— Fame in Chorus. Chor. But here the generall rout Complies again, and in so vast a shout, With so much horror, rages up to heaven, Like twenty Babels, that I must be driven To spar mine ears up, lest their silver drums Be crackt or rudely beaten out: Nor comes Now in my randome save a jangling farse Of mutes, and visibles; save to reherse The thwart, the crossly-grain'd imagerie, That still Armado-like within mine eye Floats up and down; and with innumerous sorts Of postures, mines, patheticall deports, And ocular relations, up to dresse This empty chasme: yet, as if all excesse Imply'd inconstancy, the lumber here Declines already, seising not mine ear With pristine horror; nay, as climing up Ascents, and hills, abruptly often chop
Into low vallies, now it sinks so much, That I return me to the further speech Of our Panaretus: or wherefore dream I such an ayrie Castle, since for him, Loe where distended, at the rotten root Of an old doting Pollard, breathing out His last he lyes; nor flexible to speak, Save now and then Adolphus; or in weak, And fumbling well-aways I know not what, Of death and Sweden. Therefore here, my plot Must be to change the scene; I, I, so fails The wind in poynt, that we must vere our sails, And now make ready for another board, Hail the main boling there, I so, port hard; And sweetest Zephyre, with propitious store Of fragrant breath, spur up our boat so hore, So bright a pace, as Neptune also boast His Galaxia: for some other coast Bear up I say, and while we snugly run Thus on this second tack, behold how soon The virtuousThe word signifies one that has a shrill voyce. Calasaster, fully fraught With wofull threnes, and now already brought Under our lee, pathetickly supplies Mine ear again; I, hark how shrill he cryes. Fame in Proxie. Calasaster. Calas. Comes all our hope to this? and beating then His wofull breast, why loe the man of men, Even he whose goodnesse in his greatnesse sate Like Diamonds in gold; and where of late, So many mighty can alledge but words; But Abram was our father, or the birds, And empty beasts of Heralds; far beyond
This shell of poor formality, was crown'd With reall noblenesse; he that could do, What others but discourse; and oft, as two Or three left-berries, may be found upon A gather'd Olive's upmost boughs, was one Of our best patterns, even the most admir'd Exemplar left us, is alasse expir'd. O that some chambering Jezebel that toyles In search of Philters, Cullices, and Oyles, To polish off the skin, and cock the blood; Between him, and the dart of death had stood: Or some ignoble soothing Polype, who Can fit his foot still to the present shoo, How grossely patch'd: or death for him had met Some purple churle, or hideous monster, set Within the scorner's chaire; these are the thorns, The bulls of Bashan, that with tyrannous horns, So daily charge us; if decorting these, We would have sung his dart, hung it with Bays, And Garlands; but alas the wicked, still Enlarge their lines; encrease their housholds, till They be like flocks of sheep; are fully fed With milk and marrow; Jubal, and his seed, Ingrosse the Lute, the Harp, they shine as stars Of the first magnitude: O what deferrs Unevitable justice? where alas, In what untrodden rigid wilderness, What roughCertain hills of Eirus, much torne with thunder. Ceraunian hills, or sea unknown, Is all the thunder spent, there should be none, For such a base, licentious, execrable? But softly swift, how at this wicked rabble Art thou perverted thus? I hollow ho;
And wherefore, wretched Adam, run'st thou so Stiff-necked a rebellion? dar'st thou cope With Him, to whom the Nations but a drop Are of a Bucket? Shall what grasse but growes Upon the house-top, and with which who mowes Fills not his hand, yet quarrell the decree Of Him that spans the Heav'ns, and shuts the Sea Within his Fist? Shall weak inferiour clay, Prescribe the freedom of the Potter? nay, Of the Creator? Likewise, what if here The wicked often thrive, and houses rear Among their desolate places, till the measure Of sin be crying-full, that they may treasure Wrath for the day of wrath; why yet but mark The sequel, and behold they toyl in dark And slippery waies, thou wilt at length report Their blisse a hearth of thorns, whose shine is short, Whose crackling empty; or but, in compare, Like to some upland Torrent; and thus are The suddain brooks of desart Arabie, As soon again exhal'd fainting the dry Approaching Caravans. Retract I say; For though perhaps they bravely bustle may, And branch it here a while; yet in the morn Of our refreshing, from among the corn, They shall severely cribadg'd be to dwell With everlasting burnings; when the while Gustavus and our holy zelots swim (O happy souls!) in a celestiall stream Of Allelujahs; are as fill'd with blisse (Immensly happy men!) as cover'd is The Sea with water; shall I say decor'd
With palms, & crowns, & throns: ô hast the Lord, Come quickly Holy Jesus! ô my heart How art thou swallow'd up with the transport Of heavenly touches! Fame in Person. I, the Calasast Is here extatically so possest, And sweetly silenc'd, that dismissing him, Withdrawn a while, I rather now declaim The wofulThe Word imports an up∣right and sin∣cere person. Degen-heart; for though atThis was Wallensteins Castle in Mo∣ravia. Znaim, Imprison'd rigorously, his grief has yet Such a Cathedrall voice, as at the grate I hear him cry,— Fame in Proxy. Degen. How are we now forlorn Beyond a Comforter? how must I mourn Like a sad Harp, or lowdly-howling Shalm, For this interment? he that tore the palm From all their glorious Chiefs, our strength, our stay, The royall Sweden's gone! Be this a day Of dread, of breaking down, of crying out To hills and mountains, who shall prosecute For any temper now? the lincks off shall, The bolts off must, will now imprison all Our Aequilibrium. Now letThe Branden bourgs chiefe City. Berlin howl, And curdle all her faces milk, with foul, With brackish water-floods; and also that CouragiousOr Eegodu∣num, a famous Mart Town of Germany watered with the Pegnitz. Noremberg, so sung of late, And high above the hatches; humbly now Must kisse the rod, must supplicately bow; Or being over-power'd, live in grones, And dye in shackells: then even he that runs
May read thy perillThe Saxons chief City. Dresden: therefore call For curious Engineers, new-build thy wall Of Bitumen and Mil-stones, lining it With Terrene Thunderers, both infinite, And of the royal size; see how he layes For novell Levies, traversing his waies Like a swift Dromedary, how recreuts His shatter'd grosse anew, with bloody sutes OfCroatians and Moavians. Quads and Crabbats; now the rende-vous Is made atTwo passes betwen Pra∣gue and Saxony Luitmaritz; now Gallas shews Us all his angry teeth, marching the van, As far asThe second passe. Ausig; while that counterpain Of Caesar's fury, that immense, renoun'd, ProdigiousWalstein, so named of his Dukall City, situate be∣tween Bohemia and Lusatia. Fridlander, (begirt around With Rodo-monts,Such Gen∣tlemen of com∣panies, as re∣ceive extorar∣dinary pay. Appointees, Reformad's, Cids, Epigons,The Spanish do extoll their Gyds, as we our King Arthur or Guy of War∣wick. and other martiall blades Boasting the Feofments Medalls dooble payes, And other donatives,Such as are both born and bred up in the Wars. wherewith the'yr daies Are rich enamil'd, while this termagant Dctator seconds him; and then so rant DoesA Holsteiner Field-Marshal to VValstein. Hulke up with the formidable rear, As presupposes both a flood of fire, And blood in such abundance, that dismisse We likewise now the fair Herbipolis, (or call it Wortzberg) so to be deflowr'd, So miserably starv'd and over-power'd With twitch and weeds, that where shal Galen now Go seek alas for simples! also thou So jovial Bacharah, that hast thy name From Bacchus altars, and a fluent stream Of pretious wine exported, break, ô break Thy chirping roomers! What symposiack
Can now be seas'nable? he comes, he comes, His fier-locks are ready span'd, his drums Beat with an Emphasis; what shall I say ToTwo Cities in the Palati∣na. Creutznatch, Frankenthal, but that their day Of doom is likewise near; ô wring your hands Submit, submit your necks, 'tis iron bands, And cuffs you now must wear; the glorious blood Of honourable Craven and Fairfax shed Among your parapets, now proves in vain; The product of it, the result, the gain, Will soon be sworded out; and for his spight To thee poor Heidelberg, thou hast been writ In Capitals, and with a coal, and long In his black book, thou shalt be made a song, A by-word, even a proverb of reproach, A very heape, a hissing, even a wretch Beyond expression, tush his Cuyrassiers Will quaffe upTwo Rivers in Saxony. Elve, and Elster.— Fame in Person. Here with tears, While eke our Degen-heart is suffocate; Nor his huge Iron-voice articulate, But thickly rivited with many a yell, With many a groan, that hacks and mangles all. He sayes to Non-sense, I must lightly fleck From hence again, declining him, to speak The furious heat ofThe Flower∣deluce. Iris; loe her head As tough and masculinely helmeted, As e're Minerva's; and like her she hands A threatning spear; nor poorly condescends By Sweden's expiration to go lesse,
And leave her wing; but roundly does professe The side of Justice; Ganymedes bird Must render an account, for having stirr'd The coals so fiercely; must restore a throng Of glorious pennage, practically wrung From the pacifickThe Halci∣on. Authè,The Red∣breast. Silvia sweet The Dove, theThe bird of Paradise, or of God, as this word signifies in the Moluc∣cos. Manucodiat, with a flight Of others as deplum'd.— Fame in Proxie. Iris. Doe doe, recall, Quoth this Virago, (fiercely therewithall Grinding her teeth;) I, do but reckon up The time of yore, and many a dismall stoup Has this unsaturable aery made, With many a sharking Vulture, many a glead, My breast dilacerating; on revenge Hang out the bloody ur-coat; help us change Our Pike-heads into Stings, with so much store Of VVolfbane being smeer'd, and Hellebore, That all our serred ranks, and squadrons rage Like charging Hydraes, Hydra-like engage: Come come, make ready there, advance the shot; So so, now charge him home, pour all your hot, And hissing lead into his bosome; were But Sweden's Obit to be reckoned for, Why yet the dearest souls, and essences, Of manifold Re-publicks, Cities, Princes, And mighty Monarchs, in his bosome met Concentrically; made it their retreat, Their generall subterfuge; Come then, arise Thou dread A drastria, draw thy bloud-shot eyes Upon this rigorous brood.—
Fame in Person. But here the late Impetuous fragor does importunate My deaf again; so like a multitude Of many raging waters, every loud, Each shriller accent drowning; that my verse Must now the second time become a farse Of mines, of postures, of dilacerate hair, Hands wringing, plaudits, many a passionate pair Of dissentaneous hands, promiscuously Clapping and wringing. Now must the supply Be meerly visibles; convitious mowes, Breasts beaten, gaudy capers;— Fame in Chorus. Chor. At out woes, Loe there a sort of Drablers andOf Bidet, a small Nag up∣on which such horse-mens Boyes use to follow their Masters. Bedees, Cast up their caps, and leap, as if the brees Now gave upon their reer, or else were beating Their quarters up; and mainly aggravating The hideous bustle, somewhat off from these, Within a plump of old and mighty trees, That like the pillars of a roomthy Church, With corpulent and lofty bodies, arch The green and brushie seeling, here behold A pravity of monstrous, manifold, Crabats and Gourtesans, so likewise set Upon the merry pin, and over-heat With heady draughts, with brimmers over-flow'd, That wildly vapouring into scuffles, bloud, And mutuall slaughter; they reflect again The drunken Lapithes, and Centaurs, slain
At Hippodamia's wedding. Yonder look How passionateBishop of VVortsbourg, and Duke of Franconia, dri∣ven out of his Country by the King of Sweden▪ Hasfelt bustles, up to stoke Whole forrests into Bone-fire; which as fast TheA Country upon the Ri∣ver Mayne, di∣vided into se∣verall Earl∣doms, siding with Gustavus. Weterawes sad severall Princes haste To dash out with their tears. Nor these alone Dissolve so much, but see whereBogislaus then Duke of Stetin and Pomeren. Pomeren, And eke theJohn Albert, then Duke of Mechlinbourge. Machlinbourger, and even swarms Of Lords, and Roytelets, are sighing storms For their Augustus, such an anagram As without torture prophecy'd the name Gustavus highly glorious; to proceed As I have known a draught so fanciefy'd, Per pale so parted into ridge and rivell As with a glorious Angell has a devill Commistly blended; let me here display Where powder'd captain Encombommata So ranckly vapors eke, and brandishes His Kilzadog, that pens and standishes O quitt ye well; our Madam-gentles now Shall caroll out his worth forsooth, and how He rants and rages, if the surly Swed With his bent brow to Monsieur Muri-ced Reduce him not. Here have I found again A rabblement of shavelings Tridentine (Or we may call it Legion else as well, For they are many) here I say with all The gods of their Pantheon high and low, Even all their puppetry, their trinckets, how In a triumphant superstitious file (As pleyted as a hedge of thorns the while And as extended) how they rome about, (May we but guesse by posture) shrilling out
iô to mighty Wallstein, who good man While our Adolphus dyed a Laureat, ran Most resolutely Prageward. I have found Likewise a little distant, Atè woun'd In Laynez armes, and now they part and run Gesticulating wildly up and down, Like Deer before a tempest, now embrace, And newly hug each other, now they dress Their heads with Lawrell, now their bills of fare Bespeak Podridaes, and they Printing are For Pageants, Bonfires, Conduits running wine, Garments of Trophee-work (in brief) design A most insulting joy, my next relation Must be the sad and desolate condition Of Worms, of Frankfort (by the golden bull Intrusted with the splendid monopoll Of making Caesars,) and again of Spire, Of Wittenborgh so full of zelous fire And Orthodoxall light; and how do these For their Adolphus now like bullrushes Calamitously quake and hang the head: How now for Sack-cloath, cineritian bread Even such a penance as both man and beast Full lowly layes, piaculerly post Their eager sanctions; ô the bitter fewd The mortall medly that the world is brew'd, Combusted with, in present; there aloft A most stupendious pile whose aerie shaft May play with Tenarif for pike and place,The Empe∣ror's chief councellor, Duke of Cru∣man. Lo Eggenborgh in a prospective-glasse (That learned Kepler made, and far and near Could throughly roomage all our hemisphear)
Be-jearing Oxenstern; then must I tell How now for grief the Baltick Sea-nymphes vail Their faces with a wash of Cepiaes ink; And still of other desolat's that drink Despaire like water in; to ballance which, (And hail thou happy season ushering such A temper in) Mine eye has likewise spy'd Where in CampaniaOne of the just pretenders to the Duke∣dome of Saxo∣ny extorted from his An∣cestors by Charles the 5. Weymer does divide His conquering Grosse: now being in the van, Now in the reer; and on aA kind of extraordinary Jennet bred upon the Pire∣nian Moun∣tains. Lavedan, (As Volteger, as everThe horses of Achilles, Balius was, As everThe horses of Achilles, Zanthus) how from place to place He nimbly flyes, demonstrating right hands Sent him fromField-Mar∣shall under the Duke of Saxony. Arnheim; which so countermands The deafning hurley, with a blaze of hope Becalming some, so roughly swallowing up Some other in distrust and suddain fear, That farwell Mutes and Visions, now mine ear Distinguishes again; and of the low Dejected residue, condoling so, So miser-made at Swedens expiration, Nor to be comforted, does with the passion OfQuasi VVar∣mond, Tom Tell roth. Pharamond present us, such an odde A Mister wight, so blunt an Antipode To ruffling mischief, that behold his face All rigge and furrow, and his limbs (alas!) So tenter'd out, and torn, with rods, with racks, Strapadoes, and the like, my bosome akes, And trembles at it: Nay, though Pasher late Has rent him Sparrow-mouth'd with gagging, yet He still so lashes out, so renders truth In all her nakednesse, that full of ruth,
Fame in Proxie. Phar. Is then, quoth he, our mightiest Sweden dead? On vengeance, on! or if thy feet be Lead, Yet hast thou Iron-hands. Ye bloody crew, And of incestuousA great Flye, of four wings, an Emblem of over-hot mar∣riages, such as the Austrian Princes use. Hanitons; 'tis you, 'Tis you that did it; if we may prevent Th' assassinating Butchers,Captain of a Horse troop. A joynt conspi∣rator with Quint, for the murther of Gustavus. Baptist, Quint: ComeThe King is said to be slain by a Trooper of his Regi∣ment. Picolomoni, come open tort, Come ball and powder, his presumptuous mart And carelesse of theHe was, when slain, without dfen∣sive armes and only in a plain Suite of Spa∣nish leather. Cuyrasse, will betray Him quickly to your fury. Thus I say, ThoughThe Sir name of the Austrian Emperors. See Ʋerstegan. Stock by sirname, hast thou ranted up To Stork in practise: shut the door of hope That we were entring at, or to decline And waive all second causes, 'tis our sin That thus imployes thee tyrant-like a while As an expedient Crucible, to boyle And calcinate us; 'tis our sin that payes Such wofull wages, sadly so dismayes With tears in trophee-work; the flocks upon Our many precious hills are lately grown So course and nauseous, that we must be fed With bills of studious fare, must have our kid Dress'd in the mother's milk, our eggs with gray LuxuriousWe call it Amber-greece, mistaking the latter syllable, for g which in French and Dutch (from whence we bor∣row it) is Gray, succinum. But tell me, say, Thou soft SirLiguritor a Gluton, a Sweet-tooth. Lecker-beck, is then the Mars Incompt and rugged, with hisA name, as Cotgrave has it, succeeding from the strength of the old Earl of Angolesme. Taille-fers, By these so mainly timbr'd? or may these A Peleus shield from hot Hypolites, And her obsequious grins? why then go seek For Sol in Tenarus, or snow where thick
Pyracmon,Two of the Clycops. tawny Brontes, forge their hot Tempestuous Thunder-bolts: No no, complot We temperance rather; let the cook, declin'd To such a Mors in Olla, who can find Unnaturall births, luxuriousA French dih compoun∣ded of severall ingredients minced toge∣ther. Haches out, As Anah did his Mules; let him be brought At length upon the weights, and voided hence, WhereWho watered his Garden∣herbs with Wine and Hony. Aristoxenus at such expence His Lettice waters, or Poppea bright, And Cleopatra, quaffe their exquisite, Their sumptuous Unions; I, we howle and roare, At Swedens death, but let us sin no more, Our sin has slain him; and indeed is wrought To such an awlesse Belial, every draught Commits a severall health; we look the wine For Caprialls and for Babies; then decline Our Virgin vowes, with let Lyaeus swell As Jordan does in harvest; when if well Observing the successe, 'tis full of flaws, Of babling, wrath, of wounds without a cause, Of Paliardise; and to bring up the reer The drought after drunken∣nesse, the after∣thirst. Eluchus turning, with a brand of fire Invades theThat part of the palate in which the tast remains. Cephaline; Full happy thou Great Ah'suerus, and could we but plough Once with thy Heifer; if our sanctions were Like those of Medes and Persians; to deterre, To sear, to launce, to lop off, this would teach Us Hester also, where we now but reach To sensuallThe word signifies dink∣ing. Vashti; but our Lawes neglect, As Struhions do their eggs, or to be suck'd By Foxes, Wolves, or trodden day by day, Among the feet of swine; I, let me say,
Thrice happy Sweden, maugre all the rage Of our licentious Mars; who kept the sage Temperate feasts, and void of excesse. Nephalia so precisely, clenching such Examples in us.— Fame in Person. Hitherto the speech Of Pharamond distinct enough and plain, Was now cut off, abruptly drown'd again, By loud and squeling Claudia; one who late Sate as be-muffled by the prison-grate As merkest midnight, but here taking fire By these of Pharamond, and even with ire Her vail and precious tresses, (or be bold To call them braydes, and bendelets of gold,) Purpassionately rending, she replyes, Fame in Proxie. Claudia. 'Tis true indeed, he was of all our eyes The comfort, the Collyrium, even the breath Of all our nostrills; so the sons of Heth Oppugning, as might even applause inferre Super-superlative: but then, O where The requisite return, and what the fruit Of all his Travell? all his resolute Assaults, andSodain incur∣sions derived from Algeires in Africa whence the like was often made through the streight of Gibrarlter into Spain Algarads? the magnifier Of ancient Babel, had for conquering Tyre, An Aegypt given him; thou my dearest drad, Not aA donative of studded bus∣kins given to souldiers. Clavarium, how exagited For truth and justice; with the daily tort Of Sang-reall, Arbutus, Mal-effort, How coursly handled; Nay, which urges more, When being Trump, why yet cut-off before
The game were cousummate; impell'd away From such a door of hope, to be the prey Of death and darknesse; so deserted is The splendid, the mellifluousA river of Scythia, conta∣minated by the influx of a bit∣ter rillet. Hypanis, To Vultures inquinations; tufted all With Negromantick herbs; and by the gaul, The perbreak of Exampus, putrified From all his noblesse; thus I say decry'd, And like a thred of silver, rippl'd out, Among the puzzels, the portents about Inclement Caucasus. O, flow my tears, Deep calls to deep, and the most candid ears, Are deaf with water-spouts; I, such as at The last grand Session, shall with heads elate, Judge Men, and Angels; jeer'd as refuse are Outed these terrene Chattels, to the barre Of tyranny convented oft, and slain All the day long; alas the while, in vain They cleanse their hands, their hearts they bootless wash With innocence.— Fame in Proxie. Pharam. But how is it thou rash Distemper'd woman, here quoth Pharamond, (Raising his voice again, how lately drown'd, Above her clattering sharps;) thou wretch as lame, In thy deport, thy patience, as thy name; O how is it, I say, thou doest so roar, So wildly kick like a gainsaying Core Against the pricks? up, up thou Libbard, up, Reform thy freckled hide; if Fullers soap, (Some call it eke Cymolian earth,) if this Wash not effectually, take Herb of grace,
In penitentiall tears infusing it, And 'tis enough abstersive; makes as white As garden Lillies: Why the righteous here, Must weather many a bitter storm, and bear The parching heat, the burthen of the day; Like Balsome trees, and Larches-like display Their worth among their wounds; Look as the brave East-Indie-man, transpierces many a wave That Bandog-like assailes him; nor declines His great intendment, for the torrid line's Malevolence, or doubling such extent Of many a fore-land, many a Prominent, And tedious Cape; till up at length he beare With Taprobane, or Java, taking there His precious lading in; such must they be Here under sayl: And in this worldly sea If Syrens tempt thee, these with upward fair, Are downward fish, an interdicted pair, A wicked miscellane; If perhaps withstood By tyrannous Whales, who tumble up the flood, And boyle it like a Cauldron; or else runs Thy course, throughBurning fea∣vers, of Caleo. Calentur's,The strmy North-east wind, Acts 27. 24. Euroclydons, Or barking Scylla's, yet if knowledge steer, Zeal whistle in thy canvasse, thou shalt bear Up snugly, maugre all; invictly stem The strongest setting tides, and leaving them With the so tedious Cape of hope, behind At length to lee-ward: for a terrene Ind, A place of fading merchandise, befraight With matchlesse blisse, with an exceeding waight Of endlesse glory: which our royall Swede Exemplifies, who by the triple head
Of Geryon, with his infinitely more, And as outragious hands as heretofore, To steeple-high Briareus voted was Though ruffel'd often, many a bloody base Though virulently bid; yet with a might Almost to miracle, could over-fight And worst their insolence: till in a cloud Of glorious victories and trophees strow'd Along the world, at last he mounted up To that divine.— Fame in Chorus. But here the catadup Of noise again so passes all belief, That loe Cleoritus to blaze his grief, Fungus his joy, loe how they swell and stare, And with their straining shoot as red, as are The cheeks of Bacchanals: Nay further eke See Bulbus-head the Boar, how Heyfer-like He wildly gambols, often howting out His brutish jollity the while no doubt, In that same savage note, by woodmen us'd Among their Deer, but all in a confus'd Obstreperous medley swallowed; Yonder then, (For I must slent off this same ch'ame again, With mutes, and visions) see whereTwo Syco∣phants in chief favour with the Emperor Ferdinand. Cremsmunster, And Trautmanstorfe, (in nature rigider, More Giant than in name:) see how they buz And croak in Caesar's ear, proscribing thus, Innumerous innocents: And still so thwart, So crossely run the Dice, I must impart Upon another coast, the Turtle true,
Fair Basilissa, weltering in a dew Of briny-tears; even all her beauteous face, Besprent with water-gauls; and now alas, (Which irks me deeply) lo! she groans and grieves Her self into a swound; Now redi-vives; In ghastly manner, newly sinks away, Is fetch'd again; wo worth the dismall day That I must leave her thus! for now that old Sexagenary (lately so befool'd, To batter down his blood,) with many a band Chops in between us; now they make a stand, AndAt first an Enginier un∣der Walftein, af∣ter by degrees a Collonell. Farenbach, with other leaders joyne In Pyrrhick dances, with the Mattachine In armour jove it; now that fly of Court, ProdigiousFirst a fol∣lower of the Count of Ha∣naw, after im∣ployed to levy Caesars confis∣cations. Ossa, tickling at the sport, In a deep eglet of Corinthian Brasse, Healths it to Caesar.— But to touch and passe, To certifie by sips and transiently, Being my sole designe; here passing by These lusty Lamechs, and their gaudy scene; See yonder also near the mantling Rhene, How while Zelotes goes about to stave The Heydleburgers tun, as but a wave In our late shipwrack; see how Zuffenbeck The trouper, charges him with many a steek, While Grossendorst his Swager, int'rimly Lyes sucking at the spigget;— Next mine eye (No longer trading with so course a pair;) Among innumerous others far and nere Pressing for notice, singled has the bright
Illustrious Clari-dame; and while a cyte Of abler pens, will yet supinely sleep, Fly silly muse, canst thou not fly? then creep To do her service; this the royall Queene, Not broking up a momentany shine, From Jewellers, and Druggists, which at night Must be put off again; her red and white, Her Jewells are so highlyMost abso∣lute and com∣pleat for ex∣cellency. Paragon And immarcessible, that they renown Her doubly radiant, as without within; And like the vest on both sides full of fine Discolor'd needle-work, so quondam voted To Jbis Sissara; yet to be noted As a prodigious omen, while our loud Looe gadding Madoysells are struck and strew'd With morning Pinks and Roses, loe her drsse Is sprigs of Yew; her pendants are (alas) But wofull willough Catlis; while the nice MaddamSh would have this, and she woud have that: And would hve she knowes not what. Ie-e-scay-quy o treated is With anxious care and cost, this royall dame, Ti Queen of ears, is sadded from the name Of Naomi to Maro; uh the great The golden Bull, growes old and obsolete; And while byBy this Law but for Em¦perors of the same house might lineally succeed each other, yt has there now bn six o ven of Austria with∣out any inter∣ruption. Munchum lately tug'd and sol'd, The Wiens sword (as bloody-sharp as bold) Has tyrannously ut off both his horns; No hope, no help, the wicked world forlorns Our noblest pieces, even so transitory Is worldly splendour, that full sadly sorrie See how she folds her arms; now looks to heaven, As crying Lord alas; how was he given A prey into their teeth? now with a hand
Exactly chambleted, and porselain'd With white and blew she does her pen employ, To rouse her draded brother Angli-roy, With the Mal-heur; yet now again forbears, Because the paper suggish is with tears, And swallows all impression; now she goes To yonder Temple with religious vowes That she may deprecate our further harm, And close behind her, many a wofull swarm OfOne of the conclusions of Lipsich was, that both Cal∣vinists and Lu∣therans (to take away those di∣stinctions, kin∣dling so much hatred) should joyntly be thus named. Evangelicals; Now makes a stand, From severall draughts, presented here to hand, Choosing hisA monument erected to the honour of the dead. Cenotaphium,— Fame in Person. I should still Enlarge me thus, and royalize my quill With more of her; but as Celestiall news Here interposes, may perhaps excuse My self a while; for yonder massie clowd, Giving such fire, so (doubtlesse) full of lowd, And bellowing Meteors; lo! how from between The dark some pleyts thereof, a Cherubin Now gently stoops with healing on his wings, To poor Panaretus, by severall pangs, And rigid Passions, hewn so lately down Into the daze of death. The hideous swoon, Now in a clammy deal of mist and gum, Was setting both his eyes, an Icie cream, Remissely floating over all his face, Implacably protended; froze the pace His pulse so long had run, and every wheel Within him now began to fur, and feel An earthly dulnesse; when behold (I say)
The starry Leech has with a fragrant May, This sad December outed; new has wound His pulse and all his Organs up, as sound, As strong, as high, as ever; So the snake, His slough, his Heckle moults, his antient beak, The royall Eagle. After whose recover, Lo! how the glorious Post does backward hover, In boughts, and wind-laces; and with a point Now made again, into the sable tent, From whence his stooping, has so deeply dasht All our conclamitants; that all abasht, See how they trembling stand, and full of fire, Shot (as it seems) from many a sulphrous tire Of the Celestiall Cannon; Which in fine Or being likewise cloy'd, or turn'd again To their first principles; about mine ear, Insist (I say) our Redivivus here, One from the dead, will somewhat interpose More taking and impulsive; on with those Thy scatter'd Elegiacks, do, proceed, No Dog now moves his tongue, the broken reed Panaretus in such a levell glade, So whilst an empty silence, may perswade Even the most luctuall rights and rarities To Swedens herse. And hark how still he cries, How passionately here!— Fame in Proxie. Panar. Alas for him, Who like a brave Alcides could esteem It all his blisse, to roam about the world, Confounding Monsters, buffeting the curld
Presumptuous browes of Tyrants; Why but search His generall conduct, his victorious march; And when atTwo Islands in the Baltick Sea, neer to Stralesundt Vsedoome, Rugen (two of those Prodigious quarrels, that Aegeon chose Of yore to shoot at Heaven,) when there he drew His active heat,Generall of the Imperiall forces in Po¦merland at the King of Swe∣dens arrivall. Torquato Conti flew (Induring not the test) to sudden aire; Nay, daring Papenheym, Hulke, Altringer (So great a Master both of Pike and Pens) Nay tyrannous Tscherclaes, Gallas, Wallenstein That great Dictator, shining all how bright, Yet as inferiour planets, lost their light At SWedens Heliack rising. All their wayes Were deep and furious, as the North west Seas, And full of grisly shapes; of Morses, Whales, Grim Unicorns with Adamantine scales; And horrid Gram pusses: yet our August Adolphus, knew to baffle their robust Insidious heat, their knittest practises To ravell out; Or wherefore name I these? Since from our present ages height, survey But that behind thee; search but far away, Where all the hills, and steeple-Tops are clad With blewish Land-schap; but where Elis stood, (Even at the furthest t'other end of time,) Or Troy, or Sparta; and behold their prime High-writ Herôes, came no neerer to His celsitude, then rough-hewen models do Their Archetyp's; then does the Belgick card A Lyon fierce, or Italy compar'd With a neat timber'd leg. And this the brave Victorious Eagle-trusser, from whose grave
Such wofull furrowes, peremptory seas Of sorrow even beyond emergencies Reflected are, that now the bread of tears Must be our daily food; our sauce the jears And taunts of them without. Alas, alas, What gloomy tropes, what miserable dresse Of severall figures, may declaim our low Precipitate condition! now, ô now Did squalid Pisces and Aquarius raign, And all the racks conjoyntly drive amayn From South-South-east, by grossely complicating Snow, rain, and other wicked weather, beating Each creature into covert; passion-filling Even our insensibles, our timber chilling With a cold sweat, bepuzling bolts and locks; Nay poorie making, melting very rocks Of toughest marble, yet were this too scant, And but a mite to tender, where a mint Paid not the debt; Alas, alas my head, My heart, my heart, behold the soveraign Swede, The coveringSee the Epist. Dedicatory. HELD, the Lion of the North, That quintessence of Kings, is batter'd forth His wondrous conduct. Let the Trumpet rend It self with ghastly groans; the Drum descend, And languish from his mettl'd ruffe, and roul To a dead march;— Fame in Person. I, quoth the heavenly soul, The dearuella Coele∣sti. Amalaswentha by him set, Nor longer keeping silence,—
Fame in Proxie. Amal. Let, ô let, Our vollies so condensly heap'd and thrust With muskytades, with many a boystrous breast Of Culverin and Canon, at the stresse That hills and regions tremble, sadly presse How very dear we held him, even so choak The Skie with pillars, curls and clouds of smoak, That like a deafning thunder may with ast Boations, cracks, and light'nings on the last Stretch our obsequious Fare-well, to the slain, Unparallel'd, invincible,— Fame in Person, And then Quoth our Panaretus, as passionately Here pecing with er.— Fame in Proxie. Panar. I, and then quoth he, YeeOf this hill see fol. the fifth. Phytelburgen-ecchoes, neer distraught With the prodigious noise; so tentr out Your clamoru voices, bounding it in grosse Up to the Grian Alpes, that also those Your sisters there, may with their mighty throats, Transport it ove to the hollow grots, And browes ofA hill in Tha, six miles hgh. Hemus; and so taking Post B shadyA hill in Thessaly. Pelion, to the forked crest O paramount Olympus; being still Thus dictated, I say, from hill to hill; Our thickning vollies, at the length may seize Extended Taunus, that Metropolis Of resonancies; and in savage dens, Deep foggy Cisterns, hollow woods, and glins;
Among the rudely pack'd together rocks And pendulously torn where other flocks Of ecchoes so consolidately swell The hideous Horricane, that rushing while Still on through many an uncouth wildernesse To Pegu, Siam, and theThought to be Malacca in the East-Indies. Chersonesse Where Jedediah fetch'd his golden oare Fame in Proxie. Amal. And thence again by the Maritime shore As far as Persian Ormus, then to Cayre Quaking the Pyramids, and millions there Of busie truckers, Fame in Proxie. Panar. Storming thus I say, From place to place, in such a thundering key. And over an unweldy vast extent Of sea and shore, a tedious continent: Till at the length,The Orcades so named of this sea-Mon∣ster, and this againe from the Latin Or∣cus. it arctick-high arrives, Among the Horrid Orks appellatives, And frozen Thule, strike and startle may All terrene tribes and kindreds, if I say All creatur's into much affright and passion, Tis such a Pleonasmick compellation, As more pathetickly will hint our great, Our Gospell prejudice,— Amal. Even a defeat Replies Amalaswenth' portently checking And mating millions; at the quondam breaking Of some stupenduous tank or beetle-brow From that high Taurus, recollect but how While cancellering, grazing here and there Destructively, with all the neighbour ayre
Even a defeat Replies Amalaswenth' portently checking And mating millions; at the quondam breaking Of some stupenduous tank or beetle-brow From that high Taurus, recollect but how While cancellering, grazing here and there Destructively, with all the neighbour ayre Torn into fragor, by the salt the souce; HowTwo Moun∣tain Kings, at length Tyran∣nizd by the Tuk and Per∣sian. Bahamon and poore Aladulus Shrunk under it, as boading in event The PersianA Persian Sword Shamshere, or the macilent Grand Senior's horse; So what alasse ensues From this portent, but even a world of wooes, But matta, matta, the parsidious Swede BeingThe Spanish word of slaughter, in French, tue tue, in English, kill kill. depriv'd us, what else but the glead Imp'd with again his subdititious pens Should Eagle-rant it; ô the sad design's That now are hatching! come come, let us flye My dear Panaretus; me-thinks I see The Reliques of our butcher'd Saints; as thrown And exprobrately scambl'd up and down, As chips at cutting wood.— Fame in Person. With fell affright, The Roses in her face, now Lilly white Began to languish, and she startled up Distractedly; her anker-hold, her hope Now drove amain; when lo Panaretus In sweet and precious compellations, thus Rejoynes with her anew.— Fame in Proxie. Panar. But tell me then, Shall such a man as I, turn back agen
Leaving the Plough? shall we that reckon'd are For beams and pillars, of the Militar, And Orthodoxall Church, ignobly swerve, Moulder, and leave it thus? why, but observe, And he that sowes in rivolets of tears, Shall after reap in joy; who weeping bears His precious seed, and thus in season out, Shall doubtlesse come again, and with the shout Of those in harvest, bring with him his sheaves; Retract, retract I say, ô how it grieves Me for thy fear, thy fall! collect thy self, And let us bravely sink both syrt and shelf, Impatience pre-supposing; steeple-deep In the spring-tide of zeal.— Fame in Person. Here gan she weep, And chatter like a Crane, hiding her head In a black Cypresse Wimple; while the sad Panaretus, pitching his eyes a'spar Upon the ground, does int'rimly prefer A Scene of silence; giving so much line To recollection, and the discipline Of sundry second thoughts; that as the fruit, The sequell of this intermitted mute Parenthesis; from her dejected stoup, See now at retrive, how she heighthens up, Gathers and growes again, as when at Sea A sail is made to windward distantly, As at the furthest ken, it equalls but Some petty fly at first, or little moat; Then like Elijahs cloud becomes a hand, And spooning on along before the wind, Encreases still, till proving at the length
When board and board of mighty bulk & strength And being double-sheath'd; so by degrees Now has she gotten wing again, now flyes, The former glorious height; her beamy brow Late in a Cypresse Lanthorn muffled, now Shines as of yore; and every principle Of holinesse, e're-while within her soul, Remissely drooping; rowses now again, And like a Gyant when refresh't with wine, So strongly races, raignes in her so cleere; That even becomes as brave and bold, as e're The wifeOr Deborah see ud. 44. of Lapidoth, her fiery zeal Thus vents it self.— Fame in Proxie. Amal. O how do we reveal Our sexe's many weaknesses, and wounds; Yet so the good Samaritan infunds His soveraign Wine and Oyl; that now, go to, Brings forth the rods, the beasts, the wheels, I, do; Now sear, and cut, and kill; let me be made A lighted torch, aOne bound up in Seare∣cloth, like the staffe of a torch, and in other such ma∣terials, stifned with wax, and fired at the bottom with brush and dry twigs; in La∣tin, Sarmenta. Sarmentarian sad, At Rome's night-revells; do, do, string your whips With Scorpions, Asps, or somewhat that out-strips Their venome far; I, bring the fury-full Busirian horses, the Perillan Bull, Or exquisiter torments; yet my trust, My treasure there is laid, where neither rust, Nor moth, nor theef, nor tyrant, Panar. Glorious dame, Quoth then Panaretus the heavenly flame That on thee so much fortitude confers, Establish it relentlesse, as the bars Of an Imperiall Palace, never time
Inferring higher tryall, of so grim, Precipitate condition; And awake Thou right hand of the Lord, up up, and take Thy former strength again; why dost not thou Turn Moab to thy wash-pot? cast thy shoe Out over Edom? Fast their Princes make In lincks of Iron; and their Nobles break Like Potters vessels. O get up, I say, And bare thine Arm again, as in the day Of Zeb and Oreb, or of those that had Their punishment at Endor, and were made Like dung upon the earth; Was it not thou? Of Yore by whom the Hussits, even a few Derided sillyHusse in the Bohemian, sig∣nifies a Gose. Geese, (though in their head But a blind Ziska) baffled so the spread Presumptuous Eagle, and her severall young, How sharp their pounces? and againe among Our other sung Magnalia, was it not Thy glorious spiriting our pike and shot, That when the SpanishThe Fifth, then Empe∣ror. Charls was whilome grown So high and supercilious, melted down His pertinacy, worsting him to fly By rainy torch-light precipitiously Among the Trentine mountains? Take, O take Thy former strength again, awake, awake, And busk thy self to battail; thou alone, Maugre his furious brand, hast lately slain The gyantCount of Tylle Lieut. Generall to the Duke of Bavria. Tscherclaes, and 'twas thou that didst That Rhodomont theThe Ducall ttle of Wal∣sein. Fridlander, amidst His iron men defeat: O shew thy power, Thou art our fort, our moat, our counter-mure, Our totall confidence;—
Fame in Proxie. Amal. I, I, 'tis he Can baffle even the highest working Sea, Make it submisse and levell; he with whom All things are possible, even Camels come To goe through needles eyes. Fame in Proxie. Panar. Tis he that Blest The youth of our Adolphus, and so dress'd It up with Trophies, when the Polander And mighty RussianOr Duke. Knez, against him were InA complica∣tion of two Enemies a∣gainst a third. Syncretisme, and did so strangelyThey were diseased with so generall a swelling in their throats, that they could nt swallow, and were there∣fore compel∣led to surren∣der. starve That Ottebourgh upon the rapid Narve, Their brideling Ottebourgh, so chanted up Invincible above both shot and sapp And want of ivers; I, 'tis he by whom Our wonderfull Adolphus lately swom Such a triumphant swelling tyde as these. And then again the great atchievances Of Gripswald, and presumptuousMonro's ex∣peditions, part the second, fol 33. Franksort, where The hand of Heaven did with a panick fear So discompose and melt the temper down Of even eight thousand Veterans to run, Quitting their posts; nor should I here makeThe Martial word for haul∣ting and repo∣sing a while upon a March. Alt But likewise hint-in that of Rugenwalt, So to the Swede miraculously handed, And that of Lansburg knottily defended, Though with morass, with fsses, breasts of thunder, And mann'd redundantly, yet humbled under His royall sword. Fame in Proxie. Amal. And as the Lord can thrive. Sparks into Bonfires, this by theVid. Monro. fol. 39. contrive Of a poor Blacksmith.
Fame in Proxie. Panar. I might here declame Of Stetin likewise, Grippenhagen, Dam, And Colberg, with a series of such other Magnifick stories, and at length discover, How the great God of Battels did engage At Lypsigh for him, Lypsigh such a stage Of wrath and ruine, Lypsigh such a dire Contorted Chaos of outragious fire, And smoke and dust, and where the horrid hail Of many a Cannons ramm'd with musket bale So through the serred ranks and bodies drill'd, As soon in surface sanguin'd all the field, Made it a Shambles, even a nauseous heap Of limbs discerpted; where, though Saxon cheap Enough was worsted, yet the day in croope InIn Dutch, the rere. Achter-tocht, immergently brought up AnA successe wrought out against the hayre. Osculanian triumph. Fame in Proxie. Amal. Lypsigh where The Meteor Tscherclaes from his lofty Sphear Was shoulder'd headlong; there to nick his boast Of beating Kings, precipitately cast At royall Swedens feet, and paid in part The wofull wages of his undesert At Magdenburgh; the rest being referr'd To be discharg'd in totall, afterward At theWhere he was slain with a Canonade. Bavarian Leech. Fame in Proxie. Panar. I, I, 'Twas this Celestiall wonder-working Strategus So furiously that far out Jehued here
The son of Nimshy, driving in carreer Even over multitudes of iron-men, (And still to passe in point, for still my pen Must further glasse his sword, and epick out Charabins charging with steel bullets, in use amongst the Protestants in the civill wars of France. His Chass-messes,) 'twas he that having fought This Colophonian field, soon after shook The stubbornOtherwise Bacenis, or Ni∣gra sylv. Duren Walt, in sequell strook It humbly perobsequious; he whose arme, Whose glorious conduct with the former swarm Of vap'ring copses, a convitious deal Of brush and underwood, that fell'd the tall Big-bodied Oaks and Elms, which far and wide Had palliado'd else and fortifi'd Upon the passes, whereas now our Swede Was further timber'd still and turrited So many radiant stories high, as those Likewise of Hall, of superstitious Extensive Erfort, Koninkhoven strong Of Millersort, of Swinsort, with a throng Of other such; and still a story higher Of Wortsbourgh, where the Castle-heads attire, Medusa-like was Drakes, wasDenomin perhaps from Couleuvrin Francois, sig∣nifying Ad∣derlike. Culverins. AndThough of a lesser bore, commanding further then the Cannon, & so named as King of Guns; and equally as mortall as that Serpent. Basilisks, (that so pretend to crowns For extramission;) O the horrid rage Of an insulting Mars, how red the stage, Where fierce Enyo buskin'd is as here, With many aOr Bulwark. Bastion,Case mate in Spanish, a Slaughter-house, ab effectu; where souldiers are covered, firing at loop-holes, Minceus will have it, Quasi casa à matir, tiguriolum ad mactandum. Case-mat,A mount within the walls, which seems derived from Chevalier Francois, and is that ridge of earth that a stradling labourer heaps between his legs with his mat∣tock, seeming, with the heighth of it, to be on horseback. The Latines use Porca for the like ridge between furrowes, calling it the Sowes back Cavalier,
And other such, that as a smaller print, Promiscuous has often rubrick in't, And swelling Capitalls; that so by fits Ascended more the chafing Parapetts. O how alas was all the Castle hill, Now generally Vesuvian, all so full Of thundring Flammi-fers, as if some mad And multiplicite ignis fatuus had Bin trepidating there from pan to pan. How did the horrid negro night unspan Her sanguinary Bandogs? Yet, I say, The mighty Lord of hosts that has his way In storms and whirlwinds, that even threshes Bulls Of Basan so to motes, and oft to nulls. That God of Battles fought this sturdy piece To such submission, that the golden Fleece, The massie treasure long enchanted here By wealthy Plutus, now was beat to bear Our Sweden faith and homage. Fame in Person. But my senses Are suddainly with new occurences Again invaded, and so marvellous The turn of things? that here Panaretus, And the Celestiall Virgin, both are strook Abruptly silent at the staring look And griefe of Apathes, a piece of late So clungly grain'd, no wedge could penetrate No wicked labour; but so pory made, And weeping ripe all over at the sad Late Tragedy, (for still in these extreams) That far beside, beyond the dismall themes
Declam'd already, see where all surrounded With thick and hawsie weather, how his wounded And per-impassion'd spirit racks and rends Him with Convulsion fits; nay which portends Implacably. Fame in Chorus. Alas the Chorus here The deaf'ning Chorus does again so rear It selfe in monstrous Pillars interwooun'd; A thousand DrumsA setting the watch, an uniting many companies in∣to an entire grosse. pirading, might be drown'd. And swallow'd in't; I, such the noise, so fell, As tozes all the Welkin, makes it boyle, Like ointment in a pot: What shall I say, Alas my wings so palpably decay, So fiercely ruffled are, and ravell'd out In the combustion, that I much mis-doubt Some crosse Catastrophè, and by fine force If beaten from my pitch, shall but dispierce For a redundant Elephantine book These petty fragments; O the furious shock! The horrible disgust, no more no more, My perspectives, my wings are now so sore Distracted tugg'd and wearied; all my dresse So puzzell'd is, and shatter'd with the stresse Of many furious Typhons; that unfit To weather out the work,The two chief nwng of∣fers then ex∣tant. I here submit, Descending back to prompt the bustling brothers Nat' Butter, Gallo-Belgicus, and others.
PARERGON. AND now my little Book, my little Birth, I know not how thou cam'st into my womb; Some other agent surely brought thee forth Between the knees; or else thyOr the Se∣cundine, where∣in the child is wrapt, while in the womb. Shilo some A kind of Sepulchrall stone, in short time consu∣ming the body inclosed. Sarcophagus had turn'd, and to thy tomb. If ought within thee be reputed worth The name of square; yet I am but aThis differs from a square by having the angels of it in∣direct: when the side angels are less exten∣ded then the rest? and if shorter, 'tis a fuil, or spin∣dle. Rhomb, But a poor fusil; and must waive the Bayes: Giving to Heaven, to God alone the Praise. G. T. FINIS.
