T881 11950379 51391
THESE For his old Friend Doctor WILD AUTHOUR Of the Humble THANKS, &c. SIR. HAd I believ'd report, that said, These Rhymes by Doctor Wyld were made, I long before this time had sent Some symptoms of our discontent. For since y' have left off being witty, Your humble thanks deserves our pitty. I can't imagine what you'l do, Your Muse turn'd Non-conformist to? And will not easily dispence With the old way of writing sence! She hath receiv'd, if that be true, As much Indulgence then as you. Surely (Dear Sir) you did not pray Since you convers'd with Tychobrah. Jove play'd the wag, and Luna pist, Do these things with Free-Grace consist? Celestial signs serve to express The good man's heav'nly mindedness; There are but twelve of them in Heaven, Yet he'l name one by one eleven; And if you'r not in too much hast, Tis ten to one, he names the last. You had been horribly put to't, If Sagittarius could not shoot: Aquarius and the Smyrna Fleet, I'le swear, a very good conceit. But, Doctor, let us know, why will ye Thus vex your self at William Lilly: Tis true, he could not find it out, That March would bring all this about; But on that day you well might gather That there would be some change of weather: And change of weather in a Nation Portends a kind of alteration. This favour, you do say, did come Fragrant and full of all perfume, Like Eastern Spices (it should seem) This had done rarely in a Theme. To the next Column—let us see How you discourse His MAJESTIE. Where every solemn Epithite Does look like Grace before you eate, Which being said, as rudely you Do take the Boldness to fall to, With Rhymes most reverently sent About Pope Clements Fundament, And Puns that would provoke the hate Of any under Graduate. Peter Non-con (it seems) must pray, And Judas Church must take the Pay. Some angry men would call him rude Ass, That calls the Church of ENGLAND Judas. You'l be no Bishop, nor no Curate, 'Tis onely Minister that you're at. Minister! It sounds methinks, Like Pastor Clark of Bennet Fynkes. These Favours which the King doth heap Upon your head, hath made you leap. And since y' have found your feet again, The Gout's got up into your Brain: If cap'ring be so fine a thing, Pr'ythee come over for the King. Your humble Servant, OBEDIAH. Ill Painters when they make a Sign Either of Talbot or of Swine, To satisfie all Persons rogant, That they might make a Hog, or Dog on't; Do never think it any shame To underwrite the Creatures Name. WILD made some Verses you must know ITER BOREALE is below. LONDON, Printed for T. D. 1672.
