T964 R2921 13447651 99589
An Historical and Geographical Account OF THE PROVINCE and COUNTRY OF PENSILVANIA; AND OF West-New-Jersey IN AMERICA. The Richness of the Soil, the Sweetness of the Situation. the Wholesomness of the Air, the Navigable Rivers, and others, the prodigious Encrease of Corn, the flourishing Condition of the City of Philadelphia, with the stately Buildings, and other Improvements there. The strange Creatures, as Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and Fowls, with the several sorts of Minerals, Purging Waters, and Stones, lately discovered. The Natives, Aborogines, their Lan∣guage, Religion, Laws, and Customs; The first Planters, the Dutch, Sweeds, and English, with the number of its Inhabitants; As also a Touch upon George Keith's New Religion, in his second Change since he left the QUAKERS With a Map of both Countries. By GABRIEL THOMAS, who resided there about Fifteen Years. London, Printed for, and Sold by A. Baldwin, at the Oxon Arms in Warwick-Lane, 1698.
THE DEDICATION. Friend William Penn, I Here present Thee with a suc∣cinct (yet compleat) Account of the late. Improvement, and Present State of the Noble Pro∣vince, and Fertile Countrey of Pen∣silvania; with the strange things that have been found there, as the Salamander-Stone, and several others, mentioned in this Treatise; disco∣vered since thou camest out of those Parts. I desire Thee to excuse me for addressing to Thee, such a Plain and Peasant-like Piece; yet however homely or coarse it may appear, Thou wilt find here a true and genuine
Description of that (once) obscure, tho' (now) glorious Place. So con∣sidering how generous and candid a Man Thou art, I know thou wilt bear with my weak and imperfect Performance, and accept of my good Meaning and kind Intention, which may encourage me, in time to come, to add some more Memoirs to this rough Essay of mine. Being unwilling to tire Thee with any long or tedious Epistle, I take my Leave of Thee, (Most Noble and Excellent Governor) and am Thy hearty Well-wisher, ever ready to serve Thee on all Occasions, (in the way of Truth,) Gabriel Thomas.
THE PREFACE. Reader, THere never having been any fair or full Account given to the World of Pen∣silvania, I thought the Cu∣rious wou'd be gratified with an ample Description thereof. For tho' this Country has made little Noise in Story, or taken up but small room in Maps, yet thus much with great Justice may be said of it, that notwithstanding the
Difficulties and Inconvenien∣cie the First English Col∣lonies met with before they were well settled there, yet the mighty Improvements, Additions, and Advantages that have been made lately there, are well worth Communicating to the Publick, and I am sensible they will be well receiv'd. The late Tedious, Hazard∣ous, and Expensive War (in which England, in Conjunction with the Allies was so deeply en∣gag'd) was without doubt no small Bar or Obstacle to the Flourishing of this New Country. The great Discouragements the Traders thither lay under, (to∣gether
with the frequent Capture of their Ships out and home, cou'd not chuse but baulk them in their honest Endeavours, which (now Peace is restor'd) they may pur∣sue with greater Security and Satisfaction. Nor is there the least question or doubt to be made, but this No∣ble Spot of Earth will thrive ex∣ceedingly, and that in a short time too, and advance considerably to the mighty Advantage of the Pre∣sent and Future Propietors, who have, and are willing to give all due Encouragement to any that shall Transport themselves thi∣ther.
I cou'd say much here in Praise of that sweet Tract of Land, but having spoken so largely and particularly thereof in the Book it self, I shall for∣bear the least mention in this place. Nor will I Anticipate or forestal thee, by presenting thee here with what thou wilt find there, with the greater Sa∣tisfaction. And so I bid thee heartily farewel. Gab. Thomas.
map of east Pennsylvania and west New Jersey PENNSYLVANIA and WEST JERS
THE HISTORY OF Pensilvania, &c. PEnsilvania lies between the Latitude of Forty and Forty five Degrees: West-Jersey on the East, Virgi∣nia on the West, Mary-Land South, and Canada on the North. In Length three hundred, and in Breadth one hundred and eighty Miles. The Natives, or first Inhabi∣tants of this Country in their Ori∣ginal, are suppos'd by most Peo∣ple to have been of the Ten Scat∣tered Tribes, for they resemble the Jews very much in the Make
of their Persons, and Tincture of their Complexions: They observe New Moons, they offer their first Fruits to a Maneto, or suppos'd Dei∣ty, whereof they have two, one, as they fansie, above (good,) ano∣ther below (bad,) and have a kind of Feast of Tabernacles, laying their Altars upon Twelve Stones, ob∣serve a sort of Mourning twelve Months, Customs of Women, and many other Rites to be toucht (here) rather than dwelt upon, be∣cause they shall be handled more at large at the latter end of this Treatise. They are very Charitable to one another, the Lame and the Blind (amongst them) living as well as the best; they are also very kind and obliging to the Christians. The next that came there, were the Dutch, (who call'd the Country New Neitherland) be∣tween Fifty and Sixty Years a∣go,
and were the first Planters in those Parts; but they made lit∣tle or no Improvement, (apply∣ing themselves wholly to Tra∣fique in Skins and Furs, which the Indians or Natives furnish'd them with, and which they Bar∣ter'd for Rum, Strong Liquors, and Sugar, with others, thereby gaining great Profit) till near the time of the Wars between Eng∣land and Them, about Thirty or Forty Years ago. Soon after them came the Swedes and Fins, who apply'd themselves to Husbandry, and were the first Christian People that made any considerable Im∣provement there. There were some Disputes be∣tween these two Nations some Years, the Dutch looking upon the Swedes as Intruders upon their Purchase and Possession, which was absolutely terminat∣ed in the Surrender made by John
Rizeing, the Swedes Governour, to Peter Styreant, Governour for the Dutch, in 1655. In the Holland War about the Year 1665. Sir Robert Carr took the Country from the Dutch for the English, and left his Cousin, Cap∣tain Carr, Governor of that place; but in a short time after, the Dutch re-took the Country from the English, and kept it in their Possession till the Peace was con∣cluded between the English and them, when the Dutch Surren∣dered that Country with East and West-Jersey, New-York, (with the whole Countries belonging to that Government) to the English again. But it remain'd with ve∣ry little Impovement till the Year 1681. in which William Penn Esq; had the Country given him by King Charles the Second, in lieu of Money that was due to (and signal Service done by) his Father, Sir William Penn, and from him bore the Name of Pen∣silvania.
Since that time, the Industri∣ous (nay Indefatigable) Inhabi∣tants have built a Noble and Beau∣tiful City, and called it Philadel∣phia, which contains above two thousand Houses, all Inhabited; and most of them Stately, and of Brick, generally three Stories high, after the Mode in London, and as many several Families in each. There are very many Lanes and Alleys, as first, Hut∣tons-Lane, Morris-Lane, Jones's-Lane, wherein are very good Buildings; Shorters-Alley, Yowers-Lane, Wallers-Alley, Turners-Lane, Sikes-Alley, and Flowers-Alley. All these Alleys and Lanes extend from the Front Street to the Second-Street. There is another Alley in the Second Street, called Carters-Alley. There are also besides these Alleys and Lanes, several fine Squares and Courts within this Magnificent City, (for so I may justly call it.) As for the particular Names of the several
Streets contained therein, the Principal are as follows, viz. Wal∣nut-Street, Vine-Street, Mulberry-Street, Chesnut-Street, Sassafras-Street, taking their Names from the abundance of those Trees that formerly grew there; High-Street, Broad-Street, Delaware-Street, Front-Street, with several of less Note, too tedious to insert here. It hath in it Three Fairs every Year, and Two Markets every Week. They kill above Twenty Fat Bullocks every Week, in the hottest time in Summer, for their present spending in that City, besides many Sheep, Calves, and Hogs. This City is Situated between Schoolkill-River and the great River Delaware, which derives its Name from Captain Delaware, who came there pretty early: Ships of Two or Three Hundred Tuns may come up to this City, by either of these two Rivers. Moreover, in this Province are Four Great Market-Towns, viz.
Chester, the German Town, New-Castle, and Lewis-Town, which are mightily Enlarged in this latter Improvement. Between these Towns, the Water-Men con∣stantly Ply their Wherries; like∣wise all those Towns have Fairs kept in them, besides there are several Country Villages, viz. Dublin, Harford, Merioneth, and Radnor in Cumbry; all which Towns, Villages and Rivers, took their Names from the several Countries whence the present In∣habitants came. The Air here is very delicate, pleasant, and wholesom; the Heavens serene, rarely overcast, bearing mighty resemblance to the better part of France; after Rain they have commonly a ve∣ry clear Sky, the Climate is some∣thing Colder in the depth of Winter, and Hotter in the height of Summer; (the cause of which is its being a Main Land or Continent; the Days also are
two Hours longer in the shortest Day in Winter, and shorter by two Hours in the longest Day of Summer) than here in Eng∣land, which makes the Fruit so good, and the Earth so fertil. The Corn-Harvest is ended be∣fore the middle of July, and most Years they have commonly be∣tween Twenty and Thirty Bushels of Wheat for every one they Sow. Their Ground is harrowed with Wooden Tyn∣ed Harrows, twice over in a place is sufficient; twice mend∣ing of their Plow-Irons in a Years time will serve. Their Horses commonly go without being shod; two Men may clear be∣tween Twenty and Thirty A∣cres of Land in one Year, fit for the Plough, in which Oxen are chiefly us'd, though Horses are not wanting, and of them Good and well shap'd. A Cart or a Wain may go through the mid∣dle of the Woods, between the
Trees without getting any da∣mage, and of such Land in a convenient place, the Purchase will cost between Ten and Fif∣teen Pounds for a Hundred Acres. * Here is much Meadow Ground. Poor People both Men and Wo∣men, will get near three times more Wages for their Labour in this Country, than they can earn either in England or Wales. What is Inhabited of this Country, is divided into Six Counties, though there is not the Twentieth Part of it, yet Peopled by the Christians: It hath in it several Navigable Rivers for Shipping to come in, besides the Capital Delaware, wherein a Ship of Two Hundred Tuns may Sail Two Hundred Miles up. There are also several other small Rivers, in number hardly Cre∣dible; these, as the Brooks, have for the most part gravelly and hard Bottoms; and it is sup∣pos'd that there are many other further up in the Country, which
are not yet discover'd; the Names of the aforesaid Rivers, are, Hoorkill-River, alias Lewis River, which runs up to Lewis Town, the chiefest in Sussex Coun∣ty; Cedar-River, Muskmellon-Ri∣ver, all taking their Names from the great plenty of these things growing there abouts; Mother-kill alias Dover-River, St. Jones's alias Cranbrook-River, where one John Curtice lives, who hath Three Hundred Head of Neat Beasts, besides great Numbers of Hogs, Horses, and Sheep; Great Duck-River, Little Duck-River, Black-Bird-River, these also took their Original Names from the great Numbers of those Fowls which are found there in vast quan∣tities; Apequinemy-River, where their Goods come to be Carted over to Mary-Land. St. George's-River, Christen-River, Brandy-Wine-River, Ʋpland alias Chester-River, which runs by Chester-Town, being the Shire or Coun∣ty-Town; Schoolkill-River, Frank∣ford-River,
near which, Arthur Cook hath a most Stately Brick-House; and Nishamany-River, where Judge Growden hath a ve∣ry Noble and Fine House, very pleasantly Situated, and likewise a Famous Orchard adjoyn∣ing to it, wherein are contain'd above a Thousand Apple Trees of various sorts; likewise there is the famous Derby-River, which comes down from the Cumbry by Derby-Town, wherein are se∣veral Mills, viz. Fulling-Mills, Corn-Mills, &c. There is curious Building-Stone and Paving-Stone, also Tile-Stone, with which latter, Governor Penn covered his Great and Stately Pile, which he call'd Pennsbury-House, the Name it still retains. There is likewise Iron-Stone or Oar, (lately found) which far ex∣ceeds that in England, being Richer and less Drossy; some Pre∣parations have been made to carry on an Iron-Work: There
is also very good Lime-Stone in great plenty, and cheap, of great use in Buildings, and also in Manu∣ring Land, (if there were occa∣sion) but Nature has made that of it self sufficiently Fruitful; besides here are Load-Stones, Ising-Glass, and (that Wonder of Stones) the Salamander-Stone, found near Brandy-Wine-River, having Cotton in Veins within it, which will not consume in the Fire, though held there a long time. As to Minerals, or Metals, there is very good Copper, far exceeding ours in England, be∣ing much Finer, and of a more glorious Colour. Not two Mile from the Metropolis, are also Purg∣ing Mineral-Waters, that pass both by Siege and Ʋrine, all out as good as Epsom: And I have rea∣son to believe, there are good Coals also, for I observ'd, the Runs of Water have the same Colour as that which pro∣ceeds from the Coal-Mines in Wales.
Here is curious Diversion in Hunting, Fishing, and Fowling, especially upon that Great and Famous River Suskahanah, which runs down quite through the heart of the Country to Mary-Land, where it makes the Head of Chesepeck-Bay, in which place there are an Infinite Number of Sea and Land Fowl, of most sorts, viz. Swans, Ducks, Teal, (which two are the most Grate∣ful and most Delicious in the World) Geese, Divers, Brands, Snipe, Curlew; as also Eagles, Tur∣kies (of Forty or Fifty Pound Weight) Pheasants, Partridges, Pidgeons, Heath-Birds, Black-Birds; and that Strange and Re∣markable Fowl, call'd. (in these Parts) the Mocking-Bird, that Imitates all sorts of Birds in their various Notes. And for Fish, there are prodigious quan∣tities of most sorts, viz. Shadds Cats-Heads, Sheeps-Heads, Her∣rings, Smelts, Roach, Eels, Perch.
As also the large sort of Fish, as Whales (of which a great deal of Oyl is made) Salmon, Trout, Sturgeon, Rock, Oysters, (some six Inches long) Crabs, Cockles, (some as big as Stewing Oysters of which are made a Choice Soupe or Broth) Canok and Mussels, with many other sorts of Fish, which would be too tedious to insert. There are several sorts of wild Beasts of great Profit, and good Food; viz. Panthers, Woolves, Fither, Deer, Beaver, Otter, Hares, Musk-Rats, Minks, Wild-Cats, Foxes, Rackoons, Rabits, and that strange Creature, the Possam, she having a false Belly to swal∣low her Young ones, by which means she preserveth them from danger, when any thing comes to disturb them. There are also Bears some Wolves, are pretty well destroy'd by the Indians, for the sake of the Reward gi∣ven them by the Christians for
that Service. Here is also that Re∣markable Creature the Flying-Squirrel, having a kind of Skinny Wings, almost like those of the Batt, though it hath the like Hair and Colour of the Com∣mon Squirrel, but is much less in Bodily Substance; I have (my self) seen it fly from one Tree to another in the Woods, but how long it can maintain its Flight is not yet exactly known. There are in the Woods abun∣dance of Red Deer (vulgarly call∣ed Stags) for I have bought of the Indians a whole Buck, (both Skin and Carcass) for two Gills of Gunpowder. Excellent Food, most delicious, far exceeding that in Europe, in the Opinion of most that are Nice and Curious People. There are vast Numbers of other Wild Creatures, as Elks, Bufa∣los, &c. all which as well Beasts, Fowl, and Fish, are free and common to any Person who can shoot or take them, without
any lett, hinderance or Opposi∣tion whatsoever. There are among other vari∣ous sorts of Frogs, the Bull-Frog, which makes a roaring noise, hard∣ly to be distinguished from that well known of the Beast, from whom it takes its Name: There is another sort of Frog that crawls up to the tops of Trees, there seeming to imitate the Notes of several Birds, with many other strange and various Creatures, which would take up too much room here to mention. Next, I shall proceed to in∣stance in the several sorts of Wild Fruits, as excellent Grapes, Red, Black, White, Muscadel, and Fox, which upon frequent Experience have produc'd Choice Wine, being daily Cultivated by skil∣ful Vinerons; they will in a short space of time, have very good Liquor of their own, and some to supply their Neighbours, to
their great advantage; as these Wines are more pure, so much more wholsom; the Brewing Trade of Sophisticating and Adulterating of Wines, as in England, Holland (especially) and in some other places not being known there yet, nor in all pro∣bability will it in many Years, through a natural Probity so fixed and implanted in the In∣habitants, and (I hope) like to continue. Wallnuts, Chesnuts, Filberts, Heckery-Nuts, Hartleber∣ries, Mlberries, (white and black) Rasberries, Strawberries, Cramber∣ries, Plumbs of several sorts, and many other Wild Fruits, in great plenty, which are common and free for any to gather; to particularize the Names of them all, would take up too much time; tire, not gratifie the Reader, and be inconsistent with the in∣tended Brevity of this little Vo∣lume.
The common Planting Fruit-Trees, are Apples, which from a Kernel (without Inoculating) will shoot up to be a large Tree, and produce very delicious, large, and pleasant Fruit, of which much excellent Cyder is made, in taste resembling that in England press'd from Pippins and Pear∣mains, sold commonly for be∣tween Ten and Fifteen Shillings per Barrel. Pears, Peaches, &c. of which they distil a Liquor much like the taste of Rumm, or Brandy, which they Yearly make in great quantities: There are Quinces, Cherries, Goosberries, Currants, Squashes, Pumpkins, Water-Mellons, Muskmellons, and other Fruits in great Numbers, which seldom fail of yielding great plenty. There are also many curious and excellent Phy∣sical Wild Herbs, Roots, and Drugs of great Vertue, and very sana∣tive, as the Sassafras, and Sarsa∣parilla, so much us'd in Diet-Drinks
for the Cure of the Ve∣neral Disease, which makes the Indians by a right application of them, as able Doctors and Sur∣geons as any in Europe, perform∣ing celebrated Cures therewith, and by the use of some particu∣lar Plants only, find Remedy in all Swellings, Burnings, Cuts, &c. There grows also in great plenty the Black Snake-Root, (fam'd for its sometimes preserving, but of∣ten curing the Plague, being in∣fused only in Wine, Brandy or Rumm) Rattle-Snake-Root, Poke-Root, called in England Jallop, with several other beneficial Herbs, Plants and Roots, which Physicians have approved of, far exceeding in Nature and Vertue, those of other Countries. The Names of the Counties are as followeth; First, Phila∣delphia County; Second, Bucks County; Third, Chester County; Fourth, New-Castle County; Fifth, Kent County; Sixth, Sussex Coun∣ty.
The chiefest and most com∣modious places for raising To∣bacco, as also for Breeding and Improving all sorts of Cattle, are the Counties of Kent and New-Castle; the other chiefly de∣pend upon Raising and Improv∣ing English Grain, of which they have a prodigious Encrease, which I have particularly in∣stanced in the beginning of this Book, both as to their Quality and Quantity: All those Coun∣ties also very much abound in all sorts of Cattle, both small and great, for the Use and Service of Man. Their sorts of Grain are, Wheat, Rye, Pease, Oates, Barley, Buck-Wheat, Rice, Indian-Corn, Indian-Pease, and Beans, with great quantities of Hemp and Flax; as also several sorts of eating Roots, as Turnips, Potatoes, Carrats, Pars∣nips, &c. all which are produc'd Yearly in greater quantities than in England, those Roots being
much larger, and altogether as sweet, if not more delicious; Cucumbers, Coshaws, Artichokes, with many others; most sorts of Saladings, besides what grows naturally Wild in the Country, and that in great plenty also, as Mustard, Rue, Sage, Mint, Tanzy, Wormwood, Penny-Royal and Pur∣slain, and most of the Herbs and Roots found in the Gardens in England. There are several Husband-Men, who sow Yearly between Seventy and Eighty Acres of Wheat each, besides Bar∣ley, Oates, Rye, Pease, Beans, and other Grain. They have commonly Two Harvests in the Year; First, of English Wheat, and next of Buck, (or French) Wheat. They have great Stocks both of Hogs and Horses, kept in the Woods, out of which, I saw a Hog kill'd, of about a Year old, which weigh'd Two Hundred weight; whose Flesh is much sweeter, and even
more luscious than that in Eng∣land, because they feed and fat∣ten on the rich (though wild) Fruits, besides those fatned at home by Peaches, Cherries and Apples. Their Horses are very hardy, insomuch that being ve∣ry hot with riding or other∣wise, they are turn'd out into the Woods at the same Instant, and yet receive no harm; some Farmers have Forty, some Sixty, and from that Number to Two or Three Hundred Head of Cattle: Their Oxen usually weigh Two Hundred Pounds a Quar∣ter. They are commonly fatter of Flesh, and yield more Tal∣low (by feeding only on Grass) than the Cattle in England. And for Sheep, they have consi∣derable Numbers which are ge∣nerally free from those infectious Diseases which are incident to those Creatures in England, as the Rot, Scab, or Maggots; They commonly bring forth two Lambs at once, some twise in one
Year, and the Wooll is very fine, and thick, and also very white. Bees thrive and multiply ex∣ceedingly in those Parts, the Sweeds often get great store of them in the Woods, where they are free for any Body. Honey (and choice too) is sold in the Capital City for Five Pence per Pound. Wax is also plentiful, cheap, and a considerable Com∣merce. Tame Fowls, as Chickens, Hens, Geese, Ducks, Turkeys, &c. are large, and very plentiful all over this Countrey. And now for their Lots and Lands in City and Countrey, in their great Advancement since they were first laid out, which was within the compass of about Twelve Years, that which might have been bought for Fifteen or Eighteen Shillings, is now sold for Fourscore Pounds in ready Silver; and some other Lots, that might have been then
Purchased for Three Pounds, within the space of Two Years, were sold for a Hundred Pounds a piece, and likewise some Land that lies near the City, that Sixteen Years ago might have been Purchas'd for Six or Eight Pounds the Hundred Acres, can∣not now be bought under One Hundred and Fifty, or Two Hundred Pounds. Now the true Reason why this Fruitful Countrey and Flo∣rishing City advance so consi∣derably in the Purchase of Lands both in the one and the other, is their great and extended Traf∣fique and Commerce both by Sea and Land, viz. to New-York, New-England, Virginia, Mary-Land, Carolina, Jamaica, Barba∣does, Nevis, Monserat, Antego, St. Cristophers, Barmudoes, New-Found-Land, Maderas, Saltetudeous, and Old-England; besides several o∣ther places. Their Merchandize chiefly consists in Horses, Pipe-Staves,
Pork and Beef Salted and Barrelled up, Bread, and Flower, all sorts of Grain, Pease, Beans, Skins, Furs, Tobacco, or t-Ashes, Wax, &c. which are Barter'd for Rumm, Sugar, Mo∣lasses, Silver, Negroes, Salt, Wine, Linen, Houshold-Goods, &c. However there still remain Lots of Land both in the afore∣said City and Country, that a∣ny may Purchase almost as cheap as they could at the first Laying out or Parcelling of either City or Country; which is, (in the Judgment of most People) the likeliest to turn to account to those that lay their Money out upon it, and in a shorter time than the aforementioned Lots and Lands that are already im∣proved, and for several Reasons. In the first place, the Countrey is now well inhabited by the Christians, who have great Stocks of all sorts of Cattle, that encrease extraordinarily, and up∣on
that account they are oblig'd to go farther up into the Coun∣trey, because there is the chiefest and best place for their Stocks, and for them that go back into the Countrey, they get the richest Land, for the best lies thereabouts. Secondly, Farther into the Countrey is the Principal Place to Trade with the Indians for all sorts of Pelt, as Skins and Furs, and also Fat Venison, of whom People may Purchase cheaper by three Parts in four than they can at the City of Philadelphia. Thirdly, Backwards in the Countrey lies the Mines where is Copper and Iron, besides other Metals, and Minerals, of which there is some Improvement made already in order to bring them, to greater Perfection; and that will be a means to erect more Inland Market-Towns,
which exceedingly promote Traffick. Fourthly, and lastly, Because the Countrey at the first, lay∣ing out, was void of Inhabi∣tants (except the Heathens, or very few Christians not worth naming) and not many People caring to abandon a quiet and easie (at least tolerable) Life in their Native Countrey (usually the most agreeable to all Man∣kind) to seek out a new hazard∣ous, and careful one in a Fo∣reign Wilderness or Desart Coun∣trey, wholly destitute of Chri∣stian Inhabitants, and even to arrive at which, they must pass over a vast Ocean, expos'd to some Dangers, and not a few In∣conveniencies: But now all those Cares, Fears and Hazards are vanished, for the Countrey is pretty well Peopled, and very much Improv'd, and will be more every Day, now the Dove
is return'd with the Olive-branch of Peace in her Mouth. I must needs say, even the present Encouragements are ve∣ry great and inviting, for Poor People (both Men and Women) of all kinds, can here get three times the Wages for their La∣bour they can in England or Wales. I shall instance in a few, which may serve; nay, and will hold in all the rest. The first was a Black-Smith, (my next Neighbour) who himself and one Negro Man he had, got Fifty Shillings in one Day, by working up a Hundred Pound Weight of Iron, which at Six Pence per Pound (and that is the common Price in that Coun∣trey) amounts to that Summ. And for Carpenters, both House and Ship, Brick-layers, Ma∣sons, either of these Trades-Men,
will get between Five and Six Shillings every Day constantly. As to Journey-Men Shooe-Makers, they have Two Shillings per Pair both for Men and Womens Shooes: And Journey-Men Tay∣lors have Twelve Shillings per Week and their Diet. Sawyers get between Six and Seven Shil∣lings the Hundred for Cutting of Pine-Boards. And for Wea∣vers, they have Ten or Twelve Pence the Yard for Weaving of that which is little more than half a Yard in breadth. Wooll-Combers, have for combing Twelve Pence per Pound. Pot∣ters have Sixteen Pence for an Earthen Pot which may be bought in England for Four Pence. Tanners, may buy their Hides green for Three Half Pence per Pound, and sell their Leather for Twelve Pence per Pound. And Curriers have Three Shillings and Four Pence per Hide for Dressing it; they buy their Oyl at Twenty
Pence per Gallon. Brick-Makers have Twenty Shillings per Thou∣sand for their Bricks at the Kiln. Felt-Makers will have for their Hats Seven Shillings a piece, such as may be bought in Eng∣land for Two Shillings a piece; yet they buy their Wooll com∣monly for Twelve or Fifteen Pence per Pound. And as to the Glaziers, they will have Five Pence a Quarry for their Glass. The Rule for the Coo∣pers I have almost forgot; but this I can affirm of some who went from Bristol, (as their Neighbours report) that could hardly get their Livelihoods there, are now reckon'd in Pen∣silvania, by a modest Computa∣tion to be worth some Hun∣dreds, (if not Thousands) of Pounds. The Bakers make as White Bread as any in London, and as for their Rule, it is the same in all Parts of the World that I have been in. The But∣chers for killing a Beast, have Five
Shillings and their Diet; and they may buy a good fat large Cow for Three Pounds, or there∣abouts. The Brewers fell such Beer as is equal in Strength to that in London, half Ale and half Stout for Fifteen Shillings per Barrel; and their Beer hath a better Name, that is, is in more esteem than English Beer in Bar∣badoes, and is sold for a higher Price there. And for Silver-Smiths, they have between Half a Crown and Three Shillings an Ounce for working their Silver, and for Gold equivalent. Pla∣sterers have commonly Eighteen Pence per Yard for Plastering. Last-Makers have Sixteen Shil∣lings per dozen for their Lasts. And Heel-Makers have Two Shillings a dozen for their Heels. Wheel and Mill-Wrights, Joyners, Brasiers, Pewterers, Dyers, Fullers, Comb-Makers, Wyer-Drawers, Cage-Makers, Card-Makers, Painters, Cutlers, Rope-Makers, Carvers, Block-Makers, Turners, Button-Makers,
Hair and Wood Sieve-Makers, Bodies-Makers, Gun-Smiths, Lock-Smiths, Nailers, File-Cuters, Skinners, Furriers, Glovers, Patten-Makers, Watch-Makers, Clock-Makers, Sadlers, Coller-Makers, Barbers, Printers, Book-Binders, and all other Trades-Men, their Gains and Wages are about the same proportion as the fore∣mentioned Trades in their Ad∣vancements, as to what they have in England. Of Lawyers and Physicians I shall say nothing, because this Countrey is very Peaceable and Healty; long may it so continue and never have occasion for the Tongue of the one, nor the Pen of the other, both equally destruc∣tive to Mens Estates and Lives; besides forsooth, they, Hang-Man like, have a License to Mur∣der and make Mischief. Labour∣ing-Men have commonly here, between 14 and 15 Pounds a Year, and their Meat, Drink,
Washing and Lodging; and by the Day their Wages is general∣ly between Eighteen Pence and Half a Crown, and Diet also; But in Harvest they have usual∣ly between Three and Four Shil∣ling each Day, and Diet. The Maid Servants Wages is common∣ly betwixt Six and Ten Pounds per Annum, with very good Accommodation. And for the Women who get their Livelihood by their own Industry, their Labour is very dear, for I can buy in London a Cheese-Cake for Two Pence, bigger than theirs at that price, when at the same time their Milk is as cheap as we can buy it in London, and their Flour cheaper by one half. Corn and Flesh, and what else serves Man for Drink, Food and Rayment, is much cheaper here than in England, or elsewhere; but the chief rea∣son why Wages of Servants of all sorts is much higher here
than there, arises from the great Fertility and Produce of the Place; besides, if these large Stipends were refused them, they would quickly set up for themselves, for they can have Provision very cheap, and Land for a very small matter, or next to nothing in comparison of the Purchace of Lands in England; and the Farmers there, can bet∣ter afford to give that great Wages than the Farmers in Eng∣land can, for several Reasons ve∣ry obvious. As First, their Land costs them (as I said but just now) little or nothing in comparison, of which the Farmers com∣monly will get twice the en∣crease of Corn for every Bu∣shel they sow, that the Farmers in England can from the richest Land they have.
In the Second place, they have constantly good price for their Corn, by reason of the great and quick vent into Barbadoes and other Islands; through which means Silver is become more plentiful than here in Eng∣land, considering the Number of People, and that causes a quick Trade for both Corn and Cattle; and that is the reason that Corn differs now from the Price formerly, else it would be at half the Price it was at then; for a Brother of mine (to my own particular knowledge) sold within the compass of one Week, about One Hundred and Twen∣ty fat Beasts, most of them good handsom large Oxen. Thirdly, They pay no Tithes, and their Taxes are inconsidera∣ble; the Place is free for all Per∣suasions, in a Sober and Civil way; for the Church of England and the Quakers bear equal Share
in the Government. They live Friendly and Well together; there is no Persecution for Re∣ligion, nor ever like to be; 'tis this that knocks all Commerce on the Head, together with high Imposts, strict Laws, and cramp∣ing Orders. Before I end this Paragraph, I shall add another Reason why Womens Wages are so exorbitant; they are not yet very numerous, which makes them stand upon high Terms for their several Services, in Sempstering, Washing, Spinning, Knitting, Sewing, and in all the other parts of their Imploy∣ments; for they have for Spin∣ning either Worsted or Linen, Two Shillings a Pound, and commonly for Knitting a very Course pair of Yarn Stockings, they have half a Crown a pair; moreover they are usually Mar∣ry'd before they are Twenty Years of Age, and when once in that Noose, are for the most part a little uneasie, and make
their Husbands so too, till they procure them a Maid Servant to bear the burden of the Work, as also in some measure to wait on them too. It is now time to return to the City of Brotherly-Love (for so much the Greek Word or Name Philadelphia imports) which though at present so ob∣scure, that neither the Map-Makers, nor Geographers have ta∣ken the least notice of her, tho she far exceeds her Name∣sake of Lydia, Thirty German Miles from Smyrna. (having above Two Thousand Noble Houses for her Five Hundred Ordinary) or Celisia, or Coelesyria; yet in a very short space of time she will; in all probability, make a a fine Figure in the World, and be a most Celebrated Emporeum. Here is lately built a Noble Town-House or Guild-Hall, also a Handsom Market-House, and a convenient Prison. The Num∣ber of Christians both Old and
Young Inhabiting in that Coun∣trey, are by a Modest Compu∣tation, adjudged to amount to above Twenty Thousand. The Laws of this Countrey, are the same with those in Eng∣land; our Constitution being on the same Foot: Many Disputes and Differences are determined and composed by Arbitration; and all Causes are decided with great Care and Expedition, be∣ing concluded (generally) at fur∣thest at the Second Court, unless they happen to be very Nice and Difficult Cases; under Forty Shil∣lings any one Justice of the Peace has Power to Try the Cause. Thieves of all sorts, are oblig'd to restore four fold after they have been Whipt and Impri∣son'd, according to the Nature of their Crime; and if they be not of Ability to restore four fold, they must be in Servitude till 'tis satisfied. They have Curious Wharfs, as also several
large and fine Timber-Yards, both at Philadelphia, and New-Castle, especially at the Metropo∣lis, before Robert Turner's Great and Famous House, where are built Ships of considerable Burthen; they Cart their Goods from that Wharf into the City of Philadelphia, under an Arch, over which part of the Street is built, which is called Chesnut-Street-Wharf, besides other Wharfs, as High-Street Wharf, Mulberry-Street Wharf, and Vine-Sreet Wharf, and all those are Com∣mon Wharfs; and likewise there are very pleasant Stairs, as Trus and Carpenter-Stairs, besides several others. There are above Thirty Carts belonging to that City, Four or Five Horses to each. There is like∣wise a very convenient Wharf called Carpenter's Wharf, which hath a fine necessary Crain be∣longing to it, with suitable Granaries, and Store-Houses. A Ship of Two Hundred Tun may
load and unload by the side of it, and there are other Wharfs (with Magazines and Ware-Houses) which front the City all along the River, as also a Curious and Commodious Dock with a Draw-Bridge to it, for the convenient Reception of Vessels; where have been built some Ships of Two or Three Hundred Tuns each: They have very Stately Oaks to build Ships with, some of which are between Fifty and Sixty Foot long, and clear from Knots, being very straight and well Grain'd. In this famous City of Philadelphia there are se∣veral Rope-Makers, who have large and curious Rope-Walks e∣specially one Joseph Wilcox. Al∣so Three or Four Spacious Malt-Houses, as many large Brew-Houses, and many handsom Bake-Houses for Publick Use. In the said City are several good Schools of Learning for Youth, in order to the Attain∣ment
of Arts and Sciences, as al∣so Reading, Writing, &c. Here is to be had on any Day in the Week, Tarts, Pies, Cakes, &c. We have also several Cooks-Shops, both Roasting and Boyling, as in the City of London; Bread, Beer, Beef, and Pork, are sold at any time much cheaper than in England (which arises from their Plenty) our Wheat is very white and clear from Tares, making as good and white Bread as any in Europe. Happy Blessings, for which we owe the highest Grati∣tude to our Plentiful Provider, the great Creator of Heaven and Earth. The Water-Mills far ex∣ceed those in England, both for quickness and grinding good Meal, their being great choice of good Timber, and earlier Corn than in the aforesaid Place, they are made by one Peter Deal, a Fa∣mous and Ingenious Workman, especially for inventing such like Machines.
All sorts of very good Paper are made in the German-Town; as also very fine German Linen, such as no Person of Quality need be asham'd to wear; and in several places they make very good Druggets, Crapes, Camblets, and Serges, besides other Woollen Cloathes, the Manufacture of all which daily improves: And in most parts of the Countrey there are many Curious and Spacious Buildings, which several of the Gentry have erected for their Country-Houses. As for the Fruit-Trees they Plant, they ar∣rive at such Perfection, that they bear in a little more than half the time that they com∣monly do in England. The Christian Children born here are generally well-favoured, and Beautiful to behold; I ne∣ver knew any come into the World with the least blemish on any part of its Body, being in the general, observ'd to be better Natur'd, Milder, and more ten∣der
Hearted than those born in England. There are very fine and de∣lightful Gardens and Orchards, in most parts of this Countrey; but Edward Shippey (who lives near the Capital City) has an Orchard and Gardens adjoyning to his Great House that equa∣lizes (if not exceeds) any I have ever seen, having a very famous and pleasant Summer-House e∣rected in the middle of his ex∣traordinary fine and large Gar∣den abounding with Tulips, Pinks, Carnations, Roses, (of several sorts) Lilies, not to mention those that grow wild in the Fields. Reader, what I have here written, is not a Fiction, Flam, Whim, or any sinister Design, either to impose upon the Ignorant, or Credulous, or to curry Favour with the Rich and Mighty, but in meer Pity and
pure Compassion to the Num∣bers of Poor Labouring Men, Women, and Children in Eng∣land, half starv'd, visible in their meagre looks, that are continual∣ly wandering up and down looking for Employment with∣out finding any, who here need not lie idle a moment, nor want due Encouragement or Reward for their Work, much less Va∣gabond or Drone it about. Here are no Beggars to be seen (it is a Shame and Disgrace to the State that there are so many in England) nor indeed have any here the least Occasion or Temp∣tation to take up that Scandalous Lazy Life. Jealousie among Men is here very rare, and Barrenness among Women hardly to be heard of, nor are old Maids to be met with; for all commonly Marry before they are Twenty Years of Age, and seldom any young
Married Woman but hath a Child in her Belly, or one upon her Lap. What I have deliver'd con∣cerning this Province, is indis∣putably true, I was an Eye-Wit∣ness to it all, for I went in the first Ship that was bound from England for that Countrey, since it received the Name of Pensil∣vania, which was in the Year 1681. The Ship's Name was the John and Sarah of London, Henry Smith Commander. I have declin'd giving any Ac∣count of several things which I have only heard others speak of, because I did not see them my self, for I never held that way infallible, to make Reports from Hear-say. I saw the first Cellar when it was digging for the use of our Governour Will. Penn.
I shall now haste to a Con∣clusion, and only hint a little concerning the Natives or Abo∣rigines, their Persons, Language, Manners, Religion and Govern∣ment; Of Person they are ordi∣narily Tall, Straight, well-turn'd, and true Proportion'd; their Tread strong and clever, gene∣rally walking with a lofty Chin. Of Complexion Black, but by design, Gypsie-like, greasing them∣selves with Bears-Fat Clarified, and using no defence against the Injuries of the Sun and Wea∣ther, their Skins fail not to be Swarthy. Their Eyes are small and black. Thick Lips and flat Noses so frequent with Negroes and East Indians, are rare with them. They have Comely Faces and Tolerable Complexions, some of their Noses having a rise like the Roman.
Their Language is Lofty and Elegant, but not Copious; One Word serveth in the stead of Three, imperfect and ungram∣matical, which defects are sup∣ply'd by the Understanding of the Hearers. Sweet, of Noble Sound and Accent. Take here a Specimen. Hodi hita nee huska a peechi, nee, machi Pensilvania  huska dogwachi, ke∣show a peechi Nowa, huska hayly, Chetena koon peo. Thus in English. Farewel Friend, I will very quick∣ly go to Pensilvania, very cold Moon will come presently, And very great hard frosts will come quickly.
I might Treat largely of their Customs and Manners, but that will not agree with my pro∣posed Brevity. As soon as their Children are born, they wash them in cold Water, especially in cold Weather. To harden and embolden them, they plunge them in the River; they find their Feet early, usual∣ly at Nine Months they can go. The Boys Fish till Fifteen, then Hunt, and having given proof of their Manhood, by a large return of Skins, they may Mar∣ry (else 'tis ashame to think of a Wife) which is usually at the Age of Seventeen or Eighteen; the Girls stay with their Mothers, and help to hoe the Ground, Plant Corn, bear Burdens, and Marry about Thirteen or Four∣teen.
Their Houses are Matts, or Barks of Trees set on Poles, Barn-like, not higher than a Man, so not expos'd to Winds. They lie upon Reeds or Grass. In Travel they lodge in the Woods about a great Fire, with the Mantle of Duffils they wear wrapt about them, and a few Boughs stuck round them. They live chiefly on Maze, or Indian Corn rosted in the Ashes, sometimes beaten and boyl'd with Water, called Homine. They have Cakes, not unpleasant; also Beans and Pease, which Nourish much, but the Woods and Ri∣vers afford them their Provision; they eat Morning and Evening; their Seats and Tables are the Ground; they are reserv'd, apt to resent and retain long: Their Women are Chaste (at least af∣ter Marriage) and when with Child, will not admit of their
Husbands Embraces any more till Deliver'd. Exceeding Libe∣ral and Generous; Kind and Affable; uneasie in Sickness, to remedy which, they drink a De∣coction of Roots in Spring-Wa∣ter, forbearing Flesh, which if they happen to eat, it must be the Female; they commonly bury their Kettles and part of their Goods with their Friends when they die, suspecting (poor Souls) they shall make use of them again at the Resurrection. They Mourn a whole Year, but it is no other than black∣ing their Faces. Their Government is Mo∣narchical, and Successive, and ever of the Mothers (the surest) side, to prevent a Spurious Issue. The Distaff (as in France) is ex∣cluded the Regal Inheritance. Their Princes are Powerful, yet do nothing without the Con∣currence of their Senate, or
Councils, consisting chiefly of Old, but mixt with Young Men; slow and deliberate, (Spaniard-like) in resolving, naturally wise, and hardly to be out-witted. Their Punishments are Pecuniary. Murder may be aton'd for by Feasts and Presents, in Propor∣tion to the Quality of the Offence, Person, or Sex injur'd; for if a Woman be kill'd, the Mulct is double, because she brings forth Children. They seldom quarel, when Sober, and if Boozy, (which of late they are more apt to be, having learn'd to drink, a little too much Rum of the Christians, to their shame) they readily pardon it, alledging the Liquor is Criminal not the Man. The way of Worship the Sweeds use in this Countrey, is the Lutheran; the English have four sorts of Assemblies or Religious Meetings here; as first, The
Church of England, who built a very fine Church in the City of Philadelphia in the Year 1695. Secondly, the Anabaptists: Third∣ly, the Presbyterians, and two sorts of Quakers (of all the most numerous by much) one Party held with George Keith; but whether both Parties will joyn together again in one I cannot tell, for that Gentleman hath alter'd his Judgment since he came to England, concerning his Church-Orders in Pensilvania, by telling and shewing them Precepts that were lawful in the time of the Law, but forbidden under the Gospel to pay Tithes, or Ministers to Preach for Hire, &c. As also to sprinkle Infants; and he tells the Presby∣terian Minister, That he must go to the Pope of Rome for his Call, for he had no Scripture for it, and that Water-Baptism and the Outward Supper are not of the Nature of the Everlasting
Gospel; nor essential Parts of it, see his Truth Advanced page 173. He gives likewise a strict Charge concerning plain Language and plain Habit, and that they should not be concern'd in the compelling part of the World∣ly Government, and that they should set their Negroes at Liberty after some reasonable time of Ser∣vice; likewise, they should not take the Advantage of the Law against one another, as to pro∣cure them any Corporeal Pu∣nishment: These Orders he tells his Followers, would make Di∣stinction between them and Jews and Moral Heathens, this was in the Year 1693. in Pen∣silvania: But now the Year 1697. since he came to England, his Judgment is chang'd, for he tells his Disciples, that Water-Baptism is come in the room of Circumcision; and by so doing, they would distinguish them∣selves from either Jews, Pagans,
or Moral Heathens: He keeps his Meeting once a Week at Turners-Hall in Fill-Pot-Lane, London, on Sundays in the After∣noon; he begins between Two and Three of the Clock and com∣monly ends between Four and Five. Friendly Reader, by this thou mayst see how wavering and mutable Men of great Outward Learning are, if the Truth of this be by any Body question'd, let them look in the Creed, and the Paper against Christians being concern'd in Worldly Government, and the Paper concerning Negroes, that was given forth by the Ap∣pointment of the Meeting held by George Keith at Philip James's House in the City of Philadel∣phia, in Pensilvania; and his Letter also in Mary-Land against the Presbyterian Catechism, Printed at Boston in New-England in 1695. with the Answer to it bound up
together in one Book and in Truth Advanced, page 173. And for what relates to him since in England, let them look into the Quakers Argument Refuted, Con∣cerning Water-Baptism and the Lord's Supper, page 70. And now Reader, I shall take my leave of thee, recommending thee with my own self to the Directions of the Spirit of God in our Conscience, and that will agree with all the Holy Scrip∣tures in its right place; and when we find our selves so, we have no need to take any Thought or Care what any Body shall say of us. The End of the History of Pensilvania.
An Historical Description OF THE PROVINCE and COUNTRY OF West-New-Jersey IN AMERICA. A short View of their Laws, Customs and Religion: As also the Temperament of the Air and Climate; The fatness of the Soil, with the vast Produce of Rice, &c. The Improvement of their Lands (as in England) to Pasture, Meadows, &c. Their making great quanti∣ties of Pitch and Tar, as also Turpentine, which pro∣ceeds from the Pine Trees, with Rozen as clear as Gum-Arabick, with particular Remarks upon their Towns, Fairs and Markets; with the great Plenty of Oyl and Whale-Bone made from the great number of Whales they yearly take: As also may other Profita∣ble and New Improvements. Never made Publick till now. By GABRIEL THOMAS. LONDON: Printed in the Year 1698.
To the Right Honoura∣ble Sir John Moor, Sir Thomas Lane, Knights and Alder∣men of the City of London, and to the rest of the Worthy Members of the West-Jersey Pro∣prietors. Worthy Friends, TO whom can the History of West-Jersey with more Ju∣stice pertain, than to
you the Noble and Generous Proprietors. That was the chief Motive that inclin'd me to this Dedica∣tion, which I hope will be the more ac∣ceptable to you, be∣cause the Account of that Country is so Sincere and Candid. I have endeavour'd (by setting forth) the great Encouragements there are) to persuade
the Poor, the Idle, the Lazy, & the Vagabonds of these Kingdoms and of Wales to hasten thi∣ther, that they may live plentifully and happi∣ly, and I doubt not but they will hearken to it, because it is their true Interest. I have done my best endeavours to possess them and others of the great Fertility and Plenty in those Parts, which I need not repeat to you, who must needs be well ac,
quainted with the State of that Place. That it may Flourish and mightily tend to your Advantage, as also to the Benefit of England, the hearty de∣sire of your Friend, Gabriel Thomas.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, MY Chief Design in writing this short Account of West-New-Jersey, is to inform all (but espe∣cially the Poor) what Ample and Happy Live∣lihoods People may gain
in those Parts, whereby they may subsist very well without either Beg∣ging or Stealing, for if they Steal, they are Whipt, and oblig'd to pay Four Fold; and if they are not of Ability to do that, they must abide in Ser∣vitude till they have made Satisfaction to the injur'd Person: And if they should be Lazy and turn to Beg, they will get nothing by that Base and Scandalous Imploy∣ment; But if they be so
Poor that they have not of their own to supply their Wants and Neces∣sities, nor are able to Work, they will have no need to Beg, for Peo∣ple out of their own free Compassion and pure Chari∣ty will relieve them in their Necessities. Now if this were all, (though it is not) it wou'd be a suffi∣cient Encouragement to the Idle, the Sloathful, and the Vagabonds of England, Scotland, and Ireland to hasten
thither, where besides this, they have a fair pro∣spect of getting conside∣rable Estates, at least of living very Plenti∣fully and Happily, which Medium of Life is far better than lingering out their Days so misera∣bly Poor and half Star∣ved; or Whipping, Burning, and Hanging for Villanies, they will have little Temptation, nay or Inclination to per∣petrate here. The French Refugees or Protestant
People, wou'd soon find it their Interest to re∣move thither, where they wou'd live far better than in Germany, Holland, Ireland or England. Written by one who ear∣nestly wisheth thy Well∣fare and Prosperity in the ways of the Lord, and then thou canst not do amiss in this World. Gab. Thomas.
THE HISTORY OF West-New-Jersey. WEst-New-Jersey lies between the La∣titude of Forty, and Forty two Degrees; having the Main Sea on the South, East-Jersey on
the North, Hudson's Bay on the East, and Pensilvania on the West. The first Inhabitants of this Countrey were the In∣dians, being supposed to be part of the Ten dispersed Tribes of Israel; for indeed they are very like the Jews in their Persons, and something in their Practices and Worship, for they (as the Pensilvanian Indians) observe the New Moons with great Devotion, and Re∣verence: And their first Fruits they offer, with their Corn and Hunting-Game they get in the whole Year, to a False Deity or Sham-God, whom they must please, else (as they fancy) many Misfor∣tunes will befal them, and great Injuries will be done them. When they bury their Dead, they put into the Ground with
them some House-Utensils, and some Money, (as Tokens of their Love and Affection) with other Things, expecting they shall have Occasion for them again in the other World. And if a Person of Note dies very far from the Place of his own Residence they will carry his Bones home some conside∣rable time after, to be bu∣ried there. They are also ve∣ry curious, nay, even nice in preserving and repairing the Graves of their Dead. They do not love to be asked twice their Judgment about one Thing. They are a People who generally delight much in Mirth, and are very studious in observing the Vertues of Roots and Herbs, by which they cure themselves of many Distempers in their Bo∣dies, both internal or external. They will not suffer their Beards to grow; for they
will pluck the Hair off with their own Fingers as soon as they can get hold of it, hold∣ing it great Deformity to have a Beard. They are very lo∣ving to one another; for if three or four of them come in∣to a Christian's House, and the Master of it happen to give one of them Victuals, and none to the rest, he will divide it into equal Shares among them: And they are also very kind and civil to any of the Chri∣stians; for I my self have had Victuals cut by them in their Cabbins, before they took any for themselves. Their chief Imployment is in Hunting, Fishing, and Fowling, and making Canows, or Indian Boats and Bowls, in all which Arts they are very dexterous and ingenious: Their Womens Bu∣siness chiefly consists in plan∣ting of Indian Corn, and pound∣ing
it to Meal, in Mortars, with Pestils, (as we beat our Spice) and make Bread, and dress their Victuals, which they perform very neatly and cleanlily. They also make Indian Mats, Ropes, Hats, and Baskets, (some of curious Workmanship) of their Hemp, which there grows wild, and Natural, in the Woods, in great Plenty. In short, the Women are very ingenious in their several Imployments as well as the Men. Their young Maids are naturally very mo∣dest and shamefac'd: And their young Women when newly married, are very nice and shy, and will not suffer the Men to talk of any immodest or lascivious Matters. Their Houses are, for the most part, cover'd with Chesnutt Bark, but very close, and warm, insomuch that no Rain can
go through. Their Age in Computation may be com∣pared with the Christians. Their wearing Habit is com∣monly Deer-Skins, or Duffles. They don't allow of mention∣ing the Name of a Friend after his Death; for at his Decease, they make their Face black all over with black Lead; and when their Affairs go well with them, they paint their Faces with red Lead, it being a Token of their Joy, as the other is of their Grief. They are great Observers of the Weather by the Moon. They take great Delight in Cloaths of various Colours. And are so punctual that if any go from their first Offer or Bargain with them, it will be very difficult for that Par∣ty to get any Dealings with them any more, or to have any farther Converse with
them; And moreover it is worthy of Remark, that when a Company of them are got together, they never interrupt or contradict one another, 'till two of them have made an end of their Discourse; for if never so many be in Compa∣ny only two must discourse at a time, and the rest must keep Silence. The English and they live very peaceably, by reason the English satisfies them for their Land. As to the manner of their Language, it is high and lofty, with a Short Sentence. Their way of counting is by Tens, as to say Two Tens, Three Tens, Four Tens, Five Tens, &c. I shall now proceed to show something of the manner and way of Discourse that happens
between them and the Neighbour∣ing Christians that use to deal and traffick with them, or when they meet one another in the Woods accidentally, one a looking for his Cat∣tel, and the other a Hun∣ting the Wild Deer, or o∣ther Game, by way of Questions and Answers. I shall put the Indian Tongue on one side of the Leaf, and the English just opposite. Their Discourse is as followeth. The Indian Tongue. The English of it. Quest. Hi∣tah takoman? Answ. Ando∣gowa nee weekin. Quest. Friend, from whence com'st? Answ. Yon∣der. Quest. Where yonder? Answ. My House. Quest. Tony andogowa kee wee∣kin? Answ. Ar∣waymouse. Quest. Where is thy House? Answ. Arway∣mouse, which is the Name of an Indian Town.
Quest. Keco kee hatah kee weekin? Answ. Nee hatah huska wees youse og huska chetena chase og huska orit che∣kenip. Quest. What hast got in thy House? Answ. I have very fat Veni∣son, and good strong Skins, with very good Turkeys. Quest. Chin∣go kee beto nee chase og youse etka chekenip. Answ. Ha∣lopa etka nisha kishquicka. Quest. When wilt thou bring me Skins and Venison, with Turkeys? Answ. To morrow, or two days hence. Quest. Keco kee hata kee wee∣kin? Answ. Nee hata orit poonk og huska horit haloons etka ne∣skee og march∣kee ochqueon. Quest. What hast got in thy House? Answ. I have very fat Veni∣son, and good strong Skins, with very good Turkeys.
(O huskia orit.) (Very well.) Quest. Kee namen neskec ka∣bay og march∣kec moos etka opeg megis? Answ. Ma∣ta namen megis nee namen ne∣skec kabay un∣dogwa tekany. Quest. Did'st thou see black Horses and red Cows, with white Sheep? Answ. I saw no Sheep: I did see black Horses yonder in the Woods? Quest. Kee namen march∣kec moos undo∣gwa tekeny? Answ. Mo∣gy. Quest. Did'st see red Cows yonder in the Woods? Answ. Yes.
Quest. Kee squa og enychan hatah? Answ. Mo∣gy. Quest. Hast thou a Wife and Children? Answ. Yes. Quest. Ka∣cha hatah? Answ. Neo. Quest. How many hast? Answ. Four. Quest. Be∣noingtid etka squatid? Answ. Ni∣sha benointid og nisha squatid. Quest. Boys or Girls? Answ. Two Boys and two Girls. Quest. Tong∣tid enychan ha∣tah? Answ. Mo∣gy. Quest. Hast got a young Child? Answ. Yes. Quest. Etka aroosise? Answ. Neo kishow. Quest. How old? Answ. Four months.
Quest. Etka aroosise kee? Answ. Pele∣nacheenckan ka∣tingan aroosis. Quest. How old art thou? Answ. Fifty years old. In the next Place I shall give an account of their way in counting or numbering; which is as followeth. The Indian Counting. The English to it. Kooty nisha nacha neo pele∣nach Kootash ni∣shash choesh pe∣skonk telen. One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six, Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten. Nishinchkan nachinchkan neo∣chinchkan pelen∣chinchkan. Twenty, Thirty, Forty, Fifty, &c.
The Names of some of the Indians. Anachkooting, Bussabenating, O∣konycan, Potasko, Quindamen, La∣mes, Alpoongan, Kohonk, Hiton, Temeny. The Dutch and Sweeds in∣form us that they are great∣ly decreased in number to what they were when they came first into this Country: And the Indians themselves say, that two of them die to e∣very one Christian that comes in here. Reader, I shall not in∣sist any farther upon this Subject, because what is deficient or short here, is inserted already in the preceding History of Pen∣silvania; for the Natives both of that, as well as of this Coun∣try, speak the same Language, and live after the same manner;
for my chief aim, in the next place, is to acquaint thee how, and after what manner the Christians live there And I hope I have pleased thee so far, as it may prove a means to encourage me to give a lar∣ger Description hereafter. The next who came there were the Dutch; which was between Forty and Fifty Years agoe, though they made but very little Improvement, only built Two or Three Houses, upon an Island (called since by the English) Stacies-Island; and it remained so, till about the Year 1675. in which King Charles the Second (or the Duke of York (his Brother) gave the Countrey to Edward Billing, in whose time, one Major Fenwick went thither, with some others, and built a pretty Town, and call'd it
Salam; and in a few Years after a Ship from London, and another from Hull, sail'd thi∣ther with more People, who went higher up into the Coun∣trey, and built there a Town, and called it Burlington, which is now the chiefest Town in that Countrey, though Salam is the ancientest; and a fine Market-Town it is, having se∣veral Fairs kept yearly in it; likewise well furnished with good store of most Necessaries for humane Support, as Bread, Beer, Beef, and Pork; as also Butter and Cheese, of which they freight seve∣ral Vessels, and send them to Barbadoes, and other I∣slands. There are very many fine stately Brick-Houses built, and a commodious Dock for Vessels to come in at, and they claim equal
Privilege with Burlington for the sake of Antiquity; tho' that is the principal Place, by reason that the late Go∣vernor Cox, who bought that Countrey of Edward Billing, en∣couraged and promoted that Town chiefly, in settling his Agents and Deputy-Governors there, (the same Favours are conti∣nued by the New-West-Jersey Society, who now manage Matters there) which brings their Assemblies and chief Courts to be kept there; and, by that means it is become a very famous Town, having a great many stately Brick-Houses in it, (as I said before) with a delicate great Market-House, where they keep their Market: It hath a noble and spacious Hall over-head, where their Sessions is kept, having the Prison adjoining to it.
Likewise in the said Town there are very many fine Wharfs and large Timber-Yards, Malt-Houses, Brew-Houses, Bake-Houses; and most sorts of Trades-Men, (whose Wages are upon the same Foot with the Pen∣silvanians) viz. Cloath-Workers, who make very good Serges, Druggets, Crapes, Camblets, (part Silk or Worsted, and part Camels Hair) and good Plushes, with several other Woollen Cloathes, be∣sides Linnen. There are many Fair and Great Brick Houses on the out∣side of the Town which the Gentry have built there for their Countrey Houses, besides the Great and Stately Palace of John Tateham Esq; which is pleasant∣ly Situated on the North side of the Town, having a very fine and delightful Garden and Or∣chard
adjoyning to it, wherein is variety of Fruits, Herbs, and Flowers; as Roses, Tulips, July-Flowers, Sun-Flowers (that open and shut as the Sun Rises and Sets, thence taking their Name) Carnations, and many more; besides abundance of Medicinal Roots Herbs, Plants, and Flowers found wild in the Fields. There are kept also in this Famous Town several Fairs every Year; and as for Pro∣visions, viz. Bread, Beer, Beef, Pork, Cheese, Butter, and most sorts of Fruit here is great Plenty and very Cheap; all those Com∣modities are to be bought every Market-Day. A Ship of Four Hundred Tuns may Sail up to this Town in the River Delaware; for I my self have been on Board a
Ship of that Burthen there: And several fine Ships and Vessels (besides Governour Cox's own great Ship) have been built there. There are also two handsom Bridges to come in and out of the Town, called London and York-Bridges. The Town stands in an Island, the Tide flowing quite round about it. There are Water-Men who constantly Ply their Wherry Boats from that Town to the City of Philadel∣phia in Pensilvania, and to other places. Besides there is Glo∣cester-Town, which is a very Fine and Pleasant Place, being well stor'd with Summer Fruits, as Cherries, Mulberries, and Straw∣berries, whither Young People come from Philadelphia in the Wherries to eat Straberries and Cream, within sight of which City it is sweetly Situated,
being but about three Miles distance from thence. There are several Meetings of Worship in this Country, viz. the Presbyterians, Quakers, and Anabaptists: Their Privilege as to Matter of Law, is the same both for Plaintiff and Defendant, as in England. The Air is very Clear, Sweet and Wholesom; in the depth of Winter it is something colder, and as much hotter in the heighth of Summer than in England. Commonly (with them) the Days differ two Hours in length from ours here. The longest Day in Summer is shorter by two Hours than the longest Day in Eng∣land, and the shortest Day lon∣ger by two Hours than with us here.
As for Corn, they have Wheat, Rye, Pease, Oates, Barley, Rice, &c. in vast quantities: Also Indian-Corn, Pease and Beans, like∣wise English Hemp and Flax, which prospers there exceeding∣ly. Eating Roots, Pumpkins, Cashews, Water-Melons, Muskmel∣lons, Cucumbers, Squashes, Carrots, Artichokes, Potatoes, Turnips, Gar∣lick, Onions, and Leeks grow there in greater Plenty than in Enland. And for Herbs, they have Cabbages, Coleworts, Savoys, Lettice, Purslane, and other Sal∣lads in abundance; beside Wild Herbs which are there very commom, as Penny-Royal, Mint, Mustard, Sage, Rue, Tansey, &c. and likewise there are choice Phi∣sical Roots, as Sassafras, Sarsa∣parilla, Black-Snake-Root, Rattle-Snake Root, and Poake-Root, with divers others, which there is great store of.
Of Fish, they have Whales, Stur∣geon, Cod, Scale-Fish, Cole and Hake-Fish, large Mackeril, Flat-fish, Rock, Shadds, Cattes, Eels, Perch, and many other sorts in pro∣digious Shoals: And Wild-Wa∣ter-Fowl, as Geese, Ducks, Swans, Divers, &c. are very numerous, even beyond all expecta∣tion. As to Land-Fowl, Tur∣keys, Geese, Pheasants, Partridges, Pigeons, Woodcocks, Blackbirds, &c. they are there in extraordinary great abundance, and very large. There is also that uncommon and valuable Bird (being near the bigness of a Cuckoo) called the Mocking-bird (known, but not very well in England, being so very Nice and Tender, that they usually die by the way) with several other Charm∣ing and Curious Birds, too te∣dious here to specifie.
As to the Wild Vermin, There are Otters, Beavers, Foxes, Mush-Rats Minx's, Wild-Cats, Rackoons, Pollcats, and also that cunning Creature the Possom, particularly mention'd and distinguish'd in the an∣nex'd Account of Pensilvania for its remarkable Qualities, whi∣ther I refer the Reader, not in the least being fond of Tauto∣logy. This Creature is about the bigness of an English Cat, be∣ing of a light gray colour. Like∣wise there were some Wolves and Bears, but now they are very rare to be seen, by rea∣son the Indians destroy them (as before). Also that strange Creature the Flying Squirril, mention'd in the foregoing Book. There are great num∣bers of Wild Deer, and Red Deer also; and these wild Crea∣tures are free and common for
any to kill and take. And for Wild Fruits, there are Chesnuts, Filberts, Hickery-Nuts, Grapes, Mulberries, Strawberries, Rasberries, Huckleberries, and Craneberries, with several sorts of Plumbs, and all those Fruits in great plenty being free for any Body to gather. Now I am a coming to the Planted Fruit-Trees, as Apples, Pears, Apricocks, Quinces, Plumbs, Cherries, Gooseberries, Currants, and Peaches, from which last they distil a liquor as in Pensilvania, much like Rumm or Brandy, in the taste; and all those Trees will come to bear in a little more than half the time, they do in England, the Soil is so rich; they have great plenty of the aforementioned Fruits, which are exceeding delicious. These, as also many other Fruits that come not to any pitch of Perfection in England, are the Natural Product of this Coun∣try, which lies warmer, being
more befriended by the Sun's hot and glorious Beams, which without doubt is the chief Cause and true Reason, why the Fruit there so far ex∣cells the English. They have likewise great Stocks of Horses and Hogs, raised in the Woods; of the latter of which I have seen some of a Prodigious Weight that only fed there, their Horses are very hardy, strong, and of good Spirit for Labour or Tra∣velling; they commonly go un∣shod (which in many Years saves much Money). Their Plow-shears require but small Reparation, wearing out but little. They Harrow their Ground with a Wooden-tyned-Harrow, and twice over does the business. Of Bees also they are well pro∣vided, & abound in Sheep naturally
very sound, and that stand well, the Rot, Scab, Maggots, &c. rare∣ly invading them; they usually bring forth two Lambs at once, and their Wooll is very fine, white, and thick; they have great Stocks of Cattle, as Cows, Oxen, &c. Their Oxen com∣monly weigh well. Tame Fowl there are (almost) incredible in numbers, viz. Geese, Turkeys, Hens, &c. In this Country also is great Plenty of working Timber, as Oaks, Ash, Chesnuts, Pine, Cedar, Walnut, Poplar, Firr, and Masts for Ships, with Pitch and Rosin, of great Use and much Benefit to the Countrey. Here are several good Navigable Ri∣vers, besides that famous Ri∣ver Delaware (which I have mentioned elsewhere, and where the Tobacco is excellent) being
deep enough for Vessels to come in: First, Prince Morise's River, where the Sweeds used to kill the Geese in great num∣bers, for their Feathers (only) leaving their Carcasses behind them; Cohansey River, by which they send great store of Cedar to Philadelphia-City; Allaway-River; Salam-River, which runs by Salam-Town (of greatest Antiquity;) Naman-River, Rack∣coon-River, which had its Name from the great numbers of those Creatures that always abound thereabouts; Old Man's River; Manto-River; Wood∣berry-River; Great Eggharbor River (up which a Ship of two or three hundred Tuns may sail) which runs by the back part of the Country in∣to the Main Sea; I call it back, because the first Im∣provement made by the Chri∣stians, was Delawar River-side:
This Place is noted for good store of Corn, Horses, Cows, Sheep, Hogs, &c. the Lands thereabouts being much im∣prov'd, and built upon: Little Egg-Harbor-Creek, which take their Names from the great abundance of Eggs, which the Swans, Geese, Ducks, and other wild Fowls on those Rivers lay thereabouts: Tim∣ber-River, alias Glocester-River, which hath its Name (also) from the great quantity of curi∣ous Timber, which they send in great Floats to Philadelphia, a City in Pensilvania, as Oaks, Pines, Chesnut, Ash, and Ce∣dars. This River runs down by Glocester-Town, which is the Shire-Town; And Newton-Ri∣ver, that runs by Newton; Coo∣per-River; Pensokin-River; Nor∣thampton-River, with several o∣thers, at a convenient distance upon the Sea, the Shores
whereof are generally deep and bold) of less Note, as VVissahis∣konk-River, that runs down into the great River Delaware, by Burlington. The Countrey inhabited by the Christians is divided into four Parts or Counties, tho' the Tenth part of it is not yet peopled; 'Tis far cheaper living there for Eat∣ables than here in England; and either Men or Women that have a Trade, or are Labourers, can, if industrious, get near three times the Wages they com∣monly earn in England. Courteous Reader, As yet I have given thee no Account of East-Jersey, because I never was there, so in reality can∣not properly or pertinently speak to that Matter. I will not pretend to impose any thing on the World, but have all
along, and shall still declare nothing but Verity; therefore one Word of that by and by. I might have given thee a much larger Account of this Coun∣trey, and have stretch'd this (now) Pocket Volume to an extraordinary Bulk and Size; and yet without straining or deviating in the least from the Principles of my Profession, which are Truth it self. I have no Plot in my Pate, or deep Design, no, not the least ex∣pectation of gaining any thing by them that go thither, or losing by those who stay here. My End chiefly in Writing, nay, indeed my great Aim, is to inform the People of Bri∣tain and Ireland in general, but particularly the Poor, who are begging, or near it, or star∣ving, or hard by it (as I be∣fore took notice in my Pre∣face) to encourage them (for
their own Good, and for the Honour and Benefit of their Native Countrey, to whom they are now a Scandal and Disgrace; and whose Milk and Honey these Drones eat up, and are besides a heavy Burden to the Commonwealth, in the Taxes paid by every Parish in Eng∣land, &c. to support them. Law-Causes are here (as in Pensilvania) speedily determi∣ned, in the second Court at least, unless in some difficult Business. One Justice of the Peace hath Power to try a Cause, and give Judgment there∣in, if the Original Debt be under forty Shillings. And for Thieves and Robbers (as I hin∣ted before in the Preface) they must restore fourfold; which, if they are not able to do, they must work hard till the in∣jured Person is satisfied.
I shall conclude with a Word or two on New-East-Jersey. This Countrey is exceeding fruitful in Cattel, of which I have seen great numbers brought from thence, viz. Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Hogs, and Horses, to Philadel∣phia, the Capital of Pensilvania. The chiefest Manufactory (be∣sides English and Indian Grain) fit for Traffick that this Coun∣trey affords. Now I shall give thee an Account of the English Manu∣factory, that each County in West-New-Jersey affords. In the first Place I shall begin with Bur∣lington-County, as for Peltage, or Bea∣vers Skins,! Otter-Skins, Minks Skins, Musk-rats Skins, Rackcoon, Wild Cats, Martin, and Deer-Skins, &c. The Trade in Glocester-County consists chiefly in Pitch, Tar, and Rosin; the latter of
which is made by Robert Styles, an excellent Artist in that sort of Work, for he delivers it as clear as any Gum-Arabick. The Commerce carried on in Salam-County, is chiefly Rice, of which they have wonderful Produce every Year; as also of Cran∣berries which grow there in great plenty, and which in Picle might be brought to Eu∣rope. The Commodities of Cap∣may-County, are Oyl and Whale-Bone, of which they make pro∣digious, nay vast quantities eve∣ry Year, having mightily ad∣vanc'd that great Fishery, tak∣ing great numbers of Whales yearly. This Country for the general part of it, is extraordi∣nary good, and proper for the raising of all sorts of Cattel, very plentiful here, as Cows, Horses, Sheep, and Hogs, &c. likewise it is well Stor'd with se∣veral sorts of Fruits which make
very good and pleasant Liquors, such as their Neighbouring Coun∣try before mention'd affords. Now Reader, having no more to add of any moment or im∣portance, I salute thee in Christ; and whether thou stayest in England, Scotland, Ireland, or Wales, or goest to Pensilvania, West or East-Jersey, I wish thee all Health and Happiness in this, and Everlasting Comfort (in God) in the World to come. Fare thee well. FINIS.
