V40 09436047 43089
Soldiers Courtship: Wherein he shews a Soldier ought not to be slighted, not only be∣cause they venture their Lives, but likewise that kings and Princes are, and have been of the same Occupation. To an excellent new Tune. Licensed according to Order. A Soldier and a bonny Lass, as they walk'd forth one day, With kisses and with Complements, he unto her did say, Sweet, let me kiss thy thy ruddy Lips, 'twill make me some what bolder. Indeed, kind Sir, my Mother said, I might not kiss a Soldier. My Dear, a Soldier travels far, in Mouty Field to fight, And proves himself a Man of War, with shining Armour bright: His Waldour daunts the mightiest For, making their Courage colder, And Dearest do not answer no, but kiss an honest Soldier. The Cowards lies on Beds of Down the silent Night secure, While we for Honour and Renown, all hardship do endure: The Summer hot, in Camy we lye, and Winter, thought much colder; What man is he that can audie the valiant Warlike Soldier? With sying Colours in the Field, we stand by force of Arms; Nothing so soon can make us yeild, as Love's the proudest Monarch vow, if once he doth behold her Therefore my sweetest Creature now embrace an honest Soldier. The Soldier is a Pillow strong, for to support the Throne, Whose Loyal Duty do's belong to Majesty alone: Fighting up to the Knees in Bloud, to be the Realm's upholder; If this thy mother understood, she'd let thee love a Soldier. My Dear, I do deserve thy Love, as thou shalt understand, There's not a noble man above a Soldier, in the Land. The Monarth whom we all obey, Relogion's true upholder; He does the Royal Scepter sway, and is both King and Soldier. My Love, when David lay asleep upon the solid Sown, Among his Lnbs and harmless Sheep, he splendid Glory he should rear, and he the Land's upholder: then tell me Love, who can compare with the right valiant Soldier? He rw Goliah with a Sling, then us'd a Sword also, And did this Giant's Head soon bring, unto the Bround full low: Throwing away his Shepherd's crook, which he wore on his Shoulder, And took the Sword and Scepter both, being both King and Soldier. A Soldier's Glory will appear from the Records of Fne, Great Alexander Love, me bear, he conqure'd where he came; No less than all the Universe, no Champion ever bolder; Therefore my sweet and honey Loss, embrace an honest Soldier. You see that Kings and Noble Peers hath Soldiers been of did, And so they are of later years, Couragious, Stout, and Bold: Then wherefore should they be run down, who are the Lands Upholder? Then prithee Dearest do not frown, but love an honest Soldier. The Damsel made him this Reply, what you have now declar'd, I cannot in the cast deny, but yet I am afraid, Your kind embraces receive, although the Land is Upholder: But first I'll ask my Mother leave, and then I'll love a Soldier. Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, J. Back.
