W3412 12743343 93167
814 WOOD (Anthony à): D. (E.) A VINDICATION OF THE HIS∣TORIOGRAPHER OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, and his Works, from the Reproaches of the Lord Bishop of Salisbury in his Letter to the Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, concerning a Book lately Published, called, A Specimen of some Errors and Defects in the History of the Reforma∣tion of the Church of England, by Anthony Hurmer. To which is added the Historiographers Answer to certain Animadvertions made in the before∣mention'd History of the Reformation to that part of Historia et Antiquitates Universitatis Oxon, which treats of the Divorce of Queen Catherine from King Henry the Eighth. Sm. 4to, 30 pp., cobb boards, FINE COPY, RARE. £4 10 0 Randal Taylor: London 1693 ⁂This rare tract is an answer to one of the many attacks on Anthony à Wood▪ the famous author of the Athenae Oxoniensis. His works are fully described and many of his statements justified by reference to the original authorities. It was probably written by Thomas Wood, his nephew, the lawyer, who appeared for him in his suit against Lord Clarendon.
A VINDICATION OF THE Historiographer OF THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD, AND HIS WORKS, FROM The Reproaches of the Lord Bishop of Salisbury, in his LETTER to the Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, concerning a Book lately Published, called, A Specimen of some Errors and Defects in the History of the Reformation of the Church of England, by Anthony Hurmer. Written by E. D. To which is added the Historiographer's Answer to certain Animadversions made in the before-mention'd History of the Reformation, to that part of Historia & Antiquitates Ʋniversitatis Oxon, which Treats of the Divorce of Queen Catherine from King Henry the Eighth. London, Printed, and Sold by Randal Taylor, MDCXCIII.
A VINDICATION OF THE Historiographer OF The University of OXFORD, And his Works, &c. THE Prefacer to the First Volume of Athenae Oxonienses, (now an Eminent Proficient in the Com∣mon Law,) saith, First, It is well known, that the Author of that Work hath through the whole course of his Life declined the pursuit of any pri∣vate interest, or advantage, and hath only, according to his Abilities, endeavoured to promote the Honour and Glory of that Nati∣on wherein he had been Born, and more espe∣cially
of that University wherein he was E∣ducated. His Early Application, or as some call it, his Natural Propensity to Histories and Antiquities, made him more fit to serve his Country in that, than in any other Study; and that part of Antiquity which was most useful in it self, and which yet lay most neg∣lected, became the immediate object of his Care, as that which not only deserved, but required and wanted the greatest Indu∣stry. The First product of his Labours and gene∣rous Studies was, The History and Antiquities of the Ʋniversity of Oxford, which being by him wrote in English in his Juvenile Years, it pleased the Chief Heads of the said University to have it put into Latin, that the Learned World might know and be acquainted with the Anti∣quity, Honour and Glory thereof: Which, had it been done by a Scribler, or poor Writer, as his Lordship of Salisbury is pleased to Chara∣cterize the Author in his Letter, p. 9. they would not in the least have taken notice of it; nor would a certainNich. Lloydius in Dictionario Historico, Geograph. Poet. &c. Edit. Oxon. in fol. 1670. p. 593. col. 2. in Voce Oxon. Writer of Note have stiled it Four Years before it was Published, Li∣ber aureolus plurimo labore nec minori judicio con∣fignatus, &c. It was a Book of Eight Years
Labour, and all, or most part of it, was Ex∣tracted from the very Bowels of Antiquity, as the many Quotations from Records and Manu∣scripts in every Page thereof do shew. It hath afforded matter for many Eminent Wri∣ters, whether Domestick, or Foreign, who have made Honourable mention of it, and its Author, as those who are Bookish Men (who have frequently stiled it, A Choice Treasure of Antiquities,) do know very well. After it was finished, the Curators of the Sheldonian Press, namely, Sir Leoline Jenkins, Sir Joseph Williamson, Dr. John Fell, (after∣wards Bishop of Oxon,) and Dr. Tomas Yate, did Dedicate it to His Majesty King Charles the Second, to whom being presented at Windsor in July, 1674, by Dr. Richard Allestry Provost of Eaton College, His Majesty was graciously pleased to accept of it, turn over several parts thereof, and hold some Conference about it with that Learned Doctor, as the Author of it was by his Letters informed. Soon after the Heads of the University of Oxon, agreed, that as many Copies that Cost Eighty Pounds should be pre∣sented to the great Persons of the Royal Court, of the Clergy, and of the Law. And after∣wards it was presented, in the Name of the said University, (1.) To the most illustrious Prince John William Prince of Neoburg, when he was Entertained by the Members thereof in the beginning of June, 1675. See in the Fasti
of the Second Volume of Athenae Oxon. p. 871. (2.) To the most illustrious Prince Cosmo de Medicis, the great Duke of Tuscany; to whom the said Hist. & Antiq. was sent by the Decree of the Venerable Convocation of the Doctors and Masters, held on the Seventh of October, 1675, and with it a Latin Letter Pen'd by the Publick Orator, wherein a Just and Laudable Character was given of the said Book, as it appears in the Register of the Acts of that Con∣vocation. The said Duke had been entertained by the University of Oxon, when he came to see it, and its Glories, in the beginning of May, 1669. (3.) To Charles Maurice le Tellier Archbishop and Duke of Rheimes, when he and other French Nobility visited the Universi∣ty. It was presented by the Hands of Doctor Fell Bishop of Oxon, the 8th of May, 1677. (4.) To his Royal Highness James Duke of York, when he was Entertained by the Univer∣sity in the Month of May, 1683. See in the said Fasti, p. 893, &c. To omit others, must not be forgotten the most Illustrious and Excel∣lent Ld. Peter Sparr Fzee, Baron of Croneberg, &c. General of the Army of Foot belonging to the King of Sweedland, and Extraordinary Embas∣sador to the King of Great Britain, from the said King of Sweedland, who had a Copy pre∣sented to him by the Heads, tho' not quite fi∣nished at the Press, when he was Entertained in Oxon, in the Month of June, 1674.
These Memoirs are purposely set down, that the Reader might understand what value the chief Members of the most Famous University of Oxon had for that Book, which they deemed a fit Present for a Prince, and other great Per∣sons, and that he might see that the Author thereof was not a poor Writer, or Scribler, or one who had no Reputation of lose, as his Lord∣ship of Salisbury in his Letter before mention'd tells you, p. 9, 10. The said Book, wherein is maintained, by several valid Arguments, the Antiquity of the University of Oxon, against that of Cambridg, remains as yet unanswer'd: Nor is any part of it Animadverted upon, but a Minute part, by Doctor Gilbert Burnet in the first part of The History of the Reformation of the Church of Eng∣land, Printed at London, 1679, wherein, p. 85, 86. the Author speaking of the Divorce of Queen Catherine from King Henry the Eighth, makes these Animadversions following on the said part in Hist. & Antiq. Ʋniv. Oxon. lib 1. p. 256. a. The Collector of the Antiquities of Oxford, informs us of the uneasiness of this matter, (the Divorce,) and of the several Messages the King sent before that Instrument, (mean∣ing the Act, or Decree of the Ʋniversity, in order to the Divorce,) could be procured. So that from the 12th of February, to the 8th of
April, the matter was in Agitation, the Ma∣sters of Arts generally opposing it, tho' the Doctors and Heads were (for the greatest part) for it. But after he has set down the Instrument, he gives some Reasons (upon what design I cannot easily imagine) to shew that this was extorted by force; and being done without the consent of the Masters of Arts, was of its self void and of no force. And, as if it had been an ill thing, he takes pains to purge the University of it, and lay it upon the Fears and Corruptions of some Aspiring Men of the University: And with∣out any proof gives Credit to a Lying Story set down by Sanders, of an Assembly called by Night, in which the Seal of the University was set to the Determination; but it appears that he had never seen, or considered the other Instrument to which the University set their Seal, that was agreed on in Convocati∣on of all the Doctors and Masters, as well Re∣gents as Non-Regents; giving power to these Doctors and Bachelors of Divinity to deter∣mine the matter, and to set the Seal of the University to their conclusion. The Original whereof the Lord Herbert saw, upon which the Persons so deputed had full Authority to set the University's Seal to that conclusion; perhaps that Instrument was not so carefully preserved among their Records, or was in Queen Mary's Days taken away, which might occasion these Mistakes in their Historian.
There seems also another Mistake in the Re∣lation he gives, for he says, those of Paris had determined in this matter before it was agreed to at Oxon. The Printed Decision of the Sorbone contradicts this, for it bears Date the Second of July, whereas this was done the Ninth of April, 1530, &c. Thus the Church Historian, soon after the Author, or Collector of the Antiquities of Ox∣ford, Examining the said Animadversions on that little part of his Book before mention'd, he divided them into several pieces, and made Answer to each, but were not then Printed. The Contents of which, and the Answers follow. —But after he hath set down the Instrument, he gives some Reasons, &c. The Two first Reasons (if they may be so called) were put in by another hand, and the other were taken by the Author from these Three Books following, viz. (1.) From A Trea∣tise of Marriage, &c. written by Doctor Nicho∣las Harpesfield, which is a Folio Manuscript, writ∣ten either in the time of Queen MARY, or in the beginning of Queen ELIZABETH, and 'tis by him quoted in the place excepted against. (2.) From The Life of Queen Catherine, writ∣ten by William Forest in the Reign of Queen Mary, and Dedicated to Her. 'Tis also a Ma∣nuscript, and written in a fair Character on
Parchment. (3.) From An Apology for the Go∣vernment of the Ʋniversity of Oxon against King Henry the Eighth, &c. written by a Master of Arts in the time of Queen Elizabeth. 'Tis a Manuscript also, and hath all the Kings Letters therein, written to the University about the Question of Marriage and Divorce, with several passages relating to Convocations and Congre∣gations, concerning the said Question. So now you may see, that he did not frame, or give those Reasons from his own Invention, but from Authors of Credit in the time they Lived. —(Ʋpon what design I cannot easily imagin.) There was no design at all in the matter, but only for Truth's sake, which very few in these Days will deliver. —And, as if it were an ill thing, he takes pains to purge the Ʋniversity of it, &c. It was a very ill thing (as he thought) for a King by his Letters to frighten Persons out of their Consciences and Opinions, and to endea∣vour to force them (as 'twere) to say and do what must please him: But forasmuch as the Masters would not be frightned, and therefore they were laid aside▪ and the matter discussed and determined by a few Old Doctors, and Ba∣chelors
of Divinity, who would act and say any thing to please the King, lest danger should follow, they ought to be commended for keep∣ing their Consciences sound, and standing up for that which they thought was Equity. —And without any Proof gives Credit to a Lying Story set down by Sanders, of an Assembly called by Night, &c. Sanders is not his Author, for he says no such thing in his Book De Schismate, of an Assembly called by Night. His Author, for it is the Apo∣logy before-mention'd, which adds, That when a Regent of Balliol-College (whom the Scho∣lars called King Henry) heard that the Commissa∣ry (or Vice-Chancellour) and his Company were going to dispatch this Night-work, denied the Seal with his Breeches about his Shoulders for want of a Hood. See in Hist. & Antiq. Ʋniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 256. a. The Truth is, the Meeting was unseasonable, and all their Actions Clancular, as having been protested against by, and done without the consent of the Regents. And as for Sanders, tho' he cannot defend him, yet ma∣ny things in his Book De Schismate, especially those relating to the University of Oxon, he finds, from other places, to be true. —But it appears, that he had never seen and considered the other Instrument, to which the Ʋniversity set their Seal, &c.
The grand Collection, or Farrago, which Mr. Thomas Master, of New-College, drew up by the Lord Herbert's appointment, in order to write the Life of King Henry the Eighth, he had seen and perused, but could not with all his diligence find that Instrument, Act, or Decree of Convocation, neither in the Three great Fo∣lio's written by another Hand, containing Ma∣terials at large for the writing the said Life, neither in any of the Registers, Records, or Pa∣pers, belonging to the University: So that for those Reasons, and because that the Lord Her∣bert says, that it was blurred, and not intended for the King, and that also it was not under Seal (you say 'twas) neither passed in the Ma∣jority of Votes, therefore did he omit it, as not Authentick. Truly he had good ground to think, that it was only drawn up, and not pro∣posed; for if it had been proposed, it would have been Registred, there being nothing pro∣posed either in Convocation, or Congregation, but is Registred, whether denied or not: And the Register of that time is most exactly kept, and nothing, as he could perceive, hath been tore out. —There seems to be another Mistake in the Relation he gives, for he says, those of Paris had determined in this matter, &c. He says it not, for it was said by M. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, then Chancellour of
the University, in his Letters thereunto, To make what Expedition they could to give in their Answer to the King's Question, forasmuch as Pa∣ris and Cambridge had done it already. For this matter he Quotes the Book of Epistles sent from, and to the University of Oxon, which is a Manuscript in the Archieves of Bodley's Li∣brary, Epist. 197. Yet he believes the Arch∣bishop said those things to hasten the Members of the Convocation of the University of Oxon the more, tho' probably it was not so. How∣ever he was not bound to take notice of that, but to follow Record as he had found it: And that he doth follow Record throughout his Book, there is not one (as he presumes) of the Ve∣nerable Senate of Antiquaries, or Historiogra∣phers, can deny it, &c. Thus far the Answer to the Animadversions of the Church Historian, made on a little part of Hist. & Antiq. Ʋniv. Oxon. Now forasmuc has the said Church-Historian doth often quote and make use of several Manuscripts and Records in the Cottonian Library, it would be well worth the Curiosity of some Persons, to Enquire why he did not make use of a certain Volume in that Library, under Faustina, c. 7. containing Let∣ters sent from, and Copies of Charters, Privi∣leges, &c. of the University of Oxon: In which Letters are several Matters relating to the Reformation of the said University by cer∣tain Commissioners appointed by King Henry
the Eighth, Anno 1535. To which may be Answered, that there being many Vile things in the said Letters, which tend rather to the De∣formation of the said University, (a Nursery to supply the Church) they would have spoiled the smooth Current of his History of Reformati∣on: And if so, as several Curious Persons have supposed, it doth, under favour, Argue much Partiality; and he that is Partial, is not fit to be an Historian. One passage, among the rest, I shall here set down, written by Nicholas Lay∣ton, or Leighton, one of the Commissioners; his Letter Dated the Twelfth of September, 1535, and directed to Thomas Cromwell Secre∣tary of State, (wherein is mention made of some of the mad work they had done relating to the Works of the Famous Joh. Duns Scotus,) tells you thus, We have set Dunce in Boccar∣do, (meaning a Prison in Oxon so called,) and have utterly Banished him Oxford for ever, with all his blind Glosses, and is now made a common Servant to every Man, fast Nailed up upon Posts in all Common Houses of Easement, Id quod oculis meis vidi. And the Second time we came to New-College, after we had declared their Injunctions, we found all the great Quadrant-Court full of the Leaves of Dunce, the Winds blowing them into every Corner, and there we found one Mr. Greenfeld, of Buckingham-shire, gathering part of the said Book-Leaves (as he said) therewith to make him Scuels, or Blaunsheers,
to keep the Deer within the Wood, thereby to have the better Cry with his Hounds,&c. Thus, Thomas Layton: Which things were mostly done by Dr. John London, another Com∣missioner, at that time Warden of New-College, who spared not to Abuse his Founder, College, University, and his Conscience, to gain Favour from great Persons, and Wealth into his Purse. If so be the said Commissioners had such dis∣respect for that most famous Author J. Duns, who was so much admired by our Predecessors, and so difficult to be understood, that the Do∣ctors of those times, namely Dr. William Roper, Dr. John Kynton, Dr. William Mowse, &c. pro∣fessed, that in Twenty Eight Years Study, they could not understand him rightly, (as John Bale, an inveterate Enemy to that Author, and Romanists,In his Mystery of Iniquity, &c. Printed at Geneva, in Octavo, Anno 1545, Fol. vel Pag. 26. reports,) what then had they for others of inferiour Note? Truly, I have ve∣ry good reason to think, that the said Commissi∣oners made sad Havock in the University at that time, and were not wanting, upon all oc∣casions, to give an ill Report of Learning, and Learned Men. So it was, that what the Wis∣dom of former times did Advance, and Cry up, the Peevish and Base Humour of these (1535)
did decry and run down, such is the World's Career. But now let's proceed, It has been a Wonder, that among all the Members of the most Fa∣mous University of Oxon, who have signaliz'd their Learning and Industry in all Professions, and almost upon all Subjects, never have under∣taken the History of the Writers thereof, and of Learning, till our Historiographer wrote the Athenae and Fasti Oxon, the First Volume of which coming out in 1691, doth make the Se∣cond Volume which he has written. It was partly collected from Records, and Registers, and some of it from the Works of Authors who are therein mention'd. Another part from Books written pro and con, and what concerns the Death and Burial of Authors, is taken from Epitaphs, Parochial and other Registers, or from the Will, or Heralds-Office at London. And lastly, what is said of such Roman Catho∣lick-Writers, either in that, or the Second Vo∣lume, who to enjoy their Religion in Peace and Safety, have fled their Native-Country, is part∣ly taken from the Registers of those Colleges and Houses of Religion beyond the Seas, where∣in they have settled, and spent their time, or from the Epitaphs, or Inscriptions on their Graves. All which hath been communicated to the Author by Letters from Persons mostly unknown to him. Now whereas the Bishop of Salisbury saith in his Letter, p. 9. That he hath
been visibly made a Tool by some of the Church of Rome, to Reproach all the greatest Men of our Church; is, under favour, not true, as he him∣self hath several times protested, and with Zealous Imprecations declared his Innocency of such a matter, so much, that he is ready to make Oath in any Court of Judicature, that he hath not in the least, either by Letter from, or Discourse with, any Roman Catholick, whe∣ther Religious, or Laick, been desired, per∣suaded, or provoked to speak any one thing of, or against, a Writer, or Bishop, or any Person else, of the Protestant Persuasion. His Lordship, in that Character of the Histori∣ographer's being made a Tool, hath seemed much to incline to the vain Reports of some Men, and hath received things too much upon trust: For had he enquired of several Persons in Oxon of known Worth and Truth, he would have found him not to be so. But it seems those just Truths which he hath given of Trimmers and Temporizers relishes not with many Men of this Age. Furthermore also, whereas his Lordship doth alledg, That he hath laid together all that the Malice of Missionaries could furnish him with, to Blemish the Work of one of the greatest Men of our Church, Bishop Jewell; is, under favour, a mistake, for he laid them not, but R Parsons the Jesuit, whom he Quotes for what he says:
And if any thing be ill said of that Bishop, those of Parsons his Party are to Answer for it, while in the mean time the Author of the Athenae Oxon is so far from speaking ill of that Worthy and Learned Bishop, that he tells you in that Book, That he was one of the greatest Lights that the Reformed Church of England hath produced; that for his great Learning and Sufferings he was made Bishop of Salisbury by Queen Elizabeth; and adds, with Cambden, (who was no Missionary) That he was a won∣derful, great, and deep Divine, a most stout and earnest Maintainer of our Reformed Religion, a∣gainst the Adversaries of his Learned Books: That he was a Man of singular Ingeny, of exqui∣fit Erudition in Theologicals, and of great Pi∣ety, &c. what more can be said? If this is not enough, after an excellent Book written of his Life by the Learned Dr. Lawrence Humphrey, I know not what is. The Truth is, which may be easily observed by any ordinary Reader (not prejudiced) that the Author of Athenae Oxon. hath writtenSo in The Works of the Learned, &c. London, 1691. qu. p. 5. very impartially, and has related whatsoever he knows, whether good or bad, of those whose Lives he writes. The Roman Catholicks are not better used by him, than those of the Church of Eng∣land,
as may be seen in the Lives of many of them in the First Volume, among which are those of John Bekinson, William Chiadsey, Edm. Bonner, Thomas Harding, Henry Cole, Edm. Campian, John Nicholls, Robert Parsons, and others, whose great Mutability in Religion, (which the Author of The works of the Learned calls Hyprocrisie) he sets down. The Second Volume of the Athenae Oxon, which makes the Third Volume that the Au∣thor hath Published, was collected as the First, viz. From Records, Registers, &c. In it you'll find a great deal of the Mystery of Ini∣quity Acted in that dismal Rebellion which was commenced by the Puritans, and other Factious People, Anno 1642, opened and displayed. It shews how those Brethren were common Preachers up of Treason and Rebellion, and how their Pulpits were Esteemed by Observing Men, the Chairs of Juglers: That Blasphe∣mies, Profanations, Absurdities, &c. were by them vented every Day in their Extemporary Prayers and Sermons, to the great blinding and misleading of the People. It shews how the Men of those times did turn themselves, and overturn all things, meerly for private Interest and Gain. It shews also the Instability of o∣thers, who then Swore and Forswore for their own Ends, made Religion a Stalking-Horse, and of Sacred Oaths, no more than common Knights of the Post.
Therein you'll find many passages relating to the Life and Actions of that Blessed Martyr King Charles the First, especially for the Two last Years of his Reign, which were never before Published, and the Intriegues of many of the Leading Men on the Rebels side, that were car∣ried on, in bringing that Pious Prince to the Block. Therein you'll find great and generous Sense of Loyalty in the Author, and from his Pen Just and Impartial Characters of the True and Suffering Sons of the Church of England; as also the Impartial Relations of such as were not so, mostly taken from their own Books and Ser∣mons, or Pamphlets written by the Brethren, or Royal Party. You'll also find therein the Just Characters of many of the Nobility and Gentry that adhered to the said King when he was at Oxon, and what not of History that re∣lates to that most Wicked and Barbarous Rebel∣lion before-mention'd? You'll also find therein many bold and undeniable Truths, which tread∣ing too close on the heels of Time, several Per∣sons (whose Relations had been Actors in, or submitters to the Men in the said unparallel'd Rebellion,) have endeavoured to make them Abuses and Libels, thereby to bring the Author into trouble. Both the Volumes of the Athenae and Fasti Oxon, (which his Lordship of Salisbury calls a despicable Book) are most exactly written ac∣cording to time; and the Author has been so
punctual, that the very Day, and sometimes the Hour of a thing done, or of the Death of a Writer, or Bishop, is set down; and all com∣pacted in so good and exact a Method, that no∣thing of that Nature can possibly be done bet∣ter: And therefore why his Lordship of Salis∣bury should say, That he has thrown together a Tumultuary mixture of Stuff and Tattle, none in Oxon can imagin it, or in the least judge where that Stuff and Tattle should be lodged. Both the said Volumes will, without doubt, be of great use to all Persons of Literature, but parti∣cularly to such as apply themselves to History, or Politicks, whom it concerns every Moment to know what kind of Men were the Authors of those Books they Read. Neither is that knowledg unnecessary to all that Study; for as the Writing of Authors may be said to be the Picture of the Mind, so to know their Life, Re∣ligion, and most remarkable Actions, must needs be a great help towards judging rightly of their Sentiments. This being an infallible Truth, it has been a wonder to many, why his Lord∣ship of Salisbury, who hath written many Lives (and many more) of Eminent Men, and seems to have a peculiar Genius that way, should now endeavour to run down the Athe∣nae and Fasti Oxon, which consists all, or most, of Lives and Characters, and make it a despi∣cable Book, and the Author a Scribler, &c.
As for that passage in Mr. W. Fulman, in the Second Volume of Athenae, p. 625, that his Corrections of, and Observations on, the First part of The History of the Reformation of the Church of England, were some omitted, and o∣thers curtail'd, &c. The Author had from Mr. Fulman himself, who related it several times with reluctancy before him, and some of his Collegiats of Christ-Church-College, and seemed to Condole his Misfortune, that his Labours and Lucubrations could not stand according to his Mind, desiring withal, that as the said Au∣thor had doneSee Hist. & Antiq. Univ. Oxon, lib. 2. p. 243. See also in Athenae Oxon, Vol. 2. p. 625. him right, as to the Col∣lecting of the Works of King Charles the First, and obtaining Materials for the Writing of that King's Life (the Glory of which, Dr. Richard Perinchief carried away,) so he would be pleased to do him right in the Work (Athenae Oxon) that he was then Meditating, to let the World know of the omitting and curtailing of many of the said Observations. All which, he according to a promise then made, hath per∣formed, and thereby done right to the Memory of his deceased Friend: Which being Just and Equitable, and not unbecoming an Historian, his Lordship of Salisbury needed not to expect to see a Writer of his (Anthony Harmer's) Rank descend so low to Cite such a Scribler, especially
upon such an occasion, &c. Had it not been for Mr. Harmer's reference to a passage in the Se∣cond Volume of the Athenae Oxon. the Cha∣racter of a Scribler, and other most terrible things of the Historiographer, would not have been mention'd; but something must be said, let it be never so unjust, lest an Answer should be deficient, Et hinc Lachrymae. I cannot but reflect on that sort of Creature, who when for their Snarling and Barking, a Stone or a Stick is thrown at them, they turn Tail to him that threw it, and fall with Teeth, and Grins upon the poor Instrument of Cor∣rection. With Reverence be it spoken, there is a great likeness in the present Case. Mr. Harmer being a little offended with the Noise made by the Writer of The History of Refor∣mation, thought fit to cast at him a passage out of Athenae Oxon. Vol. 2. p. 625. Upon this the Author of that History turns away from the Objecter, and falls upon the Book so Ob∣jected to him, with so much Fury, that if the Book had been burned, it had been better used. But pray where's the Ingenuity of this Method of Defence? Would any Court of Equity al∣low, that when a Person stands Convicted of a Crime by this or that Evidence, he shall not insist upon disproof of the Testimony, but fall upon the Witness, and call him Fool and Knave, because he dared to prove him guilty? If the Writer of this Vindication had treated Mr.
Harmer with some Scorn and Contempt, it had not affrighted him, nor deterr'd him from enquiring further into the truthPreface to the Specimen of Errours, &c. p. 7. of things. And therefore it seems when he foresaw his Scorn and Contempt would be thrown away upon the said Mr. Harmer, he was resolv'd to cast it all upon the By-stander, the Author of Athenae Oxen. And it was wisely done, not to provoke the Man that wore the Sword, but to turn the Affront upon the Naked Passenger. And he has effectually done it upon one, who can digest a Rude thing, and equally neglect Greatness and Passion. The next matter that his Lordship of Salis∣bury takes notice of, is, His Barbarous attacking the Memory of his Predecessor Bishop Ward, who was in so many respects one of the greatest Men of his Age, &c. What his Lordship means by Barbarous attacking, is, no doubt, in his sense Abusing, or Reporting False things of him. If so, then let the Reader know that what is said, being taken from Register and Observation, is as clear as the Sun at Noon: But I see Truth must not be spoke at all times. Had his Lord∣ship known Dr. Ward before His Majesties Re∣stauration, he would have been of another Mind; but his knowledg of him, was not, I presume, till after he was a Bishop, when then,
and to the time of his Death, he was esteemed a Good and Excellent Man. The Truth is, he was a Man of Parts, and a great Royalist for a time; but when he saw that King Charles the First was beheaded, and Monarchy never in a possibility of returning again, then did he change his Orthodox Principles, submit to the Men then in power, and Eat the Bread of Two Royalists, (that had been Ejected,) successively. And tho' his Friends say, that he never took the Oath caled the Engagement, yet it appears that he did so in the Register belonging to the Committee for the Reformation of the University of Oxon, as I was many Years since informed by the Clerk belonging to that Committee. What his Life and Conversation was, while he Lived in Oxon, the poor Remnant of the Royalists that then remained there, would have told you, who usually said, That had not Dr. Ward degenerated from their Principles of Loyal∣ty, he would not have lashed out into several Im∣moralities, &c. for the doing of which, he also lost the Opinion that the then Saints in the Uni∣versity had of him. And now to conclude, I shall leave with you the Character of the Author of the Athenae Oxon. which is at the end of the Epistle to the Reader, (of which but few were Printed,) set
before the First Volume of the said Athenae run∣ning thus, The Reader is desired to know, that this Herculean Labour had been more pro∣per for a Head, or Fellow of a College, or for a Publick Professor, or Officer of the most Noble University of Oxon, to have un∣dertaken, than the Author, who never en∣joyed any Place or Office therein, or can just∣ly say, that he hath Eaten the Bread of any Founder. Also, that it had been a great deal more fit for one who pretends to be a Vir∣tuoso, and to know all Men, and all things that are Transacted: Or for one who fre∣quents much Society, where the Characters of Men and their Works are frequently discus∣sed; but the Author, alas, is so far from fre∣quenting such Company, that he is as 'twere Dead to the World, and utterly unknown in Person to the generality of Scholars in Oxon. He is likewise so great an Admirer of a Solita∣ry and Retired Life, that he frequents no As∣semblies of the said University, hath no Com∣panion in Bed, or at Board, in his Studies, Walks, or Journeys, nor holds Communica∣tion with any, unless with some, and those ve∣ry few, of Generous and Noble Spirits, that have in some measure been promoters and en∣couragers of this Work: And indeed all things considered, he is but a degree different from an Ascetick, as spending all or most of his time, whether by Day or Night, in Read∣ing, Writing, or Divine Contemplation.
However, he presumes, that the less his Com∣pany and Acquaintance is, the more Impar∣tial his Endeavours will appear to the Ingeni∣ous and Learned, to whose Judgments only he submits them, and himself. To which I shall add what I know besides of the same Author, viz. That he did never in heat and forwardness meddle with a Subject, to which he was not prepar'd by Education, and a due Method of Studies: That he never Wrote to oblige a Rising Party, or to insinuate into the disposers of Preferment; but has been content with his Station, and aimed at no end but Truth: That he never took up with the Transcript of Records, where the Originals might be consulted: Nor made use of others Eyes, when his own could serve: That he ne∣ver Wrote in Post with his Body and his Thoughts in a hurry, but in a fix'd Abode, and with a deliberate Pen: That he never con∣ceal'd an Ungrateful Truth, nor flourish'd over a Weak Place, but in sincerity of Meaning and Expression has thought an Historian should be a Man of Conscience: That he has never had a Patron to oblige, or forget, but has been a free and independent Writer: And in a Word, that he confesses there may be some Mistakes in Mo∣dern Things and Persons, when he could have no Evidence but from the information of li∣ving Friends, or perhaps Enemies: But he is confident, that where Records are cited, and
where Authentick Evidence could possibly be had, there he has been Punctual and Exact. And therefore he defies Anth. Harmer to Write any one Specimen of Errours and Defects in his History; or if he can find out Eighty Nine, or One Hundred, gross Mistakes, yet he should not value his Threats of further Exposing him, and his Writings. FINIS.
