W3771 R38782 18112219 106829
Suum Cui{que} OR, EVERY ONE HIS OWN. In a Short DISCOURSE ON THE 21th. Ver. of the 22th. Chapt. of St. MATTHEW. First Preached, from the firm Principles of his own Loyalty; Then Published, to gratify the free Proposals of a Neighbours Generosity. By J. Wyllys, M. A. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brome, at the Gun at the West-end of St. Paul's Church, 1676.
To the Worshipful, John Morecraft Esq; my especial Mecenas, the Worthy owner of that true None-Such, a Mannor called Fitz∣waters, in the Barony of Shen∣field, in Essex. SIR, THat you laid this grateful task upon me, under the refreshing shaddow of your spreading Name, to print, dedicate to, and pre∣sent you with, a Sermon on this Text; made me a little solicitous to find the Reason: From any design'd reward, to unite me more to your Service, it could not be; since there is no degree beyond su∣perlative, nor are Attoms divisible. To expose my weakness, I could no way per∣swade my self 'twas, for that, as, I already am, and hope to be abundantly more, sa∣tisfied
in your Candor, so I am easily sensible, how without Printing, I am ob∣noxious. And for you, Sir, who are Ex∣tracted from the most ancient Family of the More-Craft's; You, Sir, who are celebrated for Your forreign Adven∣tures, Your domestick Physical Efforts, Your most Remarkable Mansion, and that Noble Court, that, rose from its ashes, to bear up Your Name, does blazon You, to more advantage, than can the small character of an obscure Press: How∣ever, I have hereby an opportunity, as to make known Your regards to King and Church; so to leave a Printed Record, how ready to obey all Your Commands, though otherwise to his disgrace, is Your Obliged Servant, J. W.
Suum Cui{que} Or, EVERY ONE HIS OWN. In a SERMON on St. Matth. 22. Vers. 21. ult. Render therefore unto Cesar, the things that are Cesar's: and unto God, the things that are God's. THE Blessed Jesus that was so anointed above his Fellows, that He's called the wisdom of the Father, does in these words, circumspectly answer, what was circumventingly proposed; for ver. 15. the Pha∣risees, a knowing and subtil Sect, had a design to entrap him in his talk: The Devil had be∣fore laid his snares, that are called Questuum, by which he catches so many ambitious and co∣vetous ones, viz. Riches and Honours. They in the Text, lay theirs Questionum, in which many inconsiderate and unwary ones are snar'd, viz. those of dilematical and doubtful Questions; which that they might more succesfully do, than did their Father the Devil, they first take Counsel about it, then chuse fit Emissaries to effect it, some of their own Disciples, and some of the motly Herodians, who being of a politick Reli∣gion,
propose a politick Question, about the King's Revenue: which, according to counsel taken, and instruction given, they very craftily propose, and first, to remove all suspition of their design, they first court him, which indeed he was, though they believed it not, as a Teacher and Do∣ctor, as the word rendred Master implies. Secondly, they characterise him, though truly in it self, yet falsly as to them, as one, first, of Truth and In∣tegrity; thou art true, &c. Secondly, of Courage and Impartiality; neither carest thou for any man. For, &c. Thirdly, least yet some jealousie of their design might remain, they, uncompell'd and freely, attest the truth of this Character, and become his Scio's, Master, we know, &c. and then secondly, they put the Question: tell us then what thinkst thou, &c. which cunningly insi∣nuates that 'tis his opinion, not his determination which they expected, as if they only desire to know whether as to this problem he would af∣firm or deny: if he had said 'tis, then the Pha∣risees and such as were simply Jews, would have taken just offence: they being as to Cesar a free people, and by Conquest only made tributary. If he had said 'tis not, then he would necessarily have fallen into the displeasure of Cesar's Substi∣tutes, and these mungrel Herodians. But, He was to understanding a Fencer, not to ward the blows of this two-edged Sword. Therefore knowing and observing all their fal∣sifies, v. 18. but Jesus, &c. fending theirs, he makes a blow at them, ver. 19. 20. which they break∣ing
with a positive, though unwary Answer, ver. 21. they say unto him Cesar's this, their own an∣swer becomes a Delphick Sword in his Menage; For by owning their currant Coin, to the least de∣nair, to bear the Image and Superscription of Cesar; they in that very thing own Cesar's So∣vereignty; nothing being more a badg thereof, than coining money, and therefore always alter∣ed upon the death or change of a Prince: so that he let them see, from their answer to his, how they might have saved their Question; as long as they had, or could see, money, their Coin would furnish them with an argument for Tri∣bute. It being but a rendring to Cesar the things that are Cesar's. Obj. This Connexion is clear, but how comes this in, and unto God? A. If we look back to the former Chapter, we shall find that divers Questions Religious had gone before. He was no sooner come to Jerusalem, but he begins his design'd Reformation, ver. 12, 13. and to make it the more currant, he heals all comers, ch. 21. ver 14. which produce Hosanna's from the very children. But those that chiefly should have abetted him, in such works of Piety and Charity, are displeased, and quarrel with him, not so much, overtly, for those his deeds, as the results of them, his praises: ver. 16. but he an∣swers them as he did their Instigator with Scrip∣ture, out of Ps. 8. 2. after a recess from the 17. to v. 23. the very same come again to question him, even the chief Priests, and the Elders of the peo∣ple,
instead of the Scribes, ver. 24. asking for his Commission and its derivation, which was of the same dilematical and dubious nature, as appears by the Question He opposes instead of an answer, upon the clear and open answering of which, he promises satisfaction, v. 24. & beginning of 25. but the cunning they used in their proposal, they have recourse to for their answer, in seq. 25. & 26. therefore their return is short, but subtil, ver. 27. beginning, which gives him scope to make his Rejoinder in the end of the same verse. And smartly rebukes them in three Parables, that of the two Sons, v. 28. which from their own mouth, pr. 31, he homely applies in the end of 31 and 32, and that of the Husbandman, which from v. 33, to the end of v. 40, He proposes, and they in v. 41, answer, out of which their own answer, he infers their guilt, v. 42, 3, 4. which they easily perceived v. 45, and would, if they durst, have reveng'd, v. 46. But that yet, as by the mouth of two or three Witnesses, they might be condemned, he gives them yet another Parable of the marriage of the Kings Son in the begin∣ning of this; where he closely hints the Gentiles Vocation, v. 9. and their Rejection, v. 12, 13. which they also could not but understand it, as they had done the former, that it especially concern'd them. Therefore they laying aside all religious Questions, not being able to this three∣fold allusion to answer a word, as v. 46. of this, but what he could make use of to their confutation; whilst they not caring to hear any more of that
ear, are resolved to entrap him in matter of the Kingdom. He unwilling to let them go, with∣out some reflection, on what they were willing to forget. He minds them that some things by way of rendition and tribute, do distinctly refer to God, after rendition unto Cesar, therefore, after Render unto Cesar &c. he leaves the same word to be supplied, and unto God, &c. Q. Why then begins he with Cesar? A. It may be, first, that he might upbraid them for that folly of theirs, that made sure to entrap him, by this generically different, and consulted Question; and about to convince them, that the wisdom of men is foolishness with God, He shews how, what they just now urged as irrefragable, he can with ease, immediately overthrow, or se∣condly, to let them know, that he the less won∣dred at, their not giving to God over all blessed for ever, the things that were his; when they should be found under a doubt of giving, to those who are called Gods, the things that are theirs. These for the most part being in couples, so inseparable, that who so is a bad Christian, can never be a good Subject; nor he who is a bad Subject, a good Christian. So he that is a good Subject, is a good Christian; and there is no good Christian, but is a good Subject; a truth, that if it were well weighed by our two Polar dissenters, would certainly even constrain them, that they might evidence their pretences of being the true Christians, to become the better Subjects. We should all more believe, that they did real∣ly
give unto God, &c. if more visibly they did give unto Cesar, &c. of which, according to our Saviours Order; First, and in it these three parts, the Act, Object, Subject, in whom, about what. The Act is, Give, or rather Render, which Pareus himself no great friend to Royalty, acknowledges on the place, constrain'd it may be by the force of the original word, or the clear scope of the place. 1. Render, (i. e.) give as of due and debt, not of grace and kindness: there is a due we are to render unto all men, Rom. 13. 7. (i. e.) where ano∣ther has, either a Natural, Civil, or Religious right, things are not given, but rendred. 2. Give freely, and of a willing mind, not grudgingly, and by con∣straint: Our Lord does as his, and ours, love a chearful giver, because it assimulates a man to him, who giveth freely, and upbraideth not. 3. Large∣ly and fully, not niggardly and sparingly, as we would to a Treasury or Granary, whence we hope to receive again: would we not reap little, let us sow much. For, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sow∣eth bountifully, shall reap bountifully; and con∣trarily: our opening wide, is the way to have our expectations more amply fill'd. 4. Render seasonably, and in due time; not slowly, and out of season: Who gives quickly, gives doubly: Who gives seasonably, gives tre∣bly: Nay, who renders quickly and opportune∣ly, gives; as we say of a just and punctual debtor, when he pays upon a pinch, he did me as great a pleasure, as if he had given me such or such a summ. There are a sort of viscous and
bird-lim'd gifts, that by their sticking become ungrateful: Whilst such gifts hang in the hopper (as we say) Cesar may starve for want of his due. Whosoever gives, should thus give, especially he that renders; yet more when he renders unto 2. The Object, Cesar: The whole race of the Roman Emperors, from their first original to this day, from Julius, were surnamed Cesars, and under that name are comprehended all supreme Ma∣gistrates, yea and Governors as sent by them. Which at this time were Infidels and Heathens, and so strangers to the Covenant of Grace. Nay, they were persecutors of all that professed and owned the name of Jesus; insomuch that we have recorded neer as many persecutions as there were eminent Cesars; ten of them, and but twelve of these. And did Christ give this in charge then, when Nero's, Domitian's, and Maximine's were Emperors? and shall we think he meant it less due to those, who themselves profest Christiani∣ty, and fostered it in others? was it not to Con∣stantine's and Theodosius's due? though indeed as the Church by their bounty brought forth riches, and after the Daughter, devoured the Mother, by introducing Luxury and Lasiness, yet was their Piety ne're the worse meant, or ought their due therefore to be substracted. Again, was it to be rendred to the Propagators, and not to the Defen∣ders, the James's & Charles's of our days, the most strenuous, and able Assertors of that Faith that providentially was delivered to them: insomuch that the first defended it with his Pen against
the two tropicks of Popery and Phanatism to the amasement and silence of all forreign Princes and doctors; and the stopping the mouths of all domistick gainsayers: and the Other maintain'd it against the same extreams both by Pen and Sword, with the hazzard of his life whilst at Liberty; and after to the perpetual shame of his Rebellious Subjects, but to his own eternal Honour, Seald it with his blood: Being in One, a Constellation of Confessor, Defender, and Martyr. And is it less to be rendred to our present Sove∣raign? who, as much as I pray God he ever may, has trac'd his blessed Fathers steps; nay in some made deeper impressions. He was not less hun∣ted like a Patridge upon the Mountaines, then his Father was; objected to equal perils and dangers from his Countrymen and subjects. And, his Father was actually bought and sould, first by a perfidious party of his own Countrymen to the Rebellious English, and afterwards cursedly bargain'd for betwixt those most Disingenuous, and Traiterou's Bradshaw's and Crummel's; So was there a price laid down for his life; So our present Cesar was from a Prodigious height of traiterous impudence, publickly proclaim'd an Excile from, and Enemy to his Native Soil and Subjects. And in those forreign parts where he was constrain'd to converse, how many solicita∣tions to shipwrack Faith and good Conscience must he needs meet with, which must sure be more poingnaunt and tempting, when accom∣panied with his pressing wants and Necessi∣ties
when every fresh Meal, Garb or Lodging, were each a new Stratagem; being forced to be beholding to them, who design'd Him their prey: Which was a kind of Martyrdom. But yet with what invincible, and unparalleld Resolution, did he maintain and bring home himself a Confessor and Defender of the true Faith? and is not such a Cesar fit to be rendred to, therefore Render, &c. 2. But who, or what, do you mean by all this Har∣rangue? If their be an Act, and an Object, there Must be a Subject, and that Leads to thirdly the sub∣jects. The subject therefore of this action, is two fold, 1. Who 2. What. 1. Who, in the Text, there were such, as were simply Jews, of which the Pharisees were looked upon as the Top and Prime, and therefore under them all that pro∣fess'd simple Judaism, which were under the power of their Instruction, or example, and also those party-perpale, the Lincy-woolsie Religionists, the Herodi∣ans, whose pretence, was a sort of Alcoran of Heathe∣nism and Judaism. In proportion to which our Savi∣our by this Resolution Engages all men, of whatsoever Degree or Sect, Denomination or Religion to render to Cesar, &c. I know the Romanists would exclude their Clergy: But surely St. Paul, Rom. 13. 1. when he says, Let every Soul be subject, includes 'm, unless to avoid it, they will renounce their having Souls; the Scriptures, frequently by Soul, understanding the whole man. A generation of men, decry'd by their pretended opposites, the presbyterians, but apparently all the
while Ap'd by them, as in many others, so in this, whilst they, to fend themselves, will call, not only Parlia∣ments, but Cesar's to account, for their Civil Sanctions; and all upon the same Principle, In order to Spiritu∣als, contracting only the more bugbear-name of Holy Church into The Kirk: But I see no more for one side than another, why a National Counsel, or Provincial Synod, may not now be call'd, ordered, determined and dissolved by our Soveraign Prince, as they were by the ancient Cesars, since that is the undoubted Pre∣rogative of every supreme power in its own Juris∣diction; and all persons are indefinitely oblig'd, to ren∣der unto Cesar the things that are Cesar's; which brings us to the fourth particular, and The second Subject, what they are to render, scil. the things that are Cesar's, (i. e.) such as he may, and does justly claim, by the Right of Nature, Religion, or Civil Society; which to treat of distinctly, would not be so proper, since the examination of the first, would necessarily lead me into the abstruse en∣quiry after the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, in which I should argue my self guilty of unseemly presumption; having ever esteem∣ed them the hidden things of Empire, always to be kept close lock'd in the Regal Archives: Nor is it fit that humble Subjects should so much as audaciously Smell to, less Gather, least of all make a Posie of, the Flowers of the Crown; they are Cesars by the Law of Nature, the first Man being the first Monarch, and therefore for them, we rather leave them, than render them to Him. Again, should we speak distinctly, of what the Re∣ligious,
and Civil Law, makes his, we should be forced upon coincidencies; Cesar claiming, and we standing bound to pay, many of his dues by the right of both, Religion, and Law, yea and Nature too. For, as Cesar is our Father which is natural, and by the superadded Law of the fifth Command, Divine; as also by the authoratative explanation of Human Laws, Civil. Honour and Esteem, Fear and Reverence, Obedience and Subjection, Defence and Support, Love and Prayer are his dues. Now whatsoever divine right was affix'd to the late pretended Government of the Church of England, as then 'twas nick-named: Sure I am 'tis stamp'd upon all these, and clearly sortified by the Laws of Human Nature, and Civil Society; a lawful Cesar being by all those Laws a common Fa∣ther: upon which account, 1. Cesar's due is Honour and Esteem from his Sub∣jects, which all, are as so many members in his Royal Family, He being the Father of his Countrey. There∣fore, St. Peter, 1 Ep. c. 2. ver. 17. having earnestly ex∣horted Subjects to their duty from the 13. He closes all with, Honour the King: the foundational excel∣lency of this relation exacting as a due, all possible Esteem and Honour, in thought, word, and deed. And it's one part of the inference from all that of Rom. 13. v. 7. Honour to whom honour. 2. Cesar's due is Fear and Reverence: We own them as Fathers, and They are, by our heavenly Fa∣ther, owned, as Gods; having not only the Image of God, as Men, on the one side, but on the Reverse the Image of God, as Gods; his Spirit thus speaking, I have said you are Gods, And when by the same
Psalmist He's said to sit in the Congregation of the Gods, He is universally understood to mean, the meeting of Magistrates: Cesars then are not meer men, but as vice-Gods, and as such, to be feared, and reverenc'd; therefore Rom. 13, 4. we are oblig'd to be af∣fraid of Them as immediate Ministers of God, and Revengers, to execute wrath upon them that do evil. Fear, therefore, and Reverence, is one of their dues to be rendred, v. 7. And by a strong parity of Rea∣son, not only when good and gentle, but also to the Froward, as appears, 1 Pet. 2. 18. They being our Masters paramount, and all subjects their ser∣vants, Cesar being supream, v. 13. Which Leads to the third due that we are to render to Cesar (i. e.) 3. Obedience and Subjection; either in an active Service, or a patient Sufferance: 1. Readily complying with all their Commands: not only agreeing with, but if not contrary to, Gods revealed will, then are subjects bound actively to obey. 2. Calmly and quietly undergoing the penalties, even of such injunctions, as not only disagree with, but are contrary to, Divine precepts; which indeed is the proper Cue of passive obedience: And, Note, of this disagreement or contradiction we must be sure, to be fully satisfied, before we actually disobey: And then its no great difficulty to resolve that Question, Whether it be better to obey God or Man, and even then, pa∣tiently to suffer for our non-obedience; which has been so plentifully exemplified, by holy men of all Ages, from the testimony both of divine, and human Writ, that it would be superfluous to prove it.
And this obediential subjection, we stand necessarily engaged to, nor only for wrath, but conscience sake, Rom. 13. 5. not only as the worst may, for fear of Punishment; but as the best ought, from love of du∣ty: we must be sensible, not so much of mans wrath that may, but Gods, that cannnot be shun'd but will be finished, without repentance, in the damna∣tion of disobedient resisters, Rom. 13. 2. 4. A fourth due is Defence and Support. He is the Minister of God, to every Individual Subject for good, Rom. 13. 4. always vigilant and careful for the wel∣fare of the whole, and therefore it follows, v. 6. of the 13 to the Rom. for this cause pay you tribute al∣so, for they are Gods Ministers, continually attending upon this very thing: They maintain, Fleets and Ar∣mies, for security of Seas and Trade, Judges and Courts of Judicature, to free from Intestine Force and Fraud▪ and maintain Honesty and Property. Cesar is the Stomach, the Heart and Liver of the Body politick, that digests Nutriment, and makes blood, for the Benefit of the Whole. Now as all Members, yea and all Faculties, are diligently em∣ploy'd, to provide Meat for the Belly, to invent and menage Preservatives for the Brest, rendering their utmost as due to those vital parts; nay, venturcing the loss of any, of all, to save Them: So should all Subjects, render unto Cesar, all possible Defenes, and Support. 5. And at this time lastly, Cesars due is Love and Prayer; I joyn them, because our love, is manifested in nothing more, to persons out of our reach, then in praying for them. Now Cesar, is above us, and
our ordinary duties of Charity: tho as divine Her∣bert sings: Love is a present for a mighty King; which because we cannot frequently manifest, in it's more familiar acts▪ though bound habitually to have it in readiness, therefore this, that extends to all, at all distances, and is every ones due, so in a peculi∣ar manner is it Cesars: See the Apostle's Cannon for it, 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men; but particularly, for Kings and all that are in Authority over us: And they, indeed, especially need it: Cesar's Condition tho much above others, yet is more Expos'd than others; his Greatness, makes not only his Burdens, but dangers more imminent; He becomes, from His height, a more conspicuous Mark, for the whole Artillery of Hell, and wicked men; His temptations are many, from His uncontroulable Capacitie; all be∣ing accountable to Him, He only to God: From His Eminency, He is lyable to be flatterd in any of his possible Errors, too many being still ready, with their Pillows and Kerchiefs, nay and the very Pro∣phets are apt to dawb with untemper'd mortar. Their Counsels are intricate and difficult, their thoughts oft ruffl'd with their Solicitous care of the Peoples good, and therefore as a particular and peculiar due they call for our Prayers, that They may be directed upon all Emergencies to sound and safe Resolves; that They may be preserv'd from all those theatning dangers; that They may wisely, and powerfully, re∣sist and repel, those many sly and mighty temptati∣ons; and indeed, in nothing more can subjects be
expressive of their Love to Cesar than in humble, sincere, and constant prayer. All, and every of which, must in their proportion be deriv'd upon his Substi∣tutes, it being by St. Peters Rule, 1 Ep. 2. 13, 14. Due to every ordinance of man and that for the Lords sake: For as Cesars are Gods, so all other Rulers and Governours, are Cesar's Substitutes. But oh how little has been, nay, may I not say how little is, Christs advice followed by Christians; his peaecable and humble precepts, being esteem'd rather as Bouys and Marcks on Shelfs and Rocks, not to be approach'd, than as Phares and Light hou∣ses to direct our way: Lets expostulate the thing a little, and may such as are guilty so self-judg and condemn themselves here, that they may avoid the judgment of Condemnation hereafter! we shall only thetically enquier whether. 1. This be to honour and esteem Cesar, or his Sub∣stitutes, when we speak all manner of evil of Dignities? which tho St. Jude propheci'd of, yet with such an assimulation, that one would think, should make all men avoid it, or at least the punishment annexed to it, the perishing of Corah. I am sure St. Paul, Act 23. 5. Owns the canonical obligation of Exod. 22. 28. That none ought to speak e∣vil of the Ruler of the people; which is yet much more material for the Conviction of all, who with-hold their Due; if we consider, it was after the dissolution of the Mosaical Frame, yet spoken in reference to a pretended high Priest, then in being, by whose unjust command He was struck in the Face, v. 2. and utter'd by way of retractation, that he had a∣ny
way cast dishonour, or appear to disesteem him. Those certainly that do slight, vilifie, and contemn Cesar, either in thought, word or deed, do in neither Honour and Esteem Him, and contrary to Christs Command with-hold his due, not Rendring unto Cesar the things that are Cesar's. 2. Do they Fear or Reverence Cesar, that vilifie and reproach him, and all his actions? do they regard them as Gods, that refuse them the common reverence due to men? that if they please not them, they shall not only not be, what God has appointed them; but, not be at all: Invading not only their undoubted Pre∣rogatives, but their sacred Persons. Shall it be thought an effect of fear and reverence, that made David's heart smite him, for cutting of Saul's lappet? and shall not the stupendious Treason of Remorseless se∣vering his Anointed Head from his Body, be rank'd in the front of the same Classis? I leave the question to be resolved, by the most cauterised Conscience. But we hope, that so detestable a thing, will never again enter into the heart, much less reach the hand of the most miscreant Subject. For, 1 Sam. 26. 9. Who can stretch his hand against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? Nay, who can brandish his tongue against the worst of Cesars, and not incur divine dis∣pleasure? For Solomon a King, wise and good, Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no, not in thy thoughts; though it may be thou mayest think he deserves it, much less upbraid him in thy speech; though never so reproachable. Elihu intimates, though he be pos∣sibly wicked and ungodly, yet it is a very unfitting
thing to be said to any Supreme. Job 38. 18. Is it fit to say, to a King thou art wicked? or to Princes ye are ungodly? The affirmative Interrogation strongly denies the thing; it is by no means fit: which he esteems so indubitable, that he dare leave it to com∣mon judgment. Every Cesar, not being less Gods Minister, to exe∣cute vengeance on evil doers, tho He himself be such, They are not to be reviled and flighted as Sinners, but dreaded and rever'd as Avengers. 3. Again, are such Obedient and Subject, that out of, pretended Conscience, but, real faction, dispute and question all, but contradict and oppose many of his Injunctions? Not considering, that nothing is more evi∣dent, than that all lawful Commands, are to be obeyed actively, and even the most unlawful, passively, as be∣fore; and then, are Cesar's Commands lawful, when, no way contradicted by Gods: Indeed it is unlaw∣ful to obey, when God forbids, the very matter of their commands: But then this caution is not to be forgotten, That, as we are sure, Subjection and Obedi∣ence is Cesar's due; so after the impartial use of all possible means, we stand assuredly convinc'd, that this or that command of Cesar's, runs counter with God's; else, how easie is it, to put on the pretence of Conscience, to Cloak Disobedience; appearing to give unto God, the things that are God's, and in the mean time, Robb Cesar, of that which is his; and so, under a specious notion, of it's being better to obey God then man, Disobey both. 4. Yet again, do they give Cesar his due of De∣fence and Support, who grutch every penny of Tax or Tribute, and that, most unreasonably, when by their
own Consent Legally Erogated? Such who, every day, can spend more, vainly, it may be, sinfully (i. e.) to gratifie an unreasonable passion, a destructive lust, or a factious Party, and yet think much, to render Cesar his due: Nay, who will pawn their necessaries, to supply their Extravagancies, and yet repine at every small sum, for defence and support of their Prince. Why, is not all thy peace and plenty, Liberty, and Property, both begot, and maintain'd by Cesar, suffi∣cient to oblige thee to a chearful rendring Him his due? Shall that Head, which by his Legal administra∣tion of justice, sits safe on its shoulder, refuse, when cald for, to pay its pole? shalt thou quietly sit in thy own Chimny-corner, and thinks two shillings a year for thy hearth, a rack-rent for such a Benefit? dost thou unmolested buy, sell, and get gain; and yet preser danger of plundring, before dutiful paying of Custome and Excise? Sittest thou under thy own Vine, and Fig-tree, rejoicing in the wife of thy Youth, and thy chil∣dren, like Olive branches, round about thy Table, None making the affraid: And are lawfully impos'd Taxes to dear a purchaser for such a desireable blessing? Ce∣sar's must be considered as our Seas, into which as all our Rivers Run, so from thence by secret Caverns, they again return to supply our Fountains. They are, as before, the Stomach of the Nation, that disgests all, but 'tis for the Benefit, and supply of the whole; which if rightly considered, would even con∣strain us, no more to with-hold their due, then our hand would refuse to feed our Belly: did we know the cumbersome, and unweildy nature of a Scepter, the Massy weight of an Imperial Crown; what prick∣ing thorns, Cesarian Ermyns are powdred with; (to
which purpose blessed Charls the first speaks) we would not stoop to take them off a Dunghil: Were subjects acquainted with the amusing intricacies and deep policies of their various Councels; did they but think on their many meales defer'd, nay forsaken; their interrupted sleeps, and waking nights, and all for their good: They must be forced to own, that Prin∣ces, more difficultly earn, even their dues, than the mean∣est Labourer does his hire: Remember also the grand Examplar, I mean the blessed Jesus, who upon the first intimation, rather then not pay tribute unto Cesar, He puts himself to the charge of a Miracle, the 17. ch. of this Gospel and the 27. v. Yet again. 5. And lastly, I still ask the Qurstion only, whether they answer the Apostollical Cannon, in praying es∣pecially for Kings, and all in authority; who, in their licenc'd publick devotions, vent rather Libels against, than Petitions for, their Princes? Whilst they remonstrate, not so much to God, as the Congrega∣tion, their popular, though but pretended, grievances: So far are such from praying according to the clause of tho same Canon, that under them, they may lead peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty: that they only suggest their Fears, of its being impos∣sible. Hence, He, happily, thinks Himself, and some∣times is celebrated, by others, as praying most affecti∣onately for, that does it, most scandalously against Cesar; as if the Spleen, not the Liver, were the proper Focus to warm their devotion. No wonder then such meet with, as they call it, hard measure: For why should God for them alter his resolution, of every ones reaping what he sows: If they, in the face of
God, and his Congregation, will sow disquiet and dis∣sention, what hope is there that they should reap other, than trouble and confusion? But I begin to hope, and shall at least continue to wish, better things of all English Subjects, and such as ought to accompany true Christians, obeying Christ, as in all other, so in this command especially, to give unto Cesar the things that are Cesar's. In thought, word, and deed, rendring Him all Honour and Esteem, Fear and Reverence, Obedience and Subjection, De∣fence and Support, Love and Prayer. Lest possibly, the not practising of this, should introduce a neglect of what follows: And we should not at all, or more awkwardly, give unto God the things that are Gods: For in a proportion to that of 1 Joh. 4. 20. If we render not the dues, to these Gods, we do see; how shall we, to Him, whom we have not seen? As, 1. How can we acknowledg the Supreme, that disown the sub∣ordinate Deities? Can they in likelihood have a true estimate of God, that despise Dignities? How can they fear him, that honour not the King; since both are forc'd on by the same Apostolical rule? and it were easy to instance in the rest. In a word, how can They render either to God, or ought agniz'd to Him, who are not lead by this manu∣duction; of rendring to Cesar, &c. Let us therefore all render unto Cesar the things that are Cesars, least, as a just judgment. He might with-hold from us, the things that are ours, or, strait∣ning our selves in our rendition to Cesar, we should never be truly enlarged fully to accomplish the whole Text; and give unto God the things that are Gods. FINIS.
