y18 r25217 8794195 41865
תריפה צריף׃ Physick Refin'd: OR, A LITTLE STREAM OF Medicinal Marrow, Flowing from the BONES of NATURE. WHEREIN Several Signs, particular Rules, and distinct Symptoms; where∣by the most ordinary Diseases may be distinctly known, and truly judged, are perspicuously Delineated: AND The most proper Way, safe Me∣thod, and simpathetical Cure, whereby Nature may be helped, the Sick eased, and Languishing Patients relieved (without the Use of Poysonous Purging Potions, and Venomous Medicaments) is succinctly Demonstrated: By John Yarwood, Professor of Physick. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Passinger, at the Three Bibles on London-Bridge, 1683.
TO Mrs. Mary Allsop, DAUGHTER OF Anthony Allsop, of All∣sop-i th'-Dale, Esq; SInce that Antient House, the Place of Your Nativity, hath been a Magazine of Medicine; out of which the Poor of Your Country have been Ar∣med
gratis against those Darts of Sickness, which fight against Nature; I have assumed the Bold∣ness of this Dedication; not doubting, but a Per∣son so rarely qualified (as I know You to be) will (in real Generosity) not only cast a Benevolent Aspect on these my Pub∣lick Endeavours; but (according to the wont∣ed Goodness of Your He∣roick
Spirit) candidly Ac∣cept and Countenance so small a Present, as this little Tractate, which I have (boldly enough) pre∣sumed to shadow under the Wing of Your Fa∣vour: not as if I thought, One so acquainted with Books, would be advan∣taged by reading this Compendium, (for I have seen You peruse large Volums, and known
You deduce Judgment from the best Authors) but that you may coura∣giously go on as You have begun, and (like your good Mother) continue helping them, that cannot help themselves. And that all other Noble minded Ladies & Gentlewomen may follow Your Exam∣ple, is the sincere Wish of Your Obliged Servant, Iohn Yarwood. From Shepshead in Leicester∣shire, Octob. 9th. 1682.
PHYSICK REFIN'D, &c. SECT. I. Scurvey. THere are wandering Pains running up and down the Bo∣dy; Spots appear in the Fleshy Parts; and (if the Disease be confirmed) the Gums
are affected with Bleeding and Soreness. This Disease of it self is more Troublesom, than Dangerous; but (if it be not cured) it many times brings Dropsies, Consumptions, and o∣ther Distempers arising from Obstructions of the Spleen; and is oft the Usherer in of such A∣cute Diseases, as terminate in the Grave. The Cure. The most Excellent Medi∣cines in this case, are Tincture of Tartar, Tincture of Antimo∣ny, and Tincture of Corals: Twenty Drops at a time, taken at Night, going to Bed (of any of them) in Spirit of Scurvey-Grass,
or (which is better) Spi∣rit of Tartar. Use it forty Days together. I have often cured it with Antimonium Diaphoriti∣cum, taken as the former, in Beer or Broth, twenty Grains at once, every Night for forty Days together; using in the mean time, a Diet Drink, made with Horse-Radish, Celandine, and Mustard-Seed. Crocus Martis Apperitivis in this case is very proper; but Oleum Mar∣tis is better, and may be taken eight Grains at a time. A Spi∣rit distill'd from Antimony one part, and Salt-Peetre three parts, taken to the quantity of five Drops at a time, is highly Fa∣mous in this Distemper.
SECT. II. Dropsie. THis Disease is a Watery Habit of the Body: 'Tis call'd by three Names, accord∣ing as it affects this, that, or the other Part. The First is called Ascitis; (that is) When much Water is between the Peritoneum, and the Bowels. The Second is called Timpa∣nites; (i. e.) When 'tis of a Windy Cause, known by the Hardness of the Place, (where that of Water is more soft) and
all other Parts of the Body wax lean. The Third is called Anasar∣ca, or Leucaphlegma; (that is) When all the Flesh of the whole Body appeareth moist and swelled. 'Tis generally conclu∣ded to be a Defect of the Liver. There is great Thirst, shortness of Breath, an ill Colour, and great Heaviness. If in the Beginning of the Disease, there be a Flux of the Belly, with Concoction, or the Ʋrine Made be more than what is Drunk, there is hope of Re∣covery. The Cure. Let all the Patient's Drink be sharpned with Spirit of Salt, or Oyl of Sulphur. They that
fancy Purging Medicines, use Syr∣rup of Buckthorn, an Ounce at a time in the Morning: But Syrrup of Pellitory of the Wall is better, taken a Spoonful at once, two or three times a day. The Root of Hog-Fennel, powder'd, and taken a Dram at a time, is ex∣cellent. I use Ens Veneris, twen∣ty Grains at once, every Night going to Bed. SECT. III. Small Pox. THere is first a Pain in the Head and Back; the Bo∣dy is feaverish, hot, and the
Face is red and swell'd; they are sleepy, have Red Urine, and Pricking all over the Body. The Third or Fourth Day small Pustles arise, and break out in the Skin. If they soon come forth, and Ripen easily, appear white, round, and the Breathing free, there is great Hopes of Reco∣very: But Bleeding at Nose, great Third, difficulty of Brea∣thing, Loosness, Bloody Flux, black or livid Urine, a great Feaver, the Pustles appearing Green, Black, or Blueish, or go in again, or black or blue Spots appearing; all these are dan∣gerous signs.
The Cure. First provoke Sweat with Be∣zoar Mineral; six Grains for a Child, and sixteen Grains for one of full Age. Take it at Night going to Bed. Or Antimonium Diaphoriticum may be given af∣ter the same manner, and the same Dose. Take them in Sack. Tincture of Saffron, in this case, is excellent; taken a Spoonful or two at a time, three or four times a day, in good Wine. Ten drops of Tincture of Corals, or six Grains of Tincture of Tar∣tar, given at Night in Sack, is very good. Take a little Red Fennel and Saffron, and boyl in Posset-drink, and give the Pa∣tient
to drink often, before they come out. I make up a Medi∣cine thus: Take Spirit of Wine, or Aquae Mirabolis, two Oun∣ces, Syrrup of Clove-Gilly-Flowers one Ounce, Confectio Alkermes one Dram; mix, and give a Spoonful at a time, four or five times a day. SECT. IV. Cachexia. 'TIs caused through Ob∣structions, and Hard∣ness of the Liver and Spleen; which brings the whole Body into an ill State and Disposition.
This Disease commonly follows some long Sickness, as a Dysente∣ria and Lienteria. The Flesh waxes loose and soft, the Pati∣ent is weak, hath bad Digesti∣on, loatheth Meat, desires Drink. The Body is whitish, and he goeth weakly. 'Tis mostly in∣cident to Old Men and Chil∣dren. If it continue long, it brings the Patient into a Dropsie. The Cure. All Medicines, that potently open Obstructions, are proper in this Case. Take Pulvis Ca∣checticus, half a Dram at a time, every Morning, and stir after it; taking every Night ten
Grains of Sweating Antimony. Pilulae Anodynae (which is most commonly known by the name of Matthew's, but more properly Starkey's Pill) in this Case is ex∣cellent, being taken to the quantity of twenty Grains at Night, going Bed, two or three Hours after a light Supper. Cro∣cus Martis Apperitivus, in this Case, is proper; but Oleum Mar∣tis is better, taken eight Grains at a time. I distill a Spirit from Antimony one Pound, and Nitre three Pounds; whereof I give five or six Drops in white Wine or Ale: It must be drawn in an open Retort, and cast in by two Drams at a time, and the Retort stopt quickly.
SECT. V. Worms. THere are three sorts of Worms; as first, Round ones, about six or eight Inches in length. Such as are troubled with these, feel a gnawing in the Stomach and Bowels: They start in their Sleep, have a small dryish Cough, and the Body wastes. The second sort are broad Long-Worms, which do conti∣nually gnaw the Stomach. There is great Appetite, slenderness and weakness of the Body, and
certain small things, much re∣sembling Cucumber-Seeds, avoy∣ded with the Excrements. The third sort are thin, short, and small Worms; mostly in the Fundament, and in the Right Gut. They are known by these two signs; they cause the Fun∣dament to itch, and provoke to Stool, which gives the Pati∣ent ease Worms voyded in the decli∣ning of a Disease, (without ta∣king Worm-killing Medicines) is good: But if they leave the Body in the beginning of a Dis∣ease, 'tis a sign of Death. The Cure. Take thin slices of fat Cheese, set them in a Pewter-dish be∣fore the Fire, and melt out the
Oyl; put an Ounce of it to half a Pint of sweet Wort; warm, and drink it in the Mor∣ning, fasting two Hours after it. Take Earth-Worms, slit them, scowr them in Salt, dry them with a gentle Heat, and give the Powder inwardly. Take Salt of Wormwood, drop on Spi∣rit of Salt till it cease broyling; dry it, and give twenty Grains at Night. SECT. VI. Gout. TIs a Disease of the Joynts, where there is tormen∣ting
Pains. It hath got five Names, according to those five Places of the Body it uses to torment. In the Shoulder, it is called Omagra; in the Hand, Chiragra; in the Hip, Sciatica; in the Knee, Gonogra; in the Foot, Podagra. If it be knot∣ted in the Joynts, or the Pati∣ent very old, Physicians count it uncurable. If the Pain run from one Joynt to another, 'tis then call'd a Rheumatism, or the Running-Gout. If this be with an Asthma, the Cure is difficult. The Cure. Take twenty Grains of sweat∣ing Antimony at Night, and twenty Drops of Tincture of Antimony in the Morning, or the like quantity of Spirit of
Tartar. Take seven Grains of Salt of Lead, or twenty Grains of Ens Veneris at Night, or Be∣zoar Minerale. Sixteen Grains taken as the former, sweats ex∣cellently, anoynting the Place with the Oyl of Man's Blood, or with a Lye made of the Salt of Cow-dung, dissolved in the Air, and the Part bathed there-with. Take Pigeon's-Dung, Vinegar, and Mustard-Seed, of each a like quantity; beat it into the form of an Oyntment, and ap∣ply it (on Linnen) to the Place grieved: Then lay on Empla∣strum Arthriticum, till the Pain cease; then apply Emplastrum de Minio, spread on Linnen, and let it lie on a Month; and renew it six times.
SECT. VII. Head-Ach. IF then Pain be extended to the Root of the Eyes, the Pain is within the Skull; otherwise 'tis without the Skull. It com∣monly lasteth long, and invades the Patient with pain on light Occasions; as Blows, Heat of the Sun, violent Exercise, and the like; with extream sharp Fits. In some it continues all times; in others it goes and comes by fits. If the Pain be in∣ward, and extent to the Roots of the Eyes, the Films that co∣ver
the Brain are inflamed: But if the Pain be outward, the Films that cover the Skull are grieved. 'Tis for the most part curable; but if it be of long continuance, 'tis difficult, and is in danger of Returning. The Cure. Take Oyl of Vitriol an Ounce, Spirit of Wine (or good Bran∣dy) a quart; mix them, cork it well, and set it two or three days in a warm Place; and take half an Ounce at a time, in Wine or Ale, two or three times a day. Flowers of Antimony (not Vomitive) taken ten Grains at a time, are excellent. Give it every other Night; and five Grains of Laudanum, dissolved
in Sack (or made into a Pill) may be taken the other Night. I use Ens Veneris, twenty Grains taken at Night in unsalted Broth; or the like quantity of Matthew's (or rather Starkey's) Pilulae Anodynae. Boyl Ver∣juice, and put them hot into a narrow-mouth'd Bottle, and re∣ceive the Fume at the Ear, a∣nointing the Temples of the Head with Ʋnguentum Popule∣on, or rather with this Oynt∣ment. Take Ground-Ivy, stamp it, and boyl it well in White-Wine; strain out the Herbs, and add Sallet-Oyl, and boyl it to the Consumption of the Moy∣sture; and anoynt the Head and Temples therewith; warm it well.
SECT. VIII. Megrim and Vertigo. THe Megrim is a Pain in one half of the Head; wherein if the Films that cover the Skull be inflamed, the Pain is so vehement, that the Patient cannot suffer the Skin to be touched with the Hand; being more violent, than dangerous; for 'tis commonly quickly cu∣red. The Vertigo is a Swimming of the Head. 'Tis said to be caused by a windy Exhalation. There is Giddiness; things seem to
turn round; sometimes the Pa∣tient falls down. There is ma∣ny times dimness of Sight, hard∣ness of Hearing, a decay of Taste and Smell; the Head is heavy, and acheth; some feel a gnawing in the Stomach, and have a disposition to Vomit. This distemper commonly turns to some other Disease. If the things which the Sick sees, seem Purple-colour'd, it is the Fore∣runner of the Epilepsia. If they seem red, or bloody, there is danger of Madness. Sometimes it degenerates into an Apoplexia. The Cure. For the Megrim, take ten Grains of Confectio Anodyna, or twenty Grains of Pilulae Ano∣dynae;
or else five Grains of Laudanum at Night, and two Drams of Essence of Rosemary in the Morning. Mix twenty Grains of Euphorbium finely powder'd, with an Ounce of Oyl-Olive; and drop one Drop into the Ear warm, on the pain∣ed side. Also take Euphorbium, boyl it a little in Vinegar, and apply it to the contrary side; or apply a warm Cataplasm of Goat's—Dung and Vinegar. For the Vertigo, anoynt the Nostrils with Oyl of Nutmegs, Marjoram, or Rosemary: Give inwardly Essence of Rosemary in Wine, or Peacocks-Dung dry∣ed and powder'd, a Dram at a time; or a few Grains of Native-Cinabar in Oyl of Caraways.
SECT. IX. Phrensie and Madness. THe Phrensie is a kind of madness, or fury joyned with a Feaver; affirmed by some to be an Inflammation of the Brain, or the films, hurting the internal senses; there is little sleep, they speak without sense, rise up, leap, and cry furiously, pulling as though it were straws, or the like from the Bed-clothes, they breath light∣ly, and the Pulses are small; some laugh, others are raging, angry, and hardly ruled. This disease is commonly
mortal, and if the Urine be white and clear, 'tis a dangerous sign. Madness hath a great affinity with the Phrensie, the signes are evident, they are both hard to cure, they differ in this; the Phrensie is accompanied with a Feaver, Madness is without; the Phrensie is dangerous, Mad∣ness is tedious, not perilous. The Cure. For to help the Phrensie, give 10 grains of salt of Pearl in Poppy water, for one dose, or 5 grains or Laudanum given at twice, 6 hours betwixt, dissolve it in Sack. Potable Silver ta∣ken 6 grains at a time in this
case is excellent. Tincture of Antimony or the flowers cor∣rected, are powerful. Black Helibore is a famous specifick, make it into powder and boyl it twelve hours in water to the thickness of a Syrup, add its weight of Sugar, and give half a dram at a time. Madness is cured with the same medicines (Laudanum ex∣cepted) give now and then a dram of the blood of an Ass, taken out of the veins behind the ears, and sweat after it, oyl of Rosemary is good; I use salt of Lead, and Ens Veneris with good success, 8 grains of the first, and 20 of the latter.
Sect. X. Lethargy and Deep or dead sleep. THe Lethargy is a drowsie distemper conjoyn'd with a Feaver, the patient breaths weakly, sleeps profoundly, the Pulse is great, and strikes seldom; though the party be often spo∣ken to, he (through sluggish∣ness) scarcely answereth to the question, only openeth his eyes, and shuts them again, some∣times raves, and is very forget∣ful. If he be old, Gross, Fat, and the disease of long conti∣nuance, 'twill hardly be cured. The deep or dead sleep is a disorder of the Brain, wherein
the Patient sleeps with his eyes continually shut, and he will say nothing, though he be stir∣red and pricked with needles, it's difference from a Lethargy is only in degrees, and this is without a Feaver; the cure is difficult. The Cure. The principal cure of these diseases is potable silver, taken 5 grains at night, and as much in the morning. The Chimical oyl of Rosemary is excellent, and may be given from 10 to 15 drops at a time in a little Sack, and the Temples and head (being shaved) may be anointed with it, or oyl of Caster, then lay a Plaister of Stickticum Paracelsi on the head,
taking now and then in the day time 20 or 30 drops of Elixir Proprietatis, and sweat∣ing with 15 drops of spirit of Harts-horn, or 10 grains of Be∣zoar Mineral is good. Sect. XI. Apoplexia & Catalepsis. THe Apolexia is a depri∣ving the whole body of sense and motion; they have pain in the head, sleep deeply, gnaw the Teeth, feel not when hurt, open not the eyes, An∣swer no questions, make little Urine, its sediment is like meal, and its colour like Rust or Can∣ker, they snore, and breath
little. 'Tis said to be caused through obstruction of those passages whereby the spirits are carryed from the Heart to the Brain. If this distemper be a strong one 'tis uncurable, and how weak soever, not ea∣sily helped: 'tis the worst when it seizeth young people in the summer. And if Medicines prove effectual against the A∣poplexia, yet commonly it leaves a Palsie either in the whole or part of the body. Catalepsis is a kind of Con∣gelation, sudden detention or benuming both in Body and Mind, the Patient lies as though he was dead, moves not the eyes. Sense and Motion are lost, the pulse is weak,
and he remains in the same fi∣gure of body in which he was taken, whether he lye, stand▪ or sit, with his eyes shut or open, the disease (if cured) de∣generates many times into an Apoplexia, or Lethargy. The Cure. In both these distempers, the Essence of Rosemary is excellent, a quarter of an ounce at a time or 10 drops of the Chymical oyl taken in 2 or 3 spoonfuls of wine, or 15 drops of the spirit of the brains & blood of a sheep, taken often. Aurum Potabilie 6 grains at once, transcends all other medicines; bath the head with tincture of Papper, and a∣noint it with Balsamum Poly∣chrestum. Elixir Proprietatis 15
grains in wine, is proper in these cases. Sect. XII. Epilepsia. THe Falling-sickness is a Convulsion of the body, hurting the mind and senses at some certain times, for when the fit comes, the patient is pluckt together, falls down, trembles, cryes out, and (if the disease be violent) foams at mouth. Van Helmont saith tis cau∣sed by an infensitive, befooling and mad poyson, afflicting for a space, being installed in the Mi∣driff. It commonly happens to children, but if it happen to per∣sons of full age, tis seldom cured.
The Cure. Provoke sneezing with Hel∣ebore, and administer Elixir Proprietatis, or Elixir Vitae, a dram at a time, the Antepilep∣tick spirit of Vitriol, 8 grains at once in some cordial spirit, is excellent, take 12 grains of Pulvis Antepilepticus twice in a week. Take the Livers of for∣ty Frogs, dry them with a gentle heat, and give them in fine powder at five times, morn∣ing and evening. The powder of native Cinabar is much com∣mended mixt with the oyle of Carraways. Oyl of Amber, ten grains at once may be often ad∣ministred; dry the brains of a Weesle, make the same into fine powder, and drink it in vine∣gar.
The volatile Salt, and spi∣rit of venal blood is famous in this case, 5 grains of the Salt, or ten drops of the spirit for one dose; Take every morn∣ing 2 drams of the Opeate of Moniagnana, commended by Riverius. Give a new born child 2 drams of oyl of sweet Almonds, mixt with sugar be∣fore it suck, or take any thing for preventing this distemper. Sect. XIII. Palsie and Trembling. THe Palsie is a distemper in which the whole body, or some particular part or member doth lose its sense or
motion, or both, according as all, or some of the Nerves are obstructed. If the back bone be principally affected with the obstruction, the lower parts are afflicted, but from the af∣fection of the brain, the face and upper parts are offended, this disease is more frequently seizing in the winter than in summer, and happens oftner to old people than young ones, If it be not occasioned from the cutting of a sinew, it may be cured. Trembling commonly goes before a Palsie, and is caused through weakness of the si∣new, either by reason of old Age, or excessive drinking.
The Cure. Tincture of Tarter, 10 drops, or spirit of Tartar, 20 drops at a time are proper in the case; take 12 grains of Pulvis An∣tepilepticus once in two dayes, and provoke sweat by 10 grains of Bezoar Mineral taken at night, or six grains of pota∣ble silver; bathe the place grie∣ved with an essence of Green Tobacco leaves, made with Malmsey wine, rub and chafe it well in and use it often. Then anoint with Balsamum Hystericum, or Ʋguentum Martiatum. A cataplasm of the greater Walnut-root is much commended, and often bath∣ing the part with Milk and Oyl.
Trembling is helped by the use of Elixir Proprietatis, a dram taken at once, morning and night, and by all the for∣mer medicines mentioned a∣gainst the Palsie. Sect. XIV. Melan∣cholia. THey that languish under this distemper, have strange imaginations conceit∣ing themselves to be like what they resemble not; and that they are what they are not. 'Tis known by fearfulness, sad∣ness, hatred, and such doleful passions of the Mind, some conceiting themselves to be
beast of this kind, others of that. Some are fearful of what will not hurt them, others would hurt or kill themselves, (cause no body else will) some weep, others laugh. Some foretell strange things to come, others cannot tell what was done yesterday. 'Tis a deplo∣rable disease, very uncomfort∣able state, long and tedious, and in Aged people, seldom cured. The Cure. The best thing is Potable sil∣ver, taken 6 grains at night, and a dram of Elixir Proprieta∣tis, Elixir Vitae, Essentia Mag∣na, Essence of Saffron, Syrupus Alkermes or Spiritus Analepti∣cus in the morning. The Chy∣mical
oyles of Cinanion, Cloves, or Rosemary, given to the quantity of 8 drops at once in wine or warm broth, is excel∣lent. So are flowers of Anti∣mony (corrected) 6 grains, at night taken in London Treacle, Take Black Hellebore, salt of Tartar, and as much white wine as will work them into stiff past, put it in a glass, stop the Air from it, and after it is two months old, give 5 or 6 grains at a time in a pill and increase the dose. Twenty grains of Matthews Pill is excellent.
Sect. XV. Night-mare and Cramp. BY the Night-mare, I mean that oppressive weight and nocturnal suffocation which the Greek Physitians call Ephialtes, and the Latines Incubus. It commonly seizeth the Patient 'twixt sleep and wake, he thinks he feels some∣thing very heavy upon him; he strives hard, yet cannot move, or stir himself, only groans but cannot speak; 'tis caused by eating full and late suppers, of such meats as are hard of digestion, excessive drinking or such like intempe∣rance, and if it continue long
many times turns to the falling sickness, madness, or an Apo∣plexia. The Cramp or Convulsion is a shrinking or contraction o the Nerves, either of the whole body, or of some particular part▪ That of the whole body pro∣ceeds either from the marrow of the back, when the Muscle that move the head and back are drawn together, or from defect of the brain, when th face is pluckt also with the bo∣dy. That of a part is a parti∣cular obstruction of its origi∣nal. If it be taken in time i may be cured, else not. The Cure. Both these distempers are cu∣red with the same Medicines
have prescribed to be used in the Epilepsia, at the 12 Section. In the Cramp, you may An∣noint the part shrunk with oyl of Amber, mixt with oyl of Ro∣ses, and apply over it Empla∣strum Histericum. Sect. XVI. Pearl and Cataract. THat which is vulgarly known by the name of a Pearl, is sometimes called Pin and Web, being a white spot, contracted by the Cornea, and comprehending a small space of the Pupilla. the Cataract, or suffusion, is a distemper wherein the wa∣tery
Humour of the Eye be∣comes too thick. In the be∣ginning of the disease, the pa∣tient thinks he sees small things before his eyes, as Gnats, hairs, and the like; it commonly af∣fects but one Eye at once, when the disease is confirmed, the sight totally perisheth; there appeareth dark matter in the Pupilla, or white spots about it; there are red veins about the Circle, and a thick skin over the whole Eye. The Green coloured Cataract, and that wherein the Pupil of the Eye is dilated, so far that no circle may be seen within the Tunicles, the Eye seeming all black or all white, are both un∣curable: but if the patient be
young and can see as through a mist he may be helped. The Cure. For a Pearl put into the Eye a whole seed of Oculus Christi, and wash it with this water, Honey two ounces, juice of Celandine three ounces, white Vitriol a dram (dissolved in a ounces of water) and drop it into the eye. For the Cata∣ract wash the eye 5 times a day in the infusion of Crocus Me∣tallorum in white wine, giving ten drops of Oyle of Rosema∣ry every morning, in warm wine or broth.
Sect. 17. Blindness & Inflammation of the Eyes. BLindness is sometimes To∣tal, and yet the Eye to look upon ails nothing. If the disease proceed through ob∣struction of the Optick nerves, (as commonly it doth) through super-abounding Humidity, and the sight totally extinct, 'tis accounted incurable: but if it be occasioned through the gathering of humours in the forepart of the head, (as some affirm it may) compressing the Nerves, there is some small hopes of recovery. Inflammation of the Eyes, Is
that which is commonly called Blood-shot, caused through defluctions, occasioned by heat; blows, great grief, and the like, and 'tis easily helped. The Cure. In Blindness, 'tis convenient to sharpen the Patients drink with Oyl of Vitriol, or Oyle of Sulphur, and take Oyle of Rose∣mary ten drops at a time, morn∣ing and night, in four spoon∣fulls of warm wine. Take Tutia and Aloes, of each three drams, white Sugar 2 drams, Rose-water and white wine, of each 6 ounces mixt, and in a glass well stopt, digest in the sun, or in some other such heat, for a month, shake it every day, then let it settle,
pure off the clear, and wash the Eyes with it, both morn∣ing, noon and Night, both for this distemper, and for a Cata∣ract. Inflammation, or blood∣shot, is cured by salt of Lead dissolved in fair water, or Rose-water, or white Vitriol one ounce dissolved in three pints of water, and the Eyes wash∣ed with it, or with whites of Eggs beaten to water, or wash with the water squeezed out of rotten Apples. Sect. 18. Deafness. IF this distemper proceed from a Feaver, 'tis remedied by curing the Feaver, if it be
some times better and some∣times worse, or proceed from a distemper of the Brain, it may be helped. But if the Tympany be broken, the disease from the birth, or absolute, and of long continuance, there is no hope of recovering. The Cure. Take the Gall of a Partridge, mix it with so much Oyl of Amber, and drop in three or four drops at a time, and do it three times a day; for want of that use the fat of an Eele, a Mole or Hedghog, as the for∣mer. The juice of Radishes is much commended, so is the juice of an Onion soaked in Brandy, and roasted, but I think oyl of Carawayes, two
drops at once is better. Some use the water that drops out of a green Ash stick (laid with one end into the fire) boyled a little with the said fat of an Ele, and dropped into the Ear warm, but above all, take snakes or Adders, being fat, (which is in July) cast away the heads, tayles, bowels, and skins, put the other in a glass, pour spi∣rit of wine three inches above them, stop it well, and digest in a warm place, till the sub∣stance be turned to an oyle, keep it for use, and put two or three drops at a time into the deaf Ear.
Sect. 19. Bleeding at Nose. 'TIS caused by stripes, blowes, falls, heat, ve∣hement exercise, or else through an abundance of thin blood, with pain and inflammation of the head, and if it be not soon stanched is dangerous. The Cure. Put a Tent into the bleeding Nostril dipt in the white of an Egg, and cover'd over with Bole Armoniack. Give the Patient inwardly Syrup of Vi∣negar, and apply Sticticum Pa∣racelsi to the Crown. Burn blew wooling cloth
to Ashes, and snuff them up the Nose, and cast cold water in the face. Tye up a spider in a linnen Cloth, bruse it a little, and hold it near the Nose, but touch it not. Dry the Patients blood to powder, and snuff it up the nose, and take Inwardly six grains of Salt of Lead. Take Vinegar and Plantain water, of each two pound, mix it, dip folded Linnens and apply them to the soles of the feet, palmes of the hands, and against the Liver; drinking Vinegar, and holding some of it in the mouth, or take twenty drops of Tincture of Corals in wine or ale.
Bind the Head very hard with Incle, and let the knot be in the neck, and lay a spunge dipt in Vinegar to the Nose. Wet a Linnen cloth in Vine∣gar and wrap it about the Members of him that bleedeth. Take Century, Green Rue, and red Fennel, of each a like quantity, stamp them, strain the juice into Ale; and so drink it. Wet a Cloth of Linnen in sharp Vinegar, burn the cloth, and blow the Ashes into the bleed∣ing nostrils. Sect. 20. Tooth-Ach. THe common opinion of Physitians is, that this
distemper is caused either sim∣ply through heat, or cold, or else complicately through de∣fluction of Rheum, &c. But old Hippocrates said that hot, cold, moist or dry was not dis∣eases, but that which is sharp, bitter, sour and harsh; And Helmont affirmeth, that the Tooth doth not Ake from Rheume falling on it, but by either the Goome being unco∣vered, it is made too sensible, or else matter of the last nour∣ishment being badly digested, doth putrifie about the root of the Tooth, hence comes pain, It is most common to rotten and hollow Teeth, and these are seldom cured without they be taken out.
The Cure. Take 20 Ivy leaves, a little long pepper, boyl them well in old Wine, with a handful of Salt, and hold the liquor in the Mouth on the Aking side. Take Primrose roots, Infuse them ten dayes in Brandy, and snuff a little up the Nose. Take Opium and Saffron, of each two grains, ty it up in a bit of silk (or thin rag) and hold it between the Teeth. If the Tooth be hollow, put a piece of a Crowfoot root into the hole, or dip lint in Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and apply it thereunto. Drop three or four drops of juice of Rue into the Ear on the Aking side, and lye an hour after on the other side.
Take white Pepper in pow∣der one dram, Oyl of Origanum ten Grains, mix and keep it in a box, and snuff a little up the Nose on the aking side. Sect. 21. Quinsey. IN a true Quinsey there is dif∣ficulty of swallowing, and breathing, Redness of the neck and face, a Tumor and swelling in the Throat, and sometimes a Feaver, and is commonly ve∣ry dangerous. The Cure. Most Physitians in this case draw blood. The juice of Orpin taken two or three spoonfuls at a time is excellent,
so is the juice of Housleek, or Crabfish: the juices may be mixt with the distilled water of the Herbs, and if a few drops of the Spirit of Sal Armoniack be added it will be the better, and let the tongue be rubbed with the said juice of Crab-fish or Housleek, let the Patients drink be Sal Prunella dissolv'd in water, or take Spirit of Ni∣tre two drams, Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Salt of each half a dram, put them to a pint of water, and drink it at three times, and to sweeten the blood (which in this case offends by reason of the sharpness of the Liquor Latex) the Tincture of Corals is a famous Medica∣ment, taken ten drops at once
in Wine or Ale. The Ashes of burnt Crabs, or Swallows, ta∣ken inwardly are much com∣mended, and the Ashes of an Owl (feathers and all) well calcin'd, blown into the throat, is an excellent thing to break the Imposthume. Sect. 22. Pleurisie. THis disease is an Inflam∣mation of the Pleura, or skin, girding the Ribs, caused through abundance of Venal blood sent thither, chiefly of∣fending in quality, for the Ar∣cheus being exasperated, an ex∣orbitant Pestilent Impression is made in the Latex, taunting it
with a superabounding sharp∣ness; the which lighting into the flesh, between the Ribs, causes a Pleuretical pain, and sometimes the fibres of the Pleura are rent asunder from the Ribs, and while it doth but never so lit∣tle slacken it self, the neighbor∣ing Blood runs to it, in the place of the wrinkles, made by contracting of the Fracture, and this by repeated turns, is the cause of a great Aposthume, according to the frequency and sharpness of the contractures. 'Tis known by a Feaver, dif∣ficulty of breathing, hard Pulse like a saw, a Cough, pricking pain, and sometimes a Tumor. If the Feaver be violent, spit∣tle bloody, very white, green
or black, or the Patient very old, or Astmatical, 'tis dange∣rous. The Cure. In this disease most draw blood, and affirm the necessity of that way, but this hath only the power of privation, leaves the root of the disease, from whence commonly springs up a Relaps. A dram of Goats blood taken at once (first dry'd and powdr'd is the best reme∣dy I know, take it in Poppy water, at night going to bed, (every night repeating it) in want of this give Spirit of wine and Spirit of Sal Nitre, of each twenty Grains in Poppy water as the former. Tincture of Corals and Tincture of Tartar
twenty drops at once of either, sweetens the blood notably. When the Imposthume is broke, give Syrup of Succory, and Spirit of Ground Ivy mix∣ed with its own Salt. Sect. 23. Cough and Asthma. THis disorder call'd a Cough, is commonly caused through cold taken, or through some sharp matter con∣tain'd in the Breast and Lungs, which causes a cough without spitting. If it happen to Aged people, having a great ob∣struction of the Lungs, and cease suddenly, 'tis very dan∣gerous
The Asthma is of two sorts, viz. the moyst, and the dry; the moist Asthma produceth a Cough, to expectorate the of∣fending matter, yet differs from Cough, in that it hath a mat∣tery Imposthume, or secret flegm obstructing in the bowel, whereby it brings forth excre∣mentitious matter, and cor∣rupts its proper nourishment. The dry Asthma commonly comes from the Gass of Mettals and Minerals, to diggers Mel∣ters, and Chymists, vitiating the Channels of the wind-pipe, whereby nourishment degene∣rates into Excrements. There is swelling in the Lungs, and stoppage in the Throat: In Children it turns
into a Catarrh, in men, it gene∣rally ends in a Chachexia, Plu∣risie, or Dropsie. The Cure. For a Cough, cut the flegm with Syrup of Vinegar; then use Syrup of Succory, taking at night Elixir Proprie∣tatis, Tincture of Sugar, or extract of Elecampane, and hold in the mouth Trochisci Bechici. All these medicines are good in the moist Asthma, as also juice of Radish Roots, with Tincture of Sugar. The dry Asthma is cured with Epilepticals, as Secti∣on the 12th.
Sect. 24. Inflammati∣on of the Lungs, and Ʋlcer of the Breast. AN Inflammation of the Lungs is accompanied with a sharp Feaver, caused by some preceding diseases for the most part, known by great heat, difficult breathing, and stretching out of the breast, with a redness there, the breath is hot, the eyes swell, a dry Cough, Appetite is lost, the Tongue is dry▪ the Patient is desirous of cold Air, and cold water. If this disease follow a Pleurisie, 'tis very dangerous. An Ulcer of the breast is
generally from an inflammati∣on of the Lungs, being suppu∣rated, and the Rupture of the Impostume, whereby the mat∣ter falls into the cavity of the Breast; while the suppuration is perfecting, the Feaver in∣creaseth, but being broken, the Patient spits Matter, is faint, with heaviness in the bottom of the Breast, a Cough and great pain: If the matter spit up be green, livid, froathy, or brought up with difficulty, and the bel∣ly loose, 'tis very dangerous, If the matter be not spit up in a Moneths time, it turns to a Consumption. The Cure. An Inflammation of the Lungs is cured wih the same
Medicines mentioned for a Pleurisie at Section the 22th. For an Ʋlcer in the breast, Take 10 grains of Antimoni∣um Diaphoreticum at once four times a day, Anoint the sto∣mach with Oyntment of To∣bacco, and then lay on a pul∣tis of Figs and Raisons (stoned) mixt with oyl of Amber, and Juniper berries, sharpning the Patient drink with oyl of Sul∣phur, or Vitriol. Sect. 25. Consumption THis distemper is a wast∣ing of the whole Body the Patient breathes difficult∣ly, the Eyes are hollow, the Nostrils sharp, is Thirsty,
and hath a Cough sometimes, and the hair falls off, spits ei∣ther froath, blood, or matter, from an Ulcer in the Lungs. If the matter spit up stink; If the body be very loose or an acute disease conjoyned, 'tis very dangerous, But if the Ulcer be but new begun, there is hope of Recovery. The Cure. Balsom of Sulphur is excel∣lent, take it 3 or 4 grains at a time, Morning, Noon, and Night, and let the Patients drink be sharpen'd with oyl or Sulphur 20 or 30 drops to a pint. The oyles of Rosemary, Cinamon, and Carawayes, help much, taken ten drops at a time in brothe Lukewarm,
there is a Syrup made of Co∣rals, or Tincture of the same used with good success, so is Syrup of Turneps, and extract of Elecampane, a spoonful at once in any convenient Vehicle. Trochischi Bechisi taken 5 grains at once 3 times a day hath proved effectual; so hath a Syrrup made of the juice of Cabbage 1 ounce a day. Take Choyce Myrrh 4 ounces, Saf∣fron half an ounce. Nutmegs two ounces, Aromaticum Rosa∣tum, two ounces, Olibanum, one ounce, Honey three pound, make it into an Electuary, and take as much as a Hazzle nut 3 times a day.
Sect. 26. Spitting of Blood. IT may be caused by exces∣sive crying, leaping, blows, or falls: or inwardly through Plenitude, or sharpness of the Liquor Latex, corroding the vessels. 'Tis commonly ill, more especially when 'tis from the Lungs; and many times fore∣tells a Consumption, if it be not critical, &c. The Cure. All those Medicines mentio∣ned in the last Section, for the cure of a Consumption, are proper to be used here, to which these following may be
added. If the disorder be caused through sharpness of the Latex, Goates blood gently dry'd and pouderd, and given a dram at a time is excellent, Henbane-seed powdered and mixed with Electuarium ad Ta∣bidos, and given morning, noon, and night, is commended. The Electuary is thus prepared. Take Nutmegs and Cinnamon, of each 3 ounces, Ginger, three drams, Mgistry of Pearl, two ounces, clarified Honey, twelve ounces, beat the species seve∣rally, then mix them together with the Honey; given half a dram at a time, morning and evening, Trochisci Beehici, ta∣ken 5 or 6 grains at once is profitable; 'Tis thus made
Take juice of Liquoris, one pound, white Sugar 2 pound, Opium one ounce, with the mucilage of Gum Tragocanth, make it into Roles or Troches, and dry them. But above all is Roche Allome; dissolve it in water, and distill off the wa∣ter to a dry bottom, and give 20 drops at a time in any drink. Sect. 27. Pain of the Stomach. THere is sometimes accom∣panying this disease a pain in the Head, which shews the distemper to arise from Wind, and continuing unre∣moved, a Timpany follows:
If there be a perpetual gnaw∣ing felt in the stomach,—then it is caused by Worms, and so less dangerous; if there be a looseness, vomiting or the pati∣ent thereunto inclined, it shews a sharpness in the stomach, and if it be accompanied with a Feaver, or the extream parts be cold, 'tis very dangerous. The Cure. If the distemper be occasio∣ned by Wind, things Carmi∣native are most proper. Take the distilled oyls of Cumming∣seeds, half an ounce of Fen∣nel, Annis and Caraway, of each one dram, of Dill and Camo∣mil of each half a dram, mix and take 3 or 4 grains in luke warm broth. If worms cause
the disorder take the cure from the 5 Section. If it be caused by some preternatural sharpness in the stomach; some anoint outwardly with the oyntment of Tobacco, and use Lauda∣num 3 or 4 grains, given at night in a pill, but 8 or 9 drops of oyl of Cinamon in luke∣warm broth is much safer, spi∣rit of Camomil in Mint-water, is famous in the case, so is Es∣sence of Elder, Angelica and Rosemary. Sect. 28. Swounding, and Beat∣ing of the Heart. SWounding in some is caused through extraordinary fear, Immoderate grief, &c. and in
this case 'tis the least danger∣ous: in others its without ma∣nifest cause, and these common∣ly dye suddenly, but in a Fea∣ver 'tis dangerous and perniti∣ous. Immoderate and unna∣tural beating and trembling of the heart, may be known by feeling, and is sometimes caused through shame, joy, fear or Anger: In others 'tis continual, and in these cases the least to be feared. But if it be caused from a Tumour in the Pere∣cardium or Arteries of the Lungs (as some Physitians say it may) it is incurable, and coming upon an acute disease, very dangerous. The Cure. Of both these distempers are
performed with Cordials, mongst which Aurum Potabi∣le, and Species Alexipharmaca, taken 5 or 6 grains at a time of either, is excellent, so is Elixir Proprietatis, and Elixir Vitae, 20 grains, taken in Wine or Syrup of Clove-gilly slowers. Oyl of Citrons and juice of Al∣kermes mixt with Spirit of Wine, is highly commended; so is the Essence or spirit of Bawnt, Borage, and Buglose. Magiste∣ry of Pearls, and Corals. There are a sort of Flies which Chil∣dren call Lady Cows with Golden colour'd wings, being gently dryed and powdered, are given inwardly with good success.
Sect. 29. Depraved and Lost Appetite. A Depraved Appetite is that which fondly covets, longs for, and desires to eat hurtful things, not fit for food, as Oatmeal, unripe fruits, Chalk, Coals, Ashes, &c. it commonly happens to Women with Child, and Maids troubled with the Gren sickness; this may be of long continuance, but (of it self in Maids) it is not dange∣rous, yet if it be not cured, great obstructions, Cachexia's, Dropsies, and pain of the sto∣mach follows. Want of Appetite is cause by obstruction of the mouthes
of the Meseraicks, or through too much fullness and over glutting of the stomach, or else weakness, want of natu∣ral heat, &c. and if it happen in the declination of a disease, it signifies a relapse, if it be caused through want of natu∣ral heat 'tis most dangerous, and worse to be liked in children than in men. The Cure. To women with child, the blood of a Vine is commended. Maids may remove the cause which is best performed by E∣lixir Proprietatis, Essence of Garlick, Savin, or Penroyal; Tincture or spirit of Tartar, taken 4 or 5 times at Night going to bed, 8 drops at once.
In a depraved appetite, give 9 drops of oyl of Cloves, or oyl of Cinamon in warmish broth, sharpen the Patients drink with the oyl of Vitriol, or oyl of Sulphur, and in both cases strengthen the stomach as at Sect. 30. Sect. 30. Vomiting. THis disorder is generally caused through weak∣ness or foulness of the stomach; weakness may arise from Ante∣cedent causes, as too much emptiness, want of natural rest, superlative Anger, boundless Passion, and the like. If the matter vomited up be green,
black, livid, or stinking, it is for the most part dangerous, but being of none of these colours, but coming after a Flux of the belly, 'tis good or on a Critical day, 'tis accounted by the Gale∣nists a plausible sign of Reco∣very, provided the matter vo∣mited up be such as they call Flegm and Choler. The Cure. Most Physitians in this case (when it is caused through the foulness of the stomach) give a gentle vomit. The sto∣mach must be strengthened with Syrup of Corals and Pearls, and Spirit of Mint, take a spoonful at a time morning noon, and night. Crude juice of Quinces is wonderful pow∣erful,
and Syrup of Vinegar is none of the worst Medicines. Let all the Patients drink be sharpned wirh oyl of Sul∣phur; give 15 Grains of Elixir Proprietatis in Sack, at night going to bed, or the like quan∣tity of Elixir Vitae, applying to the stomach a Cataplasm of Bread and Vinegar, or a plai∣ster of London Treacle. There may be a Magestery made of Oyster-shells and given to the quantity of 20 grains at a time, with good success. Sect. 31. Iliac Passion. THis is a distemper of the small Guts, commonly occasione through obstruction
of the Bowels, with a coldness, and putrifaction of food: it is known by most vehement and horrible pain, the stomach a∣bounds with too much moi∣sture, there is a great rumbling in the Bowels, Wind and belch∣ing without ease; the dung is stopt, and if the disease increase, the Patient voyds all the ex∣crements upward, and then 'tis mostly accounted deadly, and being accompanied with the Stranguria 'tis the worse. The Cure. 'Tis performed by those Medi∣cines prescribed for removing the Colick at the 32 Section, a dram of Cream of Tartar dissolved in a mess of unsalted broth, hath been
found effectual; so hath oyl of Almonds and Malmsey wine. I use to sharpen the Patients drink with oyl of Vitriol, to a pleasant acidity, which hath proved effectu∣all when all hope from common means hath been past, and clisters was vomited upward. Sect. 32. Cholick. TIS a pain in the Gut Co∣lon, sometimes caused by Wind, and then there is a stretching forth and swelling of the belly; if it be occasioned through Inflammation of the said Gut; there is an inward burning hear, stoppage of U∣rine, the body is bound; some∣times
there is vomiting, thirst, and a Feaver. If the distemper be behement, the belly bound, with watchings, vomiting, Hiccough, coldness of the ex∣tream parts, and cold sweats, all these are desperat symptomes; but if the disease be gentle, and the body soluble, there's little danger. The Cure Take Salt of Wormwood, and drop on it spirit of Salt, till it cease broyling, dry it and give 8 or 9 grains at a time in broth, Infuse Hawthorn flowers in Rhenish wine, distill off the spirit, and take a spoonful at once. Take Lemmon, Orange, and Citron peels, of each two ounces, spirit of wine one pint, infuse
them together 20 dayes, pour off the Tincture, and give a spoonful at once in wine, with a few drops of oyl of Cinamon. Take spirit of Salt and spirit of wine, of each a like quantity, mix them in a Glass, and administer 40 drops at once in a draught of wine or Ale. Take 6 or 7 grains of salt of Lead in white wine, or ten grains of Ens Veneris taken in broth, at night going to bed, and the like quantity at morning and noon two hours before and after meat hath been found very effectu∣all. If the disease be caused by wind, give Oyl of Anniseeds, Fennel, or Carawayes in warm broth, proper spirit or distilled water.
Sect. 33. Flux of Blood and Matter. A Bloody Flux is an Exul∣ceration of the Bowels, known by vehement pain and bloody Excrements, when the disorder is in the Great Bowels, the dung is as at other times, comes forth with wind, froath∣iness and Blood aloft, but if the small Guts be exulcerated, there is pain about the Navel, the Excrements are of various colours, (if black and stinking the case is desperate) common∣ly they are of a Lead colour, and there is a gnawing felt: If there be pain in the Liver
and Midriff, Vomiting and Hiccough, Loathing of meat, a Feaver, thirst, or pieces of flesh voided, the ease is dange∣rous. A Flux of Matter ge∣nerally follows a Flux of blood; the Patient continually goes to stool, the Excrements are crude and pale, and the taste is lost; if the disease last long, it may turn to a Dropsie: when it follows other diseases, 'tis for the most part deadly. There is also an ordinary flux of the belly, which in a drop∣sie shews recovery, but if it happen to a woman with child or the Excrements be Green, Blew, Black or Yellow, 'tis of evil signification.
The Cure. Let the Patient drink Cows Milk plentifully, Potable Gold, and tincture of Corals are ex∣cellent, so is the juice or pulp of Quinces, or a dram of crude Allum dissolved in water, and so drank, but Roach Allum dis∣solved in water, and it distilled off in Ashes is highly famous, so are Bramble Berries gathered un∣ripe, dried and powdered, and given in Red wine, the juice of sloes or Poppy water. Tincture of Emeralds is excellent, 5 grains at a time. See the following Sect. Sect. 34. Tenasmus. THis distemper is a conti∣nual desire in the Pati∣ent
to go to stooll, without voiding any thing, except bloody or filthy matter like snevil, some say it is generally caused by cold, or that it may be by means of a Flux of Blood or matter: if it continue long, there is danger of an Ʋl∣cer; and if it happen to a wo∣man with child, there is great danger of Abortion. The Cure. This distemper is helped with those Medicines mentioned in the foregoing Section of Fluxes, to which these may be added, being a like proper in all four cases. Take new butter (unsalted) melt it in a Bason set in hot water, pour off the clear from the feces, and then boyl it for half an hour, and
therewith mix verjuice, juice of sloes or Rose Vinegar, and use the same as sauce to the Yolkes of Eggs boyled hard; dry the blood of a Hare to powder, and take it in∣wardly. Take a large Apple, fill up the middle part (where the core lay) with a piece of an Honey comb (the Honey being squeezed out) Roast it in embers, and so eat it wax and all. Take the outward bark of black thorn, dry it and powder it, and drink it in red wine. Take white stones with red veins, boyle them in new milk till half the milk is wasted, and drink plentifully thereof, or new milk wherein steel hath been often quenched, works the same ef∣fect. Take yellow wax, and ducks grease, make an oyntment for the fundament.
Sect. 35. Hemorroids. THis Distemper is also cal∣led the Piles, 'tis the flowing of-blood to the Fun∣dament by the veins, which in some sent forth much, in others they send out little or no blood, and these latter have commonly vehement pain in going to stool. And at other times also: if the Flux of blood be very immoderate, 'tis dange∣rous, and brings great weak∣ness, Dropsies and an ill state of body to the Patient, but if the flux of blood be moderate Critical or otherwise for the be∣nefit of nature, 'tis— healthful
The Cure. If the Piles be swell'd or the pain vehement, apply to the place Crocus Metallorum, take in∣wardly the binding Crocus of the binding Crocus of Iron 30 grains at a time, if the flux of blood be great. There is an herb called Pile-wert, being made into an oyntment hath been found succesful, but if it be made up with the ashes of burnt cork and Capons grease 'tis the better, or mix salt of Lead with fresh butter, and there∣with ancint the place. Take Con∣scrve of Roses, and therewith mix a little fine Bole, and take a knif∣point full at a time; but above all is the fume of Frankinsence, put it on some live coales in a deep pot, and let the patient sit over it.
Sect. 36. Obstruction of the Liver. IN this Distemper the Urine is watery, thin and white, the Excrements of the belly are moist and Chylous (of the same Colour as the Urine is of) the Patient is commonly lean of body, yet very pursie and dull, the face is pale, and after eating there is a pressure in the right Hypocondria, with ill digestion: If it continue long, it is not to be cured. The Cure. The best and most absolute Medicine in this case is the spirit or Tincture of Tartar ta∣ken to the quantity of 8 or 9
drops at a time in Wine or Ale. Tincture of Corals may be ta∣ken as the former; many in this case use the filings of Iron crude, whereof they give twenty or thirty grains at a time thrice a day, but the oyl of Iron is better; its thus pre∣pared. Take filings of steel, dissolve them in spirit of salt, put the dissolution into a Glass retort; place it in a sand Fur∣nance, and distill off the spirit, which come off sweet in taste, whereof you may give 8 or 9 drops at a time, the common way of curing this disorder is by giving every morning a dram and half of Pulvis Ca∣checticus, and stiring well after it, The Yellow Jaundice are
cured by all these Medicines which are proper for the cure of the Green-sickness, and there∣fore I shall say no more of that disease; see Section the 37. Sect. 37. Yellow-Jaundice. TIS known by yellowness of the skin, most disco∣verable in the Cheeks and whites of the Eyes: the tongue is bitter, and some have a hic∣cough and vomiting, the Urine is Reddish, or Yellow, in so much that it will dye a piece of Linnen Cloth of the same Colour. If this disease come to the Patient in the beginning of a Feaver 'tis dangerous; if it comes upon an Inflammation
of the Liver, it foretells an Im∣postume, if upon a Scirrhus, it ends in a Dropsie. The Cure. All the medicines mentioned in the 36 Sect. for to open ob∣structions of the Liver, are also proper for the cure of the Yellow Jaundice. Drop oyl of Vitriol, on Salt of Tartar, till it cease making a noise, then dry it, and give twenty grains at a time in broth, or any other convenient li∣quor. Take the Gall of a Raven, dry it to powder, and drink there∣of in Ale a week together. Take a great Apple, pick out the core, fill it up with Butter, Turmerick and Saffron, Rost it, and give it the Patient to Eat, do so four or five mornings together. Elixir
Proprietatis is excellent, half a spoonful at a time, boyl in the Pa∣t ents broth Ground Ivy, and the Rootes, wires, and Leaves of Strawberries. Sect. 38. Obstruction of the Spleen. TIS known by heaviness, pain, beating & swelling on the left side under the Ribs, there is loathing of meat; black∣ness of the Tongue, Thirst, a Feaver, lying on the right side is very painful, and on the left is not easie. If it continue long, it degenerates into the Scurvy, and a Schirrus; afflicts the Pa∣tient with Melancholy and pain in the side.
The Cure. Give every morning a dram of Pulvis Cachecticus, and ten drops of spirit of Harts Horn at night. The Tincture of Tar-drawn with its own spirit, or the spirit alone, are famous in this case, whereof 6 drops may be ta∣ken at a time in Sack. Drop oyl of Vitriol on Salt of Tartar, till it cease making a noise, then dry it and give Twenty grains at a time in broth, Tincture of Corals is much commended, take 8 or 9 drops at a time in fragrant Wine. Take the roots of Polipody, stamp them to an Impalpable pap, boyl them in common water six hours, strain out the feces, clarifie the de∣coction and make it into a
Syrrup, whereof take a spoon∣full at a time, two or three times a day, Anoynt outwardly with the oyl of Rue, and apply a Plaister made up with the juice of Hemlock. Sect. 39. Stone in the Reins and Bladder. 'TIS known by pains about the Loynes, there is some times sand and redish gra∣vel voyded in the Urine, which is oft bloody, thin and in small quantity; the thigh on that side where the stone is most commonly, is pained, and as it were benummed. Stone in the bladder is known by vehement pain there after
making water, and the bigger the stone is, the greater is the pain, the Urine sometimes stops suddenly; the Patient Pisseth with most ease lying on the Back; and there is many times white Gravel sent out with the Ʋrine. The Cure. Both these distempers are helped by such Medicines as strongly provoke Urine, 'mongst which there are a sort of wood Lice call'd Sows, are famous, being washt in white wine, and the juice squeesed into a draught of white wine, and so drank; you may begin with the juice of three at a time, and so increase every day one till you come to 20,
and then decrease the number. You may pierce a Birch-tree in the moneth of March, and it will send forth abundance of Liquor, which being drank with Gromwell seeds, is highly Famous in this case; so is the water distilled from an herb called Arsmart, used as the for∣mer, or three spoonful of the juice drank in a glass of white Wine works the same effect, there is a fruit grows on white Thorn call'd Haws, the stones where of (being gathered full ripe) powdered and mixt with Gromwell seeds gives great ease to the Patient, being drank in white wine. See the 41 Secti∣on.
Sect. 40. Diabetes. IT is commonly call'd unmea∣surable Pissing, for the Re∣tentive faculty is so weak, that whatsoever is drank by the Pa∣tient is sent forth again by urine as it was taken, there is an un∣quenchable Thirst, heat in the Bowels, Leanness, and if it be not suddenly cured 'tis deadly, bringing the Patient into a Consumption. The Cure. Tincture of Emeralds in a his case is excellent, so is the salt and Tincture of Corals, to the quanti∣ty of ten grains (of any of them) at once taken in Malaga Wine.
Take harts horn, burn it till 'tis white, powder it, boyl the same in common water, and let the Patient drink thereof, or take 4 or 5 handfuls of the inner bark of the young and tender branches of the Hazel-tree, (branches of one years growth) boyl them well in common water (or rather in small beer) and let the Patient take thereof for his common drink; or in its stead, if steell be often heated and extinguished in water, and that water drank, 'tis said to be helpful in this case. But bind∣ing Crocus of Iron is very power∣ful in this Distemper, and muy be taken 20 grains at a time. Dis∣solve salt of Lead in water, and therewith bathe the back, and let a drying diet be used.
Sect. 41. Stoppage and Diffi∣culty of Ʋrine. SToppage of Urine may be caused by a stone, clotted blood, hardness, swelling or hurt of the Nerves, rela∣ting to the bladder, 'tis very dangerous if it continue long, and the Patient is troubled with a Hiccough, and his breath stinks of urine. Difficulty of urine is with Heat and Inflammation of the part, causing hot Ʋrine, but is less dangerous than the former, but it the Patient be old, if it continue long and so ulcerate the neck of the Bladder it is not easily helped.
The Cure. The most potent medicines to cure these diseases are those set down in the 39 Section, where I treated of the stone, to which these follow∣ing simples may be joyned, being proper in both cases, viz. Camo∣mil, Centaury, Burdock (Roots and seeds) Asparagus, Brook∣lime, Winter Cherries, Garlick, all sorts of Parsley, rest-Har∣row, Betony, Caraway seeds, Cummin seeds, Anniseeds, Fe∣nugreek seeds, wild Carrot seeds, Juniper-Berries, Bay-Ber∣ries, 8t. Johns-wort, Guaiacum, Fennel, Broom, Endive, Rag∣wort, Lavender, Cloves, Fea∣verfew, Smallage, Pellitory of the Wall, Rue, Garden-Cresses, Cicely, Nutmegs, Cocle, Peni∣royal,
Radish, Saxifrage, Wild-Time, Time, Lavender, Tame∣risk, Vervain, Tansie and Net∣tles. Sect. 42. Feaver. THe cause (according to Van Helmont) is an Al∣calie abounding, and there is a Poysonous excrement in the Midriffs; the most gentle fea∣vers continue but one 2, 3, or 4 dayes, wherein the Pulse is equal, and Urine not much differing from its natural co∣lour, and these are not dange∣rous; if it continue longer, 'tis call'd a Putrid Feaver, wherein the Ʋrine hath no se∣diment, but is thick and red,
the Pulse is unequal, and there is great heat; if there be a looseness and vomiting there is hope of recovery. There is al∣so a continual Feaver, which is sometimes accompanied with a Pleurisie, Quinsie, Ʋleer, or In∣flammation of the Lungs, and this is very dangerous. There is moreover a Burning Feaver, wherein the Tongue is dry, rough and blackish, there is a burning heat, thirst, gnawing in the stomach, Pale and thin Excrements and great watch∣ings, and this is very dangerous, but if the Ʋrine be red; with signs of Concoction, there is hope. The Cure. The best and safest way to cure
a Feaver, is by such universal Me∣dicines as simpathize with nature, and fortifie the heart; as Potable Gold 5 grains at once in Sack, or take spirit of Wine 2 ounces, Sy∣rup of Clove-gilliflowers 1 ounce, Confectio Alkermes, 1 dram; mix and give a spoonfull at once in good Wine. Sect. 43. Ague. THere are three sorts of Agues, (properly called Feavers) the first is named an Intermitting Quotidian; afflict∣ing the Patient every day, the cold fit comes colder and col∣der by degrees, yet is not very excessive on the one hand, nor
the hot fit much vehement on the other, but the disease com∣monly lasts long, and many times degenerates into a Drop∣sie, Cachexia or Lethargy. The second is call'd an In∣termitting Tertian, it cometh every other day with pricking and vehement cold, the pulse is equal, and anon a violent heat increaseth, with much thirst, and sometimes vomiting. The third is call'd an Inter∣mitting Quartane, and comes with two days intermission be∣tween the fits: in the begin∣ning the pulse is slow, the fit comes with vehement cold, and afterwards comes a hot burn∣ing fit, the Ʋrine is white, thin and watry, this sort of Ague
commeeth long, sometimes turns to a Diopsie, and to old people is oft mortal. The Cure. Take ten drops of spirit of Sal Armoniac (in Centaury-water) at right going to bed, 3 or 4 times a weak, keep very warm, and ex∣pect sweat. Crude Allum twenty grains at once in warm Ale is ex∣cellent, Take Bay Salt and fresh English Hops of each two hand∣fuls, and 4 ounces of Blew our∣rans; beat them all well together, spread it on Linnen, and apply it to both the wrists. Sect. 44. Hectick-fever. IN this disease there is an un∣natural heat kindled, as well
in the fleshy and sollid parts, as in the spirits; yet so without pain, that the Patient cannot tell that he hath a Feaver, there is a slack and hard pulse, dry cough, Eyes hollow, shedding of Hair, Nose sharp, the face is Leady, Ʋrine thine, crude white, or pale and at last oyly; the stomach is drawn in almost to the Ribbs and the whole bo∣dy consumeth. This distemper is for the most part mortal, when it turns to a Marasmos, and that is when all (or most of) the foresaid symptomes joyntly appear, but if it be taken in time, and good means used, they may prove ef∣fectual.
The Cure. This disease is cured like a Con∣sumption at the 25 Section. Let the Patient feed much upon Rai∣sons of the Sun, and Almonds, and let him drink Milk with a few drops of oyl of Cinamon, But Asses Milk with salt of Pearl is said to transcend. Annoint the back bone with oyl of Bay-berries mixt with oyl of Almonds. Take Nutmegs and Cynamon of each 3 ounces, Ginger 3 drams, Ma∣gistry of Pearl 2 ounces, Honey prepared 12 ounces, make it into an Electuary, and take thereof 4 times a day, the quantity of an Hazlenut at once. Spiritus Anale∣pticus, taken half an ounce at once is excellent. The Essence of Bor∣rage and Bugloss is highly com∣mended
in the case▪ so is the Ma∣gistry of Corals 10 grains at a time. Sect. 45. Spotted-feaver, and Plague. A Spotted Feaver is a conti∣nual malignant burning-Feaver, the Patient is torment∣ed with pain in the head, faint∣ings, excessive Heat, Thirst, and watchings; having (after a few dayes) spots coming out, sometimes all over the body, and sometimes only on one part, being small and of a red∣dish, purplish, livid, Leaden, or sometimes blackish colour; the distemper commonly ends in
seven dayes time; if the spots turn livid or black, and the Ʋ∣rine look as it did in health, 'tis exceeding dangerous. The Plague is a continual Malignant burning Feaver, wherein the Patient is hot with∣in and cold without; there is excessive pain in the head; with heaviness, weariness, Lumpish∣ness, carelessness, sleepiness and Sadness of the mind, loss of Ap∣petite, vomiting, thirst, bitter∣ness, and driness of the mouth; Ʋrine thick and stinking. The Pulse small and deep; there is Bubo's behind the Ears, under the Arm-holes, or in the grom; or else Carbuncles or Blew, Reddish, or Lived spots, the Dis∣ease is dangerous, but 'tis most
deadly when no Buboe's come forth, or when they come forth and go in again, or if they the spots appear of a Livid or black Colour, 'tis commonly mortal. The Cure. These distempers are helped by such Medicines as chear the spirits and comfort the heart, as the Tincture of Life. Which is thus made. Take spirit of Wine one quart, Cochineal (or Eng∣lish Saffron) one ounce, put them in a large glass well corked, set it in warm place for 20 dayes, pour off the tincture, and give a quarter of an ounce at once in the Patients drink. Spirit of Harts∣horn 20 drops at once is excel∣lent, but the most transcending medicament is 5 grains of Pota∣ble Gold.
The Conclusion. THis Compendium (adventur'd upon the Publick Stage for the Worlds Speculation) I gathered in∣to so small a Volume, for my own Use (as Occasion serves) in my Pra∣ctice: But conceiving it might be serviceable for such Ingenious well-disposed Persons, as are willing to help their poor Languishing and Sick Neighbours, (that want Silver-cords to draw the Advice of Money-suck∣ing Physicians, to supply their Ne∣cessities) I have adventured to run the hazard of being sharl'd at by all Callumnious Tongues; of whom I may say, as was said of old, . Nor do I so much as hope to escape being bit∣ten by the Heels by those Gnathoni∣cal Currs, who prefer Self-Interest
before a Publick Good, (like him who said, ) Howbeit, I have Hercu∣lean Hopes, that this little Piece of Medicinal Marrow will meet with some Ingenious Interpreters of my harmless Meaning; who would do good to all, to the utmost of my A∣bility. An Advertisement. POor People languishing under Bo∣dily Distempers, may have free Advice and Medicines for noting, from the Author of this Book; who may be met with most (if not all) Market-days, at the signe of the Crown in Loughborough. FINIS.
