Y74 R218050 99829676 34119
A BREVIARY OF THE LATER PERSECUTIONS Of the Professors of the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS, under the Romish and Antichristian Prelats through Christendome, from the time of John VVickliff in the year of God 1371. to the Raign of Queen Elizabeth of England, and the reformation of Reli∣gion in Scotland: And of the cruell Persecutions of the Christians under the Turkish Emperors, with some memorable occurrences that fell out in these times through diverse Realmes & Countreys; Collected out of the Ecclesisticall History and Book of Martyrs, By Mr. Robert Young. Luke 9 23. And he said unto them all, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, & take up his crosse daily & follow me. Vers. 24 For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake the same shal save it. Verse 25. For what advantageth it a man, if he gain the whole World, and destroy himself, or lose himself. Verse 26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shalt the Son of man be ashamed when he shall come in his glory, and in the glory of the Father and of the holy Angels. GLASGOW Printed by ROBERT SANDERS, Printer to the City, and are to be Sold at his Shop. 1674.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. Rome is not now, as it was in the Primi∣tive times, it was then the seat of the true service and worship of God, where the Word or God was truly and purely preached, professed and maintained, but now Rome is full of errors, super∣stition and idolatry, of all iniquitie and wickednesse, full of vile abominations. Petrark Mantuan, and many others, call Rome the Shop of all wickedness, Babylon, Sodom, the School of errors, the Church of heresies, an harlot with a shameless face; Mantuan thus noteth the vice there used, Pudor in villas, si non patiantur easdem Et villae vomicas. Roma est jam tota lupanar, that is, go shame to the Villages, if they be yet as free from the same filth, or now all Rome is nought save bo∣therlie. And Pasquil confirmeth the same, when one having ben at Rome, at his departure taketh his leave thus, Roma vale vidi, satis est vidisse, revertar Cum leno aut mertrix, scurra, cynedus ero. That is, Rome farewell, I have seen, and now I am glut∣ed wi h the fight, I will return when I am baud gester, catamit. All things are now saleable at Rome, saith Mantuan, —Venalia nobis Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coranae, Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale, deusque. Temples, Priests, Altars, rites (I tell not tale) Crowns, Sacrifices, Heaven and God are set to sale, and the souls of men. Tecelius the Popes pardon-mong∣er perswaded the people in Germany that whosoever would give ten shillings should at his pleasure deliver one soul out of the pains of Purgatory, and assoon as the money rang in the Basen, that soul was set at liberty, but if it were one jot lesse then ten shillings, it would profite
them nothing. This gainfull gulee Luther cryed down with all his might, and so marred the Market; and there∣fore it is said by on very well, Vivere qui sanctè cupitis, discedite Roma, Omnia cum liceant▪ non licet essepium, that is, ye that desire to live holy, depart from Rome, for when all things are lawfull, it is not lawfull to be holy. And as Rome is not now as it was of old, so neither are the Bishops of Rome such men as were in the primitive times, they were then Preachers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, maintainers and defenders of it, and gave their lives to Martyrdome for the cause of Christ and his Gos∣pel, so that there were 25. of them that died Martyrs, in order one after another. But now the Bishops of Rome re become Tyrants, and cruel persecuters of the Saints of God, and Professors of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, with fire and sword, as we may see in the Martyrdome of John Hus and Jerome of Prage▪ and thousands oe. And as this insuing Treatise doth declare, they are men of wick∣ed and vicious lives, given to unlawfull Arts and Sci∣ences, as to Necromancy. There were eighteen Popes Necromancers, one succeeding another: they are lifted up in intollerable pride, and claim and take to themselves high and arrogant titles, as universall Bishops, Princes of Priests, supream head of the Universall Church, and Vicars of Christ here one earth, which must not be judg∣ed of any, having all knowledge of Scriptures, and all Laws contained within the Chest of their breasts, chief Magistrates of the world: they exalt themselves above Kings, Princes and Emperours, causing some of them to ly under their feet, some to hold their stirrop, some to lead their horse by the bridle, some to kisse their feet, placing and displacing Emperors, Kings, Dukes and Earles, whom and when they pleased. Was it not a presumptuous thing in Gregorius the seventh, to cause the Emperor Henry the fourth to stand at his gate three dayes and three nights bare-foot and bare-legged, with his wife and childe, in the deep of Winter, both frost and snow, entreating for his absolution, and after did Excommuni∣cate him again, so that he was twise Excommunicate in
his dayes. And did not I Paschalis after Gregorie set up the son of the said Henricus against his father in war to possesse the Empire, and to put down his father, and so he did. And did not I Gregorius set up Robert Wysard and make him King of Sicilia and Duke of Capua. Did not I Pope Alexander bring under Henry the second King of England for the death of Thomas Becket, and cause him to go bare foot to his Tomb at Caunterbury with bleeding feet. Did not I Innocentius the third cause King John to kneel down at the feet of Pandolphus my Legat, and offer up his Crown to his hands, and to kisse the feet of Stephen Langtoun Bishop of Canterburie, and besides, merced him in a thousand Meks be year. Did not I Alexander bring the valiant Emperor Frederick the first to Venice by reason of his son Otho there taken pris∣oner, and there in St. Marks Church made him fall down flat upon the ground, while I set my feet upon his neck, saying that verse of the Psalm, Super aspidem & Basiliscum ambulubis, &c. Did not I Adrianus Pope, an Englishman born, controle and correct the forsaid Fre∣derick the Emperor for holding the left stirrop of my horse when he should have holden the right, and after∣ward did I not Excommunicate him and curse him, for that he was so swcy to set up his own name in writing before mine. Did not I Pope Celestine Crown Henry the fifth Emperour with my foot, and with my foot spurned the Crown from his head again in St. Peters Church, to make him know that the Popes of Rome have power both to Crown Emperors and to dispose them again. And briefly sayes the Pope, who is able to com∣prehend the greatnesse of my power and of my seat? All the earth is my Diocesse, and I the ordinary of all men having the authority of the King of all Kings upon sub∣jects, I am all in all, and above all so that God himself and I the Vicar of God hath but one Consistory, and I am able to do almost all that God can do, clavenon er∣rante. It is in my power to alter and abrogate Lawes, to dispence with all things, yea, with the precepts of Christ: and in a word, I declare and pronounce to stand upon necessity of salvation for every human creature to
be subject to me. And as their pride, so their avarice is insatiable in exacting and gathering of money of all un∣der their jurisdiction & putting it into their treasury, for Petrarch recordeth that in the Treasury of Pope John the 22. were found after his death 250 Tuns of gold. And of Boniface the 8. It is storied that when he was taken by Phlip the fair King of France, and his Palace rifled, there was more Treasure found then all the Kings of the earth were able to shew again. What hudge summes of money did Thecelius and his companions take together out of Germany for indulgences and pardons. The Pope had yearly out of England above nine Tuns of Gold. Otto one of the Popes Muscipulatores, mice catchers, as the story calls, departing out of England left not so much money in the whole Kingdome as he either carried with him, or sent to Rome before him. It was trulie an trim∣ly said by Pope Innocent the fourth. Vere enim hortus deliciarum Papis fuit tum Anglia & puteus in exhaustus. England was then a gallant garden to the Pope, and a Wel-spring of wealth that could not be drawn drie. Car∣dinal Volsey emptied the land of Twelve score thousand pound to relive and ransome Pope Clement the seventh imprisoned by the Duke of Burbon. The Apostle Paul in the 2. to the Thes. foretells of the nature and manners of those wicked men and their destruction, and by speak∣ing of one he pointeth out the body of that tyrannous and persecuting Church, hee calls him that man of sin, that breathing Devill so portentuously, so peerlesly vitious, Vtejus nomen non hominis sed vitii esse videatur, as Lipsius saith of one Tubulus a Roman Praetor that sin it self can hardly be more sinfull, next he cals him the son of per∣dition, destined to destruction even to be cast alive into the lake of fire burning with brimston. Rev. 19.29. Well might Pope Marcellus the second, strike his hand upon the Table and say, Non video quomodo qui locum hunc al∣tissimum tenent salvari possunt. I see not how any Pope can be saved when I was first in order said Pope Pius Quintus, I had some good hope of Salvation, when I wae made a Cardinal I doubted, but now that I am Pope I almost despaire. Again the Apostle calls him an ad∣versary,
and exalteth himself against all that is called God or that is worshipped, all men know who hee is that saith he can shut up heaven and open it at his pleasure, and take upon him to be Lord & Master above all Kings and Princes; before whom Kings and Princes fall down and worship, honouring that Antichrist as a God. And he sitteth as God in the Temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. In the year 1540. Pope Paul the third suffered himself to be thus blasphemously flattered. Paulo tertio optimo maximo in terris Deo. In the year 1610. Books were printed at Bononi and at Naples with this Inscription, Paulo 5. Vice Deo christianae reipublicae Mon∣archae invictissimo, pontificiae omnipotentiae conseruatori acerrimo▪ To Paul the 5. Vice-god, most invincible Monarch of Christendom, most stout defender of the Pa∣pal Omnipotency, The Pope can do all that Christ can do, of wrong he can make right, of vice vertue, of no∣thing, something saith Bellarmine, he is lifted above the Angels, so that he can excommunicate them, he can dis∣pence against not only the law of nature, but against all the Evangelists, Prophets & Apostles saith Pope John &c. In Extract, One of his parasits clawed him thus. Oraclis vocis mundi moderaris habenas Et merito in terris diceris esse Deus. He is cried up for the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and that hath both the swords throughout the World, and an illimited Empire over all resonable cre∣atures, duliae adorandus &c. Ye see then what kind of men thir Popes are, who call themselves universal Bishops, and that the charge and government of Christs universal Church is committed to them, that they are the Vicars of Christ and the successors of Peter, yet they are the greatest enemies that Christ and his Church have, they are subverters and overthrowers of his Kingdome, what cruell and bloody practises they have used throughout Christendom to subvert the Gospel, and the professors thereof, what innocent blood they have shed, the Book of Martyrs doth abundantly testifie, and this small en∣suing Treatise doth compendiously declare: but God will bring down their intollerable pride and Tyrranny and lay
them low and consume them with the breath of his mouth, as saith the Apostle. And as for Rome the Seat of Antichrist which is called Babylon, shall come to fear∣full ruine and destruction as St. John in the 18. Rev. fore∣tells it is fallen, It is fallen▪ Babylon that great City, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of all soul Spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hatefull bird, for all Nations have drunken of the wrath of her Fornication, and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her; that is spirituall whoredom which is Idolatry; the Merchants of the Earth which were inriched with the pomp and luxuriousnesse of it shall weep and wail &c. But all the Elect shall rejoice for the just vengeance that God hath taken on her. Also the Emperor Frederick is reported to have foretold the ruine of Rome in this distick. Roma diu titubans variis erroribus acta Corruet, & mundi desinet esse caput, But not to trouble Thee Gentle Reader with longer preface, I rest. Thine in the Lord to serve thee, Mr. ROBERT YOUNG.
A BREVIARY OF THE LATER PERSECUTIONS. Of the Professors of the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS, under the Romish and Antichristian Prelats. THe Persecution of the Christians in the Primitive Church under the Heathen Emperors and Tyrants of Rome, continued the space of three hundred years after the passion of Christ, to the seventh year of Constantine the great, who stayed the Persecutions, and setled peace in the Church, so that there was no set or universall perse∣cution in the Church, for the space of a thousand years thereafter, for all that time Satan was tyed and bound up, and his rage restrained against the Pro∣fessors of the Gospel, thereafter was Satan let loose again for a time, to vex and trouble the Church, as we have it in the 20. of the Revelation in these words, And I saw an Angel descending from Heaven, having
a key of the bottomlesse pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he took the Dragon the old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years, and put him into the bottomlesse dungeon, and shut him up, and signed him with his seal, that he should no more seduce the Gentiles, till a thousand years were expired, and after that he must be loosed again for a little space of time, &c. The thousand years being now expir∣ed, & Satan let loose, he begins again to persecute the Church of God, and the professors of the truth, in the person of Wickliff, in the year of our Lord 1371. in the dayes of Edward the third King of England. This Wickliff was an English-man, and a Professor of Divinity in Oxford, a man of great spirit, and of great learning, he came to such a degree or eruditi∣on, that he was thought the most excellent amongst all the Theologians at that time, he perceiving the true Doctrine of Christs Gospel to be aduldeat and defiled with so many filthy inventions of Bishops; Sects of Monks, and dark errors, and after long de∣bating and deliberating with himself, with many se∣cret sighs and bewalings in his mind the generall ig∣norance of the whole world, could no longer sffer or abide the same; he at the last determined with him∣self to help and remedy such things as he saw to be wide and out of the way, and so he began as from a deep night, to draw out the truth of the Doctrine of the Son of God, with the purity of the Doctrine which hee taught, he also lively touched the abuses of the Popedome, in so much that the Locusts (that is to say, the Monks and begging Friers) listed them∣selves up against him, to persecute him, with all the rable of, the Popish Clergie, but the Lord gave him for a Protector King Edward the third, the Duke of Lancaster the Kings son, and Lord Henery Peircy the Marshal of England, for all the time of King Ed∣wards raign, he had great liberty of his profession,
and that the King carried a speciall favour and good∣will to him, appears in this, that he sent him with his Ambassadour over into the parts of Italy, to treat with the Popes Legats concerning affairs betwixt the King and the Pope, with full commission. This King Edward was a good man and hath this commendation that he was, Orphanis quasi Pater, afflictis compations miseris condolns, oppressis relevas, & cunctis indigentibus impendens auxilia opportuna, that is, to the Orphans he was a Father, competient to the afflicted, mourning with the miserable, releiv∣ing the oppressed; and to all them that wanted a help∣er in the time of need, &c. Pope Gregory, being in∣formed of Wickliffs, Doctrine, & that was pred abroad through the land, He wrot to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to the Bishop of London, to cause apprehend the said John Wickliffe, and to cast him into prison, and that the King and Nobles of England should be admonished not to give any trust to the said John VVickliffe, or to his Doctrine in any wayes. As also, he wrote unto King Edward, or rather unto King Richard who succeeded King Edward to perse∣cute this VVickliff, but God shortned the rage and fury of this cruel Prelate against him, for that in the same year, or, in the beginning of the next year fol∣lowing, the forsaid Pope Gergory the eleventh turn'd up his heels and died: Yet the Archbishop of Can∣terbury, and the Bishop of London did vex & trouble him, and held sundry meetings of the Clergy against him, to condemne him and his Doctrine. And here is not to be past over the great miracle of Gods Divine admonition or warning; for when as the Archbishop and Suffraganes with the other Doctors and Lawiers, with a great company of babling Friers and Religi∣ous persons were gathered together to consult as touching John VVickliffs books and that whole sect. When as I say they were gathered together at the Gray∣friers
in London to begin their businesse upon St. Dun∣stanes day after dinner, about two in the cloak the ve∣ry hour and instant that they should go forward with their businesse, a wonderfull and terrible earth∣quake fell throughout all England; whereupon di∣verse of the Suffraganes being feard by the strange and wonderfull demonstration, doubting what it should mean, thought it good to leave off from their determinat purpose. But the Archbishop (as the chief Captain of that Army, more rash and bold then wise) interpreting the change which had happened clean contrary to another meaning and purpose, did confirm and strengthen hearts and minds which are almost danted with fear stoutly to proceed and to go forward in their attempted enterprise; who then dis∣coursing VVickliffs Articles, not according to the sacr∣ed Cannons of the Holy Scripture, but unto their own private affections and traditions, pronounced and gave sentence that some of them were simply and plainly Hereticall, other some false, erroneous, other irreligious, some seditious and not consonant to the Church of Rome. John VVickliff a long time after this returning a∣gain, either from his banishment, being banished by King Richard, or from some other place where he was secretly keeped, repaired to his Parish at Lutter∣worth where hee was Parson, and there quyetly de∣parting this mortall Life, sleept in peace in the Lord▪ 1384. Here is to be noted in this Man as in diverse others, whom the Lord so long preserved in such rages, of so many enemies from all their hands, even to his old age. This VVickliff had written diverse and sundry works, the which in the year of our Lord 1410. were burnt at Oxford. And not only in England, but in Bohemia. Likewise the Books of the said VVickliff were set on fire by the Archbishop of Prage, who made diligent inquisiition for the same
and burned them. The numbers of the Volumes which he is said to have burned most excellently writ∣ten and richly adorned with bosses of Gold, and co∣verings (as Aeneas Silvius writes) were about the number of two hundred. Great was the testimony given out by the Vniversity of Oxford touching the commendation of the great Learning and good Life of John VVickliff; as also great was the testimony and commendation of Master John Hus concerning John VVickliff, who affirmed that he was no Heretick, and yet the Counsel of Constance condemned him for an Heretick, and caused his Body and Bones to bee raised and burnt 41. years after his Death, and took his Ashes and threw into the River, thinking thereby utterly to extinguish and abolish both the Name and Doctrine of VVickliff for ever, for though they digg∣ed up his Body, and burnt his Bones, and drowned his Ashes, yet the Word of God and truth of his Doctrine, with the fruit and successe thereof, they could not burn; which yet to this day for the most part of his Articles do remain. After the Death of Pope Gregory the eleventh, there ensued such a great Schisme in Rome between two Popes, Urban and Clement, and other succeeding after them, one striv∣ing against another that the Schisme thereof indured the space of 39. years or there about, untill the time of the Counsell of Constance. As touching this pesti∣lent and miserable Schisme, It would require here another Iliad to comprehend in order all the circum∣stances and tragicall parts thereof, what trouble in the whole Church, what parts taking in every coun∣try, what apprehending and imprisoning of Priests and Prelats taken by land and sea, what shedding of Blood did follow thereoff; how Otho Duke of Brun∣swick, and Prince of Tarentum was taken and mur∣thered, how Joan his wife Queen of Jerusalem and Sicilia who before had sent to Pope Urban beside
other gifts at his Coronation 40. m. Duckets in pure Gold, was after by the said Urban committed to pri∣son, and in the same prison strangled: What Cardi∣nals were racked and miserably without all mercy tor∣mented on Gibbets to death, what slaughter of men, what Battels were fought between the Popes, where∣of 5000. on the one side were slain, beside the num∣ber of them who are taken Prisoners, of the behead∣ing of five Cardinals together after long torments, And how the Bishop of Aquilonensis being suspected of Pope Urban for not ryding faster with the Pope, his horse not being so good, was there slain by the Popes commandement, sending his Souldiers unto him to slay him, and cut him in pieces, with many moe acts of horrible cruelty happening in the time of this abominable Schisme. About the same time aso or about three years after there fell a cruell dissention in England between the common people, and the Nobility, the which did not a little disturb and trouble the Common-wealth. In this tumult Simon of Sud∣bury Archbishop of Canterbury was taken by the Ru∣sticall and rude people and was beheaded. In the year of God 1397. there was a battel fough∣teen betwixt Tamerlane the Tartarian Prince, and Bajazet the fourth King of the Turks, not far from the Mount Stella, where Bajazer there lost his son Mustapha, with two hundred thousand of his men, and Tamerlane not many fewer. Bajazet himself was taken, and being brought to Tamerlane, and after sundry things asked of him, he inqired of him what he would have done with him if it had been his fortune to have fallen into his hands as thou art now in mine, I would, said Bajazer, have inclosed thee in a Cage of Iron, and so in triumph have carried thee up and down my Kingdom; Even so said Tamerlane shalt thou be served: And so he made him to be schaked in fetters and chains of gold, and to be shut up in an
Iron Cage, made like a Grat, in such sort as that he might on every side be seen, and so carried him up and down as he passed through Asia, to be of his own people scorned and derided. And to his own further disgrace, upon Festival dayes used him for a footstool to tread upon when he mounted to horse, and at o∣ther times scornfully feed him like a Dog, with crumes fallen from his Table. A rare example of the uncertainty of worldly honour, that he unto whose ambitious mind Asia and Europe, two great parts of the world were too little, should be now carried up and down cooped up in a little Iron Cage, like some perillous wild beast; all which Tamerlane did not so much for the hatred to the man, as to manifest the just judgement of God against the ar∣rogant folly of the proud. It is reported, that Tamerlane being requested by one of his Noblemen that might be bold to speak unto him, to remit some part of his severity against the person of so great a Prince, answered, that he did not use that rigour against him as a King, but rathet did punish him as proud ambitious Tyrant, polluted with the blood of his own brother. About this time Berthold Schwartz and Alchimist invented the Guns and Artilery. After the death of John Wickliff, many were persecuted and suffered most cruel death in England, and many moe did forsake the Realm, and wee per∣secuted for the embracing, professing and maintain∣ing of VVckliffs doctrine. And first of all we begin at one VVilliam Sawtre, a good man, and a faithfull Priest of the Churrh of St. Margaret in the Town of Lin, and zealous of the true Religion, he is brought before Thomas Arnndell Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Clergie, and is before them convict and con∣demned for Heresie, he is first desposed and degrad∣ed from his Office, and thereafter delivered to the
secular power to be burned: This it may appear how tKings and Princes have been blinded and abused by he false Prelates of the Church, in so much that they have been their slaves and butchers to slay Christs poor innocent members. See therefore what dang∣er it is for, princes not to have knowledge and under∣standing themselves, but to be led by other mens eyes, and especially trusting to such guides, who through hypocrisie both deceive them, and through cruelty devour the people. As this King Henry the fourth was the first of Eng∣lish Kings that began the unmercifull burning of Christs Saints for standing against the Pope, so was this VVilliam Sawtre the true and faithfull Martyr, the first of all them after VVickliffs death, which I find to be burned in the raign of the forsaid King, which was in the year of our Lord, 1400. After the Martyr∣dome of this godly man, the rest of the same com∣pany began to keep themselves more clearly, for fear of the King, who was altogether bent to hold up the Popes Prelacie. Such was the raign of this Prince, that to the godly he was ever terrible, in his actions immeasurable, of few men heartily beloved, but Princes never lack flatters about them; neither was the time of his raigne very quiet, but full of trouble, of blood and misery. After the death of VVilliam Sawtre was appre∣hended one John Badby a Taylor, a Lay-man, he was accused of heresie and other Articles repugnant to the determination of the Church of Rome, before Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, and other his assiants, both Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and was condemned for an Heritick, and delivered over to the Secular power to be burnt, the Kings warrand is given for his burning, he is brought into Smithfield, and there being put in an empty Barrell, was bound with Iron Chains fastened to an Stake, having dry
Wood put about him. And as he was thus standing in the Pipe or Tun, it happened that the Prince, the Kings eldest son was there present, who shewing some part of the good Samaritan, began to endea∣vour and essay how to save his life, he admonished & counselled him, that having respect unto himself, he would speedily withdrawn himself out of these dan∣gerous Labyrinths of opinions, adding oftentimes threatnings, the which might have daunted any mans stomack, but hee hearkened not thereunto, and then was the Tun put over him, and fire put unto him; and when he felt the fire, he cryed, mercy, calling belike unto the Lord, and so the Prince immedialy commanded to take away the Tun and quench the fire: The Prince his commandement being done, asked him if he would forsake Heresie to take him to the faith of Holy Church, which thing if he would do he should have Goods enough, promising also unto him a yearly Stipend out of the Kings Treasury so much as should suffice his contentation, but this valiant Champion of Christ neglecting the Princes fair words and promises, continued constant in his pro∣fession; then the Prince commanded him straight to be put again into the Pipe or Tun, and that he should not afterward look for any grace or favour, and so he was burnt to death. Other servants of God good & religious men were accused of Heresie, and brought before the Archbishop of Canterbury, as VVilliam Thorp, who gave a large and notable confession of his Faith, and answered wisely and godly to all the points whereof he was accused by the Archbishop, where he suffered mocking and scorning and threatn∣ing; what became of this good man, and blessed servant of God, is not at yet in Story specified, by all conjecture, it is thought that the Archbishop Tho∣mas Arundell being so hard an adversary against him, would not let him go; much lesse it is to be suppos∣ed
that he would ever retract his sentence and opini∣on which he so valiantly maintained before the Bi∣shop, neither doth it seem that he had any such re∣canting spirit; Again, neither is it found that he was burned, wherefore it remaineth most likely to be true, that he being committed to some strait Prison (according as the Archbishop in his Examination be∣fore did threaten him) was so straitly keeped, that either he was secretly made away, or, else there he died by sicknesse. The like end also I find happen to John Ashton another good fellower of VVickliff, he was condemned by the Bishops, and because he would not recant, he was committed to perpetuall Prison, wherein the good man continued till his death. And as great was the constancy of the true pro∣fessors, so many did shrink, and did revolt and re∣nounce for danger of the Law. In those dayes great was the pride and glory of the Clergie of England, that none durst stir, or once mute against them, having the King so full on their side, armed moreover with Laws, Statutes, Punish∣ments, Imprisonments, Sword, Fire and Fagot, reigned and ruled as they listed, as Kings and Pinces within themselves. So strong were they of power, that no humane force was able to stand against them, so exalted in pride, and puft up in glory, that they thought all things to be subject to their reverend Majesties, whatsoever they set forth or decreed, it must be of all men received and obeyed: What greater shew of arrogancy and pride could there be then in this. When Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury passed by the high Street of London, and because they did not ring their Bells for a tri∣umph of his coming, took great snuffe thereat, and did suspend all such Churches in London, not only with the Steeple and Bells, but also with the Organs;
so many as did not receive his coming with the noise of Bells. The like stir for Bell-ringing, and for Processions, had almost happened between the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, Successor to this Thomas Arun∣dell, named Henry Chicly on the one part, and the Abbey of St. Albons on the other part, had not the Abbot in time submitting himself to the Archbishop so provided, that the ringing of their Bells at his comming might not redound to any derogation of their Liberties, whereunto the Archbishop granted by his Lettert direct to them. To expresse more∣over, and describe the glorious pomp of these Prince∣ly Prelates in those blind dayes of Popish Religion reigning then in the Church. I though to adjoyn hereunto another example not much unlike, neither differing much in time, concerning certain poor men cited up, and enjoyned strait pennance by VVilliam Courtney, predecessor of the said Thomas Arundell, for bringing Litter to his Horse, not in Wains as they should do, but in privie Sacks, in a secret manner under their Cloaks or Coats, for the which, so hain∣ous, and horrible trespasse, the said Archbishop sitt∣ing in his Tribunall-seat, did call and cite before him the said persons pro litera. 1. For Litter after his own Latin) and after their submission, injoyns them Pen∣nance, that is, that they going leafurly before the Procession, every one of them should carry openly on his shoulder his Bag stuffed with Hay and Straw, so that the said Hay or Straw should appear hanging out, the mouths of the Sacks being open; whereupon it was said, This Bag full of Straw, I bear on my back, Because my Lords Horses his Litter did lack; If ye be not good to my Lords Graces horse, Ye are like to go bare foot before the Crosse. King Henry the fourth had a Prophesie that he thould die in Jerusalem, and lying sick in a fair
Chamber at VVestminster, and lying on his Bed, he asked how they called the said Chamber, and they answered and said Jerusalem, and then he said, it was his Prophesie that he should make his end in Jerusa∣lem: And so disposing himself toward his end in the foresaid Chamber, he died upon that sicknesse, whether of Leprosie or of some other sharp disease I have not to affirm. The like Prophesie we read of Pope Sylvester 2. to whom being inquisitive for the time and place where he should die, it was answered that he should die at Jerusalem, who then saying Masse in a Chappel (called likewise Jerusalem,) per∣ceived his end there to be near, and died. Sir John Oldcastle the Lord Cobham a most worthy and religious Knight was suspect of Heresie, and to bee a favourer and maintainer of VVickliffs Doctrine, and the professors thereof, for the which he was ap∣prehended, and accused and falsly condemned for Heresie. In his examination before the Archbishop Arundell and his Clergy, he answered wisely and Re∣ligiously to every point he was posed upon, especial∣ly anent the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and con∣stantly and zealously maintained the Truth, but in end he is falsly and unjustly condemned as an Here∣tick. After that, the Archbishop Thomas Arundell had read the bill of his condemnation with most ex∣tremity before the whole multitude, the Lord Cob∣ham said with a most chearfull countenance, though ye judge my body, which is but a wretched thing, yet am I certain and sure that ye can do no harm unto my Soul, no more then could Satan unto the Soul of Job, hee that created that, will of his infinit mer∣cy and promise save, I have therein no manner of doubt. And as concerning these Articles of my Belief that I have given in unto you, I will stand to them even unto the very death by the grace of my Eternall God. And therewith he turned him unto
the People, casting his hands abroad, and saying with a very loud voice; Good Christian people, for Gods love be well war of these men, for they else will be∣guile you and lead you blindfold into Hell with them∣selves, for Christ saith plainly unto you, If one blind man lead another, they are like both to fall into the ditch. After this he fell there down upon his knees, and thus before them all prayed for his Enemies, holding up both his hands and his eyes toward Hea∣ven, and saying, Lord God Eternall, I beseech thee of thy great mercy sake to forgive my persewers if it be thy blessed will. And then he was delivered to Sir Robert Morley, and so led forth again unto the Tower of London there to be imprisoned, but he e∣scaped afterward out of the Tower, how and by what means it is uncertain, and was in VVales about the space of four years, at which time a great summe of Money was proclaimed by the King to him that could take the said Sir John Oldcastle either quick or dead, about the end of which four years being expired, the Lord Powes, whether for love or greedinesse of the money, or whether for the hatred of the true and sincere Doctrine of Christ, seeking all manner of wayes how to play the part of Judas, at length ob∣tained his bloody purpose and brought the Lord Cob∣ham bound up to London, and was brought before the Parliament, and being out-lawed in the Kings binch, and excommunicated before the Archbishop of Canterbury, for Heresie, where he was adjudged that he should be taken as a Traitour to the King, & to the Realm: What was the point of Treason is not expressed, that he should be carried to the Tower of London unto the new Gallows in St. Giles without Temple-bar, and there to be hanged and burned hanging, Treason was falsly surmized against him, his execution arose principally of his Religion which first brought him in hatred of the Bishops, the Bi∣shops
brought him in hatred of the King, the hatred of the King brought him to his death & martyrdome. The Clergy then tanqam Leones rugientes, ceased not to roar after Christian blood, and whatsoever else was in fault, still the Clergy cryed, Crucifie Christ, and deliver us Barrabas, for then all horrible facts and mischiefs, if any were done, were imputed to the poor Lollards, whom they so misnamed, that is, withered Darnell: Lollard by the Popes interpre∣tation is a word derived of Lollium, that is Darnell. Yet after the burning of the Lord Cobham, the Bi∣shops and priests were in great discredit, both with the Nobility and Commons, partly for that they had so cruelly handled the good Lord Cobham, and partly again, because his opinion, as they thought all at that time was perfect concerning the Sacrament. The prelats feared this to grow to further inconveni∣ence toward them both wayes, wherefore they drew their heads together, and at the last consented to use another practice, somewhat contrare to that they had done before, they caused by and by to be blown a∣broad by their hyred servants, friends, and babling Sir John's, that the said Lord Cobham was become a good man, and had lowly submitted himself in all things unto the holy Church, utterly changing his opinion concerning the Sacrament, and thereupon they counterfeited an abjuration in his name, that the people should take no hold of his opinion by any thing they heard of him before, and so to stand the more in aw of them, considering him so great a man, and by them subdued. At this time Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury died, and this may seem strange, that the same Thomas Arundell, who a little before sat in Judgement against the Lord Cobham, and pronounced sentence of death upon him, did him∣self feel the stroak of death, and the sentence of God executed upon him before the other, who would have
thought but that the Lord Cobham being so cast and condemned definitely by the Archbishops sentence should have died long before the Bishop, but such be the works of Gods Almighty hand, whoso turned the Wheel; that this condemned Lord survived his con∣demner three or four years. Now to leave England for a while, and to take a view of the Church of Bohemia, and the persecuti∣on there, for the profession of the Gospel of Christ, in the year of our Lord 1400. there was great divisi∣ons in Religion in the Country of Bohemia. The Emperor Charles the fourth instituted the University of Prage, and provided it of learned men, and as a Prince given to Letters, adorned often with his pre∣sence the Disputations made in Schools, but because the Teutonians (or Almains) in that University, seemed to carry away the praise and honour there in Disputations above the Bohemians, they were great∣ly ashamed that strangers should surmount them. It came to passe that one of the Bohemians having re∣covered the Books of VVickliff, communicated them to his companions, and they drew out of them great Arguments, which the Teutonians could not resist, whereupon many dissentions fell amongst them, even to Batteries and Murthers: The Teutonians seeing this, forsook the place, in so much that more then 2000 Schollars on one day went out of Prage, and came to Lipse, where they began an University after leave obtained. John Hus then had the greatest re∣nown, a man that came out of a Village called Hus, which signisieth an Hen, whereof he took his name, he was of a great and quick spirit, and well spoken, beginning to recommend the Doctrine of VVickliff in his Sermons to the people; the occasion how the Doctrine of wickliff came to Bohemia, was this, there chanced at this time a certain Student of the Countrey of Bohemia to be at Oxford one of a wealthy house,
and also of a noble stock, who returning home from the University of Oxford, to the University of Prage. carried with him certain Books of wickliffs who being communicated to John Hus a man of great know∣ledge, and of a prognant wit, took such pleasure in reading of them, that not only he began to defend this Author openly in the Schooles, but also in his Sermon commending him as a good man an holy and heavenly man, wishing himself when hee should die to bee there placed, whereas the Soul of wickliff should bee. The Bohemians being instructed with his Doctrine, began first to set against the Pope, e∣steeming him no more Honourable nor great nor o∣ther Bishops or Priests, and thereupon reformed the Doctrine by the conclusions and Articles following. First, that the dignity makes not the Priest or Bishop honourable, but Sanctity of life and good Doctrine. 2. That souls separat from the bodies, go right unto eternall pains, o straight obtain happy life. 3. That there is no witnesse in all the Scripture whereby can be proved that there is purgatory after this life. 4. To make oblation and Sacrifices for the dead is an inven∣tion of the covetousnesse of Priests. 5. Images of God or Saints, benedictions of waters and such like things are forged of men against the Word of God. 6. That the orders of begging Friers are invented by Devils. 7. That Baptisme ought to bee administred with water without cream, oyle, spittle and such polluti∣ons. 8. That the Temple of God is the world, That such as build Churches, Monastaries and Oratories therein to inclose him, do inclose Majestie which is incomprehensible. 9. That the Ornaments of Priests chasubles, corporalls, chaleices, plates, vesti∣ments, and Altars, are all but vanitie. 10. That in vain we implore the help of Saints, and that it is time lost using the Cononicall hours, 11. That fastings, merit nothing 12. That the Eucharist ought to be
administred under both kinds 13. They rejected the Masse, and received only the communion of the Supper, the word and prayer and many other Arti∣cles draw from the holy Scripture. Before we come to the Counsel of Constance where John Hus compeared & was condemned, It shall not be impertinent nor out of purpose to repeat a certain merry History and worthy otherwise to be noted that fell out at that time. Pope John 23. of that name, holding a Synod at Rome, In the first Session of the Synod, as the aforesaid John was sitting on an high seat after the Masse of the holy Ghost was sung, there came an owle, who placing her self upon one of the balks of the Temple, and looking directly upon the Pope, Saluted him in a strange manner with her fearful Song, such as were there present began to wonder, looking one at another, and also casting their view upon the Pope, they could skant keep to be much ashamed, to sweat, & to bee sore anguish∣ed and tormented in himself, finally finding no other mean whereby he might remedy his so great confu∣sion, after he had given leave to such as were assem∣bled, he rose up and retired. There was an other Session after this, wherein came the like, for this Owle could not be chased away, neither for any cryes, no nor yet for stones and staffes which were cast at it. There was then many which by this spectacle were induced to believe that such spirituall pillars have long time governed the Church of Rome. In the year of God 1414. there was a General Coun∣sel holden at Constance by Sigismund the Emperor, and Pope John the 23. for the pacifying of the Schisme in the Church which was then between three Popes striving for the Popedome. The first was John whom the Italians set up, the second was Gregory whom the French men set up, the third was Benedic
whom the Spainards placed, all three were deposed, nd Martin is chosen Pope, he is inthronized with great solemnity, the Emperor on foot leading his horse by the bridle on the right hand, and the Mar∣quesse of Brandeburg, Prince Elector likewise leading his horse on the left hand, the Pope himself ryding in the mids upon his Palfrey. This Counsel of Constance continued for the space of four years, and had in it 45 Sessions wherein many things were concluded; as here it was inacted that the Popes Authority is un∣der the Counsel, and that the Counsel ought to judge the Pope. And touching the Communion in both kinds, althogh the Counsel could not deny that it was by Christ and his Apostles used; yet notwith∣standing by the same Counsel it was decreed to the contrare. Great was the convention at this Counsel of Constance. The number of Prelats conveened at this Counsel were 346. Of Abbots and Doctors 564. Secular men, Princes and Dukes, Earles, and Knights, Esquyers 16000. besides common women belonging to the said Counsel. 450. Barbars 600. Minstrels, Cooks, and Jesters, 320. So that the whole multitude which were viewed to be in the Town of Censtance between Easter and Whitsuntide were numbered to be 60500. Strangers and Forrainers at the Counsel. At this time Wenclaus King of Bohemia was re∣quired by the Counsell to send John Hus that he might purge himself of the slanders that was raised upon him, who went thither with the Emperors safe conduct given him; he is brought before the Pope and the Cardinals, and of them is slanderously accus∣ed of many crimes, he is keeped a while in prison a∣mongst them, during which time hee wrot certain Books, that is to say, Of the Ten Commandements, Of the love and knowledge of God, Of Matrimony, Of Pen∣nance, Of the enemies of Mankind, Of the Prayer of our Lord, And of the Supper of our Lord After
Pope John fled out of Constance, the Popes ser∣vants delivered up the Keyes of the prison where John Hus was, unto the Emperor Sigismund, and to the Cardinals; then by the whole consent of the Coun∣sell the said John Hus was put into the hands of the Bishop of Constance, who sent him to a Castle of the other side of the River of Rhine, not very far from Constance, where he was shut up in a Tower, with fetters on his legs, that he could scarcely walk in the day time, and at night he was fastened up to a Rack against the Wall, hard by his Bed. In the mean sea∣son the Nobles of Bohemia did all their endeavour to purchase hid deliverance, having respect to the good renown of all the Realm, the which was wonder∣fully desamed and slandered by certain naughty per∣sons, and to this effect the Nobles of Bohemia gave in a Schedul or Bill to the Counsell, humbly entreat∣ing that John Hus might be delivered out of prison, and defend his own cause openly, he is brought before the Counsell, where many things were falsly said to his charge by his adversaries, whereof he cleared himself, yet he is condemned for an Heretick, and a teacher of false and erroneous Doctrine: when sen∣tence and judgement was given out against him, kneeling down upon his knees, he said, Lord Jesus Christ forgive mine enemies, by whom thou know∣est that I am falsly accused, and that they have used false witnesse and slanders against me, forgive them, I say, for thy great mercies sake. This his prayer and Oration, the greater part, and especially the chief of the Priests did deride and mock, he is first degrad∣ed and deprived of all the Priestly ornaments and priviledges, and before they deliver him over unto the Secular power, they put this reproach upon him, they caused to be made a certain Crown of Paper al∣most a cubit deep, in the which were painted three Devils of wonderful ugly shape, and this Title set
above their heads, Haeresiarcha, the which when he saw, he said, My Lord Jesus Christ for my sake did wear a Crown of Thorns, why should not I then for his sake again wear this light Crown, be it ne∣ver so ignominious, truly I will do it, and that wil∣lingly. When it was set upon his head, the Bishops said, now we commit thy soul unto the Devil. But I said John Hus, lifting up his eyes towards the hea∣vens, I commit my spirit unto thy hands O Lord Jesus Christ, unto thee I commend my spirit which thou hast redeemed These contumelous opprobries thus ended, the Bishops turning themselves towards the Emperor, said, this most sacred Synod of Constance leaveth now John Hus which hath no more any of∣fice, or to do in any Church of God, unto the Ci∣vill Judgement and power. Then the Emperor com∣manded Lodovieus Duke of Bavaria, which stood before him in his Robes, holding the Golden Apple with the Crosses in his hands, that he should receive John Hus off the Bishops, and deliver him unto them which, should do the Execution, by whom as he was led to the place of Execution, before the Church doors he saw his Books burning, whereat he smiled and laughed: And all men that passed by he exhort∣ed, not to think that he should die for any error or heresie, but only for the hatred and ill-will of his adversaries, which had charged him with most false & unjust crimes; all the whole City in manner being in Armour, followed him. When as he was brought to the place of Execution, he kneeled down upon his knees, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he prayed, and said certain Psalms, and especially the 50. and 31. Psalms; and they which stood hard by, heard him often times in his prayer, with a merry and chearfull countenance rept this verse, In thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit, &c. Which thing when the Lay-people beheld which stood next unto him, they
said, what he hath done before we know not, but now we see and hear that he doth speak and pray very devourly and godly. In the mean time while he prayed, as he bowed his neck backward to look up∣ward unto heaven, the Crown of Paper fell off from his head upon the ground. Then one of the Soul∣diers taking it up again, said, let us put it again upon his head, that he may be burned with his Ma∣sters the Devils whom he hath served. When as by the commandement of the Torments he was risen up from the place of his prayer, with a loud voice he said, Lord Jesus Christ assist me, and help me that with a constant and patient mind, by thy most gra∣cious help. I may bear and suffer this cruell and igno∣minious death whereunto I am condemned for the preaching of thy most holy Gospel and Word. Then as before he declared the cause of his death unto the people, in the mean time the Hangman stripped him of his garments, and turning his hand behind his back, tyed him fast unto the Stake with Ropes that was made wet. And whereas by chance he was turned towards the East, certain cryed out that he should not look toward the East, for he was an Heretick, so he was turned toward the West. Then was his neck tyed with a Chain unto the Stake, the which Chain when he beheld, smiling, he said that he would willingly receive the same Chain for Jesus sake, who he knew was bound with a far worse Chain. Under his feet they set two Fagots, admixing Straw withall, and so likewise from the feet up to the chin, he was inclosed in round about with Wood. But before the Wood was set on fire, Lodovicus Duke of Bava¦ria, with another Gentleman with him which was the son of Clement, came and exhorted John Hus that he would be yet mindfull of his safeguard, and renounce his errours. To whom he said, what er∣rour should I renounce when as I know my self
guilty of none, for as for these things which are falsly alledged against me, I know that I never did so much as once to think them, much lesse to preach them, for this was the principall end purpose of my Doct∣rine, that I might teach all men pennance and re∣mission of sins according to the verity of the Gos∣pel of Christ Jesus, and the exposition of the holy Doctors, wherefore with a chearfull mind and courage, I am here ready to suffer death. When he had spoken these words they left him, and shak∣ing hands together, they departed. Then was the fire kindled, and John Hus began to sing with a loud voice, Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God have mercy upon me. And when hee began to say the same the third time. the wind drave the flamme so upon his face that it choaked him, yet not∣withstanding he moved a while after by the space that a man might almost say three times the Lords Prayer. When all the Wood was burned and con∣sumed, the upper part of the body was left hang∣ing in the Chain, the which they threw down stake and all, and making a new sire, burned it, the head being first cut in Gobbets that it might the sooner be consumed into ashes. The heart which is found amongst the bowels being well beaten with staves and clubs was at last pricked upon a sharp stick, and roasted at a fire a part untill it was con∣sumed. Then with a great diligence gathering the ashes together they cast them into the River of Rhine, that the least remnant of the ashes of that man should not be left upon the earth, whose me∣mory notwithstanding cannot bee abolished out of the minds of the people, neither by water, neither by any kind of torment. And here is to bee con∣sidered that notwithstanding the Emperor had pro∣mised unto Master John Hus safe conduct that he might come freely unto Constance, but also that he
should return again unto Bohem without fraud or in∣terruption, yet the Emperor is forced by the im∣portunity of the Cardinals and Bishops, to breake promise, for said they, that no defence could or might be given either by safe conduct of or by any other mean unto him which was suspected or judged to be an heretick. Not long after followed the burning of that fam∣ous and learned man and godly Martyr of Christ Master Jerome of Prage burned at Constance for like cause and quarrel as Master John Hus was. This Jerome grievously sorrowing for the slanderous re∣proach and defamation of his countrey of Boheme. And also hearing tell of the manifest injuries done unto that man of worthy memory Master John Hus freely and of his own accord came unto Constance, to declare openly before the Counsel the purity and sincerity of his faith and his innocency, and how to purge himself of Heresie whereof he was slandered and defamed and gave intimation set up in diverse places of the town of Constance, charging his slan∣derers of what Nation or Estate soever: they be which will object against him any crime of error or heresie to come forth openly before him in the pre∣sence of the whole Counsell to object against him, and he shall be ready to answer openly and publick∣ly before the whole Counsel of his innocency, and to declare the purity and sincerity of his true Faith. And finding no safe conduct to compare before the Counsel, the Nobles, Lords, and Knights speci∣ally of the Bohemian Nation present in Constance gave unto Master Jerome their Letters, parents con∣firmed with their Seals for a testimony and witnesse of the premisses, with the which Letters the said Master Jerome returned again into Bohemia, but by the treason and conspiracy of his enemies, he was taken and brought back again bound with fetters and
chains, and was cited to compear before the Coun∣sel, and compearing, after some examination he is sent to prison, where he is cruelly handled with chains and bolts of Iron put upon him, and being hardly intertained he is keeped in prison the space of an year, in end he is forced to abjure and recant and consent unto the death of Master John Hus that hee was justly and truely condemned and put to death by them, He, what for fear of death, and hoping thereby to escape out of their hands according to their will and pleasure, and according to the tenour which was exhibited unto him, did make abjuration and that in the Cathedral Church and open Session, the draught thereof penned to him bee the Papists may be seen in the Book of Martyrs. After his abjuration he returns to prison where he is not so straitly chained and bound as he was be∣fore, notwithstanding he is keeped every day with Souldiers and armed men; he is brought again be∣fore the Counsell, where his enemies laid against him of new an hundred and seven Articles, to the intent he should not escape the snare of death, which they provided and led before him, unto the which Articles most subtilly objected against him, he deny∣ed that he held or maintained any such Articles as were either hurtfull or false, and affirmed that these witnesses had deposed them against him falsly and slanderously, as his most cruell and mortall enemies; he revoked his former recantation that he had wic∣kedly consented and agreed to the sentence and judgement of the condemnation of Wickliff and Hus and that he had most shamefully lied in approving and allowing the said sentence; neither was he a∣shamed to confesse that he lied, yea he did also re∣vock and recant his confession, approbation and protestation which he had made upon their condem∣nation, affirming that he never at any time had
read any errors or heresie in the Books and Treatises of the said Wickliff and Hus, &c. The Counsell condemns him as an Heritick, and drowned in all kind of Heresies, Excommunicat and accursed, leav∣ing him unto the Arbitrement and Judgement of the Secular Judge to receive just and due punishment according to the quality of so great an oftence. After he is condemned of the Counsell, he told them that his death would leave a remorse in their consci∣ences, and a nail in their hearts, and said he, Et cito vos omnes ut respondeatis mihi coram altissimo & justissimo judice post centam annos, that is, And here I cite you to answer unto me before the most high and just Judge within an hundred years; as also, when the sentence was given out against him, a great and long Miter of Paper was brought unto him, Painted about with red Devils, the which when he beheld and saw, throwing away his Hood upon the ground amongst the Prelates, he took the Miter and put it upon his head, saying, Our Lord Jesus Christ when as he should suffer death for the most wretch∣ed sinner, did wear a Crown of Thorns upon his head and I for his sake in stead of that Crown will will∣ingly wear this Miter and Cap, Afterward he was laid hold of by the Secular power and brought forth to execution. When he was going out of the Church, with a chearfull countenance and loud voice lifting his eyes up to Heaven he began to sing, Credo in unum Deum, as it is accustomed to be sung in the Church. Afterward as he passed along, he did sing some Canticles of the Church. After he came to the place of Execution, where Master John Hus had before suffered death innocently, kneeling down, he made a certain devour prayer: while he was thus praying, the tormenters took him up, and lifting him up from the ground, spoiled him of all his garments, and left him naked, and afterwards
girded him about the Loyns with a Linnen Cloath, and bound him fast with cords and chaines of Iron to the picture of John Hus. which was made fast unto the earth, and so standing upon the ground when as they began to lay the Wood about him, he sang Salve festa dies, and when the Hymn was end∣ed, he sang again with a loud voice, Credo in unum Deum unto the end. That being ended he said unto the people in the Germane. Tongue in effect as fol∣loweth. Dearly beloved children, even as I have now sung, so do I believe, and none otherwise. And this Creed is my whole faith, notwithstand∣ing I die for this cause because I would not consent and agree to the Counsell, and with them affirm and hold that Master John Hus was by them holily and justly condemned, for I did know well enough that he was a true Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. After that he was compassed with the Wood up to the crown of the head, they cast all his garments upon the Wood also, and with a Fire∣brand they set it on fire; the which being once fired, he began to sing with a loud voice, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meam. When that was ended, and that he began vehemently to burn he said in the vulgar Bohemian Tongue, O Lord God Father Almighty have mercy upon me, and be merci∣full unto mine offences, for thou knowest how sin∣cerely I have loved thy truth. Then his voice by the vehemency of the fire was choaked and stopped that it was no longer heard, but he moved continually his mouth and lips as though he had still prayed or spoken within himself. As he was burning in the sire, they brought his bedding, his straw-bed, his Boots, his Hood, and all other things he had in the Prison, and burned them all to ashes in the same fire. The which ashes after that the fire was out they did diligently gather together and carry them in a Cart,
and cast them into the River of Rine, which ran hard by the City. The Bohemians understanding what was done at Constance against their Doctors, and being greatly grieved thereat directed their Letters to this Barbar∣ous Counsell of Popish murderers, compleaning of their cruel and unjust dealing against Master John Hus being a just good and catholick man &c. Also that they have apprehended, imprisoned and con∣demned and even now peradventure, like as ye did to Master John Hus, ye have most cruelly murther∣ed the worshipfull man, Master Jerome of Prage, a man abounding in eloquence, Master of the seven liberall Arts, and a famous Philosopher, not being convict but only at the sinister and false accus∣ations of his and our accusers and betrayers, as the Letter in it self at more length bears. The Nobles and Gentlemen of Bohem and Moratia are cited up to the Counsell, and to suppresse the Bohemians from making any stir, did make Lawes and Articles to the number of 14. whereby to bridle them. And first, that the King of Bohemia shall be sworn to give obdience, and to defend the Liberties of the Church of Rome. 2. That all Ministers, Doctors and Priests shall be sworn to abjure the Doctrine of Wickliff and Hus &c. The Bohemians notwith∣standing these cruel Articles contemning the vain de-devices of those Prelats and Fathers of the Coun∣sell ceased not to proceed in their League and pur∣pose begun, joyning themselves more strongly to∣gether. And first of all these Bohemians partly for the love of John Hus and Jerome their country men partly for the hatred of their Malignant Papistry as∣sembling together agreed to celebrate a solemn me∣moriall of the Death of John Hus and Jerome, decree∣ing the same to be beholden and celebrat yearly; this done, they suppressed diverse Monastries,
Pharisaical temples, and idolatrous Phanes, begin∣ning first with the great Monastry of the Black-Friers 8. miles from Prage, driving away the wick∣ed and vicious Priests and Monks out of them, or compelling them unto a better order, whereupon ensued great troubles. Wars and Bloodsheds between the Pope Sigismund the Emperor on the one hand, and the Bohemians on the other; Immediatly after the death of Wenceslaus, arose Zisca a Noble man, and being sore grieved with the death of John Hus and Jerome, of Prage, he minded to revenge the injuries which the Counsell had done, greatly to the dishonour of the Kingdom of Bohem upon their complices and adherents, hee gathered together a number of men of Warre and subverted the Mona∣stries and idolatrous temples, pulling down and breaking in pieces the Image and Idols, driving away the Monks and Priests which hee said were kept up in their closters like Swyn in their styes to be fatted &c. He gathered together about fourty thousand men, many battels were foughten beween him and the Emperor. Zisca having but one eye before, lost the other in Battell, yet for all that he would not forsake his Army, but still took the charge of them. As the Emperor with the whole power of Germany was busied on the one side against the Bohemians, So Martin the Pope was as much occupied on the other side who about the same time directed forth a terrible Bull full of all poyson to all Bishops and Archbishop against all such as took any part or side with Wickliff, John Hus, Jerome or with their Doct∣rine and opinions. At this time the Bohemians wrote a fruitfull and Christian exhortation to the Kings and Princes to stir them up to the zeal of the Gospel. Zisca being now sick and near his death, being de∣manded what place he would be buried, hee answered and commanded his skin to bee plucked off from his
dead Carcase, and the flesh to be casten unto the fowels and beasts, and that a Drum should be made of his skin which they should use in their battels, affirming that as soon as their enemies should hear the sound of that Drum, they would not abide but take their flight: Hee was a valiant Captain of the Bohemians, he was eleven times victor in the field, he was a severe punisher of the pride and avarice of the Clergy. After Zisca was dead their was great fear, sorrow and lamentation in the Army, the Souldiers accusing fortune which gave over such an invincible Captain to be overcome with Death; im∣mediatly there was a division in the Host, the one part choosing Procopius Magnus to be their captain, the other part saying, that there was none could be found worthy to succeed Zisca, whereupon they choosing out certain to serve the Wars, named them∣selves Orphans, and albeit that oftentimes there was division between them, yet whensoever any foraign power came towards them, they joyned their Powers together in one Camp and defended them∣selves and prevailed mightily against their enemies. These things thus done the Emperor sent for the Nobles of Bohem which went unto him into a town of Hungary called Posonium in the boders of Austria upon the banks of the River Dannubius, but they would not enter into the Town, but remain without in their Tents, whether as the Emperor going out unto them, communed with them as touching His right and Title, and recovering of his Fathers king∣dom promising if there were any cause which did alienat the Bohemians minds from him, that he would take away all the occasion thereof. They made answer that he had made war upon them with∣out cause, and that he had suffered their countrey∣men contrary to his promise to be burnt at Constance not being heard, and the Kingdom to be contume∣liously
interdicted, and the Nobles of Bohemia to be condemned by the Church of Rome as Hereticks, and that he should think the force and power of the Bohemians not to be so small, but that they would provide for their own honour, whereunto the Em∣peror answered very gently, and offered them a General Counsel wherein they might declare their innocency, if they would submit themselves to the judgement of the Universall Church. But the Bohe∣mians which were now become valiant victors in Arms, would not now be overcome with words; and so nothing being finally concluded, the Emperor re∣turned home. Then Pope Martine perceiving the Gospel to encrease daily more and more, sent the Cardinal of Winchester, an Englishman, born of a Noble House into Germany, to move them unto War against the, Bohemians, whereunto also the Em∣peror did assist him. There was three Armies provid∣ed; In the first Army were the Duke of Saxonie and the lower Cities. The second Army which was ga∣thered of the Franconians was under the conduct of the Marquesse of Brandeburg. The third Army was led by Otho the Archbishop of Trevers, whom the Rhenenses, the Bavarians, and the Imperiall Cities of Snevia followed. These Armies entering into Bohemia into three severall parts, after they were passed the Wood they joyned together & pitched before Misia, this City which was taken from the Papists the night before, before they went any further they were de∣termined to recover, but when as news came to the Host how the Protestants had gathered an Army and came with all speed towards them, they fled before they saw their enemies, leaving behind them their Warlike Engines with a great prey. In end there was a Counsell hden at Basil, which went to the Bohemians that they should send their Am∣bassadours which should shew a reason of their Faith, promising a safe conduct to go and come, and free liberty to speak what they would. An Am∣bassage
of three hundred Horses was sent unto Basil, they compeared before the Counsel, and being heard they were demanded in what point they did disagree from the Church of Rome, they proponed four Ar∣ticles; First, they affirmed that all such as would be saved, ought of necessity to receive the Communi∣on of the Last Supper under the kindes of Bread and Wine. The second Article, they affirmed all civill rule and dominion to be forbidden unto the Clergy by the Law of God. The third Article, that the Preaching of the Word of God is free for all men, and in all places. The fourth Article, as touching open crimes and offences which are in no wayes to be suffered for the avoiding of greater evill. Some were chosen by the Bohemians, and some by the Counsel, to consider the Articles, and to dispute them; this Disputation continued fifty dayes, where many things were alledged on either part. In end, after long dispute and reason∣ing between the Bohemians and the Counsel, there was a concord and unity concluded between them. The Counsel permitted the Bohemians to Communi∣cate under both kindes as a thing lawfull by the au∣thority of Christ, and profitable and healthfull to all such as duely received it. As for the other three Articles the Bohemians promised to receive the De∣claration of the Church touching them, and con∣firmed it setting to their hands; what the deter∣mination was of these three Articles I find it not. Thus the Bohemians did constantly defend and main∣tain their Religion, that Bishop of Rome could never yet divert them from it, especially from the Communion of both kinds. In the year of God 1438. The noble Art of Print∣ing with Letters made in Brasse was found out, a very Divine Invention, worthy of memory and admirati∣on: yet were it more admirable if it ware not so much prophaned. The Invention was Germanick, and
very strange at the beginning, and of great profit. John Gutemberge Knight was the first Author of this goodly Invention. The thing was first essayed at Magance, sixteen years before it was divulged in Italy. One saith that John Faustus, called Gutman Invented it with Peter Scheffer. Now to leave the estate of the Church of Bohemia for a while, we return to speak of the Persecutions in England, and elsewhere, for if we will read and mark and take a view of the stirres that have been from time to time for Religion, we shall finde that in England is more burning and slaying for Religion, and more blood shed amongst them then in any other Countrey or Nation in Christendome besides; and because we cannot name all that hath been troubled and persecuted amongst them for Religion, we shall name some of the most memorable, And first of all in the first year of King Henry the sixth his Raign, was burned the constant witnesse-bearer and testis of Christs Doctrine, William Taylor a Priest under Henry Chichelie, Archbishop of Canterbury, for maintaining erroneous and hereticall Doctrine as they alledged, as that prayer ought to be directed to God alone, and to pray to any creature is to com∣mit idolatry. After long imprisonment, with great constancy did consumat his Martyrdome. Next, William White Priest, he was a follower of Iohn Wickliff, and a Priest, not after the common sort of Priests, but rather reputed amongst the num∣ber of them whom the Wise-man speaks, he was as the Morning Star in the midst of a Cloud, &c. This man was well learned, upright, and a well spoken Piest, he was apprehended and taken by the Bishop of Norwich, and of him condemned and burnt in Norwich; this man was of so divine and holy life, that all the people had him in great reverence, and desir∣ed him to pray for them, insomuch that one Margret
Wright confessed that if any Saints were to be prayed unto, she would rather pray to him then any other, when he was come unto the Stake, thinking to open his mouth to speak unto the people to exhort and confirm them in the verity, one of the Bishops Ser∣vants took him on the mouth, thereby to force him to keep silence. And thus this good man receiving the Crown of Martyrdome, ended this mortall life, to the great dolour and grief to all the good men of Norfolk. About this time also was burned Father Abraham of Colchester, and John Waddon Priest, for suspected Heresie. Many both men and women in those dayes in the time of King Henry the sixt being suspect of Heresie or Lollaroy were apprehended and accused, and cast into prison, and greatly vexed, and after their ab∣juration brought into open shame in Churches and Markets; the form of the Popish pennance was this, three fuistgations or displings in procession about the Cathedrall church three severall Sundays, and three displings about the market place three principall market dayes, his head and neck and feet being bare, and his Body covered only with a short shirt or ve∣sture, having in his hands a taper of Wax of a pound weight, which the next Sunday after his pennance, hee should offer to the Trinity, and that for the space of three years after every Ash wednesday and Mun∣day and thursday he should appear in the Cathedrall Church before the Bishop or his Vicegerents to do open pennance among the penetentiaries for his of∣fences. In the year of God 1430. shortly after the solemn coronation of King Henry the sixt, a certain man named Richard Hoveden a woll-winder and a citizen of London was burnt for suspition of Heresie. This man when hee could by no perswasions be with∣drawn or plucked back from the opinions of Wickliff,
he was by the rules of the Church condemned for He∣resie and burned hard by the town of London. Thomas Bagely a Priest being a valiant Disciple and adherent of Wickliff was condemned by the Bishop, of Here∣sies at London and was degraded & burnt in Smithfield. In the dayes of King James the first Anno 1431. was deprehended in the University of St. Andrews one named Paul Craw a Bohemian and delivered over to the Secular power to be burnt for holding contra∣ry opinions unto the church of Rome touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the worshipping of Saints, Auricular confession with others of Wickliffs opinion; they put a ball of Brasse in his mouth, to the end he should not give confession of his Faith to the people, neither yet that they should understand the defence which they had against their unjust ac∣culation and condemnation. Richard Wich Priest a man suspect of Heresie was degraded and burned at the Tower-hill. It is testifi∣ed of him that before his death he spoke (as pro∣phesying that the posterior of the Tower should sink, which also afterward came to passe, wherefore of many of the people hee was counted for an holy man in so much (as it is affirmed) they came to the place where he was burnt and there made their oblations and prayers, and a red great heap of stones and set up a crosse there by night, so that by this means a great clamour ran upon the Church men and especially up∣on such as put him to death, Then to cease therein more, the King gave commandement to punish such as went thither on pilgrimage. Here is to be remembred the lamentable losing of Constantinople, in the year of God 1453. Constan∣tinus Palaeologus being Emperor of Constantinople, was taken by the Turk Mahometes, after the siege of fifty four dayes, which siege began in the beginning of
April. The Emperor was slain, and the Turks sacking and ranging about streets, houses, and cor∣ners, did put to the sword most unmercifully whom∣soever they found both aged and young, Matrons, Virgins, Children and Infants, sparing none. The Noble Matrons and Virgins were horriblie ravished, the Goods of the City, the Treasures in houses the Ornaments in the Churches were all sacked and spoyled, the Pictures of Christ opprobriously handl∣ed in hatred of Christ. The spoyl and havock of the city lasted three days together while the barbarous Souldiours murthered and rispled what them listed. These things thus beng done, and the tumult ceas∣ed, after three dayes Mahomets the Turk entreth into the city, and first calling for the Heads and Ancients of the city, such as he found to be left alive, he commanded them to be mangled and cut in pieces. It is also reported that in the feasts of the Turks honest Matrons and Virgins and such as were of the Kings stock, after other contumelies were hew∣en and cut in pieces for their disport. And this was the end of that princely and famous city of Constan∣tinople, beginning first by Constantinos, and ending also with Constantinus. This terrible destruction of the city of Constantinople the Queen of cities, may be a warning to all Christendome. Rynold Peacock Bishop of Chichester is greatly af∣flicted & persecuted by the Pops Prelats for his faith and profession he is forced by menaces and threatn∣ings to recant, and notwithstanding his recantation he is deteined still in prison, where some say, that hee was privately made away to death. In the Reign of King Edward the fourth, Joh Goose, or John Hus, a goodly & constant servant of Christ was unjustly condemned and burnt at the Tower-hill. Thus had England also this John Hus as well as Bohe∣mia: John Goose in Englsh, is as much as John Hus
in the Bohemian Language, This John Goose being delivered to Robert Belisdon one of the Sheriffs, to see him burnt in the afternoon. The Sheriffliffe a chari∣table man had him home to his house, and there ex∣horted him to deny (saith the Story) his error. But the godly man after long exhortation heard, desired the Sheriff to be content, for he was satisfied in his conscience. notwithstanding this he desired of the Sheriff for Gods sake to give him some meat, saying tha the was very sore hungred. Then the Sheriff commanded him meat, whereof he took and did eat, as if he had been toward no manner of danger, and said to such as stood about him, I eat now a good and compleat Dinner, for I shall passe a little sharp showre ere I go to Supper; and when he had Dined he gave thanks, and requested that he might shortly be led to the place where he should yeeld up his spirit unto the Lord, and so he was burned. In the time of this King Edward the fourth this is not to be passed by, that one Burdet a Merchand dwelling in Cheapside, at the Sign of the Crown, which is now the Sign of the Flower deluce, mer∣rily speaking to his son, that he would make him In∣heritor of the Crown, meaning indeed his own house, for the which words King Edward causing them to be misconstrued, and interpreted as though he had meant the Crown of the Realm, within leffe then four houres he was apprehended, judged, drawn and quartered at Cheapside, here is Tyrannie in misconstruing a mans words, and the Laws of the Realm misconstrued for the Kings pleasure. In the ninth year of the Reign of Henry the seventh was burned a very old Woman above fourscore years, named Joan Boughton, Widow and Mother to Lady Young, which Lady was also suspect to be of that opinon that her Mother was, she was a Dis∣ciple of Wickliff, and held so fast and firmly eight
of his opinions, that all the Doctors of London could not turn her from one of them: And when it was told her that she should be burnt for her obstin∣acy and self-belief, she set nothing by their menacing words, but defyed them, for she said that she was so beloved of God and his holy Angels that she passed not for the fire. And in the mids thereof she cried to God to take her soul into his holy hands, and so she was burnt; he night following the most part of her ashes were had away of such as had a love unto the Doctrine she died for. In the next year following was a Priest burnt which was so strong in his opini∣on that all the Clerks and Doctors then there being, could not remove him from his Faith, whereof the King being informed, he caused the said Priest to be brought before his presence, who by his perswa∣sion caused him to revolt, and so he was burnt im∣mediatly. The storm of persecution which had raged long in England against many good and godly men, brake forth likewise in other parts of Christendome, as in Germany, Italy and France: In Germany and other parts there about after the burning of John Hus were many put to death for religion. In Italy one Thomas Rhedone a French-man and a Camelit Frier was burnt for the profession of Christ at Rome. At this time also fell out the Martyrdome and burning of Hieronymus Savanatola, a man no lesse godly in heart then constant in his profession, he was a Monk in Italy, and singularly well learned, he Preached sore against the evill life and living of the Spirituali∣ty, and especially of his own Order, complaining sore upon them as the Springs and Authors of all mischiefs and wickednesse, &c. He with his two companions was hanged and burnt for the Gospels truth. This man foreshewed many things to come, as the destruction of Florence and Rome, and the
renewing of the Church, which three things have happened in these times in this our remembrance; also he foreshewed that the Turks and Mores in the latter dayes should be converted unto Christ; he al∣so declared that one should passe the Alps into Italy, like unto Cyrus, who should subvert and destroy all Italy, whereupon Johannes Franciscus Picus Earl of Mirandula called him a holy Prophet, and defended him by his Writtings against the Pope, as many other learned men also defended the innocency of the said Savanarola. And speaking of this Joannes Picus Earl of Mir∣andula, it shall not be amisse to shew this Story of him. This Picus being but a young man, was so excellently witred and so singularly learned in all Sciences, and in all Tongues, both Latine, Greek and Hebrew, Chaldie and Arabie, that coming to Rome Booted and Spurred, he set up nine Conclusions to Dispute in the same with any in all Christenstome, whosoever would come against him. Of which Con∣clusions diverse were touching the matter of the Sa∣crament: And when none was found in all Rome or in Europe that openly would Dispute with him, privily and in corners certain of the Popes Clergy, Prelat, Lawyers and Friers by the Pope appointed, consulted together to enquire upon his Conclusions, whereupon they did Articulat against him for suspi∣tion of Heresie: And thus the unlearned Clergy of Rome privily circumvented and intangled this learned Earl in their snare of Heresie, against whom they durst never openly Dispute: he died being of the age of thirty two years, of such wit and towardnesse as is hard to say whither ever Italy bred up a better. In his sicknesse Charles the eight then French King moved with fame of his Learning came to visite him. The furniture of his Books cost him 700. Florents, a little before his death his mind was to
give all away, and to take a Towl and Preach, but the Lord would not permit him. With two Popes, that is, with Pope Innocent and Alexander the sixt he had much vexation. Under the Raign of Frederi∣cus the third Emperor of Germany, was one Iohn, a Pastor or a Neat herd, which was a keeper of Cattel, him the Bishop of Herbipolis condemned and burnt for an Heretick, because he taught and held that the life of the Clergy was ignominious and abominable before God. But to proceed in the Persecutions of the Godly in England in King Henry the seventh his Raign. In the Diocesse of Lincoln in Buckinghame-shire, William Smith being Bishop of the same Diocesse, one Willi∣am Tylesworth was burned in Amershame, his only Daughter being a married Woman, a Godly and a Faithfull Woman, was compelled with her own hands to set fire to her dear father, and at the same time her husband did penance at her fathers burn∣ing, and bare a Fagot, as did also many moe. At the burning of this William Tylsworth were sixty and above that were put to bear Fagots for their Penance, of whom diverse were injoyned to bear and wear Fagots at Lincoln for the space of seven years, some at one time, some at another, &c. In which num∣ber was also Robert Barlet a rich man, who for his Possessions sake was put out of his Farm and Goods, and was condemned to be kept in the Monasterie of Ashange, were he did wear on his right Sleeve a square piece of Cloath the space of seven years to∣gether. About the same time also of the burning of Wiliam Tylesworth was one Father Roberts burned at Buckinghame, he was a Miller and dwelt at Mis∣senden and at his burning there were about twenty persons that were compelled to bear Faggots and to do such pennance as the wicked Pharisees did com∣pell them. After that, by the space of two or three
years was burned at Amersham Thomas Bernard a husband man and James Mordan a labourer and they two was burned both at one fire, Also there were thirty burned on the right Cheek at the same time and bare Faggots; the cause was, that they would table against Superstition and Idolatrie and were de∣sireous to hear and read the holy Scriptures. The manner of their burning on the cheek was this, their necks was tyed fast to a Poast or Stay with Towels, and their hands holden that they might not stir, and so the Iron being hot was put to their cheeks, and thus bare they the Prints and Marks of the Lord Jesus about them. At this time also in the dayes of King Henry the seventh, was one Laurence Ghest which was burned in Salisbury for the matter of the Sacrament, he was of a comely and tall Personage, he was kept in Prison the space of two years. This Laurence had a Wife and seven Children, where∣fore they thinking to expugne and perswade his mind by stirring his fatherly affection toward his Children, when the time came which they appointed for his burning, as he was at the Stake, they brought be∣fore him his Wife and his foresaid seven Children, at the sight whereof, although Nature is commonly bent to work in other, yet in him Religion over∣coming Nature, made his constancy to remain un∣moveable, in such sort, as when his Wife began to exhort and desire him to favour himself, he again desired her to be content, and not to be a block in his way, for he was in a good course running to∣wards the mark of his Salvation, and so fire being put to him he finished his life, renouncing not only Wife and Children, but also himself, to follow Christ. As he was in burning, one of the Bishops men threw a fire-brand at his face, whereat the bro∣ther of Laurence standing by, ran at him with his Dagger and would have slain him had he not been otherwise stayed.
It is recorded likewise in the raign of this King Henry the seventh when the people was returning from the burning of a faithfull woman at Cheaping Sadbery for alledged Heresie by Doctor Whitington the Bishops Chancelour who was present at the exe∣cution, as hee returned with the rest there happened that a Bull, escaping from the Butcher into the street, he passed through the throng of the people, every one drawing aside and shifting for himself, and touching neither man nor childe till hee came where the Chancelour was, against whom the Bull as pricked with a sudden vehemency ran upon him with his horns, and taking him upon the paunch gorred him throw and throw and so killed him immediatly, carrying his guts, and trailing them with his horns all the streets over, to the great admiration and won∣der of all them that saw it. Here we see a plain miracle of Gods mighty power and judgement both in the punishing of this wretched Chancellour, and also in admonishing all other like persecutors by his exam∣ple to fear the Lord, and to abstain from the like cruelty. Besides these before mentioned, many moe in this King Henry the seventh his raign were persecut∣ed for their Religion, specially in the diocesse of Coventree and Lich-field, among whom we shall name these few. First, John Blomston was openly and publickly infamed, accused reported and a∣peached that he was a very Heretick, because he had preached, taught, holden and affirmed that the pow∣er attributed to St. Peter in the Church o God, by one Saviour Jesus Christ immediatly, did not flitte or passe from him to remain with his Successors. Item that there was as much vertue in an Herb, as in the Image of the Virgine Mary. Item that prayer and Alms avail not the dead, for incontinent after death he goeth either to Heaven or hell, where∣upon
hee concludeth there is no Purgatory &c. Richard Heghame in the same City of Coventree was accused to be a very Heretick, because that hee did hold that a Christian man being at the point of death should renounce all his own works good and ill, and submit him to the mercy of God. Item, It was fondnesse to worship the images of our Lady of Tower in the forsaid City, or of other Saints, for they are but stocks and stones. Item that if the im∣age of our Lady of Tower were put into the fire, it would make a good fire. Item that it were better to deal money unto the poor folks, than to offer to the Image of Christ and other Saints, which are but dead stocks and stones. John Smith was accused to be a very Heretick, because he did hold every man is bound to know the Lords Prayer and the Creed in English if he might for these false Priests. Thomas Butler was likewise accused to bee a very Heretick because he did hold that there were but two wayes that is to say, to heaven and to hell. Item that there was no Purgatory, for every man immediatly after death passeth either to heaven or hell. Item that prayers and pilgrimages are nothing worth, and avail not to purchase heaven &c. All these and ma∣ny moe were forced to recant and put to penance. We are not here to let passe the fearfull and miserable end of Pope Alexander who before was called Ro∣derick Borgia that fell out at this time in the year 1502. who made a covenant with the Devill that he might attain to the Popedome, and being inquisitive how long he should raigne, It was told him that hee should raign the space of eleven and eight, which was an ambiguous answer, for the Pope promised to himself the tyme of nineteen years in his Popal digni∣ty but Satans meaning was but eleven years and eight moneths, the time being expyred and his death draw∣ing near, on a certain day as he made ready an
exceeding great banquet for certain rich Senators and Cardinals and had recommended to his son Va∣lentine that hee should give Wine to drink unto one of the said Cardinals wherein there was poyson put. It came to passe that he that had the charge to deliver the Wine, unwitting he gave unto the Pope of that flagon wherein the poyson was, who being of great age, was taken with a languishment and grievous paine, he had by the space of eleven years and cere∣tain moneths excessively oppressed Italy and troubl∣ed the world. Being then detained in his Bed (as John Baleus saith) he commanded one of his men called Madena, which amongst all them of his Court and House was his most faithfull and familiar to go into his Gard rob or Wadrop and to bring him a certain little Book inriched with Gold and precious stones which was in an armory which hee specified, but this little Book contained all manners and kinds of illusions and inchantments of Necromancies, whereby the old man thought to inform himself to be certified of the close and end of his life. The servant obeying the commandement of the Pope his Master, and going unto the place specified. And after hee had opened the door, he was ready to have entered into the Chamber, he saw a certain person sit in the Popes Chaire who was altogether like unto his Master at whose sight being supprised with an horrible fear and astonishment, and as it were half dead without taking the book ran back again toward Alexander, unto whom he rehearsed what he had seen, namely that in his Wardrop he found such a Pope as himself set in a Chaire. Alexander after he had understood the thing, and seeing his servant exceedingly afraid, suffered him to rest a while, after he did so much perswade him that he returned unto the said Wardrop to see if again hee could find the said Pope. The servant then being entred found
in the said chamber him whom before hee had seen, and that more is, being asked by him that sate there, what cause brought him into that place and what businesse hee had there, he being taken with a sore trembling and as it were out of breath, answered he came to take a certain garment for the Pope. All which words the Devill being then in the chaire mak∣ing an horrible noise said, what Pope? I am the Pope. But after that these things were reported un∣to Alexander, his evill began to encrease and death aproach. A short day after, a man apparalled like a carrier or Lackie, came and fiercly knocked at the Chamber door, wherein the Pope was deteined sick, saying the must needs speak with him. The door being opened and he admitted partly with the Pope, all others drew aside, and the Pope and hee spake together as two use to do in secret causes, yet men may see a great and marvelous strife and debate be∣twixt them two, and that the Pope was not content, for he said unto him, how goes this? My tearm is not accomplished, thou knowest that thy promise was 19. years, whereof I have brued but eleven and eight months Unto which words the Lucky hardly answered, yee understand not well the speach, but are with it abused, for I said not nineteen years as ye imagined, but I said, yee should remain Pope ele∣ven years and eight moneths, the which are come and passed, and therefore ye must needs die. But although the Pope was very active to require and to pray instantly that he would have regard to his life and to the tearm that he had granted him in his Popedome, yet it was as to speak to a deaf man, and to plead in vain, for all his allegations, remonstrati∣ons, exceptions and requests profited nothing, so that they which were in the chamber and heard this marvelous debate and difference, might judge that Sathan was more expert in the Art of Arithmetick
then the Pope was, and they might easily conclude that Alexander erred in his account; Finally to close up the matter, even as Sathan went and departed from the place, in like manner also with great cryes, sighs and fearful sobs, the Popes soul (as it were) following his steps dislodged and miserably departed from his Body. This miserably and ungodly died this Pope Alexander leaving to his Son his Seigniory altogether wasted and ruinous, and to the Italians their common-wealth all confused, perverted and wasted to the end hee might be a publick example to all ages how things evil gotten melt away, and are wickedly and unluckily spent. This Pope had with his said Son a daughter called Lucretia, with whom both he and his Son lay, as Potantus and Samazarias have left written. Now to come to the Persecutions that were in King Henry the eight his Raign. During the time and Raign of King Henry the eight there was great alteration of things as well to the civile State of the Realm, as especially to the State Ecclesiasticall and matters of the Church appertaining; for at last by him was exiled and abolished out of the Realm the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, idolatry and superstition some what supprest, Images and pilgrim∣ages defaced, Abbeyes and Monasteries pulled down, Sects of Religion rooted out, Scriptures re∣duced to the knowledge of the vulgar tougue, and the estate of the Church and Religion redressed. There was at this time a fierce contention which long before had troubled the Church, and now this present year 1509. was renewed afresh between two certain orders of begging Friers, to wit, the Dominick Friers and the Franciscans, about the Con∣ception of the Virgin Mary the Mother of Christ. The Franciscans or Gray-fries held that the Virigin Mary prevented by the grace of the Holy Ghost,
was so sanctified that she was never subject one mo∣ment in her conception to Original sin. As for the Dominicks which were commonly called Black-friers or Preaching Friers held that he Virgin Mary was conceived as all other Children of Adam be, so that this priviledge only belongeth to Christ to be conceived without Original sin, not withstanding the said blessed Virgin was sanctified in her Mothers womb, and purged from the Original sin, so as John Baptist, Jeremiah, or any other priviledged per∣son. This frivolous Question kindling and gender∣ing between these two Sects of Friers brust out in such a flame of parts and sides taking, that it occupy∣ed the heads and wits, Schooles and Universities al∣most through the whole Church, some holding one part with Scotius, some the other part with Thomas Aquinas, but in end Pope Sixtus decided the Questi∣on, and sent forth his Bull for the Conception of the Virgin to be without Original sin. Having made mention of this Pope Sixtus the fourth, It shall not be amisse to she what manner of Pope he was, he builded up in Rome a Stews of both kinds, getting thereby no small Revenues and Rents unto the Church of Rome. This Pope among other his Acts reduced the Year of Iubile from the fifty unto the twenty five: He also instituted the Feast of the Conception and the presentation of Mary, and of Anna her Mother, and Joseph. Also he Canonized Bonaventur and Sir Frances for Saints. By this Sixtus also Beads were brought in and in∣stitute to make our Ladies Psalter, through the oc∣casion of one Alanus and his order, whom Baptista maketh mention of in this Verse, hi filo insertis nu∣merant sua murmura baccis, that is, these men putting their Beads upon a string, number their Pray∣ers. This Sixtus the Pope made two and thirty Cardinals in his time, of whom Patrus Ruerius was
the first, who for that he was Cardinal, which was but two years, spent in luxurious riot, wasted and consumed two hundred thousand Florens, and was left 6000. in debt. And what vile abominations this Pope permitted to this Cardinal and his Family to be done is unworthy to be named. Wesellus Gro∣mugensis in a certain Treatise of his de indiligentiis Papalibu does declare. The Pope Sixtus was a Monster rather of Nature then a Prelat of the Church. After this Sixtus came Innocentius the eight, as rude and as far from all learning as his Pre∣decessors was before him. Amongst the noble facts of this Pope this was one, that in the Town of Polus and Equicolos he caused eight men and six women with the Lord of the place to be apprehended and taken, and judged for Hereticks, because they said that none of them was the Vicar of Christ which came after Peter, but they only which follow the poverty of Christ. Also he condemned of Heresie George the King of Bohemia, and deprived him of his dig∣nity, and also of his Kingdom, and procured his whole Stock to be utterly rejected and put down, giving his Kingdom to Mathias King of Pononia. Many godly persons both men and women were per∣secuted for their Religion in the Diocess of London by Fitz James, and after him Tunstal Bishops of London, cruel persecuters of Christs Church. A∣mongst others, the chiefest objection against Joan Baker was that she would not only her self not rever∣ence the Crucifix, but had also perswaded a friend of hers lying at the point of death not to put any trust or confidence in the Crucifix, but in God which is in Heaven who only worketh all miracles that be done, and not the dead Images that be but stocks and stones, and therefore she was sory that ever she had gone so often on pilgrimage to St. Saviour and other Idols. Also that she did hold opinion that the
Pope had no power to give Pardons, and that the Lady Young her Mother, who was not long before that time burned, died a true Martyr of God, and therefore she wished of God that she her self might do no worse then the said Lady Young her Mother had done. Unto William Pottier besides diverse other false and slanderous Articles, it was al∣ledged that he should affirm that there was six Gods, the first three was the Holy Trinity, the Fa∣ther, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; the fourth was a Priests Concubine being keeped in his Chamber the fifth was the Devil, and the sixth the thing that a man setteth his mind most upon, The first part of his Articles he utterly denyed, confessing most firmly and truely the blessed Trinity to be only one God in one Unity of Deitie, as to the other three he answer∣ed that a Priest delighting in his Concubine made her as his God, likewise a wicked person persisting in his sin without repentance, and made the Devil his God. And lastly, he granted that he once hearing of certain men which by the singing and chattering of Birds would seek to know what things were to come either to themselves or others, and that these men esteem∣ed their Birds as Gods, and otherwise he spake not. Some were accused and challenged for speaking a∣gainst Pilgrimages, praying unto Saints, that they denyed the carnall and corporall presence of Chtists Body and Blood in the Sacrament of the Altar. And many were charged to have spoken against Pilgrim∣ages, and to have read and used certain English Books repugnant to the faith of the Romish Church, and the four Evangelists, Wickliff, Wicket, a Book of the Ten Commandements of Almighty God, the Revelation of St. John, the Epistles of Paul and James, with other like, which these holy ones could never abide, and good cause why, for as darknesse could never agree with light, no more can ignorance
the maintainer of that Kingdome with the true knowledge of Christ and his Gospell. John Houshold was charged to have called them Antichrists and Whoremongers, and the Pope himself a strong strum∣pet and a common bawde unto the world, who with his pardons had drowned in blindnesse all Christian Realms and that for money. Moreover about the same time were certain articles objected against John Hig alias Noke, alias Johnson, by the Bishops vicar Generall amongst which were these, first that he had affirmed that is was as lawful for a temporall man to have two Wives at once, as for a Priest to have two benefites. Also that he had in his custody a book of the four Evangelists in English, and did often read therein, and that he did favour the Doctrines and oppinions of Martin Luther, openly pronounc∣ing that Luther had more learning in his little finger then all the Doctors of England in their whole Bodies, and that all the Priests in the church were blind and had led the people the wrong way. Like∣wise It was alledged against him that he had denyed Purgatory and had said, that while he were alive he would do as much for himself as he could, for after his death he thought prayer and almes deeds would little help him, these and such like matters were they wherewih these poor and simple men and wo∣men were chiefly charged, and as haynous Hereticks excommunicated, imprisoned and at last condemned to recant, and some of them in utter shame and re∣proach, besides the ordinary bearing of Faggots before the crosse in procession, or else at a Sermon were enjoyned for pennance (as they tearmed it) as well to appear once every year before their ordinary, as also to wear the sign of a Pagot painted upon their sleeves other part of their outward garment and that during all their lives, or so often or so long as it pleased their ordinary to appoint, by which long ri∣gorous
and open punishing of them, they meant as it should seem utterly to terrifie and keep back all o∣thers from the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and his Gospel. But the Lord be evermore praised, what effect their wicked purposes therein have been taken these our most lightsome dayes of Gods glori∣ous Gospell doe most joyfully declare. William Sweting and John Brewster were put to death and burnt together in Smithfield, the chiefest case of Religion alledged against them in their Arti∣cles was their Faith concerning the Sacrament of Christs Body and Blood, which because it differed from the absurd, grosse and Capernaiticall opinion of the new School men, was counted as most hain∣ous Heresie. John Brown▪ was put to death and burned at Ash∣ford in the year of God 1517. about the fourth year of King Henry the eighth, upon the declaration of a Priest in a conference between him and the Priest, who took him for an Heretick, whereupon he was apprehended and committed to Prison, the same night as he was in the Stocks at Ashford, where he and his Wife dwelt, his Wife came and sat beside him all the night before he should be burned, to whom he declaring the whole story how he was handled shewed and told how that he could not set his feet to the ground, for they were burned to the bones, and told her how by the two Bishops War∣ham and Fisher his feet were heated upon the hote coals, and burnt to the bones, to make me (said he) to deny my Lord which I will never do, for if I should deny my Lord in this World, he would hear∣after deny me; I pray thee therefore (said he) good Elizabeth, continue as thou hast begun, and bring up thy Children vertuously and in the fear of God, and so the next day this godly Martyr was burned, commending his spirit into the hands of the Lord,
At the fire the Bayllie Arrant bade cast in his Childr∣en also, for they would spring (said he) of his ashes. This blessed Martyr John Brown had born an Faggot seven years before in the dayes of King Henry the 7. Richard Hunne Merchand Tailyour, dwelling within the City of London, and free-man of the same, who was esteemed during his life, and worthily reputed and taken not only for a man of true dealing and good substance, but also for a good Catholick man; this man was suspect of Heresie, and committed to the Lollords Tower, where he was first murthered by his adversaries the Priests, and by them hanged, whereupon they made the people to believe that he had desperatly hanged himself, and after his death led a processe against him, and con∣demned him of Heresie; and at last burned him in Smith-field. Thomas Man for alledged Heresie suffered much trouble and long imprisonment, and in end was con∣demned and burnt in Smithfield. This Tomas Man, called Doctor Man confessed that he turned seven hundred people to his Religion and Doctrine, for the which he thanked God. Against the faithfull Christians of Amershame was great trouble and persecution in the time of William Smith Bishop of Lincolne. At which time diverse and many were abjured, and it was called abjuratio magna, the great abjuration, and they which were noted of that Doctrine and profession were called amongst themselves by the name of known men, or just fast men, as now they are call∣ed by the name of Protestants. At this time although publick authority then lack∣ed to maintain the open Preaching of the Gospel, yet there were many in secret, good Christians and true Professors of the Gospel; truly the fervent zeal of those Christian-dayes, seemed much
superiour to these our dayes and times, as manifest∣ly may appear by their sitting up all night in reading and hearing, also by their charges and expenses in buying of Books in English. In which rarity of books, and want of Teachers, this one thing may be much marvelled and mused at, to note in the Re∣gisters, and to consider how the word of truth not∣withstanding did multiplie so exceedingly as it did amongst them, wherein is to be seen no doubt the marvellous working of Gods Almighty power, for so it is found and observed in considering the Regi∣sters, how one neighbour resorting and conferring with another, oft seemed with a few words of the first and second Table, did win and turn their minds to that wherein they desired to perswade them, touch∣ing the truth of Gods Word, and their Sacraments. To see their travells, their earnest seeking, their burning zeal, their readings, their watchings, their sweet assemblies, their love concord, their godly living, their faithfull meaning with the faithfull, may make us now in these our dayes of free profes∣sion to blush for shame. Four prinipal points they stood in against the Church of Rome, in pilgrim∣age, adoration of Saints, in reading of Scripture-books in English, and in the carnall presence of Christs Body in the Sacrament. After the death of William Smith succeeded John Longland, a bloody and cruell persecutor of the Saints of God, he caused the Wife to detect the Husband, the Husband the Wife, the Father the Daughter, the Daughter the Father, the Brother to disclose the Brother, and Neigbour the Neigh∣bour, neither were there any Assemblies nor readings kept, but both the persons and also the books were known; neither was one word so closely spoken, nor Article mentioned, but it was discovered. So subtilly and slightly these Catholick Prelats did use
their inquisions and Examinations, that nothing was done or said among these known men fifteen or twenty years before so covertly, but it was brought at length to their intelligence, as appears in a Table describing the grievous afflictions of good Men and Women in the Diocesse of Lincolne under John Long∣land their Bishop, with the names both of the ac∣cusers and of them that were accused, also with the crimes to them objected out of the Registers of the said Diocesse; all these were constrained to abjure and do penance, and they which were Relapse, were committed to the Secular power and burnt. As touching the burning of John Scrivener, here is to be noted that his Children were compelled to set the fire unto their Father, in like manner as Joan Clerk also Daughter of William Tylesworth, was compelled to give fire for the burning of her own na∣turall Father. The example of which cruelty, as it is contrary both to God and Nature, so it had not been seen nor heard of in the memory of the Hea∣then. Now to leave England for a while, and to take a view of other Countreys, and the Persecutions for Religion there, we shall begin first with Germany. OF MARTIN LUTHER by whom God began the Reformation of his CHURCH. MARTIN LUTHER born at Isleben in Saxonie one Augustine Frier arose in the year of God 1516. to detect and discover the errors of the Church of Rome, and to cry out against indulgences upon this occasion. Leo the tenth of that name, Pope of Rome, who under pretence of War against the Turk, sent a ubile with his Pardons abroad through all Christian Realms and Dominions, whereby he
gathered together innumerable riches and Treasure. The Gatherers and Collectors thereof perswaded the people that whosoever would give ten shillings, should at his pleasure deliver one soul from the pains of Purgatory, for thus they held as a generall Rule that God would do whatsoever they would have him, according to the saying, quicquid solveritis super terram, erit solutum in Coelis, whatsoever ye loose upon earth, the same shall be loosed in Heaven, but if it were but one jot lesse then ten shillings, they preached that it would profit them nothing. This filthy kind of the Popes Merchandise as it spread through all quarters of Christian Regions, so it came also to Germany through the means of a certain Dominick Frier named Tecellius who men impu∣dently caused the Popes Indulgences or pardons to be carried and sold about the Countrey. Whereupon Luther much moved with their blasphemous Ser∣mous of this shamelesse Frier, and having his heart earnestly bent with arden desire to maintain true Re∣ligion, published certain Propositions concerning Indulgences, and set them openly on the Temple of Wittemberge. This Frier and the rest of the Monks there cryed out against Luther, that he was an Here∣tick, and worthy to be persecuted with fire. And besides this, he burned openly Luthers Propositions, and the Sermon which he wrot of Indulgences. This rage and fumish fury of this Frier enforced Luther to treat more amply of the cause, and to maintain his matter. And thus rose the beginnings of this con∣troversie, wherein Luther neither suspecting nor dreaming of any change that might happen in Cere∣monies, much lesse such a Reformation of Doctrine and Ceremonies as afterward did follow, did not ut∣terly reject the Indulgences, but required a moder∣ation in them. The Duke of Saxonie at this time being very inquisitive to understand the truth of
Luthers Doctrine and consulted the learned men thereupon. In the number of whom was Erasmus, whom the Duke desired to declare unto him his opi∣nion touching that matter of Martin Luther saying and protesting that hee would rather the ground should open and swallow him, then hee would bear with any Opinions which he knew to be contrary to manifest truth; And therefore he desired him to de∣clare his judgement in the matter to him freely and friendly Erasmus thus beeing entreated of the Duck, began thus jestingly and merrily to answer the Dukes request, saying, that in Luther were two great faults, First, that hee would touch the bellies of Monks; the second, that hee would touch the Popes Crown, which two matters are in no case to be dealt withall. Then opening up his mind plainly to the Duke, thus he said, that Luther did well in detecting er∣rours, and that Reformation was to bee wished and very necessary in the Church, and added moreover that the effect of his Doctrine was true, but only that hee wished in him a more temperat moderation and manner of wryting and handling. Luther was condemned of the Pope as an Heretick, and rejected from the communion of the Faithful, he appealed to the Counsell to come. After this, Leo the Pope commanded that his Books should bee burnt at Rome. And on the other side Luther burnt at Wittemberge his Canons, Popish decretals. And the Emperor by the Popes instigation was ordained to exile him, but he was kept secret and solitary for a time by the advice and conveyance of certain Nobles in Saxonie, In the absence of Luther out of Wittemberge, Andre∣as Carolastadius proceeding more roughly and eager∣ly in causes of Religion had stirred up the people to throw down Images in the Temples besides other things moe. For the which cause Luther returning again into the City, greatly misliked the order of
their doings, and reproved the rashness of Carolast∣adius, declaring that their proceedings herein were not orderly, but that Pictures and Images ought first to be thrown out of the hearts and consciences of Men, and that the people ought first to be taught that we are saved before God and please him only by Faith and that Images serve to no purpose. This done, and the people well instructed, there was no danger in Images, but that they would fall of their own accord. Not that he repyned to the con∣trary (he said), as thought he would mantain Im∣ages to stand or to be suffered, but that this ought to be done by the Magistrat and not by force upon every mans head, and without order and authori∣ty &c. The cause why Luther so stood against that violent throwing down of Images, and against Caro∣lastadius, seemeth partly to rise off this, by reason this Pope Adrian in his Letters sent to the Princes and States of Germany doth grievously complain and charge the Sect of Luther for sedition and tumults and rebellion against Magistrats, and subverters and destroyers of all order and obedience as appeareth by the words of the Popes Letter, therefore Martin Luther to stop the mouth of such slanderers, and to prevent such sinister suspicions, was enforced to take this way as he did to proceed as much as he might by order and authority. Zuinglius and Luther agreed in all points of Doctrine, saving in the Doctr∣ine of the Sacrament; neither were there opinions so different in the matter of the Lords Supper, but that in the principal points they accorded. For if the question be asked of them both, what is the ma∣teriall substance of the Sacrament which our out∣ward senses do behold and feel; they will both con∣fesse bread, and not the accidents only of bread: Further if the question be asked whither Christ be there present, they will both confesse. His true
presence to bee there, only in the manner of presence they differ. Again ask whether the materiall sub∣stance laid before our eyes in the Sacrament, is to be worshipped, they will both deny it and judge it Idolatry; and likewise for transubstantiation, and for the Sacrifice of the Masle, they both do abhorre and deny the same: As also the Communion to be in both kinds to be administred, they do both assent and grant. Only their difference is in this concerning the sense and meaning of the words of Christ, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body &c. Which words Luther exponneth to be taken nakedly and simply as the letter standeth without trop and figure, and therefore holdeth the Body and Blood of Christ truly to be in the Bread and Wine, and so also to be re∣ceived with the mouth Uldricus Zuinglius with Joaunes Oecolampadius, and other moe do interpret these words, otherwise to be taken not literally but to have a spirituall meaning, and to be expounded by a Trope and Figure, so that the sense of these words, This is my body thus to be expounded; this signifieth my Body and Blood The Saxons follow Luther, and the Helvetians Zuinglius, and as time did grow, so the division of these opinions in sides, spread in further Realms and Countries, the one part called of Luther, Lutherians, the other having the name of Sacramentaries. Notwithstanding in this one unity of opinion, both the Lutherians and Sa∣cramentaries do accord and agree, that the Bread and Wine there present is not transubstantiat unto the Body and Blood of Christ as said, but is a true Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. Many conflicts he had with the Pope, his Cardinals and Clergy, and notwithstanding their furie and rage and plots against him, and the great power of his adver∣saries, the Emperor and the King of Spain and o∣ther Potentats, yet they could not prevail against him
God keeping and defending him, that they could not bereave him of his life, but died peaceably in his own country where he was born, teaching and preaching Christ the space of 29 years. Many dan∣gers he escaped, especially these two which are not to be passed by, wherein appears the great providence of God toward him; First, when a certain Jew by his enemies was appointed to come to destroy him by poyson, yet was it so the will of God, that Lu∣ther had warning thereof before, and the face of the Jew sent to him by picture, whereby he knew him, and avoided the perill. Another time as he was sitting in a certain place upon his stool, a great stone there was in the Voult over his head where he did sit, which being stayed miraculously, so long as he was sitting, assoon as hee was up, immediatly fell upon the place where hee sate, able to have crushed him all in pieces if it had light upon him. And what should I speak of his prayers which were so ardent unto Christ, that (as Melancton writes) they which stood under his window, where he stood praying might see his tears falling and dropping down. Again with such power he prayed that he (as himself con∣fesseth) had obtained of the Lord that so long as he lived, the Pope should not prevail in his country. After his death (said he) let them pray who could. Again, it is reported of him that a young man about Wittemberge, who being kept bare and needy by his Father, was tempted by way of Sorcery to bargain with the Devill or a familiar as they call him, to yeeld himself body and soul into the Devils power, upon condition to have his wish satisfied with money, so that upon the same, an Obligation was made by the young man written with his own blood and given to the Devill. Upon the sudain, wealth and alter∣ation of this young man, the matter first being noted, began afterward more and more to be susp∣suspected,
and at length after long and great admir∣ation was brought unto Martin Luther to be examin∣ed; the young man, whether for shame or fear long denyed to confesse, and would bee known of nothing, yet God so wrought being stronger then the Devil that he uttered unto Luther the whole substance of the case as well touching the money as the Obli∣gation Luther understanding the matter, and pittying the lamentable estate of the man, willed the whole congregation to pray, and he himself ceased not with his prayer to labour, so that the Devill was compell∣ed at the last to throw in his Obligation at the win∣dow, and bade him take it again unto him. And as he was mighty in his prayers so in his mons. God gave him such a grace that when like preach∣ed they which heard him, thought every one his own temptations severally to bee noted and touch∣ed. Whereof when signification was given unto him by his friends, and he demanded how that could bee; my own manifold temptation (said he) and experiences are the causes thereof. For Luther from his tender years was much broken and exercis∣ed with severall conflicts, for he confessed that he was afflicted and vexed with all kind of temptati∣ons saving only one which was with covetousnesse. With this vice he was never (said he) in all his life to be troubled nor once tempted. Pope Leo the tenth of that name bare an irrecon∣ciliable heatred unto the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, which he persecuted in the person of Luther and many others: for as one day the Cardinal Bembo uttered before him a certain thing drawn from the Gospel, he answered him mocking. It hath ever sufficiently been known what profit that sable of Jesus hath brought us and our company. O execrable blasphemy! Luther died in the year of our Lord 1546. being 63. years of age. The Prayer of
Luther at his death was this. My Heavenly Father, eternall and merciful God, thou bath manif sted unto me thy dar Son, our Lord esus Christ. I have taught him, I have known him, I love him as my life, my health and my redemption whom the wicked have per∣secuted, maligned, and with injury afflicted, draw my soul to thee. After this, he said as ensueth thrise, I commend my spirit into thy hands, thou hast redeemed me, O God of truth: God so loved the World, that he gave his only Son, that all these that believe in him should have life everlasting, Joh. 3. The Martyres of GERMANY. MAny after the death of Luther were troubled for their Religion, some tost from place to place, same exiled out of the Land for fear, some caued to abjure, some driven to Caves in Woods, some rack∣ed with torment, and some pursued to death with fagot and fire. And because we cannot name all that were persecuted and put to death for their Religion, we shall name some few of the choisest. And first, there were two young men burnt at Bruxlies, the one named Henry Voes, being of the age of twenty four years, and the other Iohn Esh, which before had been of the order of the Augustine Friers, for that they would not retreat and deny their Doctrine of the Gospel, which the Papists call Lutheranisme. As they were led to the place of Ex∣ecution, they went joyfully and merrily, making continually protestations that they died for the glory of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, believing and following the holy Church of the Son of God, saying also that it was the day which they had long desired. After they were come to the place where they should be burned, and were dispoyled of their
garments, they tarried a great space in their shirts, and joyfully embraced the Stake that they should be bound to, patiently and joyfully enduring whatsoever was done unto them, praising God with Te Deum laudamus, and singing Psalms and rehearsing the Creed in testimony of their death. One of them seeing that fire was kindled at his feet, said, me thinks ye do straw Rose, under my feet, finally the smoak and the flame mounting up to their face, choaked them. The next year after the burning of these two young men before rehearsed, was Henry Sutphen put to death by the conspiracy of the Monks and Friers, without all order of judgement, or just condemnati∣on: about the City of Diethmar in the borders of Germany, in the year 1524. they resolved to take him by night and burn him, before the people should know it, as he came to his defence to answer. They with a confused multitude of people came unto him in the night, and drew him naked out of his bed, bound his hands hard behind him, and carried him away; then he being marvellous weary and faint re∣quired to be set on horse-back, for his feet were all cut and hurt with the yce, because he was led all night barefoot, when they heard him say so, they mocked and laughed at him, saying, must we hire an horse for an Heretick, he shall go on foot whither he will or not, and after a world of indignities, mock∣ings, striking and bustetting him, he was burnt without any judgement, his cause not being heard. In the mean time a certain Woman as he passed by, offered her self to suffer a thousand stripes, and to give much money, so that they would pacifie the matter, and keep him in the prison, untill that he might plead his matter before the whole convocation of the countrey people. When they heard these words, they waxed more mad, and threw the Woman
down under feet, and trod upon her, and beat the said Henry unmercifully; the fire as often as it was kindled, would not burn, notwithstanding they sa∣tisfied their minds upon him, striking and pricking him with all kind of Weapons, the said Henry stand∣ing in the mean time in his shirt before all the rude people at the last they having gotten a great Ladder, bound him hard thereunto, and cast him into the fire. And when he began to pray, and to repeat his Creed, one strake him upon the face with his fist, saying, thou shall first be burnt, and afterward pray and prat as much as thou wilt. Then another treading upon his breast, bound his neck so hard to a step of the Ladder, that the blood gushed out of his mouth, and nose. This was done to strangle him withall, for they saw that for all his sore wounds he would not die. After that with their weapons they had kil∣led him, they rosted him upon the coals, for the Wood as often as it was set on fire, would not burn out. And thus, this godly Preacher finished his Martyrdome, and many moe godly Preachers were burnt. About the same time many other godly Persons and such as feared God for the testimony of the Gos∣pell were thrown into the River of Rhene and into toher Rivers were their Bodies afterward were found and taken up. In the same year of God 1524. the Town of Mihtemherge in Germany was taken and ransacted and diverse of the inhabitants there slain, and many imprioned for mantaining and keeping with them Carolastadius to be their preach∣er. The lamentable Martyrdom of John Clerk of Melden in France. Melden is a Citie of France ten miles distant from Paris where John Clark was first appre∣hended and taken for setting up upon the Church door against the Popes pardon lately sent thither from Rome, in which Bill hee named the Pope
to be Antichrist, for the which his punishment was this, that three severall dayes hee should bee whip∣ped, and afterwards have a mark imprinted in his forehead as a note of infamy, his mother being a Christian Woman, although her Husband were an adversary, when she beheld her son thus pitionsly scourged, and ignominously deformed in the face, constantly and boldly did encourage her son, cry∣ing with a loud voice blessed be Christ, and wel∣come be these prints and marks; thereafter leav∣ing the Town, he came to Merz in Lotharing, where he remained a certain space, applying his Vo∣cation, being a Wool-carder in his Occupation; whereas he the day before that the people of that City, should go out to the Saburbs to worship cer∣tain blind Idols, thereby (after an old use and cu∣stome amongst them received) being inflamed with the zeal of God, went out of the City to the place where the Images were, and brake them all down in pieces; tryall being taken who should be the doer thereof, this man was suspected and examined up∣on the same, at first confesseth the fact, rendering also the cause which moved him so to do, he was condemned and led to the place of Execution, where he sustained extream torments, for first his hand was cut off from his right arm, then his nose with sharp Pinsons was violently plucked from his face, after that both his armes and his papes were likewise pluckt and drawn out with the same In∣strument: To all them that stood looking upon it was an horrour to behold, and dolefull sighs of his pains. Again to behold his patience, or rather the grace of God giving him the gift to suffer, it was a wonder. Thus quietly and constantly he endur∣ed in his torments, pronouncing, or in a manner singing the Verses of the 115. Psa. Simulachra corum sunt argentum & aurm, &c, Their Images be silver and
gold the work only of mans hands, &c. The residue of his life that remained in his rent body was committ∣ed to the fire, and therewith consumed. A certain godly Priest in Suevia being commanded to come and give good counsell to sixteen Countrey∣men that should be beheaded, afterward was bid himself to kneel down to have his head cut off, no cause nor condemnation further being laid against him, but only of meer hatred against the Gospel. After that George Sherter had instructed the people in knowledge or the Gospel in Rastar, ten miles distant from Saltzburg, was accused of his adversar∣ies, and put in prison, where he wrot a Confession of his Faith, he was condemned to be burned alive, but means, was made that first his head should be cut off, and his body afterward be cast into the fire, go∣ing toward his death, he said crying aloud, that ye may know (said he) that I die a true Christian, I will give you a manifest sign, and so he did by the power of the Lord, for when his head was taken off from his shoulders, the body falling upon his belly, so continued the space while one might well eat an Egge, after that it softly turned it self upon the back, and crossed the right foot over the left, and the right hand over the left; at the sight whereof they which saw it were in a great marvell. The Magistraces which before had appointed to have burned the body after the beholding, seeing this mira would not burn it, but buried it with other Christian mens bo∣dies, and many by the same example were moved to believe the Gospel. Thus God is able to manifest the truth of his Gospel in the midst of persecution who is to be blessed for ever. Amen. Giles of rasels as he was brought to the place of burning, where he saw agreat heap or Wood pyled, he required the greater part to be taken away, and be given to the poor, a little, said he, would suffice
him. Also seeing a poor man coming by, as he went, that lacked shooes, he gave his shooes unto him; better, (said he) so to do, then to have his shooes burnt, and the poor to perish for cold. Standing at the Stake, the Hang-man was ready to strangle him before, but he would not, saying that there was no such need that his pain should be mitigated, for I fear not (said he) the fire do therefore as thou art com∣manded. And thus the blessed Martyr lifting up his eyes to Heaven in the middle of the flame, was ex∣tincted, to the great lamentation of all that stood by. After that time when the Friers of that City would go about for their Almes, the people would say, it was not meet for them to receive Almes with bloody hands. At this time also was great Persecution in Gaunt and other parts of Flanders, as Charles, ths Emperor did lye in Gaunt, the Friers and Doctors there obtained that the Edict made against the Luthe∣rians might be red openly twise a year, which being obtained, great persecution followed, so that there was no City nor Town in all Flanders, wherein some either were not expulsed, or headed, or condemned to perpetuall prison, or had not their goods confis∣cat, neither was there any respect of Age or Sexe. At Gaunt especially many there were of Head men which for Religion sake were burned: Afterward the Emperor comming to Brusels there was terrible slaughter and persecution of Gods people, namely in Brabant, Hennegow and Artoys, the horrour and cruelty whereof is almost incredible , in so much that at one time, as good as two hundreth men and wo∣men together were brought out of the Countrie about into the City, of whom some were drowned, some burnt quick, some prively made away, others sent to perpetuall prison, whereby all prisons and towers were replenished thereabout with prisoners and cap∣tives, and the hands of the Hang-man tyred with
slaying and killing, to the great sorrow of all them which knew the Gospel; being now compelled ei∣ther to deny the same or confirm it with their Blood. Ursula and Maria virgins of noble stock were burned for the Gopel in Delden, a Town in lower Germany, First Mary being the younger was put to the fire where she prayed ardently for her enemies commending her soul to God. At whose constancy the Judges did greatly marvell. Then they exhorted Ursula to turn, or if she would not, at least that she should request to be beheaded. To whom she said, that she was guilty of no error, nor defended any thing but which was consonant to the Scripture in which she trusted, to preserve unto the end. And feared not the fire, but rather would follow the ex∣ample of her dear Sister that went before. This was marvelous that the executions could in no wise con∣sume their dead bodies with fire, but left them whole lying upon the ground white, which certain good Christians privily took up in the night and burned: thus God many times sheweth his power in the midst of Tibulations, At Dornick in Fanders, Marion wife of Adrian Tailyour, for the Gopell of Christ was burned quick, she was inclosed in an iron grate formed in shape of a paslie, was laid in the earth and burned quick. A certain Prince in Germany about Hungary or the parts of Pannonia, his name is not expressed, put out the eyes of a certain Priest in Germany for no other cause but for that he had said the Masse to be no Sacrifice, in that sense as many Priests do take it. Neither did the crul Prince immediatly put him to death, but first keeped him in prison a long time afflicting him with diverse torments, then he was brought forth to be degraded, after a barbarou and tyrannous manner, first, they shaved the crowr,
of his Head, then rubbed it with Salt that the blood came running down his shoulders. After that, they razed and paired the tops of his Fingers with cruel pain that no savour of the holy oyl might remain. At last the patient and godly Martyr four dayes after yeelded up his life and spirit. Joannes Diazius a Spainyard Martyr was killed of his own brother at Neoberge in Germany. In Hungary a certain godly Priest preached that the eating of flesh is not prohibited in the Scripture, for the which the cruel Bishop after he had imprison∣ed him certain weeks, caused him to be brought out and his body to be tyed over with Haires, Geese, and Hens, hanging round about him, and so the beastly Bishop made Dogs to be set upon him, which cruelly rent and tore whatsoever they could catch. And thus the good Minister of Christ beeing driven about the City with the barking of Dogs died and was Martyred. The sight whereof as it was lamentable to the godly, so it seemed ridiculous to the wicked, but within few dayes after the impious Bishop by the stroak of Gods just hand fell sick, and became horn mad, and so raving without sense or wit misar∣ably died. Great likewise was the persecution in Bohemia for two hundreth Ministers and Preachers of the Gospell were banished out of Bohemia, for preaching against the Superstition of the Bishop of Rome, and extolling the glory of Christ. Besides these Germanus above specified and o∣thers a great number there was both in the Higher and Lower Countries of Germany, which were se∣cretly drowned or buried, or otherwise in prison made away, whose names although they be not known to us, yet they are Registrated in the books of life. But leaving to speak any further of the Mar∣tyrs which suffered in Germany which were many,
we come to speak of the French Martyrs. And be∣cause it is impossible to name all that suffered for the cause of Christ we shall make choise to some select ones. The French MARTYRS. ANd first, John Cornon a husband man of Mascon uncleetered, but to whom God gave such wis∣dome that his judges were amazed when hee was condemned by their sentence and burned. Stephen Brune a husband man at the place of his burning, the wind oe and blew the fire so from him as he stood exhorting the people, that he there con∣tinued about the space of an hour, in manner not harmed or scarce touched with any flamme, so that all te Wood being wasted away, they were com∣pelled to begin the fire again with new faggots and vessels of oyl and such other matter, and yet neither could he with all this be burned, but stood safe. Then the hangman took a staffe and let drive at his head, to whom the holy Martyr being yet alive said, when I am Judged to the fire, do yee beat me with staffes like a Dog, with that the hangman with his Pike thrust him through the belly and the guts, and so threw him down into the fire and burned his body to ashes, throwing away his ashes afterward with the wind. Constantinus a Citizen of Rhone with three other for the defence of the gospel being condemned to be burned, were put in a dung Cart, who the reat re∣joycing, said that they were reputed here as excre∣ments of this world, but yet their death was a sweet odour unto God. Aymod Dlavoy a Preacher of the Gospel being accused to have teached false Doctrine, and having
intelligence that he was to be apprehended, was will∣ed by his friends to flee and shift for himself, but he would not, saying that he had rather that he had ne∣ver been born then so to doe. It was the office of a good shepherd (he said) not to flee in time of perill, but rather to abide the danger, least the flock be scar∣tered, or least peradventure in so doing hee should leave some scruple in their minds thus to think that he had fed them with dreams and fables contrary to the word of God, therefore beseeching them to move him no more therein, he told them that he feared not to yeeld up both body and soul in the quar∣rel of that truth which hee had taught, saying with St. Paul that hee was ready not only to be bound for the testimony of Christ in the City of Burdeaux but also to die, the Somner came, and was in the City three days, during which time Aymondus preached three Sermons, the people in defence of their Preach∣er flew upon the Somner to deliver him out of his hands: But Aymond desired them not to stop his Martyrdom seeing that it was the will of God that he should suffer for him he would not (said he) resist. Then the Consuls suffered the Somner, and so Ay∣mond was carried to Burdeaux, there he was accused and false witnsse brought in against him, all their accusation was only for denying purgatory; after long and miserable imprisonment he is put to death and burnt. Frances Bonbard was said to be Secretary of the Cardinall of bellare, who being also for the Gospel condemned, after his tongue was cut off, did with like constancy sustain the sharpnesse of burning. The enemies of the Gospel seeing that these that were condemned to die at the place of the Execution, moved many with their speech, therefore they ob∣tained a decree of the Judges that all which were to be burned, unlesse they recanted at the fire, should
have their tongues cut off, which Law diligently afterward was observed. Michael Michelot a Taylour being apprehended for the Gospels sake, was judged first if he would turn to be beheaded, and if he would not turn then to be burned alive, who being asked whether of these two he would choose, answered, that he trusted that he which hath given him grace not to deny the truth, would also give him patience to abide the fire: He was burned at Warden by Turney. Seven men and women of the City of Langres for the Word and Truth of Christ Jesus were committed to the fire, wherein they died with much strength and comfort, but especially Joan which was Simon Marshall his Wife, being reserved to the last place because she was the youngest, confirmed her Hus∣band and all the other with words of singular conso∣lation, declaring to her Husband that they should the same day be married to the Lord Jesus to live with him for ever. Anne Andebert an Apothecaries Wife, and Wi∣dow, going to Geneva, was taken and brought to Paris, and by the Counsell there judged to be burned at Orleance. When the Rope was put about her, she called it her Wedding girdle, wherewith she should be married to Christ. And as she should be burned upon a Saturday, upon Michaelmas-even, upon a Saturday I (said she) I was first married, and upon a Saturday I shall be married again. And seeing the Dung-cart brought wherein she should be carri∣ed, she rejoyced thereat, shewing such constancy in her Martyrdome, and made all the beholders to marvell. Among many other godly Martyrs that suffered in France, a story of a poor Taylour of Paris, that dwelt in the Street of St. Antony, is not the least and worst to be remembred, his name is not expressed,
he was apprehended of a certain Officer in the Kings house, for that upon a certain Holy-day he followed his Occupation, and did work for his living, before he was had to the Prison the Officers asked him why he did labour and work, giving no observation of the Holy-day, to whom he answered, that he was a poor man living only upon his labour. And as for the day, he knew no other but the Sunday wherein he might not lawfully work for the necessity of his living, he is clapt into Prison: word hereof coming to the Kings ears, the poor man was sent for to ap∣pear, that the King might have the hearing of him, who being come before the King, the King com∣manded Petrus Castellanus Bishop of Mascon to que∣stion with him. The Taylour being entred, and nothing appalled at the Kings Majesty, after his reverence done unto the Prince, gave thanks to God that he had so greatly dignified him being such a wretch as to bring him where he might testifie his truth before such a mighty prince. Then Castellan∣us entring talk began to reason with him touching the greatest and chiefest matter of Religion. Where∣unto the Tailyour without fear or any halting in his speach, with present audacity, wit and memory so answered for the sincere Doctrine and simple truth of Gods Gospell as was both convenient to the pur∣pose, and also to his Questions aptly and fitly corre∣spondent notwithstanding the Nobles there present with cruell taunts and rebukes did what they could to dash him out of countenance, yet all this terrified not him, but with boldnesse of Heart and free Liber∣ty of Speech, he defended his cause, or rather the cause of Christ the Lord, neither flattering with their persons, or fearing their threats, which was to them all a singular admiration to behold the simple poor Artificer to stand so firm and bold answering before the King to these Questions propounded against
him. Whereat when the King seemed to muse with himself, as one somewhat amazed, and which might soon have been induced at that present to further knowledge, the egregious Bishop and other Courti∣ours seeing the King in such a muse, said, he was an obstinate and a stubborn person obfirmed in his own opinion, and therefore was not to be marvelled at, but to be sent to the judges and punished, and there∣fore least he should trouble the eares of the said King Henry, he was commanded again to the hands of the Officers that his cause might be inform∣ed, and so within few dayes after he was condemn∣ed by the high Steward of the Kings house to be burned alive. And least any deep consideration of that excellent fortitude of the poor man might fur∣ther peradventure pierce the Kings mind, the Cardi∣nalls and Bishops were ever in the Kings ear, telling him that these Lutherans were nothing else but such as carried vain smoak in their mouths, which being put to the fire would soon vanish. Wherefore the King was appointed himself to be present at his ex∣cution, which was sharp and cruel, before the Church of Marie the Virgin where it pleased God to give such strength and courage to his servant in suffering his Martyrdome, that the beholding thereof did more astonish the King then all the other did be∣fore. Thomas Sanpaulinus a Young Man of the Age of eghten years comming from Geneva to Paris, rebuked there a man for swearing, for the which cause he being susected for a Lutherian, was follow∣ed and watched whither he went, and was taken and brought before the Counsell of Paris, and put in Prison, where he was racked and miserably tor∣mented, to the intent he should either change his opinion, or confesse others of his profession, his tor∣ments and rackings were so sore through the setting on of Mallard and another Sorbonists, that the
sight thereof made Auberius one of the Counsel, a cruell and vehement enemy against the Gospel, to turn his back, and wept. The young man when he had made the tormenters weary with racking, & yet would utter none, at last was had to Manbelt Place in Paris to be burned, where he being in the fire, was plucked up again upon the Gibbet, and asked whether he would turn. To whom he said, that he was in the way toward God, and therefore desired them to let him go. Thus this glorious Martyr re∣maining inexpugnible, glorified the Lord with con∣stant confession of his truth. Nicholas Nayle a Schoemaker comming to Paris with certain fardels of Books was there apprehended who stoutly persisting in coufessing the truth was tryed with his sundry torments to utter what followes he had besides of his profession so cruelly that his body was dissolved almost one joynt from another, but so constant he was in his silence that he would ex∣presse none. As they brought him to the Stake, first, they put a gage or piece of wood in his mouth which they bound with Cords to the hinder part of his head so hard, that his mouth on both sides gushed out with blood, and disfigured his face monstruously; by the way they passed an Hospitall, where they willed him to worship the Picture of St. Mary stand∣ing at the Gate: But turned his back as well as he could, and would not, for the which the blind peo∣ple was so grieved, that they would have fallen up∣on him. After he was brought to the fire, they so smeared his body with Fat and Brimstone, that at the first taking of the fire, all his skin was parched, and the inward parts not touched, with that the Cords burst which were about his mouth, whereby his voice was heard in the midst of the flamme praising God, and so the blessed Martyr departed. One of the Parliament seeing the great zeal and patience of
the Martyrs at their burning, said that way not to be best to bring the Lutherans to the fire, for that would do more hurt then good. A Carpenter, and another a Poynt-maker, going to Execution to be burnt for the profession of the Gospel, their tongues were commanded to be cut off, and being cut off, there appeared a marvellous work of the Lord, for neverthelesse that their tongues were taken from them, to the intent they should not speak, yet God gave them utterance, their tongues being cut out, to speak at their death, saying, we bid sin, the flesh, the world and the devil farewell for ever, with whom never we shall have to do hearafter. Diverse other words they spake be∣side, which the people did hear and note: At last when the Tormenter came to smear them with Brim∣stone and Gun-powder, go to said Filiolus, salt on, salt on the rotten and stinking flesh; finally, as the flamme came bursting up their faces they persisting constant in the fire, gave up their lives, and finished their Martyrdome. There was at Montpelliers in the year of God 1554. a certain Sheer-man or Cloath-worker, who had been long in durance for Religion, but at length for fear and infirmity he revolted. To whom it was injoyned by the Judges to make publick Recantati∣on, and to be present also at the burning of Alencon, who was condemned to death. At the beholding of whose death and constancy, it pleased God to strike in this man such boldnesse, that he desired the Judges that either he might be burnt with this Alenon, or else be brought again to Prison, saying, that he would make no other Recantation but so: wheresore within three dayes after he was likewise condemned to the fire, and burned in the Town aforesaid. There was a rich Merchant in Paris, who said in jest to the Friers of St. Frances, ye wear a Rope about
your bodies because St. Francies once should have been hanged, and the Pope redeemed him upon this condition that all his life after he should wear a Rope: Upon this the Franciscan Friers of Paris caused him to be apprehended and laid in Prison, and so Judgement passed upon him that he should be hanged, but he to save his life was contented to re∣cant, and so did. The Friers hearing of his Re∣cantation commended him, saying, if he continued so he should be saved, and so calling upon the Officers, caused them to make hast to the Gallows to hang him up while he was yet in a good way (said they) lest he fall again. And so was this Merchand not∣withstanding his Recantation hanged for jesting a∣gainst the Friers. To this Merchand may also be adjoyned the Bro∣ther of Tamer, who when he had before professed the truth of the Gospel, and afterward by the counsell and instruction of his Brother was removed from the same, fall in desparation and such sorrow of mind, that he hanged himself. As one Thomas Galbergue was in the flamme at Tourney, the Warden of the Friers stood crying, Turn Thomas, yet it is time, remember him that came at the last hour. To whom he cryed out of the flamme with a loud voice, and I trust to be one of that sort: and so calling upon the Name of the Lord gave up his spirit, As two Mar∣tyrs at Burdeaux were in the flamme and almost con∣sumed in the fire to ashes, suddenly without matter or cause such a fear fell upon them at the execution, that the Justices & the people, notwithstanding that they had the Gates locked to them, and were defenc∣ed with all manner of weapons about them not knowing wherefore, took them to their legs, in such haste flying away, that they overran one another. The Pior of St. Antonies fell down so that a great number went over him. The Judge Pontach on his
Mule with his red robe flying as the other did, was overthrown with the preasse in the street, in such sort that he was fain to be carried to Pichons house a widow, and there cryed within, hide me, save my life, I am dead, my friends, hide my Mule that no mn see her nor know her, briefly such was the fear which came from them, that every man shut up their houses. After the fear was past, every man asked what the matter was, but none could tell, neither could the enemies of Gods truth perceive who was he that put them so to the flight and fear without any semblance of any adversary about them, Impius fugit & nemo perseqnitur. Of the cruell Masscre in FRANCE. Anno 1572. THere was at this time a marriage to be between the Kings Sister and the Prince of Navar. To this pretended Marriage it was divised that all the chiesest Protestants or France should be invited and meet in Paris, being met and conveened that same night of the Marriage, Souldiours were appointed in diverse places of the City to be ready at a watch-word, to break in into the Protestants houses; at which watch-word given, they brust out to the slaughter of the Protestants, first beginning with the Admirall who was slain in his bed, and thrown out at a window into the street, where his head being first striken off and embalmed with Spices to be sent to the Pope, At this time there was slain in three dayes above ten thousand Men and Women, old and young of all sorts and conditions, yea, and slew all the Protestants they knew or could find within the city Gates inclosed. So great was the rage of the Heathenish persecution that not only the Protestants, but also, certain whom they thought indifferent Pa∣pists,
they put to the sword in steed of Protestants, In the number of them that were sln of the more learned sort was, Petrus Ramus, Lumbinus, and others. And not only within the Walls of Paris was this uproar contained, but extended further into other Cities and quarters of the Realm, especially Lyons, Orleance, Tholous and Roan. In which Cities it is almost incredible, nor scarlely ever heard of in any Nation, what cruelty was shewed, what numbers of good Mn were destroyed, in so much that within the space of one month thretty thousand at least of Religious Protestants are numbred to be slain. Furthermore here is to bee noted, that when the Pope first heard of this bloody stir, he with his Cadinals made such joy at Rome with their processi∣on, with their Gun-shot and singing Te Deum, that in honour of that lawful festival Act, a Iubile was commanded by the Pope with great indulgence and much Solemnity, whereby thou hast here to discern and judge with what spirit and charity these Catho∣licks are moved to maintain their Religion withall, which otherwise would fall to the ground without all hope of recovery. Likewise in France no lesse rejoycing there was, the King commanding publick processions through the whole City to be made with Bone-fires, Ringing and singing, where the King himself with the Queen his Mother and his whole Court resorting together to the Caurch, gave thanks and laud to God for that so worthy victory archieved upon St. Bartholomews Day against the Protestants whom they thought to be utterly overthrown and vanqished in all the Realm for ever. And in very deed to mans thinking, might appear no lesse after such a destruction of the Protestants, having lost so many worthy and noble Captains-as then were cut off, whereupon many for fear revoking their Religion re∣turned to the Pope; diverse fled out of the Realm,
such as would not turn, kept themselves secret, durst not be known or seen, so that it was past all hope of man that the Gospel should ever have any more place in France, but such is the admirable working of the Lord, where mans help and hope most fail∣eth, there he sheweth his strength and helpeth, as here is to be seen and noted by stirring up Rochel to stand to the defence or their Religion against the Kings power, by whose example certain Cities hear∣ing thereof, took no little courage to do the like, as Mountaban and others who being confederat to∣gether, exhorted one another to be circumspect, and take good heed of the false dissembling practises not to be trusted of the mercilesse Papists, intending no∣thing but blood and destruction. Rochel standing to the defence of their lives and consciences, and to ad∣venture the worst, whereupon began great siege and battery to be laid against Rochell both by sea and land, which was Anno 1572. The whole power of France is set against Rochel. Thus the whole power of France being gathered against one power town, had not the mighty hand of the Lord stood on their side, it had been impossible for them to escape. Daring the time of this siege which lasted about seven months, what skirmishes and conflicts were on both sides, it would require a long tractation, In all which assaults ever the Popes Catholicks had the worst. Concerning the first assault thus I find written that within the space of 26. dayes were charged against the walls and houses of Rochel to the number or thretty thousand shot of iron Bullets and globes, where by a great breach was made for the adversary to invade the city, but such was the courage of them within not men only, but also of Women, Matrons and maids, with spites, fire and such other weapons that came to hand, that the adversary was driven back, with no smal slaughter of their Souldiours. Likewise in
the second assault 2000. great field pieces were laid against the Town whereupon the adversary attempt∣ed the next day to invade the Town, but through the industry of the Souldiers and citizens and also of wo∣men and maids the invaders were forced at length to flee away faster then they came. No better successe had all the assaults that followed. Mny were the tokens of Gods gracious dealings with them during the time of the siege, and amongst the rest this was very memorable at Rochel, whereas the poorer sort began to lack corn and victual, there was sent to them every day in the River (by the hand of the Lord, no doubt a great multitude of fish called Surdones) which the poor people did use in stead of bread: Which fish the same day as the siege brake up, de∣parted and came no more, testified by them which were present there in Rochel all the time. The King in end being weary of those chargeable wars, there was a peace agreed and concluded between the King and the Protestants of Rochel, in which were included other Cities of the Protestants, granting to them benefite of peace, and liberty of Religion. The next year following, died Charels the 9. the French King and the Cardinal of Lorain brother to Guise. The King died of the age of 25. years, and the man∣ner of his death is to be noted. The constant report To goeth that his blood guishing out by diverse parts of his body, he tossing in his bed, and casting out many horrible blaphemies, laid upon pillows with his heals upward and head downward, voyded so much blood at his mouth, that in few hours he dyed. Which story if it be true as is recorded and restified, may be an spectale and example to all persecuting Kings and Princes polluted with the blood of Christi∣an Martyrs.
The cruel Persecution and Bloody Boutchery of the MERINDOLIANS. FOllows the Tragicall Persecution, and horrible murther of the faithfull flock of Christ, inha∣biting in Merindol in the Countrey of Province in France; this people of a long continuance and cust∣ome had refused the Bishop of Rome his Authority, and observed ever a more perfect kind of Doctrine then others, delivered them from the Father to the Son ever since the year of our Lord 1200. for this cause they were often accused, and complained of to the King, as contemners and despisers of the Ma∣gistrats, and Rebels; they were oftentimes persecut∣ed, and many put to death for their Profession; in end the Court or Parliament at Province gave out a cruell sentence against Merindol, and condemned all the Inhabitants to be burned, both Men and Wo∣men, sparing none, no not the little Children and Infants, the Town to be razed, and their Houses to be beaten down to the ground; also their trees to be cut down, as well Olive-trees as all other, and nothing to be left, to the intent it should never be in∣habited again, but remain as a Desert or Wildernesse. The violence and execution of this cruell and bloody sentence was for a time restrained, and the rage of the adversaries repressed, till Minerius a bloody per∣secuter, and the Kings Lievtenant of Province, forg∣ed a most impudent lye against these innocent Chri∣stians, giving the King to understand that they of Merindol, and all the Countrey near about, to the number of twelve or fifteen thousand, were in the field in Armour; with their Ensigne displayed, in∣tending to take the Town of Mansfield, and make it one of the Cantons of the Switzers, and to stay
this enterprise; he said it was necessary to execute the Arrest manumilitari, and by this means he ob∣tained the Kings Letters Patents though the help of the Cardinall of Tournon, commanding the sentence to be executed against the Meridolians, notwith∣standing the King had before revoked the said sen∣tence, and given strait commandement that it should no wayes be executed. After this he gathered all the Kings Army which was then in Province, ready to go against the Englishmen, and took up all be∣sides that were able to bear Armour in the Chief Towns of Province, and joyned them with the Army which the Popes Lgat had Levied for that purpose in Avinion, and all Countries of Venice, and imployed the same to the destruction of Merindol, Cabriers, and other Towns and Villages, to the num∣ber of 22. giving Commission to his Souldiers, to spoyl, ransack, burn and destroy all together, and to kill Man, Woman, and child, without all mercy, sparing none, no otherwise then the Infidels and cruel Turks have dealt with the Christians So Me∣rindol without any resistance, was taken, ransacked, burnt, razed, and laid even with the ground, and killed all, both young and old whom they found in the Town. When he had destroyed Merindol, he laid siege to Catriers, and battered it with his Or∣dinance, but when he could not win it by force, he with the Lord of the Town, and Powling his chief Captain, perswaded with the Inhabitants to open their Gates, solemnly promising that if they would so do, they would lay down their Armour, and also that their cause should be heard in Judgement with all equity and justice, and no violence or injury should be shewed against them. Upon this they opened their Gates, and let in Minerius, with his Captains, and all his Armie; but the Tyrant when he was once entred, falsified his promise, and raged like a
Beast, for first of all he picked out about thirty men, causing them be bound and carried into a Mea∣dow near to the Town, and there to be miserably cut and hewn in pieces by his Souldiers; then be∣cause he would not leave no kind of cruelty unat∣tempted, he also exercied outrage and fury upon the poor silly women, and caused fourty of them to be taken, of whom diverse were great with child, and put them into a Barn full of Straw and Hay, and caus∣ed it to be set on fire at four corners: And when the silly women running to the great Window where the Hay is wont to be cast into the Barn, would have leaped out, they were keeped in with Pikes and Halberds: then there was a Souldier, which moved with pity at the crying out and lamentation of the Women, opened a door to let them out, but as they were comming out, the Tyrant caused them to be slain and cut in pieces, opening their bellies that the children fell out whom they trod under their feet, with many other cruel and barbarous acts against the poor innocents. This done, this Tyrant more cruel then ever was Herod, commanded one of his Captains, with a Band of Ruffians, to go into the Church (where was a great number of Women, Children, and young Infants) to kill all whom he found there, which the Captaine at the first refused to do, saying that were a cruelty unused among men of War: Whereat Minerius being displeased, charg∣ed him upon pain of Rebellion and disobedience to the King, to do as he had commanded him. The Captain fearing what might ensue, entreth with his men and destroyed them all, sparing neither young nor old. We are not here to passe by the fearfull Jugement of God that fell upon Minerius the cruel Persecuter of thir innocents, being stricken with a strange kind of bleeding at the lower parts, in manner of a bloody
Flux, and not being able to avoid any Vrine, thus by little and little his Guts within him rotred, and when no Remedy could be found for this terrible disease, and his Intrals now began to be eaten of Worms, a certain famous Chirurgeon named La Motte, which dwelt at Arles (a man no lesse Godly then expert in his Science) was called for, who after he had cur∣ed him of this difficulty of making Water, and there∣fore was in great estimation with him, before he would proceed further to search the other parts of his putrified body, and to search out the inward cause of his Maladie, he desired that they which were pre∣sent in the Chamber with Minerius would depart a little aside: Which being done, he began to exhort Minerius with earnest words, saying, how the time now required that he should ask forgivenesse of God by Christ for his enormous crimes and cruelty in shed∣ding so much innocent blood, and declared the same to be the cause of this so strange profusion of blood comming from him. These words being heard, so pierced the impure conscience of this miserable wretch, that he was therewith more troubled then with the agony of his disease, in so much that he cry∣ed out to lay hands upon the Chirurgeon as an Here∣tick; La Motte hearing this, eftsoones convyed himself out of sight, and returned again to Arles, notwithstanding it was not long but he was sent for again, being intreated by his friends, and promised most firmly that his comming should be without a∣ny perill or danger, and so with much adoe he re∣turned again to Minerius, raging and cast out most horrible and blasphemous words, and feeling a fire which burnt him from the Navel upward, with ex∣tream stinck of the lower parts, finished his wretch∣ed life, whereby we have notoriously to understand that God through his mighty arm at length con∣foundeth such persecuters of his innocent and faith∣full
servants, and bringeth them to nought, to whom be praise and glory for ever. The Persecutions of the WALDENSES, Or, WALDOYES. THe Waldenses, otherwise called Pauperes de Lugduno, have their beginning of one Petrus Waldus Citizen of Lyons, their first teacher and in∣structer, by violence o persecution being driven out of Lyons, were dispersed abroad in diverse Countreys, of whom some fled to Massilia, some to Germany, Livonia, Bohemia, Calabia, and Apulia, diverse strayed to the Countreys of France, especially about Province and Piemont, of whom came these Merindo∣lians above mentioned; they which were of the Coun∣trey of Tolousa, of the place where they frequented, wer clled Albii. or Albigenses. Against the which Albigenses, Friers Dominicus was a great doer, labour∣ing and Preaching against them ten years together, and caused many of them to be burned. And albeit great was their Persecution in all parts where they were scattered, yet could they never be utterly de∣stroyed, nor yet compelled to yeeld to the supersti∣tious and false Religion of the Church of Rome, but ever abstained from their corruption and Idolatry as much as was possible, and gave themselves to the word of God, as a Rule both truly to serve him, and to direct their lives accordingly. It happened that John Martin of Briqueras, a mile from Angrogne, which vaunted every where that he would slit the Ministers nose of Angrogne, Was assaulted by a Wolf, which bit off his nose, so that he died thereof mad. This was commonly known to all the Town thereabout; this was the just hand of God upon this Persecutior.
As the President of St. Julian comming to Angrog∣ne to vex the people there, by the way he enquired for one dwelling at St. Johns near to Angrogne and examined him whether he had not baptized his child at Angrogne, and wherefore he had so done: The poor simple mans answered that he had baptized his child at Angrogne, because baptisme was there mi∣nistred according to the institution of Chist. Then the President in a great rage commanded him in the Kings name to baptize his child again or else he should be burnt. And here we see how the Papists play the Anabaptists. The poor man desired the President that he might be suffered to make his pray∣er to God before he should make answer thereunto, which after he had done in the Hall before all the company there present he, required the President that he would writ and signe it wih his own hand, that he would discharge him before God of the dan∣ger of that offence if he should baptize his child a∣gain, and that he would take the perrill upon him and his. The President hearing this was so con∣founded that he spake not one word a good while after. Then said he in a great fury, away thou vill∣an out of my sight, and after that he never was call∣ed again any more. Barbarous was the cruelty that the enemies of the Gospel did to a good Minister of St. German in the valley of Perouse, they sent a company of Ruffians by night who brought him out of his house and after sore imprionment they put him to a cruel death, for they rosted him by a small fire, and when half his body was burnt, he confessed and called upon the Lord Jesus with a loud voice; In all these parts at this time was great Persecution, great robbery and spoyling of mens goods and lives. In their cruel outrages against those innocent peo∣ple of the Waldoyes this is not to be passed by. A
certain old man about threescore years of age, whose name was Odut Gemet, being apprehendit of them suffered a strange and cruel death, for when they had bound him, they took all kind of beasts, which live in horse dung called in French Escarborz and put them unto his navel, covering them with a Dish, the which within a short space, pierced into his belly and killed him. In that fight between the lord of Trinity & the Angronguians there were burned about 1000 houses of Angrogne. And here is not to be forgotten that they often times set fire upon the two Temples of Angrog∣ne where the word of God was preached, but they could never burn them. A notable miracle of God in keeping the temples of the Gospel from burning: So did they also to the Ministers house, which notwith∣standing remained whole, the houses round about, being all consumed with fire. That day none of An∣grogne was slain or hurt, saving only one that was hurt in his thigh. There were in all Angrongne but two that were enemies to the word of God, which that same day were slain by the souldiers, not in the cōbat but for their riches they had about them as they were running away. The one of them was a very covetous wretch and had great store of gold and silver, and would spend nothing either to help himself, or suc∣cour others, no not his poor parents. All this was spoiled by the souldiers with a hundreth or two hun∣dreth, Crowns besides, which he had about him. Besides these two there was not one of Angrogne slain that day. In the overthow of the Lord of Trinity his Army by the Walloyes, the rest that retired cryed out with a loud voice, God fighteth for them, and we do them wrong. The next day one of the principall Captains of the Army surrendred his charge to the Lord of Trinity, saying unto him that he would ne∣ver fight against this people any more, & upon that he
departed. It is a marvelous thing and worthy of per∣petuall memory that in that combat there were but two or the Waldoyes flain and two hurt, through the whole country of Piemont every man said God fight∣eth for them. One of the Captains confessed that he had been at many fierce assaults and combats, and sundry battels foughten, but yet he never saw soul∣diers so fant-hearted and amazed, yea the souldiers themselves told him they were astonished that they could not strike. Moreover they said, that this people never shot but they hurt and killed some of the Soul∣diers. Some other said, that the Ministers by their prayers conjured and bewitched them that they could not fight, and indeed wondrous is it and marvelous are the judgements of God, that notwithstand so many combats and conflicts, so great assaults, and adventures so much and so terrible shot continually made against this poor people, yet all in a manner came to no effect, so mightily Gods holy power wrought for his people. In end after many battels and conflicts there is agree∣ment made up and agreed upon between the Lord of Raconis on the part of the Duke of Savoy his High∣nesse their Master; and them of the valleys of Pie∣mont called Waldoyes through the mediation of the Dutchesse, The first Article is a promise of forbear∣ing armour against his Highnesse. 2. That it shal be lawfull for them of Angrongron and the rest of the valleyes to have their congregations, sermons and o∣thers ministers of their Religion in places accustom∣ed 3. The goods already eased as forefault shal be restored to all the inhabitants of the said valeyes, all their franchizes, freedoms and priviledges shall be restored and confirmed to them. The Masse and other service after the usage of Rome, shall be keep∣ed in all the Parishes of the said valleyes where the Sermons, Assemblies, and other ministers of their Religion are made, but none shal be compelled
to be present thereat, no to Minister aid or favour to such as shall use that service. Furthermore his highnesse shal set ordour to stay all troubles, incon∣veniences, secret conspiracies of wicked persons after such sort that they shal remain quietly in their religion with many other articles, which for observ∣ance was subscribed by the Lord Raconis and the Commissioners sent from their commonalities and their Ministers. This accord being thus made and passed by the means of the Duchesse of Savoy, the poor Waldoys have been in quiet untill this present, and God of his infinit goodnesse having delivered them out of so many troubles and conflicts, hath set them at liber∣ty to serve him purely, and with quietnesse of con∣science. To these forrain matters aforesaid, we will also adjoyn the History of a certain Jew, who dwelling in the City of Constantinople, and there received the Sacrament of Baptism, was converted and became a good Christian. When the Turks understood there∣of, they were vehemently exasperated against him, that he forsaking his Jewishnesse, should be regen∣erat to the Faith of Christ, and fearing lest his con∣version should be a detriment to their Mahometicall Law, they sought means how to put him to death, which in short time after they accomplished. And for the greater infamy to be done unto the man, they cast his dead Corps into the streets, commanding that no man should be so hardy as to bry the same; wherein the marvellous glory and power of God ap∣peared, for the dead Corps lying so by the space of nine dayes in the midst of the streets, retained so his native collour, and was so fresh, without any kind of filthinesse and corruption, and also not without a certain pleasant and delectable scent or odour as if it had been lately slain, or rather not slain at all,
which when the Turks beheld, they were thereat marvellously astonished, and being greatly afraid, they themselves took it up and carried it to a place near without the Town, and buried it. The spanish MARTYRS. WE come now to speak of the Spanish Martyrs: And first of all there was one Franciscus San Ro¦manus a Marchand at Bruges, laid in dark Prison un∣der the ground; oft and many times he was called for to Examination, where he suffered great injuries and contumelies, but ever remained in his conscience firm and unmoveable. The Articles whereupon he stood, and for which he was condemned, where these; First, that life and salvation in the sight of God commeth to no man by his own strength, works or merits, but only by the free mercy of God in the blood and Sacrifice of his Son our Mediator. That the Sacrifice of the Msse, which the Papists do ac∣count a vailable ex opere operato, for remission of sins both to the quic and dead, is horrible blsphemy. That Auricular Confession with the numbering up of sins, that satisfaction, Purgatory, Pardons, In∣vocation of Saints, worshippin of Images, be meer blasphemy aganst the Living God. Item, that the Blood of Christ is prophaned and injured in the same aforesaid. After that the Inquisitrs perceived that by no means he could be reclaimed from his Asserti∣ons, they proceeded at last to the sentence, condem∣ning him to be buned for an Heretick. Many other Malefactors were brought also with him to the place of Execution; but all they were pardoned and dimissed, he only for the Gospel being odious to the whole world was taken and burned, here arrabas was delivered, and Christ taken. As
he was led to the place of suffering, they put upon him a Mitre of Paper, painted full of Red Devils, after the Spanish guise. Furthermore as he was brought out of the City Gate to be burned, there stood a Wooden Crosse by the way, whereunto Frances was required to do homage, which he refus∣ed answering that the manner of Christians is not to worship Wood, and he was (said he) a Christian. Hereupon arose great clamour among the vulgar peo∣ple, for that he denyed to worship the Wooden Crosse; but this was turned incontinent to a miracle. Such was the blind rudenesse of that people, that they did impute this to the Divine vertue, as given that Crosse from Heaven, for that it would not suf∣fer it self to be worshipped of an Heretick and im∣mediatly for the opinion of that great miracle, the multitude with their swords did hew it is pieces, every man thinking himself happy that might carry away some chip or fragment of the said Crosse. When he was come to the place where he should suffer, the Friers were busie about him, to have him recant, but he continued ever firm: As he was laid upon the heap of Wood, and the fire kindled about him, he began a little at the feeling of the fire to lift up his head toward Heaven, which when the Inquisitors perceived, and hoping that he would recant his Doctrine, they caused him to be taken from the fire, but when they perceived nothing lesse in him, the Adversaries being frustrate of their expectation, willed him to be thrown in again, and so he was immediarly dispatched. After that the Martyrdome of this blessed man was thus consumat, the Inquisi∣tors proclaimed openly he was damned in Hell, and that none should pray for him, yea, and that all were Hereticks who doubted of his damnation, Neverthe∣lesse certain of the Emperors Souldiers gathered of his ashes. Also the English Ambasadour procured
a portion of his bones to be brought unto him, know∣ing right well that he died a Martyr, yet this could not be so secretly done, but it came to the ears of the Inquisitors, and of the Emperor. Wherefore the Souldiers going in great danger of life, were com∣mitted to Prison. Neither did the Ambassadour himself escape clear from the danger of the Popes scourge, for he was for the same sequestered from the Court, and commanded to be absent for a space. Rochus at St. Lucar in Spain was by his science a Carver or grover of Images, who as soon as he be∣gan first to taste the Gospel, he fell from making such Images as use to serve for idolatry in temples, and oc∣cupied himself in making seals, save only that he keeped standing on his stall an image of the virgin Mary artificially graven for a sign of his occupation. It happned unhappily that a certain Inquisitor passing by him in the street, and beholding the carved Image asked of Rochus what was the price thereof, which when Rochus did set (not willing belike to sell it) the Inquisitor bad him scarce half the money. The other answered again that he could not so live of that bargain; but still the Inquisitor urged him to take his offer. To whom Rochus again, it shall be yours (said he) if ye give me that which my labour and charges stand me in, but of that price I cannot afford it, yet had I rather break it in pieces, yea saith the Inquisitor break it, let me see thee Rochus, with that he took up a chissl and dashed it upon the face of the Image wherewith the nose or some othe part of the face was blemished. The Inquisitor seing that cryed out as he were mad and commanded Rochus forthwith into prison. To whom Rochus cryed a∣gain that he might do in his works what he listed. And if the workmanship of the image were not after his fantasie what was that to them. But all this could not help Rochus, but within three dayes after, sen∣tence
was given upon him that he should be burned and so was he committed to the Executer. As Ro∣chus was entering the place there to be burned, he, cryed with a loud voice, asking among the multitude which there stood by, if any man of Flanders were there: It was answered, Yea, and also that there were two Ships already fraught and appointed to sail to Flanders. Then said he, I would desire some of them to signifie unto my father dwelling in Antwerp, that I was burned here in this City, and for this cause which ye all have heard. And thus after his prayers made to God, this good man being wrong∣fully condemned after his godly lfe made this blessed end. And thereafter a certain Spainard coming to Antwerp, made diligent Inquisition there among the Image-makers to find out the Parents of this Ro∣chus, and signified to them what had happened to∣ward their son, as hath been by his said Parents and friends declared: And the Father at the hearing of the said message for sorrow thereof died shortly after, many were imprisoned and died in prison. The execrable Inquisiton of SPAIN. THe cruell and barbarous Inquisition of Spain, first begun by King Ferdinandus, and Elizabeth his Wife, and was instituted against the Jews, which after their Baptism, maintained again their own Ce∣remonies, that now it is practised against them that be never so little sspected to favour the verity of the Lord; the Spainards, and especi lly the great Divines there, do hold that this holy and sacred In∣quisition cannot erre, and that the holy Eathers the Inquisitors cannot be deceived. Three sorts of men most principally be in danger of these Inquisiors, they that be greatly rich, for fear the spoil of their
goods, they that be Learned, because they will not have their misdealings and secret abuses to be espied and detected; they that begin to increase in honour and dignity; lest they being in Authority should work them some shame or dishonour. The abuse of the Inquisition is most execrable; If any word shall passe out of the mouth of any, which may be taken in evill part, yea, and though no word be spoken, yet if they bear any grudge or ill-will against the Party, incontinent they command him to be taken, and put into an horrible Prison, and then find out crimes against him at leasure, and in the mean time, no man living is so hardy once to open his mouth for him. If the Father speak on word for his child he is also taken and cast into Prison as a favourer of He∣reticks; neither is it permitted to any Person to go in to the Prison, but there he is alone in such a place where he cannot see so much as the ground where he is, and is not suffered either to read or write, but there endureth in darknesse palpable, in horrours in∣finite, in fear miserable, wrestling with the assaults of death. And moreover, to these distresses and horrours of the Prison, the injuries, threats, whipp∣ings and scourgings, Irons, Tortures and Racks which they endure; And thus are they detained there, some many years, and murthered by long torments, and whose dayes together entreated much more cruelly (out of all compassion) then if they were in the Hang-mans hand to be slain at once. During all this time what is done in the Processe no person knoweth but only the Holy Fathers, and the Tormenters which are sworn to execut the Tor∣ments, &c. By the vigour and rigour of this In∣quisiton, many good true servants of Jesus Christ, have been brought to death, especially in the later years, since the Raign of Queen Elizabeth. In the Town of Valedolid, where commonly the
Counsell of the Inquisition is wont to be keeped, the Inquisitors had brought together many Prisoners, both of high and low estate, to the number of thirty, also the Coffin of a certain Noble-woman, with her Picture lying upon it, which had been dead long be∣fore; there to receive Judgement and Sentence. To the heating of which sentence, they had ordained in the said Town there might be Theaters or Stages: Upon the first was placed Dame Jane, sister to King Philip, and chief Regiment of his Realms: Also Prince Charles, King Philips son, with other Princes and Estates of Spain. Upon the other Scaffold mounted the Archbishop of Sivill, Prince of the Synagogue of the Inquisitors, with the Counsel of the Inquisition, also other Bishops of the Land, and the Kings Counsel with them. After all were set and placed in great pomp, were brought forth (as a spectacle and triumph) the poor servants and wit∣nesses of Jesus Christ, to the number of thirty, clothed with their Sanbenito as the Spaniards do call it, which is a manner of Vesture of yellow Cloath, comming both before them and behind them, span∣gled with red Crosses, having burning Clerges in their hands, also before them was born a Crucifix covered with black Linnen-cloath in token of mourning: Moreover, they which were to receive the sentence of death, had Miters of Paper upon their heads which the Spaniards call Coracas: After this followed a Sermon made by a Dominick Frier, which endured about an hour. After the Sermon was finished, the Procurator Generall, with the Archbishop, went to the Stage where the Princes and Nobles stood, to Minister a solemn Oath un∣to them upon the Crucifix painted in the Masse Book, the tennor, of which Oath was this, Your Majesties shall swear that ye will favour the holy Inquisition, and also give your consent unto the same, and not
only that ye shall by no manner of way hinder and impeach the same, but also ye shall imploy to the uttermost of your help and endeavour hereafter to see all them to be executed which swerve from the Church of Rome, and adjoyn themselves to the En∣therian Hereticks, without all respect of any person or persons, of what estate, degree, quality, or con∣dition soever they be. Item, your Majesties shall swear that ye shall constrain all your Subjects to submit themselves to the Church of Rome, and to have in reverence all the Laws & Commandements of the same. And also to give your aid against all them whosoever shall hold of the Heresie of the Lu∣therians, or take any part with them. After the Oath, the Archbishop lifting up his hand, gave them his Benediction, saying God blesse your Highnesse, and give you long life. In end the poor Captives & Prisoners were called our, the Procurator-Fiscall, or the Popes great Collector, first beginning with Doctor Cacalla, this Doctor Cacalla was a Frier of Austines Order, a Priest of the Town of Valedollid, and Preacher sometimes to the Emperor Chrales the fifth, a man well accounted of for his learning, who, for that he was thought to be as the Standard-bearer to the Gospellers (whom they called Lutherians) and Preacher and Doctor unto them, therefore he being first called for, whose sentence was to be de∣graded, and presently burned, and all his goods couns cat to the profit and advancement of the Justice. Sentence was given out against the rest, some put to pennance, whereof there were some Noble Person∣ages, some to be condemned to perpetuall Prison, and the most part to be burnt. After the sentence pronounced, they which were condemned to be burned, with the Coffin of the dead Lady, and her Pcture upon the same, were committed to the Se∣cular Magistrate, and their Executioners, which
were commanded to do their endeavour; then were they all incontinent taken, and every one set upon an Asse, their faces turned backward, and led with agreat Garison of armed Souldiers unto the place of punishment, which was without the Gate of the Town called Del Campo. And thus these faithfull Christians for the verity and pure World of God were led to death as sheep to the shambles, who not only most Christianly did comfort one another, but also did so exhort all them there present, that all men marvelled greatly both to hear their singular constancy, and to see their quiet and peaceable end. There dwelt in Valadolid a Knight well qualified, who in the Inquisition had two daughters which constantly perservering in the true Religion that they had learned of the good Doctor Cacalla, and others Martyrs of Jesus Christ, were condemned to be burned. The father being a most rank Papist, besought the Inquisitors to permit them for their bet∣ter information to be carried to his house, which thing the inquisitors, in regard of the great credit they reposed in him, granted. And brought ths to his house, the father endeavoured to divert them from their constant resolution, but seeing he could not convince them, but it was in vain, for the Lord (as in Luk. 21.15. he had promised) gave them ut∣terance and wisdome, which the new Pharisees, Priests, and Friers were not able to resist or gain∣say. The father seeing then that his endeavour not availed, went humself to his Grove, cut down Wood, and caused it to be drawn to Valadolid, he himself kindled the fire, and so they were both burned. Now to come to speak of the Martyrs that suffered for the Testimony of the Gospel in Italy.
The ITALIAN Martyrs. GAleacius Trecius, of the City called Laus Pom∣peia in Italy, a Gentle-man of a good Calling, and wealthy in wordly substance, and very benefi∣ciall to the poor, he was apprehended and brought to the Bishops Palace, where he was kept in bands, having under him but only a Pad of Straw, although his Wife sent unto him a good Feather-bed with Sheets to ly in, yet the Bishops Chaplains and Offi∣cers keeped it from him, dividing the prey among themselves. When the time came that he should be examined, he was thrise brought before the Com∣missioners, where he rendred Reasons and Causes of his Faith answering to their Interrogatories with such evidence of Scriptures, and constancy of mind, that he was an admiration to them that heard him. Albeit not long after through the importonat perswa∣sions of his Kins-folks and friends, and other cold Gospellers, laying many considerations before his eyes, he was brought at length to assent to certain points of the Popes Doctrine, but yet the mercy of God which began with him so left him not, but brought him again to such Repentance and bewailing of his fact, that he became afterward according to the example of Peter and St. yprian, and others more valiant in defence of Christs quarrel, neither did he ever desire any thing more then occasion to be offered again by confession; that he had lost before by deniall, affirming that he never felt more joy of heart then at the time of his Examinations, where he stood thrise to the constant confession of the Truth, and contrary, that he never tasted more sorrow in all his life, then when he slipt afterward from the same by dissimulation, declaring moreover to his brethren
that death was much more sweet unto him with Testimony of the verity, then life with the least de∣niall of Truth and loss of a good conscience. Again Galeacius returned again to the defence of his former Doctrine with much more boldnesse of spirit, con∣fessing Christ as he did before, and detested Images, affirming and proving that God only is to be wor∣shipped, and that in spirit and verity. Also to be no moe Mediators but Christ alone, and that he only and sufficiently by his sufferings hath taken away the sins of the whole world, and that all they which de∣part hence in his faith are ascertained of the ever∣lasting life; they which do not are under everlasting damnation; with such other like matter which was repugnant utterly to the Popes proceedings. His adversaries perceiving that he in no case could be re∣voked, caused him to be committed to the Secular Judge to be burned. Thus Galeazius early in the morning being brought out of Prison to the Market∣place, there was left standing bound by the Stake till noon, as a gazing-stock for all men to look upon: In the which mean time many came about him ex∣horting him to recant, but nothing could stir the setled mind of this valiant Martyr, and so he was brought to the fire and burned. Touching the story of this blessed Martyr, this by the way is to be gi∣ven for a Memorandum, that a little before this Galeazius should be burned, there was a controver∣sie between the Major of the City and the Bishops Clergy for the expenses of the Wood that should go to his burning, he hearing thereof, sent word to both the parties to agree, for he himself of his own goods would see the cost of that matter discharged. Another note moreover is here to be added, that while Galeazius was in captivity, certain of the Papists perceiving that Galeazius had great goods and possessins, practised with his wife, under colour
to release her husband, that she should lay out a sum of money to be sent to the wife of the chief Lord of Millain, called Ferrarius Gonzaga, to the end that she should intreat both with her husband, and with the Senat for Galeazius life: which money when they had thus jugled into their hands, Galeazi∣us notwithstanding was burned, and so was the silly woman robbed and defeated both of her husband and also of her money. Doctor Mollius a Gray-frier for the teaching and profession of the Gospel of Christ Jesus was four times imprisoned, and as oft delivered out of prison, all the time hee remained constant in the defence of Christs gospel, at last was brought with certain o∣ther men (which were also apprehended for religi∣on) into the temple of St. Mary at Rome either to revoke or to be burned. There sate on them six Cardinals in high seats beside the Judge, before whom preached a dominick-Frier, which cruelly inveying against the poor prisoners, incensed the Cardinalls with all the vehemency he might to their condemnation, the poor man stood holding a burn∣ing Taper in their hands, of whom some for fear of death revolted. But this Doctor Mollius with a weaver of Perusium remained constant. Then Mol∣lius began an earnest sermon in the Italian tongue wherein he confirmed the articles of faith, by the sacred Scriptures, declaring also that the Pope was not the successor of Peter, but Antichrist and his sectaries do figure the whore of Babylon. More∣over he cited them up to the tribunal seat of Christ, and they being replenished with anger, condemned him with the weaver to the fire; and commanded them to be had away. So were they carried inconti∣nent to the camp or field called Florianum, where they remained chearfull and constant, first the weav∣er, was hanged. Mollius then willing the hangman
to execute his office likewise upon him, began to exhort the people, to beware of idolatry, and to have no other Saviour but Christ alone, for he only is the Mediator between God and man, and so also he was hanged, commending his soul to God, and afterward laid in the fire and burned. The people having diverse judgments upon him, some said he died an heretick, some said he was a good man. Furthermore in the same citie of Rome and about the same time in the Monastery of St. Augustine were found two monks in their Celles with their tongues and heads cut off, only for rebuking the im∣moderat and outragious excesse of the Cardinals. Such was the cruelty then of the malignant adversa∣ries. In Pope Pius the fourth his time was hot perse∣cution in all the territories of the church of Rome a∣gainst them which were suspected for Lutherans, whereupon insued great trouble and persecution in the Kingdom of Naples in such cruel sort that many Noble Men with their wives and others are reported there to bee slain in Calabria beyond Naples in Italy, likewise the same time suffered a great number of Christs welbeloved Saints both old and young put together in one house, to the number of 88. per∣sons, all which one after another were taken out of the house, and so being laid upon the Butchers stall like the sheep in the shambless, with one bloody knife were all killed in order, a spectacle most tragi∣call for all posterity to remember and almost incredi∣ble to believe; beside also a great number condemn∣ed. Now to return again to the Isse of Brittain to Eng∣land and Scotland, and to take a view of the affairs of the Churches there. And first to begin with England In the reign of King Henry the eight at Coventree there were seven apprehended, and burnt
for the gospell of Christ, to wit, Mistresse Smith widow, Robert Hatchers a Shoemaker, Wrigsham a glover, Lansdale a Hosier, Archer a shoemaker, Hawkings a shoemaker, Thomas band shoemaker. The principal cause of the apprehension and burning of these persons was for teaching their children and family the Lords prayer, and ten commandments in English: the children were sent for to the Gray∣friers in Coventree before the Warden of the said Friers called Frier-Stafford, who straitly examining them of their beliefe, and what Heresie their Fa∣thers had taught them, charged them upon pain of suffering such death as their Fathers should in no wayes to medle any more with the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments in English. Thomas Harding, dwelling at Cheham in the County of Euchingham with Alice his Wife was first abjured by Wiam Smith Bishop of Lincoln, with diverse others moe which the same time were taken, and compelled some to beat Faggots, some were burned in the check with hotirons, some condemn∣ed to perpetual prison, some threstinto Monasteries and spoyled clean of all their goods, some compelled to make pilgrimage to the great Block, otherwise called our Lady in Lincoln, some to one part, some to another. Harding for reading upon English boos waa condemned for relpse to be burned to ashes, and was burnt being of the age of threescore years, Many simple people in the Diosie of Lincoln, were vexed afflicted and persecuted for then Religion, the Son was compelled to testifie against the Father, the Fa∣ther against the son, the wife against the Husband, and the husband against the wife, the sister against the brother.
A Brief Discourse concerning the story and Life of Tho∣mas Volsey, lae Cardinal of York, wherein is to be seen and noted the express Image of the proud, vain glorious Church of Rome, how fare it differeth from the true Church of Jesus Christ. THis Cardinall Volsey and the Popes Legat of Rome was so puft up in pride that he thought himself equal with the King. And when hee had said Masse; he made Dukes and Earies to serve him of Wine with a say taken and to hold the basen at the Lavatories. Furthermore as he was Ambassadour sent to the Emperor at Eruxels, he had over with him the great Seal of England, and was served with his Servitours, kneeling on their knees and many Noble men of England waiting upon him to the great admiration of all the Germans that beheld it, such was his monstruous pomp and pride. That glorious Cardinal in his tragicall doings did exceed so far all measure of a good subject, that he became more like a Prince then a priest, for although the King bare the sword, he bare the strok (making in a manner) the whole Realm to bend at his beck, and to dance after his pipe. Such practises and fetches, he had that when he had well stored his own Coffers, first he fetched the greatest part of the Kings Trea∣sure out of the Realm in twelve great barrels full of gold and silver to serve the Popes wars. And as his avaritious mind was never satisfied in getting, so his restlesse head was so busie rufling in publick matters that he never ceased before he had set both England, France, Flanders, Spain and Italy, together by the ears, for his pride and avarice he was hated of all men. At what time Pope Clement was taken pris∣oner, Cardinal Volsey wrote tot he Emperor to
make him Pope, but when he returned an answer, wherein he was not pleased, he waxed furious mad, and sought all means to displease the Emperor, write∣ing very sharply unto him many minacing letters, that if he would not make him Pope, he would make such a ruffling between christian Princes as was not this hundreth years before to make the Emperor re∣pent, year, though it should cost the whole Realm of England. Whereupon the Emperor answering, biddeth him look well about him, lest through his doings and atempts, he might bring the matter in that case that it should cost him the Realm of England indeed. The King finding himself deluded by Cardinal Campegius and Cardinal Volsey, anent the question of his Marriage, the decision whereof was referred to them by the Pope but nothing in it by them done, Volsey tell from the Kings favour, so that after that time he never came more to the Kings presence, for he was mightily offended with him whom he before so highly exalted and promoted to so many great dig∣nities, as to the Archbishoprik of York, the Bishop∣rick of Winchester, of Durham, the Abbee of St. Al∣bons, besides the Chancelorship of England, and ma∣ny other high dignities and preferments in the Realm: He is deprived of his Chancelorship, and it is given to Sr Thomas More. There are sundry Articles given in against the Cardinal, he is arrested and brought up toward London, he fell sick by the way, and by im∣moderat Purgations killed himself. This was the end of this vain glorious Cardinal. It is recorded of one Humfrey Mummuth Alder∣man of London, much troubled for his Religion, a notable example of Christian patience. In the Ser∣mons of Master Latimer, which the said Latimer heard in Cambridge of Master George Stafford, Reader to the Divinity Lecture in that University, who ex∣pounding
the place of St, Paul to the Romans, that we shall overcome our enemie with well-doing, and so heap hot coals upon his head, brought in this ex∣ample, saying that he knew in London a great rich Merchand, (meaning this Humfrey) which had a very poor neighbour, yet for all his poverty he loved him very well, and sent him money at his need, and let him come to his Table whensoever he would. Now the Rich Man began to be a Scripture-man, he began to smell the Gospel, the poor man was a Pa∣pist still. It chanced on a time when the rich man talked of the Gospel at the Table, where he reproved Popery and such kind of things: This poor man be∣ing there present, took a great displeasure against the rich man, in so much that he would come no more to his house, he would borrow no more money of him as he was wont to do before-times, yea, and conceived such hatted and malice against him, that he went and accosed him before the Bi∣shops. Now the rich man not knowing of any such displeasure, offered many times to talk with him, and to set him at quiet: It would not be. The poor man had such a stomack that he would not vouch∣safe to speak with him. If he met the rich man in the street, he would go out of his way. On a time it happened that he met him so in a narrow street that he could not avoid, but come near him, yet for all that this poor man (I say) had such a stomack against the rich man, that he was minded to go forward and not to speak with him. The rich man perceiving that caught him by the hand, and asked him, saying, Neighbour, What is come into your heart to take such displeasue with me; What have I done against you? Tell me, and I will be ready at all times to make you amends. Finally he spake so gently, so charitably, so lovingly and friendry, that it wrought so in the poor mans heart, that by and by he fell down upon his knees and asked him forgivennesse.
The rich man forgave him, and so took him again to his favour, and they loved as well as ever they did before. Agree with thine enemy while thou art in the way with him, Mat. 5. Great was the courage and constancy of Thomas Bilney in his Martyredome. The night before his ex∣ecution one of his friends comming to him, finding him at his repast with such a chearfull heart and quiet mind, said that he was glad to see him at that time, so shortly before his heavy and painful departure, so heartily to refresh himself, whereunto he answer∣ed: Oh said he I follow the example of the husband men of the countrey who having a ruinous house to dwell in, yet bestow cost so long as they may hold it up: And so do I now with this ruinous house of my body, and with Gods creatures in thanks to him to refresh the same as ye see. Then sitting with his said friends in godly talk to their edification, some put him in mind, that though the fire which he should suffer the next day, should be of great neat to his body, yet the comfort of Gods spirit should coole it to his everlasting refreshing. At this word the said Thomas Bilney putting his hand toward the flamme of the candle barning before then (as also he did diverse times besides) and feeling the heat thereof, O said he, I feel by experience and have known it long by Phlosophy, that fire by Gods or∣dinance is naturally hot, but yet I am perswaded by Gods holy word, and by the experience of some spoken or in the same, that in flamme they felt no heat, and in the fire they felt no consumption. And I constantly believe that howsoever the stuble of this my body shall be wasted by it, yet my soul and spirit shall be purged thereby, a pain for a time, whereon notwithstanding followes joy unspeakeable. At the comming forth of the said Thomas Bilney preacher out of the prison doors, one of his friends came
unto him and with few words as he durst, speak to him, and prayed him in Gods behalf to be constant and take his death as patiently as he could. Where∣unto the said Bilney answered with a quiet and milde countenance, ye see when the Mariner is entered his ship to sail on the troublous sea, how he for a while is tossed in the billows of the same, but yet in hope that he shall once come to the quiet haven, he beareth in better comfort the perrels which he feeleth So am I now toward this sailing, and whatsoever storms I shall feel, yet shortly after shal my ship bee in the haven as I doubt not thereof by the grace of God, desiring you to help me with your payers to the same effect. And going forth into the streets he gave much almes by the way, by the hands of one of his friends. Doctor Warner taking his leave of Thomas Bilney, he said, pasce gregem tuum, pasce gregenituum ut cum venerit Dominus inveniat te sic facientem that is, feed your flock, feed your flock, that when the Lord cometh he may find you so do∣ing. When Richard Byfield was degraded, kneeling up∣on the highest step of the Altar, the Bishop of London took his crosier staffe and smote him on the breast, that hee threw him down backwards, and brake his head that he sowuned, and when he came to himself again he thanked God he was delivered from the Malignant church of Antichrist, and that he was come into the true sincere church of Jesus Christ Militant here on earth, and I trust anone said he to be in heaven with Jesus Christ and the Church triumphant for ever, and so he was led to the fire in his apparell manfully and joyfully, and there for laik of a speedy fire, was half an hour alive, and when the left arm was on fire and burned, he rubbed it with his right hand, and it fell from his body, and he continued in prayer to the end without moving.
At the burning of James Baynham a Lawier, ap∣peared a miracle and wondrous work of God, that as he was at the stake in the midst of the flamming fire, which fire had half consumed his arms and legs, he spake these words. O ye Papists, behold ye look for miracles, and hear now may yee see a miracle, for in this fire I feel no more pain then I were in a bed of Down, but it is to me as a bed of Roses. These words spake he in the midst of the flamming fire when his legs and arms (as I said) were half consumed William Tracie a worshipful Esquire in Glocester and then dwelling at Todingtown made in his will that he would have no funeral pomp at his burying, neither passed he upon masse, and he fur∣ther said that he trusted in God only and hoped by him to be saved and not by any Saint. This Gentle∣man died, and his Son as Executor brought the Will to the Bishop of Canterbury to prove, which he shewed to the Convocation, and there most cru∣elly they judged that he should be taken out of the ground and burnt as an Heretick. This Commission was sent to Doctor Parker Chancellor of the Diocesse of Worcestr, to execute their wicked of sentence, who accomplished the same. The King hearing his Sub∣ject to be taken out of the ground two years after his death, and burnt without his knowledge, or order of the Law, sent for the Chancellor, and laid high offence to his charge, who excused himsel by the Archbishop of Canterbury which was late dead; but in conclusion it cost him three hundred pound to have his pardon. And as many were burnt at this time for the profession of the truth, so multitudes both of men and women were compelled to abjure and recant, and to do pennance, and to bear faggots. So great was the trouble of these times, for either they were driven out of the Realm, or were cast out from their goods and houses, or brought to open shame by
abjuration: Such decrees and injunctions then were set orth by the Bishops, such Laws and Proclama∣tions were provided, such watch and narrow search was used, such wayes were taken by force of oath to make one detect another, so subtilly that unneth any good man could or did escape their hands that either his name was known, or else his person was taken: yet neverthelesse so mightily the power of Gods Gos∣pel did work in the hearts of good men, that the number of them did no lesslssen for all the violence or policy of the adversaies, but rather increased. King Henry is divorced from Lady Cathrene Dow∣ager, and married with Lady Ann ullen, which was the fist occasion and beginning of a publick Re∣fomation. The King had married. Prince Arthur hi Bothers wife; the Pope which then ruled at Rome was Pope Julius the second, by whose dispensation this Marriage which neither sense of nature would ad∣mit; nor Gods Law would bear, was concluded, approved and ratified, and so continued as lawfull without any doubt or scruple, near the space of twenty years, thereafter there arose doubts and scru∣ples about the lawfulnesse of his Marriage, that first hindered the Emperour to marry Lady Mary the Kings Daughter, and upon the same doubt the King of France refused to marry the said Lady Mary the Kings daughter. The King being herewith perplex∣ed anent the lawfulness of his Marriage, consulted the Universities of all Christendome, by whom it was discussed to be unlawfull, whereupon ensued a di∣vorce between the King and the Queen. In the Parliment in the year 1533. the commons gave in a supplication, complaining of the strait deal∣ing of the Clergy in their proceeding exofficlo; this wicked act was broken by the King, for the King having more clear understanding of the abuses and enormities of the Clergy, and in special of the cor∣rupt
Authority of the See of Rome, provided cer∣tain Acts against the same. In the same parliament it was enacted and decreed that no man should appeal to the court of Rome, even the Parliament decreeth the popes Annats to cease, &c. All exactions and sums of money used to be payed to the Bishop of Rome, in pensions, Peter Pence should utterly surcease. As touching these. Peter Pence they were first brought in imposed, by King Iva about the year of our Lord 70. Which Iva king of the West Saxons caused though all his dominion in every house having a Chimney, a penny to be col∣lected and payed to the Bishop of Rome, in the name of Peter, and thereof were they called Peter Pence. And the said Peter Pence ever since or for the most part have used of along custom to be gathered and summoned by the Popes Collectors here in England from the time of Iva, to this present Parliament. The oath of the Clergy-men which they were wont to make to the Bishop of Rome (now pope quondam was abolished and made void by stature and a new oath ministred and confirmed for the same, wherein they acknowledged the King to be supream head un∣der Christ in this Church of England; these oaths were the occasion that the pope lost all his interest and jurisdiction in England within short while after. In this Parliament amongst other diverse statutes, most graiously, and by the blessed will of God, it was enacted, that the Pope and all his Colledge of Cardinals, with his Pardons, Indulgences, which so long had clogged this Ral n of England to the miserable slaughter or so manny good men and which never could be removed way before was never abo∣lished, eradicat and exploded out of this land, and sent home gin to their own country of Rome from whence they came, God be everlastingly praised therefore, Amen.
An act was made concerning the Kings highnesse to be the suppream head of the Church of England and to have authority to reform and redresse all errors heresies and abuses in the same. When all other the Kings subjects and the learned of the Realm had taken and accepted the oath of the Kings supreamacy, only Fisher, the Bishop of Ro∣chester, and Sir Thomas Moor refused to be sworn, who therefore falling into the danger of the Law, were committed unto the Tower & executed for the same. This Fisher, with Sir Thomas Moor, were great persecutors of the saints of God. Tindal betrayed be Henry Philips, was delivered into his enemies hands and burnt in Flanders by Filfoord castle. The worthy vertues and doings of this blessed Martyr, who for his painfull travels and singular zeal to his country, (may be called in these our days, an Apostle of England (it were long to recite. Among many other, this be∣cause it seemeth to me worthy of remembrance, I thought it not in silence to overpasse, which hath unto me credibly been testified by certain grave Merchants, and some of them also such as were present the same time at the fact, and men yet alive, the story where∣of was this: There was at Antwerp on a time amongst a company of Merchants as they were at supper, a certain Juglar which through his Diabolicall inchant∣ments or Art magicall, would fetch all kind of Viandes and Wine from any place they would, and set it upon the table incontinent before them with many other such like things. The fame of this Jugler being much talked of, It chanced that as Master Tindal heard of it, he desired certain of the Merchants that he might also bee present at Supper to see him play his parts. To be brief the supper was appoint∣ed and the Merchants with Tindall, were there present. Then the Juglar being required to play his feats, and to shew his cunning, after his
wonted boldnesse began to utter all that he could do, but all was in vain. At the last with his labour, sweat∣ing and toyling, when he saw that nothing would go forward, but that all his enchantment were void, he was compelled openly to confesse that there was some man present at Supper which disturbed and setted all his doings. So that a man even in the Mar∣tyrs of these dayes cannot lack the miracles of true faith, if miracles were now to be desired. After King Henry his Marriage was declared to be unlawfull, and being divorced from Lady Cathren, he married Lady Anna ullen, who three years after she was married was had to the Tower with the Lord Rochford her brother, and the nineteen day thereafter was beheaded. The words of this worthy and christian Lady at her death were these, Good Christian people I am come hither to die, for accord∣ing to the Law, & by the Law, I am judged to death and therefore I will speak nothing against it, I am to accuse no man nor to speak any thing of that whereof I am accused and condemned to die, but I pray God to save the King and send him long to raign over you, for a Gentler, or more mercifull Prince was there ne∣ver, & to me he was ever a Good, a Gentle, and a So∣veraigne Lord. And if any person will medle of my cause, I require them to judge the best. And thus I take my leave of the World, and of you all, & I hearti∣ly desire you all to pray for me, so she was beheaded. Whatsoever the cause was, or quartell objected a∣gainst her life, this was a great commendation she left behind her that during her life the Religion of Christ most happily flourished, and had a right pros∣perous course, for she was an enemy to Popery, she was a great giver of alms beyond all other Queens, and the Revenues almost of her estate, in so much that the almes which she gave in, three quarters of a year in distribution is summed to the number
of fourteen or fifteen thousand pounds, beside the great peece of money which Her grace intended to impart unto four sundry quarters of the Realm, as for a stock there to be imployed to the behoove of poor Artificers and occupyers. Again, what a zealous Defender she was of Christs Gospel all the world doth know, and her acts do and will declare to the worlds end. After the suffering of Queen Anna, the King marrid Lady Jane Seimer, of whom came King Edward as great an enemy to Gods enemies the Pope, as ever his father was, and greater too. Shorly after his birth Queen Jane his Mother the second day after died in Child bed and left the King again a Widower, which so continued the space of two years together. After this, Religi∣on bgan to go backward, as appears in the condem∣nation, burning and martyrdom of John Lambert and others. For as the King was ruled, and gave over some time to one, some time to another, so one while Reliion went forwrd, and at another time as much backward again, and sometimes clean altered and changed fo a season according as they could pre∣vail which were about the King, so variable was the change and mutation of Religion in King Henries days, for the state of R ligion decayed, all the re∣side of King Henry. A Parliament is summoned at Westmi ster in the ear, 15  through the devise and practi of certain of the Popes factors about him: Alo a Synod or convocation of all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other leand of the clergy of this re∣alm to be in like manner assembled. In which Parli∣ament, Syod or convocation, certain articles, matters and qestions touching religion, were decre∣ed to the numbr especially of six, comonly called the six Articles, or the whip ith six strings to be had and receivd among the Kings Sbjects in pretence of Unity.
The first Article in the present Parliament accord∣ed and agreed upon was this, that in the most bless∣ed Sacrament of the Altar, by the strength and effi∣cacy of Christs mighty word (it being spoken by the Priest) is present really under the form of Bread and Wine, the naturall body and blood of our Saviour Jesus Christ, conceived of the Virgin Mary, and that after the consecration there remaineth no substance of Bread or Wine, or any other substance, but the substance of Christ, God and man. Secondly, that the Communion in both kinds is not necessary ad salutem, by the Law of God to all persons, and that it is to be believed and not doubted of, but that in the flesh under the form of Bread, is the very Blood, and with the Blood under the form of Wine, is the very flesh, as well in parts as they were both together. Thirdly, that the Priests after the order of Priest∣hood received, may not marry by the Law. Fourthly, that the vows of chastity of Widow∣hood by man or woman made to God advisedly, ought to be observed by the Law of God, and that it exeemeth them from other liberties of Christian peo∣ple, which without that they might enjoy. Fifthly, that it is meet and necessary that privat Masses be continued and admitted in this English Church and Congregation, as whereby good Chri∣stian people ordering themselves accordinly, do re∣ceive both godly and goodly consolations and bene∣fites, and it is agreeable also to Gods Law. Sixthly, that Auricular Confession is expedient and necessary to be retained and contained, used and frequented in the Church of God. All agreed to these six Articles except Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, who stood openly in the Parliament against them, bringing forth such Alle∣gations as might easily have helped the cause, nisi
paucos major vicisset ut saepe solet meliorem. Great was the trouble and persecution at London for these six Articles, and else-where through the land. Doctor Barnes, Garret, and Hicrome were burnt for the Gospel at Smithfield. At this time when Lambert was burnt, there was one Colins at London, sometime a Lawyer, and a Gentleman, being distracted of his wits, coming in∣to a Church where a Priest was saying Masse, and was come to the place where they use to hold and shew the Sacrament, he seeing the Priest holding the host over his head and shewing it to the people, he in like manner counterfeiting the priest, took up a little dog by the legs and held him over his head, shewing him unto the people, for this he was by and by apprehend∣ed and condemned to the fire, and burned and the dog with him. About the same time John Longland Bishop of Lincoln burned two upon one day, the one named Thomas Bernard, and the other James Morton, the one for teaching the Lords Prayer in English, and the other for keeping the Epistle of St. James trans∣lated into English. Richard Mekins a boy not past the age of fifteen, years, was condemned to be burnt by Boner, for speaking against the Sacrament of the Altar. In Oxford also the same time or not much there-about, recanted one Master Barker master of Art of that University, a man excellently learned, who be∣ing called up to Lambeth before the Archbihop Thomas Granmer, was in his examination so stout in the cause of the Sacrament, and so learnedly de∣fended himself therein, neither Cranmer himself, nor all they could well answer to his allegations brought out of Aueu, wherein he was so promp & ripe of himself that the Archbihop with the residue of his company were brought in a great admiration of
him, notwithstanding by compulsion of the time, and danger of the six articles at last he relented, and returning again to Oxford was there caused to recant. After which the good man prospered not but wore away. The year 1541. The King was divorced from the Lady Anna of Cleve which was his fourth wife and married to the fifth, which was to Lady Cathren How∣ard, Nice to the Duke of Norfolk and Daughter to my Lord Edmund Howard, the Dukes brother, but this Marriage likewise continued not long. At this time were six Popish Monks executed for denying the Kings Supremacy. Now as touching the late Marriage between the King and the Lady Howard, this Matrimony endur∣ed not long, for in the year next following 1542. the said Lady Cathren was accused of the King of incon∣tin n living not only before her marriage with Fran∣ces Durham, but also of spouse breach since her mar∣riage, with Thomas Culpeper, for the which both the men aforesaid by act of Parliament were attained and executed for high Treason, and also the said Lady Cathren late Queen, with the Lady Jane Roch∣ford Widow, late Wise to Georg Bullen Lord Rochfords, Brother to Queen Anna Eullen, were beheaded for their deserts within the Tower. The King missing Cromwell his old Counsellour Earle of Essex, and smelling somewhat the wayes of Winchester began a little to set his foot again in the cause of religion; And therefore in the same year after the execution of this Queen, the King under∣standing some abuses yet to remain unreformed, namely about pilgrimages and Idolaty, and other things moe besides to be corrected within his domi∣nions, directed his letters unto the Archbishop of Canterbury for the speedy redress and reformation of the sam.
A proclamation concerning white meats, as milk, egges, butter, cheese and such like during the time of lent, without any scruple or grudg of conscience, any law, constitution, use or custom to the contrary notwithstanding, All this time great was the persecution in Caleice for Religion. Amongst the rest one Adam Damlip was falsly accused for Treason, and innocently put to death, At his death, Sir Ralph Elleker Knight, then knight marshall there, would not suffer the in∣nocent and godly man to declare either his faith or the cause he died for, but said to the executioner, dispatch the knave, have done. Sir Ralph Elleker say∣ing that he would not away before he saw the trai∣tors heart out. But shotly after Sir Ralph Elleker in a skirmish or road between the French-men and us at Eullen was amongst others slain whose only death suf∣ficed not his enemies, but after they had stripped him stark naked, they cut off his privy members, and cut the heart out of his bodie and so left him a terrible example to all bloody and mercilesse men, for no cause was known why they shewed such indignation a∣gainst the said Sir Ralph Elleker more then against the rest, but that it is ritten faciens justitias Dominus & judicia omnibus injuria pressis. It is reported of a certain poor labouring man of Caleice who being in a certain company said that he would never believe that a priest could make the Lords body at his pleasure, whereupon he was then accused and condemned by one Harvie Commissary there, which Harvie in time of his judgement invey∣ing against him with approbrious words said that he was an Heretick, and should die a vile death. The poor man answering for himself again, said, that he was no Heret ck, but was in the faith of Christ, and whereas thou sayest (said hee) that I shal die a vile death, thou thy self shal die a viler death, and that
shortly, and so it came to passe, for within half an year after, the said Harvie was hanged, drawn and quarterd, for Treason, in the said town of Caleice. Here is a notable example of Gods judgement upon a bloody Persecutor. The rigour of the six Articles were a little aswaged in a Parliament Anno 1544. Mistrisse Anna Askew was brought before the Inquisitors and exa∣mined, and after that, sundry times examined and put to great trouble, and put to the rack, because she would not confesse what Ladies or Gentlewomen were of her opinion, and therein, sayes she, they keeped me along time, and because I lay still and did not cry, my Lord Chancellor and M. Rich took pains to rack me with their own hands till I was nigh dead, then the Leivtenant caused me to be loosed from the Rack, incontinently I sowned, and then they recovered me again. After that I sat two long hours reasoning with my Lord Chancellor upon the bare floor, whereas he with many flattering words perswaded me to leave my opinion, but my Lord God I thank his everlasting goodnesse gave me grace to persevere, and will do (I hope) to the very end; then was I brought to an house and laid in a bed, with as weary and painfull bones as ever had patient Job, I thank the Lord my God therefore. Then my Lord Chancellor sent me word, if I would leave my opi∣nion, I should want nothing, if I would not, I should forth to Newgate and so be burned: I sent him again word that I would rather die then to break my faith, heareafter she is condemned to be burnt for her opinion touching the Sacrament, for holding that after the Priest hath spoken the words of Conse∣ctation there remaineth bread still; they both say and also teach it for a necessary Article of faith, that after these words be once spoken there remaineth no bread but even the self same body that hang upon the Crosse on goodfryday, both flesh, blood, and bones:
to this belief of theirs said I nay, for then were ou common Creed false, which saith that he sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty, and from thence he shal come to judge the quick and the dead. Lo this is the heresie that I hold and for it must suffer the death. But as touching the holy and blessed Sup∣per of the Lord, I believe it to be a most necessary remembrance of his glorious suffering and death. Moreover, I believe as much therein as my eternall and only Redeemer Jesus Christ would I should be∣lieve. She is brought into Smithfield to her execu∣tion in a Chair, because she could not go on her feet by means of her great torments, there she patiently endured death, with sundry moe that at that time was burnt with her. Then Urisley Lord Chancellor sent to Anna Askew Letters offering to her the Kings pardon if she would recant, who refusing once to look upon them, made this answer again, that she came not thither to deny her Lord and Master. Then were the Letters offered unto the other, who in like manner following the constancy of the woman, deny∣ed not only to receive them, but also to look upon them, whereupon the Lord Major commanding fire to be put to them, cryed with a loud voice, fiat Ju∣stitia. Queen Catherine Parre, late Queen and wife to King Henry the eight was in great danger for the Gospel, the Chancellor Bishop of Winchester, and others of their conspiracy but she was graciously pre∣served by her kind and loving Husband the King. King Henry died in the thirty eight year of his Reign. King Henry of his own nature and disposition was so inclinable and forward in all things, vertuous and commendable, that the like interprise of redresse of Religion hath not lightly been seen in any other Christned Prince, as in abolishing the stout and al∣most invincible authority of the Pope, in suppressing
Monsteries, in repressing custome of Idolatry and Pilgrimages, &c. which interprises as never King of England did accomplish (though some began to at∣tempt them) before him, so yet to this day we see but few in other Realmes dar follow the same. So long as Queen Bulln, Thomas Cromwell, Bishop of Cranmer, and such like good counsellours were a∣bout him he did much good. So again when sinister and evil counsell under subtill and crafty pretences had gotten once the foot in thrusting truth and verity out of the Princes ears, how much Religion and all good things went prosperously forward before, so much on the contrary side, all revolted backward again. Prince Edward succeeded his father, being of the age of nine years, and Reigned six years and eight months and eight dayes, and deceased Anno 1553. He was a vertuous and religious Prince, of admirable gifts and graces far beyond his years, Religion flouri∣shed in his time, for by the advise of his Governours, especially by his Uncle Lord John Simer Duke of Somerset, Protector of the Realm, that monstrous Hydra with six heads, the six Articles I mean, who devoured up so many men before, was abolished and taken away, the holy Scriptures were restored to the Mother Tongue, Mastes extinguished and abolished, these that were before in banishment for the danger of the truth, were again received to their Countrey, for the most part of the Bishops of Churches and Di∣ocesses were changed. Such as had been dumb Pre∣lats before were compelled to give place to others then that would preach & take pains. Besides other also out of foraign Countreys, men of learning and notable knowledge were sent for and received, among whom was Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius, which were set into the Universities. Of the old Bishops some were committed to one Ward, some
to another, but these meek and gentle times of King Edward under the Government of this noble Pro∣tector, hath this one commendation proper unto them, for that amongst the whole number of the popish sort, of whom some privily did steal out of the Realm, many were crafty dissemblers, some were open and manifest adversaries, yet of all that multi∣tude there was not one man that lost his life, for during all the time of King Edwards Reign, which was about six years, neither in Smithfield nor any o∣ther quarter of this Realm any was heard to suffer for any matter of Religion, either Papist or Protestant; either for one opinion or other, except only two, one an English-woman, called Joan of Kent, and the o∣ther a Dutch-man named George, who died for cer∣tain Articles not much necessary here to be rehearsed. Besides these two there was none else in all King Edwards Reign that died in any manner or cause of Religion, but that one Thomas Dobbie, who in the beginning of this Kings Reign was apprehended for speaking against the Idolatry of the Masse, and in the same Prison died, whose pardon notwithstanding was obtained of the Lord Protector, and should have been brought him if he had continued. The horrible and bloody Time of Queen MARY. QUeen Mary succeeded her brother King Edward to the Crown, ingyring her self by force and violence notwithstanding that Lady Jane was pro∣claimed Queen before her by King Edwards testa∣ment and the consent of the Nobility. She altered Religion that was in King Henries time and King Edwards, she made an Inhibition by proclamation that no man should preach or read openly in the Churches the word of God, the Masse is set up and
a proclamation that no man should interrupt any of these that would say masse, the Popes Authority is restored, In a word she banished the Gospel, and true Religion and brought in the Antichrist of Rome with his Idolatry & supperstition, turned the English service into Latine again &c. About this time a priest of Canterbury said masse the one day, and the next day after he came into the Pulpit, and desired all the people to forgive him, for he said he had betrayed Christ, but not as Judas did, and there made a long Sermon against the Masse. Marriage is concluded between Queen Mary and the King of Spain. Strange sights were seen before the comming in of King Philip, and subversion of Religion, for in the month of February, 1553. there was seen within the City of London about the 9. of the clock in the fore∣noon two Suns Shining at once, the one a good pretty way distant from the other. At the same time was also seen a rain bow turned contrary and a great deal high∣er then hath been accustomed, it stood with the head downward, and the feet as it were upward. In the second year of Queen Mary, there was a Cat hanged upon a Gallows at the crosse in Cheap, apparelled like a priest ready to say masse with a sha∣ven crown, her two fore feet tyed over her head with a round paper like a wafer cake put between them, whereon arose a great ill-will against the city of London, for the Queen and the Bishops were very angry withall, and therefore the same afternoon there was a proclamation that whosoever could bring forth the party that did hang up the Cat should have twenty Nobles, but none could or would earn it. Philip Prince of Spain, and Mary Queen of Eng∣land were married together by the Bishop of Win∣chester in the presence of a great number of Noble∣men
of both the Realms in the year of God, 1554. Cardinal Pool is sent legate to the King and Queen to reconcile England to their mother Church Rome, the Parliament sumit themselves to the Pope his au∣thority is restored which was matter of great joy to Rome. Great was the bloody murthering of Gods Saints in the time of Queen Mary. And first to begin with Master John Rogers, he is condemned of the Bishop of Winchester and Lord Chancellor for two articles, first for that he affirmed the Romish Catho∣lick Church to be the Church of Antichrist, and that he denied the reality of their Sacrament, he cursed him to be disgraded and condmned and put into the hands of the Litie, and so he gave him over into the Shireffs hand which were much better then his. 2. That in the Sacrament of the Altar there is not sub∣stantially nor really the natural body and blood of Christ. After that this John Rodgers had been long and straitly imprisoned by the space of an year and an half at New-gate amongst Theeves, often exa∣mined and very uncharitably entreated, and at length unjustly, and most cruelly by wicked Winchester con∣demned. Such was the Bishop of Winchester and Boner Bishop of London their charity that he could not obtain of them that favour as to talk a little with his wife before his burning; for his wife and childr∣en being eleven in number, ten able to go, and on sucking on her breast met him by the way, as he went towards Smithfield, this sorrowfull sight of his own flesh: blood could nothing move him but that he constantly and chearfully took his death with wonderful patience in the defence and quarrel of Christs Gospel. As he was going to Smithfield, he said the Psalm Miserere by the was, all the people wonderfully rejoycing at his constancy with great praises and thanks to God for the same. A litte be∣fore his burning at the stake, his pardon was brought
if he would have recanted, but he utterly refused it, so he was burned into ashes washing his hands in the flamme as he was in burning, he was the first Pro∣tomartyr of all that blessed company that suffered in Queen Maries time that got the first adventure upon the fire, he was viccar of St. Pulchers, and Reader of Pauls in London. After that Mster Rodgers had broken the yce here, under Queen Mary there suffered in like sort an Archbishop, four Bishops, twenty one Divines, eight Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hun∣dred Husband-men Servants and Labourers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two boyes, and two Infants with many moe, yea it is recorded that in lesse then four years they sacrificed the lives of eight hundred innocents here to their Idols in Queen Maries daies. We shall take a view of them that are most memorable. Lawrence Sanders Preacher, a man of worship∣full Parentage, was burned for the defence of the Gospel at Coventree, being led to the place of Exe∣cution, he went in an old Gown and a Shirt, bare∣footed, and oftentimes fell flat on the ground and prayed. When he came to the fire he fell to the ground and prayed, he rose up again and took the Stake to which he should be chained in his arms and kissed it, saying welcome the Crosse of Christ, wel∣come everlasting life, and being fastned to the Stake, and fire put to him, full sweetly he sleeped in the Lord. Mr. John Hooper Bishop of Worchester and Glo∣cester was burnt for the defence of the Gospel at Glo∣cester, he was a worthy Bishop, endued with these qualities that St. Paul requires in a Bishop, he was condemned at London, and degraded by Bishop Winchester and others, and sent to Glocester to be burnt. As he went to the fire he was led
between two Sheriffs (as it were a Lamb to the place of slaughter) in a Gown of his Hosts, his Hat upon his head, and a staff in his hand to stay himself with∣all, for the grief of the Sciatica which he had taken in prison, caused him sometimes to halt. All the way he was straitly charged not to speak, the people mourned bitterly for him. After he was entred into his prayer, a Box was brought and laid before him upon a Stool with his pardon (or at the least wise, it was fained to be his pardon) from the Queen if he would, he at the sight thereof cryed, if ye love my soul, away with it, if ye love my soul, away with it; the Box being taken away, the Lord Shandois said seeing there is no remedy dispatch him quickly; Mr. Hooper said God my Lord, I trust your Lady will give me leave to make an end of my prayers. Then said the Lord Shandois to Sir Edmund Bridges, take heed that he do nothing else but pray, if he do, tell me, and I shall quickly dispatch him; so he prayed in these words following, Lord (said he) I am hell, but thou art heaven, I am swill and a stink of sin, but thou art a gracious God and a merciful Redeemer, have mercy therefore upon me most miserable and wretched offender after thy great mercie, and accord∣ing to thy inestimable goodnesse. Thou that art as∣cended into heaven, receive me hell to be partaker of thy joyes, where thou sittest in equall glory with ty Father, for well knowest thou Lord, whereof I am, come hither to sffer, and why the wicked do secute this thy poor servant, not for my sins and sgressions committed against thee, but because I will not allow their wicked doings, to the contamin∣ating of thy blood, and to the denyall of the know∣ledge of thy truth, wherewith it did please thee by thy holy Spirit to instruct me, the which with as much diligence as a poor wretch might (being there∣to called) I have set forth to thy glory. And well
seest thou my Lord and God, what terrible pains and cruel torments be prepared for thy creature, such, Lord, as without thy strength none is able to bear or patiently to passe, but all things that are impossible with man are possible with thee. Therefore strength∣en me of thy goodnesse, that in the fire I break-not the rules of patience, or else aswage the terrour of the pains, as shall seem most to thy glory. After he had done, he was put to the fire, and he abode three quarters of an hour in the fire, for it was slow in burn∣ning and thrise it was kindled before he was consum∣ed. In the midst of the fire he prayed with a loud voice, Lord Jesus have mercy upon me, Lord Jesus have mercy upon me, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and these were the last words that he was heard to utter. But when he was black in the mouth and his tongue swollen that he could not speak, yet his lips went til they were shrunk to the Gams, and he knocked his breast with his hands untill one of his arms fell off, and then knocked still with the other, what time the fat water and blood dropped out at his fingers ends, untill by renewing of the fire his strength was gone, and his hand did cleave fast in knocking to the iron upon his breast. So immediatly bowing for wards he yeelded up his spirit. Doctor Tailyour was burned at Hadley for the testimony of the Gospel, when he was going to exe∣cution the people greatly lamented him, and cryed one to another, Ah good Lord, there goeth our good Sheepherd from us, that so faithfully hath taught us, so fatherly hes cared for us, and so godly hath governed us. O mercifull God, what shal we poor scattered Lambs do? What shall come of this wicked world? Good Lord, strengthen him and comfort him, with such other most lamentable and pitious voices. And he cryed to them, I have Preached to you Gods word and truth, and am come
this day to seal it with my blood. Coming against the Almes-house which he well knew, he cast to the poor people money which remained of that good peo∣ple had given him, in time of his imprisonment. As for his living, they took it from him at his first going to Prison, so that he was sustained all the time of his imprisonment by the charitable Almes of good people that visited him; he is not permitted to speak at his death, and therefore he kneeled down and prayed, and a poor woman that was among the people stepp∣ed in and prayed with him, but her they thrust away, and threatned to tread her down with horses, notwith∣standing she would not remove, but abode and pray∣ed with him. When he had prayed, he went to the Stake and kissed it, and set himself in a pitch Barrel which they had set for him to stand in, and so stood with his back upright against the Stake, with his hands folded together, and his eyes toward Heaven, and so he continually prayed. So stood he still with∣out either crying or moving, with his hands folded together, till Soyce with an Halbert stroke him on the head that the brains fell out, and the dead Corps fell down into the fire and burnt. The Lord Chancellor, and other his fellow. Bi∣shops, caused the Image of Thomas Becket that old Romsh traitor to be set over the Mercers Chappel∣door in Cheapside in London, in the form and shape of a Bishop, with Miter and Crosier, howbeit within two days after his erection, his two blessing-fingers were first broken away, and the next day his head also was stricken off, whereupon arose great trouble, and many were suspected, among whom one Master John Barnes Mercer, dwelling over against the same Chappel, was vehemently by the Lord Chancellor charged withall as the doer thereof, and though rather for that he was a Professor of the truth, wherefore he and three of his servants were commited to Prison,
and at his delivery) although it could not be proved upon him (he was bound in a great sum of money, as well to build it up again as often as it should be broken down, and also to watch and keep the same. And therefore at his compelled charges, the Im∣age was again set up the second day of March then next ensuing, but (for lake belike of careull watch∣ing) the 14. day of the said month in the night, the head of that dangerous beast (over whom there was such a charge given) was again the second time brok∣en off, which thing was so hainously taken, that the next Day there was a proclamation made in London, that whosoever would tell who did strik off his head (though he were of counsel and not the principal doer (he should have not only his pardon, but also an hundreth crowns of Gold with hearty thanks, but it was not known who did it. Thomas Tomkins of the Diocesse of London having first his hand burned, after was burnt himself by Bishop Boner for the constant testimony of Christs true profession. This Tomkins was a weaver by his occupation, he was of so godly life and disposition, that if any woman had come to him with her Web, as some time they did three or four in a day, he would alwayes begin with prayer, Or if any other had come to talk with him of any matter he would first begin with prayer, and if any had sought unto him to bor∣row money, he would shew him such money as he had in his purse and bid him take it, and when they came to repay it again, so far off was he from seek∣ing any usury at their hand, or from strait exaction of his due that he would bid them keep it longer while they were better able. When Boner saw that by no means he could prevail with Tomkins to forsake the truth, he found out a cruel device, First he burnt his hand at a Taper or wax-candle, supposing that by the smart and pain of the fire being terrified, he
would leave off the defence of his Doctrine which he had received. In the time that his hand was in burning, the said Tomkins afterward reported to one James Hinse that his spirit was so rapt up that he felt no pain. In the which burning he never shrunk, till the veins shrunk and the sinnews brust, and the water did spirt into Mr. Harpfields face, one that was with the Bishop, insomuch that the said Mr. Harpsfield moved with pitie desired the Bishop to stay, saying that he had tried him enough, this burning was in the hall at Fulham, and such was the cruelty of this Boner that he was not contented with the burning of his hand, rested not till he had consumed his whole body into ashes at London in Smithfield. Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester and Chan∣cellor seeing he could not prevail by cruelty to reduce men to the unity of the Catholick faith, and to call them from their errors and heresies, he gave over his murthering office to Boner Bishop of London who supplied that part right doughtily as in the further processe of this History hereafter evidently and too much may appear. William Hunter a young man of nineteen years, a Prentise in London is burnt for the Gospels sake, when hee is condemned to die, his father and his mother came to comfort him, and desired heartily of God that he might continue to the end in that good way which God had begun, and his mother said to him that she was glad that ever she was so happy to bear such a Child which could find in his heart to lose his life for Christs name sake. As he came to the place of execution, The Shireff said unto him here is a letter from the Queen, if thou wilt recant thou shalt live, if not thou shall be burned. No quoth William Hunter I will not recant God willing, then he went to the staik and prayed, saying, Son of God shine upon me, and immediatly the Sun in the
Element shined out of a dark cloud so full in his face that he was constrained to look another way, where∣at the people mused, because it was so dark a little time before, and here was an external shew of Christs favour upon him. After the burning of William Hunter was Mr. Highed, and Mr. Caustoun two worthy Gentle-men of Essx, which for the sincere profession of their Faith under Boner Bishop of London were martyred and burned in Essex. John Laurence priest, laimed with irons in Prison was born to the fire in a chaire at Colchester, and so sitting was in his constant faith consumed with fire. At the burning of this Laurence he sitting in the fire, the young children came abot the fire, and cried as well as young Children could speak, saying, Lord strengthen thy servant and keep thy promise, Lord strengthen thy servant and keep thy promise, which thing as it is rare, so it is no small manifestation of the glory of God which wrought this in the hearts of these little ones, nor yet a little commendation to their parents which from their youth brought them up in the knowledge of God and his truth. Follows the worthy and constant martyredome of the Bishop of St. David in Wales, called Robert Far∣rar, who was the next Bishop in this catalogue of of Christian martyres that suffered after Mr. Hooper. This foresaid Farrar by the favour and good-will of the Lord Protector was first called and promoted to that dignity. This man I may well call twise a mar∣tyr, not only for the cruel death of the fire which he suffered most constantly in the days of Queen Mary unto the shedding of his blood, but also for diverse other injuries and molestations in King Edwards time, which he nolesse firmly then unworthily su∣stained at the hands of his enemies after the fall of the Duke of Somerset. Of these his vexations and
troubles, with the wrangling articles and informati∣ons laid against him to the number of 56. and of the malice conceived against him by certain covetous Chanons of the Church of Carmrthen, and what were the proceedings of both pats, as well of inno∣cent, as of the crasty adversaries, what were their names in their Aticles against him is to be seen in his History, unto the which he answered all. Thus this godly Bishop being condemned and degraded, was committed to the Secular power, who not long after was brought to the plce of Execution in the Town of Carmarthen, where he in the Mercat-place most constantly sustained the torments & passion of the fire. Touching the which constancy of this bless∣ed Mutyr, this is moreover to be added and noted, that one named Richard Jonas a Knights son, coming to Mr. Farrar a little before his death, seemed to la∣ment the painfulnesse of the death he had to suffer. Unto whom the Bishop answered again to this effect saying that if he saw him once to stir in the, pains of his burning, he should then give no credit to his Doctrine. And as he said, so he right well perform∣ed the same, for so patiently he stood that he never moved, but even as he stood holding up his stumps, so still he continued, till one Richard Gravell with a staff dashed him upon the head, and so stroke him down. There was one at this time called Rawlins White a fisher man in the Country of Wales, gave his life like a valiant Souldier of Jesus Christ to martyrdome, and was burned at Cardiff, he was illiterat, but had a great desire to know the truth, he had a Boy that red to him the Scripture and other Books, whereby he attained through the grace of God to the know∣ledge of the truth, and conferred with others, and became an instructer of others, and converted many to the truth; at last he was taken as a man suspect of
Heresie, and committed to prison, and being desired oftentimes by the Bishop to recant, could no be per∣swaded thereto, he is condemned as an Heretick, and to be burnt. As he was going to execution, he saw his Wife and Children by the way weeping and mak∣ing great lamentation, the sudden sight of whom so pierced his heart, that the very tears trickled down his face. But he soon after, as though he had mislik∣ed this infirmity of the flesh, began to be as it were altogether angry with himself, insomuch that strik∣ing his brest with his hand, he used these words, Ah filthy flesh, stayest thou me so, wouldest thou fain prevail; Well, I tell thee, do what thou canst, thou shalt not by Gods grace have the victory. As he went to the Stake, he fell down upon his knees and kissed the gound, and in his rising again, the earth a little stikng on his nose, he said these words, Earth unto earth, and dst unto dust, thou art my mother, and unto thee I shall return. When he was standing at the Stake, he cast his eyes upon one, and called him unto him, and said, I feel a great fighting between the flesh and the spirit and the flesh would very fain have his swing, and therefore I pray you when ye see m any thing tempted, hold your finger up to me, and I trust I shall remember my self. When the Smith brought a Chain of Iron to fasten him to the Stake, and as he was making it fast on the other side, Rawlins said unto him, I pray you good friend knock in the Chain fast, for it may be that the flesh would strive mightily, but God of thy great mercy give me strength and patience to abide the ex∣tremity; so with patience and great constancy he suffered his Martyrdome. He was of age about three-score years. At this time died Pope Julius third, a Porkish and blasphemous Pope. Amongst other pranks and deeds of this foresaid Pope, this is also reported of
him in his life that he delighted greatly in Pork flesh and Peacocks. Upon a time when he was admoni∣shed of his Physitian to abstain from all Swines flesh, for that it was noysome for his Gout, and yet would not follow his counsell, the Physitian afterward gave warning to his Steward or orderer of his dyet, that he should set no more Pork flesh before him. Where∣upon when the Pope perceived the said Pork flesh to be laking in his accustomed service, where (said he) is my Pork? and when his Steward had answer∣ed that his Physitian had forbidden any Pork to be served, then the Pope brasting out in a great rage, said these words, bring me (said he) my Pork flesh, all dispet to di Do, that is to say in English, in the de∣spite of God. At another time he sitting at dinner pointed to a Peacock upon his Table which he had not touched, keep (said he) this cold Peacock for me against supper, and let me sup in the Garden, for I shall have Guests. So when supper came, and a∣mongst other hot Peacocks, he saw not his cold Pea∣cock brought to his Table: The Pope after his wonted manner most bitterly blasphemed God, fell into an extream rage. Whereupon one of his Car∣dinals sitting by, desired him, saying, Let not your Holiness I pray you be so moved with a matter of so small weight. Then this Julius the Pope answering again, What, said he, If God was so angry for an Apple, that he cast our first parents out or Paradise for the same? Why may not I, being his Vicar, be angry then for a Peacock, since a Peacock is a great∣er matter then an Apple? Behold here, good Read∣er, by this Pope, the holiness of that blasphemous See, and yet thou shalt see how what affection was born unto this Pope here in England, by the Dirigies, Hearses, and Fnerals commanded to be had and celebrated in all Churches by the Queen and her Counsel. At what time it chanced a woman to come
into St. Magnus Church at the Bridge foot in London, and there seeing an Hearse and other preparation, asked what it meant, and others that stood by said it was for the Pope, and that she must pray for him, nay (quoth she) that will I not, for he needeth not my prayer, and seeing he could forgive us all our sins, I am sure he is clean himself, therefore I need not to pray for him; she was heard to speak these words of certain that stood by, which by and by carried her to the Cage of London Bridge, and bade her cool her self there. In the close of the Examination of John Simpson and John Audely, two Husband-men, is to be noted the sudden fear of Bishop Boner and his Doctors, which was thus, there was assembled at that time a great multitude of people, that because the Consi∣story was not able to hold them, they were fain to stand in the Church near about the said Consistory, waiting to see the said prisoners when they should de∣part, and hearing the Bishop say, Have him speak∣ing to Simpson, being in a rage at his stout answers, Have him away. Now the people hearing in the Church these words, and thinking because the day was far spent, that the prisoners had their judge∣ment, they being desirous to see the prisoners had to Newgate, severed themselves, one running one way, another, another way, which caused such a noise in the Church, that they in the Consistory were all a∣mazed, and marvelled what it should mean, where∣fore the Bishop also being somewhat afraid of this so sudden fear, asked what there was to do? The standers by answering, said that there was like to be so tumult, for they were together by the ears. When the Bishop heard this, by and by his heart was in his heels, and leaving his seat, he with the rest of that Court betook them to their legs, hastning with all speed possible to recover the door that went into the
Bishops house, but the rest being somewhat lighter of foot then my Lord, did soon recover the door, & thronging hastily to get in, keeped the Bishop still our, and cried, Save my Lord, save my Lord, but meaning yet first to save themselves if any danger should come; whereby they gave the standers by good matter to laugh at the rediculous fear of Boner and his Doctors, and so thereafter thir two godly per∣sons Simpson and Audely were burnt. The Counsell of Trent was in this Pope Julius his time, betwixt the first and last Session thereof were eighteen years. In it all the Articles of the Popish Doctrine were confirmed. At this time by the Popish Clergy the bones of Mar∣tin Bucer and Paulus Phagins which had lyen almost two years in their graves, were taken up and burned at Cambridge, besides this, they caused Peter Martyrs wife, a woman of worthy memory to be digged out of the Church-yard, & to be burned on the dung-hill. A little before Thomas Hawkes Gentleman his death, some of his aqintance & friends which seem∣ed not a little to be confimed by the example of his constancy, and by his talk, yet notwithstanding the same again being feared with the sharpnesse of the punishment which he was going to, privily desired that in the midst of the flamme he would shew them some token if he could whereby they might be more certain whether the pain of such burning were so great that a man might not therein keep his mind qiet and patient. Which thing he promised them to do, and so secretly between them it was agreed that if the rage of the pain were tollerable, and might be suf∣fered, then he should lift up his hands above his head towards Heaven before he gave up the Ghost. In the fire when he continued long, & when his speech was taken away by violence of the flamme, his skin also drawn together, and his fingers consumed with the
fire, so that now all men thought certainly that he had been gone, suddenly, and contrary to all expect∣ation, the blessed servant of God being mindfull of his promise made before, reached up his hands burn∣ing in a ligh fire (which was marvellous to behold) over his head to the living God, and with great rejoyc∣ing as seemed, did strike or clap them three times together. At the sight whereof there followed such applause and out-cry of the people, and especially of them which understood the matter, that the like hath not commonly been heard, And so the blessed Mar∣tyr of Christ straight way siking down into the fire, gave up his spirit. Mr. John radfoord Preacher most constantly suffered for the tstimony of Christ and his truth, he was long in prison, he had many conflicts with his adversaries, he was burnt at Smithfield, many Doctors and Bishops did talk with him in prison, and two Spanish Friers dealt with him to recant, and to leave his errors, but he abode constant in the truth. When he came to the Stake he took a Fagot in his hand and kissed it, and so likewise the Stake. And when he had so done, he desired of the Sheriffs that his servant might have his rayment, for (said he) I have nothing else to give him, and besides that he is a poor man; and the Seriff said he should have it. And so forthwith Mr. Bradfoord did put off his Ray∣ment and went to the Ske, and holding up his hands, and casting his countenance to Heaven, he said thus: O England, England, epent thee of thy sins, beware of Idolatry, bware of false Antichrists, take heed they do not deceive you: but he was command∣ed by the Sheriff to be quiet. At that time with him was burnt a young man named John Lease, a Pren∣tise, of ninteen or twenty years, whom he greatly en∣couraged, & said to him, be of good comfort brother, for we shall have a merry supper with the Lord this night, & he spak no moe words that any man did hear
but imbracing the reed, sid thus, strait is the way, and narrow is the gate that leadeth to eternal salvati∣on, and few there be that find it. Here is not to be passed by a notable example of Gods hand upon Wd∣roff, one of the Sheriffs that would not suffer him to speak, but dealt churlishly with him. It happened within half an year after the burning of this blessed Martyr that he was so stricken on the right side with such a Palsie, or stroak of Gods hand, whatsoever it was, that for the space of eight years after till his dying day, he was not able to turn himself in his bed, but as two men with a sheet were fain to stir him, and withall such an insatiable devouring came upon him, that it was monstrous to see. And thus continued he the space of eight years together. This godly Erad∣foord, and Heavenly Martyr, during the time of his imprisonment, wrote sundry comfortable Trea∣tises, and many godly Letters, of which some he wrote to the City of London, Cambridge, Walden, to Lancashire, and Chasshire, and diverse to his pri∣vat friends, and to his mother, brethren, and sisters. Bradfoord was a godly and learned man, while he was in prison he teached twise a day continually, unlesse sickness hindered him, where also he ministred the Sacrament often. Preaching, Reading and Praying, was all his whole life, and he was in great credit with his Keeper, that he might go out and in when he pleased. He counted that hour not well spent wherein he did not some good, either with his Pen, Study, or in exhorting of others, &c. He was had in great reverence and admiration with all good men, that a multitude that never knew him but by fame, greatly lamented his death, yea and a nmber of the Papists themselves wished heartily his life. In his Letter to his mother, he disswades her from the Masse, and tells her the difference betwixt the Lords Supper and the Masse. The Supper was ordained
to be received of us in the memoriall of his death, for the confirmation of our faith, that his body was broken for us, and his blood shed for pardon of our sins: But in the Masse there is no receiving, but the Priest keepeth all to himself alone. Christ saith, Take, eat, no, saith the Priest, Gape, peep: There is a sacrificing, yea, killing of Christ again as much as they may: there is Idolatry in worshipping the out∣ward sign of Bread and Wine, here is all in Latine, yea cannnot tell what he saith. To conclude, there is nothing as God ordained, wherefore my good mo∣ther come not at it. In mortem Johannis Bradfordi constamissimi Martyris. Discipulo nulli supra liet esse Magistrum, Quique Deo serrit, tristia multa ferret. Corripit omniporens natum quem diligit omnem, Ad Coelum stricta est difficilisque via. Has Bradforde tuo dum condis pectore voces, Non hominum rigidas terribilesque minas, Sed nec blanditias, non vim, nic vincula curas, Tradis & accensae membra cremanda pyrae. There were at this time also two Ministers, Rland and Frankish Sheterden and Midletoun burnt at Cau∣terbury, at two severall Stakes, but all in one fire to∣gether, where they in the sight of God and of his Angels, and before men like true Souldiers of Jesus Christ gave a constant testimony of the truth of his Gospel. Sheterden wrot sundry Letters from the pri∣son in Westgate, and one to his mother before his ex∣ecution, to whom he gives warning to beware of the great idolatry, and blasphemous Masse. O let not that be your God which Myce and Worms can devour; behold, I call Heaven and Earth to record that, that it is no God, yea, the fire that consumeth it, and that moistnesse that caueth it to mould, and I take Christs Testament to witness that it is none of his Ordinances, but a meer invention of men, and a
snare to catch innocents blood, and now that God hes shewed it unto you, bewarned in time. O give over all customes, and become new in the truth: what state soever your fathers be in, leave that to God, and let us follow the counsell of his Word. Thomas Jueson Carpentar being earnestly travelled with all to recant, said in this wise, I would not re∣cant and forsake my opinion and belief for all the goods in London, I do appeal to Gods mercy, and will be none of your Church, nor submit my self to the same, and that I have said, I will say again, and if there came an Angel from heaven to teach me any other doctrine, then that which I am in now, I would not believe him: Which answer thus made he was condemned as an heretick, and committed to the se∣cular power and burned at Chicesher, persuing him in his constant faith unto the end. Among many that travelled in these troublesome days to keep a good conscience, there was one James Ables a young man, which through compulsion of the tyranny then used, was inforced to his part with his brethren in wandring and going from place to place to avoid the peil of apprehending, but when time came that the Lord had another work to do for him, he was caught by the hands of wicked men, and brought before the Bishop of Norwich, Doctor Hopton, who examining him of his Religion, and charging him therewith very sore, both with threats and fair speach, at the last the said poor James did yeeld and resented to their naughty perswasions, al∣though his conscience consent not thereto. Now when he was dismissed and should go from the Bi∣shop, the Bishop calling him again gave him a piece of money, which when the said James had received and was gone from the Bishop, his conscience began to throb and inwardly to accuse his fact how he had displeased the Lord by consenting to their beastly il∣lusions,
In which combat with himself, being pit∣teously vexed, he went immediatly to the Bishop a∣gain and there threw him his said money which he had received at his hand, and said it repented him that ever he gave his consent to the wicked perswasi∣ons, and that he gave his consent to the taking of his money. Now this being done, the Bishop with his Chaplaines did labour a fresh to win him again but in vain; for the said James Abbes would not yeeld for none of them all, although he had played Peter before through infirmity, but stood manfully to his Masters quarrel to the end, and above the force of the fire, to the consuming of his body into ashes, which tyrany of burning was done in Berie. Mster John Denly at Uxbridg was burnt for the testimony of the truth, being set in the fire with the burning flamme about him he sang in it a Psalm. Then cruell Doctor Story being there present, com∣manded one of the tomentors to hule a Faggot at him, whereupon being hurt therewith upon the face that he bled again, he left his singing and clapt his hands upon his face, truly quoth Doctor Story to him that hurled the Faggot, thou hast marred a good old song. The said John Denly being yet still in the flame of the fire put his hands abroad and sang again, yeelding at the last his spirit into the hands of God through his Son Jesus Christ. There was six godly Martyrs burnt at one fire at Canterbury for the testimony of the Truth. Elizabeth Narne widow that was one of them that was burnt at Stafford bow nigh unto London, her husband was burnt before for the profession of the truth in the month of May last by past; the chief thing objected against her as against all the rest, was touching the real and corporall presence of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; many other matters was objected against them, as for not comm∣ing
to the church, for speaking against the masse, for dispising their Ceremonies and new found Sacraments with diverse other fond and trifling toyes not worthy any mentioning. This woman being exhorted to re∣cant, she said, do what ye will, for if Christ was in an errour, then am I in an errour, upon which an∣swer shee was adjudged and condemned as an Here∣tick, and so delivered unto the secular power to be by them put to death, and so she was burnt. George Tankerfield a little before his execution prayed his Host to let him have a good fire in his Chamber, he had so, and then he sitting on a Form before the fire, put off his shoos and hose, and stretch∣ed out his leg to the flame, and when it had touched his foot he quickly withdrew his leg, shewing how the flesh did perswade him one way, and the Spirit another way. The Spirit said, be not afraid, for this is nothing in respect of fire eternall. The flesh said, leave not the company of thy friends & acquaintance, which love, and will not let thee lack nothing. The Spirit said, the company of Jesus Christ and his glo∣rious presence doth exceed all fleshly friends. The flesh, said, do not shorten thy time, for thou mayest live if thou wilt, much longer. The Spirit said, this life is nothing unto the life in Heaven which lasteth for ever, &c. And when he came to the place of execution, after he ended his prayer, he arose, and with a joyfull faith he said, that although he had a sharp dinner, yet he hoped to have a joyfull supper in Heaven. While the Fagots were set about him, there came a Priest unto him and perswaded him to believe n the Sacrament of the Altar and he should be saved. But George Tankerfield cryed out vehe∣mently, and said, I defy the Whore of Babylon, I I defy the Whore of Babylon, fy on that abominable Idol, good people do not believe him. Then the Major of the Town commanded to set fire to the
Heretick, and said if he had but one load of Fagots in the whole world, he would give them to burn him. There was an certain Knight by, and went unto Tan∣kerfield, and took him by the hand, and said, good brother, be strong in Christ; this he spoke softly, and Tankerfield said, O Sir, I thank you, I am so I thank God, so he was put to the fire and burnt. Robrt Samuel a very godly and right faithfull Peacher of Gods Word in King Edward his dayes, was now apprehended and cast into prison, and miser∣ably handled under the Bishop of Norwich, Doctor Hopon an unmercifull Prelat, he so far exceeded the bounds of piety and compassion in tormenting their poor brethren as this Bishop did, in such sort that ma∣ny of them he perverted and brought quite from the truth, and some from their wits also, he is keeped in strict prison, where he was chained bolt upright to a great poast, in such sort, that standing only on the tiptoe, he was fain to stay up the whole poise or weight of his body thereby, and to this they added a far more grievous to ment, keeping him without meat and drink, whereby he was unmercifully vexed through hunger and thrist, saving that he had every day allowed two or three mouthfuls of bread, and three spoonfuls of water to the end rather that he might be reserved to further torment, then that they would preserve his life. O worthy constancy of the Martyr. O pitilesse hearts of Papists, worthy to be complained of, and to be accursed before God and nature O the wonderfull strength of Christ in his members, whose stomack, though it had been made of Adament stone, would not have relented, and these intollerable vexations, and extream pains above na∣ture, how often times would he have drunken his own water, but his body was so dried up with his long emptinesse, that he was not able to make one drop of water. At the last when he was brought
forth to be burned, which was but a trifle in com∣parison of these pains that he had passed; certain there were that heard hm, what strange things had hapened unto him, during the time of his imprison∣ment, to wit, that after he had been famished, or pined, with hunger two or three dayes together, he then fell into a sleep, as it were one half in a slumber, at which time one cloathed all in white seemed to stand before him, which ministred comfort unto him by these words, Samuel, Samuel, be of good cheer, and take a good heart unto thee, for after this day shalt thou never either be hungry or thirsty, which thing came even to passe accordingly, for sppedily after he was burned, and from that time that he should suffer he feit neither hunger nor thrist. And thus de∣clared he to the ends as he said, that all men might behold the wonderfull works of God. Many more like matters concerning the great comfort he had of Christ in his afflictions, he could utter (he said) be∣sides this, but shamefastnesse and modesty would not suffer him to utter it. The report goeth among some that were there present, and saw him burnt, that his body in burning did shine as light and white as new tryed silver in the eyes of them that stood by. After the suffering of Robert Samuel was burned William Allen in Walfinghame, a labouring man, he being brought before the Bishop, and asked the cause why he was imprisoned, answered, that he was put in prison because he would not follow the Crosse, saying that he would never go in procession. Then being willed by the Bishop to return again to the Catholick Church, he answered that he would turn to the Ca∣tholick Church, but not to the Romish Church, and said, that if he saw the King and Queen and all other follow the Crosse, or kneel down to the Cross, he would not, for the which, sentence of condemnation was given against him, and he burned, who declared
such constancy at his martyrdom, and had such cre∣dit with the justices, by reason of his upright and well tryed conversation amongst them, that be was suffer∣ed to go untved to his suffering, and there being fastn∣ed with a Chain, stood quietly without shrinking untill he died. There were five worthy Martyrs burned at Canter∣bury in one fire, because they denied that Christ was corporally and bodily in the Sacrament: Master Robert Glover at Coventree being apprehended for su∣spiion of Heresie and imprisoned, was burnt for the testimony of the truth There was one Austen Bernher a Minister and a familiar friend of his, testified this of him. After he was condemned by the Bishop, and was now at the point to be delivered out of this world, It so happened that two or three dayes before his heart being lumpish and desolate of all spiritual con∣solation, felt in himself no apnesse nor willingness, but rather a heaviness and dulnesse of spirit, finding much discomfort to bear the bitter crosse of martyr∣dome ready now to be laid upon him, and here we see that Gods Saints may be destitute for a time, of the Lords comfort. Unto whom the said Austen an∣swering again, willed and desired him patiently to wait the Lords pleasure, and how soever his present feeling was, yet seeing his cause was just and true, he exhorted him constantly to stick to the same, and to play the man, nothing misdoubting but the Lord in his good time could visite him and satisfie his desire with plenty of consolation. whereof he faid he was right certain and sure, and therefore desired him whenoever any such feeling of Gods heavenly mer∣cies should begin to touch his heart, that then he would shew some signification thereof whereby he might witnesse with him the same, and so departed from him. The next day when the time came of his martyrdome as he was going to the place, and
was now come to the sight of the Stake, although all the night before praying for strength and courage hee could feel none, suddenly he was so mightily replen∣ished with Gods holy comfort and heavenly joyes, that he cried out, clapping his hands to Austen and saying in these words, Austen he is come, he is come, and that with such joy and alacrity, as one seeming rather to be risen from some deadly danger to liberty of life, then as one passing out of the world by any pains of death. And so he was put to the fire and burnt for the testimony of the truth. Denton being afrayed of burning said to Wolsey that he cannot burn, but he that could not burn in the cause of Christ, was afterward burned against his will when Christ had given peace to his Church, for his house was set on fire, and while he went in to save his goods he lost his life with two other that were in the same house. Not much unlike to this was also the example of Mr. West Chaplain to B. Ridley, who refusing to die in Christs cause with his masters, said masse against his conscience, and soon afterward died. The Death and Martyrdome of Bishop Ridley, and Bishop Latimer. MAster Ridley Bishop of London, and Latimer Bishop sometimes of Worcester, men of memor∣able leaning and incomparable ornaments, and gifts of grace, joyned with no lesse commendable sinceri∣ty of life, as all the Realm can witnesse sufficiently, were burnt at Oxford for the testimony of the truth. This B. Ridley was descended of a stock right wor∣shipfull, he was born in Northumberland-shire. After he past his course at Cambrige & made Doctor of Divinity, he went to Paris, and after his return
was made Chaplain to King Henry the eight, and promoted afterward by him to the Bishoprick of Worcester, and so from thence translated to the Se and Bishoprick of London in King Edwards days, & now in Queen Maries time they were laid hands up∣on, and committed to prison and accused as Here∣ticks. Great was the conference and godly talk that was between them while they were in prison. Mr. Ridley wrote many letters from the prison, as a letter from him and his prison-fellows unto Mr. Braidford, and his prison-fellows in the Kings bench at South∣wark, and to many others. And besides these let∣ters of his, diverse other tracttations were written by him, partly out of prison, and partly in prison. As for Mr. Latimer that famous Preacher and worthy Martyr of Christ and his Gospel, he was a long time a zealous and superstitious Papist, and in this blind zeal he was a very enemy to the professors of Christs Gospel, as both his. Oration made when he proceeded Batchelor of Divinity against Philip Melancton, and also his other works did plainly de∣clare; but he through the goodness of God was con∣verted by Mr. Bilney unto the truth, so that where∣as before he was an enemy, and almost a persecuter of Christ, he was now a zealous seeker after him, howbeit as Satan never sleepeth when he seeth his kingdom begin to decay, so likewise now seing that this worthy member of Christ would be a shrowd shaker thereof, he raised up his impious Impes to molest and trouble him. He wrote also many letters from the prison. Touching the memorable acts and doings of this worthy man, amongst many other, this is not to be neglected what a bold enterprise he attempted, in sending to King Henry a present, the manner whereof was this. There was then and yet remaineth still an old custome received from the old Romans, that upon new years day being the first day
of January, every Bishop with some handsome new years gift should gratifie the King, and so they did, some with gold, some with silver, some with a purse full of money, some with one thing, and some with another, but Mr. Latimer being Bishop of Worcester then amongst the rest, presented a new Testament for his new years gift with a napkin having this poesie about it, Fornicatores & adulteros judicabit Dominus. Now in Queen Maris time, after their long im∣prisonment they are brought forth to their finall ex∣amination and execution, are degraded and con∣demned as Hereticks, and delivered to the Secular power to be put to death. When they came to the fire, they brought a Eagot kindled with fire and laid the same down at Doctor Ridleys feet, to whom Mr. Latimer spake in this manner, be of good comfort Mr. Ridley, and play the man, we shall this day light such a Candle by Gods grace in England as I trust shall never be put out. And here we see the Church to be lightened by the Martyrdome of Saints. And so the fire being given to them, when Doctor Ridley saw the fire flaming up toward him he cried with a wondeful loud voice, In manus tuas Domine com∣mendo spiritum meum, Domine sujcipe spiritum meum, and after repeated this latter part often in English, Lord, Lord, receive my spiit. Mr. Latimer cry∣ing as vehemently on the other side, Oh Father of Heaven receive my soul; who receiving the flame, as it were embracing of it. After, as he had stroal∣ed his face with his hands (as it were) bathed them a little in the fire, he soon died (as it appeared) with very little pain, or none. Bt Mr. Ridley by reason of the evill making of the fire unto him, he was long in burning, he cied to let the fire come to him, for his nether pats were burnt before the fire touched his upper parts, yet for all this to ment he forgot not to call upon God still, it moved hundreds to tears in
beholding this horrible sight, for I think there was none that had not clean exiled all humanity and mer∣cy, which would not have lamented to behold the fury of the fire, so to rage upon their bodies. Thus thir two godly and learned men ended their lives for the cause of Christ, and testimony of his truth. The death and end of Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, and Chancellor of the Kingdom, enemy of Gods Word. THe next moneth after the burning of Doctor Rid∣ley and Mr. Latimer, which was the moneth of November, Stephen Gardiner Bishop and Chancellor a man hated of God and all good men, ended his wretched life. The same day when as Bishop Rid∣ley and Mr. Latimer suffered at Oxford, came the servant of the said Winchester posting in all possible speed from Oxford, bringing intelligence to the Bishop that Ridley and Latimer were burnt, he came out rejoycing and saying to the old Dke of Norfolk, being then in his house. Now (saith he) let us go to dinner. Whereupon they being set down, meat was immediatly brought, and the Bishop began mer∣rily to eat; but what followed? The bloodyly yrant had not eaten a few bits, but the sudden stroak of God, his terrible hand fell upon him in such sort as immediatly he was taken from the Table, and so brought to bed, where he continued for the space of fifteen dayes in such intollerable anguish and tor∣ments, that all that mean while, during these fifteen dayes he could not avoid by order of Urine, or other∣wise any thing that he received, whereby his body being miserably inamed within (who had inflamed so many good Martyrs before) was brought to wretched end. And therefore no doubt, as most
like it is, came the thrusting out of his tongue from his mouth so swolen and black with the Inflamation of his body; a spectacle worthy to be noted and be∣hold of all such bloody persecuters. Moreover it is recorded concerning the said Bishop, that when Doctor Daie Bishop of Chicester came to him and be∣gan to comfort him with words of Gods promise, and with the free justification in the blood of Christ our Saviour, repeating the Scriptures to him. Win∣chester hearing that, What my Lord (quoth he) will ye open that gap now, (then farewell altogether) to me and such other in my case ye may speak it, but open this window to the people, then farewell alto∣gether. The Martyrdome of Mr. John Philpot Arch-dea∣con, was burnt for the defence of the Gospels cause against the Antichristian See of Rome. After long mprisonment, & oft Examination he is condemned as an Heretick, and delivered to the Secular Power to be burnt. When he came to the place of suffering, to wit, in Smithfield, he kissed the Stake, and said, Shall I disdain to sffer at this Stake, seeing my Re∣deemer did not refuse to suffer most vile death upon the Crosse for me, and then with an obedient heart full meekly he said the 106.107, and 108. Psalms, and when he had made an end of all his prayers, he said to the Officers, What have ye done for me, and every one of them declared what they had done, and he gave to every one of them money, then they bound him to the Stake, and set fire unto that con∣stant Martyr, who in the midst of the firey flames yeelded his soul into the hands of the Almighty God, and like a Lamb gave up his breath, his body being consumed into ashes. The writings and examinati∣ons of Mr. Phipòt were by the providence of God preserved from the sight and hands of his enemies, who by all manner and means sought not only to stop
him from all writing, but also to spoil and deptive him of that which he had written, for the which cause he was many times stripped and searched with∣in the prison by his Keeper, but yet so happily these his Writings were couveyed and hid in places about him, or else his Keepers eyes so blinded, that not∣withstanding all this malicious purpose of the Bishops are yet remaining, and come to light. There were seven Martyrs that suffered together at one fire in Smithfield at London for the testimony of Christs Gospel, in the second year of persecution under Qeen Mary; five men, one wife, and one maid, all which seven as they were burned together in one fire, so were they likewise all upon one sort and form of Aticles condemned in on day. Amongst the rest of the Articles objected against them were, that they misliked the Sacrifice of the Masse, and the Sacrament of the Altar, refusing to come to their Parish Church to hear Masse, and that they did ex∣presly say that in the Sacrament of the Altar is not the very body and blood of our Saviour Christ, really, substantly and truly, and hath affirmed expresly that the Masse is idolatry and abomination, and that in the Sacrament of the Altar there is none other sub∣stance but only materiall bread, and materiall wine, which are tokens of Christs body and blood, and that the substance of Christs body and blood is no wayes in the Sacrament of the Altar, &c. As for the first of these seven, to wit, Thomas Whitlie Minister upon perswasion and counl rcanted, and subscribed a Bill of submission to renounce all errors and heresies a∣gainst the Sacrament of the Altar, &c. And I do protest and declare by these presents that I do both now hold oberve, and keep in all points the Ctaho∣lick ath and belief of Christs Church, according as this Church of England eing a member of this Catholick Church doth now profess and keep, and
in no wayes to swerve, decine, or go from the said faith, during my naturall life, submitting my self fully and wholly to you reverend Father, my said ordinary in all things concerning my reformation and amendement at all times. Now when he had thus done, he was troubled in his mind and conscience for forsaking the crosse of Christ and had no rest till he obtained again the submission he had subscribed, which havin gotten he was very glade and returned again, and with great constancy and fortitude stood to the defence or Christ Doctrine to the fire against the Papists. Five other Martyrs in Canerbury, four Women, and on Man at two staiks and one fire alto∣gether burned, who when the fire was flaming a∣bout their ears, do sing Palms. Where at the good knight Sir John Norton, being there present, weep∣ed bitterly at the sight thereof. The Martyrdome of Thomas Cranmer Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. THe Martyrdom of the reverent Pastor and Prelat Thomas Cranmr Ach-Bishop of Canterbury, who was burned at Oxford nder Queen Marie, for the confession of Christs true Doctrine, he was a gentleman born of good parentage, he attained to great knowledge and learning, and was reader of Di∣vinity lecture in the Colledge of Cambridge, and was in such special estimation and reputation with the whole University, that being Doctor of Divinity, he was commonly appointed one of the heads? which are two or three of the chiefest learned men) to ex∣amine such as yearly professe in comencement, either Batchelors or Doctors of Divinity, by whose appro∣bation the whole University licenseth them to pro∣ceed unto their degree, and again by whose dissa∣lowance
the University also rejecteth them for a time to proceed untill they be better furnished with more knowledge. When the great and weighty cause of Kig Henry the either his divorce with the Lady Ka∣thren Dwager of Spain came into qestion, which being many wayes by the space of two or three years amongst the Canonists, Civilians and other learned men diversly disputed and debated, at what time Cardinal Campeius and Cardinal Volsey being in com∣mission from the Pope to hear and determine that great cause in controversity between the King and the Queen his pretended wife, dalied and delayed all the Summer time, hearing the said cause in contro∣versie debated, and the little minding to poceed to sentence giving, took occasion to finish their commi∣ssion, and not further to determine therein. So on a night two Doctors of the kings side and Doctor Cranmer being lodged in one house, and as they were at supper, they conferred with Doctor Cran∣mer concerning the Kings cause, and asking his judgement, he answered that in his opinion they made more adoe in prosecuting she law ecclesiasticall then needed. It were better I suppose quoth Doctor Cranmer that the question whether a man may many his brothers wife or no, were decided and discurssd by the Divines, and by the authority of the word of God, whereby the conscience of the Prince may be better satisfied and qieted, then thus from year to year by frustretory delayes to prolong the ein, leav∣ing the very trth of the matter unoulted o it by the wrd of God, and this may be done as well in Eng∣land in the Universities here, as at Rome, or else where in any foraign nation. When Doctor Cran∣mer had thus endd his Tale, the other two well liked of his devise: The King hearing of this advise of ranmers, caused in all haste to send for him, I perceive said the King, I peceive that, that man
hath the Sow by the right ear. And if I had known of this devise two years ago, it had been in my way a great peece of money, and had also red me out of much disquietnesse, he comes to the King and after conference between the King and him, he layes a charge upon him to search the Scripture in the cause of his divorce, and to write his mind therein, so he went about the businesse, and incontinent wrote his mind concerning the Kings question adding to the same besides the authority of the Scriptures, of General Counsels, and of ancient writers also, his opinion which was this, that the Bishop of Rome had no such authority as whereby he might dispense with the word of God and the Scriptue. When Doctor Cranmer had made this book, and committed it to the King the King said to him, will ye abide by this that yee have here written before the B. of Rome, that will I do by Gods grace quoth Doctor Cranmer, if your Majesty do send me thither? Marie quoth the King, I will send you even to him in a sure Am∣bassage. And this by means of Doctor Cranmers handling of this matter with the King, not only cer∣tain learned men were sent abroad to the most part of the Universities in Christendom to dispute the questi∣on, but also the same being by commission disputed by the Divines in both the Universities in Cambrige and Oxford, It was there concluded that no such Matrimony was by the word of God lawfull. Where∣upon a solemn Ambassage was then prepared and sent to the Bishop of Rome, wherein went the Earle of Wiltshire, Doctor Cranmer and other Doctors. And when the time came that they should come be∣fore the Bishop of Rome to declare the cause of their Ambassage, the Bishop sitting on high in his cloath of state and in his rich apparel, with his Sandals one his feet, offering as it were his foot to be kissed of the Ambassadours, the Earie of Wiltshire disdain∣ing
thereat, stood still and made no countenance thereunto, so that all the rest keeped them from that idolatry, howbeit one thing is not here to be omitted as a Prognosticat of our separation from the seat of Rome, which then chanced by a Spaniel of the Earle of Wiltshire, for he having there a great Spaniel which came out of England with him, stood directly between the Earle and the Bishop of Rome, when the said Bishop had advanced forth his foot to be kissed, now whether the Spaniel perceived the Bishop foot of another matter than it ought to be, and so taking it to be some kind of repast, or whether it was the will of God to shew some token by the Dog unto the Bishop of his inodinate pride, that his foot were moe meet to be bitten of dogs then kissed of Christian men, the Spaniel I say when the Bishop extended his foot to be kissed, no man re∣garding the fame, straight waies (as though he had been of purpose appointed thereunto) went directly to the Popes foot, and not only kissed the same un∣mannerly, but as some plainly reported and affirmed took fast with his mouth the great toe of the Pope, so that in hast he pulled in his glorious feet from the Spaniel, whereat one man smileing in their sleeves, what they thought God knoweth. But in fine the Pontificall B. after that, sought no more at that pre∣sent for kissing his feet, but without any ceremony gave ear to the Ambassadors what they had to say. Who entring there before the Bishop offered on the Kings behalf to be defended that no man Jure Divino could or ought to Marrie his Brothers wife, and that the Bishop of Rome by no means ought to dispense to the contrary. Diverse promises were made, and sundry dayes appointed wherein the question should have been disputed, and when one part was ready to answer, no man there appeared to dispute in that behalf. So in the end the B. making to our Ambas∣sadors
good countenance and gratifying Doctor Cran∣mer with the office of the penitentiariship, dismissed them undisputed withal, the Ambassadors retuned, but Cranmer went forward in his Ambassage to the Emperor, and there to answer such learned men of the Emperors Counsell as would or could say any thing to the contrary part, &c. At this time B. Warhame then Archbishop of Can∣terbury departed this transitoy life, whereby that dignity then being in the gift and diposition of the King was given unto Cranmer as worthy for his travel of such a promotion. He proved a notable B. being indued with all these qualities that the Apostle requires in a Bishop. He had many enemies in King Henries time, but the King held him up. In Queen Maries time he is put to great trouble for his Religion, he is imprisoned and keeped long in prison, and brought out to his examination and tryall sundrie times, he is degraded from his office, and condemn∣ed. The Doctors and Divines of Oxford busied themselves all that ever they could about Mr. Cran∣mer to have him recant, assaying by all crafty pra∣ctices and allurements they might devise, to bring their purpose to passe, he at last overcome with their perswasions, whether through their importu∣nity, or by his own imbecillity, or of what mind I cannot tell, the recantation is drawn up and sub∣scribed by him, the Doctors and Prelats without delay caused the same to be imprinted and set abroad in all mens hands, this made the Papists greatly to rejoice; all this while Cranmer was in no certain as∣surance of his life, although the same was faithfully promised to him by the Doctors. The Queen hav∣ing now gotten a time to revenge her old grief, re∣ceived his recantation very gladly, but of her purpose to put him to death she would nothing relent. The Queen appoints Doctor Cole to make his Funerall
Sermon before his death. At the day of his executi∣on he makes his Sermon at S. Maries Church in Ox∣ford, there was a Stage set up over againt, the Pulpit of a mean height from the ground, where Cranmer had his standing, waiting untill Cole made him ready to his Sermon. The lamentable case and sight of that man gave a forrowfll spectacle to all christian eyes that beheld him, he that late was Archbishop, Metropolitane, and Primat of England, and the Kings privie Counsellour being now in a bare and ragged Gown, and ill favouredly cloathed with an old square Cap, exposed to the contempt of all men, did admonish men not only of his own cala∣mity, but also of our state and fortune, wherein he declared against him that being a traitor he had dis∣solved the lawfull Matrimony between the King her Father and Mother, besides the driving out of the Popes authority while he was Metropolitane, that he had been an heretick, &c. Beside these, there were other just and weighty causes which seemed to the Queen and Counsell, which was not meet at that time to be opened to the common people, &c. He encurageth him to take his death patiently by many places of Scripture. Doctor Cole rejoyced in his conversion, but that lasted not long. After the Sermon Cranmer was required to declare his faith, he declared the true confession of his faith without all collour or dissembling, for now is no time to dis∣semble, whatsoever I have said or written in time past, I believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and Farth, &c. And now I come to the great thing that so much troubleth my conscience more then any thing that ever I did or said in my whole life, that is the setting abroad of a writting contrary to the truth, which here now I renounce and refuse, as things written wih my hand con∣trary to the truth, which I thought in my heart, and
written for fear of death, and to save my life if it might be &c. And for asmuch as my hand offend∣ed writing contrary to my heart, my hand shall first be punished therefore, for may I come to the fire, it shall be first burned. And as for the Pope; I refuse him, as Christs enemy, and Antichrist, with all his false Doctrine. And as for the Sacrament, I believe as I have taught in my Book against the Bishop of Winchester, the which my Book teacheth so true a Doctrine of the Sacrament, that it shall stand at the last day before the Judgement of God, where the Papisticall Doctrine contrary thereto shall be asham∣ed to shew her face. Here the standers by were all ashamed, marvelled, were amazed, did look one upon another whose expectation he had so notably deceived. Some began to admonish him of his re∣cantation, and to accuse him of falshood; briefly, it was a world, the Doctor beguiled of so great an hope: I think there was never cruelty more notably or better in them deluded and deceived, for it is not to be doubted but they looked for a glorious victory, and a perpetual triumph by this mans recantation, so the Papists were in a great chafe against him, he is plucked down from the Stage by Friers and Papists for the true confession of his faith, he is led to the fire, when he is brought to the fire, he putteth his right hand which subscribed, first in the fire, which he held so stedfast and immoveable (saving that once with the same hand he wiped his face) that all men might see his hand burned before his body was touch∣ed, his body did so abide the burning of the flame with such constancy and stedfastness, that standing al∣wayes in one place, without moving of his body, hee seemed to move no more then the Stake to which he was bound, his eyes were lifted up unto heaven, and oftentimes he repeated his unworthy right hand so long as his voice would suffer him, and using oft
the words of Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; in the greatnsse of the flamme he gave up the Ghost. At this time in Suffolk at Ipswich Agnes Potten and Joan Trunchfield were burnt for affirming that in the Sacrament was the memoriall only of Christs death and passion, for, said they, Jesus Christ is ascended up into heaven, and is on the right hand of God the Father, according to the Scriptures, and not in the Sacrament as he was born of the Virgin Mary, for this they were burned, which they constantly suffered, which was to be wondered at, who being so simple women so manfully stood to the confession and testi∣mony of Gods word and verity. The burning of Agnes Potten was revealed to her before in her sleep, for being asleep in her bed, saw a bright burning fire right up as a Pole, and on the side of the fire she thought there stood a number of Queen Maries friends looking on. Then being asleep, she seemed to muse with her self whether her fire should burn so bright or no, and indeed her suffering was not far un∣like to her dream. Hugh Laverock Painter, an old lame man of sixty eight years, John Apprice a blind man, Martyrs, were burned at Stratford the Bow. In this discourse of this parcel or part or History, I know not whether more to marvell at the great and unsearchable mercies of God (with whom there is no respect in degrees of persons, but he chooseth as well the poor, lame, and blind, as the rich, mighty, and healthfull, to set forth his glory) or else to note the unreasonable, or rather the unnaturall doings of these unmercifull Catholicks (I mean Bishop Boner and his complices) in whom was so little favour or mercy to all sorts and kinds of men, that also they spared neither impotent age, neither lame nor blind, as may well appear by these poor creatures. They after their tryall and ex∣amination by B. Boner, were condemned and delivered
uno the civill power to be burnt. At their death the old lame man casting away his Couch, and comfort∣ing the blind men his fellow Martyr, said unto him, be of good comfot my brother, for my Lord of Lon∣don is our good Physitian, he will heal us both short∣ly, thee o thy blindnesse, and me of my lamenesse; & so patiently these two good Saints of God together suffered. After the burning of this lame and blind man were brought to the fire a Smithfield a widow and three maids, they constantly suffered for the cause of Christ There was also about this time a blind boy named Thomas Drowrie put to death at Glocheser, in his ex∣amination besides Doctor Williams then Chancellor of Glocester, amongst other Articles, he urged the Ar∣ticle to Transubstantiation, saying, dost thou not be∣lieve that after the words of Consecration spoken by the Priest, there remaineth the very real body of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, the blind Boy answer∣ed, that I do not. Then aid he, then thou art an He∣retick, and shall be burned, but who hath taught thee this heresie; Ye Mster Chancellor, when and where did I teach so, when ye preached, naming the day a Sermon to all men, as well as to me, upon the Sacra∣ment: Ye said, the Sacrament was to be received spi∣ritually by faith, & not carnally and really, as the Pa∣pists, have therefore taught. Then said the Chancel∣lord as I have done, and thou shalt live, as I do and escape burning. Then said the Boy though ye can so easily dispense with your self, & mock with God, the world, and your conscince; yet will I not so do, then said the Chancellor, God have mercy upon thee, for I will read the condemnatorie sentence against thee, Gods will be done, said he. The Register being here∣wih somewhat moved, stood up, & said to the Chan∣cellor, Fye fo shme man, will ye read the sentence against him and condemn your self: away, away, and
substitute some other to give sentence and judgement. No, said the Chancellor to the Register, I ill obey the Law, and give sentence my self according to mine of∣fice; and so he read the sentence condemnatory a∣gainst the Boy (with an unhappy tongue, and more an unhappy conscience) delievering him over to the Se∣cular power. So he was bought to the fire & burnt: who constantly suffered for the defence of the truth. There were burned at one fire at Stratford the Bow by London, eleven men and women, whole dwellings were in sundry places in Essex, the eleven men were tyed to three Stakes, & the two women looe in the midst without any Stake, and so were all burnt with such love to each others, and constancy in our Savi∣our Christ, that it made all the beholders to marvel. The Sheriff that attended upon them came to the one part, and told them that the other had recanted, and their lives theefore should be saved, willing and ex∣horting them to do the like, and not to cast away themselves. Unto whom they answered, that their faith was not builded upon man, but on Christ cruci∣fied. Then the Sheriff perceiving no good o be done with them, went to the other part, and said (like a liar) the like to thm, that they whom he had been with before had recanted, and should therefore not suffer death, counselling them to do the like, and not wilfully to kill themselves, but to play the wise men, &c. Unto whom they answered as their brethren had done before, that their faith was not builded on man, but on Christ and his sure word. The Martyrdome of a learned and vertuous young man called Julius Palmer, some time Fellow of the Magdalen Coledge in Oxford burned at Newberie. This young man in all King Edwrds daies when the Gos∣pel was preached & professed was a Papist within the University of Oxford and so obstinat that he did utter∣ly abhorre all godly prayer and sincere preaching
and almost of all them, with whom he lived, was therefore likewise abhorred, and (as I may say) pointed at with the finger, yet did after in Queen Maris time when the Gospel was surpressed, and the Masse let up, suffer most cruel death, so the Lord does call when and whom it pleases him, according to his good will and pleasure, and animats and streng∣thens them to give their life for his cause. When Palmer came to the fire and two other with him, they fell all three to the ground, and Palmer with an au∣dible voice pronounced the 31. Psalm, but the other two made their Prayers secretly to Almighty God And as Palmer began to arise there came behind him two popish Priests, exhorting him yet to recant and save his soul. Palmer answered and said, away, away, tempt me no longer, away I say from mee all ye that work iniquity, for the Lord hath heard the voice of my tears, and so forthwith they put off their rayment and went to the Stake, and kissed it, and when they were bound to the Post, Palmer said, good people Pray for us, that we may persevere unto the end, and for Christs sake beware of Popish teachers, for they deceive you. As he spake this, a servant of one of the Bailiffs threw a Fggot at his face, that the blood gushed out in diverse places, for the which fact the Sheriff reviled him, calling him cruel tor∣menter, and with his walking staffe brake his head that the blood ran about his ears. And when the fire was kindled and began to take hold upon their bodies, they lift their hands towards Heaven and quietly and chearfully, as though they had felt no smart, they cryed, Lord Jesus strengthen us, Lord Jesus asist us, Lord Jesus receive our souls. And o they continued without any strugling, holding up their hands, and knocking their hearts, and called upon Jesus untill they had ended their mortal lives. Among other things this is also to be noted that after
their three heads by force of the raging and devour∣ing flames of fire, were fallen together in a plump or cluster which was marvelous to behold, and that they all were judged already to have given up the ghost, suddenly Palmer as a man awaked out of sleep, mov∣ed his tongue and jaws, and was heard to pronounce this word, Jesu. So being resolved into ashes, he yeelded to God as joyfull a soul (confirmed with the sweet promises of Christ) as any one that ever was called beside to fuffer for his blessed Name. The Martyrdome of three women, with a young infant burned, to wit, the mother, her two daugh∣ters, and the child, in the Isle of Garnsey, for Christs true Religion, the year of our Lord 1556. Among all the Martyrdomes of this Book rehearsed, there is none almost either in cruelty to be compared, or so far off from all compassion and sense of humanity, as this mercilesse fact of the Papists done upon these women; their challenge was for not coming to the Church. Upon rash information given before their cause was tried, was condemned, and ordained o be burnt fo Hereticks, and notwithstanding that these three women were willing to be conformed to the Queens ordinances, were condemned; they made their appeal to the Queen, but could not be heard. One of the women being great with child, by the vehemency of the flame, the infant being a fair man child, fell into the fire, and eftsoones being taken out of the fire by one standing by, and was laid upon the grasse, then was the child had to the Provest, and from him to the Bayliff, who gave censure that it should be carried back again, and cast into the fire, and so was the child burnt; a mercilesse and barbar∣ous fact. Such was the bloody rage of persecution at this time that pared nither man nor woman, child wife, nor maid lame, blind, nor creeple. The Martyrdome of Joan Wast, a blind woman
from her birth, in the Town of Derbie, about the age of 22. years, burnt. In her examination before the B. and Doctor Draicot, and being asked sundry questions of them, and if she believed there things, answered, she believed as the holy Scriptures taught her, and according to that she had heard preached unto her by diverse learned men, whereof some suf∣fered imprisonment, and other some suffered death for the same Doctrine, among whom she named, beside others, Doctor Taylor, whom she said took on his conscience, that, that Doctrine was true, and asked of them if they would do so in like case for their Doctrine, which if they did not, she desired them for Gods sake not to trouble her, being a blind, poor and unlearned woman, with any further talk, saying (by Gods assistance) that she was ready to yeeld up her life in that faith, in such sort as they should appoint; for all this she is condemned and given over to the secular power tobe burnt. Doctor Draicot being appointed to preach at her execution, the blind woman being brought to the Church, and set before the Pulpit, where the Doctor entering the Sermon, he railed mightily against this poor blind woman, saying to the people that she was condemn∣ed for denying the blessed Sacrament of the Altar to be the very body and blood of Christ, really and sub∣stantially, and was thereby cut off from the body of the Catholick Church, and said that she was not only blind of the bodily eyes, but also blind in the eyes of her soul. And he said that as her body should be presently consumed with materiall fire, so her soul should be burned in hell with everlasting fire, assone as it should be separated from the body, and there to remain world without end. And said that it was no lawfull for the people to pray for her. And there∣after she was taken to the fire, which she constant∣ly endured praying to the Lord to have mercy upon her.
Follows a pitifull Story concerning the unmerci∣full handling of William Dangerfield, and Joan his wife, being in child-bed taken out of her house, with her sucking infant of fourteen dayes old, and laid in the common Jayle, amongst theeves and rob∣bers. There was in Gloccester, in the Parish of Wot∣ton, not far from Bristow, one Dangerfield, a right honest and godly poor man, who by his wife had nine children, and she now lying in child bed of the tenth. This William after he had been abroad from his house a certain space for fear of persecution, hear∣ing that his wife was brought to bed, repaired home to visite her, as natural duty required, and to see his children, she being now delivered four dayes before. The return of this man was not so soon known to some of his unkind and uncharitable neighbours, but they incensed with the spirit of Papistry, eftsoones beset the house about, and there took the said Willi∣am, and carried him to prison, and so at length was brought to the Bishop, being then Doctor Brooks, in whose cruell handling he remained a certain space so long till his legs were almost fretted off with irons. After the apprehension of the husband, the wife likewise was taken, with her young born child, be∣ing but fourteen dayes of her childbed and carried into the common Jayle, and there placed among theeves and murtherers, where both she and her poor innocent found so small charity among the Catholick men, that she could never come to any fire, but was driven to warm the cloaths that she should put about the child in her bosome. In the mean season while they lay thus inclosed in severall prisons, the husband and the wife, the B. practises with the man, and made him believe falsly that his wife had recanted, and so perswaded him likewise to recant, and so sub∣tilly drew out a form of recantation, and so likewise promised to recant, he being permitted to go to his
wife, he shewed this to her, whereat she was won∣derfully grieved, and lamented the fall of her hus∣band, and he lamented his promise made to the B. and to make his prayer to the Almighty God, and so departed he home to his house, whereby the way he took his death, and shortly after departed. After this Joan his wife continued still in prison with her little Infant, till at length also the child being staved for cold and famine, was sent away when it was past all remedy, and so shortly after died; and not long after the mother also followed, besides the old wo∣man which was Mother of the husband of the age of o years and upward, who being left in the house after their apprehension for lack of comfort there perished also, what became of their nine children it as uncertain. There were five famished at Canterbury Castle by the unmercifull tyranny of the Papists. There were at this time fifteen Martyres and con∣fessors together prisoned in the Castle of Canterbury, of which number not one escaped with their lite, but either were burned o else famished in prison. In the fifth year of Queen Marie there is an visitation com∣manded to bee holden by the Cardinall at the Uni∣versity of Cambridge and Oxford for, reformation of Religion, and any abuses and disorders that were there; many Bishops and Doctors with great pomp and solemnity were conveened there, among other things done there, they enter into processe against Martin Eucer, and Paulus Phagius for heresie, who were now dead and buried long ago, they are con∣demned for, heres, they are taken up, and their bones and books burned. When the country people saw this, Med to execution that were dead before partly deteed and abhorred the extream cruelty of the Commissioner toward the rotten Carcasses, and partly laughed at their folly in making such prepar∣ation
for their burning, for what needeth any weapon, said they, as though they were afraid that the dead bodies which felt them not, would do them some harm, or to what purpose serveth that chain wherewith they are tyed, since they might be burnt loose without any perill, for it was not to be feared that they would run away. And not only digged they up Peter Martyes bones and burnt them, but such was the despitefull handling and madnesse of the Papists towards his wife at Ox∣ford, that they took her out of her grave, at the com∣andement of Cardinal Pool, and after buried her in a dunghill, for they could not prove her to be an Here∣tick to burn her, but in the time of Queen Elizabeth she was taken out of that unclean and dishonest place where she lay, and solemnly in the face of the whole Town to bury her again in amore decent and honest monument. After this there is abloody commission given forth by King Philip and Queen Mary to persecute the poor members of Christ: There were many ap∣prehended, and at one time 22. prisoners were sent up together for Gods word to London from Colche∣ster, all whom bloody Boner B. of London was mind∣ed to have executed, by perswasion of the Cardi∣nal he was stayed. This Cardinal, was a Papist, but no bloody papist, alwayes for fear of stir among the people to see so many execute at once, upon a reason∣able submission were sent away again, yet the rage of the persecution ceased not, so that sometime ten at once, sometime seven, sometimes five ex∣cuted and burnt in Smithfield, and some in other parts of the Countrey. A certain woman being condemned of the Bishop to be burnt at Canterbury, had two children named Patience and Charity, who then said to the Bishop that if he would need burn her she trusted that he
would take and keep Patience and Charity, meaning her two children. Nay quoth the Bishop, by the faith of my body I will meddle with none of them both, for the Bishop will neither keep patience nor charity. At Colchester there were three men and three wo∣men burned in the forenoon, besides four other burned at afternoon. There that were put to the fire before noon they clapped their hands for joy in the fire, that the standers by which were very many, cryed generally all almost, the Lord strengthen them, the Lord comfort them, the Lord pour his mercies upon them, with such like words as was wonderfull to hear, thus yeelded they up their souls and bodies into the Lords hands for the testimony, of his truth. Cicely Ormes was burnt at Norwich, she was a very simple woman, but yet zealous in the Lords cause, she did for a twelve month before she was taken, recant, but never after was she quiet in con∣science untill she was utterly driven from all their Popery, between the time she recanted and that she was taken, she had gotten a letter made to give the Chancellor, to let him know that she repented her recantation from the bottome of her heart, and would never do the like again whilest she lived, but before she exhibited her bill, she was taken and sent to prison, and going to execution, she said unto the people, I would ye should not think of me that I believe to be saved in that I offer my self here unto the death for the Lords cause, but I believe to be saved by the death of Christs passion, and this my death is and shall be a witnesse of my faith unto you all here present. Good people, as many of you as believe as I believe, pray for me. Note well this saying of hers. Then she came to the Stake and kissed it, and said, welcome the sweet crosse of
Christ, and so gave her self to be bound thereto. After the Tormenters had kindled the fire to her, she said, my soul doth magnifie the Lord, and my spirit rejoyceth in God my Saviour. And in so say∣ing, she set her hands together, right against her breast casting her head and eyes upward, and so stood having up her hands by little and little, till the very sinews of her arms brast asunder, and then they fell, but she yeelded her life unto the Lord, and quietly as she had been in a slumber, or as one feel∣ing no pain. So wonderfully did the Lord work with her, his name therefore be praised for ever∣more. Amen. In this furious time of persecution was burned John Rough Minister, he was born in Scotland: At the age of 17. years he entred into the order of the black Friers at Sterling, he remained the space of 16. years, untill such time as the Lord Hamiltoun, Earle of Arrane, and Governour of the Realm of Scotland, casting a favour unto him, did sue unto the Archbishop of St. Andrews, to have him out of his professed order, that as a Secular Priest he might serve him for his Chaplaine. At which request the Archbishop caused the Provincial of that house, having thereto authority to dispense with him for his habit and order. This sute being thus by the Earle obtained, the said Rough remained in his her service one whole year, during which time it pleased God to open his eyes, and to give him some knowledge, and thereupon was by the said Gover∣nour sent to preach in the freedom of Air, where he continued four years, and then after the death of the Cardinal he was appointed to abide at St. Andrews, and there he had assigned unto him a yearly pension of twenty pound from King Henry the eight King of England; howbeit at last weying with himself his own danger, and also abhorring
with himself the idolatry and superstition of his countey, and hearing of the freedome of the Gos∣pel within the Realm of England, he went to Eng∣land in King Edwars time, and there was preferrd by the Duke of Somerset as a Preacher to serve at Calill, and other placs, but in the beginning of the raign of Queen Mary, he fled with his wife into Friesland, there labouring truly for his living, in knit∣ting of Capes, Hose, and such like things, till a∣bout the end of the moneth of October last before his death: At which time lacking yarn, and other ne∣cessarie provision for the maintenance of his occupati∣on, he came over again into England here to provide for the same, he joyneth himself to the Congre∣gation at London, and was there Minister, and there∣after he was betrayed and apprehended, and sent to Newgate, he is brought to his examination before Boner. After his examination he is condemned as an Heretick and degraded, exeeming him from all bene fits and priviledges of their Church, and com∣mitted his body to the Secular power. Touching him two things may be noted, first, he being in the north Countrey in the dayes of King Edward the sixth, was the mean to save Doctor Watsons life, who in Queen Maries time was Bishop of Lincoln, for a Sermon that he made there. The said Watson after that in the said dayes of Queen Mary, being with Boner at the examination of the said Mr. Rough, to requite the good turn in saving his life, detected him there to be a pernicious Heretick, who did more hurt in the north parts, then an hundred beside of his opi∣nion. Unto whom Mr. Rough said again, Why Sir? Is this the reward that I have for saving your life when ye preached erroneous Doctrine in the dayes of King Edward the sixth. 2. Being before Boner, among other talk, he affirmed that he had been twise at Rome, and there had seen plainly with his eyes which he many times heard of before namely, that
the Pope was the very Antichrist, for there he saw him carried on mens shoulders, and the false named Sacrament born before him, yet was there more re∣verence given unto him, then unto that which they counted to be their God, When Boner heard this, rising up, and making as though he would have torn his garments, hast thou (said he) been at Rome, and seen our holy father the Pope, and dost thou blas∣pheme him. After this sort, and with that flying upon him, he plucked off a piece of his beard, and after making speedy haste to his death, he burnt him half an hour before six of the clock in the morning, because the day (belike): should not be far spent be∣fore he had done a mischievous deed. Another note concerning John Rough is this, being at the burning of Austo in Smithfield, and returning homeward again, met with one Mr. Farrar a Mrchant of Hallifax, who asked him where he had been, unto whom he answered, I have been (saith he) where I would not for one of mine eyes but I had been. Where have you been said M. Farrer? Forsooth saith he, to learn the way; and so he told him he had been at the burning of Austo, where shortly after he was burned himselt. As also John Rough had a vi∣sion of his trouble before his death, the fryday be∣fore he suffered, he had a dream, in his sleep, the matter was this, he thought in his dream that he was carried forcibly to the Bishop, and that the Bishop plucked off his beard, and cast it into the fire, saying these words, now I may say that I have had a piece of an Heritick burned in my house, and so accord∣ingly it came to passe. Richard Gibson being brought our of prison unto his nal examination. Here is to be noted that Mr. Gibson being a very big and tall man, of a personable and heroical staure, was sent for of Boner by a little and short person, a promoter, like Robin Papst,
called Robin Caley, if it were not he himself. This Robin Caley having the conducting of the said Gen∣tleman from the Pultrie, would needs hale him through Cheapside, the Gentleman desiring him to turn some other way, but the more the Gentleman entreated the more fierce was the silly Jack upon him, and drawing and holding him by the arm, would needs hale him through the high street, that all the world might see what he could do in his office. Mr. Gibson desirous to be led without holding, willed and entreated him to let his arm loose, he would go quiet∣ly of his own accord with him whither he would, only craving that he might go by him freely without noting of the people: The sawcie and impotent miser the Promoter hearing this, nay, saith he, thou shalt not escape me, so come on thy wayes, thou shalt not choose but come, and so reaching at his arm would needs drag him to the Bishop The Gentleman content to go, yet loath to be notified in the streets, gently requested again and again that refraining his hold he would suffer him to go of his own free and voluntary will, he should not need to fear him, for he would not start from him. To whom the catiff looking upon his face, come on thy way, saith he, I will hold the fast spite of thy beard, and whether thou wilt or no. Mr. Gibson seeing and beholding the intollerable braging of the wretched miser, and moved therewith not a little, could bear no longer, but said, wilt thou not, said he, and ad∣deth moreover, bitterly looking down towards him, that if he did not incontinently pluck away his hand (and so stayed withall) he would immediatly wring his neck from his body whereupon Robin Papist the Romotor was fain to pluck away his hold, and so proceeded they to the Bishop. Next after, the Martyrdome of Mr. Rough Mini∣ster of the Congregation, succeeded in like Martyr∣dome
the Deacon also of the said godly company or Congregation in London, named Cuthbert Simson, being committed to fire. This Cuthbert Simson was a man of a faithfull and zealous heart to Christ and his true flock, insomuch that he never ceased la∣bouring and studying most earnestly, not only how to preserve them without corruption of the Popish religion, but also his care was ever vigilant how to keep them together without perill or danger of per∣secution, &c. And as Mr. Rough had a vision of him∣self touching his afflictions, so had he of this Deacon∣for he dreamed that he saw two of the Guard leading Cuthbert Simson Deacon of the said Congregation, and that he had the book about him, wherein were written the names of them all which were of the Congregation, whereupon being fore troubled and awaked, and called his wife to strike light, for I am much troubled with my brother Cuthbert this night, and giving himself to read upon his book a while, he fell asleep again: being asleep, he dreamed the like dream again, and awaked therewith, he said to his wife, my brother Cuthbert is gone. And as Mr. Rough was making himself ready to go to Cutbert to see how he did, in the mean time the said Cuthbert came in with the book concerning the names and ac∣counts of the Congregation, to whom he said he was fore troubled with him all night, and declared to, him his dream. After he had so done he willed him to lay the book from him, and so carry it no more about him, unto which Cuthber answered he would not so for dreams he faid were but fantasies and not to be credited. Then Mr. Rough straitly charged him in the Name of the Lord to do it, and so he left the book behind him. The next night following he had a dream of his afflictions, Simson is apprehended and sent to the Tower of London by the Counsel. And being there commanded to tell whom I did will to
come to the English service, he answered he would tell nothing, whereupon he was set in a rack of iron the space of three hours, then they asked him if he would tell them, he answered as before, then he was loosed, and carried to his lodging again. On the Sunday after he was brought into the same place a∣gain before the Leivtenant and the Recorder of Lon∣don, and being examined, he answered as he said be∣fore, then the Leivtenant did swear by God he should tell, then they bind his two fingers together, and, put a small arrow betwixt them, and drew it through so fast that the blood followed, and the arrow brake. Then they racked himtwise, but he would not con∣fesse. Now as touching this Cuthbert Simson, this further is to be noted, that Eoner in his Consistory, speaking of Cuthbert Simson, gave this testimony of him there to the people, saying, ye see this man (faith he) what a personable man he is, and after he had thus commended his person, added moreover; And as concerning his patience, I say unto you, if he were not an Heretick, he is a man of the greatest patience that ever yet came before me, for I tell you, he hes been thrise racked upon one day in the Tower, also in my house he hath selt some sorrow, and yet I ne∣ver see his patience broken, &c. It is thought and said of some that, that arrow which was grated be∣twixt his fingers being tyed together, was not in the Tower, but in the Bishops H.B, he is condemned sad burns in Smithfield, and two other with him. The day before this Simson was condemned, he be∣ing in the Stock, Cloney his Keeper cometh in with the keyes about nine of the clock at night, after his usuall manner to view his prison, and see whether all were present, when he spied the said Cuthbert to ly there, departed again, locking the doors after him within two hours after, about eleven of the clock toward midnight, the said Cuthbert, whether being
in a slumber, or being, awake, I cannot say, heard one coming in, first opening the outward door, then the second, afterward the third door, and so look∣ing, in to the said Cuthbert, having no Candle or Torch that he could see, but giving a brighnesse & ligh most comportable and joyful to his heart, say∣ing Ha unto him, and departed again: who it was he could not tell, neither I dare define, this that he saw himself, he declared four or five times to the said Mr. Austen, and to others, at the sight whereof he received such joyfull comfort, that he also expressed no little solace in telling and declaring the same. Roger Holland in his examination by Bishop Boner, propnefied thus, this I dare be bold in God to speak, which by his Spirit I am moved to say, that God will shorten your hand of cruelty, that for a time ye shall not molest his Church. And this shall ye in, short time well perceive, for after this day in this place shall there not be any by him put to the tryal of fire and fagot. And after this day there was never one that suffered in Smithfield for the restimony of the Gospel. So Roger Holland was the last that suf∣fered in Smithfield. This Loner was a bloody perse∣cutor, for in the space of three years he put three hundred to death. The last that suffered in Queen Maries time, were five at Carterbury burned about six dayes before the death of Queen Mary. Thir godly Martyrs in their prayers which they made be∣fore their martyrdome, desired God that their blood might be the last that should be shed, and soit was. Many were delivered by Gods providence from the fie in Queen Maries time, amongst others the Dchesse of Suffolk with her husband were preserv∣ed, and fled out of the Countrey. Great were the boubles of Lady Elizabeth in Queen Maries im her sister, being assly suspect of Sir Thomas Wyats rising, was sent for by the Queen
with great routs and bands, being armed men, as the greatest traitor in the world. And as at that time she was sick and not able to travel, and yet notwith∣standing they brought her to London, and not see∣ing the Queen she was clapped into prison into the Tower. And again tossed from thence from house to house, from prison to prison, at length also priso∣ner in her own house, and guarded with a sort of cut-throats, and was continually in fear and danger of her life. Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester and Chancello, was a great foe unto her, and sundry conspired against her, to take her life, but God gra∣ciously delivered her out of their hands, especially out of the hands of the Bishop of Winchester. being in prison at Woodstock in the hands of her enemies hearing upon a time a certain milk-maid singing plea∣santly, wishing her self to be a milk-maid as she was saying, that her case was better, and life more mer∣ry then was hers in that state as she was. At this time died the Bishop of Winchester, and so by Gods providence Lady Elizabeth was delivered from the snares and plots that by him was laid for her life; three years after the death of Winchester died Queen Mary. Queen Mary being long sick, died on the 17. day of November, Anno 1558. and the same day she died was Elizabeth proclaimed Queen. As touching the manner of her death, some sayes she died of a Tym∣pany, some by her much sighing before her death, supposed that she died of thought and sorrow. Whereupon the Counsell seeing her sighing, and de∣sirous to know the cause, to the end they might mi∣nister the more ready consolation unto her, feared, as they said, that she took that thought for the Kings Majesty her husband, which was gone from her. To whom she answering again, Indeed (said she) that may be one cause, but that is not the greatest wound
that pierceth my oppressed mind, but what that was she would not express to them, but afterward opened the matter now plainly to Mr. Rise &c. When I am dead and opened, ye shall find Caleice lying in my heart; she took though for the losse of Calice. There was more English blood shed in Queen Mar∣ies time for the space of four years, then ever was in any Kings raign before her, and so her raign was un∣prosperous to her and to all her Realm in all respects, for she had never good successe in any thing she went about. She raigned only five years and five moneths. The severe punishment of God upon the persecuters of his People, and enemies to his Word, with such also as have been blasphemers, contemners, and mockers of his Religion. LEaving now Queen Mary being dead and gone, I come to them which under her were the chief Ministers and doers in this persecution, the Bishops (I mean) and Priests of the Clergy, to whom Queen Mary gave all the execution of her power, as did Queen Alexandra to the Pharisees after the time of the Machabees, of whom Josephus thus writeth, Ipsa solum nomen Regium serebat, caeterum omnent Regni potestatem, Pharisaei possidebant that is, she only retained to her self the name and title of the Kingdome, but all her power she gave to the Pha∣risees to possesse, &c. Touching which Prelats and Priests here is to be noted in like sort the wonderfull and miraculous providence of Almighty God, which as he abridged the raign of their Queen, so he suffers them not o escape unvisited: First, beginning with Stephen Gardiner the Arch-persecuter of Christs Church, whom he took away about the midst of the
Queens Raign, or wose poysoned life and stinking end, for so much as suficient hath been touched be∣fore, I shall not need here to make any new rehear∣sall thereof. After him dropped others away also, some before the death of Queen Mary, and some after, as Mor∣gan Bishop of St. Davids, who sitting upon the con∣demnation of the blessed Martyr Bishop Farrar, and unjustly usurping his room, not long after was strick∣en by Gods hand after such a strange sort, that his meat would not go down, but rise and pick up a∣gain, sometimes at his mouth, sometimes blown out of his nose, most horrible to behold, and so continu∣ed till his death. Where note moreover, when Mr. Leyson being then Sheriff at Bishop Farrars burning, had fercht away the Cattel of the said Bishop from his servants house, into his own enstody, the cattel coming into the Sheriffs ground, diverse of them would never eat meat, but say bellowing and roaring and so died. Also Jstice Morgan who sare upon the death of the Lady Jane, and not long after the same fell mad, and was beseft of his wits, and so died, hav∣ing ever in his moth, Lady Jane, Lady Jane. Before the death of Queen Mary, died Doctor Dunning that bloody and wretched Chancellor of Norwich, he died suddenly. The like sadden death tell also upon errie Commissar of Norfolk, four dayes after Queen Maries dayes, he suddenly fell down to the ground with a heavy groan, and never stred after. The Bishop or Suffragan of Dover brake his neck falling down a pair of stairs in the Cardinals chamber at Greenwich, as he had received the Cardinals blissing. One John Cowper an Carpenter, an honest and godly man, that favoured Religion, and these that were religious, had a couple of fair Bullocks, one
William Fenning came to him to see if he would sell them, who told that he would not sell them, but keep them for his own house, then Fenning threatned him, and falsly accused him of high Treason. The words he charged him with were these, how he should pray that if God would not take away Queen Mary, that then he would wish the devil to take her away, upon this he was taken, and Fenning brought in two false witnesses against him, whereupon he was condemned to be hanged, quartered and drawn, leaving his wife and nine children behind him, and all their goods taken from them. In the Harvest after, one Greenwood that was one of his witnesses, as he was stacking corn, having his health, and fear∣ing no perill, suddenly his bowels fell out of his body, & immediatly most miserably he died, such was the terrible judgment of God to shew his dis∣pleasure against this bloody act, and to warn the rest by this his judgements to repentance. Doctor Goffery Chancellor of Salisbury died in the midst of his buildings. Moreover, as touching this foresaid Chancellor, here is to be noted, he had appointed, to call before him ninety persons to examine them by Inquisition, had not the goodnesse of the Lord and his providence thus prevented him by death, pro∣viding for his poor servants in time. So the heavy hand of God fell upon Bishop Thorn∣town Suffragan of Dover, abloody persecuter or the Saints of God, upon a Sunday, looking to his men playing at the bowls, fell suddenly in a Palsie, and so was had to bed, and being willed to remember God, yea so I do, said he, and my Lord Chancellor too, &c. And now to come from Priests to Ly∣men, we have to find in them also lesse terrible demonstrations of Gods heavy Judgement upon such as have been vexers and persecuters of his people. And first, of Mr. Woodroff Sheriff used much to
rejoice at the death of the poor servants of Christ, and so hard he was in his office, that when Mr. Rojers was in the Cart going toward Smithfield, and in the way his children were brought unto him, the people making a Lane for them to come, the Sheriff threatned to break the Carters head for staying the Cart, but what happened, he was not come out of his office the space of a week but he was stricken by the sudden hand of God, the one half of his body in such sort that he lay benummed and bedred, not able to move himself, but as he was lifted of others, and so continued in that infirmity the space of seven or eight years, till his dying day. Barton Bayliff of Crowland being instant to have the Mass set up, and threatning the Curat for not saying Mass. Not long after this, the Bayliff rode from home upon certain businesses, accompanied with one of his neighbours, and as they came riding to∣gether homeward again, a Crow sitting on a Wil∣low Tree took her flight over his head, singing after her wonted note, Knave, knave, and withall let fall upon his face, so that her excrements ran from the top of his nose down to his beard. The poyson∣ed scent and savour whereof so noyed his stomack, that he never ceased vomiting untill he came home, where with his heart was so sore, and his body so distempered, that for extream sicknesse he got him to bed, and so lying, he was not able for the stinch in his stomack, and painfull vomitting, to receive any relief of meat or drink, but cried out still, sorrow∣fully complaining of stink, and with no small oaths cursing the Crow that poisoned him. To make short he continued but a few dayes, but with extream pain of vomiting and crying, he desperatly died without any token of repentance of his former life. As James Abbes Martyr was led by the Sheriff toward his execution, diverse poor people stood in
the way, and asked their almes, he then having no money to give them, and desirous yet to distribute something amongst them, did pull off all his apparell saving his shirt, and gave the same amongst them, to some one thing, to sonme another: In the giving whereof he exhorted them to be strong in the Lord, and as faithfull followers of Christ to stand stedfast unto the truth of the Gospel, which he through Gods help would then in their sight seal and confirm with his blood: while he thus occupyed, a servant of the Sheriffs going by, and hearing him, cried out aloud unto them, and blasphemously said, Believe him not good people, he is an Heretick, and a mad man out of his wit, believe him not, for it is heresie that he saith. But immediatly after the fire was put to him, such was the fearfull stroak of Gods justice upon this blasphemous railer, that he was there presently in the sight of all the people stricken with a frenesie, who in his furious rage and madnesse casting off his shoes, with all the rest of his cloaths, cryed out unto the peo∣ple, and said, Thus did James Abbes the true servant of God, who is saved, but I am damned, and thus ran he round about the Town of Burie still crying out that James Abbes was a good man, and saved, but he was damned, &c. Clark, an open enemy to Gospel and all goodly preachers in K. Edwards dayes, hanged himself in the Tower of London. The great and notable papist called Torling Smith, of late fell down suddenly in the street and so died. Dalie the Promoter was eaten into his body with lice, and so died. Cox, and earnest Protestant in King Edwards days, and in Queen Maries time a Pastist and a Promoter going well and in health to bed, was dead before the morning. Alexander the Keeper of Newgate, a cruel enemy
to those that lay there fo Religion, died very miser∣ably, being so swollen that he was more like a mon∣ster then a man, and so rotten within, that no man could abide the smel of him. This cruel wretch to hasten the poor Lambs to the slaughter would go to Boner, Storie and othes, crying out, rid my prison, I am to much pestered with thee Hereticks. John Peter son in Law to this Alexandr, an horrible blas∣phemer of God & no lesse cruel to the said prisoners, rotted away, and so most miserably died, who com∣monly when he would affirm anything, were it true or false, used to say, if it be not true , I pray God I may root or die: with many moe who felt the stroak of his hand. To adde to these also the stinking death of Edmond Boner, commonly named the bloody Bishop of London, who not many years ago, in the time and raign of Queen Elizabeth, after he had long feasted and banquetted in Durance at the Marshal-sea, as he wretchedly died in his blind Popery, so as stinkingly and as blindly at midnight was he brought out and buried in the out-side of all the City amongst theevs and murtherers, a place right convenient for such a murtherer, with confusion and derision both of men and children, who trampl∣ing upon his grave, well declared how he was hated both of God and man. I might bring in here many moe, and forrain ex∣amples of Kings, Princes, and great men, of the wrath of God that hes pursued them, for persecut∣ing of the Professors of the Gospel, but I content me with these already rehearsed. After the death of Queen Mary succeeded Lady Elizabeth her sister to the Crown, a godly and religi∣ous Princess that brought much joy and happinesse to the Realm by her gracious and peaceable govern∣ment. The Queen immediatly at her entry haying heard
of the diversitie of opinions in certain matters of Religion amongst sundry of her loving subjects, and being very desirous to have the same reduced to some godly and christian concord by the advise of the Lords and others of the privy Counsell, as well for the satisfaction of persons doubtfull, as also for the knowledge of the very truth in certain matters of difference, to have a convenient chosen number of the best learned of either part, and to confer together their opinions and reasons, and thereby to come to some good and charitable agreement. And so there was named on the one side nine, and on the other nine On the Papists side were named the B. of Winchester, the B. of Lich, the B. of Chester, the B. of Carlill, the B. of Lincolne, Doctor Cole, Doctor Harpsfield, Doctor Langdale, Doctor Chedsey. On the Pretest∣ants side, o lt bn shed Peachers, Doctor Scorie, B of Chicester, Doctor Cox, Mr. Whythead. Mr, Grindal, Mr Horner, Doctor Sands, Mr. Gest Mr. Aimer, Mr Juel who were to confer and reason at Westminster upon certain questions or Articles of Re∣llgion to be proposed in presence of the Nobility, and Lords of his Majesties secret Counsel, the matter they should talk upon was comprehended in these three propositions under-specified. 1. It is against the Word of God, and the custome of the ancient Church to use a Tongue unknown to the people in common prayer and administration of the Sacrament. 2. Every Church hath authority to appoint, take away, and change Ceremonies and Ecclesisticall Rtes, so the same be to edification. 3. It cannot be poved by the Word of God that there is in the Masse offered up a Sacrifice propitiatory for the quik and the dead. It was hereupon fully resolved by the Queens Majesty, with the advise aforesid, that it should be in writting on both parts, for avoiding of much alteration in words, and in English, and each
of them should deliever their Writings to the other what were to be improved therein &c. And their writings were to be put in the English Tongue. Now after they had sitten one day in this conference, the second day it was broken up by the Papists default, for they would have the order inverted and altered, that was appointed and agreed upon. Afterward for this contempt so notoriously made, and dissolving of the Assembly , and the godly and most christian purposes of the Queens Majesty made frustrate, the B. of Winchester and Lincolne who shewed more fol∣ly then the other, were condinly committed to the Tower of London. Boner about this time B. of Lon∣don was committed to the Marshal-sea, whereas he both in his blind bloody Heresie, as also in his deserved captivity, long remained abiding the Queens pleasure. About this time at the beginning of the flourishing Raign of Queen Elizabeth, was a Parliament sum∣moned and holden at Westminster, wherein was much debating about matters touching Religion, and great study on both parts imployed, the one to retain still, the other to impugne the Doctrine & faction which before in Queen Maries time had been established. But especially here is to be noted, that though their lacked no industry on the papists side to hold fast that which they most cruelly from time to time had studi∣ed, and by all means practised to come by, yet not∣withstanding was the providence of God at that time, that for lack of the other Bishops, whom the Lord had taken away by death a little before, the residue that there were left could do the lesse. And in very deed, (God be praised therefore) did nothing at all in effect, although yet not withstanding their laicked in them neither will nor labour to do what they could, if their cruell ability there might have served. Al∣though in this Parliament then, some diversitie there was of judgement and opinion between parties,
yet notwithstanding through the mercifull goodnesse of the Lord, the true cause of the Gospel had the up∣per hand, the Papists hope was frustrate, and their rage abated, the order and proceedings of King Ed∣wards time concerning Religion was revived again, the Supremacy of the Pope abolished, the Articles of bloody statutes of Queen Mary repealed, briefly the furious fire-brands of cruell persecution which had consumed so many poor mens bodies, were now ex∣tict & quenched: Finally, the old Bishops deposed for that they refused the Oath in renouncing the Pope, and not subscribing to the Queens just and law∣full Titles, in whose roomes and places, were others put. The SCOTISH Martyrs. HAving spoken of the Martyrs of England, let us now speak of the Martyrs of Scotland. And first to begin with M. Patrick Hammilton Abbot of Ferm, he was a man nobly descended, for he was Nephew to the Earle of Aran by his Father, & to the Duke of Al∣bany by the Mother, and not much past twenty three years of age; this young Gentleman had travelled in Germany, and falling in familiarity with Martin Lu∣ther, Phi. Melanchton, Frances Lamberr & other learned men, was by them instructed in the knowledge of true religion; In the profession whereof he was so zealous as he was resolved to come back into his country, & communicate the light he had received unto others &c. under colour of conference he is brought to S. An∣drews & accused before the B. for maintaining erroni∣ous, points of doctrine, as that the corruption of sin re∣mains in children after their Baptisme. 2. That no man by the power of his free will can do any good. 3. That no man is without sin so long as he liveth, &c. After answer and censure of the Theologs of thee
Articles he maintained, is declared to be an heretick, and given over into the hands of the secular power to suffer punishment due to heresie. He was condemn∣ed by the secular Judge, and burnt alive: when he came to the place of Execution hee put off his gown, and gave it with his bonnet, coat and other apparrell to his servant, saying this stuffe will not help in the fire, yet will do thee some good, I have no more to leave thee, but the example of my death, which I pray thee keep in mind, for albeit the same be bit∣ter and painfull in mens judgement, yet is it the en∣trance to everlasting life which none can inherite that denieth Christ before this congregation. At his death the Friers vexed him bidding him convert, pray to our Lady, and say, salve Regina, but none was more troublesome then Fier Alexander Camp∣bell whom he often besought to depart and not to vex him, but when he would not cease, he said, wicked man thou knowest I am not an heretick, and that it is the truth of God for which I now suffer, so much thou diddest confesse unto me in privat, and thereup∣on I appeal thee to answer before the Judgement seat of Christ: his body was quickly conumed, for the fire was vehement, but the patience and constancy he shewed in his dying, stirred up such compassion in the beholders as many of them doubted not to say that he suffered an innocent, and was indeed a true Martyr of Christ. This opinion was further con∣firmed by the death of the Fer and that manner of it, for within a year and lsse, he fell into a frensie and died as one despeat; numbers were brought to the knowledge of he truth by his suffering. This Mr. Patrick Hammiltoun suffered martyrdom in the year of God, 1527 Under Jimes Beton Archbishop of St. Andrews d Chancelo r of the Kingdom. After the deh of Mr. Patrick Hammilton, his Brother german James Hammilton o Levingston was
accused likewise, but the King did cause convey him secretly out of the way. Also Kathren Hammilton his sister was accused, and being questioned upon works, she answered that none was saved by his works. Then John Spence spake to her of the works of con∣gruo and condigno, to which she answered, work here, work there, what kind of working is all this? no works can save me but Christs. At this the king being present laughed, and after conveyed her away secretly. One Henry Forrest a Monk of the order of Benet, and Cellet, as they spoke then, was also accused of Heresie, but without sufficient proof. Then he was sent to Walter Ange (whom Buchanan in his Satyr against the gray Friers called Langius) to be confess∣ed, Langius having asked him by way of confession what he thought of Patrick Hammilton, he answered that he was a good man, and that his articles were to be mantained. Lang discovers this simple mans confession, and this confession being taken for a suf∣ficient proof, the poor man was condemned to be burnt , and so he was immediatly after they degrad∣ed him according to their custome. As they were leading him to the execution place, he complained of the Frier who had betrayed him, and said let no man trust the false Friers after me, They were des∣pisers rof God and deceivers of men, they burnt him at the north style of the Abbey Church in Sr. An∣drews, that the hereticks of Angus might see the fire. Mr. Normend Gourley and David Straton were brought to tryal, and condemned, the one for deny∣ing Purgatory, and that the Pope should have no jurisdiction within Scotland, the other was charged with the same points, and further was accused for maintaining the Tithes were not due to Church-men, which point he denied, confessig that the tithes of ome fish which his servants had taken at sea being
too rigourously exacted, hee said that if they would have the tithes of the fishes, they should go and re∣ceive them where the stock was taken, & that he gave order to his servants to cast every tent fish they took into the sea, because he saw nothing but rigour would content the Church, these two were burnt at one stake as hereticks, between Leith and Edin∣burgh to the intent the inhabitants of Fife seeing the fire, might bee stricken with the more terrour and fear not to fall into the like. After the death of the foresaid Martyrs under James Betoun Archbishop of St. Andrews, consult∣ation was taken by the Bishops to proceed and to burn moe hereticks, for then men began liberally to speak of religion. A merry Gentle-man named John Lindsay familiar to B. James Betoun standing by when consultation was had, said, my Lord, if ye burn any more except ye follow my counsell, ye will utterly destroy your selves, if ye will burn them, let them be burnt in hollow Cellars, for the smoak of Mr. Patrick Hammilton hath infected as many as it blew upon. Thus it pleased God that they should be taunt∣ed in their own face. At this time when Normond Gourlay and David Straton were put to tryal and condemned, were sum∣mouned Sir William Kird, Adam Dayes Henry Kernes, John Stewart of Leith, with diverse others, such as Mr. William Johnstoun Advocat, Mr. Henry Henderson School-master of Edinburgh, of whom some compeared in the Abby Kirk of Halyrudhouse, and so abjured, and publickly burnt their Bills; the burning of the Bill was a sign of recantation, others compeared not, and therefore was exiled. About this time Mr. George Buchanan for some byting verses against the Franciscans, was command∣ed to prison, but he escaping by a window of the Chamber where hee was detained prisoner, whilest
the Keepers were fast asleep, fled into France, thus there passed few dayes wherein some one or other was not called into question for Religion, but the more hote the persecution was, the favourers of the truth did every day the more increase. The Archbishop James Betoun committed the charge of the Church affairs to his Nephew the Cardinal, who succeded in his place, for he was sickly himself, and not seen often abroad. In his time lived Mr. John Major, Hector Boeth. Gilbert Crab, and William Gregory, men of good learning, and worthy to be remembred. Hector Boethius was Principall of the Colledge of Aberdene, a great Philosopher, and much commended by Erasmus for his Eloquence and felicitie of ingenie. Buchanan who could well discern of learned men, speaking in a cert∣ain place of him, saith, quod non solum artium libera∣lium cognitione supraquam illa ferchant tempora insignis erat, sed etiam humanitate & comitate singulari prae∣ditus, that he was not only learned in the liberall Sciences above the condition of these times, but al∣so of an exceeding courteous and humane inclination, yet is he traduced by some of the English Writers for a fabulous and partiall Historian. But they who like to peruse his History, will perceive that is spok∣en out of passion and malice, and not upon just cause. Mr. John Mair wrote also the History of Scotland, and wrote upon the four Evangelists. Sir John Borthwick Knight, commonly called Captain Borthwick, who being accused of heresie (as the Papists call it, and cited therefore, and not ap∣pearing, and escaping into other Countreys, was con∣demned for the same, being absent, by the sentence of David Betown Archbishop of St. Andrews, and other Prelats of Scotland, and all his goods confis∣cat, and his Picture at last burned in the open Mar∣ket-place, the Articles whereupon he was accused
and condemned came to his hands whereunto he an∣swered very wisely and religiously, confuting them all. At this time also was Thomas Forret Priest, Frier John Kello, Frier Beverage, Duncan Simpson Priest, Robert Foster a Gentleman, with three or four other men of Striviling persecuted for the Gospel and testi∣mony of Christ. This Dean Thomas Forret preached every Sunday to his Parishoners the Epistle or Gos∣pel as it fell for the time, which then was a great no∣velty in Scotland, to see any man preach except a black Frier, or a gray Frier, and therefore the Friers envyed him, and accused him to be the B. of Dunkel, in whose Diocesse he remained, as an heretick, and one that shewed the mysteries of the Scriptures to the vulgar people in English, to make the Clergy detestable in the sight of the people. The B. of Dunkel named George Crighton, moved by the Friers instigation, called the said Dean Thomas, and said un∣to him, my Joy Dean Thomas, I love you well, and therefore I must give you my counsel how ye shall rule and guide your self. To whom Thomas said, I thank your Lordship heartily. Then the B. began this counsel on this manner, my Joy Dean Thomas, I am informed that ye preach the Epistle or Gospel every Sunday to your parishoners, and that ye take not the Cow nor the upermost cloath from your pa∣rishoners, which thing is very prejudicial to the Church-men, and therefore my Joy Dean Thomas, I would ye took your Cow and your upmost cloath or Mortuary as other Church-men do, or else it is too much to preach every Sunday, for in so doing ye make the people think that we should preach like∣wise; but it is enough for you when ye find any good Epistle, or any good Gospel that setteth forth the li∣berty of the holy Church, to preach that, and let the rest be▪ Thomas answered, My Lord, I think that
none of my parishoners will complain that I take not the Cow nor the uppermost cloath, but will gladly give me the same, together with any other thing that they have, and I will give and communicate with them any thing that I have, and so my Lord we agree right well, and their is no discord amongst us. And where your Lordship saith it is too much to preach every Sunday, indeed I think it too little, and also would with that you L. did the like. Nay, nay, Dean Thomas (saith my Lord) let that be, for we are not ordained to preach. Then said Thomas, when your L. biddeth me preach when I find any good Epistle, or a good Gospel, truely I have read the New Testament and the Old; and all the Epistles and the Gospels amongst them all I could never find any evil Gospel, or any evil Epistle, but if your L. will shew me the good Epistle, and the good Gospel, and the evil Epistle, and the evil Gospel, then I shall preach the good and ommit the evil. Then spake my Lord stoutly, and said, I thank God that I never knew what the Old and New Testament was (and of these words arose a proverb which is common in Scotland, ye are like the B. of Dunkelden that knew neither new nor old Law) therefore Dean Thomas I will know nothing but my Portuise and my Pontifi∣call: Go your way; and let be all these fantasies, for if ye persevere in these erroneous opinions, ye will repent it when ye may not mend it. Thomas said, I trust my cause is just in the presence of God, and therefore I pesse not much what do follow thereupon; and so my Lord and he departed at that time. And soon after a summonds was directed from the Car∣dinal of St. Andrews, and the said B. of Dunkelden upon the same Dean Thomas Forret, and upon two black Friers called Frier John Kello, and another call∣ed Reverage, and upon one Priest of Striviling called Duncan Simpson, and one Gentleman called Robert
Forrester in Stirling, with other three or four with them of the Town of Stirling, who at this day of their appearance, after their summonding, were condemned to the death without any place of recant∣ation (because, as was alledged, they were Here∣siarchs, or chief Hereticks, and teachers of Heresies, and especially because many of them were at the Brydell and Marriage of a Priest who was Vicar of Tillbodie beside Stirling, and did eat flesh in Lent, at the said Brydell, and so they were altogether burnt upon the Castle-hill of Edinburgh, where they that were first bound to the Stake, godly and marvellous∣ly did comfort them that came behind. At this time likewise were apprehended two of the Diocesse of Glasgow, the one named Jeremiah Russel a gray Frier, a young man of a meek nature, quick spirit, and good learning; and one Alexander Kennedy who passed not eighteen years of age, one of excellent wit in vulgar poesie. To assist the B. of Glasgow in that cruell judgement, or at lest to dip his hands in the blood of the Saints of God, were sent Mr. John Lawder, Mr. Andrew Oliphant, and Frier Mort∣man, servants to Satan, apt for that purpose. The day appointed to the cruelty approaching, the two poor Saints of God were persecuted before these bloody Boutchers. Grievous were the crimes that were laid to their charge, Kennedy at the first was faint, and gladly would have recanted, but while the place of repentance was denyed unto him, the Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of all comfort began to work in him, yea the inward comfort began to brust forth, as well in visage as in tongue and word, for his countenance began to be cheerfull, and with a per∣fect joy upon his knees, he said, O eternal God, how wonderfull is that love and mercy that thou bearest unto mankind, and unto me the most catiff and mi∣serable wretch above all others: for even now when
I would have denyed thee and thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, my only Saviour, and so have cast my self into everlasting damnation, thou by thine own hand hast pulled me from the very bottom of hell, and made me to feel that heavenly comfort, which takes from me that ungodly fear, wherewith before I was oppressed. Now I defy death do what ye please, I praise God I am ready. This godly and learned Jer∣remie railed upon by these godlesse Tyrants, answered this is your hour and power of darknesse. Now sit ye as Judges, and we stand wrongfully accused, and more wrongfully to be condemned, but the day shall come when our innocency shal appear, and that ye shall see your own blindnesse to your everlasting con∣confusion. Go forward and fulfill the measure of your iniquity. While that these servants of God thus behaved themselves, variance ariseth betwixt the B. and the beasts that came from the Cardinal: for the B. said, I think it better to spare these men then to put them to death, whereat the idiot Doctors offended, said, what will ye do my Lord? Will ye condemn all that my Lord Cardinall and the other Bishops and we have done? If ye so do, ye shew your self enemy to the Church and us, and so we will repute you, be ye assured. At which words the faithlesse man afraid, adjudged the innocents to die according to the desire of the wicked, and so they were burnt, constantly triumphing over death and Sa∣tan in the midst of the fire. The King at this time was ruled wholly by the Cardinal, and made a solomn vow that none should be spared that was suspect of heresie, yea although it were his own son, which put many into fear. The fearfull vision which the King had by night much terrified him, that he withdrew his mind wholly from the extremities on which the Clergy had set him.
The King died in the year of the Lord 1542. be∣ing overwhelmed with grief and passion for the losse of his Army received at Solway by the Englishes, he departed this life at Falkland in the 32. year of his age, some few dayes before he died, he had advertise∣ment that his Queen was deliveaed of a daughter at Linlithow, at which time it is said he brust forth in passion, saying, it came with a Laste (meaning the Crown) and will go with a Lasse, fie upon it, after which he was not heard to utter many words. The Earle of Arran, Lord Hammilton was chosen Regent and Governour of the Realm. At this time there was a certain act of Parliament made, giving priviledge to all men of the Realm of Scotland to read the Scripture in their Mother tongue and language, secluding neverthelesse all reasoning, conference, convocation of people to hear the Scriptures read or expouned. Which liberty of private reading being granted by publick proclamation, lacked not his own fruite, so that in sundry parts of Scotland there∣by were opened the eyes of the elect of God to see the truth, and to abhor the Papistical abominati∣ons. Now there was certain in St. Johnstoun that were apprehended and accused for transgressing the act of Parliament before expressed and then confer∣ence and assemblies in hearing and expounding the Scripture against the Tenor of the said act. All these were condemned and judged to death, as Robert Lamb William Anderson, James Hunter and his wife Helen Stirk and others, and that by an assise by violating as was alledged the act of Parliament in reasoning and conferring upon the Scripture, for eating flesh upon the dayes forbidden, for dishonouring of images, &c. There was great intercession made by the Town in the mean season, for the life of these persons afore∣named to the Governour who of himself was willing to have done that they might have been delivered.
But the Governour was so subject to the appetite of the cruel Priests, that he could not do that which he would, yea, they menaced to assist his enemies, and to depose him except he assisted their cruelty, the men were hanged, and the women drowned. Robert Lamb prophesied of the ruine and plague that came upon David Beton the Cardinal thereafter. The Martyrdome of Mr, George Wisher. This Mr. George was a brother of the house of Pittarrow in Merns, a great knowledge, &c. He made his chief resort in the Towns of Dundie and Montrose where hee taught publickly with great profite and applause. He is discharged from preach∣ing at Dundie, he goeth to the West where the Arch∣bishop of Glasgow seeketh to apprehend him. In end he is apprehended and put to his tyall, and con∣demned to be burnt as an heretick. As he came forth of the Castle gate, there met him certain beggars ask∣ing his almes for Gods sake. To whom he answer∣ed I want my hands wherewith I should give you almes, but the mercifull Lord of his benignity and aboundance of grace that feedeth all men vouchafe to give you necessaries both unto your bodies and souls, then afterward met with him two false fiends, I should say Friers, saying, Mr. George pray to our Lady that she may be Mediatrix for) on to her Son, to whom he answered meekly, cease tempt me not my brethren. After this he was led to the fire with a rope about his neck, and a chain of iron about his midle. After his prayer made to God, and his ex∣hortation to the people, the hangman that was his tormentor, ate down upon his knees, and said, sir, I pray you forgive me, for I am not gullty of your death, to whom he answered, come hither to me, when that he was come to him, he kissed his cheek, and said, Lo here is a token that I forgive thee, my heart do thy office, and by and by he was put upon the
Gibbet and hanged, and there burnt to powder. At his execution he prophecies of the Cardinals death, he who from you higher place beholdeth us with such pride, shal within few dayes lye in the same as ignominiously, as now he is seen proudly to rest him∣self. The Cardinals death is conspired by Normond Lesly brother to the Earle of Rothesse, John Lesly his Unckle, William Kirkaldy of Grange, Peter Carmichel of Fyfe, and James Melvill one of the house of Carnbie they met at St. Andrews, and entered into the Car∣dinals chamber and killed him in his chamber. The people of the town crying for a sight of the Cardinals corpes, was brought to the very same place where he sat be holding Mr. George Wishart his execution, many then did call to mind the Martyr his last words were thereby confirmed in the opinion they had of his piety and holinesse. After this David Betoun succeeded John Hammil∣ton Archbishop of St. Andrews, who to the intent that he would in no wayes appear inferiour to his predecessor in augmenting the number of the holy martyrs of God in the next year following, called a certain poor man to judgement whose name was A∣dam Wallace, he was accused for teaching, saying and teaching of abominable heresies which are parti∣cularly lad to his charge, as first thou hast said and taught that the bread and wine on the Altar, after words of consecration, are not the body, and blood of Christ. He turned to the L. Governor, who was there present with a number of Noblemen, and of the Cergy, saying, I said never, nor taught nothing but that I found in this book and writ (having there a Bible at his belt, in French, Dutch and English) which is the word of God, and if ye will be content that the Lord God and his word be judge to me, and this his holy writ, here it is, and where I have said wrong, I shall take what punishment ye shal put to
me, for I never said nothing concerning this that I am accused of, but that which I find in this write, &c. They gave forth sentence and condemned him by the Laws, and so left him to the hands of the secular power in the hands of S. J. Campbl Justice Deputy, who delivered him to the Provst of Edenburgh to be burnt on the Castle-hill, who incontinent made him to bee put into prison with Irons about his legs and neck. At his forthcomming the Provest with great menacing words forbade him to peak to any man, or any to him, as belike he had commandment of his superiors. Comming from the town to the Castle∣hill, the common people said, God have mercy up∣on him, and on you said he; being beside the fire, he lifted up his eyes to heaven twise or thrise, and said to the people, let it not offend you that I suffer the death this day for the truths sake, for the Disciple is not above his Master. Then was the Provest angry that he spake then looked he to Heaven again and said, they will not let me speak. The cord being about his neck, the fire was lighted, and so departed he to God constantly and with good countenance to our sights. There arose in Scotland about this time a Schisme for the Pater Noster, by reason of a Sermon of Rich∣ard Marshall a black Frier, teaching that the Pater Noster should not be said to Saints, whereupon the Doctors of the University of St. Andrews, together with the gay Friers who long ago tught the people to pray the Pater Nster to Saints, had great indig∣nation, that their old Doctrine should be repugned, and stirred up a gray Frier called Toitts to preach a∣gain to the people that they should and might pray the Pater Nostr to Saints: Upon this followed in∣continent a dangerous schisme in the Church of Scot∣land, for not only the Clergy but the whole people were divided among themelves, one defending the
truth, and another the Papistry, in such sort, that there arose a Proverb, to whom say ye your Pater Noster. And although the Papists had the upper hand as then, whose works were almost holden for Law, so great was the blindnesse of that age, yet God so inspired the hearts of the common people, that so many as could get the understanding of the words of the Lords Prayer in English, which was then said in Latine, utterly detested that opinion, holding that it should be in no wayes said to the Saints, so that the Craftsmen and their servants in their Booths, when the Friers came, exploded him with shame enough, cry∣ing Frier Pater Noster, Frier Pater Noster, who at last being convict with his own conscience, was a∣shamed of his former Sermon, was compelled to leave the Town of S. Andrews. Shortly the Christi∣ans were so hotly offended, and the Papists on the other side so proud and wilfull, that necessary it was to eschew greater inconveniences, that the Clergy at last should be assembled to dispute and conclude the whole matter, that the Lay people might be put out of doubt, which being done, and the University agreed, whosoever had been present might have heard much subtill Sophistry, for some of the popish doctors affimed that it should be said to God formal∣iter, and to Saints materialiter, others ultimate & non ultimatè: Others said i should be sid to God Principaliter, and to Saints minus Principaliter; Others that it should be said to God Primarie, and to Saints Secundarie Others that it should be said to God Capiendo stricte, and to Saints Capiedo large. Which vain distinctions being heard and considered by the people, they that were simple remained in greater doubtfulnesse then they were in before, so that a well aged man and a servant to the Superiour of St. Andrews, called the Subprior Thome, being demand∣ed to whom he said his Per Noster, he answered
to God only. Then he asked again what should be said to the Saints, he answered, give them Aves and Creeds enough in the devils name, for that may suf∣fice them well enough, albeit they do not spoil God of his right. Others making their vaunt of the Doctors, said, that because Christ (who made the Pater Noster) never came into the Isle of Britain, and so understood not the English tongue, therefore it was that the Doctors concluded it should be said in Latine. This perturbation and open slander yet de∣pending, it was thought good to call a Provinciall Counsel to decide the matter, which being assembl∣ed at Edinburgh, the Papists being destitute of reason, defended their parts with lies, alleadging that the Univeasity of Paris had concluded that the Lords prayer should be said to Saints, but because that could not be proved and that they could not prevail, by reason they used their will in place of reason, and sometime despitefull and injurious talk. As Frier Scot being asked of one to whom he should say the Pater Noster, he answered, saying, say it to the devil knave. So the Counsel perceiving they could profit nothing by reasoning, they were compelled to passe voting▪ that is to the numbering of votes. But then inconti∣nent they that were called Church-men were found divided and repugnant among themselves, for some Bishops with the Doctors and Friers consented that the Pater Noster should be said to Saints, but the Bi∣shops of Sr. Andrews Caithnes and others with other moe learned men refused utterly to subscribe the same. Finally with consent of both parties, commis∣sion was given by the holy Church to Dan John Winram then Superior of St. Andrews to declare to the people how and after what manner they should pray the Lords prayer, who accepting to the Com∣mission declared that it should be said to God, with some other restrictions which are not necessary to be
put in memory, and so by little and little the bruit and tumult ceased. Queen Dowager past by sea to France and took with her diverse of the Nobility of Scotland, with diverse Barrons and Gentlemen and many others. The Dowager had to practise somewhat with her brethren the Duke of Guise and the Cardinall of Lor∣rane, the weight whereof the Governor after felt, for shortly after her return was the Governor depos∣ed of his government (justly by God, but most un∣rustly by man) and she made Regent in the year of our Lord 1554. She was an deadly enemy to the Gospell. In the cruel persecution used by Queen Mary of England, were godly men dispersed into diverse na∣tions, of whom it pleased the goodness of God to send some unto us for our comfort and instruction. And first came a simple man William Harlaw, whose erudition, although it excelled nor, yet for his whole and diligent plainnesse in doctrine is he to this day worthy of praise, and remains a faithfull member within the Church of Scotland. After him came that notable man John Willock as one that had some commission o the Q. Regent from the Dutchesse of Emden, but his principal purpose to assay what God would work by him in his native country. These two did some times in several companies assemble the Brethren, who by their exhortations began greatly to be encouraged, and did shew that they had an earnest thrist of godlinesse. And last came John Knox, who bot privatly and publickly preach∣ed the word of God. John Knox returned again to France to visite that little flock of his which he had in Geneva of the Englishes, which the wickednesse of men had com∣pessed him to leave. Immediatly after his going away the Bishop summoned him for non-appearance, burnt
him in Effigie at the Cross of Edinburgh in the year of our Lord 1555. from the which unjust sentence the said John made his appellation, and caused to print the samine, and directed it to the Nobility and Commons of Scotland, which is yet to be seen. But John Willock returning again from Emden and others, as William Harlaw, John Dowglas, and others, be∣gan in Edinburgh and others Towns of the Country publickly to exhort. The Nobility and Gentry and others, being by them godly instructed and comfort∣ed, they keep their conventions, and held Coun∣sels with such gravity and closnesse, that the enemies trembled. The Images were stollen away in all parts of the Countrey. And in Edinburgh was that great Idol called St. Gile, or Sanctus Egidius, first drown∣ed in the north Loch, after burnt, which raised no small trouble in the Town, for the Friers rooping like Ravens upon the Bishops, the Bishops ran up∣on the Queen, who to them was favourable enough, but that she thought it could not stand with her ad∣vantage to offend such a multitude as then took upon them the defence of the Gospel, and the name of Protestants, and yet consented she to summond the preachers, whereat the Protestants neither offended, nor yet thereof afraid, determined to keep the day of summonds, as that they did, which perceived by the Prelats and Priests they procured a Proclamati∣on to be publickly made that all men that were come to the town without commandement of the authori∣ty should with all diligence repair to the Borders, and there remain fifteen dayes, for the Bishop of Gal∣loway in this manner of ryme said to the Queen, Madam because they are come without order. I rid you send them to the Border. Now had God so provided that the quarter of the West-land (in the which was many faithful men) was that same day re∣turned from the Border, who understanding the
matter to proceed from the malice of the Priests, as∣sembled themselves together and made passage to themselves, till that they came to the very privie Chamber, where the Qeen Regent and the Bishop were. The Gentlemen began to complain upon their strange entertainment, considering that her Majesty had found in them so faithfull obedience in all things lawfull. While the Queen began to craft a zealous and bold man James Chalmers of Gaithgyrth said, Madame, we know that this is the malice and device of the Iewels, and of that Bastard (meaning the Bishop of St. Andrews) that standeth by you, we avow to God we shal make a day of it, they op∣press us and our Tennants, for feeding of their idle bellies, they trouble our Preachers and would mur∣ther them and us, shall we suffer this any longer? no Madame it shal not be, and therewith every man put on his stee bonnet. There was heard nothing of the Queens part but my joyes, my hearts, what ailes you, me meanes no evill to you nor to your preachers, the Bishops shall do you no wrong, ye are all my loving subjects, I know nothing of this proclamation; the day of your Preachers shall be discharged, and we will hear the controversie that is betwixt the Bishops and you, they shall do you no wrong. My Lords (said she to the Bishops) I forbid you either to trouble them or their preachers, & un∣to the Gentlemen who were wondrously commoved, she turned again and said. O my hearts, should you not love the Lord your God with all your heart & with all your minds, and should ye not love one another as your selves: With these and the like words she keep∣ed the Bishops from buffers that time, and so the day of summonds being discharged, began the bre∣thren universally further to be encouraged, but yet could the Bishops in no fort be quiet, for St. Geils day approaching, they gave charge to the Provest
Baillies and Counsell of Edinburgh, either to get a∣gain the old St. Gile, or else upon their expenses to make a new Image. The Counsel answered that to them the charge appeareth very unjust for they un∣derstood that God in some places had commanded idols and Images to be destroyed, but where he had commanded Images to be set up, they had not read, and desired the Bishop to find a warrand for his com∣mandement. Whereat the Bishop offended, admo∣nished under pain of cursing which they prevented by a former appellation, appealing from him as a partial and corrupt Judge unto the Popes holinesse, and so great things following that passed in oblivion. Yet would not the Priests and Friers cease to have that great Solemnity and manifest abomination which they accustomedly had upon St. Giles day, to wit, they would have that Idole born, and therefore was all preparation duly made. A Marmouset Idol was borrowed from the Gray-friers, Thus the Priests and the Friers carried with Tabors and Trumpeters, Bnners and Bg-pipes, and who was there to lead the ring, but the Queen Regent her self with all her shavelings for honour of that feast, well, about go∣eth it, and cometh down the high street to the Bow. The Queen Regent dyned that day in Alexander Carpenter his house, betwixt the Bowes, and so when the idol returned back again, she left it and past into her dinner. The hearts of the brethren were won∣derfully inflamed to see such abomination so manifest∣ly maintained, and so immediatly after that the Q. was entered into the lodging, some of them drew nigh unto the Idol, and willing to help to bear him, and getting the ferror upon his shoulders, &c. And some began to cry, down with the idol, down with it, and then without delay, it was pulled down and broken, the Priests and Friers fleed. Queen Regent laid up this amongst her other inventions, till that
she might have seen the time proper to have reveng∣ed it. After this some Noblemen, and Barrons, and others resolving upon a Reformation of Religion, their petitions put up to the Queen Regent taking no effect, joyning in Counsel, did bind themselves by oaths and subscriptions to assist one another, and hazard their lives and substance to advance the cause of Religion, and so proceed peace and peace till the Reformation was established. Shortly after these things, that cruel tyrant, and unmerciful hypocrite, falsly called B. of St. Andrews apprehended that blessed Martyr of Christ Jesus Walter Mill, a man of decreeped age, whom most cruelly and unjustly he put to death by fire in St. An∣drews in the year of God, 1558. Which thing did so highly offend the hearts of all godly, that immedi∣atly after his death, began a new fervency among the whole people, yea, even in the Town of St. Andrews, began the people plainly to condemn such unjust cru∣elty, his constancy moved so the hearts of many, that the B. steward of his Regality, Provest of the Town called Patrick Lermond refused to be his tem∣porall Judge, to whom it appertained if the cause had been just. Also the B. Chamberlane beeing therewith charged, would in no wayes take upon him so un∣godly an office, yea, the whole Town were so of∣fended with his unjust condemnation, that the B. servants could not get for their money so much as one cord to tye him to the Stake, or Tar-barrel to burn him, but were constrained to cut the cords of their own masters Pavilion to serve their turn. Neverthe∣lesse one servants of the B. more ignorant and cruel then the rest, called Allexander Somervel interpry∣sing the office of atemporal judge in that part, con∣veyed him to the fire. While he was exhorting the people, there was geat mourning and lamentation of the multitude, for they perceiving his patience,
stournesse and boldnesse, constancy and hardinesse were greatly moved and stirred up, and their hearts mightily inflammed for him. This Walter Mill was the last Martyr that died in Scotland for Religion, and his death, the every death of Popry in this Realm. John Knox returns again from Geneva to Scotland and joynes himself to the congregation (for the Re∣formers of Religon at this time were called the con∣gregation (he preached to them at Perth where the Reformation began. The people having heard how odious idolatry was in Gods presence, what com∣mandment he had given for the destruction of the Monuments thereof, and what idolatry and what abomination was in the Masse, they were so inflam∣med, that neither could the exhortation of the Preachers, nor the commandment of the Magistrat stay them from destroying the place of idolatry. So the Monastry at Perth was demolished, the Charter∣house a building of exceeding cost and largnesse was not only ruined, but the stones and timber so quick∣ly taken away, as in lesse then two dayes space a ve∣stige thereof was scarce remaining to be seen, the Images were publled down at Cowper in Eyfe, which the Curat took so heavily as the night following, he put violent hands in himself, And so the Images & Altars, and Monasteries were demolished through∣out the Country, and by the just judgement of God in the same place where Walter Mill was burnt, the Images of the great Church of the Abbey which passed both in number and costlinesse were burnt as the rest were. When Q. Regent heard what was done at Perth she was so inraged that she did vow utterly to destroy St. Johnston Man, Woman and Child; and to consume the same by fire, and the re∣after to salt it in sign of a perpetuall desolation. The congregation labours to pacifie the Q. Regents rage
by their Letters directed unto her, but her rage and the Priests could not be stayed, but forward they move against these, who then were in St. Johnston a very few and mean number of Gentlemen, who perceiving the extremity to approach, did write to all their brethren to repair toward them for their re∣lief, to the which they found all men so ready bent, that the work of God was evidently to be espied; for the Earle of Glencarn and the brethren of the West, came with all haste for the relief of St. Johnston, by whose presence the tyranny of the enemy was bridl∣ed. There is an appointment concluded between Q. Regent and them, and so the Lords departed out of the Town, but before their departure they make a new Covenant to concur and assist one another for the mentinance of Religion. The Q. entered into the Town, the Duke Monsieur Dosel, and the Frenchmen, who in discharging their volley of Har∣quebuts, killed a Son of Patrick Murray about ten or twelve years of age, who being brought to the Q. presence, and understanding whose Son he was, said, It is pity it chanced on the Son and not on the Father, but seeing it is so chanced, we cannot be against fortime. She erects idolatry against the ap∣pointment. The Q. began to rage against all god∣ly and honest men, their houses were oppressed by the French, the lawful Magistrats as well Provest and Billies were unjustly and without all order de∣posed from their Authority. She left four colours of the Souldiers to abide in the Town to mantain ido∣latry and to ressist the congregation, and so she left the Town in extream bondage, but shortly after from this bondage was the Town delivered by the Congregation, and the French forced to leave the Town, and made parent to all the Kings subjects. When the Nobility and Gentry and others of the Congregation saw that their just petitions was reject∣ed
of Queen Regent for Reformation of Religion, and strangers brought in to suppresse them, their commonwealth and posterity, Idolatry mantained, and Christ Jesus his true Religion despised, while idle bellies and bloody tyrants the Bishops maintain∣ed, and Christs true Messengers persecuted, while finally vertue contemned & vice extolled, and while that a great part of the Nobility and Commonallity are most unjustly persecuted, after consultation and good advice, they deprive her from all regiment and authority amongst them, and this was divulga by sound of Trumpet at the Mercat crosse of Edin∣burgh, and proclamed by officers of Arms in head Burrows within the Realme of Scotland. The day following all the Souldiers in Leith, French and Scots are summoned by sound of Trumpet to de∣part out of Leith within the space of 12. hours: de∣fyance is given; whereupon there was Skirmishing without great slaughter, and preparation of Scalls and Ladders was made for the assault, which was concluded by common consent of the Nobility and Barrons. The French Souldiers issued many a time out of Leith and did great harm through the Coun∣try, the Congregation not able to suppresse them & Queen Regent her faction, they were constrained to implore the Q. of England her aid and support, which she most willingly granted upon certain con∣ditions specified in a Treaty past at Barwick betwixt the Duke of Norfolk, Lievtenant to her Majesty on the one part, and certain of our Commissioners on the other part. The Army she sent by Land was esteem∣ed ten thousand men, the Town is assaulted. The Queen Regent sate all the time of the assault (which was both terrible and long) upon the fore-wall of the Castle of Edinburgh, and when she perceived the overthrow of us, and that the Ensignes of the French were again displayed upon the walls, she did laugh
heartily, and said, now I will go to the Masse and praise God for that mine eyes have seen. The French proud of the victory, stripped naked all the slain, & laid their dead carcasses before the Sun along the wall, where they suffered them to ly more dayes then one. And here we may see the inhumanity of the mercilesse French. The siedge is continued, and 2000. fresh men sent for that purpose, which the Camp greatly comforted, began to forget the former discomfiture, and to sustain the daily Skirmishing as they did be∣fore. In the which the French after the day of the as∣sault, did ever receive the hurt and the repulse. At this time Queen Regent sickned, and shortly thereafter she finished her life, unhappy to Scotland from the first day she entred into it, untill the day she departed this life, which was the 9. day of June, in the year of God 1560. Upon the 16. day of June, after the death of the Q. Regent, came into Scotland Monsieur Randam, and with him the B. of Valance in commission from France to negotiate a peace, from England there came Sir William Cecill chief Secretary, & Doct. Whitton their negotiation was long some, for both England and we fearing deceit, sought by all means that the Contract should be sure: In end peace was concluded and pro∣claimed, and sudden provision was made for trans∣porting of the French to France. The English Army departed by Land, the most part of our Nobility Pro∣testants honourably conveyed them (as in very deed they had well deserved) but Lord James would not leave the Lord Gray with the other Noblemen of Eng∣land till that they entered into Berwick. After whose r turning the Counsel began to look as well upon the affairs of the Common-wealth as upon the matters that might concern the stability of Religion. And first of all there is publick thanksgiving to God for their delivery, and the Ministers distributed as the
necessity of the Countrey required. And so was John Knox appointed to Edinburgh, Christopher Good∣man, (who the most part of the troubles had remain∣ed at Air) was appointed to St. Andrews, Adam Herriot to Aberdene, Mr. John Row to St. Johnstoun, Paul Messen (to whom was no infamy then known) to Jedburgh, William Christison to Dundee, David Fer∣guson to Dumfermling, & Mr. David Lindsay to Leith. There were nominated for Superintendents & over∣seers, that all things should be carried in the Church with order and well, Mr. John Spotswood for Lothian, Mr. John Winram for Fyfe, Mr. John Willock for Glas∣gow, the Laird of Dun for Angus, and Merns, Mr. John Carswell for Argyl and the Isles, these to be elected at the dayes appointed, unless that the Coun∣treys whereto they were to be appointed, could in the mean time find out men more able and sufficient, or else shew such causes as might disable them from that imployment. The sum of the Doctrine that they were to establish & maintain was drawn up in plain and se∣veral heads, as most true and necessary to be believed, and to be received within the Realm, which was pre∣sented to the Parliament; and by them confirmed, rati∣fied and approven as wholsome and sound Doctrine, grounded upon the infallible truth of God. Also at the same time in the Parliament there was an act made against the Masse, & the sayers & the hearers thereof, & the abuse of the Sacraments. And an act for the a∣bolishing of the Pope and his usurped authority in Scotland. The 19. day of August 1561. betwixt seven & eight hours before noon arived from France, Mary Queen of Scotland then widow, her husband the King of France then being dead, she is received with great mirth & joy, but the Sunday thereafter, the 24. of August when that preparations began to be made for that Idol of the Masse to be said in the Chapel, the godly be∣gan to be offended & displeased thereat, & to cry out
against it, and openly to say, shall that Idol be suffer∣ed again to take place within this Realm? It shall not be. The Lord Lindsay (then but Master) with the Gentlemen of Fyse and others, plain cried in the Closse or Yard, the idolatrous Priests should die the death according to Gods Law, the godly departed with grief of heart, and after noon repaired to the Abbey in great companies, and gave plain signifi∣cation that they could not abide the Land which God by his power had purged from idolatry, should in their eyes be polluted again. Great pains and travel was taken by the Nobility & the Church to move the Queen to renounce the Mass, but could never prevail with her, but were forced to suffer her to enjoy it. In the year of God 1564, about the midst of July (the dispensation of the Marriage being brought from Rome) the Queen was espoused to the Lord Darnley after the Popish manner in the Chapell of Halyrudhouse, by the Dean of Restalrig, and the next day he was by the sound of Trumpet proclaim∣ed King, and declared to be associated with her in the Government. The slaughter of Signeur Davie is conspired. Di∣verse tails were brought to the King of the neglect & contempt that he was holden in, & of the great respect carried to the stranger, the vanity and arrogancy of the man himself was likewise so great as not content to exceed the chief of the Court, he would outbrave the King in his apparrel, in his Domestick furniture, in the number and sorts of his horses, and in every thing else, so as no speech was for the time more common and current in the countrey then that of Davies greatnesse, of the credit and honour where∣unto he was risen, and of the small account that was taken of the King, this the King taking in heart, he did open his grief to his Father, who advised him to assure the Nobility at home, and to recall these that
were banished in England, which done he might easily correct the insolency, and aspyring pride of that base fellow. The slaughter of Davie was this: The King taking of the Lord Ruthven with him, who was but lately recovered of a feaver, and follow∣ed by four or five men at most, entred into the room where the Queen sat at supper, Ruthven seeing Davie at the table (for the Queen was accustomed when she supped private, to admit others to sit by her) and that night the Countesse of Argyle and beneath her Davie was placed, commanded him to arise and come forth for the place where he sat did not beseem him. The Queen starting up hastily, went hastily between Davie and Ruthven to defend him, and Davie clasping his hands about her midle, the King laboured to loose them, willing her not to be afraid, for that they were come only to take order with that villane. Then was he dragged down the stairs to the Gallery, where Morton with his company was walking, there they set upon him, and striving who should give the first stroak, killed him with many wounds. The con∣spirators fleed into England. The King by sound of Trumpet at the Mark Crosse of Edinburgh protest∣ed his innocency, denying that ever he gave his con∣sent to his death, yet was the contrary known to all men, so as this served only to the undoing of his re∣putation, and made him find few or no friends there∣after to aid him in his necessity; Inquisition being made for the murtherers, Thomas Scot Sheriff-De∣pute of Perth and servant to the Lord Ruthven, with Sir Henry Zair sometimes a Priest, being apprehend∣ed, were after tryall hanged and quartered. Many for not appearing were denounced rebels. In all this proceeding there was none more earnest or forward then the King, notwithstanding whereof the hatred of the fact lay heavy upon him, nor could he ever after this again recover his former favour with the Queen.
Anno. 1566. the 19. of June, betwixt nine and ten of the Clock in the evening the Q. was brought to bed of a son to the exceeding joy of the Subjects, for which the Nobles and whole people assembled the next day in the Church of St. Geils, gave solemn thanks to God. The Queen waxing strong went by water to Alla∣way, a house belonging to the Earl of Mar, and keeped private a fw dayes. In that place brake out first her displeasure against the King her husband, for he followed her thither, was not suffered to stay but commanded to be gone. And when at anytime after he came to Court, his company was so loathsome unto her, as all men perceived she had no pleasure nor content in it, such a deep indignation had possessed her mind, because of the disgrace offered to her in the slaughter of her man Davie, the envy whereof was all laid upon the King as she would never digest it. Pre∣paration is made for the Princes Baptism, he is bapti∣zed in Stirling the 15. day of December 1566. Am∣bassadors were sent from France to be Gossips and witnesses to the Baptisme. The Earle of Bedford is sent from the Queen of England, who brought with him a Font of Gold; weying two stone weight, with a Basen and Ewer for the Baptism;'s the King was nei∣ther admitted to come to the Baptism, nor suffered to come to the feast, the Ambassadors had a watch word given them not to see nor salute him; the King all this time keeped his Chamber, his Father hearing how he was used, writ to him to repair unto him who soon after went (without goodnight) toward Glasgow to his Father, he was hardly a mile out of Stirling when the poyson (which they had given him) wrought so upon him that he had very great pain and dolour in every part of his body. At length being arrived at Glasgow the blisters brake out of a blewish colour, so the ysicians presently knew the disease to come by
Poyson, he was brought o low that nothing but death was expected, yet the strength of his youth at last did surmount the poyson. The Queen hearing that the King was recovered, she went to Glasgow to visite him, and thereafter goes with her to Edin∣burgh where he is murthered by Bothwell, and the house where he lay burned with powder about twelve of the clock in the night, his body was cast forth in a yaird without the Town wall adjoyning close by: there was a servant likewise murthered be∣side him, who had been also in the Chamber with him, he had been King but 18. Months, he was of a comly stature, and none was like unto him within this Island, he died under the age of 21. years. The Earl of Lennox in the mean time wrote to the Queen to cause punish Bothwell with his other complices for murthering the King. A day is appointed for his triall by an assyle, he is acquite of the murther by the Jury, yet the suspicions of the people were nothing diminished. Bothwell is devorced from his wife, the banes of Bothwell with the Queen asked, Mr. John Craig protesteth against it, notwithstanding of his opposition the marriage went on and was celebrated, the 15. of May by Adam B. of Orkney in the Abbey of Halyrudhouse after the manner or the reformed Church, yet was no sooner finished, then the ill fruits thereof began to break out. The Qeen by Bothwels perswasion taking purpose to visite the Bor∣ders, and having chag d the Subjects to accompany her thither with a provision for 15. dayes, it was pub∣lickly rumoured that these forces were gathering for some other businesse, and that the intention was to have the Prince her Sone in her own custody, and taken out of the Earie of Mar his hands. The Noble men that had combined themselves at Stirling, took Arms, Bothwell flieth, and the Qeen rendereth her self to the Lords, she is sent prisoner to Lochlevin
and Bothwell was declared by open proclamation not only the murtherer of the King, but also the com∣mitter of it with his own hand, and a thousand crowns were offered to any man that would bring him in. Bothwell taketh the sea, and there he playes the Pirat, and made spoyl of all that came in his way, he is pursued by Grange with five ships well manned who comming upon him unlooked for as he lay in one of the Creeks of Orkney, gave him the chase, and had certainly taken him if they had not been hinder∣ed by Rocks and shallow waters. Shortly after hee was taken upon the coast of Norroway, and conveyed to Denmark, where being detected by some Scotish Merchants, he was put in a vile and loathsome pri∣son, and falling in a frensie, which keeped him 14. years made an ignominious and desperat end, such as his wicked and flagitious life had deserved. The Q. is moved to make resignation of the Crown, the King is Crowned at Stirling, the Earle of Murray is elected Regent. Few dayes after the commitment of the Quenn the Earle of Glencairn with his domesticks, went to the Chapell of Halyrudhouse where he brake down the Altars and the Images, which fact as it did content the zealous Protestants, so it did highly offend the Popish affected. The Bishop of Orkney was conveened before the Generall Assembly of the Church, and deposed from his function and Office for marrying the Queen and Bothwell, and the Countesse of Argyle ordained to make publick satisfaction for giving her presence at the Princes baptisme, at the Papistical rites there used. At this time John Hepburn called Bolton, John Hay younger of Tallow, and two chamber boyes of Both∣wells, Powry and Dalgleish were brought to triall for the Kings murther, and found guilty by their
confessions, being entised to the said wicked fact by Bothwell. The Queen after eleven months imprisonment e∣scapeth out of Lochlevin. The Queens resignation is decerned null being extorted by fear, and proclama∣tions made in her name, commanding all the Leeges to meet is Armes at Hamilton for pursuing the Re∣bels that had usurped the Royal Authority: Many of the Nobility took her part. The Regent assembl∣eth his Forces, there gathered to him about 400. The Queens power was much greater. The Earle of Argyle was Lievtenant on the Queens part the battel between them was foughten at Langside the 13. of May 1568. The Queen who stood a mile off from the battell on a little height, perceiving the field lost, made towards the borders, the rest that escaped fled the readiest way they could find, every man to his own house, the number of the slain was about 300. Many were taken prisoners, amongst whom the most eminent was Lord Seaton & Rosse, the Mrs. of Cassels and Eglinton, Sir James Hamilton of Evendale, and Sherifts of Air and Linlithgow. Of the Regents side one only was slain, the Lords Hoome and Ochilerie wounded: all the rest with few escaped that followed the chase too far returned with him to Glasgow, where they went first to the Church and gave thanks to God for the victory they had ob∣tained almost without any effusion of blood. This conflict happened upon the 13. of May the eleventh day after her escape from Lochlevin. The Queen fleeth to England, and writeth to Queen Elizabeth. The Bishop of Orkney was reponed to his place, and for removing the scandall he was injoyned in his first Sermon to make publick acknowledgement of his fault, and crave forgivenesse of God, the Church and State whom he had offended. The Duke of Chattellerault returned, and being
made Deputy by the Queen, caused publish his Let∣ters prohibiting the subjects to acknowledge any other Soveraign then the Queen, hereupon the Re∣gent gave forth Proclamations, charging the Lieges in the Kings name to meet him in Armes at Glasgow the 10. of March. The Regent and the Duke were agreed by the means of the Superintendents. James Hamiltoun of Bothwell-Haugh taketh in hand the Regents murther, he is killed by him at Linlithgow as he was riding, by the shot of a Bullet: the Murtherer escapeth, and the death of the Re∣gent was greatly lamented. The Earle of Lennox is chosen Regent & Govern∣our of the Realm untill the Kings Majority, or till he were able by himself to administrate the publick af∣fairs. The Regent was shot by Captain Calder at Stirling and with the same bullet Wormestoun who did what he could to save the Regent was stricken dead. After him the Earle of Marre was elected Regent. After the Earle of Marre was the Earle of Morton elected Regent, as the man in that time of greatest courage and counsell. The Earle of Morton is challenged for the murther of the Kings father by Captain James Steward, and is committed, and thereafter brought to his tryall, sen∣tence is pronounced, and he execute for concealing the Kings murther. The Queen is excute and beheaded after 19. years captivity in England. The Spanish Navy was in the year of God 1583. In the year of God 1597. there was a great businesse for the tryall of Witches. Amongst others one Mar∣garet Aikin being apprehended upon suspitin, and threatned with torture, did confesse her self guilty; being examined touching her associats in that trade, she namd a few, and peceiving her delations find
credit, made offer to detect all of that sort, and to purge the countrey of them, so she might have her life granted, for the reason of her knowledge, she said that they had a secret mark all of that sort in their eyes, whereby she could surely tell how soon she looked upon any, whether they were Witches or not, and in this she was so readily believed, that for the space of three or four moneths she was carried from Town to Town to make discoveries in that kind. Many were brought in question by her delati∣ons, especially at Glasgow, where diverse innocent women through the credulity of the Minister Mr. John Cowper were condemned and put to death. In end she was found to be a meer deceiver, for the same persons that the one day she had declared guilty, the next day being presented in another habit, she cleans∣ed and sent back to Fife where first she was appre∣hended. At her tryall she affirmed all to be false that she had confessed, either of her self or others, & per∣sisted in this to her death, which made many for think their to great forwardnesse that way, and moved the King to recall the commissions given out against such persons, discharging all proceedings against them, except in case of voluntary confession, till a solid or∣der should be taken by the Estates touching the for∣me that should be keeped in their tryall. In the year of God 160. was Gowries conspiracy against the King discovered, both he and his brother Mr. Alexander Ruthven were killed at St. Johnstoun, and the King delivered. The Ministers of Edinburgh, being rqired by the Counsel to give thanks for his Majesties deliverance, refused to obey, excusing themselves that nothing ought to be deliv red in Pul∣pit, but that whereof the truth was known, and that all which is uttered in that place should be spokn in faith. When by no perswasion they could be moved to perform that duty, it was resolved that the Coun∣sel should go together to the Market Crosse, and that
the Bishop of Rosse should after a naration of the Kings daughter and deliverance conceive a publick thanksgiving, which was done, the multitude ap∣plauding and expressing a great joy. Mr. Patrick Gal∣loway the Mononday thereafter in presence of the King Preached at the Market Crosse, who choosed the 124. Psalm for his Theam, did take occasion to discourse of all the particulars of the conspiracy, and gave the people great satisfaction, for many doubt∣ed that there had been any such conspiracy, the con∣dition of Princes being as the Emperor Domitian said herein miserably, that even when conspiracies made against their persons are discovered, yet they are not credited unlesse they be slain. The King to testifie his thankfulnesse for his deliverence mortified a thousand pound to the poor yearly to be taken of the readiest fruits of the Abbacie of Scoon. After this order was taken for a publick and solemn thanksgi∣ving to be made in all the Churches of the King∣dome. The Ministers of Edinburgh who gave the refuse were commanded to remove themselves out of the town within 48. hours, and inhibited to Preach within his Majesties dominions under the pain of death. Three of the number, to wit, Mr. Walter elcanquel, Mr. William Watson, and Mr. John Hall, acknowledging their fault were pardon∣ed, Mr. James Balfour likewise remitted, But Mr. Robert Truce taking a course by himself, and saying he would reverence his Majesties report of that acci∣dent, but could not say he was perswaded of the truth of it, was banished the King dominions, and went into France. The 15. of November a Parliament was held at Edinburgh, wherein sentence of the forfeiture was pronounced against Gowry and Mr. Alexander his brother, their posterity disinherited, and in detestati∣on of the paracid attempted, the whole surname of
Ruthven abolished, but this last was afterwards dis∣pensed with; and such of that name as were knowen to be innocent, tollerated by the Kings clemency to enjoy their surnames and titles as in former times. The bodies of the two brethren being brought to the Parliament house, were after sentence given, hanged upon a Gibbet in the publick street, and then dismem∣bred, their hands cut off and affixed upon the top of the prison house, and the 5. of August ordained to be keeped yearly in remembrance of his Majesties de∣livery. Prince Charles was born at Dumfermling. The Queen of England continuing constant in her affection when she was asked a little before her death by the Lord Keeper and Secretary who were directed by the Counsel to understand her will touching her Successor, answered, none but my Cousen the King of Scots After which words she spake not much. A Queen incomparable for wisedom and fidelity of Go∣vernment. She departed this life the 24. of March, in the 70 year of her age, and 44. of her raign. The same day in the forenoon the King of Scots was pro∣climed King first at the Palace of White hall next at the Crosse in Cheapside within the City of London with an infinite applause of all sorts of people. But leaving the prosecution of any moe occurences that fell out in this our Realm, which late Histories at large does declare, I shall close this part with one or two remarkable things specially concerning Glasgow, in reckoning out the Bishops of Glasgow till the Re∣formation, I find St. Mungo to be the first. This City was made famous at first by Kentigern commonly called St. Mungo. He was begotten by Engenius the third, King of the Scots upon Thametis Daughter to Loth King of Picts. His Mother finding her self with child, out of shame and fear of her Fa∣thers wrath, stole privily away; and entering into a little
Vessel that she found in the nearest coast, was by the wind and waves cast on land where the town of Cul∣rosse is now situated, and there was delivered of her birth, and leaving the Child with a Nurse, returned home. His Parents bing unknown, he was brought to Servanus and baptized, and bred up by him, yet it seems by the Hymne they did ordinarly sing in the Festivals that made his Father afterwards to be known. They repo t of him that a Lady of good place in the Country having lost a King, which her Husband gave her, as she crossed the River of Clyde, and her Husband waxing jealous, as if she had be∣stowed the same upon one of her lovers, she did mean her self unto him in rating his help for the safty of her honour, and that he going to the river after he had used his devotion, willd one who was making to fish, to bring him the first that he caught, which was done, in the mouth of the fish he found the Ring, and sending it to the Lady, she was thereby fred of her Husbands suspition. The credit of this I blieve upon the reportes, but howsoever it be the sea and City do both of them war in their Arms a fish with a ring in the mouth even to this day: He was certain∣ly a man of rare piety, and to the poor exceeding bountifull, lived to a great age beyond the ordinary course of men, to wit nine score and five years as in the conclusion of the hyme is said. Cum octogenos centum quque quinque vir annos Complerat, sanctus est Closgow sunere sunctus. He laid the foundation of the high Church of Glas∣gow, and was therein at his dath interred. After his death for many ages the See was in a manner desolate unto the raign of Malcolm the third, who restored the same to some integrity. The first Bishop I find named after the restitution, was 1. John Achaian, who took great pains in building the Ca∣thredal, and having brought it to a reasonable
perfection did dedicate he same in the year 1137. Jocelin Abbot of Melrosse was his successor, in his time the City of Glasgow was erected a Burgh roy∣all. Willim Babinton Chancellor of the Kingdom was after him elected Bishop. In his time as Boeth. writeth, the fabrick of the Church of Glasgow was fully accomplished, his words are, absolutum est ea tempstate Templum Catedrle Glasgu nsis sedes pro∣feto magnifica cujus aud exignam partem Guilielm∣us ibid m Epise pus iberalitate sua extruxerat, nec du operi perfecto, supersuit. He died the 25. of January 1261. William Rae the 19. Bishop, a good and zalos man build the stone Brid e of Glasgow, and died in year 1367. In the time of Mr. Mathew Gl n linnig the 21. Bishop the steeple which was all built of tim∣ber ws burnt by lightning, in place whereof he in∣tended to build one of stone, and made therefore great preparation, but was prevented by death in the year 1408. His successor William Lawder finished the work, he was Chancellor of Scotland. Mr. VVilliam Tubull the 25. Bishop founded the Colledge of Glasgow. The cruel persecutin of Chistians under the TURKISH Emperors. NOw last of all having spoken of the persecutions of the Christians under the Roman Emperos in a tractate by it self, and of the persecutions of the Roman Bishops in this place for the professing of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, we shall speak a little of the miserable persecutions, slaughter and captivity of the Christians under the Turks; thus from time to time the Church of Christ almost hath had little or no rest in this earth, what for the heathen Emperors on the
one side, what for the proud Pope on the other side, on the third side what for the barbarous Turk, for these are and have been from the beginning the three principall and capitall enemies of the Church of Christ signified in the Apocalypse, by the Beast, the false lamb, and the false prophet, from whom went out three foul spirits like Frogs, to gather together all the Kings of the Earth, to the battel of the day of the Lord God Almighty, Apoc. 16. The cruelty and malice of these enemies against Christs people hath been such that to judge which of them most exceeded in cruelty of persecution it is hard to say, but it may bee thought that the bloody and beastly tyrranny of the Turks, especially above all the rest incomparable, surmounteth all the afflictions and cruel slaughters that ever were seen in any age, or read of in any story, in so much that their is neither History so perfect, nor writter so diligent, who wryting of the miserable tyranny of the Turks is able to expresse or compre∣hend the horrible examples of the unspeakable cruelty and slaughter exercised by these twelve Tur∣kish tyrrants upon poor Christian mens bodies, with∣in the compasse of these later three hundreth years. Where of although no sufficient relation can be made nor number expressed, yet to give to the Reader some generall guesss or view thereof, let us first per∣pend and consider what Dominions and Empyres, how many countries, Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Towns Strong holds and forts, these Turks have sur∣prised, and wone from the Christians, in all which victories beeing so many. This is secondly to be noted, that there is almost no place which the Turks ever came to, and subdued, where they did not either slay all the inhabitants thereof, or led away the most part thereof into such captivity and slavery that they continued not long after alive, or else so lived that death almost had been to them more tollerable. Like
as in the time of the first persecutions of the Roman Emperors, the saving was that no man could step with his feet in all Rome but should tread upon a Martyr, so here may be said that almost there is not a town, city or village in all Asia, Grecia, also in a great part of Europe and Africa, whose streets have not flowed wi h the blood of the Christians, whom the crueli Turks have murthered, and of whom are to be seen in Histories, Heaps of souldiours slin, of men and women cut in pieces, of children sticked upon Poles and staiks, whom these detestable Turks most spytfully (and that in the sight of their Parents) use to gore to death, some they drog at their horse tails, and famish to death, some they tare in pieces tying their arms and legs to four hors s, other some they make Mars to shoot at, upon some they try their swords how deep they can cut and slash, the aged and feeble they tread under their horse, Wo∣men wi h child they spare not, but ip their bodies, and cast the Infants into the fire, or otherwise de∣stroy them. Whether the Christians yeeld to them or yeeld not, all is a matter. As in their promises their is no truth, so in their victories there is no sense of manhood or mercy in them, but they make havock of all. So the Citizens of Croia after they had yeelded & were all promised their lives, were all destroyed & that horribly. In M sia after the King had given himself to the Turks hand having promise of life, Mahomet the Turk slew him with his own hands. The Princes of Rasia had both their eyes put out with Bsns red hot set before them. Theodosia o∣therwise called Capha was also surrendred the Turke having the like assurance of life and safty, and yet contrare to the league the citizins were put to the sword an slain. At the winning and yeelding of Les∣bos what a number of young men and children were put upon sharp stakes and poles and so thrust throw
At the winning of the City of Buda, what tyrranny was shewed and exercised against the poor Christi∣ans which had yeeled themselves, and against the two Dukes Christopher Bissrer and Joannes Tranbun∣ger contrary to the promise and hand writing of the Turk is to be seen in the story of Malchior Soiterns de bello pannonico. The like aso is to be read in the story of Pernardus de Brydenbach, who writing of the talking of Hydran∣tum a City in Apulia, testifieth of the miserable slaughter of the young men that were there slain, of old men trodden under horse feet, of matrons and vir∣gins ravished, of women with child cut and rent in pieces, of the Priests in the Churches slain, and of the Archbishop of that City who being an aged man, and holding the Crosse in his hands, was cut asunder with a wooden Saw, &c. The same Bernardus also writing of the overthrow of Nigro-Pontus, otherwise called Chalcides, describeth the like terrible slaughter which was their exercised, where the Turk after his promise given before to the contrary, most cruelly caused all the youth of Italy to be pricked upon sharp stakes, some to be dashed against the hard stones, other some to be cut asunder in the midst, and other more with other kinds of torments to be put to death insomuch that all the streets and ways of Chalcids did flow with the blood of them which were there slain. In which History the foresaid Writer record∣eth one memorable example of maidenly chastity, worthy of all Christians to be noted and commended. The story is told of the Pretors daughter of that City, who being the only daughter of her father, and not∣ed to be of an exceeding singular beauty, was saved out of the slaughter, and brought to Mahomet the Turk to be his Concubine. But she denying to con∣sent to his Turkish appetite and filthinesse, was com∣manded forthwith to be slain and murthered, and so
died she a Martyr, keeping both here faith and her body undefiled unto Christ her Spouse. The like cruelty also was shewed upon them that keeped the Castle, and afterwards yeelding themselves upon hope of the Turks promise, were slain every one. What should I speak of the miserable slaughter of Methone, and the Citizens thereof, dwelling in Peloponesus who seeing no other remedy, but needs to come into the Turks hands, set the Barn on fire wherein they were gathered together, men, women, and Children, some women also with childe voluntarily cast themselves into the sea, rather then they would sustain the Turks captivity. Miserable it is to behold, long to recite, incredible to believe all the cruell attempts, and hor∣rible slaughters wrought by these miscreants against the Christians through all places almost of the world, both in Asia, and Africa, but especially in Europe, &c. At the siege of Vienna, were all the Christian captives were brought before the whole Army and slain, and diverse drawn in pieces with horses, but e∣specially at the winning of Constantinople above-men∣tioned, also at Croia and Methone, what beastly cruelty was shed, it is unspeakable, for as in Constan∣tinople Mahomet the drunken Turk never rose from dinner, but he caused every day for his disport 300. Christian captives of the Nobles of that City to be slain before his face. So in Methone after that his Captain Omares had sent unto him at Constantinople five hundred prisoners of the Christians, the cruell tyrant commanded them all to be cut and divided a∣sunder by the midle, and so being slain, to be thrown out into the fields. Leonicus Chalcondyla writing of the same story, addeth moreover a prodigious narration (if it be true) of a brute Ox, who being in the fields, and seeing the carcasses of the dead bodies so cut in two, made there a loud noise after the lowing of his kind and
nature, and afterwards coming to the quarters of the dead bodies lying in the field, first took up te one half, and then coming again took up likewise the other half, and so (as he could) joyned them both together. Which being espyed of them which saw the doing of the brute Ox, and marvelling thereat, & word being brought thereof to Mahomet▪ he com∣manded the quartes again to be brought where they were before, to prove whether the beast will come again, who failed not (as the Author recordth) but in like sort as before, taking the fragments of the dead Cops, laid them again together. It followeth more in the Author, how that Mahomet being astoni∣ed at the strange wonder of the Ox, commanded the quarters of the Christian mens body to be interred, and the Ox to be brought to his house and much made of. Some said it to be the body f a Venian, some affirmed that he was an Illyrian, but whatso∣ever he was, certain it is that the Turk himslf was much more bestiall then was the brute Ox, which being a beast, shewed more sense of humanity to a dead man then one man did to another. What Christian heart will no pity the incredible slaughter done by the Turks in Euboia, where Fabr testifieth that innumerable people sticked and goed upon stakes, diverse were thrust through with a hot iorn, children and infants yet not wained f om the mother were bshed against the stones, and many cut asunder in the midst. But never did countrey taste and feel more the better and deadly tyranny of the Turks, then did Rasia called Mysia Inferior, and now Servia, where the Prince of the same Countrey being sent for, under fair pretence of words and pro∣mises to come and speak with the Turk after he was come of his own gentlenesse, thinking no harme, was apprehended, and wretchedly and falsly put to death, and his skin slain off, his brother and sister brought
to Constantinople for a triumph, and all the Nobles of his Countrey, as Faber addeth, had their eyes put out, &c. Briefly to conclude, by the vehement and furious rage of those cursed catiffs: It may seem that Satan the old Dragon, for the great hatred he beareth to Christ, hath stirred them up to be the Butchers of all Christian people▪ inflaming their beastly hearts with such malice and cruelty against the name and Religion of Christ, that they degenerating from the nature of men to devils, neither by reason will be rul∣ed, nor by any blood or slaughter satisfied. And now to speak a little of the miserable estate of the Christian captives under the Turk. And here, First is to be noted that the Turk never commeth in∣to Europe to war against the Christians, but there fol∣loweth after his Army a great number of brokers or Merchants, such as buy men, and children to sell a∣gain, bringing with them long chains in hope of great cheats. In the which chains they lock them by fifty and sixty together, such as remain undestroy∣ed with the sword, whom they buy of the spoils of them that rob and spoil the Christian countries, which is lawfull for any of the Turks Army to do, so that the tent of their spoyl or prey (whatsoever it be) be reserved to the head Turk, that is to the great Mr. Chief. Of such as remain for Tith if they be aged of whom very few be reserved alive, because little profit cometh of that age) they be sold to the use of husbandry or keeping of beasts. If they be young men or women they be sent to certain places there to be instructed in their language and Arts, as shall be most profitable for their advantage, and such are called in their tongue Sarai, and the first care of the Turk is this to make them to deny the Christian Religion and to be circumcised, and after that they are appointed every one as he seemeth most apt, ei∣ther to the learning of their Laws, or else to learn the
fates of the war, the first Rudiments of war is to handle the bow, first beginning with a weak Bow, and so as they grow in strength coming to a stronger Bow, and if they misse the Mark, they are sharply beaten, and their allowance is two pence or three pence a day, till they come to take Wages to serve in War. Some are brought up for the purpose to be placed in the number of the wicked Janziarics, that is the or∣dour of the Turks Champion, which is the most abo∣minable condition of all other. And if any of the foresaid young men or children shall appear to excel in any beauty, him they so cut, that on part of that which nature giveth to man remaineth to be seen in all his body, whereby while the freshnesse of age con∣tinueth, he is compelled to serve their abominable abomination, and when age commeth then they serve instead of Eunuchs to wait upon Matrons, or keep horses or mules, or else to be secullians as drudges in their Kitchens. Such as be young Mai∣dens and beautiful, are deputed for Concubins. They which be of mean beauty, serve for Matrons for their drudgry work in their houses and chambers, or else are put to spinning and such other Labours, but so that it is not lawful for them either to pofsse their Christian Religion, or ever to hope for any libertie. And thus much for them that fall to the Turk by Tith. The other which are bought and sold among private subjects, first allured with fair words and promises to take circumcision, which if they will do, they are more favourable entreated, but all hope is taken from them of returning again into their own country, which if they attempt, the pain thereof is burning. And if such, coming at length to liberty will marry, they may, but then their chil∣dren remain bound to the Lord for him to sll at his pleasure, and therefore such as are wsse among them marry. They which refuse to be circumcised are mi∣serably
handled, &c. When they are brought to the Market to be sold, the buyer if he be disposed, pluck∣ing off their garments, vieweth all the bones and joynts of the body, and if he like them, he giveth his pirce and carrieth them away into miserable servi∣tude, either to tilling of their ground, or to pstor their Cttel, or some other strange kind of misery in∣credible to speak of, so much that certain of such Christian captives yoked together like Horse and Oxen, draw in the plough. The maid-servants like∣wise are keeped in perpetuall toyl and work in close places, where they neither come in sight of any man, neither be they pemitted to have any talk with their fellow servants, &c. Such as are committed to keep beasts, ly abroad day and night in the wild fields, without house and harbour, and so changing their Psture, go from mountain to mountain, of whom also bside the office of keeping the beasts, other handy-labour is exacted at pare houres, such as pleaseth their masters to put them unto. And such is the lamentable afflictions of our christian brethren under the cruell tyranny and captivity of the Turks, pssing all other captivities that ever have been to Gods people, either under Pharaoh in Egypt▪ or un∣der Nebuhadnzzar in Babylon, or under Antiohus in the time of the Machabees. We are to pitty the lamentable slvery that christians are in under the babarous Turks, and to pray for their delivery, and to be thankfull to God for our liberty and freedome. FINIS.
