20168 99850212 15399
TOM of All Trades. OR THE PLAINE PATH-VVAY TO PREFERMENT. BEING A Discovery of a passage to Promotion in all Professions, Trades, Arts, and Mysteries. Found out by an old Travailer in the sea of Experience, amongst the inchanted Islands of ill Fortune.Now published for Common good. By THOMAS POVVELL. Summum hominis bonum bonus ex hac vita exitus. LONDON. Printed by B. Alsop and T. Fawcet, for Benjamen Fisher, and are to bee sold at his shop at the signe of the Talbot in Aldersgate-street. 1631.
The Epistle Dedicatorie. POore TOM was set on shore in Kent, And to the next good Towne hee went; At whose approach the Bosseldir Kept a most lamentable stirre That TOM would offer to returne Through the good Towne of Syttingborne Hee askt him; If hee had a Passe? And told him what the Statute was; And like a Reverend Vestry wit, Swore, hee would not allow of it. But did advise him to resort To fetch his Passe at Tonstall Court. Our TOM of all Trades hereupon Askt what was his condition Who was the Owner of that place So farre in all the Countries grace? For whom (as hee walkt on the way Hee heard) the poore so much to pray The Rich to praise. And both contend, To whom hee was the greater friend. Didst never meete his name there spread, Where thou thy selfe didst vse to tread?
No? not Sir EDVVARD HALES? Quoth he, What TOM of Odcombe may'st thou be? Hee is a man scarce spends a minute, But hath his Countries service in it. Spends more to make them all accord Then other Knights doe at their boord. Hee call'd him Knight and Barronet. Both wise and Iust; And what more yet? He swore that if hee were but mist The Countrey could not so subsist. With that our TOM repaired thither, Conferr'd Report and Proofe together; And found Report had wrong'd him much In giving but an out-side touch, A tincture of a Painters trade; Where all was substance and in-layd. Then TOM resolv'd to walke no farther To finde a Father or a Mother. No other Patron would hee seeke, But tender all at this Knights feete: If hee accept what's well intended, Our TOM of all Trades travaile's ended. Signa virtutum tuarum longe late{que} ferens. THO: PŌVVELL.
TOM of all Trades: OR THE PLAINE PATH∣WAY TO PREFERMENT. TRINITY Terme was now ended; For by de∣scription of the time it could bee no other par∣cell of the yeare. In that the Scriveners at Temple-barre, had no im∣ployment, but writing of blanke Bonds, and texting of Bills, for let∣ting of Chambers in Chancery-lane. The Vintners of Fleetstreet discharged their Iourneymen; A ge∣nerall humility more then usuall possest the Cooke∣ry of Ram-Alley. The Ostlers of Holborne had more than ordinary care to lay up theyr Ghuests bootes, rather for feare of theyr slipping out of Towne, than for any good observance towards them. And your Countrey Attorneys would no longer by any
meanes endure the vnwholsome ayre of an Eight penny Ordinarie. Every one that had wherewith to discharge his Horse out of the stable, strove who should first be gone. And amongst the rest, my selfe made shift for so much money as wherewith to a∣bate the fury of Mistrisse Overcount mine hostesse, and so I departed likewise. At the top of Highgate hill I overtooke a Gen∣tleman of Northamptonshire, riding homeward, whom I well knew; Him I saluted cheerefully, and he received me lovingly. But in travayling toge∣ther (Me thought) he was not (Master of that mirth∣full disposition which he was wont to carry along with him to shorten the way betwixt his house and London, I gave him to vnderstand, how strange, and notable this alteration appeared in him; And withall desired to know so much of the occasion thereof as might be impartible to a friend of so small growth. To which he answered thus; Sir, I come from London, (It is true) from the Terme (It is certaine true) from London and Terme. True and certaine in nothing but expences in all things, yet I would have you know, that it is neither the Thunderclap of dissolving an Iniunction, nor the Doomesday of a Decree, nor Counsaylors Fees, nor Attornies Bylls in a language able to fright a man out of his wits, can proscribe me my wonted mirth. It is something nearer and dearer (my deare friend) that robs me of that cheere which used to lift me vp into the very Spheare, where loue himselfe sits to bid all his guests welcome right heartily: I remember mee of Children, sixe Soones, and
three daughters, of whom I am the vnhappy Fa∣ther. In that, besides the scars which my vnthrif∣tines hath dinted vpon their fortunes, the wounds of vnequall times, and a tempestuous age approa∣ching are like to take away from them all hope of outliuing the low water ebbe of the evill day all meanes of thriving by honest paynes, study or in∣dustry are bereft them. The common vpon which industry should depasture is overlayd Numerous∣nes spoiles all, And poverty sells all at an vnder value. In this case (Sir) what can be aduisd Wherevnto I thus replyed. Sir, I haue heedfully attēded you in the delivery of your perplexed thoughts, concerning the care which you have of your children, taking the true, and even levell of the declention of arts, the distent of trades, & trading, the poverty of all professions, and the de∣stemper, not of ours only, but of all Christian cly∣mates at this present, tending rather to a more con∣tagion in the generall ayre, then a calmer tempara∣ment (for ought that yet appeareth) as for the stormynesse of the sea of state forraigne or dome∣stick, let vs leave the greater, and lesser vessels that be exposed to it, vnto the proper Pylates, Masters, and Marryners, who have the charge to attend the line, or plye at the tackle, we are but poore passen∣gers and may assure our selues to partake in their boone voyage, if they suceed well, as they may be certaine to suffer in the same Shipwracke with vs, if wee miscarry. I addresse me to give you the best ad∣vise, I can touching the preferment of every of your
six sonnes and three daughters, in manner following It is true in most Gentlemen, and very likely in you, as in others, living onely vpon the revenew of lands. That the height of their Husbandry amounts to no more than to cleere the last halfe yeeres boo∣king, and borrowing at the rent day. That their cre∣dit may hold vp and keepe reputation till the next ensuing that againe. When you dye, the eldest Sonne claimes the in∣heritance of what you leave, thanke God, and na∣ture for it, your selfe least of all, and your fatherly providence never a whit. If you take some course in your life time to make the rest of your Children some small portions or estates out of the whole of your lands. It is tenne to one but you destroy both him, and them by that meanes. For the heire commonly striving to vphold the reputation of his Ancestors. He abates nothing of his fathers accustomed expences towards the rai∣sing of those portions or estates so deducted. And they on the other side, presume so much vpon the hope thereof, that no profession will fit them. To bee a Minister (with them) is to be but a Pedant. A Lawyer, a mercenarie fellow. A Shop-keeper, a man most subject to the most wonderfull Cracke, and a creature whose welfare depends much vpon his Wives well bearing, and faire carriage. What is then to be done. Surely, it would be wished, seeing God and na∣ture hath provided for the eldest, your younger sonnes, and your daughters; especially, being worst¦able
to shift, should bee by you provided for in the first place, while your Land is of virgin reputation, while it is chast, and vndishonested by committing of single fornication with Countrie Creditors, that trade without sheets (that is) by Pole deed, only for sa∣ving of costs; or at least, before it have defiled the bed of its reputation by prostituting to the adulterous imbracings of a Citie Scrivener: But especially, be∣fore it grow so impudent, as to lie downe in the Market place, and to suffer everie pettie Clarke to bring its good name vpon Record, and charge it that it was taken in the very fact betweene other mens sheets. As in this Statute, or in that Iudgment: Take heed of that by any meanes. And bee sure to match your eldest sonne, when your credit is cryed vp to the highest, while your heire is yet in your power to dispose, and will bend to your will, be∣fore his blood begin to feele the heate of any affecti∣ons kindling about him, or before he can tell what difference is betwixt a blacke wrought Wastcoate, with a white apron & a loose bodied gowne without an apron. Put him of in his best clothes (I meane) in the assurance of your lands, fell him at ye highest rate. Then dicotomize the whole portion of his wife in∣to severall shares betwixt your other children. Not share and share like, but to every each one the more according to their defects: Let impotencie, decrept∣nes, ilfavourdnes and incapacitie, rob the other of so much money as they have done them of com∣linesse, activitie, beautie, and wit. Put them not into any course of living accor∣ding to any prescript order, or method of your
owne election. But according to their inclination and addition, seeing that every one by instinct of nature, delighteth in that wherein he is like to bee most excellent. And delight, and pride in any thing undertaken, makes all obstacles in the way of attai∣ning to perfection of no difficulty. Now in the next place take heed that you put off those your sonnes whom you finde fit and addicted to be bred in the Ministerie, or made up to the law, or to be apprentized betimes, and before they take the taynt of too much liberty at home. And when they be put forth, call them not home speedily to revisit their fathers house, no not so much as Hospitably by any meanes. In the first place take your direction for the SCHOLLER. His Education. His Maintenance. His Advancement. FOr his Education. The Free-Schooles general∣ly afford the best breeding in good letters. So many of them also afford some reasonable meanes in ayde of young Schollers, for their diet, lodging, and teaching, given to them by the Foun∣ders or Benefactors of such Schooles.
Some of them be of the foundation of some Kings and Queenes of this Land, and they are com∣monly in the gift of the King, or his Provost, or Substitute in that behalfe. Others be of the foun∣dation of some Bodies or Societies incorporate. And they are commonly in the gift of such Masters, Wardens, Presidents, and their Senior fellowes, such chiefe officers of any other title, or such Ma∣ster Wardens, and Assistants, or such Opposers, Visitants, or Committees of such bodies respe∣ctively as be appointed thereunto. Others be of the foundation of some private persons: And they are for the most part in the gift of the Executor, Heire, or Feoffees of such Donor, according to the purport of his Will, or Grant, or both. Of every of which severall kindes respectively are: Eaton. Westminster. Winchester. The Merchantaylors Schoole London. The Skynners at Tunbridge. Sutton's Hospitall. St. Bartholomews. And very many other the like. Briefly, few or no Counties of this Kingdome are unfurnisht of such Scholes. And some have so many, that it is disputable whether the Vniversi∣ties with the Innes of Court, and Chancerie have where to receive them or no. Some of such free-Schooles againe, have Schol∣lerships
appendant unto them, in the one of the Vni∣versities or both. To which upon Election yearely, they are re∣moveable, As. From Eaton, to Kings Colledge Cambridge. From Westminster, to Trinity Colledge Cambridge, or Christchurch Oxon: From Winchester, to New Colledge Oxon. From the Merchantaylors, to St. Iohn's Oxon. And the like, from many the like. Some other Free-Schooles have pensions for preferment of their Schollers, and for their mainte∣nance in the Vniversitie. Some Companies Incorporate (especially of London, having no such pensions in certaine, doe u∣sually out of the Stocke of their Hall allow main∣tenance in this kinde. Besides that, there be many other private per∣sons (upon my knowledge) who doe voluntarily allow yearely exhibition of this nature. Now if you would know how to finde what is given to any such Free-Schooles, and in whose disposing they now be. Search. In the Tower of Lon∣don, till the end of Rich. the 3. For Grants and for License of Mortmaine, inde. And in the Chappell of the Rolles. From thence till the present. And for the like,
In the Register of the Prerogative Court, for such things devised by Will, by King, Quéene, or Subiect. For such Grants given by Will. And sometimes you shall finde such things both in the Tower, and the Prerogative, and in the Rolls, and Prerogative respectively. For the time since our reformed Church of England began here. Search. Doctor Willets Synopsis. For all from the King, or from any o∣ther. Search. In divers of our Chroni∣cles. For the like. Next adde certaine helpes for discovery and attayning thereof. FIrst (if it may be) procure a sight of the Liedger Bookes, of such as in whom the disposition of such things resteth, which they keepe for their owne use. Next be acquainted with some of the Disposers themselves. Next take the directions of the Master or Tea∣cher of such Free-Schooles. Especially, to be interessed in the Clarkes or Re∣gisters of such Societies as have the disposing of any such things. Also to use meanes by Letters of persons po∣werfull, and usefull to such disposers.
For (indeed) it is not the sound of a great mans name to a Letter in these dayes, wherein they are growne so common, and familiar to our Societies (of London especially) can prevaile so soone as the Letter subscribed by the Lord Maior, or other emi∣nent Officer of the Citie, to whose commandement they be immediately subjugate. Lastly, if you use the meanes least seene, most u∣sed, and best allowed, together with these: For dis∣coverie and attaining of any such thing, it will not be besides the purpose as I take it. Now suppose your sonne is brought to the Vniver∣sitie by Election or as Pensioner. THe first thing you must take to your care is. In case he come not by election, but as a Pensi∣oner, to live for the present upon your owne charge, how to procure him a Schollership in the Colledge where you bestow him. Or in case he come elected into one, how to procure a farther addition of maintenance to him. To bring him into a Schollership, place him with a Senior fellow of the house (as Tutor) though you allow to some Iunior fellow somewhat yearely for reading unto him. This Senior fellow if the number of places voide will beare it may nominate your sonne for one in his owne right, if it will not beare it, he may call to his ayd some and so many suffrages of the rest as with the speaking merit of your sonne may worke your desire.
Then how to procure a pension for addytament of meanes. The chiefe skill is to finde it out, being eyther in the gift of some body Incorporate. Or of some private person. Wherein the discovery is to bee made (as aforesaid.) If you sue to a Company consisting of many per∣sons Tradesmen, you must enquire who bee the most potent Patritians, and best reputed Vestrie wits amongst them, such as carry their gloves in their hands, not on their hands. Amongst an Assistance of many, onely two or three strike the stroke, and hold the rest in a won∣derfull admiration of their extraordinary endow∣ments. And how to speake sensibly to these two or three is no Mysterie. You know they are faith∣full fiduciaries in the election. And therefore, you must not presume to offer any thing by any meanes. Onely you may desire them to accept this poore peece of plate, with your name and Armes upon it, and binde you unto their love, in keeping the me∣mory of you hereafter. Doe but try them in this kinde, and attend the successe. I tell you, this with a Bucke at the Renter Wardens feast, may come somewhat neere to the matter. But for the pension to be obtained of a private person, the way is not the same. It proceedeth of the givers meere charity, and must be taken by the hand of a desertfull receiver. Though withall it may sometimes fall out, that merit is made by me∣diation, especially of some such reverend Divine, as he doth most respect and frequent. For other, let∣ters
can little prevaile with such persons. The best note to discover a man inclinable to al∣low such a pension, is to examine how wealth and charitie are equally and temporately mingled in him. And be sure withall that he be a man of some reasonable understanding in what he doth in this kinde. For a Fooles pension is like a new fashion eagerly pursued at the beginning, but as scurvily left off in the proceeding. Your next care is, in his due time to put on a fel∣lowship, when he shall put off his Schollership, seeing the Schollership keepes him company no farther than to the degree of Master of Arts, and a quarter of a yeare after, in those Colledges, where Schollerships are longest lived. And in some not so long. In some Colledges, The Fellowship followes the Schollership of course, and as the one leaveth him, the other entertaines him. But in the most it is not so, but comes by Election. Which Election passeth by the Master and Senior Fellowes, where∣of every one doth name one, if the number to be Elected will beare it: or if not, then they passe by most voyces. Where note, that the Master hath a double voyce, and in some places hee hath the nomination of one, if there be two places voyd, yea if there be but one at sometimes. In Colledges the letters of great persons, especi∣of the Lords grace of Canterburie, and the Vniver∣sitie Chancellor have beene of great prevailance. But it is not so now in these dayes.
There bee beneficiall gradations of preferment likewise, for Fellowes in their Colledges; as Le∣cturer, Deane, Bowser, Vice-master, and Master. But for my part, I better like and commend those who when they find themselves fit to put forth into the world, take the first preferment that is offered un∣to them, rather than such who live cloystered like Votaries: who have Sacraments to fill up their pla∣ces be it but to keepe out others, such as use no ex∣ercise, but wiping the dust off their bookes, and have an excellent activity in handling the fox tayle, such as hold no honour like to Supplicat reverentijs vestris. And to be head Bowsier of the Colledge, as good as to be Chiefe Butler of England. These preferments of the Colledge all but that of the Master comes of course by order, and anti∣quity. Therefore no meanes but patient abiding needs for the acquiring of them in their due time. I hasten to send your sonne out of the Cloy∣ster into the Common-wealth, and to shew you how many wayes of Advancement are open unto him abroad, with the meanes to discover, and at∣taine. And first for the Ministrie. First for his ease let him looke no farther then next to hand, and enquire what benefices belong
to their owne Colledge, and are in the guift of their Master and Senior fellowes (as most Colledges have divers such) and amongst them which are void at the present, or whose Incumbent is not like to live long. And if he find out any such; than if he know not after so long cotinuance among them to speake in his Seniors owne Dilect, let him never travaile beyond Trumpington for me. More indigitly, For attaining of such a Benefice, let him enquire where the Mattens are read with Spectacles, or where the good old man is lifted vp into the pulpit, or the like, and make a way for Suc∣cession accordingly. Where note, that many times a fellow of the house may hold such a Benefice together with his fellow∣ship, or a Pension for increment of livelyhood. And such tyes, as these are commonly the bond of matrimony whereby they are so wedded to the Colledge. Next, he must clime vp to the maine top of Spe∣culation, and there looke about him to discover what Benefices are emptie abroad where the Incumbent lives only vpon the Almes of Confectio Alchermis: Or where one is ready to take his rise out of Sierge into Sattin, out of Parsonage and a Prebendarie, in∣to a Deanarie and a Donative, let him not be slow of footmanship in that case by any meanes.
For Benefices abroad. Benefices a broad are in the gift of The King imediately; Or the Lord Keeper for the King. Some Lord Bishop, Some Deane and Chapter: Some Bodie incorporate: Some Parish: Some Private Patron: You shall find in the Tower (a collection of the Patent Rolls gathered, of all Presentations made by the King in those dayes to any Church Prebendarie or Chappell. In right of the Crowne or otherwayes from 1. of Edward the first, till the midst of Edward the third. The King himselfe only and immediately presen∣teth in his owne right, to such Benefices as belong to him and are aboue twenty pounds value in the first Fruits Bookes. For attayning of any which, I can advice you of no better course, than to learne the way to the backe stayres. The Lord Keeper presents for the King to all such benefices as belong to his Majestie, and are un∣der twenty pounds value in the bookes. Now to know which of these are full, and who are Incumbents in any of these. Search, The first Fruits Office. The Clarke, who hath the writing of the Pre∣sentations.
The Lord Keepers Secretarie being. Where note that the King hath used very seldome to grant any such living in Reversion. And the Lord Keeper now being. His care is so great in this, as in all cases of common good to provide for mans merit, and cherish industrie in the growing plants, that no one can offer unto him a repuest of this kinde, without trespasse to his good disposition. In the next place concerning Benefices in the Presentation of any of the Lords Bishops. Note that most Bishopricks in England, have pre∣sentation to divers Benefices belonging to their Seas For the number and present estate of these. Search. Their owne Leidgers. Their Registers. Enquire of Their Auditors. Their Stewards of their Courts. And sometimes you shall light upon some of theyr bookes of this kind, in the hands of the heyres or Executors of such as have borne such offices under them. He that is Chaplaine to such a Lord Bishop, hath for the most part the best meanes, accesse, and op∣portunity, to ataine to such a Benefice. The commendations of such a great personage as to whom this Patron oweth greatest respect, especi∣ally for his affairing in Court, may doe some good in the matter. The like wayes of discovery, and the like meanes
of attaining any Benefice in the Presentation of any Deane, and Chapter, are to be used with them respe∣ctively, as with the Bishops. With every Deane and Chapter, are likewise di∣vers Prebendaries to be obtained of their gift after the same manner, and by the same meanes also. The other bodies Incorporate, besides those of Colledges, and Deanes and Chapters have many of them (especially of London, and some subordinate Soci∣eties thereof) right of the presentation to divers Benefices. Also some Parishes by prescription doe present to their owne perochiall Benefices. And many Pa∣trons are content to present, according to the ap∣probation of the Parishioners upon their hearing, and allowing, and due exclamation of the integrity of the life of such suitors, and no otherwise, divers governors, and gradations of the lands of divers Hospitals, and Mesons de dien have like right of presentation to Benefices, as have other bodies In∣corporate. And the meanes of discovery and attai∣ning are likewise the like. In Parishes, and Companies of Tradesmen In∣corporate, some very few rule the roast. Your Alderman of the Ward his Deputie, your Common Councell-man. Yea sometime that petty Epitomie of Wardemote Enquerst, that little busie morsell of Iustice (the Beadle of the Ward) will make a strong partie in the election, if he be put to it. The Probotory Sermon, that must be made up∣on such tryall before such an Auditorie, would be according to the capacitie in generall. But more es∣especially,
according to the humor and addiction of those whose wits the rest have in singular reverence. As Mr. Francis Fiat, a good vnderstanding Fishmon∣ger (I assure you) you may give the stile of right wor∣shipfull to them, though the best man of the com∣pany be but a Wine Cooper, and his iudgement better in Claret, then in Contioclerum a great deale. If your sonne vpon his tryall can but fit their pallats smoothly which is hard to doe; In regard that they are so hallow mouthed, let him be sure though he misse the Benefice for want of preperati∣on, yet tenne to one but they will straine themselues to bring him in as a Lecturer, which is a thing they reverence farre beyond the Parson of the Parish by many degrees. Lastly, for private Patrons, and the Benefices in their guifts; Search, The Bishops Register: for Iustitution, and Presentation. The Archdeacons Register: for the Induction. The Archbishops Register: if it be a Peculiar. It was my chaunce lately to see a booke of all the Benefices within the Diocesse of Canterbury, with the manner of their tything in every each one respectiuely. In which I find, that there are, or should be with the Register of every Lord Bishop, seaven Bookes kept for Entrie of the matters, and busines of their Diocesse, of which this of Benefices is the cheife.
The like I saw formerly of the Diocesse of St. Davids which confirmes mee in the institution, and custome of keeping the said bookes also in other Diocesse. And seeing that severall privare Patrons are of severall dispositions, some more Lucrative and Co∣vetous: Others more charitable, and religious, I can give you no other rule of attaining the Benefice than this, viz. That your sonne bring with him abilitie of lear∣ning. Integritie of life, and conformitie of beha∣viour, according to the order of the Church esta∣blisht amongst vs and these shall make his way, with the good and generous Patron. But for the other patron it makes no matter at all for learning and a very little for manners, or whether he be a man conformable or no. Truely he is indifferent, for his part very indifferent. To such a patron your sonne must present him∣selfe: thus (if he meane to be presented) according to present necessitie. He must both speake and prove himselfe a man indued with good gifts. For he shall have to deale with a Patron of a quicke Ca∣pacitie, more dexterous in apprehension than your sonne or you can be in deliverie. Be this Patron what he will, your comfortis, the Benefice must be filld, and that within a limi∣ted time, howsoever it is dangerous to attend the ending of the day in this case, (For seldome doth the Clarke of the market get any thing by their standing too long and above their accostomed houre.)
Lapse by reason of Simony and Lapse for not presenting, in due time; Both offer advancement to learning But the first is at hand to discover as a witch: And the second as rare to find out as a faith¦full fiduciarie or a fast Freind. The degrees of rising in the Ministrie are not ea∣sier knowne then practized by the industrious man. Breifly if all Church livings in England were e∣qually distributed, There is noe one of the Mini∣stry if he want not learning, or good manners needs want maintenance, or good Livelyhood. Here I could wish to God; That it might please the right reuerend Fathers of the Church the Lord Bishops; That they would once in every of their times cause a true Catalogue of all the Benefices within their severall Diocesse with the names of the Patrons thereof according to the last presentation to be sent into the office of the first fruits for the better information of all such as deserue, and would gladly attaine to some meanes of mainte∣nance, which they may the better doe by hauing recourse thither, there to take notice of all things of this nature. For I know that many fit downe in their wants, having good meanes to many private Patrons, onely for lacke of knowledge of the same. Note that it is an vsuall thing in private Pa∣rons to graunt reversion, and Advowson of such livings, My selfe intended heretofore to collect all such Benefices with their Patrons, into a certaine Cal∣lender
for such direction (as aforesayd) and made some passage into it. But the farther I went, the more impossible I found it. And I am now resol∣ved that without the Bishops assistance it cannot be done. And so much for the Ministerie. The Lawes promotions follow. By Civill Law, and Common Law. FOr breeding of your youth in the Civill Law, there are two Colledges of especiall note in our Vniversities: the one is Trinitie-hall in Cambridge; the other is, New-Colledge in Oxford. I remember me not of any Free-Schoole in Eng∣land, that have any place appendant in Trinitie-hall in Cambridge. But in new Colledge of Oxford, the Free-Schoole of Winchester, hath claime both of Schollerships, and Fellowships (the whole Col∣ledge consisting of none other, as I take it. It is to be confest, the charge of breeding a man to the Civill Law, is more expensive, and the way more painefull, and the bookes of greater number, and price than the Common Law requireth. But
after that the Civill Lawyer is once grown to Matu∣rity. His way of Advancement is more beneficiall, more certaine, and more easie to attaine, than is the Common Lawyers, and all because their number is lesse, their learning more intricate. And they ad∣mit few or no Sollicitors to trample betweene them and the Clyent. So that the Fee comes to them immediately, and with the more advantage. The Preferments at which they may arrive, are these: Chancellor to the Byshop. Archdeacon. Commissarie, where they have Commissarie Officiall. Iudge, and Surrogate. Advocate for the King. Mr. of the Chancerie. The Kings Proctor. Advocate, and Proctor at large. In these Courts, viz. The High Commission. The Delegates. The Prerogative. The Consistorie. The Arches. The Bishops Courts. The Archdeacons Courts. Chancellors, Commissaries and Officials Cou. The Admiraltie Courts. The Court of the Kings Requests, In times past. The countenance of some Byshop, especially of
the Lord Archbyshop upon a Civilian, will much ad∣vance his practice as an Advocate, and give him promotion as a Iudge. There are under the greater officers aforenamed, divers other inferiour Officers: as Register. Arctuarie. Examiner. The number of the Doctors (though I finde them never to have been limited.) Yet it is certaine that the time was within memory of man, when the house of their Commons did commonly give them all sufficient lodging, and dyet. And as for the number of Proctors, they were of late times limited. How it is now I know not. For the Common Law. FOr breeding of Students at the Common Law, take directions for their method of studie out of that Tractate which Mr. Iustice Dodridge did in his time pen for the purpose. Onely (for my part) I doe much commend the ancient custome of breeding of the younger Students. First, in the Innes of Chan∣cery; there to be the better prepared for the Innes of Court. And this must needs be the better way, see∣ing too much liberty at the first prooves very fatall, to many of the younger sort. I have observed, and much commend also the breeding of some Com∣mon
Lawyers in this kinde, viz. That when they have beene admitted first into an Inne of the Chancerie, they have beene withall en∣tred as Clarkes in the office of some Prothonotarie of the Common-Pleas to adde the skill of the Practicke to their speculation. And if a Student be thus bred, by his foundation in the one; and his experience in the other, he shall with more facilitie than others, who step into the Inne of Court at first, attaine to an abilitie of practise. Besides other ordinary requisite parts and Arts in a Common Lawyer. Skill in the Records of all Courts of Record, and in other antiquities of Presi∣dent. With some Reading in the Civill Law, also will much inable him. The Common Lawyer is to be bred onely upon the purse. The charge most at the first. For after he hath spent some few yeares effectually. He may attaine to the imployment of some private friends, for advising with, and instructing of greater Coun∣saile, whereby he shall adde both to his meanes, and knowledge. It is true, that I have knowne some Attorneyes and Sollicitors, put on a Counsailors gowne, with∣out treading the same usuall path to the barre (as aforesaid.) But indeed, I never looke upon them, but I thinke of the Taylor, who in one of his Cu∣stomers cast suites had thrust himselfe in a∣mongst the Nobilitie at a Court Maske, where pulling out his Handkercher, hee let fall his Thimble, and was so discovered, and hand∣led, and dandled from hand to foote, till the Guard
delivered him at the great Chamber doore, and cry∣ed, farewell good feeble. If the Common Lawyer be sufficiently able in his profession, he shall want no practice, if no pra∣ctice no profit. The time was that the younger Counsaile had some such helpe, as To be a Favourite. A Kindred. To marry a Neece, Cosin, or a Cham∣bermaide. But those dayes be past, and better supply their roomes. As fellowes of Colledges in the Vniversities get pensions, or Benefices, to adde to their livelyhood. So Barresters and Counsailors of the Innes of Court, advance their meanes by keeping of Courts of Mannors. Leets, and Barrons: Swanimootes of Forrests. Stannaries. Cinque Ports, &c. By places of Iudges of Inferiour Courts. As London, and other like Corporations. The Virdge. The Tower of London. St. Katherines neare the Tower. Borough of Southwarke. The Clinke. Wentworth and like Liberties.
By office of Recorder of some Corporate Towne. Feoda rie of some Counties: The Kings Councell in the Marches of Wales, or at Yorke, or Iudge, or Counsayle of some Countie Pallatine: The greater places of preferment for Common Lawyers are. The Iudges at Westminster, and elsewhere: The next, are all the severall Officers of the Courts of Westminster and elsewhere: All which you shall finde set forth breifly in Smiths Common-wealth of England, and part in mine owne Search of Records. And all these, together afford sufficent maintenance for thousands of per∣sons who may bee here well prouided for. Here I should and here I could for better dire∣ction of yonger brothers shew what meniall Clarke∣ships of large exhibition, are vnder the great Offi∣cers of the Land, the Iudges, the Kings Councell, and other Officers which are not elsewhere pub∣lisht. And I know it would open a doore to many a proper mans preferment, especially; vnder the Lord Keeper: as Secretaries for Chancerie businesse, and Spirituall promotions, the Commission of the Peace, Iniunctions, the Dockquets. And other the like vn∣der the Lord Treasurer, as Secretaries for the busi∣nesse of the Realme, and the Custome-house besides the Inlets to so many preferments about the Cu∣stomes, and Escheators: places, vnder the Lord Treasurer, vnder the Chauncellor of the Exchequer Duchie, and Principalitie of Wales, and Duchie of
Cornewall, as Seale keeper, Secretary, &c. Vnder the Master of the Court of Wardes, as Se∣cretarie; vnder the Iudges, as Marshall. Clarke of the Bailes, &c. Vnder the Barrons of the Exchequer, as Examiner; Clarke of the Bailes and other Clarkes. Vnder the Kings Attourney Generall, as Clarke of the Pattens, Clarke of the Confessions and entries, Clarke of the References, Booke bearer. Vnder the Sollicitor Generall, Clarke of the Patents, Booke bearer. Besides many other Clarkes vnder the white staues of the Court, and in the Counting house, and many seue∣rall offiices. All which with hundreds more that I could name, with a plainer and more large deduct∣ion, were it not for feare that what I well intend for generall good would be taken in offence for priuate preiudice. But for the Clarkeships of the Kings houshold examine farther the Blacke booke in the Exchequer, The Phisition followes. ANd heere I remember me of an old tale fol∣lowing, viz. At the beginning of the happy raigne of our late good Queene Elizabeth, diuers Commissioners of great place being authorized to enquire of, and to displace all such of the Clergie as would not con∣forme to the reformed Church, one amongst others was Conuented before them, who being asked whe∣hter he would subscribe or no, deniedit, and so conse∣quently
was adiudged to lose his benefice, and to be deprived his function, wherevpon in his impatience he said; That if they (meaning the Commissioners) held this course it would cost many a mans life. For which the Commissioners called him backe againe, and charged him that he had spoke treasonable, and seditious words tending to the raysing of a re∣bellion, or some tumult in the Land, for which he should receiue the reward of a Traytor. And be∣ing asked whether hee spake those words or no, he acknowledged it, and tooke vpon him the Iu∣stification thereof; for said he, yee have taken from me my liuing, and profession of the Ministrie, Schollership is all my portion; and I have no other meanes now left for my maintenance but to turne Phisition, and before I shalbe absolute Master of that Misterie (God he knowes) how many mens lives it will cost. For few Phisitions vse to try experiments vpon their owne bodies. With vs it is a Profession can maintaine but a few. And diuers of those more indebted to opini∣on, than learning, and (for the most part) better qualified in discoursing their travailes than in dis∣cerning their patients maladies. For it is growne to be a very huswiues trade, where fortune prevailes more then skill. Their best benefactor the Nea∣politan Their grand Seignieur. The Sorpego, their Gonfollinere. The Sciaticke, Their great Marshall that calls the Muster Rolle of them all together at every Spring and fall, are all as familier to her as the Cuckow at Canck-wood in May. And the cure of
them is the skill of every good old Ladies cast Gentlewoman, when she gives over painting, shee falls to plastering and shall have, as good pra∣ctize as the best of them, for those kind of dis∣eases. Marry for Womens griefes amongst Phisi∣tions, the Masculine is more worthy then the Feminine. Secrecie is the cheife skill, and virilitie the best learning that is required in a Womans Phisition. But I never read of many of those to be long liued, or honestly wiued hi∣therto in all my reading. Hitherto I speake nothing in disrepute of the more reverend, and learned sort of Phisitions who are to be had in singular reverence, and be vsefull to mankind next to the Divine. Indeed, I rather pitty them, and pittying smile to see how pretily these young gamesters Male and Female lay about them, and engrosse the greater part of Patientrie in all places where∣soeuer. And here I may more fitly say (God knowes) how many mens liues this abused opinion had of such Gamesters costs. Because they be not Masters of that Mysterie, and that science which requires the Greeke tongue, exactly, all the learning, and skill of Philosophie, Historie of all sorts (especially naturall) knowledge of all vegetatives and Minerals, and whatsoever dwels within the foure elements. Also Skill in Astro∣nomy, Astrologie. And so much of the Iudicialls
vpon all manner of Calculations as may be well warranted with much other kind of learning, art and skill, whereof my young travailing Phisition, and trading wayting woman never heard. Their meanes of Advancement are in these wayes. viz. To be Phisition of some Colledge in one of the Vniuersities, (as diuers Colledges have such places) Phisition to the King or Queenes person. Phisition to either of their housholds. Or to some Hospitall, (as most have such.) Or to some great persons, who may preferre them hereafter, and be somewhat helpefull in the meane time. To a good old Vsurer, or one that hath got his great estate together vnconscionably: For they feare nothing but death, and will buy life at any rate: There is no coward to an ill Consci∣ence. It is not amisse, to make way of acquaintance with Gallants given to deepe drinking, and sur∣feyting: For they are patients at all times of the yeare. Or, a Gentlewoman that would faine vse the meanes to bee pregnant. Or, your Lascivious Lady, and your man in the Perriwigge will helpe to furnish with a foot∣cloth.
A Citizens wife of a weake stomacke, will sup∣ply the fringe to it. And if all faile. And the Bathe will affoord no roome: Let them finde out some strange wa∣ter, some unheard-of Spring. It is an easie matter to discolour or alter the taste of it in some measure, (it makes no matter how little.) Report strange cures that it hath done. Beget a Superstitious opi∣nion in it. Goodfellowship shall uphold it. And the neighbouring Townes shall all sweare for it. The Apprentice followes. THe first question is, to what Trade you will put your Son, and which is most worthy of choice. For the Merchant it requireth great stocke, great experience in Forraine estates. And great hazard, and adventure at the best. And this is not all. For it depends upon the Peace of our State with forraine Princes, especially those with whom we hold mutuall traffique. Or, who lye in our way to intercept, or impediment our Trade abroad. Besides that, in time of Warre they can hold no certainty of dealing, or supply∣ing their Factorie in parts beyond the Seas. Ship∣ping is subject ever at the let goe, to bee stayed. Marriners to be prest, and many other inconve∣niences attend them in such times. Besides the burthen of Custome and Imposition which all
States impose more or lesse. So that unlesse wee have peace with such Neighbours, there is little hope in that profession in the ordinarie and lawfull way of trading. Happily you will alledge that some Merchants thrive well enough, when the warres most rage, and when the streame of State is most troubled. Some then hold it to be the best fishing; they that gaine then (Sir) if they gaine justifiably: gaine not as Merchants, but as men of Warre, which occupati∣on a man may learne without serving seaven yeares Apprentiship unto it. And if they gaine justifiably as Merchants, it must be in some generall stocke of a Society incorpora∣ted, who have purse to passe to and fro with suffici∣ent power, in the most dangerous times. And if such Societies are tollerable at any time, it is at such times. How they be otherwise allowable. I leave to consideration. For the Shopkeeper, his welfare for the most part, depends upon the prosperity of the Mer∣chant. For if the Merchant sit still, the most of them may shut up their Shop windowes. Little Skill, Art, or Mystery, shall a man learne in Shop∣keeping. A man shall never in forraigne parts, be∣ing put to his shifts out of his owne Meridian, live by the skill of weighing and measuring. The most use of advantage, he can make of it, is to bene∣fit betweene the Mart and the Market, than which nothing is more uncertaine, seeing there is no true judiciall of the falling, and rising of commodities, And the casualties that they are subject vnto, (espe∣cially)
in time of Warre. Take this for a generall rule, that those Trades which aske most with an Apprentice, are incertai∣nest of thriving, and require greatest stockes of set∣ting up. Amongst Trades, give me those that have in them some Art, Craft, or Science, by which a man may live, and be a welcome ghuest to all Countries abroad, and have imployment in the most stormy times at home, when Merchants and Shopkeepers are out of use: (as.) An Apothecarie. A Druggist. A Chirurgion. A Lapidarie. A Ieweller. A Printer. An Ingraver in Stones and Mettall. One that hath skill in seasoning of Shipwood. A Carpenter of all sorts, especially of Ship∣ping. A Smith of all sorts, especially of Clockes, Watches, Guns, &c. A Planter, and Gardner of all sorts. An Enginere for making of Patars, and the like Engines of Warre. And Hot Presses for Cloth, &c. And Engines to weigh any Ship, or Guns that are drowned, &c. Skrues, &c. A maker of all sorts of Instruments, for Na∣vigation, Compasses, Globes, Astrolabes. A Drainer of grounds Surmounded. A Sale-maker, and
A maker of Cordage, Tackle, &c. A Lymner. A Clothier, a Clothworker, and a Dyer. A Taylor, Shooe-maker, Glover, Perfumer, and Trimmer of Gloves. An Imbroiderer. A Feltmaker, a Glasier, and one that can paint in Glasse. Briefly, any Manufacture or trade, wherein is any Science, or Craft. Onely those Trades are of least use and benefit, which are called Huswives Trades (as Brewer, Ba∣ker, Cooke, and the like.) Because they be the skill of Women as well as of men, and common to both. I would have you know, that the Maker was be∣fore the Retaylor, and most Shopkeepers are but of a sublimated Trade and retayle, but as Attorneyes to the maker. But if the Maker (without dispute of Freedome in any Corporation, might set up Shop and sell his commoditie immediately) it would be a great deale better for the Common-wealth, than now it is. Besides, it is no matter of difficultie, burthen, or disgrace, for a Shopkeeper, yea a Merchant, or a Gentleman, to have the skill of some one of these Manufactures, besides his Revenew, or profession, to accompany him, what fortune soever may carry him into Countries unknowne. To my knowledge, a great Earle lately of this Land, did thinke it no scorne to indeavour the at∣taining of the Craft, and trade of a Farrior, where∣in he grew excellent.
And when our acquaintance tooke first life with those of the Low Countries, upon a Treatie where∣in our Embassador strove to set forth the worthi∣nesse of our King and Kingdome, with the Native commodities thereof. The Dutch (igno∣rantly conceiving that no man could attaine to wealth, without some good occupation, or manufa∣cture) askt him, what handicraft our King was brought up unto, or what trade he had used to get so much wealth withall. I admit the Merchant Royall, that comes to his Profession by travaile and Factory, full fraught, and free adventure to be a profession worthy the see∣king. But not the hedge-creeper, that goes to seeke custome from shop to shop, with a Cryll under his arme, That leapes from his Shop-boord to the Ex∣change, and after he is fame-falne and credit crackt, in two or three other professions, shall wrigle into this and that, when he comes upon the Exchange, in stead of enquiring after such a good ship, spends the whole houre in disputing, whether is the more profitable house-keeping, either with powder Beefe & brewes, or with fresh Beefe and Porridge: though (God wot) the blacke Pot at home be guilty of ney∣ther. And so he departs when the Bell rings, and his guts rumble, both to one tune, and the same purpose. The Merchant Royall might grow prosperous, were it not for such poore patching interloping Lapwings, that have an adventure of two Chal∣dron of Coles at New-castle; As much oyle in the Greeneland fishing, as will serve two Coblers for
the whole yeare ensuing. And an other at Rowsie, for as many Fox-skins, as will furre his Long-lane gowne, when he is called to the Livorie. The Shopkeeper is a cleanly Trade; especially, your Linnen-Draper, which company hath the greatest Commonalty, and the largest priviledges of all other; and yet they maintaine nothing by Charter, for (indeed) they have none. But a manufacture for my money; especially, if he sell to the wearer immediately. Now for the better incouragement of men of Trade. Know that in most Companies of Trades∣men incorporate (especially in London) there is provision made by divers benefactors of their So∣cieties deceased, for the enabling and setting up of young beginners, by stockes of money remaining in the hands of some few of the chiefe of their Company, (how faithfully disposed I leave to their owne consideration.) But surely the poorer sort complaine much of the misimployment of it gene∣rally. There is but one little Crevis to peepe in at their dealings. And that is betweene their Masters consci∣ence, & the Clarks connivence, which is so narrow, that you may sooner discern the South Pole through the maine Center, than discover their mysterie. Indeed in times past, the Clearkship of the Company hath beene bestowed upon some ancient decayed member of the Company, for his lively∣hood. But the Attorney and Scrivener; and some petty Clarkes of the Citie, by the Letters of, &c. pre-occupy those places.
And here I could wish for righting of the dead, and releeving of the poorer members of such Com∣panies, who are kept in ignorance. That some paines were taken in the Prerogative Office, for the collating of all guifts of this nature, to be publisht in print, that the meanest might thereby be able to call their Grand Masters to account, if they abuse the trust in them reposited in this behalfe. I ac∣knowledge the youth of mine age to be determined. And (God knowes) how poore a remaine of life is left in my Glasse, yet if it may please those in whom the power resteth, to give me leave to search (Gratis) for all Grants and guifts of pious use in all kindes whatsoever. I could willingly bestow that little of my Lampe, in collection of these things, and publish them to posterity. Provided alwayes, that I and mine may have the priviledge of imprinting the same for some fitting number of yeares to come. The Navigator. NExt to the man of Trade, or rather equally with him, I must give the Navigator his due for that his profession is as full of science, as use∣full to the Common wealth, and as profitable to himselfe as any trade whatsoever. If he attaine the skill of knowing, and handling the tackle, the cer∣taine art of his Compasse; the knowledge of langua∣ges, and dispositions of forreigne Nations where
he travailes and trades, he may rise from a Squabler to a Master, from a Master to be a Generall honestly, and with good reputation in a short time. The Nauigator his way of Advancement, and imployment is, by The Lords of his Maiesties privie Councell, The High Admirall: Commissioners for the Kings Navy: Chiefe Officers of the Navyes of Societies incorporate: Private Merchants, and the like. With the Trinitie house. But if he get to be an Owner he may trade as free as bird in ayre, as a man of warre or a man of trade, and Commerce. If he take heed that he intrench not vpon the incorporated Companies, especially the minotaur. He cannot do amisse (with Gods assistnace.) He may liue merrily, and contentedly, be it but in tra∣ding as a meere Carryer of home cōmodities. Impor∣ted from one port to another within the kingdome. The Husbandman. THe Husbandman may likewise for the happie content of the life, and the honest gaine which it brings with it, be worthy to inuite a right good mans sonne to vndergoe the profession. Your sonne whom you intend for a Husbandman,
must be of a disposition part gentile, and rusticke e∣qually mixt together. For if the Gentleman be pre∣dominant: his running Nagge will out run the Con∣stable. His extraordinary strong Beere will be too headstrong in office of Church-Warden. And his well mouthed dogges will make him out-mouth all the Vestrie. But if the clowne be predominant he will smell all browne bread and garlicke. Besides, he must be of a hardier temper than the rest of his brethren, because the vnhealthfullest corners of the Kingdome are the most profitable for Fermors. He must especially aime at a Tenancie vnder the Crowne, or some Bishops Sea, Deane and Chapter; some Col∣ledge; some Companie, some Hospitall, or some other bodie incorporate. Wherein the Auditor or Recei∣ver, must be his best Intelligencer, and Director. Young vnthrifts acquaintance when they first arriue at the age of one and twentie. And good old con∣scionable Landlords that hold it a deadly sinne to raise the rents of their Grandfathers, or hope to be deliuered out of Purgatorie by their Tenants pray∣ers will doe well These professions before mentioned, be (as it were) the orbs to receiue all fixed starrs, and such dispositions as may be put into any certaine frame. But for a more libertine disposition, Fit it with the profession of a Courtier. For an overflowing, and Ranker disposition, make him a Souldier. But beyond this he is a lost man, not worthy a fathers remembrance, or prouidence.
The Courtiers wayes of advancement be these: BY the generall and most ancient rule of Court, if you would have him to be preferred unto the Kings service in the end. And in the meane time to have sufficient meanes of maintenance. Place him with one of the White Staves of the Houshold. By the more particular rule, (if you can) put him unto the Lord High Steward his Service (who a∣mongst the white Staves) hath the chiefest hand in preferring to any office beneath stayres. If the High Steward be full, seeke to the Lord Chamberlaine, who hath the chiefe power to pre∣ferre to the places above stayres, and to the War∣drobe. And if there be no entrance there, then seek to the Treasurer of the Houshold, and next to the Con∣trollor. The Master of the Houshold. The Cofe∣rer, and the rest of the greene Cloth. The Master of the Horse preferres to the Avena∣narie and other Clarkeships offices, and places about the Stable. The principall Secretary hath heretofore had a great hand in preferring to the Clarkeships in the office of the Signet, and the Lord privie Seale into the privie Seale office. The Master of the great Wardrobe into the Clarkeships, and offices there. The Master of the Robes. The Master of the Iewell-house, the Kee∣per of the privie Purse. The Master of the Toyles
and Tents with some other the like have whilome beene the meanes of preferring divers their follow∣ers into the service of the King, in divers benefici∣all places, and Clarkeships, in their severall offices respectively. The Lord Treasurer without the house, pre∣ferres to his Majesties service, in most places in or about the Custome-houses, in all the parts of Eng∣land. And besides these, I sinde no meanes used of old, for preferment into the Kings service for these kind of places. The yeomen of the Guard, were wont to come in for their personage, and activitie by their Captaines allowance. And the Bed-chamber mens servants, ever were in way to be preferred for Pages of the privie Chamber, or Groomes, or placed at the back staires, not of right, but of custome. For the Clarkes of the Houshold, they were wont anciently to rise by certaine degrees, according to the prescription of the Black Booke, but how it is now, I know not. For your better satisfaction of Court Offices, their order and Fee. Search, the Blacke Booke in the Exchequer, and in the Court. And for all Offices whatsoever under the King, throughout the whole Kingdome; Either in Castle, Parke, Chase, Court, or house of the Kings royalty or place soever, with the then Fees of the same, I referre you to a booke. Whereof many hundred Copies are extant, which was collected by the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and
by him delivered to the late Queene Elizabeth of famous memorie. And so much for the Courtier. The Souldier followes. ANd the question is first. Whether the better way of thriving, is to be a Sea Soldier, or a Land Soldier. Questionlesse the better way of thriving is to be a Sea Soldier. In this Kingdome of England being an Island, for that he is more vsefull to his Coun∣try. More learning is required to be a Sea Soldier than to be a Land Soldier. A Sea Soldier is cer∣taine of victuals, and wages; where the Land Sol∣diers pay will hardly find him sustenance. A Sea Soldier may now and than chaunce to haue a snapp at a bootie or a price which may in an instant make him a fortune for ever; where the Land Soldier may in an age come to the ransacking of a poore fisher Towne at the most. More valour is required in a Sea Soldier than in a Land Soldier; because the extremitie of the place requires it. The Sea Captaine is exposed to as much danger during the whole fight as the poorest man in the Ship; where the land Captaine vseth but to offer his men to the face of the enemy, and than retreateth. The way to rise to preferment at Sea, is by the Admiralls Countenance, and the Vice Admiralls in the Kings seruice, or in other service by the favour of great traded Merchants, and especially of your
bodies incorporate: and their chiefe Officers; and more especially their President, and Treasurer for the time being. His breeding is a matter of more moment than his age regardeth. If he be true bred, he should be first made a perfect Nauigator able to direct the Sterage of their course, a∣ble to know the tackle, and appoint every Sayler to his charge. He should know what number of Say∣lors, what Ordinance, and what munition should be re∣quisite for a Ship of such a burden. He should be a skilfull Caneere, and able to direct the Gunner, to say what quantity of powder a Peece of such bore ond depth requireth, and of what weight the bullet should be where such a quantity of powder is vsed, whether the Peece be sound or hony-combed. He should be able to know and direct what quantity of victuall should be required for so many men, for such a voyage. And what quantity of powder and shot. Also, to ouersee and direct the Purser and Steward in the expence of their victuall without profusenesse, or too much percemonie. Likewise skilfull in all manner of Fire-workes and fitting Engines for sea fight. Briefly, he should be so compleat, as that none should be able to teach him in his place, and he skil∣full to controle every other in their places. He should be courteous and louing to his men. Aboue all things he should be zealous of the honour of God. See that the divine service be duely read on board E∣vening and Morning, and that swearing be severely punished. A Sea Captaine, is not a place for a young
man to leape into instantly, and imediately out of a Ladies Vshership; a Great mans bed chamber, or a Littletons discipleship. It is not your feathered Gallant of the Court, nor your Tauerne Roarer of the Citie, becomes this place I assure you. I find not any Meson de dieu for relieving of mayned Marriners only, but that erected at Chattam by Sir Iohn Hawkins Knight, Treasurer of the Navie of the late Q. Elizabeth; wherein it was provided, that there should be a deduction of Sixpence by the Moneth, out of eve∣ry man and boy their wages in every voyage towards the same. Which I could wish were aswell imployed as collected. The Land-Souldier followes. IF the Land-Souldier thinke to thrive and rise by de∣grees of service, from a Common Souldier to a Captaine in this age, (alas) hee is much deceived. That custome is obsolete, and growne out of use. Doe what he can doe in Land-service, hee shall hardly rise by his single merit. His happinesse shall be but to fill his hungry belly, and Satiate himselfe upon a Pay day. But if hee be of Kinne, or a favourite to some great Officer, hee may carry the Colours the first day, bee a Lieutenant the second, and a Captaine before he knowes how many dayes goe to the weeke in their Regiment. The Land-service where a man may learne most ex∣perience of Warre discipline, is in the Low-Countries,
by reason of the long exercise of Warres and variety of Stratagems there. Beyond that Northward, the service is both more unprofitable and more dangerous, and lesse experience is to be there learned. The more your Sonne turnes his face to the South the more profitable the Land-service is. Lastly, if hee have no friend or kindred to raise him in the Land-service, I assure you that there is no Law against buying and selling of Offices in the Low-Coun∣tries, for ought that I have read. Neither is it marka∣ble amongst them. After the Souldier returnes home, it makes no mat∣ter what number of wounds hee can reckon about him. All the wayes of reliefe for him that I can number are these: A poore Knights place of Windsor; If the He∣rald report him a Gentleman, And the Knights of the Honourable Order of the Garter will accept him. A Brother of Suttons Hospitall; If the Feoffees have not Servants of their owne to preferre before him. A Pensioner of the County; If the lustices find him worthy. And that hee was prest forth of the same County. Saint Thomas in Southwarke, and St. Bartholmews, Smithfield; onely till their wounds or diseases be cured and no longer. And that if the Masters of the sayd Hospitals please to receive them. For the Savoy where Souldiers had a foundation, I know none now.
And other Houses appropriated for reliefe of Soul¦diers now in use I remember none. For the chiefe are long since demolished. The Tem∣plarij are gone. The Knights of St. Iohn of Ierusalem forgotten. That famous House upon Lincolne greene is rac'd to the ground. And many the like now better knowne by the Records than the remaines of their ru∣ines with their Revenue, are all diverted from the uses of their first foundation to private and peculiar Inhe∣ritances, which I pity more than the dissolution of all the Monasteries that ever were. Heere you see, is preferment enough for your sixe Sonnes though you bestow every one upon a severall Profession. Onely take this generall Rule for all, viz. To what course soever your sonnes shall betake them. Bee sure that they all have Crammar learning at the least. So shall they bee able to receive and reteyne the impression of any the said Professions. And other∣wise, shall scarce possibly become Masters in the same, or any one of them. Or if they doe, It will bee with more than ordinary paines and difficulty. Your three Daughters challenge the next place. FOr theyr Portions, I shewed you before; how and when to raise them. That is, by the Marriage of your eldest Sonne, or out of that part of your personall estate which you may spare without prejudice of your selfe.
I would have their breeding like to the Dutch Womans clothing, tending to profit onely and comelinesse. Though she never have a dancing Schoole-Master, A French Tutor, nor a Scotch Taylor, to make her shoulders of the breadth of Bristow Cowsway. It makes no matter. For working in curious Italiā purles, or French borders, it is not worth the while. Let them learne plaine workes of all kind, so they take heed of too open seaming. In stead of Song and Mu∣sicke, let them learne Cookery and Laundrie. And in stead of reading Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia, let them read the grounds of good huswifery. I like not a fe∣male Poetresse at any hand. Let greater personages glory their skill in musicke, the posture of their bo∣dies, their knowledge in languages, the greatnesse, and freedome of their spirits: and their arts in arreigning of mens affections, at their flattering faces. This is not the way to breed a private Gentlemans Daughter. If the mother of them be a good Huswife, and Reli∣giously disposed, let her have the bringing up of one of them. Place the other two forth betimes, and be∣fore they can judge of a good manly leg. The one in the house of some good Merchant, or Citizen of civill and Religious government, The o∣ther in the house of some Lawyer, some Iudge, or well reported Iustice or Gentleman of the Country, where the Servingman is not too predominant. In any of these she may learne what belongs to her improve∣ment, for Sempstrie, for Confectionary, and all re∣quisits of Huswifery. She shall be sure to be restrai∣ned of all ranke company, and unfitting libertie; which
are the overthrow of too many of their Sexe. There is a pretty way of breeding young Maides an Exchange shop, or St. Martins le grand. But many of them get such a foolish Crick with carrying the Bandbox under their Apron to Gentlemens Cham∣bers, that in the end it is hard to distinguish whether it be their belly or their bandbox makes such a goodly show. And in a trade where a woman is sole Chapman, she claimes such a preheminence over her husband, that she will not be held to give him an account of her dea∣lings, eyther in retaile, or whole saile at any rate. The Merchants Factor, and Citizens servant of the better sort, cannot disparage your Daughters with their Societie. And the Iudges, Lawyers, and Iustices followers, are not ordinary Servingmen, but men of good breed, and their education for the most part Clarkely, whose service promiseth their farther and future advance∣ment. Your Daughter at home will make a good wife for some good Yeomans eldest Sonne, whose father will be glad to crowne his sweating frugality, with alliance to such a house of Gentry. The youngmans fingers will itch to be handling of Taffata, and to be placed at the Table, and to be carved unto by Mistris Dorothie, it will make him and the good plaine old Ione his Mother, to passe over all re∣spect of Portion or Patrimony. For your Daughter at the Merchants, and her sister if they can carry it wittily, the City affords them va∣rietie.
The young Factor being fancy-caught in his days of Innocency, & before he travaile so farre into experi∣ence as into forreigne Countries, may lay such a foun∣dation of first love in her bosome, as no alteration of Climate can alter. So likewise, may Thomas the fore-man of the Shop, when beard comes to him, as Apprentiship goes from him, be intangled and belymed with the like springs. For the better is as easily surprized as the worse. Some of your Clarkly men complaine the moysture of their palmes. Others the Sorpego in their wrists, both movin anes. With a little patience your daughter may light up∣on some Counsailor at Law, who may be willing to take the young Wench, in hope of favour with the old Iudge. An Attorney will be glad to give all his profits of a Michaelmas Terme, Fees and all, but to wooe her through a Crevice. And the Parson of the Parish being her Ladies Chaplaine, will forsweare ea∣ting of Tithe Pig, for a whole yeare, for such a parcell of Glebe Land at all times. And so much for your Sonnes and Daughters. I now espy mine Host of the Bull here in Saint Al∣bans standing at his doore upon his left leg like to the old Drummer of Parish-garden, ready to entertaine us. Therefore I will here conclude with that of the Poet. —Navibus at{que} Quadragis petimus benevivere, quod pet is hic est, Est Anglis, animus si te, non deficit equus. FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAVVCET for Ben: Fisher, and are to bee sold at his Shop at the signe of the Talbot in Alders∣gate-street. 1631.
