7805 99844881 9730
¶ A PROCLAMATION ordeined and made by the kinges highnes, with the aduise of his most honourable counsaile, the .xxi. daye of Maye, in the .xxxvi. yere of his maiesties reygne, lymyttyng howe and at what pryces beefe mutton veale porke wyldefoule and other kyndes of vitailes shalbe solde. FORASMOCHE as it is come to the knowledge of our soueraine lord the king, that bochers and other victailers, ha∣uing more respecte to theyr owne priuate lucre and aduantage, then the cōmon welth of this his hignes realme, haue reised the prices of flesh, as of beeffes, muttons, veales, and other kynde of pultrey and victailes, to suche excessiue and high prices, that his louyng subiectes cannot gayne with theyr labours and salary, sufficient to paye for theyr conue∣nient victailes and sustenance: onles that spedy remedy be prouided in that behalfe. HIS highnes therfore, by the aduyse of his most honourable counsaile, and by the auctoritie of the acte of parliament, made in the .xxxi. yere of his maiesties reigne, straightly chargeth and commandeth, that all and euery the sayde bochers and victuallers, sellynge fleshe by retayle, as well within the citie of London and the suburbes of the same, as in all other places within this his realme of Englande, as well within fraunchises and liberties as without, shall from and after .xiiii. dayes next ensuing this present proclamation published and proclaimed according to the said statute, sell the fleshe of beefe mutton veale porke and lambe, being good and holsome for mannes body, by retaile by weight, not aboue the pryees and rates hereafter ensuyng: That is to saye, betwene the .xv. daye of Iune, and the feast o the byrth of our lorde god yerely, euery pounde of beefe to be solde, not aboue the pryce of halfe peny and halfe ferthyng the pounde: Euery pounde of mutton, not aboue the price of a peny the pounde: and euery pounde of veale, not aboue the price of a peny the pounde. And that the flesshe of beeffes, muttons, and veales to be solde betwene the sayde feast of the byrthe of our lorde god, and the sayde .xv. daye of Iune, not aboue the pryces and rates hereafter folowyng: That is to say, the pounde of beefe to be solde, not aboue three ferthinges the pound, the pounde of mutton, not aboue a peny the pound, and euery pounde of veale, not aboue thre ferthinges and a halfe fer∣thyng the pounde. And furthermore that the fleshe of lambe and porke shall be solde at all tymes in the yere, not aboue the prices and rates herafter folowing. That is to say, the best lambe to be solde, not aboue the price of. ii. s. The second lambe, not aboue the price of xx. d. and the meanest lambe, not aboue the price of .xvi. d. And the halfe and quarters of euery suche lambes, to to be solde, not aboue the rates of the sayd pryces of lambes. And also the fleshe of porke to be solde by retayle or otherwyse, not aboue the price of three ferthin∣ges the pounde. AND furthermore his highnes, by the same auctoritie, straightly chargeth and commaundeth all and singuler his subiectes, inhabi∣ting within the cities of London and Westminster, and in the suburbes of the same, and in the borough of Southwarke, being free men of the said cities and borough, or of any of them, to sell all maner of wyld foule and pultrey wares not aboue the rates and prices herafret ensuing. That is to saye, the beste swanne, not aboue the price of fyue shillinges: the beste crane bustard or storke, not aboue the price of foure shillinges: Herneshewes shouclars and byttours of the beste, not aboue the price of .xviii.d. the pece. Pecocke olde, the best, not aboue the price of .xx. d. Pechikins the best, not aboue the price of .xiiii.d'. the pece: The capon of grece of the best, not aboue the price of .xx.d'. Capon of Kent, otherwise called boyling capon of the best, not aboue the price of .viii.d. Capon good, not aboue the price of .xiiii.d. Henne of grece the best, not aboue the price of .vii. d. Brewe and egrete of the best, not aboue the price of .xii.d'. the pece: Bytters of the best, not aboue the price of .xii. d. the pece: Gulles of the best, not aboue the price of .xii. d. the pece: Grene geese fat, solde betwene Ester and Midsomer, not aboue the price of. vii. d. the pece: Geese great, sold betwene midsomer and shrouetide of the best, not aboue the price of .viii.d. the pece: Goodwithez fat, not aboue the price of .xii.d. the pece, A dosen of dotterelles of the best, not aboue the price of .iii.s̄.iiii.d. the dosen: Quayles of the best, the dosen, not aboue .iiii.s̄. sparrowes the dosen, not aboue .iii.d'. the dosen: Pigeons of the best, not aboue .viii.d'. the dosen: Rabbettes suckars fat, not aboue .xviii.d'. the dosen: Conies, betwene Easter and Alhalowtide the best, not aboue .ii.s̄. the dosen: wynter conyes, betwene halowtide and shrouetyde, not aboue .ii.s̄.vi.d'. the dosen: Malarde of the best, not aboue .iii.d'. the malard: Teeles of the best, not aboue .ii.d'. the teele: wygeons fat, not aboue .iii.s̄. the dosen: woodcockes of the best, not aboue .iiii. the pece. Plouers grene of the best, not aboue .iii.s̄. the dosen: Bastard plouers fat, not aboue .ii. s̄.vi.d'. the dosen: Marles of the best, not aboue .xviii.d'. the dosen: Hen Snyttes of the best, not aboue .xviii.d'. the dosen: Larkes of the best,  vi.d'. the dosen: Buntynges of the best, not aboue .iiii.d'. the dosen: Great byrdes of the best, not aboue .vi.d'. the dosen
