15310.1 A3822A 99900416 151979
ARTICLES EXHIBITED IN PARLIAMENT AGAINST WILLIAM ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, Feb. 25. 1640. Published by a true and perfect Copy. Printed in the yeare 1640
Articles of the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, AGAINST WILLIAM LAWD, Archbishop of Canterbury, in mainte∣nance of their Accusation, whereby he stands charged with High Treason, Febr. 25. 1640. I. THat hee, the said VVilliam Laud, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, traiterously la∣bored to subvert the fundamentall Lawes and Government of the Kingdome by giving his Majestie advice, privately, and at Counsell Table, High Commission, and in other places, that hee would have governed by Civill Lawes, and further said, hee would make the proudest Subject in the Kingdome to give way unto him: and being told it was against Law, he said he would make it Law, and that the King might at his owne pleasure take away without Law, and make it warran∣table by Gods Law.
II. His countenancing of bookes, and their Authors, for the maintenance of his unlimi∣ted and absolute power, whereby the power of Parliament is denied, and the Bishops power of Prelacie set up. III. That he traiterously went about to inter∣rupt the Judges by his threatnings, and other meanes, to constraine them to give false judge∣ment in the case of Shipmony, as will appeare both by writings under his hand, and by te∣stimony of divers persons of good worth and quality. IV. That he hath taken bribes, and sold justice in the High Commission as Archbishop, and hath not onely corrupted the Judges there, but also sold Judicious places to bee cor∣rupted. V. That hee hath endeavoured the incroach∣ment of Jurisdiction and Institution of Ca∣nons, which are not onely unlawfull, but pre∣judiciall to the subject. And that he hath ex∣ercised his authority very cruelly, both as a Counsellour, Commissioner, and a Judge. VI. That hee hath traiterously assumed a capi∣tal power over his Majesties subjects, deny∣ing his power of Prelacie as from the King.
VII. That by false enormious Doctrines and other synister wayes and meanes Hee went about to subvert the Religion established in this Kingdome, and to set up Papistrie and superstition in the Church. VIII. That by undue meanes and practice hee hath gotten into his hand the power of no∣minating of Ministers to Spirituall promo∣tion, and hath preferred none but scanda∣lous Ministers thereunto, and that hee pre∣ferred corrupt Chaplains to His Maje∣sty.
IX. That his owne Ministers, as Haywood, Laifield and others, are notoriously disaffect∣ed to Religion. X. That he hath Trayterously endeavoured to reconcile us to the Church of Rome, and to that end hath employed a Jesuite and a Papist-Priest, and hath wrought with the Popes Agents in severall points.
XI. That to suppresse preaching, Hee hath suspended divers good men, and used un∣lawfull meanes by Letters, and otherwise to severall Bishops, to suppresse them. XII. That he hath Trayterously endeavoured to suppresse the French Religion, which is the same wee are off, and the Dutch Church, and to set division betweene them and us.
XIII. That he hath Trayterously endeavoured to set Division betweene the King and his Subjects, and hath gone about to bring in Innovations into the Church: And hath in∣duced the King to Warre with the Scots, and many upon their death Bedds, to give to∣wards the maintenance of the Warre: And hath caused the Clergie to give freely to∣wards the same, and hath brought in many Superstitions and Innovations into the Church of Scotland: And that hee procured the King to breake the pacification, thereby to cause a bloody Warre between the King∣domes.
XIIII. That to preserve Himselfe from being questioned, for these and other his Trayte∣rous designes, from the First of his Maje∣sties Raigne untill now. Hee laboured to subvert the Rights of Parliaments; by all which Words, Councells, and Actions he hath Trayterously laboured to Alienate the hearts of the Kings leige people from his Majesty, to set a Division betweene them; and to ruine and destroy His Majesties King∣domes. For which they impeach him of High Treason against our Soveraigne Lord the King, his Crowne and Dignity. And the said Commons, by protestation saving to themselves the liberty of exhibit∣ing at any time hereafter, any other Accu∣sation or Impeachment against the said
WILLIAM LAUD, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. And also, to the replying of the An∣swers that Hee, the said Arch-Bishop shall make unto the said Articles, or any of them. And of offering proofe also of the Premisses, or any of them, or any o∣ther Impeachment or Accusation, that shall bee exhibited by them, as the course of Parliaments require. DOE PRAY; That he, the said VVilli∣am Laud, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, may be put spee∣dily to answer for all, and every of the Premisses: That such Proceedings, Examinations,
Tryalls, and Judgements, may be upon every of them, had and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice. FINIS.
