B3244 e664_6 R206837 99865940 118196
A Bloudy Fight in France, BETWEEN The Kings Army, and the Parliaments, neer the City of Paris: With the manner how the Citizens sallyed forth, and the great Defeat given them by His Majesties Horse, commanded by the ti∣tular Duke of York; with the besieging of the City; and a Treaty for the surrender: Also, a great Victory obtained by the English against the French at Sea; the number of ships sunk and taken; and the seizing of the most richest Prize that hath been known for many years. woodcut of a man with a poleaxe atop a horse May .15 London, Printed for Richard Hare, 162.
Another great VICTORY Obtained by the King of France, Against the Prince of Conde, neer the Gates of Paris, &c. SIR, SInce the Defeat given to the Prince of Conde neer St. Dennis, the Lord Mar∣shal Turein advanced with two thou∣sand Horse towards Paris; which the Lord Marshal de Hospital (Governor of the City)
perceiving, commanded the Gates to be shut, and the Trained Bands to be in readi∣ness; by which timely Allarm, the Citizens were soon in a posture of Defence; and upon the neer approach of the Cavalry, a considerable party of the Citizens were commanded forth, who gave a gallant Onset, but received a great Repulse; for the Kings Horse charged with such an irresistable re∣solution, that they quickly made good their way through the very thickest of the young Infantry; and upon their countermarching charge, galled them so extremely with small shot, and Lances, that they immediatly dis∣sipated them, breaking their Ranks, and for∣cing them to retire into the City with many crackt Crowns: This blow proved very dis∣advantagious to the Parisians, by reason that the Kings party gained an opportunity here∣by to block up the City, and to intercept provisions from any pass whatsoever. And hath also now begat a Treaty, for a rendition of the said City: which if it prove effectu∣all, by all consequence it appears, that the
rest of the Garrisons will soon submit, and finally a general peace to be established. The King hath sent for the Lord Dighy from the Governm, of Mantes, to confirm a great∣er Title of Honour upon him; so that his Lordship hath left Sir Lewis Dives Gover∣nour for his Majesty. Gen. Harcourt is advanced with his Army neer to the City of Burdeaux, with a Design, to make a sudden and general Assault; for he hath gained a great advantage of the Ene∣my, and hath drawn most of his forces be∣fore it. He hath a very considerable Army, consisting of about twelve thousand foot, and three thousand horse, which are most of them quarered from the Suburbs to Reolle, and from thence to Nerai. The Duke of York (so called here) is in great favour with the French Cavalry; and as his Actions gaineth honour, so doth his Name purchase Fame; for since he received the sole Command of the Switzers, he hath performed singular service in three several fights. As for further particulars, in relation to the engagement of
both Armies, and the King of Scots, J shall refer you to the Abstract of the next Posts Letters. St. Germans, May 17. 1652. An exact Relation of the great Fight between the French and English, on the eleventh of this instant May. ON Munday last, being the seventeenth of this instant May, we received intelli∣gence, that the Parliaments ships having no∣tice of the French Fleet, bound from the In∣dies, were designed for the Coast of Marvella, the Elizabeth, the Leopard, the Lyon, and di∣vers others, resolved to intercept them, or sink by their sides; And accordingly, make∣ing up towards them, they had not sayled many hours, but they discerned the Royal Navy, being the richest that hath been taken
for many years; and comming within Canon shot, gave them seven broad sides; but was answered again, treble the number; where∣upon both Fleets prepared for fight, and im∣mediatly the Canons began to roar, and smal shot, from the Decks, slew most thick and violent, till it pleased God, after a sharp Conflict; the French began to decline engage∣ment, and endeavored to make an escape; which the English perceiving, made up close to them, and soon after boarded four, where∣in was plenty of rich Commodities; as ap∣pears by the ensuing Schedule, viz. 6000 Pieces of Mercoolees. 5000 Pieces of Derebands. 4520 Pieces of Broad Baftaes. 22440 Pieces of Narrow Baftaes. 880 Pieces of Tapseiles. 1066 Pieces of Guniea Stuffe. 500 Pieces of Nicannees. 400 Pieces of white Guzzees. 900 Pieces of blew Guzzees. 1060 Pieces of Pintadoes.
1080 Pieces of browne Dutties. 1499 Pieces of blew Dutties. 9091 Pieces of Sannoes. 2850 Pieces of coloured Ginghams. 9300 Pieces of Sallampores. 8095 Pieces of Long Cloath. 240 Pieces of browne Ginghams. 309 Pieces of Oringall Bettellees. 303 Pieces of Moorees. 330 Pieces of white Ginghams. 80 Pieces of blew Sallampotes. 1900 Pieces of Chillees. 34500 Pieces of Parcallees. In this fight, tis said, that the French lost about four hundred men, besides the loss of two ships, which were sunk: The English had likewise many slain and wounded, and their ships extremely torn and battered. FINIS.
