B3412 E665_4 99859726 111822
Of CHRISTS TESTAMENTS, Viz: Baptisme and the Supper. Written in two Bookes. The 1. Of holy Baptisme, how it is to be understood in the Ground thereof, and why a Christian should be Baptised. The 2. Of the holy Supper of the Lord Christ, what it is, with the Benefit and Effects of it, and how the same may be worthily Participated of. And how these are to be understood, both according to the Old and New Testament. Set forth from the True Theosophicall Ground, through the three Principles of the Divine Revela∣tion, and presented to the Children of God for the Information of their understandings. Written in the yeare of Christ 1624. by JACOB BEHM of Old Seidenberg alias Teutonicus Philosophus. And Englished by JOHN SPARROVV, Barrister of the Inner Temple London. LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold neare the signe of the Golden Lyon in Aldersgate-streete, o y H. Blunden at the Castle in Cornhill neere the Exchange. 1652.
Jesus said to his Disciples, Matth. 28.19. Mark. 16.16. Goe forth into all the World, and Teach all People, and Baptise them in the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. Whosoever beleeveth and is Baptised shall be saved, but whosoever beleeveth not shall be condemned.
The Englishers Preface. THese two little Books intituled together by the Authour the Booke of the Two Testaments, the one of Baptisme, the other of the Supper, doe the most deeply and plainly handle those two Grand Mysteries of any Booke extant since the Apo∣stles Times, and doe cleerly satisfie the doubts and put an end to the different Opinions con∣cerning each of them, and so make all friends to∣gether; those that are called Anabaptists, and those that are called Paedobaptists; those that bap∣tise persons of age upon confession of their Faith, and those that baptise Infants with Witnesses to stand for them: also this Treatise intimateth so much that it may be diseerned who is a fit ad∣ministratour of Baptisme to those new converted, or to the Infant children of converted Parents; It reconcileth the difference of Opinion about Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, and the Par∣ticipation of meere Bread and Wine: and shew∣eth how to understand truly the right Participa∣tion of the true flesh and bloud of Christ under Bread and Wine, and being there is reall partici∣pation to be had of the flesh and bloud of Christ without Bread and Wine, why the Bread and Wine was so Instituted to be celebrated and commu∣nicated: and so also seeing the Baptisme of the
Holy Ghost hath been many times without Wa∣ter, why the Baptisme of Water is necessary to be used, even to those that had before received the Holy Ghost as well as the Apostles. All which, being understood, it will likewise appeare what the Ground of the Preaching of the Word of God is, as it is an Ordinance of God, and how wee shall truly perceive what is the Essence of all Ordinances as they are so called, (which in the signification of the word is no more but a thing ordained or appointed) and so it will be easie to finde how far short men are of rightly Esteeming the true Ordinances, and how for∣ward they are in taking that for such which is not indeed the Ordinance of God. The Preaching of the Word, the Administrati∣on of Baptisme, and the Participation of the Sup∣per, are Ordinances of God. The Communion of Saints or holy people (two or three met in Christs Name) are a true Church or Congregation of God according to his holy Ordinance. The Ma∣gistrate, Ruler, or King, and all that are in autho∣rity, are the Ordinance of God, for the punish∣ment of Evill doers, and for the encouragement of them that doe well. Gods Ministers, Presbyters or Elders, Oldmen or Fathers in the Experimen∣tall knowledge of Christ; his Bishops or Over∣seers, Shepheards or Pastours, or feeders of his flock; his Doctours or Teachers, Instructors in the wayes of Godlines; or Prophets appointed to tell People of their sinnes: also Evangelists or Messen∣gers of the Glad tydings of salvation; Disciples
or Schollers in the schoole of Christ, such as are taught of God; and Apostles, or such as are sent of God and Christ by the Holy Ghost; these must needs be ordained and appointed by God: and so Forgiveness of sinnes or Absolution; Excommuni∣cation, or casting out from the Congregation of Christ, and delivering to Satan. Healing of the sick by the Elders fervent prayer of Faith. The Laying on of the hands of the Presbytery or El∣dership, whereby the Gift of the Holy Ghost was bestowed. Also Marrying in the Lord. Are all of them the Ordinances of God; Every Duty of Man towards God, or of one towards another, men∣tioned either in the Old or New Testament, are cleerly the Ordinances of God. But how any thing is a true Ordinance of God, and wherein it doth consist, is hardly knowne and little considered as it should be, that it might be certainly understood, and there is much Ex∣ercise of our Minds before wee can goe about to examine it rightly; wee must know God before wee can know his Ordinances, which are of his own appointment, and if we know not who he is, how can we know that we love him, and that it is not somewhat else which we love instead of him? for it is said by the Apostle John, He that saith he loveth God and hateth his brother, is a lyar and the truth is not in him, for if a man loveth not his brother whom he hath seene, how can he love God whom he hath not seene, and1 Joh. 4.8. he that loveth not know∣eth not God, for God is love. Further the same A∣postle saith, that1 Joh. 4.18. God is love and he that dwelleth
in Love, dwelleth in God and he in him: and how can any know this Excellent thing Love, in which who so dwelleth is1 Joh. 3.14. passed from death to life, if he knoweth not he hath it in him, and then how can he either know God or love him? This Love must be in us if we be the Disciples of Christ; nay there is not any thing mentioned in the whole Bible concerning Heaven and Re∣demption, but we must have it in us while we are in this life, or else we are not Partakers of it; yea God hath shed abroad his love into our hearts, which is that word of Truth and life which is able to save our soules, and doth perfectly save them thatYeeld to it in obedience to the dictates to it. receive it (that is, beleeve): and it is both shed abroad and received by very many soules, that neither know what that word is, nor how they have received it: for example; when any Man is troubled at his doing of Evill, and is sorry for it, and wisheth from his heart he had not done it, endeavoureth to have a better watch over himselfe, resolveth never to doe the same againe, desiring strength to be able to resist his doing of Evill any more, being carefull least evill suggestions in his minde should allure him, and entice him to any evill againe, and constantly walketh thus circumspectly in his whole life to the end of his dayes. This Man hath the Love of God shed abroad in his heart, and hath received it, else it could not bring forth such fruits of the Spirit: and he that is so led by the Spirit is the childe of God: though it may be such a one doth not know, if you aske him, what Gods Love is,
though he dwelleth in it; and the cause why there is so small progresse in the knowledge of Christianity, and the true Ordinances of God, is, because men think to learne those things by roate, and not by Heart: some are so far enemies to themselves, which is deeply to be lamented, that if they read that the Scripture saith a thing, they care not what it maneth, or how to under∣stand it aright, by seeking and finding the thing out which is spoken of, that they may be sure of the meaning of what they reade, in that in esti∣mable booke of God: Indeed the Holy Scrip∣tures have perfectly declared all the Mysteries of God, and his Ordinances, and they have been rendred out of the Originall Languages of He∣brew and Greeke, into the Mother Tongues al∣most of all Nations, sufficiently to leave them without excuse, that be not obedient in their lives and Conversations, so far as they may know, so that it will be far more easie for the Heathen to excuse themselves at the Last day, then for those that have read or heard the Scriptures, and live not accordingly; though the Heathen also shall be left without excuse, as the Scripture saith; God hath left them without excuse, in that he doth good, and giveth them raine from Heaven, and fruit∣full seasons, filling their hearts with food and Glad∣nesse. Furthermore, The Scriptures have had many laborious Expositions of the words and rendrings both of the Originall and translated Copies, by large Writings, Commentaries, and Glosses, but
the things which are undeniably meant by those words, are not so well understood as they might be, if wee would be more frequent and diligent in the practise of that which bringeth all wis∣dome and understanding, which is, inward Ex∣perience, Examination of Experimenting of Spi∣rituall things: according to that of the Apostle; Try or Examine all things, but hold that which is Good: In outward things wee are easily perswa∣ded to try before wee trust, but concerning in∣ward things, wee are for the most part ready to take them upon trust, and never try or Examine whether those things are so or no; as the Noble Bereans, who were commended for searching or Examining the Scriptures, to see whether those things were so or no; not whether those words were written, but whether the things mentioned were such, for they had experience of the things in Scripture before hand: But there is a feare in some, that if wee should be so inquisitive, and prying into Mysteries, wee should run into the Extream of beeing too wise, which cannot be, ex∣cept, in our own conceit; for our Saviour sayth; Be ye wise as Serpents, but Innocent as Doves; and in∣deed true wisdome is required to be able to dis∣pence the Ordinances of God, and not reading and conceiving only, but Living the life of Christ, whereby wee shall come to the true knowledge of Christ within us, and though he were in our Parents before us, and in their seed, and so from our beginning to be, and continually ever since, in us, knocking and calling at the inward doore of
our hearts invisibly & without a forme, & as the seed of God in the Embrio, before our knowing & receiving of him, yet after we have opened to him, and heard his call by yeelding our hearts in obe∣dience therunto, he will get a form in us, & be born in us, and wee shall be regenerated in him, and so wee shall often feele him, and see him; but after that againe wee must attaine the stature of a Man in Christ, and be his disciples and schollers, and be taught by the Holy Ghost proceeding from him in us, before we can know and understand such Mysteries as his Ordinances are: But if wee did seeke, wee should finde God and Christ in our Hearts; for though they be in us wee finde them not, because wee examine not what, and who they are, and we are discouraged in our seeking, partly because many have sought as wee have accounted it aright, and have not found, but the truth is, they have not sought in the right place; they looke to finde God any where but in their hearts, and yet he that cannot finde him there, shall never be able to finde him at all, but there whosoever seeks shall find him who is the foun∣tain, from whence all things flow forth; the Scriptures did flow from him, and whatsoever could possibly have been written, is hidden in him: the Prophets and Apostles wrote and spake what they understood, but God was in their hearts and mindes, and filled them with the un∣derstanding of the Holy Spirit: Our Saviour Je∣sus Christ had not the Spirit by measure; for in him dwelt the fullnesse of the Deity bodily; and he
grew in understanding till he had the unction above his fellowes, from which understanding in him, proceeded those sayings, whereupon the people confessed, that he taught as one having power, and not as the Scribes and Pharisees, who though they were learned in the Scriptures, yet Christ sayd to them; Yee erre, not knowing the Scriptures; that is, the meaning of the things ex∣pressed in them, nor the Power of God; and he that understandeth not the thing in his minde which he would utter, cannot rightly speak nor write of it: the Scriptures are such writings of men full of Divine wisdome and understanding, but few other Bookes are written by those that so much as thought that the Apostles had such through knowledge of what they wrote in divine Mysteries: some there are that seeme to thinke that the writers of the Scriptures had it by such a kinde and manner of revelation, as if a man or Angel should relate and dictate words to them, and they themselves have no understanding of it, more, then their reason can apprehend, upon the bare hearing of the words, and that is all the skill some of this age account possible to be at∣tained, in the Mysteries of God: but we are di∣rected by the Apostle James, who well under∣stood what he said by Experience, that if wee want understanding wee should aske it of God: and though God be in every one, and every one li∣veth, moveth, and hath his being in him, yet without the Spirit of God moveth and teacheth us in our understandings, wee know him not:
where the fruits of the Spirit are, in that Mans heart the Spirit of God hath moved and taught him in his understanding: but from that small measure of understanding, he is not able present∣ly to apprehend the Mysteries of that Spirit, and of those fruits, that is, whence they spring, how they are begotten and brought forth, how they grow, &c. nor can they be knowne but by the same Spirit whose fruits they are; he that hath not the fruits of this Spirit, which is holinesse, peace, righteousnesse, joy in the Holy Ghost, enjoyeth not the kingdome of God, nor till wee have sought and found peace and holinesse, wee shall not see God: and except wee be borne againe of water and the Holy Spirit, we cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven, though it beLuke 17.21. within us. Now, can any teach what it is to be born again? and what this Water and holy Spirit is? but he that hath them, and hath been borne againe by them; I would men were diligent to desire such spirituall things, and then God, who dwelleth in their hearts, would feele and heare their desires, and breath forth his holy Spirit in them, and sa∣tisfie their desires with his Gifts and Graces, and then he would fill their minds and understand∣ings also, with the knowledge of all his Myste∣ries, and so they would learne in the schoole of Christ by Divine Experience, the true Ordinances of God; and then we should be better able to edifie one another in our most holy Faith, and wee should by degrees, improving that measure of knowledge we have; at length attaine the highest
knowledge of the highest Apostle. Wee want but the sincere practise of what we know, for by that meanes wee should not Quench, but stirre up the Gifts and Graces of Gods Holy Spirit that are within us, till it multiply and flow forth with all its Gifts, which wee suppose are not attainable, because men have not endea∣voured that they might attaine them. And that is the Reason, wee have the Ordinances, not in Power, but in much weaknesse, wanting those Gifts which would enable Men, to dispence the Ordinances of God: It is a Great Gift to have our Calling and Election sure, in that sense, which the Apostle Paul meant it, according to the highest understanding of that Mysterie, which the Apostle himselfe knew, must needs be attainable by labour and Endeavour; and up∣on the knowledge of this Mysterie, doth many o∣ther Mysteries depend, it is that, for which the Ordinances were Instituted, as helps and meanes to bring us to the assured certainty of our salvati∣on: wee content our selves, with an Imaginary superficiall perswasion, without knowing assu∣rance; for if wee did endeavour, labour, search, seeke and try, wee should soone perceive, how it might be made infallibly sure; and then wee should as assuredly, understand the high Excel∣lency of Every Ordinance of God. All the Arts and Trades in the world are My∣steries, and are not truly knowne, but by those that have had Experience in them; then how can there be a skilfull Dispencer of the Mysteries
of God, his Ordinances; but by Experience in them; we are able to learne them all by Experi∣ence, but without that, wee know nothing of them, more then the very beast: The Devills, that far surpasse Mortall Men in knowledge, yet cannot know the Mysteries of God, because they cannot experiment them, but those of Dark∣nesse they worke, and therefore know them: and wee are placed in this world, to work the works of God, that wee may know, what that Good and acceptable will of God is, and there∣fore wee should Work out our salvation, with feare and trembling: by obedience in well-doing; and that will bring us, to feele and know the good Spirit of God, which will teach us the way and course, how to finde every thing, if wee search and enquire in that Spirit; threfore let us en∣deavour after that which is Holy, and wee shall feelè what the God of Holinesse is; and then we shall cleerly understand the Scriptures, and the writings of all other Men, wee shall be able to discover what is true and what is false, in all the words and writings of any Man, under∣standingly and demonstratively, to the convin∣cing of all hearers, both in Divine and Naturall things. From these Instances that have been mentio∣ned, it may be perceived, that all the Ordinances of God, have proceeded from the Holy Ghost, nei∣ther can any thing be the Ordinance of God, where the Holy Ghost is not, in some measure or other, no man is the Minister of the Word of
God, any further, then he is taught by the Spi∣rit of God, and speaketh what he understandeth, by the same Spirit. None were fit to be made Deacons or Elders, but one full of the Holy Ghost, then surely none are able to make Dea∣cons or Elders, but by the Power of the Holy Ghost that is in them, and so of all other Ordi∣nances: and according to the measure of the Holy Spirit in us, such is the validity and Effi∣cacy of the Ordinances to us: the Outward per∣formance, of the things directed in the Scrip∣ture, by men of sincere hearts, is sufficient, and they are warnings to us to forsake our Evill wayes, in the Observance of which course, wee may assuredly finde true Christianity, and con∣sequently salvation: but this is in the lowest degree: and it were to be wished, that none were so presumptuous, as to arrogate to them∣selves, that they are such, as performe the true Ordinances of God, unlesse they have the same holy Spirit of God, filling their hearts, as they had, of whom it is recorded in the holy Scrip∣tures, that they did performe them aright: when wee are scarce truly Children of God, let us have a care that wee suffer not others to account us above what wee are, but rather in∣forme them sincerely that wee are not such as they take us to be; and not take upon us to be called Gods Faithfull Servants, Ministers of God, Preachers of the Word, Elders, Teachers, Pastours, Overseers, Messengers, and Embassa∣dours of Christ, or Apostles, such as are sent
from God; neither should any mention those Texts of Scripture which speake of the true Officers of Christ, as if the same were meant and applyable to thamselves, and so urge them in Sermons, that those hearers that have not abi∣lity to discerne the truth in things that differ, are made confident to maintaine stiffely, that those Scriptures mean them they call Ministers, as well as it did the Apostles, Evangelists, and other faithfull Teachers in those dayes; and doe alledge those Scriptures in their behalfe, and call them Divines, whereas none of the Apo∣stles were so named in all the Scripture but John the Divine, the beloved Disciple, and most sub∣lime in vision and Revelation: when as if wee truly examine our selves according to the Scrip∣tures, wee shall finde wee ought rather to be e∣steemed Enemies of God and of his Sonne Jesus Christ our Lord: But let us presse forward in the wayes of Godlinesse, that wee may be at length strong Men in Christ, and enjoy his Or∣dinances in the Power, as it was and is, in the spi∣rits and soules of all the faithfull holy ones, who have true understanding and knowledge in the Divine Mysteries by Experience, such were the Prophets, and Apostles, and faithfull in all ages. No curious workman, can make his servant expert in his work, except the servant doe try and exercise himselfe, and by practise attain the skill and readinesse in his trade by Experience, that he may be able not onely to direct how to
worke by hearesay, but to shew his skill, by his own doing the same thing himselfe: The Apostles could doe the same thing which they taught others, or else they could not have rightly taught as they did. Now hee that considereth this Booke, will finde, that the Authour knew and writt Experi∣mentally, and that if wee follow his doctrine and Experience, wee may attaine, not onely the un∣derstanding of his Writings, but be able to speak and write, all that he understood, and so disclose those things plainly and fully, which he had not time nor leave to write otherwise then obscurely of; Which when wee have arrived to, wee shall leave that seeking after the most desirable world∣ly things, which passe away in a Moment; and presse after the high Price of the Calling of Je∣sus Christ: now if by my means, any shall be stirred up, to strive, and so undoubtedly at∣taine, the blessed Crowne of Eternall Life, it will be also my Crowne of rejoycing in the world to come, though heere I must acknowledge my selfe one of the unworthiest of the children of Men. JOHN SPARROVV.
A LETTER TOCharles of Endern. Carol von Endern. Our salvation is in the Life of Jesus Christ in us. NOble Sir, beloved in Christ, with the Hear∣ty Desire of the Divine Light in the work∣ing power of the Holy Ens in our Imma∣nuel, I send over to you the little Booke of Christs Testaments, with the Preface to it. It should have been written but sin∣gly in the three first sheets, for I would have written it all over againe, and had begun with the first Chap∣ter: And I am purposed to bring to the Presse this little Booke in a more child-like manner, for the better understanding of the simple. But because of the high sense, I let theOne by the other, one on one side, the other on the other, verse for verse. one be written against the other: seeing you and others Exercised Lovers understand this sense well: and so the sublime under∣standings may have that which is high, and the simple that which is lowly in the sense: yet there is one and the same understanding in them both, though in the lower sense more simple words might be made use of; and so I commit you to the continuall saving Love of Jesus Christ. Dated at Gerlitz 7• May, the yeare of Christ. 1624. JACOB BEHM.
The Summary Contents of the Chapters in this first Booke, concerning the Holy Baptisme. CHAP. I. How Reason useth to behold it selfe in a Creaturely Image-like manner, when it considereth of Christ and his Testaments, and whence the strife about Christs Te∣staments ariseth, and how that strife is an empty un∣profitable thing. CHAP. II. Of the Covenant of God after the Fall; what the Fall of Man is, and how God hath bound himselfe in Covenant with him againe. What the Circumcision in the old Testament is, and what the Baptisme in the New. CHAP. III. A Briefe and fundamentall information, how Man is Baptised by the Holy Ghost, with Christs sufferings, Death, and Resurrection, in body and soule. CHAP. IV. Of the outward Water-Baptisme by the hand of Man; who is worthy so toOr, to Admi∣nister it. Baptise, and what baptised In∣fant receiveth that Testament worthily; and how it goeth with the unworthy Hand, as also with the un∣worthy Baptised Infant.
The Preface to the Reader. SHEWING How the Testaments of Christ must be fun∣damentally understood, rightly participa∣ted, and worthily fed upon. A Looking Glasse for Teacher and Hearer. 1. CHristian loving Reader, this little Booke of the Testa∣ments of Christ, in this present time, when Men strive onely about Opinions, ought well to be considered. Men are wholly and altogether departed from the right understanding, seeing they will maintaine Christs Testaments with Disputing and the Sword. 2. There needs no Disputing about it, onely an earnest sincere penitent Man, who hath the Faith, understandeth this Testamen∣taryCovenanting. Institution and participation in the Power of Christ, but it is foolishnesse to the Naturall Man, and cannot be apprehended, 1 Cor. 2.14. 3. There belongeth quite another Earnest Sincerity to the true understanding, which is not apprehended by humane Reason, and is rightly understood by no Man, unlesse the Spirit of Christ open it to him in his Heart. 4. There lyeth a fast Seale before it, which no Reason nor Art can breake up, but onely that slaine Lamb of the House of Israel, who hath the Key of David, Revel. 3.7. Chap. 3.5. 5. Christs Testaments are to Reason without the Divine Light, a closed Booke, but to the true children of Christ, they are an Ope∣ned Booke. Christs Testaments are a Seale of the firme and Eter∣nall Covenant of God, wherewith God hath received Man to Grace againe after the horrible Defection, and sealed him with the flowing forth of his Love, by his bloud and Death, that weeOr, Might. should be∣leeve his Word and Promise, which he hath revealed to us in the Holy Scripture concerning his Sonne, with the Redemption from sinne, and heertofore declared by the Prophets.
6. Which Word in the flowing forth of his Love, is come into our humanity, and hath assumed a Humane Soule, also flesh and bloud, and hath established this Eternall Covenant with his Bloud and Death: And so now he giveth this Testament to his Faithfull ones for aAusibeute Talent, or ear∣nest Penny, or Pawne. Pledge, and so maketh them Branches on the Vine of his Flesh and Bloud, so that they are imbodied to himselfe therewith, and made his right children, in whom HEE himselfe will dwell with his flesh and bloud, with this TestamentaryAusibeute Talent, or ear∣nest Penny, or Pawne. Pledge: so that there∣by they may Pray to the Father with joyfull affiance in true child∣like Humility, in the Name of his Sonne JESUS CHRIST, and so he will give them this Grace, John 16.23. 7. This Testament he offereth to us after a twofold Manner: First, through his Word Preached, whereby he Stirreth and Openeth the Hearts of the Hearers, that they enter into true Repentance for their Sinnes, and so procure themselves this Pledge of his Testa∣ments. 8. Secondly, Through the TrueOr, Essentiall. substantiall participation of his Flesh and Bloud, by the Mouth of Faith with Bread and Wine, whereby he sealeth the Faith with his Bloud and Death, and thereby Openeth the Lifes understanding of the Inward Divine Hearing, so that the poore fallen Man, (which was dead to the Divine Hearing through sinne) attaineth againe the Divine Hearing in his understand∣ing, and so is converted againe, and so entereth into his first Inheri∣tance, which he had in Paradise, and giveth up his will to God, who reneweth his Heart,Senses. Thoughts, and Minde, through his Inspeaking or Inspiration, and continueth and dwelleth in him with his Pledge of this Testament, and powerfully worketh in him in his Faith, and generateth him to be a new Creature, which with its Spirit walketh in Heaven, and is a right Image of God, whereby the earthly fleshly will is daily killed, and the Newborne will dayly goeth to Heaven, Joh. 6.56. Phil. 3.20. 9. Which Heaven in the Inward Ground of his Life, is revealed in the Spirit of Christ in him, where the good AngelicallOr, Senses. thoughts climbe up upon the right Jacobs Ladder (Gen. 28.12.) and Christ his Lord sitteth above on the top of it at the Right hand of God, and dayly pre∣senteth them with his humane and heavenly flesh and bloud before the wrath of God, and the severe Judgement, and is with him in all his need: Also incloseth his Prayers in himselfe, and thereby pre∣senteth them before Death, Hell, the Devill, and the Anger of God. 10. This Publication, both of his Word Taught, as it is written in the Bible, and isImpregnated, or conceived. received in the sacramentall participation, where he profferreth his Word in his flesh and bloud, a Christian Man should
receive, and finde himselfe in thisCelebration. Custome, and unite and tie him∣selfe as a Member with the Congregation of Christ; for in Christ wee are all but one, as a TreeText. in. and its Branches, Gal. 3.28. 11. It is not so to be understood, that this Covenant and Testa∣ment is given onely by an outward hearing of the Word Preached, and Participation of Bread and Wine at theOr, Sacrament Testament, as the present World so Erreth in Many Hearts: No, it must be a right sincere Earnest with true working Repentance, so that God with the Key of his Love unlocketh and Openeth the Hearing and the right Mouth, which shall receive this Testament, so that the poore soule have a right hunger and thirst after it, and bring its desire, through Christs sufferings, Dying, Death, and Resurrection to it. 12. Otherwise there is no true Mouth for such participation. It must be a right Earnest sincere purpose, that must put off the Defiled Garment, and be willing to passe into a New Life. It must be doing, doing, or it availeth nothing. 13. This Pledge belongeth onely to Christs Children, which so heare and keepe the Word in their Hearts, that it bring forth fruit. There must be Great earnestnesse both in the Teacher and Hearer; for if any will handle and impart the Covenant of Christ, he must himselfe be capable of the Covenant and Testament. If the Sheepe must heare the voyce of Christ out of the Mouth of any and follow him, then also the Spirit and power of Christ must be in that Mans voyce: Else he is but a Hireling, and the Sheepe heare not Christs voyce from his Mouth, but onely the word of Man, Joh. 10. 14. So also in like manner, the Hearers Eare should be directed to God in true Repentance, that he also may heare the voyce of Christ: not onely with outward Eares, but with the Eares of Di∣vine power, that the Teachers and Hearers power may strike toge∣ther, that the Spirit of Christ may workeText, Be∣tween them. together with them, and the Heart may finde the Teachers Power, that Good fruit may Grow from it. 15. A Teacher should not teach for the sake of wages onely, but should know and well consider, that he standeth there in Christs stead, and that Christ will Teach through him, if he be a rightOr, Pastor. Shepheard. 16. So also the Hearers should incline their Eare to that, and Consider that they should there heare Christs voyce, and receive it with great Earnestnesse: and not thinke it is enough to Goe into the Church, and there sit an houre, to play the Hypocrite, and heare a Ser∣mon; and remaine afterwards as before: No, such going to Church and hearing, is no Service of God; It bettereth them not, if in the Sermon or Preaching they have not heard Christ teach in their hearts:
Going to Church maketh none vertuous, unlesse he heareth in the Church Gods Word workingly in his soule. 17. So also is it with the Sacraments, wee should not thinke it is enough to Confesse and goe away, as if such a Custome did take away sinnes without true Repentance, and that he may sin a new after∣wards; No, it is not so, whosoever is washed and afterwards defileth himselfe with the same Mire, he is then as he was before. 18. Christ must Absolve thee in thy soule with his sufferings and Death, and Inspeake or Inspire his satisfaction into thee in thy soule, else it availeth not. The Priests Mouth is onely an Outward Instru∣ment, and coworketh in his Spirit: but if he be a hireling, he cannot cowork, but yet the Covenant of God in Christ Jesus worketh in the Repentant Heart, and absolveth it. 19. Loving Brethren, both teacher and hearer, who handle the Covenant of Christ, have a care what you doe, there is great ear∣nestnesse required, that you be not Guilty of the Death of Christ: Consider diligently the Great severe Earnestnesse of God, how HE hath instituted this Covenant with so Great hard Paine and Anguish through so great reproach and sufferings; It must needs be from a very great cause, that this Testament was Ordained with such severe Earnestnesse. 20. God requireth of Man againe Earnestnesse, to the receiving this Testament: Not with cold luke warme Hearts, onely to cover over sinne with the sufferings of Christ, and Comfort ones selfe with it in Impenitency. 21. It is not a forgivenesse from without, which is imputed to Man from without: No, but through Christs Bloud and Death: when the poore soule penetrateth into that, then the sufferings, Dying and Resurrection, together with the satisfaction, in this Testamentary Covenant is put on to it in the Bloud of Christ. This killeth Sinne, Death, and Hell, and leadeth the poore soule to the Father, in Christ. 22. It is not enough for a Man to know that Christ dyed for sinne, and assenteth to it, and holdeth it for true, and receiveth the satis∣faction as a work done: No, no, there is no such receiving: but the whole Man must give it selfe thereinto, and must will to dye in Christs Death to the Evill Naturall own will, as also to wicked Lusts: and then Christ putteth on him his victory and satisfaction, and the true heavenly Spirit springeth forth through Christs Death in his Resurrection, as a faire flower out of the wilde Earth, and there is a true Christian borne, who is a branch on the vine Christ, John 15. 23. Now there belongeth no great art or skill to this, but onely
a childlike simplicity and Humility: the Plowman is as neere it as the Doctor: they must all in the simplicity of Christ enter into humili∣ty, and come with the lost sonne, and the Publicane in the Temple; there is no other way to it. 24. There needs no Great Speculation about it, with what trim∣med words or behaviour man cometh thereto, but wee must come onely with the Children, which yeeld to the Father under his Rodde, and pray for Grace. 25. He who hath learned much, and knoweth how to fit himselfe for it, is no more acceptable to God, then he that knoweth nothing, but yet with his whole Heart and soule in sorrow for sinnes turneth to him, and hath Faith in the Grace, and a true Earnest Purpose and Resolution to be a New Creature. 26. This Ground, is onely therefore brought forth so deeply, that every one that strive about it, might see the true Inward Ground, and cease from strife, and yeeld himselfe into the simplicity and Love of Jesus Christ. Whereby then suddenly the power of Sa∣than will be diminished, and People and Nations will see that the Christians are the children of God, If they thus walke in Love; which I wish from my Heart; for which Cause this little Booke is written.
Note. Heere the Reader that loveth God is to know; FIrst, that these two little Books were copied faithfully and diligently out of the Authours own blessed Manuscript, as he wrote them Anno 1623. And secondly, that he afterwards in the yeare 1624. up∣on the desires of some good friends & lovers of the Truth, was purposed (as may be seene in the foregoing Letter to Carol von Endern) for the better understanding of the simple, to bring them both into a more child-like forme, but it is done onely to part of the third Chapter of this first Booke, and no further. Thus writeth the Publisher of the High dutch Copie. But more particularly, let the Reader take notice that the Authour had gone on to the 17th verse of the 3d Chap∣ter, as may appeare in the Printing of the double Pages in this Book, and so it was Printed in the High Dutch, and in the same manner here in the English; only with a dif∣ferent magnitude of Letter, those words which are the same on both sides, are as neere as can well be observed in a letter of the same bignes with the whole Book, but on the first side that which is not on the other side also, is with a smaller letter, and it was the first Booke that was writ∣ten and finished by the Authour, and on the second side, that which was not in the other, is with a larger letter, & was that other Copie which he entended to finish quite through the whole Booke, and this is done to distinguish in some measure the alteration of the Expression in the two severall Copies, for the better understanding of the My∣stery, and if it be diligently Observed, it will very much help to the understanding of this, and all his other Wri∣tings,
because where the Expression is obscure in the one, it is cleerer in the other; And besides; by the varying the Ex∣pression, all may discerne what latitude the Authours words may admit of, in their meaning in all his Bookes. Further, it is certain that we may be lead by the severall Expressions to the true knowledge of some part of the Myste∣ry, and this great benefit accrues from thence, that it will ena∣ble us to speak & write infallibly, that which hath never been spoken or written concerning that Mystery, be it in Divine or Naturall things. But by the way, this is not to be attained by outward Hear∣ing or Reading onely, but by Experience; Teachers or Hearers that want Experience are indeed Ordinary Teachers and Hearers, but not true ones, for such are Extraordinary in the account of our times: such hearers are all they that understand the Word feelingly, and bring forth fruit, in their lives and Conversations, and have the Power of Godlinesse, these can teach truly from what they know, though in a weake measure; but those that are called Ordinary Teachers, that have onely a forme of Godlines, and deny the Power therof, cannot teach at all, nor deserve so much as the Name of an Ordinary Teacher, such a one is not so much as a true hearer. Our Saviour teacheth us, that whosoever will do the will of our Father which is in Heaven,Joh. 7.17 they shall know of his words whether they be of God: and if he submit his doctrine to be Examined by every one by this Rule, why should not every word of all others be examined by the same Rule; let us thus do, and we shall Or∣dinarily attain that which is indeed Extraordinary, even the true knowledge of spirituall things, the things of God, which are impossible to be perceived by the Naturall man. And ac∣cordingly I desire thee to Judge of the Authour of this Booke, and no otherwise. Farewell.
The First Chapter Of Reasons viewing of it selfe, how it useth to run in a Creaturely Forme, when it considereth of Christ and his Testaments. 1. ALL Strife and Mis-understanding concerning Christs Per∣son and his Testaments which he left behinde him, ari∣seth from the defected Creaturely Reason, which will be a Mistris of All things or Beeings, and looketh onely in the Multiplicity of Beeings, and in the variety and difference of Beeings, and doth but loose it selfe in such viewing, and breaketh it selfe off from its Centre, or Originall, and disperseth theOr, Senses. Thoughts in the Multiplicity of Beeings, that they cannot see what their ground is out of which they are sprung, and so in their Confusion and running out, breake themselves off from their Chas. viz: from the Eternall WORD of God, and from the Eternall Divine speaking. In which spoken Word, all Beeings, together with understanding, Reason and Thoughts consist, and take their Ground and beginning from it. 2. For if the Abyssall, not Naturall, uncreaturall GOD, viz: the Eternall ONE, speake his WORD no more, and that speaking should Cease, there would be no understanding Reason or Thoughts more, also no Nature nor Creature, and all Beeings would be an Eternall nothing: for every Life ariseth from the Exhalation of the Eternall ONE, viz: from the Abysse: and there could be no Formability in the Eternall One, according to which, or out of which something might be made. 3. For if there were a formability to a figure, then there must also have been a cause from whence the forme were arisen, and God were not one onely God, who were without Ground, Time, and Place; for all that hath a beginning hath a Ground; but that which hath no beginning, is without Ground and Forme. 4. Every beginning goeth out of the Eternall ONE through the Exhalation of the Eternall ONE, whereby the Eternall ONE bring∣eth it selfe into selfe-viewing perceptibility and findingnesse, to the Moving and forming of it selfe. Every visible and Invisible Beeing, Spirituall and Corporeall, have taken their Originall in the Exhala∣tion of the Eternall ONE, and stand with their Ground therein, for
the beginning of every Beeing is nothing else but an Imagination of the Abysse, that the same bring it selfe by its own longing into an Imagina∣tion, and Modelleth and Imageth it selfe, and apprehendeth the Imagelike∣nesse, andOr, Exhaleth it. breatheth it forth from the Eternall One to a viewing of it selfe. 5. WhichOr, Haling. breathing is the Eternall Word of the Abyssall Deity; as a speaking forth of the Abysse into a Ground, of the Unsubstantiall into a Sub∣stantiall: In which the whole Creation, with the speaking forth, as in the seperability of the speaking, hath taken its beginning, and doth yet evermore so take it. And every life doth consist in that seperability of the speak∣ing, where the immodeled Imagination in the Exhalation parteth it selfe into seperability. In which Parting the sensibilility of the onely life is un∣derstood, where the One vieweth it selfe in the Multiplicity. 6. Also heerein is to be understood the Ground of the Properties, in that the Parting of the Onely Longing bringeth it selfe into Desiringnesse, andComprehend∣eth. incloseth and maketh it selfe Essentiall or Substantiall: in whichComprehensi∣bility. Inclosibili∣ty the seaven formes of Nature take th beginning, as is sufficiently declared in our other Writings. 7. Therefore say I, the cause that Men dispute and strive about God, about his Word, Essence, or Beeing, and Will, is, that the un∣derstanding hath broken it selfe off from its Centre or Ground: which Breaking off, is nothing else, but that the Properties (which are gone forth out of the Eternall out-speaking of the Word, into a Creaturely Life) have brought themselves into selfe-lust, to the out-speaking of themselves, and in their own selfe-conceived Lust, have broken themselves off from the E∣ternall-LongingOr, after. towards the Word of the Eternall speaking, and brought themselves into an own sensibility of Nature, and confused themselves in the formes of Nature. Where all the thoughts or senses will dwell and run without the Onely God in selfe Speculation and Reason: and can in no wise come to their Centre or Ground, except they sinck downe into themselves in the Speculation, and goe againe into the Ground out of which they are Existed, and fall againe into the Eternall speaking Word, and give their owne wills into the Eternall speaking Word, that the same owne will of the Crea∣turely Life may be out-spoken with, and in the Eternall Speaking Word in the Seperability of the Word. 8. In which re-out-speaking the New Regeneration of the Humane Life and Will is understood. For the Humane Life was in the Beginning of Man, in the Word of GOD, and by the Inbreathing of the Word into the Humane Body was manifested, and came into Sensibility, Perceptibility and Willing. Where then the willing hath broken it selfe off from the Word, wherein the Life was, without Creature, and hath brought it selfe into a selfe-Seperability and visibility of its perceptibility of the five senses. In which Sensibility it now at present runneth, and seeketh the Seate of God therein, but findeth onely a measurablenesse, and Naturall and Creaturely formednesse: wherein
now it striveth about its owne Centre. For the own will hath brought it selfe into an own Centre, and broken it selfe off from the whole, and as to the to∣tall is become as it were dead. 9. Therefore saith Christ, Ʋnlesse ye be converted and become as Children, and be new-borne through water and the Spirit, ye cannot see the Kingdome of God, Matth. 1.4. Joh. 3.5.7. The owne will should goe againe into its no∣thing, and then it standeth againe in the first Birth, and will be againe out∣spoken from the Eternall Word in a Divine Will. For whatsoever it is (whose living and willing willeth or runneth without the Eternall speak∣ing Word) that same is without the Eternity, and liveth meerely in the Time. 10 But seeing the soule hath its Originall out of the Eternall Word as a Power thereof, therefore it cannot Rest in the Beeing or Essence of Time, but seeketh its own Mother, who Generated it, and brought it into a Creaturely Forme, but its going forth, maketh that it cannot finde its Mother. 11. Therefore all Strife about the Divine Mysteries is an unprofitable thing, and is done from without, without God, in selfe-perceptibility, where the Sensibility vieweth it selfe in Nature in a Creaturely Forme. There is no comprehension or true understanding or knowledge of God, except the Image▪like Reason forsake it selfe, and sinke downe with its owne will into its Cen∣tre againe, out of which it is gone forth: viz: into the Eternall Speaking Word of God: that it receive that speaking or breathing of God into it selfe againe, and through the Divine Science or skill, speake in aDistinguish∣able. Separable and sensible Forme: that it be a dwelling and Temple of God, wherein Gods will worketh, Governeth, and willeth. Else there is no true knowledge or skill concerning God and his Beeing or Essence. 12. For no Spirit knoweth God or his word and will, unlesse Gods word and will be manifested and Stirring in it. Naturall Reason without the Light of God seeth onely the Naturall Imagelikenesse, and goeth on in its own speculation, and frameth in it selfe the Divine Beeing or Essence, as if that were just such a thing. From whence is come the Strife amongst the Learned in Reason, so that Men strive and dispute about God, and about his Beeing or Essence and Will, where each of them holdeth his Imagination for Divine, and will have his own Image which he hath framed in the Imagination of his Reason, to be honoured for God: whereas yet it is onely a Naturall Image of Reason: and thus Men strive all the world over about these Images of Reason. 13. But a true Man, who standeth rightly in the Image of God, hath no Strife in Religion: For he liveth in his first Mother, who hath formed him with Soule, Spirit, and Body, and his whole Substance, into an Image: he co-willeth and acteth with her: he is resigned into her, and yeeldeth his will to her, and she feedeth and nourisheth him: Every property of the true resigned Man is nourished with its like. As first; the Body out of the Limus of the Earth, is nou∣rished
from the Earth: Secondly, the Body of theThoughts. Senses and Reason which is a spirituall Body, is nourished from its Astrum or Constellation and Starres, out of which it hath its Originall. Thirdly: But the Soule is nourished in its Prin∣ciple from the Word and Beeing or Essence of God: for it is out of Gods Word brought and come into a Body. 14. Now if it bring not it selfe in its own Imagibility and willing into self∣hood, but bringeth its will againe into the Divine Speaking, then it gets its nourishment from the Essentiall Word of God, viz: from the Essentiall Wisdome of God: this is its Nutriment, from whence it also reacheth and attaineth divine skill: For every Spirit seeth no otherwise, nor deeper, then onely into its Es∣sentiall Imagibility; viz: into that Essence wherein it worketh, so that the same hath made it Imagelike through the Imagination: therewith it formeth itselfe, and in such Essence vieweth it selfe, and so high also is its knowledge. 15. Therefore saith Christ: Except you turne againe with your Will and Ima∣gibility, and become as a Childe, which hath no Imagibility in its Imagination, you shall not see God. Also ye must be new-borne againe, or else ye shall not ïnherit the Kingdome of God: That which is borne of flesh: viz: of fleshly Imagelikenesse, that is flesh and cannot inherite the Kingdome of God: but that which is formed and generated spiritually and through the Spirituall Imagination, that is Spirit, Joh. 3.6. For to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace: and to be Fleshly Minded, is Death, and enmity to God, sayth St. Paul, Rom. 8.6, 7. 16. Into what the Spirit of the Will bringeth it selfe with its Imagination so that it impresseth and comprehendeth it, therein also it Imageth it selfe into Beeing or Essence: For no Spirit can bring any thing to passe without Beeing or Essence; If the Eternall One were not Essentiall, all would be nothing: and if that ONE had not a Will, there would be no Desire, nor Power, nor Word, nor Essence. 17. Indeed we acknowledge that the Will of the Abysse hath brought it selfe into a Longing and Imagination, of it selfe; whence Nature and Creature have their Originall; Whence also the Naturall Life hath its Originall; which now also out of the Partiblenesse of the Exhaled will, hath its owne Will and Imagi∣nation, to forme and Image it selfe according to its longing and desire: As we see such changing in Nature, how Nature Imageth it selfe into so many kindes and Properties: and how those Imaged Properties, doe every one desire their like againe. 18. Seeing then we understand in Man, that he especially above all other Creatures desireth and longeth after three Properties. As first he longeth accord∣ing to hisSensible or conceptive. apprehensive understanding, after the Hidden God: and though in∣deed he seeth him not with bodily eyes, yet he desireth him: Secondly, he long∣eth after his Astrum or Constellation, out of which the Minde and Rationall Life is proceeded, therefore the Rationall Life longeth again after its Mother. Thirdly, he longeth after the Starres or Powers of the Earth, and the other Ele∣ments, and desireth them for his Nourishment: and therefore we know also by
this hunger of his, that he must have his Originall out of these Three: For there is also such a threefold Spirit out of such an Originall to be understood in him: And then also such a Threefold Essence or Substance, wherein his Spirit work∣eth; where every Operation longeth after it first Mother, and receiveth its Nutriment from her. 19. But seeing the Soule, viz: the Inward Ground of Man, in Adam the first Man, hath with its longing and desire out of its first Mother (out of its first Originall) viz▪ out of the Divine Word and Will, turned out into the Operati∣on of the Constellation and Elements, and formed it selfe in that Operation, and plowed it selfe into a strange Imagination: whereby the Divine food, viz: the Essentiall Wisdome of God is withdrawen: from which, with its longing desire, it hath broken off it selfe; thereupon it is wholly blinde as to God, and the first Divine Essence, (wherein God Created it,) is departed. 20. When the soule brought its Imagination from that [Divine Essence or Substance] out of and into the Earthly and Astrall property, then also its Bo∣dy, wherein the Threefold Spirit worketh, became wholly Earthly Grosse and Beastiall; for into whatsoever the Imagination of the Spirit bringeth it selfe, such a Body also is, through the Impression of the Spirituall desire. As we see in Man, that he hath gotten a Grosse Earthly Body, wherein the Principles now stand in Meere Strife, Contrariety, and Enmity: from which, Paine,Fragility. Corrupti∣bility and Death exist: which yet God did forbid him in Paradise, while he yet stood therein, That he should not Eate of the Knowledge of Evill and Good, with the Imagination, else he should fall into such Necessity, Misery, and Death, and die to the Kingdome of Heaven, as it is also come to passe, Gen. 2.17. 21. When the Soule brought it selfe into the Earthly Imagination, it brought it selfe into the Earthly Image, and lost the Heavenly Image: whereas it should Image it selfe into the Essentiall Wisdome, viz: into the Holy Heavenly Essen∣tiall Word, and take its Nourishment therestom: then it Imaged itselfe in the outward Astrum or Constellation, and in the Serpents and Devills desire: where∣by in its Noble Image it became a Visard and Monster in the sight of God, and lost its Angelicall forme which it had, as also Paradise, and the Kingdome of Heaven; and now with its Ground stood in the Impression of Darknesse in the Anger of God, and must have ever stood in such Visardly Image, If the Great Love of God had not come to helpe it againe, and that the Divine Word, viz: its first Mother (its first Originall) had not againe Inspired or Spoken the Grace into it; so that the same Word would with its most Inward Secresie and Love, give it selfe againe into the Ground of the Soule with a New well-spring and fountaine, and bring the soule a New Nourishment into its Life, whereby its naturall fiery and painfull property becometh changed into the Image of God againe. 22. Which great Divine Love would be a Death to theAdverse. Contrary will, as also to the Serpents and Devills Poyson, and slay the Monstrous Image and
false Imagination, and bring the first Image againe into a New Life, which New Life in this introduced Love should againe cate of the essentiall Wisdome of God, and with its desire Image it selfe therein, that the true Divine Science may be manifested therein againe, and might worke in a Creaturely Life, and so bring it selfeIn the midst. together into a Creaturely Imagibility. 23. To which End also God Created Angells and Men, because he would Image his Eternall Knowledge with the Essentiall Wisdome inFormings. Formes, in and with which the Eternall Spirit playeth, and hath thereby erected a Harmony of Divine fullnesse of joy, to the endlesse Solace of such Images, viz: of the Angells and Men, and those who have their rise out of Gods Word and Power. 24. And even therefore it is that the Eternall Word of the Divine Exhala∣tion, with the Manifestation of so Great Love and Grace, (which inspired or spake it selfe in againe in Paradise after the Fall) is become Man, and hath in∣troduced its Essentiall Love, viz: the Essentiall Wisdome of God, againe into Our Heavenly Ens and Substance that was faded as to God: and hath made our Substance that was faded as to God, living in him, with the Introduction of his living Divine Essence: and with this Introduced Essentiall Love, which gave it selfe in with the Essence of our soules, as also into our Flesh and Bloud, hath with its will and desire broken the Monstrous will of the soule, viz: the selfe-six∣ed Image-like false desire, as also the Devills Imagination, which he had intro∣duced into Man; and hath with his Love brought the false properties into the Temperature againe; and is become Death to Death, which held us captive, so that it must die to its Wrath andFragility. Corruptibility in this Introduced Love, and suffer the Humane Life, in this Love to spring forth through IT, to a new Will and Eternall Life. 25. This new introduced Love and Grace, hath given it selfe together into the Breaking of the Humane Life, viz: into the Dying of Man, in the Person of Christ, and brought the Humane received Owne-will, with it selfe, into Death and broken it: and hath suffered the Humane Image, (which the Owne-will, through its Imagination and Desire of selfe-hood hath made thus Grosse and
vile, and brought it from the first Angelicall Image into such a Monster) to hang upon the Crosse, and there to be put to scorne: and so hath borne the Eternall scorne which Man must have borne, as aTriumph, or shew. spectacle upon the Crosse. And there openly made it appeare before all Angells and Spirits, how this great Grace of Love would destroy the Devills introduced Desire, and Death also: and with this new Introduced Love spring forth through death, and bring forth the humane Life through Death, and change the Wrath of the Anger of God into Love, and make Darknesse Light, and through this new ino∣duced Love, convert and transmute the Grosse (Earthly) Humane Image into a Heavenly Image againe. 26 As the impurity of Gold is changed in the fire or much more, as a Man may by the Tincture turne Copper, Lead, or Grosse Iron into Gold: so also is the Humané Spirit, together with the Body in their Three Principles, changed into the Divine power and property, and through Death brought into an Eter∣nall Life, which consists in Power and Glory in the Will of God. 27. Where now wee understand, that the humane Soule in this transmuted new Birth, and introduced Love, doth againe Eate of the Essentiall Wisdome of God, and with its will Imageth [or frameth] it selfe in the Divine Science; and therein hath Divine skill and knowledge: And so by such Resurrection through the Death, (where the Man Christ in the Divine Power is arisen
through Death, and hath made Death Life) is become a Lord over Sinne, Death, the Devill, and Hell, and hath borne all of them in its Resurrecti∣on, as aShew or Triumph. spectacle on the humane Soule and Body, as a Victor over them. 28. And here may be rightly mentioned what Christ saith, Joh. 17. Father the Men were thine, but thou hast given them unto Mee, and I now give them this victory, viz: the New Life introduced into Death, that Death in them also may be Destroyed, that they in my Power may goe through Death, and in my ower be also thus transmuted, and through my Resurrection come againe to thee: and as I am arisen from Dead, and have brought their (by Me assumed) Humanity, to thee; so that I as true God and Man in One Person, am One with thee, and have possessed the Throne of Glory: So Father I will also, that those which thou hast given Mee, be where I am and see my Glory. 29. Now seeing Christ hath said, Joh. 6. Hee is the Bread that is come downe from Meaven, that giveth life to the World, and that wee should eate his flesh and drink his bloud: and that whosoever eateth and drinketh the same, he would remaine in them, and they should remaine in Him; and whosoever eateth not nor drinketh not the same, they have no life in them: Also Joh. 4. Hee would give us the water of Eternall Life, and whosoever should drink thereof, should thirst no more, but it would flow in him to a sountaine of Eternall Life, and streames of living water should flow from him. 30. Therefore here-following I will set downe a short fundamentall Ex∣position, what his Testaments, which he left behinde him, of Baptisme and the Last Supper, are, what Baptiseth and is Baptised, how it is done, and to what
profit and Effect it is done; also how the participation of his body and bloud in his Testaments is effected; with what Mouth, and what food it is; also who partaketh thereof worthily, and how it is with the unwor∣thy.
The First Chapter How Reason useth to view it selfe in a CreaturelyImaginary Manner. Imagelikenesse, when it considereth of Christ and his Testaments. Whence the Strife about Christs Testaments ariseth; and how the same is an Empty unprofitable thing. ALL Strife and Mis-understanding concerning Christs Per∣son, Office and Beeing or substance, as also con∣cerning his Testaments which he left behinde him, wherein he workethAt Present. Presentially, ariseth from the defected Creaturely Reason, which runneth on onely in an Imagelike Opinion, and reacheth not the Ground of this Mystery, and yet will be a Mistris of all things or beeings, will Judge all things, and doth but loose it selfe in such Image-likenesse, and breaketh it selfe off from its Centre, and disperseth theInward senses or thoughts. thoughts, and runneth on in the Multiplicity, whereby its Ground is confused, the Minde disquieted, and knoweth not it selfe. No Life can stand in Certainty, except it continue in its Centre, out of which it is sprung. Seeing then the Soule is sprung from Gods Word and Will, and yet is entered into its own Lust and desire to will of it selfe: in such searching of selfe-willing, it cannot reach its first Ground from whence it is sprung: and threupon it runneth without its Ground in meere uncertainty till it returne to its Originall againe. Every Beginning goeth out of the Eternall ONE, viz: out of the Tri-unity of GOD, through the Exhalation, or speaking of the unity of GOD. As a fountain floweth from its Originall. Through which flowing forth, the unity bring∣eth it selfe into selfe-viewing findingnesse and perceptibility, to the Forming and Imaging of it selfe. Every visible and Invisible Bee∣ing, both Spirituall and Corporeall, have taken their Originall in the Exhalation of the Divine Power, and are aOr, Re∣semblance or Antitype. Reflection
of the seperable will of God, and stand with their Ground therein. For the Beginning of every Beeing is nothing else, but an Imagination of the out-flown will of God, which hath brought it selfe into Seperability, formednesse, and Imagelikenesse; wherein lyeth the whole Creation: And every life doth consist in its re-exhalation andResem∣blance or Antitype. Reflection in the same manner. Seeing then that the Humane Life is an out-flowing and Reflection of the Divine Power, understanding, and skill, therefore the same ought to continue in its origi∣nall, or else it looseth the divine knowledge, Power and skill, and with selfe-speculation bringeth it selfe into Centres of its owne, and Strange Imaging, wherewith its Originall becometh darkned and strange. As is to be knowne by Erroneous Reason, which ever teacheth concerning GOD, and yet hath no true un∣derstanding: also it never cometh to rest whiles it run∣neth on in Strange Imaging. Therefore say I, that this is the onely cause that Men Dispute and Strive about God, his Word, Essence or Beeing and Will; that the understanding of Man hath broken it selfe off from its Originall, and now runneth on in meere self-will, thoughts, and Ima∣ges in its own Lust to self-ishnesse, and Imagineth to it selfe another Ground to the Divine Willing, wherein yet there is no true knowledge, nor can be, so long till the Life returneth into its Originall, viz. into the Divine out∣flowing and will. And if this be done, then Gods will speaketh forth the Divine Power and Wonders againe through the hu∣mane willing. In which Divine Speaking the life may know and comprehend Gods will, andOr, Image. frame it selfe therein. Then there is true divine knowledge and un∣derstanding in Mans skill, when his skill is continually renewed with divine Power, and when divine skill pres∣seth
forth through the life, in that kinde and manner as in the Beginning it did flow forth from the divine Power and skill. As Christ hath taught us, when he sayth; Ʋnlesse ye be con∣verted and become as a childe, ye shall not come into the kingdom of God. That is, that the life turne it selfe againe into God out of whom it is proceeded, and forsake all its owne Ima∣ging and Lust, and so it cometh to the Divine Vision againe. All Strife about the Divine Will and Beeing or Essence, whereby men despise one another, cometh from selfe Imagelikenesse, that one Man comprehendeth the Image of another, viz: his thoughts, and yet cannot rightly apprehend them. Where One Man sets himselfe in the Thought and Minde of another, and bringeth that which is his owne thereinto, and compelleth that which is anothers into his Meaning, and forcibly sets himselfe aloft in the Thoughts and Minde of another, and holdeth them for his proper owne, and will make a shew therewith, and therewith domineere in and over the Thoughts and Minde of others: Men must worship and reverence his Thoughts and Minde, and hold them to be the Word of God, orOr, Ora∣cles. the speaking of God. Thus Man deludeth himselfe, and Robbeth God of his honour, taketh his Covenant in his Mouth, and yet hateth the Nurture of the Spirit of God, which therefore reproveth him in his Conscience, that he is but an Apostate Luci∣fer, and will compell others into his Image, that they shall hold it for the Word of God. But a true Man, Inclineth himselfe, to his Originall, and forsaketh all Images, and desireth no selfe Image∣bility of his understanding, except what God will frame and speake with and through him: and despiseth none,
but only distinguisheth the true from the false, the Good from the evill, and teacheth the Truth with Divine Powerfull out-flowing and will. All Disputation concerning Gods Beeing or Essence and Will, is performed in the Images of the Senses or thoughts without God: For if any liveth in God, and willeth with God, what needeth he dispute about GOD, who or what GOD is? But that he disputeth about it, is a signe, that he hath never felt it at all in his Minde or Senses, and it is not Given to him that God is in him, and willeth what he will. It is a certaine signe that he will exalt his owne Meaning and Image above others, and that he desireth the Dominion. Men should friendly conferre together, and offer one another their Gifts and Knowledge in Love, and try things one with another, and hold that which is Best, 1 Thes. 5.21. And friendly instruct one another, and not so stand in their own opinion, as if they could not Erre: Seeing we have a Mighty Enemy against us, who sud∣denly bringeth strange Images into Mans thoughts, and maketh Men Insult: whence Sects and Scissmes exist. It lyeth in no Mans Person, that Men should suppose, that the Divine Understanding must come onely from such and such: For the Scripture saith; Try all things, and hold that which is Good, 1 Thes. 5.21. The Touchstone to this Knowledge, is, First, the Cor∣ner-Stone Christ: that Men should see, whether a thing enter out of Love into Love: or whether alone purely the Love of God be sought and desired: whether it be done out of Humility or Pride: Secondly, whether it be according to the Holy Scripture of the Bible: Third∣ly, is it according to the Humane Heart and Soule, wherein the Booke of the Life of God is incorporated,
and may very well be read by the Children of God: where then the true Minde hath its Touch-stone in it selfe, and can distinguish all things: If it be so that the Holy Ghost dwell in the Ground of the Minde, that Man hath Touchstone enough, That will leade him into all Truth. Christs Testaments are a secret Mystery, and are prof∣fered to the Minds and Thoughts that are departed from, and come againe to God, where the Life bringeth it selfe to God againe, and so will the Thoughts that returne to God be first fed with Divine Power and Understanding: the same afterwards kindle the Life, that it hungreth af∣ter God: to which afterwards is given Christs Flesh and Bloud for aOr, Pawne or Earnest. Pledge and Seale, and the Divine Essence or Substance will be imprinted therein: whence the Life is brought againe into its Originall: viz: into Gods Power and Word. A false Thought or Minde of Man is nourished againe by its Likenesse, viz: from its owne Conjecture, or from highnesse of Minde, or from the Subtilty of the Ser∣pent: and these it desireth to Exalt, and put into an Image: and that Image is a Branch on the Tree of Satan. Now that Man which is fed from the Divine Power and Spirit in his Minde and Thoughts, he is Divinely Minded, and bringeth forth Good things out of his Good Heart. But that Man who is fed in his Thoughts from the Power and Will of the Flesh, he is fleshly Minded onely. When Reason considereth of Christs Testaments, and thinketh and considereth how yet Christ can be present in his Testaments, then it thinketh, it is done after anImaginary. Image-like Manner. And when it knoweth that it is not done in anImaginary. Image-like Manner, then it falleth quite from that,
and thinketh HEE is present onely in Remembrance: As when his Word is preached, then he worketh thus onely in the same powerfully: and so it thinketh also concerning his Testaments, that Christ worketh onely Spiritually in the Faith: and that the Testaments are onely Signes or Symboles, whereby wee should instruct our selves what he hath done for us, and therewith onely declare his Death, and the shedding of his Bloud, and should keepe it in lively Remembrance, to our Com∣fort. Thus Reason understandeth nothing at all of the Kingdome of Christ, much lesse of his Person, or of his Of∣fice: and in that respect Men dispute and strive about it, and will needs attaine it with the Searching of Rea∣son: all this attaineth not the true understanding: For Christs Testaments are Heavenly, and Reason is Earthly & worldly: It seeketh Christ in the Time [or that which is Temporary] and if it finde him not therein accord∣ing to their Power, then it supposeth, HEE is present only to theOr, Senses. Thoughts, which cast themselves up to him in Heaven: But this will not renew the Life, and bring it into God againe: It will not make the New-Birth. All Strife cometh from hence, that Men doe not un∣derstand that Heaven wherein Christ sitteth at the Right hand of God, that he is in this world, and that the world standeth in Heaven, and Heaven in the World, and are in one another, as Day and Night. The Inward Ground of the Word, out of which the Foure Elements are sprung, is the Heaven, viz. a Spirituall World: In that Inward Power Christ Ruleth, true God
and Man, through the Outward World: For where Christ sayth; Matth. 28.18.20. All Power is given to Mee in Heaven and on Earth: Also; I am with you alwayes till the End of the World: Also; Hee shall rule over all his Enemies, till all his Enemies are laid under him as a footstoole, 1 Cor. 15.25. Psal. 110.1. This is to be understood of his inward Kingdome, where, in the inward Power he ruleth over the outward Earthly, and also the Hellish. For the outward World is sprung out of the inward Spirituall World; viz: out of Light and Darknesse; which fabrick, before the Office of Christ stood in the Eternall Creators Office; who from Eternity hath wrought [or effected] light and darknesse, viz: the Spi∣rituall World: which fabrick is flown forth and become visible, and brought by God into a Creation, wherein Light and Darknesse, viz: Good and Evill, rule one with another: where is understood Hell and Paine in the flowing forth of the Eternall Darknesse, and the Light of Nature, in the flowing forth of the Light; and in that where Evill and Good ruleth alike, is understood the Kingdome of Nature, with hot and cold, and all o∣ther properties. This Dominion hath God given to the Office of Christ, that he being both true God and Man, should rule over all the Propriety, and selfe-willing of this Kingdome, where Evill and Good rule one in another. As the Sun in the visible World ruleth over Evill and Good, and with its light and power, and all whatsoever it selfe is, is present every where, and penetrates into Every Beeing, and yet in its Image-like for me doth not pluck away to it selfe with its Efflux, but wholly giveth it selfe into Every Beeing, and yet ever remaineth whole, and no∣thing of its Beeing goeth away therewith: Thus also it is to be understood concerning Christs Person and Of∣fice; which ruleth in the Inward Spirituall World visi∣bly, and in the Outward World Invisibly, and through∣ly
penetrateth the Faithfull Mans Soule, Spirit, and Heart. And as fire gloweth through the Iron, and as the Sun worketh through and through an Hearb, so that the Hearb becometh Solar, [or filled with the vertue of the Sunne, and as it were so converted by the Sunne that it becometh wholly of the Nature of the Sunne]: so Christ ruleth in the Resigned Will, in soule and body over all Evill Inclinations, over Satans introduced Lust, and Generateth the Man to be a new heavenly Creature, and wholly floweth with it selfe into him, both as to Divine and humane power, so that the Faithfull Man becometh a right branch on his Vine, in which, God and Man (as to that same inward New Birth) dwelleth. Now herein consist the Testaments of Christ, that Hee offereth himselfe to theText, Glauben. Vide Ch. 2. v. 1. on the second side. Faith, that Hee will give it this Flesh and Bloud, and all Grace, and Spiritually dwell in Man, as the Sun dwelleth in the Plant, and maketh the fruit Ripe andOr, supple. Tender. So in like manner is the poore fallen Earthly Man, which perished in Soule and Body, againe renewed, and wrought out to be a heavenly fruit; where in the End, onely the Grossnesse of the flesh falleth from him, and the Spirit together with the Soule remaineth in Christ: and also heere in this Life according to this indwelling power, dwelleth in Heaven; concerning which St. Paul saith; Our Conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. But the Body is in the World; and of the Worlds Essence: And now as the Heaven penetrateth the World, and giveth it Vertue and Power: so also Christ throughly penetra∣teth the outward Man with his inward ruling power, and resisteth the vaine Lust of the Earthly Nature. Therefore say I; none understand any thing of God, ex∣cept God worke it in his Minde andOr, senses. Thoughts; for all Naturall knowledge is outward in the World, and ari∣seth from its Astrum, and runneth on in surmisings,
doubting whether a thing be so or no: But the Spirit of Christ assureth in the Soule and Spirit of his Faithfull, and witnesseth in them that they are Gods Children, Rom. 8.16. Now how this present Essentiall participation is effected, and what the Covenant of Grace between God and Man is, both of the Old and New Testament: What Baptisme and the Supper of Christ are, shall be declared in the fol∣lowing Chapters.
The Second Chapter. Of the Institution of Baptisme, what it is, who it is that Baptiseth, and what is Baptised; And how theOr, Bap∣tisme of Water. Water-Baptisme is to be understood. 1. WHen any will kindle a Fire, they must have some substance that will take fire: it must be a sub∣stance, wherein there is an Oyle and Water, or it burneth not. For if they cast a Stone, or the like into the Fire, it will not so burne as to come to aBlazing. shining Light: so also it is to be understood concerning the Soule; When it brake its desire off from Gods Essence of Love and Meek∣nesse: which divine Meeknesse in it was as a Spirituall Oyle and fountaine of Water, wherein itAsswaged or refreshed. allayed its fiery source, and therein its fire had a shining and Light: then its owne Seperator: viz: the Naturall Fiat,Text. Impressed. Impression. com∣pressed it selfe, so that by suchText. Impressed. Impression. compression its properties became as a hard
Stone, or as a hungry source of Fire, wherein there is indeed great heate, and yet cannot come to any kindling [of Light] as a hard Stone which lyeth in the Fire, and yetOr, is not of a light fire. is not properly the same with Fire, because of the hardText. Impressed. Impression. con∣pression of the Stone. 2. And yet a Man may understand that there is not onely a Hots fire in the perished Soule, as a hot burning Fire-source, but also a Cold Fire-source, wherein Hot and Cold stand in Eternall Strife andOr, opposition. Con∣trary Will: as the Cause of the true fire, viz: a darke fire-source of Anguish, wherein there is alwayes a desire of kindling, and yet no kindling may be effected, because of the strongText. Impression. Compression: And that
the Substance of the Oyly and Watery Meeknesse is game, and is she: up in such a hard indissoluble Death. 3. And this is now that which God said to Adam: The Day when thou shalt Eate of the Tree (or fruit) of the Knowledge of Good and Evill, thou shalt die the Death. 4. Thus the poore Soule is poysoned through false Imagination, and through its owneText. Impression. compression of its desire, is come to be such a hungry fire-source; which is onely a shutting in of the true Life, and a Ground of Darknesse, a source of Enmity and Contrariety, wherein there is no more any true Ens, wherein the Life might bring it selfe into Light. 5. As a hard Stone is shut up, so the Soule was shut up, and was out of the good Love-Life a Poyson-Life, after that manner as out of An∣gells there became Devills: which now also are of such a horrible poy∣sonous stincking fire source in their Essence, and cannot attaine the kindling of the Light: The cause is this, that they are become Enemies of the Divine Love, that the Love is to them a Death of their Evill Will and Essence, which would slay their false Life in the twinckling of an Eye, if they did but come therein. 6. ThisText. Impresseten. compressed Substance of the Soule, perished as to God, and blinde as to God, the Great Love of God out of mre Grace came a∣gaine to help, as soone as the Soule together with the Body was thus fallen, and spake in or breathed in it selfe againe into the Centre of the Soule, viz: into the Compressed shut up and vanished Heavenly Ens of the Soule, viz: into the source of Meeknesse which it had, which was no more Moveable. 7. Into this [Soule] the Moveable power spake in it selfe againe to be a New Centre and Covenant, that God would in the fullnesse of Time in this inspoken voyce of Grace, and in Mans vanished heavenly Ens introduce and Manifest his living Ens, viz: the Essentiall Word of his
Power and Wisdome, with the Most high Love, viz: the Name JE∣SUS out of JEHOVA, and therewith make the vanished Essence or Substance of the Heavenly part living and growing againe: whereof the Soule should Eate, and thereby its anxious fire-source would be trans∣muted and changed into a Love fire. 8. This inspoken Grace-word of the Serpent-Destroyer, that is it now, which the Soules of the Holy Children of God before the Incarnation of Christ, have kindled, that they beleeved God and his promise, of the fullfilling that was to come: And in this Faith have they sa∣crificed. 9. For their Sacrifices, especially of the first Fathers after Adam, were onely, that they represented an Image or Figure, how the Soule should be sacrificed in the fire of GODS Wrath, and how through this inspoken-Grace-Ground and Covenant, the Soule should be transmuted in the fire ofOr, Gods Wrath fire. Gods Wrath, and changed into a Love. fire, and how it should enter into the Death and Dying of its self-will with the false Imagination, and should burne away the false will in the fire of Wrath, and in the power of this inspoken Grace of the Love and Meeknesse of God, goe forth through the fire into a cleare light, and so become a New-borne childe, that is no more Dark but Light: and how the Introduced poyson of the Serpent must sever it selfe therefrom, as the smoake severeth it selfe from the Fire and Light, so that then the Fire and Light becometh a clearer Glance, and no more shut up, as in the Wood it lyeth shut up in the Es∣sence. 10. This Image, Type, or Figure, they set before them with their Sacrifice, and introduced their Imagination thereinto, with the inspo∣ken Grace of the seede of the Woman, and Serpent-Destroyer, that so their Imagination might Forme, Mould or Image it selfe in the Figure of Christ, that so the spirit of their Will might stand in aOr, Imaging. Modelling, wherein it might worke in the Grace.
11. For without Substance no working can be: therefore they Imagined or typified to themselves the Regeneration, with the Sacri∣fices by fire, and formed or Imaged in them the Serpent-Destroyer, in the fire, how HEE would change Gods fire of Wrath in the soules-fire into a Light- and Love-fire, and how the Enmity would sever it selfe from the Soule: and how the Soule should through Christs Death, (where the Love of God gave up it selfe into this fire) be changed into an Angell. 12. By this Immodeled Image or Type they pierced with their desire and earnest Prayer, to God: and Gods Word of Grace also thus had modelled and inspoken it selfe in Men: and Now there was a Conjunction between God and Man: for the Humane desire went with this Image into God, and Gods Love-desire went into this I∣mage of the Serpent-Destroyer; and so the desire of Man brought this Image of the Imagination into the Sacrifice: and so the Sacrifice was kind∣led with the Holy fire. And it was not a Common fire that they had.Note. If thou Babell could∣est understand this, it were well for thee, and thou wert delivered from the Fables wherein thou runnest on thy Course. 13. This Holy fire consumed their Sacrifice through Gods-Imagi∣nation and kindling: to signifie: how theOr, Animall Image. Beastiall Image of Man should be preserved in the fire of God, and the grossnesse of the Element be consumed: and out of the fires Consuming should goe forth the right true created pure bright Spirituall Image in Adam, which through this Great Love shall be preserved and brought through into Clarity by the Fire: In which New Image, the Love it selfe would be the fire of life, that it might no more Imagine and Imprint falshood.
14.Note. With such an Imagination and Beleefe or Faith, the first Men before Christs time, (before he manifested himselfe in this incorporated Grace-Covenant, and became Man) were apprehended and taken into the Living Word of God, viz: into that Grace, wherein their Soule came into Divine Rest: untill at the fullfilling, that Christ fullfil∣led this processe, and arose from Death: and then Hee also with his Life and Substance in them, viz: in their Inward Ground of the Hea∣venly part which vanished in Adam; arose; and they have put on Christ, as to the Soule and spirituall Substance: and so now waite for their Body, out of the Limus of the Earth, viz: the Third Principle; viz: the Outspoken formed Substantiall outward Word; with its Spirit of the Resurrection at the Last Day: As also it is thus to be under∣stood concerning Christians, which here have put on Christ. 15.Note. This Ground of the Holy Fire, began with Adam and Abel: When Abel and Cain Sacrificed, God looked graciously on Abels Sa∣crifice: for the Image or Type of Christ stood with his Imagination of Faith therein: therefore God kindled his Sacrifice with the Holy Fire, and it was acceptable before him: for it was a Conjunction with the Divine Desire: But Cains he looked not graciously on, for he had not such Faith or Beleese, but stood in the perished Natures owne Lust and Desire, and had Imprinted or Imaged to himselfe the Kingdome of this World: and therefore the Holy Fire would not kin∣dle in his Image or Type. 16. For Cain stood in the Image of the perished Adam, as a right fi∣gure of Adam after the Fall: and Abell stood in the figure of the New Regeneration, viz: in Christs figure [signifying] how Christ would with his Sacrifice goe into Death: and so the Image of the perished Adam stood neere Cain [signifying] how Christ was come to seeke lost Man, and to Generate him a New with his Sacrifice. 17. But as the vanity of Men gat the upperhand, and their Nature became still more Evill and shamefull, then was quenched this un∣derstanding of the Holy Fire among them, till the Flood came upon them, and destroyed them: which was a Type of the Baptisme [sig∣nifying] how the water of Eternall Life, viz: Gods Substantiall Meeknesse, would drowne and quench that false Fire, viz: the false life of the Soule, and how the Soule would grow up out of the Holy Water in the Meeknesse of God to a New Life of Light. 18. But when God renewed his Covenant with Abraham, which
was Established in Paradise, then HEE gave him the figure of Christ againeWith. in the Circumcision [signifying] how Christ with his heavealy Bloud would cut off Sinne and vanity from our uncleane Birth: And therefore the Masculine Persons must be Circumcised in that same Member, whereby the Humane propagation is Effected. 19. Further he sets before him the Figure of Christ by his Sonne Isaac, in calling him to sacrifice and slay his Sonne on the Wood, how it would goe with the humane Redemption; how Christ would be a Sacrifice in our recei∣ved humanity: and he awakened againe the Holy fire which devoured his sa∣crifice: to signifie how Gods Love-fire would swallow up into it selfe Gods Wrath fire in Man, and turne it into Divine Love, and there∣upon gave him the promise, that the seede of his Covenant, which would through this Holy Fire, through the Transmutation, through the dying of vanity, grow forth in the Love-fire, would be so great and so many as the starres in the firmament: Thus would Gods children through the Sacrifice and Death of Christ, through this changing grow forth out of the Holy Fire. 20. This stood in the Old Testment in the figure, and theReconciliati∣on. attonement was done in the Sacrifice through the Holy Fire, which fire was an Image of the Wrath of God, which would devoure in it selfe the sinnes together with the Soule: for the Fathers property in the Wrath was turned into thisFire-noyse. fire-smoak, and the Sonnes property in the Love and Meeknesse brought it selfeOr, into. in the Wrath for they sacrificed the flesh of Beasts, but yet they brought their Imagi∣nation and Prayer into the Grace of God, and Imaged or Imprinted themselves in the Covenant of the Grace of Love. 21. And with this Imaging or Imprinting they entered into the Sacrifice, as into the fire of Gods Wrath, and Divine Love, wherein the attonement was done: and so the Wrath-fire of their introduced desire tooke the Earthly vani∣ty, and consumed it through the beastiall property of the Sacrifice: to signifie, that Man outwardly hath assumed to himselfe beastiall Properties, and awakened them in him through false Lust.
22. Seeing then also such beastiall Properties hung to the Mande of Man, viz: the Animale soule from the Constellation, so that their Prayer and Will were not pure before God, therefore Gods Wrath-fire confumed this Beastiall vani∣ty of Man in the Sacrifice through Beastiall Properties, and their Immodeled Image or Type of the Grace went with their prayer into the holy Fire: and there was the soulish-desire received in: that same Holy sire, now pierced with the re∣ceived humane desire through the Fathers Wrath-fire in the Sacrifice. 23. And thus the Children of Israel in the Sacrifice and fire wereAned. released from their sinnes and vanity, in a spirituall manner, upon the future fullfilling, till Christ would Come and assume our humanity, and give up himselfe to God his Father (as a Sacrifice,) into his Wrath-fire, and with the manifested Love∣source in the Name JESVS turne the Wrath into Love: where then the Wrath swallowed up the humane owne Will, and Gods Love-will, through Christs Love, grew forth through Death and through the Wrath, and the huma∣nity went through Death into the Eternall Life. 24. In this manner was Israel in the Type of Christ, through the Covenant of God, through the sacrifice and fire, after a spirituall manner ransomed from sinnes: for Israels Faith went through the Sacrifice into the Covenant of God, viz. into the Grace-Attonement of the Womans seede: and Gods Imaginati∣on went also into his Covenant made with Adam and Abraham: and there was a Conjunction: and the true attonement in the Covenant was done through the holy fire: which holy fire afterwards in Christ manifested it selfe in the huma∣nity, and tooke away the Strength from the Poyson of the wrath of God, and turned it into Love, and brake open the strong Impression of Death in the soule; fire, and brought the Divine Love and Meeknesse thereinto. 25. But when the time drew neere that GOD would manifest his Love-fire through his Covenant in the Humanity, that the same fire should be kindled, in the Humane Life, then God rewed the Type, and with St John began the Water Baptisme, and brought his Covenant out of the Circumcision into the Baptisme. 26. But saith Reason; What is or signifieth Water-Baptisme? What doth God thereby? also what doth it Effect? Answer: As is mentioned above: The Soule had so hardText. Im∣pressed. com∣pressed it selfe in its properties in the wrath-full Anger of God, that there∣by it stood in Eternall Death: In it was no divine Love-Ens more ma∣nifest or moveable, wherein it might be able to kindle the Holy fire of the Love of God: and therefore God sent the Baptisme before this holy kindling, and set it in the first Covenant: For when the Word and the power of the Holy fire, became Man, and manifested it selfe in Christ; then the Holy Word in the Holy fire through the assumed Hu∣manity, spake in it selfe into its fellow-Members according to the Hu∣manity. 27. Now if this Inspeaking should take Effect in Man, and be∣come Substantiall; then must the DivineEintauchen, Soaking or steeping. Infusion goe before: for as the Word in the Covenant manifested it selfe in the humanity, then
the meeke Love and Grace in the Covenant did flow forth: with this flowing forth of the Divine Love was the Covenant setInstituted. and placed in the Water-Baptisme: for seeing Man was Earthly and Elementary, there must also be an Elementary Medium or Meanes for that pur∣pose, wherein the flowing forth of the Divine Love in the Covenant might take hold, that a humane Naturall Substance might be in the middle, whereinto the Divine and also the Humane Imagination might enter, and Infuse it selfe in the humanity for a new Ens or kindler, wherein the Holy Fire might kindle it selfe in the dry soules-fire. 28. As was done under Circumcision, in the Sacrifices, there the Bea∣stiall fat was a Medium, wherein by such kindling, the humane desire through the Covenant went to meete God, and Gods-Imagination went into the Covenant: Thus stood the Holy Fire in the Covenant, op∣posire to the Wrath in the Introduction of the humane desire in the Sacri∣fice: Gods Imagination in his Love-fire went into the Covenant, and the Hu∣mane Imagination went also through the Sacrifice in the Fire into the Cove∣nant: for in the fire was Gods Wrath met opposite, where through the humane Imagination must goe into the Covenant, and so consume the sinne and un∣cleannesse in the Humane desire, which pierced to God: Thus stood in the Covenant the lovr fire met opposite to the humane desire: and the same tooke the humane desire in the Wrath-fire to it, according to its purity. 29. As may be seene by Moses on Mount Sinai, where first the Fathers Property in the Covenant out of the Wrath-fire opened it selfe, and re∣quired Mans Righteousnesse, that the same should walke before God in full obedience and purity, and in purity draw neere unto him through the Sacrifice in the fire: And if not, then he would devoure them in the Curse through this Wrath-fire: which was an Image, Type or shadow: [signifying] how the humane vanity should and must be purged through Gods wrath-fire: But in the same wrath-fire stood the love-fire met opposite in the Covenant in the Sacrifice, as an Image of Christ, and quenched the Wrath-fire, so that the soules-desire with its prayer and Will, could pierce through this wrath-fire into God. 30. This Love-fire, that stood opposite to the Wrath in the Sacrifice, which also the Wrath-fire kindled, so that it devoured the Sacrifice, that is it, which in the limit of the Covenant, in the seede of the Woman awakened it selfe with heavenly Substantiality, viz: with the Essentiall Wisdome, and gave it selfe up into our Substance, vanished as to God, yet heavenly. 31. Our substance vanished and shut up in Death, was signified by the drie Rod of Aaron, which Substance grew in this awakening and introducing of the Heavenly Living Love:Or, Substance. Essence, where Gods Substance became Man, in whom the Holy fire could Burne: For, the Divine Ens, which vanished in Adam, which grew againe with such kindling, was the food of this Love-fire, as a Spirituall Holy Oyle, wherein the Love-fire could kindle and burne: and that same Love-burning was the New Life of the Regeneration. 32. But seeing inBy OTHER may be ment o∣ther men then the man Christ himselfe. OTHER Men there should not be Effected such a superna∣turall kindling through the speciall Moving of God: [but] that other Men should all be kindled through this holy fire out of Christ; therefore went the
Covenant through the Water-Baptisme with the out flowne Grace first into the Heavenly Ens of Man, viz: into the vanished Substance, wherein the Incorporated Paradisicall-Covenant of the Serpent-Destroyer steed, and pierced into the same Covenant. 33. Yet seeing the Humane Essence, which was become Earthly, should goe together with such piercing in, therefore there must also be such a Me∣dium for it; wherein the Humane Essence can take hold: for in Gods Holinesse it cannot take hold; for the will was rent off from that; there∣fore there must now be a similitude, wherein the Imagination of the Humane Nature may take hold. 34. For Christ also had this similitude, viz: the Elements, received from us Men; that the Divine Imagination might take hold in the Water: that so the Divine and humane Imagination together, might awaken and kindle the Incorporated Paradisicall-Covenant, in that manner as a Glimmering (Mo∣ther▪) fire or tinder-fire cometh into the wood and Glimmereth. 35. After such a manner, through the Baptisme was introduced a Divine Mother-fire of the Holy fire, (a holy and Divine Glimmering fire) which destroyed and brake sinne and Death to pieces in the Inwardnesse of Man, viz: in the vanished heavenly Ens: from which the dry withered Tree of the Inward Ground might receive a life againe, viz: a Spirituall Oyle: In which new Spirituall Oyle of the Power of the Divine Light, the Love-fire, viz: the New-Life should burne. 36. This is now the Water-Baptisme, to which the Holy Ghost in the Inward Ground is the hand, which with the flowing forth of the Divine Love out of Christs suffering, Death, and Resurrection bapti∣seth with his Victory: That is; Hee Infuseth Christs Humanity, Suf∣fering, Death, and Resurrection, into the Inward Ground, and kindleth the Incorporated Paradisicall Covenant with this fire, that the dry Rod of Aaron buddeth forth. 37. For with this Infusion of the Holy Ghost, Christ is bestowed upon Man: he is hereby incorporated to Christ, and the Heavenly Ens, which in Mary assumed our humane Ens, with the whole pro∣cesse of Christ, is put on him, and imprinted in his even heavenly va∣nished Ens, to a New Life which hath overcome Death. 38. As a Tincture, tinctureth wholly and throughly penetrateth the Mettle, or as fire gloweth quite through the Iron: so heere it is to be understood concerning those who are capable of such Infusion, as shall further be taught.
The Second Chapter. Of Gods Covenant after the Fall, what the Fall of Man is, and how God hath bound and united himselfe with him againe. What the Circumcision in the old Testament and the Baptisme in the New are. WHen any will kindle a Fire, they must have some Sub∣stance that will take Fire: it must be a Substance, wherein there is an Oyle and Brimstone, or it burn∣eth not. For if they cast a Stone, or the like into the Fire, it will not so burn as to come to a shining light: so also it is to be understood concerning the poore Soule; When it brake its desire off from Gods Essence of Love and Meeknesse: which Essence in the beginning was in it, as a Spirituall Oyle and Water, and it was as a Spirituall Brim∣stone, wherein the Light of God did burne: then it brought it selfe into owne Desire: whereby it was shut up as a hard Stone, and lost all its Love and Meeknesse; and was as a burning Brim-stone-spirit, which could not be re∣medied, unlesse the Oyle of Divine Meeknesse and Love did flow into it againe. To this flowing into the Humane property, there must be a Subject, as a Medium, or Meanes, orResem∣blance, or thing of the like nature. Antitype,
whereby it may be done: whereinto also the Humane Faith Entered, and received the virtue or power through a Medium or Meane. This Medium in the Old Testament is the Circumcision, together with the Sacrifices; and in the New Testament it is the Holy Baptisme, and Supper of Christ, together with the Word taught, whereby the Divine Love and Meeknesse, as the rightBalsam or Ʋnction. Anointing Oyle of divine pow∣er is againe flowen into theGlauben, See Ch. 1. v. 28. on the second side. Faith: and so the shut Mouth of the soule is received into and comprehended in the Covenant of God, and opened againe by the sweet Grace, so that it can againe Eate of the heavenly Manna. What signifieth now this Anointing? Answer: Nothing else, but that as Man is Tinctured againe in Soule and Body, and so throughly penetrated and healed that he is capable of the Divine Power againe, viz: of the Divine fire of Love: so must his Brimstone Spirit of the Wrathfull fiery Soule, perished as to God, be remedied againe by the Covenant of God by such an Anointing Oyle: As with the Baptisme there is powred into it, the Water of the Eternall Life of Divine Meek∣nesse: and in the Supper is powred into it, the fire-burn∣ing Love in the Life of our Lord Jesus Christ. Reason sayth. Cannot God forgive Man his sinne without a Medium? Answer: The Matter was not about forgivenesse: The Soule wanted not onely forgivenesse, but a New-Birth. It had brought it selfe into owne-will, and quite broken it selfe off from Gods will, whence the Eternall Darknesse existed in it: For the source of its Life, viz: its own Seperator (understand the Cause of its Creaturely Moving and Life) had lift up it selfe, and the properties
of Life were quite gone forth from their Temperature, and had brought themselves into a strange burning fire, viz: into an anguishing heat and cold, into Eternall hunger and thirst, into Horror and Despaire: Where, in the Life of the Body and of the Soule, all properties were against one another, and Man stood in an Eternall dying source: Hee was become quite Blinde and Dead as to God: and the more he moved himselfe in his owne ability to ap∣prehend God, the greater was his anxious source: For the poore Soule was by Lust gone into Earthlinesse: wherein Satan and the Spirit of Errour had captivated it, and made it wholly Monstrous: And now the More it sought Rest therein, the greater was its Paine. And this now is that which God said to Adam: The Day when thou shalt Eate of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evill, thou shalt die the Death, Gen. 2.17. Thus the poore Soule is poysoned through false Imagination, and through its owneImpression. compression of its desire, is come to be such a hungry fire-source, which is onely a shutting in of the true Life, and a Ground of Darknesse, a source of Enmity and Contrariety, wherein there is no more any true Divine Ens, wherein the Life might bring it selfe into Light. As a hard Stone is shut up, so also the Soule was shut up, and out of its Good Life there became an Evill Life: as out of Angells there became Devills, which now also are of such a Horrible poyso∣nous stincking fire-source in their Essence, and cannot attaine the kindling of the Light, and are an Enemy of all Love and Truth. This Compressed blinde Soule-substance, and perished as to God, the Great Love of God, came againe to helpe instantly after that Fall, and spake it selfe in againe into the Centre of the Life, as a new Covenant, viz: into the source of Meeknesse which it had, which Love-source in it was no more Moveable. And did set into the Humane perished heavenly Ens, his new Grace-Covenant, viz: the Destroyer of the Serpent; that God would in the fullnesse of Time in this inspoken voyce of Grace introduce thereinto, and manifest therein his living Ens,
viz: the Living Word of his Power and Wisdome, with the most high Love, viz: the Name JESUS, and therewith make the va∣nished Essence or Substance living and growing againe: from whence the Soule should againe Eate of the heavenly Substance, whereby its anxious fire-source would againe be changed into a Love fire: Of which the dry Rod of Aaron, [mentioned] by Moses, which grew againe and bare Almonds, was aText. Bild, Image or Type. figure. This inspoken Grace-word of the Serpent-Destroyer, is it now, which the Soules of the holy Children of God before the Incarnation of Christ, have kindled, that they beleeved God and his Promise of the fulfilling that was to Come: and in this Faith have they sacri∣ficed. For their Sacrifices, especially of the first Fathers after Adam, were only, that they represented an Image or Figure, how the Soule should be sacrificed in the fire of Gods Wrath, and how the Soule should through this inspoken Ground of Grace and Covenant, in the fire of Gods wrath be changed into a Love-fire: how it should Enter into Death and a Dying to its self-will of false Desire: how the false will should be burned off from it, and in the power of this in∣spoken Grace of the Love and Meeknesse of God, spring up or goe forth through the fire into a cleere light, and so become a new borne childe, which is no more dark but light: also did live no more in its owne will, but in Gods will: and how the in∣troduced Serpents-Poyson in this transmutation doth sever it selfe there from, in that manner as the smoake severeth it selfe from fire and Light, whereas then the fire and Light becometh a cleerer Glance, and is no more shut up, as it lyeth in the Essence of the Wood shut up: Even as the (Holy) Divine fire of the Soule was through sinne thus also shut up, which none could unshut and kindle, but only the Love of God in this in∣corporated Grace-Covenant. This Image, Type, or Figure, they set before them with the Sa∣crifices [looking] upon the future fulfilling, and introduced their Faith, with the inspoken Grace of the Womans-seede and Ser∣pent-Destroyer, that so their Faith might thus Forme or Mould it selfe in the Figure of Christ, that the Spirit of their will, might stand in the figure and Image of Christ, that their Faith might Work in that incorporated Grace.
For without Substance no working can be: therefore they Imagi∣ned or typified to themselves the Regeneration with the Sacrifices by fire, and formed or Imaged in them the Serpent-Destroyer in the fire; [typifying] how HEE would change Gods Wrath-fire in the Soule into a Light and Love-fire; and how the Enmity would sever it selfe from the Soule; and how the Soule should through Christs Death, (in which the Love of God would Give up it selfe into this Wrath-fire) be changed into an Angell. By this Immodeled Image or Type, with their desire and Earnest prayer they pressed through the Sacrifice to God; and Gods Word with the Grace had thus also with the Covenant Mode∣led it selfe in Men: and now there was a Conjunction between God and Man, for the Humane desire went with this Image through the Sacrifice in the Holy fire into God, and Gods Love-desire went into this Image of the Serpent-Destroyer: For God kindled the Sacrifice with the Holy Fire. And it was not a Common fire that they had in their Sacrifi∣ces, though they used wood and Sacrifices thereto: yet their fire was not from a stone and a steele, but from the highest Tincture of the Paradisicall ground, from whence the fire of Life is sprung: If Man could understand it, and did not so runne on in blindnesse, it were well for him, and he were delivered from Babell and Fables. This holy Fire consumed their Sacrifices through Gods Imaginati∣on and kindling: and there the humane introduced Will, which hangeth to Earthlinesse is clensed and in the holy Fire purged, and ransomed from sinne, upon the future fullfilling. For the ground out of which this Holy Fire came, Manifested it selfe afterwards in Mans Life, in the Person of Christ. Thus stood the figure in their Sacrifices [to shew] how the earthly Image of Man should be preserved in the fire of God, and how the grossenesse of the Elements should be consumed, and out of the Consuming of the fire should goe forth the right true created pure bright spirituall Image in Adam, which in the fire of Gods Wrath through this holy fire of the Great Love should be brought into Clarity: In which New Image, the Great fiery Love would it selfe be the fire of Life, that it might no more Imagine falshood.
With this Faith the first Men before Christs time, (before Christ manifested himselfe in this incorporated Grace Covenant, and be∣came Man) were apprehended and taken into the Living Word of God, viz: into the Grace, wherein their Soule came into Divine Rest: Note: till Christ fullfilled this Type, and arose from Death; and then hee also with his life and Substance in them, viz: on their In∣ward Ground of the Heavenly part, which vanished in Adam; arose, and was manifested, and they put on Christ in Soule and Spirit: and so now wait for their Body out of the Limus of the Earth, viz: the Third Principle of the visible worlds property, viz: the for∣med Outspoken substantiall word of the Resurrection at the Last Day: As also it is thus to be understood concerning Christians. This Ground of the Holy Fire began with Adam, with Abell and Caine; when Abell and Caine sacrificed, God looked graciously on Abells sacrifice, and kindled it with holy Fire, and the sweet smell went up before the LORD: for the Image or Type of Christ in his Faith stood therein, therefore God kindled his Sacrifice with the Holy Fire, and it was acceptable before God: for it was a Conjun∣ction with the Divine desire; But Cains he looked not graciously on; for he had not such Faith or beleefe, but stood in the perished Ada∣micall Nature of own Lust and desire, and had imprinted or Ima∣ged to himselfe the Kingdome of this world: and therefore the Holy Fire would not kindle in his Sacrifice. Cain stood in the Figure of the perished Adam after the Fall, and Abell stood in the figure of the New Regeneration: [signifying] how Christ would with his Sacrifice goe into Death, and die for Man: and so the Image of Caine stood neere [signifying] how Christ was come to seeke the poore falne Man, and with his Sacrifice generate him a New. But as the vanity of Men gat the upperhand, and their Nature be∣came still more Evill and shamefull, then was quenched this under∣standing of the Holy Fire among them, till the Flood came upon them and overthrew them: which was a Type of the Baptisme [signify∣ing] how the water of Eternall Life, viz: Gods Substantiall Meek∣nesse would drowne and quench that false fiery life of the Soule, and how the Soule would grow up out of the Holy Water in the Meeknesse of God to a New Life of Light. Now when the time came that God renewed his Covenant with Abraham, which Hee had established in Paradise: HEE gave him the figure of Christ againeWith. in the Circumcision and the Holy
Fire; as is to be seene by the Sacrifices of Abraham, Gen. 15. how the Fire came forth between the Parts, and how at the same time in a vision terrour and great anguish fell upon him, all which signifie the Death of Christ, and the transmu∣tation of Soules. The Circumcision of the Member of the Humane propa∣gation was a figure [signifying] How the fleshly Man of Masculine and Feminine seede, should be cut off from the Image Created in Adam, through the Death of Christ, with the Anger of God: and through the bloud-shed of Christ be againe brought into the Eternall Virginity: therefore must the Masculine Persons be Circumcised on that same Member: to signifie the uncleane Birth after a Beastiall Man∣ner, which is aAbomina∣tion. vanity in the presence of God: therefore God set his Grace-Govenant in the figure of Christ on this Member, and so set Christ before him, whom hee had set up for a throne of Grace, that they might walke be∣fore him, and that his anger might not eate them up, Gen. 17. And he sets the figure of Christ forth with his processe neere upon Isaac [signifying] how the Redemption of Man∣kinde should be Effected. How Gods Love-fire should swallow up into it selfe Gods Wrath-fire in Man: and turne it into Love:
and thereupon gave him the Promise, that this promised incorpora∣ted Seede, which would through the Transmutation in the Fire, through the Dying of Vanity, grow forth in the Love-fire, would be so great as the Starres in Heaven. But when the time drew neere, that GOD would manifest his Love-fire through his Covenant in the Humanity, that the same fire should be kindled in the Humane Life, then he brought his Co∣venant [typified] with Circumcision, into Water-Baptisme, and with St John began the Water-Baptisme. But saith Reason; What is or signifieth the Water-Baptisme? What doth God worke thereby? Answer: As is mentioned above: The Soule had so much enra∣ged it selfe with wrath, in its properties, that thereby it stood in E∣ternall Death: In it was Gods Love-Essence no more manifest, wherein it might be able to kindle the Holy Fire of God, viz: the Holy Life: therefore God sent the Holy Baptisme before, and set it in the Covenant. For when the Word, viz: the power of the holy Fire, became Man, and revealed it selfe in Christ, then Christ with the holy Fire through the assumed humanity inspake him∣selfe into his fellow Members, according to the Humanity. Now if this Inspeaking should take Effect, and become Substantiall, then must the DivineEintauchen. Infusion goe before: for as soone as the word manifested it selfe in the Humanity, then the Meeke Love and Grace
in the Covenant did flow forth: with this flowing forth of the Divine Love in the Covenant was the Covenant set in the Water-Bap∣tisme: Seeing Man was of an Elementary Earthly kinde, there must also be an Elementary Medium or Meanes for that purpose, wherein the flowing forth of the Divine Love in the Covenant might take hold; that a humane Naturall Substance might be in the Mid∣dle, whereinto the Divine and humane Imagination might Enter, andEintauchen. Infuse it selfe in the humanity for an Ens or kindler, wherein the Holy fire might kindle it selfe in the dry soules fire. As was done by the Circumcision and in the Sacrifice, where the Beastiall fat was a Medium, wherein the humane desire in such kindling with the Covenant went to meete God: and Gods Imagination went thus to meete the Covenant in Man. Thus stood the Holy Fire opposite to the Wrath, and Consumed the un∣cleannesse in the Humane Will, that it might pierce to God. By Moses on Mount Sinai, wee see this Image also, where first the Fathers Property in the Fire manifested it selfe, and required Mans full obedience, to live before God in Holinesse, and draw neere to him in purity through the Sacrifice: If not then would he devoure them in the Curse through this fire: Which also was an Image, Type, or Shadow; [signifying] how the humane vanity should and must be purged through Gods Wrath-fire: But Israel could not through the fire come to salvation and the Love of God, and through Moses goe into the Promised Land, but through Joshua and Christ. Therefore God brought his Heavenly Substance with his Covenant into the Water-Baptisme, that there
might be a tolerable Medium, whereby he might intro∣duce his Love-Essence into our vanished also heavenly Sub∣stance, wherein the Holy fire might kindle it selfe againe. Even therefore, because the humane Essence was become Earthly; that Man might beare or endure it: for there must be such a Medium, wherein the humane Essence can take hold: for in Gods Holinesse without a Medium it cannot take hold: the will was rent off from it. Therefore God became Man, that he might [cause to] flow in us his Deity with the humanity, that we might comprehend or take hold of him: also that the Divine Imagi∣nation might introduce and awaken it selfe in Man, and co∣worke with the humane [Imagination]: and therefore he assumed the humanity, that he might work in us with the Deity through the Humanity. Thus with the Water-Baptisme, was a Glimmering Mother-holy-fire, imprinted in Gods Love for a Subject or Object of Divine Imagination and working, whereby Death accor∣ding to the Inwardnesse of Man would be broken to Pieces, and a new life spring forth: As fire in wood beginneth to Glimmer, so was this Infusion or Baptising, anOr, Ʋncti∣on. Anoin∣ting of the Holy Spirit, for a new Lifes Oyle, wherein the Divine Light might kindle it selfe. This is now, the Ground of the Water-Baptisme, to which the Holy Ghost in the inward Ground is the hand, which with the flowing forth of the Divine Love out of Christs suffering, death, and resur∣rection, baptiseth with his victory: That is; Hee Infuseth Christs hu∣manity, suffering, Death, and resurrection into Man, and kindleth the incorporated Paradisicall Covenant with this fire, that the dry Rod of Aaron cometh to Bud forth againe. For with this Infusion of the Holy Ghost, Christ is bestowed upon Man: he is hereby incorporated to Christ, and the heavenly Ens, which in Mary assumed our humane Ens, with the whole processe of Christ, is put on and imprinted in him to a new Life. As a Tincture, tinctureth the Mettle, or as fire gloweth through the Iron: so here also it is to be understood concerning those that are capable of this Infusion, as it followeth further.
The Third Chapter. A Briefer and more fundamentall Instruction, how Man is Baptised by the Holy Ghost, with Christs Suffering, Death, and Resur∣rection in Body and Soule. 1. WHen God would introduce his Covenant with the Circumcision into the Water-Baptisme, then the Word of the Inspoken Grace, wherein the Holy Fire of God was, First, before hand became a Man, and assumed first beforehand the Womans seede, as our soule and humanity, that he might baptise us with the Living Covenant, which was become a Man. 2. For the Body of Man, to which the Baptisme was necessary, was out of the Elements: and now if it should be Baptised, the Cove∣nant must first beforehand give it selfe into an Elementary Medium, as in the Humanity of Christ, and Sanctifie that Medium, that Man might through this Medium be baptised. 3. For it was not to be done onely for the Heavenly Substance of Man, which vanished in Adam: in which the Covenant in Paradise in∣corporated it selfe, that it alone should be baptised; No; but also for the Soule, and for the Body out of the Limus of the Earth. 4. The whole Man needed the Baptisme: All the Three Principles of all the Three worlds in Man must be baptised: viz: The first Princi∣ple is the Eternall Nature, viz: the true Soules Life, that came out of the Word of the Inspeaking, into the Body; The Second Principle is the true Eternall Spirit; viz: the Holy Power of the Light and Love (which I call in this little Booke, the heavenly vanished Ens and Substance in Adam) wherein Adam vanished, viz: the Soules will departed out from it; The Third Principle is the Astrall Animall
Soule, Ex Spiritu Mundi, out of the Spirit of the World, with its Bo∣dy out of the Limus of the Earth, viz the whole outward visible Man. 5. This Threefold Man was wholly fallen; for as the Divine Light in the Spirit of the Second Principle went out, he was quite blinde as to God, and dead as to Paradise; In this must a Divine Love-Ens be Infused againe, in which Love-Ens, the Divine fire and Light might againe kindle to a new Life; but if this must be done, then must the Holy Fire first beforehand manifest it selfe with the Covenant in the Threefold Humanity, as in Christs Humanity, that Gods Spirit might baptise us out of, with, and through, this threefold Humanity; that Each Principle in us might be baptized with its like or simili∣tude. For the Holy Ghost Baptizeth through Christ to the for∣givenesse of Sinnes. 6. The Holy Fire of the Divine Power in Christ Baptiseth his Temple in us, which the Holy fire, viz: the Divine life in us would pos∣sesse, viz: the vanished Ens of the Heavenly worlds Substance, the Spirit of understanding, or of Power, viz: the Second Principle, or An∣gelicall Body out of the Angelicall worlds Substance, to which Substance Christ afterwards giveth his most holy spirituall flesh for food, in which he himselfe dwelleth: This Divine Love in the Holy fire baptiseth this Spirit, for it is an Ens of the Holy fire, wherein it burneth or liveth: And the first Principle, viz: the fiery Soule out of the Divine Science of the seperable speaking word, out of the Fathers Property, is bapti∣sed with the fiery Spirit of the Fathers Property, as with the fire burning Love. 7. Thus to be understood. The Soule is of the Fathers Property, and in this Baptisme with his Infusion into the Soule, he giveth it to the Son in his Love-fire: The Fathers Property in the fire taketh hold on the Soule, first with the Law of Nature, with his Strickt Righteousnesse, with the Eternall Birth of the fire-Ground: whereby the hardImpression. Compressed Dead Soule in that Infusion of the fire is moveable, and its hardImpression. Compression
of the false Magnetick Desire is broken in sunder and opened, in that manner, as a Man strikes up fire. 8. Thus now the Divine Light of the Great Love is in the Opened Name JESUS out of JEHOVA in the Centre of the Fathers fire: When the Fathers fire, unlocketh the fiery Soule, then the light of the Divine Love can shine into it, and Introduce the Love Ens into it: for so soone as the Wrath-fire unlocketh the Soule; iustantly it receiveth the Love-fire of the Sonne, and goeth into it; as fire Gloweth through Iron, or as a Tincture penetrateth Metrall. 9. And thus is the Soule given from the Father to the Sonne, and thus the Sonne Giveth it the Love-fire, viz the Eternall Life: for if the Fathers Property did not move together in the shut up Soule, then the Soule would re∣maine in its Impression in Eternall Death, and the Light could not be manifested in it. 10. TheCommotion or Contrition. shrill sounding and kindling of the Fathers fire, is the fountains of humane Repentance, where man trembleth before sinne; for in the fire-glance is the false compressed vanity of sinnes in the Darknesse of the Soule, Manifest, and the Love-shining in, of the Sonne, is the Meeke Love-Oyle, that uniteth and tempereth the Contrition or shrill sounding, againe. 11. For the Sonne is in the Father, and the Father in the Sonne, and they baptise together, The Father with fire, and the Sonne with Light: after that manner as fire is struck, so that the meeke Light-Glance is mani∣fested
out of the fire, and so the fire burning is wholly turned and growne into a Light Glance  The Fathers fire with its terrour consumeth the vanity in the Soule, and the Sonnes Love healeth it againe. Thus is the Baptisme according to the Inward Ground of Mans Soule and Spirit, to be understood. 12. The Third Property; of the Third Principle,Text. With. in the Water-Baptisme, wherewith the body of the outward Worlds Substance, as also the Spirit of the Constellation in Man is baptised, is thus to be consi∣dered:
By the Water, viz: by the Element of the Body of Christ, the right Adamicall Man (which was created in Adam as to the Body, understand out of the outward worlds Substance) is baptised, for here the Holy Ghost baptiseth, who goeth forth from the Father and the Sonne, his Going forth is the formation of the world, and the world is the outspoken, formed Word, and the Spirit of God it is that hath formed it. 13. For Hee is to be understood in all the Three worlds, in each world according to their Property: As in the Fathers wrath accord∣ing to the Darknesse, he is the flame of Painfullnesse, and in the Eter∣nall Light, he is the Love-flame of God: and in this world in Spiritu Mundi, in the Spirit of the world he is the formour and workmaster of every thing, in every thing according to its property: As the Se∣perator of the thing is, so also is the outflowne Spirit out of the out∣spoken word in every thing. 14. For in the outward worlds Substance, it is not to be understood, that the Spirit of its Substance, is called God, but it is the outflowne Spirit in the outspoken word of God, which with its ground standeth in the Word of God. 15. The Outflowne Spirit of the Outward Creaturely and Natu∣rall Life, is flowne forth out of Gods Love and Wrath, out of Light and Darknesse, viz: out of the first and second Principle, as out of the Eternall Nature, out of the Speaking of the Word, and standeth with its Ground in Gods Speaking, for the Eternall WordOr, breatheth forth that out∣spoken Spirit. exhaleth it selfe with that Spirit into a Creaturely Life. 16. It, (that same Exhaled Spirit) is the outward Creaturely Life, in Every Creature, according to its property. It is the Soule of the Outward World, viz: the Inceptive Soule, a life of the foure Elements. Its power is a fiery and lightish Constellation: What the whole out∣ward Constellation is in it selfe in its power; the same is that [Spirit] alone in it selfe: yet as a shut up Constellation that lyeth in the Tem∣perament, and yet unfolds it selfe in Every Life, and maketh it selfe Seperable, according to the lifes property. Text. By.In the Temporary Creatures with a Temporary Property, andText. By. in the Eter∣nall with an Eternall Property. In Man with a temporary and [fragile] Corruptible property, and also with an Eternall. Which Eternall hangeth to the Eternall Exhaled Word (to the Eternall Ex∣haling): wherein Man at the Last Day, according to the visible Image, shall arise and come againe, out of the Corruptibility, and be presented before Gods Judgement (before The Judgement) and be put upon the GreatOr, fiery Tri∣all. fires-Proba, where the Mortall shall seperate it selfe from the Eternall.
17. Understand us now heere rightly thus, concerning the Bap∣tisme of this Outward Spirit: The Inward Holy-Spirit of Divine Love kindleth the Outflowen Spirit, and anointeth it with Divine Power: For, the humanity of Christ according to our Outward Spirit was a∣nointed of the Holy Ghost: and that same outward Spirit of Christ, which in Christs Person in the Elements of the Body ruled after a humane Manner, that in the Covenant of his Testament in the Water-Baptisme, anointeth the Inward ground of the Water; and the anoin∣ted power in the water, in the word of the Covenant, anointeth the true Man, which in Adam was Created out of the Limus of the Earth; and so also it anointeth the Spiritus Mundi, the Spirit of the world; viz: the rightNote. Astrall Soule, which at the Last Day shall come againe and be tryed. 18. Now understand us dearely and well, it availeth us much: This Anointing of Water-Baptisme, is anointed with Christs suffering, death, and resurrection; it is anointed with Christs shedding of his bloud, with which heavenly bloud, he changed Gods Wrath into Love, and besprinkled Death in the humane Property, wherewith he anointed the Earth, when he shed forth this his bloud upon and into it: Note also: It was anointed therewith, when Christ yeelded his anoin∣ted Life of the outward humanity received from us, in his Death, in∣to this Spiritus Mundi, this spirit of the world againe, and anointed that also with his Anointing in his Death: viz: where his outward mortall soule, received from us (which dyed on the Crosse, and yeelded it selfe into the hand of God, as into his Outspoken Word) went out of the Body into the Elements: Also: It is anointed there∣with where this his outward Soule with the Eternall Soule, wherein the holy Ghost was; penetrated through Death and Hell: And also therewith, where the Holy Ghost in the Word, received this his dead Astrall Soule, our of death, and brought it through death with his re∣surrection into Eternall Life, where Gods Love anointed it with the Eternall Life. 19. This Anointing of Christ is understood in the Water-Bap∣tisme as in the Covenant of God, for God anointeth in the humanity of Christ the Elements of the Body, together with the Mortall and Immortall Soule, and bringeth Christ with this anointing into his Death, and into the Wrath, and through Death into the Eternall Life; And this Anointing (wherein Christ hath overcome Gods Wrath, Sinne, Death, the Devill, and Hell) hath God with his Cove∣nant of the Old-Testament ordained in the Water-Baptisme, and offe∣reth it now to Every man. 20. And so now if a Man desireth it, and inclineth himselfe to it, as a Man, and not a Beast, then the Holy-Ghost baptiseth the inward Ground, viz: his Temple, which himselfe possesseth, viz: the true E∣ternall
Spirit, together with the Eternal Soule: And the anointing of Christ, out of his humanity received from us, anointeth and bap∣tiseth in us the true first Man Created in Adam out of the Limus of the Earth, together with the Mortall Soule, (yet that a Man may un∣derstand the Ground herein, is that) which shall arise and live Eter∣nally. 21. This is done through Christs suffering, Death, and Resurrecti∣on in his bloudyOr, Fight or combat. Conflict; viz: the victory of his Death is the hand that baptiseth. Note; the right Man is baptised unto Life, and the Serpent-Grosse earthly Man, is baptised with Christs Death and dy∣ing, so that he shall dye, and leave all his evill lusts and desires to the Death of Christ, that that may kill it, and bring a new will out of the Death of Christ, out of Soule and Body. 22. The Evill Man, viz: that Serpent-Monster, is taken with this baptisme (viz: where the hand of God, viz: his speaking Word it selfe, taketh and baptiseth) and is buried with Christ in his Death, and in that Hell, into which Christ in his dying entred: understand, into the Darknesse of Gods Wrath, viz: into the Abysse of the humanity: and this anointing in the Baptisme bindeth and uniteth it selfe with the true Adamicall first Body, which was before the fall of Adam, and generateth, through Christs victory, a new will in soule and bo∣dy, which obeyeth God. 23. Thus then according to this anointing, the true Man standeth in the Anointing of Christ, and the Serpent-Monster standeth in Gods wrath: and yet during this time [of life] dwell in one body, but each in its Principle, viz: in its own Property; concerning which St Paul saith; Rom. 7.20.25. Now if I sinne, it is not I, but sinne in the Evill flesh that doth it: Also: so then I now serve God with the minde of the anointed Ground, and with the Minde of the false flesh I serve the Law of sinne. 24. And saith further: Rom. 8.1.28. Now then there is no con∣demnation to them that are in Christ Jesus in his anointing, which accord∣ing to this purpose of God are called in the Word, or are thus compre∣hended in the Calling in the Anointing: where he then meaneth the right anointed Man, which in this time [of life] sticketh hidden in theViz: Shell. Scales of the Earthly Body, as fine Gold in a Grosse stone, and yet according to the Anointing dwelleth in Heaven; as St Paul also saith; Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven: Also Rom. 6.15. Gal. 2.17. Shall we then that belong unto Christ be yet sinners? that be farre from us: where he meaneth the Anointed Ground, and not the bea∣stiall Monster of Earthlinesse, full of Evill inclinations, which stand∣eth in the wrath of God, the Condemnation; and shall not inherite the Kingdome of God, which yet in this [life] time, hangeth to the right anointed Man.
25. The anointed Ground is the Christian, and not the outward Grosse Beast: The Anointing it is, which daily breaketh the head of the Monster the Serpent, viz: the Evill Earthly will, where the Strife in Man is, where one property willeth Evill and the other Good, and that which overcometh, driveth Man on to Work: Therefore shall and must Mans Works be Judged, and every one be gathered into its barne: viz: that which is done in the power of the Anointing, in∣to the Kingdome of God; and that which is done in the power of the Monster the Serpent, into Damnation, into the Darknesse of Wrath and Death.
The Third Chapter. A Briefer and more fundamentall Instruction, how Man is Baptised by the Holy Ghost, with Christs Suffering, Death, and Re∣surrection, in Body and Soule. WHen God would introduce his Covenant with the Water Baptisme into the humanity, then was the inspoken Grace-word of the holy fire of God, viz: the fiery Love; First beforehand become Man, and tooke first beforehand the Womans seede on him, viz: our soule, spirit and whole humanity, that he might Baptise us with the living Covenant, which was God and Man. For the Body of Man, to which the Baptisme was necessary, was out of the Elements: and now if it should be baptised, the Covenant Would first beforehand give it selfe into an Elementary Medium, as in the humanity of Christ, and sanctifie the same, that Man might through this Medium be baptised. For it was not to be done alone, for the heavenly Substance which vanished in Paradise; in which Substance, as in the most inward Ground of the humanity, the Covenant in Paradise incorporated it selfe; that the same Ground alone should be bap∣tised: No; but also for the Soule, and for the Body out of the Limus of the Earth. The whole Man needeth the Baptisme: All the Three Principles, viz: all the Three worlds Properties in Man must be baptised: The first Principle is the Eternall Nature, The Mysterium Mag∣num, the Great Mystery, out of which the visible world is sprung forth, a ground of the true Eternall Soule which through Gods inbreathing came into the Body: The second Principle is the true Eternall Spirit, viz: the Holy Lights-Power (which Power I call in this little Booke, the heavenly Ens or Sub∣stance vanished in Adam) which vanished in Adam with the Fall, as the Soules-will departed out there-from into Earthli∣nesse,
and brake its will off therefrom: The Third Principle is the Man from the outward worlds Substance, viz: the A∣strall soule with its Body out of the Limus of the Earth, which stand∣eth in the foure Elements. This Threefold Man was wholly fallen; for as soone as the Light in the Spirit of the Second Principle, went out, he was quite blinde as to God, and dead as to Paradise, in this must a Divine Love Ens be Infused or imprinted againe, wherein the Divine fire and Light might kindle it selfe to a new Life: and therefore the Ho∣ly Fire of the Great Love of God in the Covenant must ma∣nifest it selfe in the Humanity of Christ, that Gods Spirit might Bap∣tise us out of, with, and through, this Threefold Humanity; that Each Principle in us might be baptised with its like or similitude: For the Holy Ghost Baptiseth through Christ, to the forgivenesse of sinnes. How is this Baptisme of the Holy Ghost Effected? Answer: Gods holy Fire of the Divine Love power in Christ Jesus baptiseth his Temple in us, which the holy fire Life, viz: Gods Spirit will possesse, viz: the vanished Ens of the Heavenly worlds Substance, the Spirit of power and understanding the second Princi∣ple or Angelicall Ground: to which Ground Christ afterwards giveth his holy Spirituall flesh for food, wherein the trueOwne very Reflect I∣mage. Ex∣presse Image of God doth Consist: The Divine Love and sweetnes in the holy fire, baptiseth this Spirit, for it is an Ens of the holy fire, wherin it burneth or liveth: And the first Principle, viz: the fiery Soule out of the Divine Science of the Seperable Eternall-Speaking word out of the Fathers fiery Substance is baptised with the fiery Spirit of the Fathers Property, as with the fire-burning Love. Ʋnderstand this thus. The Soule is of the Fathers Property, according to the fiery omnipotency, and in this Baptisme, in which the Father cobaptiseth, Hee giveth it to the Sonne in his Love-fire: under∣stand the Soule is of the Fathers fire, become a wrath-fire: This wrath-fire with his Infusion he giveth to his fire-burning-Love: The Fathers Property in the fire, taketh hold on the Soule, first with the Law of Nature, as with his strickt righteousnesse of the Eternall Birth of the fire-ground: whereby the hardImpressed. Compressed dead Soule in that sameEintauchen Infusion of the fire of the Divine life, is moveable, and its hardImpressed. Compression of the false Magnetick desire is broken in sunder and opened, in that man∣ner
as a Man strikes up fire: thus a new fire of God is kindled, whichTrembling or Contriti∣on. Commotion, or shrill sounding, is also the Ground of Repentance. Now when the Fathers fire is stirred and kindled, then shineth the Divine Light of the Great sweet Love in the opened Name JESUS out of the Holy Name JEHOVA in the Centre of the Fathers fire, out of the unity of God, as the Beames of Divine Grace in the Soule: for the Soule is with this Glimps unlocked, and then suddenly the Light of Love taketh in the unlooked ground, & filleth it with the substance of Love. And thus the Sonne, viz: the Love of the Father, receiveth the Soule, and sanctifieth it, and throughly penetrateth it; as fire throughly penetrateth the Iron. And that is it which Christ saith: Father the Men were thine, and thou hast given them unto mee: and I give them the Eternall Life: Also:Note. This is the Eternall Life, that they rightly know thee Father, that thou art the true God, and whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3.6. In this inshining and indwelling Light, is the New Birth, and God is Comprehended and knowne in the Spirit: whereupon followeth instantly the true Faith, which willeth nothing but what God will; for thus is Christ the Light of the Little World, viz: of Man, and gi∣veth the Eternall Light-Life of God, to the Soule. And thus the Soule liveth in the Father, and yet with the Sonnes office is governed and sanctified, and its anxi∣ous Fire-Life is a meere Love-burning: But the Fathers Concussion or shrill sounding is necessary, that the soules fire-source may be touched, that the Soule may finde what it is: for it is thereby brought into continuall Re∣pentance and humility, when the Beame of Gods wrath of∣ten toucheth it, that it consider its fall, and is at no time secure: (for it hath a great Enemy neere it in its flesh and bloud, viz: Satans poyson) that it may no more run-on in its owne will as formerly: For the Soule in this Beame of wrath trembleth before sinne, and so sinne is
manifested in the Light: and then comes Sorrow and La∣mentation over sinne on a heape. And thus standeth this pretious figure in the Inward Ground. For where the owne will of sinne is shaken through Repentance, there the holy anointing Oyle of Love penetrateth instantly and healeth these wounds. Thus the Father Baptiseth with fire to Repentance, and the Sonne with Love, to Sanctifica∣tion; and the Holy Ghost manageth the office, who bap∣tiseth with a New life: For the whole holy Trinity bap∣tiseth according to the Divine Manifestation; For with∣out and beyond the Manifestation there is onely One Triune God in one onely GoodSubstance or Essence. Beeing and Will, whereof a Man cannot say: the Father is wrath, this or that, but is the Triune Good Beeing: But according to his Manifestation, out of which the Soules and Angells, together with Every Heavenly and Hellish Beeing is sprung, (viz: after the Manner of the Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery;) from hence ariseth his Wrath or fire-source, and that from Eternity in Eternity. Note: Thus now a Man may understand the Baptisme according to the Inward Ground, according to Soule and Spirit: viz: the Father Baptiseth with the Concussion or shrill sounding to Repentance with fire. in which fire, the bitter suffering and dying of Jesus Christ is impressed in∣to the poore Soule: for the Wrath-fire which holdeth the Soule captive, is overcome and softened with Love: and this is impressed in the Soule as a victory: and the Sonne baptiseth with the holy anointing-Oyle of Gods Love, and healeth the poore shaken Soule againe: And the true Comforter the Holy Ghost, which goeth forth through Christs Death, through Christs Resurrection, through the Father in the Sonne, he baptiseth with a new Life, and giveth true Faith and understanding, that wee receive and know this. The Third Property of the Third Principle, with the Water-Baptisme, wherewith the body of the outward worlds Substance, as also the Outward Life is baptised, that is considered as followeth:
By the Water, viz: by the Element of the body of Christ, the Right Adamicall Man out of the Elements, which was created in Adam, understand the outward worlds Substance, is baptised: for heere the Holy Ghost Baptiseth, who goeth forth from the Father and the Sonne, his going forth is the formation of the world, and the world is the outspoken formed Word, and the Spirit of God it is, that hath formed that outspoken Word. Hee is to be understood in all Three Principles or Worlds, in each world according to their property. As First in the Fathers wrath according to the Darknesse, Hee is the flame of painefullnesse: and Secondly, in the Eternall Light he is the Love flame of God: and Thirdly, in this world in Spiritu Mundi, in the Spirit of this world hee is the formour and workmaster of Every thing, in every thing according to its property: as the Seperator or Archaeus of the thing is, from whence it ariseth, so also is the outflowne Spirit out of the outspoken word, in every thing. And it is not to be understood, that the Spirit of the Outward Substance, is called God, but it is the outflowne Spirit in the outspo∣ken Word of God, which with its Ground standeth in the Word of God. The Outflowne Spirit of the outward Naturall and Creaturely Life, is flowen forth out of Gods Love and Wrath, out of Light and Dark∣nesse, viz: out of the first and second Principle, out of the Eternall Nature, out of the Speaking of the Word, for the Eternall Word, hath breathed it selfe with that Spirit into a Creaturely, Image-like Life. It is the Soule of the Outward World, a Life of the foure Ele∣ments. Its power is as a fiery and lightish Constellation: What the whole outward Constellation is in it selfe in its power, the same is that [Spirit] every where alone in it selfe, yet as a shut up Constellation that lyeth in the Temperament, and yet unfoldeth it selfe in every Life, and maketh it selfe Seperable, according to every Lifes property. Note. Courteous Reader, this is what our Authour, bles∣sed in the Spirit of the high knowledge, indeed readily began to bring to the easier understanding for the sim∣ple, but hath not finished it, forAnno. A. † O. 1624. in his Jubilee-yeare, or 50th yeare of his Age, he went, ac∣cording to the Mystery, againe, into his Grave or Magick and Mentall Principle.
The Fourth Chapter. Of the Outward Water-Baptisme by Mans hand: who is worthy to performe such Baptisme? and what Baptised Infant doth worthily receive this Baptisme; how it go∣eth with the unworthy hand, as also with the unworthy Baptised Infant. In this time highly necessary to be considered. 1. WHen God established the Testament of his holy Cove∣nant of Grace in Paradise, out of the Type and Sa∣crifices, & would ordaine the Circumcision into Wa∣ter-Baptisme: then he bringeth forth a Branch out of his Covenant in a humane Manifestation, and be∣gan the Water-Baptisme thereby; As is cleerely to be seene in John the Baptist, who was proclaimed by the Angelicall Message or Embassie, and moreover of the stock of the high Priests. 2 His Incarnation or becoming Man, came not from the will of the flesh, for his Father Zachary and Mother Elizabeth, which were ancient people full of Dayes, who were cleerly dead in the fleshly sperme or seede, where the ability of Man was cleerly gone: The seede of Zachary and Elizabeth, was raised up through the moving of the Holy Ghost out of the Paradisicall Grace-Covenant in their now quite vanished Spermatick Property.
3. Indeed he came out of the humane Ground, but not out of hu∣mane ability, for the Anointing in the Covenant awakened it, so that their sperme, above the course and power of Natures owne ability was unlocked: which Holy Ghost raised up a seede out of the humane sperme, and to that purpose choseThe Seede. it in its first beginning. 4. But the anointing of John was done in Maries Salute, when shee came to old Elizabeth, and the divine anointing stirred in her (un∣derstand in Mary) out of Christs Incarnation or becoming Man: When Mary full of this anointing, saluted Elizabeth, then the Incar∣nation of Christ, diffused with the anointing through the salute of Mary in John in the Mothers womb: and not onely in John, but al∣so in his Mother Elizabeth, so that shee was full of this anointing, and both the Mothers prophesied in the Spirit of this anointing. 5. And this is the Baptisme of John, when as he was anointed with the Incarnation of Christ, out of Christ, and received the Bap∣tisme of the Holy Ghost out of the Covenant in the Mothers womb, so that he should be a Forerunner and declarer, that the time of the A∣nointing, and fullfilling of the Covenant of God, was at hand: that God hath introduced his Covenant of the anointing of Grace, into the humanity, and that the Covenant is become a Man: that God will hence forward shed forth his anointing through the humanity of Christ, through an Elementary Medium or Meanes, (that consist∣eth no more in fire, as in the Old Testament, but in Love and Meek∣nesse of Water, so that the time of Grace is at hand, wherein God hath given his anointing into the humanity. 6. And then wee see that God there began no new Covenant, but onely a New Ordinance: for John suffered himselfe to be Circum∣cised, as also Christ: John tooke the power and calling out of the Co∣venant of the Circumcision, out of the Sacrifices of fire, and by the command of God brought them into the Water-Baptisme: to signifie that hence forward sinne should be drowned by the death of Christ in his Love and Meeknesse, and no more burne in the fire, as was done by Israel in the Type. 7. Moreover wee see by John, that he did not yet baptise with the forgivenesse of sinnes, but with Repentance, viz. with the Spirit of the anointing to Repentance, which soundeth through the hearts of Men, and prepareth the way for the Spirit of Christ, which unlock∣eth the Doores of Mens hearts and soules, that afterViz. John the Baptist. him, the King of Glory might enter in at those Opened Gates; concerning which David sayth; Open the Gates wide for the King of Glory; that the King of Glory, viz: Christ may enter in, Psal. 24.7.9. And as John witnesseth, He bap∣tised with water to Repentance and forgivenesse of sinnes, yet he is not Christ, but after him cometh he that hath the fan in his hand, who will baptise with the fire of the Spirit, Luk. 3.16, 17.
8. Also wee see in John, that he must be the sonne of a Priest, who were conversant about Circumcision and Sacrifices: he must come out of the Law of the Covenant, and suffer himselfe to be Circumci∣sed, and put on the Covenant, that he might with the Spirit of the Covenant and of Circumcision, begin the Water Baptisme; viz: the Ordinance of Grace and forgivenesse: for sinne should be destroyed now no more by fire, but by Love, which God manifested in the Co∣venant through Christ; it [sinne] should be drowned and changed by Gods Meeknesse. 9. Therefore also, God ordained for this destroying of sinnes this meanes of the Water-Baptisme: to signifie, that sinne should be drowned in the bloud of Christ, in his Love and Grace, and that Man should henceforth have an open Gate of Grace to God in the Love and Meeknesse, so that now with the Repentant sorrow for sinnes, with theThe absolution from sinnes. forsaking of sinnes he may Enter through this Gate into Grace. 10. And wee see heere in John, the beginner of the Water-Bap∣tisme, what Man is worthy to baptise with this new Grace Covenant, viz: such a one, as also beforehand, hath been baptised with this Grace, as John was by Christ, who was Baptised even in his Mothers womb: for flesh and bloud without this anointing cannot Baptise: for this Might, standeth not in theOr, Power. authority of Man, but in ChristsOr, Power. au∣thority. 11.Note. A Christian, in whom is the anointing of Christ, baptiseth with the anointing of Christ, for the Holy Trinity baptiseth with the Grace-Covenant of the anointing, with Christs Incarnation or becom∣ing Man, with his suffering, death, and victory: Now will any bap∣tise, they must not onely baptise with the Hand and Water-Baptisme, but also with the Faith of the anointing. 12. An unfaithfull, or unbeleeving Baptiser, doth no more in this high work of the Baptisme; Then the Font-stone [or Bason] doth, which holdeth the water: for though he sprinkle or powre water; and useth the words of Christ; yet he Effecteth nothing therewith, but is dumb [or dead] in the working, except the Covenant of Christ worketh and baptiseth: he is but meerly a Medium or means, like a worklesse [inanimate]Or, Thing. Substance, that doth not it selfe work together in this Covenant: but onely doth the work, in which work God worketh in respect of his Covenant. 13. Not so to be understood, as if the worke by the unworthy hand were therefore whollyOr, Ineffectu∣all. powerlesse: no, the Covenant of God,Absenteth or withdraweth. severeth not it selfe; for the unworthy hands sake, which is but a Medium or Means: for faithfull Parents, which stand in the anointing of this Covenant, and have put on the Covenant, they have the a∣nointing also in their seede; and generate Children out of the pro∣perty
of their bodyes and soules: now if they be baptised in body and soule, and have put on the anointing of Christ, wherefore then not also the Ens of their bodyes? if they be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, (who dwelleth in them;) and eate Christs flesh and drink his bloud, so that Christ is in them and they in Christ; as Christ sayth; Joh. 6.56. Wherefore then not also the fruit of their Bodies? For Christ sayth indeed (Matth. 7.18.) a Good Tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, and a bad Tree cannot bring forth Good fruit: If the eye of the spirit be light, then is the whole body light: If the Leven be Holy, then is the whole Lump Holy, Matth. 6. Rom. 11. 14. John was baptised in the Mothers womb through the Spirit of Christ out of Maries voice, as also his mother Elizabeth: and wee see cleerly, how it came to passe, for as Elizabeth heard the Spirit of Mary, the Holy Ghost moved in her, and also in her fruit alike; they received the Baptisme of Christ out of his humanity alike, the Mo∣ther with the Sonne: wherefore then not also now at present, in holy Parents, in whom the anointing is, For such as the Tree is, such is also its fruit: But the Covenant in the Baptisme is therefore, that every one should themselves with their owne will, as a particular branch on the Tree, and as a life of their owne, put on the Covenant of Christ, as through the outward Medium or Meanes ordained thereunto. 15. Not to understand; that a childe of honest anointed Parents, which hath attained life, though it dye before the Baptisme, that it is not in the anointing of Christ; It hath indeed put on the anointing of its Parents, for it is existed out of their substance, out of their bap∣tised soules and bodies substance, and onely needeth, if it liveth, to enter into the Image of the visible Covenant, as a life of its owne; and with its will give it selfe up into that which it inheriteth from its Parents: But seeing a childe understandeth not this, therefore the Parents doe it with their Faith, and every one of those that are called to that work, viz: thePathen Gossips. Witnesses or God-fathers and God-mothers, who in their faiths-desire with their PrayerTransferre or deliver over. recommend the childe to the Covenant of Christ, and present it in the Covenant of Christ to the Holy Trinity, and desire the Covenant to be upon this Childe. 16. All these, both the Parents and standers by: viz: the faith∣full Baptiser and Witnesses, worke with their faith in the property of the Childe, and reach out to it with their faith the Covenant of Christ: for the will of their Faith, taketh the Childes will being without understanding, into their faiths desire, and so beare the childes will in their will, with their anointing into the Covenant of Christ, viz: before the Holy Trinity. 17. When the Baptiser sprinkleth or powreth the water upon the Childe, then is his faith together in the water, and fastneth it selfe
in the words of Christ, who sayth; Matth 28.19. Goe hence into all the world, Baptising all Nations, in the Name of the Father, Sonne, and Ho∣ly Ghost: Upon Christs command they Baptise Men, the Baptiser Baptiseth with the Hand, and with Faith: and the Parents together with the Witnesses, baptise with their Faiths desire, with the anointed will: they infuse it into Christs Covenant; and Christ infuseth him∣selfe therein, with his Bloud, Death, and Victory, viz: with the victo∣ry of his Death: and kindleth the faiths-Ens of the Childe, with his love fire. 18. Thus the Graine of Mustardseed of the love-fire, soweth it selfe into the Childes Soules and Bodies Ens, as a GlimmeringHatcher, bree∣der, or Em∣ber. Mo∣ther of Divine Love: which Mother afterwards, when the childe getteth understanding of its owne, is more kindled through Faith, Repentance and Prayer, and becometh a high shining Light: and when afterwards the Mouth of Faith eateth Christs flesh and drinketh his bloud, then this holy Mother love-fire, atteineth holy Oyle to the burning of its Life. 19. With the Baptisme is implanted the humanity of Christ ac∣cording to the holy Love-water, viz: the Water of Eternall Life, in which water the holy fire may burne: and with the Supper is parti∣cipated the Holy Tincture in the bloud and flesh of Christ, viz: the true Love-fire burning, a spirituall Anointing Oyle out of the divine fire and Light, which the water of Love kindleth, viz: the Baptisme-Cove∣nant: And though a Childe be borne of Holy Parents,Note. and in the Mothers womb be cleerely in this Covenant, yet it ought also to put on this Covenant in its owne selfesubsisting person, in its owne lifes will: for this Cause, that in the flesh, Sinne and uncleannesse is to∣gether propagated and inherited, and therefore should it selfe put on this Covenant: for it ought and must it selfe with the Covenant of Grace breake the head of the Serpent in the flesh, and therefore it ought also it selfe to put on Christ with his victory: For Christ now offereth himselfe, to it selfe, it ought therefore in its owne person to receive him with its owne will, and give its owne will up to him. 20. For the Baptisme is nothing else but a marriage or Contract with GodText. auff: upon. in Christs bloud and Death, wherein Christ bindeth him∣selfe to Man with his victory and Resurrection, and placeth Man therein: And Man in the Baptisme giveth up his Adamicall averse will to the Death of Christ, and desireth to dye to his owne will in the Death of Christ, and to rise againe through Christs Resurrection out of Christs Death, with, and in Christ, to a new will, and to live and to will with Christ: For wee are through the Baptisme with Christs victory, planted anew in the Word of God: for Man is the Outspoken Imaged Word of God, which hath brought his will in Adam from the speaking of God into an owne will and speaking, and is become trea∣cherous
to the Word of God: and with the Baptisme the Imaged Word promiseth and incorporateth it selfe againe with the Eternall Speaking of God, that it will speake and will according to God: viz: Gods righteousnesse and truth. 21. The Baptisme is an Oath which Man swearethIn or into. to God, when he renounceth the Devill and his Kingdome, and giveth up himselfe to God for his proper owne, viz: for a Temple of God: And though a childe understandeth not this: yet the Baptiser, as also the Parents and Witnesses should understand it and introduce their faith into the childes will; and so with their introduced will in the childes will, together plunge or sinke themselves downe with this oath into Gods Covenant through the Word of Christ upon his command in the Wa∣ter-Baptisme: and apprehend the Command of Christ in themselves, viz: in their Faith, and so in their understanding enter into the Cove∣nant with the childesOr, Ignorance. not-understanding; and in the stead, and with the will of the childe, in their will make such a promise to God: for this the Parents may and ought especially to doe: seeing the childe is sprung up out of their life and substance, as the branch out of the Stock,Thus, so they have also power, to comprehend the will of the childe in the will of their Faith, and with the will of the childe to give up and binde or unite it unto God. 22. Moreover the Baptiser hath this in his power, who upon the Command of Christ standeth there in Christs stead, and bringeth in his Mouth the Command of Christ, and baptiseth with his hand upon the command of Christ: such a one, should be the Anointed of Christ, and enter into that worke through the Doore of Christ, or he is but as a piece of wood, or clod of earth, standing by as an Earthly Medium, and himselfe doth not baptise together with his Faith, but is onely an outward Instrument of the Covenant, as the Axe wherewith the Car∣penter heweth: though indeed he is not altogether as the Axe that cutteth, but as the hand that holdeth the Axe: he neither cutteth nor coworketh in the work of the Spirit, but is onely the outward Instrument, and doth onely an outward thing: Hee reacheth not he Covenant, but onely the Water, and bringeth a dead word in his life, but the office of Christ is in the command. 23. The living Word in the Covenant which there baptiseth, hath not its originall out of the power of the wicked mouth, but out of the Command in the Covenant: The wicked Mouth bringeth the outward litterall Word, as a Minister thereof, but the Covenant bringeth the Living Word in Power: If the Parents and Witnesses be faithfull, they reach forth the childe with their Faith to the Covenant, and the wicked Baptiser with his Mouth and Hand is but an Instrument to it, in that manner and way, as a Clock striketh and soundeth, and yet hath no life, but giveth notice and understanding to the Living
what it meaneth: or as a wicked Man in a shew of Holinesse, nameth and acknowledgeth the Holy Name of God before a Holy person, where instantly the Holy Name of God is thereby stirred and be∣cometh working in the Heart of the Holy Man that heareth it, and yet the Hypocrite in his knowledge neither understandeth it nor find∣eth it; and this stirring of the good Heart doth not proceed out of the wicked Mouth, and enter into the Holy Heart, but it proceedeth out of the Name of God. 24. Thus also the Holy Name baptiseth by the wicked Baptiser, and not the evill Mouth, but he must be an Instrument, that pro∣nounceth the Holy Name, which worketh not from his pronouncing, but from the Name and Covenant, through the faithfull Parents and Witnesses introduction of their Faith:Note. For the Covenant is it selfe a Faith [or Beleeving] viz: Gods Word and Mouth: The Covenant bap∣tiseth them all, that give themselves up into it, whether worthily or unworthily, whether the Faith of the Boptiser and of the Parents and Witnesses be there or not, but with great difference, as the Scripture saith; With the Holy thou art Holy, and with the Perverse thou art perverse, Psal. 18.26. Also, such as the People are, such a God they have: and as St Paul saith of the Supper; Therefore they received it to Judgement, because they distinguish not the Lords body. 25. For where Gods Love is present, there his wrath is also pre∣sent: where Light is, there is also Fire: The Ens of Faith presseth onely through the Fire forth into Light: The Covenant standeth firme, the childe is baptised with the Covenant, the Covenant re∣ceiveth it, although there were onely a wicked Baptiser, and also such Witnesses without Faith: But as the Mouth is, such is also the food in the Mouth, as the Lord saith by the Prophet; Wherefore doth the wicked take my Covenant into his Mouth, and hatethNurture or chastisement. to be reformed? Psal. 50.16, 17. Men should not misuse the Name of God, for the Lord will not leave him unpunished that misuseth it, Deut. 5.5. Hee will not cast the Pearle before Swine, Matth. 7.6. The wicked Man that draweth neere to his Covenant, is to God in his Covenant a Good savour to the Condemnation of Death, and the Holy is a good savour to life, 1 Cor. 2.15, 16. 26. What else can be, if there are Evill Parents without Faith, but that they also beget wicked children, for as the stock is, so also is the fruit: And now if they convert not, and through true earnest Repentance and Prayer, incorporate their fruit to Christ, and send them with faith to this Covenant, but indeed invite such wicked Witnesses or Gossips, without Faith thereunto, and there be also a wicked Baptiser, who shall baptise heere? Shall the Love of God in the Co∣venant of Grace baptise? May it not be as St Paul sayth of the Sup∣per; That the wicked receive it unto Judgement? Now if a Man make a mock of the Covenant, how will Gods Glory appeare among the
Scorners? there it is rightly sayd, With the Holy thou art holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse: If the seede beOr, False. bad, though a Man cast it into good Ground, yet there groweth bad fruit from it, for it draweth from the good Ground, an Ens of its owne likenesse to it selfe. 27. How then may it goe there, where a childe springeth from Parents that are quite wicked, and also wicked Witnesses are onely called to it, which stand there onely for state and pride, or for hu∣mane savour, which are also for such causes called to it, whereas there is no Faith nor Good will, much lesse an Earnest Prayer, but onely an Earthly Eucifer standeth before the Covenant of Christ, and the Bap∣tiser is also a dead person: who awakeneth heere the Holy Covenant? As the Faith is that moveth or stirreth the Covenant, such is also the Manifestation of the Covenant, and so is also the Baptisme. 28. Christ sayth; Suffer little children to come unto mee, for of such is the Kingdome of God, Matth. 10.14. Chap. 19.13. but he meaneth children, not Wolves and Beasts: Hee biddeth them to come to him, and Not to bring them to him in the Devills pride and state, with state∣ly high-minded false unfaithfull People, which doe but despise the humility of Christ, and scorne Love; it must be in Earnest if a Man will enter through the Wrath of God into Love. 29. Reason sayth thus; What is it to the childe, that it is begotten of wicked Parents and is brought by Evill People to the Covenant of Christ? Answer: Yes indeede, what is it to God, who willeth not the Death of a Sinner, that wicked Parents beget wicked children, and that a Man doth but scorne his Covenant of Grace: shall he therefore cast the Pearle before Swine? The Parents indeed know very well, that God sayth; Hee will punish the sinne of the Parents on the Children unto the third and fourth Generation, Deut. 5.9. Shall he then powre his Love into their wicked Wills, when as indeed they doe not desire the Love, nor is there any Earnestnesse there, but meerly the perfor∣mance of a Custome, and they doe it onely with an hypocriticall shew without Earnestnesse, and withall make use of such people about it, which doe but scorne the simplicity of Christ with their Pride. 30. To be conversant with the Testaments and Covenant of Christ, and to make use of them, will require great Earnestnesse, not onely in shew but in power: For the Covenant of God in Christ is made through his bloud and Death, and to that End, that whosoe∣ver will partake of this Covenant and Testaments, should convert with his will and enter into Repentance, and dye to the Inherited false Lust in the Covenant, through Christs Death, and be New borne out of the Covenant of these Testaments. 31. For the Baptisme consisteth not alone in Water, but in the
Word of God, and in the Faith: The water is but a Medium, where∣in the Word of God and the Faith, taketh hold and worketh, and without the Word of God and Faith there is no Baptisme; the faith of Man must take hold on the promised Word, and in the Water these two, viz: the Faith and the Word of God bring themselves in∣to oneOr, Essence. substance, and that spirituall substance is the Baptisme, which is understood under Water: Now if there be no Faith at this work; then is the Word without Humane Substance, only in it selfe accord∣ing to and in the Covenant, and that baptiseth Man according to the Mans Property, but Faith in the Grace apprehendeth the Grace in the Covenant and Word, and bringeth it selfe with the Covenant into the Water; and so then the Word of God and the Faith and the Water baptise alike. 32. For the outward Elementary water is not the Ground of the Baptisme; but the spirituall Water, which is united and tyed with the Word in the Covenant, and with the Faith: for the Word powreth it selfe forth in a Water-source of Life inText. Eine. great Meeknesse and Love, and the Faith taketh hold of this promised Word of Grace in the Covenant: This Grace in the spirituall water, comprehendeth it selfe with the Elementary water, after the manner as the Invisible world hath made it selfe visible with this worlds substance, viz: with the Elements: and as the Invisible Word of God worketh by the visible, and as the visible substance of the Elements shall againe goe into the Invisible: Thus also in the Baptisme-Covenant, the Invisible Ele∣ment, viz: the heavenly substance uniteth it selfe with the visible Ele∣ments of Mans body: viz: the substance of Eternity with the sub∣stance of Time: the Eternall Speaking Word of Divine Love with the OutspokenOr, Formed. Imaged Word of the Humanity. 33. For the Pure Element, according to the holy spirituall World, out of which the foure Elements are sprung forth, is that which baptiseth through the foure Elements of Mans Body: The true Man created in Adam, which sticketh in the Grosse husk of the foure Ele∣ments, that is baptised to Eternall Life, for the Pure Element soak∣eth or Infuseth it selfe againe into the vanished Image of Man, which Image was out of the Pure Element, but vanished in Adam; And to that End God hathOr, Instituted. ordained his Covenant in the Water Baptisme: and there belongeth now Faith to it, and Repentance to this Recei∣ving: for Repentance is an unlocking or stirring of the hidden shut up things of Man, whereby the Inward Spirituall desire, viz: the Spirituall Mouth to such Receiving, is opened: and Faith is the Opened Mouth which taketh in the Holy Element. 34. And although a childe without understanding cannot doe this, yet those with their Faith should doe it, who baptise, and the rest that are present at the Baptisme, for their Faith must comprehend it selfe
in the childes will, for the childe hath not yet a willing, neither to Good nor Evill, but their Faith comprehendeth it selfe in the childes Life, viz: in Soule and Spirit: which may well be, being all soules, have their originall from One, and so they are in the Centre, one onely Ground, viz: in the Word of God, out of which the Soule hath taken its originall, and wherein they all stand together in the Ground, for this Comprehending in [the childe] is nothing else, but to in∣troduce their love-will into the childe: and although a Man cannot doe that in his owne power and Might, yet if the will of Man compre∣hendeth it selfe in Gods Word and Promise, and taketh hold of the Promised Grace, together with the command that wee should doe this thing, then is the Possibility there: For the Promised Word gi∣veth and worketh the ability in Mans Will, and giveth the Deed: Gods will taketh Mans will resigned up to him, and doth it through his Might with Mans will. 35. Therefore say I, it is a dangerous thing, to baptise children without the Faith of the Parents, and of them that Baptise, and the rest that are present to the work: The Scripture sayth, Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God: But this Faith is not a Histo∣ry or Knowledge, that a Man onely give assent to it, and beleeve that it is Gods work: No, it is an Earnest, desirefull co-working, a pressing in to the Promised Grace, an Earnest consideration of our inherited sinne, and of the Great earnestnesse of God, and how he through this Grace-Covenant receiveth us againe as children, and powreth his Grace into us with this work. 36. Those that are present should with Great humility andTurning into God. in∣version to God, with Earnest prayer, apply themselves to this Cove∣nant, and well consider, what they there purpose to doe, for they stand even before the Covenant of the Holy Trinity, before Gods open Face, and have to deale with God and Man, and should well imprint in them the bitter sufferings, and dying of Jesus Christ: into which a childe is baptised, of which they are co-working Witnesses ac∣cording to the Faith: and not stand before this Covenant, as a Whore before a Glasse, with proud Hearts, as if it were a worldly ho∣nour which a Man should make use of, about it: such People which have no understanding and Faith towards it, and onely come to it with proud hearts, are notOr, Further∣ance. profitable to this Covenant, but a hin∣derance, they hinder others, who Gape upon the Pride and bravery, and therewithall forget the Earnestnesse. 37. And although the Baptisme may be performed without such Persons, through the Parents and the Baptisers Earnestnesse and prayer; yet the Christian Church hath so ordained, that living Wit∣nesses should be present, which with their prayer attend this Earnest∣nesse, and it was well ordained: but it is come to such a Misuse that
it were many times better that such children of Infidelity were not pre∣sent: for, the Devill belongeth not to this work: Now if the Devill have the chiefe Dominion in a Man, what is then such a Man profi∣table at it? As is mentioned before; The Funt-stone or Bason, and the unfaithfull Stander-by is one as good as the other, but that the Proud Man is a hinderance to others. 38. The Baptisme is a substantiall working, not a meere signe orOr, significa∣tion. symbole of the Testament of Christ: The Holy Ghost baptiseth the Soule and the Spirit, from Christs bloud and Death, with his victory: and the Holy Element of the spirituall Water baptiseth the Body of the foure Elements to the Resurrection of the Dead, and baptiseth the Serpents Ens, and awakened introduced Poyson to dye, [or for Dead]. 39. It is a substantiall working Infusion of the Covenant of God: therefore if the Infant baptised should worthily receive it, there must be Earnestnesse: A Christian, who is a Christian in Christ,Note. in whom Christ worketh, liveth, andText. Ist. dwelleth, he should Baptise; for he must enter into this Sheepfold by the Doore of Christ: viz: through Christs Spi∣rit, and not climbe up otherwhere, else he is a Theefe and a Murtherer, and cometh onely that he may robbe and steale the honour of Christ,Note. and de∣ceive Men, he should be A true Shepheard and not a hireling: Heere a∣vaileth no babling and making a shew, but there must be Earnest∣nesse, for it is an Earnestnesse with God: All Jangling and disputation about this work, is an unprofitable thing, and moreover hurtfull, Men should lay hould of it with Earnestnesse, and follow the Com∣mand of Christ, and beleeve what Christ hath sayd. 40. There belongeth no more to this work, but Faith and Wa∣ter, and Earnest Prayer in true Repentance, with such a Will, that one Man would helpe to release another from Death, the Devill and Hell, and (help) to introduce him with himselfe into the Kingdome of God: that is the whole processe that belongeth heereunto: Every one that is a true Christian in Christ,Note. is worthy to be a Stander by and present at this work: but he that is not such a one, is unworthy, whe∣ther he be Baptiser or Stander-by, one as well as the other, there is no re∣spect of Persons with God: In Christ wee are ONE, Hee is the Stock, wee are the Branches: Hee worketh his work through his fellow Members, as the Stock of the Tree generateth its fruit through its Twiggs and Branches: The Stock useth no strange Tree for its Twigges, so also Christ onely useth his Members to his work of his fruit. The End of this first little Booke Concerning The Holy Baptisme.
The Second Booke, Concerning The Holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ; What kinde of Participation it is, and how that is to be understood. Also concerning the Contention of the Learn∣ed about Christs Cup: what they doe about it, also what is to be held concerning it. Wherein Babell, the Great City upon Earth, with her forme and Wonders, together with the Antichrist, standeth quite naked and manifest. To the Comfort of the simple Children of Jesus Christ, and to the building up of the true Christian Religion, in this confused troublesome Time. All very Earnestly and sincerely discovered from the knowledge of the Great Mystery. LONDON; Printed by M. S. and are to be sold by H. B. at the Castle in Cornhill. 1652.
1 COR. 11.28. Let a Man Examine himselfe, and so let him Eate of this Bread and Drink of this Cup.
An Intimation or Instruction to the READER. THough indeed I heere dive and search sub∣limely and Deepe, and set it downe very cleerely, yet the Reader must be told thus much, that without the Spirit of God, it will be a Mystery to him, and not apprehen∣ded. Therefore let every one looke well to it, what he judgeth, that he fall not into the Judgement of God, and be captivated by his owne Turba, and that his owne Reason distract him; this I say, meaning well, and give it to the Reader to Ponder [in his Minde]. JACOB BEHM of Old Seidenberg.
The Contents of the Chapters in this Second little Booke, Concerning the Holy Supper of Jesus Christ. 1. OF the Ground of the Old Testament, how this Testament was cleerly in the Type among the Jewes. 2. Of the Supper of the New Testament, how the Type is come into Essence [or Substance]. 3. How the Disciples did eate and drinke the flesh and bloud of Christ. 4. Of the difference in the Participation of it, what the wicked receive with this Testament: and how a Man should so prepare himselfe, that he may be truly worthy. 5. Of the Contention and Strife in the high Schooles or Universities, about Christs Testaments: how that Strife that hath filled the face of the Earth, is a vaine and very hurtfull thing, and ariseth in the Anger of God, from the Devills desire and will, whereby all brotherly Love and unity is destroyed, the highly pretious Name of GOD blasphemed, and the Holy GHOST in his Divine Wonders is Judged and despised by Reason.
The First Chapter. Of the Ground of the Old Testament; how this Testament was cleerly in the Type among the Jewes. 1. WHen God sent Moses to Pharao, and commanded him, to let the Children of Israel goe into the Wildernesse and sacrifice to him, and Pharao would not doe it, then God sent great Plagues and punishments upon him; and lastly, theStifling. destroying Angel, which slew all the first-borne in Egypt; and there he commanded Is∣rael the Passeover, or to slay and eate the Paschal-Lamb, viz: a Lamb of a yeare old, and besprinkle the Doores and upper Poasts with the Bloud thereof, that the slaying anger should therePasse by. passe over, and kill none in the House, Exod. 2.12. 2. Which was a Type of the New-Testament, [shewing] how the Poasts and Doores of our Life should be sprinckled with the Bloud of the Lamb Christ, that Gods Anger in soule and body may not swal∣low us up into his wrath: And as they must Eate up that Lamb wholly or quite and leave nothing over, so would the Lamb Christ, give himselfe in his Testament wholly for food to his Christendome, and not divided; and would besprinkle the Poasts of our Life with his Bloud of Love, that the destroying Angel in Gods Anger might not take hold of us and slay us. 3. Also wee have an Image or similitude thereof in the Ʋnleavened Cakes, which they must Bake and Eate, [shewing] that they should through this Paschal-Lambs Figure, which signified Christ, be a New and sweetDowe. Lump, when they should eate the right Paschal-Lamb Christ, in his Testament: all which was a Figure of the New Rege∣neration: [signifying] how the same should be borne through the right Paschal-Lamb Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7. and how the same (New Birth) would Eate the sweet food of the Divine Grace. 4. This is a Powerfull Figure of the terrible Fall in Adam, and then in the New Birth or Regeneration in Christ, for in Adam the first Birth, viz: the first Angelicall Life, was slaine by Gods Anger, and by the Grace-Covenant in Christ, was the same brought back againe, and spoken [or inspired] into Adam and Eve: thus now the Spirit of God signifieth by this figure of Moses in Aegypt, how that same inspo∣ken Grace should be fullfilled with heavenly and divine Substance, also how Man should beSmeared or streaked. marked and sprinckled by that Mark, viz:
by the bloud of the Lamb of God: and how God would give him the substance of his sweet Love for food, whereby the Naturall foul∣ish fire-Life should be againe quickened, and attaine a Divine Ens in its Lifes-Essence, and thereby be transmuted and changed againe into the Angelicall Image. 5. Also wee see this Image very cleerly in the Sacrifices of Israel: How they must slay and sacrifice Beasts and burne the Fat: For when God gave the Law to Moses, that Israel should live in full obedience in the Covenant of this Law, then he gave him also the figure, [shewing] how this Law should be fullfilled, and how Man should beReleased or reconciled. attoned from Sinne, and the Anger of God: as wee may cleerly see this, in theLevit. 8.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. third Book of Moses in the Eighth Chapter, where the Image of the reconciliation or attonement standeth. Where it standeth thus. Sacrifice.And Moses caused an Heifer to be brought for a Sinne-Offering, and Aa∣ron with his Sonnes layd their hands upon his head: there it was slaine, and Moses tooke the bloud, and with his finger put it round about upon the homes of the Altar, andClensed it from sinne. clensed the Altar, and powred out the bloud at the foote of the Altar, and sanctified it, so that he made an attonement on it: And tooke all the fatt upon the Inwards, and the Kall upon the Liver, and the two Kidneyes with the fatt on them, and burned it upon the Altar: But the Heifer with his hide, flesh, and dung, he burnt with fire without the Host, as the Lord had commanded him: And brought a Weather or Ram for a Burnt Sa∣crifice; and Aaron with his Sonnes layd their hands upon his head, and it was slaine there: And Moses sprinckled the Bloud round about upon the Altar, and clave the Ram in pieces, and burnt the head, the pieces and the Rump: and washed the Inwards and the leggs with water, and so burnt the whole Ram upon the Altar; this was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet savour, a fire to the Lord as the Lord had commanded him, Leviticus 8.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 6. This is a true figure of the Sacrifice of Christ with our assumed hu∣manity: how he hath offered our humanity, through the sacrifice of his body, to the Anger of God, and how God in this sacrifice, hath smelt his sweet love in the Humanity of Christ, and reconciled his wrath in the fire. 7. The Figure of Christ standeth thus. Levit. 8.10.11.12.When Moses should make this sacrifice, he tooke first the anointing Oyle, and anointed theTabernacle. dwelling place, and all that was therein, and sanctified it, and sprinckled therewith seaven times upon the Altar, and anointed the Al∣tar, and all its implements, the Laver with its foote, so that it was sanctified;
and powred the anointing Oyle upon Aarons Head, and anointed him, so that he was sanctified. Moses standeth heere in the figure of God, and Aaron standeth in the figure of Christ according to our Humanity, and the Heifer stand∣eth in the figure of the earthly, perished Adam, according to his Bea∣stiall property; and the Ram standeth in the figure of the true Man created in Adam [shewing] how the same should be offered up to God againe in the humanity of Christ: Moses anointed Aaron, that is, God anointed our Humanity in Christ with his highest Love, viz: with the substantiall Wisdome, and Divine substance in the Name JESUS. 8. And that is it, that Moses first anointed the Tabernacle, which signifieth the Body of Mary, in which GOD became MAN, and therefore the Angel called her the Blessed among all women, Luk. 1.28. For God first sanctified the Tabernacle, and sprinckled with his a∣nointing oyle of Love upon all the seaven properties of the Naturall Life: which life in the humanity of Christ, the Altar of Moses signifi∣ed, which God anointed, when JESUS assumed Mans Life: The Laver with its foote signifieth: How God hath anointed the humane Hand or desire in the humanity of Christ, with which he should doe wonders: The anointed Head of Aaron signifieth, how the humanity of Christ, viz: our humane Science, should be anointed with the Holy Ghost. 9. This, God set forth by Moses in the Type; for when Moses had anointed Aaron together with the Tabernacle and the sonnes of Aa∣ron, and established the whole buisines; then he caused a Heifer to be brought for a sinne-offering: which Heifer signified the Grosse Earthly Man impressed through Adams Lust: On this Heifer must Aa∣ron and his sonnes lay their hands upon his head, which signifieth, how God in Christ, and then the Priests or Pharisees would lay their hands upon our, in Christ assumed, Mortall humanity and flay that is put to death, our humanity according to this Worlds Substance: and how his humane Bloud should be sprinckled round about on the Hornes of the Holy Altar, with the finger of God, viz: as with the laying hold of Gods Anger: and how God would thus cleanse his Altar in the Humanity; upon which Altar, viz: the humane Life; should holy Sacrifices be offered to God againe. 10. But that Moses did burne the fatt of the Liver and Kidneys, upon the Altar, signifieth, that our true Adamicall Man out of the Limus of the Earth, according to its right Inward Ground, should not be cast away, or thrust out from God, but be kindled in the fire of Gods Anger with the fire of Love, and be offered to God. As this then was done in the humanity of Christ, when he sacrified our hu∣manity to the Anger of God, but yet did introduce it with his Love
through Death into Life, as out of the fire there springeth up a cleere Light, as out of the-fire dying, a new Life, which consisteth in power and Love. 11. But that Moses did burne with fire the Heifer with his hide, flesh, and Dung, without the Host, and only sprinckled the bloud of the Heifer upon the hornes of the Altar, and kindled the fatt, it signifieth, that the grosse beastiall body of our flesh with skin and bones, shall not come upon Gods Altar, and inherite the kingdome of God, but it shall be consumed with the Essentiall fire of the Earth without the holy Fire of God: as Moses must burne the Heifer without the Host, so also should and must, the Grosse beastiall Man be burnt up without the City of God, viz: in its owne Principle, by that same Nature-fire: as it is done before our Eyes: But this Earthly Mans Bloud, wherein the Astrall soule veth, should be sprinckled upon the Hornes of the Altar: which signifieth the right Man created in Adam out of the Limus of the Earth with the right Astrum, whose bloud or power shall come againe at the Last Day: that same bloud was in Christs huma∣nity, with the inclusion of the Heavenly bloud, sprinckled upon the hornes of the Altar in his suffering and dying on theNote. Tree of the Crosse; for a signe, that our bloud, after a right humane manner, is with Christ come upon Gods Altar, and that God in Christ hath therewith Marked us in the Eternall Heavenly Altar. 12. But that the other bloud must be powred at the foote of the Altar, signifieth, that our humane bloud, wherein our outward humane life consisteth, which here dyeth, is in its dying powred out at the foote of the Altar, viz: into the [foure] Elements, and reserved to the bringing againe of the first true Man, that the right life shall be kept at the foote of the Altar, that is, in its owne Principle, as in Mysterio Magno in Spiritu Mundi, in the Great Mysterie in the Spirit of the world, till God shall purge this Altar of the foure Elements, and bring forth againe the same pure vertue and power of the bloud, to∣gether with the Elements, and bring them into the Temperature, and so then the humane bloud shall againe come to the Soule, according to the property of the Spirituall World. 13. For this cause must Moses and Aaron in the figure powre out the Heifers bloud at the foote of the Altar: for God had not to doe about the blood of Beasts, but he set forth the figure of Mans restora∣tion, and signifieth under it, that Wee Men according to the out∣ward Grosse Earthly Man were but such Beasts, which Grosse bea∣stiall property had swallowed up the true Man into it selfe: Thus he signifieth, how he would with his power bring againe and new Gene∣rate that same inward devoured Ground: And as the power and ver∣tue of our Mumia, of the oyly property shall be kindled againe through the fire of God, as Moses kindled the fatt; so shall the pow∣er
of the inward Ground, heere even in the time of this life, be kindled with the Divine fire, and burne upon Gods Altar, which through the Ʋnction or anointing of the Spirit of God should be done in us: Even as Moses kindled the fatt, so should also the spirit of Christ kindle our Inward Ground even in this [lifes] Time: And when this comes to be done, then should the Heifer, viz: the beast-Man be slaine; that is, he should be daily Mortified, and with his will and beastiall desire be cast forth without the Host of God: for he is but Earth and a Beast, and not fit for the Kingdome of Heaven, Joh. 6. 14. But the Ram now signifieth the right anointed Man in the hu∣manity of Christ, as also our inward Ground, which with Christs a∣nointing in us becometh living againe. As God through Aarons sons, viz: through the high Priest, would lay the hand of his Anger upon it, and slay it, that our humane will might be slaine; so shall in this slaying the bloud of this Ram, viz: the right humanity, be sprinckled every where upon the Altar of God, and the humane will shall be split in pieces, and quite forsake the owne will, and the Head, viz: the humane senses or thoughts be kindled with Gods fire: Even as Mo∣ses kindled the Head of the Ram, as also the pieces and the Rump, so must also our humanity in Christ, be washed with the water of Love, and afterwards be sacrificed upon the Altar of God, viz: on the Tree of the Crosse. 15. Note. But that the Ram must be kindled with fire,Note. and be offered to the Lord, for a sweet savour to the Lord: therein Lyeth the Great Mystery: The Ram is the right Man Created in Adam, which Christ, as the Word, or the power of God, tooke on him, from our Ada∣micall Humanity, in the Body of Mary: and signifieth by the Ram, that God in Christ would thus anoint our right Adamicall Humanity, with the holy anointing Oyle, and bring it to God againe. 16. But seeing the humane will was departed from God, and had brought it selfe into Earthly beastiall Lust: therefore should this Ram, viz: the Humanity of Christ be kindled with Gods fire of An∣ger: for the Anger of God was become manifest in the humanity: and therefore God anointed first the humanity with the Spirit of his Love in Christs humanity, and afterwards offered this Ram, viz: the right Adamicall humanity to the fire of God, that in the Anointing of the Love-Oyle, the anger-fire might be kindled, and the anger fire in the anointing of the Love, viz: through the Oyle of its holy sub∣stance, be transmuted, and wholly turned into a Love burning. 17. For our humane soule was become an Anger fire, viz: an En∣mity against God, and therefore thus God reconciled it in the Love of its substance: That is, Gods anger in the humane life was thus e∣conciled, for Gods power smelt, or thus drew, in the fire, the humane life againe into the Eternall Word, viz: into God. Gods Anger-fire
was the Mouth, which received the humane Life againe into it, and swallowed up the humane averted will into it selfe. 18. But when this Great love had given up it selfe into the hu∣mane Life in Christ, then was Gods Anger-fire with its devouring in the soules fire, turned into meere Love, viz: wholly into a Love-fire: and thus Death in the fire of Gods Anger, which holdeth the soule captive with its Impression: wherein the soule was a darknesse, viz: a darke fire; was broake open, and againe turned into the Light Life. 19. And that is it, which God with this Sacrifice sets forth in a Type, of the Comming of Christ: for Moses sayth: This was a sweet savour to the Lord: Now God doth not savour the beastiall Life; for that shall not inherite the Kingdome of God: Gods buisines which he had to doe by Moses, was not about the Ram and the Heifer, but he set forth the humanity under them before him: Gods Imaginati∣on went into the Humanity in his inspoken Grace-Covenant, viz: in that inspoken Grace word of Love, which stood as a Goale or Limit in Man, even unto Mary, where it manifested it selfe in the Humanity: Into this went Gods Imagination, and Mans Imagination went into this Type, viz: into the Sacrifice in the fire: Thus went also the In∣corporated Grace-Covenant with Mans Imagination into the Sacri∣fice of the fire, as into the Type [signifying] how Christ should recon∣cile Gods anger in the humanity. 20. And thus was the humane will in the Type of Christ ransomed in the fire; for the Incorporated Grace-Covenant, went with the hu∣mane desire, in their prayer (which through this Sacrifice in the fire pressed into God) together into the fire of the Sacrifice, and recon∣ciled (that is, destroyed) the Earthly Beastiall property of the hu∣mane will, in the fire, with the Love: For with the fire God formed an Image before him, as a substance, in which fire substance Gods fire Imaged it selfe, and reconciled the Elementary fire in Man: his E∣ternall Love-fire, savoured the humane will, through the incorporated Grace, through that Medium of the fire, for Moses had holy fire, wherewith he kindled the Sacrifice. 21. Thus was the Elementary fire of Man reconciled in the Holy Fire, and yet must a Beastiall Medium, viz: Beasts flesh, come into the Holy fire of Moses, seeing Man was become Beastiall: that the beastiall kinde be burned away in the Holy fire through the Fathers anger-fire; and that Gods Love-fire might kindle the humane soule-fire in its introduced desire in the Sacrifice and so Gods desire in the Word smelt Mans desire through the fire; for in the fire, the Beasti∣all vanity of Mans will, burnt away in the anger-fire: and so then the cleere humane will, pressed into Gods Love-fire, as a sweet savour: for the incorporated Paradisicall inspoken Grace, pressed with the cleere will of Man, into God.
22. And that is it which Moses sayth; It was a sacrifice of a sweet sa∣vour unto the Lord: For God desired to smell nothing there, but onely Mans will, viz: the humane Life, which before the times of the world, was in the Word of God: indeed without Creature, but yet in power, which was inbreathed to the Created Image: That same did God smell through the Sacrifice in the Ens of Christ viz: through the inspoken Grace, and reconciled the averted will through the Grace in the Fire, so that the humane will became divine againe: and brought (1) the humane Lifes fire, and (2) Gods Love fire, into one fire, as into one lifes burning: and that was a right Sacrifice of Reconciliation, or sinne-offering, when sinne was offered to the fire of Gods anger to be consumed. 23. And thus also the beastiall flesh, which they offered and eare afterwards, was sanctified to Man: for Gods Imagination in the Co∣venant went thereinto; therefore Moses calleth it; Holy Flesh: also, Holy Bread, such was the Shew bread, sam. 21.6. Matth. 12.4. All which, stood in the Type [signifying] How that same incorporated power of the Grace-Covenant, would manifest it selfe with Heavenly Substance in Christ, and give it for food of the humane soule, viz: to the soules fire: in which food, the soules-fire should be turned into a Love-fire. 24. For in the Old Testament this sweet Grace Covenant gave it selfe into the Sacrifice of the fiery soules desire, for sood, as to the Soules Mouth in the fire: For the Soule, viz: the Soulish Faiths Mouth, did in the Sacrifice of fire, eate of this sweet Grace, not in the Substance, but in the power, upon the fullfilling that was to come, till the power was manifested in the flesh: But their Body did un∣der it, eate of the blessed bread and flesh,Note. wherein also the power of the Grace, viz: the Imagination of the Covenant, was. Thus the Jewes did eate Christs flesh and drank his bloud in the Grace Ens, in the power, in the Type; where the power was not yet flesh and bloud: but yet that same word of Grace, which afterwards became Man, was therein. 25. But when the time came, and was fulfilled, that the same in∣corporated Word of Grace (which received their Soule in the faiths-desire in the fiery Essence) became Man, then it gave it selfe to this faiths Mouth, viz: of the fiery soulish Essence, according to the Di∣vine and humane property, for food: Of which wee will heere fol∣lowing write more at large, and set downe the true Ground, how Christs flesh and bloud it to be eaten and drunk: not out of a Conceit or Opinion, but out of the Ground of the Scripture, and true certaine knowledge through Gods Grace.
The Second Chapter. Of the Supper of the New Testament, how the Type is come into Substance. 1. WHen the time was fullfilled, that this Grace-Covenant should manifest it selfe, and assume the Humanity with Soule and Body, then the Type ceased; For the Anger-fire of God in the Soule and in the flesh of Man, was togetherOr, Immode∣led. imprinted in the Substantiall Word, viz: in the Divine Ens: which Divine Ens out of the Divine power, assumed also the Divine Ens of Adam, which vanished as to the Kingdome of Heaven, viz: to the Holy Working Fire, when the Soule Imaged it selfe into Earthlinesse; and made it living, that is burning in it selfe againe, through the Holy Fire, where then the Divine Sacrifice in the fire was manifested in the Humanity. 2. For the Soule was of the Fathers property, according to his fires might, and was become a meere fire of Anger: This the Father gave to the Sonne, as to the Manifested Grace-Covenant, and brought the Fathers Anger-fire in the Soule, into the Sonnes Love fire, so that the Fathers anger-fire and the Sonnes Love fire, in the humane Substance stood in one Ground: the Love-fire became Substantiall, that is, a heavenly flesh, and gave it selfe to the anger-fire of the Fa∣ther in the humane Lifes property, for food to a fire-burning, after the manner, as a Man putteth a pleasant Oyly Balsam to a fire, and then the fire in its burning giveth forth out of it selfe, a pleasant smell and vertue out of this Balsam Oyle. 3. Thus the Father now smelt this pleasant savour in the Humanity in the Soules fire, which savour he formerly smelt in the Sacrifice in the Type: for Christ was now the right high Priest, which offered to God his Father the acceptable Sacrifice of the sweet savour in the Humanity, and reconciled the Anger in the Humanity: The Altar of God upon which Moses sacrificed, was now in the Humanity of Christ, who offered up to God the sweet humanity out of the heavenly Ens, with the Adamicall humanity into his Anger-fire, which burned in the Adamicall humanity: Sinne in the Adamicall flesh was destroyed through the sweet heavenly flesh: viz: through the Substantiall Word of Love, through JESUS, viz: Gods greatest Sweet∣nesse. 4. God brought the Sacrifice of Moses, viz: the reconciliation in
fire, into the humanity, and made of Moses, Christ; viz: the right high Priest, who with his holy bloud besprinckled the Altar, viz: the fire-Life; as Moses did with the bloud of Beasts in the Type. 5. And we see this Eminently in the Supper of Christ, which when at last he would enter into his sufferings, and kill sinne in our huma∣nity, with the substantiall Love fire in his bloud, then at last he Eate the Paschall Lamb with his Disciples: for he had given himselfe up into the Type with his Grace-Covenant, with the heavenly flesh, and would fullfill the Type with the flesh of Love, and bring forth the Adami∣call humanity through Death; viz: through Gods Anger, through the inclosure of the Adamicall Life into Gods Love-fire, and breake open the Prison of Death. 6. So now in the Type of the Paschal-Lamb he began the New Testament, viz: the fullfilling of these Types: and lead his Disciples to the Sacrifice of the New Testament; viz: to the Altar of God, in his flesh and bloud, that they should eate the fullfilling of the Old Testament in the Sacrifice of the New Testament: for he brought the Old Testament, viz: the figure, into the New, viz: into his flesh and bloud, which was the Sacrifice of reconciliation for the sinnes of the World; and gave them theOr, Reconci∣liation. attonement in his flesh to Eate, and in his bloud to drink. 7 For the reconcillation should be no more done in fire, where the Fathers anger burnt away the vanity in Mans Faith, but it should be done in the Love-fire, in the flesh of Christ: they should now with their faiths desire, viz: with the fiery lifes Mouth of the soule, eate and drink the reconciliation with Christs flesh and bloud: No more with Faith in the Type, but in Substance, no more in power without Substance, but with Substantiall Divine and humane power, wherein the humanity of Christ himselfe should be the Paschal Lamb: Not Dei∣ty without Humanity, but Deity and Humanity alike. 8. For the Paschal-Lamb must be eaten quite up, and so also he would not give them onely a piece of his humanity, but (Note) gave him∣selfe to them wholly and altogether, into their soules fire-mouth, viz: into the Faiths-desire: The soules fiery Mouth was now the fire of God which devoured the Sacrifice: as common fire devoureth Oyle, and giveth a cleere light out of its consuming: Thus also Christ gave to his Disciples, viz: to their faiths desire, understand, to the fiery Mouth of the Soule, as to the true Life; his heavenly Body and his heavenly Bloud, in that manner and way, as the heavenly Ens in the limit of the Covenant gave it selfe, into Mary, into the vanished Ens, and became one Person, wholly undivided. 9. Note; He gave his whole heavenly humanity to them into their Adamicall Humanity, understand to the Paradisicall Ground: for every Life desireth an Ens of its likenesse, viz: every fire desireth
an Ens for its burning, which is like that fire. 10. The foolish fire-life was become dark through the Impressi∣on of Death, and therefore needed a light Ens, out of the Divine Light, as a Substance of Light: as a holy anointing Oyle: wherein the dark painfull Soules fire changeth it selfe into a Light- and Love-desire: This now conceived upon Christs Altar, viz: out of Christs humanity, the Substantiall Love, viz: the Substantiall Wisdome of God: that same fire in this Substance was the Name and the power JE∣SUS, viz: Gods greatest holinesse, which changeth the Soules fire into a Light: whence Christ said; Hee was the Light of the world, Joh. 8.12. For in his power, hath the Soule againe attained eyes of Di∣vine Light, so that it beholdeth God againe. 11. And as a Man giveth Oyle to common fire, out of which ari∣seth a Light, so in like manner is to be understood concerning the dark Soules fire; which receiveth into it selfe, Christs heavenly Ens of the Divine Substantiall Love, in this Testament, and kindleth a∣gaine, the vanished even heavenly Ens in Adam, and burneth in its likenesse: wherein the Kingdome of Heaven, viz: the City of God is a∣gaine unlocked, where the Divine Light in that same unlocked Para∣disicall Ground shineth againe: which is the City of God in Man, where the Holy Ghost dwelleth; of which Christ saith; Hee that Ea∣teth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, he continueth in Mee and I in him, Joh. 6.56. 12. In this Paradisicall unlocked Ground, Christ, viz: the Divine Love-Ens, continneth dwelling in the Light: for the power in the Light is the Divine Ens, viz: the Supernaturall heavenly flesh, a Tin∣cture of Life, which Tincture tinctureth the Soule, and giveth the heavenly fire-Glance to the Soules-fire; But yet that a Man may rightly understand it: The Soule is the Fathers fire, which receiveth into it selfe (viz: into its fiery desire) the Sonnes Substantiall Love, viz: the holy Love-fire, which hath turned it selfe into the humane Tincture, viz: into flesh and bloud, understand, into that same hu∣mane Lifes power: Thus is the changing of the Soules Will Effected. 13. Thus wee see first this figure in Moseses Sacrifice of reconcilia∣tion, that the Soule, viz: the Faiths desire of the Soule brought it selfe into the Sacrifice, as into a Substance, and with the Substance went into the fire, where the reconciliation through fire, was made in the introduced Covenant of the Love-fire, in that manner and way, as the Substantiall Love of Christ should give it selfe up into the Soules-fire, wherein Gods anger did burne, for food and reconcilia∣tion: Secondly, wee see also by Moses, not onely how the Soule is ransomed from sinne through fire, and with the Love in the Cove∣nant became fed with the holy fire of Grace, but they blessed also the bread and flesh through the reconciliation of the Grace-Covenant,
and did eate the same, viz: the holy bread and flesh, as God also com∣manded them. 14. Which signifieth the Orall eating and drinking of the Sub∣stantiall Grace; where not onely the Soule is fed, but (Note) also the right Adamicall Man, which shall arise from Death againe: for the Earth was cursed through Mans sinne, and Man must from the Curse of Gods anger Eate of the Earthly fruit: but with this Sacrifice and blessing of the Covenant, God erecteth now a new blessing, so that Is∣rael did eate of Blessed food againe, where the Grace pressed through the Curse againe, as the Sunne presseth and penetrateth through Water. 15. All which was a Type of the Testament of Christ, which would not onely feed the Soule with Substantiall fiery Love; But (Note) also the right Adamicall Body: and that when he would ordaine his New Testament under Bread and Wine, [signified] how the inward Grace of Love would presse through the outward Man, as the Sunne penetrateth through the Water, or as fire penetrateth through Iron. 16. And by the Orall eating and drinking of his New Testament is signified the Paschal Lamb in the Old Testament, where the Grace-Covenant of the Divine blessing gave it selfe into a visible Elementa∣ry Substance, viz: into a Medium, wherein the humane Body recei∣ved the Grace: And it points at the New Testament, where Christ, viz: the Substantiall Grace, would with his Love, with the power of his flesh and bloud, of Divine and humane property, give himselfe in∣to his fellow-Members the Christians, through an Elementary Medi∣um of blessed Bread and Wine for-foode and drink: where-through, the accursed Body out of the Limus of the Earth, (which hath eaten the Curse into it selfe) is blessed againe. 17. This wee see cleerly by the Last Supper of Christ, that Christ with the Institution of the New Testament, would not ordaine any strange or new thing, but onely fullfill the Old Testament; and with the Substantiall Grace, which in his Soule and flesh was become MAN; give himselfe up into the Covenant of the Old Testament: and himselfe be the fullfilling, viz: the Paschal Lamb, and the Holy bread and flesh, where-through our right Adamicall Man is to be blessed: For he first eate the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples, and incor∣porated himselfe with them in the Covenant of the Old Testament: and washed their feete for them: Afterwards he tooke the Bread, gave thanks, and brake it, and gave to them, and sayd: Take and Eate, that is my body, which is given for you: In like manner also he tooke the Cup after the Supper and gave thanks, gave to them and sayd: Drink yee all thereof, that is my bloud of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the for∣givenesse of sinnes: I say unto you, I will now henceforth drink no more of this
fruit of the Vine, till at the day that I will drink it new with you in my Fa∣thers Kingdome, Matth. 26. Mark. 14. 1 Cor. 11.23. 18. This is now the true Ground, and signifieth first how the sweet Grace of Gods Covenant, hath given it selfe up into our humanity: and secondly, how that same Grace-Covenant, (which in the Old Te∣stament with the Sacrifices and Paschal-Lamb, gave it selfe to Israel under that same food for a blessing,) doth now with the assumed hu∣manity give it selfe to Man also under a Medium, viz: under Bread and Wine, to be eaten and drunk: and Thirdly: how he would not take away the first Covenant, and begin some new thing; but how he himselfe would be that very Grace-Covenant, and now present him∣selfe as a Man, and now give himselfe into Man after a Divine and hu∣mane way; that as they had participated of him heretofore, with his Grace in the Covenant, in the Sacrifice, in a spirituall way in power, through a Medium, so now they should participate of him also in a corporeall and spirituall way through the Medium of Bread & Wine, and Substantially participate of that same incorporated Grace in the Covenant. 19. For the cause was this; that he would give himselfe to them to be participated both in a humane and also in a Divine property, a∣like; that they should participate of the Grace (which had given it selfe into the humanity, and slaine Death, and opened the humane Life againe, and brought it through Death) in a new humane Life: that the same New Life out of Christs Death and Resurrection, might unlock even their Life which was shut up in Death, therefore he gave them this new unlocked humane Life of his assumed humane Life, with his flesh and bloud, even under an Elementary Medium, that the Faith might conceive it through a Medium. 20. Therefore there must be a Medium, that (first) Gods Imagi∣nation of his Love, and (secondly) Mans Faiths desire might come together, and take hold one of another by a Medium; for as the par∣ticipation of the Old Testament was done in a Spirituall way, so now it should be both in a Substantiall and Spirituall way alike: for the Deity hath now presented the Paschal-Lamb in the humanity of Christ; and Gods Imagination (which went formerly into the Sa∣crifice) went now into the humanity of Christ: and the Imaginati∣on of the humanity of Christ went with Divine power into the Medi∣um of Bread and Wine, and through the same, in the participation thereof, into the humane Life.
The Third Chapter. How the Disciples of Christ have Eaten and Drunk Christs flesh and bloud: and how that is properly to be understood. 1. REason should heere goe out from the Image likenesse in∣to that which is unimagelike, and forsake the folly which Men strive for, for it was not an Imagelike participation, but is understood under an Imagelike one; Christ gave not his Disciples the Imaged Creaturely outward palpable fleshly humanity, as some piece thereof: No, that is not consistent, for he sate by them at the Table, and did not rend the Imaged substance of his body, but he gave them the spirituall humanity, viz: the power and vertue of his body and bloud, his owne Mumia, wherein the Di∣vine and humane power is understood: which Mumia is a true hu∣mane Substance of flesh and bloud, and is a spirituall flesh, out of which the visible Image groweth, and is wholly one with the visible Image. 2. See a Similitude in the Sunne, which standeth in its Orb, but presseth with its Lustre, power, and whole Substance, with all what∣soever it is in Essence, power, and Substance, forth out of it selfe into the whole world, and giveth it selfe to every Element, Substance, and Creature, to all hearbs, and Trees, also to every Creaturely life, and worketh in all things, whatsoever it will receive, and yet teareth not it selfe, when it goeth forth from it selfe, and giveth it selfe to the o∣ther Creatures, it continueth alwayes whole, and goeth not away from its Substance. 3 So is also the Supper of Christ to be understood; as wee see a Similitude of it in the hearbs and grasse of the Earth, which neither doth, nor can doe any thing without the power of the Sunne, it set∣teth the Jawes of its Essence wide open towards the Sunnes power and vertue; that is, it hungereth onely after that, and into that hun∣ger the Sunne shineth in, and kindleth the Spirit, viz: the Brimstone, Salt, and Oyle of the Hearb: and as soone as that is done, that the Sunnes vertue findeth or perceiveth it selfe in the Brimstone, Salt and Oyle of the Hearb, then it worketh therein, whence the Hearb attaineth a perceptible warmth, and conceiveth and impresseth the Sunnes vertue in it selfe, so that the Sunnes vertue and power be∣cometh Substantiall in the Hearb, and groweth with the Hearb, and tinctureth the same, whereby the Hearb becometh Sunney or Solar, and worketh, to [the bringing forth] fruit.
4. So in like manner wee are to understand concerning Christs Testaments: for Hee is the Sunne of Life, and the Light of the world, Joh. 8 12 Hee according to the Deity, is the Eternall Speaking Word, viz: the power and verue of the Deity, the power of the Di∣vine Light, and according to the humanity, he is, the formed out∣spoken Word which is wholly one with the Eternall Speaking Word: for hee hath introverted our received humanity with the Eternall Word, viz: turned the outward inward, viz: the Substance of Time; and turned the inward outward, viz: the Substance of the Eternity: and is with the Divine Substance, through our humane Substance re∣ceived from us, become pressing forth; as the Sunne presseth forth from it selfe, and giveth forth it selfe, so the Divine Substance giveth it selfe forth through the humane: Note: The Divine Substance bringeth the humane forth with it selfe; for the Divine Desire go∣eth forth towards the humane Essence, and the humane Essence go∣eth in towards the Divine out-pressing delight or desire. 5. Note: But, being the Divine power and vertue excelleth the humane, therefore is the humane brought forth through the Divine power, so that the humane power and vertue giveth it selfe, toge∣ther with the Divine, through the Divine power: for the humane power and vertue is a perception or invention of the Divine, wherein the Divine findeth it selfe in something, viz: in the formed Substance of the word of power, wherein the Divine power loveth it selfe, as in its perceptible Substance, as the Soule loveth it selfe in its Body. 6. Note: And thus hath God powred his love through the hu∣mane Substance in the humanity of Christ, into the Disciples of Christ, with the humane Substance; in that way and manner, as the Sunnes power and vertue in Spiritu Mundi, in the Spirit of the World; as with the Effluence of the power and vertue of the Starres, mingleth it selfe with the Spirituall Brimstone, Salt and Oyle in the upper E∣lements, so that it comprehendeth their power and vertue in its Glance, and giveth it selfe to them, and it (the power) giveth it selfe into the Sunnes power and vertue, and [so they] worke toge∣ther, whereby the light of Nature is unlocked, and with such working give themselves into the Earth, Hearbs, Trees, and all Creatures: so that in an Heath or Tree such a vertue doth exist; whence the ve∣geration or budding forth of Creatures doth exist: where alwayes in such growing or life, a man is to understand (1) an Elementary Sub∣stantiall power and vertue, and then (2) a super-Elementary Sun∣ney or Solar and Starry or Astrall power and vertue, where the Sun∣ney and Sarry with their strong power presse forth with the Elemen∣tary. 7. Note: Now wee see in hearbs and all things that grow out of
the Earth, when they take hold of and Eate this power and vertue of the Sunne and Starres, in them, that they doe not rend themselves and make or use a severed Mouth to doe it withall, but the Essence of their desire (viz: even the Naturall Brmstone, Salt and Oyle in the Hearb) is the Mouth, which taketh hold and eateth in it selfe the In∣fluence of the upper Elements of the Sunne and Starres: Thus also in like manner it is to be understood concerning Christs Disciples and all other Men: they have Eaten and drunk Christs flesh and bloud, under Bread and Wine, as through a Medium, with the ssentiall de∣sirous Faiths-Mouth: not with a circumscribed creaturely compre∣hension, but with the Faiths desire. 8. Note: Yet that a Man may rightly understand it [he is to know]: (1) the outward Mouth with its comprehension, appre∣hendeth the outward Elementary Substance, Bread and Wine: The Mortall tansitory Substance of Man, viz: the Grosse Flesh (which shall not, nor cannot inherite the Kingdome of Heaven, Joh. 6.63. 1 Cor. 15.50.) that apprehendeth and eateth Bread and Wine, for Bread and Wine is also an earthly transitory Substance, which goeth into the Belly, and out from thence againe, as all naturall sood, Matth 15 17. And (2) the right true Man, which was created in Adam, which be∣fore the beastiall grossenesse, was a right Man and Image of the visi∣ble World, according to its inward Spirituall Ground; the same ea∣teth Christs flesh, which is even such Spirituall Substantiall flesh; with the Essentiall desire: Note: understand the flesh that he tooke on him in Mary, viz: our humane, but not the outward Ground of the Corporall foure Elements, but the Inward holy Element, viz: the Ground, out of which the soure Elements proceed: Not Fire, Aire, Water, and Earth, but the Eternall pure Element, which is a Sub∣stance of Paradise, which is hidden in the foure Elements, understand the Substance of Eternity, out of which time is gone forth into a vi∣sion Substance: that same flesh as a spirituall Mumia, out of which, Man as to the visible body hath taken its originall in verbo Fiat, in the word Fiat, which in Adam became blinde as to the Kingdome of Heaven, when he went with the desire into the foure Elementary grossenes: which fleshly Substance in Christs becoming Man was fil∣led with heavenly living Substance, and made living againe; Note; that is it which the right Adamicall Man eateth, which sticketh hid∣den in the Grosse shell of the foure Elements: and in that Substance, the right Man Eateth Christs Passion, Dying, and Death, which death of Christ is in his victory become an Eternall Life, which Life so risen out of the Death of Christ, breaketh our Earthly evill will, and is become a Death to our Death, which the outward Nature holdeth for a Life. 9. Note: Note: And heere is Christs Passion and Dying put on
to Man, altogether Essentially,Workingly, Effectually. Operatively, which Lifes-Death of Christ, swalloweth up our Death, wherein the Body when it heere dyeth according to the foure Elementary Substance, resteth; and the foure Elementary becometh dust and ashes: this same power and vertue of the true humanity resteth in its Principle to the coming againe of the Corporeall Substance. 10. But (2) the Soule which is a spirituall fire, in its desire, as with the true Faiths Mouth, eateth the Supernaturall Substantiall Love of the Name JESUS: which (Name) is become a Sub∣stantiall Power and vertue, viz: the Supernaturall Wisdome of God, wherein the whole Deity is understood workingly. 11. The Soules Mouth eateth of this Holy Substance, whereby the Soule is turned into a Love-fire-burning, for the Love of Christ gi∣veth Ens and Substance to the Soules Fire; the fiery Life of the Soule taketh this Love Substance into its Essence, and by this Love-burn∣ing the TempleOr, Sophia, The Wisdome of God. Soph-JAH is againe unlocked, viz: the Substantiall Holy powerfull-Light, the true Spirit which vanished in Adam: As a Light goeth forth out of fire, so through the Soules-fire, another Principle, viz: the property of the Divine power and vertue goeth forth, and in that out-going power and vertue dwelleth the super∣naturall unsubstantiall God in Trinity: for this is the Divine Principle, where God in Man dwelleth, worketh, and willeth, wherein the Di∣vine Light is understood, whichPenetrateth. diffuseth it selfe through the true Man, as fire through Iron. 12. Note: Understand it aright thus; Man standeth in Three Principles, viz: in Three Beginnings: (1) the visible Man is the visi∣ble World, which is outward and inward, viz: a transitory and an un∣transitory, viz: the Pure Element, and the Efflux, viz: the soure E∣lements: (2) the Grosse Man, with outward flesh and bloud, is the foure-Elementary Body, and the Spirituall Body in the Quintessence or fist Essence, is the Holy Element which is hidden in the foure, which is neither hot nor cold, neither dry nor moist: But the Soulish Ground, is not the Element, it is grounded in the Eternall Word, where the fiery Word of the Fathers property hath inbreathed it selfe into the Created body, as another Principle of an Eternall Na∣ture. 13. Now the Third (3) Supernaturall Ground of Man is the true Spirit, understand the Substantiall Light, the Substantiall Wisdome, which with the Soules breathing in came into Man, but yet vanished when the Soule brought it selfe from the breathing Word into owne Will, into the visible Substance, with the desire; for the Soules fire-Life out of the Fathers property, could no more attaine that, there∣fore was this ground vanished as to the Creature, and not in God, but onely to the Creaturely Soule.
14. And when this holy Ground of the soule and body was hid∣den, then was soule and body a darkDale or Valley. Dangeon, sull of Paine and Tor∣ment: for God was hidden to it, and instantly the Principles ac∣cording to their properties began to qualifie and operate; as (1) the Soule according to the Anger property of God the Father, which as to the light shining in it was hidden: And (2) the outward Body, began to qualifie in the foure Elements, viz: in hot and cold, and in all other properties of the Starres power and vertue, and every awa∣kened property impressed it selfe into a substance, whence the body became grosse, hard and beastiall, and the true Image of God, a Vi∣sard and Monster: And that is the sinne, for the sake of which Gods power and vertue went againe into the Humanity and received the Humanity, and overflowed into us againe his divine power and ver∣tue through and in a right Humanity. 15. Seeing then Man standeth in Three Principles, as an Image according to time and Eternity of the visible and invisible Sub∣stance, and that Christ true GOD and MAN, hath also put on to himselfe the visible and invisible Substance in one undivided Per∣son, so also is the participation of his Substance in his Testaments to be understood, as that every Principle in Man eateth and drinketh of its likenesse againe; viz: Note: (1) The outward right Adami∣call Image out of the Limus of the Earth, eateth againe of the same humanity of Christ which he received from Man; and (2) The Soule eateth of the Divine Love-fire; and (3) the Heavenly Divine Sub∣stance vanished in Adam, eateth of the Substantiall Wisdome, and yet wholly unsevered through one onely Faiths Mouth alike: But: Note: (4) The grosse Beast of the Grosse flesh, which is but a Huske, receiveth onely the outward husk of the Testament, viz: Bread and Wine, and under them the Judgement of God, that breaketh and killeth the Lust of the body of this Grossenesse; therefore Man should distinguish the body of the LORD, and his bloud, from the Ani∣mall Man [that is] without Faith, which receiveth onely the Judgement under Bread and Wine, for as the Mouth is, so is also the food in the Mouth. 16. Christ sayd, Joh. 6. My flesh is the right food, and my bloud is the right drink: Also: I am the Bread that is come from Heaven, that Giveth Life to the World: Hee that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud, he conti∣nueth in Mee and I in Him: but he that eateth not the flesh of the Sonne of Man, he hath no life in him: Then the Jewes contended one among another and sayd: How can this Man give us his flesh to eate, and were offended at this saying: But he sayd: My words are Spirit and Life: Note: To sig∣nifie, that wee should beleeve his words, and he that comprehend∣eth and receiveth his word in himselfe, he comprehendeth in him∣selfe that word which is become flesh and bloud; which word is be∣come
a true humane Substance, and that the Faiths Mouth compre∣hendeth in it selfe, viz: the right hunger or desire of the right true humanity, after a spirituall way and manner: Note: As the word of the Divine power is become Man, so is it also comprehended by the Faith, and is Man in his Members also. 17. That same Spirituall Substantiall Word taketh on it our Hu∣manity, understand the spirituall humanity, and giveth it selfe into the same, and worketh and dwelleth therein substantially after a spirituall manner; as hee dwelt and wrought in the Body which he received from Mary: where Men saw on Him outwardly our flesh and Bloud, viz: the spirituall Worlds substance, and yet in the visible was the invisible substance: of which he sayd; Joh. 3.13. He was therewith come from Heaven. 18. Thus also that same invisible spirituall substance of Christ, which hath united and introverted it selfe with our Hunity; into our Faiths desire; in that manner as a spark of fire falleth into Tin∣der, and kindleth the Tinder, and consumeth the substance of the Tinder, and maketh it altogether fire: so also the Substantiall Power and vertue of Christ consumeth in his Tinder, viz: in the humane spi∣rituall Ground; in the Minde,Seses. Thoughts and Will, and evill influxes in Thoughts and Will: whether they were from the desire of the Earthly flesh, or from the Devill, and from the Lust of the world cast thereinto, yet that same spirituall fire, consumeth all, for it taketh in the Life of Man, and ruleth it. 19. It is a Light, viz: a Spirituall Oyle in the Life of Man, where∣in the true Spirituall Life, viz: the soulish Life burneth, and without this Spirituall Oyle there is no true Light or Life in Man, but onely an Astrall Light; and the true soule standeth in the dark Dungeon in its Essence, and helpeth it selfe with the Astrall Light of the Sunne, in which regard it hath also vaine earthly Desires and Lust in it. 20. But that soule which attaineth this Holy anointing Oyle of Christ in it selfe, turneth its longing and desires away from the vanity of the World, into Gods word and power, and is as a new young childe, that lyeth in the Mothers womb, and suffereth the Mother to nou∣rish it: Thus it hangeth to Christs Essence, Substance and power, and eateth of the Stock of the Vine Christ, as the branch eateth of the Stock of the Vine, Joh. 15. 21. Reason should understand us right, It is not so to be under∣stood, that Christ hath with his flesh and bloud, with the grosse mor∣tall flesh and bloud, introverted himselfe into Man, which flesh and bloud is of no profit, but is onely as a receptacle or shall of the right spirituall Man: Much lesse doth the Divine Substance mingle it selfe with Bread and Wine; so that when I behold the blessed Bread
and Wine, and receive it into the Earthly mortall Mouth, I should think, that I comprehended Christs flesh and bloud with my fleshly Mouth, as I comprehend Bread and Wine therewith. 22. No: That cannot be, Bread and Wine is but a Medium or meanes thereunto, even as the Earthly Mouth is a Medium or meanes of the Spirit: the Spirituall Faiths Mouth of Man comprehendeth Christs flesh and bloud under Bread and Wine: not inherent in Bread and Wine: for Bread and Wine changeth not it selfe into Christs flesh and Bloud, but it is a meanes thereto ordained, which Medium belongeth to the visible Man, through which Medium, the Invisi∣ble giveth it selfe into the Invisible Spirituall Man. 23. In Bread and Wine two properties are understood, as (1) the Grosse Elementary Earthly Substance, that belongeth to the Mor∣all Man; and then (2) the power and vertue therein, wherein the Tincture of the Bread and the Wine lyeth, which (Tincture) is above the Elementary Substance, wherein the foure Elements lye in the Temperature, which is a heavenly Paradisicall power and vertue; that same Tincture of Bread and Wine is the true Medium wherewith Christ the humane Tincture giveth himselfe as into the humane Life: for, Man liveth notBy Bread onely. from the foure Elements onely, Matth. 4.4. The Grosse food which entereth into the Mouth, doth not alone sustaine Life, but the Inward power and vertue, viz: the Quintessence or fist Essence, wherein the Tincture lyeth as a spirituall fire. 24. The Elementary foodWorketh, or Effecteth. produceth onely mortall flesh, and giveth a Source or moving of the Mortall Life, but the Spirituall Man taketh his Nutriment from the Tincture, for it selfe is a Tin∣cture, viz: a Spirituall Fire: therefore Christ powreth or over-flow∣eth his heavenly flesh and bloud, viz: the Holy anointing Oyle, into the Life of Man, through and with the Nutriment of the true Life, viz: through the Tincture of Bread and Wine: Not to understand, that the Tincture of Bread and Wine is able to apprehend such a thing, but it is onely a permissive Medium thereunto, as the Outward Mouth of a Man is but a Medium, where-through the power and ver∣tue of the Tincture in the food is over flowed into the Spirituall Man: and, because in Bread and Wine there lyeth the highest Tin∣cture; which is neerest to the Life of Man, which most of all su∣steineth the Life of Man, therefore also hath Christ ordained this Te∣stament under it. 25. But (1) wee should not be earthly minded, and suppose, that after the Bread and Wine is blessed with the words of Instituti∣on, that then Christs flesh and bloud is inherent in the Bread and Wine, and that every wicked Man may partake of it without the right Mouth; No, if that were so, then could Bread and Wine com∣prehend the divine power and vertue in its own capacity, and Christs
Spirituall flesh and bloud were become Bread and Wine, and it would no more continue to be as Christ sayd; My words are Spirit and Life, Joh. 6.63. 26. Mans spirituall Mouth, taketh with the Faith Christs words and Life, which words are a power of his flesh and bloud, where the divine word is become a humane Substance: That same humane and divine substantiall word is given to Man with the Tincture of Bread and Wine, as through a Medium, that there may be a visible signe, of what is done in the inward Ground. 27. Note, Note; (2) wee should not depend on this meanes or Medium alone, and think, that Christs flesh and bloud is onely and alone Participated in this use of Bread and Wine; as reason in this present time miserably erreth therein: No, that is not so, Faith when it hungereth after Gods Love and Grace, alwayes eateth and drink∣eth of Christs flesh and bloud, through the Medium or meanes of the blessed food, and without the Medium or meanes of the food: Christ hath not bound himselfe to Bread and Wine alone, but hath bound himselfe to the Faith, that hee will be in Man, Hee will continue in him, and Man shall continue in Christ: His powerfull living Word would continue substantially in the Faith, of which Substance, the Faith may alwayes (as also it ever might) eate, for it is the Faiths Nutriment, wherein the Faith doth subsist and is a Substance: Note: The Faith in such participation becometh a substance; viz: a spiritu∣all flesh and bloud of Christ, in which the Living GOD in Trinity, dwelleth, worketh, and willeth. 28. The Substantiall Faith in Man is Christ himselfe, who continu∣eth in Man, who is the Life and Light of Man: That is, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, who dwelleth in us; as Paul sayth; Know yee not, that yee are the Temple of God, that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? Also, the Temple of Christ is Holy, which yee are, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Also, Shall wee that belong unto Christ, be yet Sinners? that be far from us, then were Christ a servant of Sinne, in us, Galat. 2.17. This same substantiall Faith is also the branch on the Vine of Christ, which power and vertue pene∣trates through the whole Man (as the Sunne doth an hearb) and killeth the Lust and workes of the flesh. 29. The Mortall flesh is not the Substantiall Faith; that flesh comprehendeth not Christs flesh and bloud, but suffereth it as a Grosse stone suffereth the Tincture of Gold: and as fine Gold lyeth and groweth in the Grosse stone; so also the love of Christ groweth in the true Life of Man, and penetrateth through the Life, as fire doth through Iron: Not that such power stood in Mans Life, that it could receive the substance of God in its owne power and vertue; No, it is given him of Grace; as the Sunne of its own will giveth it selfe to the Hearb: And the Hearb cannot therefore say, I am the
Sunne, because the Sunne worketh in it: so also can Man not say:Note. I am Christ, because that Christ dwelleth and worketh in him as in his Expresse Image: But the Creature is the Passive wherein the Creator dwelleth and worketh. 30. Wee are Members of Christ according to his humanity, and are therefore called Christians, because Christ dwelleth and worketh in us, in that wee are in our Life his twiggs and branches, in those in whom he bringeth forth fruit through his power and vertue: O little Children, it is a Great Mysterie! Note, Note; the use of this Testament, where wee especially under Bread and Wine should partake of Christs flesh and bloud; is therefore ordained, that so wee should come together, and eate of One Bread, drink of One Cup, and thereunder receive Christ, that wee should Instruct one another, what he hath done for us, and declare his suffering Death and bloud-shedding one among another, and teach it to our children, and should binde our selves therewith in Love, and exhort one another, that wee in Christ are Members of one Body, that wee in Christ are all but One. 31. Even as the One onely Christ giveth himselfe into us all in Common to be one onely Life, and loveth us all in his one onely Hu∣manity, and reacheth forth that same onely humanity with his great Love and Grace to us all in Common, under one Bread and Wine, and so bindeth himselfe to us in one only participation: Thus should wee also in such coming together and participation, as members of one body, binde our selves together in true Love and faithfulnesse, and se∣riously Consider, that in such participation wee are all but one in Christ: for wee partake all of one onely Christ, and in that same one Christ wee are one onely Body, which is Christ in his Members: O little Children, what a depth of Mysterie is this if wee did rightly consider it! Satan in the Anger of God, hath rent us asunder, and made us at odds, so that wee have Opposite thoughts: and heere com∣eth Christ with his Love, and maketh us all, in himselfe, one onely Man againe, which is he himselfe in us: so that all of us together are become branches rooted in his tree, which he himselfe is; and all live from his vertue and substance, and stand in one stock, which is himselfe. 32. Therefore wee should rightly consider this, and not with un∣worthy hearts and Mouths draw neere to this Communion, and sup∣pose it is enough, that wee partake of Bread and Wine: No, it is a brotherly, memberly Band and Covenant; wee binde our selves therewith in Christ to be one onely Man, and that same one onely Man, is every one himselfe in Christ: therefore our purpose in such coming together should be, that wee as Members of one Body, will binde our selves fast with such participation, and forsake Satan with
his Opposite will, and heartily love one another, as Christ hath loved us, and hath given his life into Death for us. 33. To this End is this Testament of participation under Bread and Wine ordained: Not to understand, as if it were a participati∣on apart and asunder, whereof a Christian without the use of this could not partake: for if wee are in Christ, and he himselfe be in us, and is our Life and Light, and wee thus rooted in him in the Sub∣stantiall Faith; which Faiths Substance he himselfe is: Wherefore should not then that same Lifes desire, be able alwayes, if it but turne it selfe thereinto, to eate thereof: this Ordinance is onely a mem∣berlike Band of Love; that wee might thereby instruct one another what Christ hath done for us, till hee shall visibly come to us againe in his assumed humane Imagelikenesse; and as our right High Priest be ever with us and in us. The Fourth Chapter. Of the difference of such Participation, what the wicked receive by this Testament: and how a Man should rightly pre∣pare himselfe for it; that he may be rightly worthy. 1. AS is above-mentioned, it lyeth not in the conceit or sup∣position that one need onely draw neere with the Body to such Communion, and think: when I have participa∣ted of Bread and Wine with others: then I have recei∣ved the true Testament of Christ, whereby my sinnes are forgiven mee: No, St Paul sayth: Hee that distinguisheth not the Body of the LORD from Bread and Wine, he receiveth it to his owne Judgement, 1 Cor. 11.29. Bread and Wine cannot apprehend this Testament, much lesse the Faithlesse, who come to it onely out of Custome, and that he will have the Name of a Christian. 2. So also it standeth not in the Priests power, with his blessing to bring the Body and Bloud of Christ into the Bread and Wine; but it standeth in the Divine Institution, which Institution is hidden from the wicked Mouth, and it is done to him as to Judas, who though indeed he also eate and drank of the Bread and Wine of the
Supper; and was invited to the Testament; yet he did not receive Christs flesh and bloud, viz: the Love of God; for after the Supper Satan went into him: which is as much as to say: the power and ver∣tue of the Testament touched him, so that his inward false Faiths Mouth, was thus stirred and opened, but as his Faiths Mouths was, so was also the Testament in his participation, as the Scripture sayth: With the Holy thou art Holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse Psal. 18.26, 27. 3. Hee received the Testament of Christ, but [it was] the Judge∣ment onely: which Judgement in the Holy or Saints killeth the Earth∣ly Will of the Serpent: that is, when the Soule is capable of the ho∣ly power and vertue; so that it hath a Mouth of Faith, which recei∣veth the Love in the Testament, then it receiveth also herewith in like manner Christs suffering. Death and Resurrection, which killeth Sinne in Soule and Flesh; but the wicked Mouth is not capable of the Love; therefore it receiveth onely Christs suffering and Death, and Not his Resurrection, for with his false opinion, he layeth his de∣sire, viz: the false Faiths Mouth, to Christs Flesh and Bloud, and killeth Christ in this participation in his Testament, in himselfe: he is thereby Guilty of the Death of Christ, for with his false participati∣on, and false Faiths desire, he toucheth the severe Judgement of God in Christs Agony, Wounds, and Death. 4. Therefore, in that he is onely capable of the Judgement, the Judgement of God which killed Christ for our sinnes sake, in this Te∣stament is moveable in the Soule and property of the wicked; which Judgement, toucheth or stirreth Christs wounds and Death in his Testament, in this participation of false property, for the false Ser∣pents-seede with this touchOr, pierceth. stingeth Christ in the Heele: for Christ of∣fereth the Soule his Testament, and would slay the Serpent: but while Satan hath the chife Dominion in the Soule, he will not re∣ceive it, but through the Soules Essence casteth his false Poysonous rayesOr, against. upon the wounds of Christ, and desireth to kill Christ. 5. Understand; he desireth to poyson and infect that Ground in Man, where Christs Bloud and Death, with his Resurrection, should be possessed, and stirreth it selfe so much the more in the false Soule, as he did in Judas: when he received this Testament, then he was Stirring in Judas, and tooke his life in: Therefore sayth the Scrip∣ture; After the Sop, Satan entered into him, Joh. 13.27. For his false Heart had stirred the Judgement of God, therefore it came also into him, for it was within him aforehand, but not manifest, till he tou∣ched the Covenant in the Testament; so it went with him as with Ʋzza, Who unworthily touched the Arke of God, 2 Sam. 6.6, 7. 1 Chron. 14.9, 10. which a wicked Man ought to observe, that he doe not without repentance for his sinnes touch this Testament, else, he lay∣eth
his hand of false property, on Christs Wounds, Agony and Death, and will in the End receive Judas wages therefrom. 6. It is not so to be understood, as if the wicked, who applyeth himselfe with others to the Covenant of the Testaments of Christ, did receive nothing, as also is to be understood in Baptisme; for the Testament standeth firme, the Institution continueth in power and vertue, for the Faithlesse doth not take away the Covenant and pow∣er; The Covenant goeth with such participation and use, into all, but as the Mouth is, such also is the participation: Gods great Love and Grace, viz: the Substantiall Love, giveth not it selfe into the wicked Soule, but the Processe of Christ, with his paine,Or, Anguish. Agony, Scorne and Death, goeth indeed into the wicked soule, for therein the Man-Devill, viz: the wicked Heart, pierceth Christ in his wounds, and maketh it selfe Guilty of the Death of Christ. 7. The wicked indeed participateth on Christs Going into Hell, on his Anguish, and Death, but he is not capable of his Resurrection, wherein Christ ruleth over Death and Hell: for his wicked will de∣sireth not to dye in Christs Death with Christ, to his wickednesse and false matters and conversation, but desireth onely to arise and Live with sinnes in Christs Spirit; he will rule in the Resurrection of Christ with his Earthly Lucifer, therefore he treadeth the Death of Christ with the feete of his false desire, and doth the same which the Pharisees did to Christ: therefore it were better for him not to boast himselfe to be a Christian, and that he did not touch or meddle with Christs Testament. Of the Ground of Absolution. What forgivenesse of Sinnes is. 8. The false conceit and grosseOr, Ignorance. mis-understanding, when Men teach, Christs Testaments destroy sinne, needs yet a moreOr, Sharp. acute exposi∣tion, that the wicked Man may not thus hide himselfe under it, and so cover himselfe with Christs purple Mantle, and weare it as a Badge upon him in falshood: Christs Bloudshedding, as when he destroyed Gods Anger therewith, and turned the Anger into Love, is that which destroyeth sinne: Hee that worthily participateth of Christs Bloud∣shedding, in him sinne is destroyed through his victory and resur∣rection with his bloud and Love; Hee that cometh to it with a Peni∣tent heart for his by-past sinne, and is angry at it, and hath a strong purpose in himselfe, no more to enter into it, he layeth hold with the Faith on the Testamentary Grace. 9. It is false for one to deferre his repentance till the participa∣tion of the Testament of Christ, [and then to think] that the same
will take away his sinne: There is no forgivenesse of sinnes, either by Testament or Absolution, unlesse a Man convert from sinne, and be renewed through earnest sincere Repentance and turning in to the Grace of God in Faith on Christ in the Holy Ghost: that he taketh up another will and resolution to goe out from falshood and wicked∣nesse. 10. For, the forgivenesse of sinnes in Christs Testaments, and with∣out the use of them is nothing else but this: when Christ in the Con∣verting Sinner ariseth from Mans Death, into Mans Faith; and a New obedient will ariseth out of his Death, and becometh a Light in Mans Life, so that the Eternall Night is turned into a cleere Day, then Sinne is forgiven: for if the Eternall day of Love dawneth, then is the Night of the Eternall Darknesse of Gods Anger turned into Love, and there is the Wedding of the Lamb rightly kept; and not with the unworthy Heart, which without repentance and forsaking of its sinnes runneth to the Testament, and supposeth, that its sinnes are forgiven through the laying on of the Priests Hand, and participation of the Testaments. 11. The Priest hath no power to forgive sinne, it standeth not in his owne might and power, the might is in the Ordinance of Christ: Christ in Man, and so farre also as he is in the Priest himselfe, forgi∣veth sinne to the Repenting Conscience: The Absolution is but a Medium, viz: an outward signe thereof, that wee should receive one another in Love and hearty forgivenesse, and binde and reconcile our selves in the Love of the bands of Christ, in his Bride, and in Love receive one another into the Communion of the body, viz: of the Bride of Christ. 12. The Minister of Christ, taketh the faithfull Penitent Man, through an Outward Absolution, in Christs stead, into theChurch. Commu∣nion or Congregation of Christ: Hee is with his Absolution a Medium or meanes, of that which Christ himselfe through his absolution dothWorkingly. Effectually in the inward Ground, and so Man is through such a a Medium outwardly confirmed: But if there be no Faith and con∣version there; but onely a Custome, then there is also no Absolution; for the Priests Absolution without Christs co-working, is powerlesse and dead, for the power sticketh not barely in the outward Ordinance and in the Priest, but in the Communion of the Saints in Christ, viz: in the Bride of Christ, the same taketh the Repenting Man into their Memberlike fraternity, in the Faith of that which is to come, the Spi∣rit of Christ in his members receiveth him. 13. A wicked Priest, in whom the Spirit of Christ is not, cannot absolve him, nor receive him, but the Office of Christ through the word of his Promise, receiveth him: A false Priest is but an outward worklesse instrument as to himselfe, and doth no more with this than
the wicked Priest with the Water-Baptisme, which onely powreth the water, and speaketh the words without co-working; But the Spirit of the Office looketh not upon the unworthy Minister of the Office, but upon those that come to the Office with Faith: He absolveth him through his Office, and receiveth him with the Bride of Christ in whom Hee worketh, into the Church or Congregation, and not by a wicked Pharisee, who himselfe is not capable of the Office, and one∣ly sitteth there as an Idoll, which Man worshippeth, and is himselfe but a Devill full of falshood, and attributeth that to himselfe, which he himselfe hath not. 14. There must be earnestnesse used in going about with such an Office of the power of God, or else Christ is but mocked therein: Therefore no Man should relye upon the Ordinance and think, that the Ordinance absolveth him, or that for the Ordinance and Institu∣tion sake of Christ he receiveth the Testament: If any will receive Christ into himselfe for a lodger; he must then bring the Temple of Christ, wherein Christ absolveth him, with him into the Ordinance; The absolution is but a receiving into the Communion of the Mem∣bers of Christ; the Priest receiveth him outwardly with the Congre∣gation, and Christ receiveth him in the Faith, and bindeth himselfe workingly with him; which cannot be done without Faith and Ear∣nest turning into God: and now as Christ worketh inwardly in him, so also the Congregation or Church, viz: the Bride of Christ, worke membrally in him with their prayers, and they all are but one in Christ. 15. But it is a snare of the Devill, that the wicked think, that he is a sinner indeed, but he will at last goe to the Office of Christ, to the Communion of Saints; and will be absolved and receive Christs Testament, that his sinnes may once be forgiven him, and then will sinne a new, when his old sinne is done away: as it cometh to passe, that many begin to hang their heads a little and make a shew, and pre∣sently afterwards enter into their old Custome againe, into all abo∣minations and Blasphemy: These Crucifie Christ, andNote. pierce him in his wounds; and it goeth with such a one as with Judas, who after he had eaten, Satan entered into him, it were better he continued alto∣gether from it, so long as it is not with him in Earnestnesse, if that he thinketh to be and remaine a true Christian Of true Christianity. What a right Christian is. 16. Christianity is not a bare conceit, that a Man need onely to acknow∣ledge with the Mouth and beleeve, that Christ dyed for us, and hath
satisfied for sinne, that a Man need onely to give assent to the Go∣spel, and hold the History of what was done by Christ, to be true, and that a Man need onely and balely to goe to his Testament, and there receive the Grace which he left behinde him, and comfort himselfe therewith, and accompt it as a Merit and imputed Grace: It is not enough for a Man to heare Sermons preached, and to be Bap∣tised to Christ, and goe to the Supper, so that a Man doe but keepe the Custome: this by farre maketh no Christian, it must be Earnest∣nesse, none is a Christian, unlesse Christ live and work in him; as Christ himselfe sayth; Without mee yee can doe nothing: Joh. 15.5. Also: Hee that gathereth not with mee scattereth, Matth: 12.30. 17. A Christian must be one Spirit in and with Christ, and will and work in the power of Christ: it is a living active working Grace, in a Christian; a continuall burning fire, a feeling power and vertue, which though it be often covered with the Lust of the flesh, and the vanity of the world, yet itGloweth. glimmereth and burneth in the Heart, as a fire, and reproveth the flesh, and the vaine lust of untruth, reje∣cteth the false way, and willeth it not: that same inward fire is the Spirit of Christ, which without ceasing breaketh the head of the Ser∣pent; viz: the Lust of the flesh: The flesh hath the will of this world; but that same kindled ground, hath the will of God: If any be a Christian, then he will hate and be angry at the will of the flesh, he will be an Enemy to his evill fleshly Lust, and constantly com∣plaine and hold himselfe to be unworthy,Note. and continually with his in∣ward will of the soule sinck himselfe, into thePurest. meerest Grace, into Gods mercy, and not say of himselfe, I am a right Christian, but will continually presse with his Desire into Gods Mercy, and fly to Grace, that he might be but a right Christian, and will accompt himselfe in all his conversation alwayes too unworthy of such Grace, and in conti∣nuall resigned humility with weeping and prayer; onely presse into Grace, his whole life will be a all Repentance, and [he will] evermore desire to apprehend Grace, as it hath apprehended him. 18. A right Christian is affrighted at sinne, when the Lust of the flesh would worke sinne: also when he seeth others work sinne, then he groaneth in himselfe at it; and wisheth that such evill were not committed, it is an abomination to him in his Eyes, he loveth truth and righteousnesse, and hateth the false way: and although the Earth∣ly flesh often unawares without any purpose of will, falleth upon him with a sudden false Lust, and many times bringeth him to fall, as hath been with David, and Solomon; and Many Saints, and is still done, yet such a Man in whom the Spirit of Christ is, doth not lye in sinne; but the Inward Ground, viz: the Incorporated Grace in the Spirit of Christ, cometh quickly with GodsStrict. severe righteousnesse, in the An∣ger,
and entereth into him in the Conscience; as the Prophet Nathan entered into Davids conscience, and touched his conscience, and awakened the fire of Anger: when David suddenly began with great sorrow to repent and acknowledge his sinne, and entered into such Earnest Repentance, that he would receive no comfort from all his friends, and would not suffer his Eares to be filled with comfort, and the tickling of Grace, till he felt the Grace of the Lord in his Conscience; no flattery would set his heart at peace, till the Lord spake into him with his Grace 2 Sam. 12.7. Of the worthy preparation to the holy Testament of Christ. 19. If any will call himselfe a Christian, and comfort himselfe with the Merits of Christ, and approach to his Testament, and worthily re∣ceive the same, let him consider his wayes well, and looke to his heart, and see how it is framed, 1. Whether he standeth in such a desire, as to be willing to dye wholly from vanity; 2. Whether it be in his purpose, to goe out from all falshood, unrighteousnesse, lying and de∣ceit; and that he be resolved never to enter into them againe: 3. Whether he desire the Grace of God in Christ, with a cleane pure wil 4. Also whether he is sorry for his sinne: 5. Whether he finde and feele such a will in himselfe, that from henceforth he will wholly goe forth from his former Sinnes and Blasphemies: 6. And also whe∣ther he be so minded, that he will yeeld up his whole heart and will to Gods Mercy: 7. Also whether he findeth feeleth and knoweth a place in himselfe where he will lay up this high Testament, viz: the flesh and bloud of Christ with his Grace: 8. Also whether or no he hath made roome in his heart and whole soule for the Spirit of Christ, that he may there enter in as a Living Conqueror over Death and Hell, and may erect his Kingly Palace in his heart and soule: 9. And whether he be capable of this, where Christ sayth; Wee will come unto you and make our dwelling in you, Joh. 14.23. 10. Also whether the Temple of the Holy Ghost in him be swept and purged with right re∣pentance: 11. Also whether there be a right Mouth in him, that can rightly receive Christs Holy flesh: 12. Also whether the Essence of his Life be so framed, that Christ with his Substance and with his Love may continue therein? For Christ sayth, Hee that Eateth my flesh and drinketh my Bloud, continueth in Mee and I in him, Joh. 6.56. 13. Also whether he finde in his Minde that the Streame of the Li∣ving Waters of Divine Love flow from him, that he love his God, and his brother and Neighbour as himselfe: 14. Also whether he wish∣eth and desireth to doe Good to his Enemies. 15. Whether he accomp∣teth
any thing in this world as his owne, of which he sayth; This is mine owne onely: 16. Or whether in that which he hath and possesseth he accompteth himselfe but a servant of God, and a Steward to him and his brother therein: and Consider that he is but an Officer and Servant of God in his state and condition, & in his temporall Goods, that none of it is his own, but Gods and his brothers? 17. Also whe∣ther he trusteth God in his conversation, and keepe and esteeme his Life as his Lord Christ did; who was but a Pilgrim in this world, and had nothing for his owne, and also willingly left his Life for his bre∣thren? 18. Also whether he findeth a sparkle of such a will in him∣selfe. 20. Now if he finde all this in himselfe, then he is rightly worthy and very fit for such a Testamentary participation: but if not, and yet findeth such a hunger in himselfe, that he would willingly be and will so, then he is in the drawing of the Father to the Grace in Christ, then he should not long parly with Reason, and frame doubts in himselfe, but should that very houre enter into such an Earnest purpose, that he will enter into Earnest sincere Repentance, and continually fly to the Grace of God in Christ, and pray, that he will give him such a heart and will, and not attribute to himselfe, as if he would attaine it in his owne power and vertue, but barely and meerly sinck into the most pure Grace, into the Mercy of God, and be in himselfe as a young childe, which onely hath a desire after the Mothers Milke, that cannot help himselfe, but flyeth to the Mother for her to helpe him. 21. His going to the Communion of Saints should be in Humility: with a right reconciliation with all those, whom he hath wronged, or who have wronged him, and should forgive all his Enemies, and wish the same to them which he desireth for himselfe: With the feare of God, and a penitent Heart, in a right Earnest purpose, he may approach thereto, and bring no owne desire to the Testament of Christ, nor willing to apprehend and comprehend such Grace by his owne ability, but onely sinck himselfe downe, and wholly give him∣selfe up into the Grace as unworthy: and cast himselfe upon the Grace, to doe with him what it will; and not at all will to desire the Spirit of Divine Joy; understand, as a propriety; but give himselfe up to it, and sinck downe in the Grace, that the same (Spirit of Grace) may be in him how and when it will. 22. The Heart and Minde should say in it selfe before the Testament of God, thus: O thou Great Grace of God, I unworthy sinfull Man,
come to thee upon thy Call, whereas thou hast bidden us poore Men to come and thou wilt refresh us, Matth. 11.28. Be it done unto mee according as thou sayst, how thou wilt, I give up my selfe herewith wholly and altogether, doe thou with mee poore unwor∣thy Man according to thy Grace, how thou wilt; I will Eternally be thy owne: Break now my will, and go∣vern it with thy will, I can and am able to doe nothing but sinck now wholly and altogether into thy Grace. 23. Such a Man as so wholly giveth himselfe up to God, and con∣tinueth standing in such resignation with his will, he will in the End when the Grace moveth in him, finde and feele, what Grace and Di∣vine Love is: When the Divine fire is kindled in his life, then he will seele and taste what Christ in him is, and finde quickly how he is become another Man of other thoughts and will. 24. And then he is a Christian, when Christs Love-fire striveth with Gods Anger in the Conscience, and it will be set before that Man in Christs processe in this world, that he must follow after Christ, in his suffering, anguish, paine, scorne, and persecution, and must take the Crosse of Christ upon him, and be conformable to Christs Image: where there is Inwardly Strife against Sinne, and fleshly Lusts that are in him, so that he despiseth himselfe and hateth the evill Lust; and outwardly he hath contempt, scorne, trouble, and misery: whereas the world accompteth him for a stranger and a foole, where reason looketh upon it selfe as foolish, and he himselfe as to the mat∣ters and conversation of this world will be a foole, and hateth every thing which his flesh loveth: where there is none that flattereth him, but all his good friends, shun him and withdraw themselves, except onely a few of the children of God, who take notice of it, and whom God sendeth him for his comfort: Then may he think, that he at that time with Christ, hangeth to the Crosse, and he so behaveth himselfe, that he would willingly even dye with Christ, for the profession sake of the Tru h, in hope that he also in Christs victory and overcoming shall arise with Christ, and live Eternally in Christ. 25. This is a Christian and worthy for the Communion of Saints, who is entered into this processe, and converseth therein: All others who goe onely out of Custome, and accompt Christs Testament, for an outwardly imputed Grace, and as a worke done beleevingly appro∣priate it to himselfe, and will receive it as a Gift, but will not be new-borne, and be another Man of other thoughts and will, and keepe
the defiled Cloake of sinne in the Conscience in him, and passe quickly againe into the old footsteps: All these are unworthy and unfit, and uncapable of the Testament, and receive it onely unto Judgement, as before is mentioned. The Fift Chapter. Of the Contention, Disputation, and Strife of the Learned about Christs Testaments: what they Effect therewith, and what is to be held concerning it. 1. NOt out of an affection to meddle with any one in his good Conscience, will I adde this Chapter, but for the comfort of the simple children of Christ, which Men so lead into Errour, and shut them up in opinions, and se∣duce them from the true understanding in contention, and make of Christs Testaments a meere Den of Murther, and binde and shut up the Conscience in Snares and Bands, to them I will sig∣nifie what they should hold concerning the contentious Disputation of the Learned in Reason, and what they set up thereby. 2. Christs Testaments are nothing else, but a Band and Covenant between God and Man, a Memberlike union of the children of Men, where God with the humanity of Christ hath bound himselfe with Man againe after the fall, to be their loving God: Now all that with∣out this Memberlike Band and Covenant of Love, contend and dis∣pute about conceits and opinions, about knowledge, that goeth into owne selfe without Christ, and there is no true understanding in any such, for none knoweth Christ, but the Father onely, and those to whom the Fa∣ther will reveale him, Matth. 11.27. 3. Now if Christ be revealed to and in a Man, then he hath no contentious Disputation, nor Strife with any Man about that know∣ledge and skill, but he is lowly, and accompteth himselfe unworthy of any such knowledge; he despiseth none for the difference sake of his Gifts, but is in Love with all Men, and letteth every Man have his owne, and giveth to his Neighbour onely his Love will, and con∣sidereth how he may be a Member of Christ and of his Brethren and Sisters.
4. But that Men run into so many Opinions, and strive, contend, and dispute about them, and despise one another for the Letter sake, and scorne, and give them to the Devill: there the simple Christian is to know, that in all such Strife there is no true understanding, but meere Pride and AntichristianMatters. doings, or miserable confounding of the words of Christ, where nothing ariseth from it but disunion, unsafety, Enmity, and nothing else is effected therewith but the De∣vills will. 5. And that is, because they give out themselves to be Teachers of the Kingdome of Christ, and yet are not sent or knowne of God; they take their matter all from others, and exchange words and let∣ters, and contend and dispute about the Art, how Men may artifici∣ally set letters together, and make opinions, which composure is most artificiall, and compell the Consciences into that Art; but they them∣selves understand not what they doe: their knowledge sticketh barely in the letters, and yet have not the Living word CHRIST in them, who giveth testimony to the Literall word: Had they Christ in the Love in them, then they would impart that same Love, and would shew men Christ in themselves, and would so walke that Men might see they were Christs children: But while they onely contend and dispute, and will not so love and live, themselves, it is false and but an hypocriticall shew. 6. But that this is true, let Men looke upon their supposition, about which they contend: One heape of them sayth, Christ is sub∣stantially under Bread and Wine: Also, Bread and Wine is changed into the Testament of Christ, and there is a change of the Bread and Wine; and so will receive Christ into the Beastiall and Mortall Man, which Beast yet is not profitableText. In the holinesse. as to Holinesse: The other Party sayth; It is onely a signe and signification of the Body of Christ, that he was broken or dy∣ed for us: and denieth theAll-present, presentiall. present substantiall participation, and un∣derstand nothing concerning Man, what and how he is, what he wanteth and standeth in need of, that he may attaine the salvation of God againe: The Third Party will handle the matter best, and keep to the words of the Institution, but say; That Christ is participated with and under Bread and Wine, that is, Christs flesh and bloud is eaten and drunke under Bread and Wine; but yet have no understanding how that comes to passe, what is in Man that is capable of such a Gift, and will know nothing of the inward Ground and right Adamicall hu∣manity, and deny also moreover the Substantiall inhabiting of Christ, and is as farre from understanding as either of the other two: Nei∣ther will they know how the participation is wrought, but depend barely on the dead letter, but lay about them, lash and thunder, with railing, scorne, Heresie, and Blasphemy.
7. Every party striveth onely about a literall Image, and will have Christ bound to theirImaginary. Imagelike opinion, and will be Patron of that same Image, and doe it upon no other ground, but that they will at∣taine Glory, honour, and high Esteeme by it: which may be knowne in that they all of them disgrace and contemne one another, that each of them may but maintaine hisImaginary. Imagelike opinion, and be called and esteemedOr, Masters and Dispen∣cers. Lords of the Mysteries of Christ; and yet in the ground of their hearts respect nothing but the Earthly Lucifer, with temporary honour and selfe-will; and will beVenerated. worshipped as Christ: Every party would have it so, that Men should worship their Image, viz: their framed literall Opinion. 8. With Christs Testaments they distinguish their Images, and make them a Sect therewith: and cry; Heere is the Church of Christ, there is Heresie and Seduction: cleave unto mee, heere is Christ: and therewith imbitter the hearts of Kings and Princes, as also the Mindes of the People, so that one brother, for an Image-like opinion sake, despiseth, disgraceth, slandereth, and blasphemeth another, and ac∣compts him and cryeth out upon him for Devillish, and will raise warres and bloudshed, and desolation of Land and People, for the sake of such Idoll-Images: all which are a meere empty shell without fruit, and belong to the fiery World for Seperation. 9. Men have brought it to this passe, that the people think they are saved, if they doe but cleave to the opinion [of such men] and allow it: whether they understand it or no, when they doe but ho∣nour a Sectarian Name thereby, and hold the Patron of their opi∣nion to be right; so that when one heareth the name of him, he cry∣eth; Yes, yes, that is right: and yet knoweth not what it is: so alto∣gether have men blinded and seduced the simple, that Men looke onely upon Mens Names, and think Christ is in the Opinion; and that which is yet worse, men so compell the people with power into such Image-like Opinions, and have so blinded Men, that they for∣sake even body and Goods for an Opinion sake, which yet they un∣derstand not in the ground of it, and persecute, hate, and kill one another for it. 10. Every one of them cryeth Men will take away the true Do∣ctrine, viz: the true Faith, from them, and yet they have it not, nei∣ther is it in their Opinion; thus altogether is the world filled and blinded with Opinions: Men suppose, if a Man use but Christs Testa∣ments according to the opinion of his Patron, then there is blessed∣nesse and salvation therein, else there can be no salvation: and who∣soever imagineth not according to the same opinion, and hangeth and cleaveth to them, cannot be saved; also he is no true member of the right Christendome.
11. Men doe so miserably contend about such Image-like opini∣nions, that the Churches are made nothing else but meere houses of contentious Disputation, and spirituall Dennes of Murther: which Murther in the End comes to warres and bloudshed, and meere disgrace and dishonour is done to Christ for his holy Gifts and Testaments sake: and nothing else in truth is thereby erected, but as Israel dan∣ced about the Golden Calfe, and made an Idol-calfe to be their God, and joy∣ed in their owne handiworke; viz: in their Idoll-Image, and lost their God: and therefore also the anger of God was wrath against them, and de∣voured them all in the Wildernesse, so that such Idoll and Image Servants could not come into the promised Land. 12. Loving brethren, contend not about Opinions, all contenti∣ous Disputation is an Image of an Idoll: Christ hath concerning his Omnipresence, told us of no opinion, where he sayth, He will be with us every day to the End of the world, Matth. 28.20. He sayth not, in such or such an opinion, but where he signifieth his presence, he sayth thus; as the lightening goeth forth and shineth to the going downe thereof, so shall also the Ever enduring coming of the Sonne of Man be, Matth. 24.27. And sayth; The kingdome of God is inwardly within you, Luk. 17.21. 13. Christs Light and power riseth up in his children in the in∣ward Ground, and shineth to them through the whole course of their life, and in that well-spring of Light is the kingdome of God in Mn: Now if he have not this, let him contend and dispute as much as he will, yet he will bring it into him by no opinion; but if he hath it, out of the same wellspring flow even streames of Love; it needeth no Opi∣nion, let him onely looke that Christs kingdome be borne in him, that Christ be Man in him: else he is no Christian, be he how he will for opinion, he must stand as a branch in the vine of Christ, Joh. 15. The Opinion helpeth him not, but the true Faith, which through the breaking forth of Love is active, and worketh good works, Gal. 5.6. if he have not the works of Love, then he hath also no Faith: the opinion maketh no salvation, but is Babell, a confusion of the Tongues of the one onely Love: None is a Christian, unlesse he love his neighbour, and desireth to doe him good. 14. The outwardly imputed Grace, without the innateOr, childelike. filial Grace is all false; when Christ worketh in a Man, then he is a Chri∣stian, and then the sufferings, merits, and satisfaction of Christ availe him: when he hath him in himselfe for an Advocate, who hath done it, that he doe it also in him, and attracteth his merits to him, then is the kingdome of God in that Merit, otherwise all Imagelike Opini∣ons are faise: No work pleaseth God but what he himselfe worketh in Man through his Spirit, therefore let us be the children of Christ, and not the children of Images.
15. Christ hath imparted his kingdome to us in his Testaments, he that will receive it must be his childe, else there is no Inheritance: to work Repentance is better then to desire to know much: Is not the knowledge given from God to a Man, then he will not [be able to] understand the Ground of the divine secret Mystery, but if it be given him, he neede no Image: to continue in the humility and sim∣plicity of Christ, and to cleave to his love and Grace without despising of any one, is good Christianity: All what∣soever speaketh of it selfe is Babell; in Christ wee are all Members, and all one. AMEN. The End of the second little Book concerning The Holy Supper.
The Table of the Two Testaments. Angells. Book 1. Ch: 1. THe End why God Created the Angells and Men; also of Reasons Misunderstanding of the Testaments of Christ. Verse. 23. Book 1. Ch: 2. How Angells became Devills. Verse. 3, 4, 5 Anointing. Anointed. Book 1. Ch: 3. How Christs anointing is under∣stood in the Water Baptisme. Verse. 19 Book 1. Ch: 3. How the Body and Soule is anoin∣ted by Christ in the Water-Bap∣tisme. Verse. 19.20 Book 1. Ch: 4. John Anointed when Mary sa∣luted Elizabeth. Verse. 4 Book 1. Ch: 4. A Baptizer should be the Anoin∣ted of Christ. Verse. 22 Antichristian. Booke 2. Ch. 5. Of Antichristian doings. Verse. 4 Arise. Booke 1. Ch. 3. What that is, wherein Man at the last day shall Arise and stand be∣fore the Judgement. Verse. 16.17.20 Baptisme. Baptised. Baptise. Baptiser. Booke 1. Ch. 2. How the Deluge was a figure of Baptisme. Verse. 17 Booke 1. Ch. 2. Why God sent the Baptisme and Divine Infusion in an Elementary Earthly Medium. Verse. 26.27. Booke 1. Ch. 2. What is the Ground of that Water-Baptisme, to which the holy Ghost is the Hand that Baptiseth. Verse. 36 Book 1. Ch: 3. How the whole Man needed Bap∣tisme. Verse. 4 Book 1. Ch: 3. How the Baptisme of the holy Ghost is effected. Verse. 6 Book 1. Ch: 3. What it is in the Water-Bap∣tisme, wherewith the Body from the Outward World and the Spirit of the Constellation in Man is Baptised. Verse. 12 Book 1. Ch: 3. How wee are buried with Christ in Baptisme. Verse. 22 Book 1. Ch: 4. John the Baptist the Beginner of Water-Baptisme. Verse. 01 Book 1. Ch: 4. Circumcision changed into Water-Baptisme. Verse. 6 Book 1. Ch: 4. Why God Ordained the Water-Baptisme. Verse. 9 Book 1. Ch: 4. Why the Outward Baptisme is requisite to those that live to have it. Verse. 14.15.19. Book 1. Ch: 4. Wee are through Baptisme plan∣ted anew in the Word of God. Verse. 20 Book 1. Ch: 4. How God is with the Holy, & with the Ʋnholy in the Baptisme. Verse. 24 Book 1. Ch: 4. What required to Baptisme in them that are present. Verse. 33.34.40 Book 1. Ch: 4. Wicked people at the Baptisme, a hinderance to the work. Verse. 36 Book 1. Ch: 4. Baptisme not a meere signe, but a substantiall work. Verse. 38 Book 1. Ch: 3. What was done that the Three Worlds properties in Man might be Baptised. Verse. 5
Book 1. Ch. 3. What it is in Man that is Baptised into Death. Verse. 21 Book 1. Ch. 4. Faithfull Parents Baptised in Soule and Body, generate Children in that Baptisme. Verse. 13 Book 1. Ch. 3. How the Father Sonne and Holy Ghost Baptise together. Verse. 11 Book 1. Ch. 4. Who it is that is worthy to Bap∣tise with Water. Verse. 10.11.39 Book 1. Ch. 4. Holy Parents Baptise their Of∣spring in Spirit, yet why the Out∣ward Baptisme is requisit in those that live to have it. Verse. 14, 15.19 Book 1. Ch. 4. The unfaithfull Baptiser is dead in that work, though God alwayes worketh in respect of his Cove∣nant. Verse. 12 Beasts. Book 2. Ch: 1. The Image of Reconciliation in the sacrificing of Beasts, and burning the Fat of them mentioned Levit. 8.14. &c. Verse. 5 Body. Book 1. Ch: 1. How wee came to have this Bea∣stiall Body. Verse. 20 Book 1. Ch: 2. What Body the Saints, before (and since) Christ, put on; and what Bo∣dy they waite for in the Resurre∣ction at the Last Day. Verse. 14 Book 1. Ch: 3. The Body of Man necessary to be Baptised. Verse. 2.3 Book 2. Ch: 3. Why the Bread and Wine cannot be turned into the Body and bloud of Christ. Verse. 25 Book 2. Ch. 4. How it is, not to distinguish the Lords Body. Verse. 1 Children. Book 1. Ch: 4. Christ biddeth; Suffer little Chil∣dren to come to him. Verse. 28 Christ. Christs. Christian. Booke 1. Ch: 2. Why God must become Man; and why Christ must receive the Ele∣mentary part from us. Verse. 34 Booke 1. Ch: 2. How Christ is bestowed upon Man. Verse. 37.38 Booke 1. Ch: 3. How Christ is the Light of the (little) World. Verse. 10 Book 2. Ch. 2. How Christ is the Light of the world. Verse. 10 Book 1. Ch. 3. How Christ penetra∣trated through Death and Hell. Verse. 18 Book 1. Ch. 3. How Christ descended into Hell. Verse. 22 Book 1. Ch. 4. John the forerunner of Christ. Verse. 5 Book 2. Ch. 2. How Christ was the right High Priest. Verse. 3.4 Book 2. Ch. 2. Christ gave his whole Humanity to his Disciples. Verse. 8.9 Book 2. Ch. 2. What the Citie of God in Man is, and how wee continue in Christ, and be in us. Verse. 11 Book 2. Ch. 2. Christ, by the last Supper, fulfilled the Old Testament. Verse. 17 Book 2. Ch. 3. Man cannot say I am Christ, though Christ dwelleth in him. Verse. 30 Book 2. Ch. 4 Who they are that Crucifie Christ now, and wound him. Verse. 15 Book 2. Ch. 4. How a Man shall feele and Taste what Christ in him is. Verse. 23
Book 2. Ch. 5. None know Christ, but those to whom, and in whom the Father revealeth him. Verse. 2, 3 Book 2. Ch. 5. How Men say, heere is Christ. Verse. 8 Book 2. Ch. 5. How Christ is with us Every Day to the End of the World. Verse. 12 Book 1. Ch. 3. What was effected by Christs shedding forth his bloud upon the Earth. Verse. 18 Book 1. Ch. 3. What in Man is the Christian, and why Mans works must be Jud∣ged. Verse. 25 Book 2. Ch. 4. The whole life of a Christian should be continuall Re∣pentance, and flying unto Grace and the meere Mercy of God. Verse. 17.20.21 Book 2. Ch. 4. A right Christian is afraid of all Sinne. Verse. 18 Book 2. Ch. 5. None is a Christian but he that desireth to doe his neighbour good. Verse. 13 Church. Churches. Book 2. Ch. 4. Faithful Witnesses about Baptisme, well ordained by the Christian Church. Verse. 37 Book 2. Ch. 5. How the Churches are made spirituall Denns of Mur∣ther. Verse. 11 Circumcised. Book 1. Ch. 2. The Covenant and the Holy Fire, renewed with Abraham, and why Masculine Persons must be Cir∣cumcised. Verse. 18 Communion. Book 2. Ch. 3. It is not enough to partake of Bread and Wine in the Communion. Verse. 32 Book 2. Ch. 3. What our purpose must be when wee goe to the Communion. Verse. 32 Book 2. Ch. 3. How a Christian partaketh of the Communion without Bread and Wine. Verse. 33 Book 2. Ch. 3. The usefulnesse of the Ordinance of the Communion. Verse. 33 Book 2. Ch. 4. Wee must desire the same to all our Enemies that wee desire for our selves, if wee will worthily goe to the Communion of Saints. Verse. 21 Contention. Book 2. Ch. 5. The Authour sheweth the Conten∣tion of the Learned for the Com∣fort of the simple. Verse. 1 Covenant. Book 1. Ch: 2. Why God transferred the Cove∣nant from Circumcision into Bap∣tisme. Verse. 25 Book 1. Ch: 2. Why the Covenant of the Water-Baptisme was first brought into the Heavenly Ens of Man. Verse. 32 Book 1. Ch: 4. The Covenant of Christs Testa∣ments is alwayes powerfull. Verse. 6 Book 1. Ch: 4. The wicked Man in Gods Cove∣nant is a sweet savour unto con∣demnation. Verse. 25 Book 1. Ch: 4. What it is to a childe, that it is be∣gotten of wicked Parents, and brought by wicked people to the Covenant: also what it is to God. Verse. 29 Book 1. Ch: 4. Why the Covenant of God is made in Christs Bloud and Death. Verse. 30
Book 1. Ch. 4. Baptisme a Spirituall Substance brought with the Covenant into the VVater. Verse 31.32.33 Creature. Book 2. Ch: 3. VVhat it was that vanished as to the Creature when Man fell. Verse 13 Dead. Death. Book 1 Ch: 5. VVhat is baptised to the Resurre∣ction of the Dead, or for Dead. Verse 38 Book 1 Ch: 1. How Christ became Death to Death. Verse 24 Book 1 Ch: 2. How the Soule dyed the Death, was poysoned and came to have an Evill Life: How Angells became Devills. Verse 3.4.5 Book 1 Ch: 3. VVhat it is that is baptised into Death. Verse 21 Book 2. Ch. 1. How Death was broke open 18. Ch. 2 verse. Verse 13 Book 2. Ch. 3. VVhat it is that is Death to Death, which Outward Nature holdeth to be a Life. Verse 8.9 Dispute. Book 2. Ch. 1. The cause why Men Dispute about Divine things. Verse 7.11, 12 Book 2. Ch. 1. VVat Men should doe, that they need not Dispute about God. Verse 14, 15 Book 2. Ch. 1. Men should conferre and instruct one another, not Dispute. Verse 16 Father. Book 2. Ch: 4. How wee are in the Drawing of the Father. Verse 20 Faith. Book 1. Ch: 2. How the Spirituall Oyle and VVa∣ter of the Soule hath flowed into the Faith, and made the fallen Soule capable of the New Birth. Verse. 1.2 Book 1. Ch. 2. In what Faith the Children of God before Christs Incarnation Sacrifi∣ced, and why they used those Types Verse. 8.9.10.11 Book 1. Ch. 4. Parents have power, to give up the Childes will, to God, in their Faith. Verse. 21 Book 1. Ch. 4. A dangerous thing to Baptise with∣out Faith. Verse. 35 Book 2. Ch: 3. How the Invisible Substance of Christ falleth into our Faith, as a sparke into Tinder. Verse. 18 Book 2. Ch: 3. The Substantiall Faith in Man is a Branch on the Vine Christ. Verse. 28 Book 2. Ch: 5. Of Mens crying, the true Doctrine and Faith, will be taken away from them, and yet they have it. Verse. 10 Fire. Book 1. Ch: 2. How the Sacrifice was kindled with Holy Fire. Verse. 12 Book 1. Ch: 2. How the understanding of the Holy Fire came to be quenched. Verse. 17 Book 1. Ch: 2. How the Divine Holy Fire was in∣troduced through Baptisme. Verse. 35 Book 2. Ch: 1. Moses had holy Fire for the Sacri∣fice. Verse. 20 Flesh. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Christ giveth us Eternall Life, how wee Eate his Flesh, and drink his Bloud, how he giveth us the wa∣ter of Eternall Life. Verse. 28.29
Book 1. Ch. 3. To what in Man, Christ giveth his holy Spirituall Flesh for food. Verse. 6 Book 2. Ch. 1. How there was holy Flesh, and holy Bread. Verse. 23 Book 2. Ch. 2. Of holy Flesh. Verse. 13 Book 2. Ch. 2. How Christs flesh and bloud is the Sacrifice of the New Testament. Verse. 6.7 Book 2. Ch. 3. Christ gave his Disciples his Spiri∣tuall Flesh and Bloud. Verse. 1 Book 2. Ch. 3. In what manner wee eate and drink the Flesh and bloud of Christ. Verse. 6.7. Book 2. Ch. 3. Christs mortall Flesh but the shell of the Spirituall Flesh. Verse. 21 Book 2. Ch. 3. How Faith alwayes eateth Christs Flesh and bloud without a Medium as well as with it. Verse. 27.33 Book 2. Ch. 3. VVhy it was so ordained that wee should partake of Christs Flesh and bloud under Bread and VVine. Verse. 31 Food. Book 2. Ch. 2. How Israell did eate blessed Food, notwithstanding the Curse. Verse. 14 Forgivenesse. Book 2. Ch. 4. No Forgivenesse of sinnes without Conversion and Resolution to depart from wickednesse. Verse. 9 Book 2. Ch. 4. What the Forgivenes of sinnes is. Verse. 10 Book 2. Ch. 4. The Power of Forgivenesse is in Christs internall Ordinance, not in the Priest. Also of the Bride of Christ. Verse. 11.12 Formes. Book 1. Ch. 1. VVerein the seaven Formes of Nature take their Beginning. Verse. 6 God. Book 1. Ch. 3. VVhat in the Outward VVorlds Substance is called God. Verse. 1 Book 1. Ch. 3. How with the Minde, Paul served God, and with the flesh the Law of sinne. Verse. 23 Book 1. Ch. 3. VVho are called according to the Purpose of God. Verse. 24 Book 2. Ch. 3. VVhere it is that God dwelleth in Man. Verse. 11 Grace. Book 1. Ch. 1. How Grace (the New Covenant) came into the Soule to helpe it a∣gaine; of which Aarons Rod was a Figure. Verse. 6.7 Book 1. Ch. 4. John declared that the time of Grace (the Kingdome of Heaven) was at hand. Verse. 5 Book 2. Ch. 3. Mans Life cannot in its own Power receive the Substance of God, but it is given of Grace. Verse. 29 Book 2. Ch. 4. The true imputed Grace, is to live in Christ. Verse. 16 Book 2. Ch. 4. The whole Life of a Christian should be continuall Repentance, and flying unto Grace, and the meere mercy of God. Verse. 17.20.21 Book 2. Ch. 5. The Innate Filiall Grace is the true imputed Grace. Verse. 14 Ground. Book 1. Ch. 1. VVhat searching cannot reach the true Ground whence every Bee∣ing
taketh its Originall. Verse. 3.4 Heaven. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Divine understanding is attai∣ned and the Kingdome of Heaven. Verse. 8.9 Book 1. Ch: 1. Of the Misunderstanding where Heaven is. Verse. 24 Book 1. Ch: 1. How Christ dwelleth in Man; and Man in him, in Heaven; and wit∣nesseth in the soule infallibly, that wee are the children of God. Verse. 28.29.30 Book 1. Ch: 3. How wee dwell in Heaven, and have our Conversation there. Verse. 24. Hell. Book 2. Ch: 4. The wicked partaketh of Christs going to Hell: It were better the wicked did not meddle with Christs Testaments. Verse. 7 Humanity. Book 1. Ch: 3. VVhy Christ assumed our Huma∣nity. Verse. 1 Book 2. Ch: 3. The Substantiall VVord taketh on it our Humanity, the Spirituall Humanity, the Invisible Substance, with which Christ came downe from Heaven. Verse. 17 Image. Book 1. Ch: 2. The Beastiall Earthly Image of Man is preserved in the Fire of God. Verse. 13 Book 2. Ch: 4. How wee are made conformable to Christs Image. Verse. 24 Book 2. Ch: 5. How Three Parties strive onely about a literall Image of Christs Testaments. Verse. 7 Infant. Book 1. Ch: 4. How the Faithfull Baptiser, Pa∣rents, VVitnesses, and Standers by, work to the Baptising of the Infant, though it hath no understanding of what is done. Verse. 15.16 Book 1. Ch: 4. How the Command of Christ, Matth. 28.19. is effectuall in the Baptising of an Infant. Verse. 17 Book 1. Ch: 4. VVhat a wicked Baptiser doth, and how the Infant is notwithstanding baptised with the Living VVord. Verse. 23 Book 1. Ch: 4. How it is with an Infant of wick∣ed Parents, that is baptised by a wicked baptiser, and wicked People standers by. Verse. 26.27 John. Book 1. Ch: 4. John the Baptist, the sonne of a Priest. Verse. 8 Lamb. Book 2. Ch: 4. How the wedding of the Lamb is rightly kept. Verse. 10 Law. Book 1. Ch: 3. How the soule is layd hold on by the Law of Nature, and what is the Ground and fountain of Repen∣tance. Verse. 7.10.11 Life. Book 1. Ch: 1. Where the Book of Life is to be found. Verse. 18 Book 1. Ch: 2. What is the New Life of Regene∣ration.
Verse. 31 Book 1. Ch: 3. How the Sonne Giveth the Soule Eternall Life, and what Eternall Life is. Verse. 9.11 Book 1. Ch: 3. VVhat the Creaturely Life is. Verse. 15 16 Light. Book 1. Ch: 3. When, the Divine Light in the Name Jesus is received into the Soule. Verse. 8 Book 2. Ch: 3. The Invisible Substance of Christ is a Light and Spirituall Oyle in the Life of Man. Verse. 19 Medium. Book 1. Ch. 2. VVhy there must be an Earthly Medium, to Enter into the Cove∣nant of God by. Verse. 33 Book 2. Ch: 1. VVhy the Beastiall Medium in the Sacrifices must be used. Verse. 21 Book 2. Ch: 2. Of the Elementary Medium of blessed Bread and Wine. Verse. 16 Book 2. Ch: 2. How through the Medium of Bread and Wine, wee participate of Christ in a Corporeall and Spirituall way. Verse. 18.19 Book 2. Ch: 2. VVhy there must be a Medium in the New Testament as well as in the Old Testament. Verse. 20 Book 2. Ch: 3. Bread and VVine a Medium to the visible Man. Verse. 22 Mumia. Book 2. Ch: 3. Of the Humane Mumia, and what it is. Verse. 1 Opinion. Book 2. Ch: 5. How Men cleave to an Opinion, whether they understand it or no. Verse. 9 Ordinance. Book 2. Ch: 4. None should rely meerely upon the Outward Ordinance. Verse. 14 Participation. Book 2. Ch: 5. The Three Contenders about the presence of Christ in the Supper, have no understanding how the true Participation is wrought. Verse. 6 Passeover. Book 2. Ch: 1. Of the Paschall Lamb, the Passe∣over, and how it was a Type of Christ. Verse. 1.2 Power. Book 1. Ch. 1. How the Soule comes to loose the Divine power and knowledge. Verse. 5 Book 2. Ch: 3. VVhat the Humane Power is to the Divine Power. Verse. 5 Book 2. Ch: 3. What that Sinne was, upon which Gods Power went into the recei∣ved Humanity againe. Verse. 14 Book 2. Ch: 3. Man liveth not by Bread onely, but by the inward Power thereof. Verse. 23 Book 2. Ch: 3. Mans Life cannot in its owne Power receive the Substance of God, but it is given of Grace. Verse. 29 Presence. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Christs Presence, Office, and Kingdome are to be understood. Verse. 25.26.27 Principles. Principle. Book 2. Ch: 3. Of the Three Principles in Man. Verse. 12
Book 2. Ch: 3. How each Principle in Man eateth its like in the Participation of Christs Testaments. Verse. 15 Reason. Book 1. Ch: 1. How the Body, and Reason, and Soule of Man, is distinctly fed with Nourishment. Verse. 13.18 Redemption. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Christ effected our Redemp∣tion, and through Death brought the Soule into Eternall Life, and how the Soule is become Lord over Sinne, Death, the Devill and Hell. Verse. 25.26.27 Book 1. Ch: 2. Of Isaac a Type of Our Redemp∣tion. Verse. 19 Repentance. Book 1. Ch: 3. How the Soule is layd hold on by the Law of Nature, and what is the Ground and Fountaine of Repen∣tance. Verse. 7.10.11 Book 1. Ch: 4. John baptised but with Repen∣tance: onely prepared the way, and Opened the Gates for the King of Glory to Enter in. Verse. 7 Book 2. Ch: 4. Repentance must not be deferred till the participation of the Testa∣ments. Verse. 9 Sacrifices. Sacrifice. Book 1. Ch: 2. How the Sacrifices were effectu∣all, and how God and the Soule wrought with the Sacrifice. Verse. 20.21.22.23.24 Book 1. Ch: 2. The Fat of Beasts a Medium in the Sacrifices. Verse. 28 Book 1. Ch. 2. VVhat the Sacrifice Typified. Verse. 29 Book 2. Ch: 1. How the Sacrifices were a figure of Christs Sacrifice. Verse. 6 Seede. Book 1. Ch: 2. Of the Seede of the Woman, and Destroyer of the Serpent. Verse. 8.9.10.11 Book 1. Ch: 2. Of Abrahams seede as the Starres. Verse. 19 Book 1. Ch: 2. The Love-fire awakened it selfe in the Seede of the VVoman. Verse. 30 Book 1. Ch: 4. The Parents of John Dead in their fleshly Seede. Verse. 2.3 Book 1. Ch: 4. How the Graine of Mustard-seede is sowen in the Ens of the Childe. Verse. 18 Book 2. Ch: 4. How the Seede of the Serpent stingeth Christ in the Heele. Verse. 4 Signified. Signifieth. Book 2. Ch: 1. What the unleavened Cakes signi∣fied. Verse. 3.4 Book 2. Ch: 1. What Moses, Aaron, the Heifer, and the Ram signified in the fi∣gure. Verse. 7.9 Book 2. Ch: 1. What the Tabernacle signified: why Mary was called the blessed among all women: what the Altar, the Laver, and anointing the Head of Aaron, signified. Verse. 8 Book 2. Ch: 1. What the Burning of the Fat, sig∣nified. Verse. 10 Book 2. Ch: 1. What the Burning of the Heifer without the Hoast signifieth, and
that the bloud sprinckled upon the Altar, signifieth that our bloud shall come againe to the Soule in the power of it at the Last Day. Verse. 11.12 Book 2. Ch. 1. What the powering of the bloud at the foote of the Altar, signifieth. Verse. 12.13 Book 2. Ch. 1. What the Ram signified; how it was a sweet Saviour to the Lord. Verse. 14.15.16.17.19.22 & Ch: 2. verse 3. Sonne. Book 1. Ch: 3. Of the Soules being given to the Sonne, and how the Sonne gi∣veth it Eternall Life; and what Eternall Life is. Verse. 9.11 Ch: 2. v. 2 Sop. Book 2. Ch: 2. How it was with Ʋzza; and with Judas after the Sop. Verse. 5 Soule. Book 1. Ch. 1. How the Soule came to be helped againe after the Fall. Verse. 21.22 Book 1. Ch. 1. How the Soule is become Lord over Sinne, Death, the Devill, and Hell. Verse. 25.26.27 Book 2. Ch. 3. The Soule eateth of the super∣naturall substantiall Love of the Name Jesus. Verse. 10 Spirit. Book 1. Ch. 1. How the Spirit leadeth into all Truth. Verse. 18 Book 1. Ch. 3. How the Spirit of God is to be understood in all the Three Worlds. Verse. 13 Supper. Book 2. Ch. 3. A resemblance between Christ in his Supper, and the influence of the Sun in hearbs. Verse. 2.3.4.6 Book 2. Ch. 3. Why Christ Ordained the Testa∣ment of his Supper under Bread and Wine. Verse. 24 Book 2. Ch. 5. How all the Three Contenders and Disputers about the Presence of Christ in the Supper, have no understanding how that participa∣tion is wrought. Verse. 6 Teachers. Book 2. Ch. 5. Of Teachers not sent. Verse. 5 Testaments. Testament. Book 2. Ch. 4. Christs Testaments destroy sinne in the Penitent receiver. Verse. 8 Book 2. Ch. 4. XVIII enquiries into a Mans own heart, to finde whether he may worthily receive the Testament of Christ. Verse. 19 Book 2. Ch. 4. How the Minde when it cometh to Christs Testaments must ac∣knowledge it is able to doe nothing. Verse. 22 Book 2. Ch. 4. Hee that will not be a Man of New thoughts and will, receiveth the Testament unto Judgement. Verse. 25 Book 2. Ch. 5. Hee that will receive the King∣dome of Christ in his Testaments must be his childe. Verse. 15
Types. Type. Book 1. Ch: 2. How Cain and Abell differed, and of their severall Types. Verse. 15.16 Book 2. Ch: 2. Why the Type ceased. Verse. 1 Thoughts. Book 1. Ch: 1. What is the Ground of the under∣standing and Thoughts. Verse. 1.2 Book 1. Ch: 1. How the Thoughts come to be fed with divine foode, which is the Essentiall wisdome of God. Verse. 19 Variety. Book 1. Ch: 1. The cause of the changing and va∣riety in Nature. Verse. 17 Vine. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Man becometh a Branch on the Vine Christ. Verse. 27 Book 2. Ch: 3. How the Holy Man is a Branch on the Vine Christ. Verse. 20 Understanding. Book 1. Ch: 1. How Divine Understanding is attained, and the Kingdome of Heaven. Verse. 8.9 Book 1. Ch: 1. Of the Three Touch-Stones of the Divine Understanding. Verse. 18 Wicked. Book 2. Ch: 4. The wicked Priest and Pharisee is not capable of being in the Office of Christ. Verse. 13 Will. Book 2. Ch: 2. How the Soules will cometh to be changed. Verse. 12 Word. Words. Book 1. Ch: 1. Why the Eternall Word is be∣come Man. Verse. 24 Book 2. Ch: 3. What signifieth to us Christs say∣ing; My words are Spirit and Life. Verse. 16 Book 2. Ch: 4. Mans spirituall Mouth receiveth Christs words and Life. Verse. 26 Book 2. Ch: 5. The Living Word giveth Testi∣mony to the Literall word. Verse. 5 Works. Book 1. Ch. 3. What in Man is the Christian, and why Mans Works must be Judged. Verse. 25 FINIS. REader, pray cause these faults to be mended with a Pen. Page 21. on the second side, line 10. for, unlooked, reade unlocked. Page 50. line 2. for, foolish reade soulish. page 55. line 31. for vision reade visible.
