C2799 E377_12 99861885 159954
The Kings Majesties SPEECH TO The Commissioners at Nottingham, on Saturday the 13. of February, In the praise of Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning the Trust which was reposed in him by the Parliament. And his fidelity to His Majestie. With divers Questions propounded by His Majestie to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. And Sir Thomas Fairfax his Answer to His Majesty again concerning them. Charles I's royal blazon C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE London, Printed for E. H. February 19. 1647.
The Kings Majesties SPEECH TO The Commissioners at Nottingham in the praise of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIREFAX, in divers reasons which he shew∣ed to them. ON Saturday February 13. his Excel∣lency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX having his head quarters in Nottingham, to which His Majesty was to come, attended by the Parliaments Commissioners from Mansfield, and not by Newark, as was first inten∣ded, was in a strait, how he should deport himselfe towards his Majesty, being Generall for the Parlia∣ment, and was like to undergoe the censures of di∣vers spirits, whether way soever hee moved, but at last, concluded it were better for him to suffer for
civilities, then the contrary: hee commanded that certaine of his Officers should prepare themselves to attend him, to meet his Majestie and wait upon him, which was accordingly: few that were inferiour to Captaines went: these marched neere two miles, met his Majesty; His Majesty after some space, percei∣ved who it was, and casting his eye upon the Gene∣rall, the Generall alighted and kissed his Majesties hand, ayd after mounting, conducted him into the Towne, and to his lodging. His Majesty as it is said, asked the Generall, what Fo ces were gone for Ireland, and of my Lord Lisle; to which the Generall gave answer, purporting the Parliaments care, and strong intentions for a speedy reducing that Kingdome. His Majesty hath moved every day save the Sab∣bath, notwithstanding the badnesse of the weather, being snowy and stormy; when his Majesty past from Leeds the people more then 5000. appeared, crying, a King, a King. His Majesty still refuses to heare the Commissio∣ners Ministers Preach or pray, resolving, first to have satisfaction to his objections, and give his consent to the establishment of Presbytery a King, before hee acts in it. Upon the 13. of February being Saturday, The Kings Majesty about seven of the clock in the mor∣ning went out of Nottingham, attended by the Gene∣rall with his Officers, and after leave taken depar∣ted. His Majesty after the Generall was gone, said to
some of the Commissioners as followeth, which is in praise of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. His Speech is this, THat the Generall was a person of Honour, Faithfull to his trust, and one, that ever kept his word with him, that is, in keeping promises and Articles of War, and in using prisoners, with such respect, as was fit for men in that conditi∣on, and as he would expect in such a con∣dition. A Letter sent from Nottingham, to his loving friend in London. Noble Sir, I Thanke you for your last, you need not conjecture that there is any excommunication betweene our pens, yesterday his Majesty came from Mansfield, the Generals Excellency had notice of his Majesties com∣ming hither that day, and therefore went to meet him. His Excellency with the chiefe Officers (none un∣der Captains) went from hence towards Bescot Park, and about 2. miles of, met the King neere Bescot, who was then coming hither with the Commissioners and Gentlemen.
The King made a stop, when the Generall came to him, and his Excellency alighting, his Majesty gave him his hand to kisse. But his Majestie spake not one word to the Generall, neither did the Generall speak any thing to his Majestie. His Majestie looking very earnestly on all our Of∣ficers, but said nothing to them, onely rid cheerfully along till they came hither. The Generall waited on the King to his lodging; and went with his Majestie to the Privy-Chamber-doore, but went not in with the King, nor afterwards to his Majestie that night. The next morning the Generall wayted on his Majestie againe, and then the King had much more discourse with the Generall, then he had the day be∣fore. Wherein his Majestie propounded divers que∣stions to the Generall, concerning the affaires of Ire∣land, and divers other reasons, and was discreetly and wisely answered againe by his Excellency the Gene∣rall. His Majestie againe enquired much after the Lord Lisle, and concerning the businesse of Ireland and the Forces desired for that service, and many other things in relation to preparations, and prosecutions of that Warre. The Generall likewise gave his Majestie exceeding wise and discreet Answers: As becommeth a Per∣son of honour, and yet so reserved, that his Majesty had little from his Excellency that could adde to his Majesty by way of information, the gallant and dis∣creet Answers which hee made to his Majestie was
admitted, the noble and faithfulnesse of this valiant Generall hath beene so spread abroad, that all the Christian World will love him, for the favour and mercy which hee hath shewed to his Enemies, and so he hath gotten the love of his King, Parliament, and Country even to his dying day. His Majestie with the Commissioners intended to lye that night at Leicester, and stay there the Lords day, and that night, and then to goe for Holmby on Monday, to be there Munday night, Sir this is all at this time from Nottingham this 13. of February, 1646. Your humble servant W. Smith. The Earle of Stamford. Mr. Ashurst, and M. Good∣win, went from hence yesterday to Morpith, farther North. His Excellency Generall Leven came into the town of Barwick with a small retinue of his Officers and Gentlemen, and lodged there all night. The next morning his Excellency with his atten∣dants went from hence into Scotland, and so to goe on toward Edenburgh, having left instructions with his Officers what to doe in the managing of the Scots souldiers through their Towne, out of England in∣to Scotland. It is reported by some that came out of Scotland, that have beene at Edenburgh, who say that Kolkit∣toth with his Forces, is within thirty miles of Eden∣burgh: the truth thereof, I do not certainly know, but it seemes that either hee or some of his party have
given them an alarum aboue Edenburgh, but ere long I make no question, but you will heare of some pas∣sages between them and the Scots Forces when they are come into Scotland, and begin to draw a little nearer to them. The Parliament of Scotland have had their seve∣rall debates of late, about their joyning with the Par∣liament of England, in sending Commissioners to his Majesty, to presse him to take the Covenant, and signe the Propositions. They have received Letters from the Generall Assembly of the Kirk about it. The faire correspondence with the Parliament of England and Scotland doth much encourage the hearts of all true-hearted Subjects in both Kingdomes, and the gallant usage of his Majesty at Holmby, that there is no fear or Jealousies any more in both Kingdomes, and I make no doubt, but that God will ere long, so worke it in his Majesties heart, that he will bee wil∣ling to take the Covenant and signe the Propositions, to the joy of all his loving Subjects, and the good of himselfe and his posterity hereafter. FINIS.
