c6121 e261_4 99871074 159304
THE COPPIE OF A LETTER From Sir Thomas Fairfax his Quarters to the Parliament, concerning the great Battell betweene Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX and Goring at Langport on Thursday the 10. of July 1645. Where were slaine, 300. Dead upon the place. Many caried to Bridgewater. Taken prisoners. 6. Colours. 14. Lieutenant Colonels and Majors. 100. Captaines and Officers of Note. 2000. Prisoners. Taken besides. 1200. Horse. 40. Colours of Horse and Foot. 4000. Armes for horse and foote. 2. Peeces of Ordnance. 6. Cartloades of Ammuni∣tion. All their Bag and Baggage that was in the field. L. Gen. Cromwells speech in the head of the Armie. 2. Garrisons taken from them. A list of the Chiefest Com∣manders on our side, that were killed: or wounded. And in what manner the E∣nemies are dispersed into their severall quarters. Also how Maior Generall Massey the day before tooke Lievetenant Generall Porter, Lievetenant Generall of Gorings Horse 2 Segeant Majors. 9. Colours. 6. Captaines. 250. Horse. Many inferiour Officers. 200. Prisoners and divers slaine. And the Enemie pursued to Bridgewater, and all the passa∣ges blockt up both by land and water. Appointed to be Printed, and pubished according to Order. Printed By Barnard Alsop, and Iane Coe.
THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM Sir THOMAS FAIRFAXES Quarters, read in the House of Commons on Saturday Iuly 12. 1645. AN account I gave you in my last, of our Affairs till ye∣sterday, I left Goring with his whole Army, at Lang∣port; since they be pleased to take a short account of our Actions, yeasterday wee advanced to Sutton, drawing out that part of our Army which we had into Sutton Field, the rest being foure thousand five hundred Horse and Dra∣goones (at the least) under the command of Major Gen. Massy, were on the other side of the river, & those 8 regiments of Foot which we had at Nasby field,
were also quartered at Martock to Mssey advanced with his horse, and Dragoones, having foot to back them to North-cary (being ordered to streighten the enemies quarters, and to hinder them from any plundering exercise; It seems 500 of the¦m being upon a design out, and having no intelligence of his being in motion, was surprised being in a carelesse posture; fell on them: being (as I take it) 9 Colours, 200 prisoners, and a∣bout 250 hose▪ slew about 30▪ wee in the meane time were drawn up within a mile of Lang-port, with those horse and foot the Generall had with him, not knowing of his en∣gagement. And there being 3 Rivers between him, and us, and the way almost twelve miles march, the last might wee quartered at Sutton, and this morning by three of the clock, drew out into Sutton field, having with us but seven Regiments of horse; viZ. The Generalls (formerly called Lievtenant Ge∣nerall Crumwels) Whalleyes Varmodeus, Gracsoes, Rich, Fleet∣woods, and Butlers, which were not in all 2000 horse, of foot we had all, but the Muskettiers of three Regiments, having sent for them the last night from Matlock, early in the morning the e∣nemies appeared in the field, and about 7 a clock they had made themselves masters of a psse which lay in the midst between our body and theirs, had lined the hedges between us and them, with at least 2000 muskettiers; so that the passage to them was extream dangerous, being so streight, that four horse could hardly passe abrest, and that up to the belly in water; they lying so in flanks and fronts to receive us. In that posture they stood till nigh eleven of the clock, having in the interim sent away most of their Traine, and Baggage, led horse and other lumber, to Bridgwater; being resolved to make good their retreat thi∣ther, which they conceived they could, having such an advanta∣geous passe thither; we understanding their intentions by some Scouts, and other countrymen, resolved to charge them; and accordingly drew down a commanded party of muskettiers to beat them from the hedges, which was done with gallant re∣solution; advancing the same time with two Regiments of horse into the lane, all that we could draw up in the front was but a
single troop, and that commnded by Bethell, the enemy stand∣ing ready with 3 bodies of horse, of about 1000 to charge him, he with a single troop charged and broke two of their divisi∣ons, of about 400 received the charge of the third division both in front and flank, was somewhat overborne at last, and forced to retire to the Generals Reg ment, which was about 100 yards behind D borrough, with the Generals troop sheltred him by his flank to rally, and charge up himselfe with about 200 horse of the Generals Regiment, disposest the enemy and set them all a running, gained freedome by it for all our horse and foot, to draw into bodies, sent the enemy running, not being able to en∣dure another charge, the Generall, Lievtenant Generall, and some other officers upon the hill, beholding the gallant charges commended it, for the most excellent peece of service that ever was in England, we had them in chase almost to Bridg-water, having put them to the clean rout, that ever any enemy were put to; what the number of the slain be I cannot tell you, being searse come from the chase. The prisoners come in already are 900. and I conceive there will come in as many as will make 2000. and 12000 horse at the least; for Colours I am uncertaine, I dare say at least 40. the Armes at least 4000. 2 peece of Ord∣nance I saw, and divers carriages of Ammunition, and to make it a compleat victory, he pursued the enemy through Lang∣port, having gained the Garrison, and though they fired the town just at the Bridge, to hinder the chase, yet we followed the victory through the fire, the successe of this victory must be ascribed next unto God) to the good conduct of the Ge∣nerall, and Crumwels following the chase through Langpord, where he himselfe passed through the fire flaming on both sides of him. The enemy cryed out, they are now utterly undone, and that the King must now goe into Ireland. This victory was opportune, In regard, had they stayed but three dayes longer, Goring would have had a reinforcement of six thou∣sand horse and foot from Greenffeld and the King, they being transporting their forces as fast as can be to Mainhead, Watch∣head, and Uphill, there being 1500 that landed at Uphill,
came to Bridgewater yesterday. Sir, this is all at present from your affectionate and humble servant. Langport July 10. 7 at night. The report of the Scout that brought the aforesaid letter, which is here placed by way of postscript for further satisfaction▪ On wednesday the ninth of July 1645. there were 1500 of the enemies commanded by Liutenant generall Porter, who lay at Abersile, on whom Major generall Massy fell before the E∣nemy were aware of it; with Colonell Massy were Lieutenant Bull, Maior Sanderson, Colonel VVeb, and some other officers, who with the common souldiers behaved themselves gallantly, the enemy about 3 of the clock grazing their horses, and ha∣ving made works about Abersile Church, and in exceeding good quarters, little thinking Massy so neer, had set a small guard of foot at the towns end, Major generall Massy drew his men into two divisions, for each end of the town one, himselfe commanded one, and Capt. Gutredge the other, which was but asmall party: for C. Massy commanded the main body him∣selfe, Massies men marched with green boughes in their hats, C. Gutridge comming to the towns end, found the hedges lined with Muskettiers at the southwest end of the town, Cap. Frans∣way, a Dutch Captain, commanded a party to fall on the one side of the ambuscadors, and Capt. Gutredge on the other. The Dutch Captain when he was charged by the enemy, began to face about, which impeded Capt. Gutredges prosecution of the busines, yet the rest of the officers and souldiers, with the wisdome of Capt. Gutredge, ended the businesse so well, that they beat up their ambuscadors for all that, and drove them quite away: in the mean time Maior Gere all Massy marched up to the other side of the Town, Colonell Cook having the command of the forlorn hope, who in like manner had lined the hedges at that end of the town, and Col: Massy with Co: Cook and the rest, raised them, and those with the rest at the other end of town, followed so hard upon the enemy, that they drove
them all from the town, pursuing them within two miles of Langport, and took many Armes in Abersoile. Maior Generall Massys word was VVales, the enemy staid not give any word at all. On Thursday the tenth of Iuly Sir Tho: Fairfax march∣ed toward the enemy, discovered them when hee was with his body by the windmils, between Lamport and Summerton, the enemy were then on the Hills in Lamport field about two mile and a half off, the water being between them. About eleven of the clock they drew out, and about one of the clock Maior Be∣thel charged the enemy: the fight was very hot, and lasted about two hours, about 3 of the clock Goring was got himselfe into Bridgewater, Prince Charles bein gone from thence before, and the Lord Hopton with him to Barnstable with three Troops of Horse, to raise what forces they could in those parts, to ioyne wih those which were to come from Greenvill. Rupert was gone to the King before also to send what strength he could to ioyn with them, and Greenvils horse, as appeared afterwards, were then upon their march toward Goring, and also Sir John Barkley was before drawn off, upon some discontent or other towards Exceter, but, is beleeved, returning with Greenvill. Sir Thomas Aston was then with Goring, who hath a regiment in which are good store of Papistr, but hee ranne away like a base Coward. and the greatest part of his Regiment are taken, of which the poore county men are not a little glad, for they have been extream cruell in plundering. Sir Lewis Dives was then in Sherburn, it seems he loves a garrison better then the field, and holds it more secure. The Cavaliers seem to be very sorrowful for their losses, we perceive by them, that they have lost some considerable men, but will not be known who they are. Sir Thomas Fairfax quartered that night at Oller, sour miles from Bridgwater, Maior Generall Massy is ioyned with him, where he blocked up that side of their garrison, Lieutenant Ge∣nerall Crowell making a speech in the head of the Army, de∣claring how the enemies passage by water might be stopped up, whereupon a party of 1500 horse and Dragoons were sent to block up the west side for the same purpose
A list of Major generall Masseys victorie at North-Carry on Wednesday the 9. of uly. 165. 1500. Routed which were surprised by Colonell MASSEY. 9. Colours taken from the said partie of 1500. Levetenant Generall Porter Lieuetenant Gene∣rall of Gorings horse taken prisoner. 2500. Horse and armes taken from them at the same time. 2. Serjant Majors taken prisoners, and 6 Captains. 200. of their inferiour officers and common men taken prisoners. A list of the particulars what was taken, and how many flaine at the Routing of Goring by Sir Thomas Fairfax, at Lang∣port on Thursday the 10. of July, 1645. 300. Slaine, and left dead upon the place. Divers officers Carried dead and some wounded into Bridge∣water. 6. Collonells, some of which are notorious incendiaries 14. Leivenant Collonells and Sejeant Maiors. 100. Captains, and Reformadoes, and other officers of note. 2000. Prisoners: whereof divers inferiour officers. Taken besides 1200. horse. 40. Colours of horse, and foot, 4000. Armes pistols Carbines, firelocks, muskets pikes &c. 2. Peeces of ordnance. 6. Cart loade of Ammunition, powder match, &c. All their bagg, and baggage which they had left in the field The losse on our side. 2. Reformado Captains: one of them a dutch man both slain. Collonell Butlers Captaine Leivetenant slaine, and his Cor∣net let fall his Colours, but they were honourably regained. Colonell Butler, a slight cut on the arme. Colonell Edward Cooke shot on the mouth, only on the upper lippe, the hurt not much. FINIS.
