C6166 669.f.5[5] 99869258 160718
A COPY OF A LETTER VVHICH Master Speaker is ordered by the Commons house of Parliament, to send to the Members of that House, that are now Residing in their severall Counties, to further the Advancement of the Adventure for IRELAND. SIR, BY the appointment of the House of Commons, I am to let you know, that they have sent unto the Sheriffe of your County, both the Acts concerning the speedy reducing the Rebels in Ireland, and likewise the Names of such Members of this House, as have subscribed here in London to this Adventure, and the summes they have Adventur'd; requiring him together with the Justices of Peace of the same County, to communicate the same with the best advantage in the severall divisions, and that no encouragement might be wanting to a worke so Pious in it selfe, so necessary to the Peace of both Kingdomes and to the establishing and assuring the true Protestant Re∣ligion therein, and so beneficiall to such well-affected Persons as shall adventure. They have commanded me to re∣quire you to repaire to the Sheriffe, and to assist him the best wayes you can, to encourage and advance this worke, and not doubting of your Publike affections, they assure themselves, that you apprehend the necessitie and conse∣quence of the worke so neerely, that you will with such alacritie, as becomes a businesse of this Nature; Propound your owne Example to the Gentry, and other well-affected persons of your County, and subscribe to the Adven∣ture in such a Proportion, as may best stand with your owne Occasions; not having more to say, but that the House will expect an account from you herein, I rest. I. Aprill, 1642. A COPIE OF A LETTER VVHICH Master Speaker is ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, to send to the severall Sheriffs of this Kingdome. SIR, BY order of the House of Commons, I am directed to giue you notice that divers well affected persons to the publque good have under-written great summes of monie for the speedy reducing of the Irish Rebels to their obedience to his Majestie, and the Crowne of England, and for the advancing of a businesse of so gene∣rall concernment, and tending not only to the common good of both Kingdomes, & the setling of the true Pro∣testant Religion there, but to the particular advantage of the Adventurers; The House doth hold fit to leave no way omitted, that may advance and further so good a worke. And for that purpose have commanded me here∣with to send you two Articles of Parliament made for the stating of the Rebels Lands upō the Adventurers accor∣ding to the proportion of their respective adventures. And likewise the names of such Members of the House who have already subscribed to this Adventure, and the Summes they have adventured, which they have done to the intent you should communicate the same for the better encouragement of others for following their pious exam∣ples, and therefore they have commanded me to recommend it unto your best care, that you together with the Justices of Peace (to whom you are to give notice of this Letter) may in your seuerall Devisions communicate the same to men of the best qualitie of your Countie, and use your best diligence to perswade them to contribute to so necessary a worke, which (with Gods assistance) is not only a most ready and likely way to reduce the Re∣bels, and secure the peace and safetie of this Kingdome, but to retribute an ample benefit to the Adventurers. And you are likewise to signifie unto them that who shall subscribe and interest themselves in this Adventure, they are conceived by the House of Commons to be persons heartily affected to the publique Weale. Sir, your care∣full endavours in this service will bee very acceptable to the House, and so I rest. Printed at London by T. P. for T. B.
