D157 e173_23 99859734 111830
A DAMNABLE TREASON, By a Contagious Plaster of a PLAGUE-SORE: Wrapt up in a Letter, and sent to Mr. PYM: Wherein is di∣covered a Divellish, and Unchristian Plot against the High Court of PARLIAMENT, October 25. 1641. The true Ef∣fige of M. I. Pym, Esqu. Burgesse in he High Court of Par¦liament for Tavistock in Devonshire. Reade in this Image him, whose deerest Blood Is thought no price, to buy his Countries good, VVhose name shall flourish, till the blast of Fame Shall want a Trumpet, or true worth, a Name. depiction of John Pym, English Parliamentarian (1584-1643) Printed for W. B. Anno Dom. 1641.
(?)depiction of John Pym, English Parliamentarian (1584-1643)
A Damnable TREASON: BY A PLAGVE-SORE: Wrapt up in a Letter, and sent to Mr. PYM. ARe ye still involved in such inveterate malice (O ye the breath of Romish Dragons) to cast your poyson at our purest Fountains! O gree∣dy Caterpillars: why doe you seeke to de∣voure our choysest Plants? Doe ye not know that in striving against Gods dearest Saints, yee doe but with too great paines weave out your own Destruction; for God beholdeth all your mischiefe, and saveth the righ∣teous from the cruelly? How bold was this attempt of inhumanity, and filthi∣nesse in the very abstract. And that attempted not from some secure place, or Our-side of the City: but neere the very heart, and in the face of the City, at Ludgate: where they might have but cast up their eyes, and lookt upon that famous Monument of Queene Elizabeth, the Memoriall whereof may strike them with terrour to all Ages. But see the suttlety of this Damnable Project, compiled without all Christianity. Whether it was a
man, or woman, spirit of Divell. This without all doubt is certaine, that the filthiest puddle of Hellish Corru∣ption, cannot be more detestable A Man in the shape of a Divell, or the Divell in shape of a Man, became visibly the onely Actor in this uncleane Conspirasie. And whe∣ther because to hide his shaggy haire, or to transforme his vissadge, he comes not in his hat, but with a Moun∣teere on his head. This thought he, will in some Case keepe mee, that I may the farther presume to bee kept from Discovery. And for his Messenger he takes not such an one, who had any knowledge of him; lest so unconstancy should move discovery: he takes away such suspition, and cal∣led a sturdy Porter, whom hee thought (being ignorant of what he did) would effect this matter as it was in∣tended: which that hee should be the more ready to performe, he rewarded him with 12. pence, which made the Porter to be very ready to undertake the delivery, and doe the message, little knowing (without all doubt, as is conceived) the great and filthy burden that he was to carry. The Gentleman habited, but Dunghill, nay, fil∣thy Actor takes into his polluted hands a Letter which he delivered incontinently to the Porter, with such Re∣lations, as if his actions had bin reall. The Letter was to be delivered to the Honourable Mr. Pym, & at the Parlament house; there was the aime of this conspiracie even to undo us all by depriving us of these worthy pillers of our Kingdome. But thought hee, perhaps Master Pym may not be there, what then? what shall be done? if this porter deliver the letter carelesly, Master Pym being from the House, this may perhaps not take effect, therefore, porter (quoth he) if thou dost not see Master Pym himselfe, leave the letter with the doore-keeper, (di∣recting him carefully to deliver it to his own hands;) this was plotted to the end it should bee opened; and vewed by the whole house.
Thus the porter went to Westminster to perform his message O poore man, thou never carried'st suche burden, a faire letter full of filth. When he came to the Parliament house, hee deli∣vered the letter according to the direction. Which Mr Pym received very courteously, little imagining what was within the letter; who sitting in the house of Com∣mons, incontinently before the Honourable Assembly brake it open in the view of the whole House; which being opened! (Oh who can parallell so unchristian an action, did Hell ever before broach the like? Behold, admire and wonder. O the filthinesse of this invention, did ever letter enclose the like? who could ever have thought that any christian should have forged such an invention.) IN the Letter was enclosed a filthy clout, with the contagious plaster of a Plague sore upon it; would not this have started the stoutest Hector or Hercu∣les, would not this have made the stoutest heart to tremble, when a man should open it in the presence of such an assembly, a letter full of nothing but a poluted clout in the corruption of a plague sore; but yet oh noble Senators, hold up your heads with comfort for God is with you.
The wicked Lines that were writ in the LETTER. To my honoured friend, John Pym, Esq; Mr. Pym, Doe not thinke that a Guard of men can protect you, if you persist in your Traytorous courses, and wicked Designes. I have sent a Paper-Messenger to you, and if this doe not touch your heart, a Dagger shall, so soon as I am recovered of my Plague-sore: In the mean time you may be forborne, because no better man may bee indangered for you. Repent Traytor. What a bold, wicked presumption was this, thus to abuse that Honourable, and worthy Gentleman; whom I pray God, ever to protect, with comfort, peace, honour, safety, in this life: and in the Life to come, eter∣nall Glory? What would such as these doe, in case they might have their will who dare thus to breath out their poyson against the Honourable Assembly! O wretched abusers, to call him Traytor, who is so good a Subject. But as a Lyars tongue is no slander; so such poysoned Aspes cannot hurt, whom God preserves. Doth not the whole Kingdome talk with one voyce a∣greeing, that we are happy in such as hee, whom God preserve amongst us? Was ever such a Paper-Messenger sent before: by which, what rationall man in the world will not say, that such Popish Inventions come from the Divell. But let me aske them why they doe presume, that to threaten to prevaile with Sword, or Punyard? Is not God the Guide of all things, hee can turne your owne
swords upon your selves, ye Hellish Plotters, & destroy you utterly with your owne weapons, in the middest of your greatest Glory. See your owne vanity: are not your two dayes past; and yet God hath blessed, and preserved them all from your hands; and so I trust he will for ever. God overturne at his owne time, and in his owne way, all those Wicked, and Damnable Plots of the un∣godly Papists. But ever let this Blessing light on and go along with the Honourable Assembly, in all their Consultations, and Decrees: that God may bee thereby glorified, Reformation wrought, Peace and Tranquility setled, and the whole Land become the People of the Lord for ever. The true Relation how he was descryed. SEarch being made (by Command from the House) for the finding out of this wretched fellow, who de∣livered the Letter to the porter. They came to the Inne where it was supposed he lay, as he was described by the Porter, and a Boy: who also casually looked upon him when he sent the Porter. This boy comming to the Inne puts on a Tapsters Apron, and ranne up the Staires in∣to his Chamber, with a good spirit (as he was directed) that so hee might see whether it was the man, or not, Anan, anan, anan Sir, saith he, what lacke ye: who being
in Bed; said, he did not call, but being to goe out early that morning, before it was day: he therefore called for a Candle, which was brought him. Then the boy looked upon his nose, and saw a Wart, of which before he took notice. as also a red Ribond about his arme; of which, he gave information to the Constables, hee were there ready, and to apprehend him presently, who denyed it. But the Porter and the Boy accused him: he being asked, if he had taken the Oath of Allegeance; he said, he ne∣ver knew what it meant. But in fine, he is committed to the Gate-house, & when it shall please the Honourabls Assembly to bring him to his tryall: I pray God that his providence may so rule the matter; that what mischiefe, plots, Innova∣tions, or popish Treacheries, lye hid under his know∣ledge, may, by him be discovered, and all other whatso∣ever, in Gods good time; which God grant, for his Christ, his sake, Amen. FINIS.
