D1973 D2014A 669.f.10[22] 99869163 162563
AS not unknowne. This Petition or Prophesie on record, presented to His Majestie in the yeare 1633. Along time Though hath wai∣ted, yet be it knowne was accomplished, then this present yeare: 1644. When He on a Friday morning was killed or suffered. Who lit∣tle thought such a sopp prepared was for him to be his Lords blow (Mat. 24.) The Lord of that servant shall come in a day and an houre he lookes not for. For supposing or saying he defers his comming, because unknowne the houre and day. And shall cut him assunder, or as the word renders it, Cut of his head: to wit, as much to say with that Hypocrite Iudas, receives his portion due to him or the same sentence. Not dreamed of in his Diarie, where sets downe the 19. of September 1633. He was translated to be Arch BB. The Lords day by whose heigh authority was translated into a Lawlesse day of Revells and drinking. And so fullfils these also Revel. 17, 8. His Sabbaticall time: who was seven yeares compleat, and eight current Arch BB. of LAMBETH (or BETHLAM:) before his going into prison rewarded as he had shut up and silenced others. And as in His Majesties reference, how presumptions so ever the imprinting then seemd of those Bookes concerning the Lords comming re∣veald, &c. And this Petition stiled so detestable and odious to be preferrd yet since hath provd not so detestable as true, in applying great Baby∣lons judgements to great Brittaine, with that hand writing (Dan. 5.) dedicated to the present reigne, or his the last of the Assyrians weighed with this not more weake and found wanting then since so carried was away. TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTJE. The humble Petition of the Lady Eleanor. 1633. Most humbly shevveth to Your Matie. THat the word of God spoken in the first yeare of Your happie reigne unto the Petitioner, upon Friday last did suffer early in the morning: the B: BEAST ascended out of the Bottomlesse pitt: having seaven Heads, &c. seaven Yeares, viz: making VVarre, hath overcome, and killed them: Bookes sealed by the Prophets. By the Bishop of Lambeth horned like the Lambe, harted like a VVolfe, are condemned to be burned at Pauls-Crosse, where our Lord crucified, &c. This is the third Day, that their dead Bodies shrowded in loose sheets of paper. Lye in the streets of the Great Cittie, &c. more cruell and hard harted, then other tongues and Nations, who will not suffer them so to be buryed. If your Highnesse please to speake the word, the spirit of life will enter into them, they will stand upon their feete, &c. Craving no other pardon, humbly as in duty bound shall pray for your Matie. The word of God to the King, Revela: 17. October, 1633. The BEAST that was, and is not: Even Hee is the eight, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition. At the Court at White-Hall, October the 8. 1633. His Majestie doth expresly command the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterburyes Grace, and his highnes Commissioners, for causes Ecclesiasticall: That the Petitioner be forthwith called before them, to answer for presuming to Imprint the said Bookes, and for preferring this detestable petition. Sydney Mountague; Concordat cum originale fact à'collatione, per me Thomam Maydwell, no librum publium.
