d581 e407_38 99864123 160527
A DECLARATION From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND The Generall Councell of the ARMY; CONCERNING, The obstructive proceedings of divers Citizens of Lon∣Lon, towards the Souldiery; As also the Charge of the Army upon them, and the rest of their Ad∣herents about the City. Together with their last Proposals to both Houses of Parliament, and a Letter from his Exceliency and the Army, read in both Houses of Parliament upon Satturday last, and communicated to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mon-Councell of the City of London. BY the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Generall Councell of the Army, this Declara∣tion, together with the Proposals, were sent to the Commis∣sioners of Lords and Commons residing with the Army, to be presented to both Houses of Parliament, and read upon Sat∣turday  Septemb. 18. 1647. 7ber 21 Printed at London for C. W. and are to be sold at the Royall Exchange in Cornhill, 1647.
A DECLARATION FROM His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Generall Councell of the Army, concer∣ning the City of London &c. VVHereas the great neglect of divers persons within the City of London, hath occasioned too many delayes in raising Money for supply of the Army, and other Forces of the Kingdome; His Ex∣cellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General-Coun∣cell of the Army, Doth declare, That they take no∣tice of the great wants of the Souldiery, both of the Army, and other Forces, and Garrisons; as also of the sufferings of the County, in respect of free quar∣ter,
which might have been peevented, and a course ta∣ken for disbanding superfluous Forces, and sending o∣ver of others for the reliefe of Ireland, and the sup∣plying of those that are there already, had it not been for neglect or delay of those on whom the Parlia∣ment have depended in that particular, and they doe especially take notice of the delayes made by the Ci∣ty in advancing of that summe, which the Houses have demanded of them upon the security of the Ar∣reares so long since due from the City to the Army; upon which they doe declare, and propound to this effect. I. That for what time their defauls or delayes have oc∣casioned, and shall further occasion the Armies stay here∣abouts, the charge thereof should some way be laid upon them, and their adherents about the City. II. That the Houses would be pleased speedily to consider of the Delinquencie of those that had a hand in the Tu∣mult, Desine, and Engagement of a new Warre, and that such Fines may be upon them for the same, as shall bee a∣greeable to justice. III. That in case the Money be not brought in by the time limited, the Parliament would be pleased to give leave to the Generall (with the advice and directions of the Com∣mittee for the Army) for the levying of the said Ar∣reares.
All which they rather desire from grounds of rea∣son and evidence from the speeches of many in the City, and designes and hopes of the Parliament and Armies Enemies to raise the Army into distempers, and the Country about them into confusion. This Declaration was agreed upon at the Head∣quarters at Putney, upon Thursday last, there being a Generall Councell of the Army appointed to be held every Thursday. The Generall Councell met in the Church, the Generall, many Generall Officers, Field-Officers, inferiour Officers, and Agitators met. A great part of the time was spent in consideration, and debate of the Proposals of the Army, and some few things agreed upon to be altered, and explained in them, which no doubt will give much satisfaction to the Kingdome. After the aforesaid Declaration was finished, it was, by the appointment of his Excellency, and the Councell of Warre, sent to the Right Honourable the Commissioners of Lords and Commons residing with the Army, to be presented from them to both Houses of Parliament, which according, with a Letter from the Generall and Army, to this effect, vix. That they earnestly desired, some speedy course might be taken for their pay, that so they might be inabled to pay their quarters, was presented to both Houses of Parliament upon Satturday last, and after reading thereof, orde∣red to be communicated to the Lord Major, Alder∣men, and Common-Councell of the City of Lon∣don.
The Debates of the Generall Officers of the ARMY. SIR, UPon Thursday last, being the 16. of this instant, his Excellency Sir Thomas Fair∣fax, and the generall Officers of the army, had a great meeting at Putney, where they spent much time, in debating upon the present af∣faires of the Kingdom, and upon many great and weighty matters, exceedingly materiall towards the setling of a firme peace and u∣nion. During which time of consultation, in debate thereof, many worthy and excel∣lent speeches were made at the Councell ta∣ble, in the presence of the Generall, Lieute∣nant Generall, and the rest of the Officers as∣sembled together, by certain Colonels of the Army, which was to this effect viz. That they desired nothing so much, in respect of their own particulars, as to see this languish∣ing
and tottering Kingdome, restored to a happy and flourishing condition, that so the pure light of the Gospell may shine forth in abundance, and appeare in its full lste throughout all darke and obscure corners of the Kingdom, and that the joyfull newes of Peace may have its full Eccho and tryumphant sound throughout all his Maie∣sties Realmes and Dominions, and that the hearts both of King and People may be firmly kuit and united together, &c. With many other worthy expressions and protestations, touching the setling of a firme peace. Much time were spent, touching divers weighty businesses in behalfe of the whole Kingdome, concerning the peace, and future safety; as also some things debated upon in reference to the Proposalls, that after the Rights, Liberties, Peace and safety of the Kingdome being provided for, the Kings Majesties Royall person, his Gonsort the Queena, their Highnesses, Charles Prince of Wales, James Duke of Yorke, and the rest of the Royall Issue, may be restored to a condi∣tion of safety, honour, and freedome in this Nation, without diminution to their perso∣nall
Rights, or further limitation to the ex∣ercise of the Regall power, &c. No wayes are left unassayed, for the ob∣taining of a speedy settlement of the King∣dome, and establishing of his Maiesty and his Royall posterity in their full Rights & Freedomes, so that there is great hopes of a happy and mutuall concurrence, betwixt the King and his great Councell. The Generall Councell goes on unammously in all their Undertakings, and not so much as one dis∣senting Member amongst them. BY the appointment of his Excellency, and the Councell of Warre, the fore-going Declara∣tion was sent to the Commissioners of Lords and Commons, to be presented to both Houses of Par∣liament. FINIS.
