d557 e443_16 99864191 116413
A DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION OF THE SHERIFFES, Justices of the Peace, and other of His Majesties well affected Subjects, in the Counties of Flint and Denbigh, at a generall meeting in Wexham, the 9. of this instant May, 1648. WHEREIN, They declare their Resolution, touching the solemn League and Covenant, and to oppose all forces whatsoever, that shall enter the said Counties, for the disturbance of the publike peace of England and Wales. REsolved and agreed upon, that this Declaration be published throughout the sixe Counties of Northwales, together with our desires, concerning the peace of the Kingdome. LONDON, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.
THE DECLARATION and Resolution, Of the Sherriffs, and Justices of the Peace in Flint Sheere. &c. FIrst, It is resolved that the pre∣sint distemper of the times and danger imminent upon this Countrey, doth necessi∣tate the putting of the same into a posture of defence a∣gainst any that shall bee in Armes against the Parliament. Secondly, it is resolved, that we shall in pur∣suance of the Solemn League and Covenant in all just wayes, resist and suppresse all Forces what∣soever, either Natie within thse Counties of Northwales, or or those that shall from Forreign
Countries, invade these parts, contrary to the Authority of both Houses of Parliament to the contempt thereof, and the disturbance of the publik peace, in order whereunto it is fur∣ther resolved. Thirdy, that the Dclaration of this Resolution be published throughout the six Couns of North-wales, wih mation of our desies: That all wel affect persns there∣in will joyne and subscribe with us, wi h whom we obliege our selves to a mutuall defence of each other in this engagement and the taking of subscriptions is refered to he Commissiners of the asssmnt of 6000 l. per mensem, of the said espective Counties, and to such as they or any of them shall appoint. Fourthly, that those persons that shall sub∣scribe these resolutions, shall improve their in∣terests in their severall limits, to engage all per∣sons well-affected, both Horse and Foot to bee ready with their Armes for defence, and preser∣vation of the peace of the Countrey, in the obedience of the Parliament. And to yeeld their assistance in the suppression of any insur∣rection, or vnlawfull tumultuary meeting of such as have been in Armes against the Parliament. Fifthly, that the names of such persons as shall be ingaged to be in readine ein the County of Denbigh be returned to the governour of Denbigh, who with
the advice and and assistance of the high Sheriffe of that Countie Sir Thomas Middleto, Simon Thelmall Esquire, the elder of place and ward the Commissi∣oners for the 6000 l. Pr mensem, the Committees of North Wales, or any four of them, shall have power to appoint fitt men to daw togeather, and con∣duct such persons for the service afore∣said as occasion shall require, And as they shall receive orders from the said Governour, and any foure of the persons aforesaid. Sixthly that the names of such persons as shall be ingaged to be in the readi∣nesse for the same service in the county of Flint, be returned to the Governour of Denbigh, who with the advice and assistinance of the high sheriffe of that countie, Col, Thomas Ravenscroft, Col. Iohn Aldersey, Iohn Salisbury of Bath∣grage Esqr. Capt Luke Loyd the Com∣missioners for the 6000 l. per mensem, the committee of North Wales, or any foure of them, as occasion shall require & they shall receive Orders from th, sid
Govenour, & any sore of the persons aforesaid. Seventhly, that the Armes of the Inhabitants of the Counties of Denbigh and Flint, that have been in hostility against the Parliament, be by warrant called in, and brought to Denbigh Castle, for the use of the said Counties respe∣ctively. And that there be intimation in the said Warrants, that such persons as shall quitly and readily surender up their Armes, shall be taken notice of, as persons not inclinable, to disturbe the publike peace, And that such persons as shall refuse to deliver up their Armes, or conceale the same, shall be esteemed prone, and ready to enter∣taine new Commotions and not persons well af∣fected to the peace of their Countrey, giving fur∣ther to understand, it is not our intention by the seazure of Armes to adde feare, or molestation to any that shall conforme. But on the contrary, we shall cherish such, and all others, who shall not contrive practice, or act somthing to the di∣sturbance of the Countries Peace. Eightly, That the Castle of Ruthin and Ruthland, be in pursuance of the Order of the honourable House of Commons, forthwith made more untenable, and that Warrants be immedi∣ately sent forth, under the hands of the Justices of the peace, and Commissioners of the respective Counties, or any three or more of them for that purpose. And the care of the demolishment of Ruthin Castle is referred to Simon Thebwll, of place and ward Esquire. And the present Go∣vernour
of Denbigh. And for Ruthland Castle to Ruge▪ Hummer Esquire, High Sheriffe of the Countie of Flint. SIR, THe Report that spread abroade of re-uni∣ting the Wesh forcs, and a supposed defeate given to our forces is false; but the contrary you may be assured of; and the great victory obtained by Col. Horton against them. Here followeth a List of the prisoners taken and in custody, viz. 25 Majors, and Captains, 32 Lieutenants, 27, Ensignes, 10 Private Gentlemen, and about 2600 privat Souldiers. Wee want roome to enlarge further the perticulers, but the whole businesse will be pub∣lished at large by it sel e.
A declaration of the Taking of Har∣bottle Castle, for the King, by Sir, Gilbert Errington. Sir. CAptain Ball, with a ship of 32. Guns keeps provision from Bar∣wick, but Langdale gives out that 3 ships are comming from Leath to fight with him. The Irish take ships with∣in two or three leagus of the Coasts. Sir, Gilb. Errington hath taken Har∣bottle Castle in Northumher land for the King; Major Gen. Lambert hath sent to secure the Garisons, and to fortifie Appleby, in westmerland, Raby in the Bishopricke, and Walton hall in Yorkeshire. Sir. Philip Mus∣grave is marching towards Perith with 500 Horse, intending to possesse Appleby, and other places. FINIS.
