E1220 E469_13 99864835 162368
AN ANSVVER of Both Houses of Parliament TO His Majesties LAST Message. Agreed on Munday the 30 of Octo. 1648 to be sent by Sir Peter Killeygrew. WITH Further Instructions to the Commissioners. AND The Copies of severall Votes of the House of COMMONS. And Instructions concerning the Army. LONDON, Printed for H. Becke, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.
AN Answer of both Houses of Parliament, to His Majesties last Message. Die Lunae Octob. 30. 1648. FIRST. REsolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament as∣sembled, that His Majesties Paper concerning Epis∣copacy, of Newport 31 Octob. 1648. by which it is said, that HIs Majesty conceives that his former Answers to your Propositions concer∣ning the Church, would have given more sati faction to his two Houses then is expressed in your papers of the 16 and 17. of this Instant, as containing in them (if considered in their sull extent) Concessions of the most material things desired, and therefore for a Declaration of his intentions by these former An∣swers, as for a further and finall Answer to the said Propositions and Paper of the 19th, His Majesty saith as followeth: That albeit for the reasons expressed in his former Paper, he cannot consent to a Bill, and the Ordinance for abolishing of Bishops, yet for the satisfaction of his two Houses, and setling the publique peace he will consent to a Bill for the taking away of al Archbishops, Chancellors, Commissioners, Deans and Sub-Deans, Deans and Chapters, Arch-Deacons Canons, and Prebendaties, all Chan∣ters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers, Subcenters, and Sacrists, and all Choral, and Choristers, old Vicars, and new Vicars of any Cathedral or Collegiat Church, and all other their under Officers, but of the Church of England, and Do∣minion of Wales, and out of the Church of Ireland, and further, his Miesty will consent to suspend the exercise of all Episcopal Government for the space of three years, and hath consented & will consent to confirm the form of Church Govern∣ment now presented unto him, for the space of 3 years, and that no other shall be used during the said time; In which time his Majesty continues his desire that a consultation with the Assembly of Divines at Westmin. 20 of his own nomination
being added, to his end his Majesty and his two Houses may within these 3 years informs  the practise of the Primitive Church in  Episcy and may accordingly agree in limiting the Bishops to the  and aistce of Prebitery, and in the exercise of their jurisdiction, and ing their ∣er, if it be thought fit. And his Majesty will consent, that in calen  shall be agreed on within the said 3 years then after the said time, the powr of or∣dination shall not be exercised by Bishops, without the counccil and assistance of Prosbyters, and that no other Episcopall Jurisdiction shall be exercised by Bishops without the councell and assistance of Presbyters, and that no other Jurisdiction shall be exercised by Bishops, but such, and in such manner as shall be agreed on by his Majesty and his we Houses of Parliament. And his Majesty doth prosesse, that if in that time he be convinced that the function of Bishops is not agreable to the Word of God, or that Christ commanded any other Government, he will chearfully imbrace that, and take away Episcopacy, but untill hee bee convinced, he beleeves himselfe bound in conscience to uphold that function, as is above expressed, That this Answer from His Majesty is not satisfactory. 2 Resolved upon the Question, that His Majesties, Paper of Octob. 21. Concerning The Ordinances for the settling the Bishops Lards upon Trustees, and so the sale of those Lands, though his Majesty upon consciencious scruples (wherein h hath the concurrent opinion of the Divines, as well of the Reformed, as other Churches) hath not consented thereunto, yet he hath offered satisfaction to all such as purchased any of those Lands, or disbursed mony upon that security by legall estates for lives or yeares (not exceeding 99 yeares) reserving onely the propriety and Inheritance of those Lands to the Church and Churchmen, and the old rent, or other moderate rents for their maintenance; and that if those Leases shall not suffice, his Majesty would propound and consent to some other way for their further satisfaction, and therefore other satisfaction, for those debts and engagements (which were the motives for the sale of those Lands) being proposed, and his Majesty having herein condescended as fit as possibly he can, he desires his two Houses would comply with his Majesty in this particular. His Majesty hath offered by Act of Parliament to confirme the calling and fit∣ting the Assembly of Divines, as largely in the matter desired as the Ordinance it selfe proposed for that purpose. He hath likewise offered to continue the pub ique use of the Directory in all Churches and Chappels, as is desired in your Proposi∣tion: And to consent to the repeale of so much of all Statutes as concerne the Books of Common-prayer, and to take the same away out of all Churches and Chappels, except his Majesties Chappell, where hee intends the use thereof may be continued for himselfe and his houshold, untill another publique Forme of Prayer should be agreed on by his Majesty and his two Houses. His Majesty hath
likewise consented to the Bill for suppressing Innovations, wherein they  provision for the due observation of the Lords day; and offered (if that was not sufficient) to consent to the matter of the Ordinance for observation hereof, as fully as is desired: But for the Ordinances presented to his Majesty which con∣cerne the Assembly of Divines, the Directory, the taking away the Bookes of Common prayer, and the observation of the Lords day, many expressions therein require nebessary alterations, in respect of some things happening since their first framing, others reflect on former established Laws, and other matters not ne∣cessary; and therefore though he consented to the matter therein desired, yet hee could not confirme those Judiciall Ordinances in terini, as they are penned, Whereas you conceive his Majesty did not give his Assent to the Bill for the better advancement of the Preaching of Gods Holy Word in all parts of this Kingdome his Majesty by his former Answer did sufficiently expresse his consent thereunto by consenting to the Bill for suppressing of Innovations (in which that for the ad∣vancement of Preaching is included.) And his Majesty doth againe give consent thereunto; as also to the Bill against enjoying Pluralities of Benefices by Spirituall persens and non Residency, formerly delivered to his Majesty, as is desired in the Propositions. This Answer from his Majesty is not satisfactory. 3 Resolved by the Lords and Commons that His Majesties Paper of Octob. 21. Touching Reformation of Religion; Whereas you say his Majesties Answer comes far short of the Proposition which desires that his Majesty should consent; that Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant bee settled, in such manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon after Consultation had with the Assembly of Divines, his Majesty saith, That he hath answered all the particulars which are set dowe as branches of that generall Proposition, and can∣not thine that it will bee expected that he should oblige himselfe gene rally to what his two Houses shall hereafter agree touching matters of Religion' before he be satisfied of the nature thereof. His Majesty conceives that he had given a full answer to your Proposition for an Act or Acts to be passed for a stricter course to be taken to prevent the saying or hearing of Masse in the Court, or any other part of this Kingdome, or the King∣dome of Ireland, he having consented thereunto, with exemption onely of the Queen and her Family (few whereof are of her Profession) according to the Ar∣ticles of Marriage agreed on betwixt the two Crownes, which his Majesty con∣ceives his two Houses will not advise him to breake. And as for restraining the accesse of all others but her Family, and in all things else his Majesty consents to that Proposition as is desired. This Answer from His Majesty is not satisfactory. 4. Resolved, &c. Touching the Covenant, his Majesty answers as formerly, that he remains yet
unsatisfactory to take it, or impose it upon others, and conceives it not proper to be insisted on at this time, and that the end thereof (without taking it) will bee obtained by this agreement, if happily concluded. For the Articles of Religion presented to his Majesty, which are desired to be confirmed by Act of Parliament, his Majesty hath already answered, that he had not yet time to peruse them with that deliberation as is requisite, before hee birde up himselfe and his subjects in mtters of Faith and Doctrine; and conceives his Houses will thinke it not im∣proper to respite the confideration of them to a further tune, considering how peri∣lous, definitions are in matters of Religion, how long time he Articles have been in framing, and that since the beginning of this Treaty, and not before, they came intely to his Majesties view. His Majesty having so far consented to the severall particulars of this Propo∣sition, that the remaining differences are very few, doth therefore earnestly de∣sire his two Houses that they may be no obstacle to the settlement of the bles∣sed Peace now in hand. This Answer from His Majesty is not satisfactory. Die Lunae. 30 Octob. 1648. SIR Peter Kileygrew is to carry the Votes at large from both Houses of Parliament to the Commissioners, And a Letter to desire them to go on in the Treaty with His Majesty according to their Instructions for a safe and well-ground∣ed peace. Die Sabbati 21 Octob. 1648. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Committee of Sequestrations in London, be summoned to give an account to this House on Munday morning next, what they have done upon the Order of this House, of the 7 of Octob. 1648. injoyning them to leavy the Arrears due by severall persons for the Assessement of the Army, mentioned in the said Order, upon their estates. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
Die Sabbati, 21 Octob. 1648. ACcording to former Order the Commons resumed the consideration of the Reports made from the Committee of the Army in order to the taking off free-Quarter. And the In∣structions given the last yeare for bringing in the Arreares of the Assessements, and the Ordinance for them passed concerning Free-Quarter were read. 1 Resolved, &c. That Members be imployed to use their best indeavours to bring in the Arreares of the Assessements for the Army, to the end Free-Quarter may be taken off. 2 Resolved, &c. That Members of this House be sent down to the Generall to conferre with him and his Officers such as they shall appoint, how the Army and all other Forces may be redused to the establishment, and how those Forces that are to be reduced may have satisfaction. 3 Resolved, &c. That this Committee shall have power to consider with the Generall and such Officers as he shall ap∣point, how the Army may have satisfaction, for the pay due since the 15th of January 1647. And that consideration may bee likewise had of the Free-Quarters taken upon the Coun∣try since the said 15th of Jan. That satisfaction may be given them. 4 Resolved, &c. That the Committee have likewise power to confer with the Generall, and such Officers as he shall ap∣point, how the Army may with the most conveniency, be quar∣tered according to former Instructions, and directions. Mr. Scawen. Sir Will. Litton, Sir Rich. Onslowe Mr. Preistley, Cap. Wingate, Col. Birch, Sir Th. Dacres, Mr. Lemmon.
This Committee or any three of them are appointed to go unto the Generall upon the vote aforesaid. H. Elsyinge Cler. Par. D. Com. Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament. 1 THat the Committee of the Army do give their Warrant to the Treasurers of War, to satisfie and pay unto the Members of the Committee of the Army imployed by this House into several Coun∣ties, upon the publique service, The expenses and charges they were at in the discharge of that imployment. 2 That the Members of the Committee of the Army that were im∣ployed in the severall Counties upon the service of the house have the thanks of this house given unto them for their good services. Mr. Scaw∣en (then present) had accordingly the thanks of this house given him by Mr. Speaker. H. Elsynge Cler. Par. D. Com. Resolved, &c. That it be referred to the Committee of the Army to bring in the names of 10. Delinquents not yet engag∣ed, whose estates or compositions may bee converted to the use of the Army, H. Elsyng Cler. Par. D. Com. FINIS.
