E2378 E437_12 99864167 161634
THE TRUE ANSVVER OF THE PARLIAMENT TO The Petition of the Lord Major, and Common-Councell, for removing the Army, securing the Tower, putting the City into a posture of defence, and to have Major Generall Skippon Commander in chiefe. ALSO, The Oath and Information of Mr. Iohn Everet, Discovering to the Lord Major and Common-councell, the intents of the Army against the City of London. LIKEVVISE, A Letter from Norwich of the manner of blowing up of the Magazine there, the killing of above 100. persons and other sad accidents, which happened at the same time. April 27. 1648. Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbot. LONDON: Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.
A LETTER FROM NORWICH. SIR, I Am sorry that this opportunity should meet with the occasion of sending you ill newes from hence: for, on Munday last, here fell out a very sad accident; the manner thereof, and the occasion was briefly thus. I believe that you have heard that this town, as well as other places, was much divided, some against the Parliament and Army, and
others for them, which caused a difference betwixt not only the meaner sort of people, but even amongst those which were in chiefest place in the City, and the disaf∣fected party did so increase, that the rest were often∣times openly scorned and divided by them: the Major acting in some things otherwise then was expected was sent for vp to the Parliament, which the malignant party were exceedingly vexed at, and said he should not be subject to that command, nor be carryed out of the city: the well-affected laboured to have the Parl orders obey∣ed and here the businesse began to grow high, and came to an open quarrell, many hundreds of people being ga∣thered together, and the malignant party thinking to ex∣punge the rest, and possesse themselves of all the armes and ammunition in the city, they ran with one accord, to the Magazine, which was furnished with a great quantity of powder and ammunition. Here they began to arm themselves, and threatned ruine to all that bad or durst oppose them; but before they became formidable, the Magazeen (amongst them) was fired, and at least 40 houses was blown vp and spoyled by powder, the blow whereof did shake the whole City, threw downe part of some churches, wounded and killed a great many of the Inhabitants, the certain number not being yet known, nor many of them that were killed, as yet found, or can bee known, for many were torn in pieces, and carryed limbe
from limbe, several legs, arms, &c. being found in the streets, but we already find missing & mortally wound∣ed at least 120. persons; besides as many more which received slight wounds & hurts. Yet was not this great mischiefe a sufficient terrour to those that escaped, and had gotten armes, for they continued and persisted in their course, and would quit the City of all that joyned not with them, and take their goods for a prey: so that this combustion and distraction lasted divers hours, till 3. Troopes of Col. Fleetwoods horse, which were sent for, came into the City, and appeased the matter, and secured some of the chief Matiniers: so that we hope all things will be now quiet. And I wish, that accor∣ding to the Proverb, others may be warned by our harms, and that when there is no enemy abroad, we may not find him at home, and by private dis∣sentions, bring inevitable ruine and distractions upon our selves; which is all for the present, hee hath to write, that is Your humble servant, T. S. Norwich 25. April 1648.
Die Jovis 27. April. 1648. REport was made of the transaction of the late business in the City of London, in relation to the information lately given, that the Army had some intentions against the City, which was grounded on a single affidavit made by one Mr. Everet, an Excize-man for the County of Bedford, of e∣state 220. li. per annum. This man went to the Head-quar∣ters at Winsor, to get assistance for gathering the Excize at Bedford, & taking his Lodging at an Inne, he over-heard some in another roome to say to others of their acquaintance with them, that they had acquainted an eminent Comman∣der with what they had to propose, & that he seemed to ap∣prove wel of the design, which hee said he heard them ex∣plain to be the securing of the city, disarming of disaffected persons, the demanding of a million of money, &c. But that any such thing was the sense of the Army, or had bin deba∣ted by a Councel, as some have reported, is utterly false; However, M. Everet thought himself bound in duty to dis∣cover to the city what he had heard, and thereupon came and acquainted the Lord Major, who caused him to finde sufficient sureties, & then took his examination upon oath, the effect whereof I have already set downe. Hereupon a Common-councel was called on Munday night last, where the said Mr. Everet appeared, and affirmed what hee had be∣fore declared to the Lord Major. And after a long sitting of the Common-councel, they came to this result, That some particulars should be drawn up, and presented to the Parl. in relation to the peace and safety of the city, and the two Sheriffs Alderman Gibs, Alderman Fouk, and 8 Commoners were appointed, as a Committee to draw up the same, Tuesday night was another Common-councell at Guild-Hal about this busines, where they concluded, and made an Act in these words.
BY THE MAJOR. FOrasmuch, as it is conceived and apprehended by the Common-councell, that the City at the present is in great danger; These are therefore, according to the Desire and Direction of the said Court to will and require you in his Majesties Name, That presently vpon sight hereof, you respectively, with the Constables of your several Precincts, do repair to every Housholder within the same, and give them strict charge and command, that at their perils, they doe so order and dispose of their Servants, and all others vnder their charge, that they be not only kept from committing any outrage or misdemeanour; But that they and their ser∣vants from time to time be in readinesse, according to their severall capacities, with Armes, Weapons, and Ammunitions for preservation of the Peace, defence of themselves, the City, and the Magistrates thereof: And also, that all Persons who are of the Trained Bands of this City, Do from time to time upon the beat of the Drum, repair with all speed to their Colours: And therein demeasn themselves as may conduce to the safe∣ty and welfare of this City. And that you do from time to time certifie vnto me, or some other of his Majesties Iustices of the Peace, the Names of such Constables, and others, as you shall finde to be remisse or negligent in the performance of their re∣spective Duties in this behalfe, to the intent, that they may be punished according to the same. And hereof faile you not, as you tender the safety of your selves and the City, and will answer the contrary at your perill. This 25. of April, 1648. MICHEL. To the Deputy, Common-Councell-men, and Constables in the Ward of
The 27. of this instant, divers. Aldermen and Common-councel men of the city of London, presented a Petition to both Houses of Parl. setting forth the good affection of the city to the Parl. and that they will venter their lives & for∣tune, for the preservation thereof, according to their Cove∣nant, desiring that the city might be put into a posture of defence, the Tower in their hands, the Army removed fur∣ther, their chains put up, and Maj. Gen. Skippon Commander in chief of their Forces, that they might not be disarmed, plundered, &c. To which Petition, the E. of Manchester returned the an∣swer of the Lords, which was to this effect. 1. I am commanded to let you know, that the Lords doe return hearty thanks to the Lord Major of London, Alder∣men, and Common-councel, for expressing their good affe∣ctions to the Parliament. 2. And that it never entred into the thoughts of the Parl. to disarm the city, and know not that any others had any such intent, and that the Parl. are and e∣ver shall be very carefull for the good and safety of the ci∣ty. 3. As for the information brought to the city by one Jo: Everet, the House would take it into special examination to find out the truth or falshood therof; in the mean time, they see not any cause why such a slight information should bee any blemish or scandall to the Army, which have approved themselves in many things faithful. 4. As for that concern∣ing Major General Skippon, he is a member of the House of Commons, and so it did not belong to their Lordships to meddle therein before the Commons had debated that bu∣sinesse. 5. And as for the putting up of the chaines for their own safety, they left it to their own discretion. FINIS.
