E3756 E116_7 99872933 156033
EXCEEDING JOYFULL NEWES From the Cavaleers at NOTTINGHAM. Declaring their Resolution and Proposi∣tions to the Lords at Nottingham, now atten∣ding his Royall Majesty, being happy and wel∣com'd Tydings for London. With their ter∣rible threatnings against Colonell GORING. Likewise, happy Tydings from Shereborn Castle, declaring the Proceedings of the Parliaments Forces against the Marquis of Hartford, and the state and condition he is now in. Signified by Letters to the House of Commons, up∣on Satterday last, being the 3. of September. Also the manner of Captain Browns com∣ming to London on Satterday last, with 7. Troopes of horse, bringing with him 5. Cart loads of Arms and Ammunition, and six Prisoners, which he took in Kent, namely the Lord Roper, Mr. Adrian Scroope the Duke of Le∣nox Stewart, and 4. more. September 6. London Printed for Iohn Wight, 1642.
THE CAVALEERS PROPOSITIONS. To the Lords at Nottingham, now at∣tending his Royall Maiesty. With the threatnings of the Cavaleers a∣gainst Collonell Goring. THe Cavaleers having information that Co∣lonel Goring was de∣sirous to yield up the Town of Portsmouth and to come with all Expedition to hi Majesty, where ha∣ving spent some time
in consultation thereupon, they resolved to propound certain Propositions to the Lords at NOTTINGHAM, who are now attending his Royall Majesty, which was to this effect VIZ. I. That as Collonell Goring is resolved to yeeld up the Town of Portsmouth, to the Parliaments Forces, upon condition he may have free liberty to come to the King, therefore their humble desires are, that they would be pleased to yeeld their consents, that he may not be admitted to come to his Maiestie. II. That seeing he hath proved false and trecherous to the King and Parliament, they are resolved, that wheresoever they light on him, to be his Executioner, and to cut him in pieces. These Propositions were presented unto the Lords at Nottingham, August 31. by many thousands of the Cavaleers. And upon Saturday last, being the 3. day of this instant September, the Honourable house of Commons received information from Ports∣mouth, that Collonell GORING hath sent se∣verall Treaties to the Committee that lyeth
at Suthicke fiue miles from the Town of Ports∣mouth, and would gladly yeeld up the Town to the Parliaments Forces, but first he is resolved to know what punishment hee shall undergoe before that he will resign up the same, and to that end desired the Lord WENTWORTH to go to the Committee at Suthick, with these Propositions. I. That if they would be pleased to grant unto him a free pardon for this Crime which he hath committed, by betraying the Trust confided in him by both houses of Parliament, he would resign up the Town. II. That if they would be pleased to to doe him that favour, to give him leave to goe be∣yond the Seas, and to promise, that hee shou'd be transported over with safety, he would yeeld up the Ordinance, and all the rest of the Am∣munition. These Propositions and Desires of Colonell GORING was propounded to the Committee by the Lord WENTVVORTH, but they could not give him an Answer of them, till they knew the Houses pleasure ther∣in. The said GORING doth now endeavour by all possible means to make an escape out of the Town of Portsmouth, and to goe beyond the Seas, but by reason of the great vigilancie and care of the Earle of Warwick, it is thought he cannot make an escape without the consent of both Houses of Parliament.
The great spleen and malice that the Cavaleers hath took against Colo∣nell Goring can by no wayes be ap∣peased, they having generally Re∣solved to be his Executioner, and to cut him in pieces, and to punish him with such torments, that never any Christian as yet endured, because hee proved false and treacherous on both sides. He is now in a lamentable condi∣tion, and the Souldiers that are with∣in the Town are in a great perplexi∣ty, ready to be his Executioner. He hath also sincs his first shutting up of the Gates held out very stoutly, and hath beaten down many Bul∣warks and Fortifications, which the Parliaments Forces had raised, playing with his Ordnance very fast against them, but now he hath almost spent all his powder and shot, so that he cannot hold out very long. The Parliaments Forces hath now finished their Rampeer, and are resolved
to make an attempt against the town very suddenly, being in great hopes of gaining the same. It is thought that the Marquesse of Hartford is in the like condition that Colonell Goring is in, by reason of the abundance of Forces that have now besieged him in his strong hold at Shereborn Castle. For upon Saturday last, it was sig∣nified to the House of Commons, that the Marquesse is compassed in with 4. or 5000. men, and that they could easily fetch him out but that they are very unwilling to shed any bloud, and therefore it may be they will try his patiencr for want of food. Likewise upon Satterday last, Cap∣tain Brown came from Kent, and was brought in by seven Companies of Horse, and came to the Lord Gene∣ralls House, and having disarmed all the Papists in the County of Kent, brought six prisoners with him, wher∣of one was called Master Adrian Scroop
the Duke of Lenox Stewart, at whose House they took five Cart Loads of Arms and Ammunition, and likewise the Lord Roper was one of them. It is reported by Letters from Portsmouth, that Sir John Meldrum is raising of great Horn-works against the Town, and that his Advice much advantageth the service, daily endea∣uouring, and using his best skill to further that happy work, he is a great encouragement to the souldiers, and a man much esteemed of amongst them, being sent down by the consent of both Houses of Parliament. Published for the Encouragement of all those that are well-willers to this hap∣pie Reformation. FINIS.
