E3678 E302_3 99861080 158735
An Exact RELATION OF Prince Rupert His marching out of BRISTOLL, the 11. of this instant Septemb. 1645. according to Articles of agreement made betweene him and the Right HONOURABLE, Sir Thomas Fairfax. With the manner how, and the place whither he is to goe, as how farre the Generall himselfe accompanied him, the number of his Forces both Horse and Foot, of his Wagons, and other particulars. Also what Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and all other Provisions which Sir Thomas found in the City, Forts, and Castle, fully exprest. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Wright at the Kings head in the old Bayley. 18. Sept. 1645.
A Letter sent from Bristoll to his friend in LONDON: Shewing the manner of Prince Ruperts marching from thence to Oxford. Bristoll 12. Septemb. 1645. YEsterday according to the Articles, Prince Rupert marched out in this man∣ner, having first drawne all his Foot into the Roy∣all Fort and Castle, his Horse standing in the Greene under the Fort, within the Line, those Wagons appointed for him being laden with his Baggage, in all not above eight. Hee drew out part of his Foot and Horse before his VVagons, and part following, Himselfe next with his
Lifeguard of Firelocks came forth, all in Red Coats be∣fore him, and his Lifeguard of Horse following, accom∣panied with some Lords, viz. Cromwell, Grandison, &c. Colonell Hamonds Regiment of Foot standing at the Port to receive the Keyes of the Fort and march in, Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, Colonell Montague, Colonel Rainsborough, and some other Officers waited at the Port of the Fort for his comming out, and waited upon him to the Generall, who stood with the Convoy of Horse without the Line, and accompanied him over Durdum Downe, being almost two miles: The Prince was clad in Scarlet, very richly laid with silver Lace, mounted up∣on a very gallant black Barbary Horse; the Generall and the Prince rid together, the Generall giving the Prince the right hand all the way; the number of the Princes Foot was about 2000. The Horse with the designed number of two hundred and fifty and the Lifeguard al∣together, made about foure hundred: And I think there might be of Noblemen and Gentlemen at the least three hundred more. The Prince upon the Greene then na∣med the place to which he would march, which was to Oxford, and quartered at Westberry the last night: Colo∣nell Butler with his Regiment, and Major Hemington with the Lieutenant Generals Regiment, waited on him as Convoy. The Generall upon his returne viewed the Royall Fort which certainly is one of the bravest Citadels in England, in it foure and twenty pieces mounted upon five Bastions, Powder in quantity, Victuals in abundance of all sorts, fourescore or an hundred tunne of Beare, Bread sufficient to serve almost one hundred thousand men a day. Upon the Line, Castle, and Forts, might bee in all
about two hundred pieces of Ordnance mounted, two or three hundred barrels of Powder, a great Magazine of Armes, some say three or foure thousand, the City it selfe being the next to London in the Kingdom; all this successe is the Lords doing, which ought to be marvel∣lous in our eyes. VVhat is next to be done is now to be considered on; I hope God will counsell us for the best: VVe shall be very sudden on motion, and then I shall give you a further accompt. So Iremaine, &c. WE took Basalisk warning piece which was lost in Cornwall, with some other pieces also lost there; so that at Naseby and Bridgewaer we have retaken all the Pieces the Earle of Essex lost in Cornwall. There is left onely a Regiment of Foot in the Fort and Castle, by reason the Sicknesse is much in the Towne; this day the Army removes to Cavesham and Penford, fresh Quarters free from sicknesse untill the Money come from Reading, and this place be setled. Somersetshire is raising two thousand men to recruit the Army, part of which we are to receive to morrow, and hope for one thou∣sand and five hundred more out of Gloucestershire.
Articles of Agreement betweene the Commissioners appointed on the behalfe of his Highnesse Prince RUPERT, and his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX for the sur∣render of the City of Bristol, Septemb. 10. 1645. THat his Highnesse Prince Rupert, and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers, Gentlemen, and Souldiers, and all other persons whatsoever now residing in the City of Bristoll, the Castle and Forts thereof, shall march out of the said City, Castle, and Forts thereof, with Colours, Pikes and Drums, Bag and Baggage; the Prince his Highnesse, all Noble∣men, Gentlemen, and Officers in Commission, with their Horse and Armes, and their servants with their Horses and Swords, and common souldiers with their Swords; the Prince his life∣guard of Horse with their Horse and Armes, and 250. Horse besides to be disposed of by the Prince, and his lifeguard of Fire∣locks with their Armes, and each of them one pound of Powder and a proportion of Bullet, and that none of the persons who are to march out upon this Article, shall be plundered, Search∣ed, or Molested. 2 That such Officers and Souldiers as shall be left sick or woun∣ed in the City, Castle or Forts, shall have liberty to stay till their recovery, and then have safe Conducts to goe to his Ma∣jesty, and in the interim to be protected.
3 That the persons above mentioned, who are to march away, shall have a sufficient Convoy provided for them to any Garri∣son of the Kings as the Prince shall name, not exceeding fifty miles from Bristoll, and shall have eight dayes allowed for their march thither, and shall have free quarter by the way, and shall have two Officers to attend them for their accommodati∣on, and twenty Waggons for their Baggage, if they shall have occasion to use the same. 4 That all the Citizens of Bristoll, and all Noblemen, Gentle∣men, Clergy-men, and all other persons residing in the said City, and Suburbs of the same, shall be saved from all Plunder and violence, and be secured in their Persons and Estates from the violence of the Souldier, and shall enjoy those Rights and Liberties which other Subjects enjoy under the Protection and Obedience of the Parliament 5 That in consideration hereof, the City of Bristoll, with the Castle, and all other Forts and Fortifications thereof, without any sleighting or defacing thereof, and all the Ordinance, Arms, Ammunition, and all other Furniture and Provisions of War (excepting what is before allowed) shall be delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax to morrow being Thursday the eleventh day of this instant September by one a clocke in the afternoon without any diminution or imbezelment. His Highnesse Prince Rupert then naming to what Army or Garrison of the Kings he will march. 6 That none of the persons who are to march out on this agree∣ment, shall plunder, hurt, or spoile the Towne, or any person in it, or carry out any thing but what is properly their owne. 7 That upon signing these Articles Colonell Okey and all
persons now in prison in the City of Bristoll, the Castle or Forts of the same, shall immediately be set as liberty. 8 That sufficient Hostages be given to Sir Thomas Fairfax (such as he shall approve) this night, who are to remaine with him untill the City be delivered. 9 That neither the Convoy nor Officers sent with the Prince shall receive any injury on their going or comming backe, and shall have seven dayes allowed for their returne. 10 That upon the delivery of the Towne sufficient Hostages be given for performance of the Articles on both parts. Singed by us the Commis∣sioners appointed on the behalfe of his Highnesse Prince Rupert. Jo. Myn. Jo. Tilyer. W. Vavosor. Signed by us the Commis∣sioners appointed on the behalf of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. Ed. Montague. Tho. Rainsborough. Jo. Pickering. FINIS.
