E3908 E393_15 99862097 160304
AN EXTRACT OF CERTAIN PAPERS OF INTELLIGENCE, FROM CAMBRJDGE, Concerning His MAJESTIE and the ARMIE. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
An Extract of certain Papers of Jntelli∣gence, from Cambridge, concerning His Majesty and the Army. Sir, I Beleeve you are big in expectation of receiving News from these parts. Thus therefore. The King on Saturday was brought by a very small party, under the conduct of no greater an one then a Coronet, within four miles of this place; and all the noise was, that he would be here, the Harbingers in the meane time buying up the whole Market. But wee (who vsually are not taken with the first reports of things) thought not fit hereupon to assemble together either in the Head or Body; where∣as the Major and Aldermen (somewhat more credulous) fitted their Saddles and Foot-loathes unto their Horses, and had pro∣vided a Present for His Majesty; which quickly after came as ac∣ceptable to his eares, as if to his hands. The Towns-folkes had in all those streets, through which it was conceived he would passe, deckt their stalles and windowes with green boughs and whole Rose-bushes, and the ground all along with Rushes and Herbs. But the King turn'd aside uto my Lady Cuts her house; and there yet abides, whither people flow apace to behold him. He is exceeding chearfull, shewes himselfe to all, and commands that no Scholler be debar'd from kissing of his hand: and there the Sophs are (as if no farther then Barnwell) in their Gowns and Caps: it was mirth to see how wett yesterday they were admit∣ted
into the presence. Generall Brown signifying, and furthering the Kings pleasure unto them. Then the King had a large table of Diet: but this day (I beleeve) about to have a farre greater. For the Generall, Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell, and others of the Commanders and Councel of warre, are gone this noon to dine with him. It is conceived, that by to morrow somewhat may be discern'd. Sir, Your unfained friend. CAMBRIDGE. June 7. 1647. POSTSCRIPT. THe Generall quarters at Master Buck Seniors house: but the report is, that it will be this night the Kings quarters.
Sir. THe court is still at the Lady Cutts's house. The Officers of the army returned last night, all of them highly extolling the King for his great Improvement. Hee argued his own, and his subjects Case with each of them (one by one) to their no small Astonishment. He desired a speedy Remoove from that place: but back to Holmby, and those parts, he will by no meanes. He told the Generall, that those, which brought him hither, promised, That they would carry him to New-market; and he hoped, that they were men of Honour, who would make good their words. Recreation he much desired: and told them withall; That, if they would not take order for his Removall, he would remove himselfe: For confident he was, that there were those about him, which would further him in it. This after∣noon therefore he passes through Cambridge to New-market-faire; for this is the day. To morrow at Botsom-beacon is to be the Generall Rendevouz, as is yet intended, though some do fear deep inconveniencies may ensue thereon; the Counsels being yet various, and the souldiers talking high, So that it is thought the appearance shall be but of some part of the army. The Vice-Chancellour had the Generall last night to a great supper: and this morning he made a Spirituall breakfast at St. Maries; but neither the Generall, nor any of them, were thereat: The King sent on Saturday (So that you may discern, that then he thought he might have been for New-market) for Doctor Brounrigg, Doctor Collins and Doctor Comber to be in the way: because he intended to see them: and so they then were: and no doubt will be to day, if so be the first be yet in town, or can have timely notice of this his March. It were infinite to set downe the face∣tiousnesse that flowes from his lips upon all occasions to all: That one day may be in his Chronicle. Major-Generall Browne is much his Attendant, and gaines credit of all for Gallantry and great civility. It is conceived, that after the Rendevouz, they may fall back into these their quarters againe, or else incline somewhat more neere Royston; and Royston become the Head∣quarters,
Meethinks I foresee eminent Ruine, if not a speedy peace. God of his mercy avert the former, and guide, whom it concernes, into the best and safest meanes of the latter. This from him, who (doubtlesse) may safely write thus, even from Camb. June 8 1647. Sir, Your Friend. POSTSCRIPT. THe King is now (being two of the clock) gone by: He left Cambridge, and went as low as Granchester: to New-mar∣ket, still they say: but perchance it is to Royston. The Rende∣vouz holds to morrow, but to be on Og-Magog Hils. Sir, I Told you yesterday that the Rendevouz, intended for this day, was like to be but of part of the Army: and it will proove true: and it is not to be at Botsum-beacon, but at Bennet Church, and the rather by way of an Humiliation-day, then a numbring their Hoast: There is to be three Sermons preached by Mr. Pe∣ters, Mr. Saltmarsh, and Mr. Vice-Chancellour. God grant, that they may promote his Glory and our Peace. The more Ge∣nerall Rendevouz is put off untill to morrow: and to be (as is now reported) about Fulmore. The King is at New-market; and it is conceived, that they will not bring him into the Head of the Army at the Rendevouz, but still quarter him at the back of the Army, rather then he should be accounted pertaining unto it. The Great Ones still speak high in his worth, whose presence and aspect caused trembling in some of the greatest, and their stoutest; as if it had been some Angelicall salutation. What is good, or may with safety be, I communicate unto you: But the wickednesse of some is so great, as not to be made so open, as in paper: and I feare it will have too great an influence (in time)
upon the hearts of many. Let me know when you returne, that I may not lose my labour in sending a letter more, then you in friendship may expect from Sir your Servant. Iune 9 1647. Sir THe humilliation day was kept at St. Maries, and Mr. Sea∣man came in for the fourth man: you have (I know) a pre∣sumption, that I was not there; but I heare, that Mr. Peters is still Mr. Peters. That day and yesterday a fellow preach't against him (I think, or else against his way) on the market-hill. I, with the rest of my company, kist the Kings hand, and saw him at sup∣per. So long we stay'd; because he was all that afternoone alone in his Closet; at his prayers or pen; as who can conceive other∣wise? For his treasure might in farre lesse time (sure) have been runne over. He came out very cheerfully, lookes very well, and communicated himself very freely in Discourse, with some two or three that attended him. That day Collonel Thomson (former∣ly of the Kings Army) endeavoured, as others, to have a sight of the King, but was not onely refused at the Guards, but alo di∣spatcht out of the Town. Yesterday the three Doctors were with the King, whom he lifted from of their knees; and he had opportunity of some lit le discourse with them. The Army removed yesterday from us, took with them tenne loads of Ammunition from the Castle: and the Ordnance follow them this day. They seem truely to look more towards such Or∣dnance still, then the Ordinance of Parliament. I know not, how they come to take so great a distast against the Houses. After all, that the Commissioners brought, was read at the Head of each Regiment, and Major Skippon had in like manner glossed thereon, and in a plausable way assayed to be a Mediator; they first were ask't by Major I. Skippon, whether they had heard, and understood, what had been delivered, who answered; Yes, yes: being asked,
next, whether they were satisfied therewith? replyed: No, no: What would they then? They cryed out; Iustice, justice, justice. And so went it through the whole Army: most saying, they long e∣nough have had faire words; others wondring, how the Com∣missioners durst come unto them, and some crying, lets vote them out of the field. By the rules of some knowing ones I discerne that they intend to purge the Houses and Synode of somewhat which they account destructive to the whole. Could they truely descry it, and set about it impartially, it might be the Crown to (what they yet have not) a victory. Their head-quarters were last night at Royston, and inclining (as I am inform'd) towards Ware. W. tels one, they are expected this night at Theobals. Well then may this be Barnaby-bright, by such a March, and by my letter. But I march on; though chiefely, if not freely, to tell you, that, if you feare such approaches may (as doubtlesse it will) breed distraction in the City, then my affection bids you, Come out of her, come out of her &c. To the best cause, I wish the best successe; and to my friends, safety, and (if it please God) Peace unto us all. Let me not be forgot to any that likes well of my being Sir. YOVR SERVANT. Cambridge. June 11. 1647. POSTSCRIPT. I Cannot heare how the Generall and Commissioners parted: but by the Soldiers, they were hooted out of the field. Nei∣ther was there so good Correspondency between them and the Generall, as to sup or break fast together, whil'st they were here in Town. FINIS.
